Self-Assembling Systems

Self-Assembling Systems
Theory and Simulation
Edited by
Li-Tang Yan
Department of Chemical Engineering,
Tsinghua University, China

This edition ﬁrst published 2017
© 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Registered Oﬃce
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial oﬃces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com.
The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the
publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eﬀorts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability
or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising
herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Yan, Li-Tang, 1978–
Title: Self-assembling systems : theory and simulation / Li-Tang Yan.
Description: Chichester, West Sussex : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2016. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016024926 (print) | LCCN 2016028669 (ebook) | ISBN
9781119113140 (cloth) | ISBN 9781119113157 (pdf) | ISBN 9781119113164
(epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Self-assembly (Chemistry) | Colloidal crystals. | Polymers.
Classiﬁcation: LCC QD475.Y36 2016 (print) | LCC QD475 (ebook) | DDC
547/.2–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016024926
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12pt WarnockPro by SPi Global, Chennai, India
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

v
Contents
List of Contributors
xiii
Preface
xvii
1
Theoretical Studies and Tailored Computer Simulations in
Self-Assembling Systems: A General Aspect
1
Zihan Huang and Li-Tang Yan
1.1
Introduction
1
1.2
Emerging Self-Assembling Principles
3
1.2.1
Predictive Science and Rational Design of Complex Building Blocks
3
1.2.2
Entropy-Driven Ordering and Self-Assembly
5
1.2.3
Programmable Self-Assembly
10
1.2.4
Self-Assembling Kinetics: Supracolloidal Reaction
14
Acknowledgments
16
References
16
2
Developing Hybrid Modeling Methods to Simulate Self-Assembly in
Polymer Nanocomposites
20
Xin Yong, Stephen C. Snow, Olga Kuksenok and Anna C. Balazs
2.1
Introduction
20
2.2
Methodology
21
2.2.1
Dissipative Particle Dynamics
21
2.2.2
Polymer Chains, Gels, and Nanoparticles
22
2.2.3
Radical Polymerization Model
24
2.3
Results and Discussions
27
2.3.1
Modeling Bulk Polymerization Using FRP and ATRP
27
2.3.2
Modeling Regeneration of Severed Polymer Gels with Interfacially Active
Nanorods
32
2.3.3
Modeling the Formation of Polymer–Clay Composite Gels
43
2.4
Conclusions
47
Acknowledgments
48
References
49

vi
Contents
3
Theory and Simulation Studies of Self-Assembly of Helical
Particles
53
Giorgio Cinacchi, Alberta Ferrarini, Elisa Frezza, Achille Giacometti and
Hima Bindu Kolli
3.1
Introduction: Why Hard Helices?
53
3.2
Liquid Crystal Phases
55
3.3
Hard Helices: A Minimal Model
56
3.4
Numerical Simulations
57
3.4.1
Monte Carlo in Various Ensembles
57
3.4.1.1
Canonical Monte Carlo simulations (NVT–MC)
59
3.4.1.2
Isothermal–Isobaric Monte Carlo Simulations (NPT–MC)
59
3.4.2
Details on the MC Simulation of Hard Helices
59
3.5
Onsager (Density Functional) Theory
61
3.6
Onsager-Like Theory for the Cholesteric and Screw-Nematic Phases
64
3.7
Order Parameters and Correlation Functions
67
3.7.1
Nematic Order Parameter ⟨P2⟩
68
3.7.2
Screw-Like Nematic Order Parameter
68
3.7.3
Smectic Order Parameter
70
3.7.4
Hexatic Order Parameter
70
3.7.5
Parallel and Perpendicular Pair Correlation Functions
71
3.8
The Physical Origin of Cholesteric and Screw-Like Order
73
3.9
The Phase Diagram of Hard Helices
74
3.9.1
The Equation of State
75
3.9.2
Phase Diagrams in the Volume Fraction–Pitch Plane
76
3.9.2.1
Phase Diagram for r = 0.1
77
3.9.2.2
Phase Diagram for r = 0.2
78
3.9.2.3
Phase Diagram for r = 0.4
79
3.10
Helical (Bio)Polymers and Colloidal Particles
79
3.11
Conclusions and Perspectives
81
Acknowledgments
82
References
82
4
Self-Consistent Field Theory of Self-Assembling Multiblock
Copolymers
85
Weihua Li and An-Chang Shi
4.1
Introduction
85
4.2
Theoretical Framework: Self-Consistent Field Theory of Block
Copolymers
88
4.3
Numerical Methods of SCFT
90
4.3.1
Reciprocal-Space Method
90
4.3.2
Real-Space Method
93
4.3.3
Pseudo-Spectral Method
95
4.3.4
Fourth-Order Pseudo-Spectral Method
98
4.4
Application of SCFT to Multiblock Copolymers
98
4.5
Conclusions and Discussions
104
Acknowledgments
107
References
107

Contents
vii
5
Simulation Models of Soft Janus and Patchy Particles
109
Zhan-Wei Li, Zhao-Yan Sun and Zhong-Yuan Lu
5.1
Introduction
109
5.2
Soft Janus Particle Models
111
5.2.1
Soft One-Patch Janus Particle Model
111
5.2.2
Soft ABA-Type Triblock Janus Particle Model
113
5.2.3
Soft BAB-Type Triblock Janus Particle Model
114
5.2.4
Integration Algorithm
116
5.3
Soft Patchy Particle Models
117
5.3.1
The Model
117
5.3.2
Integration Algorithm
118
5.4
Physical Meanings of the Simulation Parameters in Our Models
121
5.5
GPU Acceleration
121
5.6
Self-Assembly of Soft Janus and Patchy Particles
122
5.6.1
Self-Assembly of Soft One-Patch Janus Particles
122
5.6.2
The Role of Particle Softness in Self-Assembling Diﬀerent Supracolloidal
Helices
123
5.6.3
Self-Assembly of Soft ABA-Type Triblock Janus Particles
124
5.6.4
Template-Free Fabrication of Two-Dimensional Exotic Nanostructures
through the Self-Assembly of Soft BAB-Type Triblock Janus Particles
125
5.6.5
Self-Assembly of Soft Multi-Patch Particles
126
5.7
Conclusions
127
Acknowledgments
128
References
128
6
Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus Capsid Formation, Maturation,
and Envelopment
134
Jehoon Kim and Jianzhong Wu
6.1
Introduction
134
6.2
Molecular Thermodynamics of Capsid Formation
140
6.2.1
Energetics of Viral Assembly
141
6.2.1.1
Rigid Capsids
141
6.2.1.2
Nucleocapsids
144
6.2.2
Thermodynamics of Capsid Formation and Stability
147
6.2.2.1
Stability of CTD-Free Empty Capsids
147
6.2.2.2
Stability of Nucleocapsids
150
6.2.3
Modulation Eﬀects
152
6.2.4
T3/T4 Dimorphism
153
6.3
Electrostatics of Genome Packaging
154
6.3.1
Thermodynamics of RNA Encapsidation
155
6.3.2
The Optimal Genome Size of an HBV Nucleocapsid
157
6.3.3
Charge Balance between Packaged RNA and CTD Tails
157
6.4
Dynamic Structure of HBV Nucleocapsids
159
6.4.1
Structure of WT and Mutant Nucleocapsids
159
6.4.2
The Location of CTD Residues
161
6.4.3
Implication of the CTD Exposure
165
6.4.4
The Eﬀect of Phosphorylation of Capsid Structure
165

viii
Contents
6.5
Capsid Envelopment with Surface Proteins
167
6.6
Summary and Outlook
171
Acknowledgments
173
References
174
7
Simulation Studies of Metal–Ligand Self-Assembly
186
Makoto Yoneya
7.1
Introduction
186
7.2
Modeling Metal–Ligand Self-Assembly
187
7.2.1
Modeling Metals, Ligands and their Interactions
187
7.2.2
Modeling Solvents
189
7.2.3
Computational Methods
190
7.3
Self-Assembly of Supramolecular Coordination Complex
190
7.3.1
Self-Assembly of M6L8 Spherical Complex
190
7.3.2
Self-Assembly of M12L24 Spherical Complex
194
7.4
Self-Assembly of Metal–Organic Frameworks
198
7.4.1
Self-Assembly of 2D-Like MOF
198
7.4.2
Self-Assembly of 3D-Like MOF
200
7.5
Conclusion and Outlook
203
Acknowledgments
204
References
204
8
Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles: Membrane-Mediated
Interaction, Internalization Pathways, and Cooperative Eﬀect
208
Falin Tian, Tongtao Yue, Ye Li and Xianren Zhang
8.1
Introduction
208
8.2
N-Varied DPD Technique
210
8.2.1
Traditional DPD Method
210
8.2.2
N-Varied DPD Method
210
8.3
The Interaction between NP and Membrane
211
8.3.1
Membrane-Mediated Interaction between NPs
211
8.3.2
Internalization Pathways of the NPs
214
8.3.2.1
NP Properties Aﬀecting the NP–Membrane Interaction
216
8.3.2.2
The Eﬀect of Membrane Properties on NP–Membrane Interaction
221
8.4
Cooperative Eﬀect between NPs during Internalization
222
8.5
Conclusions
226
References
226
9
Theories for Polymer Melts Consisting of Rod–Coil Polymers
230
Ying Jiang and JeﬀZ. Y. Chen
9.1
Introduction
230
9.1.1
Rod–Coil Polymers and Recent Theoretical Progress
230
9.1.2
Basic Parameters
235
9.1.2.1
Molecular Parameters
235
9.1.2.2
Polymer-Melt Parameters
236
9.1.2.3
Other Parameters
236
9.2
Theoretical Models
237

Contents
ix
9.2.1
The Ideal Rod–Coil Diblock Model
237
9.2.1.1
Comments
237
9.2.1.2
Formalism
237
9.2.2
The Lattice Model
240
9.2.2.1
Comments
240
9.2.2.2
Formalism
240
9.2.3
The Wormlike–wormlike diblock model
242
9.2.3.1
Comments
242
9.2.3.2
Formalism
242
9.2.3.3
Reduction to the Rod–Coil Problem
244
9.2.4
Numerical Algorithms
245
9.2.4.1
Comments
245
9.2.4.2
Lattice Sampling
245
9.2.4.3
Spectral Method
245
9.2.4.4
Pseudo-Spectral Method for GSC Propagator and Finite Diﬀerence for Rod
Probability
246
9.2.4.5
Single-Chain Mean-Field Calculation
246
9.2.4.6
Finite Diﬀerence Method for a WLC Problem
247
9.2.4.7
Combined Finite Diﬀerence and Spherical Harmonics Expansion
247
9.2.4.8
Full Spectral Method for a WLC Problem
247
9.2.4.9
Pseudospectral Method for a WLC Problem
248
9.2.4.10 Pseudospectral Backward Diﬀerentiation Formula Method for a WLC
Problem
248
9.3
Concluding Remarks
250
References
251
10
Theoretical and Simulation Studies of Hierarchical Nanostructures
Self-Assembled from Soft Matter Systems
254
Liangshun Zhang and Jiaping Lin
10.1
Introduction
254
10.2
Computational Modeling and Methods
255
10.2.1
Particle-Based Methods
255
10.2.2
Field-Based Methods
256
10.3
Hierarchical Nanostructures of Block Copolymer Melts
256
10.3.1
Hierarchical Structures Self-Assembled from ABC Terpolymers
257
10.3.2
Hierarchical Patterns Self-Assembled from Multiblock Copolymers
259
10.3.3
Hierarchical Structures Self-Assembled from Supramolecular
Polymers
262
10.4
Hierarchical Aggregates of Block Copolymer Solutions
264
10.4.1
Hierarchical Aggregates Self-Assembled from Block Copolymer
Solutions
265
10.4.2
Multicompartment Aggregates Self-Assembled from Triblock Terpolymer
Solutions
267
10.4.3
Multicompartment Aggregates Self-Assembled from Amphiphilic Copolymer
Blends
270

x
Contents
10.4.3.1 Mixtures of Diblock Copolymers
270
10.4.3.2 Blends of Terpolymers and Copolymers
270
10.4.3.3 Blends of Distinct Terpolymers
271
10.4.3.4 Multicomponent Rigid Homopolymer/Rod–Coil Diblock Copolymer
Systems
272
10.5
Hierarchically Ordered Nanocomposites Self-Assembled from
Organic–Inorganic Systems
272
10.5.1
Hierarchical Self-Assembly of Block Copolymer/Nanoparticle Mixtures
273
10.5.2
Hierarchical Self-Assembly of Polymer/Nanoparticle/Solvent Systems
275
10.6
Conclusions and Perspectives
277
10.6.1
New Theoretical Insights
277
10.6.2
Horizontal Multiscale Modeling
278
10.6.3
Inverse Design Strategy
278
10.6.4
Element–Structure–Property Relationships
278
Acknowledgments
278
References
279
11
Nucleation in Colloidal Systems: Theory and Simulation
288
Ran Ni
11.1
Introduction
288
11.2
Theory of Nucleation
289
11.2.1
Free Energy Barrier
291
11.2.2
Kinetics of Nucleation
293
11.2.3
Equilibrium Distribution of Cluster Sizes
295
11.3
Order Parameter
296
11.4
Simulation Methods for Studying Nucleation
298
11.4.1
Brute Force Molecular Dynamics Simulations
299
11.4.2
Umbrella Sampling
299
11.4.3
Forward Flux Sampling
301
11.5
Crystal Nucleation of Hard Spheres: Debates and Progress
304
11.6
Two-Step Nucleation in Systems of Attractive Colloids
308
11.7
Nucleation of Anisotropic Colloids
310
11.8
Crystal Nucleation in Binary Mixtures
313
11.9
Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
316
Acknowledgments
316
References
316
12
Atomistic and Coarse-Grained Simulation of Liquid Crystals
320
Saientan Bag, Suman Saurabh, Yves Lansac and Prabal K. Maiti
12.1
Introduction
320
12.2
Thermotropic Liquid Crystal
321
12.2.1
Fully Atomistic Simulation
321
12.2.2
Coarse-Grained Model
328
12.3
Discotic Liquid Crystals
339

Contents
xi
12.4
Chromonic Liquid Crystals
344
12.5
Conclusion and Outlook
347
Acknowledgment
347
References
348
Index
353

xiii
List of Contributors
Saientan Bag
Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
India
Anna C Balazs
Department of Chemical and Petroleum
Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
USA
Hima Bindu Kolli
Department of Chemistry
University of Oslo
Norway
JeﬀZ. Y. Chen
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Waterloo
Canada
Giorgio Cinacchi
Departamento de Física Teórica de la
Materia Condensada
Instituto de Física de la Materia
Condensada (IFIMAC), and Instituto de
Ciencias de Materiales “Nicolás
Cabreras”
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Spain
Alberta Ferrarini
Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche
Università di Padova
Italy
Elisa Frezza
BMSSI, UMR 5086 CNRS / Institut de
Biologie et Chimie des Protéines
Université de Lyon I
France
Achille Giacometti
Dipartimento di Scienze Molecolari e
Nanosistemi
Università Ca’ Foscari di Venezia
Italy
Zihan Huang
Department of Chemical Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing
China
Ying Jiang
School of Chemistry and Environment
Beihang University
Beijing
China
Jehoon Kim
Department of Chemical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge
USA
Olga Kuksenok
Department of Materials Science and
Engineering Clemson University
USA

xiv
List of Contributors
Yves Lansac
GREMAN, Université François Rabelais
CNRS UMR 7347
Tours
France
Weihua Li
Department of Macromolecular Science
Fudan University
Shanghai
China
Ye Li
State Key Laboratory of Organic–
Inorganic Composites
Beijing University of Chemical
Technology
China
Zhan-Wei Li
Changchun Institute of Applied
Chemistry
Chinese Academy of Sciences
China
Jiaping Lin
School of Materials Science and
Engineering
East China University of Science and
Technology
Shanghai
China
Zhong-Yuan Lu
Institute of Theoretical Chemistry
Jilin University
Changchun
China
Prabal K. Maiti
Deparment of Physics
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
India
Ran Ni
School of Chemical and Biomedical
Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
Suman Saurabh
Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
India
An-Chang Shi
Department of Physics and Astronomy
McMaster University
Hamilton
Canada
Stephen C. Snow
Department of Chemical and Petroleum
Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
USA
Zhao-Yan Sun
Changchun Institute of Applied
Chemistry
Chinese Academy of Sciences
China
Falin Tian
State Key Laboratory of Organic–
Inorganic Composites
Beijing University of Chemical
Technology
China
Jianzhong Wu
Department of Chemical and
Environmental Engineering
University of California
Riverside
USA

List of Contributors
xv
Li-Tang Yan
Department of Chemical Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing
China
Makoto Yoneya
Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AIST)
Higashi
Tsukuba
Japan
Xin Yong
Department of Mechanical Engineering
State University of New York at
Binghamton
USA
Tongtao Yue
State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil
Processing
China University of Petroleum
(East China)
Qingdao
China
Liangshun Zhang
School of Materials Science and
Engineering
East China University of Science and
Technology
Shanghai
China
Xianren Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Organic–
Inorganic Composites
Beijing University of Chemical
Technology
China

xvii
Preface
Self-assembly is one of the most prominent and promising candidates for the devel-
opment of novel materials with high performance. However, in order to successfully
exploit them in technological applications and to ensure eﬃcient scale-up, an in-depth
understanding of structure formation, kinetic mechanism and structure–property
relationship is required. Theoretical studies and tailored computer simulations oﬀer
unique approaches to investigate the evolution and formation of structures as well as
to determine structure–property relationships in self-assembled systems. In light of
the growing interest in the design and synthesis of building blocks for the self-assembly
of complex structures, this book looks at the ﬁeld of self-assembly from a theoretical
perspective, highlighting the importance of computational studies to support the
design of new self-assembling materials with useful structural and properties. The aim
of this book is to bring together leading scientists working on the issues in theoretical
and simulation research of self-assembly, and to oﬀer researchers and graduate students
an in-depth review of the most recent developments in this ﬁeld.
The book begins with discussions on the fundamental principles of self-assembly. In
addition to the general aspect and emerging concepts presented in the ﬁrst chapter,
Balazs and coworkers introduce in Chapter 2 developing hybrid modeling methods to
simulate self-assembly in polymer nanocomposites, focusing on new computational
approaches to model two types of radical polymerization, namely free radical poly-
merization and atom transfer radical polymerization, in the framework of dissipative
particle dynamics. Helical biopolymers and colloidal particles could exhibit liquid
crystal phases at high densities. These phases are often tacitly assumed to be the same
as those occurring in systems of rod-like particles. To explore the eﬀect of self-assembly
of helical polymers and colloids, and in particular to discover whether there is anything
special just determined by the helical shape, Giacometti and coworkers have under-
taken a comprehensive investigation of the phase behavior of hard helices, interacting
through purely steric repulsions, using Monte Carlo simulations and an extension of
Onsager theory, a density functional theory that was originally proposed to explain the
onset of nematic ordering in a system of hard rods. The details regarding this interesting
work are presented in Chapter 3.
The content then moves on to computational tools and techniques for the simula-
tion of self-assembling systems. Two state-of-the-art and important methods or mod-
els are emphasized in this section. The ﬁrst is self-consistent ﬁeld theory (SCFT) of
self-assembling multiblock copolymers. In Chapter 4, Li and Shi introduce the recent
applications of diﬀerent methods of SCFT to the study of the self-assembly of block

xviii
Preface
copolymers. In particular, they focus on a review of recent progress in the study of the
self-assembly of multiblock copolymers, alongside some speciﬁc details of the numer-
ical techniques. Undoubtedly, this chapter can serve as a very useful reference source
for readers who are interested in applying SCFT to multiblock copolymer systems. The
second is the simulation model of soft anisotropic particles developed by Li, Sun and Lu.
In Chapter 5, they introduce two major kinds of general and eﬀective mesoscale models
to describe the aggregation behavior of soft Janus and patchy particles: the soft Janus
particle model and soft patchy particle model.
In the last section, the latest research advances of diﬀerent emerging topics are
reviewed and consolidated. The ﬁrst topic is the application of theory and simulation
to self-assembly in biological systems, described in three chapters. In Chapter 6,
Kim and Wu analyze the formation of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) core particles,
viral maturation mechanisms and essential ingredients of antiviral strategies from a
thermodynamic perspective. Importantly, statistical mechanical models are used by
them to quantify the thermodynamics of the HBV genome packaging, the dynamic
structures for the ﬂexible domains of the viral capsids during maturation, and the
stability of the core viral particles before and after RNA encapsidation. In biological
systems, hydrogen bonds are known to play a crucial role in the structure formation
of a DNA helix, protein alpha-helix and beta-sheet, among others. Compared to this
hydrogen-bond-directed
self-assembly,
coordination-bond-directed
self-assembly
is less pronounced in biological systems, but has been extensively studied recently
in synthetic chemistry. In Chapter 7, Yoneya introduces MD simulation studies of
metal-ligand self-assembly, emphasizing the useful applications of their modeling
method. This method ﬁlls the gap between simulations and real reaction systems.
Studying the interaction between biomembrane and nanoparticles is essential for
understanding the nature of cellular life and for the safe application of nanoparticles.
In Chapter 8, Zhang and coworkers summarize recent developments of computer
simulation studies on the nanoparticle–membrane interaction, and particularly stress
the results from dissipative particle dynamics simulation. They particularly concentrate
on membrane-mediated interaction, internalization pathways and cooperative eﬀect.
The second topic in the last section is the application and development of theoretical
approaches to self-assembling systems. In Chapter 9, Jiang and Chen introduce theories
for polymer melts consisting of rod-coil polymers. An interesting model based on the
wormlike chain model and developed by them is emphasized, which can describe the
crossover of the polymer chain from the rod limit to the ﬂexible limit. In the other
chapter (Chapter 10), Zhang and Lin describe recent progress in design strategies of
structural hierarchy from the view of computational modeling, concentrating on the
superstructures of polymer-based systems via the multistep process of self-assembly.
The following topics are involved: (1) hierarchical nanostructures self-assembled
from block copolymer melts, (2) multicompartment aggregates from block copolymer
solutions, and (3) hierarchically ordered nanocomposites formed by organic–inorganic
systems. They ﬁnally conclude with a brief but very useful outlook on challenges and
perspectives.
The third topic in the last section turns to the simulation studies of the self-assemblies
in colloidal systems. In Chapter 11, Ni reviews recent progress in nucleation studies in
colloidal systems by using computer simulations, which includes the classical descrip-
tion of nucleation, i.e. classic nucleation theory, state-of-the-art simulation methods for

Preface
xix
studying nucleation, and the new nucleation phenomena observed violating the classic
understanding of nucleation as well as the important future directions of nucleation
study that have not yet been explored well. The liquid crystalline phase is ubiquitous
in nature and is exhibited by a variety of systems like surfactants, nucleic acids, lipid
molecules, etc. Simulation methods employed to study liquid crystalline phases range
from molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, Brownian dynamics to dissipative particle
dynamics. Maiti and coworkers present a comprehensive view of the various methods
used in simulating self-assembly phenomena in liquid crystals in Chapter 12.
Written by specialists in various disciplines, such as polymers, soft matter, nanopar-
ticle self-assembly, biophysics, and so on, this book provides comprehensive knowledge
in this emerging and important ﬁeld, although covering all aspects of the ﬁeld is impos-
sible. From the editor’s point of view, I am very pleased and honored with the principles,
methods and outlook conceived in each chapter, and would also like to express my most
heartfelt thanks to all contributors who delivered truly excellent topics of research and
took the time to write up detailed and pedagogical chapters.
February 2016
Li-Tang Yan

1
1
Theoretical Studies and Tailored Computer Simulations in
Self-Assembling Systems: A General Aspect
Zihan Huang and Li-Tang Yan
Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials (MOE), Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
1.1
Introduction
Self-assembly—a governing principle by which materials form—is the autonomous
organization of matter into ordered arrangements [1, 2]. It is typically associated with
thermodynamic equilibrium, the organized structures being characterized by a mini-
mum in the system’s free energy, although this deﬁnition is too broad. Self-assembling
processes are ubiquitous in nature, ranging, for example, from the opalescent inner
surface of the abalone shell to the internal compartments of a living cell [3]. By these
processes, nanoparticles or other discrete components spontaneously organize due to
direct speciﬁc interactions and/or indirectly, through their environment. Self-assembly
is one of the few practical strategies for making ensembles of nanostructures. It
will therefore be an essential part of nanotechnology. Self-assembly is also common
to many dynamic, multicomponent systems, from smart materials and self-healing
structures to netted sensors and computer networks. In the world of biology,
living cells self-assemble, and understanding life will therefore require understanding
self-assembly. The cell also oﬀers countless examples of functional self-assembly that
stimulate the design of non-living systems [4, 5].
Self-assembly reﬂects information coded (as shape, surface properties, charge,
polarizability, magnetic dipole, mass, etc.) in individual components; these char-
acters determine the interaction among them. The design of building blocks that
organize themselves into desired structure and functions is the key to applications
of self-assembly [2]. Much of materials science and soft condensed-matter physics
in the past century involved the study of self-assembly of fundamental building
blocks (typically atoms, molecules, macromolecules, and colloidal particles) into bulk
thermodynamic phases [6]. Today, the extent to which these building blocks can be
engineered has undergone a quantum leap. Tailor-made, submicrometer particles
will be the building blocks of a new generation of nanostructured materials with
unique physical properties [7–11]. These new building blocks will be the “atoms” and
“molecules” of tomorrow’s materials, self-assembling into novel structures made possi-
ble solely by their unique design [2]. For example, patchy particles consisting of various
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

2
Self-Assembling Systems
compartments of diﬀerent chemistry or polarity are ideal building blocks of potentially
complex shapes with competing interactions that expand the range of self-assembled
structures beyond those exhibited by traditional amphiphiles such as surfactants
and block copolymers [9]. By controlling the placement of “sticky” patches on the
particles, assemblies can be made that mimic atomic bonding in molecules [8]. This
greatly expands the range of structures that can be assembled from small components.
Extension of the principles to particles of alternative compositions (such as those made
from noble metals, semiconductors or oxides) will allow optical, electronic and catalytic
materials to be coupled in previously impossible architectures that have potentially
new emergent properties. Playing tricks with designer “atoms” also includes the shape
of the building blocks [12]. For instance, the local curvature of dumbbell-shaped
nanoparticles can be harnessed to control the ionization state of a molecular layer
adsorbed on their surfaces and the self-assembly patterns of the particles [13].
Understanding the relation between building blocks and their assemblies is essential
for materials design because physical properties depend intimately on structure, which
however poses many challenges if considering complex thermodynamic and kinetic
behaviors involved in the assembling processes. Indeed, a priori prediction of hierar-
chically assembled structures from a desired building block requires an in-depth under-
standing of the delicate balance between entropic and enthalpic interactions [14–17].
Central to this issue is exploring entropy-driven structural organization, because
entropy keeps springing non-intuitive ﬁndings in the manipulation of the self-assembly
of nanoparticles and the structural formation of soft matter systems [14]. On the other
hand, directed self-assembly using a template or an external ﬁeld may also give rise to
novel ordered non-equilibrium structures, free from the constraints of entropy max-
imization, and hence these systems can “reside” in a state of local equilibrium within
the global free energy with low entropy states often characterized by complex spatial
or coherent spatiotemporal organization [18]. In this case, identifying the possible
structures at metastable states is important for controlling the formation of structures
or patterns. Not surprisingly, many advances have been made in theoretical models and
simulation approaches to predict and analyze structures, dynamics and properties of
self-assembling systems; computer simulations oﬀer a unique approach to identify and
separate individual contributions to the phenomenon or process of interest [19, 20].
However, the theoretical and computational research of self-assembling systems is
far from trivial. These many-body systems cover variations in relevant time and length
scales over many orders of magnitude. The assembled structures and macroscopic
properties of materials are ultimately to be deduced from the dynamics of the
microscopic, molecular level, implicating a lot of demand for new simulation techniques
and theoretical approaches. From the computational point of view, the key is to develop
methods capable of reaching time and length scales much larger than those accessible
by brute force computer simulations on the atomic level [21]. The feat is not a simple
one, since it requires a major eﬀort over a wide range of activities, including the devel-
opment of coarse graining techniques, novel simulation methods and ways to link the
diﬀerent regimes to each other. Even with these challenges, theory and simulations have
proven invaluable and indispensable in studies of self-assembling systems, including
applications in numerous directions such as development and examination of new prin-
ciples, predictive science and computer design of complex building blocks, suggesting
guidelines of programmable assembly, and exploring entropy interaction in various

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
3
assembling systems, etc. The purpose of this chapter is therefore to introduce the general
aspects of the development and applications of theoretical approaches and computa-
tional modeling in self assembling systems, focusing on basic and emerging principles.
1.2
Emerging Self-Assembling Principles
1.2.1
Predictive Science and Rational Design of Complex Building Blocks
Predicting structure from the attributes of a material’s building blocks remains a
challenge and the central goal for materials science. Here we introduce the rational
design and predictive science of two emerging and important building blocks for
superstructure construction through self-assembly, that is, polyhedral particles and
particles that can self-assemble into helical structures with chirality.
At present, a major focus in material science is to engineer particles with anisotropic
shapes and interaction ﬁelds that can be self-assembled into complex target structures
[1, 2]. Assemblies of anisotropic particles undergo order–disorder transitions involving
changes in both translational and rotational degrees of freedom and can lead to phases
with partial structural order or “mesophases” [22, 23] such as crystals, plastic crystals
and liquid crystals. These ordered assemblies have distinctive electronic, optical and
dynamical properties and are highly desirable for fabrication of advanced electronic,
photonic and rheological devices [24]. Although numerous theoretical [25, 26] and
experimental [27, 28] studies on mesophase behavior of particles with anisotropic
shapes have been reported, a roadmap marking out the most probable mesophases that
could be formed by constituent particles with particular geometrical features remains
incomplete. Exploring such relations will translate into a deeper understanding of
the phase behavior of colloidal systems with diﬀerent particle shapes. The simulation
prediction of a dodecagonal quasicrystal with tetrahedra demonstrated the unexpected
complexity that could be achieved for particles solely with hard interactions [29].
Escobedo and Agarwal [30] carried out detailed Monte Carlo simulations of six
convex space-ﬁlling polyhedrons to demonstrate that translational and orientational
excluded-volume ﬁelds encoded in particles with anisotropic shapes can lead to purely
entropy-driven assembly of morphologies with speciﬁc order and symmetry. Their sim-
ulations reveal the formation of various new liquid-crystalline and plastic-crystalline
phases at intermediate volume fractions. They further propose simple guidelines for
predicting phase behavior of polyhedral particles: high rotational symmetry is in general
conducive to mesophase formation, with low anisotropy favoring plastic-solid behavior
and intermediate anisotropy (or high uniaxial anisotropy) favoring liquid-crystalline
behavior.
Recently, a more reﬁned structure prediction of polyhedral particles has been attained
by Glotzer et al. [31] through investigating 145 convex polyhedra whose assembly arises
solely from their anisotropic shape. Their simulations demonstrate that from simple
measures of particle shape and local order in the ﬂuid, the assembly of a given shape into
a liquid crystal, plastic crystal or crystal can be predicted. Two important shape param-
eters that were revealed to predict the general category of ordered structure are the
coordination number and the isoperimetric quotient (Figure 1.1). Although still unable
to predict a speciﬁc structure, their results provide an important step toward a predictive

4
Self-Assembling Systems
15
Glass2
TCP
BCC
BCC
FCC (HCP)
Cubic
LC
Tetra
FCC
CRYSTALS
LIQUID
CRYSTALS
PLASTIC
CRYSTALS
10
Bravais
Lattice
Discotic
Glass1
Smectic
Nematic
Non-Bravais
Lattice
Coordination number (Dense fluid)
Coordination number (Dense fluid)
Coordination number (Ordered phase)
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Isoperimetric quotient
(a)
(b)
0.6
0.8
1.0
5
15
10
0
0
5
10
15
5
Figure 1.1 (a) The coordination number in the ﬂuid phase, CNf, is correlated to the isoperimetric
quotient (IQ) of the polyhedron. Here, IQ is a scalar parameter for the sphericity of the shape and
coordination number is a measure of the degree of local order. Data points are drawn as small
polyhedra, which are grouped according to the assemblies they form. (b) Polyhedra have, in most
cases, nearly identical coordination numbers in the ordered phase (CNo) and the ﬂuid phase (CNf)
close to the ordering transition. Because of this strong correlation, combining CNf and IQ allows for
prediction of the assembly category expected for most cases. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [31].
Copyright permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science (2012). (See insert for
color representation of the ﬁgure.).
science of nanoparticle and colloidal assembly, which will be necessary to guide exper-
iments with families of polyhedrally shaped particles that are now becoming available.
Rational design of building blocks for self-assembly can be signiﬁcantly facilitated
if the ﬁnal structure can be predicted as a function of the building block parameters
[30–33]. The interaction ﬁelds and anisotropic shapes encoded in the building blocks
allow potential approaches for such a prediction. However, considering the complex
energy landscape and kinetic pathway, the predictive science of sophisticated supra-
colloidal structures remains a key challenge. In particular, although numerous studies
on the predictive self-assembly of anisotropic particles have been reported [30, 31], a
priori prediction of helical supracolloidal structures from rationally designed building
blocks still lacks a general roadmap and has yet to be demonstrated. Helical structure
represents the principal element responsible for the property of chirality. Control over
chirality at nano- and mesoscales is rapidly becoming a goal of great scientiﬁc interest
because such unique architectures will allow optical, plasmonic and catalysis materials
to have distinctively emergent properties [34–36]. This aspect is particularly relevant
for photonic applications [37], where the optical properties are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by the periodically arranged unit cells. Molecular scaﬀolds such as DNA origami
can enable the high-yield production of superstructures that contain nanoparticles
arranged in nanometer-scale helices [38]. However, large-scale fabrication of these
scaﬀolds poses a signiﬁcant hurdle for many practical applications.
The notion of a directional interaction ﬁeld encoded by the surface patches suggests
that patchy particles can be used to generate supracolloidal helices without ﬁxed
templates that oﬀer limited controllability and may penalize the properties of particle
assemblies [39, 40]. However, the ability to design and control supracolloidal helices

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
5
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
x
y
z
θ
φ
Figure 1.2 Tunable helical supracolloidal structures from a facile particle model. (a) Cartoon of patchy
particle model used in the simulations. The top patch is a self-complementary patch while the other
two patches are a pair of complementary patches. The relative directions of these patches are
determined by angles 𝜃and 𝜑. (b) Right-handed double-stranded helix formed from patchy particles
with patch direction of 𝜃= 60∘and 𝜑= 120∘. (c) Right-handed double-stranded helix with larger
pitch and radius than those in (b), where the parameters are set as 𝜃= 60∘, 𝜑= 150∘. (d) Left-handed
double-stranded helix formed from patchy particles with patch direction of 𝜃= 60∘and 𝜑= −120∘.
In (b)–(d), the building blocks and the top and side views of the helically supracolloidal structures
and their geometrical representation are shown. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. 41.Copyright
Permission from Nature Publishing Group (2014).
assembled from patchy particles or colloids is limited by the absence of a general pre-
diction principle. Challenges include exploring a facile design rule of patchy particles
for helical self-assembly and further establishing a critical prediction principle for
such supracolloidal architectures. Recently, inspired by biological helices, Guo et al.
[41] showed that the rational design of patchy arrangement and interaction can drive
patchy particles to self-assemble into biomolecular mimetic supracolloidal helices.
They further derived a facile design rule for encoding the target supracolloidal helices,
thus opening the doors to the predictive science of these supracolloidal architectures
(Figure 1.2). It is also found that kinetics and reaction pathway during the formation
of supracolloidal helices oﬀer a unique way to study supramolecular polymerization,
and that well-controlled supracolloidal helices can exhibit tailorable circular dichroism
eﬀects at visible wavelengths.
1.2.2
Entropy-Driven Ordering and Self-Assembly
Precise control of self-assembled structures remains a challenge because the structural
architectures are governed by an intricate balance of entropic and enthalpic interac-
tions. Central to this issue is exploring entropy-driven structural organization because
entropy keeps springing non-intuitive ﬁndings in the manipulation of the self-assembly
and the structural formation of soft matter systems [14–16, 42]. In fact, under-
standing entropic contributions to ordering transitions is essential for the design of
self-assembling systems with hierarchical structures. Various unexpected structures can

6
Self-Assembling Systems
form by self-assembly of tailor-made building blocks, and these can be designed so that
such structures increase the entropy of the system [43–45]. Indeed, over the past few
decades examples have been highlighted in which entropic interactions are exploited to
direct self-assemblies, such as self-assembly of complex colloids, shape-entropy medi-
ated particle assembly, hierarchical self-assembly in polymer nanocomposites, etc. In
this section, we brieﬂy summarize the advancement of these emerging topics as follow.
Entropy can be a subtle and elusive concept. Although in some sense it is the quantiﬁ-
cation of disorder, it has long been known that for hard colloidal spheres at high density
an ordered crystal has higher entropy than a disordered ﬂuid [46, 47]. Yet the formation
of a crystal seems to be at odds with the widespread notion of entropy as a measure of
disorder. Actually, this would only be possible if the entropy of the ordered phase were
higher than that of the disordered phase at the same density and temperature [14]. In the
system of densely packed hard colloidal spheres, the entropy loss caused by collective
ordering of the mean atomic positions is more than compensated by the fact that each
particle has more space to explore. Thus, the colloidal spheres must crystallize [into
hexagonal close-packed or face-centered cubic lattices in three dimensions, and the
hexagonal lattice in two dimensions (2D)] to gain accessible volume and thus entropy.
With patchy particles, however, this argument is partially reversed. Granick et al.
[48] show that, through decoration of the particle surfaces with a simple pattern of
hydrophobic domains, triblock Janus colloidal spheres can be induced to self-assemble
into an open kagome structure, contrasting with previously known close-packed
periodic arrangements of spheres. In this case, a crucial new factor is the “rotational
rattle room,” deﬁned by the solid angle that each particle can rotate before any of its
sticky patches lose contact with those of its neighbors (Figure 1.3a) [15]. A lost contact
would represent a “broken bond,” which is eﬀectively forbidden by its relatively high
energy penalty. Therefore, the rotational entropy of a patchy particle clearly depends
on its environment, in contrast to what occurs for non-patchy hard spheres, which
can always undergo complete rotation and for which entropy per particle is always a
constant. Recently, Mao et al. [49] showed that under well-motivated limiting assump-
tions the rotational-entropy contribution is calculable analytically. They constructed an
eﬀective description of the interactions in a system of patchy particles with ﬂuctuating
lattice positions, and compared it with experimental data on the mode structure of
lattice vibrations for triblock Janus spheres. Their calculations determined that in two
dimensions the kagome lattice is more stable than the close-packed hexagonal lattice.
Both lattices have four bonds per particle and thus the same energy, but at close packing
the latter has two additional non-bonded contacts (Figure 1.3b). In a hexagonal crystal
of the same density as the kagome lattice (whose maximum density is lower), patchy
particles have more room to rattle translationally, but the combined entropy of rotation
and vibration is reduced. For densities that are not too high, the latter eﬀect dominates,
and the kagome lattice is stabilized.
If the particles are non-spherical, the optimal packing geometry is not always
clear. The systematic study of families of idealized colloidal and nanoscale systems by
computer simulation has produced overwhelming evidence that shape is implicated in
the self-assembly of model systems of particles [50, 51]. In these model systems, the only
intrinsic forces between particles are steric, and the entropic eﬀects of shape (which
we term “shape entropy”) can be isolated. Damasceno et al. [31] have recently shown
that arbitrarily shaped hard polyhedra display considerable predictability in their dense

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
7
α
(a)
(b)
α = 120°
α = 120°
αʹ
Figure 1.3 The rotational “rattle room” of patchy colloids. (a) Bonded contacts between triblock Janus
spheres are maintained as long as the edges of the overlaid triangles cross the attractive dark gray
patches. For a ﬁxed particle conﬁguration, the angular excursions that a particle can make without
breaking any of its four contacts are independent of the corresponding excursions of neighboring
particles. In two dimensions such a rotational entropy can therefore be calculated one particle at a
time, and depends only on the bond angles 𝛼and 𝛼′. (b) The hexagonal (left) and kagome (right)
lattices have the same number of bonded contacts and thus the same energy per particle. However,
for moderate densities, particles in a kagome lattice have less room to rattle by translation, yet more
entropy from rotational and vibrational motions, than particles in a hexagonal lattice at the same
density. The latter eﬀect dominates, which favors the formation of the kagome crystal over the
hexagonal. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [15]. Copyright permission from Nature Publishing
Group (2013).
packing arrangements. Depending on their shape, some polyhedra will form ordered
crystals, while others form liquid crystals, “plastic” crystals in which the particles rotate
freely, or disordered glasses. The entropic forces promoting the dense phases here heed
details of particle shape: in particular, there is often a propensity for particles to sit face
to face with facets aligned, creating directional preferences that can lead to ordered
self-assembly. However, the origin and strength of these forces are unclear.
Using computer simulations of polyhedral packings, Anders et al. [52] clarify the
concept of a shape-dependent directional entropic force, showing that it can be given
a rigorous description based on the role of shape and faceting in maximizing the
entropy of dense packings. As such, the force is an emergent property of local particle
conﬁgurations, and it typically manifests itself for polyhedra as a repulsion between
corners and an attraction between faces. For these systems the force is typically of the
order of a few kT (where k is Boltzmann’s constant and T is temperature), making it
comparable to van der Waals and depletion forces.
Another common example of entropy-driven self-assembly is polymer nanocom-
posite in which the mixing of polymers and nanoparticles is opening pathways for
engineering ﬂexible composites that exhibit advantageous electrical, optical or mechan-
ical properties [16, 17, 53]. One typical system is diblock copolymer/nanoparticle
mixtures where the microphase separation of the copolymer can direct the spatial

8
Self-Assembling Systems
0.78
0.77
0.76
–TSA
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.72
0.025
Self-assembled
Non-self-assembled
0.05
0.075
0.1
0.125
0.15
0.175
0.2
ϕp
Figure 1.4 A-block entropic free energy contribution −TSA (where SA is the conformational entropy
of the A block) per polymer chain, for large particles (R = 0.3R0, gray curve) and small particles
(R = 0.15R0, black curve), as a function of 𝜙p. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [56]. Permission from
American Association for the Advancement of Science (2001).
distribution of nanoparticles and thereby tailor the properties of the composite
[54, 55]. The optical performance of composites, for example, is highly sensitive to the
speciﬁc location of the particles within the matrix, and the microphase separation of
block copolymers can be used to great advantage. However, block copolymers do not
simply “template” the arrangement of the nanoparticles. Because the nanoparticles
are solids, the polymer chains must stretch around these obstacles, causing a loss in
conformational entropy that increases with particle radius. In the absence of speciﬁc
interactions, larger nanoparticles are expelled from the bulk of the copolymers, whereas
smaller particles are not (Figure 1.4). This signiﬁcantly aﬀects the spatial distribution
of nanoparticles within homopolymers and block copolymers and the hierarchical
structure of particle-ﬁlled systems. Using a combination of self-consistent ﬁeld- and
density-functional theories, Thompson et al. [56] predicted that larger A-like particles
(i.e., particles that are compatible with the A blocks of AB copolymers) localize at the
center of the A microdomains, whereas smaller particles are more uniformly dispersed
within a speciﬁc microdomain.
The observations above imply that the spatial distribution of nanoparticles in the
microphase-separated morphologies can be controlled by tailoring the nanoparticle
ligands (i.e., enthalpic eﬀects) and the size of the nanoparticles relative to the radius
of gyration of the polymer (i.e., entropic eﬀects). For example, by blending A-like
nanoparticles of diﬀerent sizes with symmetric AB diblocks, one can fashion gradient
materials within the A lamellae, where the largest particles are localized in the center,
bordered by the next larger particles, which in turn are neighbored by smaller particles.
The entropic penalty associated with chain stretching around particles can also
be harnessed to tailor the precisely interfacial organization of Janus nanoparticles in

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
9
Figure 1.5 The Ka dependence of the excess
entropy per bead, SBB, calculated from the
pair correlation function between B-block
beads. The inset diagrams (a)–(c) show the
position of Janus nanoparticles and the
organization of the stiﬀB blocks around them
in response to the increase of the chain
stiﬀness. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref.
[59]. Copyright permission from American
Chemical Society (2015).
(a)
(b)
(c)
0
200
400
600
800
–24
–23
–22
–21
–20
–19
SBB/kB
Ka/kBT
the scaﬀold of block copolymers [57–59]. For example, by combining coarse-grained
molecular dynamics and a ﬁnite diﬀerence time domain technique, Dong et al. [59]
report entropy-mediated precise interfacial organization of Janus nanoparticles in
ﬂexible–semiﬂexible block copolymers and the resulting optical properties of this
heterogeneous material. They ﬁnd that the stiﬀness of the semiﬂexible block can
regulate the oﬀ-center distribution of symmetric Janus nanoparticles with respect
to the phase interface, featured by a roughly 35% deviation from the interface to the
utmost extent. The results reveal how entropic and enthalpic eﬀects in this multiphase
material contribute to the self-assembled morphologies and, in particular, can lead to
entropically driven spatial transition of interfacial nanostructures (Figure 1.5). This
might be the very ﬁrst simulation study to capture the chain stiﬀness-dependent spatial
transition in the interfacial assembly of nanoparticles, and thereby enables applications
of chain stiﬀness in precise control over the interfacial assembly of nanoparticles in
polymer scaﬀolds.
The entropic repulsion between tethered Janus nanoparticles at ﬂuid interfaces can
template the mixing of otherwise incompatible nanoparticles, toward perfect mixing of
binary nanoparticles at single-nanoparticle level [60, 61]. Indeed, by means of computer
simulations, Liu et al. [60] show novel mechanomutable nanocomposites designed by
binary mixtures of tethered Janus nanoparticles at the interface of a binary ﬂuid mixture
under mechanical pressure. The nanoparticle organization in the systems exhibits a
reversible transition between the random state and the long-ranged intercalation state
that can be eﬀectively controlled by various structural parameters of the tethered
chains and the applied pressure (Figure 1.6). The dynamics mechanism of the transition
is explored by examining the detailed trajectories of the interfacial nanoparticles
during their 2D diﬀusion. The origin driving the collective organization of the binary
Janus nanoparticles at the ﬂuid–ﬂuid interface is explained by combining computer
simulations and theoretical analysis, revealing that both the conformational entropy
eﬀect of the tethered chains and suﬃcient tether disparity dominate the collective
nanoparticle organization in the mechanical response behavior. The attractive feature
of the procedure proposed by this work is that the interfacial nanostructures are tuned
simply by pressing an accessible system containing binary tethered Janus particles in a
binary ﬂuid. The motif and ﬁndings described in this letter thereby suggest a facile route
to create well-deﬁned, responsive and ﬂexible nanopatterns formed by multicomponent

10
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 1.6 (a) Janus nanoparticles tethered with long and short ligand chains. (b) The random
arrangement of nanoparticles at the ﬂuid interface for the initial simulations. The gray plane surface
represents the ﬂuid interface whereas the ﬂuid beads are not shown for clarity. The arrows indicate
the lateral and vertical changes of the simulation box while applying mechanical pressure.
(c)–(e) Top-view snapshots of the interfacial nanoparticle patterns where S = S0 (c), S = 0.64S0 (d) and
S = S0 (e). The dashed circles in (c) and (e) highlight the phase domains of the same nanoparticle
component. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [60]. Copyright permission from American Chemical
Society (2014).
nanoparticles in the interface of wide ﬂuid mixtures, and consequently lead to a class
of interface-reactive nanocomposites toward technologically important materials and
devices.
1.2.3
Programmable Self-Assembly
Programmable self-assembly is an emerging and important concept for future materials
fabrication toward precisely controlled structures and optimized properties. For more
details of this concept please refer to a recent review by Cademartiri et al. [62]. Here
we brieﬂy summarize it and further introduce the theoretical aspect of the relative
researches. The programmed assembly of structures from their components requires
information [63, 64]—that is, instructions or guidance that direct the reproducible
formation of a particular structure from myriad possibilities (Figure 1.7). Such
“assembly information” must specify the location and connectivity of the building
blocks within the assembled structure and, often, the order and manner in which they
are added to it. The information encoded within the building blocks determines the

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
11
Top-down
Bottom-up
Encoding
Simple
components
Assembler
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
1
0
0
0
10
0100
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Self-assembly
Self-assembly
Complex structures
Simple structures
Simple or comlpex
structures
Simple
components
Informed
components
01
1
1
1
0
00
1
1
1
111
1
11
1
0
0101 00010
00
Figure 1.7 The role of information in top-down manufacturing and bottom-up self-assembly. Top-down manufacturing assembles simple building blocks into
complex objects by using assemblers. This approach has been the standard strategy for manufacturing, but becomes increasingly diﬃcult at the molecular and
nanoscale. By contrast, the bottom-up self-assembly of simple (high-symmetry) components invariably leads to simple structures. The self-assembly of
complex structures requires information-rich building blocks (informed components). This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [62]. Copyright permission from
Nature Publishing Group (2015).

12
Self-Assembling Systems
complexity of the ﬁnal structure [65], which at equilibrium minimizes the system’s free
energy and is determined by the accessible conﬁgurations and their respective energies.
In this context, assembly information is encoded into the building blocks in two
formats: constraints, which determine the accessible conﬁgurations, and interactions,
which determine their energy [62].
DNA may be the only practical chemical system that can produce the large numbers
of distinct and highly selective interactions preferred by programmable self-assembly
[62]. Interactions based on DNA hybridization are well suited for this approach because
of the large number of possible interactions, their high speciﬁcity and their tunable
strength, typically achieved by varying the number of bases in the “sticky ends” of
the DNA strands. Early examples of DNA-based interactions between nanoparticles
constructed mostly dimers and trimers [66, 67], and have since been extended to
achieve the reliable and programmable formation of nanocrystal superlattices [68, 69]
and well-deﬁned clusters [70, 71]. In this approach, colloidal building blocks present
multiple types of single-stranded DNA on their surface and organize to form structures
that maximize DNA hybridization [69]. Particle geometry can also modify both the
strength and directionality of attractive surface forces. For example, two cubic particles
coated with complementary DNA linkers will bind face to face to maximize DNA
hybridization [72]. Recent advances in colloidal synthesis oﬀer trivalent and tetravalent
particles that enable directional bonding via speciﬁc DNA-based linkers [8]. These
particles allow the programmed assembly of ﬁnite structures speciﬁed by assembly
information encoded within selective DNA-based interactions, well-deﬁned surface
patches and steric constraints due to particle shape and size.
Theoretical analysis and simulations have played an important role in understanding
the process and predicting the formed structures of programmable self-assembly.
The results have not only conﬁrmed the experimental results but also stimulate the
experiments by providing new predictions.
From the theoretical point of view, the ﬁrst analytical model was proposed by
Tkachenko [73] in 2002, who obtained a phase diagram as a function of two dimen-
sionless parameters. It was suggested that diamond, body-centered cubic (bcc) and
other lattices can be obtained by controlling interactions between two particles. Starr
et al. [74] have provided theoretical descriptions for equilibrium properties and the
dynamics of DNA-linked nanoparticles with concepts from polymer physics, which
was considered a successful way to describe novel self-assembly systems. Mirkin et al.
[69] have also proposed a rule-based complementary contact model (CCM) to predict
the crystal structures of DNA-grafted colloidal nanoparticles. Most recently, they
have further constructed a simpliﬁed model to study the kinetics of the crystallization
process, in which a given particle will transition between free, singly bound and doubly
bound states [75]. Based on numerical solving of the thermodynamic equations, the
variation of melting temperature and annealing window were predicted, suggesting
that the model is useful in the design of future crystals.
From the computer simulation point of view, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation
may be the most successful way to describe the dynamics of self-assembly. The ﬁrst
coarse-grained model for MD simulations was introduced by Sciortino et al. [76]. Later,
this model was modiﬁed by Starr et al. [77]. In 2011, Travesset et al. [78] provided a new
modiﬁed coarse-grained model to study the crystallization dynamics of DNA-coated
nanoparticle systems. A key development of this model is that ﬂanking beads are

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
13
(a)
(c)
x
FL
ssDNA
(Sticky end)
dsDNA
ssDNA
5'TTCCTT- A -TTGCTGAGTATAATTGTT3' - A10-(CH2)3S-GNP
3' AACGACTCATATTAACAA
(b)
Figure 1.8 Cartoon of the coarse-grained model. (a) A model DNA chain for a sequence used in the
experiments. The bead size for the dsDNA portion of the chain is 𝜎, corresponding to a diameter of
approximately 2 nm; the bead size for the ssDNA portion is 0.5𝜎, corresponding to an approximate
diameter of 1 nm. (b) A model spherical GNP core. (c) An example of two SNA-GNPs: the particle on the
left has an 8#nm gold core and 40 DNA chains; the particle on the right has a 10 nm core and 60
attached DNA chains. For more details, see Ref. [79], from which this ﬁgure is reproduced. Copyright
permission from American Chemical Society (2012).
utilized to protect any base from binding to more than one complementary base.
However, Travesset’s model is limited to simulate the formation of many kinds of
lattices that have been realized with dsDNA experimentally. To address this issue, de
la Cruz et al. [79] proposed a new modiﬁed model to better describe these systems.
It is to date the most detailed model that is able to capture the crystallization process
of many nanoparticles. As seen in Figure 1.8, there are two main modiﬁcations in the
model. First, the linker DNA chain contains both ssDNA and dsDNA and the dsDNA
is modeled with a bead size two times larger than that of ssDNA. Second, the sizes of
two nanoparticles, the number and the lengths of grafted DNA chains can be diﬀerent.
Their MD simulation results showed that binary superlattices of bcc, CsCl, AlB2, Cr3Si
and Cs6C60 can be assembled from binary mixtures of DNA-linked nanoparticles
(Figure 1.9). The phase diagrams as a function of the particle size ratio and the DNA
coverage ratios for three stoichiometric ratios (1:1, 1:2 and 1:3) were in accordance with
experimental results. They also found that the crystallization process is accompanied

14
Self-Assembling Systems
CsCI
AIB2
Cr3Si
Figure 1.9 Snapshots of the crystal structures obtained from MD simulations. Left to right: The ideal
crystal cell, a simulation snapshot after the system fully crystallized and the averaged positions of the
SNA-GNPs. For more details, see Ref. [79], from which this ﬁgure is reproduced. Copyright permission
from American Chemical Society (2012).
by a slight decrease of enthalpy. Furthermore, suitable linker sequences for future
nanomaterial designs were proposed.
1.2.4
Self-Assembling Kinetics: Supracolloidal Reaction
The focus of nanoscience is gradually shifting from the synthesis of individual building
blocks to the organization of larger nanostructures. The past decade has witnessed
great progress in nanoparticle self-assembly, yet the quantitative prediction of the
kinetics of their formation remains a challenge. In their pioneering research regarding
this important topic, Kumacheva et al. [80, 81] reported on the marked similarity
between the self-assembly of metal nanoparticles and reaction-controlled step-growth
polymerization. Their results indicate that the kinetics and statistics of step-growth
polymerization enable a quantitative prediction of the architecture of linear, branched

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
15
and cyclic self-assembled nanostructures; their aggregation numbers and size distri-
bution; and the formation of structural isomers. The strong similarity of self-assembly
of nanoparticles to polymerization reactions has also been identiﬁed in the kinetics of
other colloidal systems [8, 83]. Based on this similarity, the molecular concepts of
polymer chemistry can be applied to achieve controllable nanoparticle assembly.
On the other hand, the ability to visualize nanoparticle assemblies and to exploit
characterization tools used in nanoscience oﬀers a unique way to study polymerization
reactions. These works bridge the gap between polymerization reactions taking place at
a molecular level and nanoparticle self-assembly occurring at a length scale two orders
of magnitude larger.
In this context, Guo et al. [41] noted that the construction of supracolloidal helices
through systematic computer simulations presents colloidal analogs of the molecular
design to some supramolecules with ordered structures [83, 84]. The patchy particles act
as multifunctional monomer units that “react” with each other, in a process analogous
to supramolecular polymerization [83, 84]. The multi-patchy conﬁguration signiﬁcantly
increases the sophistication of the kinetics and reaction pathway. Figure 1.10a shows the
0
10
20
30
40
M
t/τ × 105
0
200
400
600
800
1000
n
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
1 × 103τ
1 × 104τ
2 × 104τ
5 × 104τ
1 × 105τ
M
(a)
(b)
(c)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
t/τ × 105
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
M
ϕ
ϕ
Figure 1.10 Kinetics in the self-assembling process of the helically supracolloidal structure. (a) The
number-averaged degree of colloidal clusters as a function of self-assembling time t. (b) Variation
in the number of patch groups in the course of self-assembly for species shown in inserts.
(c) Number-averaged distributions of colloidal clusters at diﬀerent times. Error bars in (a) and (b)
indicate standard deviation. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. 41. Copyright Permission from Nature
Publishing Group (2014). (See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).

16
Self-Assembling Systems
time dependence of the average number of patchy particles in the supracolloidal chains,
M, that resembles the number-averaged degree of polymerization. Interestingly, the
M–t plot can be divided into two regimes. In the ﬁrst regime, M increases linearly with
time, being characteristic of reaction-controlled step-growth polymerization. However,
the linearity of the M–t plot is relatively suppressed and the plot presents obvious ﬂuc-
tuation in the second regime.
To understand the kinetic mechanisms, they turned to a detailed analysis of the change
in the concentrations of diﬀerent species in the course of self-assembly [41]. Based on
patchy interactions directed by their types, four representative species are concerned:
individual patchy particle (IP), colloidal cluster linked by self-complementary patches
(SP), colloidal cluster linked by a pair of complementary patches (PP) and the elemen-
tary colloidal cluster of perfect helix (EC) (Figure 1.10b). Figure 1.10b shows that the
concentration of IP is extremely reduced at the initial stage owing to the formation of
SP and PP. The complementary patches in SP and PP link each other spontaneously while
the formation of EC with long-ranged patchy addition is relatively slow. Thus, the reac-
tions of SP and PP dominate the kinetics in the ﬁrst regime, resulting in the characteristic
of reaction-controlled step-growth polymerization. In the second regime, however, the
reaction of EC becomes the major eﬀect, where sophisticated dynamical interconver-
sion between clusters induces the obvious ﬂuctuation in the kinetic plot. The distribu-
tion of colloidal clusters also becomes wider in the second regime, as demonstrated by
Figure 1.10c. These ﬁnding may provide fundamental information for understanding the
mechanisms of some reactions in supramolecule chemistry towards helically molecular
architectures [83–85].
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Bojun Dong, Junshi Liang, Pengyu Chen, Ye Yang and Guolong
Zhu for helpful discussions. This work is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under grant nos. 51273105, 21422403 and 21174080, and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of China under grant
no. 2016YFA0202500.
References
1. Whitesides, G. M.; Grzybowski, B. Science 2002, 295, 2418–2421.
2. Glotzer, S.C. Science 2004, 306, 419–420.
3. P. Ball, The Self-Made Tapestry: Pattern Formation in Nature (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1999).
4. Whitesides, G. M.; Boncheva, M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2002, 99, 4769–4774.
5. Philip, D.; Stoddart, J. F. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 1996, 35, 1155–1196.
6. Frenkel, D. Science 2002, 296, 65–66.
7. Jones, M. R.; Mirkin, C. A. Nature 2012, 491, 42–43.
8. Wang, Y.; et al. Nature 2012, 491, 51–55.
9. Zhang, Z.; Glotzer, S. C. Nano Lett. 2004, 4, 1407–1413.
10. Glotzer, S. C.; Solomon, M. J. Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 557–562.

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
17
11. Huang, M.; et al. Science 2015, 348, 424–428.
12. Gang, O.; Zhang, Y. ACS Nano 2011, 5, 8459–8465.
13. Walker, D. A.; Leitsch, E. K.; Nap, R. J.; Szleifer, I.; Grzybowski, B. Nat. Nanotech.
2013, 8, 676–681.
14. Frenkel, D. Nat. Mater. 2015, 14, 9–12.
15. Cates, M. E. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 179–180.
16. Balazs, A. C.; Emrick, T.; Russell, T. P. Science 2006, 314, 1107–1110.
17. Yan, L. T.; Xie, X. M. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2013, 38, 369–406.
18. Grzelczak, M.; Vermant, J.; Furst, E. M.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. ACS Nano 2010, 4,
3591–3605.
19. Schatz, G. C. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 85–92.
20. Service, R. F. Science 2012, 335, 1434–1435.
21. Karttunen, M.; Vattulainen, I.; Lukkarinen, A. Novel Methods in Soft Matter
Simulations (Springer, Berlin, 2004).
22. Burda, C.; Chen, X.; Narayanan, R.; El-sayed, M. Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 1025–1102.
23. Frenkel, D. Physica A 2002, 313, 1–31.
24. Gudiksen, M. S.; Lauhon, L. J.; Wang, J.; Smith, D. C.; Lieber, C. M. Nature 2002,
415, 617–620.
25. Veerman, J. A. C.; Frenkel, D. Phys. Rev. A 1992, 45, 5632–5648.
26. John, B. S.; Escobedo, F. A. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 044909.
27. Yin, J. S.; Wang, Z. L. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997, 79, 2570–2573.
28. Maeda, H.; Maeda, Y. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, 018303.
29. Haji-Akbari, A.; et al. Nature 2009, 462, 773–777.
30. Agarwal, U.; Escobedo, F. A. Nat. Mater. 2011, 10, 230–235.
31. Damasceno, P. F.; Engel, M.; Glotzer, S. C. Science 2012, 337, 453–457.
32. Ramano, F.; Sciortino, F. Nature Comm. 2012, 3, 975–980.
33. Morgan, J. W. R.; Chakrabarti, D.; Dorsaz, N.; Wales, D. J. ACS Nano 2013, 7,
1246–1256.
34. Harris, A. B.; Kamien, R. D.; Lubensky, T. C. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1999, 71, 1745–1757.
35. Gansel, J. K. et al. Science 2009, 325, 1513–1515.
36. Inoue, Y.; Ramamurthy, V. Chiral Photochemistry (Marcel Dekker Press, New York,
2004).
37. Soukoulis, C. M.; Wegener, M. Nature Photon. 2011, 5, 523–530.
38. Kuzyk, A.; et al. Nature 2012, 483, 311–314.
39. Song, C.; et al. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 3256–3261.
40. Fan, Z.; Govorov, A. O. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 2580–2587.
41. Guo, R.; Mao, J.; Xie, X. M.; Yan, L. T. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 7021.
42. Szleifer, I. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 693–694.
43. Sheiko, S. S.; Zhou, J.; Arnold, J.; Neugebauer, D.; Matyjaszewski, K.; Tsitsilianis, C.;
Tsukruk, V.; Carrillo, J. M. Y.; Dobrynin, A. V.; Rubinstein, M. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12,
735–740.
44. De Nijs, B.; Dussi, S.; Smallenburg, F.; Meeldijk, J. D.; Groenendijk, D. J.; Filion, L.;
Imhof, A.; van Bladderen, A.; Dijkstra, M. Nat. Mater. 2015, 14, 56–60.
45. Zhang, D.; Carignano, M. A.; Sleifer, I. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96, 028701.
46. Alder, B. J.; Wainwright, T. E. J. Chem. Phys. 1957, 27, 1208–1209.
47. Pusey, P. N.; Van Megen, W. Nature 1986, 320, 340–342.
48. Chen, Q.; Bae, S.; Granick, S. Nature 2011, 469, 381–384.

18
Self-Assembling Systems
49. Mao, X.; Chen, Q.; Granick, S. Nature Mater. 2013, 12, 217–222.
50. de Graaf, J.; van Roij, R.; Dijkstra, M. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 155501.
51. Ni, R.; Gantapara, A. P.; de Graaf, J.; van Roij, R.; Dijkstra, M. Soft Matter 2012, 8,
8826–8834.
52. van Anders, G.; Klotsa, D.; Ahmed, N. K.; Engel, M.; Glotzer, S. C. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 2014, 111, E4812–E4821.
53. Kao, J.; Thorkelsson, K.; Bai, P.; Rancatore, B. J.; Xu, T. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42,
2654–2678.
54. Bockstaller, M. R.; Thomas, E. L. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 166106.
55. Lin Y.; Böker, A.; He, J.; Sill, K.; Xiang, H.; Abetz, C.; Li, X.; Emrick, T.; Long, S.;
Wang, Q.; Balazs, A. C.; Russell, T. P. Nature 2005, 434, 55–59.
56. Thompson, R. B.; Ginzburg, V. V.; Matsen, M. W.; Balazs, A. C. Science 2001, 292,
2469–2472.
57. Yan, L. T.; Popp, N.; Ghosh, S. K.; Böker, A. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 913–920.
58. Dong, B.; Guo, R.; Yan, L. T. Macromolecules 2014, 47, 4369–4379.
59. Dong, B.; Huang, Z.; Chen, H.; Yan, L. T. Macromolecules 2015, 48, 5385–5393.
60. Liu, Z.; Guo, R.; Xu, G.; Huang, Z.; Yan, L. T. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 6910–6916.
61. Huang, Z.; Lu, C.; Dong, B.; Xu, G.; Ji, C.; Zhao, K.; Yan, L. T. Nanoscale 2016, 8,
1024–1032.
62. Cademartiri, L.; Bishop, K. J. M. Nat. Mater. 2015, 14, 2–9.
63. Lehn, J. M. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 2836–2850.
64. Cartwright, J. H. E.; Mackay, A. L. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 2012, 370, 2807–2822.
65. Soloveichik, D.; Winfree, E. SIAM J. Comput. 2007, 36, 1544–1569.
66. Mirkin, C. A.; Letsinger, R. L.; Mucic, R. C.; Storhoﬀ, J. J. Nature 1996, 382,
607–609.
67. Alivisatos, A.; et al. Nature 1996, 382, 609–611.
68. Biancaniello, P.; Kim, A.; Crocker, J. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 58302.
69. Macfarlane, R. J.; et al. Science 2011, 334, 204–208.
70. Feng, L.; Dreyfus, R.; Sha, R. J.; Seeman, N. C.; Chaikin, P. M. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25,
2779–2783.
71. Yan, W.; et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 15114–15121.
72. Jones, M. R.; et al. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 913–917.
73. Tkachenko, A. V. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89, 148303.
74. Hsu, C. W.; Sciortino, F.; Starr, F. W. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 55502.
75. Macfarlane, R. J.; Thaner, R. V.; Brown, K. A.; Zhang, J.; Lee, B.; Nguyen, S. T.;
Mirkin, C. A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 14995–15000.
76. Starr, F. W.; Sciortino, F. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2006, 18, L347–L353.
77. Vargas Lara, F.; Starr, F. W. Soft Matter 2011, 7, 2085–2096.
78. Knorowski, C.; Burleigh, S.; Travesset, A. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 21550.
79. Li, T.; Sknepnek, R.; Macfarlane, R. J.; Mirkin, C. A.; de la Cruz, M. O. Nano Lett.
2012, 12, 2509–2514.
80. Liu, K.; et al. Science 2010, 329, 197–200.
81. Klinkovaa, A.; Thérien-Aubina, H.; Choueiria, R. M.; Rubinsteinb, M.; Kumacheva,
E. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013, 110, 18775–18779.
82. Chen, Q.; Whitmer, J. K.; Jiang, S.; Bae, S. C.; Luijten, E.; Granick, S. Science 2011,
331, 199–202.

1 Theory and Computer Simulations: A General Aspect
19
83. van Gorp, J. J.; Vekemans, J.; Meijer, E. W. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124,
14759–14769.
84. Kim, H. J.; Zin, W. C.; Lee, M. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 7009–7014.
85. Ho, R. M.; Chiang, Y. W.; Lin, S. C.; Chen, C. K. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2011, 36,
376–453.

20
2
Developing Hybrid Modeling Methods to Simulate
Self-Assembly in Polymer Nanocomposites
Xin Yong1, Stephen C. Snow2, Olga Kuksenok3 and Anna C. Balazs2
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, State University of New York at Binghamton, USA
2Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Clemson University, USA
2.1
Introduction
One of the grand challenges in nanotechnology is designing nanocomposites with
well-deﬁned properties and functionalities. A particularly vital functionality for
the next generation of nanocomposites is the ability to undergo self-repair or even
self-regeneration; these attributes allow the materials to exhibit signiﬁcantly greater
sustainability and lifetimes of use. The creation of eﬀective self-healing nanocomposites
is challenging because the systems require multiple components that must interact
in a spatially and temporally well-coordinated manner. In eﬀect, the materials should
mimic salient features of the complex biological behavior that enables wound healing.
Polymeric nanocomposites constitute ideal materials for creating biomimetic systems
since the soft matrix allows the material to be ﬂexible and compliant, much as a
biological muscle. Moreover, the polymer “arms” that interlink the hard components
in the composites enable the materials to reorganize or reconﬁgure, aiding in the
self-healing process. Finally, the hard components within the nanocomposites provide
an eﬀective “skeleton” that greatly improves the mechanical behavior of the material, as
well as imparts desired optical, magnetic, or electrical properties.
A vast range of nanocomposites can be fabricated by radical polymerization, which
constitutes one of the most versatile and widely applied polymerization techniques
[1]. Generally speaking, radical polymerization can be categorized into two types: free
radical polymerization (FRP) [2, 3] and controlled/living radical polymerization [4, 5].
In both processes, a free radical is formed at the active chain end of a growing polymer
chain, which reacts with a monomer and thereby successively adds this monomer to
the chain. The relevant reactions in radical polymerization are initiation, propagation,
termination, and chain transfer. In atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) [6–9],
which is a living radical polymerization technique, the termination of growing polymer
chains is absent and the initiation is fast relative to the propagation. Due to these two
features, chains polymerized by ATRP are relatively monodisperse as compared to
chains polymerized by FRP.
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
21
To design and synthesize well-tailored nanocomposites that can be utilized in a range
of applications, including self-healing, we must establish a better fundamental under-
standing of the coupling between radical polymerization reactions and the dynamics
of the host solution, which often contains a variety of nanoinclusions. Computer
simulations provide a powerful means of probing these interactions at mesoscopic
length scales, and thus can yield guidelines for optimizing the macroscopic properties
and functionalities of the nanocomposites.
Recently, we developed a dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) framework to model
the formation of polymer gels by both polymerization processes, FRP and ATRP [10,
11]. DPD is an eﬀective mesoscale particle-based method to simulate the behavior
of complex ﬂuids and multi-component mixtures. Hence, by adapting this approach
to simulate radical polymerization reactions, one can capture eﬀects arising from the
coupling of the reaction kinetics and dynamics of the host solution.
In Section 2.2, we describe our approach for modeling both FRP and ATRP processes
within the DPD framework. In Section 2.3, we ﬁrst focus on modeling bulk polymeriza-
tion using both FRP and ATRP approaches. We validate our respective approaches by
comparing our results to available experimental and/or simulation data. For example,
we show that our DPD approach successfully captures living copolymerization of
monomers and bifunctional cross-linkers to form a polymer gel.
We then utilize both simulation techniques to model two distinct types of polymer
nanocomposites. In the ﬁrst example, we rely on ATRP and exploit the properties of
interfacially active nanorods to design composites that undergo self-regeneration. In
the second example, we utilize FRP to model the fabrication of polymer–clay composite
gels. The latter materials constitute ideal systems for creating adaptive, biomimetic
composites. In particular, in the presence of external stimuli, the “muscle-like” gel
[12, 13] can drive the actuation of the composite, and thereby yield a strong,
reconﬁgurable material.
2.2
Methodology
2.2.1
Dissipative Particle Dynamics
Dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) is a coarse-grained, particle-based method for
simulating complex ﬂuids and multi-component mixtures. In this approach, a volume
of ﬂuid is modeled by individual beads, where each bead represents a cluster of
molecules. The temporal evolution of this many-body system is dictated by the motion
of the beads. In particular, the movement of each bead is governed by Newton’s
equation of motion, m dvi∕dt = fi. Each bead i experiences a force fi(t) that is the sum
of three pairwise additive forces: fi(t) = ∑(FC
ij + FD
ij + FR
ij), where FC
ij, FD
ij , and FR
ij are
the conservative force, drag or dissipative force, and random force, respectively. All
pairwise forces are truncated at a certain cutoﬀradius rc, i.e., the sum only applies on
all beads j within a distance of rc from bead i.
The conservative force is a repulsive force given by FC
ij = aij(1 −rij)̂rij, where
rij = |ri −rj|∕rc and ̂rij = (ri −rj)∕|ri −rj|. In contrast to hard-core potentials (e.g., the
Lennard-Jones potential) in which the repulsion diverges when the distance between
beads approaches zero, this soft-core force permits a degree of overlap between beads.

22
Self-Assembling Systems
As a result, we can apply larger time steps than those typically used in molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, which commonly involve hard-core potentials. Combined
with the coarse-grained representation of multi-component systems, the use of soft
potentials allows DPD to capture physical phenomena occurring on relatively larger
length and time scales than those normally captured by MD, and makes DPD an ideal
computational simulation tool to model self-assembly in polymer nanocomposites.
The interaction parameter aij determines the maximum repulsion between beads i
and j, which is given in terms of kBT∕rc. Here, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the
temperature of the system. We set rc as the characteristic length scale, room temperature
as the reference temperature, and the corresponding energy scale kBT0 at T0 = 25∘C
as the characteristic energy scale. Thus, we set kBT = 1 at T = 25∘C. The reduced
temperature is then introduced as T∗= T∕T0 (e.g., T∗= 1.01 for T = 28∘C). All the
interaction parameters are presented as functions of the reduced temperature T∗.
The drag force and random force work together as a thermostat for producing a canon-
ical ensemble. These forces are applied on pairs of neighboring beads such that the
momentum is conserved locally, and hydrodynamic behavior emerges in relatively small
systems [14–16]. In particular, the drag force is FD
ij = −𝛾𝜔D(rij)(̂rij ⋅vij)̂rij, where 𝛾is a
simulation parameter related to viscosity arising from the interactions between beads.
𝜔D is a weight function that goes to zero at the cutoﬀradius rc, and the relative velocity
is vij = vi −vj. The random force is given by FR
ij = 𝜎𝜔R(rij)𝜉iĵrij, where 𝜉ij is a zero-mean
Gaussian random variable of unit variance and 𝜎is the amplitude of the noise. The
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem relates 𝜎to 𝛾as 𝜎2 = 2kBT𝛾[15]. Finally, the weight
functions take the following form: 𝜔D(rij) = 𝜔R(rij)2 = (1 −rij)2 for rij < rc.
The velocity Verlet algorithm is applied to integrate the equation of motion in time.
Knowing the characteristic length, mass, and energy, the characteristic time scale for
the DPD simulation is then deﬁned as 𝜏=
√
mr2
c∕kBT0. We use time step Δt = 0.02 𝜏
for all simulations. By setting 𝛾= 4.5, we obtain a relatively rapid equilibration of the
temperature in the system and ensure the numerical stability of the simulations for
the speciﬁed time step [16]. The remaining simulation parameter is the average bead
number density of the entire system, 𝜌sys, which is set to 3 unless stated otherwise. All
simulations are performed by modifying and extending the particle dynamics software
code LAMMPS [17].
2.2.2
Polymer Chains, Gels, and Nanoparticles
Polymer nanocomposites incorporate a variety of nanoparticles dispersed in the poly-
mer matrix, which consists of physically entangled or chemically cross-linked polymer
chains. As a particle-based approach, DPD can readily capture the molecular archi-
tecture of the chains and the detailed topology of the networks. Moreover, it allows
us to incorporate nanoparticle inclusions of diﬀerent types, shapes, and sizes into the
polymer matrix and to explicitly specify the interactions between these inclusions and
other components in the system. Below, we describe how we construct hydrogels ﬁlled
with nanorods or nanoclay particles in the framework of DPD.
The semi-ﬂexible polymer chains are modeled as a sequence of DPD beads that are
connected by harmonic bonds. The interaction potential between neighboring beads
consists of a bond potential and an angle potential. The functional form of the potential

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
23
is given by E = 1
2Kbond(r −r0)2 + Kangle[1 + cos(𝜃)]. The ﬁrst term is the elastic energy
of a harmonic bond, where Kbond is the elastic constant and r0 is the equilibrium bond
distance. The second term represents the bending energy with the rigidity parameter
Kangle [18, 19]. Here, 𝜃is the bond angle between two adjacent bonds.
The chemically cross-linked gels can be constructed from the polymer chains in
two ways. In the simulations of nanorod-ﬁlled gel, we introduce cross-linking beads to
connect diﬀerent polymer strands and specify the topology of the gel. Namely, we take
the initial conﬁguration of the gel to be a ﬁnite-sized tetra-functional network with a
diamond-like topology [20]. Each strand consists of 30 beads. This ﬁnite-sized network
contains cross-links, which are beads with a connectivity of four, and dangling ends,
which are located on the surface of the lattice and have a connectivity of less than four.
The bond and angle potential parameters of the gel are set respectively as Kbond = 128,
r0 = 0.5, and Kangle = 4 to prevent bond crossing, and produce a polymer concentration
comparable to the experimental results for hydrogels [21–23]. The gel layer shown in
Figure 2.1a is periodic in the lateral (x and y) directions and contains 16 488 beads in
total (540 strands, 252 cross-links and 36 dangling ends).
In contrast, the gels with nanoclay particles modeled in the simulations do not have a
speciﬁed topology and do not contain chemical cross-linking agents. The polymer net-
work emerges in a polymer-grafted nanoclay solution due to covalent bonds formed
during free radical combination reactions, which we detail further below. In particu-
lar, the connectivity is established via the combination of growing chains from diﬀerent
clay particles (as sketched in Figure 2.1b), which forms the inter-particle cross-linking
chains (X-chains). Each clay particle now serves as the multi-functional cross-linkers
that maintain the integrity of the network. Meanwhile, we note that the combination
reaction also generates intra-particle looped chains (L-chains), in which both ends are
attached to one particle; these L-chains do not contribute to the formation of the gel
network.
(a)
(b)
L-chain
X-chain
d
w
Figure 2.1 (a) Equilibrium state of a nanorod-ﬁlled polymer gel in a good solvent (not displayed).
Inset: enlarged view of initiator modiﬁed nanorod with one end functionalized with polymer chains
and a cross-section of the hexagonal nanorod. (b) Snapshot of nanoclay-embedded polymer network
at monomer conversion 95%. Inset top: schematic representation of the network. Inset bottom:
detailed structure of the nanoclay particle. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from the
American Chemical Society. (See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).

24
Self-Assembling Systems
The nanoparticles considered in our simulations are nanorods that are modiﬁed to
be interfacially active by grafting polymer chains, and exfoliated nanoclay particles that
have discoid shapes as shown in Figure 2.1. These nanoparticles are modeled as clusters
of DPD beads and the constituent beads of each particle move collectively as a rigid
body. Here, the shaft of each nanorod is formed from 210 beads, with the cross-section
having hexagonal structure (see inset in Figure 2.1a). The lattice constant of the
hexagonal structure is 0.5 and the distance between layers of hexagonal cross-sections
is also 0.5. The rod has a total length of 15 dimensionless units.
We functionalize one end of the nanorod with 12 polymer chains. The length covered
by the chains is approximately one ﬁfth of the total length. Each chain is formed from 20
connected beads with the same bond and angle potentials as described above for the gel.
The grafting is achieved by bonding an end bead of the chain to a surface bead of the rod,
whose position is randomly picked in the chain-covered region. The remaining surface of
the rod is modiﬁed with initiators for the polymerization reaction; i.e., a certain fraction
of the surface beads are replaced with initiator beads. We deﬁne the initiator density 𝜎i
as the number of initiator beads on each rod divided by 144, which is the total number of
beads on the remaining rod’s surface (excluding the portion of the surface functionalized
by the grafted chains). In this manner, the polymer chains will grow from the surface of
the rod during polymerization.
The clay particle is modeled as a nanodisk with two layers of DPD beads arranged in
a face-centered cubic lattice structure (see inset in Figure 2.1b). The lattice constant of
the FCC structure is 0.7 and each clay particle has 232 beads in total. The size of the
clay particle is 6 dimensionless units in diameter and 1 dimensionless unit in thickness.
A certain fraction of the particle beads are replaced with the initiator beads in the same
way as we modiﬁed the nanorod surface.
2.2.3
Radical Polymerization Model
We develop a DPD framework to model the formation of polymer gels by FRP and ATRP.
The major diﬀerence between these two polymerization processes is that the termina-
tion of a growing polymer chain is absent in ATRP. Furthermore, the initiation is fast
relative to propagation in ATRP. These two features lead to chain length being rela-
tively monodisperse. In contrast, the termination reactions are important in FRP [2–5],
which should be taken into account in the simulation. Also, the rates of initiation and
propagation should be comparable in FRP approaches [2–5]. Two mechanisms of chain
termination are introduced in our model, namely radical combination and dispropor-
tionation. In order to form polymer networks, the chain transfer reactions should be rare
events, and we exclude these reactions in both FRP and ATRP simulations. We note that
the activation and deactivation processes of the growing polymer chain end in ATRP are
not explicitly modeled in our coarse-grained approach [24, 25]. Figure 2.2 presents only
the dominant reactions considered in FRP and ATRP. The reaction kinetics are coupled
to the dynamics of the system, which are evolved by the DPD simulations. This reac-
tive DPD model is particularly useful for capturing both hydrodynamics and chemical
reactions in the presence of solid inclusions with complex geometries.
In our simulations, the reactive components include the initiator, monomer, and
cross-linker, and all three are modeled as coarse-grained DPD beads. We use diﬀerent
bead types to represent the states of the reactive species. For example, an unreacted

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
25
(a)
Initiation
Pi
Pp
+
*
+
*
+
*
+
*
+
*
+
*
*
*
*
*
*
+
*
+
*
+
+
*
*
*
*
Propagation
n
n
m
m
m
n
n
m
m
n
n
n
n
m
n
n
n
n
l
l
l
n
Termination
Initiation
Propagation
Cross-linking
(b)
Pt,C
Pt,D
r
Pi
r
2Pi
r
Pp,M
r
Pp,X
r
Pp,P
r
Pp,M
r
Pp,M
r
r
r
r
Figure 2.2 Schematic of the elemental reactions in (a) standard FRP and (b) living radical
copolymerization of monomer and cross-linker. An asterisk indicates an active radical. Open beads
show unreacted or partially reacted species and ﬁlled beads show fully reacted species. Pi
r, Pp,M
r
, Pp,X
r ,
Pp,P
r , Pt,C
r , and Pt,D
r
are probabilities of the respective reactions (initiation, propagation with monomer,
propagation with unreacted bifunctional cross-linker, cross-linking with partially reacted cross-linker
with pendent functional group, termination through combination, and termination through
disproportionation). Reproduced from Ref. [11] with permission from Elsevier.
monomer is speciﬁed as type 1, but this monomer changes to type 2 when it is added
to a growing chain and becomes the new active end. Once the monomer has fully
reacted, it is labeled as type 3. Our cross-linker consists of two reactive cross-linking
units, which simulate a divinyl cross-linker [25] that forms a bridge to connect two
chains. Due to the existence of two reactive units, the cross-linker has six diﬀerent
states corresponding to diﬀerent eﬀective reactivity (i.e., the extent to which it has
reacted). In addition to the dominant reactions shown in Figure 2.2, we account for
such relatively rare events as a reaction between an initiator and partially reacted
cross-linker, reactions between two cross-linker beads in diﬀerent states, and a reaction
between a monomer and a cross-linker with two active radicals [25]. The result of the
speciﬁc chemical reaction is modeled by updating the bead types after the reaction
has occurred [25–27] (see the reaction scheme in Figure 2.3). Below, we describe the
reaction scheme in detail.
A list of beads with free radicals (denoted R-beads), which can be activated by
initiators or active chain ends, is constructed at the beginning of every reaction step. In
each reaction step, we select an R-bead from the list as the reaction center and search
all reactive beads within an interaction radius ri = 0.7 from the given R-bead. If there

26
Self-Assembling Systems
Begin a reaction step
Create a list of all
R-beads
Select a R-bead from
the list
No
Yes
Pick all
R-beads?
Next reaction step
Pick a reactive bead within
the interaction radius
Reactive bead type?
Is the R-bead
an initiator?
Propagate?
Initiate?
Combination
Update bead type and 
bond information
Termination
mechanism
Disproportionation
n
m
Terminate?
No
No
No
No
*
*
Yes
Yes
Yes
* R-bead
Monomer
Cross-linker
Pt,D
r
Pt,C
r
Pi
r
r
r
r
Yes Pt = Pt,C + Pt,D
r
r
r
Pp,M/Pp,X/Pp,P
Figure 2.3 Flowchart of the reaction scheme in the computational model of radical polymerization.
Details of the individual steps are described in the text. Reproduced from Ref. [11] with permission
from Elsevier.
are reactive beads within this interaction range, one is picked at random and a reacting
pair is formed. Based on the types of the R-bead and the selected reactive bead, the
corresponding elemental reaction is determined.
We then use reaction probabilities Px
r to characterize the reaction kinetics [24, 28–30],
where the superscript x stands for the type of reaction. A successful reaction changes the
type of the reacting beads accordingly. Depending on the reaction, the reacting pair of
beads can result in an irreversible bond formation, with the energy of the bond given by
Ebond = 1
2Kbond(r −r0)2. Here, Kbond = 128 and r0 = 0.5 are the same as the parameters
for the predeﬁned polymer chains. Notably, the chains created during the polymeriza-
tion reactions do not contain an angle potential between three successive beads (see

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
27
above); hence, the stiﬀness of the chains in the newly generated gel is lower than that in
the predeﬁned gel. Within every reaction time step, the above steps are conducted for
the entire list of R-beads.
Every R-bead within the list is only allowed to go through the reaction procedure
once per reaction step regardless of whether the reaction occurs or not (as dictated
by the corresponding reaction probabilities). The reaction steps are separated by the
reaction interval 𝜏r = 0.2 𝜏, and thus the reactions are performed every 10 time steps
[24]. By choosing diﬀerent probabilities for the reactions, Pi
r, Pp,M
r
, Pp,X
r
, Pp,P
r , Pt,C
r , and
Pt,D
r , we can eﬀectively adjust the rate constants of the respective reactions: initiation,
propagation with monomer, propagation with unreacted bifunctional cross-linker,
cross-linking with partially reacted cross-linker with pendent functional group,
termination through combination, and termination through disproportionation [28].
2.3
Results and Discussions
2.3.1
Modeling Bulk Polymerization Using FRP and ATRP
We ﬁrst model bulk polymerization in a three-dimensional system to obtain a polymer
solution using FRP. The simulation box is 20 × 20 × 20 units in size, with periodic
boundary conditions being imposed in all three directions. The initial conﬁguration of
the system is generated by randomly distributing initiator, monomer, and solvent beads
in the simulation box, modeling a solution with the dissolved components. The ratio of
the initial concentrations of initiator and monomer is [Ini]0∕[M]0 = 1∕75. The solvent
concentration is [S]0 = 50%, which results in a polymer volume fraction equal to 0.5
in the solution when the polymerization reaches full conversion. The solution with the
dissolved components was equilibrated for 1 × 105 simulation time steps before the
polymerization starts. The polymerization time is 1 × 106 time steps. We consider
the initiator and monomer to be chemically compatible in the solvent. Therefore, we
model the athermal solvent condition at the reference temperature with the interaction
parameters between any two beads, aij, set to aij = 25.
We choose the following reaction probabilities for our reference case: the initiation
probability Pi
r = 0.005, the monomer addition (propagation) probability Pp,M
r
= 0.005,
the total termination probability Pt
r = Pt,C
r
+ Pt,D
r
= 0.001. We assume that chain com-
bination is the dominant one of the two termination mechanisms in the considered
polymerization (e.g., one involving vinyl radicals) [31]. Thus, we set the ratio between
the probabilities of the two termination processes to Pt,C
r ∕Pt,D
r
≈4.7 [31].
We characterize the detailed polymerization kinetics by monomer conversion,
molecular weights, and the polydispersity index (PDI), as shown in Figure 2.4. To obtain
the molecular weight of polymer chains from the degree of polymerization, we assume
that the molecular weight of each monomer bead is 1. Figure 2.4a shows the evolution of
the monomer conversion and ln([M]0∕[M]) as a function of the simulation time steps.
The curve is concave downward, which indicates the decline of polymerization speed
as time elapses. This behavior is attributed to the termination reactions that diminish
the number of active chain ends [2]. Correspondingly, the number average and weight
average molecular weights Mn and Mw both increase signiﬁcantly at the late stage of
polymerization due to the combination of growing polymer chains, which produces

28
Self-Assembling Systems
1
0.8
5
4
3
2
1
1.3
1.2
Polydispersity index
Molecular weight
1.1
1
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
50
100
150
0
0.6
ConvM
ConvM
In([M]0/[M])
In([M]0/[M])
0.4
0.2
(a)
(b)
0
0
2
4
Time step
Mn
ConvM
MW
PDI
6
8
10 × 105
Figure 2.4 (a) Monomer conversion (squares) and ln([M]0∕[M]) (circles) as a function of the number of
simulation time steps. (b) Number average molecular weight Mn (squares), weight average molecular
weight Mw (open circles), and polydispersity index PDI = Mw∕Mn (crosses) as functions of the
monomer conversion. Error bars arise from averaging over four independent runs. Reproduced from
Ref. [11] with permission from Elsevier.
long chains in short times. The PDI shown in Figure 2.4b provides a quantitative
characterization of the molecular weight distribution of the growing chains. The PDI
shows a non-monotonic behavior as monomer conversion increases. It ﬁrst increases
rapidly before reaching a peak value and then decreases to a plateau. The large peak at
the beginning of the polymerization indicates that the growth of all the polymer chains
does not occur simultaneously; this primarily results from comparable rates of initiation
and propagation. At the late stage of the polymerization, the PDI increases again due to
the chain combination, which also produces chains with a wide range of lengths [28, 32].
Our reaction model allows us to probe the chain propagation and termination and
the state of growing chains in greater detail. In particular, a disproportionation reaction
reduces the number of polymer chains with active ends by two and increases the
number of non-reactive polymer chains by two. Whereas, a combination reaction

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
29
reduces the number of polymer chains with active ends by two, but only increases the
number of non-reactive polymer chains by one, because the total number of polymers
decreases by one due to combination. As shown in Figure 2.5a, the increase in the
monomer conversion leads to a decrease in the total number of polymers because
of the chain combination reactions. Both disproportionation and combination yield
an increase in the number of non-reactive polymers and a decrease in the number
of polymer chains with active ends. Figure 2.5b conﬁrms that the ratio between the
number of combination reactions versus the number of disproportionation reactions
is consistent with the ratio between corresponding reaction probabilities stated
above.
With the well-characterized reference case, we can now explore how three reaction
probabilities, namely Pi
r, Pp,M
r
, and Pt
r, aﬀect the polymerization kinetics. We ﬁrst vary
the initiation probability Pi
r while keeping all other parameters the same as those in
the above case. When we decrease Pi
r to 0.0005 (i.e., one tenth of the propagation
probability), there is no noticeable diﬀerence in the time evolution of ln([M]0∕[M]) and
the PDI of the ﬁnal polymer solution (see Figures 2.6a and 2.6b). This behavior is in good
ConvM
150
100
50
50
40
30
20
10
0
00
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Active
Total
Npolymer
Ntermination
r
Non-active
Disproportionation
Combination
(a)
ConvM
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b)
Figure 2.5 (a) Numbers of total polymer
chains (squares), chains with active ends
(circles), and non-reactive (crosses)
polymer chains as functions of the
monomer conversion. (b) Numbers of
termination reactions, combination
(downward triangles), and
disproportionation (rhombuses) as
functions of monomer conversion. Error
bars arise from averaging over four
independent runs. Reproduced from
Ref. [11] with permission from Elsevier.

30
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
5
Pi
r = 0.00005
Pi
r = 0.0001
Pi
r = 0.0005
Pi
r = 0.005
Pt
r = 0.0001
Pt
r = 0.0005
Pt
r = 0.001
Pt
r = 0.005
Pt
r = 0.0001
Pt
r = 0.0005
Pt
r = 0.001
Pt
r = 0.005
Pi
r
Pi
r
Pt
r
Pt
r
Pi
r = 0.00005
Pi
r = 0.0001
Pi
r = 0.0005
Pi
r = 0.005
4
3.5
2.5
2
1.5
1
3
4
3
2
1
0
5
6
7
4
3
2
1
0
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0
2
4
6
Time steps
In([M]0/[M])
In([M]0/[M])
8
Polydispersity index
Polydispersity index
0
0.2
0.4
ConvM
0.6
0.8
1
(c)
(b)
(d)
10 × 105
0
2
4
6
Time steps
8
0
0.2
0.4
ConvM
0.6
0.8
1
10 × 105
Figure 2.6 Polymerization kinetics with varying (a, b) initiation probability Pi
r and (c, d) total
termination probability Pt
r. Other reaction probabilities are the same as those in the reference case.
(a, c) Dependence of ln([M]0∕[M]) on the simulation time steps. (b, d) Polydispersity index as a
function of the monomer conversion. Error bars arise from averaging over four independent runs.
Reproduced from Ref. [11] with permission from Elsevier.
agreement with the experimental observation that the eﬀect of initiation is negligible
unless kp∕ki > DPn∕4 [33], where kp and ki are the actual rate constants of propagation
and initiation, respectively. Here, DPn is the number average degree of polymerization
at the end of the polymerization process. Due to the diﬃculty in obtaining accurate
conversions between the physical rate constants and the reaction probabilities used in
the simulation, we cannot directly verify the above relation. However, we observe the
eﬀect of slow initiation when Pi
r is further decreased, which is presented by the upward
curvature of the ln([M]0∕[M]) curve at small monomer conversion and the diﬀerent
PDI curves at the late stage of the polymerization.
Unlike in the ln([M]0∕[M]) curve and the late stage PDI, the rate of initiation
signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the rise of the PDI peak at small monomer conversion, even
when Pp,M
r
∕Pi
r = 10 (see Figure 2.6b). The higher peak of the PDI during the onset of
the polymerization process means a wider molecular weight distribution, which is
attributed to the fact that slower initiation permits the propagating chains to grow
longer before a new chain is initiated.
The characteristic feature of FRP is the prominent chain termination, and thus
we examine the eﬀect of termination probability on the polymerization kinetics.
Here, we vary the total termination probability Pt
r, but keep the ratio between the

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
31
probabilities of the two termination processes, combination and disproportionation,
constant at Pt,C
r ∕Pt,D
r
≈4.7 [31]. We plot ln([M]0∕[M]) and the PDI in Figures 2.6c and
2.6d, respectively. At the lowest value of Pt
r considered here (which corresponds to
the weakest termination reaction), the behavior of ln([M]0∕[M]) is nearly linear and
shows the ﬁrst-order reaction kinetics with constant concentration of the active chain
ends [2]. The termination eﬀect is clearly reﬂected in the downward curvature of the
ln([M]0∕[M]) curves and their clear deviation from the linear behavior as Pt
r increases.
As shown in Figure 2.6c, the overlap of the PDI curves at small monomer conversion
suggests that the termination has no eﬀect at the early stage of the polymerization,
when the eﬀect of initiation is dominant due to the small concentration of the active
chain ends. In contrast, the termination eﬀect prevails at the late stage. The late stage
PDI increases as Pt
r increases, as demonstrated in Figure 2.6d, indicating that longer
chains with more heterogeneous chain lengths are formed.
Finally, we observe that the propagation probability Pp,M
r
only dictates the monomer
conversion reached at the end of the polymerization. In particular, higher probability
leads to higher monomer conversion. In contrast to tuning Pi
r and Pt
r as discussed
above, varying Pp,M
r
has no consequence on the shape of the PDI curve.
After we explored the kinetics of three-dimensional bulk polymerization via FRP, we
simulate the living copolymerization of monovinyl monomers and divinyl cross-linkers
to form polymer gels. As we noted in the methodology section, we neglect chain termi-
nation reactions by setting Pt
r = 0 and model fast initiation compared with propagation
due to the nature of ATRP [8]. Hence, we only list the initiation, propagation, and
cross-linking reactions in Figure 2.2b. For ATRP, the values of Pp,M
r
should be suﬃciently
small to achieve controlled polymerization growth in the kinetically controlled reaction
regime [29]. Here we take Pi
r = Pp,M
r
= 0.0025 and Pp,X
r
= 2Pp,M
r
. The reaction probability
Pp,P
r
controlling the cross-linking process is chosen as Pp,P
r
= 3Pp,M
r
to account for the
fact that the bifunctional cross-linker is modeled by a single bead [25, 26]. Similar
to the FRP simulation, the initial conﬁguration of beads is a random distribution of
initiator, monomer, cross-linker, and solvent beads in the simulation box. The initiators,
monomers, and cross-linkers are chemically compatible and dissolve in an athermal
solvent. Therefore, the interaction parameters between any two beads, aij, is set to
aij = 25. Using these values, we investigate the eﬀect of varying the volume fraction of
cross-linker on the gel point.
Our purpose is to validate the ﬁrst-order kinetics and to compare the charac-
teristic features of gelation with those obtained in previous experiments [25, 34].
We probe the polymerization in the solution as we did in the bulk polymeriza-
tion through FRP and measure the gel point, which is deﬁned as the monomer
conversion at which the reduced degree of polymerization (RDP) reaches a
peak value [26]. The RDP is the weight-average degree of polymerization of all
macromolecules, except the longest chain. The simulation results and previ-
ous experimental data are summarized in Table 2.1 Figure 2.7a shows that the
copolymerization with initial concentration ratios of monomer, cross-linker, and
initiator equal to [M]0∕[X]0∕[Ini]0 = 78∕20∕2 clearly exhibits ﬁrst-order kinet-
ics for both monomer (solid line) and cross-linker (dashed line), which validates
our ATRP model. Notably, gelation occurs at 34% monomer conversion and 57%
cross-linker conversion with these parameters, as can be seen from the black curve in
Figure 2.7b.

32
Self-Assembling Systems
Table 2.1 Comparison among the gel points in ATRP experiments
and DPD simulations
ATRP expa
DPD simb
[Ini]0(%)
[X]0(%)
[M]0(%)
convM
convX
convM
convX
2
1
97
no gelation
no gelation
2
1.2
96.8
no gelation
no gelation
2
1.5
96.5
no gelation
no gelation
2
2
96
no gelation
no gelation
2
2.2
95.8
0.97
1.00
0.99
1.00
2
3
95
0.78
1.00
0.89
0.99
2
6
92
0.61
0.81
0.62
0.86
2
10
88
0.42
0.66
0.49
0.74
2
20
78
0.32
0.43
0.34
0.57
a)
Experimental values are taken from Refs. [21, 30].
b)
Simulated gel points by using DPD ATRP scheme with total bead
number of 81 000.
We further investigate the eﬀect of the ratio of cross-linker to initiator ([X]0∕[Ini]0)
on gelation. We vary the cross-linker amount [X]0 while ﬁxing the initial concentra-
tion of initiator as [Ini]0 = 2%. We plot the RDP as a function of monomer conversion
in Figure 2.7b, in which the sharp peaks in the curves correspond to the gel points.
We observe that the gel point shifts toward lower monomer conversion as the vol-
ume fraction of the cross-linker increases. In other words, gelation occurs earlier for
an increasing amount of cross-linker. These results are in quantitative agreement with
previous experiments [25, 34].
Figure 2.7c conﬁrms that our DPD approach successfully captures living copolymer-
ization of monomer and bifunctional cross-linker to form a polymer gel. We plot the
simulated gel point as a function of the initial concentration ratios of cross-linker to
initiator, [X]0∕[Ini]0, showing that the gel points obtained with our DPD technique are
in good agreement with previous experimental data [25, 34]. This behavior indicates
that our DPD method can accurately take into account the spatial distribution and
long-range diﬀusion of pendant functional groups that are subject to the topological
constraints in formed macromolecules [25].
2.3.2
Modeling Regeneration of Severed Polymer Gels with Interfacially Active
Nanorods
Designing synthetic systems that mimic the remarkable ability of amphibians to regrow
limbs is considered as one of the holy grails of materials science. While self-healing
materials that can mend local defects have been developed [35–38], there are virtually
no examples of systems that can regenerate bulk sections of a severed material. The
advent of such regenerative materials can dramatically extend the useful lifetime of
manufactured products by giving them the ability to regrow when damaged.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
33
(a)
(b)
Time
Conversion
0.6
Monomer
Cross-linker
1
104
1.0/97.0
2.0/96.0
2.2/95.8
3.0/95.0
6.0/92.0
10.0/88.0
20.0/78.0
103
102
RDP
101
100
10–1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.8
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
0
0.2
ATRP exp
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0
2
4
6
(c)
8
10
DLL sim
DPD sim
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ConvM
ConvM
In([X]0/[X])
[X]0/[Ini]0
[X]0/[X]0
In([M]0/[M])
Figure 2.7 (a) Conversions and ln([M]0∕[M]) of monomer (solid lines) and ln([X]0∕[X]) of cross-linker
(dashed lines) on reaction times during copolymerization with initial concentration ratios
[M]0∕[X]0∕[Ini]0 = 78∕20∕2. (b) Evolution of the reduced degree of polymerization (RDP) with
monomer conversion for a systematic variation of the initial concentration ratios of cross-linker to
initiator [X]0∕[Ini]0, while ﬁxing [Ini]0 = 2%. (c) Comparison of DPD simulated gel points with ATRP
experimental values. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from the American Chemical Society.
Our eﬀorts are inspired by the biological processes in tissue regeneration [39], which
is guided by an internalized “instruction set”: initiation, propagation, and termination
[40], signaling molecules mediate the dynamic cascade of the biological events in
the regrowth [40]. Analogous to biological systems, fully synthetic self-regenerating
materials should incorporate the following elements: ﬁrst, the system must contain a
component that not only senses the removal of material but also initiates the regrowth;
second, the system must involve a means of continuing or propagating the desired
growth; ﬁnally, when the material reaches a certain size, the ongoing reactions must
terminate.
Using the DPD gel model and ATRP reaction scheme, we design a nanorod-ﬁlled gel
that undergoes these processes to regenerate the gel matrix when a layer of the material
is sliced oﬀ. With this layer removed, the interfacially active nanorods diﬀuse to the
newly formed interface and extend into the outer solution, which contains monomers
and a small fraction of cross-linkers. Polymerization initiated from the rods’ surfaces
grows chains that become cross-linked to form a new gel that resembles the severed
layer. After the initial cut, the regeneration requires no external intervention; synergistic

34
Self-Assembling Systems
interactions among all components in this system enable the vital processes leading to
the regrowth, which could be repeated with subsequent cuts.
Figure 2.1a presents the components of the uncut material: nanorods functionalized at
one end and dispersed in a polymer gel, which is swollen in a good solvent at 28 ∘C. The
solvent is weakly incompatible with the rods’ shafts, but compatible with the end-grafted
chains, making the functionalized rods essentially amphiphilic. The rods also contain
initiator sites for ATRP. These rods serve to trigger the ensuing, vital reactions when
the sample is cut. The amorphous solid walls with density 𝜌wall ∼3 and height h =1 are
placed at the boundaries of the simulation box in the normal direction (z) above and
below the gel layer. Bounce-back boundary conditions are applied at the ﬂuid–solid
interfaces to prevent solvent and gel beads from penetrating into the walls, and produce
no-slip boundary conditions with minimal interfacial density oscillations [41]. The
initial simulation box is 24.6 × 24.6 × 34.9 units in size and the space between the two
walls is ﬁlled with the corresponding number of solvent beads, keeping the total density
of the system consistent with the density of the swollen gel at the speciﬁed temperature.
Moreover, the gel layer is attached to the substrate via an adhesive interaction between
the gel and wall beads. This eﬀective attraction is modeled by a truncated Hookean
spring force [42] Fadh = −Kadhrij with a cutoﬀradius of rc, where Kadh characterizes the
strength of the adhesion and Kadh is 6 unless stated otherwise. This force allows the gel
to remain anchored to the bottom wall in all our simulations.
After equilibrating the nanorod-ﬁlled gel system for 1.5 × 106 time steps, we model the
act of cutting oﬀthe upper portion of the gel by moving the top wall upward (in the +z
direction) and adding outer solution beads to this newly created space (see Figure 2.8a).
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Outer
solution
(c)
3
3
3
4
3 4
2
Figure 2.8 (a) Initial conﬁguration of the gel after the upper layer was cut oﬀ. (b–e) Snapshots of the
system when the rods diﬀuse and extend into the outer solution, taken at the following times:
(b) t = 2500, (c) t = 10 000, (d) t = 23 700, and (e) t = 34 300. Numbers identify the rods that extend
into the outer solution. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from the American Chemical
Society.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
35
The simulation box changes from 24.6 × 24.6 × 34.9 to 24.6 × 24.6 × 64.9, with the total
density being 𝜌sys = 3. The outer solution is partially immiscible with the inner solution.
To properly model the thermo-responsive behavior of a realistic gel (e.g.,
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide), PNIPAAm), we relate the repulsive parameter between
a polymer and solvent bead, aps, to the Flory–Huggins parameter characterizing the
polymer–solvent interaction, 𝜒ps, as follows: aps = a + kBT𝜒ps∕0.306 [16]. In studies
of PNIPAAm, it is typically assumed that 𝜒ps depends on temperature and polymer
concentration [23, 42–44]. Hence, we assume that 𝜒ps(T, 𝜙) = 𝜒1(T) + 𝜒2𝜙p, where 𝜙p
is the polymer volume fraction in the gel and 𝜒1(T) = (𝛿h −T𝛿s)∕kBT, with 𝛿h and 𝛿s
being the respective changes in enthalpy and entropy [23, 45]. Note that 𝜙p is calculated
as 𝜙p = 𝜌p∕𝜌gel, where 𝜌p is the time-averaged polymer number density and 𝜌gel is the
time-averaged total number density of the gel including the polymer and solvent beads.
Here, we set a = 25 T∗and take 𝛿h = −14.331 × 10−14 erg, 𝛿s = −5.452 × 10−16 erg•K−1,
and 𝜒2 = 0.596 to reproduce the experimentally observed lower critical solution
temperature (LCST) volume phase transitions of the PNIPAAm gels [23, 46]. Notably,
this is the ﬁrst DPD simulation that captures such temperature-induced volume phase
transitions in gels.
Our choices of the interaction parameters between the diﬀerent components, aij, in
the system are listed in Table 2.2. The components can be separated into hydrophilic
and hydrophobic moieties: the inner solution and end-grafted chains on the rods are
hydrophilic; the outer solution (including the monomers and cross-linkers) and the
nanorods are hydrophobic. The gel is slightly hydrophobic, as characterized by positive
experimental values of the 𝜒ps parameter [23]. We set the interaction parameter
between the gel and end-grafted chains on the rods to be 20 (i.e., we assume some
relatively weak attractive interactions between these moieties). Finally, we set the
rod–solvent interaction to 35 only upon introducing the outer solution. During the
initial equilibration of the nanorod-ﬁlled gel system, we set this interaction parameter
to 25 (i.e., the rods are hydrophilic) to prevent the clustering of the rods in the original
sample and to ensure their uniform distribution in the gel matrix. Experimentally, such
a change in the properties of the rod–solvent interactions can be achieved, for example,
if rods are additionally functionalized with photosensitive moieties that are hydrophilic
in the dark and become hydrophobic in light [47].
We ﬁrst probe the cascade of cooperative events that occur when the upper half of the
nanorod-ﬁlled gel is removed (see Figure 2.8). With this dramatic cut, the system is now
exposed to the outer ﬂuid, which is both weakly incompatible with the solvent in the gel
Table 2.2 List of DPD interaction parameters between diﬀerent components
in units of reduced temperature T*
Inner
solution
Outer
solution
Gel
Rod
Rod-grafted
chain
Inner solution
25
35
25 + 𝜒ps∕0.306
35
25
Outer solution
—
25
35
25
35
Gel
—
—
25
35
20
Rod
—
—
—
25
35
Rod-grafted chain
—
—
—
—
25

36
Self-Assembling Systems
35
Rod 1
Rod 2
Rod 3
Rod 4
30
25
20
15
100
1
2
3
4
× 104
Time
Zrod
com
Figure 2.9 Time evolution of the center of
mass of the four rods in the z-direction. The
rod numbers correspond to the respective
rods in Figure 2.8. Reproduced from Ref. [10]
with permission from the American Chemical
Society.
and compatible with the rods. The outer solution also contains dispersed monomer and
a small concentration of cross-linking molecules to provide materials for the regrowth
of the polymer matrix. The amphiphilic rods act as crucial sensors, indicating a change
in the state of the system. Speciﬁcally, rods near the new interface encounter the more
compatible outer solvent and hence diﬀuse toward this boundary to maximize their
interaction with this ﬂuid. Figures 2.8b–e illustrate the rods’ progression to the cut and
the ﬁnal orientation at the cut, and Figure 2.9 shows the rods’ center of mass as a func-
tion of time. Because the chains on the rods are attracted to the gel and incompatible
with the outer solution, they prevent these particles from diﬀusing out of the gel matrix.
Hence, the grafted chains anchor the nanorods at the interface where the cut gel meets
the outer solvent.
We note that, since the rods diﬀuse toward this newly formed interface only upon
exposure to the outer ﬂuid, rods buried deep within the network remain within the gel
(see Figure 2.8e and Figure 2.9). Moreover, steric hindrance from rods already at the
interface can inhibit particles deeper in the matrix from reaching the cut. We assert
that the extension of the rods into the outer solution also depends on their orientation.
Namely, when a rod is oriented downward (i.e., the unfunctionalized end points to the
bottom of the gel), the grafted chains are closer to the interface. Due to the unfavorable
enthalpic interactions between the grafted polymer chains and the outer solvent, the
rod is likely to diﬀuse away from the cut. Furthermore, topological constraints imposed
by the gel matrix hinder the reorientation of these downward-pointing rods.
To explore the eﬀect of the initial proximity of the rods to the cut on the number
of rods that remain buried in the matrix, we conduct two separate sets of simulations
involving the vertically aligned, upward-pointing rods. In the ﬁrst set, the rods were
placed a distance of 3rc closer to the interface than in the second set. (Recall rc = 1 in
the simulations.) The runs from the ﬁrst set have 25% fewer buried rods than the runs
from the second set.
Figures 2.10a and 2.10b demonstrate the eﬀect of the rods’ orientation. We plot
the trajectories of rods in eight independent runs for samples containing rods that
are initially randomly distributed and ones with rods initially vertically aligned and
pointing upward, respectively. The results show that the latter samples yield a higher
fraction of rods localized at the interface at the end of simulation. (Notably, 31%
fewer rods remain buried in the gel for the case in Figure 2.10b than for the case in

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
37
35
12/32 pop out
22/32 pop out
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1
2
3
(a)
(b)
4
5
6 × 104
6 × 104
Time
Zrod
com
35
30
25
20
15
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time
Zrod
com
Figure 2.10 Time evolution of the z-coordinate of the center of mass of the rods for eight
independent runs (total 32 rods) with: (a) random initial distribution (position and orientation) of rods
and (b) rods that were initially aligned vertically and facing upward and have 𝛥zrod−cut = 4.4, which is
the distance between the tip of the rods and the interface. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission
from the American Chemical Society.
Figure 2.10a.) Figure 2.10a also reveals that even when the rods are initially randomly
distributed in the gel, 38% of them become localized at the new interface.
With rods at the interface, the initiator sites now become exposed to the
monomer-laden outer solution. Hence, the system undergoes one of the critical
events for regeneration: the initiation process. Importantly, chain growth in ATRP
is signiﬁcantly slower than the diﬀusion rate of rods to the interface [48, 49]. Thus,
the polymerization primarily occurs once the rods are at the cut (not within the gel’s
bulk). Also, the high surface area provided by the rods facilitates changes in initiator
concentration, which plays a signiﬁcant role in the structure of the new layer as
discussed further below.

38
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Figure 2.11 (a–e) Regrowth of the top layer at the following monomer conversions: (a) 0%, (b) 25%,
(c) 50%, (d) 75%, (e) 96%. Initial monomer and cross-linker concentrations are [M]0 = 30% and
[X]0 = 0.53%. Initiator density𝜎i is 0.25, which corresponds to a concentration [Ini]0 = 0.27%.
(f–j) Top-down views corresponding to frames a–e. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from
the American Chemical Society.
Figure 2.11 shows snapshots of the critical propagation step, as monomers form chains
from the surface of the rods via the ATRP. As shown in the reaction diagram (Figure 2.2b)
the cross-linkers become part of these growing polymers and can bridge two separate
neighboring chains, thereby binding the system into a network. For these concentra-
tions of monomer and cross-linker, the rods remain localized at the interface as the gel
continues to grow.
The ﬁnal component for biomimetic regeneration is a mechanism for turning oﬀ
the propagating reaction and thereby regulating the height of the regrowing layer.
The concentration of monomer and cross-linker are the critical variables in the
termination process; once these species have completely reacted, the growth halts.
Figure 2.12a shows that with initial concentrations of 30% and 0.5% for the monomer
and cross-linker respectively, both species become almost fully converted into the gel
within the time scale of the simulation. The density proﬁles in Figure 2.12b demonstrate
the vital role of the percent conversion of the monomers in the density of the regrown
gel, for a ﬁxed initiator concentration; at 38% conversion, the densities of the two gels
are quite similar; at 96% conversion, the new gel exhibits a higher density than the
original material.
More importantly, the properties of the new gel can be tailored to resemble those of
the original material by tuning the initiator density on the rod, 𝜎i, and initial monomer
concentration [M]0. Increasing [M]0 leads to increases in the density and height of the
new layer (Figure 2.13a). The densities of the two layers can be reasonably matched by
the appropriate choice of the initiator concentration, 𝜎i (Figure 2.13b). The density of

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
39
(a)
Time
1
Monomer
Cross-linker
0.8
0.6
Conversion
0.4
0.2
1.4
1.2
0.8
ρb
p
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1
00
0.5
1.5
2.5
1
2
3
× 104
(b)
Z
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
In([X]0/[X])
In([M]0/[M])
ConvM = 38%
ConvM = 67%
ConvM = 96%
Figure 2.12 (a) Dependence of conversions and ln([M]0∕[M]) of monomer (solid lines) and
ln([X]0∕[X]) of cross-linker (dashed lines) on reaction times during copolymerization, where [M] and
[X] are the respective concentrations of unreacted monomer and cross-linker at a given time.
(b) Number density proﬁles of the newly formed gel at diﬀerent monomer conversions. The black
dashed line represents the corresponding number density proﬁle of the original gel at t = 3 × 104.
Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from the American Chemical Society.
the new gel is reduced with decreases in 𝜎i due to decreases in the number of grow-
ing polymer chains per unit volume [24]. Notably, the structure of the regenerated gel
layer is relatively heterogeneous, exhibiting a dense network with a high fraction of
cross-links in the proximity of the rods (see Figure 2.14). While the fraction of inter-rod
cross-links is relatively insensitive to 𝜎i (increasing only slightly at [M]0 = 50% with
decreasing 𝜎i), it increases dramatically with increases in [M]0for any given value of 𝜎i
(Figure 2.15).
Although we showed that the density of the new gel can be tuned to match that of the
uncut gel, the resulting composite is not ideal due to the lack of embedded nanorods in

40
Self-Assembling Systems
0
0
2
[M]0 = 20%
[M]0 = 30%
[M]0 = 40%
[M]0 = 50%
1.5
0.5
1
0
2
1.5
0.5
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
(a)
Z
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(b)
Z
ρgel
σi = 0.0834
σi = 0.125
σi = 0.375
σi = 0.5
σi = 0.25
ρgel
Figure 2.13 Density proﬁles of the system (including original gel, new gel, rods, and grafted chains) at
monomer conversion 95% with: (a) diﬀerent initial monomer concentrations [M]0 for initiator density
on the rod surface 𝜎i = 0.25([Ini]0 = 0.27%) and for initial cross-linker concentrations [X]0 varying with
[M]0 by ﬁxing [M]0∕[X]0 ≈56; (b) with diﬀerent initial densities 𝜎i ([Ini]0 varies from 0.09% to 0.54%)
for [M]0 = 30% and [X]0 = 0.53%. Insets are the corresponding snapshots of the gel system in (a) with
[M]0 = 20% and [M]0 = 50%, and in (b) with 𝜎i = 0.00834 and 𝜎i = 0.5. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with
permission from the American Chemical Society.
the regenerated layer. Thus, it is important for the nanorods to disperse in the new layer
so that the characteristics of the uncut material are replicated as closely as possible.
Notably, the presence of nanorods in the regenerated layer also impart additional
strength to the new gel [50–53]. However, when the nanorods, initially anchored at the
interface, escape into the regrowing gel as the amount of new gel increases during
the polymerization (see Figure 2.16), their anchoring eﬀect diminishes. Consequently,
the structural integrity between the cut gel and the new gel is compromised due to the
repulsive interaction between the respective moieties that leads to the development of
a gap at the interface.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
41
Figure 2.14 Top-down view of the
spatial distribution of the cross-links
at monomer conversion 96% for the
regenerated gel system with
𝜎i = 0.25 and [M]0 = 30%
(corresponding to the simulation in
Figures 2.11e and 2.11j). Reproduced
from Ref. [10] with permission from
the American Chemical Society.
0.2
0.15
Xinter-rod/Xtotal
0.1
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
σi
0.4
0.5
[M]0 = 20%
[M]0 = 30%
[M]0 = 40%
[M]0 = 50%
Figure 2.15 Fraction of the number of inter-rod cross-links (Xinter-rod) with respect to the total number
of cross-links formed (Xtotal) as a function of initiator density and initial monomer concentration. Data
are taken at cross-linker conversion of at least 96%. Error bars indicate the variations among four
independent runs. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from the American Chemical Society.
In order to produce a true nanocomposite polymer matrix that resembles the original
composite while preserving a coherent interface, we propose to introduce a new type
of cross-linker to the system (below, we refer to it as the additional cross-linker), which
binds the original gel and the regrown gel. Namely, additional cross-linkers constitute
a fraction of the original gel chain beads. The modiﬁed uncut gel is now essentially
a copolymer network with one monomer containing functional groups that remain
inert during the polymerization reaction until they are activated by external stimuli,

42
Self-Assembling Systems
[M]0 = 20%
[M]0 = 30%
[M]0 = 5%
[M]0 = 10%
[M]0 = 40%
[M]0 = 50%
55
50
45
40
35
30
250
0.5
1.5
Time
× 104
2.5
1
2
3
zrod
com
Figure 2.16 Position of center of mass of nanorods. Left: the z position of the center of mass of the
four nanorods is measured over time for diﬀerent initial monomer concentrations in the solvent.
Right: system snapshots for [M]0 = 40% (top) and [M]0 = 10% (bottom) at the end of the simulation.
The simulation box changes from 24.6 × 24.6 × 34.9 to 24.6 × 24.6 × 94.9 after the cut to incorporate
more materials for regeneration. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with permission from the American
Chemical Society.
resembling the agents used in click chemistry [54]. Once the additional cross-linkers
are activated, they participate in the polymerization reaction to form covalent bonds
that bridge the cut gel and regenerated layer. The additional elemental reaction relevant
to the additional cross-linker is sketched in Figure 2.17.
Our results show that the structure change at the interface is evident after
incorporating additional cross-linkers, as shown in Figure 2.18a. Where there had once
been a separation at the interface, the additional cross-linker holds the two gels together
through covalent bonds. By counting the number of reacted cross-linkers as a function
of z position, we quantitatively characterize the eﬀect of the additional cross-linker.
Importantly, the cross-linker proﬁle exhibits a peak at the interface with the additional
cross-linker in contrast to a dip for the system without the additional cross-linker.
m
Pp,S
r
l
l
*
*
+
n
m
n
Figure 2.17 Formation of an inter-gel cross-link. The radical from an active end (indicated by an
asterisk) is ﬁrst transferred to the additional cross-linker. At this point, the additional cross-linker with
the radical may now form another bond. An open circle indicates that the particle has not yet fully
reacted. Pp,S
r
= 0.075 is the reaction probability between a monomer with the radical and an
additional cross-linker.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
43
(a)
(b)
30
30
Interface
35
40
25
25
20
20
15
15
10
10
5
5
00
Z
Z
No additional cross-linker
5% additional cross-linker
No additional cross-linker
5% additional cross-linker
Reacted cross-linkers
Figure 2.18 (a) Comparison of system with no additional cross-linker (left) and with 5% additional
cross-linker (right). (b) Spatial distribution of reacted cross-linkers, which is deﬁned as a cross-linker
that has formed at least three bonds (including the original and additional cross-linkers), in the z
direction. The results are averaged across four independent runs.
2.3.3
Modeling the Formation of Polymer–Clay Composite Gels
The synthesis of polymer nanocomposites often involves in situ polymerization that
occurs within complex, multi-component ﬂuids [50–53]. A better understanding of
the coupling of the polymerization reactions to the dynamics of the host solution is
vital for precise control of the polymerization, and hence the properties of the ﬁnal
products. Here, we study the FRP of hydrogels with embedded clay particles using our

44
Self-Assembling Systems
DPD model. Furthermore, the particle-based model allows us to readily incorporate clay
particles into the polymer solutions or gels and to explicitly specify clay–polymer and
clay–solvent interactions.
Previous
experiments
have
shown
that
nanocomposite
gels
consisting
of
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide), PNIPAAm, and inorganic clay prepared by FRP
exhibit excellent mechanical properties compared to chemically cross-linked gels
[55–57]. In these gels, the exfoliated clay particles in an aqueous solution connected
by polymer chains serve as the multi-functional cross-linkers to form the polymer
network. In the absence of organic cross-linker agents in the solution, the formation
of polymer–clay composite gels relies solely on the combination reactions of active
chain ends emanating from the surface of the clay particles during the polymerization
[55–57].
To model the preparation of such composite gels, the initial solution comprises
solvent beads, initiator beads, monomer beads, and initiator-modiﬁed clay particles
(as described in Section 2.2.2). We consider an athermal solution for the clay particles
by choosing the interaction parameters between clay beads and other solution beads
(including solvent, initiator, and monomer) all as 25. The clay particles are randomly
dispersed in the solution after equilibrium. The simulation box has dimensions of
30 × 30 × 30 with periodic boundary conditions in all three directions. The solution
was equilibrated for 5 × 105 simulation time steps and the polymerization runs for
3 × 106 time steps to reach suﬃciently large monomer conversion (at least 90%
monomer conversion).
We ﬁrst demonstrate the successful formation of the nanocomposite polymer
network. In the simulation, the initial concentrations of initiator [Ini]0 and monomer
[M]0 are 0.13% and 9.83%, respectively. Hence, [Ini]0∕[M]0 ≈1∕74 is chosen to be
similar to that in our reference case for the bulk polymerization. When the polymeriza-
tion reaches full conversion, the polymer volume fraction of the gel 𝜙p is 0.1, which is
consistent with the experimentally prepared polymer–clay composite gels [57]. To com-
pensate for a signiﬁcantly smaller monomer concentration, we use a propagation prob-
ability Pp,M
r
= 0.01 to achieve a large monomer conversion within the polymerization
time. The initiation probability is set to ten times as large as Pp,M
r
to ensure suﬃciently
fast initiation. The overall termination probability is set to Pt
r = 0.002, so that Pp,M
r
∕Pt
r =
5 (as in the reference case for a bulk polymerization discussed in Section 2.3.1).
Figure 2.2b illustrates the simulation systems at monomer conversion of 95%. The
number of clay particles in the system is NC = 6. Because [Ini]0 is equal to 0.13%, the
total number of initiator beads is 108. These beads are distributed equally over the six
clay particles, resulting in 18 initiator beads per particle. The snapshots show that the
polymer chains grow from the initiator beads on the surface. The emanating chains
form a shell structure around the center clay particle. At large monomer conversion,
the gel network starts to emerge due to covalent bonds formed during the combination
reactions.
To quantify the gel formation, we characterize the polymerization kinetics by inves-
tigating the dependence of ln([M]0∕[M]) on time. A deviation from linear ﬁrst-order
kinetic behavior is evident at large monomer conversion (Figure 2.19a), indicating the
eﬀects of chain termination. We observe a monotonic decrease in the number of poly-
mers with active ends with time. Notably, we ﬁnd that active chain ends are consumed
faster at the early stage of the polymerization. This behavior is diﬀerent from that in the

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
45
In([M]0/[M])
In([M]0/[M])
ConvM
Ncluster
0
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
00
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0
50
100
Number of active polymer
2
4
0.5
1
2
3 × 106
1.5
(b)
(a)
Time steps
2.5
Nactive
polymer
Figure 2.19 (a) ln([M]0∕[M]) (squares) and the number of active polymers (circles) as functions of
reaction time steps during polymerization. The number of clay particles in the solution is NC = 6. (b)
Number of clusters in the simulation system as a function of monomer conversion for the system with
NC = 6. Error bars arise from averaging over four independent runs.
bulk polymerization discussed in Section 2.3.1, in which the rapid decrease in the num-
ber of polymers with active ends occurs at the late stage (see Figure 2.5a). To understand
this behavior, recall that at the beginning of polymerization, the distribution of the active
chain ends in the solution are highly heterogeneous in space because the initiator is con-
centrated near clay platelets [55–57]. Hence, the probability of chain ends meeting each
other is highest near the clay surface when polymerization just starts. As chains grow,
the volume that active chain ends can explore increases, which leads to more homoge-
neous distribution. Thus, we attribute this observed fast consumption of active chain
ends at the early stage to the high local concentration of propagating chains around
particles.

46
Self-Assembling Systems
Furthermore, we characterize the gelation process by tracing the evolution of the
number of clusters Ncluster formed during the polymerization, as shown in Figure 2.19b.
Each cluster consists of interconnected clay particles and associated polymer chains
that connect diﬀerent particles (referred to as X-chains above). Here, we deﬁne gelation
when all particles are incorporated into a single cluster. With four independent runs, we
observe that the gelation only occurs at monomer conversions ∼93%. Gelation is deﬁned
when the averaged Ncluster with error bars is close to 1.
Finally, we explore how the number of clay particles, NC, inﬂuences the polymeriza-
tion kinetics and gelation. To isolate the eﬀects of NC, we vary NC from 3 to 12 while
maintaining the initial concentrations of initiator and monomer. The corresponding
volume fraction of clay particles varies from 1.1% to 4.2%. As a result, the initial local
concentration of active chain ends near the clay particle is expected to decrease when
there are more particles in the solution. Figure 2.20a shows that except for the smallest
value of NC = 3, the dependence of ln([M]0∕[M]) on time is not aﬀected (within the
magnitudes of error bars). NC = 3 does result in much more pronounced downward
In([M]0/[M])
4
NC
NC
NC
NC = 3
NC = 6
NC = 9
NC = 12
NC = 3
NC = 6
NC = 9
NC = 12
3
2
1
0
0
2
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0
5
10
15
20
12
6
3
1
0
0.5
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.5
1
1.5
Time steps
2
2.5
3
(a)
(b)
(c)
× 106
ConvM
Ncluster
NX-chain
Figure 2.20 Eﬀect of NC on the evolution of (a) ln([M]0∕[M]) and (b) the number of clusters.
(c) Number of X-chains formed due to the combination of growing polymer chains as a function of the
number of clay particles NC. Error bars arise from averaging over four independent runs.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
47
curvature associated with frequent termination reactions, which are due to the large
initial concentration of active chain ends around the particles discussed above. Notably,
this heterogeneous distribution of initiator is most pronounced for the smallest number
of particles; an increase in NC leads to a more homogeneous distribution of initiator
and, correspondingly, a more homogeneous distribution of active chain ends at early
times.
The number of clusters exhibits complicated behavior when we vary NC. Figure 2.20b
shows that the number of clusters decreases as the monomer conversion increases, indi-
cating that the system is undergoing gelation. Successful gelation occurs for NC = 3, 6,
and 9, but none of the four runs reaches gelation when NC = 12. On the one hand, as
noted above, a larger number of particles results in more homogeneous distribution of
active chain ends. In principle, this could allow more active chain ends to be preserved
until the growing chains from diﬀerent particles are long enough to meet and form the
X-chains. As shown in Figure 2.20c, the number of X-chains increases monotonically
as NC increases. This behavior is consistent with experimental observations [57]. It has
been shown that more X-chains would lead to better mechanical properties [57]. There-
fore, a large number of X-chains is desired in the composite gels. A large number of
particles, however, increases the diﬃculty of satisfying our chosen criterion for gelation
(Ncluster = 1). Based on this criterion, there is a tradeoﬀbetween an increase in the num-
ber of X-chains and decrease in the chance to form a single cluster. In our simulations,
3.2% volume fraction of clay particles (NC = 9) appears to yield an optimal composite
gel with the largest number of X-chains.
2.4
Conclusions
We develop a reactive DPD approach to explore the self-assembly behavior in polymer
nanocomposites in the course of polymerization. Our model allows us to simulate FRP
and ATRP in the same computational framework. Chemical reactions change the bead
types of the components involved and can also lead to the formation of a covalent bond
between the reacting pair of beads, where experimentally relevant reaction probabilities
are employed to govern the reaction kinetics. The reactions are coupled to the dynam-
ics of the DPD system, which is evolved according to Newton’s equations of motion.
The characteristic features of FRP and ATRP are successfully reproduced in the simu-
lations. More importantly, this coupling captures the interplay between hydrodynamics
and chemical reactions in multi-component mixtures.
In the bulk polymerization via FRP, we systematically varied the reaction probabilities
relative to the set of reference parameters in order to understand the eﬀects of initiation,
propagation, and termination on the polymerization kinetics. The slow initiation eﬀect
is exhibited in the simulations as the upward curvature of the ln([M]0∕[M]) curve and
the increase of the PDI peak at small monomer conversion. The termination probability
has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the polymerization. In particular, the polydispersity
index and maximum degree of polymerization signiﬁcantly increase with an increase
in the termination probability. By modeling a living copolymerization of monomers
and cross-linkers, we observed that the network-forming gelation is in quantitative
agreement with the corresponding experiments. An increasing amount of cross-linkers

48
Self-Assembling Systems
facilitates the gelation, which provides evidence that the eﬀects of the polymer geom-
etry and the spatial distribution of the pendant functional group are captured in the
model.
We then modeled a polymer nanocomposite that enables self-regeneration of the gel
when a signiﬁcant portion of the material is severed. The cut instigates the dynamic
cascade of cooperative events leading to regrowth. The information for the regeneration
is inherent to the system; the “popping up” of the rods at the interface provides the
signal to initiate the polymerization that leads to the formation of the new gel. The living
copolymerization is halted when monomer and cross-linker are consumed, yielding a
layer with a speciﬁed height, cross-link density, and monomer density. As some of the
rods remain buried in the bulk of the gel, subsequent cuts below the newly regenerated
region can reposition the previously buried nanorods to the interface, and hence to
repeated regrowth. These subsequent events do, however, require the addition of new
monomers and cross-linkers to the host solution. In this system, the interfacially active
rods play a crucial role in the initiation and propagation steps of the regrowth by sensing
the damage, migrating to the cut, and thereby delivering controllable quantities of the
initiators to the critical location. Notably, the chains grafted to the ends of the rods also
serve an important function: they provide a means of tailoring the eﬀective adhesion
between the newly regenerated and old gels. Furthermore, by allowing the nanorods
to diﬀuse into the regenerated layer and introducing an additional cross-linker into
the original gel that bridges the cut gel and regenerated layer, we demonstrated the
regeneration of a true nanocomposite polymer matrix that resembles the original
composite while preserving a coherence interface.
Finally, we investigated the preparation of polymer–clay composite gels by FRP
with exfoliated inorganic clay in an aqueous solution. We successfully demonstrated
gelation of the polymer–clay composites caused by the combination reactions of
active chain ends emanating from diﬀerent clay particles, where each particle acts as
a multi-functional cross-linker. We showed that the number of clay particles strongly
aﬀects the gelation process, and we observed that a 3.2% volume fraction of clay
particles produces a composite gel with the largest number of X-chains.
To summarize, our reactive DPD approach provides an eﬀective means to model
simultaneous self-assembly and polymerization processes involving multi-component
mixtures. Our ﬁndings provide insight into the polymerization kinetics of FRP and
ATRP, as well as potential guidelines for synthesizing polymer nanocomposites that
exhibit the desired properties. The regrowth of a severed gel layer outlined here helps
pave the way for creating materials that are both self-regulating and self-replenishing
[58], leading to systems with improved functionality over signiﬁcantly extended
lifetimes.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the U.S. Department of Energy, Oﬃce
of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award
DEFG-02-02ER45998 for the development of the computer simulations, and from the
Army Research Oﬃce under grant number W911NF-13-1-0489 for applications of the
model toward 4D printing.

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
49
References
1. G. Odian, Principles of Polymerization (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2004),
4th edn.
2. K. Matyjaszewski, T. P. Davis, eds., Handbook of Radical Polymerization (John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2002).
3. G. Moad, D. H. Solomon, The Chemistry of Radical Polymerization (Elsevier Science
Ltd, Amsterdam, 2006), 2nd edn.
4. M. Krzysztof, Controlled Radical Polymerization. ACS Symposium Series (American
Chemical Society, 1998), vol. 685, p. 500.
5. W. A. Braunecker, K. Matyjaszewski, Controlled/living radical polymerization:
Features, developments, and perspectives. Progress in Polymer Science 32, 93–146
(2007).
6. K. Matyjaszewski, N. V. Tsarevsky, Macromolecular engineering by atom transfer
radical polymerization. Journal of the American Chemical Society 136, 6513–6533
(2014).
7. K. Matyjaszewski, Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP): Current status and
future perspectives. Macromolecules 45, 4015–4039 (2012).
8. K. Matyjaszewski, J. Xia, Atom transfer radical polymerization. Chemical Reviews
101, 2921–2990 (2001).
9. J.-S. Wang, K. Matyjaszewski, Controlled/“living” radical polymerization. Atom
transfer radical polymerization in the presence of transition-metal complexes.
Journal of the American Chemical Society 117, 5614–5615 (1995).
10. X. Yong, O. Kuksenok, K. Matyjaszewski, A. C. Balazs, Harnessing interfacially
active nanorods to regenerate severed polymer gels. Nano Letters 13, 6269–6274
(2013).
11. X. Yong, O. Kuksenok, A. C. Balazs, Modeling free radical polymerization using
dissipative particle dynamics. Polymer 72, 217–225 (2015).
12. X. He et al., Synthetic homeostatic materials with chemo-mechano-chemical
self-regulation. Nature 487, 214–218 (2012).
13. A. Shastri et al., An aptamer-functionalized chemomechanically modulated
biomolecule catch-and-release system. Nature Chemistry 7, 447–454 (2015).
14. P. J. Hoogerbrugge, J. M. V. A. Koelman, Simulating microscopic hydrodynamic
phenomena with dissipative particle dynamics. Europhysics Letters 19, 155–160
(1992).
15. P. Espanol, P. Warren, Statistical mechanics of dissipative particle dynamics.
Europhysics Letters 30, 191–196 (1995).
16. R. D. Groot, P. B. Warren, Dissipative particle dynamics: Bridging the gap between
atomistic and mesoscopic simulation. Journal of Chemical Physics 107, 4423–4435
(1997).
17. S. Plimpton, Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics. Journal of
Computational Physics 117, 1–19 (1995).
18. H. Masoud, A. Alexeev, Controlled release of nanoparticles and macromolecules
from responsive microgel capsules. Acs Nano 6, 212–219 (2012).
19. W. Pan, D. A. Fedosov, G. E. Karniadakis, B. Caswell, Hydrodynamic interactions
for single dissipative-particle-dynamics particles and their clusters and ﬁlaments.
Physical Review E 78, 046706 (2008).

50
Self-Assembling Systems
20. P. K. Jha, J. W. Zwanikken, F. A. Detcheverry, J. J. de Pablo, M. Olvera de la Cruz,
Study of volume phase transitions in polymeric nanogels by theoretically informed
coarse-grained simulations. Soft Matter 7, 5965 (2011).
21. P. Nikunen, I. Vattulainen, M. Karttunen, Reptational dynamics in dissipative
particle dynamics simulations of polymer melts. Physical Review E 75, 036713
(2007).
22. A. Karatrantos, N. Clarke, R. J. Composto, K. I. Winey, Topological entanglement
length in polymer melts and nanocomposites by a DPD polymer model. Soft Matter
9, 3877 (2013).
23. S. Hirotsu, Softening of bulk modulus and negative Poisson ratio near the volume
phase-transition of polymer gels. Journal of Chemical Physics 94, 3949–3957 (1991).
24. H. Liu, M. Li, Z.-Y. Lu, Z.-G. Zhang, C.-C. Sun, Inﬂuence of surface-initiated
polymerization rate and initiator density on the properties of polymer brushes.
Macromolecules 42, 2863–2872 (2009).
25. H. Gao, P. Polanowski, K. Matyjaszewski, Gelation in living copolymerization of
monomer and divinyl cross-linker: Comparison of ATRP experiments with Monte
Carlo simulations. Macromolecules 42, 5925–5932 (2009).
26. P. Polanowski, J. K. Jeszka, K. Matyjaszewski, Modeling of branching and gelation in
living copolymerization of monomer and divinyl cross-linker using dynamic lattice
liquid model (DLL) and Flory–Stockmayer model. Polymer 51, 6084–6092 (2010).
27. P. Polanowski, J. K. Jeszka, W. Li, K. Matyjaszewski, Eﬀect of dilution on branching
and gelation in living copolymerization of monomer and divinyl cross-linker:
Modeling using dynamic lattice liquid model (DLL) and Flory–Stockmayer (FS)
model. Polymer 52, 5092–5101 (2011).
28. J. Genzer, In silico polymerization: Computer simulation of controlled radical
polymerization in bulk and on ﬂat surfaces. Macromolecules 39, 7157–7169 (2006).
29. S. Turgman-Cohen, J. Genzer, Computer simulation of controlled radical polymer-
ization eﬀect of chain conﬁnement due to initiator grafting density and solvent
quality in “grafting from” method. Macromolecules 43, 9567–9577 (2010).
30. S. Turgman-Cohen, J. Genzer, Simultaneous bulk- and surface-initiated controlled
radical polymerization from planar substrates. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 133, 17567–17569 (2011).
31. A. Fahr, A. H. Laufer, Direct rate measurements of the combination and dispropor-
tionation of vinyl radicals. Journal of Physical Chemistry 94, 726–729 (1990).
32. T. Zhao, Y. Zheng, J. Poly, W. Wang, Controlled multi-vinyl monomer homopoly-
merization through vinyl oligomer combination as a universal approach to
hyperbranched architectures. Nature Communications 4, 1873 (2013).
33. K. Matyjaszewski, A. H. E. Müller, Naming of controlled, living and “living”
polymerizations. Am. Chem. Soc., Polym. Prepr. 38, 6–9 (1997).
34. H. Gao, W. Li, K. Matyjaszewski, Synthesis of polyacrylate networks by ATRP:
Parameters inﬂuencing experimental gel points. Macromolecules 41, 2335–2340
(2008).
35. Y. Yang, M. W. Urban, Self-healing polymeric materials. Chemical Society Reviews
42, 7446–7467 (2013).
36. B. J. Blaiszik et al., Self-healing polymers and composites. Annual Review of
Materials Research 40, 179–211 (2010).

2 Hybrid Modeling Methods for Polymer Nanocomposites
51
37. M. D. Hager, P. Greil, C. Leyens, S. van der Zwaag, U. S. Schubert, Self-healing
materials. Advanced Materials 22, 5424–5430 (2010).
38. D. Y. Wu, S. Meure, D. Solomon, Self-healing polymeric materials: A review of
recent developments. Progress in Polymer Science 33, 479–522 (2008).
39. M. J. Webber, J. A. Kessler, S. I. Stupp, Emerging peptide nanomedicine to
regenerate tissues and organs. Journal of Internal Medicine 267, 71–88 (2010).
40. J.-D. Benazet, R. Zeller, Vertebrate limb development: Moving from classical
morphogen gradients to an integrated 4-dimensional patterning system. Cold Spring
Harbor Perspectives in Biology 1, a001339 (2009).
41. D. A. Fedosov, I. V. Pivkin, G. E. Karniadakis, Velocity limit in DPD simulations of
wall-bounded ﬂows. Journal of Computational Physics 227, 2540–2559 (2008).
42. M. Quesada-Pérez, J. A. Maroto-Centeno, J. Forcada, R. Hidalgo-Alvarez, Gel
swelling theories: The classical formalism and recent approaches. Soft Matter 7,
10536 (2011).
43. S. Hirotsu, Phase transition of a polymer gel in pure and mixed solvent media.
Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 56, 233–242 (1987).
44. B. Erman, P. J. Flory, Critical phenomena and transitions in swollen polymer
networks and in linear macromolecules. Macromolecules 19, 2342–2353 (1986).
45. P. J. Flory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY,
1953).
46. H. G. Schild, Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide): Experiment, theory and application.
Progress in Polymer Science 17, 163–249 (1992).
47. A. Manna et al., Optimized photoisomerization on gold nanoparticles capped by
unsymmetrical azobenzene disulﬁdes. Chemistry of Materials 15, 20–28 (2003).
48. M. Shibayama, Y. Isaka, Y. Shiwa, Dynamics of probe particles in polymer solutions
and gels. Macromolecules 32, 7086–7092 (1999).
49. M. Zhong, K. Matyjaszewski, How fast can a CRP be conducted with preserved
chain end functionality? Macromolecules 44, 2668–2677 (2011).
50. S. S. Ray, M. Okamoto, Polymer/layered silicate nanocomposites: A review from
preparation to processing. Progress in Polymer Science 28, 1539–1641 (2003).
51. F. Hussain, M. Hojjati, M. Okamoto, R. E. Gorga, Review article: Polymer-matrix
nanocomposites, processing, manufacturing, and application: An overview. Journal
of Composite Materials 40, 1511–1575 (2006).
52. D. R. Paul, L. M. Robeson, Polymer nanotechnology: Nanocomposites. Polymer 49,
3187–3204 (2008).
53. K. Haraguchi, Synthesis and properties of soft nanocomposite materials with novel
organic/inorganic network structures. Polymer Journal 43, 223–241 (2011).
54. J. Xu, J. Ye, S. Liu, Synthesis of well-deﬁned cyclic poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) via
click chemistry and its unique thermal phase transition behavior. Macromolecules
40, 9103–9110 (2007).
55. K. Haraguchi, T. Takehisa, S. Fan, Eﬀects of clay content on the properties of
nanocomposite hydrogels composed of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) and clay.
Macromolecules 35, 10162–10171 (2002).
56. K. Haraguchi, T. Takehisa, Nanocomposite hydrogels: A unique organic–inorganic
network structure with extraordinary mechanical, optical, and swelling/de-swelling
properties. Advanced Materials 14, 1120–1124 (2002).

52
Self-Assembling Systems
57. K. Haraguchi, T. Takada, Synthesis and characteristics of nanocomposite gels
prepared by in situ photopolymerization in an aqueous system. Macromolecules
43, 4294–4299 (2010).
58. A. C. C. Esteves, Y. Luo, M. W. P. van de Put, C. C. M. Carcouet, G. de With,
Self- replenishing dual structured superhydrophobic coatings prepared by
drop-casting of an all-in-one dispersion. Advanced Functional Materials 24,
986–992 (2014).

53
3
Theory and Simulation Studies of Self-Assembly of Helical
Particles
Giorgio Cinacchi 1, Alberta Ferrarini 2, Elisa Frezza 2,3, Achille Giacometti 4 and
Hima Bindu Kolli 5
1Departamento de Física Teórica de la Materia Condensada, Instituto de Física de la Materia Condensada (IFIMAC) and
Instituto de Ciencias de Materiales “Nicolás Cabreras”, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain
2Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Italy
3BMSS, IUMR 5086 CNRS/Univ. Lyon I, Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines, France
4Dipartimento di Scienze Molecolari e Nanosistemi, Università Ca’ Foscari di Venezia, Campus Scientiﬁco, Ediﬁcio Alfa,
Italy
5Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Norway
3.1
Introduction: Why Hard Helices?
Crystallization as an ordering phenomenon is neither restricted to molecular systems,
nor to attractive interactions [1]. Even in the absence of explicit attractive interactions,
systems might be spontaneously forming ordered aggregates driven by entropic gain,
a well-know example being the formation of a crystal structure in a hard colloidal
sphere systems [2]. This is one of several counterintuitive examples where there is a
spontaneous ordering driven by entropy [3]. While in this case the number of possible
crystal structures was still limited by the aspeciﬁcity of the steric interactions, the
new developments in the chemical synthesis of colloids paved the way to constructing
crystals with prescribed crystal structures by changing the shape of the colloidal
building blocks [4].
Together with the shape, also the chirality of the building blocks may play an impor-
tant, though not yet fully explored, role in self-assembly processes [5]. Leaving aside
the issue of the emergence of homochirality in biological systems from equally probable
molecular chiral moieties, a crucial problem in the current understanding of the origin
of life, the use of chiral particles ﬁnds important applications in photonic metamateri-
als. Helically nanostructured materials have been attracting increasing attention, also
because of their unique electrical and mechanical properties [6–8]. Control of their
three-dimensional organization is also a crucial step in pushing the chiral properties to
a mesoscale range.
While it is possible to control the enantioselective process by using depletion
interactions and faceting of the building blocks [5], helices are among the natural
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

54
Self-Assembling Systems
objects to focus on when dealing with chirality. New functional materials [9, 10] can
be produced by exploiting the intrinsic chirality of the helical structures, which are
useful in catalysis and demixing of enantiomers [11, 12]. The importance of the helix
in nature is unquestionable: proteins, polysaccharides, DNA and RNA, the so-called
molecules of life, have a helical structure. The helical shape is exhibited in nature
also by microorganisms, like ﬁlamentous viruses, and cell organelles, like bacterial
ﬂagella. Filamentous viruses are formed by a DNA of RNA core, wrapped by a coating
of helically arranged proteins. Well-known examples are the Tobacco Mosaic Virus
(TMV), the ﬁrst discovered virus [13], and viruses related to the ﬁlamentous phage fd,
whose mutants are present in nature (M13, fd), while others can be obtained by genetic
engineering. They have been widely investigated as models of highly anisotropic,
colloidal systems, with the advantages of being essentially monodisperse and that their
length, of the order of a micrometer, makes them suitable for imaging techniques,
such as optical microscopy. Bacterial ﬂagella are helical macromolecular structures
assembled from a single protein (ﬂagellin). Their helical shape can be tuned with high
precision by regulating external parameters such as temperature or pH, and their large
size, of the order of microns, makes them very handy for optical observations.
Because of their shape anisotropy, helical biopolymers and colloidal particles may
exhibit liquid crystal phases at high densities [14]. These phases are often tacitly
assumed to be the same as those occurring in systems of rod-like particles. However,
it cannot be taken for granted that at such high densities the intrinsic helicity of the
shape can be neglected. To explore the eﬀect of self-assembly of helical polymers and
colloids, and in particular to discover whether there is anything special just determined
by the helical shape, we have undertaken a comprehensive investigation of the phase
behavior of hard helices [15–19], interacting through purely steric repulsions, using
Monte Carlo simulations and an extension of Onsager theory [20], a density functional
theory (DFT) that was originally proposed to explain the onset of nematic ordering in a
system of hard rods. These studies have revealed an unexpectedly rich phase behavior,
the most interesting result being the existence of a special phases characterized by
screw-like ordering. Such an organization had been proposed for DNA, based on
theoretical considerations [21], and had been observed in dense suspensions of ﬂagellar
ﬁlaments [22]. Hard helices are an athermal system: phase transitions are controlled
by density and are driven by the entropy gain on moving from the less to the more
ordered phase. This is a minimalist model, possibly insuﬃcient to account entirely
for the complexity of real systems. It is nonetheless useful to obtain a general picture,
lacking in the previous literature, that will represent a useful reference for interpreting
the behavior of systems that may be more complicated.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 3.2, we brieﬂy recall
the main features of liquid crystal phases, with special attention to their chiral versions.
Then, we will describe our model systems and the methods used to investigate them.
In Section 3.5, we give an outline of Onsager theory, whereas in Section 3.6 we extend
Onsager theory to helically modulated nematic phases. In Section 3.7, we review the
deﬁnitions of the order parameters and correlation functions necessary to identify the
various phases. In Section 3.8, we discuss the physical origin of the chiral nematic phases
formed by helical particles, and the next Section 3.9 gives an overview of the phase
behavior of hard helices. In Section 3.10, theoretical predictions are compared to experi-
mental data, and ﬁnally Section 3.11 presents the conclusions and possible perspectives.

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
55
3.2
Liquid Crystal Phases
Anisometric molecules and particles can form liquid crystal phases, which are ﬂuid
states characterized by long-range orientational order, while long-range translational
order is absent or only partial. The phase transitions can be induced by changes of
temperature or density, and in the two cases one speaks of thermotropic and lyotropic
systems, respectively. To the former class, mostly represented by organic low molar mass
molecules and polymers, belong the materials used in electro-optical applications. The
latter class includes various kinds of systems, like surfactants, lipids, anisotropic colloids
and stiﬀor semi-ﬂexible polymers. Important examples of lyotropic liquid crystals can
be found in nature, e.g. biomembranes and DNA.
Liquid crystals comprise a variety of phases, diﬀering from each other in the kind and
symmetry of order [23, 24]. Probably the most common is the nematic (N), in which
the centers of mass of molecules or particles are randomly distributed in space, but
their long axes are preferentially aligned with each other. The average alignment axis
is denoted as the director (̂n). This is the phase generally found in the proximity of the
isotropic phase, at lower temperature in thermotropic or higher density in lyotropic
systems. With further decreasing temperature or increasing density, smectic (Sm)
phases may be found, which exhibit an additional one-dimensional order: molecules
or particles are preferentially located in layers, and the director may be either parallel
(e.g smectic A, smectic B) or tilted (e.g. smectic C) with respect to the layer normal
(z axis). In the smectic A and C phases the positions of molecules or particles are
randomly distributed within layers, whereas in the smectic B phase there is hexatic
short-range order within the layers. Other, less common, phases can be found for
speciﬁc systems. One of them is the biaxial N phase (Nb), which diﬀers form the
conventional (“uniaxial”) N phase because the orientational distribution in the plane
perpendicular to the director ̂n is anisotropic: thus, two other directors, ̂b and ̂c, can
be deﬁned, with ̂n = ̂c × ̂b [25, 26]. Biaxial N phases (Nb) were detected in solutions
of surfactants that self-assemble into biaxial micelles [27] and in colloidal suspensions
of board-like particles [28], whereas their existence in thermotropic systems is more
controversial. In this context, bent mesogens were proposed as suitable candidates, but
the results are less straightforward.
Chiral molecules or particles can impart the liquid crystal phase a chiral character
[29]. The chiral analog of the nematic is the cholesteric or twisted nematic (N∗) phase,
where the director ̂n rotates in helical way around a perpendicular axis, rather than
being uniform. Handedness and pitch () of the cholesteric helix are determined by
the structure at the molecular level, but the connection is not straightforward [30, 31].
The general features are that pitches are orders of magnitude longer than the molecular
size (from hundreds of nanometers to millimeters) and cholesteric phases formed by
enantiomers have identical pitch and opposite handedness. Some chiral systems also
exhibit, between the isotropic and the cholesteric phase, one or more blue phases [32],
which can be described as ﬂuid lattices of defects, with cubic symmetry and lattice peri-
ods of the order of the wavelength of visible light. They are locally chiral, since directors
are locally arranged in double-twist cylinders. On the other boundary of the N∗phase,
the smectic phases may also be chiral: in the so-called smectic C chiral (SmC∗) phase,
the director, tilted with respect to the layer normal, rotates in a helical way from layer
to layer, again with typical pitches longer than 100 nm. In the case of short-pitch

56
Self-Assembling Systems
cholesterics, between the cholesteric and the smectic, twist grain boundary (TGB)
phases may be found. These are frustrated structures, ﬁrst predicted by de Gennes [33]
and Lubensky [34], and observed soon after [35], composed of smectic slabs, rotated
with respect to one another and separated by defect walls. Such a helical superstructure
results from the competition between the cholesteric organization and smectic layering,
which cannot be simultaneously realized without the formation of defects.
3.3
Hard Helices: A Minimal Model
Our model helices are formed by chains of Nb partially fused hard spherical beads, each
of diameter D, rigidly arranged in a right-handed helical fashion as shown in Figure 3.1.
All lengths will eventually be expressed in units of D that will set the length scale. The
morphology of the helix will be deﬁned by providing the radius r and the pitch p, along
with an additional parameter that can be chosen either to be the contour length L or the
Euclidean length Λ. Upon ﬁxing the contour length L and changing r and p indepen-
dently, the aspect ratio will be changing. Conversely, upon ﬁxing the Euclidean length
Λ and changing r and p independently, the contour length L will be modiﬁed. We can
easily ﬁnd the relation between Λ and L. The centers of the beads can be identiﬁed by
the following helix parametric equations:
xi = r cos(2𝜋ti)
yi = r sin(2𝜋ti)
1 ≤i ≤Nb
(3.1)
zi = pti
The centers of the beads lie on an inner cylinder of radius r, whereas the diameter of
the outer cylinder (2r + D) is the width of the helix rmax. The long axis of the helix ̂u
passes through the center of the helix. Given r, p and L, the increment Δt = ti+1 −ti can
be computed as
L
14 = 2𝜋Δt
√
r2 +
( p
2𝜋
)2
.
(3.2)
Z
n
c
x
α
u
w
Figure 3.1 Model helix made up of a chain of partially overlapping
hard spheres. The orientation of the helix in space is univocally
deﬁned by the direction of its main axis ̂u and its two-fold symmetry
axis ̂w. Reproduced from Ref. [18] with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry.

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
57
The parametric equations could alternatively be written using the number of turns as the
ﬁxed value instead of ﬁxed L [15]. The Euclidean length Λ is measured as the component
parallel to the long axis of the helix of the distance between ﬁrst and last bead. Diﬀerent
helix shapes—from a slender rod to a highly coiled helix—can be achieved by varying r
and p independently, as illustrated in Figure 3.2. The limit case of r = 0 corresponds to
a rod-like shape that can be contrasted with known results from the phase diagram of
hard spherocylinders [36].
In our studies we have generally focused on helices of Nb = 15 beads and constant
contour length L = 10 (see Figure 3.2).
In a system of our model helices, the only interactions are hard-core repulsions; that
is, beads belonging to diﬀerent helices interact as follows:
u(rij) = ∞,
rij < D,
(3.3)
u(rij) = 0,
rij > D,
(3.4)
where rij is the distance between a pair of beads belonging to diﬀerent helices.
3.4
Numerical Simulations
The problem of calculating the properties of a condensed matter system by solving the
equations of motion appears a dreadful task in view of the large number of particles
(≈1023) involved. Statistical mechanics helps to relate the equilibrium thermodynamic
properties of the system to the average of particle properties by treating them in
a probabilistic way, thus bridging microscopic properties with thermodynamical
quantities. In this framework, Monte Carlo (MC) methods have been evolved in the
past decades as one of the most eﬃcient and reliable tools for assessing, and calculating
thermodynamical properties and drawing the corresponding phase diagrams.
One of the crucial issues for generating proper microstates is ergodicity. Macroscopic
properties measured in experiments are time-averaged quantities. The time scale of
the observation is very large when compared to the switching time scale from one
microstate to another. Because of this, we can assume that the system visits all accessible
microstates during the observation time. Hence, a macroscopic quantity obtained by
taking an average over a suitable ensemble is equivalent to the time-averaged quantity.
In order to ensure that the system is in equilibrium, the sampling of microstates
should obey “detailed balance,” which requires the forward and backward rates of any
transition between states to be equal.
Diﬀerent ensembles, corresponding to the diﬀerent independent thermodynamical
variables, can be used by performing appropriate Legendre transformations. In our
studies we have employed the Monte Carlo technique under isothermal–isochoric
(NVT) and isothermal–isobaric conditions (NPT) to study the phase behavior of
systems of hard helices. Here, N, V, P and T denote the number of particles, the total
volume, the pressure and the temperature of the system, respectively.
3.4.1
Monte Carlo in Various Ensembles
The ﬁrst MC simulation was implemented on hard disks by Metropolis in 1953 [37].
Since then, MC has evolved into a reliable methodology for studying virtually all soft

58
Self-Assembling Systems
r 0.1
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
p8
p9
p10
r 0.2
r 0.3
r 0.4
r 0.5
r 0.6
r 0.7
r 0.8
r 0.9
r 1.0
Figure 3.2 Helical shapes studied, with radius r ranging from 0.1 to 1.0, pitch p ranging from 1 to 10,
and constant contour length L = 10.

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
59
matter systems, ranging from simple and molecular ﬂuids, to polymers, surfactants and
proteins. This list includes mesogens forming liquid crystal phases.
In general, a MC approach consists of the three steps: (i) Determining the microstate
probability distribution for the ensemble of interest. (ii) Determining the set of MC
moves accomplishing changes in all ﬂuctuating quantities. (iii) Imposing the detailed
balance condition to ﬁnd the acceptance criterion.
3.4.1.1
Canonical Monte Carlo Simulations (NVT–MC)
The most common and convenient ensemble for ﬂuid systems is usually the canonical
(NVT) ensemble, where N particles are inserted into a ﬁxed computational box of vol-
ume V at a given temperature T. In this case, the pressure is computed via the virial
theorem [38],
P = 𝜌kBT + 1
3V
⟨
∑
i<j
fij ⋅(Ri −Rj)
⟩
,
(3.5)
where 𝜌is the number density, and fij is the force on particle i due to particle j, located
at Ri and Rj, respectively. For isotropic potentials, depending only on the distance
Rij = |Ri −Rj| between particles, this can be easily translated in terms of an integral
involving the pair correlation function g(R). However, the same procedure is not as
straightforward for non-spherical hard-core discontinuous potentials.
3.4.1.2
Isothermal–Isobaric Monte Carlo Simulations (NPT–MC)
Isothermal–isobaric (NPT) Monte Carlo simulations were ﬁrst employed by
W. W. Wood [39] in the study of a ﬂuid of hard disks. The isothermal–isobaric
ensemble is widely used because most of the experiments are done at controlled
pressure and temperature. In NPT–MC simulations the system is assumed to be in
thermal contact with a large heat bath, and mechanically coupled with a barostat.
The mechanical coupling allows the system to change its volume in order to keep its
pressure constant. The problem of ﬁnding the correct probability distribution (point (i)
above) is a standard textbook topic [38], so we will focus here on the problem of ﬁnding
the correct moves for generic biaxial particles.
3.4.2
Details on the MC Simulation of Hard Helices
The position of a helix is deﬁned by the coordinates of its center of mass, while its orien-
tation is speciﬁed by the unit vectors ̂u, parallel to its axis, and ̂w, parallel to its two-fold
symmetry axis (see Figure 3.1). The combination of the two unit vectors provides the
equivalent information to the three Euler angles 𝜔= (𝜃, 𝜙, 𝜓).
Unlike spherical particles, uniaxial objects, such as spherocylinders, require rota-
tional moves of their C∞axis (̂u) in addition to the translation of their center of mass.
Biaxial particles require an additional rotation of the ̂w transversal axis. There are
several ways of accomplishing this task. One possibility, due to Barker and Watts [38],
consists of selecting with equal probability one of the three axes of the computational
box, and performing a random rotation of ̂u around that axis, supplemented by an addi-
tional random rotation of ̂w around ̂u in the case of biaxial particles. A convenient (and
equivalent) alternative hinges on the use of quaternions, thus avoiding the repeated

60
Self-Assembling Systems
use of trigonometric equations that are typically time consuming. A quaternion
can be deﬁned as the unit vector in four-dimensional space Q ≡(q0, q1, q2, q3) with
q2
0 + q2
1 + q2
2 + q2
3 = 1. The quaternion oﬀers an eﬃcient way to generate uniform ran-
dom vectors on the four-dimensional unit sphere [40]. The one-to-one correspondence
between the Euler angle and the quaternion representation is given by
q0 = cos
(𝜃
2
)
cos
(𝜙+ 𝜓
2
)
q1 = sin
(𝜃
2
)
cos
(𝜙−𝜓
2
)
q2 = sin
(𝜃
2
)
sin
(𝜙−𝜓
2
)
q3 = cos
(𝜃
2
)
sin
(𝜙+ 𝜓
2
)
,
and the rotation matrix deﬁning the rotation is given by
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
q2
0 + q2
1 −q2
2 −q2
3
2(q1q2 −q0q3)
2(q1q3 + q0q2)
2(q1q2 + q0q3)
q2
0 −q2
1 + q2
2 −q2
3
2(q2q3 −q0q1)
2(q1q3 −q0q2)
2(q2q3 + q0q1)
q2
0 −q2
1 −q2
2 + q2
3
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
.
Finally, in an NPT calculation, a volume move is required, where one or more lengths
of the box are randomly changed so volume is increased or decreased. This is a global
move, involving the whole system, and hence should be performed with a relative
frequency of 1∕N with respect to the local translational and rotational moves of a single
helix. On average, we then attempted N∕2 translations and N∕2 rotations with equal
probability, and one volume move within each MC step. Typical equilibration times
were of the order of 109 MC steps, followed by production runs for collecting statistics
of the order of 3 × 109 steps.
Simulations with hard particles consume more computational time compared to
those with soft particles. This is because of the overlap check for each pair of particles.
In our model systems (see Figure 3.1), the distance between two particles cannot be
less than the diameter D of a bead. The overlap check in such non-convex particles
needs some tricky algorithms to reduce the computer time. In our calculations we ﬁrst
inserted a helix into a suitable spherocylinder, for which a fast test for overlapping is
available, and then tested for possible overlaps at the level of single spheres forming the
helix only in the event of overlapping of the embedding spherocylinders. In this way,
the computational time to simulate a ﬂuid of hard helices formed by 12 partially fused
spheres, and having a ﬁxed contour length of L∕D = 12, is roughly a factor 8 larger
compared with the corresponding ﬂuid of spherocylinders.
Most of our simulations were carried out with periodic boundary conditions (PBC)
on a ﬂoppy (i.e. shape adaptable) triclinic box, but no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found
when using a cuboidal box. Such conditions are fully compatible with the existence of
helical order with small periodicity, comparable with the particle length. However, they
do not allow in general the development of a cholesteric organization because systems
of prohibitively large sizes would be required when the periodicity is much longer than
the scale of particle chirality. For this reason, using PBC in our simulations we could ﬁnd
nematic phases, with uniform rather than twisted ̂n directors (i.e. →∞).

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
61
In our simulations we used a number of particles varying from 900 to 2000, always
ﬁnding rather stable results. The value 900 was then used for most of the simulations.
3.5
Onsager (Density Functional) Theory
This section describes the Onsager theory for the isotropic-to-nematic phase transition
in a system of hard, slender, rod-like particles [20]. Beside serving as a basis for all
the speciﬁc calculations described in the following sections, this theory is of general
importance for the whole of (soft) condensed matter science. Onsager formulated it
in the forties [20]. That is, in the same period when Kirkwood remarkably conjectured
that a hard-sphere system, despite the absence of any attractive interactions, will
ultimately exhibit, on increasing density, a disorder–order transition between a ﬂuid
phase and a crystal phase [41]. Since no other interactions are operative but hard steep
repulsions, this ordering phase transition is purely driven by the sole entropy. That is,
at a suﬃciently high density, the crystal is thermodynamically more stable than the
ﬂuid because its entropy is larger. Such a statement was rather counterintuitive and
not easily accepted at that time. Yet, the Kirkwood conjecture was later conﬁrmed in
the earliest applications of the numerical simulation techniques [39, 42]. The Onsager
theory proceeded, in essence, along the same lines yet, exploiting the peculiarity of a
system of hard, long and thin rods, it proved analytically, rather than numerically, the
entropic origin of the disorder–order transition between an isotropic liquid phase and
a nematic liquid crystal phase. Thanks to these basic works, the concept of ordering
entropy progressively gained acceptance and is nowadays well established.
Let us suppose we have a system of hard rod-like particles. For example, the one
shown in Figure 3.3, formed by prolate ellipsoids that interact only through hard
repulsive interactions. Looking at this ﬁgure, the particle centroids appear uniformly
distributed in space while the particle main (C∞) axes roughly align along a common
direction, the director ̂n: this is a snapshot of a system in a nematic liquid crystal phase.
Hard-particle systems of this sort mimic rather closely suspensions of rod-like
colloidal particles interacting through short-range repulsive interactions. In fact,
Figure 3.3 Image of a system of hard prolate ellipsoids
in the nematic liquid crystal phase. The image was
created with the program QMGA [43].

62
Self-Assembling Systems
Onsager set out to develop his theory to explain earlier experimental results on
suspensions of this kind, either of inorganic (mineral) origin, such as the suspensions
made of V2O5 colloids [44], or organic (biological) origin, such as those formed by
the tobacco mosaic virus particles [13]. In these experiments, a transition between
two phases was observed at a low concentration of colloids. Onsager showed that the
transition, involving an isotropic liquid phase and a nematic liquid crystal phase, was
due to the highly anisometric shape of the colloidal particles.
One can view a system of N hard, equally sized and rigid rods, uniformly distributed
in a container of volume V and free to rotate, as a (inﬁnite-component) mixture, each
component being identiﬁed by the orientation, 𝜔. With the symbol 𝜔one intends a set
of variables required to deﬁne the orientation of a particle in the laboratory frame of
reference. For example, in the case of cylindrically symmetric particles, the components
of the unit vector ̂U along the particle’s C∞axis. One can then deﬁne a distribution
function f (𝜔) such that Nf (𝜔)d𝜔gives the number of particles whose orientation is
comprised within the interval [𝜔, 𝜔+ d𝜔]. The distribution function f (𝜔) is normalized
such that ∫d𝜔f (𝜔) = 1.
In full analogy with the expression of the entropy of an ideal multi-component
mixture, one can write the expression of the ideal entropy of the hard-rod system
as
Sid = −NkB
[
log
(𝜌Λ3
trΘrot
T
)
−1 + ∫d𝜔f (𝜔) log f (𝜔)
]
,
(3.6)
with kB the Boltzmann constant, Λtr is the thermal wavelength and Θrot is the rotational
temperature [45]. The integral in Eq. (3.6) plays the role of a mixing entropy.
In the aforementioned experiments, signiﬁcant deviations from the ideal behavior
were, however, observed even at low concentration. This is due to the hard interactions
between the particles, whose eﬀect is appreciable even at low concentration provided
the particles are suﬃciently anisometric, and therefore that eﬀect signiﬁcantly depends
on particle orientation.
In a dilute and uniform system of particles interacting with short-range interactions,
the pressure P can be expressed as a virial series in the number density 𝜌= N∕V:
P = 𝜌kBT [1 + B2(T)𝜌+ B3(T)𝜌2 + · · · ],
(3.7)
with T the absolute temperature and the coeﬃcients B𝓁, 𝓁= 1, 2,… are termed virial
coeﬃcients. The ﬁrst coeﬃcient B1 = 1, while the successive coeﬃcients, starting with
the second virial coeﬃcient B2, depend on particle interactions and T.
Originally devised as an empirical way to account for deviations from the ideality,
the virial series was given a statistical-mechanical foundation by the remarkable work
of Mayer and Mayer [46]. They showed that the virial coeﬃcients can be written as
integrals, of rapidly increasing complexity as the order 𝓁increases, whose integrands
depend on the Mayer function M. The latter is deﬁned as:
M(Ri, 𝜔i, Rj, 𝜔j) = e
−
u(Rj−Ri,𝜔i,𝜔j)
kBT
−1,
(3.8)
with Ri the vector giving the position of particle i’s centroid in the laboratory frame of
reference and u(Rj −Ri, 𝜔i, 𝜔j) the potential energy of interaction between particles i

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
63
and j. In particular, the expression for the leading second virial coeﬃcient is
B2(𝜔i, 𝜔j|T) = −1
2 ∫d𝜔i f (𝜔i) ∫d𝜔j f (𝜔j) ∫dRM(R, 𝜔i, 𝜔j).
(3.9)
Observe that for hard interactions, the Mayer function takes on two values only: −1
if particles overlap and 0 if they do not. The dependence on temperature drops oﬀ: a
hard-particle system is athermal. The second virial coeﬃcient can thus be rewritten as:
B2(𝜔i, 𝜔j) = 1
2 ∫d𝜔i f (𝜔i) ∫d𝜔j f (𝜔j)v(𝜔i, 𝜔j),
(3.10)
with v(𝜔i, 𝜔j) the volume that particle i excludes to particle j. The expressions for the
next virial coeﬃcients are increasingly more complicated, to such an extent that the
computational burden to evaluate them rapidly becomes prohibitively heavy even for
hard spheres, the simplest hard-particle model. Thus, exact summation of a virial series
is in general precluded and one has to resort to approximations whose reliability should
always be tested. The system of hard slender rods is, however, an exception in this
respect.
In fact, Onsager made the crucial observation that, as long as the particles are
needle-like, the terms of order 𝓁higher than two can be neglected in Equation (3.7).
In this case, the system’s excess free energy Fex, obtained from the non-ideal part of the
equation of state by standard thermodynamic integration, results:
Fex = NkBT 𝜌
2 ∫d𝜔f (𝜔) ∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′)v(𝜔, 𝜔′).
(3.11)
Summing Equations (3.6) and (3.11) provides the system’s total free energy F:
F
NkBT = log
(𝜌Λ3
trΘrot
T
)
−1 + ∫d𝜔f (𝜔) log f (𝜔)
+ 𝜌
2 ∫d𝜔f (𝜔) ∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′)v(𝜔, 𝜔′).
(3.12)
Observe that the free energy is a functional of the distribution function f (𝜔): the
Onsager theory is a precursor of modern density functional theories. The thermody-
namic stable state of the system at a given 𝜌corresponds to that speciﬁc distribution
function f (𝜔) that minimizes the free energy. If f (𝜔) is constant, that is, the particle
orientations are uniformly distributed, the orientational entropy term is maximized.
Conversely, the density-dependent excluded-volume term is minimal when particles
align. It is from the competition between these two terms that the isotropic-to-nematic
phase transition arises at suﬃciently high density.
The rigorous minimization of the free energy functional under the constraint of
distribution function normalization leads to the following integral equation:
log K f (𝜔) = −𝜌∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′)v(𝜔, 𝜔′),
(3.13)
with K a constant whose value is determined by ensuring the normalization condition.
Its analytic solution is not available. Onsager bypassed this diﬃculty by resorting to an
approximate trial function f (𝜔) whose form can be regulated by the value of a single
parameter 𝛼and minimized directly the free energy, Equation (3.12), with respect
to 𝛼. This procedure can be extended to functional forms containing an arbitrarily

64
Self-Assembling Systems
large number of variational parameters. A common choice is that of using a truncated
expansion of f (𝜔) on a set of orthonormal basis functions. The expansion coeﬃcients
are the orientational order parameters. The integral Equation (3.13) can nonetheless be
solved by an iterative algorithm that, starting from a guessed orientational distribution
function, ends whenever self-consistency is satisﬁed within a given tolerance.
One can thus see that, beside the isotropic-liquid solution of Equation (3.13),
corresponding to a constant f (𝜔) and always present for any value of 𝜌, an addi-
tional anisotropic-liquid solution emerges provided the value of 𝜌is suﬃciently high
[47, 48]. Inserting the isotropic and anisotropic solutions into the expression for the
pressure, the equations of state for the isotropic and nematic phases can respectively
be obtained. From standard thermodynamics, the chemical potential expressions for
the two branches can also be obtained. Equating pressure and chemical potential,
the value of 𝜌at which the isotropic phase and nematic phase are in equilibrium
can thus be determined. The Onsager theory predicts the isotropic-to-nematic phase
transition to be ﬁrst order, in agreement with experimental evidence. Provided the
experimental rod-like colloids have a suﬃciently large aspect ratio, like the tobacco
mosaic virus particles, the agreement is essentially quantitative [49]. Deﬁnite conﬁrma-
tion of the validity of the Onsager theory came from numerical experiments on model
hard-particle systems such as that shown in Figure 3.3.
Deviations from Onsager predictions increase with decreasing aspect ratio, because
of the progressively higher contribution of virial coeﬃcients beyond second order [50].
In earlier calculations approximate values of B3 were obtained [51, 52], and recently
the eighth virial level has been reached for hard uniaxial ellipsoids [53]. Surprisingly
good agreement between theory and simulations (in systems of hard rod-like particles)
could be obtained using the Parsons–Lee expression [54], where many-body eﬀects are
introduced in an approximate way, by multiplying the Carnahan–Starling form of the
excess free energy of hard spheres [55] by the second virial coeﬃcient speciﬁc to the
particles under investigation [56]. So, the excess free energy reads:
Fex = NkBTG(𝜂)𝜌
2 ∫d𝜔f (𝜔) ∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′)v(𝜔, 𝜔′),
(3.14)
where G(𝜂) = (4 −3𝜂)∕4(1 −𝜂)2. Here, 𝜂= 𝜌v0 is the volume fraction, with v0 being the
volume of a particle. In Ref. [15] we used the Parsons–Lee approximation to investigate
the isotropic-nematic transition of hard helical particles and compared with the results
of MC simulations (see Figure 3.5).
The Onsager theory forms the basis of all successive developments in the ﬁeld. The
case of hard helices is no exception in this respect.
3.6
Onsager-Like Theory for the Cholesteric and
Screw-Nematic Phases
We have considered two kinds of helically modulated nematic phases: cholesteric and
screw-nematic. In the former, the nematic director ̂n, i.e. the average alignment axis
of the helical axes (̂u), spirals around a perpendicular axis (the y axis of the laboratory
frame in Figure 3.1). In the screw-nematic (Ns*) phase it is the secondary polar director
̂c, i.e. the average alignment axis of the ̂w axes of helices, that spirals around ̂n (the z

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
65
axis of the laboratory frame in Figure 3.1). For such phases the Onsager theory outlined
in the previous section has to be generalized to include explicit dependence upon
positional variables. In both cases a single positional variable is needed, i.e. the position
along the helical axis, because there is translational homogeneity perpendicular to
such an axis. In the case of a helically modulated phase with the helical axis along
the direction h and pitch , we can introduce the orientational distribution function
at the h position, f (𝜔|h), which has periodicity too, and is normalized such that
∫d𝜔f (𝜔|h) = 1, irrespective of h. By retaining only the second and third terms in
the virial expansion, the excess Helmholtz free energy of such a system is given
by:
Fex
VkBT = 𝜌2
2∫

0
dh∫d𝜔f (𝜔|h)∫dh′
∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′|h′)
[
aexcl(h, 𝜔, h′, 𝜔′)
+𝜌
3 ∫dh′′
∫d𝜔′′f (𝜔′′|h′′)a3(h, 𝜔, h′, 𝜔′, h′′, 𝜔′′)
]
,
(3.15)
where the functions aexcl(h, 𝜔, h′, 𝜔′) and a3(h, 𝜔, h′, 𝜔′, h′′, 𝜔′′) have been introduced.
The ﬁrst is given by:
aexcl(h, 𝜔, h′, 𝜔′) = −∫dR′
⊥M(0, h, 𝜔, R′
⊥, h′, 𝜔′),
(3.16)
where M is the Mayer function, Equation (3.8), and R⊥is the vector position in the
plane perpendicular to h. aexcl is interpreted as the area of the surface obtained by
cutting with a plane perpendicular to the helical axis at position h′ the volume excluded
to a particle with orientation 𝜔′ by a particle at position h with orientation 𝜔[57]. The
second function in Equation (3.15) is given by:
a3(h, 𝜔, h′, 𝜔′, h′′, 𝜔′′) = −∫dR′
⊥∫dR′′
⊥M(0, h, 𝜔, R′
⊥, h′, 𝜔′)
M(0, h, 𝜔, R′′
⊥, h′′, 𝜔′′)M(R′
⊥, h′, 𝜔′, R′′
⊥, h′′, 𝜔′′).
(3.17)
Since aexcl and a3 actually depend on the diﬀerences 𝜁′ = h′ −h and 𝜁′′ = h′′ −h,
Equation (3.15) above can be rewritten as:
Fex
kBTV = 𝜌2
2 ∫d𝜔f (𝜔|h = 0) ∫d𝜁′
∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′|𝜁′)
[
aexcl(𝜔, 𝜁′, 𝜔′)
+𝜌
3 ∫d𝜁′′
∫d𝜔′′f (𝜔′′|𝜁′′)a3(𝜁′, 𝜔, 𝜔′, 𝜁′′, 𝜔′′)
]
.
(3.18)
If the Parsons–Lee approximation is used, the following expression is obtained:
Fex
kBTV = 𝜌2
2 G(𝜂) ∫d𝜔f (𝜔|h = 0) ∫d𝜁′
∫d𝜔′f (𝜔′|𝜁′)aexcl(𝜔, 𝜁′, 𝜔′).
(3.19)
For a uniform nematic phase f (𝜔|h = 0) = f (𝜔), and if the expansion is truncated at
the second virial term, Equation (3.14) is recovered. The equations above are equally
valid for the cholesteric and screw-like nematic phase. In the former case, h = Y and 
is the cholesteric pitch; in the latter case, h = Z and coincides with p, the pitch of a
single helix.
The free energy of the cholesteric and screw-nematic phases bears a dependence
upon the helical pitch , introduced by the orientational distribution function f (𝜔|𝜁).

66
Self-Assembling Systems
Thus, determination of the equilibrium state at a given density requires minimization
of the free energy with respect to this parameter, in addition to the other quantities that
deﬁne the orientational distribution function. The numerical handling of the free energy
of helically modulated nematic phases is signiﬁcantly more demanding than for the
uniform case, not only because of the positional dependence which explicitly appears
in Equations (3.16), but also because of the inherent biaxiality of such modulated phase.
Similar approach has been recently implemented for the twist-bend nematic phase
[58]. When dealing with the cholesteric phase, some simplifying assumptions can be
used, taking advantage of the long scale of the twist deformation, compared to the scale
of interparticle interactions. A ﬁrst consequence of the long cholesteric pitch is that the
biaxiality is very small, so as a ﬁrst approximation it can be neglected. This was done in
Refs. [59, 60], where a Parson-Lee treatment was proposed based on expressions of the
free energy in terms of uniaxial order parameters and the wavenumber q. The Straley
approach can also be adopted [61], where further assumptions are made, i.e. that f (𝜔)
in the N∗phase is identical to that in the undeformed N phase at the same density,
but with respect to a director that rotates in a helical way, and that the q dependence
of the excess free energy can be accounted for by the following truncated Taylor
expansion:
Fex = Fex|q=0 + dFex
dq
||||q=0
q + 1
2
d2Fex
dq2
||||q=0
q2.
(3.20)
Here, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is the free energy density of the undeformed
nematic phase. So, the diﬀerence between the free energy of the twisted and the
uniform nematic phase, Fex −Fex|q=0, can be compared with the elastic energy of the
cholesteric phase, which according to the continuum elastic theory reads [23]:
Fel
V = k2 q + 1
2K22 q2,
(3.21)
where K22 is the twist elastic constant and k2 is the chiral strength. The former is a
positive quantity accounting for the energetic cost of twist deformations, and has
typical values of the order of piconewtons. The chiral strength k2 is a pseudoscalar,
which has opposite values for systems which are the mirror image of each other and
vanishes in the achiral nematic phase. The equilibrium pitch of a cholesteric phase is
obtained by minimization of the elastic energy and is given by:
= −2𝜋K22∕k2;
(3.22)
it becomes inﬁnitely long in achiral nematic liquid crystals.
Comparing Equations (3.20) and (3.21), we can write the microscopic expression for
the chiral strength and the twist elastic constants:
k2 = dFex
dq
||||q=0
,
(3.23)
K22 = d2Fex
dq2
||||q=0
.
(3.24)
These two quantities behave diﬀerently under inversion: the former is invariant (scalar),
whereas the latter changes its sign (pseudoscalar). Thus, for chiral particles that are the

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
67
Figure 3.4 Comparison between
numerical simulations (circles) and
Onsager-like theory for perfectly
parallel helices, in the plane
screw-nematic order
parameter–volume fraction. Lines are
theory results using the II virial
approximation (dashed), the II virial
approximation with Parson–Lee
correction (dash-dotted) and the III
virial approximation (solid).
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
η
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
r = 0.4 p = 4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
<P1,c>
<P1,c>
r = 0.4 p = 8
mirror image of each other (enantiomers), the free energy of the undeformed nematic
phase and the twist elastic constant are identical, whereas k2 takes opposite values.
In our calculation for the cholesteric phase of hard helices [17] we followed the Straley
approach, along the lines described in Ref. [62]. In the case of the screw-nematic phase,
we adopted the simplifying assumption of perfectly parallel helical axes; thus, helices
had only translational and azimuthal freedom [18]. This could be justiﬁed by the high
degree of orientational order that characterizes the screw-nematic phase. However,
the high value of density at which the N–N∗
S transition occurs called for considering
also the explicit contribution of the third virial terms. Indeed, it was seen that their
inclusion is needed to achieve a nearly quantitative agreement with corresponding
numerical simulation data, as illustrated in Figure 3.4. The generalization of these
results to systems of freely rotating hard helices is planned for the near future. While
conceptually clear [Equations (3.15)–(3.18)], it is expected to require a considerable
numerical eﬀort not only because of the complexity of a helically modulated phase but
also because of the incorporation of the third virial term contribution. This task will
nonetheless be rewarding in that it will allow the treatment of both cholesteric and
screw-like nematic phases at the same level of theory and the accurate study of their
mutual phase transition and the transition between these and the isotropic phase.
3.7
Order Parameters and Correlation Functions
Diﬀerent phases are characterized by appropriate order parameters capturing their
distinctive symmetry and the corresponding degrees of ordering, and by suitable
correlation functions. In the following we will present the order parameters and
correlation functions that have been used to characterize the diﬀerent phases formed
by helical particles. Some of the latter are conveniently resolved along the ̂n director (||)

68
Self-Assembling Systems
and perpendicular to it (⊥), according to the following decoupling of the interparticle
vector Rij = Ri −Rj:
Rij = R||
ij + R⊥
ij = (Rij ⋅̂n)̂n + |Rij × ̂n|̂R⊥
ij.
(3.25)
3.7.1
Nematic Order Parameter ⟨P2⟩
Nematic ordering, i.e. the degree of (non-polar) alignment of the ̂u axes of helices with
respect to the ̂n director, is quantiﬁed by the order parameter:
⟨P2⟩=
⟨3
2 cos2 𝜃−1
2
⟩
,
(3.26)
where P2 is the second Legendre polynomial and cos 𝜃= ̂u ⋅̂n. Here and henceforth,
angular brackets denote ensemble averages. ⟨P2⟩is zero in the isotropic phase and
nonzero in the nematic phase. It can also be nonzero in other more ordered phases, in
which case there are other additional order parameters. In a simulation, average values
are obtained as mean values over the trajectory; so, ⟨P2⟩would be obtained as the mean
of the following quantities, calculated for each trajectory frame:
(P2)frame = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
3
2(̂n ⋅̂ui)2 −1,
(3.27)
where the sum is over all particles. However, one does not know at the outset the
orientation of the director ̂n, as particles can align in principle along any direction in
space. A convenient approach is to use the second rank Veilliard–Baron tensor [63]
Q𝛼𝛽= 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(
3
2u𝛼
i u𝛽
i −
𝛿𝛼𝛽
2
)
,
(3.28)
where 𝛼, 𝛽= x, y, z are indices referring to the laboratory frame, and u𝛼
i is the compo-
nent of the unit vector ̂u of particle i along 𝛼. The Q matrix represents a symmetric,
traceless second rank tensor. The three eigenvalues 𝜆1, 𝜆2, 𝜆3 of Q are a measure
of nematic order in the three orthogonal directions deﬁned by the corresponding
eigenvectors. In case of uniaxial nematics, −2𝜆1 = −2𝜆2 = 𝜆3. The largest (in absolute
value) eigenvalue, 𝜆3, is the nematic order parameter ⟨P2⟩, and the corresponding
eigenvector is the nematic director ̂n.
Figure 3.5 shows the order parameter ⟨P2⟩as a function of the volume fraction 𝜂, for
helices with radius r = 0.2 and pitch p = 4. We can see the typical behavior, with ⟨P2⟩
close to zero at low density (isotropic phase) and then jumping to a high value beyond a
given density. This jump is a signature of the ﬁrst-order isotropic-to-nematic transition.
The fact that ⟨P2⟩does not exactly vanish in the isotropic phase is a ﬁnite-size eﬀect.
Likewise, we ﬁnd 𝜆1 ≈𝜆2 within a 5% discrepancy, which, however, can be taken as
compatible with the uniaxial character of the conventional N phase.
3.7.2
Screw-Like Nematic Order Parameter
The phase diagram of helices presents phases that, unlike the conventional nematic, are
characterized by screw-like order. This is quantiﬁed by the order parameter,
⟨P1,c⟩= ⟨̂w ⋅̂c⟩,
(3.29)

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
69
Figure 3.5 The nematic order
parameter, ⟨P2⟩, as a function of the
volume fraction 𝜂for helices with
radius r = 0.2 and pitch p = 4, whose
morphology is displayed in the inset.
The plot shows the results of NPT–MC
simulations (ﬁlled circles) and those of
Onsager theory with Parsons–Lee
correction, see Equation (3.14) (line).
Representative snapshots from
simulations in the isotropic (left) and
the nematic phases (right) are shown.
<P2>
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
η
which measures the average alignment along a common direction (̂c) of the two-fold
symmetry axes (̂w) of helices. In phases with screw-like ordering the ̂c director rotates
in a helical way around the ̂n director, with periodicity equal to the pitch p of the helical
particles. To calculate ⟨P1,c⟩from simulations it is expedient to perform a preliminary
rotation of −2𝜋(Ri ⋅̂n)∕p around ̂n of the particle coordinates. The ̂c director and the
⟨P1,c⟩order parameter are then determined for the untwisted structure, following the
same procedure used for the calculation of the nematic order parameter.
In smectic phases there is also the possibility of an in-layer transversal polar order
without correlation between layers. Even in this case an order parameter deﬁned
according to Equation (3.29) can be used, but the average has to be meant over all
particles belonging to individual layers. To stress this point and distinguish this case
from screw-like order, we will use for it the symbol ⟨Player
1,c ⟩.
Figure 3.6 shows the polar order parameter, ⟨P1,c⟩, as a function of the volume fraction,
𝜂, for helices with radius r = 0.2 and pitch p = 4. Comparing with the plot of the nematic
order parameter, ⟨P2⟩, calculated for the same helices (see Figure 3.5), we can see that
⟨P1,c⟩is negligibly small in both the isotropic and nematic phases, but at higher density it
raises, reaching values close to 1. The diﬀerent gray scales in Figure 3.6 refer to diﬀerent
Figure 3.6 Polar order parameter,
⟨P1,c⟩, as a function of the volume
fraction 𝜂for helices with radius
r = 0.2 and pitch p = 4 (see inset).
The symbols show the results of
NPT–MC simulations; the lines are
meant as a guide to eye. I(isotropic),
N(nematic), N∗
s(screw-nematic),
Sm∗
A,s(screw smectic A), Sm∗
B,s(screw
smectic B), C(compact). Phase
labeling is reported in Table 3.1; C is
a high density compact phase.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
<P1,C>
η

70
Self-Assembling Systems
phases in which ⟨P1,c⟩is diﬀerent from zero; to distinguish between them, additional
order parameters have to be introduced.
3.7.3
Smectic Order Parameter
Smectic order can be characterized by the translational order parameter
⟨𝜏1⟩=
||||
⟨
exp
(
2𝜋i z
d
)⟩||||
,
(3.30)
where z is the position along the director ̂n and d is the layer spacing. Since such spacing
is not known a priori, ⟨𝜏1⟩is calculated for diﬀerent values of d. The maximum ⟨𝜏1⟩value
is then taken as the smectic order parameter and the corresponding d value as the layer
spacing [64, 65].
The order parameter ⟨𝜏1⟩is close to unity in the case of perfect layering and close
to zero for non-layered phases, like I, N and N∗
s. A representative example is reported
in Figure 3.7, where ⟨𝜏1⟩is plotted as a function of the layer spacing d calculated at
diﬀerent 𝜂values for helices with r = 0.2 and p = 4. The black line in the ﬁgure, which
is always close to zero, corresponds to the N∗
s phase at 𝜂= 0.370. The lines for 𝜂= 0.417,
0.441 and 0.478 respectively, showing peaks at d ≈11.5, correspond to smectic phases
and are in order of increasing volume fraction 𝜂. The maximum values of peaks are
their corresponding smectic order parameters. With increase in 𝜂, the order parameter
increases and the corresponding layer spacing shows a small tendency to decrease.
3.7.4
Hexatic Order Parameter
The ⟨𝜏1⟩order parameter captures the onset of smectic ordering but is unable to
distinguish between the smectic B phase, where there is six-fold bond-orientational
(hexatic) ordering, and other phases, like the smectic A, where there is no in-plane
ordering. This discrimination can, however, be accomplished by calculating the hexatic
order parameter ⟨𝜓6⟩[64, 66]:
⟨𝜓6⟩=
⟨
1
N
N
∑
i=1
||||||
1
n(i)
n(i)
∑
j=1
exp(6i𝜃ij)
||||||
⟩
.
(3.31)
d
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
η = 0.370
η = 0.417
η = 0.441
η = 0.478
τ1
Figure 3.7 The dependence of
translational order parameter
𝜏1 ≡⟨𝜏1⟩on layer spacing for helices
having r = 0.2, p = 4 on either side of
the N∗
s –Sm∗
A,s transition. The
maximum value of 𝜏1 is taken as the
smectic order parameter.

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
71
Figure 3.8 Cartoon showing the quantities used to deﬁne the
hexatic order parameter ⟨𝜓6⟩, Equation (3.31). The gray circles are
transversal sections of cylinders enclosing the helices and the
thick short line inside each circle indicates the orientation of the
helix ̂w vector. The bond angle 𝜃ij is the angle between a reference
axis (thick solid line) in a plane perpendicular to the director ̂n, and
the projection of the interparticle vector Rij into this plane (dashed
line). Reproduced from Ref. [19] with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry.
θij
Here, the inner sum is over all nearest neighbors of particle i within a single layer, whose
number is n(i), and 𝜃ij is the angle between the unit vector ̂R⊥
ij deﬁned in Equation (3.25)
and a randomly ﬁxed reference axis in a plane perpendicular to ̂n. (see Figure 3.8)
⟨𝜓6⟩is equal to 1 in the case of perfect hexatic ordering and otherwise vanishes. The
piece of information stemming from ⟨𝜓6⟩can be supported by calculation of the average
number of nearest neighbors ⟨n⟩within each layer, which would be equal to 6 for perfect
hexagonal order. ⟨n⟩is computed by taking for any helix the number of its nearest
neighbors in a plane and averaging this number over all helices and all conﬁgurations.
Both 𝜓6 and ⟨n⟩are very sensitive to the deﬁnition of the nearest neighbor distance. We
used the value corresponding to the ﬁrst minimum of the radial distribution function.
We note that helices display smectic phases with or without screw-like ordering. We
can then identify ⟨P1,c⟩to check whether the phase is screw-smectic or simply smectic.
It turns out that the latter does not occur for all cases studied in our simulations, while
we ﬁnd both screw-smectic A (Sm∗
A,s, no in-plane hexagonal order) and screw-smectic
B (Sm∗
B,s, with in-plane hexagonal order). Conversely, we do not have any evidence of a
simple SmA phase in our results for appreciable curliness (r > 0.1). The reason is likely
to be ascribed to the fact that before encountering a smectic phase, the system is in a
screw-nematic phase, and there is no reason for losing this organization when initially
entering into a smectic phase. The screw organization may or may not be lost at higher
densities in the presence of short range in-plane hexagonal order. In the former case,
the helices secondary axes ̂w tend to be correlated within each layer but uncorrelated
from one layer to the neighboring ones. We call this organization smectic B polar
SmB,p. In the latter case, the ̂w are further correlated from one layer to the neighboring
ones, thus maintaining the original screw-like organization. We call this conﬁguration
screw-smectic B (Sm∗
B,s).
Table 3.1 summarizes the diﬀerent phases exhibited by hard helices and the relative
order parameters.
3.7.5
Parallel and Perpendicular Pair Correlation Functions
In addition to global order parameters, it proves essential to introduce pair correlation
functions that provide detailed insights into the structural features of the phase. In
particular, it is useful to consider correlation functions resolved along the ̂n director
and perpendicular to it, according to the decoupling of the interparticle vector shown
in Equation (3.25). Thus, two relevant correlation functions are g||(R||) and g⊥(R⊥),

72
Self-Assembling Systems
Table 3.1 Summary of the diﬀerent phases
identiﬁed in the MC simulations of hard helices,
along with the corresponding order parameters.
Phase
Code
Order parameter
Nematic
N
⟨P2⟩
Screw-nematic
N∗
s
⟨P2⟩, ⟨P1,c⟩
Smectic A
SmA
⟨𝜏1⟩
Screw-smectic A
Sm∗
A,s
⟨𝜏1⟩, ⟨P1,c⟩
Smectic B
SmB
⟨𝜏1⟩, ⟨𝜓6⟩
Polar smectic B
SmB,p
⟨𝜏1⟩, ⟨𝜓6⟩, ⟨Player
1,c ⟩
Screw-smectic B
Sm∗
B,s
⟨𝜏1⟩, ⟨𝜓6⟩, ⟨P1,c⟩
which are sensitive to interparticle correlations along the director and perpendicular
to it, respectively.
The perpendicular positional correlation function g⊥(R⊥) is related to the probability
that, given a particle, another one is found at a distance that, when projected onto a
plane perpendicular to the director, is equal to R⊥, and is deﬁned as [66]:
g⊥(R⊥) =
1
2𝜋R⊥N
⟨
1
𝜌Lz
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j≠i
𝛿(R⊥−|Rij × ̂n|)
⟩
,
(3.32)
where 𝛿(· · ·) is the Dirac delta function and Lz is the length of the simulation box along
the director ̂n. Note that the number density is taken inside the average as the volume
V of the box may change in the course of simulations. The volume is calculated as V =
LxLyLz, where Lx and Ly are the lengths of the simulation box perpendicular to director ̂n.
The parallel positional correlation function, g||(R||), is related to the probability that,
given a particle, another one is found on a plane perpendicular to the director ̂n, at the
distance R||, and is deﬁned as:
g||(R||) = 1
N
⟨
1
𝜌LxLy
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j≠i
𝛿(R|| −Rij ⋅̂n)
⟩
.
(3.33)
One important correlation function, designed to identify the onset of screw-like order-
ing, is:
g ̂w
1,||(R||) =
⟨∑N
i=1
∑N
j≠i 𝛿(R|| −Rij ⋅̂n)(̂wi ⋅̂wj)
∑N
i=1
∑N
j≠i 𝛿(R|| −Rij ⋅̂n)
⟩
.
(3.34)
The function g ̂w
1,||(R||) detects correlations between the C2 symmetry axes of helices with
the value of its maximum coinciding with ⟨P1,c⟩. It also allows a direct measure of the
pitch of the phase, as seen in Figure 3.9 for helices with r = 0.2 and p = 3 and p = 6. The
plots show pronounced oscillations, whose amplitude increases with increasing density,
with periodicity equal to the pitch p of the helical particles.
The set of correlation functions help to distinguish diﬀerent phases: In the isotropic
and nematic phases, both g||(R||) and g⊥(R⊥) exhibit the characteristic behavior of a

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
73
Figure 3.9 Correlation function ĝw
1,||(R||)
as a function of the projection of the
interparticle distance along the director
̂n, from MC simulations of hard helices
with radius r = 0.2 and pitch p = 3 and
p = 6, at diﬀerent values of the volume
fraction 𝜂.
η = 0.321
r = 0.2, p = 3
η = 0.330
η = 0.342
η = 0.351
η = 0.367
η = 0.359
η = 0.368
η = 0.375
η = 0.388
η = 0.397
0.5
–0.5
0
5
10
R‖
R‖
15
–1
0
1
r = 0.2, p = 6
0.5
–0.5
0
5
10
15
–1
0
1
g1,‖ (R‖)
wˆ
g1,‖ (R‖)
wˆ
liquid; in the smectic A phase g⊥(R⊥) is still liquid-like, whereas g||(R||) displays the
characteristic peaks of one-dimensional ordering; in the smectic B phase, g⊥(R⊥) will
additionally acquire the structure characteristic of hexatic ordering; ﬁnally, g ̂w
1,||(R||)
exhibits oscillations with periodicity identical to the particle pitch p in the presence of
screw-like ordering, both in the nematic and smectic phases.
3.8
The Physical Origin of Cholesteric and Screw-Like Order
Elongated particles such as rigid spherocylinders interacting only via excluded volume
form a nematic phase upon compression because of the gain in translational entropy
accompanying the onset of orientational order. Rigid hard helical particles will display
a similar tendency to align their main axes along a common director ̂n, but with two
important diﬀerences.
The ﬁrst diﬀerence stems from the fact that a helix is a chiral object. Again, formation
of the nematic phase is driven by the gain in translational entropy accompanying
the orientational order, for helices with suﬃciently high aspect ratio. However, due
to the particle chirality, pair conﬁgurations with right- and left-handed twists of the
helix axes (̂u) are not equivalent. So, they give diﬀerent contributions to the average
excluded volume [17, 59, 60]. Depending on the morphology and the state point,
right- or left-handed contributions may prevail for helices with a given handedness.
Anyway, the net eﬀect is very small, since it derives from the imbalance of oppositely
signed and very similar contributions. The macroscopic result is that the director is
twisted; a right-/left-handed cholesteric phase is formed if pair conﬁgurations with
a right-/left-handed twist have on average a smaller excluded volume. Due to the

74
Self-Assembling Systems
u1
^
W1
^
W2
^
u2
^
Figure 3.10 Pairs of helices in antiphase (left) and in
phase (right).
smallness of the net chirality of the average excluded volume, the cholesteric pitch is
large on the particle length scale (for non-chiral particles the net chirality vanishes and
the N phase is formed, which can be seen as cholesteric with inﬁnite pitch). Moreover, a
given cholesteric handedness cannot be uniquely associated with a given handedness of
the constituent helices. According to the Straley model [61], inversion of the cholesteric
handedness is predicted as a function of the thread pitch p for hard threaded rods:
considering right-handed screws, the cholesteric handedness would switch from right
to left on moving from tight to looser pitch. Analogous results were obtained in recent
studies of hard helical particles, which additionally showed that a given system may
exhibit N∗handedness inversion upon increasing density [17, 59, 60].
The second important diﬀerence from rod-like particles originates from the particular
shape of the helix that triggers a tendency for neighboring parallel helices in a nematic
organization to slide one over another in a screw-like fashion. This can be rationalized as
follows. Imagine having two parallel helices with no azimuthal correlation between their
respective orientations in the plane perpendicular to ̂n (see Figure 3.10, left). Under
these conditions, the system looks locally nematic. At higher densities, neighboring
parallel helices are expected to have a signiﬁcant intrusion between grooves, thus
providing an eﬀective azimuthal correlation stemming from having helices in phase
(see Figure 3.10, right), with a corresponding signiﬁcant loss of rotational entropy about
their own axes. This can only be compensated by a translational motion of the helix
along the nematic direction ̂n in a screw-like fashion. We call this the screw-nematic
phase, and denote it as N∗
s. A similar mechanism also occurs in smectic phases, and
will be termed screw-smectic. Screw-like order is characterized by a phase periodicity
and handedness identical to the pitch p and handedness of the constituent helices, at
any density. Another distinctive consequence is the emergence of a local polar order (̂c
is a polar director), which is missing in both N and N∗phases.
3.9
The Phase Diagram of Hard Helices
We have performed NPT–MC simulations for helices of diﬀerent morphology (see
Figure 3.2), and using the order parameters and correlation functions deﬁned in
Section 3.7 we have identiﬁed the sequence of phases formed by them. In the following
we will present some representative results. Scaled quantities will be used throughout,

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
75
with the bead diameter D taken as the unit of length and kBT as the unit of energy. In
all calculations right-handed helices were considered. For left-handed helices the same
phase diagrams would be obtained, but in the case of helical phases the handedness
would be reversed.
A special comment has to be reserved for cholesteric phases. For the reasons men-
tioned in Section 3.4, no cholesteric phase could be found in our NPT–MC simulations
due to the periodic boundary conditions. However, this does not compromise the
signiﬁcance of the phase diagrams, since the existence of a large-scale director twist
does not essentially modify the thermodynamic and ordering properties of the N
phase. On the other hand, using an Onsager-like theory (Section 3.6) we calculated the
cholesteric pitch in the state points corresponding to nematic phases, and we obtained
values of the order of 100–1000 D [19]. So, what throughout the paper, based on the
NPT–MC results, we have denoted as nematic phases, should rather be considered as
actual cholesteric phases.
3.9.1
The Equation of State
In the volume fraction-pressure plane, the pressure displays a jump in the case of
a ﬁrst-order transition or a change in slope for a continuous transition. However,
the diﬀerences between liquid crystal phases can be small, and even a ﬁrst-order
transition may be very weak. As an example, Figure 3.11 shows the equation of state
for helices with r = 0.2 and pitches p = 4 and p = 8. In both cases we can see the
sequence I–N–N∗
s –Sm with increasing density. This is a common behavior. The
isotropic–nematic and nematic–smectic transitions are found to be always ﬁrst order,
Figure 3.11 Reduced pressure P∗= PD3∕kBT versus
volume fraction 𝜂for helices with r = 0.2 and pitch
p = 4 (top) and p = 8 (bottom). The corresponding
shape of the helix is displayed in the insets. Diﬀerent
phases are identiﬁed by diﬀerent grays and labeled
accordingly. (See insert for color representation of the
ﬁgure.).
3
2
P *
P *
η
η
1
0
3
2
1
00.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.2
0.4
NS
*
N
C
C
I
NS
*
N
I
0.6
SmB,S
*
SmA,S
*
SmB,p
SmA,S
*

76
Self-Assembling Systems
II
I
II
I
II
I
Figure 3.12 Cartoon of a top view of two neighboring smectic layers (I) and (II) with diﬀerent in-plane
organizations. Sm∗
A,s (left), Sm∗
B,s (center) and SmB,p (right).
as indicated by the jump in the nematic ⟨P2⟩and smectic ⟨𝜏1⟩order parameters.
Conversely, the transition between nematic N and screw-nematic N∗
s phase appears to
be continuous, on the basis of the behavior of ⟨P1,c⟩.
As we can see in Figure 3.11, the relative amplitudes of the diﬀerent phases depend
on the helix morphology. The N∗
s phase occurs at a higher volume fraction than the
N phase, which can be rationalized considering that high packing is required for the
screw-like mechanism to be advantageous from the entropic view point. For curly
helices the N∗
s phase tends to widen and, in some cases, for very curly ones, we have
found direct transition from the isotropic to the screw-nematic phase. At even higher
density, N∗is superseded by a smectic phase which preserves the screw-like order.
In this phase, denoted as Sm∗
A,s, the centers of mass of the helices are homogeneously
distributed within each layer, with their orientation in phase, that is, the ̂w vectors tend
to be parallel, and diﬀerent layers are correlated in a screw-like fashion. This is sketched
in Figure 3.12 (left). Upon increasing the density, we observe two alternative scenarios.
In the Sm∗
B,s phase, Figure 3.12 (center), the system maintains the same global
organization as in the Sm∗
A,s case, but with additional in-plane hexatic order. Essentially,
helices stack on top of each other with the appropriate azimuthal orientation to form
a system of inﬁnite helices along the ̂n direction, in this way having a signiﬁcant gain
in translational entropy. In the SmB,p phase, Figure 3.12 (right), in-plane hexatic and
azimuthal correlations are preserved, but diﬀerent layers are fully uncorrelated. Here,
entropy is maximized by losing the screw order in favor of an optimal packing of the
helices with appropriate oﬀsets.
The diﬀerent kinds of smectic phases are shown in Figure 3.13.
3.9.2
Phase Diagrams in the Volume Fraction–Pitch Plane
We are now in the position to summarize the phase behavior of diﬀerent helical shapes.
This will be accomplished in the volume fraction–pitch plane for the two diﬀerent
radii discussed in previous sections (r = 0.2 and r = 0.4). The case r = 0.1 will also be
shown as a paradigmatic example of a very slender shape not showing any tendency to
a screw-like organization.

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
77
N
0 deg
90 deg
90 deg
0 deg
N*s
Sm*A,S
Sm*B,S
N
N*s
Sm*A,S
SmB,p
Figure 3.13 Snapshots from NPT–MC simulations of helices with r = 0.2, p = 4 (top) and r = 0.2, p = 8
(bottom). Density increases on moving from left to right, displaying the sequence of phases. Diﬀerent
grays are given according to the projection of the local tangent to helices onto a plane perpendicular
to the director ̂n [43]. Adapted from Ref. [19] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Figure 3.14 Phase diagram in the volume fraction
𝜂versus pitch p plane for helices having r = 0.1.
Symbols correspond to calculated points.
Diﬀerent phases are labeled as indicated in
Table 3.1. The symbol N⋆is used for state points
that in NPT–MC simulations were found in the
nematic phase, and then their cholesteric pitch
was determined by an Onsager-like theory.
Reproduced from Ref. [19] with permission from
the Royal Society of Chemistry.
I
2
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
4
6
p
8
N*
SmA
SmB
η
3.9.2.1
Phase Diagram for r = 0.1
As can be seen in Figure 3.2, helices with r = 0.1 are almost rod-like particles with
high aspect ratio. Therefore we expect a phase behavior not very diﬀerent from that
of their spherocylinder counterparts. Figure 3.14 shows this to be the case: as in
spherocylinders, we ﬁnd isotropic to nematic N and nematic to smectic A and B
transitions upon increasing 𝜂, the diﬀerence between SmA and SmB being the hexatic
order of the latter, as discussed.
The only qualitative diﬀerence from the phase diagram of hard spherocylinders is in
the nematic phase, which here is cholesteric rather than uniform nematic, as shown

78
Self-Assembling Systems
4
5
6
7
8
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
–1000
–500
0
p
η
Cholesteric pitch
Figure 3.15 Cholesteric pitch ,
calculated in state points indicated
as N∗in the phase diagrams in
Figure 3.14 (r = 0.1, full circles),
Figure 3.16 (r = 0.2, open triangles)
and Figure 3.17 (r = 0.4, asterics). 𝜂is
the volume fraction and p is the pitch
of the helical particles (only p values
greater than 3 are shown).
by the values of predicted by an Onsager-like theory and shown in Figure 3.15.
Left-handed N∗phases are predicted (< 0), with pitches longer than 500 D, which
tend to decrease with increasing density.
The absence of screw-like order in this case is clearly due to the weak curliness of the
helices, which is not suﬃcient to trigger the screw-like behavior. The aspect ratios are
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other, ranging between 8.78 and 9.14. As the pitch
p increases, the aspect ratio slightly increases and stabilizes the nematic phase at lower
𝜂, consistent with the spherocylinder counterpart.
3.9.2.2
Phase Diagram for r = 0.2
Figure 3.16 shows the phase diagram of helices with r = 0.2. Comparing with the case
r = 0.1 we can appreciate signiﬁcant diﬀerences, with the presence of several new
phases, most of which are chiral. As in the case r = 0.1, at a given density these systems
exhibit a transition from the isotropic to the nematic phase. And again, calculations
based on an Onsager-like theory predict this to be a twisted nematic phase. The pitch,
shown in Figure 3.15, is much smaller than for r = 0.1, the sign of a stronger chirality
of interactions between the curlier helices. Then at higher density the screw-nematic
phase appears, which is followed by smectic phases speciﬁc to helices. The increase of
helix radius from r = 0.1 to r = 0.2 brings about a signiﬁcant curliness in helical shape
to promote a screw-like ordering at higher densities.
I
C
2
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
4
6
p
8
N*
N*
S
Sm*B,S
Sm*A,S
SmB,P
η
Figure 3.16 Phase diagram in the volume
fraction 𝜂versus pitch p plane for helices
having r = 0.2. Symbols correspond to
calculated points. Diﬀerent phases are
labeled as indicated in Table 3.1; C is a high
density compact phase. The symbol N⋆is
used for state points that in NPT–MC
simulations were found in the nematic
phase, and then their cholesteric pitch was
determined by an Onsager-like theory.
Reproduced from Ref. [19] with permission
from the Royal Society of Chemistry.

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
79
Figure 3.17 Phase diagram in the volume
fraction 𝜂versus pitch p plane for helices
having r = 0.4. Symbols correspond to
calculated points. Diﬀerent phases are
labeled as indicated in Table 3.1; C is a high
density compact phase. The symbol N⋆is
used for state points that in NPT–MC
simulations were found in the nematic
phase, and then their cholesteric pitch was
determined by an Onsager-like theory.
Reproduced from Ref. [19] with permission
from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
I
C
2
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
4
6
p
8
N*
N*
S
Sm*B,S
Sm*A,S
η
An important diﬀerence occurs for p values below and above p = 6. For p < 6 the
Sm∗
A,S develops into a Sm∗
B,S ordering upon increasing 𝜂. Here, the screw-like coupling
between diﬀerent layers is then favored as hexatic ordering is gradually setting in. Con-
versely, for p > 6 this is lost in favor of a rearrangement of neighboring layers to achieve
an optimal packing. A glance back to Figure 3.2 reveals the reason for this being again
related to the fact that for p > 6 helices are slender enough to make unfavorable the
screw-like organization. As we will see below, this will not be the case for r = 0.4.
3.9.2.3
Phase Diagram for r = 0.4
Figure 3.17 shows the phase diagram of helices with r = 0.4. A notable diﬀerence with
respect to the case r = 0.2 hinges on the increased stability of the N∗
s phase with respect
to the N∗counterpart, and the disappearance of the SmB,p phase in favor of a wider
Sm∗
B,s phase that extends over all p values above a certain 𝜂. This was anticipated above,
and can be ascribed to the curliness of all helices with r = 0.4, as can be inferred again
from Figure 3.2. Another diﬀerence with the r = 0.2 case is given by the presence of
several triple points, a signature of a rich polymorphism. At higher densities, one ﬁnds
rather compact structures, denoted as “C,” with the exception of helices with low p, for
which the situation is less clear. Here one could expect the presence of rotator phases in
analogy with what occurs in the spherocylinder counterpart. The N∗phase appears only
in a narrow region, for helices with a long pitch. According to an Onsager-like theory,
in this phase the director is spontaneously twisted, with a pitch smaller than in the
systems previously examined.
3.10
Helical (Bio)Polymers and Colloidal Particles
It is interesting to see how results obtained for hard helices compare with the behavior
of systems made of helical particles, several examples of which can be found in natural
or synthetic polymers and colloids. Cholesteric phases have been found in solutions
of stiﬀor semi-ﬂexible, covalent or supramolecular, helical polymers, either in water
or in organic solvent. In such systems a variety of interactions is generally present and
this, in addition to the intrinsic ﬂexibility of polymers, may aﬀect the features of the
cholesteric phase [31], as well as the relative stability of phases [66]. The presence of
linear self-assembly, which introduces a state-dependent length dispersion of polymers,

80
Self-Assembling Systems
makes the situation even less straightforward in the case of supramolecular polymers.
The clear picture of the phase behavior that we have reached represents nonetheless
a useful, general reference, previously lacking, even for systems which may be much
more complex. Indeed, the complexity of real systems calls for clear guidelines, as can
be obtained from simple models that can be fully understood.
Aqueous solutions of double stranded B-DNA (> 100 base pairs), which is
right-handed, form a left-handed cholesteric phase with a pitch of the order of
some micrometers [67, 68]. Relatively short DNA duplexes (< 20 base pairs), whose
aspect ratio would be too low to induce liquid crystal order, also exhibit N∗phases
upon self-assembling into long helical aggregates, promoted by end-to-end stacking
interactions [69]. In this case, however, both right- and left-handed cholesteric phases
were found, depending on the oligonucleotide sequence and length. Based on the
Straley model [61], a right-handed N∗phase would be predicted for the B-DNA helix
morphology [70], a prediction conﬁrmed by calculations based on Onsager theory
for a coarse-grained B-DNA model [62, 71]. This is also in agreement with the results
obtained for our model of hard helices, which indicate the formation of a right-handed
N∗phase in the case of right-handed helices with small pitch p [17, 59, 60]. The variety of
behaviors exhibited by B-DNA oligomers, with a prevalence of left-handed cholesterics,
was ascribed to the competing eﬀect of other interactions, speciﬁcally electrostatic
ones, superimposed on steric repulsions, which would promote an opposite twist of
particles [71, 72].
Other helical polymers that in organic solvents form cholesteric phases are polypep-
tides, and particularly well studied is the case of poly(𝛾-benzyl-L-glutamate) (PBLG).
This has a right-handed 𝛼-helical structure and may form either a right- or a left-handed
N∗phase, depending on the solvent, with pitches of the order of hundreds of nanome-
ters. In this uncharged system a special role of dispersion interactions was invoked,
whose eﬀect would depend on the relative dielectric constant of polymer and solvent
[73], and again on the competition between dispersion interactions and the underlying
steric repulsions [74, 75].
Cholesteric phases have also been observed in helical colloidal systems: a well-known
example is that of ﬁlamentous viruses, which are formed by a DNA core wrapped
by a coating of helically arranged proteins. fd and M13 viruses were found to form a
left-handed N∗phase with pitch ranging from tens to hundreds of micrometers [76];
however, the fd Y21M mutant, which diﬀers from fd only by having a methionine in
place of a tyrosine as the 21rst amino acid in the coat protein, forms a right-handed N∗
phase with a pitch almost an order of magnitude larger [77]. Either the competition
between steric and electrostatic interactions [78] or a key role of helical shape ﬂuctua-
tions [76] were proposed for these systems, but no comprehensive understanding has
been reached, yet.
Experimental evidence of screw-nematic order has been observed in concentrated
suspensions of helical ﬂagella isolated from Salmonella typhimurium [22]. While
ﬂagella with a rod-like shape exhibit a nematic phase, ﬁlaments with a pronounced
helical character were found to undergo a direct transition from the isotropic to a
modulated nematic phase with pitch in the micrometer scale, which in the original
paper was denoted as conical. It can be easily veriﬁed that the experimental results
are fully compatible with what we have called the screw-nematic phase, with the helix
axes (̂u) preferentially aligned along the same direction (the main director ̂n) and the

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
81
two-fold symmetry axes of helices ̂w spiraling around ̂n. This was discussed in detail in
Refs. [16, 18, 19]. Direct transition from the isotropic to the N∗
s phase can be seen in the
phase diagram that we have calculated for helices having r = 0.4 and various values of
the pitch (Figure 3.17). In such a phase diagram the N∗
s phase is superseded by smectic
phases at higher density, at variance with the experimental system, which did not
exhibit any smectic phase. This diﬀerence can be ascribed to the length polydispersity
of the helical ﬂagella, which inhibits the formation of layers, but is fully compatible with
the existence of screw-like order.
It is also worth noting that in the experiments on helical ﬂagella, no cholesteric phase
has been observed. It would be interesting to investigate in detail what is the role of
length polydispersity in the stability of a cholesteric phase in systems of helical particles.
To our knowledge, there has been no evidence of screw-like order in polymeric
systems. A possible reason is that polymers, owing to their shape and ﬂexibility, do
not meet the requirements for the stabilization of phases with screw organization.
This is what occurs for the slightly helical particles whose phase diagram is shown
in Figure 3.14. Another possible reason is the diﬃculty in experimental detection of
space modulations with pitch in the nanometer range. We hope that new, targeted
experiments can shed light on this issue, possibly involving the design and synthesis of
polymers with a more pronounced helical shape.
3.11
Conclusions and Perspectives
In this chapter we have tried to account for some recent results obtained by considering a
ﬂuid of rigid helices interacting only sterically, that is, via excluded volume only. To this
end, we have used a combination of Monte Carlo simulations and density functional
theory.
Notwithstanding the fundamental role of helical motifs in nature, a detailed study of
this ﬂuid was surprisingly missing, likely because the phase behavior of helical particles
was assumed to be a minor variation of that of hard straight rods. Conversely, we found
a rich and unconventional polymorphism of entropically driven liquid crystal phases
that, as well as conventional nematic and smectic (A and B) phases, also appearing in a
ﬂuid of rod-like particles, display speciﬁc phases, whose origin we have discussed.
A rigid helical particle is a chiral object, in that left-handed helices cannot be super-
imposed on their right-handed counterparts. Because of this chirality, neighboring
parallel helices in a nematic phase experience a twist that propagates in the direction
perpendicular to the original plane following a helical path with a pitch typically much
larger than the particle itself. Therefore the phase looks nematic on a short scale but
is cholesteric on a much larger scale. We found this phase to be favored at moderate
volume fractions and moderate curliness.
At larger densities and for more pronounced curliness, when there is suﬃcient
interlocking between neighboring helices to promote azimuthal coupling, a diﬀerent
mechanism sets in, where there is a tendency for the parallel helices to slide up and
down along the nematic director to increase their translational entropy, compensating
for the corresponding loss of rotational entropy due to the azimuthal coupling. This
is the driving mechanism for the formation of a screw-nematic phase whose origin is
rooted in the helical shape of the particles.

82
Self-Assembling Systems
We have further discussed how a similar mechanism favors the formation of
screw-smectic phases (both A and B), in addition to another smectic phase (called “B
polar”) where this organization is replaced by a diﬀerent one with horizontal sliding
and rotation of neighboring smectic layers which diﬀers from the conventional smectic
B by the presence of polar transversal order.
These ﬁndings suggest signiﬁcant sensitivity of the liquid crystal phases to the shape
of the helices that is to be accounted for in all those experimental systems for which hard
helices can be reckoned as a good minimal model. This includes biological systems, such
as helical ﬂagella, but also helically nanostructured materials exhibiting special optical
properties that are of interest for photonic metamaterials.
The above model could be made more realistic by adding charges, localized interac-
tions, by allowing mixing right- and left-handedness, as well as by including ﬂexibility
in the helices. These model variants will be useful in describing diﬀerent systems.
Yet, there are a number of possible further studies even maintaining the helices as
hard and rigid. One interesting issue hinges on the possible presence of columnar
phases in a system of monosized hard helices, which are exhibited for instance by
fd viruses [80]. Equally deserving a dedicated study is a detailed analysis of the
high-densities ordered phases, as they might provide some surprising features in
view of the non-convex nature of the helices [5]. Other important, still unexplored,
issues concern the behavior of mixtures of helices, diﬀering in length and morphology,
mixtures of enantiomers, as well as the dynamics of the onset of screw-like phases.
All these issues will be pursued in the near future.
Acknowledgments
G.C. thanks the Government of Spain for the award of a Ramón y Cajal research
fellowship and for ﬁnancial support under the grant FIS2013-47350-C5-1-R, and the
grant MDM-2014-0377. A.F. and A.G. acknowledge ﬁnancial support from MIUR
PRIN-COFIN2010-2011 (contract 2010LKE4CC). The use of the SCSCF multiprocessor
cluster at the Università Ca’ Foscari Venezia is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1. Whitesides G.M, M. Boncheva, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99, 4769 (2002);
Whitesides G. M., B. Grzybowski, Science 295, 2418 (2002).
2. Pusey P.N., W. Van Megen, Nature 320, 340 (1986).
3. Frenkel D., Nature Mat. 14, 9 (2014).
4. Glotzer S. C., M. J. Solomon, Nature Mat. 6, 557 (2007).
5. Damasceno P. F., A. S. Karas, B. A. Schultz, M. Engel, S. C. Glotzer, Phys. Rev. Lett.
115, 158303 (2015).
6. Yang M., N. A. Kotov, J. Mater. Chem. 21, 6775 (2011).
7. Gibbs J., A. G. Mark, T.-C. Lee, S. Eslami, D. Schamel, P. Fischer, Nanoscale 6, 9457
(2014).
8. Liu L., L. Zhang, S. M. Kim, S. Park, Nanoscale 6, 9355 (2014).

3 Theory and Simulation of Helical Particles
83
9. Douglas S. M., H. Dietz, T. Liendl, B. Hogberg, F. Graf, W. H. Shih, Nature 459, 414
(2009).
10. Seeman N. C., Nature 421, 427 (2003).
11. Nakano T., Y. Okamoto, Chemical Review 101, 4013 (2001).
12. Yashima E., K. Maeda, H. Idia, Y. Furusho, K. Nagai, Chemical Review 109, 6102
(2009).
13. Bawden F. C. et al., Nature 138, 1051 (1936).
14. Rey A. D., Soft Matter 6, 3402 (2010).
15. Frezza E., A. Ferrarini, H. B. Kolli, A. Giacometti, G. Cinacchi, J. Chem. Phys. 138,
164906 (2013).
16. Kolli H. B., E. Frezza, G. Cinacchi, A. Ferrarini, A. Giacometti, T. S. Hudson,
J. Chem. Phys. 140, 081101 (2014).
17. Frezza, E., A. Ferrarini, H. B. Kolli, A. Giacometti, G. Cinacchi, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 16, 16225 (2014).
18. Kolli H. B., E. Frezza, G. Cinacchi, A. Ferrarini, A. Giacometti, C. de Michele, F.
Sciortino, Soft Matter 10, 8171 (2014).
19. Kolli H. B., G. Cinacchi, A. Ferrarini, A. Giacometti, Faraday Disc. 186, 171 (2016).
20. Onsager L., Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 51, 627 (1949).
21. Manna F., V. Lorman, R. Podgornik, B. Zeks, Phys. Rev. E 75, 030901(R) (2007).
22. Barry E., Z. Hensel, Z. Dogic, M. Shribak, R. Oldenbourg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
018305 (2006).
23. de Gennes P. G., J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals (Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1993), 2nd edn.
24. Demus D., J. Goodby, G. W. Gray, H. W. Spiess, V. Vill, Handbook of Liquid
Crystals (Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 1998).
25. Luckhurst G. R., T. J. Sluckin, eds. Biaxial Nematic Liquid Crystals: Theory,
Simulation, and Experiment (John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, Chichester, 2015).
26. Berardi R., L. Muccioli, S. Orlandi, M. Ricci, C. Zannoni, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
20, 463101 (2008).
27. Yu L. J., A. Saupe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 1000 (1980).
28. van den Pol E., A. V. Petukhov, D. M. E. Thies-Weesie, D. V. Byelov, G. J. Vroege,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 258301 (2009).
29. Kitzerow H., C. Bahr, eds. Chirality in Liquid Crystals (Springer, Heidelberg, 2001).
30. Pieraccini S., S. Masiero, A. Ferrarini, G. P. Spada, Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 258 (2011).
31. Katsonis N., E. Lacaze, A. Ferrarini, J. Mater. Chem. 22, 7088 (2012).
32. Wright D. C., N. D. Mermin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 385 (1989).
33. de Gennes P. G., Sol. State Commun. 10, 753 (1972).
34. Renn S. R., T. C. Lubensky, Phys. Rev. A 38, 2132 (1988).
35. Goodby J. W., M. A. Waugh, S. M. Stein, E. Chin, R. Pindak, J. S. Patel, Nature 337,
449 (1989).
36. Bolhuis P., D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 666 (1997).
37. Metropolis N., A. W. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, E. Teller, J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1087
(1953).
38. Allen M. P., D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1989).
39. Wood W. W., J. D. Jacobson, J. Chem. Phys. 27, 1207 (1957).
40. Vesely F. J., J. Comput. Phys. 47, 291 (1982).

84
Self-Assembling Systems
41. Kirkwood J. G., J. Chem. Phys. 7, 919 (1939).
42. Alder B. J., T. E. Wainwright, J. Chem. Phys. 27, 1208 (1957).
43. Gabriel A., T. Meyer, G. Germano, J. Chem. Theory. Comput. 4, 468 (2008).
44. Zocher H., Z. Anorg. Chem. 147, 91 (1925).
45. McQuarrie D. A., Statistical Mechanics (University Science Books, Sausalito, CA,
2000).
46. Mayer J. E., Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics (Pergamon Press, New York, 1968).
47. Kayser R. F., H. J. Raveché, Phys. Rev. A 17, 2067 (1978).
48. Herzfeld J., A. E. Berger, J. W. Wingate, Macromolecules 17, 1718 (1984).
49. Oldenbourg R., X. Wen, R. B. Meyer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1851 (1988); Fraden S., G.
Maret, D. L. D. Casper, R. B. Meyer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2068 (1989).
50. Frenkel D., J. Phys. Chem. 91, 4912 (1987).
51. Straley J. P., Molec. Crys. Liq. Cryst. 24, 7 (1973).
52. Mulder B. M., D. Frenkel, Mol. Phys. 55, 1193 (1985); Tjipto-Margo B., G. T. Evans,
J. Chem. Phys. 93, 4254 (1990).
53. Denniston M., A. J. Masters, Phys. Rev. E 84, 021709 (2011).
54. Parsons J. D., Phys. Rev. A 19, 1225 (1979); Lee S.-D., J. Chem. Phys. 87, 4972
(1987); Lee S.-D., J. Chem. Phys. 89, 7036 (1989).
55. Carnahan N. F., K. E. Starling, J. Chem. Phys. 51, 635 (1969).
56. Camp P. J., C. P. Mason, M. P. Allen, A. A. Khare, D. A. Kofke, J. Chem. Phys. 105,
2837 (1996).
57. Cinacchi G., L. Mederos, E. Velasco, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 3854 (2004).
58. Greco C., A. Ferrarini, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 147801 (2015).
59. Belli S., S. Dussi, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij, Phys. Rev. E 90, 0250503(R) (2014).
60. Dussi S., S. Belli, R. van Roij, M. Dijkstra, J. Chem. Phys. 142, 074905 (2015).
61. Straley J. P., Phys. Rev. A 14, 1835 (1976).
62. Tombolato F., A. Ferrarini, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 054908 (2005).
63. Veilliard-Baron J., Molec. Phys. 28, 809 (1974).
64. Memmer R., Liq. Cryst. 29, 483 (2002).
65. Cifelli M., G. Cinacchi, L. de Gaetani, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 164912 (2006).
66. Cinacchi G., L. De Gaetani, Phys. Rev. E 77, 051705 (2008).
67. Rill R. R., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 83, 342 (1986).
68. Livolant F., A. Leforestier, Progress in Polymer Science 21, 1115 (1996).
69. Zanchetta G., F. Giavazzi, M. Nakata, M. Buscaglia, R. Cerbino, N. A. Clark, T.
Bellini, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107, 17497 (2010).
70. Proni G., G. Gottarelli, P. Mariani, G. P. Spada, Chem. Eur. J. 6, 3249 (2000).
71. Frezza E., F. Tombolato, A. Ferrarini, Soft Matter 7, 9291 (2011).
72. Wensink H. H., Europhys. Lett. 107, 36001 (2014).
73. Samulski T. V., E. T. Samulski, J. Chem. Phys. 67, 824 (1977).
74. Osipov M. A., Nuovo Cimento D 10, 1249 (1988).
75. Emelyanenko A. V., Phys. Rev. E 67, 031704: (2003).
76. Grelet E., S. Fraden, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 198302: (2003).
77. Tombolato F., A. Ferrarini, E. Grelet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 258302 (2006).
78. Barry E., D. Beller, Z. Dogic, Soft Matter 5, 2563 (2009).
79. Zhang Z., E. Grelet., Soft Matter 9, 1015 (2013).
80. Grelet E., Phys. Rev. X 4, 021053 (2015).

85
4
Self-Consistent Field Theory of Self-Assembling Multiblock
Copolymers
Weihua Li1 and An-Chang Shi2
1State Key Laboratory of Molecular Engineering of Polymers, Collaborative Innovation Center of Polymers and Polymer
Composite Materials, Department of Macromolecular Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
4.1
Introduction
Block copolymers are heterogeneous polymers composed of chemically distinct
subchains or blocks tethered together. This combination of chemical diversity and
chain connectivity makes block copolymers a fascinating class of soft materials with
unique structural and mechanical properties [1, 2]. In particular, the self-assembly
of block copolymers has attracted tremendous attention due to their ability to form
various ordered structures with domain sizes at the nanometer scale. These nanoscopic
ordered morphologies possess potentials for advanced applications in a wide range of
areas. From a thermodynamic point of view, the self-assembly of block copolymers is
governed by a delicate balance of two opposing trends, i.e. the repulsive interactions
between the chemically distinct blocks and the connectivity of the polymer chains.
The repulsive interaction between chemically diﬀerent blocks tends to drive the
system to phase separate, whereas the connectivity of the blocks prevents a phase
separation at the macroscopic scale. From this perspective block copolymers represent
a classical example of frustrated physical systems. To alleviate this frustration, phase
separation occurs in block copolymer systems via the formation of nanoscopic domains
composed of diﬀerent blocks. The packing of these domains can further assume
diﬀerent symmetries, leading to the formation of various periodic nanostructures.
For the simplest block copolymer composed of A and B blocks, which are linked
at their ends to form an AB diblock copolymer, its self-assembly behavior is mainly
controlled by two characteristic parameters, viz the volume fraction of the A block,
f , and the interaction parameter, 𝜒N, which is the product of the Flory–Huggins
parameter (𝜒) and the total polymerization index N. By varying these two variables,
AB diblock copolymers could self-assemble into ordered structures including lamellae
(L), hexagonally packed cylinders (HEX), spherical domains arranged on a hexagonally
close-packed (HCP) or body-centered cubic (BCC) lattice, and bicontinuous phases
composed of networked cylinders with diﬀerent symmetries—gyroid or Fddd (O70)
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

86
Self-Assembling Systems
[3, 4]. Furthermore, conformational asymmetry of the A and B blocks could lead to the
formation of complex spherical phases such as the A15 phase and the Frank–Kasper
𝜎-phase [5].
Due to the availability of diﬀerent monomers and chain architectures, the type of
block copolymers is unlimited. In recent years, the development of modern synthetic
techniques makes complex block copolymers consisting of more than two blocks
(i.e. multiblock) and more chemically distinct components accessible, as demonstrated
in numerous recent experiments [6–8]. The vast library of chain architectures, includ-
ing linear, star, comb, and loop topologies, provides unlimited possibilities for the
fabrication of diverse structures. As a simple extension of the AB diblock copolymers, a
complex block copolymer is the ABC triblock copolymers composed of three diﬀerent
blocks with diﬀerent topologies (e.g. linear, ring, or loop). It has been well established
that chain topology could have a large eﬀect on the self-assembly behavior of ABC
triblock copolymers. Even for a given topology, an ABC triblock copolymer could
exhibit complicated self-assembly behavior, and thus be capable of forming more
ordered structures than the AB diblock copolymer. This richer phase behavior of
ABC triblock copolymers is partly due to the very large phase space with at least ﬁve
independent parameters including three interaction parameters and two independent
composition parameters [9]. For linear ABC triblock copolymers, experimental and
theoretical studies have revealed a rich array of intricate and novel structures, such as
a square array of cylinders [10, 11], helical supercylinders [12, 13], and knitting pattern
[14, 15]. Furthermore, for AB-type block copolymers, new structures can be obtained
by utilizing designed chain architectures. For example, the perforated lamellar phase,
which is metastable in simple AB diblock or ABA triblock copolymers, could become
a stable phase in ABm miktoarm and comb block copolymers [4]. More recently, it has
been predicted that ABm (m = 3) miktoarm block copolymers could exhibit a phase
transition sequence from disorder, HCP, BCC, and 𝜎to A15 phases [5]. From these
previous studies it can be concluded that the self-assembly of multiblock copolymers
provides a robust platform for the fabrication of rich ordered structures.
In general, the study of the phase behavior of block copolymers could be formulated
as a forward problem or an inverse problem. In the forward problem, the possible
phases that could be formed from a given block copolymer are explored, both exper-
imentally and theoretically. The resulting phase diagram can then be used as library
to obtain desirable structures. In the inverse problem, a desired structure or ordered
phase is speciﬁed ﬁrst, then possible block copolymer architectures and compositions
are explored to obtain this ordered structure as an equilibrium phase of the system.
In principle, the forward problem has a unique solution, whereas the inverse problem
could have multiple solutions. In order to solve the inverse problem, or to design block
copolymers for the engineering of given ordered structures, eﬃcient methods and
strategies to explore possible phases of a given copolymer are needed. More importantly,
an understanding of the principles of structural formation is needed so that the desired
structures could be designed following these principles. As an example of the inverse
problem, Xie et al. have demonstrated a guiding principle allowing the design of multi-
block terpolymers for the formation of a large number of targeted structures in the form
of binary crystalline phases [16]. This basic idea can be extended to tailored multiblock
copolymers for various desired structures if the underlying self-assembly mechanism is
understood.

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
87
In order to realize the idea of designing multiblock copolymers for desired structures,
it is essential to have a robust and eﬃcient theoretical framework that is capable of
predicting the phase behavior and morphologies of block copolymers with any speciﬁc
molecular architecture. Ideally, the theory should take the molecular parameters as
input and be able to predict thermodynamically stable phases and the phase transition
boundaries between them. In the past, a number of theoretical methods have been
developed to study the phases and phase transitions of block copolymer systems.
One of the most successful theoretical frameworks for inhomogeneous polymeric
systems such as block copolymers is the self-consistent ﬁeld theory (SCFT). The SCFT
has its origin in the work by Edwards in the 1960s [17]. This theoretical framework
was explicitly adapted to treat block copolymers by Helfand in 1975 [18]. From the
mathematical point of view, block copolymer theory presents a complex problem, and
it is diﬃcult to obtain exact solutions. Diﬀerent approaches have been developed to
solve the SCFT equations for block copolymer systems. In 1980 Leibler proposed an
approximate analytical theory by assuming that the free energy functional could be
expanded around the homogeneous state [19]. Therefore, Leibler’s theory is valid in the
weak-segregation regime. A similar theory was introduced by Ohta and Kawasaki for
the study of AB diblock copolymers in 1986 [20]. The Ohta–Kawasaki theory has been
extended to more complex block copolymer systems, such as to AB/C blends [21] and
very recently to ABC linear triblock copolymers [22]. Another approximate analytical
theory, valid in the strong-segregation regime, was introduced by Semenov in 1985 [23].
These approximate theories have been applied to a variety of block copolymer systems,
leading to valuable insights into the phases and phase transitions of block copolymers.
Besides the eﬀorts of developing analytic methods, an alternative approach to block
copolymer theory is to solve the SCFT equations using numerical techniques. The
earliest attempts to obtain numerical solutions for diblock copolymers were made by
Helfand and coworkers [24]. Later, Shull as well as Vavasour and Whitmore constructed
phase diagrams of block copolymer melts and solutions using approximate numerical
techniques [25, 26]. The ﬁrst accurate three-dimensional solutions of the diﬀerent
ordered phases for diblock copolymers were obtained by Matsen and Schick in 1994
using the spectral method, or the reciprocal-space method, to solve the SCFT equations
[27]. The spectral method utilizes the space-group symmetry of the ordered phases
and is able to provide exact numerical solutions to SCFT equations. This technique
has been applied to a large number of block copolymer systems [3, 4, 11]. In the early
applications of the spectral method, the symmetry of the ordered phases is assumed to
be known, leading to an eﬃcient numerical method to obtain accurate SCFT solutions.
Replacing the symmetry-restricted basis functions by a generic Fourier series, the
spectral method could be extended for discovering new phases, as demonstrated in
the case of ABC linear triblock copolymers by Guo et al. [28]. Complementary to the
reciprocal-space method, an alternative method is to solve the SCFT equations in real
space. In particular, Drolet et al. proposed that the real-space SCFT could be used to
discover new ordered structures starting from random initial conditions [29]. In 2002,
a new numerical method, which solves SCFT equations by taking advantage of both
real-space and reciprocal-space methods, was developed by Tzeremes and coworkers
[30]. The pseudo-spectral method is highly accurate and numerically eﬃcient because
it takes advantage of the high eﬃciency of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm.
Moreover, it was further developed to be able to calculate the free energy of phases

88
Self-Assembling Systems
with a higher order of accuracy [31]. These previous studies have demonstrated that the
SCFT based on the Gaussian model of the ﬂexible polymer chains provides a powerful
theoretical framework for the study of block copolymers. In this chapter we provide a
review of various approaches to solving the SCFT equations, emphasizing applications
to the study of the self-assembly of multiblock copolymers.
The theory of block copolymers is a very active research area in polymer science.
Signiﬁcant progress is continuously being made. Therefore it is virtually impossible
to include all the current theoretical developments in a short review chapter. Instead,
we focus on the recent applications of diﬀerent methods of SCFT to the study of the
self-assembly of block copolymers. In particular, we focus on a review of the recent
progress in the study of the self-assembly of multiblock copolymers, alongside some
speciﬁc details of the numerical techniques. We hope that this chapter will serve as a
reference source for readers who are interested in applying the SCFT to multiblock
copolymer systems. There is a large body of literature on block copolymer theories,
including a number of valuable reviews and books [32–34]. Systematic derivations
of the formulation of SCFT for block copolymers are provided in these references,
and are not repeated in this chapter. Rather, the presentation of the material in this
chapter relies heavily on these review articles and on our own work. Furthermore, we
focus on the SCFT of block copolymers in this chapter, and thus a number of diﬀerent
theoretical approaches are not mentioned. We apologize in advance for our failure to
cite all of the relevant and important references.
4.2
Theoretical Framework: Self-Consistent Field Theory of
Block Copolymers
The formulation of the self-consistent ﬁeld theory of block copolymers starts with a
molecular model of the polymers. For block copolymers, one of the most successful
molecular models, or the “standard model,” is a coarse-grained model in which the
polymer chains are modeled as ﬂexible Gaussian chains and the interactions between
the distinct monomers are described by short-range contact potentials [32]. Further-
more, the hard-core repulsive interactions are treated using the incompressibility
condition. The advantage of this simple model is that the thermodynamic behavior of
the system can be formulated in terms of a ﬁeld theory, the self-consistent ﬁeld theory
(SCFT), which allows systematic studies using a variety of techniques. In particular, the
mean-ﬁeld approximation of the theory results in a powerful theoretical framework
for the study of block copolymer phase behavior. The solutions of the SCFT equations
have provided a quantitative phase diagram for diblock copolymers, which is in good
agreement with experiments. For more complex block copolymers, SCFT solutions
also provide useful guides to experiments. Further development of the SCFT on
studying the eﬀect of anisotropic Gaussian ﬂuctuations on ordered phases provides an
understanding of the nature of these ﬂuctuations, as well as a technique to study the
stability, kinetic pathways, and scattering function of ordered structures [33]. Recently,
SCFT has been combined with the string method to study the minimal free energy
paths (MFEPs) that dictate the transition pathways connecting diﬀerent phases in bulk
[35] or the defective structures in external ﬁelds [36, 37]. In what follows, we brieﬂy

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
89
formulate the SCFT equations. For more details about the derivation and underlying
physics we refer readers to the literature [32–34].
We use AB diblock copolymer melts as an example to formulate the SCFT. Extension
to more complex block copolymers as well as block copolymer blends and solutions
is straightforward. We use a canonical ensemble approach and consider n copolymer
chains in a volume V at a given temperature T. Each copolymer chain consists of N
segments of species K = A, B. The blocks A and B contain NA = fN and NB = (1 −f )N
segments, respectively. Each block has an associate segment length (i.e. Kuhn length)
bK = 𝜀Kb, where b is a reference Kuhn length. The segments are assumed to have the
same segment density, 𝜌0, which is deﬁned as segments per unit volume; thus the volume
occupied by one segment is 𝜌−1
0 . It is convenient to choose the spatial length unit as
the Gaussian radius of gyration of the chain, Rg = b
√
N∕6. The chain contour length is
scaled by the segment number N. When each copolymer chain is treated as a spatial
curve, the free energy per chain within the mean ﬁeld approximation can be expressed
as [32–34]
F
nkBT = −ln Q + 1
V ∫dr{𝜒N𝜙A(r)𝜙B(r) −wA(r)𝜙A(r)
−wB(r)𝜙B(r) −𝜉(r)[1 −𝜙A(r) −𝜙B(r)]},
(4.1)
where 𝜙K(r) (K = A, B) are the local concentration or volume fraction of the segment K.
The quantity Q is the partition function of a single copolymer chain interacting with the
mean ﬁelds of wK(r), which are produced by the surrounding chains. The ﬁeld function
𝜉(r) is a Lagrange multiplier used to enforce the incompressibility condition, 𝜙A(r) +
𝜙B(r) = 1. Minimization of the free energy functional with respect to the compositional
and ﬁeld functions leads to the following SCFT equations:
wA(r) = 𝜒N𝜙B(r) + 𝜉(r),
(4.2)
wB(r) = 𝜒N𝜙A(r) + 𝜉(r),
(4.3)
𝜙A(r) = 1
Q ∫
f
0
ds q(r, s)q†(r, s),
(4.4)
𝜙B(r) = 1
Q ∫
1
f
ds q(r, s)q†(r, s),
(4.5)
Q = 1
V ∫drq(r, s)q†(r, s),
(4.6)
𝜙A(r) + 𝜙B(r) = 1.
(4.7)
In the above equations, the quantities q(r, s) and q†(r, s) are the end-segment distribu-
tion functions measuring the probability of ﬁnding the segment s at the position r when
starting from the end s = 0 or s = 1, respectively. The distribution functions satisfy the
modiﬁed diﬀusion equations,
𝜕q(r, s)
𝜕s
= 𝜀(s)∇2q(r, s) −w(r, s)q(r, s),
(4.8)
−𝜕q†(r, s)
𝜕s
= 𝜀(s)∇2q†(r, s) −w(r, s)q†(r, s),
(4.9)
where w(r, s) = wA(r), 𝜀(s) = 𝜀A for s < fA, otherwise w(r, s) = wB(r), 𝜀(s) = 𝜀B. The ini-
tial conditions are q(r, 0) = 1 and q†(r, 1) = 1.

90
Self-Assembling Systems
4.3
Numerical Methods of SCFT
A number of numerical methods, formulated in real-space or in reciprocal-space,
have been developed to solve the SCFT equations since SCFT was formulated in the
1970s. Generically, all the numerical approaches share a common technique, i.e. a
self-consistent iteration process (also referred to as a Picard-type algorithm) [27, 29].
This iteration process consists of the following steps: (i) initializing the mean ﬁelds
wK(r), (ii) calculating the propagators q(r, s) and q†(r, s) as well as the single-molecular
partition function Q via solving the modiﬁed diﬀusion equation, (iii) calculating the
density distributions 𝜙K(r), and (iv) updating the mean ﬁelds with the new density pro-
ﬁles. Convergence of the iteration process leads to the solution of SCFT equations with
converged density proﬁle and corresponding free energy that speciﬁes the morphology
and determines the stability of the structure, respectively. The details of implementing
the SCFT in real-space and in reciprocal-space are diﬀerent, and will be discussed in
the following subsections.
4.3.1
Reciprocal-Space Method
The reciprocal-space method, or the spectral method, is based on the observation
that, for an ordered phase of block copolymers, all spatial functions of interest, i.e. the
density distributions, the mean ﬁelds, and the propagators, are periodic functions. In
principle, these periodic spatial functions can be expanded in terms of a set of basis
functions composed of the plane waves eiG⋅r, where G are the reciprocal lattice vectors
of the given ordered phase. Therefore, an ordered phase is speciﬁed by the set of
expansion coeﬃcients of these basis functions. For a given ordered phase, its structure
is speciﬁed by its space-group symmetry, which in turn determines the permissible
reciprocal lattice vectors. For example, the ordered phases from the self-assembly of
diblock copolymers are the one-dimensional lamellar phase, the two-dimensional (2D)
hexagonal phase with the plane group p6m, the BCC spherical phase with the space
group Im3m, and the double gyroid phase with the space group Ia3d. The corresponding
reciprocal lattice vectors are determined using these real-space structures.
Besides the translational symmetry, the point-group symmetry of a given phase
ensures that some of the reciprocal lattice vectors are symmetrically equivalent, thus
having equal magnitudes. These symmetrically equivalent reciprocal lattice vectors
could be grouped together, forming a star of reciprocal lattice vectors. The basis
function of a star could be constructed as a linear combination of the plane waves of the
corresponding vectors. The idea of reconstructing new basis functions is critical in the
reciprocal-space method (also named as the spectral method) because it dramatically
reduces the number of basis functions and thereby enhances the computational
eﬃciency.
Speciﬁcally, each of these new basis functions is a linear combination of the form
[32, 33]
fn(r) =
1
√
Nn
∑
i∈n
Sn
i eiGn
i ⋅r,
(4.10)
where the wave vectors Gn
i are related by the point group symmetry and satisfy the
relation |Gn
i |2 = 𝜆n, the factor Sn
i = ±1 according to the space group, and Nn is the

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
91
number of reciprocal lattice vectors belonging to the nth star. The values of Sn
i and Nn
can be found from the International Table of Crystallography. The new basis functions
are orthonormal [i.e., V −1 ∫fi(rfj)(r)dr = 𝛿ij], and are eigenfunctions of the Laplacian
operator, ∇2fn(r) = −𝜆n fn(r). Usually, the set of basis functions starting with f1(r) = 1
are ordered in a nondecreasing series of 𝜆n. As a consequence, the spatial functions of
the ordered phase under consideration can be expanded in terms of the set of the basis
functions:
𝜙K(r) =
∑
n
𝜙K,n fn(r),
(4.11)
wK(r) =
∑
n
wK,n fn(r),
(4.12)
q(r, s) =
∑
n
qn(s) fn(r).
(4.13)
With the expansion, the partial diﬀerential diﬀusion equation of q(r, s) [or q†(r, s)]
becomes the normal diﬀerential equations of their coeﬃcient functions qn(s) [or q†
n(s)],
dqn(s)
ds
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
∑
m
Anmqm(s), if s < f ,
∑
m
Bnmqm(s), if s > f ,
Anm = −𝜆n𝜀A𝛿nm −
∑
l
wA,lΓnml,
Bnm = −𝜆n𝜀B𝛿nm −
∑
l
wB,lΓnml,
(4.14)
where Γnm = V −1 ∫fn(r) fm(r) fl(r)dr. The initial condition is qn(0) = 𝛿n1. The diﬀerential
equations of the coeﬃcient functions q†
n(s) are similar. The set of linear diﬀerential
equations is readily solved by diagonalizing the matrix A or B, leading to the solution
of the amplitudes of the propagator functions. Accordingly, the SCFT equations in
Equations (4.2)–(4.7) in terms of the amplitudes of all spatial functions become
wA,n = 𝜒N𝜙B,n + 𝜉n,
wB,n = 𝜒N𝜙A,n + 𝜉n,
𝜙A,n =
1
q1(1) ∫
f
0
ds
∑
ml
qm(s)q†
l (s)Γnml,
𝜙B,n =
1
q1(1) ∫
1
f
ds
∑
ml
qm(s)q†
l (s)Γnml,
Q = Vq1(1),
𝜙A,n + 𝜙B,n = 𝛿n,1.
(4.15)
The free energy can also be written in terms of these amplitudes as
F
nkBT = −ln[q1(1)] −𝜒N
∑
n
𝜙A,n𝜙B,n.
(4.16)
Besides the two controlling parameters, f and 𝜒N, the free energy of a given ordered
phase is an implicit function of the wavelength or the period, D, of the structure

92
Self-Assembling Systems
because the wave vector G is inversely proportional to D. The equilibrium value of
the period D is obtained by minimizing the free energy with respect to D. The phase
diagram is constructed by comparing the free energy of diﬀerent phases. Importantly,
the accuracy of the free energy is determined by the number of basis functions in the
spectral method, which, in turn, dictates the computational cost. With the development
of high-performance computing technologies, larger numbers of basis functions can
be included in the calculations using the spectral method, which guarantees a reliable
accuracy for the free energy of each known ordered phase. In other words, as long
as the candidate ordered phases are known for a given block copolymer, its phase
diagram can be constructed accurately with the spectral method. For example, since the
relatively accurate phase diagram of the simplest AB diblock copolymer, which consists
of lamellar, cylindrical, double gyroid, and BCC spherical phases, was ﬁrst constructed
by the spectral method in 1994 [27], two new phases of HCP sphere and bicontinuous
Fddd have been included in the phase diagram. The accuracy of the phase boundaries
surrounding the gyroid phase in the strong segregation region has been improved,
resulting in an up-to-date phase diagram of AB diblock copolymers (Figure 4.1) [3, 4].
Although the above formulation of the SCFT is for AB diblock copolymers, it is
straightforward to extend the spectral method to polymeric systems with diﬀerent
molecular architectures as well as multi-component block copolymer systems. For
example, the spectral method has been applied to determine the phase diagrams of
diverse block copolymer systems including copolymer/homopolymer blends [38] and
multiblock copolymers [4]. For example, Matsen has calculated the phase diagrams
of AB-type multiblock copolymers with various architectures including ABA triblock,
ABm miktoarm, (AB)m star, ABAB · · · linear multiblock, and comb consisting of an A
backbone and regularly spaced teeth of B blocks. His results suggest that the topology of
the phase diagrams is relatively unaﬀected by diﬀerences in architecture, but the phase
boundaries shift signiﬁcantly in the f –𝜒N plane. In particular, the perforated-lamellar
(PL) phase, which is a metastable phase in the AB and ABA triblock copolymers, could
become stable in the comb multiblock copolymers (Figure 4.2). This prediction implies
that the design of molecular architectures of multiblock copolymers could provide an
Figure 4.1 Phase diagram of AB
diblock copolymer melts, consisting of
the stability regions of lamellar (L),
cylindrical (C), BCC spherical (S), HCP
spherical (Scp), gyroid (G), and Fddd
(O70) morphologies. Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [4].
50
40
30
20
χN
10
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
f
0.6
disordered
C
S
Scp
Scp
S
C
G
O70
L
0.8
1.0

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
93
50
40
30
20
χN
10
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
f
0.6
disordered
C
S
Scp
S
PL
SA15
C
G
O70
L
0.8
1.0
Figure 4.2 Phase diagram of a melt of an AB comb copolymer which is composed of a B-block
backbone and regularly spaced teeth of A-blocks. Here, N is the number of segments of each tooth.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [4].
opportunity to obtain new ordered morphologies. The spectral method of SCFT with
its accuracy and eﬃciency provides a powerful tool to determine the phase diagram of
new designed multiblock copolymers.
Initially, the spectral method would require the symmetry of ordered phases as an
input, thus limiting its application to exploring unknown structures. However, this
limitation could be overcome by replacing the restricted basis functions with the
full set of plane waves. Because any function can be expanded in terms of a set of
the plane waves, this approach provides a generic description of diﬀerent ordered
phases. The utilization of generic Fourier series leads to an increase in the number
of basis functions, and thereby increases the computational cost signiﬁcantly. With a
reasonable number of basis functions, Guo et al. demonstrated that the generic spectral
method is capable of discovering new structures in ABC linear triblock copolymers
(Figure 4.3). In practice, the combination of the generic reciprocal-space method and
the spectral method enables us to study the phase behavior of complex block copolymer
systems. The generic reciprocal-space method is used to construct possible candidate
structures in the parameter space of interest, while the spectral method is used to
compute accurate free energies of these structures, which are used to construct phase
diagrams.
4.3.2
Real-Space Method
A natural method to solve the SCFT equations is to discretize the system in real
space. While the real-space approach has been used in a number of previous studies,
a three-dimensional computational method to solve the SCFT equations in real space
was proposed by Drolet and Fredrickson [29]. In this approach, the system of SCFT

94
Self-Assembling Systems
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
D
D
S
G
L2
G
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.6
G+S(I)
L+S(II)
0.6
0.8
0.8
1.0
(a) L3
(j) C
(k) CCS
(q) SCS
(r) SA
(b) L2
(c) HPL2
(d) HPL3
(e) L+C(I)
(f) L+S(I)
(h) L+C(II)
(i) L+S(II)
(n) C+S
(m) C+HEL
(u) G+S(II)
(t) G+S(I)
(o) CA
(p) S
(v) GA
(s) GCS
1.0
fA
0.6
fc
fB
B
C
C
L2
G
G
G
G
GA
L3
G+S(II)
L+S(I)
C+HEL
L+C(II)
L+C(II)
L+S(II)
C+S
G+S(I)
L+C(II)
C
C
L2
D
S
S
A
0.8
1.0
Figure 4.3 (Top) Morphologies self-assembled in the ABC linear triblock copolymers with
𝜒ABN = 𝜒BCN = 35 and 𝜒ACN = 15, discovered by the general spectral method of SCFT.
(Bottom) Phase diagram of these morphologies. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [28]. (See insert
for color representation of the ﬁgure.).

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
95
equations is placed on a discrete grid and all spatial functions [e.g. wK(r), 𝜙K(r), q(r, s),
and q†(r, s)] are expressed as a set of values on the lattices. The steps of the iteration
algorithm in real space are implemented as follows. First, an initial guess for the value
of wK(r) on each lattice point is constructed with a random number generator. Alter-
natively, the ﬁelds wK(r) can be obtained from Equations (4.2) and (4.3) with 𝜉(r) = 0
and the density functions 𝜙K(r) are randomly initialized with the reasonable range of
values 0 < 𝜙K(r) < 1. Second, the partial diﬀerential equations of q(r, s) and q†(r, s) are
solved using a Crank–Nicholson scheme that is an alternating direction implicit (ADI)
method with second-order accuracy of the integration step Δs and is unconditionally
stable. Third, new density proﬁles are obtained by evaluating Equations (4.4)–(4.6).
Finally, the mean ﬁelds are updated with the new density proﬁles and the Lagrange
function or the pressure function 𝜉(r) that is constructed from the incompressibility
condition. In order to maintain the stability of the solution, a linear mix of new and
old ﬁelds is usually used for the next iteration. These steps are repeated until the mean
ﬁelds and free energy converge and the incompressibility condition is satisﬁed.
The most prominent feature of the real-space method proposed by Drolet and
Fredrickson is the utilization of random initial conditions for the mean ﬁelds or the
density proﬁles. This method oﬀers one possibility of searching new morphologies
self-assembled by complex block copolymers. One strategy for using the real-space
method is to perform a large number of parallel runs in the parameter space of interest,
hopefully to obtain many possible candidate structures that may be either stable
or metastable. As a demonstration, Drolet and Fredrickson applied this strategy to
ABCA tetrablock copolymers, and obtained a few novel 2D ordered phases for this
system (Figure 4.4). In general, although the real-space method with random initial
conﬁgurations could provide a number of candidate structures, it is possible that
using random initial conditions alone could miss many of the candidate phases as
demonstrated by Xu et al. [39]. The best practice is to use a combination of diﬀerent
initialization schemes to obtain candidate structures [39].
4.3.3
Pseudo-Spectral Method
The main computational task in the real-space method is to obtain solutions of the
modiﬁed diﬀusion equations. This is usually done by using the Crank–Nicholson
scheme in which the temporal integration is carried out by solving a triangular matrix
for diﬀerent directions in sequence. It is known that there are some severe constraints
on the spatial and temporal resolutions of this method. To improve the stability and
accuracy, Tzeremes et al. proposed a new scheme, or the pseudo-spectral method, to
solve the modiﬁed diﬀusion equations [30]. The pseudo-spectral method utilizes both
the real-space and reciprocal-space descriptions of the functions. Computationally, the
interchange between these two descriptions could be carried out eﬃciently by taking
advantage of the split-step Fourier transform. Due to the availability of a number of fast
Fourier transform (FFT) packages, the pseudo-spectral method can be highly eﬃcient
and accurate.
The pseudo-spectral method starts with the observation that the solution of the mod-
iﬁed diﬀusion equation Equation (4.8) can be expressed as a time-evolution operation,
q(r, s + ds) = exp[ds (𝜀(s)∇2 −w(r, s))] q(r, s).
(4.17)

96
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.4 Two-dimensional morphologies obtained by solving the SCFT equations for ABCA
tetrablock copolymer melts in real space. Regions rich in A, B, or C monomers are shown in gray, black,
and white, respectively. The interaction parameters are ﬁxed as 𝜒ABN = 𝜒ACN = 𝜒BCN = 35, and the
compositions of the four panels are: (a) (fA, fB, fC) = (0.26, 0.37, 0.37), (b) (fA, fB, fC) = (0.34, 0.33, 0.33),
(c) (fA, fB, fC) = (0.48, 0.26, 0.26), and (d) (fA, fB, fC) = (0.24, 0.56, 0.20), respectively. Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [29].
This solution is exact. However, a direct evaluation of the time-evolution operation is
not straightforward due to the fact that the Laplacian operator ∇2 does not commute
with the position operator. One eﬀective method to overcome this diﬃculty is to ﬁnd
an approximate solution of the time-evolution operation by splitting the two operators
in the exponential. Within an error of order ds3, the operator-splitting leads to the fol-
lowing approximate solution:
q(r, s + ds) ≈exp
[
−ds
2 w(r, s)
]
exp[ds𝜀(s)∇2] exp
[
−ds
2 w(r, s)
]
q(r, s).
(4.18)
The separation of the operators in Equation (4.18) can be used to develop an eﬃcient
numerical method for solving the modiﬁed diﬀusion equations. Speciﬁcally, the
operator exp[−dsw(r, s)∕2] is simply implemented in real space, whereas the operator
exp[ds𝜀(s)∇2] is conveniently implemented in the Fourier space. Using this strategy
leads to a numerical implementation for solving the modiﬁed diﬀusion equation via

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
97
Equation (4.18):
q(r, s + ds) ≈exp
[
−ds
2 w(r, s)
]
FFT−1{exp[−ds𝜀(s)k2]
× FFT
(
exp
[
−ds
2 w(r, s)
]
q(r, s)
)}
,
(4.19)
where FFT and FFT−1 represent the forward and backward (inverse) fast Fourier
transform (FFT), respectively. The wave vector k has a standard deﬁnition in a discrete
space [34]. Highly eﬃcient FFT algorithms enable calculations with a large grid size,
e.g. 643, for a three-dimensional (3D) system on a single processor. Larger grid sizes are
accessible by using parallel programming techniques, especially with the availability of
well-developed FFT software packages such as FFTW [40]. A large grid size enables
one to choose small grid spacing, thus ensuring accurate computation of the free energy
of the system. In contrast to the spectral method in which the integration along the
contour length is done analytically, the discretization degree of the contour length ds
becomes the main factor inﬂuencing the accuracy of the free energy calculation. This is
especially true for the case of strong segregation. Fortunately, the eﬀect of ds becomes
negligible when ds ≤0.01 for weak or intermediate segregation degree. Because of
these advantages, the pseudo-spectral method has become the method of choice for
the study of the self-assembly behaviors of many block copolymer systems, including
geometrically conﬁned systems [41, 42] and multiblock copolymer systems [16, 39, 43].
The pseudo-spectral algorithm to solve the modiﬁed diﬀusion equation provides a
fast and accurate method for ﬁnding solutions of the SCFT equations. Because the
mean ﬁelds and density proﬁles are represented in real space and reciprocal space,
the initialization of the iterative procedure could be performed in real and reciprocal
space. This ﬂexibility of initialization makes it possible to search for new structures
as proposed by Drolet and Fredrickson in the case of the real-space method. On the
other hand, as pointed out by Xu et al. [39], the strategy of starting with random initial
conﬁgurations for the search for new structures may miss many local minima. The best
practice is to use a combination of diﬀerent methods to construct initial conﬁgurations,
which could lead to a large number of possible candidate structures [39]. Furthermore,
for a given block copolymer system with ﬁxed parameters and ﬁxed system sizes,
random initial conditions could lead to the formation of many defective morphologies.
This problem becomes more pronounced for the complex ordered phases such as
continuous networked phases (gyroid or Fddd) and some hierarchical phases of multi-
block terpolymers. Relaxation of these defective structures to reach a local or global
minimum is usually a formidable task. In order to overcome this limitation of random
initialization, a number of approaches to initialization procedures have been developed,
as summarized by Xu et al. [39]. One specialized initialization procedure proposed by
Li and coworkers utilizes specially tailored initial mean ﬁelds to obtain a given structure
as the solution of the SCFT equations. For example, for the hexagonal cylinder phase,
the density proﬁle at the strong segregation limit can be readily generated. This density
proﬁle is then inserted into Equations (4.2) and (4.3) to produce the initial mean ﬁelds.
The calculation is further accelerated by using a rectangular computational box with a
ﬁxed side ratio of Ly∕Lx =
√
3 and an appropriate estimated value of Lx, which consists
of two cylindrical domains. Using this initial mean ﬁeld with proper symmetry and

98
Self-Assembling Systems
length scale, the SCFT calculation converges quickly to the solution of the hexagonal
phase. It is then straightforward to minimize the free energy with respect to Lx leading
to the equilibrium morphology and domain period. This initialization strategy is readily
extended to more complex structures. In the following section, the application of the
pseudo-spectral method with the special initialization scheme to the study of the phase
behavior of multiblock copolymers is illustrated using three examples.
4.3.4
Fourth-Order Pseudo-Spectral Method
It is known that the pseudo-spectral method is accurate to the second order of the
discrete step ds. While the spectral method is adequate for block copolymer systems
in the weak to intermediate segregation regimes, a direct application of this method to
the strong-segregation regime could lead to inaccurate results. For strongly segregated
systems with very sharp interfaces, e.g. for AB diblock copolymers with 𝜒N > 60, the
error induced by a ﬁnite step ds could become considerable. A naive approach to rectify
this limitation is to simply reduce the step size ds, which requires longer computational
time. On the other hand, it has been shown that the inﬂuence of the computational error
on the location of the phase boundaries, which are determined by the relative values of
the free energies, is less sensitive to the accuracy of the free energy itself [44]. Therefore,
the second-order algorithm still provides accurate results for the phase boundaries.
Alternatively, the accuracy of the computation could be signiﬁcantly increased by
using a fourth-order pseudo-spectral method to solve the modiﬁed diﬀusion equations
[31]. In the fourth-order algorithm, the Laplacian operator is treated implicitly with
a fourth-order backward diﬀerentiation formula (BDF4), whereas the source term
is discretized explicitly using the fourth-order accurate Adams–Bashford formula,
leading to the following discretization scheme:
25
12qn+1 −4qn + 3qn+1 −4
3qn−2 + 1
4qn−3
= ds∇2qn+1 −dsw(qn+1 + 4qn −6qn−1 + 4qn−2 −qn−3),
(4.20)
where qn+i denotes q(r, s + ids). The initial values required to apply this formula are
obtained using backward Euler and Richardson’s extrapolations. This fourth-order
scheme is also unconditionally stable. This highly accurate algorithm has been applied
to identify the phase diagram of AB diblock copolymers extending to very strong
segregation degree, i.e. 𝜒N ≤100, aiming to focus on the stability region of the double
gyroid phase (Figure 4.5). The phase diagram indicates that the contraction of the phase
region of the gyroid slows down as 𝜒N increases, and hence the gyroid phase remains
a stable phase within a narrow region at large values of 𝜒N = 100.
4.4
Application of SCFT to Multiblock Copolymers
The development of numerical methods to solve the SCFT equations has led to great
progress in the study of the phases and phase transitions of block copolymer systems.
There have been numerous applications of SCFT to the study of the self-assembly of
block copolymer melts, solutions, and block copolymers under conﬁnement. In this

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
99
100
80
60
40
χN
20
0
0
0.2
0.4
f
0.6
H
H
Q230
Q229
Q229
CPS
CPS
DIS
L
0.8
1
Figure 4.5 Phase diagrams of AB
diblock copolymer identiﬁed by the
fourth-order pseudo-spectral method,
extending to a strong segregation
region of 𝜒N ≤100. Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [31].
section we use three examples to illustrate the application of SCFT to the discovery and
understanding of complex ordered phases formed from multiblock copolymer melts.
The ﬁrst example concerns the formation of complex structures from ABC triblock
copolymers. The self-assembled structures from block copolymers become increasingly
complicated as the complexity of the block copolymer architecture increases. For
example, addition of one more type of block changes an AB diblock copolymer to an
ABC triblock copolymer. This seemingly trivial change leads to a tremendous increase
in the dimension of the phase space for the system. Instead of two parameters, f and
𝜒N, for AB diblock copolymers, the phase behavior of an ABC triblock copolymer
melt depends on at least ﬁve parameters, i.e. two independent volume fractions of the
blocks and three independent interaction parameters. Furthermore, the topology of
the triblock copolymers could be linear or star-like, resulting in richer phase behavior.
For multiblock copolymers with more types of blocks, the dimensionality of the phase
space is even larger. Exploring the phase behavior in a phase space with such a large
dimensionality, e.g. ﬁve dimensions for ABC triblock copolymers, is a formidable task.
Instead of attempting to construct a complete phase diagram of the system, it is useful to
focus on the understanding of the formation mechanisms of particular ordered phases
of interest. One particular interesting ordered structure is the helical morphologies
formed in various soft matter systems. Helical structures are ubiquitous in nature,
especially in biological systems. In the case of block copolymers, a hexagonally arranged
helical super-cylindrical phase has been observed in experimental studies of linear
PS-b-PB-b-PMMA triblock copolymers. In this complex morphology the PMMA-core
cylinder is decorated by a substructure consisting of PB helices. Understanding the
formation mechanism of the helical superstructures from the self-assembly of achiral
block copolymers presents an interesting challenge in soft matter theory. Another
interesting question about these helical structures concerns the number of helices
preferred by the super-cylinder. Initially, the number of helices was speculated to
be four from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images [12]. Later on it was
determined to be double helices by the 3D transmission electron microtomography

100
Self-Assembling Systems
(TEMT) technique [45]. However, it is still not fully understood why double helices are
formed, or whether other numbers of helices cannot be formed, such as single/triple or
even quadruple.
The SCFT provides an ideal theoretical framework to resolve the question about the
optimum number of helices because the accurate free energy of the diﬀerent structures
could be obtained by using the pseudo-spectral method coupled with the special
initialization algorithm. Speciﬁcally, using initial conﬁgurations constructed from
helical structures it is possible to obtain solutions of the SCFT equations corresponding
to various helical super-cylindrical phases (e.g. single/double/triple/quadruple) as well
as other competing super-cylindrical phases including sphere-on-cylinder, straight
cylinder-on-cylinder, ring-on-cylinder, and perforated layer-on-cylinder (Figure 4.6).
All these intricate morphologies are self-consistent solutions of the SCFT equations,
thus these structures represent metastable or stable phases of the system. Detailed SCFT
calculations by Li et al. led to the conclusion that the quadruple helical morphology
is an unstable structure, whereas single/double/triple helices are metastable or stable
phases [13]. Furthermore, the availability of the free energy of the diﬀerent candidate
structures allows the construction of the phase diagram of the system (Figure 4.6). The
phase diagram indicates that the double and triple helical phases are stable, whereas
the single helical phase is metastable. Besides the total free energy of the ordered
phases, SCFT calculations provide more detailed information about the structures,
thus enabling us to probe the self-assembly mechanism of the helical super-cylindrical
phases. The competition between the interfacial energy and the stretching energy leads
to preferred diameters of the helical domain and the core cylinder for a given set of
parameters, resulting in a speciﬁc length ratio of the helices to the core cylinder. When
the length ratio deviates from an integer value, the B-block domain tends to curve
into helices around the C-core cylinder such that the variable pitch angle of the helices
(a)
(b)
(c)
(f)
(h)
(g)
(d)
(e)
80
70
SC
CC
PC
C
H2C
a
H3C
a
60
50
0.08
0.12
fB
0.16
0.20
χN
Figure 4.6 (Left) Candidate super-cylindrical morphologies produced by the pseudo-spectral method
coupled with a special initialization scheme. (Right) Two-dimensional cross-section of phase diagram
of ABC linear triblock copolymers with ﬁxed 𝜒ACN = 20 and fA = 0.70, showing the stability regions of
super-cylindrical phases including sphere-on-cylinder (SC), double helices-on-cylinder (Ha
2C), triple
helices-on-cylinder (Ha
3C), and perforated lamella-on-cylinder (PC). The superscript “a” of Ha
2C or Ha
3C
denotes that the helical super-cylinders have an anti-chirality arrangement and possess half
left-handed and half right-handed helices. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [13].

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
101
regulates the length ratio. The scenario of the varying length ratio of the helical domain
to the core cylinder and the pitch angle of the helices rationalizes the stability of double
and triple helical super-cylindrical phases. The prediction of the stable triple helical
phase was conﬁrmed in a later experiment [46].
The second example explores the possibility of forming binary crystals of spherical
domains from multiblock terpolymers. A class of ordered structures self-assembled
from block copolymers is the spherical phase that resembles the space symmetry of
atomic crystals. These ordered phases could be referred to as “mesocrystals” in which
the spherical domain could be regarded as an artiﬁcial macromolecular “atom” (AMA).
For the simple AB diblock copolymers, the dominant spherical phase or mesocrystal is
a body-centered cubic (BCC) crystal in which the spherical A-domains, or the AMAs,
are located on a BCC lattice and the B-blocks form a matrix. For linear ABC triblock
copolymers with equal-sized A and C spherical domains, the stable phase is that the A
and C spheres occupy the two sub-lattices of the BCC structure, forming a mesocrystal
with the symmetry of a CsCl crystal. Compared with their atomic counterparts, the
mesocrystals formed from block copolymers have a much larger size and tunable
period. These characteristic lengths could be regulated by the molecular weight of
the block copolymers. In contrast to the rich array of binary ionic crystals, much
smaller numbers of ordered spherical phases have been observed in the self-assembly
of sphere-forming block copolymers. In particular, the commonly observed stable
binary spherical phase formed by ABC linear triblock copolymers is the CsCl crystal,
as compared with the large number of binary ionic crystals or metallic alloy crystals.
Designing block copolymers such that they spontaneously form spherical phases
corresponding to the diﬀerent binary atomic crystals presents an open and challenging
question to the inverse problem of structures by design using block copolymers.
As mentioned in the introduction, the inverse problem could have multiple solutions.
Furthermore, because the types of multiblock copolymers are virtually unlimited due to
the possibility of diﬀerent blocks, architectures, and topologies, from this perspective,
it is impracticable and impossible to search for a desired ordered phase by simply
exploring all possible types of block copolymers. It is essential to establish guiding
principles for a given class of morphologies, so that the discovery of ordered phases
does not become an impractical problem [47]. For the case of binary mesocrystals, Xie
et al. have proposed a useful guiding principle for the molecular design of multiblock
terpolymers for the formation of binary crystal phases [16]. The basic idea is to use the
length of bridging block chains to regulate the nearest neighbor distance, thus control-
ling the number of nearest neighbors, or the coordination number (CN). According to
this design principle, they proposed to use B1AB2CB3 pentablock or AB2CB3 tetrablock
terpolymers, in which the A and C blocks self-assemble into A and C spherical domains,
to solve the inverse problem of stabilizing diﬀerent binary mesocrystals. The length of
the middle B2 block of these multiblock terpolymers could be used to tune the eﬀective
bond length and the average magnitude of the CNs (Figure 4.7). Moreover, the asym-
metry of the CNs between the A and C spherical domains could be regulated by the
relative lengths of the two tail blocks B1 and B3. Once the architecture of the multiblock
copolymers is speciﬁed, their phase diagram is explored to establish stable regions of the
desired ordered phases. In order to obtain solutions of the SCFT equations correspond-
ing to a given binary mesocrystal, initial conﬁgurations of the system, which specify the
positions of the A and C spheres, are constructed according to the space symmetry of

102
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
A
B
C
AB2C
B1AB2CB1
B1AB2CB3
AB2CB3
TiO2
CN=4
Li3Bi
CaF2
CN=16/3
ReO3
CN=3
CN=7
AIB2
CN=8
CsCI
CN=8
NaCl
CN=6
1
increase fB1 = fB3
increase fB3 with fB1 = 0
increase fB1
fixed fB = fB1 + fB2 + fB3
ZnS
α-BN
CN=4
ZnS
CN=4
CN=3
α-Al2O3
CN=24/5
CaF2
CN=16/3
Nb3Sn (A15)
CN=6
CN=6
Nb3Sn (A15)
Artificial macromolecular “atoms” (AMAs)
(b)
2
3
Figure 4.7 Design principle of multiblock terpolymers for binary soft mesocrystals. (a) Artiﬁcial
macromolecular “atoms” (AMAs) self-assembled by linear ABC triblock copolymers pack into the CsCl
crystal lattice. (b) AMAs formed by multiblock terpolymers can be programmed to assemble into a
variety of crystallographic arrangements by tailoring the polymer architectures. Three possible paths
are demonstrated to design series of mesocrystals with varying magnitudes and asymmetries of
coordination numbers (CNs) by tuning the relative lengths among the B blocks while keeping the total
B component ﬁxed. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [16]. (See insert for color representation of the
ﬁgure.).
the desired crystal structure. Once the positions of the A and C spheres are given, the
density proﬁles of the system could be constructed assuming phase separation is com-
plete. The initial mean ﬁelds can then be generated according to the SCFT equations.
With the properly constructed initial mean ﬁelds, it is possible to obtain solutions of
the SCFT equations using the pseudo-spectral method or the spectral method. These
solutions usually lead to the ordered phases corresponding to the desired ordered
binary mesocrystals. Using this strategy of designed initial conﬁgurations, Xie et al.
obtained a large number of candidate structures for the system, each of these ordered
morphologies corresponding to a local minimum of the free energy landscape. The
phase diagram of the multiblock copolymers is then constructed by comparing the free
energy of these candidate phases, as shown in Figure 4.8. These phase diagrams validate
the concept of regulating the CN of the structure using the length of the middle block.
Speciﬁcally, decreasing the length of the middle B2 block results in the phase transition

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
103
0.24
(a)
(b)
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.00.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
CSC
0.18
D
4
CsCI
Cp4mm
4
Cp4mm
3
Cp3m1
6,3
Cp6mm
4,2
Cp4mm
CsCI
ZnSc
CaF2
CA/C
α-BN
α-Al2O3
NASC
2
Cc2mm
(c)
H2
NaCl
ZnSc
CA/C
C
α-BN
0.12
0.06
0.00
0.08
0.10
0.12
f
fB2
fB2
Li3Bi
A15
HG
PC
H1
0.14
0.16
γ
NaCI
Figure 4.8 (a) Phase diagram of symmetric B1AB2CB1 pentablock copolymers in the f = fA = fC –fB2
plane for ﬁxed 𝜒ABN = 𝜒ACN = 𝜒BCN = 𝜒N = 80. (b) Phase diagram of asymmetric B1AB2CB3
pentablock copolymers in the fB2 –𝛾plane, where 𝛾= fB1∕fB3 quantiﬁes the asymmetric degree of the
molecule. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [16].
sequences from CsCl, NaCl, ZnS, to 𝛼-BN shown in Figure 4.8a and from NaCl,
Al2O3, CaF2, to Nb3Sn (A15) shown in Figure 4.8b. These phase transition sequences
reveal that the magnitude and asymmetry of the CNs of the A and C spheres could be
controlled by varying the relative length of the middle B2 block and the asymmetry of
the two tail B blocks. In addition, this design principle is further validated in the case of
two-dimensional binary crystal phases with p6mm, p4mm, and p4gm plane symmetries.
The third example studies the formation of complex spherical packing phases from
AB-type block copolymers. For linear AB diblock copolymers, the commonly observed
spherical phase is the BCC phase in which spherical domains are located at the lattice
sites of a body-centered-cubic lattice. On the other hand, there are two well-known
examples of packing problems of spherical domains, i.e. hard spheres and equal-sized
bubbles. It is well known that hard spheres form close-packed structures such as the
face-centered-cubic (FCC) or hexagonally close-packed (HCP) phases. The packing of
equal-sized bubbles presents a more interesting problem, known as the Kelvin problem,
in which a space-ﬁlling arrangement of the bubbles requires a minimal surface area.
Initially it was conjectured that the solution to the Kelvin problem is the BCC lattice
[48]. It took more than a century for researchers to ﬁnd the correct solution, the A15
lattice or its variations, to the Kelvin problem. It is well known that the packing of spher-
ical domains of block copolymers is dictated by two competing factors, the entropic
and enthalpic contributions to the free energy [32]. This competition could lead to
diﬀerent spherical phases. It has been established that the spherical phase of AB diblock
copolymers is mainly the BCC phase except for a very narrow region of the HCP phase
at the vicinity of the order–disorder transition (ODT). Besides these two commonly
considered spherical phases, theoretical studies based on SCFT have predicted that
the A15 morphology could become an equilibrium phase for nonlinear AB-type block
copolymers, e.g. ABm miktoarm copolymers [4, 49]. More interestingly, experimental
studies have revealed that a new and complex spherical phase, the Frank–Kasper
𝜎-phase with a unit cell containing 30 spheres, could be formed in PI-b-PLA diblock
copolymers and PS-b-PI-b-PS-b-PEO tetrablock copolymers [8]. Inspired by these
previous experimental and theoretical studies, Xie et al. examined the mechanisms for

104
Self-Assembling Systems
the stabilization of the Frank–Kasper 𝜎-phase. Speciﬁcally, these authors carried out
SCFT calculations for conformationally asymmetric AB diblock copolymers and ABm
miktoarm copolymers and obtained solutions of the SCFT equations corresponding
to the Frank–Kasper 𝜎-phase, using a special initialization scheme based on the
strong segregation approximation and the space symmetry of the crystal lattice. Phase
diagrams including the Frank–Kasper 𝜎-phase have been obtained for these conforma-
tionally asymmetric AB-type block copolymers (Figure 4.9). Their results predicted that
the Frank–Kasper 𝜎-phase could appear before the A15 phase for decreasing annealing
temperature or increasing 𝜒N. The A15 phase becomes stable in the region of large
composition and high 𝜒N for ABm miktoarm copolymers with m ≥3. The predicted
phase transition sequence for decreasing temperature is from BCC to the Frank–Kasper
𝜎-phase, and then to the A15 phase. It is interesting to note that this phase transition
sequence has been observed in a number of diﬀerent soft matter systems, such as the
packing of micelles formed by amphiphilic superbranching liquid crystals [50].
In summary, it could be concluded that eﬃcient and accurate methods to solve
the SCFT equations have been developed. In particular, the pseudo-spectral method
coupled with a designed initialization scheme provides a robust platform to explore
and discover ordered phases of block copolymers. It has been demonstrated that this
combination can be used to obtain a large number of candidate structures [39]. The
availability of the candidate phases makes it possible to construct phase diagrams for
multiblock copolymers. This strategy could be used to solve the forward problem of the
self-assembly of block copolymers, i.e., constructing phase diagrams for given block
copolymers. Furthermore, the availability of eﬃcient and accurate SCFT algorithms
coupled with the capability of ﬁnding solutions for given structures makes it possible to
explore the reverse problem of structures by design using multiblock copolymers. The
validity of this approach has been veriﬁed by two examples, the formation of various
binary mesocrystals and the stabilization of the Frank–Kasper 𝜎-phase. The most
important ingredient in the design of multiblock copolymers for desired structures is
the understanding of the formation mechanism of the given ordered phase. This under-
standing is then used to establish design principles for a given morphology. Besides
changing the architecture of the block copolymers, there are various routes to regulate
the phase behavior. For example, it is well established that blending homopolymers or
diblock copolymers into more complex block copolymers could provide an eﬃcient
route to regulate the phase behavior of the system due to selective space-ﬁlling by the
added polymers [51].
4.5
Conclusions and Discussions
In this chapter the self-consistent ﬁeld theory (SCFT) of inhomogeneous polymeric
systems and its numerical implementation have been reviewed, focusing on the study
of block copolymer self-assembly. Special attention has been paid to the introduction of
various numerical approaches to solving the SCFT equations. The spectral method, or
reciprocal-space method, developed by Matsen and Schick, which takes advantage of
the symmetry of the ordered phases, is highly eﬃcient and accurate for the calculation
of the free energy of given ordered structures. Accordingly, the spectral method is often
used to identify phase diagrams of relatively simple block copolymer systems, leading

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
105
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f
(a)
(b)
(c)
0.6
0.7
0.8
dis
dis
fcc
fcc
A15
bcc
bcc
fcc
fcc
bcc
bcc
σ
σ
Non-sphere phases
Non-sphere phases
dis
fcc
A15
bcc
fcc
bcc
σ
Non-sphere phases
0.9
χN
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
χN
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
f
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
χN
Figure 4.9 Phase diagrams of miktoarm ABm block copolymers with m = 2, 3, and 4 in (a), (b), and (c),
respectively, from top to bottom. In ﬁgure (a) of AB2, the boundaries between the A15 phase and the
BCC phase as well as the cylindrical phase without considering the 𝜎-phase are plotted in dashed lines.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [5].

106
Self-Assembling Systems
to a comprehensive understanding of the self-assembly mechanism of simple block
copolymer systems that serves as the foundation for understanding the phase behavior
of complex block copolymers. The spectral method has been extended to a generic
reciprocal-space method by replacing the symmetry-determined basis functions with
the complete set of plane waves. This generic spectral method is capable of the search
and discovery of new ordered phases. Alternatively, the real-space method with random
initial conditions proposed by Drolet and Fredrickson provides a useful addition to
the methods for the discovery of new structures. The third numerical method in this
chapter, the pseudo-spectral method, combines the advantages of the real-space and
reciprocal-space methods. The pseudo-spectral method is able to achieve a reasonable
balance between eﬃciency and accuracy because of its implementation of the spectral
collocation. Thus the pseudo-spectral method has become the method of choice for
the numerical solution of the SCFT equations.
Because the overall self-consistent algorithm is iterative in nature, the initial condition
of the iteration plays an essential role in the converged solution of the calculation. Pre-
vious studies have demonstrated that, coupled with special initialization schemes, the
pseudo-spectral method could be used to generate a rich array of candidate structures.
This strategy of using diverse initialization schemes has been successfully applied to
studying the self-assembly of multiblock copolymers. Based on these previous studies,
a two-step strategy to explore and discover new ordered phases emerges, in which
the fast SCFT algorithm is combined with various initialization schemes to produce a
large number of possible candidate structures, then the accurate free energy of these
candidate structures is computed and compared to construct phase diagrams.
Besides solving the forward problem by constructing phase diagrams for given block
copolymers, the SCFT coupled with initialization schemes could be used to solve the
inverse problem of structures by design using multiblock copolymers. The question is to
design molecular architectures of multiblock copolymers for the formation of desired
structures. A crucial step to solving the inverse problem is to develop useful guiding
principles based on the understanding of the self-assembly mechanisms of block copoly-
mers. The validity of the design principles could be veriﬁed via computing the stability
regions of the desired structures using the coupling scheme of the pseudo-spectral
method and the special initialization scheme. The feasibility of this strategy of structures
by design has been demonstrated in the examples of binary crystal spherical phases
from speciﬁcally designed multiblock ABC terpolymers and the stabilization of the
Frank–Kasper 𝜎-phase in conformationally asymmetric AB-type block copolymers.
In contrast to the accurate spectral method, the pseudo-spectral method is of
second-order accuracy in the discrete step ds along the chain contour length. There-
fore, pronounced errors in the free energy calculations may occur as the segregation
strength is increased. The error due to the second-order algorithm could be eliminated
by extending this second-order scheme to the fourth-order one. The fourth-order
scheme has been applied to diblock copolymers at large values of 𝜒N and the result
establishes the stability of the gyroid phase in the strong segregation regime of AB
diblock copolymers.
Besides the numerical schemes discussed in this chapter, other potentially useful
approaches have been developed in the literature. For example, a highly eﬃcient
pseudo-spectral method has been developed by Ceniceros and Fredrickson, which
adopts a semi-implicit algorithm [52]. The most prominent feature of this method is

4 SCFT for Multiblock Copolymers
107
that it employs asymptotic small scale information about the nonlocal density operators
from the random phase approximation. For AB-type block copolymers, the iteration of
SCFT equations with the implementation of this algorithm converges in only tens of
iteration steps. It is plausible that a combination of these newly developed algorithms
with specially designed initialization schemes could provide a powerful platform for
the study of the self-assembly of multiblock copolymers.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr Li-Tang Yan for the invitation to contribute this chapter. The
study on the self-assembly of multiblock copolymers was carried out in fruitful collab-
orations with Drs Nan Xie, Meijiao Liu, Yuci Xu, Weiquan Xu, Kai Jiang, Mr Hanlin
Deng, and especially Profs. Feng Qiu and Pingwen Zhang. W. H. Li acknowledges the
support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos. 21322407 and
21574026); A.-C. Shi acknowledges the support of the Natural Science and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC) of Canada.
References
1. F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 41, 525 (1990).
2. I. W. Hamley, The Physics of Block Copolymers (Oxford University Press, Oxford
1998).
3. C. A. Tyler and D. C. Morse, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 208302 (2005).
4. M. W. Matsen, Macromolecules 45, 2161 (2012).
5. N. Xie, W. H. Li, F. Qiu, and A. C. Shi, ACS Macro Lett. 3, 906 (2014).
6. J. Masuda, A. Takano, Y. Nagata, A. Noro, and Y. Matsushita, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97,
098301 (2006).
7. G. Fleury and F. S. Bates, Macromolecules 42, 1691 (2009).
8. S. Lee, M. J. Bluemle, and F. S. Bates, Science 330, 349 (2010).
9. F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Physics Today 52, 32 (1999).
10. Y. Mogi, et alet al., Macromolecules 25, 5408 (1992).
11. M. W. Matsen, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 785 (1998).
12. U. Krappe, R. Stadler, and I. Voigt-Martin, Macromolecules 28, 4558 (1995).
13. W. H. Li, F. Qiu, and A. C. Shi, Macromolecules 45, 503 (2012).
14. H. Ott, V. Abetz, and V. Altstadt, Macromolecules 34, 2121 (2001).
15. M. J. Liu, W. H. Li, F. Qiu, and A. C. Shi, Macromolecules 45, 9522 (2012).
16. N. Xie, M. J. Liu, H. L. Deng, W. H. Li, F. Qiu, and A. C. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
136, 2974 (2014).
17. S. F. Edwards, Proc. Phys. Soc. 85, 613 (1965).
18. E. Helfand, J. Chem. Phys. 62, 999 (1975); Macromolecules 8, 552 (1975).
19. L. Leibler, Macromolecules 13, 1602 (1980).
20. T. Ohta and K. Kawasaki, Macromolecules 19, 2621 (1986).
21. T. Ohta and A. Ito, Phys. Rev. E 52, 5250 (1995).
22. P. C. Millett, Phys. Rev. E 92, 022602 (2015).
23. A. N. Semenov, Sov. Phys. JETP 61, 733 (1985).

108
Self-Assembling Systems
24. E. Helfand and Z. R. Wasserman, Macromolecules 9, 879 (1976).
25. K. R. Shull, Macromolecules 25, 2122 (1992).
26. J. D. Vavasour and M. W. Whitmore, Macromolecules 25, 5477 (1992).
27. M. W. Matsen and M. Schick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2660 (1994).
28. Z. J. Guo, G. J. Zhang, F. Qiu, H. D. Zhang, Y. L. Yang, and A. C. Shi, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 101, 028301 (2008).
29. F. Drolet and G. H. Fredrickson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4317 (1999).
30. G. Tzeremes, K. Ø. Rasmussen, T. Lookman, and A. Saxena, Phys. Rev. E 65, 041806
(2002).
31. E. W. Cochran, C. J. Garcia-Cervera, and G. H. Fredrickson, Macromolecules 39,
2449 (2006).
32. M. W. Matsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14, R21 (2002).
33. A. C. Shi, in Developments in Block Copolymer Science and Technology, Edited by
I. W. Hamley (Wiley, New York 2004).
34. G. H. Fredrickson, The Equilibrium Theory of Inhomogeneous Polymers (Oxford
University Press, Oxford 2006).
35. X. Y. Cheng, L. Lin, W. N.E, P. W. Zhang, and A. C. Shi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,
148301 (2010).
36. H. Takahashi, N. Laachi, K. T. Delaney, S. M. Hur, C. J. Weinheimer, D. Shykind,
and G. H. Fredrickson, Macromolecules 45, 6253 (2012).
37. W. H. Li, P. F. Nealey, J. J. de Pablo, and M. Müller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 168301
(2014).
38. M. W. Matsen, Macromolecules 36, 9647 (2003).
39. W. Xu, K. Jiang, P. W. Zhang, and A. C. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. B 117, 5296 (2013).
40. M. Frigo and S. G. Johnson, Proc. ICASSP 1998, 1381 (1998).
41. W. H. Li, R. A. Wickham, and R. A. Garbary, Macromolecules 39, 806 (2006).
42. W. H. Li and R. A. Wickham, Macromolecules 39, 8492 (2006).
43. W. H. Li and A. C. Shi, Macromolecules 42, 811 (2009).
44. Y. C. Xu, W. H. Li, F. Qiu, H. D. Zhang, Y. L. Yang, and A. C. Shi, J. Polym. Sci.
Part B: Polym. Phys. 48, 1101 (2010).
45. H. Jinnai, T. Kaneko, K. Matsunaga, C. Abetz, and V. Abetz, Soft Matter 5, 2042
(2009).
46. T. Higuchi, et alet al., Macromolecules 46, 6991 (2013).
47. F. S. Bates, M. A. Hillmyer, T. P. Lodge, C. M. Bates, K. T. Delaney, and G. H.
Fredrickson, Science 336, 434 (2012).
48. W. Thomson, Philos. Mag. 24, 503 (1887).
49. G. M. Grason, B. A. DiDonna, and R. D. Kamien, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 058304 (2003).
50. X. Zeng, G. Ungar, Y. Liu, V. Percec, A. E. Dulcey, and J. K. Hobbs, Nature 428, 157
(2004).
51. M. J. Liu, B. K. Xia, W. H. Li, F. Qiu, and A. C. Shi, Macromolecules 48, 3386
(2015).
52. H. D. Ceniceros and G. H. Fredrickson, Multiscale Modeling and Simulation 2, 452
(2004).

109
5
Simulation Models of Soft Janus and Patchy Particles
Zhan-Wei Li1, Zhao-Yan Sun1 and Zhong-Yuan Lu2
1State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, China
2State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Institute of Theoretical Chemistry, Jilin University,
Changchun, China
5.1
Introduction
Surface-anisotropic colloidal building blocks have brought an almost unbelievable
revolution in materials science [1–13]. As the simplest case of colloidal particles with
surface anisotropy, Janus particles have attracted considerable attention due to their
unique anisotropic feature and the possibility of generating fascinating hierarchical
nanostructures [12–20]. In fact, the anisotropic surface coverage of spherical particles
is not restricted to a 50 : 50 ratio, and the number of the patches patterned on the
surface of a spherical particle is also not restricted to one. So patchy particles with
tunable number, size, direction, and geometrical arrangement of the patches provide a
richer palette for the design and creation of desired aggregate structures [7, 11, 13, 17].
Up to now, a large variety of supracolloidal structures including biomimetic helices
[18, 21–24], low-coordinated two-dimensional (2D) [20, 25–28] and three-dimensional
(3D) [29–33] open lattices, and quasicrystal [34, 35], have been achieved in experiments
and simulations through the self-assembly of surface-anisotropic Janus and patchy
particles. Furthermore, due to the speciﬁcity and directionality of Janus and patchy
particles that mimic the key features of atoms and molecules, Janus and patchy particles
represent useful model systems to understand several long-standing fundamental
questions, mainly concerned with the formation of glasses [36–39], the crystallization
of proteins [40–42], and the collective behavior of living systems [43, 44].
According to their diﬀerent elastic moduli, surface-anisotropic Janus and patchy
particles may be classiﬁed into two major categories: hard Janus and patchy particles,
and soft Janus and patchy particles. So far, hard Janus and patchy particles have been
synthesized by various methods [7, 14, 15, 45–47], including templating, colloidal
assembly, particle lithography, glancing-angle deposition, and so on. Unlike conven-
tional hard and non-deformable Janus and patchy particles, soft Janus and patchy
particles are ﬂexible and deformable, and have been realized as Janus and patchy
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

110
Self-Assembling Systems
micelles from the self-assembly of block copolymers [14, 45, 48–55], single-patch
Janus microgels by atom transfer radical polymerization or a Pickering emulsion-based
method [56, 57], and single-patch Janus dendrimers [58, 59] and hyperbranched
polymers [60] by divergent or convergent approaches. The softness and deformability
of soft Janus and patchy particles can be quantitatively described by the elastic
modulus [61–64], and tuned by varying the cross-linking density [48, 65], the grafting
density [56], the number of primary branches, the density of radial branches [58, 59],
and so on. Thus, soft Janus and patchy particles play an important role in bridging
the gap between ultra-soft block copolymers and hard Janus and patchy particles
[55, 61–64, 66, 67], and exhibit fascinating aggregation behaviors into a variety of
striking new self-assembled structures, and accordingly show novel aggregation
mechanisms [13, 54, 55, 60–64]. Due to their soft and deformable characteristics, soft
Janus and patchy particles bring new excitement to materials science, and will attract
more attention on the self-assembly of novel and designable soft functional materials
[53–55, 58, 60].
Soft Janus and patchy particles mostly consist of a large number of monomeric units.
Their sizes typically range from about 10 nm to 1000 nm, and even up to the micrometer
scale [53–55, 58, 64, 67]; the length scales of their aggregated structures will be much
larger. Thus, the aggregation phenomena of soft Janus and patchy particles involve both
the microscopic and mesoscopic scales. It is an extremely challenging task and also
a more feasible strategy to gain insight into the aggregation behavior and mechanism
of soft Janus and patchy particles via computer simulation. For hard patchy particles,
several general patchy models [8], including rigid-body patchy models [3, 68, 69],
spot-like patchy models [70–73], and extended Kern and Kern-inspired patchy models
[17, 74–79], have been successfully developed. Because of the complex architectures
of soft Janus and patchy particles, mesoscopic coarse-grained methodologies are better
choices to provide solutions to investigate the aggregation behavior of soft Janus and
patchy particles [54, 55, 58, 60, 80, 81]. However, to date, there are still no general
mesoscopic coarse-grained models available for investigating the aggregation behavior
of various types of soft Janus and patchy particles.
In this chapter, we mainly introduce two major kinds of general and eﬀective
mesoscale models to describe the aggregation behavior of soft Janus and patchy
particles: soft Janus particle models (SJPMs) and soft patchy particle models (SPPMs).
SJPMs are speciﬁcally designed to study the aggregation behavior of soft one-patch,
and ABA-type and BAB-type triblock Janus particles, and SPPMs are mainly developed
to simulate the aggregation behavior of soft multi-patch particles with tunable number,
size, direction, and geometrical arrangement of the patches. The interactions between
soft Janus and patchy particles are all described by single-site soft anisotropic attractive
potentials that can reﬂect deformable and anisotropic characteristics of soft Janus and
patchy particles. The major advantage of these single-site anisotropic potentials is
simple, easy to implement, and computationally eﬃcient. Furthermore, these single-site
anisotropic potentials can be used to describe various types of soft Janus and patchy
particles with diﬀerent degrees of particle softness. The simulation parameters in
these potentials can be ﬁxed from the experimentally measurable particle properties.
Thus, our SJPMs and SPPMs can be directly mapped onto experimental systems in
diﬀerent conditions [61–64]. In order to improve the computational eﬃciency of
SJPMs and SPPMs in dynamics simulations, we give the simulation algorithms that

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
111
ﬁt the compute uniﬁed device architecture (CUDA) framework of NVIDIA graphics
processing units (GPUs) [64, 82]. SJPMs show good performance in simulating the
systems of soft one-patch and triblock Janus particles [82]. In comparison with SJPMs,
the performance of SPPMs is slightly aﬀected by the use of the quaternion method to
describe the anisotropic characteristics of patchy particles, but is still very satisfactory
[64]. Therefore, our SJPMs and SPPMs provide a powerful tool to investigate the
aggregation behavior of soft Janus and patchy particles over larger spatial and temporal
scales [61–64].
5.2
Soft Janus Particle Models
In our SJPMs [61–63], the deformable and anisotropic characteristics of soft Janus par-
ticles are described via a single-site soft anisotropic attractive potential, inspired by the
soft-particle model in dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) [83] and the Kern–Frenkel
model [74]. For simplicity, we use the interaction cutoﬀradius (rc) as the unit of length,
kBT as the unit of energy, and choose the moment of inertia (I) and the mass (m) of
the particle as the units, thus the time unit 𝜏=
√
mr2
c∕kBT. In the following, all the
variables and simulation parameters are given in reduced units, and the soft anisotropic
attractive potential [61–63] is expressed as
Uij =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝛼R
ij
2
(
1 −
rij
rc
)2
−f 𝜈𝛼A
ij
2
[
rij
rc
−
(rij
rc
)2]
rij ≤rc (≡1.0)
0
rij > rc.
(5.1)
In this potential, the anisotropic factor f is mainly responsible for describing the
anisotropic feature of soft Janus particles, which is diﬀerent for diﬀerent SJPMs.
The magnitude of 𝛼R
ij controls the strength of repulsion, 𝛼A
ij controls the strength of
attraction between the attractive patches, and 𝜈controls the angular width of the
attraction. Thus, both 𝛼A
ij and 𝜈control the ﬂexibility of Janus particle aggregates.
5.2.1
Soft One-Patch Janus Particle Model
In the soft one-patch Janus particle model [61], the anisotropic factor f is given as
f =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
cos 𝜋𝜃i
2𝛽cos
𝜋𝜃j
2𝛽
if cos 𝜃i ≥cos 𝛽and cos 𝜃j ≥cos 𝛽
0
otherwise.
(5.2)
As illustrated in Figure 5.1a, the light gray part represents the attractive patch and
the dark gray part represents the repulsive region, and the directions of the attractive
patches on particle i and j are speciﬁed by unit vectors ⃗ni and ⃗nj, respectively. 𝜃i is the
angle between ⃗ni and the interparticle vector ⃗rji = ⃗rj −⃗ri, and 𝜃j is the angle between ⃗nj
and ⃗rij = −⃗rji. The size of the attractive patch is described by Janus balance 𝛽, which is
half of the opening angle of the attractive patch, and the fraction of surface covered by
the attractive patch 𝜒is related to 𝛽by the relation 𝜒= sin2 (
𝛽
2
)
[61, 74, 78].

112
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
ni
β
β
β
ni
rji
rji
rji
nj
ni
ni
nj
ni
ni
nj
θi
θj
θi
θj
θi
θj
Figure 5.1 Graphical representation of soft Janus particle models. (a) Soft one-patch Janus particle
model. (b) Soft ABA-type triblock Janus particle model. (c) Soft BAB-type triblock Janus particle model.
The force between two neighboring soft one-patch Janus particles ⃗Fij is given by the
derivation of Equation (5.1),
⃗Fij = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗rij
= 𝛼R
ij(1 −rij)
⃗rij
rij
+ 𝛼A
ij f 𝜈(1
2 −rij
) ⃗rij
rij
−
𝛼A
ij
2 (rij −r2
ij)
𝜈f 𝜈−1
(
𝜋
2𝛽sin 𝜋𝜃i
2𝛽
𝜕𝜃i
𝜕cos 𝜃i
𝜕cos 𝜃i
𝜕⃗rij
cos
𝜋𝜃j
2𝛽
+ 𝜋
2𝛽sin
𝜋𝜃j
2𝛽
𝜕𝜃j
𝜕cos 𝜃j
𝜕cos 𝜃j
𝜕⃗rij
cos 𝜋𝜃i
2𝛽
)
,
(5.3)
where
𝜕𝜃i
𝜕cos 𝜃i
𝜕cos 𝜃i
𝜕⃗rij
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
1
√
1 −cos2𝜃i
(
⃗ni
rij
−
(⃗ni ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
)
if cos 𝜃i ≥cos 𝛽,
0
otherwise,
(5.4)

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
113
𝜕𝜃j
𝜕cos 𝜃j
𝜕cos 𝜃j
𝜕⃗rij
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
−
1
√
1 −cos2𝜃j
(
⃗nj
rij
−
(⃗nj ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
)
if cos 𝜃j ≥cos 𝛽,
0
otherwise.
(5.5)
The force responsible for the rotation of soft one-patch Janus particle ⃗gi is given as
⃗gi = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗ni
= −
𝜋𝛼A
ij
4𝛽(rij −r2
ij)𝜈f 𝜈−1 sin 𝜋𝜃i
2𝛽
1
√
1 −cos2𝜃i
cos
𝜋𝜃j
2𝛽
⃗ri
rij
.
(5.6)
Note that rc is omitted in the above derivations since we have deﬁned rc ≡1.0 in
Equation (5.1). In the following, rc will be always taken as 1.0 unless otherwise declared.
5.2.2
Soft ABA-Type Triblock Janus Particle Model
In the soft ABA-type triblock Janus particle model [62], the anisotropic factor f is given
as
f =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
cos
𝜋𝜃′
i
2𝛽cos
𝜋𝜃′
j
2𝛽
if | cos 𝜃i| ≥cos 𝛽and | cos 𝜃j| ≥cos 𝛽
0
otherwise.
(5.7)
As illustrated in Figure 5.1b, the light gray parts represent the attractive A-type patches
and the dark gray part represents the repulsive B-type middle band, and the directions
of the attractive patches on particles i and j are speciﬁed by unit vectors ⃗ni and ⃗nj, respec-
tively. 𝜃i is the angle between unit vector ⃗ni and the interparticle vector ⃗rji = ⃗rj −⃗ri, and 𝜃j
is the angle between ⃗nj and ⃗rij = −⃗rji, and then cos 𝜃i = −⃗ni ⋅⃗rij∕rij and cos 𝜃j = ⃗nj ⋅⃗rij∕rij.
Here, 𝜃′
i = arccos(| cos 𝜃i|), and 𝜃′
j = arccos(| cos 𝜃j|). The fraction of surface covered by
the attractive A-type patches 𝜒is related to 𝛽by the relation 𝜒= 2sin2 (
𝛽
2
)
[62, 74, 78].
The anisotropic force between two ABA-type triblock Janus particles [62] is then
given as
⃗Fij = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗rij
= 𝛼R
ij
(1 −rij
) ⃗rij
rij
+ 𝛼A
ij f 𝜈(1
2 −rij
) ⃗rij
rij
−
𝛼A
ij
2 (rij −r2
ij)𝜈f 𝜈−1
(
𝜋
2𝛽sin
𝜋𝜃′
i
2𝛽
𝜕𝜃′
i
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗rij
cos
𝜋𝜃′
j
2𝛽+ 𝜋
2𝛽sin
𝜋𝜃′
j
2𝛽
𝜕𝜃′
j
𝜕| cos 𝜃j|
𝜕| cos 𝜃j|
𝜕⃗rij
cos
𝜋𝜃′
i
2𝛽
)
,
(5.8)

114
Self-Assembling Systems
where
𝜕𝜃′
i
𝜕| cos 𝜃i| =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0
if | cos 𝜃i| = 1
−
1
√
1 −| cos 𝜃i|2
otherwise,
(5.9)
𝜕𝜃′
j
𝜕| cos 𝜃j| =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0
if | cos 𝜃j| = 1
−
1
√
1 −| cos 𝜃j|2
otherwise,
(5.10)
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗rij
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
−⃗ni
rij
+
(⃗ni ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if cos 𝜃i ≥cos 𝛽
⃗ni
rij
−
(⃗ni ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if cos 𝜃i ≤−cos 𝛽,
(5.11)
and
𝜕| cos 𝜃j|
𝜕⃗rij
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
⃗nj
rij
−
(⃗nj ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if cos 𝜃j ≥cos 𝛽
−
⃗nj
rij
+
(⃗nj ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if cos 𝜃j ≤−cos 𝛽.
(5.12)
The force responsible for the rotation of soft ABA-type triblock Janus particle ⃗gi is
given as
⃗gi = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗ni
= −
𝜋𝛼A
ij
4𝛽(rij −r2
ij)𝜈f 𝜈−1 sin
𝜋𝜃′
i
2𝛽
𝜕𝜃′
i
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗ni
cos
𝜋𝜃′
j
2𝛽,
(5.13)
where
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗ni
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
−⃗ri
rij
if cos 𝜃i ≥cos 𝛽
⃗ri
rij
if cos 𝜃i ≤−cos 𝛽.
(5.14)
5.2.3
Soft BAB-Type Triblock Janus Particle Model
In the soft BAB-type triblock Janus particle model [63], the anisotropic factor f is
given as
f =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
cos 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
i
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
cos 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
j
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
if | cos 𝜃i| ≤cos 𝛽and | cos 𝜃j| ≤cos 𝛽
0
otherwise.
(5.15)

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
115
As illustrated in Figure 5.1c, the dark gray parts represent the repulsive B-type patches
and the light gray part represents the attractive A-type middle band, and the directions
of the repulsive patches on particles i and j are speciﬁed by unit vectors ⃗ni and ⃗nj, respec-
tively. 𝜃i is the angle between ⃗ni and the interparticle vector ⃗rji = ⃗rj −⃗ri, and 𝜃j is the
angle between ⃗nj and ⃗rij = −⃗rji, and then cos 𝜃i = −⃗ni ⋅⃗rij∕rij and cos 𝜃j = ⃗nj ⋅⃗rij∕rij. Here,
𝜃′
i = arccos(| cos 𝜃i|), and 𝜃′
j = arccos(| cos 𝜃j|). The fraction of surface covered by the
attractive A-type middle band 𝜒is related to 𝛽by the relation 𝜒= 1 −2sin2 (
𝛽
2
)
[63, 74, 78].
The anisotropic force between two BAB-type triblock Janus particles is then given as
⃗Fij = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗rij
= 𝛼R
ij(1 −rij)
⃗rij
rij
+ 𝛼A
ij f 𝜈(1
2 −rij
) ⃗rij
rij
−
𝛼A
ij
2 (rij −r2
ij)𝜈f 𝜈−1
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝜋
𝜋−2𝛽sin 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
i
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
1
√
1 −| cos 𝜃i|2
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗rij
cos 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
j
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
+
𝜋
𝜋−2𝛽sin 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
j
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
1
√
1 −| cos 𝜃j|2
𝜕| cos 𝜃j|
𝜕⃗rij
cos 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
i
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
,
(5.16)
where
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗rij
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
−⃗ni
rij
+
(⃗ni ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if 0 ≤cos 𝜃i ≤cos 𝛽
⃗ni
rij
−
(⃗ni ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if −cos 𝛽≤cos 𝜃i < 0,
(5.17)
and
𝜕| cos 𝜃j|
𝜕⃗rij
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
⃗nj
rij
−
(⃗nj ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if 0 ≤cos 𝜃j ≤cos 𝛽
−
⃗nj
rij
+
(⃗nj ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
if −cos 𝛽≤cos 𝜃j < 0.
(5.18)
The force responsible for the rotation of soft BAB-type triblock Janus particle ⃗gi is
given as
⃗gi = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗ni
= −
𝜋𝛼A
ij
2(𝜋−2𝛽)(rij −r2
ij)𝜈f 𝜈−1 sin 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
i
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
1
√
1 −| cos 𝜃i|2

116
Self-Assembling Systems
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗ni
cos 𝜋
2
(𝜋∕2 −𝜃′
j
𝜋∕2 −𝛽
)
,
(5.19)
where
𝜕| cos 𝜃i|
𝜕⃗ni
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
−
⃗rij
rij
if 0 ≤cos 𝜃j ≤cos 𝛽
⃗rij
rij
if −cos 𝛽≤cos 𝜃j < 0.
(5.20)
5.2.4
Integration Algorithm
For these SJPMs, the translational displacements of soft Janus particles follow Newton’s
equations of motion,
̇⃗ri = ⃗vi,
(5.21)
̇⃗vi =
⃗Fi
mi
,
(5.22)
and the equations of rotational motion of soft Janus particles can be written as [62, 84]
̇⃗ni = ⃗ui,
(5.23)
̇⃗ui = ⃗g⊥
i ∕I + 𝜆⃗ni.
(5.24)
Here, Equation (5.23) simply deﬁnes ⃗ui as the time derivative of the orientation ⃗ni.
Physically, the ﬁrst term in Equation (5.24) corresponds to the perpendicular component
of ⃗gi, responsible for rotation of the particle, where
⃗g⊥
i = ⃗gi −(⃗gi ⋅⃗ni)⃗ni.
(5.25)
The second term in Equation (5.24) corresponds to the force 𝜆⃗ni along the vector ⃗ni,
which constrains the vector length to be a constant of the motion [84]. The equations
of both translational and rotational motions in Equations (5.21)–(5.24) are numerically
integrated via a half-step leap-frog algorithm [84, 85]. In the rotational motion, a full
step in the integration algorithm is advanced through the equation
⃗ui(t + 1
2𝛿t) = ⃗ui(t −1
2𝛿t) + 𝛿t⃗g⊥
i (t)∕I −2
[
⃗ui(t −1
2𝛿t) ⋅⃗ni(t)
]
⃗ni(t).
(5.26)
The step is completed using
⃗ni(t + 𝛿t) = ⃗ni(t) + 𝛿t⃗ui
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
.
(5.27)
In SJPMs, the simulations are performed in NVT conditions (the number of
particles, the volume, and the temperature are constant). The weak coupling Berendsen
thermostat is used to control the temperature at a target value [61–63, 85]. For the
solution systems of soft Janus particles, the solvent particles are explicitly presented in
the simulations. The solute–solvent and solvent–solvent interactions follow the ﬁrst
term of Equation (5.1). For a system of N particles, the number of Janus particles is
NJ = N × Φ, and the number of spherical solvent particles is Ns = N × (1 −Φ) (Φ is
the concentration of soft Janus particles in solution).

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
117
5.3
Soft Patchy Particle Models
5.3.1
The Model
In our soft patchy particle models (SPPMs) [64], the deformable and anisotropic char-
acteristics of soft patchy particles are also described via a single-site soft anisotropic
potential analogous to the one used in SJPMs. This anisotropic potential is expressed as
Uij =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝛼R
ijdij
2
(
1 −
rij
dij
)2
−
Mi
∑
𝜅=1
Mj
∑
𝜆=1
f 𝜈(⃗n𝜅
i , ⃗n𝜆
j , ⃗rij)
𝛼A
ij dij
2
[
rij
dij
−
( rij
dij
)2]
rij ≤dij
0
rij > dij,
(5.28)
where
f
(
⃗n𝜅
i , ⃗n𝜆
j , ⃗rij
)
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
cos
𝜋𝜃𝜅
i
2𝜃𝜅
m
cos
𝜋𝜃𝜆
j
2𝜃𝜆
m
if cos 𝜃𝜅
i ≥cos 𝜃𝜅
m and cos 𝜃𝜆
j ≥cos 𝜃𝜆
m
0
otherwise.
(5.29)
Here, rij is the distance between the centers of particles i and j, di and dj are the
diameters of particles i and j, respectively, and dij = (di + dj)∕2. So the eﬀect of the size
polydispersity of patchy particles can be considered in SPPMs. But for simplicity, we
normally choose dij = di = dj ≡1.0 as the unit of length, deﬁne the interaction cutoﬀ
radius rc ≡dij, use kBT as the unit of energy, and choose the mass mi of the particle as
the unit, thus the time unit 𝜏=
√
mid2
ij∕kBT [61–64]. All the variables and parameters
in SPPMs are given in reduced units. As illustrated in Figure 5.2, the light gray parts
of the particle surface represent the attractive patches, Mi and Mj are used to describe
the number of the attractive patches of particles i and j, the directions of the attractive
patches 𝜅(𝜅= 1,…, Mi) and 𝜆(𝜆= 1,…, Mj) on particles i and j are speciﬁed by patch
vectors ⃗n𝜅
i and ⃗n𝜆
j , respectively, both of which are unit vectors. 𝜃𝜅
i is the angle between ⃗n𝜅
i
and the interparticle vector ⃗rji = ⃗rj −⃗ri, and 𝜃𝜆
j is the angle between ⃗n𝜆
j and ⃗rij (⃗rij = −⃗rji),
and then cos 𝜃𝜅
i = −⃗n𝜅
i ⋅⃗rij∕rij and cos 𝜃𝜆
j = ⃗n𝜆
j ⋅⃗rij∕rij. Thus, 𝜃𝜅
i = arccos(cos 𝜃𝜅
i ) =
arccos(−⃗n𝜅
i ⋅⃗rij∕rij), and 𝜃𝜆
j = arccos(cos 𝜃𝜆
j ) = arccos(⃗n𝜆
j ⋅⃗rij∕rij). The sizes of the
attractive patches 𝜅and 𝜆are described by 𝜃𝜅
m and 𝜃𝜆
m, which are half of the opening
angle of the attractive patches (i.e. the semi-angular widths of the patches). The fraction
of surface of particle i covered by the Mi attractive patches, 𝜒, is related to 𝜃𝜅
m by the
relation 𝜒= ∑Mi
𝜅=1 sin2 ( 𝜃𝜅
m
2
)
[64, 74, 78]. As described above, due to the simplicity and
ni
κ
ni
κ
nj
λ
rji
θm
κ
θi
κ
θj
λ
Figure 5.2 Graphical representation of soft patchy particle models.

118
Self-Assembling Systems
eﬃciency of this single-site anisotropic potential, it is very easy and convenient to obtain
a wide range of patchy particle models with diﬀerent anisotropies, simply by changing
the number Mi, size 𝜃𝜅
m, direction ⃗n𝜅
i , and geometrical arrangement of the patches of
particle i.
5.3.2
Integration Algorithm
In dynamics simulations, all patchy particles have position ⃗ri, velocity ⃗vi, angular
momentum ⃗Li, angular velocity ⃗𝜔i, normalized quaternion ⃗qi, mass mi, moment of
inertia tensor ⃗Ii, and number of the attractive patches Mi, and all attractive patches have
the direction ⃗n𝜅
i and size 𝜃𝜅
m. Here, the normalized quaternion ⃗qi = (qi,0, qi,1, qi,2, qi,3)
is introduced in order to describe the orientation of patchy particle i, and generate a
minimal representation of the rotation matrix from the body frame to the space frame
[64, 69, 84, 86]
⃗es = ⃗A(⃗qi)⃗eb,
(5.30)
with
⃗A(⃗qi) =
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
qi,0
2 + qi,1
2 −qi,2
2 −qi,3
2
2(qi,1qi,2 −qi,0qi,3)
2(qi,1qi,3 + qi,0qi,2)
2(qi,1qi,2 + qi,0qi,3)
qi,0
2 −qi,1
2 + qi,2
2 −qi,3
2
2(qi,2qi,3 −qi,0qi,1)
2(qi,1qi,3 −qi,0qi,2)
2(qi,2qi,3 + qi,0qi,1)
qi,0
2 −qi,1
2 −qi,2
2 + qi,3
2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
,
(5.31)
and
qi,0 = cos 𝜃
2 cos
(𝜙+ 𝜓
2
)
,
qi,1 = sin 𝜃
2 cos
(𝜙−𝜓
2
)
,
qi,2 = sin 𝜃
2 sin
(𝜙−𝜓
2
)
,
qi,3 = cos 𝜃
2 sin
(𝜙+ 𝜓
2
)
,
(5.32)
where 𝜃, 𝜙, and 𝜓are the Euler angles in the standard convention. In the body frame,
a patchy particle’s center of mass is at the origin and the moment of inertia tensor ⃗Ib
i
is diagonal. For spherical patchy particles with homogeneous mass distribution mainly
considered in the present model, the moment of inertia tensor ⃗Ib
i is taken as a unit
diagonal matrix for the sake of simplicity. Although the space-ﬁxed direction of the
attractive patches ⃗n𝜅
i varies with time in the simulations, the body-ﬁxed direction ⃗n𝜅b
i
will not change provided that ⃗n𝜅b
i
is speciﬁed in the body frame at the beginning of the
simulations. The transformation of the directions from body-ﬁxed frame to space-ﬁxed
frame is handled in a manner analogous to Equation (5.30),
⃗n𝜅
i = ⃗A(⃗qi)⃗n𝜅b
i .
(5.33)
The motion of patchy particles is governed by Newtonian mechanics [64, 69, 84, 86],
and the equations of motion of the particles in the space frame are given as
̇⃗ri = ⃗vi,
(5.34)
̇⃗vi =
⃗Fi
mi
,
(5.35)
̇⃗Li = ⃗𝜏i,
(5.36)

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
119
̇⃗qi = 1
2
⃗S(⃗qi) ⃗𝜔i,
(5.37)
where ⃗Fi = ∑
j⃗Fij and ⃗𝜏i = ∑
j⃗𝜏ij are the force and torque acting on patchy particle i due
to all its direct neighbors, respectively. In Equation (5.37),
⃗𝜔i = (0, 𝜔x
i , 𝜔y
i , 𝜔z
i) = ⃗A(⃗qi)(⃗Ib
i )−1 ⃗AT(⃗qi)⃗Li,
(5.38)
and
⃗S(⃗qi) =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
qi,0
−qi,1
−qi,2
−qi,3
qi,1
qi,0
qi,3
−qi,2
qi,2
−qi,3
qi,0
qi,1
qi,3
qi,2
−qi,1
qi,0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
.
(5.39)
The force between two neighboring patchy particles ⃗Fij is given by the derivation of
Equation (5.28),
⃗Fij = −
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗rij
= 𝛼R
ij
(
1 −
rij
dij
) ⃗rij
rij
+
Mi
∑
𝜅=1
Mj
∑
𝜆=1
{
𝛼A
ij f 𝜈(
⃗n𝜅
i , ⃗n𝜆
j , ⃗rij
) (
1
2 −
rij
dij
) ⃗rij
rij
−
𝛼A
ij
2
[
rij
dij
−
( rij
dij
)2]
𝜈f 𝜈−1 (
⃗n𝜅
i , ⃗n𝜆
j , ⃗rij
) (
𝜋
2𝜃𝜅
m
sin
𝜋𝜃𝜅
i
2𝜃𝜅
m
𝜕𝜃𝜅
i
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜅
i
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜅
i
𝜕⃗rij
cos
𝜋𝜃𝜆
j
2𝜃𝜆
m
+
𝜋
2𝜃𝜆
m
sin
𝜋𝜃𝜆
j
2𝜃𝜆
m
𝜕𝜃𝜆
j
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜆
j
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜆
j
𝜕⃗rij
cos
𝜋𝜃𝜅
i
2𝜃𝜅
m
)}
,
(5.40)
where
𝜕𝜃𝜅
i
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜅
i
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0
if cos2𝜃𝜅
i = 1
−
1
√1 −cos2𝜃𝜅
i
otherwise,
(5.41)
𝜕𝜃𝜆
j
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜆
j
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0
if cos2𝜃𝜆
j = 1
−
1
√
1 −cos2𝜃𝜆
j
otherwise,
(5.42)
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜅
i
𝜕⃗rij
= −
⃗n𝜅
i
rij
+
(⃗n𝜅
i ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
,
(5.43)
and
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜆
j
𝜕⃗rij
=
⃗n𝜆
j
rij
−
(⃗n𝜆
j ⋅⃗rij)⃗rij
r3
ij
.
(5.44)

120
Self-Assembling Systems
The torque ⃗𝜏ij acting on patchy particle i due to its neighboring particle j is given by
⃗𝜏ij =
Mi
∑
𝜅=1
−
𝜕Uij
𝜕⃗n𝜅
i
=
Mi
∑
𝜅=1
Mj
∑
𝜆=1
𝜋𝛼A
ij dij
4𝜃𝜅
m
[
rij
dij
−
( rij
dij
)2]
𝜈f 𝜈−1(⃗n𝜅
i , ⃗n𝜆
j , ⃗rij) sin
𝜋𝜃𝜅
i
2𝜃𝜅
m
𝜕𝜃𝜅
i
𝜕cos 𝜃𝜅
i
cos
𝜋𝜃𝜆
j
2𝜃𝜆
m
⃗ri
rij
.
(5.45)
The equations of motion of patchy particles in Equations (5.34)–(5.37) are numeri-
cally integrated via a velocity-Verlet-like algorithm [64, 69, 84]. First, the velocity and
angular momentum at time t + 1
2𝛿t, and the position and orientation at time t + 𝛿t, are
calculated using the equations
⃗vi
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
= ⃗vi(t) + 1
2𝛿t
⃗Fi(t)
mi
,
(5.46)
⃗ri(t + 𝛿t) = ⃗ri(t) + 𝛿t⃗vi
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.47)
⃗Li
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
= ⃗Li(t) + 1
2𝛿t⃗𝜏i(t),
(5.48)
⃗qi(t + 𝛿t) = Q
(
⃗qi(t), 𝛿t, ⃗𝜔i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
))
,
(5.49)
where the angular velocity ⃗𝜔i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
is calculated via Equation (5.38), and the
function Q is an application of the Richardson method [69] to reduce the error in
integrating Equation (5.37). The Richardson method to update quaternion ⃗qi from t to
t + 𝛿t is implemented as follows:
⃗𝜔′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
= ⃗A(⃗qi(t))
(
⃗Ib
i
)−1 ⃗AT(⃗qi(t))⃗Li
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.50)
̇⃗q
′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
=
1
2
⃗S(⃗qi(t)) ⃗𝜔′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.51)
⃗q′
i(t + 𝛿t) = ⃗qi(t) + 𝛿t ̇⃗q
′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.52)
⃗q′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
= ⃗qi(t) + 1
2𝛿t ̇⃗q
′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.53)
⃗𝜔′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
= ⃗A
(
⃗q′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)) (
⃗Ib
i
)−1 ⃗AT (
⃗q′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
))
⃗Li
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.54)
̇⃗q
′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
=
1
2
⃗S
(
⃗q′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
))
⃗𝜔′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.55)
⃗q′
i (t + 𝛿t) = ⃗q′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
+ 1
2𝛿t ̇⃗q
′
i
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
,
(5.56)
⃗qi (t + 𝛿t) = 2⃗q′
i (t + 𝛿t) −⃗q′
i (t + 𝛿t) .
(5.57)
To preserve the constraint qi,0
2 + qi,1
2 + qi,2
2 + qi,3
2 = 1, all the quaternions in
Equations (5.50)–(5.57) should be renormalized after being updated [84]. The force ⃗Fi

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
121
and torque ⃗𝜏i at time t + 𝛿t are then calculated based on the position and orientation at
time t + 𝛿t, and the velocity and angular momentum are advanced fully to t + 𝛿t using
⃗vi(t + 𝛿t) = ⃗vi
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
+ 1
2𝛿t
⃗Fi(t + 𝛿t)
mi
,
(5.58)
⃗Li(t + 𝛿t) = ⃗Li
(
t + 1
2𝛿t
)
+ 1
2𝛿t⃗𝜏i(t + 𝛿t).
(5.59)
In SPPMs, the simulations are performed in the NVT ensemble [64, 87]. The
solvent particles are explicitly considered in the simulations. The solute–solvent
and solvent–solvent interactions follow the ﬁrst term of Equation (5.28). The
equations of motion of the solvent particles are numerically integrated via the standard
velocity-Verlet algorithm [64, 84]. For a system of N particles, the number of patchy par-
ticles is Np = N × Φ, and the number of spherical solvent particles is Ns = N × (1 −Φ)
(Φ is the concentration of patchy particles in solution). Then, the data structures
required to implement the above velocity-Verlet-like algorithm consist of the following
quantities for each patchy particle: Np, mi, ⃗Ib
i , ⃗ri, ⃗vi, ⃗Li, ⃗𝜔i, ⃗qi, ⃗n𝜅b
i , ⃗Fi, and ⃗𝜏i.
5.4
Physical Meanings of the Simulation Parameters in
Our Models
Our soft Janus and patchy particle models can be directly mapped onto experimental
systems in diﬀerent ambient conditions [61–64]. As given in Refs. [61–64], if we
choose the anisotropic factor f = 1 and rc = dij ≡1.0, the anisotropic potentials in
Equations (5.1) and (5.28) will become an isotropic potential with a shallow attractive
well, Uij =
𝛼R
ij
2 (1 −rij)2 −
𝛼A
ij
2 (rij −r2
ij). The parameter 𝛼R
ij is related to the linear elastic
modulus E of the particle by 𝛼R
ij = 𝜋Ed2
eﬀ∕6 [88, 89]. Here, deﬀis the eﬀective diameter of
the soft Janus or patchy particle, and can be estimated by deﬀ= (𝛼R
ij + 𝛼A
ij ∕2)∕(𝛼R
ij + 𝛼A
ij ).
If 𝛿is deﬁned as the range of attraction related to the eﬀective diameter deﬀ, and
(1 + 𝛿)deﬀ= dij, then 𝛿is also related to 𝛼R
ij and 𝛼A
ij by 𝛿= 𝛼A
ij ∕(2𝛼R
ij + 𝛼A
ij ). The
energy minimum of the attractive potential at rij = deﬀgives the adhesion energy
G = −Umin
ij
= 𝛼A
ij (1 −deﬀ)∕4, which determines the association strength between
Janus or patchy particles and can be tuned by altering the salt concentration, pH, or
temperature in experiments [61–64, 88]. Thus, the simulation parameters 𝛼R
ij and 𝛼A
ij
can be ﬁxed from experimentally measurable particle properties including the elastic
modulus E, the eﬀective diameter deﬀ, and the adhesion energy G.
5.5
GPU Acceleration
Due to their high computational performance, graphics processing units (GPUs)
are becoming an increasingly important element of computer simulation [64, 69, 82,
90–94]. Several highly optimized GPU-accelerated molecular dynamics (MD) packages
have been designed for investigating polymeric systems eﬃciently, such as GROMACS
[90], LAMMPS [91], AMBER [92, 93], HOOMD-blue [69], and GALAMOST [82]. In

122
Self-Assembling Systems
Performance (time steps per second)
0
400
800
1 AMD Opteron Quad-core 2382 CPU
4 AMD Opteron Quad-core 2382 CPUs
1 GeForce GTX 680 GPU
1 GeForce GTX 480 GPU
Processors
Figure 5.3 Comparison of the performance of the soft ABA-type triblock Janus particle model
implemented in GALAMOST with the corresponding CPU code. The performance data are measured
by time steps per second. All simulated systems have identical simulation settings with the number of
ABA-type triblock Janus particles, NJ = 24 000, 𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝛼A
ij = 88 (G ≈2.00 kBT), 𝜈= 1∕2, and 𝛽= 45∘.
order to improve the computational eﬃciency of our SJPMs and SPPMs in dynamics
simulations, we have given the simulation algorithms in Refs. [64, 82], which ﬁt the
compute uniﬁed device architecture (CUDA) framework of NVIDIA GPUs. As shown
in Refs. [64, 82], the performance of our SJPMs and SPPMs implemented in the
GALAMOST package is very satisfactory. For example, we compare the performance
of our SJPMs implemented in GALAMOST with the corresponding CPU code by
simulating the ordered packing of soft ABA-tpye triblock Janus systems with 24 000
Janus particles [62], as illustrated in Figure 5.3. The performance of our SJPMs imple-
mented in GALAMOST running on a single GPU is far beyond the performance of the
corresponding CPU code running on four parallel CPU cores. Therefore, our SJPMs
and SPPMs provide a powerful tool to investigate the aggregation behavior of soft Janus
and patchy particles over larger spatial and temporal scales.
5.6
Self-Assembly of Soft Janus and Patchy Particles
5.6.1
Self-Assembly of Soft One-Patch Janus Particles
Due to their deformable and anisotropic characteristics, soft one-patch Janus particles
hide many surprises in the design and fabrication of hierarchically self-assembled
structures [61]. As shown in Figure 5.4, by properly tuning the Janus balance 𝛽and
the strength of attraction between attractive patches 𝛼A
ij (i.e. the adhesion energy G),
soft one-patch Janus particles can reversibly self-assemble into a number of fascinating
hierarchical structures in dilute solutions, such as micelles, worm-like strings, single
helices, double helices, bilayers, and complex supermicelles [61], which may have
great potential in nanotechnology and biotechnology. As suggested in Ref. [61], the

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
123
Janus balance
adhesion energy
Figure 5.4 Representative equilibrium superstructures self-assembled from soft one-patch Janus
particles by properly tuning the Janus balance 𝛽and the strength of attraction between attractive
patches 𝛼A
ij while keeping 𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝜙= 5%, and 𝜈= 1∕2. (See insert for color representation of the
ﬁgure.).
distribution S(n) of the number of nearest neighbors per Janus particle n and the
distribution P(cos 𝛾) of cos 𝛾= ⃗ni ⋅⃗nj for all pairs of contacting Janus particles can be
used to quantitatively characterize the structural details of diﬀerent self-assembled
structures. S(n) = Np(n)∕Nsolute, where Np(n) is the number of Janus particles with the
number of nearest neighbors n, and Nsolute is the total number of Janus particles in the
system. The distribution P(cos 𝛾) is expected to show well-deﬁned peaks for an ordered
state and to be ﬂat in a completely disordered state [61]. Therefore, it is clear that soft
one-patch Janus particles provide a rich palette for the design of novel and exciting
hierarchical superstructures.
5.6.2
The Role of Particle Softness in Self-Assembling Diﬀerent Supracolloidal
Helices
The design and fabrication of biomimetic helical structures by simple and experi-
mentally realizable surface-anisotropic colloidal particles remain among the current
grand challenges in materials science. As the simplest case of surface-anisotropic
particles, soft one-patch Janus particles exhibit remarkable ability to self-assemble into
diﬀerent desired helical structures [61, 95]. As presented in Ref. [61], for softer Janus
particles whose deformability is higher, the range of anisotropic attraction is longer,

124
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.5 Biomimetic supracolloidal helices self-assembled from soft one-patch Janus particles by
tuning particle softness. (a) Single helices (𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝛼A
ij = 308 (G ≈17.00 kBT), 𝛽= 115∘). (b) Double
helices (𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝛼A
ij = 242 (G ≈11.50 kBT), 𝛽= 120∘). (c) Bernal spirals described as a stack of
face-sharing tetrahedra (𝛼R
ij = 39 996, 𝛼A
ij = 4420 (G ≈55.00 kBT), 𝛽= 80∘).
and then the number of nearest neighbors per Janus particle is not limited to six.
Thus, single helices (Figure 5.5a) and double helices (Figure 5.5b) with more nearest
neighbors are observed. With decreasing softness of Janus particles (i.e. Janus particles
become harder), the range of anisotropic attraction becomes shorter, and the number
of nearest neighbors will not exceed six. Thereby, Bernal spirals described as a stack of
face-sharing tetrahedra in Figure 5.5c are obtained through the self-assembly of harder
Janus particles [95]. These building blocks in our simulations are suﬃciently simple,
and the experimental implementation of soft one-patch Janus particles with tunable
softness is within the reach of today’s experimental capabilities [13, 48, 51–53, 56,
58, 65]. Therefore, soft one-patch Janus particles with tunable softness hold sig-
niﬁcant promise for the design and fabrication of biomimetic helical structures
[61, 95].
5.6.3
Self-Assembly of Soft ABA-Type Triblock Janus Particles
As presented in Ref. [62], the aggregation behavior of soft ABA-type triblock Janus parti-
cles mainly depends on the Janus balance 𝛽and the ﬂexibility of Janus particle aggregates
(the strength of attraction 𝛼A
ij and the angular width of attraction 𝜈). By examining the
inﬂuence of 𝛽, 𝛼A
ij , and 𝜈, some ordered packing structures including hexagonally packed
columnar structure and body-centered tetragonal structure are observed. Furthermore,
typical aggregated structures, such as thread-like structures, network structures, and
pyrochlore lattice structures (i.e., the 3D generalization of the 2D kagome lattices) are
also observed by the self-assembly of soft ABA-type triblock Janus particles in dilute

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
125
β = 30°
β = 60°
β = 65°
Figure 5.6 Typical equilibrium structures self-assembled from soft ABA-type triblock Janus particles
with diﬀerent Janus balance while keeping 𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝛼A
ij = 220 (G ≈10.00 kBT), 𝜙= 5%, and 𝜈= 1∕2:
thread-like structures (𝛽= 30∘), network structures (𝛽= 60∘), and pyrochlore lattice structures
(𝛽= 65∘).
solutions, as shown in Figure 5.6. Therefore, soft ABA-type triblock Janus particles can
not only provide the building blocks for the design and creation of various ordered struc-
tures, but also serve as very useful model systems to understand some fundamental
questions such as polymerization and gelation in polymer science.
5.6.4
Template-Free Fabrication of Two-Dimensional Exotic Nanostructures
through the Self-Assembly of Soft BAB-Type Triblock Janus Particles
The design and creation of two-dimensional (2D) well-ordered nanostructures by
a facile template-free fabrication strategy remain major scientiﬁc and technological
challenges. Recently, we have introduced a new concept to achieve template-free
fabrication of diverse 2D nanostructures by resorting to the deformable and anisotropic
characteristics of soft BAB-type triblock Janus particles [63]. As shown in Figure 5.1c,
these particles are spherical and symmetrically decorated with two repulsive patches
separated by an attractive middle band. As can be seen in Figure 5.7, the attraction
strength between attractive middle bands 𝛼A
ij (i.e. the adhesion energy G) and the Janus
balance 𝛽coordinate to generate a number of fascinating 2D ordered non-close-packed
(ncp) and close-packed nanostructures, such as hexagonal, square, and honeycomb-like
ncp arrays, and hexagonally close-packed (hcp) arrays. Interestingly, the 2D hexagonal
and square ncp nanostructures can further close to form vesicles with hexagonal and
square ncp surface lattices, respectively. The relative stability of these 2D nanostructures
can be eﬃciently evaluated through calculating their free energy diﬀerences with respect
to the reference nanostructure [63, 87, 96, 97]. As suggested in Ref. [63], the free energy
diﬀerences per particle of these 2D nanostructures are low enough to allow spontaneous
formation of these ordered nanostructures, and it is possible to observe reversible
structural transitions between them over a convenient timescale. It is clear that the
interplay between particle softness and controllable directional attraction plays a dom-
inant role in creating these nanostructures, which may lead to promising applications
such as coating curved substrates and soft-electronic/optical devices. Therefore, our

126
Self-Assembling Systems
sh-ncp vesicle
s-ncp vesicle
Figure 5.7 Representative non-close-packed (ncp) and close-packed nanostructures self-assembled
from soft BAB-type triblock Janus particles, including 2D single-layer hexagonal ncp (sh-ncp), square
ncp (s-ncp), honeycomb-like ncp (hc-ncp), and hexagonal close-packed (hcp) arrays, and vesicles with
sh-ncp and s-ncp surface lattices, at 𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝜙= 5%, and 𝜈= 1∕2.
work paves the way for the experimental realization of 2D well-ordered nanostructures,
and oﬀers a new direction for the creation of novel colloidal nanostructures without any
template [63].
5.6.5
Self-Assembly of Soft Multi-Patch Particles
With the aid of SPPMs, the self-assembly behavior of soft multi-patch particles with
tunable number, size, direction, and geometrical arrangement of the patches can also
be eﬀectively investigated. Apparently, 2D and 3D open lattices can be obtained from
the self-assembly of soft three-patch and four-patch particles with regular triangular
and tetrahedral arrangement of the patches, respectively. In the body-ﬁxed frame,
the patch vectors of the three-patch particle in Figure 5.8a are ⃗n1
i = (0, 0, 1), ⃗n2
i =
(0.8660, 0, −0.5), and ⃗n3
i = (−0.8660, 0, −0.5), and the patch vectors of the four-patch
particle in Figure 5.8b are
⃗n1
i = (0, 0, 1),
⃗n2
i = (0.8165, −0.4714, −0.3333),
⃗n3
i =
(−0.8165, −0.4714, −0.3333), and ⃗n4
i = (0, 0.9428, −0.3333). To obtain well-ordered
self-assembly structures, the annealing method [62, 64, 98] is adopted in the simula-
tions. As shown in Figure 5.8a, soft three-patch particles that mimic sp2 hybridized
atomic orbitals [6], self-assemble into a graphene-like two-dimensional structure
with a hexagonal honeycomb lattice, which accommodates a large potential in opto-
electronic applications [99, 100]. Soft four-patch particles with a regular tetrahedral
patch arrangement are able to stabilize the diamond lattice structure in Figure 5.8b
[54, 55], which has attracted considerable attention in the ﬁeld of patchy particles
[70, 77, 79, 101] due to their potential applications in photonics and biosensing
[102, 103].

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
127
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8 (a) Graphene-like two-dimensional structure with a hexagonal honeycomb lattice
self-assembled from soft three-patch particles with regular triangular arrangement of the patches.
(b) Diamond lattice structure self-assembled from soft four-patch particles with regular tetrahedral
arrangement of the patches. In the simulations, 𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝛼A
ij = 220 (G ≈10.00 kBT), 𝜈= 0.5, and
𝜃𝜅
m = 45∘. (See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).
5.7
Conclusions
In this chapter, we have introduced two kinds of general and eﬀective mesoscale
models, which are capable of investigating the aggregation behavior and mechanism of
various types of soft Janus and patchy particles. The simulation models and algorithms
are presented in detail, and all these models can be directly mapped onto experimental
systems in diﬀerent conditions. We have also summarized possible structures obtained
from the self-assembly of soft one-patch, and ABA-type and BAB-type triblock Janus
particles [61–63, 95] and soft multi-patch particles [64]. A number of fascinating
ordered structures have been achieved by utilizing the deformable and anisotropic
characteristics of soft Janus and patchy particles, for example, biomimetic helical
structures (single helices, double helices, and Bernal spirals), low-coordinated 2D
(non-close-packed hexagonal, square, and honeycomb-like arrays and graphene-like
structures) and 3D (pyrochlore lattices and diamond lattices) structures. Therefore,
soft Janus and patchy particles with deformable and anisotropic characteristics open up
new avenues for the design and creation of desired supracolloidal structures. Our soft
Janus and patchy particle models provide a powerful tool to investigate the aggregation
behavior of soft Janus and patchy particles over larger spatial and temporal scales. These

128
Self-Assembling Systems
simulation results are helpful for the experimental realization of various supracolloidal
structures. Furthermore, the soft Janus and patchy particle models may be used as
minimal models to deepen our understanding on the formation of glasses, the collective
behavior of living systems, the crystallization of proteins, and so on. These research
directions will receive more attention in future studies.
Acknowledgments
This work is subsidized by the National Basic Research Program of China (973
Program, 2012CB821500). The authors also appreciate the ﬁnancial support from
the National Science Foundation of China (21474110, 21474111, 21222407). Z.Y.L.
acknowledges the support of the Jilin Province Science and Technology Development
Plan (20140519004JH).
References
1. Frenkel, D. (2002) Playing tricks with designer “atoms.” Science, 296, 65.
2. Glotzer, S.C. (2004) Some assembly required. Science, 306, 419.
3. Zhang, Z. and Glotzer, S.C. (2004) Self-assembly of patchy particles. Nano Lett.,
4, 1407.
4. Glotzer, S.C. and Solomon, M.J. (2007) Anisotropy of building blocks and their
assembly into complex structures. Nat. Mater., 6, 557.
5. Jones, M.R. and Mirkin, C.A. (2012) Materials science: Self-assembly gets new
direction. Nature, 491, 42.
6. Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Breed, D.R., Manoharan, V.N., Feng, L., Hollingsworth, A.D.,
Weck, M., and Pine, D.J. (2012) Colloids with valence and speciﬁc directional
bonding. Nature, 491, 51.
7. Pawar, A.B. and Kretzschmar, I. (2010) Fabrication, assembly, and application of
patchy particles. Macromol. Rapid Commun., 31, 150.
8. Bianchi, E., Blaak, R., and Likos, C.N. (2011) Patchy colloids: state of the art and
perspectives. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 13, 6397.
9. Lee, K.J., Yoon, J., and Lahann, J. (2011) Recent advances with anisotropic particles.
Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 16, 195.
10. Li, F., Josephson, D.P., and Stein, A. (2011) Colloidal assembly: The road from
particles to colloidal molecules and crystals. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 50, 360.
11. Yi, G.R., Pine, D.J., and Sacanna, S. (2013) Recent progress on patchy colloids and
their self-assembly. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 25, 193101.
12. Hu, J., Zhou, S., Sun, Y., Fang, X., and Wu, L. (2012) Fabrication, properties and
applications of Janus particles. Chem. Soc. Rev., 41, 4356.
13. Walther, A. and Müller, A.H.E. (2013) Janus particles: Synthesis, self-assembly,
physical properties, and applications. Chem. Rev., 113, 5194.
14. Walther, A. and Müller, A.H.E. (2008) Janus particles. Soft Matter, 4, 663.
15. Du, J. and O’Reilly, R.K. (2011) Anisotropic particles with patchy,
multicompartment and Janus architectures: Preparation and application. Chem.
Soc. Rev., 40, 2402.

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
129
16. Lattuada, M. and Hatton, T.A. (2011) Synthesis, properties and applications of
Janus nanoparticles. Nano Today, 6, 286.
17. Sciortino, F., Giacometti, A., and Pastore, G. (2009) Phase diagram of Janus
particles. Phys. Rev. Lett., 103, 237801.
18. Chen, Q., Whitmer, J.K., Jiang, S., Bae, S.C., Luijten, E., and Granick, S. (2011)
Supracolloidal reaction kinetics of Janus spheres. Science, 331, 199.
19. Yan, J., Bloom, M., Bae, S.C., Luijten, E., and Granick, S. (2012) Linking
synchronization to self-assembly using magnetic Janus colloids. Nature, 491
(7425), 578.
20. Romano, F. and Sciortino, F. (2011) Colloidal self-assembly: Patchy from the
bottom up. Nat. Mater., 10, 171.
21. Morgan, J.W.R., Chakrabarti, D., Dorsaz, N., and Wales, D.J. (2013) Designing a
bernal spiral from patchy colloids. ACS Nano, 7, 1246.
22. Olesen, S.W., Fejer, S.N., Chakrabarti, D., and Wales, D.J. (2013) A left-handed
building block self-assembles into right- and left-handed helices. RSC Adv., 3,
12905.
23. Fejer, S.N., Chakrabarti, D., Kusumaatmaja, H., and Wales, D.J. (2014) Design
principles for Bernal spirals and helices with tunable pitch. Nanoscale, 6, 9448.
24. Guo, R., Mao, J., Xie, X.M., and Yan, L.T. (2014) Predictive supracolloidal helices
from patchy particles. Sci. Rep., 4, 7021.
25. Chen, Q., Bae, S.C., and Granick, S. (2011) Directed self-assembly of a colloidal
kagome lattice. Nature, 469, 381.
26. Chen, Q., Diesel, E., Whitmer, J.K., Bae, S.C., Luijten, E., and Granick, S. (2011)
Triblock colloids for directed self-assembly. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 133, 7725.
27. Romano, F. and Sciortino, F. (2011) Two-dimensional assembly of triblock Janus
particles into crystal phases in the two bond per patch limit. Soft Matter, 7, 5799.
28. Chapela, G.A., Guzmán, O., Martínez-González, J.A., Díaz-Leyva, P., and
Quintana-H, J. (2014) Self-assembly of kagome lattices, entangled webs and linear
ﬁbers with vibrating patchy particles in two dimensions. Soft Matter, 10, 9167.
29. Chen, Q., Bae, S.C., and Granick, S. (2012) Staged self-assembly of colloidal
metastructures. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 134, 11080.
30. Cates, M.E. (2013) Patchy colloids: Entropy stabilizes open crystals. Nat. Mater.,
12, 179.
31. Mao, X. (2013) Entropic eﬀects in the self-assembly of open lattices from patchy
particles. Phys. Rev. E, 87, 062319.
32. Mao, X., Chen, Q., and Granick, S. (2013) Entropy favours open colloidal lattices.
Nat. Mater., 12, 217.
33. Romano, F. and Sciortino, F. (2012) Patterning symmetry in the rational design of
colloidal crystals. Nat. Commun., 3, 975.
34. van der Linden, M.N., Doye, J.P.K., and Louis, A.A. (2012) Formation of
dodecagonal quasicrystals in two-dimensional systems of patchy particles. J. Chem.
Phys., 136, 054904.
35. Reinhardt, A., Romano, F., and Doye, J.P.K. (2013) Computing phase diagrams for a
quasicrystal-forming patchy-particle system. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 255503.
36. Jiang, S., Yan, J., Whitmer, J.K., Anthony, S.M., Luijten, E., and Granick, S. (2014)
Orientationally glassy crystals of Janus spheres. Phys. Rev. Lett., 112, 218301.

130
Self-Assembling Systems
37. Smallenburg, F., Leibler, L., and Sciortino, F. (2013) Patchy particle model for
vitrimers. Phys. Rev. Lett., 111, 188002.
38. Smallenburg, F. and Sciortino, F. (2013) Liquids more stable than crystals in
particles with limited valence and ﬂexible bonds. Nat. Phys., 9, 554.
39. Romano, F., Russo, J., and Tanaka, H. (2014) Inﬂuence of patch-size variability on
the crystallization of tetrahedral patchy particles. Phys. Rev. Lett., 113, 138303.
40. Doye, J.P.K., Louis, A.A., Lin, I.C., Allen, L.R., Noya, E.G., Wilber, A.W., Kok, H.C.,
and Lyus, R. (2007) Controlling crystallization and its absence: Proteins, colloids
and patchy models. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 9, 2197.
41. Liu, H., Kumar, S.K., and Douglas, J.F. (2009) Self-assembly-induced protein
crystallization. Phys. Rev. Lett., 103, 018101.
42. Fusco, D. and Charbonneau, P. (2013) Crystallization of asymmetric patchy models
for globular proteins in solution. Phys. Rev. E, 88, 012721.
43. Huisman, B.A.H., Bolhuis, P.G., and Fasolino, A. (2008) Phase transition to bundles
of ﬂexible supramolecular polymers. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 188301.
44. Yang, Y., Meyer, R.B., and Hagan, M.F. (2010) Self-limited self-assembly of chiral
ﬁlaments. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104, 258102.
45. Wurm, F. and Kilbinger, A.F.M. (2009) Polymeric Janus particles. Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed., 48, 8412.
46. Nie, Z., Li, W., Seo, M., Xu, S., and Kumacheva, E. (2006) Janus and ternary
particles generated by microﬂuidic synthesis: Design, synthesis, and self-assembly.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 128, 9408.
47. Lattuada, M. and Hatton, T.A. (2007) Preparation and controlled self-assembly of
Janus magnetic nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 129, 12878.
48. Erhardt, R., Zhang, M., Böker, A., Zettl, H., Abetz, C., Frederik, P., Krausch, G.,
Abetz, V., and Müller, A.H.E. (2003) Amphiphilic Janus micelles with polystyrene
and poly(methacrylic acid) hemispheres. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 125, 3260.
49. Srinivas, G. and Pitera, J.W. (2008) Soft patchy nanoparticles from solution-phase
self-assembly of binary diblock copolymers. Nano Lett., 8, 611.
50. Holmes, R.M. and Williams, D.R.M. (2011) Single-chain asymmetric block
copolymers in poor solvents: Candidates for patchy colloids. Macromolecules,
44, 6172.
51. Gröschel, A.H., Schacher, F.H., Schmalz, H., Borisov, O.V., Zhulina, E.B.,
Walther, A., and Müller, A.H.E. (2012) Precise hierarchical self-assembly of
multicompartment micelles. Nat. Commun., 3, 710.
52. Gröschel, A.H., Walther, A., Löbling, T.I., Schmelz, J., Hanisch, A., Schmalz, H.,
and Müller, A.H.E. (2012) Facile, solution-based synthesis of soft, nanoscale Janus
particles with tunable Janus balance. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 134, 13850.
53. Gröschel, A.H., Walther, A., Löbling, T.I., Schacher, F.H., Schmalz, H., and Müller,
A.H.E. (2013) Guided hierarchical co-assembly of soft patchy nanoparticles.
Nature, 503, 247.
54. Capone, B., Coluzza, I., LoVerso, F., Likos, C.N., and Blaak, R. (2012) Telechelic
star polymers as self-assembling units from the molecular to the macroscopic
scale. Phys. Rev. Lett., 109, 238301.
55. Capone, B., Coluzza, I., Blaak, R., Verso, F.L., and Likos, C.N. (2013) Hierarchical
self-assembly of telechelic star polymers: From soft patchy particles to gels and
diamond crystals. New J. Phys., 15, 095002.

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
131
56. Bradley, M. and Rowe, J. (2009) Cluster formation of Janus polymer microgels.
Soft Matter, 5, 3114.
57. Suzuki, D., Tsuji, S., and Kawaguchi, H. (2007) Janus microgels prepared by
surfactant-free Pickering emulsion-based modiﬁcation and their self-assembly.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 129, 8088.
58. Percec, V., Wilson, D.A., Leowanawat, P., Wilson, C.J., Hughes, A.D., Kaucher,
M.S., Hammer, D.A., Levine, D.H., Kim, A.J., Bates, F.S., Davis, K.P., Lodge, T.P.,
Klein, M.L., DeVane, R.H., Aqad, E., Rosen, B.M., Argintaru, A.O., Sienkowska,
M.J., Rissanen, K., Nummelin, S., and Ropponen, J. (2010) Self-assembly of Janus
dendrimers into uniform dendrimersomes and other complex architectures.
Science, 328, 1009.
59. Peterca, M., Percec, V., Leowanawat, P., and Bertin, A. (2011) Predicting the size
and properties of dendrimersomes from the lamellar structure of their amphiphilic
Janus dendrimers. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 133, 20507.
60. Liu, Y., Yu, C., Jin, H., Jiang, B., Zhu, X., Zhou, Y., Lu, Z., and Yan, D. (2013)
A supramolecular Janus hyperbranched polymer and its photoresponsive
self-assembly of vesicles with narrow size distribution. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 135,
4765.
61. Li, Z.W., Lu, Z.Y., Sun, Z.Y., and An, L.J. (2012) Model, self-assembly structures,
and phase diagram of soft Janus particles. Soft Matter, 8, 6693.
62. Li, Z.W., Lu, Z.Y., Zhu, Y.L., Sun, Z.Y., and An, L.J. (2013) A simulation model for
soft triblock Janus particles and their ordered packing. RSC Adv., 3, 813.
63. Li, Z.W., Lu, Z.Y., and Sun, Z.Y. (2014) Soft Janus particles: Ideal building blocks
for template-free fabrication of two-dimensional exotic nanostructures. Soft Matter,
10, 5472.
64. Li, Z.W., Zhu, Y.L., Lu, Z.Y., and Sun, Z.Y. (2016) A versatile model for soft patchy
particles with various patch arrangements. Soft Matter, 12, 741.
65. Angell, C.A. and Ueno, K. (2009) Materials science: Soft is strong. Nature, 462, 45.
66. Likos, C.N. (2006) Soft matter with soft particles. Soft Matter, 2, 478.
67. Heyes, D.M. and Bra´nka, A.C. (2009) Interactions between microgel particles. Soft
Matter, 5, 2681.
68. Yan, L.T., Popp, N., Ghosh, S.K., and Böker, A. (2010) Self-assembly of Janus
nanoparticles in diblock copolymers. ACS Nano, 4, 913.
69. Nguyen, T.D., Phillips, C.L., Anderson, J.A., and Glotzer, S.C. (2011) Rigid
body constraints realized in massively parallel molecular dynamics on graphics
processing units. Comput. Phys. Commun., 182, 2307.
70. Zhang, Z., Keys, A.S., Chen, T., and Glotzer, S.C. (2005) Self-assembly of patchy
particles into diamond structures through molecular mimicry. Langmuir, 21,
11547.
71. Bianchi, E., Largo, J., Tartaglia, P., Zaccarelli, E., and Sciortino, F. (2006) Phase
diagram of patchy colloids: Towards empty liquids. Phys. Rev. Lett., 97, 168301.
72. Sciortino, F., Bianchi, E., Douglas, J.F., and Tartaglia, P. (2007) Self-assembly of
patchy particles into polymer chains: A parameter-free comparison between
Wertheim theory and Monte Carlo simulation. J. Chem. Phys., 126, 194903.
73. Romano, F., Tartaglia, P., and Sciortino, F. (2007) Gas-liquid phase coexistence in a
tetrahedral patchy particle model. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 19, 322101.

132
Self-Assembling Systems
74. Kern, N. and Frenkel, D. (2003) Fluid–ﬂuid coexistence in colloidal systems with
short-ranged strongly directional attraction. J. Chem. Phys., 118, 9882.
75. Giacometti, A., Lado, F., Largo, J., Pastore, G., and Sciortino, F. (2009) Phase
diagram and structural properties of a simple model for one-patch particles.
J. Chem. Phys., 131, 174114.
76. Giacometti, A., Lado, F., Largo, J., Pastore, G., and Sciortino, F. (2010) Eﬀects of
patch size and number within a simple model of patchy colloids. J. Chem. Phys.,
132, 174110.
77. Romano, F., Sanz, E., and Sciortino, F. (2010) Phase diagram of a tetrahedral patchy
particle model for diﬀerent interaction ranges. J. Chem. Phys., 132, 184501.
78. Sciortino, F., Giacometti, A., and Pastore, G. (2010) A numerical study of
one-patch colloidal particles: From square-well to Janus. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,
12, 11869.
79. Romano, F., Sanz, E., and Sciortino, F. (2011) Crystallization of tetrahedral patchy
particles in silico. J. Chem. Phys., 134, 174502.
80. Klein, M.L. and Shinoda, W. (2008) Large-scale molecular dynamics simulations of
self-assembling systems. Science, 321, 798.
81. Bianchi, E., Capone, B., Kahl, G., and Likos, C.N. (2015) Soft-patchy nanoparticles:
modeling and self-organization. Faraday Discuss., DOI: 10.1039/C4FD00271G.
82. Zhu, Y.L., Liu, H., Li, Z.W., Qian, H.J., Milano, G., and Lu, Z.Y. (2013) GALAM-
OST: GPU-accelerated large-scale molecular simulation toolkit. J. Comput. Chem.,
34, 2197.
83. Groot, R.D. and Warren, P.B. (1997) Dissipative particle dynamics: Bridging the gap
between atomistic and mesoscopic simulation. J. Chem. Phys., 107, 4423.
84. Allen, M.P. and Tildesley, D.J. (1987) Computer Simulation of Liquids, Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
85. Berendsen, H.J.C., Postma, J.P.M., van Gunsteren, W.F., DiNola, A., and Haak, J.R.
(1984) Molecular dynamics with coupling to an external bath. J. Chem. Phys., 81,
3684.
86. Miller, T.F., Eleftheriou, M., Pattnaik, P., Ndirango, A., Newns, D., and Martyna,
G.J. (2002) Symplectic quaternion scheme for biophysical molecular dynamics.
J. Chem. Phys., 116, 8649.
87. Frenkel, D. and Smit, B. (2002) Understanding Molecular Simulations, 2nd edition,
Academic Press, Waltham, MA.
88. Groot, R.D. and Stoyanov, S.D. (2008) Mesoscopic model for colloidal particles,
powders, and granular solids. Phys. Rev. E, 78, 051403.
89. Groot, R.D. and Stoyanov, S.D. (2010) Equation of state of surface-adsorbing
colloids. Soft Matter, 6, 1682.
90. Berendsen, H.J.C., van der Spoel, D., and van Drunen, R. (1995) GROMACS: A
message-passing parallel molecular dynamics implementation. J. Comput. Phys., 91,
43.
91. Plimpton, S. (1995) Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics.
J. Comput. Phys., 117, 1.
92. Götz, A.W., Williamson, M.J., Xu, D., Poole, D., Grand, S.L., and Walker, R.C.
(2012) Routine microsecond molecular dynamics simulations with AMBER on
GPUs. 1. Generalized Born. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 8, 1542.

5 Simulation of soft Janus and Patchy Particles
133
93. Salomon-Ferrer, R., Götz, A.W., Poole, D., Grand, S.L., and Walker, R.C. (2013)
Routine microsecond molecular dynamics simulations with AMBER on GPUs. 2.
Explicit solvent particle mesh Ewald. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 9, 3878.
94. Rovigatti, L., Šulc, P., Reguly, I.Z., and Romano, F. (2015) A comparison between
parallelization approaches in molecular dynamics simulations on GPUs. J. Comput.
Chem., 36, 1.
95. Zou, Q.Z., Li, Z.W., Lu, Z.Y., and Sun, Z.Y. (2016) Supracolloidal helices from soft
Janus particles by tuning the particle softness. Nanoscale, 8, 4070.
96. Müller, M. and Daoulas, K.C. (2008) Calculating the free energy of self-assembled
structures by thermodynamic integration. J. Chem. Phys., 128, 024903.
97. Norizoe, Y., Daoulas, K.C., and Müller, M. (2010) Measuring excess free energies
of self-assembled membrane structures. Faraday Discuss., 144, 369.
98. Zhang, J., Lu, Z.Y., and Sun, Z.Y. (2013) Self-assembly structures of amphiphilic
multiblock copolymer in dilute solution. Soft Matter, 9, 1947.
99. Allen, M.J., Tung, V.C., and Kaner, R.B. (2010) Honeycomb carbon: A review of
graphene. Chem. Rev., 110, 132.
100. Xu, M., Liang, T., Shi, M., and Chen, H. (2013) Graphene-like two-dimensional
materials. Chem. Rev., 113, 3766.
101. Noya, E.G., Vega, C., Doye, J.P.K., and Louis, A.A. (2010) The stability of a crystal
with diamond structure for patchy particles with tetrahedral symmetry. J. Chem.
Phys., 132, 234511.
102. Hartl, A., Schmich, E., Garrido, J.A., Hernando, J., Catharino, S.C.R., Walter,
S., Feulner, P., Kromka, A., Steinmuller, D., and Stutzmann, M. (2004)
Protein-modiﬁed nanocrystalline diamond thin ﬁlms for biosensor applications.
Nat. Mater., 3, 736.
103. Aharonovich, I., Greentree, A.D., and Prawer, S. (2011) Diamond photonics. Nat.
Photon., 5, 397.

134
6
Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus Capsid Formation,
Maturation, and Envelopment
Jehoon Kim1 and Jianzhong Wu2
1Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
2Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California Riverside, USA
6.1
Introduction
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an infectious pathogen aﬀecting many people throughout
the world [1]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) [2], over 240
million people alive today are chronically infected with HBV, placing them at high risk
of liver cirrhosis (scarring), hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer), and liver failure
[3]. The prevalence of chronic HBV infection is particularly high in sub-Saharan Africa
and East Asia (between 5% and 10% of the adult population). Even in the US, more than
one million people are chronically infected with HBV, and up to 40 000 Americans are
becoming HBV carriers each year [4]. The virus is responsible for up to 80% of all cases
of hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide, second only to tobacco among known human
carcinogens. Every year, there are over 4 million acute clinical cases of HBV infection
globally, and about 780 000 persons die from HBV-induced chronic active hepatitis,
cirrhosis, or primary liver cancer.
Although HBV infection is now preventable through vaccination, existing vaccines
have no therapeutic eﬀect on the chronically infected population. Current treatment
is mostly based on antiviral cytokine interferon alpha (IFN-α) and reverse transcrip-
tase inhibitors [5, 6]. Interferon therapy is eﬀective in about 20%–40% of patients with
rather unpredictable eﬃcacy, and long-term treatment is often accompanied by strong
side eﬀects. The HBV-polymerase has been a well-recognized target for inhibiting the
viral replication and several nucleos(t)ide-analogs (e.g., tenofovir and entecavir) have
been developed as antiviral agents [7–10]. These drugs are eﬀective in suppressing HBV
replication with little toxicity and adverse eﬀect. However, current treatment does not
cure hepatitis B infection completely in most people and requires sustained medica-
tion to prevent the virus rebound. Tremendous studies have been devoted to improving
the drug eﬃcacy and overcoming potential resistance [11, 12]. Because HBV mutates
fast in a changing environment, drug resistance is almost inevitable for any therapy
that targets a speciﬁc motif of the viral genome or the reverse transcriptase. Alternative
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
135
antiviral strategies have been pursued in recent years including non-interferon immune
enhancers and therapeutics improving the vaccine eﬃciency [1].
Development of more eﬀective therapeutic strategies for HBV infection hinges on
a better understanding of the viral structure and the morphogenesis from a system’s
perspective. As shown schematically in Figure 6.1, the HBV virion (viz., “Dane parti-
cle” [13]) is a double-shelled particle made of an icosahedral nucleocapsid (NC) and a
spherical shell of lipoproteins [14–16]. The whole particle measures 42nm in the outer
diameter, enclosing a 36nm-diameter protein capsid and a 26nm-diameter genomic
core. The envelope is composed of the HBV surface proteins embedded in a lipid bilayer
(Figure 6.2). These lipoproteins, known as HBV surface antigen (HBsAg), are conven-
tionally used as a target of diagnosis for the viral infection.
The envelope proteins exist in three interrelated forms derived from a single open
reading frame of the HBV genome. These proteins are distinguished according to their
sizes: small (S), middle (M), and large (L). The S protein (S-HBs) is the most abundant; it
consists of 226 amino-acid (aa) residues that can be divided into four trans-membrane
domains (TM1-4). M and L proteins are augmented with the extended N-terminal
domains (Pre-S1 and Pre-S2) after a common S domain. Each M-protein (M-HBs) is
formed by the addition of Pre-S2 domain (55 aa) to the N-terminus of S-HBs, and
P 
42 nm
36 nm
26 nm
Surface protein S
(HBsAg)
 
Surface protein M
Surface  protein L 
Core protein × 2
(HBcAg)
Linker peptide
 
Partially double-stranded DNA
C-terminal domain
HBcAg 
core domain (140 aa) 
9 aa linker 
“protamine” tail (34 aa) 
HBV Virion 
Polymerase
(P protein)
Figure 6.1 A schematic representation of an HBV virion. The virus has a double-shelled structure
containing an icosahedral nucleocapsid, about 36 nm in outer diameter, coated with three interrelated
lipoproteins (S, M, L) known as the HBV surface antigens (HBsAg). Inside the nucleocapsid is a partially
double strained DNA in strong binding with the highly ﬂexible and positively charged C-terminal
domains of the capsid proteins.

136
Self-Assembling Systems
N-glycan
O-glycan
Cytosol
Cytosol
Lumen
Lumen
L: i-preS
L: e-preS
S
226 aa
1 2
3 4
1
2
3 4
1 2
3 4
1 2
3 4
281 aa
389 (or 400) aa
M
N
N
N
N
N
Figure 6.2 HBV lipoproteins (S, M, L) share a common S domain with diﬀerent N-terminal extensions.
The S protein consists of 226 amino acid (aa) residues; it is mostly imbedded in the lipid bilayer and
can be divided into four trans-membrane (TM) regions. The M protein is N-terminally extended from
the S protein with the Pre-S2 domain (with 55 aa). The L protein carries an additional N-terminal Pre-S1
domain (gray), which consists of 108 or 119 aa depending on the genotype. The N-terminus of the L
protein is anchored into the lipid bilayer by a 14-carbon chain of saturated fatty acid added by
myristylation (shown as the open circle). Upon translational membrane insertion, the Pre-S1 and
Pre-S2 regions of the L protein are initially located on the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) membrane with TM1 not being inserted in the membrane (L: i-preS). In HBV virions, about half of
the L proteins translocate the Pre-S region onto the viral surface (L: e-preS). Reproduced from Ref. [17]
with permission from Springer.
the L-protein (L-HBs) is an extension of both Pre-S1 (108 aa or 119 depending on the
strains) and Pre-S2 to S-HBs. The S proteins are mostly embedded in the lipid and
represent a major component of the viral envelope.
The Pre-S domains of the M and L proteins are ﬂexible and not embedded in the lipid
membrane. After translation, about half of the Pre-S domains are on the cytoplasmic
side and half on the cisternal side (lumen) of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) mem-
brane. The Pre-S1 located on the cytosolic side (outer) is required for surface proteins
binding with the viral nucleocapsids. Recently, it has been shown that about 50% of L
proteins have this domain exposed on the surface of infectious virus particles such that
it functions as the binding site for the host cell receptor [18]. In particular, lipopeptides
derived from the ﬁrst 48 aa of Pre-S1 are essential for HBV entering human liver cells
and are able to inhibit HBV infection [18]. While the S and L proteins are required for
HBV envelopment and infection, the M-protein appears dispensable [15, 19].
The HBV nucleocapsid (NC) exists in two diﬀerent sizes in vivo, with the major-
ity (>90%) having a T = 4 icosahedral symmetry and a small fraction having a T = 3
symmetry [20]. The T4 capsid is composed of 120 capsomers, i.e., dimers of the cap-
sid protein known as hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) or core proteins [21]. These
capsomers are arranged symmetrically on the triangulation lattices of the icosahedral
surfaces (Figure 6.5). The HBV capsids are fenestrated, with hydrophilic pores 1.4nm in
diameter around the 3-fold axes; hydrophobic oval pores, about 2.4nm long and 1.8nm
wide, at the 2-fold axes; and smaller pores 0.3nm in diameter at the positions of the

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
137
Figure 6.3 The structure of the N-terminal
region of the HBV capsid protein (HBcAg
1–149) in its dimer form (i.e., capsomer). The
capsid dimer has a T-shaped structure
stabilized by strong hydrophobic attractions
between α-helical hairpins.
5-fold icosahedral axes [22]. These pores make nucleotides and small chemical species
directly accessible to the capsid lumen.
In wild type (WT) HBV, each capsid protein comprises 183 aa residues, which
is separated into an N-terminal assembly domain (aa 1–140), a nonapeptide linker
(aa 140–149), and a highly basic, protamine-like C-terminal domain (CTD, aa
150–183). The assembly domain consists of the ﬁrst 140 aa residues from the N
terminus and exists as a dimer (i.e., capsomer) right after synthesis. Figure 6.3 shows
the dimer structure as determined from high resolution cryo-EM [23] and X-ray crys-
tallography [24] measurements. Each monomer consisting of a protruding α-helical
hairpin (aa 50–110), with the lower part surrounded by three shorter helixes (aa 13–17,
aa 27–43, and aa 112–127), an irregular N-terminal region (aa 1–12), a proline-rich
loop (aa 128–136), and an extended strand (aa 137–140). The C-terminus of the capsid
protein is not seen in the cryo-EM images. It includes the ﬂexible nonapeptide linker
(aa 141–149) and the CTD tail that is rich in positively charged arginine residues
(aa 150−183). The linker and CTD tail are highly ﬂexible and may be located on either
side of the capsid [25, 26].
The capsid proteins are dimerized right after synthesis, driven by the strong associ-
ation of two α-helical hairpins into a compact four-helix bundle [27]. The dimer has a
T-shaped form stabilized by hydrophobic attractions between α-helical hairpins and a
disulﬁde linking between C61 of each monomer. Recent cryo-EM structure shows that
the disulﬁde bond is not indispensable for the capsomer formation [25]. While muta-
tions or truncations at the assembly domain impair capsomer formation, CTD chains
play a critical role in HBV morphogenesis, particularly during NC formation, RNA pack-
aging, and DNA synthesis.
Inside, each T4 HBV capsid contains a genome that is made of a relaxed circular (rc)
[28], partially double-stranded (ds) DNA, approximately 3200 base pairs (bp) in length.
The negative (−) strand of dsDNA, i.e., the one with opposite polarity to the mRNA,
encodes four overlapping reading frames for the synthesis of HBV surface proteins, cap-
sid (or core) proteins, X proteins, and the viral polymerase (P). While the multifunctional
P protein (832 or 854 aa depending on the strains) is indispensable for viral replication,
the X protein (154 aa) plays an important role modulating the remodeling of the HBV

138
Self-Assembling Systems
genome through acetylation, mono-methylation, and phosphorylation of DNA-bound
histones [29]. The positive (+) strand of the DNA genome is incomplete and varies in
length (1800 to 2700 bases). As revealed in cryo-EM images [30], the genomic mate-
rial binds to the CTD tails of the capsid proteins, resulting in a distinctive band of
protein–nucleic acid complex located between radii 9–12.5nm inside the NC. The pep-
tide linkers provide radial connections of the CTD tails to the inner surface of the viral
capsid [31]. Because of the ﬂexibility of these highly hydrophilic macromolecules, more
detailed internal structures of HBV NCs are not amenable to conventional structural
studies such as X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM.
Schematically, Figure 6.4 shows the life cycle of HBV infection [32]. The viral repli-
cation undergoes sequential events that require spatially and temporally coordinated
interactions of the key components of the infectious virion [33]. The viral entry is
triggered by the Pre-S1 domain of HBsAg binding to a receptor at the surface of a
hepatocyte cell [34, 35]. Subsequently, the entire virion is internalized by membrane
fusion [16]. After entering the liver cell, the surface proteins are uncoated by the lipid
molecules while the nucleocapsid (NC) migrates into the cytosol of the infected cell. The
NC particle is somehow destabilized, possibly due to the change of local environment
cccDNA 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
surface
receptor  
Nucleus
Cytoplastic membrane 
mRNA 
pgRNA 
X 
endoplasmic
reticulum   
nucleoplasm
cytosol
Figure 6.4 Schematic of the HBV replication life cycle. The viral entry into human hepatocytes is
initiated by the Pre-S1 domain of HBsAg binding to a receptor that is normally involved in bile acid
transport in the liver. After being transferred into the cytosol, the nucleocapsid is disassembled,
leading to the release of the genomic material. Viral replication starts with the formation of a
covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) in the nucleoplasm; the cccDNA templates RNA transcription
and subsequently protein synthesis. Nucleocapsid (NC) assembly is driven by strong electrostatic
interactions between capsid proteins and pregenome (pg) RNA. Inside NC, the polymerase (P)
translates pgRNA ﬁrst into a single-stranded (ss) DNA, and then a partially double-stranded (ds)
(>50%) DNA. The matured capsid is then enveloped with surface proteins in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) or migrates back to the nucleoplasm for cccDNA ampliﬁcation. (See insert for color
representation of the ﬁgure.).

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
139
(e.g., pH decreases) during the transport of the viral genome to the cellular nucleus.
The detailed mechanisms for NC disassembly are not yet well understood. The confor-
mational change to the nucleocapsid results in deproteinization of rc-DNA and triggers
the nuclear localization signal (NLS) for subsequent rc-DNA nuclear import [36].
Within the nucleoplasm, the rc-DNA is ﬁrst converted into a plasmid-like, covalently
closed circular (ccc) DNA [37]. Clearance of cccDNA remains challenging for existing
antiviral drugs. In recent years, it has been a major target for the development of new
therapeutic strategies [1].
cccDNA serves as the transcriptional template to produce multiple copies of prege-
nomic (pg) and subgenomic RNA chains through RNA polymerase II of the host cell
[38]. After the transcriptions, the mRNAs are exported into the cytoplasm of the
infected cell and translated into the HBV surface, core, X, and P proteins. In diﬀerent
reading frames, the pgRNA (about 3500 nucleotides in total length) acts as the mRNA
for the synthesis of both the core and P proteins. Self-assembly of HBV capsids occurs
when the core proteins accumulate above a certain threshold level, concomitant to the
formation of P protein and pgRNA complexes that are encapsidated in the progeny
NCs [39, 40].
Inside a newly formed (immature) NC particle, the pgRNA serves as the template for
the synthesis of a complete (−) strand DNA [41, 42]. While the pgRNA is degraded dur-
ing the (−) DNA synthesis, the (+) strand DNA is formed with the (−) strand DNA as the
template. For reasons yet unknown, the synthesis of (+) strand DNA is incomplete dur-
ing the replication process. Recent experiments uncovered a critical role of electrostatic
interactions and CTD phosphorylation in NC maturation [43–45]. However, the molec-
ular basis for this essential regulation remains obscure. Depending on the concentration
of envelope proteins, the matured NCs can be transported back to the nucleoplasm for
intracellular ampliﬁcation of cccDNA or bud into the ER membrane of the host cell
for envelopment with the viral surface proteins [15]. An intricate aspect of the hepad-
navirus life cycle is that only nucleocapsids containing dsDNA and a large excess of
empty capsids can be coated with envelope proteins [46]. Nether single-stranded RNA
nor DNA containing capsids can bind with the surface proteins or be transported into
the nucleoplasm.
In addition to the virions and empty capsids, HBV replication results in abundant
subviral spherical and ﬁlamentous particles (SVP) that contain no viral genome. The
spherical SVP, about 22 nm in diameter, are predominately composed of S-HBs, and the
ﬁlaments are formed because of addition of L-HBs [47]. While SVP outnumber viri-
ons in the serum of HBV patients by orders of magnitude, their biological functions
and the pathway of self-assembly are not yet known. It has been suggested that SVP
contribute to a persistent infection by enhancing immune tolerance [48]. SVP induce
shared immunological responses with the HBV virions, and thus can be used as eﬀective
immunogens for antiviral treatments. For example, the current (the second generation)
human vaccine for HBV was developed by expression of S-HBs particles in yeast [49].
Capsid formation, genome maturation and viral envelopment represent three critical
steps in the HBV life cycle. A theoretical description of such processes from a molecu-
lar perspective may help better understand viral replication and morphogenesis, leading
to fresh insights into the experimental studies of antiviral strategies. The main purpose
of this review is to summarize our recent theoretical work concerning the microscopic
structure and physiochemical properties of HBV at the various stages of replication.

140
Self-Assembling Systems
Speciﬁcally, we introduce molecular thermodynamic models for predicting the stabil-
ity of HBV capsids either with or without loading nucleic materials and for describing
key biomolecular forces underlying genome encapsidation and envelopment. We show
that HBV capsids are stabilized due to a delicate balance of hydrophobic and electro-
static interactions and thus their stability is sensitive to capsid mutation and solution
conditions. The theoretical model is used to examine how the electrostatic interaction
between the packaged genome and the highly charged C-terminal domains (CTD) of
capsid proteins regulates the nucleocapsid formation. New biophysical schemes are pro-
posed to regulate HBV replication by controlling the charge status and positions of CTD
tails. We also investigate probable interaction sites between the Pre-S1 domain of L-HBs
and the capsid core proteins (HBc) based on a combination of molecular dynamic (MD)
simulations and molecular docking. By addressing fundamental issues related to capsid
assembly, genome packaging, and viral maturation, we expect that the thermodynamic
models will contribute to a better understanding of various biophysical processes of the
HBV life cycle and development of novel antiviral strategies for ultimate eradication
of HBV.
6.2
Molecular Thermodynamics of Capsid Formation
HBV infects only primary hepatocytes from humans, chimpanzees, and a primate-like
animal called the treeshrew (Tupaia belangeri). Toward the development of a more
eﬀective treatment of HBV infection, it is critically important to understand the thermo-
dynamic stability of the viral capsids at diﬀerent stages of replication [50, 51]. Because
of the limited availability of primary hepatocytes from permissive hosts, it is extremely
diﬃcult to experimentally investigate the energetic proﬁles of the capsid assembly under
an intracellular environment. In vivo assembly of HBV is further hampered by the small
amount of virus produced in an infected human cell, which has been estimated on
the order of 1–10 virions per cell per day [52, 53]. Nonetheless, in vitro assembly of
HBV capsids devoid of CTD and nucleic acids has been analyzed in detail [54, 55].
By describing the self-assembly process in terms of a cascade of low-order associa-
tion reactions, Zlotnick and coworkers found that the intermediate concentrations were
extremely low and the kinetic of self-assembly followed essentially a one-step process
[56]. The single-step model allows for the quantiﬁcation of the thermodynamic stability
of empty HBV capsids on the basis of the concentrations of the capsomers and the fully
assembled capsids at various solution conditions [57].
Whereas existing experimental analyses of capsid stability were mostly performed
on empty capsids devoid of any nucleic materials or the CTD tails, there have been a
number of investigations into the role of CTD in HBV replication, such as its relations
with the genome size [58] as well as the unknown functions associated with phosphory-
lation [44]. Several experimental studies have been reported on the in vitro assembly of
empty or RNA-containing HBV capsids with the WT CTD [59–61]. When compared
to that for empty capsids without CTD, the assembly of the full-length capsids occurs
at relatively high salt concentration (≥0.25M) to avoid strong electrostatic repulsion
among the basic tails. Whereas favorable electrostatic attractions between CTD
and RNA chains are expected to make NC more stable than corresponding empty
capsids [54, 59–61], NC particles undergo signiﬁcant stability changes during the

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
141
replication cycle. It has been suggested that NCs with dsDNA are relatively unstable in
comparison to those containing ssRNA or ssDNA [45, 62]. Further evaluation of the
NC stability is very desirable, in particular with respect to diﬀerent genome contents
and characteristics.
In recent years, the assembly of viral capsids has been subject to extensive molecular
simulation studies (e.g. [63–65]). Whereas simulation advances the fundamentals of
viral assembly and dynamics [65–67], the theoretical analysis is mostly based on simple
model systems within a relatively narrow range of the parameter space. Simulation of
the life cycle of a real virus is computationally challenging, if not impossible, due to
the large number of underlying biomacromolecules, complicated intracellular environ-
ment, and long duration pertinent to the self-assembly pathways [64]. Little information
is currently available for the capsid stability under the physiological conditions.
Built upon previous developments [68–71], we have recently formulated a ther-
modynamic stability model speciﬁc to HBV nucleocapsids [72]. Using coarse-grained
models to represent the key viral components, we derived analytical expressions for
intermolecular interactions upon self-assembly and complexation of capsid proteins
and genome. Although the coarse-grained model captures major non-speciﬁc interac-
tions important for the viral formation, by necessity it does not account for the detailed
site-speciﬁc interactions that are also part of the self-assembly. Overall, the molecular
thermodynamic model is able to quantify the free energies of capsid formation for both
empty capsids and nucleocapsids in good agreement with experimental data.
6.2.1
Energetics of Viral Assembly
Capsid formation is entropy driven associated with the reorganization of water
molecules for hydrophobic interactions and the release of massive counterions due to
the binding of the nucleic acids with oppositely charged polypeptides. Experimental
investigations on the formation of viral capsids and polyelectrolyte complexes ren-
der an excellent starting point for interrogating the molecular driving forces of the
capsid assembly processes. Despite decades of theoretical eﬀorts from a fundamental
perspective, a microscopic approach is yet to be established to quantify hydrophobic
and polyelectrolyte complex interactions. Fortunately, a number of semi-empirical
models are readily available to capture the entropic eﬀects responsible for the virus
assembly. We use such models in this work to describe hydrophobic and polyelec-
trolyte interactions underlying the formation of empty and RNA-loaded HBV capsids.
While the discussion here is mainly focused on HBV, we expect that the procedures
are similarly applicable to capsid formation for other viruses.
6.2.1.1
Rigid Capsids
It was proposed ﬁrst by Crick and Watson that many small viruses have an icosahedral
capsid with near perfect arrangement of protein subunits [73]. The lattice structure gives
the repeating subunits an identical environment and allows for a good estimation of the
formation free energy simply based on the contact value of the protein–protein interac-
tions [57]. While a thermodynamic model has been proposed before for the formation of
empty HBV capsids from the assembly domain of the core proteins (viz., HBcAg without
CTD) [74], the icosahedral lattice was not explicitly used in the previous work.

142
Self-Assembling Systems
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
1.6nm 
3.2nm 
Figure 6.5 A course-grained model for the arrangement of HBV capsomers on T3 and T4 capsids. (a)
Each capsomer consists of two core proteins (HBcAg without CTD), depicted as three tangentially
connected spheres with their radii determined from the protein crystal structure. (b) A lattice model
for the arrangement of capsid proteins at a triangular facet of a T3 capsid. (c) The lattice model for a T4
capsid. In both cases, the major capsid holes are shown as hexagons and triangles.
In our coarse-grained representation of an HBV capsid, we assume that each capsomer
has a rigid structure that can be described by three tangentially connected spheres mim-
icking the topology of HBcAg determined from experiments. Figure 6.5 shows schemat-
ically the lattice model for the arrangement of HBV capsomers at the triangular facets
of T3 and T4 capsids. The diameters of these coarse-grained segments are selected such
that they approximately reproduce the protein volume as determined from the crystal
structure [24]. The large sphere of the capsomer, 3.2 nm in diameter, corresponds to the
4-helix bundle of each HBcAg subunit. The large sphere is ﬂanged between two small
spheres, each 1.6nm in diameter, representing the base part of the HBcAg assembly
domain (see Figure 6.3). According to the crystalline structure of the HBV capsids and
the icosahedral symmetry [75], each subunit has four nearest neighbors in both T3 and
T4 capsids, joined through hydrophobic contacts.
The Helmholtz free energy of capsid formation corresponds to the reversible work
to bring the subunits from inﬁnitely apart to the T3 or T4 icosahedral lattice. Approxi-
mately, the free energy can be decomposed into contributions due to hydrophobic (Fhyd),
van der Waals (Fvdw), and electrostatic (Fele) interactions:
ΔF0 = Fhyd + Fvdw + Fele.
(6.1)
As has been well documented [76], the hydrophobic interaction is short-ranged and
can be related to the solvent accessible surface area of the protein subunits. While
both van der Waals and electrostatic interactions are longer-ranged, depending on the
protein–protein separations and the salt concentration. These longer-ranged potentials
are relatively insigniﬁcant for the formation of empty HBV capsids because of the low
charge density of the assembly domain of the core proteins and the small Hamaker
constant for proteins in an aqueous solution [51].
The coarse-grained model for the subunits shown in Figure 6.5 allows us to estimate
the hydrophobic free energy without explicitly accounting for the protein surface area.
Because the subunits are in contact only through the small spheres, the total hydropho-
bic free energy of association corresponds to a summation of their contact hydrophobic
potentials. According to a recent work on hydrophobic interactions [77], the potential

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
143
of mean force between two hydrophobic spheres of diameter σ = 1.6nm at contact can
be estimated from the overlapping volume of the hydration layers:
𝛽whyd = −A𝜎2
w(2𝜎w + 3𝜎),
(6.2)
where 𝜎W = 2.8 Å denotes the diameter of a water molecule, and A is a constant reﬂect-
ing the diﬀerence between the entropy of water molecules within the solvation shell and
that in the bulk [77]. Based on the solubility of small hydrocarbons in water over the tem-
perature range of interest in this work, we ﬁnd that parameter A (in units of nm−3) can
be linearly correlated with the absolute temperature:
A = 0.067T + 4.481.
(6.3)
Substituting the expression for A into Equation (6.2) gives the reduced hydrophobic
free energy for each inter-dimer contact,
𝛽whyd = −0.028T −1.883,
(6.4)
where 𝛽= 1/(kB T), kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature.
According to Equation (6.4), the hydrophobic free energy between the neighboring
dimers is around −6 kcal∕mol at room temperature (T = 298K). The value is close
to that estimated by Ceres and Zlotnick [57] and comparable to the binding free
energy used in molecular simulation of capsid assembly [78]. In a T4 HBV capsid,
our coarse-grained model predicts 120 × 4∕2 = 240 direct contacts between small
hydrophobic spheres, which yields a hydrophobic free energy of Fhyd = 240whyd. For a
T3 capsid, the hydrophobic free energy is Fhyd = 180whyd.
We can predict the van der Waals energy between the protein subunits using the
standard equations from the colloids literature [79]. Because the solvent-mediated van
der Waals force between small spheres is insigniﬁcant in comparison to the hydropho-
bic potential, we may estimate the van der Waals energy from that between the large
spheres. For spherical particles much larger than a water molecule, the van der Waals
free energy is given by
wvdw = −H𝜎L
24d .
(6.5)
In Equation (6.5), 𝜎L = 3.2 nm is the diameter of the large sphere in our
coarse-grained model of the capsomers, H denotes the Hamaker constant, and
d = 0.8 nm is the surface-to-surface distance between the large spheres. For proteins
in water, the Hamaker constant is not subject to large variations [80]. In this work, we
assume H ≈4 × 10−21 J, independent of temperature. Using this Hamaker constant,
we calculate the van der Waals energy for the attraction between two neighboring
capsomers, about −0.1kcal∕mol. As expected, the contribution of van der Waals energy
to the free energy of capsid formation is much smaller than that of the hydrophobic
interaction. Nevertheless, each big sphere interacts with four nearest neighbors and, in
a T4 HBV capsid, the total van der Waals free energy is Fvdw ≈−40H. For a T3 capsid,
the total van der Waals free energy is Fvdw ≈−30H.
We follow Kegel and van der Schoot [70] to estimate the electrostatic repulsion among
the subunits. In this model, the electrostatic charges are assumed to distribute uniformly
kat the surface of a spherical capsid shell. The free energy of surface charging is given by
Fele = Ac . 𝜎2 . lB . 𝜅−1. kBT,
(6.6)

144
Self-Assembling Systems
where Ac represents the total charged surface area, 𝜎is the charge density, lB stands for
the Bjerrum length, 𝜅−1 = 1∕
√
8𝜋lB𝜌s is the Debye screening length, and 𝜌s is the overall
number density of ions in the electrolyte solution. The Bjerrum length depends only on
temperature and the solvent dielectric constant:
lB = e2 ∕(4𝜋𝜀0𝜀rkBT),
(6.7)
where e is the unit charge, 𝜀0 is the vacuum permittivity, and 𝜀r is the solvent dielec-
tric constant. Over the temperature range considered in this work (273K to 318K),
the water dielectric constant can be accurately represented by an empirical quadratic
function of the absolute temperature (in Kelvin) [81]:
𝜀r(T) = 249.21 −0.79069T + (0.72997 × 10−3)T2.
(6.8)
We estimate the eﬀective charge density from the number of charged residues in
the region of α-helical hairpins (50–110 aa) of the capsid proteins. This region forms
spikes at the capsid surface and is depicted as a large sphere in our dimer model. At the
physiological condition, each native HBV core protein contains eight charged residues
in the α-helical hairpin domain [24]. The same number was used in an earlier work
for the capsid charge without CTD [70]. We assume that these charges are uniformly
distributed at a spherical surface of R = 15nm in radius, approximately equal to the
inner radius of the T4 capsid. From the spherical cavity model, we can estimate the
parameters 𝜎and Ac.
6.2.1.2
Nucleocapsids
We may extend the coarse-grained model discussed above to formation of nucleocapsids
by including additional contributions due to the CTD tails and nucleic acids. Both T3
and T4 capsids may contain ssRNA, ssDNA, or dsDNA, depending on the speciﬁc stage
of HBV replication. For simplicity, here we consider only T4 capsids containing ssRNA.
Similar models can be applied to capsids containing either ssDNA or dsDNA.
We assume that, at the physiological condition, every arginine residue carries one
positive charge, every glutamate residue or phosphorylated serine (155th, 162th, and
170th residue) carries one negative charge, and all other residues from the CTD are
electrostatically neutral. Accordingly, the CTD chain of a wild type capsid has 16
positive (valence Zi = 1), 4 negative (Zi = −1), and 14 neutral (Zi = 0) amino-acid
residues. To describe the molecular excluded volume eﬀects, we describe the CTD
chains as tangentially connected hard spheres, each sphere standing for one aa residue.
These coarse-grained segments have the same size (with diameter ac = 0.5 nm) but
diﬀerent electrostatic valences. Similarly, the conﬁned RNA chain is represented by a
tangentially connected chain of charged spheres with identical diameter and valence,
ar = 0.75nm and Zr = −1, respectively. While recent theoretical studies suggest the
importance of the secondary structure of RNA in the formation of nucleocapsids
[83, 84], it is known that RNA encapsidation in HBV is not sensitive to the genome
origin and that nucleocapsid formation is mainly driven by strong and non-speciﬁc
RNA–CTD interactions [60]. As a result, we may assume that the RNA sequence, and,
subsequently, speciﬁc forms of the secondary structure, have little eﬀect on capsid
formation. In both wild type and E. coli regenerated T4 capsids, the number of RNA
segments is about 3400, and the RNA content is slightly less in a T3 nucleocapsid [54].

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
145
Region 2
Region 1
CTD
RNA
R
D
Figure 6.6 A schematic representation of an HBV nucleocapsid containing CTD and RNA chains. Here,
D denotes the thickness of Region 2, and R ∼12.6nm is the radius at the capsid interior wall. The
electron-microscopy image of an HBV capsid is adapted from the literature [82].
In comparison to empty capsids, nucleocapsid formation includes an additional free
energy due to the change in the conformations of encapsidated chains, the molecu-
lar excluded volume eﬀects, the entropy of mixing among macromolecules and small
ions, and electrostatic interactions. All these contributions can be estimated from the
polymer model shown schematically in Figure 6.6. According to this model, the capsid
conﬁning eﬀect is represented by a spherical cavity of radius R. The inner space of the
capsid is divided into two regions: Region 1 is free of polymers, and Region 2 consists
of the nucleic acids associated with the CTD chains. The division between these two
regions, i.e., the thickness of the complex region D, can be determined by minimization
of the complexation free energy,
𝜕Fplex(D)
𝜕D
= 0.
(6.9)
The electrolyte solution of small ions in Region 1 is fully equilibrated with the sur-
roundings and makes negligible contribution to the free energy of capsid formation.
For RNA and CTD chains in Region 2, the concentrations of cations and anions, 𝜌2
+
and 𝜌2
−, are deﬁned by the Donnan equilibrium:
𝜌2
+ 𝜌2
−= 𝜌0
2,
(6.10)
𝜌2
+ −𝜌2
−−𝜌p = 0,
(6.11)
where 𝜌p stands for the total charge density of RNA and CTD chains, and 𝜌0 denotes
the overall number densities of small ions in Region 1. The total charge density of the
biomacromolecules is related to their molecular characteristics and the volume of
Region 2:
V2 = 4𝜋(R2D −RD2 + D3∕3).
(6.12)
The free energy of complex formation reﬂects the diﬀerence between the free energy
of the conﬁned polymer chains and those corresponding to isolated RNA and CTD
chains at inﬁnite dilution. Approximately, this free energy includes contributions due
to the changes in polymer elastic energies (elas), segment excluded volume eﬀects (exc),

146
Self-Assembling Systems
electrostatic interactions, and the entropy of mixing [85]:
Fplex = ΔFr
elas + ΔFc
elas + ΔFexc + ΔFels.
(6.13)
We calculate the change in elastic energy for transferring the RNA from an isolated
state to that in the spherical shell from the freely rotating chain model,
𝛽ΔFr
elas = 𝜋2nrar
2
6D2
,
(6.14)
where nr ≈3400 is the number of nucleotide segments in the RNA chain, and ar is the
monomer diameter. In Equation (6.14), the proportionality constant accords with the
ground-state dominance approximation [86]. Similarly, the conformation free energy
associated with the conﬁnement of CTD tails is obtained from [87]
𝛽ΔFc
elas = 3
2Nt
(Re
2
D2 + D2
Re
2
)
,
(6.15)
where Nt = 240 is the number of CTD tails in each T4 capsid, and Re is the average
end-to-end distance for a free CTD chain. Assuming that each CTD tail is a freely
rotating chain with a bond angle of 116∘, we have R2
e ≈2.56nca2
c where nc = 34 is the
number of amino-acid residues and ac is the segment diameter.
At inﬁnite dilution, the excluded volume is negligible for CTD and RNA chains. In
that case, the excluded-volume free energy can be estimated from the modiﬁed Flory
theory for the polyelectrolyte complex [74]:
𝛽ΔFexc = νrNr
2 + νrcNrNc + νcN2
c
4𝜋R2D
,
(6.16)
where ν stands for segmental excluded volume. In principle, ν depends on both the seg-
ment size and electrostatic interactions [84, 88, 89]. Here we use the “bare” excluded
volumes of the polymers on the right-hand side of Equation (6.16), i.e., νr = 4𝜋ar
2∕3,
νc = 4𝜋ac
3∕3, and νrc = 4𝜋{(ar + ac)∕2}3 ∕3 for RNA, CTD, and RNA–CTD interac-
tions, respectively. As detailed in the following, we account for the charge eﬀects along
with their Coulomb interactions with the small ions.
The excess free energy due to electrostatic interactions and entropy of mixing can be
calculated from the Overbeek–Voorn (OV) theory for polyelectrolyte complexes [90],
𝛽Fels = −V2𝜅2
3
12𝜋
+
∑
i
Ni ln 𝜙i,
(6.17)
where 𝜅2 represents the Debye screening parameter (in Region 2), Ni stands for the
number of RNA or CTD chains or salt ions, and 𝜙i = niνiNi ∕V2 represents the volume
fraction. For simplicity, we assume that ni = 1 for salt ions, and that the ionic molar
volume is the same as that for water molecules, νi = 18cm3∕mol. For RNA and CTD
chains, the volume of individual segments is related to the segment diameter.
Because the OV theory includes the electrostatic energy and the entropy of mixing
among small ions, we must subtract from Equation (6.17) the free energy corresponding
to the background electrolyte occupying the same volume and the free energies of RNA
and CTD chains at inﬁnite dilution. In calculating the background free energy, the salt
concentration is the same as that of the bulk and the polymer concentration vanishes.
To use the OV theory for RNA and CTD chains at inﬁnite dilution, we assume that the

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
147
electrostatic energy and entropy of mixing are the same as those corresponding to a
conﬁned chain in a spherical cage with cavity radius the same as the polymer gyration
radius. According to the literature [91–94], the radius of gyration for a single RNA chain
depends on its chain length and the surrounding salt concentration,
Rg,r = 5.84 × n1∕3
r
C−1∕8
s
,
(6.18)
where Rg has units of Å and Cs is in M. We calculate the radius of gyration for each CTD
chain according to the freely rotating chain model with a bond angle of 116∘:
Rg,c = (0.43nca2
c∕6)1∕2.
(6.19)
We use diﬀerent models for RNA/CTD in energetic and geometric characterizations
because the former is divided into several interrelated contributions (e.g., elastic, elec-
trostatic, etc.) while the latter (e.g., the radius of gyration) represents the overall behavior
of polymer chains.
6.2.2
Thermodynamics of Capsid Formation and Stability
The stability of HBV capsids has been analyzed by in vitro experiments either with or
without the genomic materials. In both cases, the intermediate structures are insigniﬁ-
cant, suggesting that the thermodynamics of capsid formation can be described in terms
of a one-step process similar to that commonly used for micellization. While micelles
often show a broad polydispersity in terms of size and shape, viral capsids adopt a nearly
uniform size due to the quasi-equivalence of the capsid proteins arranged in a lattice-like
structure
6.2.2.1
Stability of CTD-Free Empty Capsids
As mentioned above, in vitro formation of empty HBV capsids free of CTD can be
described by the single-step model, i.e., in terms of a quasi-chemical reaction for the
core protein dimers [95],
N × Dimer ↔Capsid,
(6.20)
Where N = 90 and 120 for T3 and T4 capsids, respectively [75]. In a dilute solution, the
equilibrium dimer concentration (D0) and that of the fully assembled capsids (C) satisfy
the mass action law
KC = [C]∕[D0]N,
(6.21)
where KC denotes the apparent equilibrium constant. In terms of the mole fractions of
dimers (XD0) and capsids (XC), the equilibrium constant is dimensionless:
K0 =
XC
XN D0
.
(6.22)
We can ﬁnd the connection between the two equilibrium constants by converting the
molar concentrations into the corresponding mole fractions:
[D0] = [W] ⋅XD0,
[C] = [W] ⋅XC,
(6.23)

148
Self-Assembling Systems
where [W] is the molarity of pure water. Substituting Equation (6.23) into (6.22) gives
ln K0 = ln Kc + (N −1) ln[W].
(6.24)
The free energy of capsid formation is related to the dimensionless equilibrium
constant
ΔF0 = −kBT ln K0.
(6.25)
According to Equation (6.25), the free energy of capsid formation reﬂects the diﬀerence
between the chemical potential of the empty capsid and that of the CTD-truncated pro-
tein dimers at the standard conditions, i.e., in their corresponding hypothetical pure
states [70]. With the concentrations of the core-protein dimers and the fully assembled
capsids measured at various equilibrium conditions, we can quantify the equilibrium
constant and subsequently the free energy of capsid formation [51].
We compare in Figure 6.7 the theoretical predictions with in vitro experiments for
the equilibrium constants of empty T4 capsids over a large range of temperatures and
salt concentrations [57]. Here, the symbols represent the experimental data from the in
vitro formation of CTD-free empty T4 HBV capsids, and the lines are from our theoret-
ical predictions. Clearly, the coarse-grained model captures both the temperature and
salinity eﬀects on the capsid stability. In light of the simplicity of the theoretical model
and noticeable scattering in the experimental data, the quantitative agreement between
the theory and experiment is satisfactory. Our theoretical results further support the
conjecture that capsid formation is a one-step process, mainly driven by hydrophobic
interactions [57]. In addition, we ﬁnd that the contact hydrophobic free energy can be
quantitatively described with the solvation shell model [77].
It has been shown that the self-assembly of empty HBV capsids from CTD-truncated
core proteins is entropy driven, primarily due to inter-dimer hydrophobic interactions
[57]. If one divides the free energy of capsid formation into the contact values between
nearest neighboring dimers, the equilibrium constant provides an indirect measure of
the pair association constant [51],
Kcontact = (NK0∕jN−1)2∕cN,
(6.26)
2.3
2.1
InK0 × 10−3
1.9
1.715
25
35
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.15
T (°C)
45
Figure 6.7 The equilibrium constant
for the formation of CTD-free empty
T4 capsids. Symbols are experimental
data [57] and lines are theoretical
predictions. The salt concentration (M)
is denoted beside each line.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
149
where j represents the degeneracy of the capsid with N dimers, and c stands for the
number of contacts per dimer. The association free energy per contact (for each dime
pair) is then given by
𝛥Fcontact = −kBT ln Kcontact.
(6.27)
Experiments for in vitro assembly of empty HBV capsids indicate that the aver-
age value for the contact free energy is between −3 and −4 kcal∕mol, which is
“surprisingly” small in comparison to alternative estimations based on the dimer
structure (∼−10 kcal∕mol) [57]. The discrepancy was attributed to multiple causes
including possible changes in the protein structure due to the self-assembly, the
pairwise additivity assumption for the binding free energy, or the imprecise calculation
of the hydrophobic interactions. As shown in Figure 6.7, our thermodynamic model
faithfully captures the equilibrium constant for the assembly of empty T4 in all
conditions.
Whereas hydrophobic attractions are mainly responsible for empty capsid formation,
it is worthwhile mentioning that electrostatic interactions and van der Waals forces are
also needed to attain a quantitative performance of the theoretical model. For example,
Figure 6.8 shows the equilibrium constant versus temperature at 0.15M salt condition.
Excluding van der Waals association free energy (Fvdw) would result in a systematic devi-
ation from the experimental values. The sensitivity of the numerical results is related,
in part, to the partial cancelation of the electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions, and
to the large number of proteins for the formation of a capsid. Besides, the sensitivity
also reﬂects the exponential relationship between the formation free energy and the
equilibrium constant.
It has been shown before that, at higher temperature or salt concentration, the HBV
capsids become more stable and the increased stability can be rationalized in terms of
hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions between capsid proteins [57, 70, 96]. Our
numerical analysis conﬁrms the dependence of protein–protein interactions on both
temperature and ionic strength [66, 71, 97]. It is worthwhile noting that other eﬀects may
also inﬂuence the capsid satiability. For example, the increase in ionic strength might
lead to the conformation change of the capsid protein, thereby enhancing the capsid
Figure 6.8 The eﬀect of van der
Waals force on capsid stability. The
symbols and the dashed line are the
same as those shown in Figure 6.7,
and the solid line represents ln K0
without considering van der Waals
interactions.
2
1.9
InK0 × 10−3
1.8
1.7
1.620
30
25
35
40
T (°C)
45

150
Self-Assembling Systems
stability [57]. Besides, chemicals such as zinc ions or heteroaryl dihydro pyrimidines
may also alter the conformation of the capsid protein, preventing their proper assembly
[98–101]. Recent experiments indicate that mutation on certain residues of the capsid
protein modulates the tendency of capsid assembly [102–105].
6.2.2.2
Stability of Nucleocapsids
Our thermodynamic analysis can be similarly applied to the assembly of HBV nucleo-
capsids with native core protein dimers in the presence of either RNA or DNA. In this
case, the quasi-chemical reaction becomes
N × Dimer (D) + Nucleic Acids (NA) ↔Nucleocapsid (NC),
(6.28)
and the corresponding equation for the mass action law is
KNC =
[NC]
[D]N[NA].
(6.29)
In a dilute solution, the apparent equilibrium constant is related to the free energy of
capsid formation,
𝛽ΔF = −ln KNC −N ln[W].
(6.30)
Assuming that NC capsids maintain the structure integrity for both the core-protein
assembly domain as well as the capsid shell, we may divide the free energy of nucleo-
capsid formation in terms of that corresponding to the formation of a CTD-free empty
capsid, designated as ΔF0, and a contribution due to CTD–RNA/DNA interactions and
encapsidation of biomacromolecules:
ΔF = ΔF0 + Fplex ,
(6.31)
where Fplex denotes the free energy of polyelectrolyte complexation between CTD and
nucleic acids. Interestingly, complex formation between oppositely charged polyelec-
trolytes is also entropy driven, primarily due to the release of a large number of counte-
rions associated with the electrostatic binding, i.e., between the positively charged CTD
chains and negatively charged nucleic acids [106]. Whereas in vitro assemblies of both
empty and RNA-containing nucleocapsids have been recently demonstrated [60, 61,
107, 108], we are unaware of explicit quantiﬁcation of the formation free energy for HBV
nucleocapsid at diﬀerent solution conditions. Because native HBV core proteins are able
to assemble into empty capsids both in vitro and in vivo, the competition between empty
and nucleocapsids makes the experimental procedure for studying nucleocapsid forma-
tion conceivably much more diﬃcult than that for empty capsids.
Figure 6.9 shows our theoretical predictions for the encapsidation free energy of RNA
and CTD chains versus the thickness of the polyelectrolyte complex, D. As expected,
the free energy shows a minimum at an optimal D, which varies with the solution con-
ditions. In these calculations, we use R = 13nm for the inner radius of the HBV capsid,
and calculate the ion concentrations from the Donnan equilibrium with polymer charge
density 𝜌p = 520∕V2. For the range of bulk salt concentrations (0.1 ∼0.7 M) considered
in this work, the optimal complex thickness lies around 10.5 ∼11 nm, much larger than
that detected in cryo-EM measurements.
Nucleocapsids are expected to be thermodynamically more stable than the corre-
sponding empty capsids owing to the strong electrostatic attraction between RNA

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
151
Figure 6.9 The free energy of
encapsidation for CTD and RNA
chains as a function of the thickness
of the complex layer. The salt
concentration (M) is denoted beside
each line, and the minimum points
are indicated by triangle symbols.
βFplex × 10−3
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
5
7
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
9
11
D (nm)
13
and oppositely charged CTD chains. To validate this hypothesis, Figure 6.10 shows
the eﬀects of salt concentration on the total free energy of CTD/RNA encapsidation.
For all conditions considered in this work, Fplex is negative, indicating that RNA
encapsidation indeed stabilizes the T4 capsid. As expected, the complex formation
free energy becomes less negative as the salt concentration increases. Experimental
studies conﬁrmed that the nucleocapsids are more stable than the corresponding empty
capsids [54, 61]. The enhanced stability was also suggested by a previous theoretical
investigation [109]. Figure 6.10 shows that the encapsidation free energy approaches
zero at suﬃciently high salt concentration (Cs). In agreement with experiments, the
stabilizing eﬀect of complex formation is most eﬀective when Cs is relatively small.
We may explain the overall salt eﬀect on the nucleocapsid stability as a balance of
protein–protein and RNA–CTD interactions. While salt ions reduce the electrostatic
repulsion between capsid proteins, they also abate the electrostatic binding energy
between CTD and RNA chains. As a result, nucleocapsid assembly would be most
favorable at an intermediate salt condition. Indeed, an intermediate salt condition
(0.25 ∼0.35M) must be applied for in vitro nucleocapsid assembly (e.g., [61, 82]).
Figure 6.10 The encapsidation free
energy for CTD and RNA chains in a
T4 capsid (𝛽Fplex) as a function of the
salt concentration (CS).
Cs (M)
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
βFplex × 10−3

152
Self-Assembling Systems
6.2.3
Modulation Eﬀects
Recently, several strategies have been proposed to design new drug molecules for
HBV by controlling the kinetics of capsid assembly and stability [110]. For example,
heteroacryl- dihydropyrimidine (HAP) is able to disrupt capsid formation [99–101].
Because of the potential therapeutic values of such molecules, it is worthwhile testing
whether or not our model is able to capture their eﬀects on HBV capsid formation.
According to previous publications [99–101], HAP molecules are able to interca-
late at the dimer–dimer contact regions of the capsid proteins, and HAP intercalation
enhances dimer–dimer association. HAP disrupts capsid formation mainly by kinetic
trapping of the assembly intermediates due to the increased hydrophobic association
between capsid proteins. The strengthened capsid association is due to the ﬁlling of the
void hydrophobic regions while keeping the dimer–dimer distance unchanged [101].
Such a wedging eﬀect is naturally accounted for in our hydrophobic model for the cap-
somers association. As shown in Figures 6.5b and 6.5c, the modulation eﬀect would be
most signiﬁcant if the size and shape of the hydrophobic molecule could match those
corresponding to the hydrophobic pores of two-fold symmetry or triangular wedges
between dimer–dimer contact regions.
We may also predict a scenario such that hydrophilic molecules are able to bind the
dimer contact regions of the capsid proteins [111]. In this case, the association energy
would be decreased due to the reduction of the dimer contact area. Figure 6.11 shows
that a reduction of the hydrophobic patch area of the protein dimers by 10% would
decrease the capsid stability by ∼200 in the ln K value. For comparison, we consider
the eﬀect of electrostatic interactions on the capsid stability by increasing either the
charged surface area or the surface charge density. Figure 6.11 indicates that the inﬂu-
ence is much less signiﬁcant in comparison to the hydrophobic eﬀect. According to our
thermodynamic model, an eﬃcient HBV “modulator” should bind speciﬁcally to the
base part of the HBcAg assembly domain while enhancing repulsion among the protein
InK0 × 10−3
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.420
25
30
33
40
45
T (°C)
WT
Increased charged area
+e of surface charged per CP
Loss of hydrobic patch area
Figure 6.11 Hydrophobic and
electrostatic eﬀects on the equilibrium
constant of empty HBV capsids. The
solid line corresponds to the theoretical
results if there is a 10% reduction of the
buried hydrophobic area at each dimer
contact; the dotted line is for a 10%
increase of the capsid charged area;
and the dashed line is for an increase of
one unit charge for each capsid protein.
For comparison, also shown in this
ﬁgure are the equilibrium constants of
wild type capsids from theory (WT,
dash-dotted line) and experiment
(circle points) at 0.15M.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
153
subunits, such as an amphiphilic molecule with a hydrophobic binding domain associ-
ated with a charged group or a hydrophilic chain. The hypothesis may be easily validated
with future experiments.
6.2.4
T3/T4 Dimorphism
T3 and T4 capsids form concurrently during both in vivo and in vitro syntheses of HBV
capsids. The composition of dimorphism reﬂects the diﬀerence in the free energy of
capsid formation. Because each dimer maintains the same number of contact neighbors
in both T3 and T4 capsids (see Figure 6.5), the association energy between dimer units
has little inﬂuence on T3 and T4 dimorphism except that the number of dimers is 90
in T3 instead of 120 in T4. However, the size of an empty T3 capsid is slightly larger
than would be expected according to the degree of association. The average radius of a
T4 capsid is around 15nm, and that of the T3 capsid is 13.3nm [55]. Accordingly, the
ratio of spherical surface area is 13.32 : 152 = 0.786 : 1, which is slightly larger than the
ratio for the number of capsomers (0.75 : 1). Such a loosely assembled structure can be
depicted in our capsid model by setting two small units at each dimer contact slightly
farther apart, i.e., by setting the distance between small units to 1.5nm for a T3 capsid
instead of 1.4nm as for the T4 capsid.
Table 6.1 presents the hydrophobic contact energy and the electrostatic repulsion
energy calculated from our thermodynamic model. Due to the reduced hydrophobic
potential, the free energy for T3 capsid formation per each monomer (−4 kBT) is signif-
icantly less negative that that of the T4 form (−7.7kBT). The higher energy state for T3
capsids explains the prevalence of T4 capsids at both in vivo and in vitro conditions [55].
Table 6.1 Free energy of self-assembly for T3 and T4 capsids.
T4 (Cp149*, HBeAg**)
T3 (Cp149*)
T3 (HBeAg**)
Number of monomers (n)
240
180
180
Rave
15
13.3*
12.9**
Fcap
−1856.19
−725.99
−1540.13
Fcap∕n
−7.73
−4.03
−8.55
Fhyd+vdw
−2592.44
−1252.77
−2100.08
Fhyd+vdw ∕n
−10.80
−6.96
−11.67
Fele
736.25
526.78
559.95
Fele ∕n
3.07
2.93
3.11
The average radius (Rave) is obtained from Zlotnick et al. for Cp149 capsid* [55], and
from Wingﬁeld et al. for HBeAg capsid** [54]. Unit of R is nm. The free energy of
capsid formation, Fcap, and its division into hydrophobic and van der Waals
interactions, Fhyd+vdw, and electrostatic interaction Fele are compared with the
corresponding values per monomer for both T4 and T3 capsids. Here the unit of
energy is kBT, and the solution condition is 37 ∘C and 0.15 M salt.

154
Self-Assembling Systems
The higher energy for T3 capsids agrees with an earlier analysis of the capsid stability in
vacuum [112].
It has been suggested that the capsid protein plays an important role in T4/T3 dimor-
phism [54, 55]. Without CTD, T4 capsids are more prevalent than T3 capsids. However,
truncation of more than 34 C-terminal residues inverts the relative composition, i.e.,
T3 capsids may be preferred over the T4 form at the same assembly condition [54, 55].
We demonstrated above that the coarse-grained model provides a good description of
empty capsid formation without CTD (CP149). For comparison, we may also quantify
another truncation case where only 3–144 aa residues of the wild type capsid protein are
maintained. Such a system was studied many years ago by Wingﬁeld et al. [54]. Follow-
ing their data, we estimate that the mean radius of the T3 capsid is 12.9nm, while that
for T4 is 15.1nm. Because the ratio of the spherical surface area is now slightly smaller
than the dimer number ratio, the T3 capsid is more tightly assembled in comparison to
a conventional T4 capsid. In a T3 capsid, the contact distance between nearest dimers
(r) is about 1.38nm. Although the change of r is small (about 10% of the small unit
overlap distance), the contact free energy per each monomer increases up to −8.6 kBT,
explaining the prevalence of the T3 capsids (see Table 6.1). As discussed in the following,
the dimorphism of the HBV capsid is also sensitive to the variation of the C-terminal
domain of the capsid proteins.
We have also evaluated the eﬀects of RNA–CTD interaction on the dimorphism of
HBV nucleocapsids. It is well known that T3 nucleocapsids are rare (<5%) in both in vivo
or in vitro assembly [113]. To check the dimorphic probability using our nucleocapsid
model, we estimate the pgRNA and CTD encapsidation free energy in a way similar to
that for T4 nucleocapsids. For T3 nucleocapsids, we set the radius of the inside shell to
11nm, considering that the capsid thickness is about 2 nm. Whereas the encapsidation
free energy on a T4 capsid is to be obtained in a self-consistent way with respect to an
optimal thickness D for an RNA–CTD complex region, the CTD–RNA association in
a T3 capsid tends to spread into the entire capsid lumen without reaching a free energy
minimum. The absence of a polymer-free Region 1 is probably because the excluded vol-
ume eﬀect is too large to package pgRNA into a narrow T3 nucleocapsid. A recent study
on in vitro encapsidation of nanoparticles also indicates that the volumetric restriction
makes T3 nucleocapsids less stable than T4 nucleocapsids [114]. For pgRNA encapsi-
dation in WT T3 nucleocapsids, our model predicts that the free energy of CTD–RNA
complex formation, Fplex = −1863kBT at 37 ∘C with 0.15M salt condition. At the same
condition, Fplex = −4582kBT for a T4 nucleocapsid. Because the stabilizing eﬀect by
RNA–CTD complex formation is much smaller for T3 nucleocapsids, we ascertain that
the energetics in genome encapsidation results in the prevalence of T4 nucleocapsids.
6.3
Electrostatics of Genome Packaging
Recent mutagenesis studies indicate that pgRNA packaging is strongly correlated with
the net charge of the CTD tails, leading to the so-called “charge balance hypothesis”
[59, 115, 116]. A partial truncation of the ﬂexible, highly charged CTD tails reduces
the amount of encapsidated RNA, and restoring the arginine residues to the truncated
CTD increases the nucleic content. A positive correlation between the C-terminal
tail length and the RNA content was conﬁrmed by cryo-EM measurements [117].

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
155
While the charge balance hypothesis entails a stoichiometry-like correlation between
basic residues and their binding partner of nucleic acids, a more quantitative description
of the charge–charge relation is diﬃcult to establish because electrostatic interaction
between macromolecules is aﬀected not only by the net charges of the macromolecules
but also by the solution conditions such as salt concentration, identities of low molecu-
lar weight ions, pH, and temperature [104]. Besides, the charge distribution at the CTD
tails may also play an important role. For example, it is unclear whether all arginine
residues at the C-terminus make equal contributions to the electrostatic interaction
with encapsidated RNA or DNA during the HBV life cycle [116].
The regulative role of electrostatic interactions in capsid formation has been identi-
ﬁed before for many ss-RNA/DNA viruses [118–126]. Like HBV, genome packaging is
intimately aﬃliated with electrostatic interactions between the nucleic acids and oppo-
sitely charged, ﬂexible domains of the capsid proteins [127]. Several theoretical studies
suggest that viral packaging conforms with a ﬁxed charge ratio between nucleic acids
and capsid proteins [128–132]. A conserved ratio (N∕Q = 1.61) of the genome size (N)
to the overall charge of capsid proteins (Q) was observed for more than 30 wild type
viruses. While the universality of a linear relation between capsid charge and genome
size has been partially justiﬁed [68], its applicability to all viruses was challenged by
more recent theoretical studies [46, 62]. Genome packaging involves other mechanisms
such as the Donnan equilibrium [46] and speciﬁc eﬀects including the genome structure
[83, 91] that may lead to nonlinearity or diﬀerent charge ratios in complexation between
macromolecules of opposite charges.
6.3.1
Thermodynamics of RNA Encapsidation
To a certain degree, the thermodynamics of RNA encapsidation may be considered as an
equilibrium partition of a long RNA chain between the inner and outer space of the cap-
sid. Figure 6.12 depicts, schematically, a packaged chain at the early stage of assembly.
The exposed portion of the RNA chain is eventually degraded by intracellular nuclease
[115, 133], and the inside portion deﬁnes the optimal size of the genome.
The thermodynamic potential for RNA fragments both inside and outside the capsid
can be written as
F = Fcap + Fout,
(6.32)
where Fcap accounts for the free energy of the entire nucleocapsids, and Fout represents
the energy of the exposed RNA in the local cellular environment outside capsid. At equi-
librium, the optimal genome size minimizes the overall potential, i.e.,
𝜕F
𝜕NRNA
= 0,
(6.33)
where NRNA stands for the number of nucleotides of the packaged RNA chain.
We may estimate the free energy of RNA outside the capsid from the reversible
work to insert the unpackaged RNA segments into the cellular environment. The free
energy of RNA insertion corresponds to the volumetric work to create a cavity in a
cellular milieu (П ≈5 bar [134, 135]),
Fout = ПvR(NpgRNA −NRNA),
(6.34)

156
Self-Assembling Systems
Unpackaged RNA
Nucleocapsid
pgRNA
CTD
Figure 6.12 Schematic of RNA packaging in an HBV nucleocapsid. The optimal genome size can be
determined from a partial encapsidation of the RNA chain that minimizes the thermodynamic
potential of the entire nucleocapsid in an aqueous electrolyte solution. The unpackaged RNA
fragments are subjected to degradation by intracellular nucleases.
where νR stands for the excluded volume of each RNA segment, and NpgRNA is the num-
ber of segments of the entire pgRNA chain. Because the free energy for the outside part
of the RNA is a linear function of NRNA, its derivative with respect to NRNA, i.e., the ther-
modynamic potential, is independent of the size of the unpackaged RNA. It has been
shown that, under the cellular osmotic pressure, the contribution to the total thermo-
dynamic potential due to the exposed RNA is relatively minor [136].
The thermodynamic potential within the nucleocapsid accounts for the genome–
capsid interactions with the participation of salt ions. The corresponding semi-grand
potential (Fcap) depends on the compositions of the RNA and CTD chains, the chemical
potentials of the small ions, and the interaction potentials between those components
and the capsid shell:
Fcap =
∑
𝛼=±ions ∫dr𝜌𝛼(r)[ln 𝜌𝛼(r) −1]
+
∑
𝛼=±ions ∫dr𝜌𝛼(r)[ψ𝛼(r) −𝜇𝛼]
+
∑
M=R,T ∫dR𝜌M(R) ψM(R) −Fex,
(6.35)
where subscripts 𝛼and M denote salt ions and macromolecules (R = RNA,
T = CTD tail); dR = dr1dr2 · · · drM stands for a set of diﬀerentials; 𝜇𝛼is the
chemical potentials of salt ions; ψM(R) = ∑M
i=1 ψp(ri) represents the external potential
for the polyion, while ψp(ri) is that of each segment; ψ𝛼(r) is the external potential of
small salt ions; 𝜌𝛼(r) and 𝜌M(R) are the density proﬁles of small ions and polymers,
respectively; and Fex is the excess potential due to intermolecular interactions. With
an appropriate model for polymers and small ions, both excess Helmholtz energy and
molecular density proﬁles can be calculated from classical density functional theory
(DFT). We have demonstrated in our earlier works the theoretical performance of DFT

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
157
Figure 6.13 Theoretical predictions
(black open square) and experimental
data (Exp. 1 [115], circle; Exp. 2 [141],
triangle) for the optimal RNA length
(kb or kilo-base) in the wild type (WT)
and mutant HBV nucleocapsids.
NRNA (kb)
C-termini residue
162
165
168
171
174
177
180
183
3.6
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
Theory
Exp. 1
Exp. 2
for inhomogeneous polyelectrolyte systems [137, 138] and its successful applications to
HBV nucleocapsids [136, 139, 140].
6.3.2
The Optimal Genome Size of an HBV Nucleocapsid
The thermodynamic model for RNA encapsidation has been used to identify the
optimal RNA length for both WT and mutants of HBV. It has been shown that a newly
formed WT HBV nucleocapsid contains a single copy of pgRNA, which consists of
about 3400 nucleotides. A similar amount of bacterial ssRNA can be encapsidated by
expression of the full-length capsid proteins in E. coli [61]. When the CTD tails are
truncated, however, the capsid contains a smaller RNA chain.
Figure 6.13 shows the theoretical predictions for the RNA size in the WT and mutant
nucleocapsids with diﬀerent degrees of CTD truncation. The number of residues in the
core protein (183∼162) is used to denote the WT and C-terminally truncated mutants.
The theoretical data for the optimal genome size are compared with mutagenesis studies
in E. coli systems [115, 141]. In general, the theoretical predictions correspond well with
those from experiments. The predicted values are slightly higher than the experimental
data probably because our model determines the optimal genome size without consid-
ering the polymerase and other proteins that are also encapsidated [40]. Although these
proteins make little contribution to the overall charge of the HBV capsid in comparison
to the core proteins, they occupy certain capsid volume inﬂuencing the total amount
of packaged RNA. For WT and mutants with low degree CTD truncations, neverthe-
less, the theoretical predictions are excellent. By contrast, the calculated RNA size for
mutants with shorter CTD tail (e.g., with C-termini residue of 162 or 164) exhibits more
signiﬁcant deviation (10%∼20%) from the experimental data. Such a corroborated result
conﬁrms that RNA packaging in HBV is mostly regulated by nonspeciﬁc interactions
between RNA and the CTD tails.
6.3.3
Charge Balance between Packaged RNA and CTD Tails
Our DFT calculations support the lack of a universal stoichiometric relation in HBV
genome packaging. To illustrate, Figure 6.14 presents the packaged RNA size (NRNA) as a

158
Self-Assembling Systems
NRNA (kb)
Qtail × 10−3
1.2
1.6
2.7
2.4
2.8
3.2
5
4
3
2
Theory (this work)
Exp. 1
Exp. 2
N/Q = 1.61
Figure 6.14 Correlation between the
RNA size (NRNA) and the net charge of
C-terminal tails (Qtail). The solid line
(N∕Q = 1.61) was proposed by Belyi
and Muthukumar [68].
function of the net charge of CTD tails (Qtail) of the HBV core proteins. Both the theoret-
ical predictions and experiment data for the optimal genome size (shown in Figure 6.13)
are assorted according to Qtail for WT and mutants. Although there is an overall trend
that NRNA increases with Qtail, both experimental data and theoretical predictions show
that the charge ratio (NRNA∕Qtail) is not constant. For example, two mutants have the
same Qtail but noticeably diﬀerent NRNA values (e.g., 167 and 169).
A number of thermodynamic models have been proposed to explain the existence of
an optimal charge ratio between nucleic acids and capsid proteins. For example, Hu
et al. argued that the optimal RNA size is dependent on the contour length of pep-
tide tails, and obtained a ﬁxed charge ratio of N∕Q = 2 [33]. Diﬀerent charge ratios
(<1, 1, and 2) have also been predicted with the assumption of a uniform capsid charge
placed at the inner capsid surface [128, 131, 132]. Most notably, Belyi and Muthuku-
mar determined N∕Q ∼1.6 based on the counterion-condensation theory for RNA
and peptide tails [68]. The linear charge relation is compared in Figure 6.14 together
with our model and experimental data. Clearly, neither the WT nor mutant HBV nucle-
ocapsids follow the “universal” charge ratio. Instead, the DFT calculations show that
the charge ratio varies from 1.1 to 1.8 depending on speciﬁc mutants. According to
a recent experiment, the charge ratio universality is also not valid for brome mosaic
virus (BMV) [62]. The number of charges in capsid protein arms is not a sole factor
in controlling the RNA packaging. Our DFT calculations on HBV packaging draw a
similar conclusion that the additional controlling factors beyond the net charge eﬀect
should be considered. As indicated before [136], the excluded volume and correlation
eﬀects of macromolecules and salt ions contribute in the RNA packaging process. A
proper consideration of such eﬀects allows us to quantify the equilibrium constants
for the capsid formation and obtain an optimal genome size in good agreement with
experiments.
The theoretical results shown in Figure 6.14 were obtained by assuming that three
serine residues (155th, 162nd, and 170th aa) were phosphorylated for the WT virus
and that each phosphorylated serine carried a negative unit charge. Although the bac-
terial capsids are not phosphorylated, we assume that E. coli can make up to the total

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
159
amount of negative charge equivalent to that in mammalian capsids by packaging mul-
tiple RNA chains [60]. In other words, the lack of phosphorylation is compensated by
the diﬀerence between small RNAs and pgRNA. Whereas these serine residues are most
relevant to phosphorylation in vivo, it has been reported that serine residues at the 176th
and 178th aa may also be phosphorylated [142]. If that is the case, the optimal genome
size would be reduced by ∼170 bases in comparison to that for the WT virus. If all ﬁve
serine sites are phosphorylated, the RNA size is longer (by ∼70 bases) than that of the
C-terminal truncated mutant 169 with regular phosphorylation, although these mutants
have the same net charge (Qtail) for the CTD tails. Apparently, such a diﬀerence is not
accounted for by the universal charge ratio or charge balance hypothesis. The diﬀerence
is somewhat expected because, as discussed below, the additional phosphorylation sites
are located around the C-terminal end region and mostly exposed at the capsid surface.
6.4
Dynamic Structure of HBV Nucleocapsids
A balanced electrostatic interaction between the CTD tails and the encapsidated nucleic
acid is required for many viral activities including capsid stability, assembly, RNA encap-
sidation, and DNA replication [115, 143]. However, the HBV capsid undergoes drastic
changes in both electrostatic charge and packing density as the pgRNA is reversely
transcribed to a partially double-strained DNA. Several important questions may be
raised from a biophysical perspective: Does the nucleocapsid preserve an internal charge
balance with regard to the capsid evolving stages? How does the capsid structure, in par-
ticular distributions of the protamine tails and the overall packing density, evolve during
the reverse transcription? What are the internal properties of nucleocapsids, such as the
electrostatic potential distribution, osmotic pressure, and forces on the capsid inner sur-
face? What are the roles of ions in charge regulation? Addressing all these questions calls
for more detailed information on the distributions of all charged components, including
nucleic acids, protein tails, and ions, within the nucleocapsid.
6.4.1
Structure of WT and Mutant Nucleocapsids
As mentioned before, the HBV capsid is fenestrated with symmetrical pores allowing for
mass transport and extrusion of the CTD tails [15, 26, 40]. The CTD exposure aﬀects
genome packaging, nuclear entry, as well as capsid envelopment and egress [58, 144,
145]. In addition, it has been recognized that the CTD tails are involved in signaling
capsid maturation [37, 145, 146]. Because CTD exposure alters the surface properties
of the NC particle, its location at diﬀerent stages of replication may diﬀerentiate the
mature and immature NCs.
Figure 6.15 presents the theoretical predictions for the radial distributions of RNA
and CTD segments at diﬀerent levels of CTD truncation. As indicated in a previous
report [136], RNA segments exhibit extremely high contact density at the inner capsid
surface. Immediately following the RNA layer are tethered CTD segments, with the rest
forming a brush-like structure. For mutants with truncation over ﬁve residues, we ﬁnd
the radial distributions of capsid components are virtually identical to our previous pre-
dictions from a conﬁned capsid model [136]. Noticeably, however, some CTD segments
approach outside the capsid region for both WT and CP179 mutant.

160
Self-Assembling Systems
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
20
183
179
173
C-termini residue
r (nm)
(a.a.)
ρ (r) nm−3)
171
164
5
4
3
2
1
0
183
179
173
164
exposed CTD segments
171
RNA
CTD
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.15 Radial distributions of RNA (solid line) and CTD chains (dashed line) in WT and mutant
HBV nucleocapsids [147]. Here, r stands for the radial distance from the capsid center; the
perpendicular dashed lines indicate the position of the capsid shell. (f) The average number of amino
acid (aa) residues from the CTD tails located outside the capsid wall for WT and mutants.
The last panel of Figure 6.15 compares the average number of exposed CTD residues
for diﬀerent mutants. For WT nucleocapsids, 3–4 CTD residues per capsid protein are
exposed in the outside region. Because these residues do not participate in the com-
plex formation with encapsidated RNA, we expect about 10% of CTD segments are
dispensable for genome packaging. The exposure of CTD tails in wild type HBV virus is
consistent with previous biochemical analysis showing their accessibility to proteases
and antibodies [148, 149]. It has also been conﬁrmed by recent cryo-EM structures
[62, 150]. Because our theoretical calculations assume a spherical symmetry for CTD
distributions, we are not able to distinguish diﬀerent holes of the capsid shell responsible
for the CTD exposure.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
161
6.4.2
The Location of CTD Residues
In order to clarify how CTD chains regulate genome evolvement as well as intracel-
lular traﬃcking of HBV capsids [146, 151], it is imperative to determine their spatial
distribution during diﬀerent stages of replication. Regrettably, experimental detection
of the CTD structure has been elusive. Whereas the assembly domain of HBV capsids
maintains a relatively rigid structure, CTD chains are highly ﬂexible and their struc-
ture is changing in response to the evolving genome [37, 149, 151–154]. Recently, the
serine–arginine protein kinase (SRPK) was utilized to analyze the location of CTD tails
in empty and RNA-containing HBV capsids [155]. The in vitro experiments for the bind-
ing aﬃnity of SRPK with HBV capsids indicate that the CTD tails are exposed at the
surface when the capsid does not contain any nucleic materials. Conversely, the CTD
tails are mainly distributed inside the capsid for the RNA-containing nucleocapsids
[155]. However, the CTD chains were not visible through a conventional microscopy
such as cryo-EM [22, 156]. Only recent studies capture a trace amount of CTD chains
through reconstructed EM images [150, 154].
HBV capsids expressed in E. coli contain the bacterial RNA instead of pgRNA
[151, 154, 155, 157, 158]. The in vitro assembly of HBV capsids typically occurs at an
electrolyte concentration much larger than that corresponding to the physiological
condition. The high salinity is required not only to avoid capsid aggregation but also
to maintain the thermodynamic stability of the reassembled capsids [158]. While
DNA-containing viral particles are available from expression in mammalian cells at
physiological conditions, a discrete separation of the capsids at each maturation state
is currently impracticable. Detection of the capsid structure is also complicated by the
intracellular environmental eﬀects [108].
The theoretical framework discussed above allows us to determine the distributions
of individual residues of the CTDs at diﬀerent stages of replication. Figure 6.16 shows
the accumulated number of linker-CTD residues as a function of the radial distance
r from the capsid center. At each radial distance, we calculate the accumulated num-
ber of CTD residues per capsid protein (i.e., it changes from 0 to 42 as r increases
from 0 at the capsid center to 22 at its fullest extent outside the capsid surface). For
an empty capsid (Figure 6.16a), the accumulated number of CTD residues is about 29 at
the inner capsid wall (r = 13 nm) and 30 at the outer surface (r = 15nm). Accordingly,
30 residues are on average located inside the empty capsid, and 12 residues are exposed
outside. However, for RNA-containing NC (Figure 6.16b), the accumulated number of
linker-CTD residues is about 40 at the outer surface (r = 15nm), indicating that only
two CTD residues are distributed outside the capsid (r > 15nm). At r = 19 nm from
the center of the NC, the accumulated number of linker-CTD residues approaches 42.
For the empty capsid (Figure 6.16a), CTD residues are distributed further from cap-
sid center (up to r = 22 nm). We have also considered the distribution data for charged
and neutral amino-acid groups but found not much variation between the empty and
RNA-containing capsids.
Figure 6.17 compares the exposure ratio of individual CTD segments. A segment
is “100% of exposure” if it is fully distributed in the outer region of the capsid,
i.e., r ≥17 nm. We assume that the residues in the outer region are able to fully
interact with surrounding molecules like cellular enzymes. For convenience, we

162
Self-Assembling Systems
Empty capsid
linker + CTD
+ a.a.
− a.a.
· a.a.
Nucleocapsid
linker + CTD
+ a.a.
− a.a.
· a.a.
0
5
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Accumulated # of a.a.
Accumulated # of a.a.
5
0
10
15
r (nm)
20
0
5
10
15
r (nm)
(a)
(b)
20
Figure 6.16 The accumulated number of CTD residues for empty (a) and RNA-containing (b) HBV
capsids. The accumulated number is obtained from a radial integration of the density proﬁles for the
linker-CTD residues and normalized by the total number of CTD tails (Nt = 240). In other words, the
y-axis corresponds to the summed number of residues per CTD tail up to the radial distance (r) from
the capsid center. As r increases, the summed value approaches 42, which is the total number of
traced residues for each tail. The accumulated values for charged (+ and −) and neutral (⋅) residue
groups are shown separately.
5
10
15
CTD residue
20
25
30
Nucleocapsid
Empty capsid
35
0
60
R R R
R R
R R R R
R R R R
R E
R T
R S
S
S
Q
Q
Q C
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
G
50
40
30
Probability of Exposure (%)
20
10
0
Figure 6.17 The ratio of the CTD residues exposed to the outer region of HBV capsids. The CTD
residues exposed in the region r ≥17nm are counted for both the empty capsid and nucleocapsid.
Each residue is ranked from the tethering site (1) to the end segment (34).

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
163
rank each residue according to its position at the CTD chain, i.e., residue 1 rep-
resents the amino acid tethered at the inner capsid surface, and residue 34 is the
C-terminal residue. As expected, the empty capsid shows higher overall CTD exposure
compared to the NC. Assuming that the RNA content is mainly responsible for
the deviation between the empty capsid and the NC, we ﬁnd that the attraction
between CTDs and RNA internalizes more than half of exposed CTD segments in the
empty capsid. In the latter case, the exposed ratio peaks around 21st–26th residues
(170Ser-171Pro-172Arg-173Arg-174Arg-175Arg), coinciding with a typical binding motif for
SRPK [159, 160].
Schematically, Figure 6.18 depicts the distribution of CTD residues for the empty
capsid according to our theoretical calculations. Because the end residues have a slightly
lower exposure ratio than the 21st–26th residues, a CTD tail must somehow bend in
the middle, giving it a hook-like shape. The bent structure increases the possibility of
the motif to contact with the SRPK. We ﬁnd that about 30% of the residues present in
such a motif are within reach of the SRPK kinase. In vitro study by Chen et al. indicates
the transient CTD location in HBV capsids [82]. It revealed the association of SRPK
on the outer surface of the empty capsid, mediated by the enzyme-binding motif in
the CTD. The same assay was conducted for the NC-containing RNA genome, but in
that case the enzyme binding was mostly inhibited. The SRPK binding demonstrated
CP dimer
2-fold pore
(b)
(c)
(a)
CTD
Outer
surface
SRPK
binding
motif
r
Figure 6.18 Schematic representation of the CTD location. (a) A 2-fold capsid pore and a dimer of the
capsid core protein [64]. (b) Six CTD tails in each 2-fold pore. (c) CTD tails of the empty capsid. Here, the
tails are distributed both inside and outside the empty capsid through the 2-fold hole.

164
Self-Assembling Systems
unequivocally that the surface characteristics of the capsid change with the CTD
location. Corresponding to the experimental approach, our theoretical results capture
the transient feature of the capsid surface, rendering additional evidence of the
interaction of CTD with SRPK. Although the primary kinase responsible for HBV
phosphorylation is still under active investigation, SRPK has been a well-speculated
candidate [142, 161]. SRPK is able to fulﬁll the in vitro phosphorylation of HBV CPs
[142]. Moreover, the binding of this enzyme to every 2-fold pore of an HBV empty
capsid has been reported [155].
The density distributions of individual CTD segments in HBV capsids suggest that
a speciﬁc motif, 21st–26th CTD residues of the CTD, is located in the outer region
(r ≥17nm) with the highest probability. Such a serine/arginine repeats domain serves
as an ideal substrate for SRPK binding and nuclear localization signals (NLS) [162, 163].
At the physiological condition (Cs = 0.14M), the exposure fraction of the SRPK binding
motif is expected to be ∼30% of that corresponding to the empty capsid. A recent in vitro
HBV study demonstrated that the empty capsid was decorated with SRPK proteins at
all 2-fold capsid pores. However, RNA-containing nucleocapsids (RNA-NCs) failed in
that binding assay, indicating that CTDs were not accessible to SRPK [155]. Regarding
the exposure of the kinase binding motif, the deviation between the empty capsid and
the NC has been conﬁrmed by our DFT calculations. In the presence of the RNA, the
exposure fraction of the SRPK binding motif of the 21st–26th CTD segments is reduced
to ∼5%.
Chen et al. observed no interaction between RNA-NCs and SRPKs from the chro-
matography of capsids sample into the SRPK bound column [155]. However, our
theoretical model predicts that CTD chains are partially exposed in RNA-NCs but in
a relatively much smaller portion in comparison to empty capsids. One explanation for
this discrepancy is that the enzyme binding requires substantial substrate contact as for
the case of the empty capsids. For RNA-NCs, the target motif exposure is insuﬃcient
to retain capsids bound on the column. It is worth mentioning that, in experiment,
the RNA-NCs were obtained from an E. coli system, ﬁlled with the host RNA. Although
the bacterial RNA mimic the authentic pgRNA regarding its content [22], their
sequence and chemical characteristics are surely diﬀerent [116]. If the RNA size in the
NC model is set to have a slightly larger value than that of the authentic pgRNA (3.5kb),
we ﬁnd that the CTD exposure ratio decreases signiﬁcantly (data not shown). Rabe et al.
[37] compared the structures of E-coli-derived capsids and authentic immature capsids.
It was indicated that a certain portion of CTDs was exposed to outside RNA-NCs
obtained in vivo. However, NCs obtained from E. coli were not aﬀected by outside
enzymes, suggesting their CTDs were not exposed. But even for an E-coli-derived
nucleocapsid with RNA, it was speculated that a certain portion of CTDs are exposed.
Vanlandschoot el al. observed the CTD-mediated attachment of nucleocapsids to gly-
cosaminoglycans expressed on the plasma membranes of cells [85]. A recent structural
analysis showed that a small portion of CTDs are stretched out through NC pores
[150]. These results suggest that CTDs are at least partially exposed in RNA-ﬁlled NCs
but the exposure fraction is substantially smaller compared to the empty capsid. The
distinct structures of capsids suggest that the CTD location, speciﬁcally the distribution
of the kinase target motifs, can be modulated in response to the encapsidated genome.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
165
6.4.3
Implication of the CTD Exposure
Several recent investigations indicate the transient exposure of CTDs on the capsid
surface [24, 146, 149, 151, 164, 165]. It has been postulated that the exposed CTDs may
regulate the post-translational process of the HBV core, i.e., traﬃcking into nucleus,
envelopment, and secretion. Kann et al. determined the fraction of the exposed CTDs
for NCs in diﬀerent maturation stages, and suggested the CTD-associated signal
modulates the capsid delivery into the cellular nucleus [166]. Ning et al. observed that
the secreted HBV particles contained either empty capsids or NCs with dsDNA, while
the immature NCs, i.e., those ﬁlled with pgRNA or single-stranded DNA, were excluded
from secretion [108]. Accordingly, a hypothesis was set such that the immature NCs
negatively regulate the traﬃcking process [108, 154, 155].
Our theoretical model supports the mechanism of genome-regulated exposure of
CTDs. Although we are not describing the whole process of HBV replication, a sub-
stantial structural change of CTD implies its functional correlation with the maturation
signaling. Our model predicts that about ten residues per CTD tail (34 residues) are
exposed outside the empty capsid. The exposure of 30% of CTD segments modiﬁes
the surface characteristics and aﬀects the capsid traﬃcking. For empty capsids, the
CTD tails have been suggested to extrude into far space from the capsid center, so
that the outermost reachable r is ∼19nm for RNA-NC but ∼22 nm for the empty
capsid. Such a structural deviation between empty and RNA-ﬁlled capsid supports the
hypothesis that the degree of CTD exposure may trigger selective selection upon the
post-translational process [108, 154, 155]. The hypothesis, speciﬁcally the rationale on
the transient CTD structure, was endorsed by experiments [154, 155]. In supporting
those observations, our model gives the evidence on the CTD exposure and accessibility
into the outer capsid space.
6.4.4
The Eﬀect of Phosphorylation of Capsid Structure
Formation of HBV capsids and pgRNA reverse transcription are strongly correlated with
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of serine residues at the CTD of the core pro-
tein [44, 167, 168]. Phosphorylation at this domain is essential for packaging of pgRNA
and for at least the initial stage of DNA synthesis. However, matured nucleocapsids
are fully dephosphorylated and mutation on the phosphate sites may block synthesis
of DNA [43, 115, 169]. Because phosphorylation aﬀects the capsid charge and its aﬃn-
ity to the genomic nucleotides, reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of
the HBV core proteins provide an eﬀective means to regulate electrostatic and other
non-speciﬁc interactions within the HBV nucleocapsid. A quantitative understanding
of the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanism will therefore allow us to iden-
tify promising biophysical schemes to halt HBV replication by controlling the positions
and charge status of the CTD chains.
Each CTD chain has three phosphorylation sites (S155, S162, and S170) important
for RNA encapsidation and reverse transcription [144, 170]. For the wild type virus, the
CTD chains are phosphorylated at the early stage of replication (with pgRNA or inter-
mediate DNA) [145], but dephosphorylated for matured capsids (with dsDNA) [44, 171].
Replacing three serine residues with charged amino acids aﬀects pgRNA encapsida-
tion and DNA synthesis. For example, a phosphorylated analog, with one serine residue

166
Self-Assembling Systems
0.6
RNA (pCTD)
RNA (CTD)
0.4
ρ(r) (nm−3)
0.2
0
0
5
10
r (nm)
15
0
10
5
15
20
1.8
Linker + pCTD
Linker + CTD
1.2
ρ(r) (nm−3)
0.6
0
r (nm)
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.19 Eﬀect of phosphorylation on the distributions of RNA and linker-CTD tails. (a) RNA
distribution in phosphorylated (pCTD) and unphosphorylated (CTD) capsids. (b) The distributions
of phosphorylated (pCTD) and unphosphorylated CTD tails.
replaced by glutamic acid, is able to package the pregenomic RNA but fails to support
viral DNA replication [144]. Meanwhile, substantial reduction of RNA packaging was
observed by substitution of serine with aspartic acid [168, 172].
Phosphorylation eﬀects can be studied with DFT calculations simply by setting the
valence of those three serine residues from 0 to −1 for the phosphorylated case. The
addition of negative charges aﬀects both the RNA distribution and the exposure of CTD
chains. Figure 6.19 shows that the RNA structure inside the capsid varies signiﬁcantly in
response to CTD phosphorylation. Compared to the unphosphorylated case, the RNA
segments become more uniformly distributed and are positioned closer to the capsid
surface. CTD phosphorylation also transduces the RNA distribution to have a relatively
higher peak near the capsid surface. Besides, phosphorylation reduces the extent of CTD
exposure outside the capsid. Because the addition of negative charge reduces intra-chain
electrostatic repulsion, the CTD brush is slightly collapsed in comparison to the unphos-
phorylated brush.
It was postulated that HBV carries serine residues in diﬀerent phosphorylation states
during the process of the capsid assembly and pgRNA reverse transcription. Speciﬁcally,
in a duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV), the capsid proteins [64] were in phosphorylated
form upon the capsid assembly. However, they were dephosphorylated for the mature
NC ﬁlled with rcDNA [44, 173]. The CTD in phosphorylation state is believed to control
the pgRNA encapsidation as well as the reverse transcription. Mutation of phosphory-
lation sites on CTD to mimic unphosphorylation hinders RNA packaging [168, 172,
174]. Similar mutation studies indicate that CTD phosphorylation aﬀects DNA synthe-
sis [145, 172, 174].
Our DFT calculations show that CTD phosphorylation induces RNA segments to be
more localized toward inner capsid surface (Figure 6.19). The alteration in RNA struc-
ture was observed by Wang et al. [154]. In the phosphorylation-mimic case, the pgRNA
inside the capsid shows more ordered structure than that in an E-coli-derived nucle-
ocapsid. Our theoretical analysis indicates that such a structural ordering of RNA is
correlated with the CTD location. In phosphorylated state, more CTD segments are

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
167
localized at the region around 7 ∼12nm from the capsid center, and the inner shell
(< 7 nm) distribution of the phosphorylated CTDs is relatively depleted. It is expected
that the RNA–CTD interaction would be reduced because of negative charges added
to the CTD by the phosphorylation. Figure 6.19 shows such reduced complex forma-
tion between RNA and CTDs. At the inner region (r < 7 nm), the density proﬁle of
RNA for the phosphorylated case is higher than that for the unphosphorylated one.
However, the corresponding densities of CTD segments are inverted in that region,
thus the unphosphorylated CTD chains show higher segmental density than phospho-
rylated CTD chains. In other words, the CTD chains stay relatively apart from the RNA
when they gain additional negative charges from phosphorylation. Accordingly, phos-
phorylation results in higher RNA density close to the inner surface of the capsid and
it maintains monotonic radial distribution except near the inner wall. By contrast, RNA
exhibits a more inhomogeneous distribution if the CTD chains are unphosphorylated.
6.5
Capsid Envelopment with Surface Proteins
HBV virions are generated from matured nucleocapsids after coating with surface pro-
teins pre-existing in the ER membrane [48, 175]. As indicated above (see Figure 6.2),
the Pre-S domain of the L-HBs plays a critical role in the envelopment of nucleocap-
sids [176], as well as in signaling cell binding with the hepatocyte receptors [18]. To
mediate those interactions, L-HBs take alternative topologies for binding with the cap-
sid proteins and hepatocyte receptors, with the Pre-S domain located at the inside and
outside of the viral membrane, respectively. The internal Pre-S domain also mediates the
interaction between the surface protein and cytosolic HBV nucleocapsids [177, 178].
Mutagenesis studies reveal candidate residues in HBcAg that interact speciﬁcally with
the envelope proteins. Those residues may be located at the tip of the HBcAg spikes [179]
or around the base of the 4-helix bundle where the C-terminus residues are located
close to the capsid pores [180]. However, it remains unclear how the surface and the
capsid proteins are engaged in an HBV virion. One key question is whether there are
speciﬁc interactions between HBsAg and HBcAg. While electron microscopy measure-
ments reveal a non-icosahedral arrangement of HBsAg in the envelope [31], Seitz et al.
proposed a distinct packaging rule for the surface proteins, supporting their speciﬁc
interactions with the nucleocapsid [181].
We may consider the putative interactions of HBcAg with the Pre-S domain of HBsAg
as a special type of regulatory cellular processes that are mediated by protein–peptide
interactions [182]. Although high-resolution analysis, such as NMR spectroscopy
and X-ray crystallography, uncovers the atomic structure of many protein–peptide
complexes, the structural information for the putative protein–peptide pair in HBV
is unavailable. While it is experimentally challenging to detect the HBV surface–core
protein recognition and binding processes, theoretical modeling and computation
provide a valuable alternative.
We have identiﬁed probable interactions between the Pre-S1 domain of L-HBs and
the core protein HBcAg using MD simulation and molecular docking methods. In
MD simulations, we select 12 peptide fragments from the Pre-S1 domain in L-HBs
(Figure 6.20b). Each peptide is initially placed at a random position near the HBcAg
monomer. Parallel MD runs are then applied to each peptide to locate the binding

168
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 6.20 The sequence of amino-acid (aa) residues in the Pre-S domain of the large HBV surface
protein (L-HBs). (a) N-terminal residues (1–174 aa) of L-HBs. (b) 8-mer peptides (P1∼P12) used in MD
simulations. (c) 4-mer peptides (P4) used for molecular docking.
site. In most cases, the peptide moves around the protein without making any speciﬁc
binding with the protein. However, the P4 peptide is able to bind with the core protein
in a short simulation time [102], and remains associated until the end of the simulation
[177].
Figure 6.21 shows two snapshots of the P4 peptide–core protein conformation from
MD simulation. Within about 2 ns time frame, the peptide lands on the protein surface
and the bound state is preserved over the entire duration of the simulation. The pep-
tide approaches from a random position (Figure 6.21a), and ends up in a ﬁxed bound
state with the core protein (Figure 6.21b). The binding domain is located at residues
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.21 Snapshots from MD simulation for P4 peptide binding to the HBcAG protein. (a) Initial
conformation with P4 randomly placed around HBcAg. (b) The P4-core structure after 2 ns of
simulation.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
169
15
10
5
00
0.5
1
Time (ns)
(a)
(b)
D (nm)
1.5
2
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
00
0.5
1
Time (ns)
RMSD (nm)
1.5
2
135–139 aa
130–134 aa
Figure 6.22 Evolution of P4–HBc association. (a) Change of the distance between the averaged
centers of the P4 peptide and two binding domains (130–134 aa; 135–139 aa) from HBcAg. (b) Root
mean square distribution (RMSD) of the backbone atoms in the P4 peptide.
135–139 of the capsid protein. According to the 3D protein structure, these residues are
located at the initial portion of the linker domain of HBcAg and form a relatively ﬂexible
loop.
Figure 6.22a shows the change in distance between the center of mass for the P4
peptide and that of the putative binding domain (135–139) in HBcAg during the MD
simulation. At the early stage of simulation, the P4–HBc separation oscillates at a
frequency much lower than that of RMSD because its conformation ﬂuctuates quite
fast before reaching the binding domain of the core protein. At ∼0.8ns, however,
the P4–HBc distance converges within about 2 nm. In comparison with the RMSD
data (Figure 6.22b), we see that the peptide binds to the protein around 1 ns before its

170
Self-Assembling Systems
conformation converges into a stable form at ∼1.1ns. At ∼1.5ns, the peptide RMSD
reduces to approximately 1.0Å due to its association with the protein. However, a
certain range of structural ﬂuctuation remains, indicating that it might not be the ﬁnal
binding state. The equilibrated state of the protein–peptide complex is reached only
after a long simulation, on the order of several μs [183]. Nevertheless, it appears evident
that there exists a selective binding between a certain fragment (P4, 101–108 aa) of
the Pre-S1 domain in L-HBs and HBc protein. Although this binding is identiﬁed at a
relatively short time frame, we expect that it reﬂects the general characteristics of the
speciﬁc peptide–protein association.
We may determine the P4–HBcAg binding energy using the MM/PBSA method. For
that purpose, we run additional MD steps in an explicit water model and the results are
shown in Table 6.2. Approximately, the internal energy (ΔEtot) for the peptide–protein
complex formation is ∼−36 kcal∕mol, and the corresponding entropy change (TΔS)
is ∼−29 kcal∕mol. The diﬀerence between internal and entropic contributions leads
to the peptide–protein binding free energy (ΔG), −6.67kcal∕mol. The interaction is
relatively weak in comparison to that typical for peptide–protein binding (for ∼8-mer
peptide, it is about −10kcal∕mol [184]). Nevertheless, similar ligand–receptor
association has been shown in other cellular signaling processes such as the T-cell
response [185, 186]. A comparison of polar (ΔUCoul + ΔWPB = 13.5kcal∕mol) and
non-polar (ΔUVDW + ΔWnp = −49.18kcal∕mol) contributions indicates that, over-
all, the surface–core protein binding is driven by hydrophobic interactions. The
combination of favorable hydrophobic but unfavorable electrostatic contributions
to protein–peptide associations has been observed in many promiscuous protein
recognitions [28, 147, 187].
To conﬁrm the molecular recognition mechanism identiﬁed by MD simulation,
we have also conducted the docking analysis for the P4 peptide–HBcAg association.
It has been suggested that a probable docking of ﬂexible peptide is mostly allowed
for a short peptide composed of less than ﬁve residues. Accordingly, we considered
4-mer sub-fragments of the P4, as listed in Figure 6.20c, and conducted parallel trials
of the docking procedure to the surface of the HBV core protein. Among 20 selected
grid positions for each of ﬁve sub-P4 fragments, we detected three pairs of successful
docking with negative binding energy. Interestingly, one of them is the case of P4-3
docked on the domain of 135–139 aa from the HBV core protein. This complex
formation is clearly overlapped with the P4–HBcAg binding conformation predicted
by our MD simulation. As seen in Figure 6.23, the P4-3 peptide, representing 103–106
aa in L-HBs, is supposed to be well adopted into a narrow loop region of HBcAg that is
close to the linker domain of the core protein.
Table 6.2 The binding energy (kcal/mol) for the core protein–peptide
interactions. Here, 𝛥UVDW is the van der Waals energy; 𝛥UCoul is the
electrostatic energy; 𝛥WPB and 𝛥Wnp are the polar and non-polar
contributions to the solvation energy; 𝛥Etot is the total interaction
energy, which is the sum of 𝛥Epolar and 𝛥Enp; T𝛥S is the entropic
energy term; 𝛥G is the binding free energy.
ΔUVDW
ΔUCoul
ΔWPB
ΔWnp
ΔEtot
TΔS
ΔG
−43.37
−292.19
305.69
−5.81
−35.66
−28.99
−6.67

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
171
ALA137
PRO135
ILE139
ΔEbind = −2.45 kcal/mol
Figure 6.23 Docking of sub-fragment P4-3 onto HBcAg. Shown here are the docked conformation for
P4-3 (101–103 aa of L-HBs) and the approximated binding energy. (See insert for color representation of
the ﬁgure.).
We recall that only the mature nucleocapsids (with dsDNA) can be enveloped while
the immature nucleocapsids (with ssRNA or ssDNA) are excluded in the envelopment.
The probable binding between L-HBsAg and HBcAg suggests a possible scenario
explaining the maturation-dependent selection mechanism for the formation of HBV
virions. MD simulations and the docking analysis indicate that the recognition is medi-
ated by 135–139 aa domain in HBcAg, which is located near the ﬂexible C-terminal
region. Such binding can be inhibited by the exposure of the C-terminal domain (CTD,
150–183 aa) of HBc. Although the CTD structure is not yet experimentally available,
the equilibrium structure of the HBV nucleocapsid including the CTD chain location
can be determined by the DFT calculation [140, 188].
Figure 6.24 shows the DFT predictions for the radial distributions of CTD residues
in three diﬀerent capsids: the mature form with dsDNA, immature form with ssRNA,
and empty capsid without any genome content. The CTD chains tend to be associated
more strongly with dsDNA with virtually all residues residing inside the capsid. On the
other hand, a marginal portion of CTD segments is located beyond the inner capsid wall
in the immature capsid. For empty capsids, an even greater portion of CTD residues
are extruding outside the capsid region. Such a varied CTD positioning with respect to
the genome content strongly suggests that the selective mechanism in the envelopment
depends on the CTD location. When the CTD chains are totally internalized, i.e., in
mature nucleocapsids, the putative core–envelope interaction should not be disturbed.
However, if the CTD chains are placed close to the inside capsid wall or block the pore
area on the capsid, then the contact of L-HBs to the binding site in HBc (135–139 aa)
could easily be inhibited. Such a scenario may help to explain why only the empty and
mature nucleocapsid can be enveloped. It is possible that the secretion of matured and
empty capsids goes through diﬀerent mechanisms. The requirements from core or enve-
lope proteins for secreting empty capsids are still being investigated.
6.6
Summary and Outlook
In this review, we highlight our recent work on the thermodynamic basis of capsid
formation, maturation, and envelopment in the life cycle of the hepatitis B virus

172
Self-Assembling Systems
2
1.5
0.5
Empty capsid
Immature NC (ssRNA)
Mature NC (dsDNA)
ρ(r) (nm−3)
0
0
5
10
R (nm)
15
20
1
Figure 6.24 Radial distributions of CTD chains at diﬀerent stages of maturation. Density proﬁles [𝜌(r)]
of the CTD residues are compared for the mature (with dsDNA), immature (with ssRNA), and empty
capsids. Perpendicular dashed lines show the location of the capsid wall.
(HBV). Our objective is to provide a quantitative understanding of the viral replication
processes and help development of promising antiviral strategies. A systematic inves-
tigation is conducted by modeling physiochemical processes at diﬀerent scales from
macroscopic range to atomic level, from which the thermodynamic basis on the capsid
assembly, genome packaging, dynamic capsid structure, and capsid envelopment are
elaborated. These theoretical models not only unveil the assembly pathways and repli-
cation mechanisms but also provide quantitative descriptions of molecular interactions
and guidelines for designing new experiments.
Self-assembly of capsid proteins and genome encapsidation are two critical steps
in the life cycle of most plant and animal viruses. A theoretical description of such
processes from a physiochemical perspective may help better understand viral replica-
tion and morphogenesis, and thus provide fresh insights into the experimental studies
of antiviral strategies. The molecular thermodynamic models developed in this work
can be used to predict the stability of HBV capsids either with or without loading
nucleic materials. With the key components represented by coarse-grained models,
the theoretical predictions are in excellent agreement with experimental data for the
formation free energies of empty T4 capsids over a broad range of temperature and
ion concentrations. The theoretical model also predicts T3/T4 dimorphism in good
agreement with the capsid formation for in vivo and in vitro conditions. In addition,
we have studied the stability of the viral particles in response to physiological cellular
conditions with the explicit consideration of the hydrophobic association of capsid sub-
units, electrostatic interactions, molecular excluded volume eﬀects, entropy of mixing,
and conformational changes of the biomolecular species. Because the course-grained
model captures the essential features of the HBV nucleocapsid stability revealed by

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
173
recent experiments, we expect that it can also be used to unravel HBV stability after
cell entry and at diﬀerent stages of capsid maturation.
In addition, we studied the equilibrium properties of HBV capsids using the classical
density functional theory (DFT). DFT has the advantage of numerical eﬃciency com-
pared to simulation methods, and provides direct information on thermodynamic prop-
erties with precise evaluation of various non-bonded molecular interactions beyond
mean ﬁeld approximations. We show that, in combination with coarse-grained poly-
mer models, the DFT is able to quantify structure and thermodynamic properties of
empty or genome-containing nucleocapsids. DFT calculations predict the optimal RNA
lengths in quantitative agreement with experiments on the wild type (WT) virus and
C-terminally truncated mutants. It is shown that the encapsidated genome and the ﬂex-
ible tails of core proteins undergo structural transitions with regard to viral maturing
steps or in response to phosphorylation of the capsid proteins. We ﬁnd that both nucle-
ocapsid formation and genome packaging strongly depend on the charge density of
CTDs. Moreover, theoretical results for the distributions of amino acid residues in CTD
tails in diﬀerent replication stages unveil the signature of mature nucleocapsids that dif-
ferentiate them from the immature ones, suggesting that the CTD tails may be utilized
to regulate the post-transcriptional process of the viral particles.
The combined analysis of MD simulations using both implicit and explicit water
models as well as molecular docking reveals speciﬁc peptide–protein binding
underlying the HBsAg–HBcAg association. The theoretical results suggest that the
speciﬁc binding of Pre-S domain of L-HBsAg with HBcAg arises from recognition
between protein domains consisting of 101st–108th residues from L-HBsAG and
135th–139th residues from HBcAg. A theoretical analysis based on the molecular
mechanics/Poisson–Boltzmann surface area (MM/PBSA) method indicates that the
approximated binding energy is −6.7 kcal∕mol, which is weaker than that for typical
cellular receptor ligand binding. The capsid–envelope association is enhanced by
multi-body cooperative eﬀects and may be regulated by the spatial location of ﬂexible
C-termini of HBcAg. The theoretical model provides further insights into the selective
envelopment of HBV capsids at diﬀerent degrees of maturation. We found the domains
of 101–108 aa in L-HBs and 135–139 aa in HBc are critical in this molecular recogni-
tion. The L-HBs–HBc association has a lower binding free energy in comparison with
typical cellular receptor–ligand binding, indicating that envelopment is a cooperatively
driven multi-body process. Considering that the binding site is close to the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of HBcAg, we expect that the core–envelope association is closely
coordinated with the nucleocapsid maturation. In immature nucleocapsids, the putative
docking of L-HBsAg to HBcAg is blocked because the CTD tails are partially exposed
and cover the capsid surface. The dynamic nature of the CTD distribution explains the
selective envelopment of HBV nucleocapsids during virion formation.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Dr Jianming Hu at Penn State College of Medicine and Dr
Rex Hjelm at the Los Alamos National Laboratory for careful reading of this manuscript
and helpful comments. For ﬁnancial support, we thank the National Institutes of Health
(R21-AI077532) and the National Science Foundation (NSF-CBET-0852353). The

174
Self-Assembling Systems
allocation of supercomputer hours from the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc
Computing Center (NERSC) is also gratefully acknowledged.
References
1. Ahmed, M., F. Wang, A. Levin, C. Le, Y. Eltayebi, M. Houghton, L. Tyrrell, and K.
Barakat, Targeting the Achilles heel of the hepatitis B virus: a review of current
treatments against covalently closed circular DNA. Drug Discov Today, 2015. 20(5):
548–561.
2. WHO, Hepatitis B: Fact sheet N∘204 2015, World Health Organization.
3. Trepo, C., H.L.Y. Chan, and A. Lok, Hepatitis B virus infection. Lancet, 2014.
384(9959): 2053–2063.
4. Ott, J.J., G.A. Stevens, J. Groeger, and S.T. Wiersma, Global epidemiology of hep-
atitis B virus infection: New estimates of age-speciﬁc HBsAg seroprevalence and
endemicity. Vaccine, 2012. 30(12): 2212–2219.
5. Liaw, Y.F., N. Leung, R. Guan, G.K.K. Lau, I. Merican, G. McCaughan, E. Gane,
J.H. Kao, M. Omata, and A.-P.C.U. Work, Asian-Paciﬁc consensus statement on the
management of chronic hepatitis B: a 2005 update. Liver International, 2005. 25(3):
472–489.
6. Orlando, R., M. Foggia, A.E. Maraolo, S. Mascolo, G. Palmiero, O. Tambaro, and
G. Tosone, Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection: From the past to the future.
European Journal of Clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, 2015. 34(6):
1059–1070.
7. Chu, C.K., T.W. Ma, K. Shanhmuganathan, C.G. Wang, Y.J. Xiang,
S.B. Pai, G.Q. Yao, J.P. Sommadossi, and Y.C. Cheng, Use of
2’-ﬂuoro-5-methyl-beta-l-arabinofuranosyluracil as a novel antiviral agent for
hepatitis-B virus and epstein-barr-virus. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,
1995. 39(4): 979–981.
8. de Man, R.A., L.M.M. Wolters, F. Nevens, D. Chua, M. Sherman, C.L. Lai, A.
Gadano, Y. Lee, F. Mazzotta, N. Thomas, and D. DeHertogh, Safety and eﬃcacy of
oral entecavir given for 28 days in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
Hepatology, 2001. 34(3): 578–582.
9. Dienstag, J.L., R.P. Perrillo, E.R. Schiﬀ, M. Bartholomew, C. Vicary, and M. Rubin,
A preliminary trial of lamivudine for chronic hepatitis-B infection. New England
Journal of Medicine, 1995. 333(25): 1657–1661.
10. Lai, C.L., S.G. Lim, N.A. Brown, X.J. Zhou, D.M. Lloyd, Y.M. Lee, M.F. Yuen, G.C.
Chao, and M.W. Myers, A dose-ﬁnding study of once-daily oral telbivudine in
HBeAg-positive patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology, 2004.
40(3): 719–726.
11. Chong, Y.H. and C.K. Chu, Understanding the unique mechanism of L-FMAU
(clevudine) against hepatitis B virus: Molecular dynamics studies. Bioorganic &
Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 2002. 12(23): 3459–3462.
12. Yadav, V. and C.K. Chu, Molecular mechanisms of adefovir sensitivity and resis-
tance in HBV polymerase mutants: A molecular dynamics study. Bioorganic &
Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 2004. 14(16): 4313–4317.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
175
13. Dane, D.S., C.H. Cameron, and M. Briggs, Virus-like particles in serum of patients
with Australia-antigen-associated hepatitis. Lancet, 1970. 1(7649): 695–698.
14. Seeger, C. and W.S. Mason, Hepatitis B virus biology. Microbiology and Molecular
Biology Reviews, 2000. 64(1): 51–68.
15. Bruss, V., Hepatitis B virus morphogenesis. World Journal of Gastroenterology,
2007. 13(1): 65–73.
16. Beck, J. and M. Nassal, Hepatitis B virus replication. World Journal of Gastroen-
terology, 2007. 13(1): 48–64.
17. Prange, R., Host factors involved in hepatitis B virus maturation, assembly, and
egress. Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 2012. 201(4): 449–461.
18. Glebe, D. and S. Urban, Viral and cellular determinants involved in hepadnaviral
entry. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 2007. 13(1): 22–38.
19. Bruss, V. and D. Ganem, The role of envelope proteins in hepatitis-B virus assem-
bly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 1991. 88(3): 1059–1063.
20. Zlotnick, A., Viruses and the physics of soft condensed matter. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2004. 101(44):
15549–15550.
21. Zlotnick A, V.B., Tan Z, Lewellyn E, Turner W, Francis S., Core protein: A
pleiotropic keystone in the HBV lifecycle. Antiviral Research, 2015. 121: 82–93.
22. Zlotnick, A., N. Cheng, S.J. Stahl, J.F. Conway, A.C. Steven, and P.T. Wingﬁeld,
Localization of the C terminus of the assembly domain of hepatitis B virus capsid
protein: Implications for morphogenesis and organization of encapsidated RNA.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
1997. 94(18): 9556–9561.
23. Bottcher, B., S.A. Wynne, and R.A. Crowther, Determination of the fold of
the core protein of hepatitis B virus by electron cryomicroscopy. Nature, 1997.
386(6620): 88–91.
24. Wynne, S.A., R.A. Crowther, and A.G.W. Leslie, The crystal structure of the
human hepatitis B virus capsid. Molecular Cell, 1999. 3(6): 771–780.
25. Yu, X.K., L. Jin, J. Jih, C.H. Shih, and Z.H. Zhou, 3.5 angstrom cryoEM structure
of hepatitis B virus core assembled from full-length core protein. Plos One, 2013.
8(9): e69729.
26. Watts, N.R., J.F. Conway, N.Q. Cheng, S.J. Stahl, D.M. Belnap, A.C. Steven, and P.T.
Wingﬁeld, The morphogenic linker peptide of HBV capsid protein forms a mobile
array on the interior surface. Embo Journal, 2002. 21(5): 876–884.
27. Conway, J.F., N. Cheng, A. Zlotnick, P.T. Wingﬁeld, S.J. Stahl, and A.C. Steven,
Visualization of a 4-helix bundle in the hepatitis B virus capsid by cryo-electron
microscopy. Nature, 1997. 386(6620): 91–94.
28. Basdevant, N., H. Weinstein, and M. Ceruso, Thermodynamic basis for promiscuity
and selectivity in protein-protein interactions: PDZ domains, a case study. Journal
of the American Chemical Society, 2006. 128(39): 12766–12777.
29. Luo, L., S. Chen, Q. Gong, N. Luo, Y. Lei, J.J. Guo, and S. He, Hepatitis B virus X
protein modulates remodelling of minichromosomes related to hepatitis B virus
replication in HepG2 cells. International Journal of Molecular Medicine, 2013.
31(1): 197–204.

176
Self-Assembling Systems
30. Roseman, A.M., J.A. Berriman, S.A. Wynne, P.J.G. Butler, and R.A. Crowther,
A structural model for maturation of the hepatitis B virus core. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2005. 102(44):
15821–15826.
31. Dryden, K.A., S.F. Wieland, C. Whitten-Bauer, J.L. Gerin, F.V. Chisari, and M.
Yeager, Native hepatitis B virions and capsids visualized by electron cryorni-
croscopy. Molecular Cell, 2006. 22(6): 843–850.
32. Hu, J., HBV Virology and Replication. 2015, Springer.
33. Nassal, M., Hepatitis B viruses: Reverse transcription a diﬀerent way. Virus
Research, 2008. 134(1–2): 235–249.
34. Watashi, K., S. Urban, W.H. Li, and T. Wakita, NTCP and beyond: Opening the
door to unveil hepatitis B virus entry. International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
2014. 15(2): 2892–2905.
35. Yan, H., G.C. Zhong, G.W. Xu, W.H. He, Z.Y. Jing, Z.C. Gao, Y. Huang, Y.H. Qi, B.
Peng, H.M. Wang, L.R. Fu, M. Song, P. Chen, W.Q. Gao, B.J. Ren, Y.Y. Sun, T. Cai,
X.F. Feng, J.H. Sui, and W.H. Li, Sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide is
a functional receptor for human hepatitis B and D virus. Elife, 2012. 1: e00049.
36. Guo, H.T., C.X. Xu, T.L. Zhou, T.M. Block, and J.T. Guo, Characterization of
the host factors required for hepadnavirus covalently closed circular (ccc) DNA
formation. Plos One, 2012. 7(8): e43270.
37. Rabe, B., A. Vlachou, N. Pante, A. Helenius, and M. Kann, Nuclear import of hep-
atitis B virus capsids and release of the viral genome. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2003. 100(17): 9849–9854.
38. Hu, J. and C. Seeger, Hepadnavirus genome replication and persistence. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Med, 2015. 5(7): 10.1101/cshperspect.a021386.
39. Ryu, D.K., S. Kim, and W.S. Ryu, Hepatitis B virus polymerase suppresses trans-
lation of pregenomic RNA via a mechanism involving its interaction with 5’
stem-loop structure. Virology, 2008. 373(1): 112–123.
40. Bartenschlager, R. and H. Schaller, Hepadnaviral assembly is initiated by
polymerase binding to the encapsidation signal in the viral RNA genome.
Embo Journal, 1992. 11: 3413–3420.
41. Liu, N., R. Tian, and D.D. Loeb, Base pairing among three cis-acting sequences
contributes to template switching during hepadnavirus reverse transcription.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
2003. 100(4): 1984–1989.
42. Lewellyn, E.B. and D.D. Loeb, Base pairing between cis-acting sequences
contributes to template switching during plus-strand DNA synthesis in human
hepatitis B virus. Journal of Virology, 2007. 81(12): 6207–6215.
43. Basagoudanavar, S.H., D.H. Perlman, and J.M. Hu, Regulation of hepadnavirus
reverse transcription by dynamic nucleocapsid phosphorylation. Journal of Virol-
ogy, 2007. 81(4): 1641–1649.
44. Perlman, D.H., E.A. Berg, P.B. O’Connor, C.E. Costello, and J.M. Hu, Reverse
transcription-associated dephosphorylation of hepadnavirus nucleocapsids.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
2005. 102(25): 9020–9025.
45. Cui, X., L. Ludgate, X.J. Ning, and J.M. Hu, Maturation-associated destabilization
of hepatitis B virus nucleocapsid. Journal of Virology, 2013. 87(21): 11494–11503.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
177
46. Ning, X.J., D. Nguyen, L. Mentzer, C. Adams, H. Lee, R. Ashley, S. Hafenstein, and
J.M. Hu, Secretion of genome-free hepatitis B virus: Single strand blocking model
for virion morphogenesis of para-retrovirus. Plos Pathogens, 2011. 7(9): e1002255.
47. Gilbert, R.J.C., L. Beales, D. Blond, M.N. Simon, B.Y. Lin, F.V. Chisari, D.I. Stuart,
and D.J. Rowlands, Hepatitis B small surface antigen particles are octahedral.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
2005. 102(41): 14783–14788.
48. Ganem, D., Assembly of hepadnaviral virions and subviral particles. Current Topics
in Microbiology and Immunology, 1991. 168: 61–83.
49. McAleer, W.J., E.B. Buynak, R.Z. Maigetter, D.E. Wampler, W.J. Miller, and M.R.
Hilleman, Human hepatitis-B vaccine from recombinant yeast. Nature, 1984.
307(5947): 178–180.
50. Mateu, M.G., Assembly, stability and dynamics of virus capsids. Archives of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, 2013. 531(1–2): 65–79.
51. Katen, S. and A. Zlotnick, The thermodynamics of virus capsid assembly. Methods
in Enzymology, 2009. 455: 395–417.
52. Nowak, M.A., S. Bonhoeﬀer, A.M. Hill, R. Boehme, H.C. Thomas, and H. McDade,
Viral dynamics in hepatitis B virus infection. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 1996. 93(9): 4398–4402.
53. Yang, D.R., C.H. Zuo, X.H. Wang, X.H. Meng, B.B. Xue, N.L. Liu, R. Yu, Y.W.
Qin, Y.M. Gao, Q.P. Wang, J. Hu, L. Wang, Z.B. Zhou, B. Liu, D.M. Tan, Y. Guan,
and H.Z. Zhu, Complete replication of hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus in
a newly developed hepatoma cell line. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 2014. 111(13): E1264–E1273.
54. Wingﬁeld, P.T., S.J. Stahl, R.W. Williams, and A.C. Steven, Hepatitis core antigen
produced in Escherichia coli: subunit composition, conformational analysis, and in
vitro capsid assembly. Biochemistry, 1995. 34: 4919–4932.
55. Zlotnick, A., N. Cheng, J.F. Conway, F.P. Booy, A.C. Steven, S.J. Stahl, and P.T.
Wingﬁeld, Dimorphism of hepatitis B virus capsids is strongly inﬂuenced by the
C-terminus of the capsid protein. Biochemistry, 1996. 35(23): 7412–7421.
56. Zlotnick, A., J.M. Johnson, P.W. Wingﬁeld, S.J. Stahl, and D. Endres, A theoret-
ical model successfully identiﬁes features of hepatitis B virus capsid assembly.
Biochemistry, 1999. 38(44): 14644–14652.
57. Ceres, P. and A. Zlotnick, Weak protein–protein interactions are suﬃcient to drive
assembly of hepatitis B virus capsids. Biochemistry, 2002. 41(39): 11525–11531.
58. Nassal, M., The arginine-rich domain of the hepatitis B virus core protein is
required for pregenome encapsidation and productive viral positive-strand DNA
synthesis but not for virus assembly. Journal of Virology, 1992. 66: 4107–4116
59. Chua, P.K., F.-M. Tang, J.-Y. Huang, C.-S. Suen, and C. Shih, Testing the balanced
electrostatic interaction hypothesis of hepatitis B virus DNA synthesis by using an
in vivo charge rebalance approach. Journal of Virology, 2010. 84(5): 2340–2351.
60. Newman, M., P.K. Chua, F.M. Tang, P.Y. Su, and C. Shih, Testing an electrostatic
interaction hypothesis of hepatitis B virus capsid stability by using an in vitro cap-
sid disassembly/reassembly system. Journal of Virology, 2009. 83(20): 10616–10626.
61. Porterﬁeld, J.Z., M.S. Dhason, D.D. Loeb, M. Nassal, S.J. Stray, and A. Zlotnick,
Full-length hepatitis B virus core protein packages viral and heterologous

178
Self-Assembling Systems
RNA with similarly high levels of cooperativity. Journal of Virology, 2010. 84:
7174–7184.
62. Dhason, M.S., J.C.Y. Wang, M.F. Hagan, and A. Zlotnick, Diﬀerential assembly of
hepatitis B virus core protein on single- and double-stranded nucleic acid suggest
the dsDNA-ﬁlled core is spring-loaded. Virology, 2012. 430(1): 20–29.
63. Yu, N. and M.F. Hagan, Simulations of HIV capsid protein dimerization reveal
the eﬀect of chemistry and topography on the mechanism of hydrophobic protein
association. Biophysical Journal, 2012. 103(6): 1363–1369.
64. Freddolino, P.L., A.S. Arkhipov, S.B. Larson, A. McPherson, and K. Schulten,
Molecular dynamics simulations of the complete satellite tobacco mosaic virus.
Structure, 2006. 14(3): 437–449.
65. Hagan, M.F., Modeling viral capsid assembly. Advances in Chemical Physics, 2013.
155:1–68.
66. Siber, A., A.L. Bozic, and R. Podgornik, Energies and pressures in viruses:
Contribution of nonspeciﬁc electrostatic interactions. Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics, 2012. 14(11): 3746–3765.
67. Zhang, R., E. Wernersson, and P. Linse, Icosahedral capsid formation by capsomer
subunits and a semiﬂexible polyion. Rsc Advances, 2013. 3(47): 25258–25267.
68. Belyi, V.A. and M. Muthukumar, Electrostatic origin of the genome packing in
viruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2006. 103: 17174–17178.
69. Bruinsma, R.F., W.M. Gelbart, D. Reguera, J. Rudnick, and R. Zandi, Viral
self-assembly as a thermodynamic process. Physical Review Letters, 2003. 90:
248101.
70. Kegel, W.K. and P. van der Schoot, Competing hydrophobic and
screened-Coulomb interactions in hepatitis B virus capsid assembly. Biophysical
Journal, 2004. 86(6): 3905–3913
71. Siber, A. and R. Podgornik, Nonspeciﬁc interactions in spontaneous assembly of
empty versus functional single-stranded RNA viruses. Physical Review E, 2008. 78:
051915.
72. Kim, J. and J.Z. Wu, A molecular thermodynamic model for the stability of hepati-
tis B capsids. Journal of Chemical Physics, 2014. 140(23): 235101.
73. Crick, F.H.C. and J.D. Watson, Structure of small viruses. Nature, 1956. 177(4506):
473–475.
74. van der Schoot, P. and R. Bruinsma, Electrostatics and the assembly of an RNA
virus. Physical Review E, 2005. 71: 061928.
75. Crowther, R.A., N.A. Kiselev, B. Bottcher, J.A. Berriman, G.P. Borisova, V. Ose,
and P. Pumpens, Three-dimensional structure of hepatitis B virus core particles
determined by electron cryomicroscopy. Cell, 1994. 77: 943–950.
76. Baldwin, R.L., The new view of hydrophobic free energy. Febs Letters, 2013. 587(8):
1062–1066.
77. Wu, J. and J.M. Prausnitz, Pairwise-additive hydrophobic eﬀect for alkanes in
water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2008. 105: 9512–9515.
78. Hagan, M.F., Controlling viral capsid assembly with templating. Physical Review E,
2008. 77: 051904.
79. Israelachvili, J.N., Intermolecular and Surface Forces. 3rd ed. 2011, Burlington, MA:
Academic Press.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
179
80. Farnum, M. and C. Zukoski, Eﬀect of glycerol on the interactions and solubility of
bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. Biophysical Journal, 1999. 76(5): 2716–2726.
81. Weast, R.C., Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. 1984, Boca Ranton, FL: CRC
Press.
82. Chen, C., J.C.-Y. Wang, and A. Zlotnick, A kinase chaperones hepatitis B virus
capsid assembly and captures capsid dynamics in vitro. Plos Pathogens, 2011. 7:
e1002388.
83. Perlmutter, J.D., C. Qiao, and M.F. Hagan, Viral genome structures are optimal for
capsid assembly. eLife, 2013. 2: e00632.
84. van der Schoot, P. and R. Zandi, Impact of the topology of viral RNAs on their
encapsulation by virus coat proteins. Journal of Biological Physics, 2013. 39:
289–299.
85. Vanlandschoot, P., F. Van Houtte, B. Serruys, and G. Leroux-Roels, The
arginine-rich carboxy-terminal domain of the hepatitis B virus core protein medi-
ates attachment of nucleocapsids to cell-surface-expressed heparan sulfate. Journal
of General Virology, 2005. 86: 75–84.
86. Casassa, E.F. and Y. Tagami, An equilibrium theory for exclusion chromatography
of branched and linear polymer chains. Macromolecules, 1969. 2: 14–26.
87. Prinsen, P., P. van der Schoot, W.M. Gelbart, and C.M. Knobler, Multishell
structures of virus coat proteins. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2010. 114:
5522–5533.
88. Netz, R.R. and D. Andelman, Neutral and charged polymers at interfaces. Physics
Reports-Review Section of Physics Letters, 2003. 380: 1–95.
89. Zandi, R. and P. van der Schoot, Size regulation of ss-RNA viruses. Biophysical
Journal, 2009. 96: 9–20
90. Overbeek, J.T.G. and M.J. Voorn, Phase separation in polyelectrolyte solutions.
Theory of complex coacervation. J Cell and Comp. Physiol., 1957. 49: 7–26.
91. Yoﬀe, A.M., P. Prinsen, A. Gopal, C.M. Knobler, W.M. Gelbart, and A. Ben-Shaul,
Predicting the sizes of large RNA molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2008.
105: 16153–16158.
92. Hyeon, C., R.I. Dima, and D. Thirumalai, Size, shape, and ﬂexibility of RNA struc-
tures. Journal of Chemical Physics, 2006. 125: 194905.
93. Carrillo, J.-M.Y. and A.V. Dobrynin, Polyelectrolytes in salt solutions: Molecular
dynamics simulations. Macromolecules, 2011. 44: 5798–5816.
94. Caliskan, G., C. Hyeon, U. Perez-Salas, R.M. Briber, S.A. Woodson, and D.
Thirumalai, Persistence length changes dramatically as RNA folds. Physical Review
Letters, 2005. 95: 268303.
95. Zlotnick, A., P. Ceres, S. Singh, and J.M. Johnson, A small molecule inhibits and
misdirects assembly of hepatitis B virus capsids. Journal of Virology, 2002. 76:
4848–4854.
96. Kegel, W.K. and P. van der Schoot, Physical regulation of the self-assembly of
tobacco mosaic virus coat protein. Biophysical Journal, 2006. 91(4): 1501–1512.
97. Siber, A. and R. Podgornik, Role of electrostatic interactions in the assembly of
empty spherical viral capsids. Physical Review E, 2007. 76(6).
98. Stray, S.J., P. Ceres, and A. Zlotnick, Zinc ions trigger conformational change and
oligomerization of hepatitis B virus capsid protein. Biochemistry, 2004. 43(31):
9989–9998.

180
Self-Assembling Systems
99. Stray, S.J., C.R. Bourne, S. Punna, W.G. Lewis, M.G. Finn, and A. Zlotnick, A
heteroaryldihydropyrimidine activates and can misdirect hepatitis B virus capsid
assembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 2005. 102(23): 8138–8143.
100. Katen, S.P., S.R. Chirapu, M.G. Finn, and A. Zlotnick, Trapping of hepatitis B
virus capsid assembly intermediates by phenylpropenamide assembly accelerators.
Acs Chemical Biology, 2010. 5(12): 1125–1136.
101. Bourne, C.R., M.G. Finn, and A. Zlotnick, Global structural changes in hepatitis
B virus capsids induced by the assembly eﬀector HAP1. Journal of Virology, 2006.
80(22): 11055–11061.
102. Alexander, C.G., M.C. Jurgens, D.A. Shepherd, S.M.V. Freund, A.E. Ashcroft, and
N. Ferguson, Thermodynamic origins of protein folding, allostery, and capsid for-
mation in the human hepatitis B virus core protein. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2013. 110(30): E2782–E2791.
103. Ceres, P., S.J. Stray, and A. Zlotnick, Hepatitis B virus capsid assembly is
enhanced by naturally occurring mutation F97L. Journal of Virology, 2004. 78(17):
9538–9543.
104. Newman, M., F.M. Suk, M. Cajimat, P.M. Chua, and C. Shih, Stability and mor-
phology comparisons of self-assembled virus-like particles from wild-type and
mutant human hepatitis B virus capsid proteins. Journal of Virology, 2003. 77(24):
12950–12960.
105. Packianathan, C., S.P. Katen, C.E. Dann, and A. Zlotnick, Conformational changes
in the hepatitis B virus core protein are consistent with a role for allostery in virus
assembly. Journal of Virology, 2010. 84(3): 1607–1615.
106. de Vries, R. and M.C. Stuart, Theory and simulations of macroion complexation.
Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science, 2006. 11(5): 295–301.
107. Yu, X., L. Jin, J. Jih, C. Shih, and Z.H. Zhou, 3.5A cryoEM structure of hepatitis B
virus core assembled from full-length core protein. PLoS One, 2013. 8(9): e69729.
108. Ning, X., D. Nguyen, L. Mentzer, C. Adams, H. Lee, R. Ashley, S. Hafenstein, and
J. Hu, Secretion of genome-free hepatitis B virus: Single strand blocking model for
virion morphogenesis of para-retrovirus. Plos Pathogens, 2011. 7(9): e1002255.
109. Ting, C.L., J. Wu, and Z.-G. Wang, Thermodynamic basis for the genome to capsid
charge relationship in viral encapsidation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2011. 108:
16986–16991.
110. Campagna, M.R., F. Liu, R.C. Mao, C. Mills, D.W. Cai, F. Guo, X.S. Zhao, H. Ye, A.
Cuconati, H.T. Guo, J.H. Chang, X.D. Xu, T.M. Block, and J.T. Guo, Sulfamoylben-
zamide derivatives inhibit the assembly of hepatitis B virus nucleocapsids. Journal
of Virology, 2013. 87(12): 6931–6942.
111. Tan, Z.N., K. Pionek, N. Unchwaniwala, M.L. Maguire, D.D. Loeb, and A. Zlotnick,
The interface between hepatitis B virus capsid proteins aﬀects self-assembly, prege-
nomic RNA packaging, and reverse transcription. Journal of Virology, 2015. 89(6):
3275–3284.
112. Uetrecht, C., C. Versluis, N.R. Watts, P.T. Wingﬁeld, A.C. Steven, and A.J.R.
Heck, Stability and shape of hepatitis B virus capsids in vacuo. Angewandte
Chemie-International Edition, 2008. 47: 6247–6251.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
181
113. Kenney, J.M., C.H. Vonbonsdorﬀ, M. Nassal, and S.D. Fuller, Evolutionary con-
servation in the hepatitis B virus core structure: comparison of human and duck
cores. Structure, 1995. 3: 1009–1019.
114. He, L., Z. Porterﬁeld, P. van der Schoot, A. Zlotnick, and B. Dragnea, Hepatitis
virus capsid polymorph stability depends on encapsulated cargo size. Acs Nano,
2013. 7(10): 8447–8454.
115. Le Pogam, S., P.K. Chua, M. Newman, and C. Shih, Exposure of RNA templates
and encapsidation of spliced viral RNA are inﬂuenced by the arginine-rich domain
of human hepatitis B virus core antigen (HBcAg 165-173). Journal of Virology,
2005. 79(3): 1871–1887.
116. Newman, M., P.K. Chua, F.-M. Tang, P.-Y. Su, and C. Shih, Testing an electro-
static interaction hypothesis of hepatitis B virus capsid stability by using an in
vitro capsid disassembly/reassembly system. Journal of Virology, 2009. 83(20):
10616–10626.
117. Liu, S., J. He, C. Shih, K. Li, A. Dai, Z.H. Zhou, and J. Zhang, Structural compar-
isons of hepatitis B core antigen particles with diﬀerent C-terminal lengths. Virus
Research, 2010. 149(2): 241–244.
118. Bringas, R., Folding and assembly of hepatitis B virus core protein: A new model
proposal. Journal of Structural Biology, 1997. 118(3): 189–196.
119. Dong, X.F., P. Natarajan, M. Tihova, J.E. Johnson, and A. Schneemann, Particle
polymorphism caused by deletion of a peptide molecular switch in a quasiequiva-
lent icosahedral virus. Journal of Virology, 1998. 72(7): 6024–6033.
120. Kaplan, I.B., L. Zhang, and P. Palukaitis, Characterization of cucumber mosaic
virus: V. Cell-to-cell movement requires capsid protein but not virions. Virology,
1998. 246(2): 221–231.
121. Marshall, D. and A. Schneemann, Speciﬁc packaging of nodaviral RNA2 requires
the N-terminus of the capsid protein. Virology, 2001. 285(1): 165–175.
122. Schmitz, I. and A.L.N. Rao, Deletions in the conserved amino-terminal basic arm
of cucumber mosaic virus coat protein disrupt virion assembly but do not abolish
infectivity and cell-to-cell movement. Virology, 1998. 248(2): 323–331.
123. Schneemann, A. and D. Marshall, Speciﬁc encapsidation of nodavirus RNAs is
mediated through the C terminus of capsid precursor protein alpha. Journal of
Virology, 1998. 72(11): 8738–8746.
124. Scott, K.P., M.J. Farmer, D.J. Robinson, L. Torrance, and A.F. Murant, Compar-
ison of the coat protein of groundnut rosette assistor virus with those of other
luteoviruses. Annals of Applied Biology, 1996. 128(1): 77–83.
125. Smith, T.J., E. Chase, T. Schmidt, and K.L. Perry, The structure of cucumber
mosaic virus and comparison to cowpea chlorotic mottle virus. Journal of Virology,
2000. 74(16): 7578–7586.
126. Tihova, M., K.A. Dryden, T.V.L. Le, S.C. Harvey, J.E. Johnson, M. Yeager, and
A. Schneemann, Nodavirus coat protein imposes dodecahedral RNA structure
independent of nucleotide sequence and length. Journal of Virology, 2004. 78(6):
2897–2905.
127. Hagan, M.F., Modeling viral capsid assembly. Advances in Chemical Physics, 2014.
155: 1–67.
128. Angelescu, D.G., R. Bruinsma, and P. Linse, Monte Carlo simulations of polyelec-
trolytes inside viral capsids. Physical Review E, 2006. 73(4): 041921.

182
Self-Assembling Systems
129. Belyi, V.A. and M. Muthukumar, Electrostatic origin of the genome packing in
viruses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 2006. 103(46): 17174–17178.
130. Hu, T., R. Zhang, and B.I. Shkovskii, Electrostatic theory of viral self-assembly.
Physica a-Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 2008. 387(12): 3059–3064.
131. Siber, A. and R. Podgornik, Nonspeciﬁc interactions in spontaneous assembly of
empty versus functional single-stranded RNA viruses. Physical Review E, 2008.
78(5): 051915.
132. van der Schoot, P. and R. Bruinsma, Electrostatics and the assembly of an RNA
virus. Physical Review E, 2005. 71(6): 061928.
133. Ostrow, K.M. and D.D. Loeb, Underrepresentation of the 3’ region of the cap-
sid pregenomic RNA of duck hepatitis B virus. Journal of Virology, 2004. 78(5):
2179–2186.
134. Jiang, H. and S.X. Sun, Cellular pressure and volume regulation and implications
for cell mechanics. Biophysical Journal, 2013. 105(3): 609–619.
135. Tinevez, J.-Y., U. Schulze, G. Salbreux, J. Roensch, J.-F. Joanny, and E. Paluch, Role
of cortical tension in bleb growth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 2009. 106(44): 18581–18586.
136. Jiang, T., Z.-G. Wang, and J. Wu, Electrostatic regulation of genome packaging in
human hepatitis B virus. Biophysical Journal, 2009. 96(8): 3065–3073.
137. Jiang, T., Z. Li, and J. Wu, Structure and swelling of grafted polyelectrolytes: Pre-
dictions from a nonlocal density functional theory. Macromolecules, 2007. 40(2):
334–343.
138. Li, Z.D. and J.Z. Wu, Density functional theory for polyelectrolytes near oppositely
charged surfaces. Physical Review Letters, 2006. 96(4): 048302.
139. Kim, J. and J. Wu, A theoretical study of SRPK interaction with the ﬂexible
domains of hepatitis B capsids. Biophysical Journal, 2014. 107(6): 1453–1461.
140. Meng, D., R.P. Hjelm, J. Hu, and J. Wu, A theoretical model for the dynamic struc-
ture of hepatitis B nucleocapsid. Biophysical Journal, 2011. 101(10): 2476–2484.
141. Sominskaya, I., D. Skrastina, I. Petrovskis, A. Dishlers, I. Berza, M. Mihailova, J.
Jansons, I. Akopjana, I. Stahovska, D. Dreilina, V. Ose, and P. Pumpens, A VLP
library of C-terminally truncated hepatitis B core proteins: Correlation of RNA
encapsidation with a Th1/Th2 switch in the immune responses of mice. Plos One,
2013. 8(9): e75938.
142. Daub, H., S. Blencke, P. Habenberger, A. Kurtenbach, J. Dennenmoser, J. Wissing,
A. Ullrich, and M. Cotten, Identiﬁcation of SRPK1 and SRPK2 as the major cel-
lular protein kinases phosphorylating hepatitis B virus core protein. Journal of
Virology, 2002. 76(16): 8124–8137.
143. Chu, T.H., A.T. Liou, P.Y. Su, H.N. Wu, and C.H. Shih, Nucleic acid chaperone
activity associated with the arginine-rich domain of human hepatitis B virus core
protein. Journal of Virology, 2014. 88(5): 2530–2543.
144. Lan, Y.T., J. Li, W.Y. Liao, and J.H. Ou, Roles of the three major phosphorylation
sites of hepatitis B virus core protein in viral replication. Virology, 1999. 259(2):
342–348.
145. Lewellyn, E.B. and D.D. Loeb, Serine phosphoacceptor sites within the core pro-
tein of hepatitis B virus contribute to genome replication pleiotropically. Plos One,
2011. 6(2): e17202.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
183
146. Schmitz, A., A. Schwarz, M. Foss, L. Zhou, B. Rabe, J. Hoellenriegel, M. Stoeber,
N. Pante, and M. Kann, Nucleoporin 153 arrests the nuclear import of hepatitis B
virus capsids in the nuclear basket. Plos Pathogens, 2010. 6(1): e1000741.
147. Huang, Y.-m.M., M. Kang, and C.-e.A. Chang, Mechanistic insights into
phosphopeptide-BRCT domain association: Preorganization, ﬂexibility, and phos-
phate recognition. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2012. 116(34): 10247–10258.
148. Gallina, A., F. Bonelli, L. Zentilin, G. Rindi, M. Muttini, and G. Milanesi, A recom-
binant hepatitis B core antigen polypeptide with the protamine-like domain deleted
self-assembles into capsid particles but fails to bind nucleic acids. Journal of Virol-
ogy, 1989. 63(11): 4645–4652.
149. Seifer, M. and D.N. Standring, A protease-sensitive hinge linking the two domains
of the hepatitis B virus core protein is exposed on the viral capsid surface. Journal
of Virology, 1994. 68(9): 5548–5555.
150. Yu, X., L. Jin, J. Jih, C. Shih, and Z.H. Zhou, 3.5 angstrom cryoEM structure of
hepatitis B virus core assembled from full-length core protein. Plos One, 2013.
8(9): e69729.
151. Kann, M., B. Sodeik, A. Vlachou, W.H. Gerlich, and A. Helenius,
Phosphorylation-dependent binding of hepatitis B virus core particles to the
nuclear pore complex. Journal of Cell Biology, 1999. 145(1): 45–55.
152. Schlicht, H.J., R. Bartenschlager, and H. Schaller, The duck hepatitis B virus core
protein contains a highly phosphorylated C terminus that is essential for replica-
tion but not for RNA packaging. Journal of Virology, 1989. 63(7): 2995–3000.
153. Guo, H., R. Mao, T.M. Block, and J.-T. Guo, Production and function of the cyto-
plasmic deproteinized relaxed circular DNA of hepadnaviruses. Journal of Virology,
2010. 84(1): 387–396.
154. Wang, J.C.Y., M.S. Dhason, and A. Zlotnick, Structural organization of pregenomic
RNA and the carboxy-terminal domain of the capsid protein of hepatitis B virus.
Plos Pathogens, 2012. 8(9): e1002919.
155. Chen, C., J.C.-Y. Wang, and A. Zlotnick, A kinase chaperones hepatitis B virus
capsid assembly and captures capsid dynamics in vitro. Plos Pathogens, 2011. 7(11):
e1002388.
156. Roseman, A.M., O. Borschukova, J.A. Berriman, S.A. Wynne, P. Pumpens, and R.A.
Crowther, Structures of hepatitis B virus cores presenting a model epitope and
their complexes with antibodies. Journal of Molecular Biology, 2012. 423(1): 63–78.
157. Wingﬁeld, P.T., S.J. Stahl, R.W. Williams, and A.C. Steven, Hepatitis core antigen
produced in Escherichia coli: Subunit composition, conformational analysis, and in
vitro capsid assembly. Biochemistry, 1995. 34(15): 4919–4932.
158. Porterﬁeld, J.Z., M.S. Dhason, D.D. Loeb, M. Nassal, S.J. Stray, and A. Zlotnick,
Full-length hepatitis B virus core protein packages viral and heterologous RNA
with similarly high levels of cooperativity. Journal of Virology, 2010. 84(14):
7174–7184.
159. Gui, J.F., W.S. Lane, and X.D. Fu, A serine kinase regulates intracellular-localization
of splicing factors in the cell cycle. Nature, 1994. 369(6482): 678–682.
160. Colwill, K., L.L. Feng, J.M. Yeakley, G.D. Gish, J.F. Caceres, T. Pawson, and X.D.
Fu, SRPK1 and Clk/Sty protein kinases show distinct substrate speciﬁcities for
serine/arginine-rich splicing factors. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 1996. 271(40):
24569–24575.

184
Self-Assembling Systems
161. Zheng, Y.Y., X.D. Fu, and J.H.J. Ou, Suppression of hepatitis B virus replication by
SRPK1 and SRPK2 via a pathway independent of the phosphorylation of the viral
core protein. Virology, 2005. 342(1): 150–158.
162. Li, H.-C., E.-Y. Huang, P.-Y. Su, S.-Y. Wu, C.-C. Yang, Y.-S. Lin, W.-C. Chang, and
C. Shih, Nuclear export and import of human hepatitis B virus capsid protein and
particles. Plos Pathogens, 2010. 6(10): e1001162.
163. Yeh, C.T., Y.F. Liaw, and J.H. Ou, The arginine-rich domain of hepatitis-B virus
precore and core proteins contains a signal for nuclear transport. Journal of
Virology, 1990. 64(12): 6141–6147.
164. Yu, M.S. and J. Summers, Phosphorylation of the duck hepatitis B virus capsid
protein associated with conformational changes in the C terminus. Journal of
Virology, 1994. 68(5): 2965–2969.
165. Hilmer, J.K., A. Zlotnick, and B. Bothner, Conformational equilibria and rates of
localized motion within hepatitis B virus capsids. Journal of Molecular Biology,
2008. 375(2): 581–594.
166. Kann, M., A. Schmitz, and B. Rabe, Intracellular transport of hepatitis B virus.
World Journal of Gastroenterology, 2007. 13(1): 39–47.
167. Machida, A., H. Ohnuma, F. Tsuda, A. Yoshikawa, Y. Hoshi, T. Tanaka, S.
Kishimoto, Y. Akahane, Y. Miyakawa, and M. Mayumi, Phosphorylation in the
carboxyl-terminal domain of the capsid protein of hepatitis-B virus: Evaluation
with a monoclonal-antibody. Journal of Virology, 1991. 65(11): 6024–6030.
168. Gazina, E.V., J.E. Fielding, B. Lin, and D.A. Anderson, Core protein phosphoryla-
tion modulates pregenomic RNA encapsidation to diﬀerent extents in human and
duck hepatitis B viruses. Journal of Virology, 2000. 74(10): 4721–4728.
169. Liu, K., L. Ludgate, Z.H. Yuan, and J.M. Hu, Regulation of multiple stages of
hepadnavirus replication by the carboxyl-terminal domain of viral core protein in
trans. Journal of Virology, 2015. 89(5): 2918–2930.
170. Nassal, M., The arginine-rich domain of the hepatitis B virus core protein is
required for pregenome encapsidation and productive viral positive-strand DNA
synthesis but not for virus assembly. Journal of Virology, 1992. 66(7): 4107–4116.
171. Basagoudanavar, S.H., D.H. Perlman, and J. Hu, Regulation of hepadnavirus reverse
transcription by dynamic nucleocapsid phosphorylation. Journal of Virology, 2007.
81(4): 1641–1649.
172. Kock, J., M. Nassal, K. Deres, H.E. Blum, and F. von Weizsacker, Hepatitis B
virus nucleocapsids formed by carboxy-terminally mutated core proteins contain
spliced viral genomes but lack full-size DNA. Journal of Virology, 2004. 78(24):
13812–13818.
173. Pugh, J., A. Zweidler, and J. Summers, Characterization of the major duck hepatitis
B virus core particle protein. Journal of Virology, 1989. 63(3): 1371–1376.
174. Melegari, M., S.K. Wolf, and R.J. Schneider, Hepatitis B virus DNA replication is
coordinated by core protein serine phosphorylation and HBx expression. Journal of
Virology, 2005. 79(15): 9810–9820.
175. Huovila, A.P.J., A.M. Eder, and S.D. Fuller, Hepatitis-B surface-antigen assemblies
in a post-ER, pre-Golgi compartment. Journal of Cell Biology, 1992. 118(6):
1305–1320.

6 Molecular Models for Hepatitis B Virus
185
176. Bruss, V., A short linear sequence in the pre-S domain of the large hepatitis B
virus envelope protein required for virion formation. Journal of Virology, 1997.
71(12): 9350–9357.
177. Bruss, V. and K. Vieluf, Functions of the internal pre-S domain of the large surface
protein in hepatitis-B virus particle morphogenesis. Journal of Virology, 1995.
69(11): 6652–6657.
178. Poisson, F., A. Severac, C. Hourioux, A. Goudeau, and P. Roingeard, Both pre-S1
and S domains of hepatitis B virus envelope proteins interact with the core
particle. Virology, 1997. 228(1): 115–120.
179. Bottcher, B., N. Tsuji, H. Takahashi, M.R. Dyson, S. Zhao, R.A. Crowther, and
K. Murray, Peptides that block hepatitis B virus assembly: Analysis by cryomi-
croscopy, mutagenesis and transfection. Embo Journal, 1998. 17(23): 6839–6845.
180. Ponsel, D. and V. Bruss, Mapping of amino acid side chains on the surface of
hepatitis B virus capsids required for envelopment and virion formation. Journal of
Virology, 2003. 77(1): 416–422.
181. Seitz, S., S. Urban, C. Antoni, and B. Boettcher, Cryo-electron microscopy of
hepatitis B virions reveals variability in envelope capsid interactions. Embo Journal,
2007. 26(18): 4160–4167.
182. Schittl, B. and V. Bruss, Mutational proﬁling of the variability of individual
amino acid positions in the hepatitis B virus matrix domain. Virology, 2014. 458:
183–189.
183. Shan, Y., E.T. Kim, M.P. Eastwood, R.O. Dror, M.A. Seeliger, and D.E. Shaw,
How does a drug molecule ﬁnd its target binding site? Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 2011. 133(24): 9181–9183.
184. Logean, A., A. Sette, and D. Rognan, Customized versus universal scoring
functions: Application to class I MHC-peptide binding free energy predictions.
Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 2001. 11(5): 675–679.
185. Corse, E., R.A. Gottschalk, and J.P. Allison, Strength of TCR-peptide/MHC
interactions and in vivo T cell responses. Journal of Immunology, 2011. 186(9):
5039–5045.
186. Germain, R.N. and I. Stefanova, The dynamics of T cell receptor signaling:
Complex orchestration and the key roles of tempo and cooperation. Annual Review
of Immunology, 1999. 17: 467–522.
187. Hou, T., K. Chen, W.A. McLaughlin, B. Lu, and W. Wang, Computational analysis
and prediction of the binding motif and protein interacting partners of the Abl
SH3 domain. Plos Computational Biology, 2006. 2(1): 46-55.
188. Kim, J. and J.Z. Wu, A theoretical study of SRPK interaction with the ﬂexible
domains of hepatitis B capsids. Biophysical Journal, 2014. 107(6): 1453–1461.

186
7
Simulation Studies of Metal–Ligand Self-Assembly
Makoto Yoneya
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan
7.1
Introduction
In biological systems, hydrogen bonds are known to play a crucial role in the structure
formation of a DNA helix, protein alpha-helix and beta-sheet, among others [1].
Compared to this hydrogen-bond-directed self-assembly, coordination-bond-directed
self-assembly is less pronounced in biological systems, but has been extensively studied
recently in synthetic chemistry [2, 3]. In these coordination systems, both ﬁnite
supramolecular complexes and inﬁnite polymer networks are possible via self-assembly
with the appropriate metal–ligand system design [3, 4]. Well-known examples are the
ﬁnite spherical complex Pd(II)12L24, which is composed of 12 palladium ions [Pd(II)]
and 24 bent ligands (L in Figure 7.1a) [4], and the two-dimensional (2-D)-like inﬁnite
network which is composed of cadmium ions and linear ligands (4,4′-bipyridine,
Figure 7.1b) [5].
The former M12L24 cages are most extensively studied as ﬁnite supramolecular com-
plexes [6], and proven to be functional molecular cages to encapsulate perﬂuoroalka-
nes [7], polymerize methyl methacrylate segments [8] and protect a small protein [9].
The latter-type 2-D-like or 3-D inﬁnite coordination polymer networks, which are also
known as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), have been extensively studied over the
last decade for various applications, e.g., gas storage, gas separation, and catalysis [10,
11]. Understanding the mechanism of these coordination-directed self-assemblies is
important for designing new functional materials. However, only a limited number of
experimental studies have been reported to date on the self-assembly process in both
ﬁnite supramolecular complexes and inﬁnite polymer networks [12–15].
Computational studies can play a signiﬁcant role in this area of research [3]. Gener-
ally, the time scale of the metal–ligand self-assembly is far beyond the accessible time
scale of common molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Therefore we must speed up
the self-assembly using some types of coarse-grained modeling to ﬁll the gap between
simulations and real reaction systems.
In this chapter, we will introduce MD simulation studies of the metal–ligand
self-assembly, which begins with our modeling method.
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
187
N
N
N
N
Pd2+
Cd2+
(b)
(a)
N
N
N
N
Figure 7.1 (a) 4,4′-benzene-1,3-diyldipyridine (L) and (b) 4,4′-bipyridine (bpy).
7.2
Modeling Metal–Ligand Self-Assembly
7.2.1
Modeling Metals, Ligands and their Interactions
We began with the relatively straightforward part of the modeling, i.e., metals and lig-
ands. For the metal-atom non-bonded interaction parameters, literature values [16]
or values in the universal force ﬁeld (UFF) [17] were applied, and the van der Waals
bond length was scaled to reproduce the metal–ligand nitrogen distance from the X-ray
diﬀraction study. For ligand molecules, we applied the ﬂexible united- or all-atom model
with the exception that all bond-stretching degrees of freedom were constrained to
the equilibrium bond lengths. For the inter- and intramolecular interactions, a general
AMBER force ﬁeld (GAFF) [18] was used. In the united-atom model, the CH and CH2
united-atom parameters from a reoptimized united-atom force ﬁeld [19] were used.
Restrained electrostatic potential (RESP) charges [20], which were obtained using ab
initio molecular orbital calculations with the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level in the Gaussian03
program [21], were used for the atomic charges of the ligands.
Next, the metal–ligand coordination interaction is to be modeled. Various meth-
ods have been proposed to model the coordination of metal ions and ligands [22]. For
example, the bonded model uses covalent bonds between metal ions and coordinating
sites of ligands to maintain the speciﬁc symmetry of the coordinations. For our purposes,
this bonded model did not apply because we wanted to simulate spontaneous coor-
dination bond formations and breaks over the course of the simulations. In this case,
we applied a non-bonded model, which maintains the coordination with the electro-
static and van der Waals interactions. More speciﬁcally, we applied the cationic dummy
atom (CaDA) model, which was originally applied to zinc complex proteins [23]. The
zinc CaDA model uses four identical dummy atoms that are tetrahedrally attached to
the zinc ions and evenly transfers the atomic charge of the zinc divalent cation to the

188
Self-Assembling Systems
+0.5
+0.5
+0.5
+0.5
Pd
Figure 7.2 Pd(II) model using cationic dummy atoms (CaDA) and M6L8 nanosphere. The Pd(II) CaDA
model uses four identical dummy atoms, which are coplanarly attached to the Pd ions, and evenly
transfers the atomic charge of the Pd(II) cation to the four dummy atoms.
four dummy atoms. Similar to this zinc model, the Pd(II) CaDA model uses four iden-
tical dummy atoms, which are coplanarly attached to Pd, as shown in Figure 7.2. The
metal-dummy atom distance was set to 0.09 nm as in the original CaDA paper [23].
The metal–ligand binding in the CaDA model is purely electrostatic and possibly
too simple to represent the actual coordination interaction. We compared the calcu-
lated metal–ligand binding energy between the present model and the ab initio MO
calculations. The results are summarized in Table 7.1. The binding energy was obtained
as the dissociation energy of a pyridine (py) molecule from the Pd(II)(py)4 complex.
The MP2/6-31G* level optimized geometry of Pd(II)(py)4 was used to calculate the
metal–ligand binding energy. The DGDZVP basis set [24] was used for Pd. The binding
energy value with the present force-ﬁeld calculation was between those of the standard
Hartree–Fock (HF) and high-level MP2 methods; we think that it is suﬃcient for the
present study.
Table 7.1 Calculated metal–ligand binding energy (kcal/mol)
HF
MP2
Present force-ﬁeld
−52.8
6-31G*
−49.65
−61.18
6-311G*
−49.20
−61.26
6-311G**
−49.10
−61.16
cc-pVDZ
−48.79
−60.61
aug-cc-pVDZ
−48.41
−65.05

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
189
7.2.2
Modeling Solvents
Next, we explain the method that we used to speed up the assembly process of the model
metal–ligand system in a solution.
As discussed in Section 7.1, we introduce the methods to ﬁll the time scale gap
between the actual and the simulated systems. In this study, we accelerated the
assembly of metals and ligands by implicitly treating the solvent as a continuum
medium. There are various types of implicit-solvent models [25]. Here, we applied a
combination of three methods: Langevin (stochastic) dynamics, reaction ﬁelds and
coarse-grained potentials. To account for the dynamic (heat-bath) eﬀects of the solvent
molecules, Langevin dynamics (LD) [26], which adds a friction and random force to
the conventional MD, was applied. To represent the electrostatic eﬀects of the solvent,
the generalized reaction ﬁeld method [27], which extends the “classical” reaction ﬁeld
method to ionic systems, was used. In this method, the relative dielectric constant
beyond the distance parameter for the complete neutralization (screening) can be
separately speciﬁed as the far ﬁeld value 𝜖r f from the near-ﬁeld value 𝜖r. Similar to
the electrostatic eﬀects, the van der Waals interactions among the ligands are also
screened by the solvation to eﬀectively be short-range repulsive ones. We applied
a Weeks–Chandler–Andersen (WCA) potential [28] for this short-range repulsive
potential. The WCA potential was truncated at the repulsive part of the common
Lennard-Jones potential and shifted as follows:
V(rij) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
4𝜖ij
[( 𝜎ij
rij
)12
−
( 𝜎ij
rij
)6]
+ 𝜖ij
rij < 21∕6𝜎ij
0
rij ≥21∕6𝜎ij,
(7.1)
where rij is the distance between the atoms, and 𝜖and 𝜎are Lennard-Jones potential
parameters. Such a combination of the Coulomb interaction with an eﬀective dielectric
constant and the WCA potential interaction was used as a simple implicit-solvent model
in the ionic-system study [29]. A combination of the LD heat-bath and WCA potential is
also used in the well-known Kremer–Grest model for polymers in a good solvent [30].
We did not include counter anions (e.g., NO−
3 ) in our model. To realize the
metal–ligand self-assembly within the available computational time, we should
enhance the probability of coordination formation between the Pd(II) ions and the
ligands. Inclusion of the counter ions reduces this probability because these ions would
compete with the ligands for the metal ions. In reality, the metal–ligand self-assembly
takes a much longer time than that in our model because the ligand coordination
requires time to dissociate the solvents or counter anions from metal ions. Our model
(without real solvents and counter anions) overestimates the coordination rate of the
metal ions to the ligands. Because of the overestimation, our model is certainly a poor
model to evaluate an accurate coordination rate. In principle, the time scale in any
coarse-grained model is not the “real” time scale, but the “coarse-grained” time scale
because of the acceleration dynamics, which is the case for our model. However, this
overestimation eﬀectively accelerates the coordination rate of the metals to the ligands
and enables our model to realize the metal–ligand self-assembly within the available
computational time.

190
Self-Assembling Systems
To study the metal–ligand self-assembly, we should consider the elements that play
important roles in the self-assembly process, but we think that it is not necessary to use
the most realistic possible model. Currently, we do not have evidence showing that the
dissociation process of the solvents or anions from metal ions plays such an active role.
Thus, we did not include the actual solvents and anions in our current model to propose
the “minimum” model that realizes the metal–ligand self-assembly.
7.2.3
Computational Methods
Finally, we explain the computation methods. Trajectories were produced using the MD
program package GROMACS (version 4) [31] with modiﬁcation of the non-bonded
interaction routine to use the WCA potential. For the LD time integration, we used the
leapfrog stochastic dynamics integrator [32] and LINCS bond constraint [33], where
the time step was either 4 fs for the all-atom model or 5 fs for the united-atom model
because of the stability of the LINCS algorithm [34].
The charge-group-based twin-range 0.65 nm van der Waals and 1.4 nm electrostatic
cutoﬀdistances [35] were applied to the non-bonded interactions. In contrast to the
common setting for the latter value (1.4 nm) [36], the former value (0.65 nm) is shorter
than the common value because we used the short-ranged WCA potential. The simu-
lation temperature was maintained by coupling to a stochastic thermostat with a time
constant 𝜏t = 0.1 ps via LD. The LD friction coeﬃcient for each atom was speciﬁed as
the GROMACS default value, i.e., mass/𝜏t.
7.3
Self-Assembly of Supramolecular Coordination Complex
7.3.1
Self-Assembly of M6L8 Spherical Complex [37]
We ﬁrst tried one of the simplest examples of the spherical complex, M6L8, a nanosphere
of octahedral symmetry with six palladium (Pd) ions and eight tridentate ligands (ligand
1 in Figure 7.3) [38]. The M6L8 complex can be readily formed from a 4 : 3 mixture of lig-
and 1 and Pd(NO3)2 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at 90∘C. The formation process was
directly monitored by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy in DMSO −d6 solvent,
which shows the completed complexation reaction within 5 min [38]. Additionally, no
peaks other than those due to the M6L8 complex were observed, which establishes the
monodisperse assembly and remarkable thermodynamic stability of the complex. The
N
N
N
Figure 7.3 Pyridine-capped tridentate ligand 1.

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
191
Figure 7.4 Initial structure made by random placement of
24 Pd(II) and 48 ligand 1 models (which corresponds to four
M6L8 nanospheres) in the cubic simulation box with a
volume of (20 nm)3.
structure of M6L8 was determined by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) [38], which reveals that
the six Pd(II) occupy the apices of the octahedral array and the trigonal faces of the octa-
hedron are capped by the tripodal non-planar ligand 1 in a truncated fashion, leading
to a near-spherical shape.
We tried a relatively small system to clarify the acceleration factors in the MD
simulation, using the model in the previous section. The initial structure was made
by random placement of 24 Pd(II) and 48 ligand 1 models (which corresponds to
four M6L8 nanospheres) in the cubic simulation box with a volume of (20 nm)3, as
shown in Figure 7.4. The initial concentration is the factor that aﬀects the formation
process of the M6L8 nanosphere, i.e., a long time free diﬀusion occurred when the
initial concentration was too low and a highly random aggregation occurred when
it was for too high. The concentration of the Pd(II) ions and ligands in the initial
structure described above was chosen by trial and error and is about 1/234 of that in the
M6L8 crystal state [38], but a far higher concentration than that of the experimentally
prepared solution (0.01 mol/l).
There are many other factors that could aﬀect the formation rate of the spherical
complex. Temperature is surely another factor, but we set it to the experimental
condition, i.e., 90∘C (363 K). Herein, we focus on the parameter that controls the
metal–ligand coordination interactions, i.e. the near-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant
𝜖r. The far-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant, 𝜖r f , was speciﬁed as 47.0 for the DMSO
solvent as described in the previous section. Application of this value (𝜖r = 47) for even
short-distance (near-ﬁeld) charge–charge interactions are clearly inadequate because
this means there are as many DMSO molecules (as the continuum medium) between
these short-distance-separated charges. However, a common choice for the near-ﬁeld
𝜖r = 1, which corresponds to the vacuum, is also inadequate in this study, because this
completely neglects the pseudo-ligand eﬀect of the DMSO solvent. A polar solvent such
as DMSO could behave like a ligand, where the resulting metal–solvent interaction
enhances the metal–ligand exchange probability. This pseudo-ligand eﬀect of the polar
solvent could be parameterized as the enlarged 𝜖r rather than one that corresponds to
the vacuum.
We compare the results with three diﬀerent near-ﬁeld dielectric constants, 𝜖r = 1.0,
2.5 and 4.0, all starting with the same initial conﬁguration. Snapshots after the 250 ns
LD runs are shown in Figure 7.5 for these three 𝜖r settings. Among these, the complete
M6L8 nanosphere formation during the same 250 ns LD simulation was only observed

192
Self-Assembling Systems
Figure 7.5 Snapshots after the 250 ns LD runs setting 𝜖r = 1.0 (left), 2.5 (center), 4.0 (right).
An enlarged image of a completed nanosphere is additionally shown in the central case.
with 𝜖r = 2.5. For all six Pd(II) within this completed nanosphere, time variations of the
coordination numbers (judged from the distance between Pd and ligand-nitrogen atoms
with the threshold of 0.27 nm) of each Pd(II) are shown in Figure 7.6. The time evolutions
in this ﬁgure can be divided into three stages. The period up to 50 ns was characterized
by a rather monotonic increase of coordination numbers from metal–ligand assembly
(an assembly stage). The subsequent period, 50–80 ns, was characterized by frequent
coordination exchange via tentative coordination of more than four that evolves from
a rather randomly assembled cluster to a near-spherical shape (an evolution stage). In
the last period, above 80 ns, the coordination numbers were almost ﬁxed to four and the
nanosphere was stable (a ﬁxation stage). This simulated three-stage process in Figure 7.6
corresponds well to the stages explained in the experimental study [12].
We then compare the time evolutions of the ligand exchange rates of the three cases
𝜖r = 1.0, 2.5 and 4.0. We deﬁne the ligand exchange rate as the number of metal–ligand
0
50
100
150
200
250
time (ns)
0
1
2
3
4
5
coordination number
t = 55 ns
t = 80 ns
t = 50 ns
Figure 7.6 Time variations of the coordination numbers of the six Pd(II) within the completed M6L8
nanosphere. Each of the six plots is vertically shifted for clarity. Snapshots at the simulation times of
50, 55 and 80 ns are additionally shown in the ﬁgure. (See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
193
0
50
100
150
200
250
time (ns)
0
10
20
30
exchange rate (ns−1)
εr = 1.0
εr = 4.0
εr = 2.5 (only within nanosphere)
εr = 2.5
Figure 7.7 Time variations of the ligand exchange rates for the LD runs with 𝜖r = 1.0, 2.5 and 4.0. The
broken line corresponds to the exchange rates of the six Pd(II) ions within the completed nanosphere
(instead of all the Pd(II) ions) for the LD run with 𝜖r = 2.5.
pair alterations over a speciﬁed time period, 𝜏(taken here to be 10 ns), and then average
over all of the pairs in the system. The evaluated rates vs. time are shown in Figure 7.7. In
this ﬁgure, the broken line corresponds to the exchange rates of the six Pd(II) ions within
the completed nanosphere (instead of all the Pd(II) ions) for the LD run with 𝜖r = 2.5. The
broken plot clearly corresponds to Figure 7.6, i.e., the exchange rate increased in stage
2 (50–80 ns) and then steeply (more than two orders of magnitude) decreased to a very
small exchange rate value in stage 3 (above 80 ns). We think this large rate diﬀerence
between the completed nanosphere (in stage 3) and the incomplete clusters (in stage
2) corresponds to the large experimental exchange rate diﬀerence between the M12L24
nanosphere and a fractional tetra-monodentate model complex [12]. The exchange rate
constants themselves are much lager (ca 0.1–10 ns−1 in Figure 7.7) in our simulation
model than those in the experimental report (ranging from ms−1 to days−1 in Ref. [12]).
The real process will depend on both the diﬀusivity of the fragments in the DMSO
solution and the ligand exchange rate. We think the acceleration in our current model
was realized not by the fastened diﬀusivity, but by the enhanced ligand exchange rates
described above. Actually, we found that the diﬀusion constants in the implicit solvent
model with the Langevin dynamics (this study) and those in the explicit DMSO model
[39] solvents with the ordinary MD are the same order. Moreover, the dependence of the
diﬀusivity on the simulated self-assembly was diminished in our study because of the
much enhanced initial system concentration in comparison with the real experimental
system.
From the results described above, we believe that our accelerated simulation cor-
rectly follows the self-assembly process of the real reaction systems when we properly
select the simulation parameters, e.g., 𝜖r. This 𝜖r can be regarded as a parameter that

194
Self-Assembling Systems
scales the metal–ligand binding energy, because Coulomb potentials, qiqj∕(4𝜋𝜖rij), are
the only source of the (metal–ligand) attractive interactions. In the current model, the
three-state process was seen with 𝜖r = 2.0–2.5. In contrast, the exchange rate was very
large when 𝜖r = 4.0, and the coordination bonds tend to break before the dimers grow
into larger clusters, i.e., clustering rate limiting. When 𝜖r = 1.0, the Pd(II)-ligand bind-
ing energy is relatively strong; thus, it takes a rather long time to break and exchange the
coordination bonds to develop new conformers, i.e., breaking rate limiting.
7.3.2
Self-Assembly of M12L24 Spherical Complex [40]
Next, we applied our model to the larger spherical complex M12L24, which is a nanocage
with 12 Pd(II) ions and 24 pyridine-capped bidentate ligands [4, 41] as shown in
Figure 7.8 for example.
To compare with the previous M6L8 case, we ﬁrst used a relatively small system with
an initial structure generated by random placement of 48 Pd(II) and 96 ligand a models
(which corresponds to four M12La
24 nanocages) with the same solvent condition [37].
The initial structure is shown in Figure 7.9a. The concentrations of the Pd(II) ions and
ligands in the cubic simulation box (volume = 30 nm3) were chosen to be comparable
to the M6L8 system in our previous study.
Snapshots after the 500 ns Langevin dynamics (LD) [42] runs at the simulation
temperature of 343 K (70∘C, the experimental reaction conditions [4]) are shown in
Figure 7.9b. As shown in the enlarged image in Figure 7.10, a complete M12La
24 nanocage
was successfully formed during this LD run. For all 12 Pd(II) within this completed
nanocage in Figure 7.10, the time variations of the coordination numbers (judged from
the distance between Pd and ligand-nitrogen atoms with the speciﬁed threshold [37])
of each Pd(II) are shown in Figure 7.11. The time evolutions in this ﬁgure can be divided
N
N
N
N
O
N
N
R
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.8 Pyridine-capped banana-shaped bidentate ligands a, b and c (R = OCH3).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.9 a) Initial structure generated by random placement of 48 Pd(II) and 96 ligand a models in
the cubic simulation box (volume = 30 nm3). (b) Snapshot after a 500 ns LD run with M12La
24 and M6La
12
nanocages in the circle and square, respectively.

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
195
Figure 7.10 Enlarged view of the M12La
24 nanocage from the
snapshot after the 500 ns LD run in Figure 7.9b.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
time (ns)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
coordination number
t = 440 ns
Figure 7.11 Time variations of the coordination numbers of the six Pd(II) within the completed M12La
24
nanocage. Snapshots at the simulation time of 440 ns are additionally shown in the ﬁgure.
into three stages: an assembly stage up to ca 100 ns, an evolution stage for 100–500 ns
and a ﬁxation stage above 500 ns. The simulated three-stage process in Figure 7.11
corresponds well to the stages found in our previous simulations on the M6L8 system
and that explained in the experimental study on the M12L24 system [12].
We also tried completely parallel simulations for the furan-cored ligand b shown
in Figure 7.8. With this ligand b, we also observed the spontaneous formation of the
M12Lb
24 nanocage as shown in Figure 7.12. From the results described above, we are
convinced that our model, which was originally developed for the M6L8 system, is
capable of demonstrating the self-assembly of the larger M12L24 system for two of the
ligand types shown in Figure 7.8.
Next, we enlarged the system size to see the cluster size distribution evolution during
the M12L24 nanocage formation. We constructed a system eight times larger than the
ﬁrst system (with 384 Pd(II) ions and 768 ligand a models, which corresponds to 32
M12La
24 nanocages) by doubly stacking the MD cells in each xyz direction. As in our

196
Self-Assembling Systems
Figure 7.12 M12Lb
24 nanocage from the snapshot after the 500 ns
LD run.
previous study [37], we also incorporated 192 explicit solvent atoms of the CH united
atom type into the above system. This solvent atom number (half of the Pd ion number)
was the optimum number to speed up M6L8 cage formation in the previous study. A
random initial structure was constructed through a 50 ns high-temperature (473 K) LD
run using uncharged Pd(II)-CaDA models. The LD run with the original Pd(II)-CaDA
model was then performed for 1 𝜇s at 343 K. The cluster size distributions were analyzed
based on the ligand-metal coordination bonds from the simulated trajectories.
Figure 7.13 shows the ligand cluster size distributions as a function of time; the
vertical axis corresponds to the mass fractions. Here, a ligand cluster size of 24
corresponds to the completed M12La
24. As shown in this ﬁgure, the mass fraction for
24-sized clusters at the ﬁnal step (1.0 𝜇s) was ca 0.1, which corresponds to 3–4 M12La
24
cage assemblies, compared with 1.0 for a 100% yield assembly. In contrast, we observe
peaks at 12, 16 and 18 for the larger fraction at approximately 0.14, 0.1 and 0.15 (corre-
sponds to 4–9 nanocages), respectively. These smaller-sized clusters correspond to the
0.0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ligand cluster size
mass fraction
1
time (μs)
Figure 7.13 Cluster size distributions of the ligand a as a function of time. The vertical axis
corresponds to the mass fractions.

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
197
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.14 (a) M6La
12, (b) M8La
16 and (c) M9La
18 cages from the snapshot after the 1 𝜇s LD run shown in
Figure 7.13.
lower-nuclearity complexes with speciﬁc symmetries. A peak for the ligand cluster size
12 corresponds to the cube shape M6La
12 cage (shown in Figure 7.14a) whose formation
was reported in a real reaction system of bidentate ligand with acetylene spacers (ligand
c in Figure 7.8) using platinum (Pt) instead of the Pd ion [41]. The latter peaks at 16 and
18 correspond to the M8La
16 and M9La
18 nanocages shown in Figures 7.14b and 7.14c,
respectively. These two cages are composed of eight three-ligand membered rings as in
M12La
24, but two and three (instead of six for the M12La
24) four-ligand membered rings
in the M8La
16 and M9La
18 nanocages, respectively. Recently, these two forms, M8L16
and M9L18, were experimentally conﬁrmed as metastable intermediate structures that
exist during the real self-assembly process [13]. In these smaller nanocages (M6La
12,
M8La
16 and M9La
18), the coordination network geometries around the Pd(II) ions were
deformed compared with M12La
24. These geometry distortions were not so large as
being toward tetrahedral geometry from the original coplanar one, but relatively small
out-of-plane and adjacent angle deformations between the coordinated pyridines. The
results above show that the larger M12L24 self-assembly process noticeably involves the
trapping structures with lower-nuclearity in contrast to the smaller M6L8 cage.
We also tried corresponding simulations with the furan-cored ligand b. Figure 7.15
shows the ligand cluster size distributions as a function of time, which corresponds
to Figure 7.13 for the ligand a. The mass fraction for 24-sized clusters at the ﬁnal step
(around 0.1) is similar to that in Figure 7.13 for the ligand a. However, the peaks for the
smaller-sized clusters (at 12, 16 and 18) were much suppressed compared to Figure 7.13.
It is highly probable that the slightly larger bend angle (ca 127∘[43]) of the furan-cored
ligand b would make those smaller-sized clusters energetically unfavorable compared
to ligand a. This shows that the trapping at the lower nuclearities sensitively depends on
the bend angle of ligands, and a slightly larger bend angle (compared to the geometri-
cally optimum angle for the ﬁnal structure, here 120∘for M12L24 [44]) would be eﬀective
to suppress the trapping.
As mentioned above, in the bidentate ligand real reaction system using Pt(II) instead
of the Pd(II) ion, the deformed Pt(II)6Lc
12 cube, instead of the Pt(II)12Lc
24 sphere, was
observed [41]. It is proposed that the angle between the pyridyl coordination vectors
(bend angle) determines which structures is observed experimentally [3, 44, 45]. Indeed,
the formation of an M6L12 cube using the ligands with a 90∘bend angle [46] follows the
proposed hypothesis. However, Pt(II)6Lc
12 vs. Pd(II)12Lc
24 formation from the same lig-
and c (with bend angle ∼120∘) is not predicted by the hypothesis [43]. It is said that

198
Self-Assembling Systems
0.0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
mass fraction
ligand cluster size
time (μs)
Figure 7.15 Cluster size distributions of the ligand b as a function of time. The vertical axis
corresponds to the mass fractions.
the stronger metal–ligand binding energy by the Pt(II) ion kinetically stabilizes the
metastable complex Pt(II)6Lc
12 even with the deformation energy penalties [41].
7.4
Self-Assembly of Metal–Organic Frameworks [47]
In this section, we apply our previous model developed for the self-assembly of a ﬁnite
complex to inﬁnite MOFs.
7.4.1
Self-Assembly of 2D-like MOF
We ﬁrst tried to simulate 2-D-like MOF self-assembly using our previous simulation
model for Pd(II)12L24 by simply changing the ligand from the bent form in Pd(II)12L24
(Figure 7.1a) to the linear form 4,4′-bpy (Figure 7.1b) in DMSO. The DMSO solvent was
treated implicitly as a continuum medium with a far-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant of
47.0, as in the previous cases. The simulation temperature was maintained at room tem-
perature (293 K) by coupling to a stochastic thermostat [37, 40]. The initial structure was
made by random placement of 384 Pd(II) ions and 768 4,4′-bipyridine (bpy) ligands in
the cubic simulation cell with a volume of (603 nm3), as shown in Figure 7.16a. We note
that the all-atom ligand model and the coarse-grained solvent model without atomic
solvent was used in this section.
The simulated time evolution of the total number of coordination bonds (judged from
the distance between the Pd atoms and the nitrogen atoms of the ligands Pd–Nbpy using
the appropriate threshold [37]) is shown in Figure 7.17 with a solid black line. It shows
saturating behavior after ca 0.2 𝜇s, which implies that the coordination bonding rates

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
199
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.16 (a) Initial structure and snapshot after (b) 0.4 𝜇s, (c) 0.6 𝜇s and (d) 0.8 𝜇s of the
[Pd(II)(4, 4′-bpy)2] system simulation viewing along the z-axis (hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity).
The bounding box corresponds to the simulation box with 3-D periodic boundary conditions. The box
sizes and shapes are diﬀerent after 0.4 𝜇s.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
time (μs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
N
0
80
160
240
320
v (nm3)
× 103
Figure 7.17 Time evolution of the number of coordination bonds (black line) and number of zero- to
four-coordinated (gray lines) Pd(II) and the simulation box volume (black dashed line) in the
self-assembly process of the [Pd(II)(4, 4′-bpy)2] system. The dashed horizontal line at
N = 1536 = 2 × 768 corresponds to the full-bonding limit of the total coordination bonds.
are strongly dependent on the number density of the unbound pyridine rings. Then, to
increase the bonding rates, we shrunk the simulation box volume (ca −1.0%/ns) after
0.4 𝜇s, as shown in the box volume change in Figure 7.17 with a black dashed line.
With this box shrinkage, the number of four-coordinated Pd(II) was increased and the
total number of coordination bonds approached its full-bonding value, as shown in
Figure 7.17.
Here, we note the eﬀect of the metal–ligand binding strength upon the MOF
self-assembly. In our model, the metal–ligand binding was modeled with Coulomb
potentials, qiqj∕(4𝜋𝜖rrij), and the near-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant 𝜖r can be
regarded as a scaling parameter of the binding energy. As described previously,

200
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.18 Snapshot after 0.8 𝜇s of the [Pd(II)(4, 4′-bpy)2] system simulation with (a) 𝜖r = 4.0 and (b)
𝜖r = 1.0 (hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity).
the far-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant (𝜖r f ) was speciﬁed as 47.0 for the DMSO
solvent. A polar solvent such as DMSO could behave like a ligand and enhance the
metal–ligand exchange probability (eﬀectively decreasing the metal–ligand binding
energy). Figure 7.18 shows the corresponding snapshots after 0.8 𝜇s with the larger
(𝜖r = 4.0) and the smaller (𝜖r = 1.0) near-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant than the
previous setting of 𝜖r = 2.5 in Figure 7.16d. In comparison to Figure 7.16d (𝜖r = 2.5),
Figure 7.18a (𝜖r = 4.0) shows only small clusters with mostly up to three-coordinated
Pd(II) complexes because of the smaller metal–ligand binding energy. In contrast,
Figure 7.18b with the smaller 𝜖r = 1.0, which means the larger metal–ligand binding
energy, shows more irregular deformed (e.g., triangular) networks compare to the much
regular square networks in Figure 7.16d. In the current model, regular networks were
obtained with 𝜖r ∼2–3. This corresponds to the metal–ligand binding strength being
within a window of ±20% around the optimum values for the regular MOF growth.
7.4.2
Self-Assembly of 3D-like MOF
Next, we considered the 3-D extension of the 2-D-like MOF described above
using octahedral metal centers. With the use of [9]ane-S3 capped hexacoordi-
nated ruthenium ions and 4,4′-bpys, the formation of a supramolecular cube
{([9]ane-S3)Ru(II)}8(4, 4′-bpy)12 in nitromethane was reported [48]. Removal of the
capping groups may give an inﬁnite 3-D cubic network, because an analogous octa-
hedrally coordinated pyridine (py) complex Ru(II)(py)6 has previously been reported
[49]. However, no such 3-D MOFs consisting of only the octahedral centers and the
4,4′-bpys have been reported to date [3]. We then tried the corresponding simulation
for the system.
The Ru(II) ion’s nonbonding parameters were taken from the universal force ﬁeld
(UFF) [17], and the van der Waals bond length (originally 0.2963 nm) was scaled by 0.78
to reproduce the Ru–Npy,bpy distance (ca 0.21 nm) from the XRD studies [48, 49]. The
atomic charge of the Ru(II) evenly transferred to the dummy atoms that were attached
octahedrally to the Ru(II) atom. The solvent, nitromethane, was treated implicitly as a
continuum medium with the far- and near-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant of 36.2 and
1.75, respectively. The initial structure (Figure 7.19a) was made by random placement

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
201
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.19 (a) Initial structure and snapshot after (b) 1.0 𝜇s of the [Ru(II)(4, 4′-bpy)3] system
simulation (hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity). Scales (box sizes) are diﬀerent in these snapshots.
of 256 Ru(II) ions and 768 4,4′-bpy ligands in the cubic simulation box with the same
volume (603 nm3) as in the previous system.
The time evolution of the total number of coordination bonds and the number of
zero- to six-coordinated Ru(II) is shown in Figure 7.20a. Though we applied the same
box shrinkage rate after 0.4 𝜇s as in the previous case, up to ﬁve-coordinated Ru(II)
complexes were obtained without any six-coordinated ones. Additionally, the total
coordination bond number was saturated at much lower values, and the snapshot
after 1.0 𝜇s (Figure 7.19b) shows disordered non-regular networks. This result may be
consistent with the lack of experimental reports of 3-D MOFs consisting of Ru(II) ions
and 4,4′-bpys noted above.
Then, we tried to identify the key design factor to realize regular 3-D MOFs using
the current simulation model as a tool. The clue for this was the previously reported
3-D cubic MOF composed of silver (Ag) ions and pyrazine (pyz) ligands [50]. In this
system, relatively long Ag–Npyz distances of ca 0.25 nm were obtained by XRD measure-
ments [50]. This length is larger than the reported Ru–Nbpy distance of ca 0.21 nm [48],
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time (µs)
0
200
400
600
800
N
0
400
800
1200
1600
N
0
200
400
600
800
N
0
400
800
1200
1600
N
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time (µs)
(a)
Figure 7.20 (a) Time evolution of the number of coordination bonds (black line) and number of zero-
to six-coordinated (gray lines) Ru(II) in the self-assembly process of the [Ru(II)(4, 4′-bpy)3] system.
(b) Corresponding time evolution with the Ru–N distance enlargement.

202
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.21 Snapshot after (a) 0.4 𝜇s, (b) 0.6 𝜇s, (c) 0.8 𝜇s and (d) 1.0 𝜇s of the enlarged Ru–N distance
[Ru(II)(4, 4′-bpy)3] system simulation (hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity). Scales (box sizes) are
diﬀerent in these snapshots.
which we had used to ﬁt the Ru(II) van der Waals bond length parameter in the simu-
lation above. Because the octahedrally coordinated structure with six 4,4′-bpys is steri-
cally more crowded than the planar four-coordination center, a larger M–Nbpy distance
would be required [51].
To validate this, we resized the Ru(II) van der Waals bond length parameter to the
Ru–Nbpy distance of ca 0.255 nm with a scaling factor of 1.2 instead of the previous
value of 0.78. The corresponding time evolution of the total number of coordination
bonds from zero- to six-coordinated Ru(II) is shown in Figure 7.20b. With this enlarged
Ru–Nbpy distance, six-coordinated Ru(II) became the dominant species and the total
number of coordination bonds approached the full-bonding values at t = 1.0 𝜇s,
as shown in Figure 7.20b. Snapshots in Figure 7.21 show the spontaneous growth
process of the 3-D MOF. The marked peaks in the radial distribution function (RDF)
in Figure 7.22 with the enlarged Ru–N distance (black line) show the high structural
r (nm)
0.00.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
RDFmol-mol
Figure 7.22 The 4,4′-bpy center of molecular mass radial distribution functions averaged over the last
100 ps without (gray line) and with (black line) the Ru–N distance enlargement and with the Ru–N
distance enlargement and also the smaller 𝜖r = 1.2 (light gray line).

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
203
regularity of the obtained 3-D MOF. Also, RDF for the case without the Ru–N distance
enlargement (gray line) ﬂattens out around the value of one over a distance larger than
3 nm, which corresponds to the structureless uniform distributions of the 4,4′-bpys. We
also tried using the Ru–Nbpy distance of ca 0.24 nm and found that it was insuﬃcient
to obtain the regular MOF.
Here, we note again the eﬀect of the metal–ligand binding strength upon this 3-D
MOF case. The near-ﬁeld relative dielectric constant 𝜖r = 1.75 applied above was the
optimum value we found for the regular 3-D MOF self-assembly. With a smaller value,
e.g., 𝜖r = 1.2 (corresponding to the larger metal–ligand binding energy), we obtained
the RDF (light gray line) in Figure 7.22 that ﬂattens out again as for the case without
the Ru–N distance enlargement (gray line), even with the enlarged Ru–N distance.
This could be the result of too strong metal–ligand binding. In contrast, too weak
metal–ligand binding gives no MOF growth; it should be within a window between
appropriate values again in this 3-D MOF case.
7.5
Conclusion and Outlook
We are convinced that our model can realize the self-assembly of the ﬁnite spherical
complexes M6L8 and M12L24 in a distinct three-stage process, which is well correlated
with the experimental results [12]. We found that the diﬀerence in life times (or ligand
exchange rate) of the smaller-sized incomplete clusters and complete spherical com-
plexes is crucially important in this self-assembly.
The above result is consistent with the ﬁndings in the highly simpliﬁed model study of
the growth of the virus capsid [52]. These characteristics of the size–lifetime relations,
which are accomplished by growth reversibility in the assembly process (i.e., breakup
is even more likely than growth in smaller-sized clusters), are noted as the crucial fac-
tors for capsid self-assembly [52]. We found identical importance using a much more
direct (realistic) model than the capsid model and completely diﬀerent inter-subunit
interactions from those in the capsid model. These correspondences strongly support
the general importance of the marked life time diﬀerence and growth reversibility in the
supramolecular self-assembly.
Our results also show that the appropriate strength of the metal–ligand binding is
deﬁnitely important in both ﬁnite supramolecular complexes and inﬁnite polymer net-
works. It should not be too weak or too strong for regular structure formation. The
metal–ligand binding strength depends on the characteristics of the metals, ligands
and solvents (and counter anions, etc.). For example, the dielectric constant 𝜖r of sol-
vents can aﬀect the Coulombic binding energy qiqj∕(4𝜋𝜖rrij) between the metals and
the ligands. Then, the selection of solvent dielectric characteristics is an important fac-
tor for adjusting the metal–ligand binding strength. The solvent dielectric constant that
directly aﬀects the metal–ligand binding strength is the near-ﬁeld dielectric constant
𝜖r in our model. The eﬀective value of this near-ﬁeld dielectric constant 𝜖r is roughly
proportional to the solvent macroscopic dielectric constant (far-ﬁeld value 𝜖r f in our
model), but may vary with the molecular characteristics of the solvents (such as the
size, aﬃnity to the metal, etc.). These molecular characteristics of the solvents are also
important factors for appropriate solvent selection.

204
Self-Assembling Systems
In future studies, the eﬀect of the temperature would be interesting to investigate.
Generally, the self-assembly process strongly depends on the synthesis temperature via
entropic eﬀects [53]. The thermal energy also contributes as an activation energy to
disconnect irregularly bonded networks, which may lead to reconnection to regular
networks. Thus, a stronger-binding-energy system may require a higher temperature.
A study of these temperature eﬀects will be notably important and should be conducted
in future work. We consider that the MD simulation can also be a valuable tool to study
the temperature eﬀects in metal–ligand coordination-directed self-assembly.
Acknowledgments
The studies in this chapter were collaborations with Prof. Makoto Fujita of University of
Tokyo, Prof. Sota Sato of Tohoku University, Dr Tomohiko Yamaguchi, Dr Seiji Tsuzuki
and Dr Masaru Aoyagi of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology.
Reproduction from Ref. [47] with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.
References
1. Jeﬀrey, G.A. and Saenger, W. (2012) Hydrogen bonding in biological structures,
Springer Science & Business Media.
2. Lehn, J.M. (2002) Toward self-organization and complex matter. Science, 295 (5564),
2400–2403.
3. Cook, T.R., Zheng, Y.R., and Stang, P.J. (2012) Metal–organic frameworks and
self-assembled supramolecular coordination complexes: Comparing and contrasting
the design, synthesis, and functionality of metal–organic materials. Chem. Rev., 113
(1), 734–777.
4. Tominaga, M., Suzuki, K., Kawano, M., Kusukawa, T., Ozeki, T., Sakamoto, S.,
Yamaguchi, K., and Fujita, M. (2004) Finite, spherical coordination networks
that self-organize from 36 small components. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 43 (42),
5621–5625.
5. Fujita, M., Kwon, Y.J., Washizu, S., and Ogura, K. (1994) Preparation, clathration
ability, and catalysis of a two-dimensional square network material composed of
cadmium (II) and 4,4′-bipyridine. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 116 (3), 1151–1152.
6. Harris, K., Fujita, D., and Fujita, M. (2013) Giant hollow MnL2n spherical complexes:
Structure, functionalisation and applications. Chem. Commun., 49, 6703–6712.
7. Sato, S., Iida, J., Suzuki, K., Kawano, M., Ozeki, T., and Fujita, M. (2006) Fluorous
nanodroplets structurally conﬁned in an organopalladium sphere. Science, 313
(5791), 1273.
8. Murase, T., Sato, S., and Fujita, M. (2007) Nanometer-sized shell molecules that
conﬁne endohedral polymerizing units. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 46 (7), 1083–1085.
9. Fujita, D., Suzuki, K., Sato, S., Yagi-Utsumi, M., Yamaguchi, Y., Mizuno, N.,
Kumasaka, T., Takata, M., Noda, M., Uchiyama, S., Kato, K., and Fujita, M. (2012)
Protein encapsulation within synthetic molecular hosts. Nat. Commun., 3, 1093.
10. Furukawa, H., Cordova, K.E., O’Keeﬀe, M., and Yaghi, O.M. (2013) The chemistry
and applications of metal-organic frameworks. Science, 341 (6149), 1230444.

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
205
11. Zhou, H.C. and Kitagawa, S. (2014) Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). Chem. Soc.
Rev., 43 (16), 5415–5418.
12. Sato, S., Ishido, Y., and Fujita, M. (2009) Remarkable stabilization of M12L24 spheri-
cal frameworks through the cooperation of 48 Pd (II)–pyridine interactions. J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 131 (17), 6064–6065.
13. Fujita, D., Yokoyama, H., Ueda, Y., Sato, S., and Fujita, M. (2015) Geometrically
restricted intermediates in the self-assembly of an m12l24 cuboctahedral complex.
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 54 (1), 155–158.
14. Millange, F., Medina, M.I., Guillou, N., Férey, G., Golden, K.M., and Walton, R.I.
(2010) Time-resolved in situ diﬀraction study of the solvothermal crystallization
of some prototypical metal–organic frameworks. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 49 (4),
763–766.
15. Cravillon, J., Schröder, C., Nayuk, R., Gummel, J., Huber, K., and Wiebcke,
M. (2011) Fast nucleation and growth of ZIF-8 nanocrystals monitored by
time-resolved in situ small-angle and wide-angle X-ray scattering. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 50 (35), 8067–8071.
16. Calligaris, M., Zangrando, E., Milani, B., and Marson, A. (2005) Stereochemical
investigation of palladium (II) complexes with phenanthroline ligands: A molecular
mechanics approach. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005 (4), 704–712.
17. Rappé, A.K., Casewit, C.J., Colwell, K., Goddard III, W., and Skiﬀ, W. (1992) UFF,
a full periodic table force ﬁeld for molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics
simulations. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 114 (25), 10024–10035.
18. Wang, J., Wolf, R.M., Caldwell, J.W., Kollman, P.A., and Case, D.A. (2004) Develop-
ment and testing of a general AMBER force ﬁeld. J. Comput. Chem., 25, 1157.
19. Tiberio, G., Muccioli, L., Berardi, R., and Zannoni, C. (2008) Towards in sil-
ico liquid crystals. realistic transition temperatures and physical properties for
n-cyanobiphenyls via molecular dynamics simulations. ChemPhysChem, 10, 125.
20. Bayly, C.I., Cieplak, P., Cornell, W., and Kollman, P.A. (1993) A well-behaved elec-
trostatic potential based method using charge restraints for deriving atomic charges:
The RESP model. J. Chem. Phys., 97 (40), 10269.
21. Frisch, M.J., Trucks, G.W., Schlegel, H.B., Scuseria, G.E., Robb, M.A., Cheeseman,
J.R., Montgomery, J.J.A., Vreven, T., Kudin, K.N., Burant, J.C., Millam, J.M.,
Iyengar, S.S., Tomasi, J., Barone, V., Mennucci, B., Cossi, M., Scalmani, G., Rega,
N., Petersson, G.A., Nakatsuji, H., Hada, M., Ehara, M., Toyota, K., Fukuda, R.,
Hasegawa, J., Ishida, M., Nakajima, T., Honda, Y., Kitao, O., Nakai, H., Klene, M.,
Li, X., Knox, J.E., Hratchian, H.P., Cross, J.B., Bakken, V., Adamo, C., Jaramillo, J.,
Gomperts, R., Stratmann, R.E., Yazyev, O., Austin, A.J., Cammi, R., Pomelli, C.,
Ochterski, J.W., Ayala, P.Y., Morokuma, K., Voth, G.A., Salvador, P., Dannenberg,
J.J., Zakrzewski, V.G., Dapprich, S., Daniels, A.D., Strain, M.C., Farkas, O., Malick,
D.K., Rabuck, A.D., Raghavachari, K., Foresman, J.B., Ortiz, J.V., Cui, Q., Baboul,
A.G., Cliﬀord, S., Cioslowski, J., Stefanov, B.B., Liu, G., Liashenko, A., Piskorz,
P., Komaromi, I., Martin, R.L., Fox, D.J., Keith, T., Al-Laham, M.A., Peng, C.Y.,
Nanayakkara, A., Challacombe, M., Gill, P.M.W., Johnson, B., Chen, W., Wong,
M.W., Gonzalez, C., and Pople, J.A. (2004) Gaussian03, Revision C.02, Gaussian,
Inc., Wallingford CT.
22. Sousa, S., Fernandes, P., and Ramos, M. (2010) Molecular dynamics simulations: Dif-
ﬁculties, solutions and strategies for treating metalloenzymes. Kinet. Dyn., 299–330.

206
Self-Assembling Systems
23. Pang, Y. (1999) Novel zinc protein molecular dynamics simulations: Steps toward
antiangiogenesis for cancer treatment. J. Mol. Model., 5 (10), 196–202.
24. Godbout, N., Salahub, D.R., Andzelm, J., and Wimmer, E. (1992) Optimization
of Gaussian-type basis sets for local spin density functional calculations. Part I.
Boron through neon, optimization technique and validation. Canadian Journal of
Chemistry, 70 (2), 560–571.
25. Smith, P. and Pettitt, B. (1994) Modeling solvent in biomolecular systems. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry, 98 (39), 9700–9711.
26. Yun-yu, S., Lu, W., and Van Gunsteren, W. (1988) On the approximation of solvent
eﬀects on the conformation and dynamics of cyclosporin A by stochastic dynamics
simulation techniques. Mol. Simul., 1 (6), 369–383.
27. Tironi, I., Sperb, R., Smith, P., and van Gunsteren, W. (1995) A generalized reaction
ﬁeld method for molecular dynamics simulations. J. Chem. Phys., 102, 5451.
28. Weeks, J., Chandler, D., and Andersen, H. (1971) Role of repulsive forces in deter-
mining the equilibrium structure of simple liquids. J. Chem. Phys., 54 (12), 5237.
29. Hess, B., Holm, C., and van der Vegt, N. (2006) Modeling multibody eﬀects in ionic
solutions with a concentration dependent dielectric permittivity. Physical Review
Letters, 96 (14), 147801.
30. Grest, G.S. and Kremer, K. (1986) Molecular dynamics simulation for polymers in
the presence of a heat bath. Physical Review A, 33 (5), 3628.
31. Hess, B., Kutzner, C., Van Der Spoel, D., and Lindahl, E. (2008) GROMACS 4:
Algorithms for highly eﬃcient, load-balanced, and scalable molecular simulation.
J. Chem. Theory Comput., 4 (3), 435–447.
32. van Gunsteren, W. and Berendsen, H. (1988) A leap-frog algorithm for stochastic
dynamics. Mol. Simul., 1, 173–185.
33. Hess, B., Bekker, H., Berendsen, H.J.C., and Fraaije, J.G.E.M. (1997) LINCS: A linear
constraint solver for molecular simulations. J. Comput. Chem., 18 (12), 1463.
34. Feenstra, K.A., Hess, B., and Berendsen, H.J. (1999) Improving eﬃciency of large
timescale molecular dynamics simulations of hydrogen-rich systems. J. Comput.
Chem., 20, 786–798.
35. Lindahl, E., Hess, B., and van der Spoel, D. (2001) Gromacs 3.0: A package for
molecular simulation and trajectory analysis. J. Mol. Model., 7 (8), 306.
36. Villa, A., Mark, A., Saracino, G., Cosentino, U., Pitea, D., Moro, G., and Salmona,
M. (2006) Conformational polymorphism of the PrP106-126 peptide in diﬀerent
environments: A molecular dynamics study. J. Phys. Chem. B, 110 (3), 1423–1428.
37. Yoneya, M., Yamaguchi, T., Sato, S., and Fujita, M. (2012) Simulation of
metal–ligand self-assembly into spherical complex M6L8. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 134
(35), 14401–14407.
38. Chand, D., Biradha, K., Fujita, M., Sakamoto, S., and Yamaguchi, K. (2002) A molec-
ular sphere of octahedral symmetry. Chem. Commun., (21), 2486–2487.
39. Liu, H., Mueller-Plathe, F., and van Gunsteren, W. (1995) A force ﬁeld for liquid
dimethyl sulfoxide and physical properties of liquid dimethyl sulfoxide calculated
using molecular dynamics simulation. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
117 (15), 4363–4366.
40. Yoneya, M., Tsuzuki, S., Yamaguchi, T., Sato, S., and Fujita, M. (2014)
Coordination-directed self-assembly of M12L24 nanocage: Eﬀects of kinetic trapping
on the assembly process. ACS nano, 8 (2), 1290–1296.

7 Simulation of Metal-Ligand Self-Assembly
207
41. Fujita, D., Takahashi, A., Sato, S., and Fujita, M. (2011) Self-assembly of Pt(II)
spherical complexes via temporary labilization of the metal–ligand association in
2,2,2-triﬂuoroethanol. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 133 (34), 13317–13319.
42. Scheraga, H.A., Khalili, M., and Liwo, A. (2007) Protein-folding dynamics: Overview
of molecular simulation techniques. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 58, 57–83.
43. Bunzen, J., Iwasa, J., Bonakdarzadeh, P., Numata, E., Rissanen, K., Sato, S., and
Fujita, M. (2012) Self-assembly of M24L48 polyhedra based on empirical prediction.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 51 (13), 3161–3163.
44. Williams, A.F. (2011) Ligand design for hollow spherical complexes. Coord. Chem.
Rev., 255 (17), 2104–2110.
45. Leininger, S., Olenyuk, B., and Stang, P.J. (2000) Self-assembly of discrete cyclic
nanostructures mediated by transition metals. Chem. Rev., 100 (3), 853–908.
46. Suzuki, K., Tominaga, M., Kawano, M., and Fujita, M. (2009) Self-assembly of an
M6L12 coordination cube. Chem. Commun., (13), 1638–1640.
47. Yoneya, M., Tsuzuki, S., and Aoyagi, M. (2015) Simulation of metal–organic frame-
work self-assembly. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 17 (14), 8649–8652.
48. Roche, S., Haslam, C., Adams, H., Heath, S.L., and Thomas, J.A. (1998)
Self-assembly of a supramolecular cube. Chem. Commun., (16), 1681–1682.
49. Templeton, J.L. (1979) Hexakis (pyridine) ruthenium (II) tetraﬂuoroborate. molecu-
lar structure and spectroscopic properties. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 101 (17), 4906–4917.
50. Carlucci, L., Ciani, G., Proserpio, D.M., and Sironi, A. (1995) Novel net-
works of unusually coordinated silver (I) cations: The wafer-like structure of
[Ag(pyz)2][Ag2(pyz)5](PF6)3⋅2G and the simple cubic frame of [Ag(pyz)3](SbF6).
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 34 (17), 1895–1898.
51. Soldatov, D.V. and Ripmeester, J.A. (1998) Hexapyridine addition compounds of
metal (II) salts (nickel and magnesium perchlorates, magnesium nitrate): Their
supramolecular nature, and anion coordination of the metal cation [1]. Supramolec-
ular Chemistry, 9 (3), 175–181.
52. Rapaport, D. (2008) Role of reversibility in viral capsid growth: A paradigm for
self-assembly. Physical Review Letters, 101 (18), 186101.
53. Palma, C.A., Cecchini, M., and Samorì, P. (2012) Predicting self-assembly: from
empirism to determinism. Chemical Society Reviews, 41 (10), 3713–3730.

208
8
Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles:
Membrane-Mediated Interaction, Internalization Pathways, and
Cooperative Eﬀect
Falin Tian1, Tongtao Yue2, Ye Li1 and Xianren Zhang1
1State Key Laboratory of Organic–Inorganic Composites, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China
2State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, Center for Bioengineering and Biotechnology, China University of
Petroleum (East China), Qingdao, China
Nanoparticles (NPs) nowadays receive intense interest for their potential applica-
tions serving as a vehicle for drug delivery as well as for their potential to cause
undesirable eﬀects on human health. A biomembrane, composed of a particular type
of amphiphilic molecules, lipid molecules, is one of the most important parts of
cells, participating in a number of cellular activities, like cell signal transduction and
transportation. Thus, studying the interaction between the biomembrane and NPs is
essential for understanding the nature of cellular life and for the safe application of
nanoparticles. Recently, with the development of computer technology and simulation
techniques, computer simulations have become an important tool for studying the
interaction between NPs and the biomembrane. In this chapter, we summarize recent
developments of computer simulation studies on the NP–membrane interaction, and
particularly stress the results from dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulation. In
particular, we concentrate on membrane-mediated interaction, internalization path-
ways, and cooperative eﬀect. These studies undoubtly deepen our understanding of the
mechanisms for NPs interacting with the plasma membrane, which can not only help
us to understand the cytotoxicity of NPs, but also guide us to design new NPs for drug
delivery.
8.1
Introduction
Nowadays, nanoparticles (NPs) have received intense interest due to their potential
applications in diagnostics and therapeutics. However, the rapid development of
nanotechnology not only provides a new route to use NPs as a vehicle for drug delivery,
but also implies the potential to cause undesirable eﬀects, including the potential
negative impacts of nanomaterials on human health, namely, nanotoxicology.
As a natural barrier of the cell, the plasma membrane is composed of amphiphile
molecules such as lipids and proteins. It is the amphiphilic nature of the lipid molecule
that decides the structure of the lipid membrane, in which the hydrophobic parts
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
209
of lipids are wrapped by their hydrophilic parts. The cell membrane, serving as the
interface between the cell and the surrounding environment, protects the integrity of
the cell and participates in a number of bioprocesses, such as signal communication
among cells and uptake of nutrients. Therefore, to understand how NPs serve as carriers
for drug delivery and induce cytotoxicity it is crucial to understand the interaction
between the cell membrane and NPs.
In recent years, numerous studies have investigated the interaction between NPs
and the cell membrane through in vivo and in vitro experiments, theoretical analysis,
and computer simulations. The studies fall into two broad categories: NP toxicity and
the internalization pathways of NPs, both of which are found to be aﬀected by several
factors such as NP size, geometrical shape, surface modiﬁcation, and the surrounding
environment. Multiple mechanisms of interaction between the plasma membrane and
NPs have been proposed.
Some experimental works studied the eﬀect of NP size. For example, Mou et al.
[1] used confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) to demonstrate that the cellular
uptake of the monodisperse mesoporous silica nanoparticle (MSN) depends on the NP
size. They found that NPs having a size of 170, 110, 50, and 30nm can be internalized
into cells, and the eﬃciency of cellular uptake is highly dependent on particle size, in the
order 50nm > 30nm > 110nm > 280nm > 170nm. Similar particle size dependence
was reported by Osaki et al. [2] and Jiang et al. [3]. Besides the inﬂuence of NP size,
it has also been found that cellular uptake depends on NP concentration in solution.
It was found that there exists a threshold concentration for NP internalization, above
which the uptake eﬃciency increases with NP concentration [4]. In addition to the
above studies, there exist also numerous studies on the interaction between the plasma
membrane and NPs that predict the cellular uptake to be dependent on NP size
[5–9].
Although extensive experimental studies have been carried out in order to understand
the NP–membrane interaction, much less is known about the kinetic evolution of
these interaction processes. Moreover, in most cases, experiments cannot provide any
detailed information about the interaction mechanism at the molecular level. Therefore,
it is highly desirable to study the molecular mechanism for NP–membrane interaction
with the help of molecular simulations. As a result, coarse-grained molecular dynamics
(CGMD) and dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulations have been performed
to study the interaction mechanism and the corresponding interaction pathway. As an
example, Li et al. [10] observed experimentally that when cells (like lung epithelial cells
and macrophages) are exposed to a solution of graphene, a type of NP with a strong
shape anisotropy, graphene NPs would penetrate the cell membrane. To interpret
the penetration mechanism, the authors performed computer simulations to show
that graphene NPs enter the cells through spontaneous penetration at edge or corner
sites.
With the development of supercomputers and simulation techniques, molecular
simulation has become a very useful investigative tool. Diﬀerent types of simulation
methods have been elaborated, e.g., Monte Carlo (MC) methods, molecular dynamics
(MD), dissipative particle dynamics (DPD), Brownian dynamics (BD), etc. Each method
has its advantages and shortcomings. In this chapter, we mainly focus on recent
computer simulation studies on the interaction between the plasma membrane and
NPs, and we particularly stress the results from DPD simulations.

210
Self-Assembling Systems
8.2
N-Varied DPD Technique
8.2.1
Traditional DPD Method
The dissipative particle dynamics method was ﬁrst introduced to simulate the hydro-
dynamic behavior of complex ﬂuids [11], and proved to be especially useful in studying
the mesoscale behaviors of lipid bilayer membranes [12–15]. The elementary units of
DPD simulation are soft beads whose dynamics are governed by Newton’s equations of
motion. The force between each pair of beads contains three parts: conservative forces
(FC
ij), dissipative forces (FD
ij ), and random forces (FR
ij). The conservative force between
beads i and j, which is soft repulsive, is determined by
FC
ij =
{
aij(1 −rij)̂rij
rij < rC
0
rij > rC
(8.1)
where aij is the maximum repulsive strength, rij = ri −rj (ri and rj are the positions of
beads i and j), rij = |rij|, ̂rij = rij∕|rij|, and rC = 1 is the interaction range. The other two
forces FD
ij and FR
ij are both responsible for the conservation of total momentum in the
system and incorporate the eﬀect of Brownian motion into the larger length scale.
The dissipative force and random force are
FD
ij = −𝛾𝜔D(rij)(̂rij
•vij)̂rij,
FR
ij = 𝜎𝜔R(rij)𝜃iĵrij,
(8.2)
where vij = vi −vj are the velocity diﬀerences between particles i and j, 𝛾is the friction
coeﬃcient, 𝜎is the noise and satisﬁes 𝜎2 = 2𝛾kBT, 𝜔D and 𝜔R are the weighting factors,
𝜔D(r) = [𝜔R(r)]2 =
{
(1 −r)2
r < rC
0
r ≥rC
(8.3)
and 𝜃ij(t) is a random number distributed with
⟨𝜃ij(t)⟩= 0, ⟨𝜃ij(t)𝜃kl(t′)⟩= (𝛿ik𝛿jl + 𝛿il𝛿jk)𝛿(t −t′).
(8.4)
8.2.2
N-Varied DPD Method
A variant version of DPD, N-varied DPD, is particularly suitable for studying the
NP–membrane interaction. In conventional DPD simulations, the conservation of
the number of lipid molecules in a membrane patch would lead to an increase of
surface tension when the ﬂat membrane patch bends up. Therefore, large membrane
deformations, like budding and invagination, are prohibited in conventional DPD
simulations of ﬂat membrane patches. However, for cellular membranes, the much
larger membrane area compared to the NP size oﬀers suﬃcient excess area to release
the tension induced by a large membrane deformation. In order to solve this problem,
we adopted the N-varied DPD simulation method introduced by Hong et al. [16] and
developed by Yue et al. [17, 18]. This method oﬀers suﬃcient excess area to release the
tension induced by a large membrane deformation, as in a real cellular membrane.
For implementing this type of DPD simulation, the membrane patch in the simulation
box is divided into two parts: the central region and the surrounding boundary region;
the targeted membrane tension is maintained by monitoring the lipid number per area

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
211
(LNPA) in the boundary region. The preset membrane tension can implicitly include
the eﬀects of cytoskeletal force associated with actin polymerization, which in vivo is
tightly related to most internalization processes. The boundary region plays a role as
the reservoir of lipids, and the value of LNPA in the region (denoted by 𝜌BR
LNPA) is kept
constant by addition/deletion moves. In an addition/deletion move, new lipid molecules
are added/deleted to the boundary region if its local lipid density signiﬁcantly deviates
from the given value of 𝜌BR
LNPA. At the same time, a corresponding number of water beads
are randomly added or deleted to keep the whole density of the simulation box constant.
In practice, an addition/deletion move is often performed after 200–1500 time steps to
leave enough time to propagate the membrane tension to the whole membrane.
8.3
The Interaction between NP and Membrane
The plasma membrane consists of diﬀerent types of phospholipids and membrane
proteins. To maintain the cell integrity, the cell membrane must be impermeable to
most macromolecules and NPs. Adsorption of NPs on the membrane mainly inﬂuences
the membrane in several aspects: First, the adsorbed NPs may alter other properties of
the plasma membrane, such as the membrane rigidity, the membrane tension, or the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of lipids on the membrane. Second, the adsorbed NPs may change
global properties of the membrane: the adsorption of NPs can induce phase behavior
of the multiple-component membrane. Charged NPs may trigger phase separation by
interacting strongly with a special type of lipid having opposite charge, and the phase
separation will aﬀect the signal transduction crossing cells. Finally, the addition of NPs
changes the structure of the cell membrane and induces various membrane responses.
When NPs approach and adhere to the membrane, the addition of NPs alters the
ordering of nearby lipid molecules and changes the membrane thickness, creating local
membrane curvature, and even breaking the integrity of the cell membrane. Depending
on the properties of NPs and membrane, diﬀerent forms of NP–membrane interaction
are found, including NP adhesion on the membrane, NP aggregation on the membrane,
NP encapsulation inside the membrane, NP penetration (translocation) across the
membrane, NP endocytosis, membrane rupture, and the formation of membrane holes.
The factors that inﬂuence the interaction between NPs and membrane can be divided
into diﬀerent categories: the (physical and chemical) properties of NPs and those of the
membrane. The eﬀects of these factors are discussed below.
8.3.1
Membrane-Mediated Interaction between NPs
Due to its ﬂexibility and elasticity, a lipid membrane can be easily deformed when the
membrane interacts with NPs or some membrane proteins. In turn, these deformations
may result in more complex eﬀective interactions with NPs or proteins, leading to
eﬀective interactions between these “embedded inclusions” [13, 19]. In recent years,
a number of simulations and experimental studies have been devoted to revealing the
membrane-mediated interactions with NPs or proteins, such as transmembrane pro-
teins or anchored proteins [13, 19, 20]. The main mechanism of membrane-mediated
interactions between the inclusions had been considered in some cases as the so-called
hydrophobic mismatch eﬀect, but in other cases not.

212
Self-Assembling Systems
0
1
2
3
–2
0
2
PMF (kBT)
r/D
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
–6.0
–4.5
–3.0
–1.5
0.0
1.5
PMF (kBT)
r/D
r
r
dash line 
dash line 
solid line
solid line
–4.5
–3.0
–1.5
0.0
1.5
3.0
PMF (kBT)
r
r
(b)
(c)
(a)
(d)
ρBR
=1.2  D=2.0 nm
LNPA
ρBR
=1.5  D=2.0 nm
LNPA
ρBR
=1.2  D=10.0 nm
LNPA
ρBR
=1.5
LNPA
ρBR
=1.2
LNPA
ρBR
=1.5  D=10.0 nm
LNPA
Figure 8.1 (a) The morphologies of the NP clusters in the interior of the lipid bilayer; from left to right,
the NP diameter, D, was set to 1.0 nm, 4.0 nm, and 8.0 nm, respectively. (b) The potential of mean force
(PMF) between the NPs as a function of NP distance at diﬀerent membrane tensions and NP sizes.
(c, d) The calculated PMF as the third NP approaches the ﬁxed NP cluster formed by two identical NPs
of 10nm at (c) a positive membrane tension of 𝜌BR
LNPA = 1.20 and (d) a negative membrane tension
𝜌BR
LNPA = 1.50. Reproduced from Ref. [17] with permission from the American Physical Society.
Recently, Tian et al. [17] found through DPD simulations that hydrophobic NPs with
a diameter comparable to the hydrophobic thickness of the membrane (5 nm), prefer to
go into the hydrophobic compartments of the cell membrane and are capable of clus-
tering in the interior of a cell membrane (Figure 8.1a). In contrast, NPs with diameter
less than 3 nm or larger than 12 nm stay in the membrane as free monomers. Energy
analysis shows that the driven force for NP aggregation comes from the membrane
deformation induced by the NP insertion (Figure 8.1b). In other words, the membrane
deformation mediates an eﬀective attraction between neighboring NPs, which in turn
causes NP clustering to minimize the membrane deformation. Moreover, a series of
simulation runs demonstrated that the morphology of the NP clusters changes as a
function of membrane tension and NP diameter. This indicates that the eﬀective force
changes with membrane tension and NP diameter (Figures 8.1c and 8.1d).
Unlike this “hydrophobic mismatch” induced by the external inclusions (such
as transmembrane proteins, anchored proteins, and surface hydrophobic NPs),
it was found that some charged proteins or NPs would also lead to membrane

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
213
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
(f)
Figure 8.2 A series of simulation snapshots of membrane-curvature-induced NP attraction. The times
of the simulation snapshots are: (a) 0t, (b) 20 000t, (c) 40000t, (d) 50 000t, (e) 60 000t, and (f) 70000t,
the last corresponding to roughly 1 ms. Reproduced from Ref. [21] with permission from Nature
Publication Group.
deformation and reorganization due to the attractive interaction between NP and
membrane. This membrane deformation then induces an eﬀective interaction
between the neighboring adsorbed NPs in the absence of direct NP–NP interaction.
Reynwar et al. [21] have performed coarse-grained simulations to investigate the
membrane-curvature-mediated interactions between NPs adsorbed on a membrane.
From the simulations they conﬁrmed that when the NPs (or proteins) were adsorbed
on the surface of the lipid bilayer membrane, the NP–membrane binding would
curve the membrane near the NPs. Once a minimal local bending is realized, the
membrane-curvature-mediated attractive NP–NP interaction would drive the NPs
(proteins) to form a cluster and ﬁnally deform the ﬂat bilayer to a vesicle (Figure 8.2).
Liang et al. [22] used self-consistent ﬁeld theory to study the membrane-mediated
interactions between NPs, and found that eﬀective interactions between two NPs are
mainly dominated by competition of the deformations of the diﬀerent parts of the
lipid bilayers as well as chain stretching of the lipid molecules sandwiched between
NPs. By varying the packing density of the lipids in the membrane or changing the NP
size, the authors found that the eﬀective interactions between NPs can be eﬃciently
modulated. Yue and Zhang [15] performed DPD simulations to investigate the inter-
action between two NPs during NP internalization at diﬀerent NP sizes. The distance
between two small NPs (initial inter-NP distances of 6.46nm) decreases during NP
internalization, indicating an eﬀective attractive inter-NP interaction (Figure 8.3a–c).
However, for large NPs (initial inter-NP distances of 15.8nm), the two NPs would
keep away from each other during the internalization (Figure 8.3d–f). This indicated
that an eﬀective interaction between neighboring NPs arises purely as a result of
membrane curvature induced by NP adsorption. Due to the strong receptor–ligand
interaction, the local geometry of a small NP deforms the membrane and produces
local membrane curvature. When two membrane-curving NPs approach each other,
the bilayer deformations overlap. Then the neighboring NPs might cluster in order to
reduce the curvature energy of the membrane because the clustering could share the
work needed to bend the membrane and thereby lower the stored elastic energy. The
curvature-mediated interaction between small NPs is thus eﬀectively attractive even
without direct attraction between neighboring NPs (Figure 8.3b), while increasing NP

214
Self-Assembling Systems
4
6
8
10
12
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
Distance (nm)
Simulation time (μs)
Simulation time (μs)
Simulation time (μs)
Simulation time (μs)
0
2
(b)
(c)
(e)  
(f)
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
5
10
15
20
25
Z (nm)
16
18
20
22
24
Distance (nm)
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
5
10
15
20
25
Z (nm)
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
(a)
(d)
Figure 8.3 Endocytosis of two identical NPs. Two smaller NPs of 3.8 nm were placed on a membrane
of 38.7nm × 38.7nm (a–c), while two larger NPs of 9.0 nm were placed on a membrane of
51.7nm × 51.7 nm (d–f). (a, d) show the initial and ﬁnal structure of endocytosis of two identical NPs.
(b, e) show the evolution of the distance between two NPs. (c, f) show the evolution of NP positions
along the membrane normal direction. The initial inter-NP distances are 6.46 nm (a–c) and 15.8 nm
(d–f), respectively. Reproduced from Ref. [15] with permission from the American Chemical Society.
(See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).
size would weaken the membrane-curvature-mediated interaction because the increase
in the NP size lowers the local membrane curvature. Moreover, when the NP size
becomes large enough, we found that the eﬀective interaction between neighboring
NPs seems to be repulsive, as shown in Figure 8.3e. Further simulations indicated that
this membrane-curvature-mediated interaction was controlled by NP size and the
inter-NP distance or, equivalently, the dose of the NPs.
Chen et al. [23] and Yue et al. [24] employed computer simulation to study the inter-
action of hard NPs with lipid aggregates with curved surfaces (vesicle and membrane
tube), and conﬁrmed that when the NPs adhere on the curved membrane surface,
they may cluster due to the membrane-induced attraction as in the situation of the ﬂat
bilayer. Moreover, it was found that the morphology of the NP clusters mediated by
the membrane depends on NP size, interaction strength between the NPs and the lipid
membrane, and membrane tension.
8.3.2
Internalization Pathways of the NPs
As NPs play an important role in drug delivery, more and more attention has been
paid to the internalization pathways of NPs across plasma membranes. Yue and
Zhang performed N-varied DPD simulations of receptor-mediated endocytosis of
spherical NPs coated with ligands [18]. Depending on the membrane tension, ligand
density on the NP surface, and NP size, four diﬀerent membrane responses were
observed: receptor-mediated endocytosis, NP adhered on the membrane surface, NP
penetration, and NP-adsorption-induced membrane rupture (see Figure 8.4). This

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
215
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
80 ns
0.16 μs
1.12 μs
2.24 μs
3.2 μs
88 ns
96 ns
104 ns
0.64 μs
1.28 μs
2.24 μs
3.2 μs
0.16 μs
1.6 μs
3.2 μs
4.8 μs
Figure 8.4 Four kinds of membrane responses to adsorption of NPs: (a) Receptor-mediated
endocytosis, (b) adhesion of the NP on the membrane surface, (c) penetration of the NP into the
membrane, and (d) NP-induced membrane rupture. Both top view and side view are displayed for
each process. Reproduced from Ref. [18] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.

216
Self-Assembling Systems
study not only reveals the dynamic pathway for the NP uptake, but also demonstrates
how the internalization pathway changes with NP properties and membrane tension.
In the past few years, a number of works focused on the pathway of NP internalization
and investigated which NP properties (such as NP size, topography, and surface
modiﬁcation) and membrane properties (such as membrane composition, tension) are
the dominant factors aﬀecting the NP internalization pathways.
8.3.2.1
NP Properties Aﬀecting the NP–Membrane Interaction
With the rapid development of synthesis techniques, various NPs with diﬀerent prop-
erties have appeared. At present, the following NP properties have been considered for
the NP–membrane interaction: NP size, NP shape, NP hydrophilicity, surface coating
and especially surface charge, and NP dose (concentration). Sometimes, one of these
properties dominates the interaction between the NPs and the membrane, but more
frequently there exist several properties that cooperatively determine the interaction.
Below, we discuss how the NP properties aﬀect the interaction between NPs and the
plasma membrane, especially from the viewpoint of computer simulation.
NP Size NP size is an important parameter in designing suitable cell tracking and drug
delivery systems, and it often determines the mechanism and rate of NP uptake. Many
experimental and computer simulation studies have recently been devoted to the ﬁeld of
cellular uptake of NPs, and show that particle size can aﬀect the eﬃciency and pathway
of cellular uptake. Furthermore, several mechanisms have been proposed to indicate
that the NP size relates to the extent of membrane disruption and to the structure of
NP–lipid assemblies.
Using DPD simulation techniques, Yue and Zhang [18] suggested that small
hydrophilic NPs with a radius smaller than 3.0nm possibly penetrate the membrane
directly, sometimes followed by membrane rupture or the formation of membrane a
pore at a high membrane tension; for large NPs, they can often be partly encapsulated
by the membrane or fully internalized via pathways either as “phagocytosis” (or cell
eating) or as “pinocytosis” (or cell drinking).
Similarly, Lin et al. [25] performed CGMD simulations to investigate the size eﬀect
for hydrophobic NPs across the dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer. The
authors found that diﬀerent NP sizes have diﬀerent eﬀects on the structural change
of the membrane. However, no obvious energy barrier can be seen in the free energy
proﬁles during the process of NP translocation. The same size eﬀect was showed exper-
imentally by Roiter et al. [26], although the critical dimension of the particles obtained
from experiments is diﬀerent when compared to that from simulations. Atomic-force
microscopy images indicated that small NPs (R < 22 nm) would induce a hole in the
lipid bilayer, whereas larger NPs are mostly covered with the lipid bilayer as a whole [26].
Other studies also suggested that it is thermodynamically favorable for hydrophobic
NPs of size 2–8 nm to be embedded within a lipid bilayer. It is thermodynami-
cally possible to embed hydrophobic NPs having a diameter in proximity to, or
even exceeding, the thickness of the bilayer. The size eﬀect was often interpreted
theoretically with the Helfrich elastic model [27], in which the total free energy of the
NP–membrane system can be decomposed into two parts: the bending energy of the
membrane and the adhesion energy between NPs and the membrane. The bending
energy of the membrane changes with the radius of the NPs when NPs are wrapped

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
217
by the membrane. To minimize the total free energy of the NP–membrane system one
can obtain theoretically the relation between the NP radius and the membrane bending
as a function of membrane tension.
Topography of NPs Besides the NP size, the topography of the NPs is another impor-
tant intrinsic property aﬀecting the NP–membrane interaction, as demonstrated
both experimentally and theoretically. For example, some kinds of NPs with a high
aspect ratio, like carbon nanotubes or asbestos ﬁbers, have been shown to cause
length-dependent toxicity in certain cells [28].
To understand how NPs with a high aspect ratio interact with a plasma membrane,
Shi et al. [28] performed both experimental and simulation studies, and found that NPs
with a high aspect ratio enter cells through the tip ﬁrst. It is the tip-ﬁrst mechanism
that leads to near-vertical entry of carbon nanotubes with end caps and prevents the
long NPs from entering a cell completely. However, nanotubes without caps on their
tip show a diﬀerent mechanism for NP uptake. A subsequent study [29] found that
the internalization pathway of spherocylindrical NPs is diﬀerent when compared to
spherical NPs. For a spherocylindrical NP with an initial upright docking position on
the membrane plane, endocytosis proceeds through a laying-down-then-standing-up
sequence (see Figure 8.5). This is similar to the conclusion by Vacha et al. [30] that pas-
sive endocytosis (i.e., not ATP driven) depends on the shape of the NPs. In their studies,
CGMD simulation results demonstrated that the eﬃciency of the passive endocytosis is
higher for spherocylindrical particles than for spherical particles of the same diameter.
The NP topography inﬂuences not only the eﬃciency of cellular uptake but also the
uptake pathway. For NPs with diﬀerent shapes, Yang and Ma [14] showed that the shape
anisotropy and initial orientation of the NPs dominate the process for NP translocation
across the lipid bilayer (see Figure 8.5). Li et al. [31] performed DPD simulations to
show that rotation of NPs, which is found to be one of the most important mechanisms
for endocytosis of shaped NPs, regulates the competition between ligand–receptor
binding and membrane deformation. As a result, the whole internalization process for
those non-spherical NPs can be divided into two stages: membrane invagination and
NP wrapping. Furthermore, they demonstrated that NPs having various shapes show
diﬀerent favorable orientations at the two stages.
Besides spherical and cylindrical NPs, graphene, which is of a two-dimensional
(2D) structure, has been considered a new candidate for drug transporting in recent
years, and as a consequence the interactions between graphene and lipid membranes
have been studied. From experimental and theoretical study, Tu et al. [32] found that
pristine graphene (PG) and graphene oxide nanosheets can induce degradation of the
cell membrane of Escherichia coli, and reduce their viability. They also showed that
the graphene could penetrate into and extract large amounts of phospholipid from
the cell membrane because of the strong dispersion interaction between graphene
and lipid molecule. To clarify the mechanisms of the cellular interactions of graphene
nanosheets with various extents of oxidization, Mao et al. [33] found four diﬀerent
kinds of graphene–membrane interaction states through large-scale simulation
and theoretical analysis (see Figure 8.6). Moreover, they found that higher oxidized
graphene nanosheets could induce a larger scale of irregular membrane perturbation
destroying the integrity of the membrane, and that the perturbation degree of the
membrane increases with increasing edge length of the nanosheet.

218
Self-Assembling Systems
0.09 μs
0.81 μs
1.08 μs
1.35 μs
0.09 μs
2.25 μs
5.60 μs
7.02 μs
Figure 8.5 (Upper) Endocytic pathway of a spherocylindrical NP. The NP takes a general
laying-down-then-standing-up sequence during endocytosis. (Reproduced from Ref. [29] with
permission from the American Chemical Society.) (Lower) Computer-simulated snapshots of the
translocation of ellipsoids with vertical and horizontal starting orientations. (Reproduced from Ref. [14]
with permission from Nature Publication Group.)
NP Hydrophilicity and Surface Modiﬁcation Numerous studies have demonstrated that
adsorption of NPs often induces a change of membrane morphology and the formation
of a membrane hole, strongly depending on the surface modiﬁcation of the interacting
NPs. Further, the cellular uptakes of hydrophilic NPs and hydrophobic NPs often adopt
diﬀerent mechanisms and diﬀerent pathways.
To understand the eﬀect of the surface ligands for the interaction between the
surface ligand-coated NPs and the lipid bilayer, Yue and Zhang [18] used DPD sim-
ulations to show that there exist four possible kinds of membrane responses to the
ligand-coated NPs. In particular, both the density and distribution of the ligands on the
NP surface play a crucial role for the membrane response to the NP adsorption. They
showed clearly that the NP surface hydrophobicity can induce diﬀerent internalization
mechanisms for NP–membrane systems. Similarly, Li et al. [34] performed CGMD
simulations to investigate the eﬀect of hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties of NPs
on their interaction with dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) membranes. The

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
219
c1
b1
a1
d1
(nm)
10.5
7.0
3.5
PG
eGO
sGO
dGO
Adhering to membrane surface
Graphene-
sanwiched
structure
Lying across membrane
Hemisphere vesicle
Figure 8.6 (Upper) Typical states of the interactions between a lipid bilayer membrane and a
graphene nanosheet. (a1) Graphene-sandwiched structure for PG with side length 7.0 nm.
(b1) Hemisphere vesicle structure for PG with 10.5nm. (c1) Adhering to the surface of the membrane
for double-oxidized graphene oxide (dGO) with 3.5 nm, and (d1) lying across the membrane for dGO
with 7.0 nm. (Lower) A two-dimensional phase diagram characterizes the interrelated eﬀects of
graphene size and oxidization degree on the equilibrium states of the graphene nanosheets
interacting with the lipid bilayer membrane. The various shading patterns mark the approximate
regions of these states. Reproduced from Ref. [33] with permission from Elsevier.
simulation results showed that hydrophobic NPs could result in their inclusion into the
membrane, while hydrophilic NPs are just absorbed on the membrane surface.
Considering the inhomogeneous surface modiﬁed NPs, Ding et al. [35] investigated
the interaction between Janus NPs and the membrane, and found that there exist
two diﬀerent late-stage states for the Janus particle–membrane system: insertion
and engulfment. For the insertion state, the hydrophobic part of the NP is inserted
into the interior of the lipid bilayer, while the hydrophilic part stays outside of the
membrane. For the engulfment state, the hydrophilic part is engulfed by lipid heads
due to receptor–ligand interactions and the hydrophobic part is “engulfed” by lipid
tails because of hydrophobic interactions. The diﬀerence between the two late-stage
states is controlled by the initial orientation and the properties of the Janus NPs.
To understand the eﬀect of the surface properties of the ligand-coated NPs, Li et al.
[36] performed DPD simulations to investigate the evolution of free energy as NPs
with diﬀerent ligand patterns cross a lipid bilayer. In their studies, four kinds of ligand
patterns were considered: NPs modiﬁed as a stripe-like structure with alternating
hydrophilic and hydrophobic ligands, NPs modiﬁed with a patch-like structure, NPs
with randomly distributed hydrophilic and hydrophobic ligands, as well as NPs coated
with homogeneous hydrophobic and hydrophilic ligands respectively (Figure 8.7). The

220
Self-Assembling Systems
3-SNP
16-SNP
0 ns
640 ns
1920 ns
2240 ns
4480 ns
4-PNP
6-PNP
RNP
Figure 8.7 (Upper) Schematic drawings of diﬀerent surface modiﬁed NPs (hydrophilic ligand on the
NP surface in white, and hydrophobic ligand in purple). (Lower) Typical conﬁgurations for the
penetration of a 16-SNP during its penetration processes. Reproduced from Ref. [36] with permission
from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
free energy analysis indicated that NPs with small stripe/patch size normally encounter
a lower energy barrier for NP translocation across the lipid membrane.
Surface Charge All cells have an electrical potential generated by the diﬀerence in
cytosolic and extracellular potassium concentrations. This external potential could
aﬀect the interaction between the NPs and the membrane, and especially inﬂuence
how charged NPs interact with a polar membrane. To investigate the inﬂuence of the
surface charge on NPs, Shin et al. [37] combined experimental and computer simulation
techniques to conﬁrm that the decrease of membrane potential leads to decreased
cellular binding of anionic NPs. They also showed that an increase in membrane
potential reverses this trend and results in increased binding of anionic NPs. However,
the cellular binding of cationic NPs is minimally inﬂuenced by the membrane potential.
This study indicates that membrane potential is an important factor that must be
considered in the design of NPs for therapeutic and sensing applications.
Similarly, surface charges on NPs also signiﬁcantly aﬀect the NP–membrane inter-
action. Li and Gu [38] performed CGMD simulations and showed that compared
to uncharged NPs, charges on the NP surface improve the adhesion of NPs to the
membrane due to the electrostatic attraction. Moreover, the binding of positively
charged NPs on the phosphate terminus of the lipids increases the tilt angle of lipids
and thus enlarges the area of the head group, whereas NPs with negative charges
often induce the formation of the high ordered region in ﬂuid bilayers. Therefore,
the adsorption of cationic/anionic NPs on the membrane plays diﬀerent roles in
suppressing or promoting the membrane wrapping.
The distribution of charges on the NP surface also aﬀects the binding of NPs to a lipid
bilayer. With DPD simulations, Li et al. [39] demonstrated the importance of the pattern
of charge distribution on NP surfaces, and showed that the diﬀerent charge patterns
may induce diﬀerent morphologies of NP aggregates on a membrane. The authors also
showed that the aggregation of charged NPs requires a minimum eﬀective charged
area, and the pattern of the electrostatic distribution of the NP surface determines the

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
221
arrangement of self-assembled NPs. Lin et al. [40] pointed out that cationic gold NPs
(AuNPs) are more disruptive to negatively charged lipid membranes, often leading
to the formation of transient membrane holes. This formation of membrane pores
depends on the number of positive charges on the NP surface. Similarly, positively
charged NPs can also induce ﬂipping of membrane areas leading to particle inclusion
and membrane depolarization [41].
8.3.2.2
The Eﬀect of Membrane Properties on NP–Membrane Interaction
Undoubtedly, the properties of the plasma membrane also show signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the NP–membrane interaction. Among various membrane properties, the eﬀects of
membrane tension and membrane composition have been particularly studied.
Various bioprocesses taking place on the cell membrane may change the membrane
tension frequently and sometimes locally, which would in turn alter the NP–membrane
interaction. In this respect, Yue et al. [18] used N-varied DPD simulations to
demonstrate that the membrane tension signiﬁcantly aﬀects the interaction between
the membrane and the NPs. When the membrane tension is suﬃciently positive,
the perturbation induced by NP adsorption may rupture the membrane. At a mild
membrane tension, NP adhesion or penetration is observed, depending on the strength
of the NP–membrane adhesion. However, when the membrane tension decreases to
a negative value, the NPs will be internalized by the cell membrane via a pathway of
endocytosis.
Guo et al. [42] also conﬁrmed through computer simulations and theoretical analy-
sis that the membrane tension plays a signiﬁcant role in the wrapping of dendrimer-like
NPs. They found that when the membrane tension is larger than a critical value, the den-
drimer would induce membrane disruption. Otherwise, depending on the membrane
tension, three states for the NP–membrane system, including dendrimer penetration,
partial wrapping, and full wrapping, are found (Figure 8.8).
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
σ/(kBT/r2)
c
8
7
6
5
4
3
Generation
σ/(kBT/r2)
c
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
A/(r 2)
c
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.8 (Left) Calculated surface tension of lipid membranes, 𝜎, as a function of area per lipid. The
representative snapshots show three typical phases of G7 dendrimers interacting with a lipid bilayer
membrane at diﬀerent surface tensions: (a) penetration, (b) penetration and partial wrapping, and
(c) full wrapping. (Right) A phase diagram from the simulations. As membrane tension decreases,
diﬀerent states, from penetration (no wrapping), partial wrapping, to full wrapping, appear.
Reproduced from Ref. [42] with permission from the American Chemical Society.

222
Self-Assembling Systems
Beside the properties of the NPs and the membrane tension, there are other factors
that aﬀect the NP interaction with the membrane. For example, it has been found
that membrane proteins have a remarkable inﬂuence on the interaction between NPs
and the membrane [43, 44]. Many membrane proteins have been proved to take part
in the endocytosis process. It is well known that speciﬁc cell-surface receptors and
Rho-family GTPases are required to achieve several types of phagocytosis processes.
Note that in most situations the membrane proteins not only participate in the
NP–membrane interaction, but also change the membrane properties. For instance,
Yue et al. [13] and Li et al. [19] found that the self-assembly of the anchored proteins
can induce membrane curvature. In fact, the membrane curvature created through the
insertion and clustering of anchored proteins is shown to be inﬂuenced not only by the
membrane tension but also by the hydrophobic length of the anchored proteins.
Temperature is another factor aﬀecting NP–membrane interaction, and in general
high temperature increases the ﬂuidity of the membrane, enhancing membrane
endocytosis. In addition, some environmental conditions, such as the gradient of ionic
concentrations between the cytosol and extracellular medium, and additional magnetic
and electric ﬁelds, also show signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the interaction between NPs
and membrane. For example, Tian et al. [45] and Ding et al. [46] indicated that the
NP–membrane interaction is aﬀected by the pH value for pH-sensitive dendrimers or
some NPs modiﬁed by pH-sensitive polymers, as demonstrated experimentally.
8.4
Cooperative Eﬀect between NPs during Internalization
The above-mentioned works have showed that the interaction between a single NP and
a plasma membrane is controlled by NP size, NP shape, and the surface physical and
chemical properties of the NP. However, in real systems the membrane often interacts
with multiple NPs simultaneously. Therefore, the interaction mechanism and pathway
are often cooperatively determined by multiple neighboring NPs, rather than a single
one. This has been veriﬁed by experimental observation of the eﬀects of the NP dose,
which becomes increasingly important; sometimes, NP cytotoxicity is found only at high
NP concentrations.
From a systematic investigation of adsorbed semi-hydrophobic NPs on supported
lipid bilayers (SLBs), Jing and Zhu [47] pointed out that there exists a critical NP
concentration for NPs having diﬀerent degrees of surface hydrophobicity. Above
this critical NP concentration the SLBs will disrupt. Consistently, Lipowsky and his
coworkers [48] found that the mechanism for the interaction between multiple NPs
and the membrane is diﬀerent from that for single NPs interacting with the membrane.
Through DPD simulations, Yue and Zhang [15] indicated that the internalization of
multiple NPs was in fact a cooperative process. As shown in Figure 8.9a, small NPs
with a diameter of 2.5nm are ﬁrst partially wrapped by the membrane, and at the
same time adjacent NPs gradually approach each other to form a small cluster. As the
simulation proceeds, the size of the cluster increases, and the cluster is encapsulated
by the membrane and internalized as a whole (see Figure 8.9a). Compared to the
close-packed aggregates formed by smaller NPs of 2.5 nm, the larger NPs of size 4.0nm
tend to arrange linearly on the lipid membrane and form a pearl-chain-like structure
for the subsequent endocytosis (see Figure 8.9b). However, when the diameter of

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
223
(a)
(b)
(c)
2.0μs
4.0μs
6.0μs
8.0μs
2.0μs
4.0μs
6.0μs
8.0μs
2.0μs
4.0μs
6.0μs
8.0μs
Figure 8.9 Typical snapshots during diﬀerent internalization processes. (a) Nanoparticles with a
diameter of 2.5 nm form close-packed aggregates before internalization. (b) Nanoparticles having a
diameter of 4.0 nm aggregate into pearl-chain-like arrangements. (c) Independent endocytosis occurs
for nanoparticles having a diameter of 6.0 nm. Both top view and side view are displayed. Reproduced
from Ref. [15] with permission from the American Chemical Society.
the NPs increases further to 6.0nm, no obvious cooperative endocytosis is observed
(see Figure 8.9c). On the contrary, the NPs tend to be wrapped by the membrane
independently. Consequently, both the internalization rate and internalization pathway
of multiple NPs are strongly dependent on NP size. As mentioned above, it was rather
diﬃcult to wrap a small single NP by a cellular membrane because signiﬁcant local
membrane deformation was required. For this reason, the single NP with larger size can
be easily wrapped because a smaller membrane curvature is needed in the wrapping
process. Nevertheless, the situation for multiple NPs is quite diﬀerent, because the

224
Self-Assembling Systems
Figure 8.10 Snapshot of tube-like structures formed from multiple NPs interacting with a lipid vesicle.
(Reproduced from Ref. [48] with permission from the American Physical Society.) (Left) The NPs were
initially outside, and (Right) inside the vesicle. (Reproduced from Ref. [50] with permission from the
American Physical Society.)
energy cost associated with the strong local membrane deformation to wrap a single
small NP can be substantially reduced by NP clustering, which thus facilitates the
wrapping process. Similarly, from large-scale simulations Šari´c and Cacciuto [49]
showed that a lipid membrane could mediate aggregation of spherical NPs binding on
it for a wide range of membrane bending rigidities. The phase diagram obtained shows
that diﬀerent aggregates of NPs adsorbing onto a bilayer are in competition between
the membrane bending rigidity and the NPs’ adhesive energy.
Previous studies have indicated how NPs can aﬀect each other on a ﬂat bilayer.
Considering that the cell membrane is a closed system with some local curvatures, it
is important to understand the interaction between multiple NPs and a membrane.
Recently, based on computer simulations, Bahrami et al. [48] and Šari´c et al. [50] found
that unexpected tube-like structures can be formed when multiple NPs interact with
a lipid vesicle (Figure 8.10). Interestingly, both studies found the membrane tubules
enclosing linear aggregates of NPs regardless of whether the NPs were initially placed
outside of the vesicle or not. Similarly, Chen et al. [23] performed DPD simulations
to show that the NP concentration has important eﬀects on the interaction between
NPs and lipid vesicles. For small hydrophilic NPs with a radius less than the membrane
thickness, they tend to just adhere on the vesicle surface at low NP concentrations.
With an increase in the NP concentration, the NPs would penetrate into the vesicle.
Further increasing NP concentration to a threshold value induces vesicle rupture.
More interestingly, three diﬀerent pathways for spontaneous NP penetration, including
chain-like cooperative penetration, direct penetration, and inverted micelle-like
penetration were identiﬁed, depending on NP size and NP concentration.
Compared with the above spherical NP interaction with a lipid membrane, Yue et al.
[51] performed DPD simulations to investigate the cooperative behavior of rod-like
NPs. From the simulation they showed that not only cooperative interaction between
neighboring rod-like NPs drove the NP aggregate, but also NP orientation (Figure 8.11).
For NPs with a weak NP–membrane binding energy, the orientation-dependent
interaction between two neighboring NPs arises purely as a result of non-homogeneous
distribution of membrane curvature induced by anisotropic NP adsorption. The
orientation-dependent interaction could induce the rotation of neighboring NPs from
a non-equilibrium arrangement to the equilibrium one for two neighboring NPs. For

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
225
t=100ns
t=1600ns
t=2400ns
t=4200ns
t=100ns
t=800ns
t=1600ns
t=2400ns
t=3200ns
t=4000ns
Figure 8.11 Time sequence of typical snapshots of two rod-like NPs with a lower ligand density
(Upper) and higher ligand density (Lower). Reproduced from Ref. [51] with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry.
a strong NP–membrane adhesion energy, on the other hand, an unusual wrapping
pathway diﬀerent from endocytosis, called asymmetrical wrapping, is found. The
unusual asymmetrical wrapping also induces orientation-dependent NP interaction:
the protrusion on the upper leaﬂet creates a short-range repulsion, the lower leaﬂet
produces an intermediate-range attraction, and the disappearance of the asymmetrical
wrapping generates a long-range repulsion. Thus, for a system with multiple rod-like

226
Self-Assembling Systems
NPs, the equilibrium arrangements are not only aﬀected by NP interaction but also
by dynamic traps. Competition between the parallel and linear arrangements may
transiently stabilize conﬁgurations with “incorrect” arrangements, and then rapid
and extensive wrapping could cause the “incorrect” arrangements to be dynamically
trapped.
Similar to NP size and topography, surface-patterned NPs could also coopera-
tively induce transmembrane penetration. Recently, Zhang et al. [14, 52] used DPD
simulations to study the transmembrane penetration mechanisms of multiple NPs
with diﬀerent surface hydrophobic properties. From a series of simulations they
conﬁrmed that the quantity of NPs played a key role during the NP penetration process.
Additionally, some interesting cooperative behaviors of NPs (such as aggregation,
aggregation–dispersion,
and
aggregation–dispersion–reaggregation),
which
are
aﬀected by the coupling between the NP quantity and the NP surface property, were
observed during the NP penetration process.
8.5
Conclusions
Understanding the interaction mechanism between the NPs and the membrane can
guide us to avoid cytotoxicity while using NPs as vehicles for drug delivery. The factors
that inﬂuence the interaction between NPs and the membrane can be divided into
diﬀerent categories: the (physical and chemical) properties of NPs and those of the
membrane. Although extensive experimental studies have been carried out in the
literature in order to understand NP–membrane interactions, much less is known
about the molecular details of the interaction mechanisms and the kinetic pathways of
these processes. In this aspect, computer simulation techniques provide a complemen-
tary tool to study NP–membrane interaction. Therefore, coarse-grained molecular
dynamics (CGMD) and dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulations have been
extensively performed investigating the interaction mechanism and corresponding
interaction pathway. In this review, we have summarized the recent DPD and partial
CGMD simulations on cell uptake of NPs, focusing on membrane-mediated interaction,
internalization pathways, and cooperative eﬀect. These studies undoubtly deepen our
understanding of the mechanisms for NPs interacting with a plasma membrane, which
can not only help us to understand the cytotoxicity of NPs, but also guide us to design
new NPs for drug delivery.
Although we have a greater understanding of these mechanisms for the internaliza-
tion of NPs initiated from NP–membrane interaction, there is still a long way to go
to understand precisely NP uptake in vivo. As is well known, cell machinery is often
involved in vivo in the internalization process, i.e., active uptake of NPs. Note that in
this review, we have not discussed the role of proteins or protein complexes in the
internalization pathway and how they contribute to membrane curvature, membrane
pore formation, and the recruitment of other proteins.
References
1. F. Lu, S. H. Wu, Y. Hung, and C. Y. Mou. Size eﬀect on cell uptake in
well-suspended, uniform mesoporous silica nanoparticles, Small 5, 1408 (2009).

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
227
2. F. Osaki, T. Kanamori, S. Sando, T. Sera, and Y. Aoyama. A quantum dot conjugated
sugar ball and its cellular uptake. On the size eﬀects of endocytosis in the subviral
region, Journal Of The American Chemical Society 126, 6520 (2004).
3. W. Jiang, B. Y. Kim, J. T. Rutka, and W. C. Chan. Nanoparticle-mediated cellular
response is size-dependent, Nature Nanotechnology 3, 145 (2008).
4. T. Mironava, M. Hadjiargyrou, M. Simon, V. Jurukovski, and M. H. Rafailovich.
Gold nanoparticles cellular toxicity and recovery: Eﬀect of size, concentration and
exposure time, Nanotoxicology 4, 120 (2010).
5. J. Wong-Ekkabut, S. Baoukina, W. Triampo, I.-M. Tang, D. P. Tieleman, and
L. Monticelli. Computer simulation study of fullerene translocation through lipid
membranes, Nature Nanotechnology 3, 363 (2008).
6. K. Yang, B. Yuan, and Y.-q. Ma. Inﬂuence of geometric nanoparticle rotation on
cellular internalization process, Nanoscale 5, 7998 (2013).
7. L.-T. Yan and X. Yu. Charged dendrimers on lipid bilayer membranes: Insight
through dissipative particle dynamics simulations, Macromolecules 42, 6277 (2009).
8. H. M. Ding and Y. Q. Ma. Theoretical and computational investigations of
nanoparticle–biomembrane interactions in cellular delivery, Small 11, 1055 (2015).
9. A. Albanese, P. S. Tang, and W. C. Chan. The eﬀect of nanoparticle size, shape, and
surface chemistry on biological systems, Annual Review Of Biomedical Engineering
14, 1 (2012).
10. Y. Li, H. Yuan, A. von dem Bussche, M. Creighton, R. H. Hurt, A. B. Kane, and H.
Gao. Graphene microsheets enter cells through spontaneous membrane penetration
at edge asperities and corner sites, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
110, 12295 (2013).
11. R. D. Groot and P. B. Warren. Dissipative particle dynamics: Bridging the gap
between atomistic and mesoscopic simulation, Journal Of Chemical Physics 107,
4423 (1997).
12. L. Gao, J. Shillcock, and R. Lipowsky. Improved dissipative particle dynamics
simulations of lipid bilayers, The Journal of Chemical Physics 126, 015101 (2007).
13. S. Li, X. Zhang, and W. Wang. Cluster formation of anchored proteins induced by
membrane-mediated interaction, Biophysical Journal 98, 2554 (2010).
14. K. Yang and Y.-Q. Ma. Computer simulation of the translocation of nanoparticles
with diﬀerent shapes across a lipid bilayer, Nature Nanotechnology 5, 579 (2010).
15. T. Yue and X. Zhang. Cooperative eﬀect in receptor-mediated endocytosis of
multiple nanoparticles, Acs Nano 6, 3196 (2012).
16. B. Hong, F. Qiu, H. Zhang, and Y. Yang. Budding dynamics of individual domains in
multicomponent membranes simulated by N-varied dissipative particle dynamics,
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 111, 5837 (2007).
17. F. Tian, X. Zhang, and W. Dong. How hydrophobic nanoparticles aggregate in
the interior of membranes: A computer simulation, Physical Review E 90, 052701
(2014).
18. T. Yue and X. Zhang. Molecular understanding of receptor-mediated membrane
responses to ligand-coated nanoparticles, Soft Matter 7, 9104 (2011).
19. T. Yue, S. Li, X. Zhang, and W. Wang. The relationship between membrane
curvature generation and clustering of anchored proteins: A computer simulation
study, Soft Matter 6, 6109 (2010).

228
Self-Assembling Systems
20. T. Yue and X. Zhang. Signal transduction across cellular membranes can be
mediated by coupling of the clustering of anchored proteins in both leaﬂets,
Physical Review E 85, 011917 (2012).
21. B. J. Reynwar, G. Illya, V. A. Harmandaris, M. M. Müller, K. Kremer, and M.
Deserno. Aggregation and vesiculation of membrane proteins by curvature-mediated
interactions, Nature 447, 461 (2007).
22. Q. Liang, Q.-H. Chen, and Y.-Q. Ma. Membrane-mediated interactions between
nanoparticles on a substrate, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 114, 5359 (2010).
23. X. Chen, F. Tian, X. Zhang, and W. Wang. Internalization pathways of nanoparticles
and their interaction with a vesicle, Soft Matter 9, 7592 (2013).
24. T. Yue, X. Zhang, and F. Huang. Molecular modeling of membrane tube pearling
and the eﬀect of nanoparticle adsorption, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16,
10799 (2014).
25. X. Lin, Y. Li, and N. Gu. Nanoparticle’s size eﬀect on its translocation across a lipid
bilayer: A molecular dynamics simulation, Journal of Computational and Theoretical
Nanoscience 7, 269 (2010).
26. Y. Roiter, M. Ornatska, A. R. Rammohan, J. Balakrishnan, D. R. Heine, and S.
Minko. Interaction of nanoparticles with lipid membrane, Nano Letters 8, 941
(2008).
27. W. Helfrich. Elastic properties of lipid bilayers: Theory and possible experiments,
Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C 28, 693 (1973).
28. X. Shi, A. von Dem Bussche, R. H. Hurt, A. B. Kane, and H. Gao. Cell entry of
one-dimensional nanomaterials occurs by tip recognition and rotation, Nature
Nanotechnology 6, 714 (2011).
29. C. Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Yuan, H. Gao, and S. Zhang. Role of nanoparticle geometry
in endocytosis: Laying down to stand up, Nano Letters 13, 4546 (2013).
30. R. Vácha, F. J. Martinez-Veracoechea, and D. Frenkel. Receptor-mediated
endocytosis of nanoparticles of various shapes, Nano Letters 11, 5391 (2011).
31. Y. Li, T. Yue, K. Yang, and X. Zhang. Molecular modeling of the relationship
between nanoparticle shape anisotropy and endocytosis kinetics, Biomaterials
33, 4965 (2012).
32. Y. Tu et al. Destructive extraction of phospholipids from Escherichia coli
membranes by graphene nanosheets, Nature Nanotechnology 8, 594 (2013).
33. J. Mao, R. Guo, and L.-T. Yan. Simulation and analysis of cellular internalization
pathways and membrane perturbation for graphene nanosheets, Biomaterials 35,
6069 (2014).
34. Y. Li, X. Chen, and N. Gu. Computational investigation of interaction between
nanoparticles and membranes: Hydrophobic/hydrophilic eﬀect, The Journal of
Physical Chemistry B 112, 16647 (2008).
35. H.-M. Ding and Y.-Q. Ma. Interactions between Janus particles and membranes,
Nanoscale 4, 1116 (2012).
36. Y. Li, X. Zhang, and D. Cao. A spontaneous penetration mechanism of patterned
nanoparticles across a biomembrane, Soft Matter 10, 6844 (2014).
37. E. H. Shin, Y. Li, U. Kumar, H. V. Sureka, X. Zhang, and C. K. Payne. Membrane
potential mediates the cellular binding of nanoparticles, Nanoscale 5, 5879 (2013).

8 Simulations of Cell Uptake of Nanoparticles
229
38. Y. Li and N. Gu. Thermodynamics of charged nanoparticle adsorption on
charge-neutral membranes: A simulation study, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B
114, 2749 (2010).
39. Y. Li, X. Zhang, and D. Cao. Self-assembly of patterned nanoparticles on cellular
membranes: Eﬀect of charge distribution, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 117,
6733 (2013).
40. J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, and Y. Zheng. Penetration of lipid membranes by gold
nanoparticles: Insights into cellular uptake, cytotoxicity, and their relationship, Acs
Nano 4, 5421 (2010).
41. R. R. Arvizo, O. R. Miranda, M. A. Thompson, C. M. Pabelick, R. Bhattacharya,
J. D. Robertson, V. M. Rotello, Y. Prakash, and P. Mukherjee. Eﬀect of nanoparticle
surface charge at the plasma membrane and beyond, Nano Letters 10, 2543 (2010).
42. R. Guo, J. Mao, and L.-T. Yan. Unique dynamical approach of fully wrapping
dendrimer-like soft nanoparticles by lipid bilayer membrane, Acs Nano 7, 10646
(2013).
43. A. Grafmüller, J. Shillcock, and R. Lipowsky. Dissipative particle dynamics of
tension-induced membrane fusion, Molecular Simulation 35, 554 (2009).
44. A. Šari´c and A. Cacciuto. Self-assembly of nanoparticles adsorbed on ﬂuid and
elastic membranes, Soft Matter 9, 6677 (2013).
45. W.-D. Tian and Y.-Q. Ma. Molecular dynamics simulations of a charged dendrimer
in multivalent salt solution, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 113, 13161 (2009).
46. H.-M. Ding and Y.-Q. Ma. Controlling cellular uptake of nanoparticles with
pH-sensitive polymers, Scientiﬁc Reports 3 (2013).
47. B. Jing and Y. Zhu. Disruption of supported lipid bilayers by semihydrophobic
nanoparticles, Journal of the American Chemical Society 133, 10983 (2011).
48. A. H. Bahrami, R. Lipowsky, and T. R. Weikl. Tubulation and aggregation of
spherical nanoparticles adsorbed on vesicles, Physical Review Letters 109, 188102
(2012).
49. A. Šari´c and A. Cacciuto. Fluid membranes can drive linear aggregation of adsorbed
spherical nanoparticles, Physical Review Letters 108, 118101 (2012).
50. A. Šari´c and A. Cacciuto. Mechanism of membrane tube formation induced by
adhesive nanocomponents, Physical Review Letters 109, 188101 (2012).
51. T. Yue, X. Wang, F. Huang, and X. Zhang. An unusual pathway for the
membrane wrapping of rodlike nanoparticles and the orientation-and membrane
wrapping-dependent nanoparticle interaction, Nanoscale 5, 9888 (2013).
52. H. Zhang, Q. Ji, C. Huang, S. Zhang, B. Yuan, K. Yang, and Y.-Q. Ma. Cooperative
transmembrane penetration of nanoparticles, Scientiﬁc Reports 5 (2015).

230
9
Theories for Polymer Melts Consisting of Rod–Coil Polymers
Ying Jiang1 and JeﬀZ. Y. Chen2
1School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Canada
9.1
Introduction
9.1.1
Rod–Coil Polymers and Recent Theoretical Progress
Block copolymers consisting of rigid and ﬂexible blocks are commonly known as
rod–coil block copolymers. The rigid block can have interesting electrical and pho-
toactive properties that are exploited in device making. For example, the practical
application of organic optoelectronic devices requires self-assembly of such copolymers
[1–3]. The rod block can be made from conjugated backbone, aromatic groups, or even
the helical secondary structure of a peptide [4]. Experimental studies on self-assembly
of rod–coil copolymers have suggested remarkably rich structural morphologies
arising from microphase separation driven by immiscibility and orientation-dependent
interaction. So far, morphologies such as smectic-A, smectic-C, lamellar, hexagonally
perforated lamellar, hexagonal cylinder, gyroid, body-centered cubic, and zigzag
structures have been observed in a variety of rod–coil diblock copolymer melts [5–11].
This has provided a wide playground for manipulating microstructure by alternating
molecular-level architectures.
Past decades have witnessed surging interest in the theoretical understanding of
ﬂexible–ﬂexible block copolymers, particularly due to the success of self-consistent
ﬁeld theory (SCFT), which incorporates the Gaussian chain (GSC) model to describe
both ﬂexible polymer blocks [12–14]. The SCFT formalism can also be developed for
rod–coil copolymers following the same idea, where the ﬂexible block is treated as
GSC [15–17]. The rigid block is modeled by a rod, which typically has an orientation.
The rigid segment behaves diﬀerently from the ﬂexible block, because of its lack of
conformational entropy; in replacement, the orientational entropy becomes more
important. Depending on the physical system, the rod–rod interaction arising from
diﬀerent polymer chains can also produce orientationally dependent interactions,
typically seen in liquid crystals. Self-assembly of rod–coil block copolymers forms a
distinct class of problems in polymer physics.
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
231
Table 9.1 summarizes the main theoretical eﬀorts made in understanding the problem
of rod–coil polymer melts and microphase structures determined from these models.
There are basically three approaches: ideal rod–coil polymer model, lattice model, and
semiﬂexible–semiﬂexible polymer model; each is reviewed in this chapter.
The ﬁrst theoretical model for rod–coil diblock copolymers was introduced by
Semenov and Vasilenko [18, 19], who focused on studying the nematic and smectic
phases. In this study, they considered an ideal rod–coil diblock copolymer chain
where one end of a rigid rod is connected to a ﬂexible chain. Later, performing a
scaling analysis, Williams and Fredrickson [20] extended this model to study more
complicated “hockey puck” micelles where the tightly packed rods form cylinders at a
high volume fraction of coil blocks. Taking the isotropic Flory–Huggins interaction and
the anisotropic Maier–Saupe interaction, Holyst and Schick [21] explored the rod–coil
diblock phase diagram in the regime of weak segregation by the Landau–Ginzburg
free-energy expansion with respect to the compositional order parameter and the
orientational order parameter. Reenders and ten Brinke [22] adopted a similar method
and addressed the role played by the nematic ordering in microphase separation. In
order to explicitly investigate the eﬀects of chain ﬂexibility, Singh et al. [23] studied
the structural properties of semiﬂexible rod–coil diblock copolymers in the same
spirit [21].
The extraordinary success of the self-consistent ﬁeld theory (SCFT) on the pre-
diction of the equilibrium structures self-assembled by block copolymers allows us
to determine the rod–coil morphologies with more precision. Müller and Schick
[15] calculated the two-dimensional (2D) phase diagram of rod–coil diblock copoly-
mers explicitly involving the hexagonal cylinder phase. Adopting a 2D lattice model
accounting for chain rigidity in terms of the rotational isomeric state, Li and Gersappe
[24] studied more complicated 2D morphologies observed in experiments, such as
zigzag lamellar and elliptical cross-sectional cylinders. Chen et al. [25] developed a
self-consistent-ﬁeld lattice model and calculated the rod–coil phase diagram in which
novel three-dimensional (3D) structures are included. However, the orientational
interactions arising from the steric eﬀects between rods are all ignored in these
studies. On the basis of the Semenov–Vasilenko model [18], where the orientational
interaction is strongly imposed, Matsen and Barrett [16] concentrated on an analysis
of one-dimensional (1D) monolayer and bilayer smectic phases. In order to explore
the high-dimensional morphologies, Pryamitsyn and Ganesan [26] proposed a gen-
eral SCFT scheme in which the eﬀects of the orientational alignment of rods were
taken in the form of the Maier–Suape interaction. They mainly focused on calcu-
lating structures that are 2D in nature. Recently, Kriksin and Khalatur [27] extended
this model to the study of 3D morphologies by means of a parallelized numerical
algorithm.
The wormlike model describes the crossover of a polymer chain from the rod limit
to the ﬂexible limit. The local chain ﬂexibility can be speciﬁed in a typical model.
Sullivan et al. [28, 29] used the wormlike chain model to study the 1D smectic struc-
tures formed by rod–coil copolymers, where the Onsager steric interaction between
polymer segments was used. Implementing a ﬁnite volume algorithm, Song et al. [30]
extended the model to study the smectic-C phase for wormlike rod–coil copolymers.
Following a similar approach, Gao et al. [31] explored the 2D phases beyond smectics
by high-performing GPU techniques. The wormlike chain model incorporating the

232
Self-Assembling Systems
Table 9.1 Theoretical studies of rod–coil (RC) diblock copolymers.
Model
Microstructures studied
Description of approaches
References (year)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Nematic and smectic-A
phases
Approximate mean-ﬁeld calculations in terms of a
combinational free-energy accounting for
interactions between unlike segments, chain
conformation entropy for both blocks, and steric
interactions between rods.
Semenov and Vasilenko [18]
(1986)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Smectic-A and smectic-C
phases
Scaling analysis on the free-energy composed of
stretching entropy of coils and interfacial energy
between RC diblocks in a selective solvent.
Halperin [36] (1990)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Nematic, smectic-A, and
smectic-C phases
The same theoretical framework as in Ref. [18];
a special consideration on tilting rods from the
lamellar normal.
Semenov [19] (1991)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Smectic-A/C phases and
“hockey puck” cylindrical
micelles
Scaling analysis of the Semenov–Vasilenko
model [18].
Williams and Fredrickson [20]
(1992)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Isotropic lamellae and
nematic phase
Landau expansion of the free-energy functional up
to second order using the random phase
approximation. The interaction potentials consist
of the isotropic part described by the Flory
interaction and the anisotropic part described by
the Maier–Saupe interaction.
Holyst and Schick [21] (1992)
Semiﬂexible–semiﬂexible
diblock copolymers
Nematic and smectic-A
phases
Similar to Ref. [21]. Block ﬂexibility is modeled by
the freely jointed chain model.
Singh, Goulian, Liu, and
Fredrickson [23] (1994)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Lamellae and hexagonal
cylinders
Solving the self-consistent ﬁeld equations by
numerically evaluating the single chain partition
function and scaling analysis in terms of the
brushlike approximation in the strong segregation
limit.
Müller and Schick [15] (1996)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Nematic and smectic-A/C
phases
Mean-ﬁeld calculations of the
Semenov–Vasilenko model [18].
Matsen and Barrett [16]
(1998)

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
233
RC diblock copolymers based
on rotational isomeric state
(RIS) model
Lamella, zigzag lamella,
elliptical cylinders, and
hexagonal cylinders
Two-dimensional self-consistent ﬁeld lattice model
incorporating the RIS scheme to account for chain
rigidity.
Li and Gersappe [24] (2001)
Wormlike–wormlike RC
diblock copolymers
Nematic and smectic-A
phases
Wormlike SCFT calculations accounting for the
Onsager-type interaction.
Düchs and Sullivan [28] (2002)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Lamellae, hexagonal cylinders,
spheres (BCC), nematic, and
smectic-A/C phases
Extending the model in Ref. [21]; Landau
expansion up to the fourth order in composition
and orientation order parameters, in the weak
segregation limit.
Reenders and ten Brinke [22]
(2002)
RC diblock copolymers based
on the discrete wormlike
chain model
Smectic structures and
“hockey puck” cylindrical
micelles
Dynamic SCFT simulations via the introduction of
the diﬀusion equations individually for the
compositional and orientational order parameters.
Hamm, Goldbeck-Wood,
Zvelindovsky, and Fraaije [37]
(2003)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Smectic-A/C phases, broken
lamellas, pucks, arrowheads,
and zigzag phase
An exact 2D SCFT calculation based on the ideal
RC diblock copolymer model accounting for the
Flory interaction and Maier–Saupe interaction.
Pryamitsyn and Ganesan [26]
(2004)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Smectic lamellae, ellipsoidal
micelles
The dynamic evolution of the composition and
orientation order parameters via a set of diﬀusion
equations associated with the Landau-type
phenomenological free-energy.
Yamazaki, Motoyama,
Nonomura, and Ohta [38]
(2004)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
based on the lattice model
Lamellaes, zigzag, perforated
lamella, strip, gyroid, and
spherical micelle
Self-consistent ﬁeld lattice model employing a
two-stage relaxation scheme.
Chen, Zhang, Sun, Zheng, and
An [25] (2006)
Coil–wormlike diblock
copolymers
Smectic-A structures
SCFT calculation implemented for multiblock
copolymers accounting for the Flory-Huggins
interaction and Maier–Saupe interaction.
Shah and Ganesan [32] (2009)
RC wormlike diblock
copolymers
Nematic and smectic-A/C
structures
1D SCFT calculation accounting for the Onsager
potential to describe steric interactions between
segments.
Song, Tang, Zhang, Yang, and
Shi [30] (2009)
Semiﬂexible-coil diblock
copolymers
Lamellae, nematic, and
smectic-A/C structures
1D SCFT calculation accounting for the
Flory-Huggins and Maier–Saupe interactions.
Song, Tang, Qiu, Yang, and
Shi [33] (2011)
(Continued)

234
Self-Assembling Systems
Table 9.1 (Continued)
Model
Microstructures studied
Description of approaches
References (year)
RC wormlike diblock
copolymers
Nematic, smectic-A/C
structures, cylindrical
micelles, and zigzag phase
2D SCFT calculation. GPU (graphics processing
units) technique.
Gao, Song, Tang, and Yang
[31] (2011)
Ideal RC diblock copolymers
Cylinders, spheres, zigzags,
pucks, polyhedra, and
hexagonal chiral columnar
phase
Parallel numerical algorithm. 3D calculation of the
same model as in Ref. [26]
Kriksin and Khalatur [27]
(2012)
Semiﬂexible-coil diblock
copolymers
Lamellae, cylinders, nematic,
smectic-A/C, and pucks
2D self-consistent Brownian dynamics simulations
accounting for the nematic ordering of
self-assembled morphologies.
Kumar and Ganesan [39]
(2012)
Coil–wormlike diblock
copolymers
Lamellae, cylinders, nematic,
smectic-A/C, hexagonal
pucks, and rhombic pucks
2D SCFT calculation accounting for the
Flory-Huggins interaction and Maier–Saupe
interaction on the study of the chain conformation
combining Gaussian chain and wormlike chain
models.
Gao, Tang, and Yang [34]
(2013)
Wormlike-rod diblock
copolymers
Smectic-A/C structures,
hexagonal cylinders, elliptical
cylinders
2D SCFT calculation accounting for the
Flory-Huggins interaction and Maier–Saupe
interaction on the study of a wormlike chain
theory.
Li, Jiang, and Chen [35] (2014)
RC diblock copolymers
Spheres (BCC, A15),
hexagonal cylinders, gyroids,
and lamellae.
3D SCFT calculation based on the wormlike chain
theory.
Tang, Jiang, Zhang, Yan, and
Chen [40] (2015)

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
235
Maier–Saupe interaction in the framework of SCFT has been extensively implemented
in a variety of copolymer systems, such as semicrystalline multiblock copolymers [32],
semiﬂexible-coil diblock copolymers [33, 34], and semiﬂexible-rod diblock copolymers
[35].
9.1.2
Basic Parameters
In this section, we review the basic parameters used in a typical theoretical model to
represent the properties of a rod–coil system. Depending on the theoretical approach,
not all parameters are present in a model.
9.1.2.1
Molecular Parameters
An ideal model simply treats the block copolymer as a polymer chain made of two
blocks: a coil block that has one end jointing with a rod block. The coil and rodlike
blocks are modeled as a Gaussian coil of length LC and a rigid rod of length LR. To denote
the position of a segment, a contour variable s can be used, which has the value s = 0
starting from the coil terminal end, s = LC at the joint point, and s = L = LC + LR at the
rod terminal end (Figure 9.1). A basic segmental length aC is deﬁned on the coil block,
which is usually identiﬁed with the Kuhn length of a coil polymer. The volume of such
a segment, 1∕𝜌0, deﬁnes the volume occupied by one basic segment. Correspondingly,
we deﬁne a basic statistical unit aR on the rod block, which also has a volume 1∕𝜌0. In
general aR ≠aC. The number of these segments can then be identiﬁed. In total, a single
polymer consists of N segments among which there are NC segments on the coil block
and the remaining NR = N −NC on the rodlike block. Below we use the volume fraction
for coil segments,
f ≡fC = NC∕N,
(9.1)
which turns out to be an essential parameter. Here, following the same notation as in
Refs. [16, 26], the symbol f is used for the coil volume fraction fC where fR = 1 −fC.
Within a typical theoretical framework for the rod–coil problem, another essential
parameter that measures the inherited conformational asymmetries of the two blocks,
𝜈, is needed [16, 26]. Taking the ratio between the mean square end-to-end distances of
an ideal coil and an ideal rod we have
𝜈2 = (aC
√
N)2∕(aRN)2 = a2
C(a2
RN)−1.
(9.2)
u
s = LC
aR
aC
s = 0
s = L = Lc + LR
= LC
aC
s = 0
a
γ
Figure 9.1 A rod–coil block copolymer
of total contour length L. Basic
segmental volumes are considered for
lengths aC and aR on coil and rod
blocks, respectively. (See insert for color
representation of the ﬁgure.).

236
Self-Assembling Systems
In some references [26, 33], a prefactor of 1∕6 is used in the deﬁnition. A similar param-
eter is also needed for describing other conformationally asymmetric systems such as
coil–coil block copolymers with diﬀerent backbone Kuhn length [41, 42].
9.1.2.2
Polymer-Melt Parameters
A typical polymer melt is composed of n rod–coil polymers. The interaction between
diblock copolymers is commonly modeled by the Flory–Huggins parameter 𝜒, to be
deﬁned more precisely below, which shows up in a typical theory as the combination
𝜒N.
To complicate the matter further, in a theory that includes the orientational interac-
tion, an additional parameter, for example the Maier–Saupe coeﬃcient 𝜇, needs to be
considered [43]. Depending on the magnitude of 𝜇, in general a strong-𝜇system prefers
orientationally ordered states and a weak-𝜇system prefers orientationally isotropic
states [26]. A weak-𝜇system, however, can already contain an orientationally ordered
state—for example, rod blocks are directionally ordered in a lamellar state, driven
from microphase separation caused by 𝜒N alone. In a diﬀerent approach, the steric
interaction avoiding the overlapping of rods can be simulated by Flory’s lattice theory
[18, 16].
For a polymer melt, in a self-consistent ﬁeld theory the incompressibility condition
𝜙R(r) + 𝜙C(r) = 1
(9.3)
is generally assumed, where 𝜙R and 𝜙C are the local volume fractions for of the rod
segments and the coil segments, respectively. This implies that, on average, space is ﬁlled
by either segments aR or aC, uniformly, regardless of the nonuniform distribution of one
type of monomer. Thus, within such an assumption, a total of nN segments occupy the
system volume V, nN∕V = 𝜌0. In a typical SCFT, 𝜌0 is scaled out at the free-energy level
and becomes a nonessential parameter.
9.1.2.3
Other Parameters
Strictly speaking, a conformationally asymmetric block copolymer with a small N
cannot be called a rod–coil copolymer. Instead, one must consider a model for
rod–semiﬂexible block copolymers. Two more parameters enter into play in this case,
one of which is the ﬁnite N that is a separate parameter beyond 𝜈and 𝜒N. Because
a2
CN is no longer the mean square end-to-end distance of an ideal coil, the parameter
pair N, 𝜈should now be replaced by N, aC∕aR.
Another parameter becomes important for a rod–semiﬂexible copolymer system. The
bond angle or the lack of a ﬁxed bond angle 𝛾determines the local conformation and
global microphase-separated structures yielded from the chain persistency. In a large-N
system, however, the inﬂuence of 𝛾is only local, within the length scale of the persis-
tence length of the coil segment, which is assumed to be much smaller than a typical
microphase domain size, the radius of gyration of the coil block. The main part of this
chapter concerns the N ≫1 limit.

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
237
9.2
Theoretical Models
9.2.1
The Ideal Rod–Coil Diblock Model
9.2.1.1
Comments
The ideal rod–coil diblock model, which simply treats a block copolymer as a polymer
chain where one end of the rodlike block is jointed to that of the coil block, was
originally proposed by Semenov and Vasilenko [18] to theoretically study the smectic-A
lamellar structure where the rods are aligned perpendicular to the periodic interfaces.
Following the same idea, Semenov extended the study to the smectic-C phase [19]
where the tilt angle relative to the lamellar normal was allowed to vary in the model.
Implementing a scaling analysis, Williams and Fredrickson [20] predicted the existence
of a hockey puck state which was shown to have higher stability than monolayer
lamellae. Further developing SCFT based on the Semenov–Vasilenko model, Matsen
and Barrett [16] eliminated some approximations used in previous studies [18–20] and
generated a phase diagram which coincides reasonably well with experiments [5, 6]. In
order to describe the steric interactions between rodlike segments, they used a strong
orientational interaction based on Flory’s lattice theory [44]. In the following, we review
a commonly used model, basically following Pryamitsyn and Ganesan [26]. This model,
when applied to systems that display both positional and orientational inhomogeneities,
has yielded a variety of morphologies for rod–coil copolymers [22, 26, 27, 34, 35, 37, 45].
9.2.1.2
Formalism
Associated with the contour length s illustrated in Figure 9.1, which has the range [0, L]
over the entire chain, we now deﬁne a reduced variable t such that
t =
{
s∕NaC
for s = [0, LC],
s∕NaR
for s = [LC, L].
(9.4)
Note that the coil and rodlike blocks can be described by t in the ranges [0, fC] and [fC, 1],
respectively. The relation between t and s is nonlinear if aR ≠aC.
In a coarse-grained formalism, the conﬁguration of the coil block of the kth chain is
denoted by a space curve Rk(t) where the contour variable t has the range [0, fC]. The
reduced Hamiltonian is given by
0 =
3
2Na2
C
n
∑
k=1 ∫
fC
0
||||
dRk(t)
dt
||||
2
dt,
(9.5)
which gives rise to a Gaussian statistical weight on the chain conﬁguration. One deﬁnes
a conﬁgurational-dependent coil volume fraction by
̂𝜙C(r) = N
𝜌0
n
∑
k=1 ∫
fC
0
𝛿[r −Rk(t)]dt,
(9.6)

238
Self-Assembling Systems
and rod volume fraction by
̂𝜙R(r) = N
𝜌0
n
∑
k=1 ∫
1
fC
𝛿{r −[Rk( fC) + aR(t −fC)Nuk]} dt.
(9.7)
The Flory–Huggins interaction energy, which gives an enthalpic penalty between dis-
similar segments, is then
1 = 𝜒𝜌0 ∫dr ̂𝜙R(r) ̂𝜙C(r),
(9.8)
where 𝜒is the well-known Flory–Huggins parameter.
For any given system conﬁguration, the microscopic state of the kth rodlike block
can be speciﬁed by a unit vector uk (see Figure 9.1). Depending on the physical sys-
tem, the rod–rod interaction can give rise to an orientational-dependent interaction,
not accounted for in 1. This interaction could be of the form of an Onsager interaction
[46], or, more generally, phenomenologically represented by a Maier–Saupe interaction
term. According to the liquid crystal theory [47], the conﬁgurational-dependent orien-
tational order-parameter tensor, which measures orientation of the rodlike blocks, is
deﬁned by
̂SR(r) = N
𝜌0
n
∑
k=1 ∫
1
fC
𝛿{r −[Rk( fC) + aR(t −fC)Nuk]} [
ukuk −I
3
]
dt,
(9.9)
where I is a 3 × 3 unit tensor. The additional Maier–Saupe energy then has the form
2 = −𝜇𝜌0
2 ∫dr̂SR(r) ∶̂SR(r),
(9.10)
where 𝜇is the Maier–Saupe parameter. Usually, in an ideal chain model, the orienta-
tional ordering associated with the ﬂexible block is ignored.
For rod–coil block copolymers, the above basic energetics were ﬁrst suggested by
Pryamitsyn and Ganesan [26]. In the SCFT framework, the Helmholtz free energy of the
present system can be straightforwardly expressed as a functional of 𝜙C(r), 𝜙R(r), SR(r)
(now averaged over the conﬁgurations) and its conjugating ﬁelds wC(r), wR(r), MR(r).
Taking the saddle-point approximation we obtain the reduced free energy per chain
F
nkBT = −ln Q + 1
V ∫dr
{
𝜒N𝜙C(r)𝜙R(r)
−𝜇N
2 SR(r) ∶SR(r)
−wC(r)𝜙C(r) −wR(r)𝜙R(r)
+ MR(r) ∶SR(r) + 𝜉(r)[𝜙C(r) + 𝜙R(r) −1]
}
.
(9.11)
The last term on the right-hand side incorporates the incompressibility condition (9.3)
imposed on the component volume fractions by means of the Lagrangian multiplier 𝜉(r).
The single-chain partition function can be expressed by
Q =
1
4𝜋V ∫dr ∫du exp
[
−∫
1
fC
dtΓ (r + (t −fC)NaRu, u)]
q(r, fC),
(9.12)

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
239
where
Γ(r, u) ≡wR(r) −M(r) ∶
[
uu −I
3
]
.
(9.13)
The function q(r, fC) represents the probability of ﬁnding the rod–coil junction in the
vicinity of r. The so-called propagator satisﬁes a modiﬁed diﬀusion equation
𝜕
𝜕t q(r, t) =
Na2
C
6 ∇2q(r, t) −wC(r)q(r, t)
(9.14)
for t = [0, fC], where an initial condition q(r, 0) = 1 is assumed.
Minimizing the free energy in (9.11) with respect to functions 𝜙C(r), 𝜙R(r), 𝜉(r), S(r),
wC(r), wR(r), and M(r), we obtain a set of expressions:
wC(r) = 𝜒N𝜙R(r) + 𝜉(r),
(9.15)
wR(r) = 𝜒N𝜙C(r) + 𝜉(r),
(9.16)
𝜙C(r) + 𝜙R(r) = 1,
(9.17)
𝜇NS(r) = M(r),
(9.18)
𝜙C(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫
fC
0
dtq(r, t)q∗(r, fC −t),
(9.19)
𝜙R(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫du ∫
1
fC
dt exp
[
−∫
1
fC
dt′Γ(r −tNaRu + t′NaRu, u)
]
q(r −(t −fC)NaRu, fC),
(9.20)
S(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫du
[
uu −I
3
]
∫
1
fC
dt exp
[
−∫
1
fC
dt′Γ(r −tNaRu + t′NaRu, u)
]
q(r −(t −fC)NaRu, fC).
(9.21)
Here we have introduced a complementary propagator q∗(r, t), which contains an arc
variable t starting from the unconnnected terminal end of the rod block. For the coil
block, this propagator satisﬁes a similar modiﬁed diﬀusion equation,
𝜕
𝜕t q∗(r, t) = −
Na2
C
6 ∇2q∗(r, t) + wC(r)q∗(r, t),
(9.22)
with the initial condition
q∗(r, fC) = ∫du exp
[
−∫
1
fC
dtΓ(r + (t −fC)NaRu, u)
]
.
(9.23)
The expressions and equations in Equations (9.12)–(9.22) constitute the basic
self-consistent set of equations. This theoretical framework contains a number of
essential parameters. The overall volume fraction fC appears in Equations (9.12),

240
Self-Assembling Systems
(9.14), (9.19)–(9.21), and (9.22); the combination 𝜒N and 𝜇N appear in Equations
(9.11), (9.15), (9.16), and (9.18). Upon rescaling of all r dependent variables by
√
Na2
C,
Equations (9.14) and (9.22) become independent of this factor. The places where they
show up are now in Equations (9.12), (9.20), and (9.21), as the combination 𝜈deﬁned in
Equation (9.2). Hence there are four parameters in this formalism: fC, 𝜒N, 𝜇N, and 𝜈.
9.2.2
The Lattice Model
9.2.2.1
Comments
The lattice model is based on the assumption that every polymer segment occupies one
lattice, the most primitive unit of the calculated system. The treatment substantially
simpliﬁes the calculation of chain conformations because the propagating probability
of segments can be conveniently determined according to the ﬁnite coordinate number
of lattices. For rod–coil diblock copolymer melts, this scheme was ﬁrst adopted by Li
and Gersappe [24] in a 2D study and then extended by An et al. [25, 48, 49] to study 3D
microphase separation. Here, we outline the main steps.
9.2.2.2
Formalism
We consider n diblock copolymers with the total polymerization degree N distributed
on NL lattice sites, where the rod block and the coil block occupy NR and NC = N −NR,
respectively. The same volume for each type of segment is assumed and thus NL = nN.
The mean-ﬁeld free energy functional per chain can readily be written as
F
nkBT = −ln Q + 1
NL
∑
r
{
1
z
∑
r′
𝜒N𝜙C(r)𝜙R(r′) −wC(r)𝜙C(r) −wR(r)𝜙R(r)
+ 𝜉(r)[𝜙C(r) + 𝜙R(r) −1]
}
.
(9.24)
The summation ∑
r′ is taken for the nearest-neighbor z sites around the site at r. The single
chain partition function is calculated from
Q =
1
zNL
∑
r
∑
u
G(r, u, s)G∗(r, u, s).
(9.25)
The distribution function G(r, u, s) denotes the probability of ﬁnding the end segment
of a polymer chain of length s at site r with an orientation u. It is calculated from [50]
G(r, u, s) = G(r, s)
∑
r′
∑
u′
𝜆u−u′
r−r′ G(r′, u′, s −1).
(9.26)
The initial condition for the end-segment distribution function reads
G(r, u, 1) = G(r, 1),
(9.27)
which is independent of the orientation of the ﬁrst segment. Owing to the nonrever-
sal symmetry of the RC diblock copolymer, a second end-segment probability function
starting from Nth segment is needed,
G∗(r, u, s) = G(r, s)
∑
r′
∑
u′
𝜆u−u′
r−r′ G∗(r′, u′, s + 1),
(9.28)

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
241
which is subject to the initial condition G∗(r, u, N) = G(r, N). In all expressions, the
function G(r, s) represents
G(r, s) =
{
exp [−wC(rs)]
1 ≤s ≤NC,
exp [−wR(rs)]
NC < s ≤N.
The chain statistics in space is manipulated by the propagating probability factor 𝜆.
For the random-walk block, it takes the form [25]
𝜆u−u′
r−r′ =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0
u = −u′,
1
z −1
otherwise,
which excludes direct back folding. For the rod block it takes the form
𝜆u−u′
r−r′ =
{
1
u = u′,
0
otherwise.
Li and Gersappe considered more complicated local chain conﬁgurations that account
for the rotational isomeric state. The 𝜆factor was taken to describe details of the trans
and gauche states, [24]
𝜆u−u′
r−r′ =
{
𝜆g
gauche-state connection between s and s −1,
1 −2𝜆g
otherwise.
The parameter 𝜆g = 1∕[2 + exp (Ug∕kBT)], where Ug determines the ﬂexibility of the
polymer chain.
Minimizing the free energy functional Equation (9.24) with respect to 𝜙C, 𝜙R, 𝜉, wC,
and wR, one arrives at a set of self-consistent equations:
wC(r) = 𝜒N
z
∑
r′
𝜙R(r′) + 𝜉(r),
(9.29)
wR(r) = 𝜒N
z
∑
r′
𝜙C(r′) + 𝜉(r),
(9.30)
𝜙C(r) + 𝜙R(r) = 1,
(9.31)
𝜙C(r) =
1
zNLQ
NC
∑
s=1
∑
u
G(r, u, s)G∗(r, u, s)
G(r, s)
,
(9.32)
𝜙R(r) =
1
zNLQ
N
∑
s=NC+1
∑
u
G(r, u, s)G∗(r, u, s)
G(r, s)
.
(9.33)
By solving these self-consistent equations for a given parameter set, a particular mor-
phology can then be established. Three parameters, fC = NC∕N, 𝜒N, and z, are present
in the theory. The lattice coordination number z is determined by the selection of the
speciﬁc lattice, hence only two system parameters exist. In comparison with the ideal
chain model described above, the models in Refs. [24, 25, 48, 49] eﬀectively take
𝜇N = 0,
and
𝜈2 = 1∕N.
(9.34)

242
Self-Assembling Systems
The orientational interaction is not considered and the asymmetry parameter takes a
speciﬁc form.
9.2.3
The Wormlike–Wormlike Diblock Model
9.2.3.1
Comments
In this section, the model for a diblock-copolymer melt consisting of semiﬂexible–
semiﬂexible polymer chains in the SCFT framework is discussed. The model was ﬁrst
introduced by Matsen [51] and Jiang and Chen [52–54] to study microphase separation
of semiﬂexible–semiﬂexible polymer melts where, in these studies, the two polymer
blocks have the same persistence lengths. Here we generalize the formalism to deal with
the current system. Such a treatment accounts for the stiﬀness disparity between indi-
vidual blocks as well as the steric excluded-volume eﬀects between rods. The model
allows us to adjust chain rigidity from ﬂexible to rodlike through specifying the ratio
between block length and persistence length, and hence can be used for the rod–coil
molecular architecture [35]. In particular, by taking appropriate limits of the persistent
lengths, the model can exactly reduce to the ideal rod–coil diblock model.
9.2.3.2
Formalism
To describe the conﬁguration of the kth wormlike–wormlike copolymer, we use the
position vector of the sth monomer, Rk(s), deﬁned for the entire chain, s = [0, L].
According to the Saito–Takahashi–Yunoki (STY) model [55], a continuum version of
the discrete Kratky and Porod model [56], the polymer chain is an inextensible thread
with a linear elastic bending energy penalty
0 = 𝜆C
2 ∫
LC
0
ds
||||
duk(s)
ds
||||
2
+ 𝜆R
2 ∫
L
LC
ds
||||
duk(s)
ds
||||
2
.
(9.35)
The tangent vector uk(s) = dRk(s)∕ds, which speciﬁes the local orientation at location
s of the kth polymer chain, is a unit vector, |uk(s)| = 1. Two separate bare persistence
lengths 𝜆C and 𝜆R need to be introduced for the coil and rodlike blocks. Here we main-
tain the more general case of aR ≠aC.
Introducing the t variable deﬁned in (9.4), here we can use the same conﬁgurational-
dependent volume fractions deﬁned in (9.6) and (9.7). The Flory–Huggins interaction
energy 1 in (9.8) remains in the same form. In the most general case we introduce
two orientational order parameter tensors, one for the rod blocks as before in (9.9) and
another for the coil blocks,
̂SC(r) ≡N
𝜌0
n
∑
k=1 ∫
fC
0
[
uk(t)uk(t) −I
3
]
𝛿[r −Rk(t)]dt,
(9.36)
̂SR(r) ≡N
𝜌0
n
∑
k=1 ∫
1
fC
[
uk(t)uk(t) −I
3
]
𝛿[r −Rk(t)]dt.
(9.37)

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
243
We generalize the Maier–Saupe energy by the form
worm
2
= −1
2𝜇RR𝜌0 ∫dr̂SR(r) ∶̂SR(r)
−𝜇RC𝜌0 ∫dr̂SR(r) ∶̂SC(r)
−1
2𝜇CC𝜌0 ∫dr̂SC(r) ∶̂SC(r),
(9.38)
where 𝜇RR, 𝜇RC, and 𝜇CC represent the magnitudes of the anisotropic interactions
between rod–rod, rod–coil, and coil–coil segments, which need to be considered if all
segments are wormlike.
We can then proceed to establishing the SCFT free energy per chain for the system,
which takes the reduced form
F
nkBT = −ln Q + 1
V ∫dr
{
𝜒N𝜙C(r)𝜙R(r)
−𝜇RRN
2
SR(r) ∶SR(r) −𝜇RCNSR(r) ∶SC(r) −𝜇CCN
2
SC(r) ∶SC(r)
−wC(r)𝜙C(r) −wR(r)𝜙R(r)
+ MR(r) ∶SR(r) + MC(r) ∶SC(r)
+ 𝜉(r)[𝜙C(r) + 𝜙R(r) −1]
}
.
(9.39)
This saddle-point approximation for F is the functional of the auxiliary ﬁelds wC(r),
wR(r), MR(r), and MC(r) that the segments experience, the mean volume fractions 𝜙C(r),
𝜙R(r) , and orientational order-parameters SR(r), SC(r) at coordinate r, and a Lagrangian
multiplier 𝜉(r) that enforces the incompressibility constraint on the system. In total, nine
functions need to be dealt with.
The single-chain partition function can be obtained from
Q =
1
4𝜋V ∫drduq(r, u, 1),
(9.40)
where q(r, u, t) represents the probability of ﬁnding the tth segment of a polymer chain
starting from the t = 0 end, which is located at a spatial position r and points in a direc-
tion u. The propagator satisﬁes the modiﬁed diﬀusion equation (MDE) [57, 58]
𝜕
𝜕t q(r, u, t) =
[NaC
2𝜆C
∇2
u −NaCu ⋅∇r −ΓC(r, u)
]
q(r, u, t)
t ∈[0, fC],
(9.41)
𝜕
𝜕t q(r, u, t) =
[NaR
2𝜆R
∇2
u −NaRu ⋅∇r −ΓR(r, u)
]
q(r, u, t)
t ∈[fC, 1],
(9.42)
subject to the initial condition q(r, u, 0) = 1.
The free energy contains four interaction parameters: 𝜒N, 𝜇RRN, 𝜇RCN, 𝜇CCN. Taking
aC = 2𝜆C as the basic unit length and using it to scale all length-dependent variables,
from Equations (9.41) and (9.42) we see that the model contains parameters N, aR∕𝜆R,
and aR∕aC. In total, seven parameters exist in a complete wormlike–wormlike diblock
copolymer theory.

244
Self-Assembling Systems
Minimization of the free energy functional in Equation (9.39) with respect to the
functions 𝜙C, 𝜙R, SC, SR, 𝜉, wC, wR, MC, and MR leads to the following self-consistent
equations:
wC(r) = 𝜒N𝜙R(r) + 𝜉(r),
(9.43)
wR(r) = 𝜒N𝜙C(r) + 𝜉(r),
(9.44)
MC(r) = 𝜇CCNSC(r) + 𝜇RCNSR(r),
(9.45)
MR(r) = 𝜇RRNSR(r) + 𝜇RCNSC(r),
(9.46)
𝜙C(r) + 𝜙R(r) = 1,
(9.47)
𝜙C(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫du ∫
fC
0
dtq(r, u, t)q∗(r, u, t),
(9.48)
𝜙R(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫du ∫
1
fC
dtq(r, u, t)q∗(r, u, t),
(9.49)
SC(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫du
[
uu −I
3
]
∫
fC
0
dtq(r, u, t)q∗(r, u, t),
(9.50)
SR(r) =
1
4𝜋Q ∫du
[
uu −I
3
]
∫
1
fC
dtq(r, u, t)q∗(r, u, t).
(9.51)
By adjusting the coupled parameter Na𝛼∕2𝜆𝛼(here 𝛼= R, C) on the individual block,
the current model enables us to investigate self-assembly of block copolymers ranging
from ideal rod–coil copolymers, that were previously modeled by rigid-rod blocks con-
nected to Gaussian blocks as discussed above [15, 16, 26], to semiﬂexible–coil copoly-
mers, that were modeled by wormlike blocks connected to Gaussian blocks [30, 33, 39,
59], to semiﬂexible–semiﬂexible copolymers [35, 51–54].
9.2.3.3
Reduction to the Rod–Coil Problem
We now examine the rod–coil problem by taking the asymptotic limit,
aR∕𝜆R = 0,
(9.52)
and remove the anisotropic interaction associated with the coil block,
𝜇RC = 𝜇CC = 0,
𝜇RR = 𝜇.
(9.53)
From the expression in Equations (9.39), (9.41), and (9.42) we can see that the system
now contains ﬁve parameters, 𝜒N, 𝜇N, fC, N, and aR∕aC, if we use aC as the basic
length unit.
Within the coil limit
N ≫1,
(9.54)

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
245
in Ref. [54] we demonstrated that Equation (9.41) is equivalent to Equation (9.14), pro-
vided that q(r,t) in that equation is understood as the reduced ∫duq(r, u, t). Following
the same procedure as in Section 9.2.1, and using
√
Na2
C as the scaling unit for all r vari-
ables instead of using aC, we can then show that the only place where this factor appears
is the prefactor of the u ⋅∇r term, as the combination
√
NaR∕aC. Hence, we completely
return to the four-parameter model, 𝜒N, 𝜇N, fC, 𝜈, used in Section 9.2.1.
9.2.4
Numerical Algorithms
9.2.4.1
Comments
All SCFT models presented in this chapter require self-consistent determination of
functional sets, and this is usually achieved by designing a numerical algorithm. The
most challenging task is to numerically solve the partial diﬀerential equations, such as
those in Equations (9.14) or (9.41). After obtaining the propagator of polymer chains
from solving these equations, we can readily calculate the free energy arising from the
saddle-point approximation. Through a comparison of the free energies of diﬀerent
structures, the most stable structure is then determined.
For polymer models described by the Gaussian chain, many mature numerical
schemes are available in the literature to solve MDEs, made possible by recent progress
in studying the properties of block copolymers [14]. In contrast, designing an eﬃ-
cient numerical algorithm for solving the problem of rod–coil block copolymers
is more diﬃcult, because the simultaneous treatment of both r and u requires the
use of three spatial variables and two angular variables, which is computationally
much more involved. The full-space computation requires suﬃcient resolution in
six-dimensional coordinates, including three Cartesian spatial variables, x, y, and z,
generally represented by r, two angular variables, 𝜃and 𝜙, generally represented by u,
and one time-like variable t. Here we review a number of numerical algorithms used to
solve a typical MDE such as Equations (9.14) or (9.41); they are classiﬁed roughly into
categories according to numerical methodologies.
9.2.4.2
Lattice Sampling
As an alternative strategy to consideration of the full orientational conﬁgurations, one
can resort to the sampling technique that is based on a discrete polymer chain model.
A representative method is the lattice model used by Li and Gersappe [24] and by Chen
et al. [25]. The propagation of the end-segment statistics is calculated based on several
ﬁxed lattice directions. According to the diﬀerent chain models simulating the individ-
ual blocks, the propagator in the external ﬁelds can be conveniently computed by the
transfer matrix method based on step-weighted walks [50]. This can be done with or
without incorporating the rotational isomeric states. The method is questionable when
an accurate computation of the free energy for a directionally ordered state is required.
9.2.4.3
Spectral Method
In order to avoid the mathematical complexity of calculating (9.41) analytically, Müller
and Schick [15] adopted a “single-chain in the mean-ﬁeld” approach to numerically eval-
uate the single-chain partition function. To speed up the iterative computation of the
free energy on microstructures with a given symmetry, Müller and Schick [15] adopted

246
Self-Assembling Systems
a spectral method to deal with both compositional densities and external ﬁelds by a com-
plete set of orthonormal functions satisfying the speciﬁed symmetry. Their approach in
principle can be implemented in exploration of stability of any microstructure without
the constraint of chain architectures. The requirement of a priori determination of the
resulting structure, however, limits this method to only known microphase-separated
cases.
9.2.4.4
Pseudo-Spectral Method for GSC Propagator and Finite Diﬀerence for Rod
Probability
Pryamitsyn and Ganesan [26] employed the pseudospectral operator-splitting scheme
proposed by Rasmussen and Kalosakas [60] to solve the MDE in Equation (9.14). The
propagator is calculated step by step from
q(r, t + Δt) = e−wC(r)Δt∕2e(Na2
C∕6)Δt∇2e−wC(r)Δt∕2q(r, t) + O(Δt3),
(9.55)
where Δt is a small incremental step for the arc variable t. The method separately treats
the diﬀusive and potential contributions within a second-order accuracy in Δt. Applying
the eigen-relation between the operator ∇2 and the plane-wave function, one can con-
veniently obtain an update of function q. The method is typical of SCFT calculations for
Gaussian chain problems of other systems.
In Ref. [26], the angular dependence for the rod block is handled by a Gaussian quadra-
ture technique. In Ref. [45], Yang et al. applied a discretization approach where the ends
of all possible unit vectors u are assumed to form a unit sphere surface, which is then
discretized by a nearly uniform icosahedron triangular lattice to improve the angular
resolution of rod orientation. In a 2D study of rod–coil diblock copolymers conﬁned
between two plates, their approach demonstrated better numerical accuracy and stabil-
ity than the Gaussian quadrature approach.
Taking advantage of a pseudospectral scheme in a parallel computation environment,
Kriksin and Khalatur [27] developed an algorithm which can be implemented in
large-scale 3D SCFT calculation, using open-source packages which employ fast
Fourier transforms [61]. According to Ref. [27], the algorithm scales well up to 1024
processors and achieves more than 200-fold speedups over a single-processor calcula-
tion. The orientation-dependent calculations in Equation (9.20) and (9.21) are taken by
the method of trigonometric interpolation of integrands.
9.2.4.5
Single-Chain Mean-Field Calculation
To avoid the direct calculation of the propagator which requires the solution of
the MDE for a wormlike chain (WLC), an alternative strategy is the adoption of
single-chain computer simulation in an external potential ﬁeld [62]. In this technique,
a large ensemble of noninteracting molecules subjected to the self-consistent ﬁelds
is investigated by particle-based simulations such as the Monte Carlo method. Using
this technique, Ganesan and coworkers [39, 63] obtained theoretical predictions
comparable to experimental observations in exploration of the phase diagram of
wormlike diblock copolymers in two dimensions. This method can be very eﬃcient in
low-dimensional space.

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
247
9.2.4.6
Finite Diﬀerence Method for a WLC Problem
The most naive numerical treatment of a wormlike MDE is discretizing both positional
and orientational dependencies of the propagator. This can be performed in low dimen-
sions where the number of independent variables is reduced. In real space, the depen-
dence on a particular variable is divided into a ﬁnite number of representative nodes.
This technique can be traced back to those used in earlier studies of the isotropic nematic
interface of rod molecules which require one spatial variation and two orientational
variations [64, 65]. Instead of dividing the polar and azimuthal angles, Song et al. [30]
employed a ﬁnite volume algorithm where a unit spherical surface is discretized with an
icosahedron triangular mesh for the treatment of the u dependence. Resorting to graph-
ics processing unit (GPU) technology, Gao et al. [31] further extended this real-space
scheme to study a problem with 2D spatial variation.
9.2.4.7
Combined Finite Diﬀerence and Spherical Harmonics Expansion
The fact that the spherical harmonics are the eigenfunctions of the operator ∇2
u enables
expansion of the propagator in terms of spherical harmonics. Writing
q(r, u, t) =
∑
l, m
qj, l, m(r, t)Y m
l (u),
(9.56)
one can then treat the r dependence by a ﬁnite diﬀerence method. This method was
adopted in earlier studies of surfaces and interfaces of semiﬂexible liquid crystal poly-
mers [66–68] and smectic structures of rod–coil block copolymers [28], all with 1D
spatial variation. The application of SPHEREPACK provides an eﬃcient spherical har-
monic analysis and synthesis transformation [69], which enabled Jiang and Chen to
calculate the liquid crystal interface formed by semiﬂexible polymers [70].
9.2.4.8
Full Spectral Method for a WLC Problem
Formally, an exact expression for the MDE of a wormlike chain, Equation (9.41), can be
written as
𝜕
𝜕t q(r, u, t) = (∇2
u + ∇r + w) q(r, u, t),
(9.57)
where the three operators appearing in the above expression are ∇2
u ≡(Na𝛼∕2𝜆𝛼)∇2
u,
∇r ≡−Na𝛼u ⋅∇r, and w ≡−Γ𝛼(r, u). Replacing Equation (9.57) by its discrete
formula,
q(r, u, t + Δt) = exp[Δt
(
∇2
u + ∇r + w)
]q(r, u, t),
(9.58)
one can obtain an accurate solution of the propagators as long as the number of bases is
adequate. Matsen [51] suggested a full spectral approach where plane waves and spheri-
cal harmonics are used to describe the r dependence and the u dependence, respectively.
With this choice of eigenfunctions, the objective function can be expanded by a suitable
spectral approximation:
q(r, u, t) =
∑
k
M−1
∑
j=0
qkj(t) exp(ik ⋅r)Y m
l (u),
(9.59)
where Y m
l (u) denotes the standard spherical harmonic functions [71]. The abbreviation
index j covers the integers l and m in a spherical harmonic. The summation in Equation

248
Self-Assembling Systems
(9.59) is truncated at M, where M = (L + 1)2 represents the total number of spherical
harmonic functions used in the expansion and L is the highest order of the truncated
associated Legendre function. A 1D study on the lamellar morphology formed by worm-
like diblocks was demonstrated in this way. This numerical scheme takes advantage of
the reality that the the plane wave/spherical harmonic bases are the eigenfunctions of
the operators ∇2
u and ∇r. However, the basis functions are not diagonalizable for the
operator w. This fact leads to an expensive cost in 3D computation [14], even if the
basis functions accounting for the speciﬁc symmetry are implemented.
9.2.4.9
Pseudospectral Method for a WLC Problem
A pseudospectral operator splitting scheme for the wormlike chain model was suggested
by Fredrickson in his book [14],
q(r, u, t + Δt) = eΔtw∕2eΔt∇r∕2eΔt∇2ueΔt∇r∕2eΔtw∕2q(r, u, t) + (Δt3),
(9.60)
after the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorﬀoperator identity is performed twice [52, 72].
One advantage of using the above is that for a small Δt, terms of order Δt2 exactly cancel
out and the error only amounts to an order of Δt3 and higher. The spherical harmon-
ics and plane waves are the eigenfunctions of the operators ∇2
u and ∇r, respectively.
Existing computation packages can be used to deal with transformations connecting the
variables u and r to the expansion coeﬃcients of spherical harmonics and Fourier func-
tions [73, 74]; the method is known to be unconditionally stable and highly accurate,
which means that fewer expansion coeﬃcients and a relatively large step length Δt can
be taken in the actual calculation. The algorithm has been employed in one [52] and two
dimensions [34] for wormlike diblock copolymers.
9.2.4.10
Pseudospectral Backward Diﬀerentiation Formula Method for a WLC
Problem
The numerical procedure introduced in the following was recently developed by Jiang
and Chen for successfully calculating microphase structures self-assembled from WLC
diblock copolymers in the full 3D space [53, 54]. In this algorithm, the propagator as
a function of six variables was treated by a hybrid numerical algorithm, composed of
three main ingredients: fast Fourier transformation to handle the spatial dependence
[75], spherical harmonic expansion to handle the orientational dependence [71], and
the backward diﬀerentiation formula (BDF) to handle the t dependence [76].
The treatment starts from the usual expansion of the propagator in terms of the spher-
ical harmonics in the real-space version. We consider
q(r, u, t) =
M−1
∑
j=0
qj(r, t) ̃Y m
l (u),
(9.61)
where the real spherical harmonics are deﬁned by
̃
Y m
l (u) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
1
√
2
[Y m
l (u) + (−1)mY −m
l
(u)]
if m > 0
Y 0
l (u)
if m = 0
1
i
√
2[Y −m
l
(u) −(−1)mY m
l (u)]
if m < 0.

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
249
Substituting the expansion in Equation (9.61) into Equation (9.41) and using the
orthonormal condition, we arrive at
𝜕
𝜕t qj(r, t) =
[
−l(l + 1)Na𝛼
2𝜆𝛼
−w𝛼(r)
]
qj(r, t) −Na𝛼
M−1
∑
j′=0
Rjj′ ⋅∇qj′(r, t)
+
M−1
∑
j′=0
Θjj′(r)qj′(r, t),
(9.62)
where two vector matrices have been deﬁned:
Rjj′ ≡1
4𝜋∫du u ̃Y m
l (u) ̃Y m′
l′ (u),
(9.63)
Θjj′(r) ≡1
4𝜋∫du M(r) ∶
(
uu −I
3
)
̃Y m
l (u) ̃Y m′
l′ (u),
(9.64)
where the index j′ abbreviates both l′ and m′. The t dependence in Equation (9.62) is
dealt with by a multistep implicit–explicit scheme. Under a third-order BDF (BDF3)
scheme, Equation (9.62) is transformed into
11
6 qj(r, t) −3qj(r, t −Δt) + 3
2qj(r, t −2Δt) −1
3qj(r, t −3Δt)
= −Δtl(l + 1)Na𝛼
2𝜆𝛼
qj(r, t) −ΔtNa𝛼
M−1
∑
j′=0
Rjj′ ⋅∇qj′(r, t) −Δt
M−1
∑
j′=0
(w𝛼(r)𝛿jj′ −Θjj′(r))
×[3qj′(r, t −Δt) −3qj′(r, t −2Δt) + qj′(r, t −3Δt)] + O(Δt4),
(9.65)
where Δt is the step size taken in the computation for t. The method depends on multiple
time steps for the calculation of the propagator at the current t. Initially, Euler’s method
and Richardson extrapolation [77] are used to produce the function in the ﬁrst few time
steps.
The r dependence in the above equation is then treated by a spectral collocation
method which uses the plane wave basis. Denoting ̂as the standard Fourier transfor-
mation which manipulates a function from its r-space to k-space representations, we
can simplify Equation (9.65) by
M−1
∑
j′=0
Gjj′(k)qj′(k, t) = Pj(k, t −Δt, t −2Δt, t −3Δt),
(9.66)
where
Gjj′(k) = 11
6 𝛿jj′ −Δt
(
−Na𝛼
2𝜆𝛼
l(l + 1)𝛿jj′ −Na𝛼Rjj′ ⋅(ik)
)
and
Pj(k, t −Δt, t −2Δt, t −3Δt) = ̂[3qj(r, t −Δt)−3
2qj(r, t −2Δt) + 1
3qj(r, t −3Δt)
−Δt
M−1
∑
j′=0
(w𝛼(r)𝛿jj′ −Θjj′(r))(3qj′(r, t −Δt)
−3qj′(r, t −2Δt) + qj′(r, t −3Δt))].

250
Self-Assembling Systems
One important advantage of this formalism is that the matrix element Gjj′(k) is inde-
pendent of t and the iterative ﬁeld w𝛼(r); we only need to calculate the inversion matrix
G(k) once, in the initial setup of the computation. Finally, the k-space propagator can
be calculated from
qj(k, t) =
M−1
∑
j′=0
G−1
jj′ (k)Pj′(k, t −Δt, t −2Δt, t −3Δt).
(9.67)
Eventually, an inverse Fourier transformation yields the real-space propagator qj(r, t).
The total cost to propagate a solution forward from the initial condition to the end
of the chain using N steps is estimated to be O(NKM) [53, 54], which can be con-
trasted with the computational cost O(NKM3∕2log2M) estimated for the pseudospectral
operator-splitting scheme outlined above [14]. The current numerical algorithm has a
clear advantage. The fact that BDF3 has a truncation error of order Δt4 also enables a
larger step size in t.
9.3
Concluding Remarks
Despite recent eﬀorts in calculating the phase diagram for the problem of rod–coil poly-
mer melts, the calculation of the entire phase diagram is far from complete for a couple
of reasons.
First, a typical formalism involves spatial inhomogeneity coupled with orientational
ordering of polymer segments. The coupling requires speciﬁcation of both spatial
and orientational variables mathematically, and hence creates the computational
challenge of handling multidimensional variables; this can be contrasted with SCFT
for ﬂexible–ﬂexible block copolymer melts which normally involves spatial variation
only. The SCFT formalism for semiﬂexible–semiﬂexible diblock copolymer melts is
now generally possible by incorporating the wormlike chain model. With appropriate
identiﬁcation of the persistence lengths, the formalism can be used to study rod–coil
systems. An algorithm that exploits a simple parallel computational environment is
now possible to tackle a problem that consists of both positional and orientational
dependencies [53, 54].
Second, there are a number of essential physical parameters in the system, yielding
a multidimensional parameter space. In the above, we demonstrated that a complete
model contains four parameters for a rod–coil melt: 𝜒N, f , 𝜈, and 𝜇N. Investigating
the complete phase behavior in the entire 𝜒N –f –𝜈–𝜇space is a daunting task and
previous eﬀorts (such as those listed in Table 9.1) usually focus on a speciﬁc area of this
four-dimensional parameter space [16, 22, 25–27, 34, 35]. A complete description of
the phase diagram for the isotropic phases where 𝜇N = 0 requires the consideration of
the three-parameter 𝜒N –f –𝜈subspace; such a calculation has just become available
recently [40]. Given the fact that liquid crystal phases exist for a nonzero 𝜇N system
[16, 26], completion of the calculation for the phase diagram based on the full
𝜒N –f –𝜈–𝜇space becomes a desirable future task.

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
251
References
1. K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chemistry of Materials 16, 4533 (2004).
2. S. Günes, H. Neugebauer, and N. S. Sariciftci, Chemical Reviews 107, 1324 (2007).
3. R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer, and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules 42,
9205 (2009).
4. B. D. Olsen and R. A. Segalman, Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports
62,37 (2008).
5. J. T. Chen, E. L. Thomas, C. K. Ober, and G.-p. Mao, Science 273, 343 (1996).
6. J. T. Chen, E. L. Thomas, C. K. Ober, and S. S. Hwang, Macromolecules 28, 1688
(1995).
7. S. A. Jenekhe and X. L. Chen, Science 283, 372 (1999).
8. J.-H. Ryu, N.-K. Oh, W.-C. Zin, and M. Lee, Journal of the American Chemical Soci-
ety 126 ,3551 (2004).
9. Y. B. Lim, K. S. Moon, and M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. 18, 2909 (2008).
10. F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer, and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chemical
Reviews 105, 1491 (2005).
11. L.-Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, X.-H. Fan, and Z. Shen, Macromolecules 46, 5308 (2013).
12. M. W. Matsen and F. S. Bates, Macromolecules 29, 1091 (1996).
13. F. S. Bates, M. A. Hillmyer, T. P. Lodge, C. M. Bates, K. T. Delaney, and G. H.
Fredrickson, Science 336, 434 (2012).
14. G. H. Fredrickson, The Equilibrium Theory of Inhomogeneous Polymers (Clarendon,
Oxford, 2006).
15. M. Müller and M. Schick, Macromolecules 29, 8900 (1996).
16. M. W. Matsen and C. Barrett, The Journal of Chemical Physics 109, 4108 (1998).
17. M. Shah, V. Pryamitsyn, and V. Ganesan, Macromolecules 41, 218 (2008).
18. A. N. Semenov and S. V. Vasilenko, Sov. Phys. JETP 63, 70 (1986).
19. A. N. Semenov, Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals 209, 191 (1991).
20. D. R. M. Williams and G. H. Fredrickson, Macromolecules 25, 3561 (1992).
21. R. Holyst and M. Schick, The Journal of Chemical Physics 96, 730 (1992).
22. M. Reenders and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules 35, 3266 (2002).
23. C. Singh, M. Goulian, A. J. Liu, and G. H. Fredrickson, Macromolecules 27, 2974
(1994).
24. W. Li and D. Gersappe, Macromolecules 34, 6783 (2001).
25. J.-Z. Chen, C.-X. Zhang, Z.-Y. Sun, Y.-S. Zheng, and L.-J. An, The Journal of Chemi-
cal Physics 124,104907 (2006).
26. V. Pryamitsyn and V. Ganesan, The Journal of Chemical Physics 120, 5824 (2004).
27. Y. A. Kriksin and P. G. Khalatur, Macromolecular Theory and Simulations 21, 382
(2012).
28. D. Düchs and D. E. Sullivan, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 14, 12189 (2002).
29. R. C. Hidalgo, D. E. Sullivan, and J. Z. Y. Chen, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 19, 376107 (2007).
30. W. Song, P. Tang, H. Zhang, Y. Yang, and A.-C. Shi, Macromolecules 42, 6300
(2009).
31. J. Gao, W. Song, P. Tang, and Y. Yang, Soft Matter 7, 5208 (2011).
32. M. Shah and V. Ganesan, The Journal of Chemical Physics 130, 054904 (2009).
33. W. Song, P. Tang, F. Qiu, Y. Yang, and A.-C. Shi, Soft Matter 7, 929 (2011).

252
Self-Assembling Systems
34. J. Gao, P. Tang, and Y. Yang, Soft Matter 9, 69 (2013).
35. S. Li, Y. Jiang, and J. Z. Y. Chen, Soft Matter 10, 8932 (2014).
36. A. Halperin, Macromolecules 23, 2724 (1990).
37. M. Hamm, G. Goldbeck-Wood, A. V. Zvelindovsky, and J. G. E. M. Fraaije, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 118, 9401 (2003).
38. N. Yamazaki, M. Motoyama, M. Nonomura, and T. Ohta, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 120, 3949 (2004).
39. N. A. Kumar and V. Ganesan, The Journal of Chemical Physics 136, 101101 (2012).
40. J. Tang, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, D. Yan, and J. Z. Y. Chen, submitted (2015).
41. J. D. Vavasour and M. D. Whitmore, Macromolecules 26, 7070 (1993).
42. M. W. Matsen and F. S. Bates, Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics
35, 945 (1997).
43. W. Maier and A. Saupe, Zeitschrift Fur Naturforsch. Part a-Astrophysik Phys. Und
Phys. Chemie 14, 882 (1959).
44. P. J. Flory, in Liquid Crystal Polymers I, Advances in Polymer Science, Vol. 59,
edited by N. Plat (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1984), pp. 1–36.
45. G. Yang, P. Tang, Y. Yang, and Q. Wang, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 114,
14897 (2010).
46. L. Onsager, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 51, 627 (1949).
47. A. Y. Grosberg and D. V. Pachomov, Liquid Crystals 10, 539 (1991).
48. J.-Z. Chen, C.-X. Zhang, Z.-Y. Sun, L.-J. An, and Z. Tong, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 127, 024105 (2007).
49. J.-Z. Chen, Z.-Y. Sun, C.-X. Zhang, L.-J. An, and Z. Tong, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 128, 074904 (2008).
50. F. A. M. Leermakers and J. M. H. M. Scheutjens, The Journal of Chemical Physics
89,3264 (1988).
51. M. W. Matsen, The Journal of Chemical Physics 104, 7758 (1996).
52. Y. Jiang, W.-Y. Zhang, and J. Z. Y. Chen, Phys. Rev. E 84, 041803 (2011).
53. Y. Jiang and J. Z. Y. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 138305 (2013).
54. Y. Jiang and J. Z. Y. Chen, Phys. Rev. E 88, 042603 (2013).
55. N. Saitô, K. Takahashi, and Y. Yunoki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 22, 219 (1967).
56. O. Kratky and G. Porod, Recl. des Trav. Chim. des Pays-Bas 68, 1106 (1949).
57. K. F. Freed, Adv. Chem. Phys. 22, 1 (1972).
58. Q. Liang, J. Li, P. Zhang, and J. Z. Y. Chen, The Journal of Chemical Physics 138,
244910 (2013).
59. W. Song, P. Tang, F. Qiu, Y. Yang, and A.-C. Shi, The Journal of Physical Chemistry
B 115, 8390 (2011).
60. K. Ø. Rasmussen and G. Kalosakas, Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer
Physics 40, 1777 (2002).
61. N. Li and S. Laizet, 2DECOMPFFT: A Highly Scalable 2d Decomposition Library
and FFT Interface (Cray User Group, Edinburgh, 2010).
62. K. C. Daoulas and M. Müller, The Journal of Chemical Physics 125, 184904 (2006).
63. D. Kipp and V. Ganesan, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 118, 4425 (2014).
64. Z. Y. Chen and J. Noolandi, Phys. Rev. A 45, 2389 (1992).
65. Z. Y. Chen, Macromolecules 26, 3419 (1993).
66. S.-M. Cui, O. Akcakir, and Z. Y. Chen, Phys. Rev. E 51,4548 (1995).
67. Z. Y. Chen and S.-M. Cui, Phys. Rev. E 52, 3876 (1995).

9 Theories for Rod–Coil Polymer Melts
253
68. J. Z. Y. Chen, D. E. Sullivan, and X. Yuan, Macromolecules 40, 1187 (2007).
69. P. N. Swarztrauber, Mon. Weather Rev. 121, 3415 (1993).
70. Y. Jiang and J. Z. Y. Chen, Macromolecules 43,10668 (2010).
71. G. B. Arfken and H. J. Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists (Academic
Press, Waltham, MA, 2000), 5th edn.
72. M. W. Reinsch, Journal of Mathematical Physics 41, 2434 (2000).
73. R. A. Fisher and W. Bischel, Applied Physics Letters 23, 661 (1973).
74. R. A. Fisher and W. K. Bischel, Journal of Applied Physics 46, 4921 (1975).
75. M. Frigo and S. G. Johnson, Proc. ICASSP, 1381 (1998).
76. J. D. Lambert, The initial value problem.;In Numerical Methods for Ordinary Diﬀer-
ential Systems (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1991).
77. W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannary, Numerical Recipes
in C (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992), 2nd edn.

254
10
Theoretical and Simulation Studies of Hierarchical
Nanostructures Self-Assembled from Soft Matter Systems
Liangshun Zhang and Jiaping Lin
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Advanced Polymeric Materials, State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering,
Key Laboratory for Ultraﬁne Materials of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering,
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
10.1
Introduction
Starting from elemental building units at microscopic scales, it is a scientist’s dream to
fabricate synthetic functional materials at macroscopic scales, whose self-assembled and
responsive characteristics mimic those of living creatures. This grand dream has stimu-
lated a large number of scientiﬁc endeavors, originating from the design philosophy of
nanomaterials in supramolecular chemistry of small molecules [1], but now encompass-
ing the self-assembly of copolymers, biological molecules and colloidal particles [2–9].
In comparison with the simple patterns of molecular self-organization, complicated soft
matter systems self-assemble into well-deﬁned multiple-length-scale superstructures
without synthesizing the whole structures.
In experiments, general approaches to construct such hierarchical structures include
multilevel driving forces and multistep processes [10–12]. The approach of multilevel
forces is initiated by assembly of elemental building units into pre-assembled structural
motifs via non-covalent interactions, which act as the secondary building blocks to
generate more sophisticated architectures. In the case of the multistep process usually
emerging in block copolymer systems, the stepwise phase separation of distinct species
can be ﬁnely regulated, resulting in a structural hierarchy of self-assembled patterns.
Beneﬁting from the progresses of synthetic techniques and structural characteri-
zations, the ﬁelds of hierarchical structures from polymer systems have undergone
rapid growth. A diversity of synthetic polymers on the basis of molecular design have
been proposed to target and manipulate hierarchical nanostructures [13–16], such as
the structures-within-structures self-assembled from supramolecular polymers, the
multicompartment micelles from multicomponent copolymer solutions and the
hierarchically ordered nanocomposites from block copolymer/nanoparticle systems.
The rational design of the novel superstructures demands comprehensive under-
standing of the self-assembly behaviors of tailor-made polymers at the microscopic
level. Over the last decade, numerous advancements have been made in theoreti-
cal/computational modeling and methods to reproduce and predict the hierarchical
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
255
superstructures of complex polymeric ﬂuids. More importantly, the computer
simulations enable researchers to gain detailed thermodynamic and dynamic informa-
tion on self-assembled nanostructures, which is diﬃcult to deduce from experimental
measurements.
The purpose of this chapter is to focus on recent progress in design strategies of
structural hierarchy from the point of view of computational modeling. The simulation
approaches for the self-assembly of soft matter are brieﬂy summarized in the next
section. Then, we concentrate on the superstructures of polymer-based systems via the
multistep process of self-assembly. The multilevel approach to building the hierarchical
structures is not included. The following topics are involved: (1) hierarchical nanostruc-
tures self-assembled from block copolymer melts, (2) multicompartment aggregates
from block copolymer solutions, and (3) hierarchically ordered nanocomposites formed
by organic–inorganic systems. Finally, we conclude with a brief outlook on challenges
and perspectives.
10.2
Computational Modeling and Methods
On the basis of the magnitude of characteristic relaxation time and length, modern
computer simulation methods for polymers and other soft materials are classiﬁed into
two major categories: atomistic/molecular and coarse-grained approaches [17–19].
Although the atomistic/molecular simulations provide detailed and valuable infor-
mation about the equilibrium or non-equilibrium properties of inhomogeneous
polymeric ﬂuids, they cannot access the millisecond and micrometer scales involved
in the self-assembly due to the restriction of computational resources. A reasonable
alternative approach is coarse-grained simulations, which attempt to describe the
large-scale phenomena via lumping a small number of atoms or a group of atoms into
an eﬀective particle. The reduced freedom degree and the simpliﬁed soft interactions
in the coarse-grained model lead to signiﬁcant computational acceleration for simula-
tions of large systems, which makes possible full-scale investigations of self-assembly
phenomena. Within the framework of the statistical mechanism, there exist particle-
and ﬁeld-based coarse-grained approaches [20, 21].
10.2.1
Particle-Based Methods
Basically, there are three classic particle-based methods particularly suited to study-
ing the self-assembly behaviors of soft matter at mesoscopic levels: Monte Carlo (MC),
Brownian dynamics (BD) and dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) [17]. MC is a stochas-
tic computer simulation technique frequently used in the study of soft matter [22]. The
MC method has been widely applied in the ﬁelds of simple physical systems based on
the Metropolis algorithm. For the many-chain systems of polymers, advanced MC algo-
rithms have been developed to facilitate the sampling, which are reviewed by Binder and
Paul [23]. More signiﬁcantly, the MC method is conducted in terms of a multiscale mod-
eling framework to interpret the relationships between the molecular-level information
and the mesoscopic or macroscopic properties of simulated systems.
Coarse-grained BD is a mesoscopic method that uses an implicit solvent descrip-
tion. The loss of freedom degree is compensated by adding stochastic events [24], i.e.,

256
Self-Assembling Systems
independent white noise terms are incorporated into the motion equations of particles.
This allows one to simulate systems with large spatial and long temporal scales. In the
traditional BD method, the momentum and energy of molecular systems are not con-
served.
DPD is also a stochastic simulation technique, which was ﬁrst developed by Hooger-
brugge and Koelman and subsequently reformulated to ensure the thermal equilibrium
states [25, 26]. Similarly, the beads in the model represent whole molecules or ﬂuid
regions. Simpliﬁed pairwise dissipative and random forces are incorporated into the
motion equations. As a result, DPD simulations locally conserve momentum and guar-
antee true hydrodynamic behavior. Since DPD simulations give access to long time and
large length scales, they have been more popular for studying the self-assembly behav-
iors of soft matter.
10.2.2
Field-Based Methods
In particle-based methods, the freedom degree is the generalized coordinates associated
with the coarse-grained particles. An alternative approach to represent the particles
is on the basis of several statistical density ﬁelds. The Hamiltonian or energy of mul-
ticomponent systems is described by the functional of the density ﬁelds rather than
as functions of the coordinates. Such ideas enter into polymer physics in the form of
self-consistent (mean) ﬁeld theory (SCFT) [27], which derives from the ﬁeld-theoretic
approach of Edwards in the 1960s [28]. Recent developments in numerical methods have
accelerated applications of SCFT to studying the statistical properties of self-assembled
nanostructures of multicomponent polymers [29–31].
The standard ﬁeld-based methods are extended to describe non-equilibrium states.
The dynamic version of mean-ﬁeld theory for polymeric ﬂuids was originally proposed
by Fraaije et al. [32, 33], and is called dynamic density functional theory or dynamic
SCFT. The dynamic method shares the thermodynamic basis of static SCFT, i.e., the free
energy of polymer systems is described by the functional of the density ﬁelds in the local
equilibrium states. The kinetics of systems are assumed to obey the diﬀusion equations,
which push the systems toward states with lower energies. The driving force for the
diﬀusion is the intrinsic chemical potential obtained from a trick using hypothetical
external ﬁelds. Dynamic SCFT has successfully been applied to explore the morpho-
logical evolution and phase separation of block copolymers in the nonlinear regime
[34, 35].
10.3
Hierarchical Nanostructures of Block Copolymer Melts
Block copolymers composed of two or more chemically diﬀerent species constitute an
important class of soft materials, which are capable of spontaneously assembling into
hierarchical structures. The ﬁrst observations of such superstructures with two-length
scales were reported by ten Brinkes and co-workers using comb-shaped supramolecules
[36–39], where low-molecular-weight compounds are weakly connected to one block
of copolymers via hydrogen bonds. With the development of synthesizing methods,
it is possible to make more complicated block copolymers, which self-assemble into
novel structures involving multiple-length scales. One way is to introduce more

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
257
chemical components into the copolymers (such as ABC linear and star-like terpoly-
mers) [40–44], and another way is to add more blocks with various lengths into the
chains (such as A(BA)n and A(BC)nA′ multiblock polymers) [43, 44]. Theoretical and
computational eﬀorts have been made to achieve a fundamental understanding of the
hierarchical nanostructures of block copolymers with various molecular architectures.
In particular, we focus on three issues: (1) hierarchical structures self-assembled
from ABC terpolymers, (2) hierarchical patterns from multiblock polymers, and (3)
hierarchical structures formed by supramolecular polymers.
10.3.1
Hierarchical Structures Self-Assembled from ABC Terpolymers
Nanostructures formed by the simplest AB linear diblock copolymers involve one
characteristic length scale. Introducing chemically distinct C blocks into AB diblock
copolymers leads to ABC triblock terpolymers with linear or star-like topological
architectures, which self-assemble into abundant ordered nanophases beyond the
ordinary structures of AB diblock copolymers. The rich nanostructures provide a
platform to screen the novel superstructures involving multiple-length scales, which
are impacted by the interaction parameters between chemically distinct blocks, the
volume fractions of blocks, the topologies of chain architectures and so forth.
As the interaction parameters between the two end blocks are comparable to
or larger than those of the neighboring blocks, non-frustrated ABC linear triblock
terpolymers self-assemble into the core-shell or alternating nanostructures [45], where
the arrangement of domains coincides with the block sequence of polymers. In frus-
trated block copolymer systems, the repulsions between the two end blocks are much
weaker than those of other blocks. To balance the interface energy of incompatible
blocks and the conformational entropy of polymer chains, frustrated ABC linear
triblock terpolymers self-assemble into a large number of structures-within-structure
nanophases [46, 47], including cylinders-within-lamella, spheres-within-lamella,
cylinders-on-cylinder, spheres-on-cylinder, spheres-on-sphere and knitting pattern.
In particular, Li and co-workers utilized three-dimensional SCFT to investigate the
self-assembly behaviors of cylinder-forming ABC linear triblock terpolymers with
frustrated feature of interactions [48, 49]. The self-assembled superstructures are
composed of hexagonally arrayed cylinders in large-length scales. Each of these
structure units also contains substructures, including triple/quadruple cylinders and
single/double/triple helices (Figure 10.1a). Phase diagrams in terms of the copolymer
compositions and the interactions are constructed via comparing the free energies of
candidate phases. It is predicted that the substructures of hierarchical patterns transit
from disorder states to spheres, then to helices and ﬁnally to lamellae as the length of
the middle blocks is tuned. In addition, the geometrical properties of substructures are
also modulated through the interaction parameters between the neighboring blocks.
These theoretical predictions are generally consistent with experimental observations
[50–52].
Unlike the linear triblock terpolymers, the ends of arms are jointed together in ABC
star terpolymers. A striking feature of self-assembled structures from star-shaped
terpolymers is that the topology of polymer chains forces junctions of three arms to
be in one-dimensional lines [44]. Gemma et al. used MC simulations to explore the
self-assembly behaviors of a series of A1.0B1.0Cx star terpolymers with a wide range

258
Self-Assembling Systems
Linear Triblock Terpolymer
Triple Cylinders-on-Cylinder
Triple Helices-on-Cylinder
Star Terpolymers
Perpendicular Lamellae
-within-Lamella
Disks-within-Cylinder
Large-Length Scale
(a)
Small-Length Scale
(b)
Figure 10.1 (a) Representative hierarchical structures self-assembled from ABC linear triblock
terpolymers. Adapted with permission from Ref. [49]. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.
(b) Representative hierarchical structures self-assembled from ABC star terpolymers. Adapted with
permission from Ref. [60]. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (See insert for color
representation of the ﬁgure.).
of C arm length x from 0.2 to 25, and discovered polygonal-tiling patterns with the
three-arm junctions aligning along straight lines [53], which were ascertained by the
experiments of Matsushita’s group [54, 55]. DPD simulations reproduced the above
novel patterns, and further predicted sophisticated structures containing a mixture of
lamellae and cylinders [56]. Such structures can be regarded as hierarchical lamella
phases consisting of C layers with large repeat spacing and A/B layers with small repeat
spacing. Besides the tiling patterns, SCFT simulations systemically uncovered lamella-,
cylinder-, sphere-, gyroid- and helix-based hierarchical structures [57–60]. It was also
discovered that lamellae containing vertically oriented lamellae and cylinders contain-
ing perpendicular disks may be stable in star terpolymer systems (Figure 10.1b). The
perpendicular arrangement of large- and small-length-scale domains is not currently
observed in the self-assembled patterns of linear ABC molecules.
The computer simulations not only show the equilibrium phase behaviors of complex
polymers, but also capture the formation mechanism of sophisticated structures.
In a recent study, a dynamic extension SCFT coupling with the variable cell shape
method was developed to probe the ordering mechanism of ABC star terpolymers
from homogenous initial conﬁgurations [61]. The integrated method seeks to achieve
the stress-free states of phase-separated nanostructures. Importantly, according
to the incubation times and the rates of phase separation, three types of ordering
processes (one-step, quick–slow and stepwise mechanisms) are distinguished during

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
259
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
1st step
2nd step
Time
C
A
B
C
AB
Figure 10.2 Stepwise mechanism of
microphase separation of ABC star
terpolymers. The left panel represents the
density proﬁles of A, B and C components;
the right panel schematically illustrates the
disorder-to-order transition of ABC star
terpolymers. Adapted with permission from
Ref. [61]. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of
Chemistry.
the structural formation of ABC star-shaped terpolymers. In particular, the stepwise
mechanism corresponds to the procedure of phase separation, where one component is
ﬁrst separated from the mixed domains and the remaining mixed components are sub-
sequently segregated from each other (Figure 10.2). This type of ordering mechanism
is also found in the disorder-to-order transition of ABC linear terpolymers [62].
While the complex nanopatterns of ABC terpolymers have been thoroughly explored,
further computer simulations for such systems lie in long-range ordered hierarchical
structures and device-oriented patterns via directed self-assembly. For instance, Ross
and colleagues pointed out that ABC star terpolymers on template substrates can
produce well-aligned hierarchical nanostructures with tetragonal symmetry [63],
which oﬀer an attractive route to fabricating lithographic elements. The simulation
techniques can be applied to predict how the chemical or topographical templates
aﬀect the well-ordered nanostructures, and thereby propose promising strategies for
engineering arbitrary lattices of nanodomains.
10.3.2
Hierarchical Patterns Self-Assembled from Multiblock Copolymers
Multiblock copolymers composed of one or two long tails and many short middle blocks
provide another possibility to engineer hierarchical structures with double periodicity.
In these systems, the microphase separation between the tails and the middle blocks
leads to large-length-scale domains, and the segregation within the middle blocks gen-
erates nanodomains possessing small-length scales. The structures-within-structure
nanophases are corroborated by the experimental observations in Matsuhita’s group
[64, 65]. To understand the stable states of hierarchical structures for given multiblock
copolymers, they also developed a simple model counting the possible loop and
bridge conformations [64]. Although the predictions of the model coincide with the
experimental ﬁndings, the model ignores the contributions of interfacial tensions and
chain stretching.
Apart from the experimental and theoretical investigations, computational modeling
that provides molecular level insights has been applied to advance understanding
of the hierarchical nanostructures of Am(BA)n multiblock copolymers [66, 67],
comprising long Am tails and short (BA)n multiblocks (n is the repeating number).
Above the disorder-to-order transition, the phase separation between the long Am
tails and the short (BA)n multiblocks forms the large-length-scale lamella structures,

260
Self-Assembling Systems
Microphase
Separation 
Am(BA)n
 Lamellae-within-Lamella
Cooling 
Down
(a)
Cm(AB)nA
Perpendicular Orientation
Parallel Orientation
Lamella
(b)
Am(BC)n
A
B
C
A Block Length
Sphere
Cylinder
Lamella
Cylinder
Sphere
(c)
Self-Assembly
Cooling Down
R’(CR)nC’
Sematic and Isotropic Phase Double Sematic Phase
(d)
Lamella
Figure 10.3 (a) Hierarchical patterns of Am(BA)n linear-alternating multiblock copolymers. Adapted
with permission from Ref. [67]. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (b) Parallel and
perpendicular lamellae-within-lamella structures of ternary multiblock terpolymers. Adapted with
permission from Ref. [71]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) Lamella-, cylinder- and
sphere-based hierarchical nanostructures of Am(BC)n multiblock terpolymers. Adapted with
permission from refs. [75]. Copyrights 2010 American Chemical Society. (d) Nanostructures with liquid
crystalline phases from rod–coil multiblock copolymers. Adapted with permission from refs. [77].
Copyrights 2013 American Chemical Society.
and the segregation within the middle A and B blocks subsequently generates the
small-length-scale layers as the repulsions between the A and B species are strong
enough (Figure 10.3a). It has been demonstrated that the periodicity of nanophases
displays a local maximum as the polymers begin to form the hierarchical structures.
The phenomena are markedly diﬀerent from the monotonic behaviors of periodicity
for diblock copolymers.
Motivated by the experimental observations, the subsequent studies of the same
group focused on the hierarchical structures of multiblock terpolymers via a theo-
retical approach in the strong segregation limit and the SCFT [68–71]. Unlike the
simple counting model, the free energy of lamella-based superstructures explicitly
includes the contributions of the stretching energy of blocks, the energy of loop/bridge
conformations and the interfacial energy of incompatible blocks. The stability of
lamella, parallel and perpendicular lamellae-within-lamella structures is aﬀected by the
number of multiblocks and the Flory–Huggins interaction parameters (Figure 10.3b).
In particular, the orientation of thin layers relative to the thick layers is sensitive to

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
261
the interaction parameters between the tails and the middle blocks. The theoretically
predicted tendencies are corroborated by the results of SCFT simulations [69–71].
Besides the orientations, the number of internal layers is also regulated by the
competition between the chain entropy and the internal energy. Li and colleagues
utilized real-space SCFT to investigate the phase behaviors of A(BC)nBA multiblock
terpolymers [72], and obtained lamella-based hierarchical structures with various
numbers of internal layers. The phase diagrams are mapped via comparing the
free-energy density of candidate structures. For given ternary multiblock polymers, as
the repulsions between the tails and the middle blocks become strong, the number of
internal layers increases. These ﬁndings are further demonstrated by the subsequent
works of Li et al. [73, 74].
The above studies concentrate on the lamellae-within-lamella patterns of multiblock
polymers. As elaborated by the phase diagram of diblock copolymers, change of copoly-
mer composition is an eﬀective way to modulate the morphologies of self-assembled
nanostructures. With the help of the high accuracy and stability of numerical algo-
rithms, Wang et al. tackled the diversity and complexity of structures-within-structure
patterns self-assembled from the A(BC)n multiblock terpolymers [75]. In the param-
eter settings, the volume fractions of the B and C blocks were equal, and only the
volume fraction of the A tails was tuned. As the A tails of polymers were short, the
A-rich spheres or cylinders were embodied in the alternating B and C layers as a
matrix, as depicted in Figure 10.3c. When the A tails formed the matrix, the B and
C blocks self-assembled into concentrically cylindrical or spherical subdomains,
i.e., the cylinders-within-cylinder or the spheres-within-sphere patterns. It was also
corroborated that the orientation of substructures relative to the large-length-scale
domains could be regulated by the interfacial tensions.
Nanostructures with liquid crystalline phases from rod–coil copolymers exhibit more
advanced microscopic and macroscopic properties than the corresponding structures
formed by coil–coil copolymers. Combining the concepts of hierarchical self-assembly
with the rigid features of polymer chains opens the door to building a novel class of
superstructures simultaneously possessing double periodicity and orientation. Refer-
ring to the model of Pryamitsyn and Ganesan [76], Zhu et al. incorporated Maier–Saupe
orientation interactions into ﬁeld-theoretic simulations of polymers containing various
lengths of rod blocks [77]. Novel liquid crystalline lamellae-within-lamella structures
with double orientation (sematic-within-sematic and isotropic-within-sematic) are
achieved in rod–coil multiblock copolymer melts (Figure 10.3d). The transition
between these phases is triggered by the change of rod block length and interaction
strength. In comparison with the ﬂexible multiblock copolymers, one important
diﬀerence is that the rod–coil multiblock copolymers at small values of block num-
bers and interaction strength self-assemble into structures with multiple-length
scales.
The formation process of hierarchical nanostructures has been examined by DPD
simulations [78]. The ordering procedure of nanostructures with double periodicity
obeys the stepwise mechanism of microphase separation. Speciﬁcally, the long tails
and the multiblocks ﬁrst form ordered domains with large-length scales, and then the
multiblocks are gradually guided to self-assemble into small-length-scale structures
with tunable relative orientations. In particular, the second step of the ordering process
is very slow.

262
Self-Assembling Systems
As demonstrated in experiments [79], superstructures with multiple-length scales
from linear multiblock terpolymers signiﬁcantly enhance the mechanical properties
of polymer-based materials in comparison with the simple architectures like the
AB and ABA topologies. To elucidate the excellent mechanical properties of the
hierarchical structures, Zhu et al. combined the linear elasticity model and the SCFT
to investigate the elastic properties of A(BC)n multiblock terpolymers in the hierar-
chical lamellar states [80]. As the structures of terpolymers transit from conventional
lamellae to hierarchical lamellae, the elastic moduli of phase-separated materials
are remarkably strengthened. The increase of extension and shear moduli in the
lamellae-within-lamella states essentially originates from the contribution of internal
energy in the small-length-scale structures. On the basis of these ﬁndings, the authors
increased the number of small-length-scale layers to further raise the Young’s modulus
of multiblock terpolymer materials. These computational results provide useful guide-
lines for designing the molecular architectures of block copolymers and constructing
complex structures with hierarchical features.
Computer simulations signiﬁcantly enhance our understanding of the mechanical
properties of hierarchical nanostructures under small deformations. However, there
are many interesting problems or challenges waiting to be addressed. For example, one
long-standing problem is the origin of unique properties of hierarchical structures in
the nonlinear regime. Another important issue is that simulation results for electric,
magnetic and photonic properties seem to be relatively scarce, although the ﬁelds are
very important in the applications of hierarchical nanostructures such as quantum
dots, magnetic storage media and next-generation lithography.
10.3.3
Hierarchical Structures Self-Assembled from Supramolecular Polymers
The structural hierarchy of polymer melts was ﬁrst uncovered by ten Brinke
and
co-workers
using
comb-shaped
supramolecular
systems
[36,
37],
where
low-molecular-weight molecules are attached to a block via hydrogen bonds
(Figure 10.4a). Since the hydrogen bonds are sensitive to the temperature, the
environmental alteration triggers transitions between the conventional and hierarchi-
cal structures [36]. Due to the complexity of such systems, the related theoretical and
computational studies are very limited. To grasp the universal features of structural
hierarchy, the computer simulations focus on the simpliﬁed model of comb-shaped
supramolecular systems.
The simplest system consists of A-block-(A-graft-B) coil–comb molecules [81–84],
where the B blocks are covalently bonded with the A blocks. This model seems to
be a drastic simpliﬁcation of the comb-shaped supramolecular systems in the exper-
iments. However, it can reproduce the essential features of hierarchical patterns of
supramolecular self-assembly. In the investigation of Wang et al. [85], parallel and
perpendicular lamellae-within-lamella as well as cylinders-within-lamella patterns
were reproduced (Figure 10.4b). The segregation between the coil and comb blocks
produces the large-length-scale domains, and the comb blocks further self-organize
into the small-length-scale subdomains. Another ﬁnding is that the small-length-scale
structures remain whereas the morphologies of the large-length-scale structures are
changed by the length of tails.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
263
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10.4 (a) Structural hierarchy of comb-shaped supramolecular polymers in experiments.
Adapted with permission from Ref. [37]. Copyright 1999 Wiley-VCH. (b) Hierarchical structures
self-assembled from simpliﬁed coil–comb molecules. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [85].
Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (c) Hierarchical self-assembly of AB diblock copolymer/C
homopolymer blends via reversibly interactions. Adapted with permission from Ref. [93]. Copyright
2011 American Chemical Society.
Indeed, the A-block-(B-graft-C) coil–comb terpolymers may be more suited to
model the hierarchical self-assembly of supramolecular systems [36]. Using DPD
simulations, Huang et al. found that coil–comb terpolymers are easy to self-assemble
into multiple-length-scale superstructures [86], which are strongly dependent on the
composition of A tails, the polymerization degree and the incompatibility of diﬀerent
blocks. In particular, as the polymer chains are short, the comb blocks cannot form
highly ordered lamellae; increasing the chain length leads to the experimentally
observed structures such as spheres-within-lamella, cylinders-within-lamella and
lamellae-within-lamella.
From the model point of view, another route to comprehend supramolecular
self-assembly involves the polymer blend via a simple interaction. Linking experiment
and theory, Tang et al. modeled the hydrogen bond as a simple contact attraction,
and explored the square arrays of cylinders formed by AB/B′C copolymer blends
(attraction between the B and B′ segments) [87]. Although the study does not concern
the structural hierarchy of supramolecular assembly, it oﬀers a hint to investigating

264
Self-Assembling Systems
the hierarchical patterns of host–guest complex molecules. Park et al. used computer
simulations to explore the self-assembly mechanism of AB/BC copolymer blends
[88]. The hosts are formed by hexagonally perforated lamellae via the spontaneous
assembly of AB block copolymers in the ﬁlms. The guests are made from the spherical
morphologies of BC block copolymers. By comparing the free energy of candidate
conﬁgurations, it is demonstrated that the hierarchical structures with the sphere
position at the center of the rings are stable.
Although the above models have the ability to reproduce the complex superstruc-
tures of supramolecular assembly, they cannot explicitly treat the reversible features of
dynamic self-assembly resulted from the existence of hydrogen bonds or metal–ligand
interactions. Numerical SCFT for ﬁxed architectures was recently extended to study the
supramolecular assembly of block copolymers including dynamically bonded polymeric
mixtures and reversibly bonded polymeric networks [89–92]. Unfortunately, applica-
tions of such an extension to hierarchical self-assembly of supramolecular polymers are
extremely rare. Zhuang et al. introduced bonding reaction into the canonical SCFT to
investigate the structural hierarchy of AB diblock copolymer/C homopolymer blends
through reversible B–C supramolecular interactions [93], as depicted in Figure 10.4c.
Via raising the bonding strength, the content of bound AB-C terpolymers increases and
the concentrations of unbound AB diblock copolymers and C homopolymers decrease.
These give the opportunity to tune the hierarchical structures of supramolecular sys-
tems. The nanostructures change from tetragonal C cylinders surrounded by octagonal
A spheres, to tetragonal C cylinders surrounded by hexagonal A cylinders, then to alter-
nating hexagonal cylinders, and ﬁnally to alternating tetragonal cylinders. It is also found
that the volume fraction of bound C homopolymers plays a critical role in determining
the packing of A cylinders in the hierarchical patterns.
Most of the simulations for the hierarchical structures in the melts are restricted to
small cells containing one or two periodicities, leading to conﬁgurations with high inter-
nal stress and unrealistic dynamics of phase separations. In order to properly probe the
self-assembly behaviors of structured ﬂuids, large-cell simulations should be conducted
to reduce the internal stress eﬀects on the morphologies and the ordering kinetics.
Unfortunately, the computational intensity required by large-cell simulations is enlarged
greatly. Acceleration techniques via graphics processing units are addressing the chal-
lenges [94–96], and signiﬁcantly facilitate the development and application of new sim-
ulation methods for comprehensively grasping the fundamental principles of hierarchi-
cal self-assembly.
10.4
Hierarchical Aggregates of Block Copolymer Solutions
In solutions of polymers with multiblocks or multicomponents, the phase separation
between the polymers and the solvent molecules generates the large-length-scale
structures such as spheres, cylinders and platelets. These structures provide soft
conﬁnement environments to program the small-length-scale substructures of blocks
or solvent molecules. In the cases of (semi-)dilute solutions, aggregates with structural
hierarchy are termed multicompartment micelles, which have been widely investigated
in the experimental community [13, 14, 97–99]. Various self-assembly strategies
are applied to prepare the multicompartment nanostructures, including AB block

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
265
copolymers, ABC triblock terpolymers and copolymer blends. Meanwhile, theory
and computational modeling for polymer melts have been extended to reproduce the
observed morphologies and predict the novel sophisticated nanostructures of polymers
in solutions. These studies include hierarchical aggregates from AB block copolymer
solutions, multicompartment nanostructures from ABC triblock terpolymer solution,
and multicompartment nanostructures from amphiphilic block copolymer blends.
10.4.1
Hierarchical Aggregates Self-Assembled from Block Copolymer Solutions
For block copolymers in poor solvent, macrophase separation between the polymers
and the solvent molecules leads to large-length-scale aggregates, and microphase
separation of block copolymers inside the aggregates determines the morphologies of
subdomains under soft-conﬁnement environments. Using dynamic SCFT simulations
of discrete Gaussian chains, Sevink et al. placed the block copolymers into droplets,
and investigated the morphologies of self-assembled nanostructures [100–102]. A rich
variety of nanostructures with complex internal subdomains appeared in the droplets,
including concentric lamellae, stacked lamellae, perforated lamellae, interconnected
cylinders and spheres, as illustrated in Figure 10.5a. These hierarchical structures are
related to the copolymer composition, the droplet radius, the segregation strength of
the block copolymers, and the solvent properties. In particular, the formation process of
multilayer superstructures from the small aggregates follows the sphere–rod–platelet
pathway, and further experiences the bend step of platelets from the outside to
the inside. Chi et al. used the simulated annealing MC technique to systematically
explore the morphologies of block copolymers under the soft conﬁnements realized
by a poor solvent [103]. The similar internal morphologies of subdomains in the
droplets were conﬁrmed. As cylinder-forming block copolymers were placed inside
the droplets, stacked toroids and helices were predicted. Moreover, the shape of the
structured droplets became non-spherical due to the existence of anisotropic internal
substructures.
The block copolymer/poor solvent mixtures generally aggregate into compact
internal structures with low solvent content, which are diﬃcult to use in the ﬁeld of
nanomedicine. The vesicles formed by amphiphilic block copolymers are the simplest
multicompartment nanostructures, with hollow, solvent-ﬁlled interiors and solvopho-
bic walls. Besides the simple vesicles, several classes of multicompartment vesicles were
also prepared by the self-assembly of diblock copolymer/good solvent mixtures. On the
basis of the new mechanism of vesicle formation from amphiphilic block copolymers
[104], He et al. exploited computational modeling to devise a prenucleation strategy
for control over the size and shape of vesicles with internal multicompartments [105,
106], as shown in Figure 10.5b. As the number density of nucleation seeds decreases,
the unilamellar vesicles change to vesicles with multicompartments arranged in a
rosette-like fashion. Furthermore, the variation of solvent properties triggers the
morphological transition from multicompartment vesicles to multilamellar vesicles.
With further optimization of the parameter settings of block copolymer/good solvent
systems, complex cage aggregates are formed through the mechanism of anisotropic
micellar growth [106].
Although the prenucleation strategy can prepare metastable or stable hierarchical
structures, the experimental implementation of such kinetic control is extraordi-
narily diﬃcult. More simple and economic approaches on the basis of molecular

266
Self-Assembling Systems
(c)
(a)
(b)
(d)
Prenucleation
Strategy
Internal
Subdomains
Amphiphilic Graft Copolymers
Diblock Copolymer Stars
Periodic Superstructures
Hierarchical Vesicles
Figure 10.5 (a) Self-assembled structures of block copolymers in poor solvent. Adapted with
permission from Ref. [100]. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. (b) Prenucleation strategy to
achieve hierarchical vesicles formed by amphiphilic diblock copolymers. Adapted with permission
from Ref. [105]. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (c) Hierarchical vesicles self-assembled
from graft copolymers in backbone-selective solvent. Adapted with permission from Ref. [107].
Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Periodic ordered structures hierarchically
self-assembled from diblock copolymer stars. Adapted with permission from Ref. [108]. Copyright
2007 American Physical Society.
design are required to prepare hierarchical vesicles. Employing SCFT and DPD
simulations, Wang et al. demonstrated that the self-assembly of graft copolymers in
backbone-selective solvent opens a route to spontaneous assembly into hierarchical
aggregates such as multilamellar vesicles and multicompartment vesicles [107], as
depicted in Figure 10.5c. Examining the excess grand potential of hierarchical vesicles
suggests that the nanocontainers are thermodynamically stable due to the topological
features of amphiphilic graft copolymers. Moreover, the DPD simulations reveal that
the formation of hierarchical vesicles obeys the stepwise mechanism. Speciﬁcally, the
ﬁrst stage of hierarchical self-assembly is the formation of unilamellar vesicles via
the standard pathway, and the second stage is the coalescence of unilamellar vesicles,
leading to the production of multicompartment or multilamellar vesicles.
Star polymers are another molecular topology to hierarchically self-assemble into
intermediate soft-patchy particles and stabilized periodic structures in solutions.
Capone et al. theoretically devised a type of diblock copolymer stars [108, 109] where
the solvophilic A blocks are jointed at the center of stars and followed by solvo-
phobic B blocks. In the ﬁrst stage of hierarchical self-assembly, the macromolecules
spontaneously assemble into soft-patchy particles, where the number of patches is
inﬂuenced by the number of arms and the composition of the stars. Unlike hard-patchy
colloids, the patches formed by the copolymer stars can recombine and rearrange in the

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
267
second stage of hierarchical self-assembly. In particular, diamond and cubically arrayed
structures are produced over a wide range of polymer concentrations (Figure 10.5d).
Additionally, wormlike super-micelles are generated by the hierarchical self-assembly
of copolymer stars via intermediate pearl-necklace micelles [110].
10.4.2
Multicompartment Aggregates Self-Assembled from Triblock Terpolymer
Solutions
AB diblock copolymers in selective solvent self-assemble into limited morphologies
of nanostructures such as spheres and rods, where the space is divided into two
subdomains (inside and outside). Polymers with three or more types of species
provide the feasibility for constructing microphase-separated subdomains inside the
large aggregates, leading to the formation of multicompartment micelles. To build
multi-length-scale aggregates, researchers have expanded on the strategies of ABC tri-
block terpolymers with various molecular architectures such as linear and star-shaped
topologies of polymers [111–115], which strongly depend on the compatibility of
diﬀerent blocks, the solvent properties, the block sequence and the spatial restriction
imparted by the chain architectures.
The resulting morphologies of ABC linear triblock terpolymers are related to the
relative lengths of the three blocks and the strength of the interfacial energies. Jiang et al.
utilized DPD simulations to investigate the morphological transition of self-assembled
structures formed by ABC linear terpolymers in an A-selective solvent [116]. It is
assumed that the terpolymers with solvated A blocks self-assemble into concentric
core-shell–corona structures with only two solvophobic compartments, where the B
blocks enwrap all the C-rich inner domains (Figure 10.6a). As the B blocks become
short, the concentric structures change to raspberry-like aggregates, where the bumps
formed by the B blocks are separated by C blocks. When the solvent properties are
tuned, the C blocks come out from the inner cores and aggregate into C bumps around
the B surfaces to reduce the interfacial energy.
The solvophilic-block sequence in linear terpolymers plays a crucial role in
determining the placement of solvophobic cores and the self-assembled morpholo-
gies. In the solvophilic–solvophobic–solvophobic sequence of ABC terpolymers,
the
self-assembled
nanostructures
are
composed
of
solvophilic
coronae
and
microphase-separated solvophobic cores with common interfaces between the distinct
domains. In the solvophobic–solvophilic–solvophobic sequence, the solvophobic
cores are partitioned by the solvophilic shells, i.e., the inner solvophobic domains have
no common interfaces with the distinct solvophobic subdomains. The complicated
aggregates are named multicore micelles. Wang et al. employed three-dimensional
SCFT to investigate the multicore aggregates from ABC linear triblock terpolymers in
a B-selective solvent [117]. A variety of micelles with disk, sphere and helix cores were
observed (Figure 10.6b). The formation range of such multicore micelles is related to
the composition of the triblock terpolymers and the interaction parameters between
the middle blocks and the solvent molecules. In particular, cores with double-stranded
helix features were identiﬁed in the systems, and were only stable at the intermediate
solubility of solvophilic blocks.
The self-assembly of ABC star terpolymers provides another versatile and powerful
route toward preparing nanostructures with hierarchical features. One distinct feature

268
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10.6 (a) Multicompartment micelles from ABC linear triblock terpolymers in A-selective
solvent. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [116]. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b)
Multicore micelles self-assembled from ABC linear triblock terpolymers in B-selective solvent. Adapted
with permission from Ref. [117]. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Self-assembled
nanostructures of ABC star terpolymers in A-selective solvent. Adapted with permission from Ref.
[121]. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.
of the star-shaped architectures is that the diﬀerent arms are linked at the junction
points, thereby constraining the various subdomains to meet along a common curve
space [44]. The topological requirement eﬀectively suppresses the formation of concen-
tric core-shell–corona structures, leading to the production of complex multicompart-
ment aggregates.
Zhulina and Borisov carried out a scaling analysis for the self-assembled multicom-
partment structures of ABC star terpolymers in an A-selective solvent [118]. The free
energy contribution from the topological constraints was incorporated into the total
free energy per macromolecule in a micelle, and the spherical and cylindrical micelles
with microphase-separated subdomains were considered as candidate structures. It was
proved that the morphologies of large-length-scale structures are determined by the rel-
ative lengths of the solvophilic arms, and the number of subdomains is related to the
polymer–polymer and polymer–solvent interface tensions.
DPD simulations have also been utilized to examine the multicompartment micelles
formed by ABC star terpolymers in an A-selective solvent. For example, Xia et al.
thoroughly explored the eﬀects of arm length on the morphologies of hierarchical

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
269
self-assembled nanostructures [119, 120]. As the solvophilic arms are long, the terpoly-
mers self-assemble into “hamburger” micelles with three layers of solvophobic disks.
When the volume fraction of solvophobic arms is dominant, the ABC star terpolymers
ﬁrst self-organize into the discrete “hamburger” micelles. Subsequently, the solvophobic
cores of micelles contact each other, leading to the production of wormlike micelles
with multilayers of segregated solvophobic disks. The simulation results agree well with
the predictions of the scaling theory of Zhulila and Borisov [118].
Comprehensive understanding of the thermodynamic behaviors of ABC star ter-
polymers is presented by Li and co-workers [121]. The annealing technique of MC
simulations was applied to map the generic phase diagrams in terms of the composition
of terpolymers, the solvent quality and the repulsions between the incompatibility arms.
The simulations reproduce both the morphologies and the corresponding transition
sequences observed in the experiments (Figure 10.6c). Bilayer membrane structures
with complex inner subdomains are predicted. Moreover, two basic thermodynamic
features of nanostructures were discovered: The morphologies of large-length-scale
structures are mainly governed by the volume fractions of the solvophilic arms, and the
morphologies of small-length-scale subdomains are determined by the relative lengths
of the solvophobic arms and the conﬁnement environments.
The above investigations concentrate on the structural hierarchy of ABC terpolymers
in solution. Recently, reports have been produced about the formation pathway of
multicompartment micelles. Wang et al. extended polymeric ﬁeld theory to examine
the hierarchical self-assembly behaviors of ABC star terpolymers in dilute solutions
[122]. Apart from the multicompartment micelles reported above, segmented cage-like
micelles and spotted vesicles were observed. More importantly, two diﬀerent pathways
were identiﬁed via analyzing snapshots of nanostructure formation, as depicted in
Figure 10.7. In the cases of short solvophilic arms, the formation of hierarchical struc-
tures obeys the nucleation–coalescence–growth mechanism. When the solvophilic
Time
Nucleation-Coalescence-Growth Mechanism
Nucleation-Growth Mechanism
Figure 10.7 Self-assembly mechanisms of ABC star terpolymers in selective solvent. The upper and
lower images correspond to the cases of polymers with short and long lengths of solvophilic arms,
respectively. Adapted with permission from Ref. [122]. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.

270
Self-Assembling Systems
arms become long, the formation process of self-assembled structures only contains
the nucleation and growth steps.
10.4.3
Multicompartment Aggregates Self-Assembled from Amphiphilic
Copolymer Blends
To further expand on the design strategies of inner subdomains in the superstructures,
polymer blends are a prominent pursuit for multicompartment nanostructures with
polymer/polymer subdomains in the cores or coronae. In the computer simulations,
several blending strategies emerge to achieve the structural hierarchy of multicompo-
nent systems, such as mixtures of AB and BC diblock copolymers in A- and C-selective
solvent, blends of ABC terpolymers and AB copolymers, blends of distinct ABC ter-
polymers, as well as multicomponent rigid homopolymer/rod–coil diblock copolymer
systems in selective solvent.
10.4.3.1
Mixtures of Diblock Copolymers
The simplest example of polymer blend is the co-assembly of AB and BC diblock
copolymer mixtures in an A- and C-selective solvent. The solvophobic B blocks
produce homogenous B cores stabilized by solvophilic A/C coronae, and the incompat-
ibility between the A and C blocks drives the de-mixing of the coronae to form patchy
and Janus subdomains, depending on the repulsions between the A and C blocks.
As shown in Figure 10.8a, Srinivas and Pitera used the coarse-grained molecular
dynamics approach to simulate the binary mixtures of two diﬀerent copolymers with
common solvophobic blocks (B) but incompatible solvophilic blocks (A and C) [123].
The patches formed by the C blocks are distributed at the surfaces of the B-rich cores.
The number and size of the patches are dependent on the copolymer composition as
well as the surface tension between the B and C blocks. Altering the chemical properties
of copolymers allows the transition between spherical and cylindrical patchy micelles.
Zhu and co-workers applied the MC simulations to screen Janus-like aggregates from
AB/BC amphiphilic block copolymers [124]. Lots of control parameters were examined
and a generic phase diagram was mapped, including Janus-like cylinders, lamellae
and rings. In particular, the formation of Janus-like aggregates is sensitive to the
repulsions between the A and C solvophilic blocks. As the repulsions are increased,
the morphological transition follows the sequence of mixed micelles↔Janus micelles↔
mixture of pure micelles.
10.4.3.2
Blends of Terpolymers and Copolymers
The blending of ABC terpolymers with AB linear diblock copolymers in solutions is also
a promising approach to tune the hierarchical nanostructures. For instance, Ma et al.
implemented SCFT simulations to study the eﬀects of mixture ratio on the morpholo-
gies of ABC star terpolymers in an A-selective solvent [125]. It was found that the length
of segmented wormlike micelles becomes short as the diblock copolymers are incorpo-
rated into the systems (Figure 10.8b). The phenomena observed in the SCFT simula-
tions are demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings [112, 113]. Moreover, the diblock
copolymers are distributed at the outer part of the aggregates. Zhu et al. applied the
MC method to study the hierarchical aggregates of ABC linear triblock terpolymer/AB
diblock copolymer mixtures in solutions [126]. The pure ABC linear terpolymers are

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
271
Or
Bundle 
Bead 
Helix
A
B
C
+
C Arm Length
Star
Rod-coil block copolymer
Rigid homopolymer
Linear
Different Blending Ratio
AB
CB
AB
CB
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Copolymer + Copolymer
Terpolymer + Copolymer
Copolymer + Homopolymer
Terpolymer + Terpolymer
Figure 10.8 (a) Co-assembly behaviors of AB and BC block copolymer blends in A- and C-selective
solvent. Adapted with permission from Ref. [123]. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b)
Aggregate morphologies of ABC star terpolymer/AB diblock copolymer mixtures in dilute solutions.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [125]. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (c) Novel
multicompartment micelles self-assembled from blends of ABC linear triblock terpolymers and ABC
star terpolymers. Adapted with permission from Ref. [127]. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.
(D) Novel hierarchical nanostructures from cooperative self-assembly of rigid homopolymer/rod–coil
diblock copolymer mixtures. Adapted with permission from Ref. [130]. Copyright 2015 Nature
Publishing Group.
assumed to produce core-shell–corona structures. Incorporating diblock copolymers
into the solutions leads to the formation of segmented and double-helix multicompart-
ment micelles, which are aﬀected by the solvent quantity, the incompatibility of the
diﬀerent blocks and the mixture ratio. It was also demonstrated that the shape of the
structured aggregates is also inﬂuenced by these factors.
10.4.3.3
Blends of Distinct Terpolymers
Blends of two unlike terpolymers respectively forming various aggregates require mod-
ulations of self-assembled structures, which results in novel hierarchical morphologies.
For example, pure star-shaped and linear terpolymers self-assemble into “hamburger”
and toroid micelles, respectively. Mixtures of terpolymers produce new multicompart-
ment micelles with cogwheel-like cores [127, 128], as displayed in Figure 10.8c. The
evolution behaviors of the novel hierarchical structures were also studied via preparing
diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations. The snapshots demonstrate that the initial states only
inﬂuence the formation pathway of self-assembled micelles, but the ﬁnal morphologies

272
Self-Assembling Systems
of the novel micelles are determined by the parameter settings of systems such as the
mixture ratio, the copolymer composition and the chain architectures.
10.4.3.4
Multicomponent Rigid Homopolymer/Rod–Coil Diblock Copolymer
Systems
The structures formed by rigid homopolymers can serve as templates to direct
the self-assembly of rod–coil block copolymers. Such directed self-assembly of
non-Gaussian polymers results in novel sophisticated aggregates. Lin’s group utilized
the coarse-grained molecular dynamics method to comprehend the hierarchical
self-assembly behaviors of rigid homopolymer/rod–coil copolymer systems [129, 130].
Mixtures with short rigid homopolymers self-organize into spheres or rods. However,
long rigid homopolymers cooperatively self-assemble into large-length-scale bundles,
and rod–coil copolymers align along the bundles to produce small-length-scale
structures such as beads and helices (Figure 10.8d), which strongly depend on the
interaction parameters, the rigidity of the polymers and the mixture ratio.
As demonstrated by the above cases, computer simulations can be utilized to
understand the general principles for constructing hierarchical self-assembled nanos-
tructures. More signiﬁcantly, the simulations assist experimental researchers in
rationally synthesizing a number of compounds, which self-assemble into hierarchical
on-target patterns. In the cases of rigid homopolymer/rod–coil block copolymer
systems [129], the molecular simulations predict the novel hierarchical structures
as well as the structural transition sequences (abacus-like structures↔superhelical
structures↔plain ﬁbers) as the interaction strength of the hydrophobic blocks are
changed. To match the simulations, peptide amphiphiles and the corresponding
homopolymers are designed in experiments. The blends can self-assemble into the
novel morphologies predicted by the simulations. As the environmental temperature is
tuned, the transition sequences of morphologies are conﬁrmed. The validation between
the experimental ﬁndings and the simulation predictions manifests the fact that with
the assistance of computer simulations, researchers accelerate the exploration of novel
nanostructures from the self-assembly of block copolymers.
We note that almost all the simulations presented above encompass certain limi-
tations. For instance, the ﬁnal morphologies of block copolymer solutions may trap
at the metastable states. In a dilute solution, ﬂuctuation eﬀects are important in
the self-assembly of block copolymers. However, the formalism of SCFT neglects
the inﬂuence of thermal ﬂuctuations. This results in the alternation of mean-ﬁeld
theoretical predictions. Recent development in ﬁeld-theoretic simulation makes it
possible to numerically sample the ﬂuctuations in a complete model and accurately
capture the thermodynamic properties [27]. Unfortunately, the progress along this line
is very slow due to implementation diﬃculties of the sampling strategies.
10.5
Hierarchically Ordered Nanocomposites
Self-Assembled from Organic–Inorganic Systems
Hierarchical control over the placement of inorganic nanoparticles greatly facilitates the
fabrication of nanodevices with enhanced functions. The ordered microphase-separated
nanostructures of organic block copolymers serve as templates to guide the assembly

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
273
of nanoparticles [131–133]. Organic–inorganic hybrid systems provide the possibility
of achieving hierarchically ordered nanocomposites via the rational design of the
molecular architectures and the geometry parameters and wetting properties of
the nanoparticles. Meanwhile, the incorporation of nanoparticle guests also acts on
the thermodynamic behaviors of block copolymer hosts [134]. Therefore, the ﬁnal
self-assembled nanostructures are elegantly determined by the balance between the
entropy and the enthalpy within the polymer/nanoparticle systems. Computational
modeling for such systems advances our understanding of the cooperative self-assembly
behaviors of nanocomposites at microscopic levels. There have been several reviews
of nanoparticle assembly in a polymer matrix [135, 136]. Here, only the signiﬁcant
advancements in the subject of hierarchically ordered nanocomposites in bulks and
solutions are brought together and highlighted.
10.5.1
Hierarchical Self-Assembly of Block Copolymer/Nanoparticle Mixtures
An experimental method to control nanoparticle arrangements at nanometer
scales is the hierarchical approach from the assembly of nanoparticles within the
microphase-separated structures of multicomponent polymers. The polymers ﬁrst
self-assemble into ordered nanostructures, and in the second step the selective
nanoparticles are located in the formed nanostructures. Besides the experimental
studies on such unique systems, computational modeling is also exploited to design
various strategies for preparing hierarchically ordered nanocomposites from the
polymer and nanoparticle blends. Furthermore, it enables researchers to understand
the formation mechanism of hybrid structures and predict novel superstructures
that are not observed in the current experiments. Recent works on these aspects are
summarized below according to the nanocomposite design strategies.
The ﬁrst method to construct hierarchically ordered nanocomposites is the blending
of bidisperse particles and block copolymers. In block polymer/monodisperse particle
systems, the particles are placed at the center or the interface of phase-separated struc-
tures, depending on the sphere radius and the wetting properties of the particles [133].
Bidisperse nanoparticles display a distinct feature of particle arrangement in the host
structures. Lee et al. modiﬁed the method [133], which combines the SCFT describing
the polymeric species and statistical mechanical density functional theory (DFT) char-
acterizing the solid particles, to predict the self-assembled structures of blending sys-
tems [137]. The block copolymers guide the particles to distribute in hexagonally arrayed
cylinders, which lead to the formation of large-length-scale structures (Figure 10.9a). In
the cylinders, the large particles are concentrated at the center, but the small particles are
placed near the edge of the domains. The inhomogeneous distribution of nanoparticles
in the polymeric cylinders results in small-length-scale structures. From decomposing
the contributions of free energy, it is found that the entropy-driven mechanism results
in hierarchical distributions of nanoparticles in microphase-separated nanostructures.
The novel hybrid structures of binary nanoparticles open enormous opportunities for
preparing three-dimensional materials. Wiesner and co-workers linked experiment and
theory to comprehend the self-assembled superstructures from the mixture of ABC
triblock terpolymers and binary particles [138–140]. The alternating gyroids of ter-
polymers oﬀer templates to register the hierarchical distributions of diﬀerent particles.

274
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
Block Copolymers
Particle Mixture
Directed Assembly
Linear-Alternating
Copolymer
Small-Length-Scale
Large-Length-Scale
Co-Assembly
Figure 10.9 (a) Hierarchically ordered structures formed by block copolymer/bidisperse nanoparticle
mixtures. Adapted with permission from Ref. [137]. Copyright 2002 American Physical Society.
(b) Hierarchical nanocomposites formed by directed co-assembly of block copolymer/nanoparticle
blends in chemical templates. Adapted with permission from Ref. [141]. Copyright 2008 American
Physical Society. (c) Lamellae-within-lamella structures obtained from linear-alternating multiblock
copolymer/nanoparticle mixtures. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [142]. Copyright 2009
American Chemical Society.
In particular, various repulsions between the particles and the blocks control the pro-
grammable arrangement of nanoparticles in the gyroids of block copolymers.
The second approach for hierarchical distributions of nanoparticles is the directed
self-assembly of block copolymers on chemically patterned substrates. MC simulations
of the coarse-grained model are extended to understand the self-assembly behaviors of
block copolymer–nanoparticle hybrid systems in the chemical templates [141]. Strong
and speciﬁc interactions between the surfaces and the blocks force the copolymers
to form well-ordered lamellae. The tailored interactions between the nanoparticles
and the blocks drive the nanoparticles to locate at the center domains of the lamellae.
As homopolymers are introduced into the hybrid systems, two arrays of particles are
accommodated in each lamella of the block copolymers (Figure 10.9b). Meanwhile, the
hierarchical distributions of particles are ﬁnely tuned through the commensurability
conditions between the dimensions of the lamellae and the periodicity of the chemical
stripes. The above design rules are also suited to hierarchically placing the nanoparticles
into device-oriented structures of block copolymers.
The third approach is inspired by the hierarchical structures of block copolymers.
When the interaction parameters are large enough, linear-alternating copolymers
self-assemble into structures-within-structure nanophases, which provide guided
templates to program nanoparticle placements. Zhang et al. applied SCFT/DFT to

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
275
investigate the cooperative self-assembly behaviors and novel superstructures of
linear-alternating copolymer/nanoparticle mixtures [142]. The nanoparticles are hier-
archically located in the lamellae-within-lamellae nanostructures of linear-alternating
copolymers (Figure 10.9c). Meanwhile, the incorporation of nanoparticles also triggers
a change of substructures due to the entropy contributions. Subsequently, the same
group replaced one block of the ABC terpolymers by the nanoparticles, termed
block copolymers tethered by nanoparticles (ABP molecules) [143]. Like the hier-
archical nanostructures of ABC terpolymers, the nanoparticles act as an element to
achieve the hybrid superstructures with hierarchical arrangements of particles. The
large-length-scale distributions of particles are generated by the microphase separation
between the A blocks and the BP blocks, and the segregation between the B blocks and
the particles further form the small-length-scale distributions. It is demonstrated that
the morphologies of superstructures are related to the composition of the molecules
and the radius of the particles.
The formation kinetic of hybrid structures in polymer/nanoparticle systems obeys the
stepwise mechanism. Sevink and co-workers developed a particle–ﬁeld hybrid method
to explore the phase separation dynamics of polymer-based nanocomposites [144]. The
dynamic extension of SCFT is used to capture the evolution of block copolymer ﬂu-
ids, and Brownian dynamics is applied to describe the motion of the nanoparticles. The
nanoparticles are assumed to be incompatible with both blocks, but to diﬀerent extents.
During the ﬁrst stage of phase separation, the nanoparticles are placed at the interfaces
of self-assembled structures. The subsequent microphase separation of block copoly-
mers guides the nanoparticles to depart the interfaces and to form clusters at the center
of the block copolymer domains.
The simulation results demonstrate that various design strategies based on poly-
mer/particle mixtures can be proposed to construct hybrid structures with hierarchical
distributions of nanoparticles, such as the blend of bidisperse particles, the directed
self-assembly of block copolymers and the hierarchical structures of multiblock copoly-
mers. These data advance our understanding of the structural formation mechanism of
nanocomposites and provide useful guidelines for experimental design. For example,
Xu’s group carried out experimental studies of the co-assembly of supramolecular block
copolymers and nanoparticles [15]. The distributions of nanoparticles in the polymer
matrix were rationalized by the simulation results of Balazs and co-workers [133].
Furthermore, computational modeling has also predicted novel hybrid superstructures
of polymer/nanoparticle mixtures via the molecular design of organic compounds
[142], which provide new opportunities for the development of functional materials.
10.5.2
Hierarchical Self-Assembly of Polymer/Nanoparticle/Solvent Systems
Nanoparticles tethered by ﬂexible polymer tails self-assemble into highly diverse, ther-
modynamically stable hierarchical superstructures in solutions. Experimentally, the
class of organic–inorganic tethered materials has attracted extensive research interest
[145, 146]. In computational modeling, Ma et al. conceived a model of solvophobic
homopolymer tails tethered by a solvophilic nanoparticle head [147]. The DPD simu-
lations show that molecules with a small diameter of solvophilic heads self-assembled
into bilayer vesicles, which are similar to those of amphiphilic block copolymers. As the
radius of the solvophilic heads becomes large, the tethered molecules self-organize into

276
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
Self-Assembly
Increase Rp
Vesicle
Patch
Chain
Cluster
Time
Hierarchical
Micelles
Rp
Figure 10.10 (a) Self-assembled structures of nanoparticles tethered by ﬂexible polymer tails in dilute
solution. Adapted with permission from Ref. [147]. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b)
Hierarchical self-assembly of diblock copolymer functionalized nanoparticles in selective solvent.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [148]. Copyright 2014 American Institute of Physics.
wormlike micelles with multicompartment features (Figure 10.10a). It is also demon-
strated that the formation mechanism of such superstructures obeys the conventional
aggregation–coalescence–growth pathway.
In comparison with the cases of grafted homopolymers, the self-assembly behaviors
of diblock copolymers tethered by nanoparticles display a distinct diﬀerence. In par-
ticular, Estridge and Jayaraman used coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations
to probe the hierarchical self-assembly of functionalized spherical nanoparticles at
low grafting density of block copolymers [148]. At the optimal design parameters, the
hybrid systems ﬁrst self-assemble into anisotropic soft particles with various numbers
of patches due to the amphiphilic characteristics of the block copolymers. To lower the
free energy, such patchy particles are further driven to form chain-like intermediate
states, and ﬁnally achieve large clusters with solvophilic coronae and solvophobic cores
(Figure 10.10b). The above self-assembly pathway of nanoparticle/block copolymer
systems is termed the stepwise “polymerization” process, which is diﬀerent from
the aggregation–coalescence–growth mechanism for nanoparticle–homopolymer
tethered molecules.
Amphiphilic block copolymers can spontaneously organize into aggregates with
controllable size and shape in a selective solvent, which serve as templates to program
nanoparticle arrangements. An SCFT-based theoretical approach was extended to
investigate the co-assembly behaviors of amphiphilic block copolymer/nanoparticle
mixtures in dilute solutions [149]. It was found that the solvophobic nanoparticles are
distributed at the cores or walls of aggregates, but the arrangements of nanoparticles are
not hierarchical. As demonstrated in experimental studies [13], triblock terpolymers
in selective solvent self-assemble into multicompartment aggregates, which could
potentially be exploited to hierarchically place nanoparticles. Therefore, one important
further study topic is that the aggregates formed by ABC triblock terpolymers are
utilized to guide the hierarchical distributions of particles.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
277
Another important further topic is new modeling and simulation methods for the
structural hierarchy of nanocomposites. Recently, hybrid particle–ﬁeld methods have
been developed to study the distributions of nanoparticles in self-assembled structures
[134, 150]. The shape and size of inorganic particles are represented by cavity func-
tions. Coupling terms are introduced to model the wetting properties of particles. In
the hybrid methods, the SCFT is used to obtain the local equilibrium states of polymeric
ﬂuids. In the spirit of Sides et al. [134], the force acting on a single particle follows the
Hellmann–Feynman theorem. The scheme is seemingly suited to spherical nanopar-
ticles, and it was modiﬁed to adapt for rod-shaped anisotropic particles [151]. In the
treatment of Hall et al. [150], the force is calculated by the gradient of the chemical
potential. The advantage of the method is that the translation and rotation of parti-
cles with various shapes are described in the uniﬁed framework of rigid motion. The
above modeling and methods may oﬀer a novel avenue to screen the hierarchical struc-
tures of nanocomposites. For instance, nanorod/nanotriangle mixtures are guided to
produce hierarchical distributions of nanoparticles in the copolymer matrix, as well as
nanorods tethered by polymer tails self-assembling into hierarchical structures with the
helix arrangement of anisotropic particles.
10.6
Conclusions and Perspectives
The hierarchical nanostructures formed by polymer-based systems provide a powerful
platform for mankind to understand and mimic nature. The rational design of hierar-
chical structures on demand is a critical step that promotes researchers to achieve high
performance nanomaterials. Computational modeling and simulations are exploited to
grasp the universal thermodynamic and dynamic principles of multiple-length-scale
superstructures self-assembled from block copolymers. The examples and design
strategies summarized in this chapter involve multicomponent polymers with complex
topologies in bulk and solution, as well as hybrid nanocomposites. In principle, the
phase separation of unlike molecules leads to the emergence of large-length-scale
structures, which guide the production of small-length-scale subdomains from the
microphase separation of incompatible components. The formation mechanism of
structural hierarchy generally obeys the stepwise pathway of phase separation.
While the reported results are encouraging, there remain lots of challenges and
opportunities for further understanding the hierarchical self-assembly of complicated
molecules and rationally designing the structural hierarchy formed by soft matter.
10.6.1
New Theoretical Insights
The hierarchical nanostructures of block copolymers may be formed via various
dynamic pathways of self-assembly, including non-hierarchical and hierarchical
assembly procedures. These pathways involve intermediates with counterparts on the
equilibrium structures (for example, lamellae-with-lamella structures via multistep
phase separation) or intermediates with no such counterparts (for instance, cage
aggregates via the nucleation–growth process). Classical theories on the basis of
near-equilibrium assumptions are not suﬃcient to physically explain the self-assembly
phenomena of such complex systems. New theoretical insights are required to further

278
Self-Assembling Systems
understand the self-assembly mechanisms and ﬁnely control the hierarchical structures
of soft matter. For example, the far-from-equilibrium theoretical framework is proving
important, and it is likely to connect naturally with the hierarchical self-assembly of
biological systems [152].
10.6.2
Horizontal Multiscale Modeling
To build realistic models for hierarchical nanostructures, the mesoscopic information
for the structural hierarchy and certain nanoscale features (such as hydrogen bonds,
metal–ligand interactions and host–guest interactions) should be retained. Currently,
the most available methodology is hierarchical multiscale modeling, where simulations
at the lower level pass information to higher-level simulations (“vertical” multiscale
modeling). The scheme strongly depends on systematic coarse-graining and mapping.
Another alternative route is “horizontal” multiscale modeling, where ﬁne-grained
details are incorporated into the existing methods from diﬀerent spatial levels [153].
The integrated approach is especially appropriate for hierarchical self-assembly
involving multilevel driving forces.
10.6.3
Inverse Design Strategy
As the self-assembly systems become more complex, the computer simulations face
greater challenges in screening the hierarchical structures via a “forward” strategy (from
primary building elements to superstructures). An alternative and more promising strat-
egy is to begin with the superstructures and then to determine the composition, inter-
action parameters and sequences of polymers via “inverse” optimization methods [154].
This design philosophy was recently implemented to develop guided templates for reg-
istering device-oriented structures of block copolymers [155, 156]. Incorporating the
inverse design strategy into existing simulation methods will signiﬁcantly accelerate the
construction of hierarchical nanostructures.
10.6.4
Element–Structure–Property Relationships
A critical challenge is the relationships between hierarchical nanostructures and
their macroscopic properties. Although the enhanced mechanical properties of
multiple-length-scale structures were conﬁrmed by computer simulations [80],
relatively few studies focused on the relationships between the self-assembled
superstructures and other excellent properties, such as switchable optical property
and protonic conductivity. An integrated method, which combines the mesoscopic
approach for determining the morphologies and existing theories (Maxwell’s or
drift–diﬀusion equations) for predicting the collective properties, may provide an
eﬀective route to realize the accurate prediction of element–structure–property
relationships for novel materials.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51203049,
21574040, 21234002). Support from the 111 project (B14018) is also appreciated.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
279
References
1. Lehn, J.-M. (1993) Supramolecular chemistry. Science, 260, 1762–1763.
2. Qiu, H., Hudson, Z. M., Winnik, M. A., Manners, I. (2015) Multidimensional hier-
archical self-assembly of amphiphilic cylindrical block comicelles. Science, 347,
1329–1332.
3. Liu, K., Nie, Z., Zhao, N., Li, W., Rubinstein, M., Kumacheva, E. (2010)
Step-growth polymerization of inorganic nanoparticles. Science, 329, 197–200.
4. Douglas, S. M., Dietz, H., Liedl, T., Högberg, B., Graf, F., Shih, W. M. (2009)
Self-assembly of DNA into nanoscale three-dimensional shapes. Nature, 459,
414–418.
5. Ke, Y., Ong, L. L., Shih, W. M., Yin, P. (2012) Three-dimensional structures
self-assembled from DNA bricks. Science, 338, 1177–1183.
6. Chen, Q., Bae, S. C., Granick, S. (2011) Directed self-assembly of a colloidal
kagome lattice. Nature, 469, 381–384.
7. Chen, Q., Whitmer, J. K., Jiang, S., Bae, S. C., Luijten, E., Granick, S. (2011) Supra-
colloidal reaction kinetics of Janus spheres. Science, 331,199–202.
8. Glotzer, S. C., Solomon, M. J. (2007) Anisotropy of building blocks and their
assembly into complex structures. Nature Mater., 6, 557–562.
9. Damasceno, P. F., Engel, M., Glotzer, S. C. (2012) Predictive self-assembly of poly-
hedra into complex structures. Science, 337, 453–457.
10. Yang, Y., Wang, C. (2009) Hierarchical construction of self-assembled
low-dimensional molecular architectures observed by using scanning tunneling
microscopy. Chem. Soc. Rev., 38, 2576–2589.
11. Wang, A., Huang, J., Yan, Y. (2014) Hierarchical molecular self-assemblies: con-
struction and advantages. Soft Matter, 10, 3362–3373.
12. Whitelam, S., Jack, R. L. (2015) The statistical mechanics of dynamic pathways to
self-assembly. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 66, 143–163.
13. Moughton, A. O., Hillmyer, M. A., Lodge, T. P. (2012) Multicompartment block
polymer micelles. Macromolecules, 45, 2–19.
14. Gröschel, A. H., Müller, A. H. E. (2015) Self-assembly concepts for multicompart-
ment nanostructures. Nanoscale, 7, 11841–11876.
15. Kao, J., Thorkelsson, K., Bai, P., Rancatore, B. J., Xu, T. (2013) Toward functional
nanocomposites: taking the best of nanoparticles, polymers, and small molecules.
Chem. Soc. Rev., 42, 2654–2678.
16. Thorkelsson, K., Bai, P., Xu, T. (2015) Self-assembly and applications of anisotropic
materials: a review. Nano Today, 10, 48–66.
17. Frenkel, D., Smit, B. (2007) Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms
to Applications, 2nd edn, Academic Press.
18. Kremer, K., Müller-Plathe, F. (2001) Multiscale problems in polymer science: simu-
lation approaches. MRS Bull., 26, 205–210.
19. Peter, C., Kremer, K. (2010) Multiscale simulation of soft matter systems. Faraday
Discuss., 144, 9–24.
20. Fredrickson, G. H., Ganesan, V., Drolet, F. (2002) Field-theoretic computer simula-
tion methods for polymers and complex ﬂuids. Macromolecules, 35, 16–39.
21. Müller-Plathe, F. (2002) Coarse-graining in polymer simulation: from the atomistic
to the mesoscopic scale and back. ChemPhysChem, 3, 754–769.

280
Self-Assembling Systems
22. Landau, D. P., Binder, K. (2009) A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in Statistical
Physics, 3rd edn. Cambridge University Press, New York.
23. Binder, K., Paul, W. (2008) Recent developments in Monte Carlo simulations of lat-
tice models for polymer systems. Macromolecules, 41, 4537–4550.
24. Öttinger, H. C. (1996) Stochastic Processes in Polymeric Fluids, Springer-Verlag,
New York.
25. Hoogerbrugge, P. J., Koelman, J. M. V. A. (1992) Simulating microscopic hydrody-
namic phenomena with dissipative particle dynamics. Europhys. Lett., 19, 155–160.
26. Español, P., Warren, P. B. (1995) Statistical-mechanics of dissipative particle
dynamics. Europhys. Lett., 30, 191–196.
27. Fredrickson, G. H. (2006) The Equilibrium Theory of Inhomogeneous Polymers,
Oxford University Press, New York.
28. Edwards, S. F. (1965) The statistical mechanics of polymers with excluded volume.
Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 85, 613–624.
29. Matsen, M. W., Schick, M. (1994) Stable and unstable phases of a diblock copoly-
mer melt. Phys. Rev. Lett., 72, 2660–2663.
30. Drolet, F., Fredrickson, G. H. (1999) Combinatorial screening of complex
block copolymer assembly with self-consistent ﬁeld theory. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83,
4317–4320.
31. Guo, Z., Zhang, G., Qiu, F., Zhang, H., Yang, Y., Shi, A.-C. (2008) Discovering
ordered phases of block copolymers: new results from a generic Fourier-space
approach. Phys. Rev. Lett., 101, 028301.
32. Fraaije, J. G. E. M., van Vlimmeren, B. A. C., Maurits, N. M., Postma, M., Evers, O.
A., Hoﬀmann, C., Altevogt, P., Goldbeck-Wood, G. (1997) The dynamic mean-ﬁeld
density functional method and its application to the mesoscopic dynamics of
quenched block copolymer melts. J. Chem. Phys., 106, 4260–4269.
33. Maurits, N. M., Fraaije, J. G. E. M. (1997) Mesoscopic dynamics of copolymer
melts: from density dynamics to external potential dynamics using nonlocal kinetic
coupling. J. Chem. Phys., 107, 5879–5889.
34. Hasegawa, R., Doi, M. (1997) Adsorption dynamics. Extension of self-consistent
ﬁeld theory to dynamical problems. Macromolecules, 30, 3086–3089.
35. Yeung, C., Shi, A.-C. (1999) Formation of interfaces in incompatible polymer
blends: a dynamical mean ﬁeld study. Macromolecules, 32, 3637–3642.
36. Ruokolainen, J., Mäkinen, R., Torkkeli, M., Mäkelä, T., Serimaa, R., ten Brinke,
G., Ikkala, O. (1998) Switching supramolecular polymeric materials with multiple
length scales. Science, 280, 557–560.
37. Ruokolainen, J., ten Brinke, G., Ikkala, O. (1999) Supramolecular polymeric mate-
rials with hierarchical structure-within-structure morphologies. Adv. Mater., 11,
777–780.
38. Ikkala, O., ten Brinke, G. (2002) Functional materials based on self-assembly of
polymeric supramolecules. Science, 295, 2407–2409.
39. ten Brinke, G., Loos, K., Vukovic, I., du Sart, G. G. (2011) Hierarchical self-
assembly of two-length-scale multiblock copolymers. J. Phys. Condens. Matter,
23, 284110.
40. Zheng, W., Wang, Z.-G. (1995) Morphology of ABC triblock copolymers. Macro-
molecules, 28, 7215–7223.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
281
41. Chatterjee, J., Jain, S., Bates, F. S. (2007) Comprehensive phase behavior of poly
(isoprene-b-styrene-b-ethylene oxide) triblock copolymers. Macromolecules, 40,
2882–2896.
42. Auschra, C., Stadler, R. (1993) New ordered morphologies in ABC triblock copoly-
mers. Macromolecules, 26, 2171–2174.
43. Bates, F. S., Hillmyer, M. A., Lodge, T. P., Bates, C. M., Delaney, K. T., Fredrickson,
G. H. (2012) Multiblock polymers: panacea or pandora’s box? Science, 336,
434–440.
44. Matsushita, Y. (2007) Creation of hierarchically ordered nanophase structures
in block polymers having various competing interactions. Macromolecules, 40,
771–776.
45. Tyler, C. A., Qin, J., Bates, F. S., Morse, D. C. (2007) SCFT study of non-frustra-
ted ABC triblock copolymer melts. Macromolecules, 40, 4654–4668.
46. Sun, M., Wang, P., Qiu, F., Tang, P., Zhang, H., Yang, Y. (2008) Morphology
and phase diagram of ABC linear triblock copolymers: parallel real-space self-
consistent-ﬁeld-theory simulation. Phys. Rev. E, 77, 016701.
47. Guo, Z., Zhang, G., Qiu, F., Zhang, H., Yang, Y., Shi, A.-C. (2008) Discovering
ordered phases of block copolymers: new results from a generic Fourier-space
approach. Phys. Rev. Lett., 101, 028301.
48. Li, W. H., Qiu, F., Shi, A.-C. (2012) Emergence and stability of helical superstruc-
tures in ABC triblock copolymers. Macromolecules, 45, 503–509.
49. Liu, M., Li, W. H., Qiu, F., Shi, A.-C. (2012) Theoretical study of phase behavior of
frustrated ABC linear triblock copolymers. Macromolecules, 45, 9522–9530.
50. Krappe, U., Stadler, R., Voigt-Martin, I. (1995) Chiral assembly in amorphous
ABC triblock copolymers. Formation of a helical morphology in polystyrene-
b-polybutadiene-b-poly(methyl methacrylate) block copolymers. Macromolecules,
28, 4558–4561.
51. Elbs, H., Abetz, V., Hadziioannou, G., Drummer, C., Krausch, G. (2001) Antiferro-
magnetic ordering in a helical triblock copolymer mesostructure. Macromolecules,
34, 7917–7919.
52. Jinnai, H., Kaneko, T., Matsunaga, K., Abetz, C., Abetz, V. (2009) A double heli-
cal structure formed from an amorphous, achiral ABC triblock terpolymer. Soft
Matter, 5, 2042–2046.
53. Gemma, T., Hatano, A., Dotera, T. (2002) Monte Carlo simulations of the mor-
phology of ABC star polymers using the diagonal bond method. Macromolecules,
35, 3225–3237.
54. Takano, A., Kawashima, W., Noro, A., Isono, Y., Tanaka, N., Dotera, T., Matsushita,
Y. (2005) A mesoscopic Archimedean tiling having a new complexity in an ABC
star polymer. J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 43, 2427–2432.
55. Hayashida, K., Kawashima, W., Takano, A., Shinohara, Y., Amemiya, Y., Nozue,
Y., Matsushita, Y. (2006) Archimedean tiling patterns of ABC star-shaped terpoly-
mers studied by microbeam small-angle X-ray scattering. Macromolecules, 39,
4869–4872.
56. Huang, C.-I, Fang, H.-K., Lin, C.-H. (2008) Morphological transition behavior
of ABC star copolymers by varying the interaction parameters. Phys. Rev. E, 77,
031804.

282
Self-Assembling Systems
57. Tang, P., Qiu, F., Zhang, H. D., Yang, Y. L. (2004) Morphology and phase diagram
of complex block copolymers: ABC star triblock copolymers. J. Phys. Chem. B, 108,
8434–8438.
58. Li, W. H., Xu, Y. C., Zhang, G. J., Qiu, F., Yang, Y. L., Shi, A.-C. (2010) Real-space
self-consistent mean-ﬁeld theory study of ABC star triblock copolymers. J. Chem.
Phys., 133, 064904.
59. Zhang, G. J., Qiu, F., Zhang, H. D., Yang, Y. L., Shi, A.-C. (2010) SCFT study of
tiling patterns in ABC star terpolymers. Macromolecules, 43, 2981–2989.
60. Xu, W., Jiang, K., Zhang, P., Shi, A.-C. (2013) A strategy to explore stable and
metastable ordered phases of block copolymers. J. Phys. Chem. B, 117, 5296–5305.
61. Cao, X., Zhang, L., Wang, L., Lin, J. (2014) Insights into ordered microstruc-
tures and ordering mechanisms of ABC star terpolymers by integrating dynamic
self-consistent ﬁeld theory and variable cell shape methods. Soft Matter, 10,
5916–5927.
62. Xia, J., Sun, M., Qiu, F., Zhang, H., Yang, Y. (2005) Microphase ordering mech-
anisms in linear ABC triblock copolymers. A dynamic density functional study.
Macromolecules, 38, 9324–9332.
63. Aissou, K., Choi, H. K., Nunns, A., Manners, I., Ross, C. A. (2013) Ordered
nanoscale Archimedean tilings of a templated 3-miktoarm star terpolymer. Nano
Lett., 13, 835–839.
64. Masuda, J., Takano, A., Nagata, Y., Noro, A., Matsushita, Y. (2006)
Nanophase-separated synchronizing structure with parallel double periodicity
from an undecablock terpolymer. Phys. Rev. Lett., 97, 098301.
65. Nagata, Y., Masuda, J., Noro, A., Cho, D., Takano, A., Matsushita, Y. (2005) Prepa-
ration and characterization of a styrene-isoprene undecablock copolymer and its
hierarchical microdomain structure in bulk. Macromolecules, 38, 10220–10225.
66. Nap, R., Erukhimovich, I. Y., ten Brinke, G. (2004) Self-assembling block copolymer
systems involving competing length scales: a route toward responsive materials.
Macromolecules, 37, 4296–4303.
67. Nap, R., Sushko, N., Erukhimovich, I., ten Brinke, G. (2006) Double periodic
lamellar-in-lamellar structure in multiblock copolymer melts with competing
length scales. Macromolecules, 39, 6765–6770.
68. Subbotin, A., Klymko, T., ten Brinke, G. (2007) Lamellar-in-lamellar structure of
A-b-(B-b-C)m-b-B-b-A multiblock copolymers. Macromolecules, 40, 2915–2918.
69. Klymko, T., Markov, V., Subbotin, A., ten Brinke, G. (2009) Lamellar-in-lamellar
self-assembled C-b-(B-b-A)m-b-B-b-C multiblock copolymers: Alexander-de
Gennes approach and dissipative particle dynamics simulations. Soft Matter, 5,
98–103.
70. Markov, V., Kriksin, Y., Erukhimovich, I., ten Brinke, G. (2013) Perpendicular
lamellar-in-lamellar and other planar morphologies in A-b-(B-b-A)2-b-C and
(B-b-A)2-b-C ternary multiblock copolymer melts. J. Chem. Phys., 139, 084906.
71. Subbotin, A., Markov, V., ten Brinke, G. (2010) Parallel versus perpendicular
lamellar-within-lamellar self-assembly of A-b-(B-b-A)n-b-C ternary multiblock
copolymer melts. J. Phys. Chem. B, 114, 5250–5256.
72. Markov, V., Kriksin, Y., Erukhimovich, I., ten Brinke, G. (2013) Perpendicular
lamellar-in-lamellar and other planar morphologies in A-b-(B-b-A)2-b-C and
(B-b-A)2-b-C ternary multiblock copolymer melts. J. Chem. Phys., 139, 084906.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
283
73. Subbotin, A., Markov, V., ten Brinke, G. (2010) Parllel versus perpendicular
lamellar-within-lamellar self-assembly of A-b-(B-b-A)n-b-C ternary multiblock
copolymer melts. J. Phys. Chem. B, 114, 5250–5256.
74. Xu, Y., Li, W., Qiu, F., Yang, Y., Shi, A.-C. (2011) The inﬂuence of volume fractions
on the phase behaviors of linear A(BC)nBA′ multiblock terpolymers. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys., 13, 12421–12428.
75. Wang, L., Zhang, L., Lin, J. (2010) Hierarchically ordered microstructures
self-assembled from A(BC)n multiblock copolymers. Macromolecules, 43,
1602–1609.
76. Pryamitsyn, V., Ganesan, V. (2004) Self-assembly of rod–coil block copolymers.
J. Chem. Phys., 120, 5824–5838.
77. Zhu, X., Wang, L., Lin, J. (2013) Self-assembly of rod–coil multiblock copoly-
mers: a strategy for creating hierarchical smectic structures. J. Phys. Chem. B, 117,
5748–5756.
78. Zhang, X., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Lin, J., Jiang, T. (2015) Controllable hierarchical
microstructures self-assembled from multiblock copolymers conﬁned in thin ﬁlms.
Langmuir, 31, 2533–2544.
79. Fleury, G., Bates, F. S. (2009) Structure and properties of hexa- and undeca-
block terpolymers with hierarchical molecular architectures. Macromolecules,
42, 3598–3610.
80. Zhu, X., Wang, L., Lin, J. (2011) Distinct elastic response to hierarchical nanostruc-
tures. Macromolecules, 44, 8314–8323.
81. Zhang, L., Lin, J., Lin, S. (2007) Morphologies and bridging properties of graft
copolymers. J. Phys. Chem. B, 111, 351–357.
82. Zhang, L., Lin, J., Lin, S. (2009) Elastic properties of graft copolymers in the lamel-
lar phase studied by self-consistent ﬁeld theory. Soft Matter, 5, 173–181.
83. Zhang, L., Lin, J., Lin, S. (2008) Eﬀect of molecular architecture on phase behavior
of graft copolymers. J. Phys. Chem. B, 112, 9720–9728.
84. Wang, L., Zhang, L., Lin, J. (2008) Microphase separation in multigraft copolymer
melts studied by random-phase approximation and self-consistent ﬁeld theory.
J. Chem. Phys., 129, 114905.
85. Wang, L., Lin, J., Zhang, L. (2009) Hierarchically ordered microstructures
self-assembled from comb–coil block copolymers. Langmuir, 25, 4735–4742.
86. Huang, C.-I, Lin, Y.-C. (2007) Hierarchical structure-within-structure morphologies
in A-block-(B-graft-C) molecules. Macromol. Rapid Commun., 28, 1634–1639.
87. Tang, C., Lennon, E. M., Fredrickson, G. H., Kramer, E. J., Hawker, C. J. (2008)
Evolution of block copolymer lithography to highly ordered square arrays. Science,
322, 429–432.
88. Park, W. I., Kim, Y. J., Jeong, J. W., Kim, K., Yoo, J.-K., Hur, Y. H., Kim, J. M.,
Thomas, E. L., Alexander-Katz, A., Jung, Y. S. (2013) Host–guest self-assembly in
block copolymer blends. Sci. Rep., 3, 3190.
89. Feng, E. H., Lee, W. B., Fredrickson, G. H. (2007) Supramolecular diblock copoly-
mers: a ﬁeld-theoretic model and mean-ﬁeld solution. Macromolecules, 40,
693–702.
90. Mohan, A., Elliott, R., Fredrickson, G. H. (2010) Field-theoretic model of inhomo-
geneous supramolecular polymer networks and gels. J. Chem. Phys., 133, 174903.

284
Self-Assembling Systems
91. Mester, Z., Mohan, A., Fredrickson, G. H. (2011) Macro- and microphase sepa-
ration in multifunctional supramolecular polymer networks. Macromolecules, 44,
9411–9423.
92. Elliott, R., Fredrickson, G. H. (2009) Supramolecular assembly in telechelic poly-
mer blends. J. Chem. Phys., 131, 144906.
93. Zhuang, Y., Wang, L., Lin, J. (2011) Hierarchical nanostructures self-assembled
from diblock copolymer/homopolymer blends with supramolecular interactions.
J. Phys. Chem. B, 115, 7550–7560.
94. Delaney, K. T., Fredrickson, G. H. (2013) Polymer ﬁeld-theory simulations on
graphics processing units. Comput. Phys. Commun., 184, 2102–2110.
95. Zhang, L., Wang, L., Lin, J. (2014) Harnessing anisotropic nanoposts to enhance
long-range orientation order of directed self-assembly nanostructures via large cell
simulations. ACS Macro Lett., 3, 712–716.
96. Nguyen, T. D., Phillips, C. L., Anderson, J. A., Glotzer, S. C. (2011) Rigid body
constraints realized in massively-parallel molecular dynamics on graphics process-
ing units. Comput. Phys. Commun., 182, 2307–2313.
97. Laschewsky, A. (2003) Polymerized micelles with compartments. Curr. Opin.
Colloid Interface Sci., 8, 274–281.
98. Lutz, J.-F., Laschewsky, A. (2005) Multicompartment micelles: has the
long-standing dream become a reality? Macromol. Chem. Phys., 206, 813–817.
99. Gröschel, A. H., Schacher, F. H., Schmalz, H., Borisov, O. V., Zhulina, E. B.,
Walther, A., Müller, A. H. E. (2012) Precise hierarchical self-assembly of multi-
compartment micelles. Nat. Commun., 3, 710.
100. Fraaije, J. G. E. M., Sevink, G. J. A. (2003) Model for pattern formation in polymer
surfactant nanodroplets. Macromolecules, 36, 7891–7893.
101. Sevink, G. J. A., Zvelindovsky, A. V. (2005) Self-assembly of complex vesicles.
Macromolecules, 38, 7502–7513.
102. Sevink, G. J. A., Zvelindovsky, A. V. (2007) Mesoscopic dynamics of complex
vesicle formation: kinetic versus thermodynamic factors. Mol. Simul., 33, 405–415.
103. Chi, P., Wang, Z., Li, B. H., Shi, A.-C. (2011) Soft conﬁnement-induced morpholo-
gies of diblock copolymers. Langmuir, 27, 11683–11689.
104. He, X. H., Schmid, F. (2006) Dynamics of spontaneous vesicle formation in dilute
solutions of amphiphilic diblock copolymers. Macromolecules, 39, 2654–2662.
105. He, X. H., Schmid, F. (2006) Using prenucleation to control complex copolymeric
vesicle formation in solution. Macromolecules, 39, 8908–8910.
106. He, X. H., Schmid, F. (2008) Spontaneous formation of complex micelles from a
homogeneous solution. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 137802.
107. Wang, L., Jiang, T., Lin, J. (2013) Self-assembly of graft copolymers in
backbone-selective solvents: a route toward stable hierarchical vesicles. RSC Adv.,
3, 19481–19491.
108. Capone, B., Coluzza, I., Lo Verso, F., Likos, C. N., Blaak, R. (2012) Telechelic star
polymers as self-assembling units from the molecular to the macroscopic scale.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 109, 238301.
109. Capone, B., Coluzza, I., Blaak, R., Lo Verso, F., Likos, C. N. (2013) Hierarchical
self-assembly of telechelic star polymers: from soft patchy particles to gels and
diamond crystals. New J. Phys., 2013, 15, 095002.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
285
110. Koch, C., Panagiotopoulos, A. Z., Lo Verso, F., Likos, C. N. (2015) Customizing
wormlike mesoscale structures via self-assembly of amphiphilic star polymers. Soft
Matter, 11, 3530–3535.
111. Li, Z., Kesselman, E., Talmon, Y., Hillmyer, M. A., Lodge, T. P. (2004) Multicom-
partment micelles from ABC miktoarm stars in water. Science, 306, 98–101.
112. Li, Z., Hillmyer, M. A., Lodge, T. P. (2006) Laterally nanostructured vesicles, polyg-
onal bilayer sheets, and segmented wormlike micelles. Nano Lett., 6, 1245–1249.
113. Li, Z., Hillmyer, M. A., Lodge, T. P. (2006) Morphologies of multicompartment
micelles formed by ABC miktoarm star terpolymers. Langmuir, 22, 9409–9417.
114. Kubowicz, S., Baussard, J.-F., Lutz, J.-F., Thunemann, A. F., von Berlepsch, H.,
Laschewsky, A. (2005) Multicompartment micelles formed by self-assembly of
linear ABC triblock copolymers in aqueous medium. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 44,
5262–5265.
115. Zhu, J., Jiang, W. (2005) Self-assembly of ABC triblock copolymer into giant seg-
mented wormlike micelles in dilute solution. Macromolecules, 38, 9315–9323.
116. Jiang, T., Wang, L., Lin, S., Lin, J., Li, Y. (2011) Structural evolution of multicom-
partment micelles self-assembled from linear ABC triblock copolymer in selective
solvents. Langmuir, 27, 6440–6448.
117. Wang, L., Lin, J. (2011) Discovering multicore micelles: insights into the
self-assembly of linear ABC terpolymers in midblock-selective solvents. Soft Mat-
ter, 7, 3383–3391.
118. Zhulina, E. B., Borisov, O. V. (2008) Scaling theory of 3-miktoarm ABC copolymer
micelles in selective solvent. Macromolecules, 41, 5934–5944.
119. Xia, J., Zhong, C. (2006) Dissipative particle dynamics study of the formation of
multicompartment micelles from ABC star triblock copolymers in water. Macro-
mol. Rapid Commun., 27, 1110–1114.
120. Zhong, C., Liu, D. (2007) Understanding multicompartment micelles using dissipa-
tive particle dynamics simulation. Macromol. Theory Simul., 16, 141–157.
121. Kong, W. X., Li, B. H., Jin, Q. H., Ding, D. T., Shi, A. C. (2009) Helical vesi-
cles, segmented semivesicles, and noncircular bilayer sheets from solution-state
self-assembly of ABC miktoarm star terpolymers. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131,
8503–8512.
122. Wang, L., Xu, R., Wang, Z., He, X. (2012) Kinetics of multicompartment micelle
formation by self-assembly of ABC miktoarm star terpolymer in dilute solution.
Soft Matter, 8, 11462–11470.
123. Srinivas, G., Pitera, J. W. (2008) Soft patchy nanoparticles from solution-phase
self-assembly of binary diblock copolymers. Nano Lett., 8, 611–618.
124. Sheng, Y., Yang, X., Yan, N., Zhu, Y. (2013) Janus-like spheres, disks, rings,
cylinders, and vesicles from the self-assembly of mixture of AB and BC diblock
copolymers in A- and C-selective solvents, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 6254–6262.
125. Ma, J. W., Li, X., Tang, P., Yang, Y. (2007) Self-assembly of amphiphilic ABC star
triblock copolymers and their blends with AB diblock copolymers in solution:
self-consistent ﬁeld theory simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B, 111, 1552–1558.
126. Zhu, Y., Yang, X., Kong, W., Sheng, Y., Yan, N. (2012) Segmented and double-helix
multicompartment micelles from self-assembly of blends of ABC and AB block
copolymers in C block-selective solvents. Soft Matter, 8, 11156–11162.

286
Self-Assembling Systems
127. Xin, J., Liu, D., Zhong, C. (2007) Multicompartment micelles from star and linear
triblock copolymer blends. J. Phys. Chem. B, 111, 13675–13682.
128. Xin, J., Liu, D., Zhong, C. (2009) Morphology and structure control of multi-
compartment micelles from triblock copolymer blends. J. Phys. Chem. B, 113,
9364–9372.
129. Cai, C., Li, Y., Lin, J., Wang, L., Lin, S., Wang, X.-S., Jiang, T. (2013)
Simulation-assisted self-assembly of multicomponent polymers into hierarchical
assemblies with varied morphologies. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 52, 7732–7736.
130. Li, Y., Jiang, T., Lin, S., Lin, J., Cai, C., Zhu, X. (2015) Hierarchical nanostructures
self-assembled from a mixture system containing rod–coil block copolymers and
rigid homopolymers. Sci. Rep., 5, 10137.
131. Balazs, A. C., Emrick, T., Russell, T. P. (2006) Nanoparticle polymer composites:
where two small worlds meet. Science, 314, 1107–1110.
132. Lin, Y., Boeker, A., He, J., Sill, K., Xiang, H., Abetz, C., Li, X., Wang, J., Emrick, T.,
Long, S., Wang, Q., Balazs, A. C., Russell, T. P. (2005) Self-directed self-assembly of
nanoparticle/copolymer mixtures. Nature, 434, 55–59.
133. Thompson, R. B., Ginzburg, V. V., Matsen, M. W., Balazs, A. C. (2001) Predicting
the mesophases of copolymer–nanoparticle composites. Science, 292, 2469–2472.
134. Sides, S. W., Kim, B. J., Kramer, E. J., Fredrickson, G. H. (2006) Hybrid
particle–ﬁeld simulations of polymer nanocomposites. Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 250601.
135. Langner, K. M., Sevink, G. J. A. (2012) Mesoscale modeling of block copolymer
nanocomposites. Soft Matter, 8, 5102–5118.
136. Yan, L.-T., Xie, X.-M. (2013) Computational modeling and simulation of nanopar-
ticle self-assembly in polymeric systems: structures, properties and external ﬁeld
eﬀects. Prog. Polym. Sci., 38, 369–405.
137. Lee, J.-Y., Thompson, R. B., Jasnow, D., Balazs, A. C. (2002) Entropically driven for-
mation of hierarchically ordered nanocomposites. Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 155503.
138. Li, Z., Hur, K., Sai, H., Higuchi, T., Takahara, A., Jinnai, H., Gruner, S. M.,
Wiesner, U. (2014) Linking experiment and theory for three-dimensional net-
worked binary metal nanoparticles-triblock terpolymer superstructures. Nat.
Commun., 5, 3247.
139. Hur, K., Hennig, R. G., Escobedo, F. A., Wiesner, U. (2010) Mesoscopic struc-
ture prediction of nanoparticle assembly and coassembly: theoretical foundation.
J. Chem. Phys., 133, 194108–194119.
140. Hur, K., Hennig, R. G., Escobedo, F. A., Wiesner, U. (2012) Predicting chiral
nanostructures, lattices and superlattices in complex multicomponent nanoparticle
self-assembly. Nano Lett., 12, 3218–3223.
141. Kang, H., Detcheverry, F. A., Mangham, A. N., Stoykovich, M. P., Daoulas, K. Ch.,
Hamers, R. J., Müller, M., de Pablo, J. J., Nealey, P. F. (2008) Hierarchical assembly
of nanoparticle superstructures from block copolymer–nanoparticle composites.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 148303.
142. Zhang, L., Lin, J. (2009) Hierarchically ordered nanocomposites self-assembled
from linear-alternating block copolymer/nanoparticle mixture. Macromolecules, 42,
1410–1414.
143. Zhu, X., Wang, L., Lin, J., Zhang, L. (2010) Ordered nanostructures self- assembled
from block copolymer tethered nanoparticles. ACS Nano, 4, 4979–4988.

10 Theory, Simulation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
287
144. Ploshnik, E., Langner, K. M., Halevi, A., Ben-Lulu, M., Müller, A. H. E., Fraaije,
J. G. E. M., Sevink, G., Shenhar, R. (2013) Hierarchical structuring in block
copolymer nanocomposites through two phase-separation processes operating
on diﬀerent time scales. Adv. Funct. Mater., 23, 4215–4226.
145. Yu, X. F., Zhong, S., Li, X. P., Tu, Y. F., Yang, S. G., Van Horn, R. M., Ni, C. Y.,
Pochan, D. J., Quirk, R. P., Wesdemiotis, C., Zhang, W.-B., Cheng, S. Z. D. (2010)
A giant surfactant of polystyrene-(carboxylic acid-functionalized polyhedral
oligomeric silsesquioxane) amphiphile with highly stretched polystyrene tails in
micellar assemblies. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 132, 16741–16744.
146. Wang, Z., Li, Y. W., Dong, X.-H., Yu, X. F., Guo, K., Su, H., Yue, K., Wesdemiotis,
C., Cheng, S. Z. D., Zhang, W.-B (2013) Giant gemini surfactants based on
polystyrene-hydrophilic polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane shape amphiphiles:
sequential “click” chemistry and solution self-assembly. Chem. Sci., 4, 1345–1352.
147. Ma, S., Hu, Y., Wang, R. (2015) Self-assembly of polymer tethered molecu-
lar nanoparticle shape amphiphiles in selective solvents. Macromolecules, 48,
3112–3120.
148. Estridge, C. E., Jayaraman, A. (2014) Assembly of diblock copolymer functionalized
spherical nanoparticles as a function of copolymer composition. J. Chem. Phys.,
140, 144905.
149. Zhang, L., Lin, J., Lin, S. (2007) Self-assembly behavior of amphiphilic block
copolymer/nanoparticle mixture in dilute solution studied by self-consistent-
ﬁeld theory/density functional theory. Macromolecules, 40, 5582–5592.
150. Hall, D. M., Lookman, T., Banerjee, S. (2009) Non-equilibrium particle–ﬁeld simu-
lations of polymer–nanocomposite dynamics. Chem. Eng. Sci., 64, 4754–4757.
151. Tang, Q.-y., Ma, Y.-q. (2009) Self-assembly of rod-shaped particles in
diblock-copolymer templates. J. Phys. Chem. B, 113, 10117–10120.
152. Whitelam, S., Jack, R. L. (2015) The statistical mechanics of dynamic pathways to
self-assembly. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 66, 143–163.
153. Zhang, L., Sevink, A., Schmid, F. (2011) Hybrid lattice Boltzmann/dynamic
self-consistent ﬁeld simulations of microphase separation and vesicle formation
in block copolymer systems. Macromolecules, 44, 9434–9447.
154. Jain, A., Bollinger, J. A., Truskett, T. M. (2014) Inverse methods for material
design. AIChE J., 60, 2732–2740.
155. Hannon, A. F., Gotrik, K. W., Ross, C. A., Alexander-Katz, A. (2013) Inverse design
of topographical templates for directed self-assembly of block copolymers. ACS
Macro Lett., 2, 251–255.
156. Hannon, A. F., Ding, Y., Bai, W., Ross, C. A., Alexander-Katz, A. (2014) Optimizing
topographical templates for directed self-assembly of block copolymers via inverse
design simulations. Nano Lett., 14, 318–325.

288
11
Nucleation in Colloidal Systems: Theory and Simulation
Ran Ni
School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
11.1
Introduction
As we know from high school physics courses, matter exists in diﬀerent thermodynamic
“phases,” e.g. gas, liquid or solid, which are diﬀerent states of aggregation with quali-
tatively diﬀerent properties. By heat transfer, a thermodynamic system can undergo a
“phase transition” from one state to another one. Phase transition occurs almost every-
where in our daily life. For instance, the melting of an ice cube is the phase transition
process of water from solid to liquid, of which the reverse process is the freezing of liquid
water. These phase transitions are normally triggered by nucleation. For example, water
vaporization is normally triggered by the nucleation of bubbles, of which the under-
standing is also of great interest to the fabrication of many materials, such as polymer
foams [1]. Nucleation is a rare event that is normally induced by thermal ﬂuctuations.
The detection and study of nucleation on the molecular scale are very diﬃcult, since
molecules are very small and move very fast. Colloids are particles within the size range
of a nanometer to several micrometers that move around in a solvent. More than a hun-
dred years ago, Perrin pointed out that the motion of colloids is caused by collisions with
the molecules of the solvent, which causes the colloids to move in an irregular fashion,
i.e. Brownian motion [2]. Due to the Brownian motion, colloidal particles can explore
the phase space, and self-assemble similarly to atomic and molecular systems. More-
over, colloidal particles are several orders of magnitude larger than atoms or molecules,
and they move much slower. This makes it possible to track the motion of the particles
in real time using optical microscopy and to study the dynamics of physical processes,
such as nucleation, which are very diﬃcult to investigate in atomic or molecular systems.
Therefore, colloids are outstanding model systems for studying the physics of nucleation.
In past decades, colloidal systems have been employed extensively in studying the
physics of nucleation, and remarkable progress and new insights in nucleation have been
obtained. However, even for the arguably simplest particle model systems, i.e. colloidal
hard-sphere systems, the theoretical prediction on the crystal nucleation rate diﬀers by
orders of magnitude from the experimental values [3], which is still a controversial issue
in the community of soft matter physics [4–7]. Partially because of the controversies on
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
289
calculating the nucleation rates, a number of new simulation methods, e.g. forward ﬂux
sampling [8], transition path sampling, transition interface sampling [9], etc., have been
developed and employed to improve our understanding of nucleation from the theoret-
ical point of view. In this chapter, we will review the recent progress of nucleation study
in colloidal systems by using computer simulations, which includes the classical descrip-
tion of nucleation, i.e. classic nucleation theory, the state-of-the-art simulation methods
for studying nucleation, and the new nucleation phenomena observed that violate our
classic understanding of nucleation as well as the not well explored yet important future
directions of nucleation study.
11.2
Theory of Nucleation
Nucleation is the onset of a ﬁrst-order phase transition, which occurs when the
ﬁrst-order derivative of the free energy with respect to a thermodynamic variable is
discontinuous. For example, the gas–liquid phase transition is a typical ﬁrst-order
transition, which has a discontinuity in the density 𝜌. Let us take the van der Waals
ﬂuid as an example. In his thesis of 1873, van der Waals proposed two correction terms
to the ideal gas law p = NkBT∕V [10]. First, he argued that the actual volume available
to a molecule is smaller than the total volume V of the container due to the excluded
volume eﬀect between molecules. Second, he argued that the attractions between the
molecules reduce the pressure p by an amount −a𝜌2, where a > 0 is a measure of the
attraction between the molecules. Therefore, van der Waals wrote
p = NkBT
V −Nb −a𝜌2 = 𝜌kBT
1 −𝜌b −a𝜌2,
(11.1)
with the two phenomenological parameters a and b. He also found that there is a criti-
cal temperature Tc = 8a∕27bkB, below which the system undergoes a gas–liquid phase
transition upon increasing the density. A typical equation of state for the system of a van
der Waals ﬂuid at temperature T < Tc is shown in Figure 11.1.
Spinodal
Binodal
ρ gas
ρliquid
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
–0.04
–0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
ρ
p
fVdW
Figure 11.1 The equation of state (solid line) and the corresponding conveniently shifted and scaled
Helmholtz free energy density fvdW = F∕V (thick dashed line) as a function of density 𝜌for a system of
van der Waals ﬂuid at temperature T < Tc. The gas–liquid phase coexistence densities are 𝜌gas and
𝜌liquid, respectively.

290
Self-Assembling Systems
By applying a common tangent construction on the free energy density curve as shown
in Figure 11.1, one ﬁnds that the gas–liquid phase coexistence densities are 𝜌gas and
𝜌liquid, respectively, also called the binodal points. When the density of the system 𝜌
lies well inside the region 𝜌gas < 𝜌< 𝜌liquid, the system is metastable (supersaturated or
undersaturated), and in equilibrium it phase separates into a gas phase with density
𝜌gas and a liquid phase with density 𝜌liquid. The phase transition is triggered by ﬂuctu-
ations in the system. Moreover, for each isotherm T < Tc, there are two points where
𝜕p∕𝜕𝜌= 0 equivalent to 𝜕𝜌∕𝜕p = ∞, which means that an inﬁnitely small ﬂuctuation in
the pressure can induce huge density ﬂuctuations. These two points are called spinodal
points, and are the stability limits of the metastable phases. Thus, in the shaded regions
of Figure 11.1, the gas–liquid phase transition needs to be generated by ﬁnite and local-
ized ﬂuctuations, which is called nucleation. During nucleation, the metastable phase
has to overcome a ﬁnite free energy barrier, after which the nuclei can grow sponta-
neously.
Moreover, when we talk about nucleation, it is important to distinguish between
heterogeneous and homogeneous nucleation. Heterogeneous nucleation happens when
it can be assisted by a heterogeneity in the system, such as walls or impurities. For
instance, when we put a ﬁnger into a cup of Sprite as shown in Figure 11.2, there
are more bubbles of carbon dioxide on the ﬁnger compared to the bulk phase, as
nucleation of carbon dioxide bubbles is promoted by the interface created by the ﬁnger,
i.e. heterogeneous nucleation. In contrast, homogeneous nucleation occurs due to
spontaneous ﬂuctuations in the bulk phase. Although heterogeneous nucleation is
more likely to happen in real life, homogeneous nucleation is not just a theoretical sim-
pliﬁcation for studying the physics of phase transitions. There are still a lot of situations
in the real world where homogeneous nucleation dominates, such as condensation
in supersonic nozzles [11], explosions that occur when a cold liquid contacts a much
hotter one [12], formation of heavily microcrystallized ceramics [13], (nano) particle
synthesis, etc. Furthermore, experimental techniques have advanced signiﬁcantly in
recent years, which makes it possible to study homogeneous nucleation in experiments.
Figure 11.2 Nucleation of carbon dioxide bubbles around a ﬁnger.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
291
Figure 11.3 Illustration of the nucleation of
phase B in a metastable phase A.
A
A
B
I
II
Nevertheless, the mechanism of homogeneous nucleation is still an open question, and,
as mentioned before, even for a simple system of hard spheres, there is still an ongoing
debate on the discrepancy in the measured nucleation rates between experimental
and theoretical methods [3, 5–7]. This makes homogeneous nucleation an interesting
and challenging topic. In the following, we brieﬂy derive a commonly used theory to
describe homogeneous nucleation, i.e. classical nucleation theory (CNT), which was
ﬁrst formulated by Volmer and Weber [14].
11.2.1
Free Energy Barrier
We consider a metastable phase A, e.g., a gas phase, at the thermodynamic condition
where phase B, e.g., a liquid phase, is the stable phase. As shown in Figure 11.3, droplets
of phase B exist in phase A, and they may grow and shrink due to thermal ﬂuctuations.
In the following, we ﬁrst consider a homogeneous system containing only the
metastable phase A denoted as system I (left in Figure 11.3) and a system II containing
the metastable phase A and a droplet (or a cluster) of phase B (right in Figure 11.3). The
temperature of both systems is ﬁxed and equal to T.
The internal energy of the homogeneous system I can be written as
UI = TSI −PIV I + 𝜇I
AN,
(11.2)
where T is the temperature of the system, SI the total entropy, PI the pressure, V I the
total volume, 𝜇I
A the chemical potential and N the total number of particles. The internal
energy of system II, which contains the metastable phase A and a cluster of phase B, is
UII = TSII −PII
AV II
A −PII
BV II
B + 𝛾+ 𝜇II
ANA + 𝜇II
BNB,
(11.3)
where PII
A,B, V II
A,B and 𝜇II
A,B are the pressure, volume and chemical potential of phase A, B,
respectively, with the superscripts indicating the values in system II, 𝛾the interfacial
tension between A and B with the surface area of cluster B, and NA and NB are the
number of particles of phase A and B in system II, respectively.
If we keep the pressure in the metastable phase A ﬁxed, i.e. PI = PII
A = P, and the total
number of particles constrained, i.e. N = NA + NB, then the Gibbs free energy in systems
I and II are
GI = UI −TSI + PIV I = 𝜇I
AN,
(11.4)
GII = UII −TSII + PII
A(V II
A + V II
B )
= (P −PII
B)V II
B + 𝛾+ 𝜇II
ANA + 𝜇II
BNB.
(11.5)
Furthermore, as the pressure and temperature of the metastable phase A are ﬁxed, the
chemical potential is constant, i.e. 𝜇I
A = 𝜇II
A, and the Gibbs free energy diﬀerence can be
written as
ΔG = GII −GI
= (P −PII
B)V II
B + 𝛾+ [𝜇II
B(PII
B) −𝜇I
A(PA)]NB.
(11.6)

292
Self-Assembling Systems
To obtain the expression of the free energy in CNT, we make a few assumptions
below:
1) The interfacial tension 𝛾is independent of the size of the cluster, or 𝛾= 𝛾∞, with 𝛾∞
the interfacial tension of an inﬁnite cluster or the planar interface.
2) The cluster is incompressible, meaning that its density 𝜌does not change with pres-
sure. This assumption is valid for the nucleation of a denser phase from a dilute phase,
e.g. gas–liquid or ﬂuid–crystal nucleation. Using the Gibbs–Duhem equation, the
chemical potential of phase B can be written as
𝜇II
B(PII
B) = 𝜇II
B(P) + ∫
PII
B
P
1
𝜌(P′)dP′
= 𝜇II
B(P) +
PII
B −P
𝜌B
,
(11.7)
where 𝜌B is the density of phase B at pressure P.
Therefore, we can rewrite Equation 11.6 into
ΔG(NB) = (NB)𝛾∞+ [𝜇II
B(P) −𝜇I
A(P)]NB
= (NB)𝛾∞−|Δ𝜇|NB,
(11.8)
where Δ𝜇= 𝜇II
B(P) −𝜇II
A(P) is the chemical potential diﬀerence between the two phases.
Given that phase B is more stable than phase A, we have Δ𝜇< 0. In Equation (11.8), the
surface area of the cluster depends on the cluster size NB and its shape. CNT assumes
that the shape of the cluster is roughly spherical, and hence = 4𝜋R2 where R is the
radius of the spherical cluster. The Gibbs free energy of a spherical cluster with radius R
is given by
ΔG(R) = 4𝜋R2𝛾∞−4
3𝜋R3𝜌B|Δ𝜇|,
(11.9)
which contains two terms:
• a “surface” term 4𝜋R2𝛾∞, that takes into account the free energy cost of creating an
interface between phase A and B;
• a “volume” term −4
3𝜋R3𝜌B|Δ𝜇|, that indicates the fact that phase B is more stable than
phase A, and can be interpreted as the driving force for the formation of phase B.
A typical representation of ΔG as a function of the cluster radius R is shown in
Figure 11.4.
One ﬁnds that the free energy ΔG goes through a maximum at the critical cluster size
R∗=
2𝛾∞
𝜌B|Δ𝜇|,
(11.10)
beyond which the nuclei can spontaneously grow. The height of the free energy barrier
reads
ΔG∗= 16𝜋
3
𝛾3
∞
(𝜌B|Δ𝜇|)2 .
(11.11)
We note that CNT always predicts a ﬁnite free energy barrier, but the region where
nucleation and growth can happen is bounded by the spinodal as shown in Figure 11.1,
which suggests that CNT might not be valid in describing nucleation close to spinodals.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
293
R
ΔG
O
(R*, ΔG*)
Figure 11.4 Gibbs free energy ΔG of a cluster as a function of the cluster radius R according to the
classic nucleation theory where R∗and ΔG∗are the critical cluster and the height of the free energy
barrier, respectively.
11.2.2
Kinetics of Nucleation
The kinetics of nucleation is generally interpreted via a phenomenological reaction rate
theory, which was ﬁrst formulated by Volmer and Weber [14].
We assume that clusters of phase B slowly grow or shrink via attachment or detach-
ment of single particles:
Bn−1 + B1
f+,n−1
−→
←−
b−,n
Bn,
Bn + B1
f+,n
−→
←−
b−,n+1
Bn+1,
where Bn−1 is a cluster of n −1 particles, B1 a cluster of one particle (monomer), f+,n−1
and b−,n are the attachment and detachment rates of a single monomer to a cluster of
n −1 and from a cluster of n particles, respectively. This assumption is proposed on the
basis that the concentration of monomers is much higher than that of dimers, trimers,
etc., and the interaction between the growing clusters is negligible (ideal-gas-like) [15].
Hence, reactions of clusters with dimers, trimers, etc. are infrequent compared with sin-
gle particle attachment and detachment. The time-dependent cluster distribution Nn(t)
obeys the following master equation:
dNn(t)
dt
= Nn−1(t)f+,n−1 + Nn+1(t)b−,n+1 −[Nn(t)f+,n + Nn(t)b−,n].
(11.12)
The nucleation rate for a cluster size n is the time-dependent ﬂux of clusters that reaches
n:
In,t = Nn(t)f+,n −Nn+1(t)b−,n+1.
(11.13)
We now assume that the system is in a steady state, in which the cluster size distribution
does not change in time, i.e. the nucleation rate is a constant:
I = Ns
nf+,n −Ns
n+1b−,n+1.
(11.14)

294
Self-Assembling Systems
The equations can be solved by recurrence (see Ref. [16]):
I = Ns
1
[ ∞
∑
n=1
1
f+,n𝜉n
]−1
,
(11.15)
where
𝜉n =
n−1
∏
i=1
f+,i
b−,i+1
for
n > 1.
(11.16)
The ﬂuid is, due to the very small steady-state ﬂux, in a kind of quasi-equilibrium, where
for small cluster sizes n ≪n∗, the steady-state cluster size distribution is almost identical
to the equilibrium distribution. Since the clusters of size n only interact with monomers,
we assume that clusters of size n are in equilibrium with respect to monomers; we then
ﬁnd that
nN1
K−→
←−Nn,
(11.17)
where N1 and Nn are the equilibrium distributions of cluster sizes 1 and n, respectively,
and K is the equilibrium constant. The ratio of products 𝜉n in Equation 11.16 is just the
equilibrium constant K [16]. The equilibrium constant K for this reaction is simply given
by the free energy of forming a cluster with size n, and we ﬁnd
𝜉n = K = exp [−𝛽ΔG(n)].
(11.18)
Thus, Equation 11.15 can be rewritten as
I = N1
{ ∞
∑
n=1
1
f+,n exp [−𝛽ΔG(n)]
}−1
.
(11.19)
In order to calculate the nucleation rate I, Becker and Döring made several approxima-
tions [17]:
1) The terms corresponding to the clusters near the top of the free energy barrier dom-
inate the summation in Equation 11.19.
2) The shape of ΔG(n) around n∗can be approximated by a Taylor expansion at the top
of the free energy barrier:
ΔG(n) = ΔG(n∗) + 1
2ΔG(n∗)′′(n −n∗)2.
3) f+,n is further replaced by f+,n∗.
4) The sum gets replaced by an integral from n −n∗= −∞and n −n∗= ∞, by consid-
ering Nn to be a continuous function of n.
We then ﬁnd the ﬁnal expression of the steady-state nucleation rate,
I = N1f+,n∗
(|ΔG′′(n∗)|
2𝜋kBT
)1∕2
exp [−𝛽ΔG(n∗)],
(11.20)
where ΔG′′(n∗) is the second-order derivative of the Gibbs free energy with respect to
the cluster size at the top of the free energy barrier n∗, and
Z =
(|ΔG′′(n∗)|
2𝜋kBT
)1∕2
(11.21)

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
295
is called the Zeldovitch factor. On the basis of this theory, Bennett [18] and Chandler
[19] proposed a two-step scheme to calculate the nucleation rate in simulations: the free
energy barrier ΔG(n) can be obtained by performing Monte Carlo simulations using
the umbrella sampling technique, and molecular dynamics simulations starting from
conﬁgurations on the top of the free energy barrier can be employed to compute the
attachment rate f+,n∗.
The most important assumption in this theory is that when the cluster size is smaller
than the critical cluster size, the system is in quasi-equilibrium, which could be prob-
lematic in some cases. For instance, in systems of binary mixtures, dynamical hetero-
geneities may make the kinetic pathways of nucleation out of equilibrium [20], and it
may be inﬂuenced by the order parameter used in the umbrella sampling simulations
[21]. Later in this chapter, we will discuss the eﬀect of the order parameter on the nucle-
ation of binary hard-sphere mixtures.
11.2.3
Equilibrium Distribution of Cluster Sizes
In order to determine the nucleation rate, we need to calculate the probability of ﬁnding
a critical cluster, see Equation 11.20. To this end, we consider a (meta)stable ﬂuid in
a cubic box consisting of N particles at pressure P and temperature T. The partition
function is given by
Q(N, P, T) =
𝛽P
Λ3NN! ∫dVV N exp (−𝛽PV) ∫dsN exp (−𝛽),
(11.22)
where Λ is the de Broglie wavelength, and sN are the factional coordinates of the parti-
cles. We deﬁne an order parameter of the conﬁguration (sN, V) as f (sN, V) = n, where
n is the size of the largest cluster. This order parameter can be used to calculate the
nucleation rate according to the transition state theory, when it can distinguish the two
diﬀerent states, i.e. ﬂuid and crystal. The partition function of a system where the largest
cluster size is n can be written as
Qn(N, P, T) =
𝛽P
Λ3NN! ∫dVV N exp (−𝛽PV)∫dsN exp (−𝛽)𝛿K[f (sN, V) −n],
(11.23)
where 𝛿K is the Kronecker delta function. Then the free energy diﬀerence between a
system of N particles containing a largest cluster of size n and the (meta)stable ﬂuid
phase is
ΔG(n)NPT = −kBT ln
[Qn(N, P, T)
Q(N, P, T)
]
= −kBT ln ⟨𝛿K[f (sN, V) −n]⟩NPT.
(11.24)
The formation of a large cluster in the ﬂuid phase is a rare event. When the cluster size
is around the critical size, there is usually one large cluster present in the system. Thus
ΔG(n)NPT = −kBT ln ⟨𝛿K[f (sN, V) −n]⟩NPT = −kBT ln ⟨Nn⟩NPT,
(11.25)
where Nn is the number of clusters of size n. This is the free energy of ﬁnding a cluster of
size n in a system of N particles, and we scale this to a unit system by adding a kBT ln N

296
Self-Assembling Systems
term in the free energy, since the nucleation rate is system size independent. The free
energy barrier in a unit system is
ΔG(n) = ΔG(n)NPT + kBT ln N = −kBT ln
⟨Nn
N
⟩
NPT
.
(11.26)
We note that we can approximate N ≃∑∞
k=0 Nk, as the number of ﬂuid-like particles N0
is dominant. We rewrite Equation 11.26 as
ΔG(n) = −kBT ln
⟨
Nn
∑∞
k=0 Nk
⟩
NPT
= −kBT ln P(n),
(11.27)
where P(n) is the probability distribution function of ﬁnding a cluster of size n. This
can be calculated by Monte Carlo simulations with the umbrella sampling technique.
However, we should note that in the actual calculation, one can still use Equation 11.26
to compute the free energy barrier.
Moreover, when calculating the free energy barrier of nucleation, one should make
sure that there is only one critical cluster in the simulation box. Thus the system size
should be large but not too large that multiple critical clusters may exist.
11.3
Order Parameter
As shown in the previous section, nucleation is the onset of the formation process of
a new phase from a metastable mother phase. Therefore, to study nucleation, we need
to use an order parameter, e.g. the size of a large cluster of the new phase, to distin-
guish the new phase from the mother phase. In this chapter, we mainly discuss studies
on crystal nucleation, for which the local bond-order parameter is employed to diﬀer-
entiate between liquid-like and solid-like particles. The local bond-order parameter was
originally proposed by Steinhardt et al. [22] and employed by ten Wolde et al. [23, 24] in
the study of crystal nucleation in a Lennard-Jones system, and it has been widely used
in many crystal nucleation studies.
In the calculation of the local bond-order parameter, a list of “neighbors” is determined
for each particle. The neighbors of particle i include all particles within a radial distance
rc of particle i, and the total number of neighbors is denoted Nb(i). A bond orientational
order parameter ql,m(i) for each particle is then deﬁned as
ql,m(i) =
1
Nb(i)
Nb(i)
∑
j=1
Υl,m(𝜃i,j, 𝜙i,j),
(11.28)
where Υl,m(𝜃, 𝜙) are the spherical harmonics, m ∈[−l, l] and 𝜃i,j and 𝜙i,j are the polar and
azimuthal angles of the center-of-mass distance vector rij = rj −ri with ri the position
vector of particle i. Solid-like particles are identiﬁed as particles for which the number
of connections per particle 𝜉(i) is at least 𝜉c and where
𝜉(i) =
Nb(i)
∑
j=1
H[dl(i, j) −dc],
(11.29)

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
297
H is the Heaviside step function, dc is the dot-product cutoﬀ, and
dl(i, j) =
l∑
m=−l
ql,m(i)q∗
l,m(j)
(
l∑
m=−l
|ql,m(i)|2
)1∕2(
l∑
m=−l
|ql,m(j)|2
)1∕2 .
(11.30)
A cluster contains all solid-like particles which have a solid-like neighbor in the same
cluster. Thus each particle can be a member of only a single cluster.
The parameters contained in this algorithm include the neighbor cutoﬀrc, the
dot-product cutoﬀdc, the critical value for the number of solid-like neighbors 𝜉c, and
the symmetry index for the bond orientational order parameter l. A typical choice of
rc is the location of the ﬁrst local minimum of the radial distribution function g(r) in
the metastable ﬂuid phase, which only includes the ﬁrst neighbors of the particles. The
choice of dc and 𝜉c depends on the type of crystal nucleated, and for details, one can
further read Refs. [25, 26]. For example, the solid nucleus of a hard-sphere crystal is
expected to have randomly stacked hexagonal order, and one can choose dc = 0.7 and
𝜉c = 6 with l = 6. Note that this order parameter does not distinguish between particles
with diﬀerent crystalline symmetries, e.g. face-centered cubic (FCC), hexagonal close
packed (HCP) and body-centered cubic (BCC).
To further distinguish between particles with diﬀerent crystalline symmetries, one can
use the averaged local bond order parameter ql and wl proposed by Lechner and Dellago
[27], which can identify each particle as FCC-like, HCP-like or BCC-like, provided the
number of neighboring particles Nb(i) ≥10:
ql(i) =
√
√
√
√4𝜋
2l + 1
l∑
m=−l
|qlm(i)|2,
(11.31)
wl(i) =
∑
m1+m2+m3=0
(
l
l
l
m1 m2 m3
)
qlm1(i)qlm2(i)qlm3(i)
(
l∑
m=−l
|qlm(i)|2
)3∕2
,
(11.32)
where
qlm(i) =
1
Nb(i) + 1
Nb(i)
∑
k=0
qlm(i).
(11.33)
The sum from k = 0 to Nb(i) runs over all neighbors of particle i plus the particle i itself.
While qlm(i) takes into account the structure of the ﬁrst shell around particle i, the aver-
aged qlm(i) also contains the information of the structure of the second shell, which
increases the accuracy of the crystal structure determination. As shown in Figure 11.5,
in the q6–q4 or w4–q4 planes, the distribution for FCC-, HCP- and BCC-like particles
can be well separated for systems of Lennard-Jones particles [27].

298
Self-Assembling Systems
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.05
0.1
0.15
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
q4
q6
0.2
0.25
BCC
FCC
HCP
LIQ
0
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.05
0.1
0.15
q4
W4
0.2
0.25
BCC
FCC
HCP
LIQ
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.05
0.1
0.15
q4
q6
0.2
BCC
FCC
HCP
LIQ
0
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.05
0.1
0.15
q4
W4
0.2
BCC
FCC
HCP
LIQ
Figure 11.5 Top: Comparison between the q4–q6 plane (left) and the q4–q6 plane (right) for the
Lennard-Jones system in three diﬀerent crystalline structures and in the liquid phase. Each point
corresponds to a particular particle, where 2000 points from each structure were chosen randomly.
Bottom: The q4–w4 plane (left) and the q4–w4 plane (right). This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [27]
with permission of the American Institute of Physics.
11.4
Simulation Methods for Studying Nucleation
Nucleation is normally a rare event triggered by spontaneous ﬂuctuations. The
most straightforward way of studying nucleation would be brute force molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, but using brute force MD simulation would be very
ineﬃcient at low supersaturations. Because the nucleation rate drops exponentially
with decreasing supersaturation, the waiting time for a nucleation event occurring
in an MD simulation increases dramatically, and the statistics would be very bad.
Therefore, besides brute force MD simulation, we also introduce two other rare event
methods for studying nucleation, namely umbrella sampling and forward ﬂux sampling
methods.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
299
11.4.1
Brute Force Molecular Dynamics Simulations
In theory, using an MD simulation to determine nucleation rates is quite simple. Start-
ing with an equilibrated ﬂuid conﬁguration, an MD simulation is used to evolve the
system until the largest cluster in the system exceeds the critical nucleus size. The MD
time associated with such an event is then measured and averaged over many initial
conﬁgurations. The nucleation rate is given by
I =
1
⟨t⟩V ,
(11.34)
where V is the volume of the system and ⟨t⟩is the average time to form a critical nucleus.
Measuring this time is relatively easy for moderate or low supersaturations where the
nucleation times are relatively long compared to the nucleation event itself, which cor-
responds with a steep increase in the crystalline fraction of the system. For high super-
saturations, however, pinpointing the time of a nucleation event is more diﬃcult. Addi-
tionally, the precise details of the initial conﬁguration can play a role at high supersatu-
rations since the equilibration time of the ﬂuid is of the same order of magnitude as the
nucleation time. Hence, to calculate the nucleation rate, one should perform a suﬃcient
number of MD simulations starting from diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations.
11.4.2
Umbrella Sampling
Umbrella sampling is a technique developed by Torrie and Valleau to study systems
where Boltzmann-weighted sampling is ineﬃcient [28]. This method has been applied
frequently to study rare events, such as nucleation [29], and speciﬁcally has been applied
in the past to study the nucleation of hard-sphere crystals [3]. In general, umbrella
sampling is used to examine parts of a conﬁgurational space that are inaccessible by tra-
ditional schemes, e.g. Metropolis Monte Carlo simulations. Typically, a biasing potential
is added to the true interaction potential causing the system to oversample a region of
the conﬁguration space. The biasing potential, however, is added in such a way that it is
easy to “unbias” the measurables.
In the case of nucleation, while it is simple to sample the ﬂuid, crystalline clusters of
larger sizes will be rare, and as such, impossible to sample on reasonable time scales.
The typical biasing potential for studying nucleation is given by [23, 30]
Ubias[n(rN)] = 𝜆
2[n(rN) −nC]2,
(11.35)
where 𝜆is a coupling parameter, n(rN) is the size of the largest cluster associated with
conﬁguration rN, and nC is the targeted cluster size. By choosing 𝜆carefully, the simula-
tion will ﬂuctuate around the part of conﬁgurational space with n(rN) in the vicinity of
nC. The expectation value of an observable A is then given by
⟨A⟩= ⟨A∕W(n(rN))⟩bias
⟨1∕W(n(rN))⟩bias
,
(11.36)
where
W(n) = e−𝛽Ubias(n).
(11.37)

300
Self-Assembling Systems
Using this scheme to measure the probability distribution P(n) for clusters of size n, the
Gibbs free energy barrier can be determined by [31]
𝛽ΔG(n) = constant −ln [P(n)].
(11.38)
Many more details on this method are given elsewhere [31, 32].
As long as we have obtained the free energy barrier, the nucleation rate I can be deter-
mined by [3]
I = 𝜅e−𝛽ΔG(n∗),
(11.39)
where
𝜅≈𝜌fn∗
√
|𝛽ΔG′′(n∗)|
2𝜋
,
(11.40)
n∗is the number of particles in the critical nucleus, 𝜌is the number density of the
supersaturated ﬂuid, fn∗is the rate particles are attached to the critical cluster, and G′′ is
the second derivative of the Gibbs free energy barrier. Auer and Frenkel [3] showed that
the attachment rate fn∗could be related to the mean square deviation of the cluster size
at the top of the barrier by
fn∗= 1
2
⟨Δn2(t)⟩
t
.
(11.41)
The mean square deviation (MSD) of the cluster size Δn2(t) = ⟨n(t) −n∗⟩can then be
calculated by employing either a kinetic MC or MD simulation at the top of the barrier.
The mean square deviation, or variance, in the cluster size appearing in Equation
11.41 has both a short- and long-time behavior. At short times, ﬂuctuations are due
to particles performing Brownian motion around their average positions, while the
long-time behavior is caused by rearrangements of particles required for the barrier
crossings. The slope of the variance is large at short times where only the fast rattling is
sampled. However, the longer the time the further the system has diﬀused away from
the critical cluster size at the top of the nucleation barrier. Auer [33] states that runs
need to be selected that remain at the top of the barrier. However, when this is done the
attachment rate is lower than when the average over all runs is taken since it excludes
the runs that move oﬀthe barrier fast and have the largest attachment rate. This
problem is analogous to determining the diﬀusion constant of a particle performing a
random walk. By only including walks which remain in the vicinity of the origin, the
measurement is biased and excludes trajectories which quickly move away from the
origin. This result is an underestimation of the diﬀusion constant, and similarly, in this
case, an underestimate of the attachment rate. Hence, in the calculation of attachment
rate, one should include all trajectories starting from the top of the barrier. To illustrate
this, we show the size of nucleus as a function of time for diﬀerent trajectories starting
from the top of the free energy barrier in the crystal nucleation of a hard-sphere system
in Figure 11.6. One can see that the cluster can completely disappear or double in
size within 0.3𝜏l, where 𝜏l is the time that it takes a particle on average to diﬀuse over
a distance equal to its diameter, i.e. 𝜏l = 𝜎2∕(6Dl). From these trajectories, one can
calculate the kinetic attachment rate from the mean square deviation as shown in
Figure 11.7.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
301
0
50
100
150
200
0
5000 10000 15000 20000
Time t in MC cycles
25000 30000 35000
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Cluster size (n)
Time t/τL
Figure 11.6 The cluster size (n(t)) as a function of time in MC cycles for a random selection of clusters
that start at the top of the nucleation barrier.
Figure 11.7 The mean squared
deviation (MSD) of the cluster size
⟨Δn2(t)⟩as a function of time t in
MC cycles. The cluster size has been
measured every cycle and averaged
over 100 cycles to reduce the
short-time ﬂuctuations. The slope of
this graph is twice the attachment
rate (Equation 11.41).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
MSD cluster size
Time t in MC cycles
Time t/τL
Cluster size
fit
11.4.3
Forward Flux Sampling
In the classic nucleation theory and umbrella sampling method, one assumes that the
process of nucleation is a quasi-equilibrium process, and the trajectory follows the mini-
mum free energy pathway, which is not always true. Therefore, we introduce another rare
event method, namely forward ﬂux sampling (FFS), which can also be used to sample
non-equilibrium phase transitions.
The forward ﬂux sampling method was introduced by Allen et al. [8] in 2005 to study
rare events and has since been applied to a wide variety of systems. Two review articles
on the subject (Refs. [34, 35]) have appeared recently and provide a thorough overview
of the method. As shown in Figure 11.8, the basic idea behind FFS is that the whole
transition from state A (ﬂuid) to state B (solid) can be divided into many steps, and there
are a number of interfaces {𝜆i, 0 ≤i ≤n} in between A and B [34]. Then the nucleation

302
Self-Assembling Systems
B
λ0
λ1
λ2
λ3
λn
A
Figure 11.8 Schematic illustration of
the FFS method. An ensemble of
branched transition paths is
generated simultaneously by ﬁring
Mi trial runs from randomly chosen
conﬁgurations at each interface in
turn.
rate from the ﬂuid phase A to the solid phase B can be written as
kAB = ΦA𝜆0P(𝜆N|𝜆0)
(11.42)
= ΦA𝜆0
N−1
∏
i=0
P(𝜆i+1|𝜆i),
(11.43)
where ΦA𝜆0 is the steady-state ﬂux of trajectories leaving the A state and crossing the
interface 𝜆0 in a volume V, and P(𝜆i+1|𝜆i) is the probability that a conﬁguration starting
at interface 𝜆i will reach interface 𝜆i+1 before it returns to the ﬂuid (A). This assumes
that the order parameter used in the simulation is perfect, and that the ﬂuctuation of
the order parameter in each trajectory connecting two neighboring interfaces is not
too large. However, this is not generally true. For instance, if we apply this method
directly to the crystal nucleation of a hard-sphere system, a number of problems appear.
As shown in Figure 11.6, for short times the size of a cluster measured by the order
parameter ﬂuctuates wildly. The variance in the cluster size displays two diﬀerent types
of behavior: short-time ﬂuctuations related to surface ﬂuctuations of the cluster, and
longer-time cluster growth (Figure 11.7). Thus, if we try to measure the ﬂux ΦA𝜆0 directly,
we encounter diﬃculties due to these short-time surface ﬂuctuations. In theory, FFS
should be able to handle these types of ﬂuctuations; however, they increase the amount
of statistics necessary to properly measure the ﬂux and the ﬁrst probability window. In
the second part of the FFS calculations, probabilities of the form P(𝜆i+1|𝜆i) need to be
determined. In calculating these probabilities it is important to be able to determine if a
cluster has returned to the ﬂuid (A). For pre-critical clusters we ﬁnd large ﬂuctuations of
the order parameter, as shown in Figure 11.9, which can lead to a cluster being misiden-
tiﬁed as the ﬂuid (A). Speciﬁcally, in this ﬁgure the darkest trajectory (black) shows a
cluster containing 43 particles that shrinks to around 5 particles before it returns to 40,
and ﬁnally reaches a cluster size of 60 particles. Hence, if we had set 𝜆0 = 5, this trajec-
tory would have been identiﬁed as melting back to the ﬂuid phase (A). However, since
the growth of a cluster from size 5 to 60 is a rare event in our system, we presume that this
was simply a short-time ﬂuctuation of the cluster and not a “real” melting of the instan-
taneously measured cluster. For pre-critical clusters, these ﬂuctuations result in cluster
sizes that are smaller than the cluster “really” is. We suggest that these ﬂuctuations are

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
303
0
500
1000
1500
0
10
20
30
40
50
n
Time t in MC cycles
Figure 11.9 The cluster size as a function of time t in MC cycles for four random trajectories at
pressure 𝛽p𝜎3 = 17 starting with a cluster size of n = 43 using kinetic MC simulations with step size
ΔKMC = 0.1𝜎and measuring the order parameter every Δtord = 5 MC steps.
largely related to the diﬃculty that this order parameter has in distinguishing between
solid- and ﬂuid-like particles at the ﬂuid–solid interface. For larger clusters, where the
surface to volume ratio is small, this problem is minimal. However, for elongated or
rough pre-critical clusters, where the surface to volume ratio is large, these surface ﬂuc-
tuations and rearrangements are important, and can cause problems in measuring the
order parameter.
Thus, to try to address these problems, we suggest a modiﬁcation to the original FFS
method [5]. Essentially, we regroup the elements of the rate calculation such that
kAB = ̃ΦA𝜆1
N−1
∏
i=1
P(𝜆i+1|𝜆i),
(11.44)
where
̃ΦA𝜆1 = ΦA𝜆0P(𝜆1|𝜆0).
(11.45)
We note that if 𝜆1 is chosen such that it is a relatively rare event for trajectories starting
in A to reach 𝜆1, then
̃ΦA𝜆1 ≈
1
⟨tA𝜆1⟩V ,
(11.46)
where ⟨tA𝜆1⟩is the average time it takes a trajectory in A to reach 𝜆1. The approximation
made here, in contrast to normal FFS simulations, is that the time the system spends
with an order parameter greater than 𝜆1 is negligible. Since even reaching this interface
is a rare event, this approximation should have a minimal eﬀect on the resulting rate.
Additionally, in this way we are relatively free to place the ﬁrst interface (𝜆0) anywhere
under 𝜆1. One can choose to use 𝜆0 = 1 to minimize the eﬀect of ﬂuctuations, as seen in
Figure 11.9, on the probability of reaching the following interface. Here we assume that
any crystalline order in a system with an order parameter of 1 likely does not arise from

304
Self-Assembling Systems
ﬂuctuation of a much larger cluster, but rather is very close to the ﬂuid, and is expected
to fully melt and not grow out to the next interface. In this manner one can start several
parallel trajectories from the ﬂuid phase in order to measure ⟨tA𝜆1⟩, stopping whenever
the trajectory ﬁrst hits interface 𝜆1.
11.5
Crystal Nucleation of Hard Spheres: Debates and
Progress
In the seminal paper by Auer and Frenkel at the beginning of this century [3], the crystal
nucleation rate for systems of hard spheres was calculated for the ﬁrst time by using the
umbrella sampling method. However, as shown in Figure 11.10, the calculated nucle-
ation rates from simulations diﬀer by many orders of magnitude from the previous
experimental measurements [36–38]. This huge diﬀerence invoked an ongoing debate
in the community of soft matter physics, and also motivated much further research using
colloidal systems to study the physics of nucleation.
*
*
*
*
0.56
(a)
(b)
0.54
0.52
0.58
log10 (I)
Imax Ref.3
Ref.2
Ref.4
Simulation (monodisperse)
Simulation (polydisperse)
Iavg Ref.3
–21
–20
–19
–18
–17
–16
–15
–14
–13
–12
–11
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
0.60
ϕ
Figure 11.10 (a) Crystal nucleation rates I obtained from computer simulations for systems of
monodisperse and polydisperse hard spheres as a function of packing fraction 𝜙, and its comparison
with experimental measurements. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [3], and the Ref.2, 3 and 4 in the
ﬁgure correspond to Refs. [36], [37] and [38] in this chapter, respectively. (b) Snapshot of a
cross-section of a critical nucleus of a hard-sphere crystal at a liquid volume fraction 𝜙= 0.5207. This
ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [3] with permission of Nature Publishing Group.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
305
Because of the large discrepancy between the nucleation rates obtained in simulations
and experiments, a number of works were dedicated to understanding the physics of
nucleation in hard-sphere systems. It was speculated that the crystal nucleation in
hard-sphere systems may not be a quasi-equilibrium process, and one should use some
simulation methods without the quasi-equilibrium assumption. Therefore, by using
three diﬀerent simulation methods, i.e. brute force MD simulation, umbrella sampling
Monte Carlo simulation and forward ﬂux sampling simulation, we systematically
investigated the crystal nucleation in hard-sphere systems [5]. The brute force MD
simulations and FFS simulations aim to follow the real physical trajectories of the
system, which do not assume the nucleation to be a quasi-equilibrium process, and
they are also weakly aﬀected by the choice of order parameter, given that the order
parameter is not too bad. Essentially, as shown in Figure 11.11, we found that within
these estimated error bars (1–2 orders of magnitude), nucleation rates obtained from
computer simulations are all in agreement, while the experimentally obtained rates
show a markedly diﬀerent behavior, particularly for low supersaturations where the
diﬀerence between the simulations and experiments can be as large as 12 orders of
magnitude. Note that here we plot the nucleation rates in units of long-time diﬀusion
time 𝜏l to avoid the eﬀect of diﬀusion time. This agreement was further conﬁrmed by
Schilling and co-workers, who simulated the crystal nucleation in a huge system of one
million hard spheres to exclude the eﬀect of system size [4, 39].
Moreover, to be even closer to experimental situations, in which the colloidal parti-
cles are charge stabilized and not perfect hard spheres, we also investigated the eﬀect
of softness in the potential [6]. We found that the softness of the potential has a minor
eﬀect on the crystal nucleation, if the potential is not extremely soft, i.e. penetrable, and
with a proper normalization one can map the nucleation rates of soft repulsive spheres
to systems of hard spheres [5, 7, 40]. Besides the softness of the potential, another issue
Molecular Dynamics
Forward Flux Sampling
Umbrella Sampling
Exp. Harland & Van Megen
Exp. Sinn et al.
Exp. Schatzal & Ackerson
Umbrella Sampling, Auer & Frenkel
Umbrella Sampling, 5% polydispersity, Auer & Frenkel
0.56
0.55
0.54
0.53
0.52
10–20
10–18
10–16
10–14
10–12
10–10
10–8
10–6
10–4
10–2
100
0.57
0.58
ϕ
/σ3τ/
Figure 11.11 A comparison of the crystal nucleation rates of hard spheres as determined by the three
methods described in this chapter, FFS, US and MD, with the experimental results from Refs. [36–38]
and theoretical results from Ref. [3, 5].

306
Self-Assembling Systems
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0
20
40
60
Fraction of FCC (HCP) particles
80
FFS (FCC)
MD (FCC)
US (FCC)
FFS (HCP)
MD (HCP)
US (HCP)
Cluster size (n)
100
Figure 11.12 Fraction of particles identiﬁed as either FCC or HCP, respectively, in clusters produced via
molecular dynamics (MD), forward ﬂux sampling (FFS) and umbrella sampling (US) simulations as a
function of cluster size n. All three methods agree and ﬁnd the pre-critical clusters are predominately
FCC.
is that in computer simulations, due to limitations of computing power, the hydrody-
namic eﬀect was mostly neglected, which may change the dynamics of nucleation and
the resulting rate. In a recent work by Radu and Schilling, they simulated the crystal
nucleation in a dense hard-sphere system with full hydrodynamic interactions, and they
found that the viscosity of the solvent can, to some extent, speed up the nucleation rate
[41]. However, due to the large uncertainty (1–2 orders of magnitude) in measuring
nucleation rate in general, the eﬀect of hydrodynamics on the nucleation rate remains
unclear, and needs further more systematic study on hard-sphere systems with larger
density ranges.
In addition to the nucleation rate, the structure of critical nuclei in hard-sphere
systems is also not well understood. It was pointed out by Bolhuis et al. that the
thermodynamically stable crystalline structure in hard-sphere systems is FCC, but
the free energy diﬀerence between FCC and HCP hard-sphere crystals is only around
10−3kBT per particle [42]. Because of such a tiny free energy diﬀerence between these
two crystals, you might guess that the crystal nuclei of hard spheres would likely be a
uniform mixture of particles with FCC and HCP symmetries, i.e. random hexagonal
close packed (RHCP) nuclei. However, as shown in Figure 11.12, we found that the
critical nuclei of hard spheres are predominantly comprised of FCC-like particles, e.g.
more than 80% of particles have FCC-like symmetry, which has been conﬁrmed by
using three completely diﬀerent simulation methods: umbrella sampling, forward ﬂux
sampling and molecular dynamics simulations. Moreover, as shown in Figure 11.13a,
most of the FCC-like particles are in the center of the nucleus, and the small number of
HCP-like particles are found on the outside surface of the nucleus. Here we employed
the order parameter proposed by Lechner and Dellago [27] to distinguish the FCC- and
HCP-like particles, which may not be perfect. Therefore, it is fair to conclude that super-
saturated hard-sphere ﬂuids tend to nucleate FCC crystals instead of RHCP crystals.
According to CNT, the free energy of forming a nucleus consists of both the volume and

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
307
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 11.13 Typical conﬁgurations of critical nuclei for the plastic crystal nucleation of hard
dumbbells with aspect ratios L∕𝜎= 0 (a), 0.15 (b), and 0.3 (c) at supersaturation |Δ𝜇| = 0.34kBT. The
dark gray particles are FCC-like, the light black particles are HCP-like particles, while the light gray
particles are undetermined. Here L is the center-to-center distance between two spheres of diameter 𝜎
in the dumbbell.
surface term, and this suggests that possibly the preference of nucleating FCC crystal
is due to the low surface tension of FCC nuclei. By doing a free energy calculation, it
was found that in systems of hard dumbbells consisting of two connected spheres with
aspect ratio L∕𝜎< 0.3, where L is the center-to-center distance between two spheres of
diameter 𝜎in the dumbbell, the system can form a stable plastic crystal phase, in which
the positions of particles are on a crystal lattice while the orientation of each particle is
random [43]. With increasing aspect ratio L∕𝜎, the stability of the HCP plastic crystal
increases, and when L∕𝜎≳0.15, the HCP plastic crystal becomes a thermodynamically
stable crystal instead of the FCC plastic crystal. Interestingly, in the nucleation of plastic
crystals in a system of hard dumbbells, we also found that with increasing L∕𝜎, there
are more HCP-like particles in the critical nucleus, as shown in Figure 11.13b,c. These
suggest that the free energy diﬀerence between FCC and HCP crystals, although it is
tiny, does play a subtle role in determining the structure of critical nuclei, and complete
understanding of the physics behind this requires further investigation.
Following the existence of a critical nucleus in the supersaturated ﬂuid, the system
would crystallize quickly, for which the process is highly out of equilibrium. It was
found by O’Malley and Snook [45] that during the growth of a post-critical hard-sphere
nucleus, a number of morphologies were observed ranging from multiply twinned crys-
tals to a crystal with a single stacking direction. As shown in Figure 11.14a, because of
the stacking defects produced in the growth of the nucleus, the system can form a large
crystalline cluster with RHCP symmetry. Interestingly, besides the RHCP crystal, the
defects produced during growth can drive the formation of multiply twinned structures
exhibiting in some cases structures with an intriguing ﬁve-fold symmetry [45, 47] as
Figure 11.14 A cross-section through the
center of several nuclei at the induction
time. The light gray particles are
face-centered cubic ordered while the dark
gray particles are hexagonally
close-packed ordered. (a) A nucleus
possessing a single dominant stacking
direction; (b) a multiply twinned nucleus
orientated with its main ﬁve-fold axis into
the page. This ﬁgure is reproduced from
Ref. [45] with permission of the American
Physical Society.
(a)
(b)

308
Self-Assembling Systems
(b)
(a)
(c)
Figure 11.15 Typical conﬁgurations of the crystal structures for linear hard-sphere chains with chain
length N = 20 (a) and for ring-like polymers with N = 3 (b) and N = 5 (c). Only crystalline spheres are
shown here. The black and gray spheres are HCP-like and FCC-like particles, respectively.
shown in Figure 11.14b. These ﬁve-fold symmetric structures are not compatible with
any close packing structure in hard-sphere crystals. Perhaps more surprisingly, even
in the crystallization of hard-sphere polymers consisting of tangentially connected
hard spheres, we found the existence of such ﬁve-fold symmetric patterns as shown
in Figure 11.15. Additionally, it seems not dependent on the topology of the polymer,
and we found it exists in all hard-sphere polymer systems that we studied, i.e. both
linear and circular polymer systems, including even a system of circular hard-sphere
polymers of length 3 [46].
All these discrepancies, debates and intriguing phenomena have made crystal nucle-
ation in hard-sphere systems, i.e. arguably the simplest particle-based model system for
studying phase transition, a big mystery, in which there are still many open questions.
To fully understand crystal nucleation, we need to develop new simulation techniques
as well as better experiments to perform more comprehensive investigations.
11.6
Two-Step Nucleation in Systems of Attractive Colloids
According to the theory of van der Waals, a relatively long-range attraction between
particles can induce a gas–liquid transition [10], and there exists a critical tempera-
ture Tc above which the gas and liquid phases are indistinguishable. Below Tc, with
increasing density the system undergoes a ﬁrst-order gas–liquid transition, and the
phase diagram of a typical example of such a system is shown in Figure 11.16a. If we
decrease the range of attraction to the scale of 10% of the particle size (as shown in the
inset of Figure 11.16b), which normally occurs in suspensions of protein particles, the
gas–liquid critical point becomes metastable with respect to crystallization.
Ten Wolde and Frenkel found that when the temperature of the system is close to Tc,
the nucleation of the protein crystal occurs via a two-step process [49]. As shown in
Figure 11.17b, when T = Tc, the lowest free energy path to the critical nucleus (indi-
cated by the dashed line) is strongly biased towards the axis of N𝜌, which suggests that
the supersaturated gas phase ﬁrst nucleates into a metastable liquid phase, in which sta-
ble crystal nuclei form. This is diﬀerent from the conventional nucleation pathway far
from the critical point, as shown in Figure 11.17a, where N𝜌and Ncrys increase propor-
tionally. More interestingly, when close to the metastable gas–liquid critical point, the
crystal nucleation rate is enhanced by orders of magnitude by the critical ﬂuctuations.
The physics behind the existence of two-step nucleation is the competition of interfacial

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
309
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.5
2.0
2
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2
0
1.0
1.0
fluid–solid
ν(r)/ε
ν(r)/ε
vapour–liquid
T/Tc
T/Tc
vapour–solid
fluid–solid
fluid–fluid
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.0
r/σ
r/σ
1.5
2.0
(a)
(b)
ρσ3
ρσ3
Figure 11.16 (a) Typical phase diagram of a molecular substance with a relatively long-range
attractive interaction. This phase diagram corresponds to the Lennard-Jones 6-12 potential (solid
curve in insert). This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [48] with permission of the American Physical
Society. (b) Typical phase diagram of colloids with short-range attraction, which is shown as the solid
line in the inset [49]. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [49] with permission of The American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
(b)
(a)
Crystal
100
100
50
50
50
50
0
0
75
55
55
75
70
70
50
100
Np
Ncrys
Ncrys
Np
150
100
200
300
400
Crystal
Crystal
Dense
Fluid
Dense Fluid
Figure 11.17 Contour plots of the free energy landscape along the path from the metastable ﬂuid to
the critical crystal nucleus for a system of spherical particles with short-range attraction. (a) The free
energy landscape well below the critical temperature (T∕Tc = 0.89). The lowest free energy path to the
critical nucleus is indicated by a dashed curve. This curve corresponds to the formation and growth of
a highly crystalline cluster. (b) As (a), but for T = Tc. Here, N𝜌and Ncrys are the numbers of particles in
the dense cluster and crystalline nucleus, respectively. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [49] with
permission of The American Association for the Advancement of Science.

310
Self-Assembling Systems
tension between diﬀerence phases. When close to the critical point, the chemical poten-
tial diﬀerence and the interfacial tension between the gas and liquid phases are both
almost zero, and critical ﬂuctuation drives the formation of large liquid droplets to lower
the interfacial tension between the nucleus and the supersaturated gas phase. Because of
this, the two-step crystal nucleation process not only occurs around the gas–liquid crit-
ical point, it is even found to exist when the liquid phase is thermodynamically unstable
[50]. Besides crystal nucleation, due to the same physical reason, the two-step transition
process also exists in many other phase transformation processes, such as protein ﬁbril
formation [51–53], the solid–solid transition [54, 55], nucleation near the isostructural
transition [56] and so on.
11.7
Nucleation of Anisotropic Colloids
In the previous section, we discussed two-step nucleation in colloidal systems, in which
there exists a metastable phase promoting the nucleation of the thermodynamically sta-
ble phase. In this section, we show you a few colloidal systems, in which there are also
some metastable phases between the supersaturated phase and the stable phase, but the
metastable phases strongly prevent the nucleation of the stable phase.
We consider a system of hard spherocylinders, and the phase diagram of the system
in the 𝜌∗= 𝜌∕𝜌cp (reduced density) versus L∕𝜎(aspect ratio) representation is shown
in Figure 11.18, where 𝜌and 𝜌cp are the density and densest close packing density of
the system, respectively. We can see that when the aspect ratio is around L∕𝜎= 2, with
increasing density the system undergoes a direct ﬁrst-order transition from an isotropic
ﬂuid phase to an ordered crystal phase [57]. It was found that crystal nucleation in a
system of such short rods is extremely diﬃcult [58]. Nuclei of single-layered clusters
form and their further growth was prevented by surrounding particles, which is called
self-poisoning nucleation. By using direct event-driven molecular dynamics simulations,
S
Sm
N
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
I
P
L
0.0
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
L/σ
5.0
σ
ρ*
Figure 11.18 Phase diagram of hard spherocylinder in the 𝜌∗(density) versus L∕𝜎(aspect ratio),
representation from Ref. [57], where I, P, N, Sm, S denote isotropic, plastic crystal, nematic, smectic and
crystal phases respectively. Inset: illustration of a hard spherocylinder.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
311
we found that when the system is weakly supersaturated, it can nucleate multi-layered
clusters to crystallize, and a typical dynamic trajectory is shown in Figure 11.19a. More-
over, by performing umbrella sampling Monte Carlo simulations with a newly developed
order parameter [59], we indeed found that the pressure window where the nucleation
growth can occur is very narrow (Figure 11.19b), and at high pressure, the system trans-
forms into a metastable cubatic-like structure quickly, where the system gets stuck due
to the glassy dynamics [60]. Similar behavior was also observed in the nucleation of
the columnar phase in a system of hard platelets [61], which was suppressed by the
metastable cubatic phase [62]. This suggests that glassy dynamics and the metastable
phase play an important role in the nucleation of anisotropic particles.
Besides getting stuck in the metastable phase due to the glassy dynamics, for systems
of hard rods we also found that the metastable spinodal instability can prevent nucle-
ation of the stable phase. For instance, as shown in Figure 11.18, when L∕𝜎= 3.4, with
increasing density the system should undergo a direct phase transition from an isotropic
(b)
100
ΔG(n)/kBT
P* = 7.0
P* = 7.2
P* = 7.4
150
50
0
0
10
20
30
(a)
n
Figure 11.19 (a) Conﬁgurations for spontaneous crystal nucleation from a typical molecular dynamics
trajectory at P∗= 7.6 and t∕𝜏MD = 0, 1000 and 3000 (from left to right). Isotropic-like particles are
drawn 10 times smaller than their actual size. (b) Gibbs free energy ΔG(n) as a function of the number
of rods n in the crystalline cluster at pressure P∗= 7.0, 7.2 and 7.4. Inset: a typical conﬁguration of a
critical cluster (n = 81) at P∗= 7.4. (See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).
n
P* = 2.9
P* = 2.95
P* = 3.0
P* = 2.85
300
200
100
00
10
20
βΔG
30
40
50
Figure 11.20 Gibbs free energy 𝛽ΔG of a hard spherocylinder ﬂuid with L∕𝜎= 3.4 as a function of the
number of particles in the biggest cluster n, as calculated by umbrella sampling MC simulations at
pressures P∗= 2.85, 2.90, 2.95 and 3.00. Inset: a typical snapshot of the system with large clusters. This
ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [63] with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.

312
Self-Assembling Systems
ﬂuid to a smectic phase. Computer simulation shows that the calculated free energy bar-
rier for a supersaturated ﬂuid phase cannot reach a maximum. As shown in Figure 11.20,
even at high pressure P∗= P𝜎3∕kBT = 3.0, the free energy ﬁrst increases with the clus-
ter size n, and then reaches a plateau, and the size of the cluster ﬂuctuates largely around
several hundred particles without transforming into a bulk smectic phase. However, at
a slightly higher pressure, i.e. P∗= 3.05, the system can quickly phase transform into a
smectic phase via spinodal decomposition [63].
To resolve this mystery, we further characterize the system by calculating the posi-
tional and orientation structure factors, i.e. S(k) and Sor(k) of the system as shown in
Figure 11.21. We can see that with increasing density, Sor(k) shows a small-k divergence
while S(k) does not, which suggests that there is a huge orientational ﬂuctuation in the
system, while the density ﬂuctuation remains tiny. This agrees with our observation that
there exist large nematic-like clusters in the system without forming any denser smectic
clusters. We also calculate the correlation length 𝜉by ﬁtting the orientation correlation
function gor(r) ∼exp (−r∕𝜉)∕r as shown in the inset of Figure 11.21, and we clearly see a
power-law divergence of 𝜉∼|P∗−P∗
c|−𝜈with 𝜈= 0.47, which is very close to the critical
exponent 𝜈= 1∕2 for the isotropic–nematic (IN) spinodal obtained from Landau theory
[65]. This implies that the system is approaching an IN spinodal before phase transform-
ing into the stable smectic phase. The existence of this IN spinodal severely hinders the
nucleation of smectic phase, and the system can only transform into a smectic phase
when it is over the IN spinodal [60]. These results are surprising for two reasons. First,
to approach a spinodal is normally very diﬃcult, as the phase transition occurs quickly
when the system is close to the kinetic spinodal instead of the true spinodal [66], and in
this case the IN spinodal is metastable, which makes it possible to approach an IN spin-
odal in a realistic particle system for the ﬁrst time. Second, that the existence of such a
metastable IN spinodal hinders the nucleation of the smectic phase is counterintuitive.
5
0
0
5
10
15
20
0.5
1
1.5
2
10
kσ
Sor(k)
S(k)
0.001
0.01
|P*–Pc*|/Pc*
0.1
10
1
P* = 3.0
P* = 2.828
P* = 2.0
15
ξ/σ
Figure 11.21 Positional (top) and orientational (bottom) structure factor of hard rods with L∕𝜎= 3.4
at varying P∗. The inset shows the pressure dependence of the orientation correlation length 𝜉. The
dashed line is the power-law ﬁtting 𝜉∼|P∗−P∗
c|−𝜈with exponent 𝜈= 0.47.

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
313
One of the basic principles of statistical mechanics is that no matter what the starting
conﬁguration of the system is, after a long enough time of dynamical evolution, it can
always reach the thermodynamically stable state of the system. However, we found here
that in a supersaturated ﬂuid of hard rods before reaching the metastable IN spinodal,
although by deﬁnition the system is in a metastable state, the kinetic pathway of nucle-
ation of the stable smectic phase does not exist, and the waiting time for forming a stable
smectic phase in the thermodynamic limit is inﬁnite. This ﬁnding challenges the basic
principle of statistical mechanics and oﬀers new insights in understanding the role of
metastability in the process of phase transition.
11.8
Crystal Nucleation in Binary Mixtures
So far we have focused on nucleation in monodisperse colloidal systems, which have
been employed to study the physics of nucleation. Furthermore, in systems of binary
mixtures, there are a variety of diﬀerent superlattice crystals found experimentally,
which have shown great promise in photonic applications [64, 67–69]. For instance,
in systems of oppositely charged colloidal particles, depending on the size ratio and
charge ratio between the two types of colloids, a number of ABn crystals have been
observed in experiments [64].
As shown in Figure 11.22, when the size ratio a1∕a2 = 1, depending on the charge
ratio and the Debye screening length, the system can form stable NaCl or CsCl crystals.
Moreover, when the sizes of the oppositely charged colloids are not the same, they can
form many other superlattice crystals. For instance, at a1∕a2 = 0.31, ReO3, Li3N, SiF4,
LS6, CaF2, Cr3Si, A4C60, A6C60, LS4 and LS8 are predicted to be stable; A6C60, LS6 and LS8
have already been observed in experiments [67]. These predictions and ﬁndings open
up new possibilities for fabricating photonic crystals by using binary colloidal mixtures.
Therefore, the study on crystal nucleation of binary mixtures is not only of fundamental
interest but also practical importance.
However, the nucleation of binary crystals is far more complicated compared to a
monodisperse system. For instance, in a study of nucleation of oppositely charged col-
loids with size ratio a1∕a2 = 1, where CsCl is the thermodynamically stable phase [70],
it was found that the dynamics of the system can drive the formation of a metastable
disordered FCC crystal, which suggests that the nucleation pathway is intrinsically out
of equilibrium [20]. This motivated us to look at the nucleation of binary mixtures. We
ﬁrst formulated the classic nucleation theory for nucleation in binary mixtures, and we
found that the choice of order parameter has a strong inﬂuence in the calculation of
the free energy barrier [21]. To illustrate the eﬀect of the order parameter, we investi-
gated binary crystal nucleation in a toy model of hard spheres, in which we considered
a system consisting of two species of hard spheres with identical sizes, but tagged with
diﬀerent colors, i.e. species 1 is gray and species 2 is black. Obviously, the stable solid
phase to be nucleated is a substitutional disordered FCC crystal phase with the gray and
black particles randomly distributed on the FCC lattice. We choose Φ = N1 + 𝜆N2 as
the order parameter, in which N1 and N2 are the numbers of gray and black spheres in
the largest crystalline cluster, respectively.
As shown in Figure 11.23 (top), we can see that by changing 𝜆in the order parameter,
one can obtain nuclei with diﬀerent composition. Even in the steady-state distribution

314
Self-Assembling Systems
6
Q
7
8
(d)
(b)
(c)
(a)
9
10
5
NaCl
CaCl
ka1
Motion
4
3
2
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
0
b
a
c
Nacl stable, –20 kT
Nacl stable, –10 kT
Nacl stable, –5 kT
Nacl CaCl, –5 kT
Figure 11.22 (a) A CsCl crystal formed by positive (radius 1.08 μm) and negative (0.99 μm) poly(methyl
methacrylate) (PMMA) spheres. (b) LS6-type crystal formed by positive (radius 0.36 μm) and negative
(1.16 μm) PMMA particles. (c) NaCl-type crystal formed by charged (radius 1.16 μm) and uncharged
(0.36 μm) PMMA particles. (d) Theoretical phase diagram of oppositely charged colloids with size ratio
a1∕a2 = 1 based on the screened Coulomb energy, where a1 and a2 are the radius of the oppositely
charged colloids. Q is the charge ratio Q = Z1∕Z2, and 𝜅is inverse Debye screening length of the
system. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. [64] with permission of Nature Publishing Group.
calculated using FFS, which was believed much less dependent on the choice of
order parameter, one can still ﬁnd signiﬁcant dependence of composition x on 𝜆
in the pre-critical nucleus. In the two-dimensional free energy landscape shown in
Figure 11.23 (bottom), we can see that by using diﬀerent order parameters, umbrella
sampling simulations bias the nucleation of the system to follow diﬀerent pathways.
However, interestingly, all the pathways travel through the same saddle point, which
is due to the special property of saddle points. This suggests that to calculate the
nucleation free energy barrier of binary mixtures, the properties of the pre- and
post-critical nucleus, e.g. structure, composition, etc., depend on the choice of order
parameter, while the critical nucleus is independent of the order parameter.
Besides the inﬂuence of the order parameter, to study the nucleation of binary mix-
tures one should also be very careful with the ﬁnite size eﬀect of the system. As the
nucleated crystal may have a diﬀerent stoichiometry from the supersaturated binary
ﬂuid phase, to calculate the nucleation barrier of binary mixtures, in principle, one
should perform simulations either using a very large system or using the semi-grand
canonical ensemble (NPT −Δ𝜇) to exclude the ﬁnite size eﬀect, in which Δ𝜇is the
chemical potential diﬀerence between the two species in the metastable bulk phase [71].

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
315
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0
20
40
60
80
80
100
60
40
20
0
0
20
40
60
λ = 1
λ = 0.5
80
100
80 kBT
70 kBT
60 kBT
50 kBT
40 kBT
30 kBT
20 kBT
10 kBT
0 kBT
N1
N2
x
100
120
140
Theory
Steady state
λ = 1
λ = 0.5
Φ
Figure 11.23 Top: Composition x = N2∕(N1 + N2) of the largest crystalline cluster as a function of the
order parameter Φ = N1 + 𝜆N2 for a binary mixture of gray (species 1) and black (species 2) hard
spheres with equal diameter 𝜎as obtained from umbrella sampling simulations at pressure
P∗= P𝜎3∕kBT = 17. The steady-state distribution was obtained by using FFS with 𝜆= 0.5. Bottom:
Contour plot of the two-dimensional free energy landscape ΔG(N1, N2)∕kBT as a function of N1 and N2.
However, to simulate the crystal nucleation of binary mixtures, semi-grand canonical
ensemble Monte Carlo simulations are prohibitively slow. To solve this problem, we
devised a successive umbrella sampling method; for details of the method, please refer
to Ref. [21]. By using this novel method, we successfully obtained the free energy barrier
for the nucleation of an interstitial solid solution, in which the composition of the crystal
phase can be continuously tuned by changing the pressure of the system [72]. We found
that instead of nucleating the crystal with the composition corresponding to the stable
bulk phase, the system nucleates a crystalline cluster, in which the chemical potential
of the small spheres equals that of the metastable ﬂuid. This suggests that the coun-
terintuitive Ostwald’s step rule may generally appear in the nucleation of most binary
mixtures, and it makes the study of the nucleation of binary mixtures highly challenging
from both aspects of physics and simulation techniques. Therefore, nucleation in binary

316
Self-Assembling Systems
mixtures is still largely underexplored, and there are many interesting open questions to
investigate.
11.9
Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
In this chapter, we brieﬂy reviewed the progress on the study of nucleation in colloidal
systems using computer simulations in past decades. We ﬁrst derived the classical
nucleation and the state-of-the-art simulation techniques for studying nucleation, i.e.
umbrella sampling, forward ﬂux sampling and brute force MD simulations. After that
we discussed four hot topics of nucleation, in which a number of interesting phenomena
were found in past decades, and reﬁned our understanding of the physics of nucleation.
Some of the debates are still ongoing, e.g. the nucleation of hard-sphere crystals, and to
resolve these mysteries, we need to devise better theories, better simulation techniques,
and better experiments. All these debates and new phenomena have made nucleation
study one of hottest research directions in soft matter physics. In the following few
years, I personally feel that the following topics could be interesting for future study:
• large-scale dynamic simulations incorporating hydrodynamic eﬀects to study the
inﬂuence of hydrodynamics on the crystal nucleation of colloidal systems;
• polymorph selection in crystal nucleation and theoretical explanations;
• crystal nucleation pathways for anisotropic crystals and many superlattice crystals,
e.g. Laves phase, AB13 crystals, etc.;
• nucleation in non-equilibrium systems, e.g. active matter systems [73–90], and the
theoretical treatment.
The study of these problems will deﬁnitely give us new insights into nucleation and
help to build a complete physical picture of nucleation. Ultimately, the study of nucle-
ation can hopefully help and guide the fabrication of functional materials in experi-
ments.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Start-Up Grant from Nanyang Technological University.
References
1. A. Nawaby, Y. Handa, X. Liao, Y. Yoshitaka, and M. Tomohiro, Polym. Int. 56, 67
(2007).
2. J. Perrin, Ann. Chim. Phys. 18, 5 (1909).
3. S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Nature 409, 1020 (2001).
4. T. Schilling, H. J. Schöpe, M. Oettel, G. Opletal, and I. Snook, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,
025701 (2010).
5. L. Filion, M. Hermes, R. Ni, and M. Dijkstra, J. Chem. Phys. 133, 244115 (2010).
6. L. Filion, R. Ni, D. Frenkel, and M. Dijkstra, The Journal of Chemical Physics 134,
134901 (2011).

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
317
7. T. Kawasaki and H. Tanaka, Proc. Nat. Ac. of Sci. 107, 14036 (2010).
8. R. J. Allen, P. B. Warren, and P. R. ten Wolde, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 018104 (2005).
9. D. Moroni, P. R. ten Wolde, and P. G. Bolhuis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 235703 (2005).
10. J. D. van der Waals, PhD thesis, Leiden University (1873).
11. P. Wegener, Acta Mechanica 21, 65 (1975).
12. R. Reid, Amer. Sci. 64, 146 (1976).
13. A. I. Berezhnoi, Glass-Ceramics and Photo-Sitalls (Springer, New York, 1970).
14. M. Volmer and A. Weber, Z. Phys. Chem. 119, 277 (1926).
15. J. L. Katz, Pure and Applied Chemistry 64, 1661 (1992).
16. D. W. Oxtoby, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 4, 7627 (1992).
17. R. Becker and W. Döring, Ann. Phys. 24, 719 (1935).
18. C. H. Bennett, in ACS Symposium Series No. 46, ed. R. Christoﬀerson (1977).
19. D. Chandler, The Journal of Chemical Physics 68, 2959 (1978).
20. E. Sanz, C. Valeriani, D. Frenkel, and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 055501 (2007).
21. R. Ni, F. Smallenburg, L. Filion, and M. Dijkstra, Mol. Phys. 109, 1213 (2011).
22. P. J. Steinhardt, D. R. Nelson, and M. Ronchetti, Phys. Rev. B 28, 784 (1983).
23. P. R. ten Wolde, M. J. Ruiz-Montero, and D. Frenkel, Faraday Discuss. 104, 93
(1996).
24. P. R. ten Wolde, PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam (1998).
25. C. Valeriani, PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam (2007).
26. R. Ni, PhD thesis, Utrecht University (2012).
27. W. Lechner and C. Dellago, The Journal of Chemical Physics 129, 114707 (2008).
28. G. M. Torrie and J. P. Valleau, Chem. Phys. Lett. 28, 578 (1974).
29. J. S. van Duijneveldt and D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 4655 (1992).
30. P. R. ten Wolde, M. J. Ruiz-Montero, and D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 9932
(1996).
31. S. Auer and D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 3015 (2004).
32. D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulations: From Algorithms to
Applications (Academic Press, Waltham, MA, 2002).
33. S. Auer, PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam (2002).
34. R. J. Allen, C. Valeriani, and P.-R. ten Wolde, J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 21, 463102
(2009).
35. F. A. Escobedo, E. E. Borrero, and J. C. Araque, J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 21, 333101
(2009).
36. K. Schätzel and B. J. Ackerson, Phys. Rev. E 48, 3766 (1994).
37. J. L. Harland and W. van Megen, Phys. Rev. E 55, 3054 (1997).
38. C. Sinn, A. Heymann, A. Stipp, and T. Palberg, Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci. 118, 266
(2001).
39. T. Schilling, S. Dorosz, H. Schöpe, and G. Opletal, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 23,
194120 (2011).
40. D. Richard and T. Speck, Sci. Rep. 5, 14610 (2015).
41. M. Radu and T. Schilling, Europhys. Lett. 105, 26001 (2014).
42. P. G. Bolhuis, D. Frenkel, S. C. Mau, and D. A. Huse, Nature 388, 235 (1997).
43. M. Marechal and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. E 77, 061405 (2008).
44. R. Ni and M. Dijkstra, The Journal of Chemical Physics 134, 034501 (2011).
45. B. O’Malley and I. Snook, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 085702 (2003).
46. R. Ni and M. Dijkstra, Soft Matter 9, 365 (2013).

318
Self-Assembling Systems
47. N. C. Karayiannis, R. Malshe, M. Kroger, J. J. de Pablo, and M. Laso, Soft Matter 8,
844 (2012).
48. J. Hansen and L. Verlet, Phys. Rev. A 184 (1969).
49. P. R. ten Wolde and D. Frenkel, Science 277, 1975 (1997).
50. H. Liu, S. Kumar, and J. Douglas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 018101 (2009).
51. R. Ni, S. Abeln, M. Schor, M. Cohen-Stuart, and P. Bolhuis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
058101 (2013).
52. R. Ni, J. Kleijn, S. Abeln, M. Cohen-Stuart, and P. Bolhuis, Phys. Rev. E 91, 022711
(2015).
53. A. Saric, Y. Chebaro, T. Knowles, and D. Frenkel, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111,
17869 (2014).
54. Y. Peng, F. Wang, Z. Wang, A. Alsayed, Z. Zhang, A. Yodh, and Y. Han, Nature
Materials 14, 101 (2015).
55. W. Qi, Y. Peng, Y. Han, R. Bowles, and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 185701
(2015).
56. A. Cacciuto, S. Auer, and D. Frenkel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 166105 (2004).
57. P. Bolhuis and D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys 106, 666 (1997).
58. T. Schilling and D. Frenkel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 085505 (2004).
59. A. Cuetos and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 095701 (2007).
60. R. Ni, S. Belli, R. van Roij, and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 088302 (2010).
61. M. Marechal, A. Patti, M. Dennison, and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 206101
(2012).
62. M. Marechal, A. Cuetos, B. Martínez-Haya, and M. Dijkstra, The Journal of Chemi-
cal Physics 134, 094501 (2011).
63. A. Cuetos, E. Sanz, and M. Dijkstra, Faraday Discuss. 144, 253 (2010).
64. M. E. Leunissen, C. G. Christova, A. Hynninen, C. P. Royall, A. I. Campbell, A.
Imhof, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij, and A. van Blaaderen, Nature 437, 235 (2005).
65. E. F. Gramsbergen, L. Longa, and W. H. de Jeu, Physics Reports 135, 195 (1986).
66. J. Wedekind, G. Chkonia, J. Wölk, R. Strey, and D. Reguera, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 131, 114506 (2009).
67. A.-P. Hynninen, C. G. Christova, R. van Roij, A. van Blaaderen, and M. Dijkstra,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 138308 (2006).
68. A.-P. Hynninen, J. H. J. Thijssen, E. C. M. Vermolen, M. Dijkstra, and A.
Van Blaaderen, Nature Materials 6, 202 (2007).
69. Y. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, E. Ducrot, J. Yodh, M. Weck, and D. Pine, Nat. Com-
mun. 6, 7253 (2015).
70. A.-P. Hynninen, M. E. Leunissen, A. van Blaaderen, and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett.
96, 018303 (2006).
71. S. Punnathanam and P. A. Monson, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 024508 (2006).
72. L. Filion, M. Hermes, R. Ni, E. C. M. Vermolen, A. Kuijk, C. G. Christova, J. C.
P. Stiefelhagen, T. Vissers, A. van Blaaderen, and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett 107,
168302 (2011).
73. J. Tailleur and M. E. Cates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 218103 (2008).
74. A. G. Thompson, J. Tailleur, M. E. Cates, and R. A. Blythe, Journal of Statistical
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2011, P02029 (2011).
75. J. Bialké, H. Löwen, and T. Speck, Europhys. Lett. 103, 30008 (2013).

11 Nucleation in Colloidal Systems
319
76. J. Stenhammar, A. Tiribocchi, R. J. Allen, D. Marenduzzo, and M. E. Cates, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 111, 145702 (2013).
77. R. Wittkowski, A. Tiribocchi, J. Stenhammar, R. Allen, D. Marenduzzo, and M.
Cates, arXiv:1311.1256 (2014).
78. T. Speck, J. Bialké, A. M. Menzel, and H. Löwen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 218304
(2014).
79. S. C. Takatori, W. Yan, and J. F. Brady, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 028103 (2014).
80. R. Ni, M. A. Cohen Stuart, and P. G. Bolhuis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 018302 (2015).
81. I. Buttinoni, J. Bialké, F. Kümmel, H. Löwen, C. Bechinger, and T. Speck, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110, 238301 (2013).
82. G. Redner, M. Hagan, and A. Baskaran, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 055701 (2013).
83. Y. Fily and M. C. Marchetti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 235702 (2012).
84. R. Ni, M. Cohen-Stuart, and M. Dijkstra, Nat. Commun. 4, 2704 (2013).
85. R. Ni, M. Cohen-Stuart, M. Dijkstra, and P. Bolhuis, Soft Matter 10, 6609 (2014).
86. M. E. Cates and J. Tailleur, Europhys. Lett. 101, 20010 (2013).
87. Y. Fily, S. Henkes, and M. C. Marchetti, Soft Matter 10, 2132 (2014).
88. J. Stenhammar, D. Marenduzzo, R. J. Allen, and M. E. Cates, Soft Matter 10, 1489
(2014).
89. I. Theurkauﬀ, C. Cottin-Bizonne, J. Palacci, C. Ybert, and L. Bocquet, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 108, 268303 (2012).
90. J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. P. Steinberg, D. J. Pine, and P. M. Chaikin, Science 339, 936
(2013).

320
12
Atomistic and Coarse-Grained Simulation of Liquid Crystals
Saientan Bag1, Suman Saurabh1, Yves Lansac2 and Prabal K. Maiti1
1Centre for Condensed Matter Theory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
2GREMAN, Université François Rabelais, CNRS UMR 7347, France
12.1
Introduction
The liquid crystalline phase is ubiquitous in nature and is exhibited by a variety of
systems like surfactants, nucleic acids, lipid molecules, etc. Depending on the phase
behaviour, liquid crystals can be classiﬁed into thermotropic and lyotropic liquid
crystals. The two varieties of liquid crystals are diﬀerent in the conditions under which
they undergo phase transformations. Thermotropic liquid crystals undergo phase
transformation mainly as a function of temperature, while in the case of lyotropic liquid
crystals, phase change occurs primarily as a function of composition and concentration
[1]. Thermotropic liquid crystals are traditionally single component melts and show a
wide range of phases that are classiﬁed based on the positional and orientational order
of the molecules as a function of temperature [2, 3]. These intermediate phases include
nematic (N) and smectic (Sm), as well as more exotic phases such as twist grain bound-
ary (TGB), blue phase, etc., and the formation of a particular phase depends on the
chemical structure and architecture of the constituent molecules. Additionally, pressure
can also induce phase transformations and replace the role of temperature. When more
than one component is present, then the presence of a given phase is dependent on the
concentration of the mixture. Materials forming liquid crystal phases upon addition
of a solvent are called lyotropic. Commonly occurring examples of lyotropic liquid
crystals are water-amphiphilic systems where the amphiphilic molecule is character-
ized by a hydrophilic head group and a hydrophobic tail. Lyotropic liquid crystals can
arrange into hexagonal, micellar, reverse micellar and lamellar phases depending on the
balance between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic character of the molecule and the
concentration relative to the aqueous phase [4, 5]. Examples of amphiphilic molecules
are surfactants, the common ingredients of soaps and phospholipids, which are integral
constituents of cell membranes. Due to the wide range of microstructures possible with
liquid crystals, these systems are commonly referred to as complex ﬂuids.
Various phases formed in both thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals are very
sensitive to the shape of the constituent molecules. The macroscopic properties of a
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
321
given liquid crystal phase are strongly inﬂuenced by the structure of the constituent
molecule in a very complex way. A proper understanding of this structure–property
relationship is very important both from a fundamental point of view and for devel-
oping potential technologies based on liquid crystals. Due to the complex interplay of
molecular shape and interaction, it is diﬃcult to develop a predictive theoretical frame-
work for liquid crystals. As a result, computer simulations have emerged as a powerful
tool to investigate the dependence of the phase behaviour of liquid crystals on the struc-
ture of the constituent molecules [6, 7]. Various levels of description have been used
to develop models for liquid crystals. These models include simple spherocylinders or
assemblies of spheres which interact through hard or soft excluded volume interaction
[8–11], molecules with ellipsoidal shape interacting through the Gay–Berne poten-
tial [12, 13], and simple ‘bead–spring’ representation of molecules interacting through
Lennard-Jones potentials [14]. And ﬁnally, there exists a large body of work involving
atomic-level models of real molecules that show liquid crystalline ordering [15–17].
Simulation methods employed to study liquid crystal (LC) phases range from molecu-
lar dynamics (MD), Monte Carlo (MC), Brownian dynamics (BD) to dissipative particle
dynamics (DPD). In this chapter we give an overview of the various methods used in
simulating self-assembly phenomena in liquid crystals. From a microscopic point of
view, atomistic MD is a realistic approach as it considers all atom dynamics, but suf-
fers from the drawback that a huge computational eﬀort is required to explore the full
phase space and longer length and time scales involved at the mesoscopic level. An eﬀec-
tive coarse-grained model reduces the computational eﬀort considerably, but lacks the
required chemical details to be useful as a predictive tool. Developing suitable multiscal-
ing strategies that cover the range of length and time scales typically involved in these
complex mesophases is an active area of research [18–20].
In the ﬁrst part of this chapter, we give a comprehensive overview of the atomistic
simulations carried out to date on various thermotropic liquid crystals. We focus on
thermotropic liquid crystals and describe prominent atomistic MD studies of the LC
phase behaviour of various rod-like molecules. Then we discuss how Monte Carlo
simulations, along with coarse-grained models based on excluded volume interactions
can be used to study the wide variety of phases that occur in systems consisting of a
collection of bent-core or banana-shaped liquid crystal molecules. Then we move on to
describe the thermotropic LC phases formed by various disk-shaped molecules which
have many important technological applications. The second part of the chapter deals
with chromonic liquid crystals, which are basically lyotropic in nature. In this section
we describe important atomistic as well as coarse-grained studies carried out to date
on the chromonic LC phase. We also refer the reader to some earlier reviews on this
subject [21, 22].
12.2
Thermotropic Liquid Crystal
12.2.1
Fully Atomistic Simulation
Early atomistic simulation studies mostly dealt with the nematic phase and were limited
to very small system size and short time scales due to the unavailability of reliable force

322
Self-Assembling Systems
ﬁelds as well as inadequate computer resources. For example, early all-atom MD simu-
lation studies by Wilson and Allen [23, 24] demonstrated the formation of the nematic
phase in the trans-4-(trans-4-n-pentylcyclohexyl)cyclohexylcarbonitrile (CCHS) com-
pound. The isotropic phase was reported at 390 K. Cooling from the isotropic phase, the
nematic phase was obtained at 350K. The formation of the LC phase was monitored by
calculating the orientational order parameter or the so-called nematic order parameter
given by S = ⟨P2 cos 𝜃⟩=
⟨
3
2cos2𝜃−1
2
⟩
, where P2 is the second Legendre polynomial,
𝜃is the angle between the nematic director and the long axis of the molecule and ⟨⟩
refers to ensemble average.
This was followed by ‘The ﬁrst thousand-molecule simulation of a mesogen at the
fully atomistic level’ by Cook and Wilson [25], where the authors reported LC phases
of the 4-(trans-4-n pentylcyclohexyl)benzonitrile (PCHS) compound. The authors used
the OPLS-AA force ﬁeld (FF) from Jorgenson and co-workers [26] and employed the
DL_POLY software to perform the MD simulations. Simulation was started from an
ordered phase and was heated to gradually get to the isotropic phase. The measured
density and diﬀusion constant of the system in the isotropic phase matched quite well
with the experimental data, making this study an early success for atomistic simulation
in this ﬁeld. The ﬁrst simulation in which, starting from an isotropic phase, the LC phase
was shown to self-assemble was also reported by Wilson and co-workers in a system of
4,4-din-pentyl-bibicyclo[2.2.2]octane (5,5-BBCO) [27]. In this study, the authors used
the MM3 force ﬁeld [28] to describe inter- and intra-molecular interactions.
Lansac et al. [29] simulated the formation of the partial bilayer SmAd of
4-octyl-4′-cyanobiphenyl (8CB) (Figure 12.1) starting from an initial bilayer con-
dition using a force ﬁeld combining ab initio calculations (bonded interactions) and
emirical data taken mostly from the OPLS FF (non-bonded interactions). The layer
spacing was found to be close to the experimental value and a microscopic picture
of the partial bilayer showing the importance of the interactions between permanent
cyano-electric dipoles was provided. The same approach was used to study the
X
21.5 °C
33.5 °C
40.5 °C
SmAd
N
I
N
C
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
N
C
N
C
N
C
Figure 12.1 (a) Structure of the 8CB molecule along with its phase behaviour as a function of
temperature. Other molecules belonging to the same family as 8CB: (b) 5CB, (c) 6CB and (d) 7CB.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
323
reversible increase in layer spacing observed experimentally in an 8CB solvent doped
with a small number of photosensitive azobenzene (7AB) molecules [30]. Atomistic
MD simulations showed that the phenomenon was due to a nanophase segregation
of the azobenzene molecules from within the 8CB layers to locations in between the
layers during the trans-to-cis photo-isomerization (Figure 12.2). Considering the small
fraction of azobenzene molecules undergoing trans-to-cis isomerization under UV
illumination, the simulations were able to quantitatively reproduce the experimental
increase in layer spacing. This study was one of the early successes of atomistic MD
simulation in the ﬁeld of LC simulation.
Continuing their eﬀort to make a more accurate FF for LC simulation, Wilson and
co-workers started developing what is now called the liquid crystal force ﬁeld (LCFF) to
simulate various LC phases at the all-atom level [31]. The force ﬁeld employed the same
energy expression as in AMBER [26] to treat the various non-bonded and bonded terms
and used the AMBER atom type convention. To test the accuracy of this FF, Wilson and
co-workers used LCFF to reproduce the densities, heat of vaporization and diﬀusion
constant of fragments of several liquid crystal compounds as tabulated in Table 12.1.
Wilson et al. later [32] simulated the biaxial nematic phase in bent core compounds
made of 2,5-bis-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole mesogen (ODBP-Ph-C(7)) using
all-atom MD simulations. They used a combination of LCFF and OPLS-AA force ﬁelds
to describe the intra- and inter-molecular interaction. The degree of biaxiality was
found to be very small and disappears when the electrostatic interaction is turned
oﬀ. In their simulation, they were also able to show the formation of ferroelectric
domains in the nematic phase characterized by parallel orientation of the short axis
of the molecule, which is aligned such that the oxidazole dipoles are parallel to each
other. Later, the same group also reported simulation of the commercial liquid crystal
mixture E7, which is a mixture of the following four components mixed in a certain
weight percentage: 4-cyano-4′-n-pentyl-biphenyl (5CB), 4-cyano-4′-n-heptyl-biphenyl
(7CB), 4-cyano-4′-n-octyloxy-biphenyl (8CB) and 4-cyano-4′-n-pentyl-p-terphenyl
(5CT). They demonstrated the formation of the nematic phase from an isotropic
solution of E7 mixture during a 100ns-long atomistic simulation [33] using a
combination of LCFF and OPLS-AA. Interestingly they observed a more ordered
arrangement of the cyanoterphenyl component 5CT than any other components
in the mixture. LCFF was also successfully used to study the liquid crystal phase of
n-4-(trans-4-n-pentylcyclohexyl)benzonitrile (PCH5) using a fully atomistic model
[34]. The authors also calculated ﬂexoelectric coeﬃcients in the nematic phase of
PCH5, which were found to be in good agreement with the experimental results.
Later, the same group used GAFF FF [35] to simulate various LC phases of 8CB com-
pounds [36]. 8CB compounds have attracted a lot of attention as they are a good testing
ground for various LC force ﬁelds due to the wealth of experimental data available. The
authors predicted a crystal–SmA transition in the temperature window of 300–320 K
(corresponding to an experimental transition temperature of 295K), a SmA–nematic
(N) transition in the temperature window of 340–360K (corresponding to an experi-
mental transition temperature of 307K) and a N–isotropic (I) transition at 375K (cor-
responding to an experimental transition temperature of 314K). The authors could sim-
ulate the low-temperature SmA phase of 8CB materials, which also reproduced the
correct layer spacing as observed in experiments. In the same work, they also simulated

324
Self-Assembling Systems
1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
0
4
8
12
16
20
24 28
32
Z
Z
Z (angstrom)
Z (angstrom)
ρ (g/cm3)
ρ (g/cm3)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(d)

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
325
Figure 12.2 (a) Initial system for the mixture of 8CB and trans-7AB. (b) Final system for the same
mixture. The 7AB molecules are shown separately for clarity. Mass density proﬁles along the layer
normal for 8CB (open circles) and 7AB (ﬁlled circles) averaged over the last 2 ns of (c) trans-7AB and (d)
cis-7AB simulations. Mass densities of 7AB have been multiplied by a factor of 10 for clarity. The solid
curves are ﬁts to a low-order Fourier expansion. One notes that trans-7AB is preferentially
incorporated into the 8CB layers; cis-7AB exhibits a deep minimum near the centre of the 8CB layer,
indicating that it is excluded quite eﬀectively from the 8CB layers.
Table 12.1 Comparison of experimental densities and heat of vaporization
with simulated numbers using LCFF for several standard liquid fragments [31].
Liquid
T (K)
⟨𝝆⟩simu
(kg m−3)
⟨𝝆⟩expt
(kg m−3)
𝚫vapHsimu
(kJ mol−1)
𝚫vapHexpt
(kJ mol−1)
Biphenyl
343
981.3±7.1
990
62.99
61.23
4-cyanobiphenyl
360
1028.7±7.1
—
77.119
—
Butane
272.5
605.3±10.6
602
21.67
22.44
n-propylbenzene
298
861.8±7.8
860
45.88
46.48
Phenylcyclohexane
298
954.9
939
66.41
64.14
2-ﬂuorobiphenyl
343
1085.6
—
31.66
—
Hexane
298
664.36±8.0
656
33.13
31.98
Terphenyl
493
932.46 ±8.8
957.7
72.02
75.89
the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of the 8CB liquid crystal across the
N–I phase transition and found good agreement with the experimental data.
McDonald and Hanna [37] used the united atom (UA) model to simulate the LC
phases of 8CB and reported isotropic, nematic and smectic phases. In their simula-
tion, they neglected long-range electrostatic interactions. Although the study predicted
a smectic A phase, as observed in experiments, the predicted periodicity of the smec-
tic phase (19.5Å) was equal to the length of a fully extended 8CB molecule, rather
than an 8CB dimer (31.4Å) as seen in experiments. The neglect of electrostatic interac-
tions precluded dimer formation. In addition to this, the model also predicted a higher
disorder–order transition temperature. The 8CB molecules, with ﬂexible tails, which
lead to greater entropy, are expected to order at lower temperatures than the model
predicted.
Zannoni and co-workers used atomistic simulation to probe the odd–even eﬀect in
the phenyl alkyl-4-(4-cyanobenzylidene)aminocinnamates mesogenic series [38], as
well as to calculate the temperature corresponding to the isotropic to nematic (I–N)
phase transition. Back then, this was one of the largest simulations covering almost
40–50 ns for each temperature in the range of 500–560K. The equilibration was
monitored by plotting the variation of nematic order parameter S as a function of time
at each temperature, and the simulation was continued until a plateau was observed.
A combination of AMBER [39] and OPLS force ﬁelds [26] was used. The I–N phase
transition was monitored by ﬁtting the temperature dependence of the order parameter

326
Self-Assembling Systems
to the Haller [40] expression given by
⟨S2⟩Haller = (1 −⟨S2⟩Iso)
(
1 −T
TNI
)𝛽
+ ⟨S2⟩Iso,
where 𝛽is the critical exponent corresponding to the N–I transition. The N–I transi-
tion temperature (TNI) obtained through such a ﬁt and shown in Table 12.2 is in good
agreement with the available experimental results.
Later Zannoni and co-workers [41] used a modiﬁed AMBER FF to model various
properties of the nCB series of liquid crystals; their results are summarized in Table 12.3.
They modiﬁed the AMBER LJ parameter set to reproduce the experimental nematic
to isotropic transition temperature for 5CB. The ﬁnal set of LJ parameters was chosen
in such a way that they reproduced the experimental densities of the nCB series over
a wide range of temperatures. The temperature dependence of the density along with
the experimental densities are shown in Figure 12.3. Although the agreement with the
experiment in terms of density and transition temperature is very encouraging, one can
see systematic deviation in the simulated density from the experimental one particularly
Table 12.2 Comparison of N–I transition temperatures
from simulation and experiments. n = 0, 1 and 2
correspond to the ﬁrst three homologues of the phenyl
alkyl-4-(4′-cyanobenzylidene)aminocinnamate series.
Table taken from [38]. Reproduced with permission of
John Wiley and Sons Ltd.
n
𝜷
TNI(sim)(K)
⟨S2⟩Iso
TNI(expt)(K)
𝚫T(K)
0
0.384
540
0.13
553.4
−13.4
1
0.304
430
0.19
433.7
−3.7
2
0.228
465
0.09
460.9
+4.1
Table 12.3 Phase sequence and transition temper-
ature for the nCB families of liquid crystals [41].
n
Alkyl chain
Cry
SmA
N
Expt
Simu
Expt
Simu
Expt
Simu
4
C4H9
321.2
—
—
—
289.6
—
5
C5H11
297.2
—
—
—
308.2
310
6
C6H13
287.6
—
—
—
302.2
300
7
C7H15
303.2
—
—
—
316.2
320
8
C8H17
294.6
—
306.6
—
313.6
317
9
C9H19
315.6
—
321.2
—
322.6
—
10
C10H21
317.2
—
323.6
—
—
—
11
C11H23
326.2
—
330.6
—
—
—
12
C12H25
321.2
—
332.0
—
—
—

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
327
295
300
305
310
315
320
325
T / K
1.04
1.03
1.02
1.01
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
density / g cm–3
5CB exp
6CB exp
7CB exp
8CB exp
5CB sim
6CB sim
7CB sim
8CB sim
Figure 12.3 Comparison between simulated (symbols) and experimental (continuous lines) mass
densities for 8CB homologues. Reproduced from [41] with permission of John Wiley and Sons Ltd.
in the low-temperature regime. Improvements in the force ﬁeld parameters are needed
to have better quantitative agreement with available experimental data.
Recently, Zhang et al. [42] have optimized some of the parameters in the well-known
TraPPE-UA force ﬁeld from the Siepmann group [43] to simulate various LC phases of
5CB molecules and reproduced various structural properties in good agreement with
experimental results. They demonstrated the transferability of this FF to reproduce the
phase behaviour of 8CB molecules as well. Although these new parameters are able to
produce various LC phases in the correct temperature range, the dynamical quantities
such as the diﬀusion constant of 8CB over a wide range of temperatures does not show
good agreement with experiment.
Earl and co-workers have simulated various LC phases of di-, tri- and tetraﬂuoroter-
phenyls (Figure 12.4) using all-atom MD simulations [44]. They used the LCFF force ﬁeld
developed earlier by Wilson and co-workers. The same group have also simulated the
binary mixture of alkoxy substituted phenylpyrimides 2-[4-(butyloxy)phenyl]-5- (octy-
loxy)pyrimidine (2PhP) and 2-[4-(tetradecyloxy)phenyl]-5-(tetradecyloxy)pyrimidine
(PhP14) and presented a phase diagram of this mixture using fully atomistic simulation
[45]. The molecular structures of these compounds are shown in Figure 12.5.
Earl et al. [45] were able to simulate very large system involving more than 100 000
atoms over 100 ns and produced liquid crystal phases of this mixture at various mix-
ing ratios of 2PhP and PhP14. The binary phase diagram showing various LC phases is
shown in Figure 12.6. To the best of our knowledge this is the only full phase diagram
for such a complex thermotropic LC system using fully atomistic simulation. The pure
2PhP system exhibits isotropic (Iso), nematic (N), SmA, smectic C (SmC) and crystal
(Cr) phases (Figure 12.6). Pure PhP14 exhibits similar phase behaviour except for the
appearance of the SmA phase. The addition of PhP14 in the 2PhP system destabilizes

328
Self-Assembling Systems
CH2=CH(CH2)3O
CH2=CH(CH2)3O
CH2=CH(CH2)3O
C7H15
C7H15
C7H15
F
F
F F
F
F
F
F
F
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12.4 Molecular structures (left) and MM optimized geometries (right) of alkenic (a) di-, (b) tri-
and (c) tetraﬂuoroterphenyls. The ﬁgure is adapted from Ref. [44]. Reproduced with permission of the
Royal Society of Chemistry.
(a)
(b)
(C4H9)O
O(C8H17)
N
N
(C14H29)O
O(C14H29)
N
N
Figure 12.5 Molecular structures (left) and MM optimized geometries (right) of (a) 2-[4-(butyloxy)
phenyl]-5-(octyloxy)pyrimidine (2PhP) and (b) 2-[4-(tetradecyloxy)phenyl]-5-(tetradecyloxy)
pyrimidine (PhP14).
the SmC phase. The SmA layer spacing gradually increases with the addition of more
and more PhP14 compound in the pure 2PhP system.
The authors also give a molecular level picture of the organization of PhP14 in the Sm
host of 2PhP. The proposed organization is shown in Figure 12.7.
12.2.2
Coarse-Grained Model
So far we have given an overview of the simulation of various LC phases using fully
atomistic models with a variety of atomistic FFs. Over the years both the accuracy
of the employed FF and the size of the simulated systems have increased and helped
us to understand the structure–property relationship at the molecular level. How-
ever, studying the self-assembly of various LC phases starting from an isotropic
conﬁguration is still computationally challenging and precludes simulation of large
systems. Coarse-grained models are ideal for studying such self-assembly phenomena.
Hard-core models are a class of coarse-grained models that have been extensively
used in the context of self-assembly in thermotropic LC phases. They are relatively

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
329
Figure 12.6 Phase diagram of the
binary system 2PhP/PhP14 at a
pressure of 1 atm. xPhP14 is the mole
fraction of PhP14 in the mixture.
Diﬀerent phases exist for diﬀerent
ranges of xPhP14. The nematic (N),
phase exists at 0 ⋅0 ≤xPhP14 ≤0 ⋅167.
The smectic A (SmA), phase exists at a
very broad phase region. The smectic
C (SmC), phase exists at lower mole
fractions of PhP14,
0 ⋅0 ≤xPhP14 < 0 ⋅076, and at higher
mole fractions of PhP14,
0 ⋅762 < xPhP14 ≤1 ⋅0. Both
isotropic (Iso), and crystal (Cr), phases
cover the whole phase region at high
and low temperatures respectively.
Reproduced from [45] with permission
of AIP.
580
560
520
480
440
400
360
0.0
0.2
0.4
XPhP14
0.6
0.8
1.0
T / K
Cr
SmA
SmC
S
m
C
N
Iso
simple to code, computationally very eﬃcient, require modest computational resources
and are also easy to treat theoretically. In particular, hard spherocylinders have been
widely used to study various phases of liquid crystals [8, 9]. This model exhibits a rich
phase behaviour which includes the formation of isotropic (I), nematic (N), smectic
A (SmA), columnar (Col) and crystal (Cr) phases. The phase transitions in a system
of hard spherocylinders are driven by the competition between two major entropic
contributions: the orientational entropy that favours the isotropic phase and the
positional entropy that favors the ordered phases, as shown by Onsager in the limit
of inﬁnitely thin rods [46]. In the literature, various simulation methodologies such
as MC, MD and BD techniques have been used to simulate collections of thin rods
with certain aspect ratios. Below we give a brief outline of the MC methodology for
simulating hard spherocylinders. We refer the reader to the well-known and excellent
review article on this subject by Allen et al. [47].
Two main types of models of thin rods can be envisaged: it can be viewed as a col-
lection of connected spheres as shown in Figure 12.8a or a spherocylinder, as shown in
Figure 12.8b.
Each MC step consists of translation and rotation of the rods. Euler-angle-based
quaternions can be used to generate rotation moves during MC simulation. A move is
accepted if there is no overlap between two rods after an MC step, otherwise the move
is rejected. Hence an eﬃcient overlap test is the key ingredient in this technique. In the
case of rods consisting of spherical objects the overlap test is very simple. Two hard
spheres of radius R1 and R2 (Figure 12.9) overlap if the distance between the centres of
the two spheres r12 is less than σ12 = R1 + R2.

330
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12.7 (a) Snapshot of an SmA phase for a mixture with xPhP14 = 0 ⋅167 at 485 K (left).
Schematic sketch (right). (b) Snapshot of an SmA phase for a mixture with xPhP14 = 0 ⋅684 at 480K
(left). Schematic version (right). (c) Snapshot of an SmC phase for a mixture with xPhP14 = 0 ⋅833 at
460K showing the whole mixture (left), only the 2PhP molecules (centre) and only the PhP14
molecules (right). The PhP14 molecules are represented in white and 2PhP molecules in gray in the
snapshots. In the schematic PhP14 molecules are represented by tall lines while 2PhP molecules are
represented by short lines. Reproduced from [45] with permission of AIP.
However, the computational expense is enormous as of the order of N2 calculations
are involved at each MC step, where N is the number of spherical beads that constitute
one molecule of the system. To get rid of this issue cell/neighbour list are used (like
in atomistic simulations) to reduce this cost to nN, where N is the number of beads
constituting a molecule and n the average number of ‘neighbours’. Another elegant way

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
331
Figure 12.8 Models for thin rods: (a) connected spheres
and (b) hard spherocylinder with aspect ratio L∕D.
(a)
(b)
D
L
Figure 12.9 Overlap test for two rigid
spheres of radius R1 and R2.
R1
R2
to treat the thin rod is to consider the molecule to be a spherocylinder. The overlap
test for the spherocylinder shape is very eﬃcient and in the case of very long molecules
it is more eﬃcient than the neighbour list method. The key steps are outlined below.
More details can be found out in the brilliant article by Allen and co-workers [48]. The
spherocylinder can be thought of as a set of points falling within a distance R from a line
segment of length L. We can draw around every point on this line segment a sphere of
radius R that contains all points that are within a distance R from that point.
The problem reduces to determining the minimum distance between two ﬁnite line
segments i and j with orientations ̂ui and ̂uj and centres ri and rj. Any point on line i can
be parametrically written as
−→ri (𝜆) = −→ri + 𝜆̂ui
(12.1)
For line j, similarly, it is given by
−→rj (𝜇) = −→rj + 𝜇̂uj
(12.2)
The vector distance between these two points is given by
−→
rij(𝜆, 𝜇) = (−→ri −−→rj ) + 𝜆̂ui −𝜇̂uj
(12.3)
Now, we want to determine the values of 𝜆and 𝜇for which the distance rij is minimum.
A simple method to ﬁnd these values of 𝜆and 𝜇is the following. Construct the dot
product of −→
rij (Equation (12.3)) with ̂ui and ̂uj . The shortest distance vector must be
perpendicular to both ̂ui and ̂uj, so we need to solve the following equations:
(−→r
i −−→rj ) ⋅̂ui = −𝜆̂ui ⋅̂ui + 𝜇̂uj ⋅̂ui
(12.4)
(−→r
i −−→rj ) ⋅̂uj = −𝜆̂ui ⋅̂uj + 𝜇̂uj ⋅̂uj
(12.5)

332
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
(c)
Zij
(c)
rij
Figure 12.10 Various cases for computing overlap criteria for spherocylinders: (a) parallel to each
other, (b) on top of each other, (c) touching each other in parallel fashion.
Solving Equations (12.4) and (12.5) we get the following values for 𝜆and 𝜇, which
minimize the distance between the two line segments:
(
𝜆0
𝜇0
)
=
1
1 −(̂ui
•̂uj)2
(−̂ui
•−→
rij + (̂ui
•̂uj)(̂uj
•−→
rij)
̂uj
•−→
rij −(̂ui
•̂uj)(̂ui
•−→
rij)
)
(12.6)
Equation (12.6) is a general expression which helps to check the overlap criteria for
any general orientation of the spherocylinders. Below we discuss several special cases
for which Equation (12.6) reduces to a much simpler form.
Case I: For an arrangement of spherocylinders as shown in Figure 12.10a, the overlap
test reduces to a much simpler case as follows. For the parallel case we have
−→
rij ⋅̂ui = −→
rij ⋅̂uj
(12.7)
Using the above criteria in Equation (12.6), we get the following values for 𝜆
and 𝜇:
𝜆0 =
1
1 −(̂ui ⋅̂uj)2 (−̂ui ⋅−→
rij + (̂ui ⋅̂uj)(̂ui ⋅−→
rij))
=
−̂ui ⋅−→
rij(1 −̂ui ⋅̂uj)
(1 + ̂ui ⋅̂uj)(1 −̂ui ⋅̂uj) =
−̂ui ⋅−→
rij
2
(12.8)
Similarly,
𝜇0 =
̂uj ⋅−→
rij
2
(12.9)
Case II: For spherocylinders with a relative arrangement as shown in Figure 12.10b,
the overlap test can be performed by calculating the distance between the
centres of the two spherocylinders given by
zij = Li
2 +
Lj
2 + D
(12.10)

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
333
If zij < Li
2 +
Lj
2 + D then there is overlap between the spherocylinders.
Case III: For an arrangement of spherocylinders similar to that in Figure 12.10c, the
overlap can be detected if rij < D.
For all other general orientations of the spherocylinder we have to make a series
of approximations to ﬁnd the condition for overlap. In one case we set 𝜆= |L∕2|
and ﬁnd out 𝜇, which will minimize the distance between two spherocylinders. From
Equation (12.6) we have
−→
rij
2(𝜆, 𝜇) = −→
rij
2 + 𝜆2 + 𝜇2 −2𝜆−→
rij ⋅̂ui + 2𝜇−→
rij ⋅̂uj −2𝜆𝜇̂ui ⋅̂uj
(12.11)
Minimizing the above expression with respect to 𝜇,
d−→
rij
2(𝜆,𝜇)
d𝜇
= 0, we have
𝜇= 𝜆̂ui ⋅̂uj −−→
rij
2 ⋅̂uj
(12.12)
Similarly, if we set 𝜇= |L∕2| and ﬁnd out 𝜆, which will minimize the separation
between the spherocylinders, we get
𝜆= 𝜇̂ui ⋅̂uj −−→
rij ⋅̂ui
(12.13)
Frenkel and co-workers pioneered the use of the spherocylinder model to study LC
phases [49–51] and for the ﬁrst time demonstrated the existence of LC phases in such
systems. At the same time, McGrother et al. [52] used the spherocylinder model and
presented various LC phases for aspect ratios up to L∕D = 5. For L∕D = 5 they reported
isotropic (I), nematic (N), smectic A (SmA) and crystal (Cr) phases. All the phase transi-
tions were accompanied by a discontinuous jump in the density and so were concluded
to be ﬁrst order in nature. Later, Bolhuis and Frenkel [53] presented the complete phase
diagram of the hard spherocylinder model from L∕D = 0 to L∕D = ∞. The phase dia-
gram is shown in Figure 12.11.
The spherocylinder model has also been used to study the LC phase behaviour of
bent-core molecules. Bent-core or banana-shaped molecules give rise to a new class of
smectic LC phase (SmCP phase) [54, 55] which has attracted tremendous attention in
the recent past due to its potential application in display and non-linear optical (NLO)
devices. These molecules also present a very rare example of spontaneous formation
of macroscopic chiral layers from achiral molecules. The molecules comprising these
phases have ‘bow’ or ‘banana’ shaped cores (shown in the inset of Figure 12.12). We ear-
lier reported MC simulation studies for a system of 400 banana molecules and mapped
out the phase diagram as a function of the opening angle of the banana molecule [56].
The detailed phase diagram of the LC phases formed by banana molecules is shown
in Figure 12.12. Our MC simulation gives rise to a variety of LC and crystal phases
such as: isotropic ﬂuid (I), nematic (N), polar smectic A (SmAP), smectic A (SmA),
columnar (Col), polar crystal (XP) and crystal (X). In Figures 12.13 and 12.14, equilib-
rium snapshots for few LC phases for two opening angles are shown. The SmAP phase
exists up to a certain value of the opening angle, disappears beyond that and changes
to non-polar SmA. The polar and non-polar phases were diﬀerentiated from each other
by monitoring in-plane polarization of the smectic phase. The in-plane polarization is
calculated as m = ∑
imi∕N, where mi is the bow vector of the banana molecules deﬁned
in Figure 12.14. We also show, in Figure 12.14, the equilibrium conﬁguration of the
polar and non-polar smectic phases corresponding to opening angles of 165∘and 172.5∘

334
Self-Assembling Systems
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
log (L/D+1)
1.5
2.0
ρ∗
ABC
AAA
Sm
N
I
P
Figure 12.11 Phase diagram of the hard spherocylinder of aspect ratio L∕D ranging from 0 to 100.
AAA and ABC correspond to diﬀerent arrangements of hexagonal crystal lattices. Reproduced from
[53] with permission of AIP.
XP
D
Col
SmA
X
L
SmAP
SmAP
SmA
N
N
X
Col
XP
I
I
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
reduced pressure
reduced density
90
105
120
135
150
165
180
Ψ (degress)
Ψ
Figure 12.12 Phase diagram of
bent-core liquid crystal as a function of
opening angle obtained through MC
simulation. The various phases shown
include: isotropic ﬂuid (I), nematic (N),
polar smectic A (SmAP), smectic A
(SmA), columnar (Col), polar crystal (XP)
and crystal (X).

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
335
Isotropic
P* = 1
Nematic
P* = 5
SmAP
P* = 10
Figure 12.13 Final conﬁgurations from Monte Carlo simulations of N = 400 bent-core molecules with
opening angle ψ = 165∘as a function of reduced pressure P∗(P∗= 𝛽Pv0, where v0 is the volume of a
zigzag molecule and P is the actual pressure). From left to right: isotropic phase (P∗= 1), nematic
(P∗= 5) and polar smectic A (P∗= 10). (See insert for color representation of the ﬁgure.).
i
ni
mi
SmAP (in-layer polarity) Ψ = 165° 
Sm A (no polarity) Ψ =172.5°
Figure 12.14 Conﬁguration showing the polar smectic (SmAP) phase for an opening angle ψ = 165∘
and P∗= 10. This phase disappears and becomes a non-polar smectic (SmA) at an opening angle of
ψ = 172.5∘for the same value of P∗. We have also shown the in-plane arrangement of the bow vector
for both cases.
respectively. Our MC simulation results also demonstrate the existence of the columnar
phase for a narrow range of opening angle. Figure 12.15 shows the equilibrium conﬁg-
uration of a columnar phase for an opening angle of 178∘.
We were also able to show, through umbrella sampling calculations, that the SmA
antipolar phase was more stable than the SmAP phase, in good agreement with
experiments.

336
Self-Assembling Systems
Figure 12.15 Columnar phase formed at an opening angle of
ψ = 178∘.
Using the spherocylinder model, Maiti et al. [57] have studied the eﬀect of the
addition of a small concentration of bent-core molecules in a smectic host. This study
was motivated by the experiment performed by the Bangalore group at the Raman
Research Institute [58]. In their experiment, Pratibha et al. showed that the addition of
a low concentration of banana molecules to a smectic host gives rise to a new biaxial
SmA phase. It is known in the literature that a small concentration of chiral solute
added to a nematic LC phase formed of achiral molecules induces a helical twist of the
director [59]. Maiti et al. simulated a mixture of rod-like and banana molecules using
MC simulation in an NPT ensemble. They observed that the eﬀect of adding bent-core
solutes on the SmA phase depends on the shape (characterized by the banana opening
angle 𝝍) and size (characterized by the aspect ratio of the spherocylinders) of the
bent-core molecule. Initially, a SmA phase was prepared using spherocylinders of aspect
ratio Lrod∕D = 5. Simulations were performed for two diﬀerent mixtures. In one set of
simulations, a 3% concentration of bent-core molecules made of two spherocylinders
with aspect ratios of Lban∕D = 5 (the overall length of the banana molecules is twice the
rod length) was added to the SmA host. In another case, a 3% concentration of shorter
banana molecules made of two spherocylinders with aspect ratios of Lban∕D = 2.5
was added to the SmA host. It was found that in the case of bent-core molecules with
aspect ratio Lban∕D = 5, the initial SmA phase changes to an anticlinic SmCA ordering
for large values of the opening angle 𝜓. The anticlinic tilt angle 𝜃as a function of 𝜓is
shown in Figure 12.16a. For 100∘< 𝜓< 150∘, the rods in each layer attain a uniform
tilt angle 𝜃= (π −𝜓)∕2 (Figure 12.16). For 𝜓< 100∘, half of each banana molecule
is nanophase segregated between the untilted smectic layers leading to an increase
in smectic layer spacing (Figures 12.16 and 12.17). The tilt angle at diﬀerent values
of 𝜓is shown in Figure 12.16. It clearly depicts the presence of the SmC phase for
a certain range of values of 𝜓for Lban∕D = 5. For 𝜓> 150∘, molecules within each
layer are uniformly tilted, but there is no anticlinic ordering on average (Figure 12.16).
For smaller banana molecules with Lban∕D = 2.5, no anticlinic ordering is induced

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
337
40
30
20
10
0
0
5
10
6.4
6.3
6.2
6.1
6
80
100
120
140
160
180
6.5
6
5.5
5
80
100
120
140
160
180
(a)
(b)
Ψ (degrees)
Ψ (degrees)
layer spacing
θ (degrees)
layer spacing
θ (degrees)
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.16 (a) SmC tilt angle 𝜃and (b) layer spacing as a function of 𝜓for Lban∕D = 5 (left) and
Lban∕D = 2.5 (right).
Ψ = 90°
Ψ = 140°
Ψ = 170°
Ψ = 130°
Ψ = 160°
Ψ = 120°
Ψ = 120°
Ψ = 90°
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.17 Equilibrated conﬁgurations for (a) Lban∕D = 5 and (b) Lban∕D = 2.5 for various values of
𝜓. The rods are represented in grey and the bent-core molecules in black. Reproduced from [57] with
permission of the American Physical Society.

338
Self-Assembling Systems
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Z
ρ(z)
Ψ = 90°
Ψ = 120°
Ψ = 130°
Ψ = 160°
0.9
0.6
0.3
0
0.6
0.3
0
0.6
0.3
0
0.6
0.3
0
Figure 12.18 Density proﬁles for rods (solid
lines) and bent-core molecules (dashed lines)
for Lban∕D = 2.5 for various values of 𝜓. The
bent-core density has been scaled by a factor
of 30 for clarity. Reproduced from [57] with
permission of the American Physical Society.
(Figures 12.16 and 12.17), but a sharp increase in smectic layer spacing is observed
at 𝜓= 130∘resulting from an entropy-driven transition from intralamellar to inter-
lamellar nanophase segregation of the bent-core molecules (Figure 12.16). The density
proﬁles of the rods and bent-core molecules along the smectic layer at diﬀerent
values of 𝜓demonstrate this eﬀect (Figure 12.18). This study with a coarse-grained
spherocylinder model provides an understanding of the relation between shape and size
of low-concentration solute on a solvent in the LC phase. The results and methodology
can be used in molecular engineering to select a suitable solute shape to induce a
desired tilt. The results on nanophase segregation due to smectic ordering and its
dependence on the molecular shape can also be used to tune polymerization rates in
monomer–LC mixtures.
In yet another study at the coarse-grained level, using spherocylinders as the building
blocks, Maiti et al. [60] simulated a collection of zigzag-shaped molecules using the
Monte Carlo technique in the NPT ensemble and demonstrated that simple excluded
volume interactions are suﬃcient to produce a tilted lamellar (SmC) phase. The zigzag
molecules are constructed using three rigidly ﬁxed spherocylinders connected in a
zigzag fashion (Figure 12.19 inset). For 35∘< 𝜓< 80∘, the system exhibits the SmC
phase. The phase diagram of the system with varying zigzag angle 𝜓and reduced
pressure deﬁned as P∗= 𝛽Pv0, where v0 is the volume of a zigzag molecule and P
is the actual pressure, is shown in Figure 12.19. This simulation for the ﬁrst time
demonstrated that the SmC phase can be induced in a collection of molecules by steric
interactions arising out of the molecular shape alone.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
339
Figure 12.19 Phase diagram of
zigzag-shaped molecules with aspect ratio
L∕D = 2 as a function of opening angle (𝜓)
and reduced pressure (P∗). The phase
diagram shows the existence of various
phases: isotropic liquid (I), nematic (N),
smectic A (SmA), smectic C (SmC),
columnar (Col), tilted crystal (XT) and
crystal (X). The zigzag molecule is shown in
the inset and the zigzag angle (𝜓) deﬁned.
Reproduced from [60] with permission of
the American Physical Society.
L
D
Ψ
Ψ (degrees)
SmC
XT
SmA
Col
X
N
I
12
10
8
6
4
2 0
20
40
60
80
reduced pressure
12.3
Discotic Liquid Crystals
The thermotropic liquid crystal phases described so far are mostly formed by rod-like
molecules. In this section we are going to discuss discotic columnar liquid crystalline
(DCLC) phases, which are typically formed by the self-assembly of disk-like molecules,
consisting of a disk-shaped aromatic core with several aliphatic chains attached along
the edge of the core in a symmetric manner. The DCLC phase was ﬁrst observed by
Chandrasekhar, Sadashiva and Suresh in 1977 [61]. The compounds they investigated
were benzene-hexa-n-alkanoates (BHn-alkanoates), whose molecular structure is
shown in Figure 12.20.
In DCLC phases the discotics stack on top of each other to form a column and the
columns are further arranged in a regular lattice. Depending on the arrangement of the
columns, various DCLC phases can form: hexagonal columnar discotic LC phase, trian-
gular LC phase, etc. The core–core and tail–tail van der Waals interactions are mainly
responsible for the stacking of the disks in a column [62]. Like other classes of liquid
crystal phases, the DCLC phase shares some crystal-like properties like optical, electri-
cal and magnetic anisotropy, and ﬂuid-like properties like the inability to support shear
stress (in one or more direction).
DCLC materials are also promising candidates for molecular electronics [63–65]
because they can provide anisotropic charge transport. Charge transport in the DCLC
phases mainly happens through the stacked aromatic cores along the column. To get
Figure 12.20 Molecular structure of BHn-alkanoates.
O
O
O
R
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
R
O
R
R
R
R

340
Self-Assembling Systems
O
O
O
C6H13
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H13C6
O
C6H13
H13C6
C6H13
C6H13
Figure 12.21 Molecular structure of BHA7.
an eﬃcient charge transport along the columnar direction the arrangement of the
molecules in the column has to be perfect and the 𝜋−𝜋overlap between the aromatic
cores has to be suﬃciently strong [66]. Developing a DCLC material with a well-ordered
column and high 𝜋−𝜋overlap between the aromatic cores by tuning the structure
of the core and tails of the discotic molecules has been an active area of research for
the past several years. The technique of conﬁning the DCLC in a nanochannel to get a
high-quality columnar order has recently been studied by few groups [67, 68].
Benzene-hexa-n-alkanoates (BHn-alkanoates) [69], discotic hexakis triphenylene
(HAT) [62, 70] and discotic hexabenzocorone (HBC) [71] and its derivatives are some
of the widely studied discotic materials in the literature. In most of these cases the tails
are aliphatic. Recently, a disotic liquid crystal with aromatic oligothiophene connected
with a long alkyl chain as the tail was studied [72]. Beltran et al. [73] have studied
self-assembly of star-shaped discotic liquid crystal.
One of the early simulation studies on the DCLC phase was performed by Maliniak
et al. [69]. They simulated the isotropic phase of BHA7 molecules (Figure 12.21), which
have the following phase sequence [74]: solid
81.2∘C
−−−−−→D
87.0∘C
−−−−−→isotropic.
Back in 1992, these authors managed to simulate a system with 32 molecules in an
isotropic phase using the united atom force ﬁeld, where the bonded terms were taken
from the MM2(87) force ﬁeld [75] and non-bonded terms were treated using the OPLS
force ﬁeld [26]. The ﬁnal structure of the molecules at the end of a 100ps MD simulation
showed that the aliphatic chains of the molecules are alternately up and down relative
to the aromatic core. An association of molecules in pairs was revealed by the radial dis-
tribution function calculation. The order parameter calculation pointed out a decrease
in orientational order along the chains of the discotic, which was consistent with the
experimental results that were performed as part of the same work. Calculation of the
mean square displacement showed that the chains are more mobile than the cores.
In a later attempt, Mulder et al. [62] simulated the discotic columnar phase of the
HAT6 molecule. The molecular structure of HAT6 is shown in Figure 12.22.
Mulder et al. used the COMPASS force ﬁeld [76] in their simulation. They simulated
only a single column with four molecules. The initial conﬁguration of the column with
four molecules was ﬁrst prepared using the following two diﬀerent methods: (i) Four
molecules are added one by one to the column. Energy minimization was done after
the addition of each new molecule. This gives rise to what is known as the S conﬁgu-
ration where the molecules are rotated 30∘or 60∘with respect to each other. (ii) The

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
341
Figure 12.22 Molecular structure of discotic HAT6.
H13C6 O
O C6H13
X
X
X
X
O C6H13
X
O C13H13
H13C6 O
X
H13C6 O
four-molecule column was heated and then annealed. This gives rise to an L conﬁgura-
tion where the molecules are on top of each other. MD simulations were performed at
300K starting from the above mentioned initial conﬁgurations.
At the end of the MD simulation the starting S conﬁguration turned out to be the one
with the lowest energy and it matched quite well with the crystallographic report. In
their article the authors hypothesized that core/core and tail/tail van der Waals interac-
tions are responsible for the self-assembly of the columns. To substantiate their claim,
they also calculated the force constant related to the in-plane and out-of-plane motion
of the molecules by numerically evaluating the derivative of the energy. They further
divided the contribution of the force constant into core and tail parts. The results are
presented in Table 12.4.
From the data in Table 12.4 it is clear that the van der Waals interactions dominate and
that the in-plane force constants are considerably higher than their out-of-plane coun-
terparts. Interestingly, the in-plane force constant for the tails is much higher than that
for the cores. These results prove that the tail/tail van der Waals interaction is respon-
sible for the rigidity of the columns.
The ﬁrst simulation study where multiple columns were taken into account was
reported by Giorgio et al. [70] in 2004. They managed to simulate 80 HAT5 molecules
arranged in 8 columns with 10 molecules in each column. The chemical structure of a
HAT5 molecule is shown in Figure 12.23.
Columns were further arranged in hexagonal lattices. Hydrogen atoms belonging to
the core were explicitly considered while the united atom approach was used for the
alkyl chains. After an initial energy minimization they performed NPT simulation at
T = 375K corresponding to the middle of the temperature range of the discotic colum-
nar phase. A production run of almost 2 ns was performed. Berendsen temperature and
Table 12.4 Force constants resulting from MD simulations. Repro-
duced from [62] with permission of the American Chemical Society.
Force constant of the
core (kcal mol−1Å−2)
Force constant of the
tail (kcal mol−1Å−2)
Δ van der Waals’ out of plane
3.3
60.1
Δ Coulomb out of plane
1.1
3.1
Δ Coulomb in plane
5.7
4.4
Δ van der Waals’ in plane
165.2
455.3

342
Self-Assembling Systems
R
R
R
R
R
R
Figure 12.23 Molecular structure of HAT5 molecule.
pressure coupling [77] was used for temperature and pressure regulation. During the
simulation the system maintained the hexagonal structure, which was further conﬁrmed
by measuring the value of the 6-fold bond orientational order parameter 𝛹6. Various
correlation functions were measured to examine the ordering of the molecules in a
column. They also measured the mean squared displacement in the NVE ensemble to
compute the diﬀusion constant, but the time scale was too short for a reliable estimate of
dynamical quantities. The mean square displacement measurement showed a solid-like
behaviour along the direction perpendicular to the column, whereas a ﬂuid-like sliding
motion of the column was detected along the columnar direction.
The discotics of hexabenzocoronene (HBC) derivatives were ﬁrst simulated by
Andrienko et al. [71]. The diﬀerent systems simulated by Andrienko et al. are shown in
Figure 12.24. They also followed the united atom approach for the side chains, and the
hydrogen attached to the cores was explicitly considered. A system of 160 molecules
within 16 columns and 10 molecules in each column was simulated. The columns were
arranged in a hexagonal lattice. In this study also, the same kinds of order parameters
and correlation functions were measured as mentioned in the previous paragraph.
HBC derivatives in which the side chains are also aromatic were ﬁrst simulated by
Saientan et al. [78]. They simulated the discotic hexabenzocoronene/oligothiophene
hybrid (W732) which has a molecular structure as shown in Figure 12.25a. Initially, a
system of 160 molecules arranged in 16 columns with 10 molecules in each column was
R
R
R
R
R
R
R=C12
R=C10–6
R=PhC12
Figure 12.24 Molecular structure of HBC derivatives.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
343
(b)
(a)
N N
N
S
S
S
S
N
N N
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
S
S
S
S
N N
N
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
S
S
S
S
Figure 12.25 (a) Molecular structure of the HBC/oligothiophene hybrid. (b) Molecular arrangement in
the hexagonal columnar phase after 200ns of MD simulation.

344
Self-Assembling Systems
prepared. The columns were arranged in a hexagonal lattice. The system was simulated
at 357K, which is in the middle of the hexagonal discotic columnar liquid crystalline
phase. They used the GAFF force ﬁeld [35] with Berendsen weak temperature and
pressure coupling [77] to simulate the phase for almost 500ns. To verify the global
ordering of the columns, an X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) pattern was simulated with the
structure obtained from the MD simulation. The simulated XRD pattern showed a
clear agreement with the experimental lattice constant and conﬁrmed the hexagonal
arrangement of the columns. Various positional and orientational correlation functions
were calculated that completely characterized the ordering (positional and orienta-
tional) of the aromatic HBC core and also its tails in a column. Figure 12.25b shows the
instantaneous snapshot of the system after 200 ns long simulation run. It clearly shows
the arrangement of the molecules in hexagonal columnar phase with the column tilted
with respect to the columnar axis.
Beltrán et al. [73] successfully employed MD simulation to study star-shaped discotic
liquid crystals which give rise to two diﬀerent nanosegregated architectures. In a very
recent report, Busselez et al. [79] studied the discotic columnar liquid crystals of a model
Gay–Berne system both in the bulk and nanoconﬁned states using molecular dynamics
simulation.
12.4
Chromonic Liquid Crystals
In the previous section we discussed the thermotropic liquid crystalline phase formed
by disk-like molecules. In this section we are going to discuss a special class of lyotropic
liquid crystal phase, known as chromonic. Various dye molecules, drugs and anti-cancer
agents are in the class of chromonics. It is believed that there is no critical concentra-
tion of the molecules for self-assembly to occur: starting from a very low concentration,
self-assembly occurs at all higher concentrations.
Both coarse-grained and all-atom simulations of chromonic systems are reported in
the literature [80, 81], but the number of simulations attempted in this area is rather low
and begs for more attention to be given to the technological application of chromonics.
First attempt at simulating the chromonic phase was made by Maiti et al. [80] in
2001. They modelled the chromonic molecules as disc-like objects made of spheres.
The spheres are made hydrophobic or hydrophilic to mimic the hydrophobic core and
hydrophilic periphery of the chromonic. They developed two diﬀerent types of model, as
shown in Figure 12.26, with hydrophobic and hydrophilic units shown explicitly. Model
1 has a larger hydrophobic core with two hydrophilic beads attached at the periphery.
(1)
(2)
Hydrophilic Unit (water like)
Hydrophobic Unit
Water (Solvent)
Figure 12.26 A schematic representation of
model chromonic and water molecules.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
345
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.27 Simulation snapshot of the system after a simulation run starting from isotropic
conditions for low (a) and high (b) concentration.
Model 2 has a single hydrophobic bead at the core surrounded by a larger number of
hydrophilic beads at the periphery. Water was explicitly treated and also modelled as a
hydrophilic sphere in their work.
Interactions between the same type of particles and between the water and
hydrophilic particles were modelled as Lennard-Jones (LJ) potentials. To model
the water–hydrophobic and hydrophobic–hydrophilic interactions, a short-range
repulsive WCA potential (i.e. truncated and shifted LJ potential) was used.
The model chromonic and water molecules were dispersed randomly in a box and
Monte Carlo simulation was performed in an NPT ensemble. Simulations were per-
formed at various concentrations of the chromonic. Chromonic molecules were found
to form short columns (Figure 12.27) at low concentration while increases in colum-
nar length and the number of aggregated structures were observed (Figure 12.27) with
an increase in concentration. To understand the molecular order present in the colum-
nar structure, various positional and orientational correlation functions were calculated.
The calculations conﬁrmed the arrangement of the molecules in a columnar fashion
with the molecular planes parallel to each other. They also studied the variation of the
average cluster size (L) with increasing concentration (𝜙). At low concentration, L was
found to vary with 𝜙in a power-law fashion with an exponent equal to 0.6, but at higher
concentrations the dependence of L on 𝜙turned out to be stronger than the power law.
Starting from an isotropic initial organization, the formation of well-arranged colum-
nar aggregates is very time consuming and was not possible with the computational
resources available in 2001. So, they simulated a set of preassembled columns of
chromonics for both models 1 and 2. The columnar arrangement for model 1 was stable
throughout the simulation (Figure 12.28). For model 2 the columnar structure was
unstable and the system ended up in an isotropic phase. This proved the importance
of the ratio of hydrophobic and hydrophilic units in a chromonic for spontaneous
self-assembly to occur.
Recently, Glaser et. al [81] reported a Monte Carlo simulation of a collection of hard
cylinders with aspect ratios (L/D) 0.5, 0.9 and 2. The cylinders interact through hard

346
Self-Assembling Systems
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.28 Simulation snapshot for the system with (a) model 1 and (b) model 2, after the
simulation run starting from a pre-assembled conﬁguration.
core excluded volume interaction but can stack and bind end-to-end. To maintain the
sticky end condition the following form of potential was incorporated:
U(r) = −Ebond[1 −(r∕rc)𝛾]
for r < rc
= 0
otherwise
where r is the distance between the centres of the circular faces of two neighbouring
cylinders, rc = D∕2 and 𝛾and Ebond are two adjustable parameters. This model applied
originally to the stacking of short DNA strands but it is rather similar to chromonic
assembly. In the context of chromonics, only the simulation with L∕D ratio 0.5 is relevant
because the cylinder can mimic the ﬂat disk like chromonic molecules only for very low
aspect ratios.
The system was seen to order spontaneously only above a particular concentration.
At lower concentrations a nematic phase of the columns was formed while higher
concentrations gave rise to hexagonally ordered columns as typically found in the
chromonic phase. The model failed to predict a very important property of the
chromonic: the occurrence of self-assembly at all concentrations, for the obvious
reason that no eﬀect of the underlying solvent was taken into account. But this very
simpliﬁed model with a simple interaction could predict the qualitative behaviour of
the chromonics satisfactorily.
Very recently, F. Chami et al. [82] simulated the chromonic phase of disk-like anionic
azo dye Sunset Yellow (SSY) in an aqueous solution using fully atomistic simulation. The
molecular structure of SSY is shown in Figure 12.29.
The MD simulation was perfomed using GAFF [35] parameters in the AMBER force
ﬁeld [39]. The TIP3P model was used to describe water. They used the CHELPG [83]
method to calculate the atomic charges. Na+ counter ions were added to neutralize
the system. They simulated the chromonic phase at two diﬀerent concentrations of
5 wt% and 33 wt%. They studied systems consisting of both pre-assembled columns
and isotropic dispersed molecules. The pre-assembled stack of eight molecules system
(5 wt%) turned out to be stable over the course of a long simulation run (200ns).
The molecules in a column preferred anti-parallel orientation with infrequent but
rapid rotational transitions between parallel and anti-parallel conﬁgurations. For the

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
347
O
SO3Na
SO3Na
N
N
SO3Na
SO3Na
N
OH
N
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.29 Molecular structure of SSY in NH hydrazone form (a) and hydroxy azo form (b).
dispersed system, full aggregation of eight molecules in a stack was achieved within
200ns. At the concentration of 33wt% (matches with the nematic phase of SSY) the
columns showed a pseudohexagonal packing with a distance of 2.35nm between the
columns. They also calculated the free energy of binding of a molecule in a stack. A
value of 7 kBT was measured for stacks containing three and eight molecules while
an increase in binding energy by %2 kBT was obtained for the dimer. This led them
to conﬁrm the isodesmic (free energy change due to adding a new molecule to a
stack is independent of the stack size after a particular stack size is reached) nature of
self-assembly in chromonic systems.
12.5
Conclusion and Outlook
In this chapter, we have given a comprehensive summary of the status of the existing
computational studies of various liquid crystal phases. The simulation methodologies
covered in this article range from the idealized spherocylinder model to the fully atom-
istic model. Liquid crystals have wide range of applications in various technological
applications ranging from display, non-linear optics, charge transport to drug delivery.
These applications require a proper understanding of the structure–property relation-
ship and computer simulation has provided many key results in this aspect. In particular,
atomistic simulations have provided deeper understanding of the eﬀect of molecular
shape on the phase behaviour for a variety of complex LC systems. With the increase in
computational power and development of advanced and eﬃcient simulation method-
ologies and accurate force ﬁelds, future computer simulations will help in the engineer-
ing of various self-assembly phenomena with their predictive power. This will also enable
the study of the liquid crystalline phase behaviour of aggregates of much more complex
systems like large nucleic acids and biomolecules, hence providing an insight into the
complex self-assembly phenomena occurring inside living cells.
Acknowledgment
We thank DST, India for ﬁnancial assistance. PKM thanks USIEF for a Fulbright-Nehru
Senior Research Fellowship that enabled his stay at the University of Colorado, Boulder
where part of this work was carried out.

348
Self-Assembling Systems
References
1. Evans DF & Wennerström H (1999) The Colloidal Domain: Where Physics, Chem-
istry, Biology, and Technology Meet (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany) p. 672.
2. de Gennes PG & Prost J (1995) The Physics of Liquid Crystals (Oxford University
Press, New York) p 616.
3. Chandrasekhar S (2008) Liquid Crystals (Cambridge University Press, New York)
p. 480.
4. Taylor MP & Herzfeld J (1993) Liquid-crystal phases of self-assembled molecular
aggregates. Journal of Physics-Condensed Matter 5(17):2651–2678.
5. Lydon J (2004) Chromonic mesophases. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci.
8(6):480–490.
6. Wilson MR (2007) Molecular simulation of liquid crystals: Progress towards a better
understanding of bulk structure and the prediction of material properties. Chemical
Society Reviews 36(12):1881–1888.
7. Wilson MR (2005) Progress in computer simulations of liquid crystals. International
Reviews in Physical Chemistry 24(3–4):421–455.
8. McGrother SC, Williamson DC, & Jackson G (1996) J. Chem. Phys. 104:6755.
9. Bolhuis P & Frenkel D (1997) J. Chem. Phys. 106:666.
10. Williamson DC & Jackson G (1998) J. Chem. Phys. 108:10294.
11. Maiti PK, Kumar AV, & Ayappa K (2009) Computer simulation of liquid crystals.
Journal of the Indian Institute of Science 89(2):229–241.
12. Gay JG & Berne BJ (1981) J. Chem. Phys. 74:3316.
13. Bates MA & Luckhurst GR (1999) J. Chem. Phys. 110:7087.
14. Aﬀouard F, Kroeger M, & Hess S (1996) Phys. Rev. E. 54:5178.
15. Wilson MR & Allen MP (1991) Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. 198:465.
16. Glaser MA, Malzbender R, Clark NA, & Walba DM (1994) J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
6:A261.
17. Glaser M (2000) Atomistic Simulation and Modeling of Smectic Liquid Crystals.
Advances in the Computer Simulatons of Liquid Crystals, NATO Science Series, eds
Pasini P & Zannoni C (Springer Netherlands), Vol 545, pp. 263–331.
18. Praprotnik M, Delle Site L, & Kremer K (2008) Multiscale simulation of soft matter:
From scale bridging to adaptive resolution. Annual Review of Physical Chemistry
59:545–571.
19. Murtola T, Bunker A, Vattulainen I, Deserno M, & Karttunen M (2009) Multiscale
modeling of emergent materials: Biological and soft matter. Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics 11(12):1869–1892.
20. Muller-Plathe F (2002) Coarse-graining in polymer simulation: From the atomistic
to the mesoscopic scale and back. Chemphyschem 3(9):754–769.
21. Care CM & Cleaver DJ (2005) Computer simulation of liquid crystals. Rep. Prog.
Phys. 68(11):2665–2700.
22. Shelley JC & Shelley MY (2000) Computer simulation of surfactant solutions. Curr.
Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 5(1–2):101–110.
23. Wilson MR & Allen MP (1991) Computer simulations of mesogenic molecules
using realistic atom–atom potentials. Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals
198(1):465–477.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
349
24. Wilson MR & Allen MP (1992) Structure of trans-4-(trans-4-n-pentylcyclohexyl)
cyclohexylcarbonitrile (CCH5) in the isotropic and nematic phases: A computer
simulation study. Liquid Crystals 12(1):157–176.
25. Cook MJ & Wilson MR (2001) The ﬁrst thousand-molecule simulation of a mesogen
at the fully atomistic level. Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals Science and Tech-
nology. Section A. Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals 363(1):181–193.
26. Jorgensen WL, Maxwell DS, & Tirado-Rives J (1996) Development and testing of the
OPLS all-atom force ﬁeld on conformational energetics and properties of organic
liquids. Journal of the American Chemical Society 118(45):11225–11236.
27. McBride C, Wilson MR, & Howard JAK (1998) Molecular dynamics simulations of
liquid crystal phases using atomistic potentials. Molecular Physics 93(6):955–964.
28. Allinger NL, Yuh YH, & Lii JH (1989) Molecular mechanics. The MM3 force ﬁeld
for hydrocarbons. 1. Journal of the American Chemical Society 111(23):8551–8566.
29. Lansac Y, Glaser MA, & Clark NA (2001) Microscopic structure and dynamics of a
partial bilayer smectic liquid crystal. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 64(5
Pt 1):16.
30. Lansac Y, Glaser MA, Clark NA, & Lavrentovich OD (1999) Photocontrolled
nanophase segregation in a liquid-crystal solvent. Nature 398(6722):54–57.
31. Cheung DL, Clark SJ, & Wilson MR (2002) Parametrization and validation of a
force ﬁeld for liquid-crystal forming molecules. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter
Phys 65(5 Pt 1):21.
32. Pelaez J & Wilson MR (2006) Atomistic simulations of a thermotropic biaxial liquid
crystal. Phys Rev Lett 97(26):26.
33. Pelaez J & Wilson M (2007) Molecular orientational and dipolar correlation in
the liquid crystal mixture E7: A molecular dynamics simulation study at a fully
atomistic level. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 9(23):2968–2975.
34. Cheung DL, Clark SJ, & Wilson MR (2004) Calculation of ﬂexoelectric coeﬃcients
for a nematic liquid crystal by atomistic simulation. The Journal of Chemical Physics
121(18):9131–9139.
35. Wang J, Wolf RM, Caldwell JW, Kollman PA, & Case DA (2004) Development and
testing of a general AMBER force ﬁeld. J Comput Chem 25(9):1157–1174.
36. Chami F, Wilson MR, & Oganesyan VS (2012) Molecular dynamics and EPR spec-
troscopic studies of 8CB liquid crystal. Soft Matter 8(25):6823–6833.
37. McDonald AJ & Hanna S (2006) Atomistic simulation of a model liquid crystal. J
Chem Phys 124(16):164906.
38. Berardi R, Muccioli L, & Zannoni C (2004) Can nematic transitions be pre-
dicted by atomistic simulations? A computational study of the odd–even eﬀect.
ChemPhysChem 5(1):104–111.
39. Cornell WD, et al. (1995) A second-generation force ﬁeld for the simulation of
proteins, nucleic acids, and organic molecules. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 117(19):5179–5197.
40. Haller I (1975) Thermodynamic and static properties of liquid crystals. Progress in
Solid State Chemistry 10, Part 2:103–118.
41. Tiberio G, Muccioli L, Berardi R, & Zannoni C (2009) Towards in silico liquid crys-
tals. Realistic transition temperatures and physical properties for n-cyanobiphenyls
via molecular dynamics simulations. ChemPhysChem 10(1):125–136.

350
Self-Assembling Systems
42. Zhang J, Su J, & Guo H (2011) An atomistic simulation for
4-cyano-4′-pentylbiphenyl and its homologue with a reoptimized force ﬁeld. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry B 115(10):2214–2227.
43. Maerzke KA, Schultz NE, Ross RB, & Siepmann JI (2009) TraPPE-UA force ﬁeld for
acrylates and Monte Carlo simulations for their mixtures with alkanes and alcohols.
J Phys Chem B 113(18):6415–6425.
44. Yan F & Earl DJ (2011) An all-atom computer simulation study of the liquid crys-
talline phase behaviour of alkenic ﬂuoroterphenyls. Soft Matter 7(21):10266–10273.
45. Yan F & Earl DJ (2012) Atomistic simulations of liquid crystal mixtures of alkoxy
substituted phenylpyrimidines 2PhP and PhP14. The Journal of Chemical Physics
136(12):124506.
46. Onsager L (1949) The eﬀects of shape on the interaction of colloidal particles.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 51(4):627–659.
47. Allen MP (1993) Simulations using hard particles. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
344(1672):323–337.
48. Allen MP, Evans GT, Frenkel D, & Mulder BM (1993) Hard convex body ﬂuids.
Advances in Chemical Physics 86:1.
49. Stroobants A, Lekkerkerker HN, & Frenkel D (1986) Evidence for smectic order in a
ﬂuid of hard parallel spherocylinders. Phys Rev Lett 57(12):1452–1455.
50. Stroobants A, Lekkerkerker HN, & Frenkel D (1987) Evidence for one-, two-, and
three-dimensional order in a system of hard parallel spherocylinders. Phys Rev A
36(6):2929–2945.
51. Veerman JA & Frenkel D (1991) Relative stability of columnar and crystalline phases
in a system of parallel hard spherocylinders. Phys Rev A 43(8):4334–4343.
52. McGrother SC, Williamson DC, & Jackson G (1996) A re-examination of
the phase diagram of hard spherocylinders. The Journal of Chemical Physics
104(17):6755–6771.
53. Bolhuis P & Frenkel D (1997) Tracing the phase boundaries of hard spherocylinders.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 106(2):666–687.
54. Niori T, Sekine T, Watanabe J, Furukawa T, & Takezoe H (1996) Distinct ferroelec-
tric smectic liquid crystals consisting of banana-shaped achiral molecules. J. Mater.
Chem. 6(7):1231–1233.
55. Link DR, et al. (1997) Spontaneous formation of macroscopic chiral domains in a
ﬂuid smectic phase of achiral molecules. Science 278(5345):1924–1927.
56. Lansac Y, Maiti PK, Clark NA, & Glaser MA (2003) Phase behavior of bent-core
molecules. Phys. Rev. E 67(1):011703.
57. Maiti PK, Lansac Y, Glaser MA, & Clark NA (2002) Induced anticlinic ordering and
nanophase segregation of bow-shaped molecules in a smectic solvent. Phys Rev Lett
88(6):25.
58. Pratibha R, Madhusudana NV, & Sadashiva BK (2000) An orientational transition of
bent-core molecules in an anisotropic matrix. Science 288(5474):2184–2187.
59. Lavrentovich OD (1994) The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Second Edition, by PG
de Gennes and J Prost, International Series of Monographs on Physics No 83,
published OUP (1993) ISBN 0 19852024 7. Liquid Crystals Today 4(3):7–7.
60. Maiti PK, Lansac Y, Glaser MA, & Clark NA (2004) Entropy-stabilized smectic C
phase in a system of zigzag-shaped molecules. Phys Rev Lett 92(2):12.

12 Simulation of Liquid Crystals
351
61. Chandrasekhar S, Sadashiva BK, & Suresh KA (1977) Liquid crystals of disc-like
molecules. (Translated from English) Pramana - J Phys 9(5):471–480 (in English).
62. Mulder FM, et al. (2003) Dynamics of a triphenylene discotic molecule, HAT6, in
the columnar and isotropic liquid phases. Journal of the American Chemical Society
125(13):3860–3866.
63. Wu J, Pisula W, & Mullen K (2007) Graphenes as potential material for electronics.
Chem Rev 107(3):718–747.
64. Laschat S, et al. (2007) Diskotische Flüssigkristalle: Von der maßgeschneiderten Syn-
these zur Kunststoﬀelektronik. Angewandte Chemie 119(26):4916–4973.
65. Sergeyev S, Pisula W, & Geerts YH (2007) Discotic liquid crystals: A new genera-
tion of organic semiconductors. Chem Soc Rev 36(12):1902–1929.
66. Feng X, et al. (2009) Towards high charge-carrier mobilities by rational design of the
shape and periphery of discotics. Nat Mater 8(5):421–426.
67. Zhang R, et al. (2015) Columnar liquid crystals in cylindrical nanoconﬁnement. ACS
Nano 9(2):1759–1766.
68. Busselez R, et al. (2014) Discotic columnar liquid crystal studied in the bulk and
nanoconﬁned states by molecular dynamics simulation. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 141(13):134902.
69. Maliniak A (1992) Molecular dynamics of discotics in the isotropic phase. The Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics 96(3):2306–2317.
70. Cinacchi G, Colle R, & Tani A (2004) Atomistic molecular dynamics simulation of
hexakis(pentyloxy)triphenylene: structure and translational dynamics of its columnar
state. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 108(23):7969–7977.
71. Andrienko D, Marcon V, & Kremer K (2006) Atomistic simulation of structure and
dynamics of columnar phases of hexabenzocoronene derivatives. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 125(12):124902.
72. Hu N, et al. (2014) An electric-ﬁeld-responsive discotic liquid-crystalline
hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene/oligothiophene hybrid. Adv Mater 26(13):2066–2071.
73. Beltran E, et al. (2015) Self-organization of star-shaped columnar liquid crystals
with a coaxial nanophase segregation revealed by a combined experimental and
simulation approach. Chemical Communications 51(10):1811–1814.
74. Frank FC & Chandrasekhar S (1980) Evidence of a tilted columnar structure for
mesomorphic phases of benzene-hexa-n-alkanoates. (Translated from English)
Journal de Physique 41(11):1285–1288 (in English).
75. Allinger NL (1977) Conformational analysis. 130. MM2. A hydrocarbon force ﬁeld
utilizing V1 and V2 torsional terms. Journal of the American Chemical Society
99(25):8127–8134.
76. Sun H (1998) COMPASS: An ab initio force-ﬁeld optimized for condensed-phase
applications. Overview with details on alkane and benzene compounds. The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B 102(38):7338–7364.
77. Berendsen HJC, Postma JPM, van Gunsteren WF, DiNola A, & Haak JR (1984)
Molecular dynamics with coupling to an external bath. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 81(8):3684–3690.
78. Bag S, et al. (2015) Molecular structure of the discotic liquid crystalline phase of
hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene/oligothiophene hybrid and their charge transport
properties. The Journal of Chemical Physics 143(14):144505.

352
Self-Assembling Systems
79. Busselez R, et al. (2014) Discotic columnar liquid crystal studied in the bulk
and nanoconﬁned states by molecular dynamics simulation. J Chem Phys
141(13):4896052.
80. Maiti PK, Lansac Y, Glaser MA, & Clark NA (2002) Isodesmic self-assembly in
lyotropic chromonic systems. Liquid Crystals 29(5):619–626.
81. Kuriabova T, Betterton MD, & Glaser MA (2010) Linear aggregation and
liquid-crystalline order: Comparison of Monte Carlo simulation and analytic theory.
Journal of Materials Chemistry 20(46):10366–10383.
82. Chami F & Wilson MR (2010) Molecular order in a chromonic liquid crystal: A
molecular simulation study of the anionic azo dye Sunset Yellow. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 132(22):7794–7802.
83. Breneman CM & Wiberg KB (1990) Determining atom-centered monopoles from
molecular electrostatic potentials. The need for high sampling density in formamide
conformational analysis. Journal of Computational Chemistry 11(3):361–373.

353
Index
a
active matter
316
adsorption of nanoparticles
211, 215, 218
anisotropic colloids
55, 310
atom transfer radical polymerization
(ATRP)
20, 21, 24, 27, 31–34,
37–38, 47–48
b
backward diﬀerentiation formula (BDF)
248–249
fourth-order (BDF4)
98
third-order (BDF3)
249–250
Berendsen thermostat
116
biomimetic helical structure
123–124,
127
body-centered cubic (BCC)
4, 12–13,
85–86, 90, 92, 101, 103, 105, 230,
233–234, 297–298
Boltzmann-weighted sampling
299
Brownian dynamics (BD)
209, 234,
255–256, 275, 321, 329
Brownian motion
210, 288, 300
brushlike approximation
232
c
capsid envelopment
159, 167, 172
capsid formation
134, 139–158, 171–173
cationic dummy atom (CaDA)
187–188,
196
cell uptake of nanoparticles
208
charge balance hypothesis
154–155, 159
cholesteric phase
55, 66, 73, 75, 79–81
coarse-grained model
12–13, 88, 110,
141–143, 148, 154, 172, 186, 189,
255, 274, 321, 328
colloidal system
3, 15, 54, 80, 288–289,
304, 310, 313, 316
combination reaction
23, 28–29, 44, 48
cooperative eﬀect
173, 208, 222, 226
correlation function
54, 67, 71–74, 342
orientational
312, 344
positional
344
correlation length
312
Coulombic binding energy
203
Coulomb potential
194, 199
critical cluster
292–311
critical exponent
312, 326
critical ﬂuctuations
308
critical nucleus
299–300, 304–309, 314
critical temperature
289, 308–309
cross-linking
23, 25, 27, 31, 36, 110
C-terminal domain (CTD)
135, 137–167,
171–173
curliness
71, 78–79, 81
cutoﬀdistance
190
cutoﬀradius
21–22, 34, 111, 117
d
density functional theory (DFT)
54, 61,
81, 156–158, 164, 166, 171, 173, 256,
273–274
diblock copolymer melts
89, 92, 230, 240,
242, 250
diﬀusion equation
89–91, 95–98, 233,
239, 243, 256, 278
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

354
Index
disproportionation
24–29, 31
dissipative particle dynamics (DPD)
21–24, 32–35, 44, 47–48, 208–226,
255–268, 275, 321
DNA
4, 12–13, 54–55, 80, 135–141, 144,
150, 155, 159, 161, 165–166,
171–172, 186, 346
drug delivery
208–209, 214, 216, 226, 347
e
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
325
encapsidation
140, 144, 150–151,
154–157, 159, 165–166, 172
endocytosis
211, 214–215, 217–218,
221–223, 225
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
136,
138–139, 167
entropy
conformational
8–9, 230, 257
mixing
62
ordering
61
orientational
63, 230, 329
rotational
6–7, 74, 81
translational
73, 76, 81
entropy driven
2–3, 5, 7, 141, 148, 150,
273, 338
entropy of mixing
145–147, 172
equilibrium distribution
294–295
excluded volume
3, 63, 73–74, 81,
144–146, 154, 156, 158, 172, 242,
289, 321, 338, 346
f
face-centered cubic (FCC)
4, 6, 24, 103,
105, 297–298, 306–308, 313
ﬁnite diﬀerence method
247
ﬁnite spherical complex
186, 203
Flory–Huggins interaction
231, 238, 242,
260
Flory–Huggins parameter
35, 85, 236,
238
Flory interaction
232–234
Flory’s lattice theory
236–237
Flory theory
146
forward ﬂux sampling (FFS)
289, 298,
301–306, 314–316
Fourier transform (FFT)
87, 95, 97, 246,
248–250
free energy barrier
290–296, 300,
312–315
free radical polymerization (FRP)
20–21,
24–25, 27, 30–31, 43–44, 47–48
fully atomistic simulation
321, 327, 346
g
Gaussian chain (GSC)
87, 230, 234,
245–246, 265
Gay–Berne potential
321
general AMBER force ﬁeld (GAFF)
187,
323, 344, 346
genome packaging
140, 154–160,
172–173
graphene
126–127, 209, 217, 219
graphics processing unit (GPU)
111,
121–122, 231, 234, 247, 264
ground-state dominance approximation
146
h
helical polymer
54, 79–80
hepatitis B virus (HBV)
134–173
hexagonal close-packed (HCP)
4, 6,
85–86, 92, 103, 125–126, 297–298,
306–308
hierarchical aggregates
264–266, 270
hierarchical multiscale modeling
278
i
ideal rod–coil diblock model
237, 242
initiation
20, 24–25, 27–31, 33, 37, 44,
47–48
interfacial nanostructure
9
internalization pathway
208–209,
214–217, 223, 226
inverse design strategy
278
j
Janus balance
111, 122–125
Janus particle
9, 109–116, 122–127, 219
k
Kern–Frenkel model
111
Kremer–Grest model
189

Index
355
l
Langevin dynamics (LD)
189–197
Laplacian operator
91, 96, 98
lattice
Bravais
4
diamond
126–127
hexagonal
6–7, 341–342, 344
icosahedral
141–142
kagome
6–7, 124
pyrochlore
124–125, 127
lattice model
142, 231, 233, 240, 245
lattice sampling
245
leap-frog algorithm
116
Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential
21, 189, 309,
321, 345
ligand exchange rate
192–193, 203
lipid bilayer
135–136, 210, 212–213,
216–222
lipid membrane
136, 208, 211, 214, 217,
220–222, 224
liquid crystal
chromonic
321, 344
discotic
339–340, 344
lyotropic
55, 320, 344
thermotropic
320–321, 339, 344
liquid crystal force ﬁeld (LCFF)
323, 325,
327
m
macroscopic dielectric constant
203
Maier–Saupe
231–238, 243, 261
mean ﬁeld approximation
88–89, 173
mean ﬁeld calculation
232, 246
membrane curvature
211, 213–214,
222–224, 226
membrane-mediated interaction
208, 211,
213, 226
membrane rupture
211, 214–216
membrane tension
210–212, 214,
216–217, 221–222
metal–ligand binding
188, 194, 198–200,
203
metal–ligand coordination interaction
187, 191
metal–organic framework (MOF)
186,
198–203
microphase separation
7–8, 230–231,
236, 240, 242, 259–261, 265, 275,
277
modiﬁed diﬀusion equation (MDE)
89–90, 95–98, 239, 243–247
modulation eﬀect
152
molecular dynamics (MD)
9, 12, 22, 121,
186, 209, 295, 305–306, 311, 321,
344
brute force
298–299
coarse-grained
209, 226, 270, 272, 276
event-driven
310
Monte Carlo (MC)
3, 54, 57, 59, 81, 209,
246, 255, 295–296, 299, 305, 311,
315, 321, 335, 338, 345
multicompartment aggregates
255,
267–268, 270, 276
n
nanoparticle adsorption see adsorption of
nanoparticles
near-ﬁeld dielectric constant
191, 203
nematic phase
54, 60–81, 232, 321–323,
346–347
non-equilibrium state
256
NPT
57, 59–60, 69, 74–79, 314, 336, 338,
341, 345
nucleation
crystal
288, 296, 300–316
heterogeneous
290
homogeneous
290–291
two-step
308, 310
N-varied DPD
210, 221, 314
NVT
57, 59, 116, 121
o
Onsager theory
54, 61, 63–65, 69, 80
optimal genome size
155–159
order parameter
bond orientational
296–297, 342
hexatic
70–71
nematic
68–69, 322, 325
polar
69
screw-like nematic
68
smectic
70
Overbeek–Voorn (OV) theory
146

356
Index
p
pair correlation function
9, 59, 71
parallel
71
perpendicular
71
Parsons–Lee approximation
64–65
patchy particle
1, 4–6, 15–16, 109–111,
117–122, 126–128, 266, 276
persistence length
236, 242, 250
phase transition
ﬁrst-order
289
isotropic-to-nematic
61, 63–64
non-equilibrium
301
phosphorylation
138–140, 159, 164–167,
173
polydispersity index (PDI)
27–28, 30
polymerase
134–139, 157
polymer–clay composite gel
21, 44, 48
polymer nanocomposites
6, 20–22, 43,
47–48
polymorphism
79, 81
predictive science
2–5
propagation
20, 24–25, 27–31, 33, 38, 44,
47–48, 245
pseudo-spectral method
87, 95–106, 246
q
quaternion
59–60, 111, 118, 120, 329
r
random phase approximation
107, 232
rational design
3–5, 254, 273, 277
reaction probability
31, 42
real-space method
93, 95, 97, 106
receptor
136, 138, 167, 170, 173, 213–215,
217, 219, 222
reciprocal-space method
87, 90, 93, 104,
106
restrained electrostatic potential (RESP)
187
rod–coil polymer
230–231, 236, 250
s
saddle-point approximation
238, 243, 245
scaling analysis
231–232, 237, 268
scaling factor
202
scaling parameter
199
scaling theory
269
self-assembly
metal–ligand
186–187, 189–190
programmable
12
supramolecular
203, 262–263
self-consistent ﬁeld theory (SCFT)
85–107, 230–238, 242–246, 250,
256–267, 270–277
self-regeneration
20–21, 48
serine–arginine protein kinase (SRPK)
161–164
smectic phase
55, 69–82, 231, 312–313,
325, 333
spectral approximation
247
supracolloidal reaction
14
supramolecular coordination complex
190
supramolecular polymer
80, 254, 257,
262–264
supramolecular polymerization
5, 15
surface charge
152, 216, 220
t
template-free fabrication
125
termination
20, 24–31, 33, 38, 44, 47
terpolymer
ABC
106, 257, 259, 267, 269–270,
275
distinct
271
triblock
257–258, 265, 267–268,
270–271, 273, 276
topological architecture
257
topological constraint
32, 36, 268
transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
99
transmission electron microtomography
(TEMT)
99–100
u
umbrella sampling (US)
295–316, 335
universal force ﬁeld (UFF)
187, 200
v
van der Waals
142–143, 149, 153, 170,
187, 189–190, 202, 289, 308, 341
viral sssembly
141
virial approximation
67
w
Weeks–Chandler–Andersen (WCA)
potential
189–190, 345

Index
357
wormlike chain (WLC)
231–234,
246–250
wormlike–wormlike diblock model
242
wrapping
217, 220–221, 223–226
x
X-ray crystallography
137–138, 167
X-ray diﬀraction (XRD)
187, 191,
200–201, 344

15
Glass2
TCP
BCC
BCC
FCC (HCP)
Cubic
LC
Tetra
FCC
CRYSTALS
LIQUID
CRYSTALS
PLASTIC
CRYSTALS
10
Bravais
Lattice
Discotic
Glass1
Smectic
Non-Bravais
Lattice
Coordination number (Dense fluid)
Coordination number (Dense fluid)
Coordination number (Ordered phase)
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Isoperimetric quotient
(a)
(b)
0.6
0.8
1.0
5
15
10
0
0
5
10
15
5
Nematic
Figure 1.1 (a) The coordination number in the ﬂuid phase, CNf, is correlated to the isoperimetric
quotient (IQ) of the polyhedron. Here, IQ is a scalar parameter for the sphericity of the shape and
coordination number is a measure of the degree of local order. Data points are drawn as small
polyhedra, which are colored and grouped according to the assemblies they form. (b) Polyhedra have,
in most cases, nearly identical coordination numbers in the ordered phase (CNo) and the ﬂuid phase
(CNf) close to the ordering transition. Because of this strong correlation, combining CNf and IQ allows
for prediction of the assembly category expected for most cases. This ﬁgure is reproduced from
Ref. [31]. Copyright permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science (2012).
Self-Assembling Systems: Theory and Simulation, First Edition. Edited by Li-Tang Yan.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

0
10
20
30
40
M
t/τ × 105
0
200
400
600
800
1000
n
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
1 × 103τ
1 × 104τ
2 × 104τ
5 × 104τ
1 × 105τ
ϕ
M
(a)
(b)
(c)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
t/τ × 105
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
M
ϕ
Figure 1.10 Kinetics in the self-assembling process of the helically supracolloidal structure. (a) The
number-averaged degree of colloidal clusters as a function of self-assembling time t. (b) Variation in
the number of patch groups in the course of self-assembly for species shown in inserts.
(c) Number-averaged distributions of colloidal clusters at diﬀerent times. Error bars in (a) and (b)
indicate standard deviation. This ﬁgure is reproduced from Ref. 41. Copyright Permission from Nature
Publishing Group (2014).

(a)
(b)
L-chain
X-chain
d
w
Figure 2.1 (a) Equilibrium state of a nanorod-ﬁlled polymer gel in a good solvent (not displayed).
Green chains represent polymer strands and brown beads form amorphous solid walls. Inset: enlarged
view of initiator (magenta beads) modiﬁed nanorod (white beads) with one end functionalized with
polymer chains (yellow beads) and a cross-section of the hexagonal nanorod. (b) Snapshot of
nanoclay-embedded polymer network at monomer conversion 95%. Inset top: schematic
representation of the network with chain color representing grafted chain (green), cross-linking chains
(red), and looped chain (blue). Note that all types of the chains are represented by the green chains in
the snapshot. Inset bottom: detailed structure of the nanoclay particle. Reproduced from Ref. [10] with
permission from the American Chemical Society.

3
2
P *
P*
η
η
1
0
3
2
1
00.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.2
0.4
NS
*
N
C
C
I
NS
*
N
I
0.6
SmB,S
*
SmA,S
*
SmB,p
SmA,S
*
Figure 3.11 Reduced pressure P∗= PD3∕kBT versus volume fraction 𝜂for helices with r = 0.2 and
pitch p = 4 (top) and p = 8 (bottom). The corresponding shape of the helix is displayed in the insets.
Diﬀerent phases are identiﬁed by diﬀerent colors and labeled accordingly.

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
D
D
S
G
L2
G
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.6
G+S(I)
L+S(II)
0.6
0.8
0.8
1.0
(a) L3
(j) C
(k) CCS
(q) SCS
(r) SA
(b) L2
(c) HPL2
(d) HPL3
(e) L+C(I)
(f) L+S(I)
(h) L+C(II)
(i) L+S(II)
(n) C+S
(m) C+HEL
(u) G+S(II)
(t) G+S(I)
(o) CA
(p) S
(v) GA
(s) GCS
1.0
fA
0.6
fc
fB
B
C
C
L2
G
G
G
G
GA
L3
G+S(II)
L+S(I)
C+HEL
L+C(II)
L+C(II)
L+S(II)
C+S
G+S(I)
L+C(II)
C
C
L2
D
S
S
A
0.8
1.0
Figure 4.3 (Top) Morphologies self-assembled in the ABC linear triblock copolymers with
𝜒ABN = 𝜒BCN = 35 and 𝜒ACN = 15, discovered by the general spectral method of SCFT. (Bottom) Phase
diagram of these morphologies. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [28].

(a)
A
B
C
AB2C
B1AB2CB1
B1AB2CB3
AB2CB3
TiO2
CN=4
Li3Bi
CaF2
CN=16/3
ReO3
CN=3
CN=7
AIB2
CN=8
CsCI
CN=8
NaCl
CN=6
1
increase fB1 = fB3
increase fB3 with fB1 = 0
increase fB1
fixed fB = fB1 + fB2 + fB3
ZnS
α-BN
CN=4
ZnS
CN=4
CN=3
α-Al2O3
CN=24/5
CaF2
CN=16/3
Nb3Sn (A15)
CN=6
CN=6
Nb3Sn (A15)
Artificial macromolecular “atoms” (AMAs)
(b)
2
3
Figure 4.7 Design principle of multiblock terpolymers for binary soft mesocrystals. (a) Artiﬁcial
macromolecular “atoms” (AMAs) self-assembled by linear ABC triblock copolymers pack into the CsCl
crystal lattice. (b) AMAs formed by multiblock terpolymers can be programmed to assemble into a
variety of crystallographic arrangements by tailoring the polymer architectures. Three possible paths
are demonstrated to design series of mesocrystals with varying magnitudes and asymmetries of
coordination numbers (CNs) by tuning the relative lengths among the B blocks while keeping the total
B component ﬁxed. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [16].

Janus balance
adhesion energy
Figure 5.4 Representative equilibrium superstructures self-assembled from soft one-patch Janus
particles by properly tuning the Janus balance 𝛽and the strength of attraction between attractive
patches 𝛼A
i j while keeping 𝛼R
i j = 396, 𝜙= 5%, and 𝜈= 1∕2.

(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8 (a) Graphene-like two-dimensional structure with a hexagonal honeycomb lattice
self-assembled from soft three-patch particles with regular triangular arrangement of the patches.
(b) Diamond lattice structure self-assembled from soft four-patch particles with regular tetrahedral
arrangement of the patches. In the simulations, 𝛼R
ij = 396, 𝛼A
ij = 220 (G ≈10.00 kBT), 𝜈= 0.5, and
𝜃𝜅
m = 45∘.

cccDNA 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
surface
receptor  
Nucleus
Cytoplastic membrane 
mRNA 
pgRNA 
X 
endoplasmic
reticulum   
nucleoplasm
cytosol
Figure 6.4 Schematic of the HBV replication life cycle. The viral entry into human hepatocytes is
initiated by the Pre-S1 domain of HBsAg binding to a receptor that is normally involved in bile acid
transport in the liver. After being transferred into the cytosol, the nucleocapsid is disassembled,
leading to the release of the genomic material. Viral replication starts with the formation of a
covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) in the nucleoplasm; the cccDNA templates RNA transcription
and subsequently protein synthesis. Nucleocapsid (NC) assembly is driven by strong electrostatic
interactions between capsid proteins and pregenome (pg) RNA. Inside NC, the polymerase (P)
translates pgRNA ﬁrst into a single-stranded (ss) DNA, and then a partially double-stranded (ds)
(>50%) DNA. The matured capsid is then enveloped with surface proteins in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) or migrates back to the nucleoplasm for cccDNA ampliﬁcation.
ALA137
PRO135
ILE139
ΔEbind = −2.45 kcal/mol
Figure 6.23 Docking of sub-fragment P4-3 onto HBcAg. Shown here are the docked conformation for
P4-3 (101–103 aa of L-HBs) and the approximated binding energy.

0
50
100
150
200
250
time (ns)
0
1
2
3
4
5
coordination number
t = 55 ns
t = 80 ns
t = 50 ns
Figure 7.6 Time variations of the coordination numbers of the six Pd(II) within the completed M6L8
nanosphere. Each of the six plots is vertically shifted for clarity. Snapshots at the simulation times of
50, 55 and 80 ns are additionally shown in the ﬁgure.
4
6
8
10
12
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
Distance (nm)
Simulation time (μs)
Simulation time (μs)
Simulation time (μs)
Simulation time (μs)
0
2
(b)
(c)
(e)  
(f)
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
5
10
15
20
25
Z (nm)
16
18
20
22
24
Distance (nm)
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
5
10
15
20
25
Z (nm)
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
(a)
(d)
Figure 8.3 Endocytosis of two identical NPs. Two smaller NPs of 3.8 nm were placed on a membrane
of 38.7 nm × 38.7 nm (a–c), while two larger NPs of 9.0 nm were placed on a membrane of 51.7 nm ×
51.7 nm (d–f). (a, d) show the initial and ﬁnal structure of endocytosis of two identical NPs. (b, e) show
the evolution of the distance between two NPs. (c, f) show the evolution of NP positions along the
membrane normal direction. The initial inter-NP distances are 6.46 nm (a–c) and 15.8 nm (d–f),
respectively. Reproduced from Ref. [15] with permission from the American Chemical Society.

u
s = LC
aR
aC
s = 0
s = L = Lc + LR
γ
Figure 9.1 A rod–coil block copolymer of total contour length L. Basic segmental volumes are
considered for lengths aC and aR on coil and rod blocks, respectively.
Linear Triblock Terpolymer
Triple Cylinders-on-Cylinder
Triple Helices-on-Cylinder
Star Terpolymers
Perpendicular Lamellae
-within-Lamella
Disks-within-Cylinder
Large-Length Scale
(a)
Small-Length Scale
(b)
Figure 10.1 (a) Representative hierarchical structures self-assembled from ABC linear triblock
terpolymers. Adapted with permission from Ref. [49]. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.
(b) Representative hierarchical structures self-assembled from ABC star terpolymers. Adapted with
permission from Ref. [60]. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.

(b)
100
ΔG(n)/kBT
P* = 7.0
P* = 7.2
P* = 7.4
150
50
0
0
10
20
30
(a)
n
Figure 11.19 (a) Conﬁgurations for spontaneous crystal nucleation from a typical molecular dynamics
trajectory at P∗= 7.6 and t∕𝜏MD = 0, 1000 and 3000 (from left to right). Isotropic-like particles are
drawn 10 times smaller than their actual size. (b) Gibbs free energy ΔG(n) as a function of the number
of rods n in the crystalline cluster at pressure P∗= 7.0, 7.2 and 7.4. Inset: a typical conﬁguration of a
critical cluster (n = 81) at P∗= 7.4.
Isotropic
P* = 1
Nematic
P* = 5
SmAP
P* = 10
Figure 12.13 Final conﬁgurations from Monte Carlo simulations of N = 400 bent-core molecules with
opening angle ψ = 165∘as a function of reduced pressure P∗(P∗= 𝛽Pv0, where v0 is the volume of a
zigzag molecule and P is the actual pressure). From left to right: isotropic phase (P∗= 1), nematic
(P∗= 5) and polar smectic A (P∗= 10).

