© SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA – 2023 – All rights reserved - SGS is a registered trademark of SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA
With the rise of artificial intelligence (AI), the ISO and IEC have
created the ISO/IEC 42001 standard. It provides a certifiable
AI management system (AIMS) framework in which AI
systems can be developed and deployed as part of an AI
assurance ecosystem.
The global standard specifies the requirements for establishing,
implementing, maintaining and continually improving an AIMS. 
The goal is to help organizations and society benefit the most
from AI while reassuring stakeholders that systems are being
developed and used responsibly.
WHAT IS ISO/IEC 42001?
AI is developing and being adopted rapidly in many industries,
products and services. Undoubtedly, AI is influencing, and will
further influence, society and our lives.
Due to this progress and influence, trust, ethics and social
concerns must be addressed. AI must be reliable, fair and
transparent – it must be trustworthy.
WHY IS ISO/IEC 42001 IMPORTANT?
Implement AI safely, with evidence of responsibility and
accountability
Consider security, safety, fairness, transparency and data
and AI system quality throughout the life cycle
Show that introducing AI is a strategic decision with clear
objectives
Indicate strong governance concerning AI
Strike a balance between governance and innovation
Ensure that AI is used responsibly, especially concerning its
continuous learning
Ensure that all relevant safeguards are in place
Combine key frameworks with experience to implement
crucial processes like risk, life cycle and data quality
management
ISO/IEC 42001 certification follows successful completion of an
audit and enables you to:
KEY BENEFITS
Understand the standard – learn about the requirements
Get in touch – tell us what standard you are aiming for
and we will provide a detailed proposal and quote for
when you are ready
Competence – identify any skill and competence gaps
that your staff may have. We can provide training and
workshops to support
Gap assessment – identify any weaknesses
Stage 1 – confirmation that implementing the standard is
on track
Stage 2 – confirmation that the standard is fully
implemented
Certification – we will issue your certificate outlining the
scope before you share your achievement with the world.
Your stakeholders can check your certification via our
Client Directory
Ongoing improvement – regular surveillance visits to help
you maintain and enhance your management system
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
A STEP-BY-STEP CERTIFICATION PROCESS
We are SGS – the world’s leading testing, inspection and
certification company. We are recognized as the global
benchmark for sustainability, quality and integrity.
For more information on our ISO/IEC 42001 services, email:
Certification@sgs.com.
ABOUT SGS
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY –
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
ISO/IEC 42001
To implement an AIMS, you will need a solid understanding
of ISO/IEC 42001's requirements. We have training to
provide the required knowledge.
Once the system is in place, we can offer a gap assessment.
After the successful completion of an audit, we will issue
your certificate, confirming the effective implementation of
the standard's requirements.
An audit against ISO/IEC 42001 from SGS will help your
organization to stand out from the crowd by supporting you
to develop and improve performance.
WHAT WE OFFER
Any organization or professional looking to implement AI safely.
Because AI systems are complex, implementing an AIMS
requires a truly multidisciplinary approach. Depending on the
use case, this may include legal, privacy, operations, marketing,
R&D, sales, HR, IT and risk managers.
WHO IS IT FOR?
SGS.COM

