Sheldrake’s ten dogmas of science 
Rupert Sheldrake’s position, my position and the mainstream’s position 
Sky Darmos, 18.03.2019 
 
Note: Sheldrake’s answers are written by myself and based on my understanding of 
his positions. A comment from him can be found at the end of this document.  
 
The ten dogmas of science posed as questions: 
1. Is nature mechanical? 
Sheldrake: Nature has memory and natural laws are habits. Both are enforced by 
morphic resonance. Morphic resonance is everywhere in nature and therefore nature 
itself is alive. 
Me: Nature has memory and natural laws are derived from logic. The memory of 
nature is enforced both through morphic resonance and the nonlocal realm (or the 
world of experience).  
Morphic resonance is everywhere, but it is too simple to be a criterion for sentience. 
Sentience requires structures that translate thoughts into actions, and that are brains. 
Mainstream: Yes. 
2. Is the total amount of matter and energy always the same? 
Sheldrake: Dark energy seems to increase over time, as the empty space between 
galaxies increases.  
Aside from that it seems that some people can live for extended amounts of time 
without food. 
Me: Dark energy doesn't exist. The expansion of the universe is a thermodynamic 
process. However, the conservation of energy in relativity theory relies on the 
absolute equality of all frames of reference. This absolute equality, the equivalence 
principle, can't be maintained in quantum mechanics and in quantum gravity.  
When judged from the frame of reference of any observer, the cosmic microwave 
background is loosing energy ever since the expansion started.  
Secondly when we look at regions of space with gravity induced time-dilation, we 
find that things there move very slowly or almost stand still. If there indeed is a 
preferred frame of reference, than we have to accept that energy is lost within systems 
with high degrees of time dilation. 
Mainstream: Yes. 
3. Are the laws of nature fixed? 

Sheldrake: No, they are like habits. The laws and constants we find are preferred 
because the universe find them effective and useful. 
Me: Yes, because all constants are interdependent and the laws of nature can 
essentially be reduced to the laws of logic and to philosophical principles that are 
truths in out of themselves. 
Mainstream: Yes, however, we failed in deriving them from something more 
fundamental, so we have to resign to believing that there is a continuum of parallel 
universes each with its own set of constants (Weinberg & Stringtheorists) and maybe 
even laws (Max Tegmark). 
4. Is matter conscious? 
Sheldrake: Yes. Morphic resonance is a law of nature and we can associate it with 
consciousness, therefore everything must be conscious. 
Me: No, matter is created by observation through conscious observers. Conscious 
observers are like platonic radios that translate thoughts into actions. The universe is 
created retrospectively by observers in its future. 
Mainstream: Consciousness is an epiphenomenon, so we are both fine with it being 
an illusion or something with a certain ontological reality, either restricted to the brain 
only, or to larger areas, such as calculators and thermostats and maybe even the whole 
world. Operationally this is all the same, but we are fine to discuss which option we 
like more, as long as consciousness doesn't do anything. 
5. Is nature purposeless? 
Sheldrake: No, nature has purpose. It develops teleologically with a certain outcome 
in mind. 
Me: No, nature has purpose. It is influenced by potential futures it knows from 
through morphic resonance with the futures of past eons. 
Mainstream: Yes. 
6. Is all biological inheritance material? 
Sheldrake: No, the gens are far too simple to account for the complexity of life. 
Me: No, the microcosm is just an emergent property of our immediate reality. Gens 
change according to memories from past evolutions. 
Mainstream: Yes. 
7. Are memories stored as material traces? 
Sheldrake: No, they are more like brief notes that help one to access memories 
through morphic resonance. 

Me: No, they are more like brief notes that help one to access memories in the 
nonlocal realm (the world of experience). Morphic resonance plays a role in that, but 
it is not the whole picture, because it is simply the tendency of patterns to repeat, 
without a logical or meaningful element in it. 
Mainstream: Yes, brains are machines created by pure chance. 
8. Are minds confined to brains? 
Sheldrake: No. The things I see out there are really out there and not only in my 
brain. A tree really has colors and a flower really smells. My eyes are not just 
receiving light, they are projecting out into the world. 
Me: The outside world is in superposition. It does not exist independent of 
observation. When we look out into the world, it is our eyes that create the world. 
Mainstream: Yes. Furthermore every observation is a delusion, because as we 
measure we entangle ourselves with a certain outcome, making it impossible to 
perceive the whole picture, which is a universe that exists in a superposition of all 
possible states (Everett, Hawking, Tegmark & Co). 
9. Are psychic phenomena illusory? 
Sheldrake: No, they are real. The repeatability of research in parapsychology is 
comparable to that of other sciences. 
Me: No, they are real. The statistical significance of experiments in parapsychology is 
usually very high and the controls are very rigorous. No other science has that many 
double and tripple blind experiments. 
10. Is mechanistic medicine the only kind that really works? 
Sheldrake: No, there are many types of medicine. Being spiritual can often be the 
best medicine. The placebo effect also shows how important the mind is in any 
healing process. 
Me: Medicine is not my field of expertise, however, it is only reasonable that if the 
mind is not a machine, and if the mind creates the body and the surroundings, then 
only few things can be truly machine-like and those are mostly clumsy things like 
stones and rocks, or devices we build to use as tools. 
Mainstream: Yes, because we are all machines and the universe works bottom-up.  
 
 
 
 
 

Response from Rupert Sheldrake (16.04.2019):  
 
------------------------------ 
Dear Sky,  
 
Thanks for your commentary on the dogmas of science, and the very clear summary 
of your own views and how they differ from mine and from the mainstream.  There 
is of course much more detail about these discussions in my book THE SCIENCE 
DELUSION (Science Set Free in the US) but clearly you and I start from somewhat 
different positions, although our views overlap in some areas.  
 
Best wishes 
 
Rupert Sheldrake 
------------------------------ 

