
Shiva
THE WILD GOD OF
POWER AND ECSTASY
Wolf-Dieter Storl Ph.D.
Inner Traditions
Rochester, Vermont

 
 
 
Inner Traditions
One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.InnerTraditions.com
Copyright © 2004 by Wolf-Dieter Storl All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by
any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Storl, Wolf-Dieter.
Shiva : the wild God of power and ecstasy / Wolf-Dieter Storl.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-59477780-6
1. Siva (Hindu deity) 2. Gods, Hindu. 3. Hinduism. I. Title.
BL1218.S8 2004
294.5’2113—dc22
2004010959

“OM Shri Ganeshaya Namah”

The sage should study the scriptures in his search
for knowledge; but then he should leave them, like the
chaff that is left behind, when the grains
of rice have been winnowed.
AMRTABINDU UPANISHAD

CONTENTS
Introduction
Chapter 1   
   Journey to the Source of Time
Chapter 2   
   Fire and Ice
The Rock
Water
Kashi
Karttikeya’s Strange Birth
Chapter 3   
   The Shaman and His Black Dog
The Old Huntsman
Pashupati, Lord of the Animals
The Noose
The Black Dog
The God of the Shades
Bhairava
Rudra and Odin
The Treacherous God
Chapter 4   
   God’s Virile Member
Lingam Yoni
The Lingam Is Everywhere
How Arjuna Won His Magic Arrows
How Markandeya Became an Immortal
The Phallic Symbol
The Pillar of Fire

Chapter 5   
   Shankar, The Yogi on the Mountain
Shankara
The Tears of Rudra
The God Clothed in Air
The Third Eye
Three Lines of Ash
The Blue Neck
Shiva and Buddha
The Trident and the “Bâton-de-Commandement”
Chapter 6   
   The Goddess
Devi
Durga
Kali
Annapurna
Ganga
Chapter 7   
   The Dancer in the Flames
Shiva’s Dances
The Drum
Chapter 8   
   The Ideal Family
Karttikeya
Ganesha
Nandi the Bull
Chapter 9   
   The Destruction of the Sacrifice
The Aryan Background
Daksha’s Great Sacrifice
Shiva the Sinner
Chapter 10  
  Shiva as the Devil
Zarathustra
The Earth Runs Well
The Righteous Battle
Chapter 11  
  Tantra: The Serpent’s Path

The Heresy of the Agamas
Overcoming the Ego
Shakti
The Pathway of the Kundalini Serpent
Returning to Oneness
Chapter 12  
  The Saint, the Hero, and the Beast
The Rituals
Tantric Influence
Chapter 13  
  Pollen Dust and Ashes
Lingam Puja
Shiva’s Flower Garden
Bel: Shiva’s Triune Leaf
Bangeri Baba
Shiva’s Garden of Madness
Sacred Ashes
The Shadow of the Night
Chapter 14  
  Shiva’s Festivals and Holidays
The Descent of the Goddess
Festivals of the Hot Season and he Rainy Season
Festivals of the Fall Season
Festivals of Spring
Kumbha Mela
Footnotes
Notes
Bibliography
About the Author
About Inner Traditions
Copyright


Shiva

INTRODUCTION
With the stick raised high, Illusion herds the worlds.
Lord white as jasmine [Shiva]
no one can overcome your illusion.
MAHADEVIYAKKA,
SOUTH INDIAN POETESS, TENTH CENTURY
Shiva! For his devotees, he is the entire universe and the core of all beings. Who
but a fool, be he ever so wise, would dare take on the task of writing about him?
Has the writer not heard the old Indian tale of the goddess of learning who,
despite having mountains of ink powder, the sea as an inkwell, the World Tree
as her writing pen, and the surface of the earth as her paper, failed to describe the
splendor of Mahadev, the Great God? Still, neither the writer nor the reader need
despair, for Shiva is the devotee of his devotees, the lover of his lovers, and
though he is all-encompassing and all-transcendent, he reveals himself to his
worshippers—for he is the very Self of each and every one.
In south India, when worshipping Shiva, one must first of all purify the body
with water as one enters the temple, or holy site, where he customarily reveals
his numinous presence. one brings him flowers, sweet smelling incense, and
other beautiful things representing one’s heart and soul, and dedicates them to
Mahadev. One also offers a ripe coconut, which the attendant priest dashes
against a hard stone surface, spilling the milk in front of the idol, or the lingam,
which is Shiva’s sign. The hard-shelled nut represents none other than our skull,
this citadel of our hardened out little ego. Willingly one sacrifices this accursed
limited ego-nature to the all-encompassing greater Self. The ego dwarf, reducing
the universe to his own diminished dimensions by means of his clever, cutting
intellect, is never capable of grasping the wider mystery. Shiva, therefore, in an
act of mercy, seizes it, smashes it to bits, drinks out its life fluid, and lets us find
at-one-ment with him, our true Self. It is no wonder that the ego-centered
individual has always shunned and feared this seeming destroyer. And no

wonder, then, that Shiva is often seen as the diabolos, or devil.
The stories told in this book are common Indian lore. Grandmothers tell them
to the children, peasant storytellers or wandering sadhus recite them in the
evening to eager listeners. They are told, not just to entertain, but to teach, to
make a point, or to illustrate some insight into the mysteries of life. My sources
were mainly such oral tellings. There are however a number of good books,
published in English that also address these tales and legends. Many are found in
the various Puranas (“tales of ancient times”), such as the Shiva Purana. Helpful
to the curious reader might be Cradle Tales of Hinduism by Sister Nivedita,
Hindu Myths (“Penguin Classics” translated by Wendy O’Flaherty), Classical
Hindu Mythology (Cornelia Dimmit and J. A. B. van Buitenen, eds.), Hindu
Mythology, Vedic and Puranic by W. J. Wilkins, and A Classical Dictionary of
Hindu Mythology and Religion by John Dowson. All of these source books will
be listed in the bibliography.
I went to India in the role of an ethnologist, as a visiting scholar at Benaras
Hindu University, where I planned to record various aspects of cultural and
social phenomena. Faced with the heat, health problems, and most of all, the
magic of this fascinating land, my cool scholarly detachment could not prevail. It
was as if I myself were seized by Hara, the seizer, and sacrificed to my higher
Self. My paradigms of reality vaporized, my coconut was smashed, and the
grace of a wider vision (darshana) was accorded. When I left Bharata (as the
Indians call India), this holiest of lands, where the veil covering the supernatural
worlds is gossamer thin and the gods still reveal themselves to humankind, I had
no photographs, no tape recordings, and few notes. These things seemed too
profane, too limited. I myself was the page upon which He had written His
name. And now that sufficient time has passed since I came back into the
“world,” I feel at last able to tell something about Mahadev— who is, dear
reader, also your innermost Self.

1
JOURNEY TO THE SOURCE OF TIME
You have no form,
even though with the help of Maya,
you take on myriads of forms.
You have no beginning,
though you are the beginning of all.
It is you who creates, upholds and dissolves the worlds.
MAHANIRVANA TANTRA
Without number, like the stars, and endlessly colorful are the gods and demons
of India. Equally manifold are the stories, myths, and tales told about them. In
our quest for Shiva, however, these others concern us but marginally. With
Shiva we reach beyond polytheism’s glitter and glow. With him, we enter realms
deep in our innermost nature and simultaneously penetrate the profundities of
ancient history. There, as the light of our spirit beams into the abysmal chasm,
we vaguely discern the outlines of a most powerful archetype. Carl Gustav Jung
would surely have agreed that we are confronted by one of the most original
configurations of the Eurasian collective unconscious. But let us not go astray
and judge that we are dealing merely with an entity of depth psychology. We are
confronting a power that still rocks our lives, that sends its impulses from
unfathomable depths beyond our rational consciousness, that forms our reality
and sends its lifeblood pulsing through the outer world of nature as well as
through the inner world of soul and spirit. The archetype works on the outside
world and on the inside—and beyond both.
The mystery we are approaching is the image of the human being itself. At the
beginning of time, the image appeared as in a flash of lightning, by which a
surprised primate saw himself for the first time and, in that instant, was torn
from the dream consciousness of his animal state. This image of light, stunning
that first human soul, has remained engraved in the human memory ever since.
Undefinable and inapprehensible, the image was, nonetheless, given thousands
of names, decorated with endless attributes, and honored in myriad rites and

rituals. This first image became the king of all other archetypes, powers, and
dominions—the Lord of Gods. This image, this primal Archetype, is the key to
the unspeakable mystery of humankind.
Christ, by highest heav’n adored,
Christ, the everlasting Lord,
Come, Desire of nations, come,
Fix in us Thy humble home.
Veiled in flesh, the Godhead see;
Hail, th’ incarnate Deity
Pleased as man with men to dwell;
Jesus, our Emmanuel.1
With songs such as this celebrating the Light of the world, which shows us the
way to liberation, the Western world paid homage to this mystery, at least until
the dawn of the present age, which Indians call, with some justification, the Dark
Age (Kali Yuga). Indeed it has become dark, for by now we barely understand
the symbols, images, rituals, names, and expressions of this primal Archetype.
When we are not occupied with trivia and mindless consumerism, then anxiety,
depression, or dullness clouds our perception of the source of our being.
In the ancient land of India, the memory and experience of the Archetype is
closer at hand. Anyone who has spent some time there will have felt it. In
carefully maintained cult and ritual, its expression continues through countless
folktales, legends, plays, and festivals. Perhaps we can light our own torches
anew on the well-kept fire of India’s vision of God and once again illumine the
way into our own depths, past the poison-spewing dragon, down through the
realms of the gnomes, the elves, and the spirits of the ancestral dead, until we
reach the treasure chamber of our own soul where the jewel of the self rests
hidden. This self, the Hindus call Shiva, the Gracious One.
India’s gift to the rest of humanity is her uncompromising tenacity in keeping
memories alive and retaining—as in a living museum—all past states through
which humanity has traversed. Hindu culture and the Indian soul remind one of
the layers of sedimentary rocks of the towering Himalayas. In stratified
geological deposits, each rich in characteristic lead fossils, all the sequences of
past life remain recorded as they unfolded in ancient seas. South Asian society,
with its many racial and occupational castes, represents, in a similar way, a layer
cake of cultural evolution.
At the bottom of the social ladder are the thirty to sixty million hunters and

gatherers, the adavasi, or tribal peoples, who even today pursue the oldest
calling of humankind in the mountains and remaining jungles, while conjuring
spirits and dancing shamanic dances. Beyond these primitive tribals, one comes
across swidden and hoe agriculturists who worship the Great Mother, much as
the megalithic Europeans did once upon a time. The cult of the Great Goddess
was one of fertility and involved bloody rituals and headhunting. Prisoners of
war, exemplary youths, or sacrificial animals, preferably bulls, were ritually
hacked to pieces and buried in the soil, much as were planted the seeds and
tubers. In this way, peasants replenished the Goddess’s energy so that the earth
would continue to yield rich crops. Even today, one might find a short notice on
the third or fourth page of a provincial newspaper telling of an irate constable
and his men who had to arrest a number of villagers. The charge: child-sacrifice,
dismemberment of the body, and burial of the pieces in various fields to assure a
good harvest.
The dominant cultural stratum, however, is that of the Indo-European tribes of
nomadic cattle herders who fell upon the subcontinent some four to five
thousand years ago. These new Aryan settlers—who have since dominated and
formed Indian culture decisively—were a proud, patriarchal warrior folk who
called themselves the “noble ones” (arya). They brought with them horses and
the horse sacrifice, the worship of fire and the sun, holy cows, and a language
that is akin to the European tongues. The Aryan priests, the Brahmins—like their
cousins, the Celtic druids and the Roman flamins—learned endlessly long
magical spells and sacred verses by rote. The wisdom contained therein
eventually found its way into the written record of the holy Vedas. That the
ancient chants might lose their magical potency due to incorrect pronunciation
was as constant a worry to the Aryan priests as that their blood might become
diluted by mixture with the subjugated races of planters and hunters. In order to
forestall race miscegenation, a system of castes (varna) was imposed. In order to
keep the sacred language pure, the sage Patanjali set up a carefully wrought
system of the rules of Sanskrit grammar and phonetics.

“Holy cows” are still worshipped today
Aryan dominion was not seriously threatened until the twelfth century, when
Muslim zealots, drawn partially by the lure of the immense riches of the land
beyond the Indus, launched their invasions. They brought with them the culture
of medieval Islam, whose sounds, sights, and smells we can admire to this day,
preserved in nearly original purity in the Muslim ghettos of India’s towns and
cities.
There are other rare specimens purely preserved in the cultural sediments of
India. There are the Zarathustrian fire worshippers—the Parsees of Gujarat and
Bombay, who had fled the Muslim ravages of Persia. There are the Jews of
Cochin, who came as merchants and as refugees when the Romans destroyed
Jerusalem. There are the Portuguese whose Baroque Christianity, greasy pork
sausages, bullfights, sweet wine, and leisurely Mediterranean lifestyle still color
the local culture of Goa. Then, of course, there are the British, whose
twohundred-year domination has left a legacy of dutiful train officials (the trains
still run on time in India!), stodgy postmasters with handlebar moustaches,
plucky Indian Army officers, a collegiate passion for cricket, clubs, teatime,
remnants of gingerbread architecture and, last but not least, a rather queer-
sounding Hindu English. There are moments in Calcutta or Bombay when the
whole Victorian world rises in front of one’s eyes in uncanny purity.
Thus every invasion, every epoch has left its nonvanishing trace in the
fullness of India, well preserved in the formaldehyde of a system of castes,
subcastes, and occupational niches (jati). What a storehouse of treasures for the
student of ethnography and cultural history! Like a peacock’s fan, the spectrum
spreads before one’s eyes: the Old Stone Age; the Neolithic, matriarchal
planters; the patriarchal peasantry (the majority); the medieval towns and guilds;
the men and women of the Enlightenment; Victorian capitalism; and an
ultramodern world of show biz and high tech.
Each era and each culture has had a part in forming the current cult and
iconography of the Archetype, which is the subject of our treatise. The
shamanistic hunters provided the core, in the form of the trance-dancing horned
god who is the lord of the animals and the guardian of the souls: Pashupati. The
matriarchal planters gave him the Great Goddess as a companion and as the
personification of his magical, illusive power: Shakti. They also associated him
with the fertilizing phallus, serpents, and bulls. The Aryan bards, in turn, lauded
him as the all-consuming fire god, Agni, the intoxicating brew (soma) and,

above all, as the howling storm god, Rudra, with his host of the spirits of the
dead, ghosts, and goblins.
Perhaps it was through the Persian prophet Zarathustraa and his coercive
vision of the one God of Gods that the image of Shiva grew in the direction of
Mahadev, the Great God, for whom all other divinities become mere
appendages, reflections, or masks.2 Like a great sponge, he soaks up all of their
characteristics and makes them his own. Varuna (the Uranus of the Greeks), the
ancient Aryan god of heaven and guardian of the cosmic law, is pushed into the
lesser role of ruler of the waters and misty air, while his function as the keeper of
the universal right and ritual (rita) and as master of the magic we call existence,
is taken over by Shiva. Agni, the god of fire and sacrifice, becomes the mere
backdrop, the wheel of flame in which Shiva dances his dance of creation and
destruction. The sun god Surya, who traverses the heavens daily in his horse-
drawn chariot like an Aryan warrior crossing the battlefield, has a similar fate.
Even though his name is called upon daily by the worshipper in the holiest of
Sanskrit mantras (Gayatri Mantra), his light diminishes next to that of Shiva.
Even the Brahmins, those fearsome priests of Vedic times—once considered to
be almighty due to their mastery of all spells and due to the belief that the gods
and the worlds were born from within their minds—even they were humbled by
the Great God. We shall see how the seemingly omnipotent Brahmin, in the
person of Daksha, the chief of sacrificial priests and creator of many gods, is
reduced to a pitiable goat by Lord Shiva, and how Daksha’s lovely daughter, the
image of the divine human soul, leaves her strict father to take her place at
Shiva’s side.
Surya, the Vedic sun god

Periodically, when the Central Asian steppes became too dry for their grazing
animals, wild nomads would sweep into northwestern India: the Scythians
(Sakas), Huns (Hunas), and Mongolians (Kusanas). Brought along by these
horse people were elements of north and central Asian shamanism, which were
absorbed into the Indian Shiva cult. Grandiose names like Ishvara (lord),
Mahesvara (great lord), or Paramesvara (highest lord), all titles with which the
lords and kings of the nomads decorated themselves, became the names of the
great God. Many characteristics indicate that Odin (Anglo-Saxon, Old English
Wodan, Woden, Wotan), the magicwielding lord of the winds and protector of
the Nordic warriors, sprang from the same imagination as this shamanistic
Shiva. Odin, too, seems to have had his origin in the steppes and forests of Asia.
Engraved discs (bractea) of hammered gold, showing this shamanistic god on
his horse, are found all over Siberia and Central Asia.3
Perhaps Shiva owes his reputed hemp addiction to the influence of the
Scythians. These notoriously wild horsemen had the custom of celebrating their
wakes for the dead in sweat lodges in which hemp leaves were strewn over red-
hot stones. The resultant fumes helped the mourning kinsmen “lift off” and, for a
time, accompany the departed over the threshold of the dead.4 To this day, the
devotees of Shiva, the wandering saints (sadhus) and little fathers (babas), who
often take on shamanistic functions, inhale the smoke of this plant to enter the
realm of the spirits of the dead. Even though they use clay funnels (chilam)
instead of sweat lodges, the principle is the same.
Women play a major role in Hindu culture and Hindu lore. This stands in
contrast to the more patriarchal ethos of Muslim culture or even to the western
Christian culture. It is no problem at all to Hindus to worship God in form of a
Woman, as a divine lover, as a companion, as a universal maternal being (Durga,
Kali, Chamunda, and Shakti are very popular). Hindu women have a lot of social
clout: they are active in politics and professions, and in the individual extended
households, the elder women, the “matajis,” dominate the entire family and also
dominate the daughters-in-law.

A sadhu
However, as the title suggests, this book deals with only one aspect of Hindu
culture, namely, the cult of Shiva. Because it is not my intent to write an all-
encompassing book on Hinduism, I don’t have space to fully elucidate these
feminine aspects other than to mention that Shiva himself can be and is
worshipped as a female deity (Shivā) or as male and female at the same time
(Uma-Shankar; Ardhanarishvara, Shiva-Shakti). However, the Shaivites,
especially the sadhus, with whom I spent some time, generally image this god in
his male form. They do this, fully aware, that he can only be, by the grace of
Shakti, the female ground of being.
The ancient Greeks, who, after the escapades of Alexander the Great,
established the Seleucid Empire and the Greco-Bactrian kingdoms in the East,
also salted the stew. “These conquerors equated Indra with their own Zeus,
Shiva with Dionysos, Krishna with Hercules and the goddess Padma (Lotos)
with Artemis.”5 The legends of the Greek Dionysians tell of a time when the god
of wine and orgiastic religion arrived from the East riding a white bull; others
tell of his two-year sojourn in India. Some scholars are convinced that the Indian
Shiva and the Mediterranean Dionysus are more than casually related.6
The temple architecture as it exists in India to this day seems to be a gift of the
Bactrian Greeks. The Vedic Aryans had worshipped their gods out-of-doors,
putting their sacrificial beasts to the knife on low platforms laid out with fragrant
herbs and sacred darbhah grass (Desmostachya bipinnata, L.). Wandering Shiva
sadhus still perform their rituals in the open air. However, after the Greek
incursion, rectangular stone temples similar to those found in the Mediterranean
world made their appearance.

A typical Hindu temple
The heart of the temple is a little shrine (garbhagrha), which (when dedicated
to Shiva) contains a phallic stone shaft, the lingam, as a sign of the presence of
the Great God. Above this holy of holies rises a tower (sikhara), richly decorated
with gods and heavenly singers, symbolizing Mount Meru, the center of the
universe, piercing all the heavenly spheres. The assembly hall (mandapa) faces
the shrine, its roof carried by a forest of stone columns. Just in front of the hall is
a small vestibule. The temple is considered to be the sacred body of the god. The
gateway (gopuram) is his feet, the shrine is the heart and the tower is his neck
and head, which ends in a tuft of hair (sikha), just as it does with the devotee.7
Since our Western churches have their origin in Greek architecture, the
similarity should not surprise us. Here, too, we find the vestibule, the assembly
hall, the tower, and the sanctum sanctorum. Though the shrine on the altar does
not contain God in the form of a lingam, it does contain the core symbol of the
Christian faith, the monstrance, the chalice of the Lord’s Body, the Host (Latin
hostia = sacrificial animal).
Besides building the first stone temples, Greek sculptors fashioned the first
lifelike images of Buddhas and bodhisattvas meditating in lotus postures as we
still find them displayed all over south and east Asia. It was not long before
Shiva, in his appearance as the peaceful Shankar, was sculpted in a similar
manner, sitting in the absolute tranquillity of deep meditation on his tiger skin.
Perhaps it was the contact with the so-called Syrian Christians of Kerala (the
little flock of Christians that the apostle Thomas had supposedly converted) that
gave Shaivism in south India a totally new turn. It was the bhakti movement,
preached by Tamil saints, that conceived of their dancing lord as the God of
Love, similar to Christ. In complete self-abandon and devotion, they sing that
God’s ocean of love is not found in some external object but in the devotee’s

heart. The holy bard Basavanna, the founder of the Lingayat sect (whose
members wear a little Shiva lingam encased in silver around their necks, much
as Catholics wear a cross), sings the following verse: The rich will make temples
for Shiva.
What shall I, a poor man, do?
My legs are pillars,
The body, the shrine,
The head, a cupola of gold.
Listen, O Lord of the Meeting Rivers,
Things standing shall fall
But the moving ever shall stay.8
The indwelling of the blessed Lord cannot be gained through pious works but
flows continually out of his fountain of immeasurable grace toward the human
soul. Our relationship to God is not like that of a baby monkey that needs to
muster its strength to cling onto its mother; rather it is like that of a kitten that
the mother cat carefully carries in its jaws to safety. Shiva, thus, is a savior who
seizes the human being much like “a peasant who grabs his cow by the horns
when it is about to sink into the quagmire.”9 Like Christ, who took upon himself
the bitter cup of perdition, so Shiva drank the poison of the world, which the
activity of the gods and titans churned from the depths of the primal ocean. To
his bhaktas, his loving devotees, he is a caring mother and a good shepherd.
Basavanna sings: . . . the Lord of the Meeting Rivers
stays with me
every step of the way
and looks after me.
As we see, every cultural stream is a river feeding the ocean of Shiva. He
takes the images and imaginations of every age as his decoration. The process
has not ended. This powerful Archetype is by no means fading as the
materialistic, hyper-rationalistic mania of our civilization reaches ever-new
heights. On the contrary, our thoughts and achievements become his adorning
tinsel. Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (Osho), for example, reinterpreted the palate of
Western psychotherapy and transpersonal psychology in partially Shaivite
terms.10 Various swamis (spiritual teachers), from Shri Chimoy to Gopi Krishna,
insist doggedly that their teachings and methods for achieving Shiva

consciousness are solidly “scientific.” There are Indian scholars (pundits) who,
having realized the power inherent in a historical interpretation of the world
process, go as far as claiming that Shiva is a historical figure who some five
thousand years ago invented tools, speech, fire, music, and all other prerequisites
of human civilization, and fathered humankind with his three wives: with Gauri
the white race, with Durga the yellow race, and with Parvati the black race. Such
immodest scholars have even ranged themselves with atomic energy. Taking
Nehru’s slogan (“Let your factories be temples and your temples be factories”)
as a starting point, they easily interpret the rounded cement core of the nuclear
plant as the expression of the Shiva lingam and the horrible energy potential it
contains as the expression of his Shakti power.
Even for us Westerners, the naked god with matted hair and a trident in his hand
is not just a curiosity of cultural or religious history. He stalks, unrecognized, the
alleyways of our megalopolises and roams the minds of some of their
inhabitants. A chance glimpse of him irrevocably fascinates and sets to vibrating
long-neglected strings in our innermost soul. Longforgotten reminiscences of
ancient, Indo-European and pre-Indo-European shamanism, vague memories of
a time when humankind was wild and free, will suddenly shimmer through all
the layers of our cultural conditioning. No timid prayer or hasty striking the sign
of the cross, no government authority or weighty scientific fact-finding will
banish him. Though long pronounced dead by the rational Enlightenment, or at
least banished to the garden of lunacy, accessible to a few poets, lovers, and
madmen, the Archetype will raise its head and make the ground tremble. The
tiled walls of the laboratory already show ominous cracks: wars on terrorism,
star wars, financial jitters, environmental collapse. A wild, uncanny god smiles
through these fissures and beckons us to cast our eye into dimensions that make
us sway and steal our breath.
Of course, one had been aware of this “oriental idol” for some time. Ever
since the British berserkers in the guise of cool colonial administrators and
businessmen took on India, scholars have been busy studying and defining this
phenomenon. But it was not until the 1960s that the floodgates were opened
wide, when masses of flower children, hippies, adventurers, and refugees from a
dismal, materialistic consumer society followed the call of the Pied Piper of the
Orient. Cheap jet travel and the newly completed overland route made it
possible.
Once again a New World was discovered, a world whose king is Shiva. Once

again there was culture shock on both sides. At first, the flower children were
received by the Indian peasants like gods. They were fed, sheltered, and
worshipped. Many a young hippie couple was treated like Shiva and Parvati
who, as every Indian knows, occasionally take on human form to travel the land
in order to test the strength of devotion. Some of the young seekers never made
it back. Dysentery, hepatitis, cruel fevers, sheer exhaustion, and drugs took their
toll. Most, however, returned transformed to the cities of the West. They
reappeared dressed in afghan velvets, shining silks, colorful paisleys that smelled
of musk, patchouli, and other exotic fragrances. Hair freely flowing and eyes
filled with a gentle glow, and ornamented with necklaces, bracelets, ankle
bracelets, nose-rings and earrings, they told tales of wonder and delight. None
who went came back unchanged. Even if they managed the jump back into the
everyday routine of job and family, somewhere along the line their “minds had
been blown.” Like seeds cast into fertile ground, Shiva, Kali, and Krishna came
back with them, taking root in the wasteland, sending shoots here and there
through the cement and plastic.
Indianized Western hippies and Westernized Indians in Goa Since then, the first wave of India freaks,
dropouts, ganja devotees and guru seekers has ebbed away. The established powers spared no effort to stay
the cultural erosion and end this seeming heyday of fools. But though the external tide of the India craze
has receded, the inner tide is flooding on. Everywhere people are practicing meditation and yoga. They do
it to stay fit, lose weight, find themselves, give easy births and, in the executive suite, to cope with the stress
of competitive business. It should be known that Shiva is Mahayogi, the lord of yoga.
Drugs, especially the smoking of marihuana, have become firmly integrated
aspects of the youth subculture and the music scene. It should be known that
Shiva is Aushadhishvara, the lord of herbs and drugs. Knowingly, he winks his
eye at the hippy and the ganja-smoking Rastafarian who, with dreadlocks and
easygoing lifestyle, looks like an African version of the Shiva sadhu.

Tantra (Nepalese print)
In a society where men and women are at war with each other and sex is used
as a weapon, it is no wonder that tantra and sexyoga are increasingly popular.
Shiva appears as the master of tantric technique and teaches frustrated couples
how to be eternally in love (as he is with Parvati) and how sex can be a pathway
to enlightenment.
Is it any wonder that a repressed, overcivilized humankind, thoroughly out of
harmony with its basic nature, is fascinated by a figure such as Tarzan, Lord of
the Apes? The fantasies of Edgar Rice Borroughs have been translated into fifty-
eight languages with a total of over fifty million copies in print. The natural man,
he who can talk to the animals and make unfettered love to his companion, Jane,
has appeared in film after film since 1918. In him we meet again the archetype
of Shiva as Pashupati, lord of the animals. With his mistress, the goddess
Parvati, or at times alone, clad only in a tiger skin, unkempt, and unburdened by
civilization, he roams the wilderness and jungles and hears the stories of all
creatures.
“Psssst!” he whispers to the man in the pinstripe suit. “How do things stand
with the environment? Can you hear what the plants and animals are telling
you?”

2
FIRE AND ICE
If it rains fire
you have to be as water;
if it is a deluge of water
you have to be as the wind;
if it is the Great Flood
you have to be as the sky;
and if it is the Very Last Flood of all the worlds
you have to give up self
and become the Lord.
ALLAMA PRABHU,
MEDIEVAL SOUTH INDIAN POET, TENTH CENTURY
Whereas animals possess consciousness, human beings are gifted with reflective
self-consciousness. Long, long ago in some dim past, while foraging for food in
the savannas of Africa, the awesome realization of the Self must have suddenly
flashed into the soul of some apelike primate ancestor. Legions of
anthropologists and prehistorians have attempted to locate this threshold of
humanity and reconstruct a picture of this past by patiently taking clues from
bone fragments and pollen analyses, charcoal scrapings and bits of chipped rock.
No flights of fancy here, but hard, objective data and clear thinking to match it.
Occultists and “spiritual scientists,” on the other hand, approach the problem
with entirely different methods. Using meditation and trance, they try to sink
consciously into the deeper layers of the mind, like geologists taking bore probes
to find what picture images lay buried there in the racial memory. Their tools are
“spiritual organs” (for example, the “third eye”), developed by rigorous spiritual
exercises and supported by an ascetic lifestyle that often involves vegetarian
diets, fasting, and abstinence from alcohol. Thus sensitized, they can fathom
their own transpersonal depths or manage to read in the socalled Akashic
chronicle. The basic assumption is that every thought, word, or event creates
vibrations that leave their impression in the ether (akasha), much as light rays do
on photographic film. The initiate whose spiritual eye is open would be able to

perceive these subtle impressions in his or her soul and in the ethereal mantle of
the earth.
Obviously, the hard-core scientist and the occultist researcher relate to each
other as dogs do to cats. But this should not bother us. In our attempt to elucidate
the Shiva archetype, we shall utilize the results of both schools. The one side
deals with the phenomena more from the outside, the other more from the inside.
Prometheus chained to a rock
In Greek myth, it was Prometheus (the forethinker) who took pity upon the
human animal and brought her fire and, thereby, culture. Fire was the
prerogative of the gods and its theft angered the deities tremendously. Which
evildoer would thus dare disrupt the cosmic order? Father Zeus, the only divinity
it behooves to carry the thunderbolt, had this rebel who dared to steal the fire
chained to a cliff in the Caucasian mountains, where an eagle feeds daily on his
liver. There Prometheus must remain until, on some distant day, Hercules will
free him from his suffering.
The scientific anthropologist is not especially interested in such mythological
imagery. Instead, she will point out the bits of wood coal found at L’Escale in
southern France, radiocarbon-dated at nearly eight hundred thousand years ago.
There, at the dawn of the last series of Ice Ages, rather apish-looking hominoids
(Homo erectùs) had built distinct hearths. Some five hundred thousand years
ago, another Homo erectus, the Peking man, roasted the meat of bears, buffalo,
and boars, as well as other Peking men, on hearths in the Choukoutien Caves. It
is now estimated that humanity came into control of fire some million years ago.
One of the primate horde must have been possessed by sufficient courage to lift
a burning fire brand, perhaps where a brushfire had set a bush aflame or where
lightning struck a solitary tree. Such a flash of lightning kindled not only an
elemental fire—it kindled the human spirit. It was truly a moment of heroism
when that individual overcame the animal fear of fire and reached for the

flaming torch. No animal can do this. At that very moment, the first of
humankind stood on earth—a sovereign!
Homo erectus tending the fire
With that horrendous deed, everything changed. Nothing remained the same.
Even if the act of kindling remained a secret for ages, the next time lightning
struck a tree the sacred element could be caught again, carried along, fed, and
kept alive. Culture (Latin cultus = the careful tending), the essential criterion of
humanity and symbol of human freedom from the compelling guardianship of
the gods and instincts, took its beginning. The carriers of the flame wielded
power. They had power over predatory beasts. In the ambers they could fire-
harden the tips of their wooden spears. Raw meat and tough tubers could be
cooked soft. With fire, early humans could enter the cold forests and steppes of
the north, despite ice and winter storms.
But it was not just the human animal that dared grasp for the fire: the Fire
seized the human being. The Spirit, equated in most cultures with fire or fiery
air, incarnated in the human primate. The Fire Spirit from the external
macrocosm of Nature took up residence in the human microcosm. As this
happened, the inner divine light became so strong that the first fire catcher no
longer feared the external flame.
Thus, the old myths of Prometheus, who angered the gods, and of other light-
bringers, such as Lucifer (Latin lux = light, ferre = to carry), the disobedient
angel who fell from heaven, indicate archaic memories. In the form of a
shimmering serpent appearing at the tree, this Spirit “deceived” the feminine
receptive soul, leading the innocent half-animal astray and initiating it into the
mystery of good and evil. In that act, the serpent tore the original oneness apart,
splitting it into the dichotomies of inside/outside, microcosm/macrocosm,
man/woman, I/other. Adam loses his rib and must leave the original paradise
where death, toil, and suffering are unknown.

This moment of the rending of the universe must have been the moment when
the spark of speech moved the tongue for the first time. (In India the muni sage,
who has bridged the chasm and regained the pristine unity, stops speaking and
commenting. With a mysterious hush of a smile on his lips, he sits in silence.) In
this twinkling of an eye, when Fire sundered us from the rest of creation, all
naming, denoting, designating, and objectifying began. The incarnating
Luciferian spirit cast its harsh light upon the now “external” Nature. Its
intelligence created the “world.” Gods and demons appeared in myriad forms
and screamed to be named. Maya, the grand illusion, which the wise of India try
to flee, started her seductive dance. At the same time, religion, the yearning of
the suffering soul for the original harmonious oneness, entered the scene. One
must come to terms with these gods and demons. Their anger must be appeased.
One offered them prayers, respect, and tribute in blood and sacrifice.
That first bold reach for the flame burned itself deep into human memory. It is
recalled in the dreams, myths, legends, and rituals of all peoples. The sacred fire
plays a central role in most rites. It is the focus of attention—focus being the
Roman word for all private and public sacred fires. The hearth is the center of
the house, just as the sun, the celestial fire, is the heart of the heavens. In the
blood sacrifice, the red embers and the warm red liquor of life find communion.
Fire and blood are a bridge to the other world and provide blessing (Old English
bledsian = to bless with a daub of blood).
The cooking fire is the flaming mouth of Agni (related to Latin ignis = fire,
ignition), Shiva in his fiery form. Indian mothers to this day flick bits of butter or
flour into the stove, calling each god by name to accept the offering. Fire is also
the door through which mortals enter the spirit world: those who have lost their
worldly attachment enter the fire’s light as it diffuses into the eternal, indivisible
Brahman.a Other souls, still attached to the endless cycle of life and death, enter
the smoke of the fire, rise to the rain clouds, reenter the soil with the rain, are
absorbed by the crop plants, become food, enter the blood, transform into sperm
and egg, and commence with a new incarnation.

Agni, the god of fire
On the other hand, heroes can be born of fire. Draupadi, the wife of the five
Pandavas (the heroes of the Mahabharata) was born, along with her twin
brother, when a libation was poured on the sacrificial fire. Karttikeya, Shiva’s
son and savior of the world, was born of fire, as were Romulus and Remus, the
first Romans, when a virgin was made to conceive by a male organ of generation
that sprang out of the sacrificial fire. It is a common belief among European
peasants that when a woman’s apron is scorched by flying cinders, she is about
to conceive.1 Everywhere, mantras, oaths, and binding spells are spoken into the
living flame, be it to bind a man and a woman into wedlock, be it to swear
loyalty or revenge.b Such is the power of this element.
Whether it was actually a flash of lightning that led humankind on its odyssey
of self-discovery, we cannot, of course, know as a scientific fact. But the theme
crops up again and again. Even modern fantasies are fueled by the idea of the
generative force of the thunderbolt. Benjamin Franklin, who drew lightning from
the sky with his kite and inaugurated the age of electricity, stirred the
imagination of his time. A few years later, in her classic novel, Frankenstein, or
the modern Prometheus (1818), Mary W. Shelley gave a prophetic vision of the
mad attempt of science (represented by Dr. Frankenstein) to create a new
superman. This new being, constructed of choice limbs and organs derived from
the freshly deceased, is brought to life by the electrical discharge of a lightning
storm.
This archetypal picture of life derived from heavenly fire spooks in the brains
of sober, modern scientists as well. One still assumes that it was the influx of
cosmic radiation combining with electrical arcs (lightning) discharged into the
Precambrian sea that caused the “dilute organic soup” of amino acids, proteins,
and other polymers to weld together to form the first living molecules capable of
reproduction.c

The holy fire is the focus of the Indian wedding
The god associated with fire in the old Nordic and Germanic sagas is the
trickster, Loki (his name being related to Swedish laga, Old High German Loug,
Old English Lieg = a shooting flame). He is the cunning, magical being who can
change his form at will, whose scandalmongering tongue outrages the gods and
whose offspring include Hel (goddess of the underworld), the world serpent, and
the wolf of doom. His father is Farbauti, the lightning bolt, and his mother is
Laufey, the verdant oak. Having killed the sun god, Baldur, he tries to flee the
wrath of the gods by constantly changing his form. Thor catches him anyway
and he is chained, like Prometheus, to a rock where a snake’s venom
continuously drips on him. Were it not for his faithful wife, who catches the
acrid drops in a bowl, the pain would be too much to bear. When she turns to
empty the bowl and the bane burns him, he writhes in pain, causing the earth to
tremble.
The Slavs tell of Perun, a heaven god associated with the thunderbolt and
fertility. And the Baltic tribes worshipped a Perkun, whose lightning bolt strikes
out of high heavens. It is interesting in our context that the names of these deities
refer to the oak tree (Latin quercus, Old Latin perquos = oak).2 Surely our
conjecture is not too far off when we guess that the initial kindling of the human
spirit took place when lightning, like a cosmic serpent, struck a towering
deciduous tree next to some hapless Homo erectus, for everywhere folklore
combines the elements of fire/lightning/heaven/god/trickster (serpent)/tree in an
archetypal symbolic complex.

A pipal (fig) tree
In later times the tribal king—as a representative of the heaven god—held
court under such a tree.d Often a cone-shaped rock (menhir) was set in the same
place, as a symbol of the heavenly thunderstone. Under its protection, the Thing
or Ting, the assembly of the free and noble, was held at astrologically auspicious
times (usually at full moon), to decide what shall be and what shall not be, what
is right and what is wrong. Here at the thingstead, duels were fought and ordeals
were held, sacrificial fires kindled and oaths sworn, for this was the First Tree.
Its roots reached into the underworld where the dragon dwells and its crown
pierced the heavens. It is the same archetypal tree that is the shaman’s ladder.
Under a tree such as this, Siddhartha, the son of a king, meditated until he
became illuminated and became the Buddha, the Enlightened One. We shall
soon see what all this has to do with Shiva.
 THE ROCK 
Monkeys occasionally pick up stones to throw at predators or to crack the shells
of tasty nuts. At the dawn of humanity, however, it was no longer a frightened or
hungry animal that haphazardly picked up a stone, but a being possessed by a
newly incarnate spirit who then formed the object in accordance with an inner
imagination to serve her as a tool or weapon. At that point in time, regular
toolmaking traditions appeared that help the prehistorian to trace cultural
development and migration routes. The socalled firestones, the flints and cherts
that, when struck, flake off into razor-sharp blades, were the preferred raw
material. The accompanying sparks and smell of sulfur are to this day the sign of
the Promethean, or demonic.
Is not the hard rock, which can kindle a fire, like the male organ, which when
stone hard, engenders the spark of life in the maternal womb? The association of

stone, fire making, and fertility is so basic that it has left its trace in language.
The word child (German Kind, from Old German kenda = generated) is related
to the verb “to kindle” and can be traced to its Indo-European root gen, “to bear,
kindle, generate.” (We recognize it in such words as Sanskrit Janati = he begets;
Greek Genea = birth, race; and Latin generatio = kindle, generate.) The flint
chopper or hand tool with which the hearth fire can be kindled, thus readily
becomes the symbol of the phallus through which the fire of life is passed from
generation to generation. In turn, it is associated with the thundering god of the
heavens, whose fire-semen lights up the sky and impregnates the Earth Mother,
just as it generates ideas in the minds of human beings.
The lightning bolt (or thunderstone) is the scepter of numerous gods who
bring life and fertility as well as deal in death. The worship of a hammer god
(Thor) and “thunderer” is recorded for the culture of northwestern Europe
already some three to four thousand years ago in the Bronze Age rock
engravings of Scandinavia. His stone hammer (mjollnir) played an important
role in all rituals.e Marriages were solemnized by laying such a hammer in the
lap of the bride! Sacrificial victims were slain with it. At the thingstead, rapping
thrice with the hammer made a transaction or judgment legal and binding—as it
still does at our courts and auctions today. In heathen times, northern Europeans
wore a miniature Thor’s hammer around their neck as an amulet, much as the
Lingayats of south India carry a Shiva lingam.
Just like Thor (the Thunar of the Anglo-Saxons), Indra, the old Vedic thunder
god, sports a mighty thunderbolt (vajra), with which he smashes the skulls of
demons and blesses the earth with fertilizing rain. The vajra (lightning,
thunderbolt, jewel, diamond, phallus) is to this day the focus of the esoteric sects
of Vajrayana or the Diamond Vehicle of Buddhism. It rests as a jewel in the
lotus (padma), as the phallus, or lingam, in the vagina, and as enlightenment
(Buddha) in the heart.
The dual nature of this magical stone is readily apparent. It is the generator of
life and fertility, as well as the dealer of death and the kindler of the final
conflagration. As a weapon of war and hunt, the hand ax, or spear point, brings
the quarry to fall, assuring food for the clan; and it brings the destruction of the
enemy, thus restoring peace. As a phallus, it wounds the virgin but makes
continued life possible. As a grinding stone, it destroys nuts and grains in order
to prepare the life-sustaining meal. The act of grinding destroys the grain but, at
the same time, multiplies it by fragmenting it. In a similar way, in the original
act of creation, the Cosmic Giant (Sanskrit Purusha, Norwegian Ymir, Hebrew
Adam Kadmon) was sacrificed and multiplied by dismemberment. The great
sacrifice, involving the stone knife, thus stood at the beginning of the world.

Creation is multiplicity derived from the destruction of the original unity.
To early humankind, the heat generated by the campfire, by the sexual act, by
the effort of the hunt or battle, by dance or hard work, was the expression of one
and the same source, the cosmic fire spirit. As the Indians view it, the ascetic, or
sadhu, is holy because of the accumulated, unspent heat (tapas) generated by his
or her ascetic practices. Because of this inner ardor, the sage can burn up sins
and reduce old works (karma) to ashes. At the same time, he or she can brood
out new worlds, just like the hen broods out its eggs.f Because of their fiery
nature, the Indian fakir and the Siberian shaman can walk over red hot coals,
pick up glowing iron, plunge their arms into boiling water, sit naked in the snow,
or burn their potent imaginings into souls that are not as hot.
In this context, the word shaman is quite revealing. Once, Palispeaking
Buddhist monks, the samana, carried the concept to the forests and taigas of the
north. It is derived from the Sanskrit shramana, referring to an ascetic, one who
makes an ardent effort (from Sanskrit shram = to exercise, to heat up). The
ashram (Sanskrit asrama) is thus such a place where a heated effort is
undertaken. Shiva is the master of all ascetics, fakirs, and shramanas. He
contains all the heat of the universe in his lingam. At the end of time, this heat
will conflagrate all of creation, just as it will generate it anew.
Archaic societies all over the world set up boulders, menhirs, megaliths, and
styles as centers of religious activity. They can be interpreted as oversized hand
axes, thunderbolts, and (yes, old Sigmund Freud was right) phalluses. They were
the gateways to the other world. The dead were buried near them and the unborn
hovered there in order to incarnate anew. Often they were smeared with
sacrificial blood, later with blood red ocher (hematite). In India one still finds
cylindrical bir or bhairan stones—painted a bright vermilion—in which local
divinities manifest themselves. The Shiva lingams, conical stones representing
God, are no longer covered with blood or cinnabar red, but washed with milk,
coconut juice, or Ganges water. The priests (pujaris) who attend the lingam,
nonetheless, dab red powder on the foreheads of the devotees. In a similar
manner, the ancient Germanic and Celtic priests blessed the worshippers by
dabbing sacrificial blood onto the middle of their brows.
 WATER 
The heat of the flame brings about its dialectical opposite: It melts ice to water;
it smelts metal out of the rock. The flow of semen ends the heated passion of the
sensual embrace; the gushing of the quarry’s blood ends the heat of the chase;
the moist cool of the moon’s night ends the fiery rule of the sun’s day. Out of

such opposites life arises.
In the Nordic creation myth, which has similarities to the myths of the Vedic
Indians, the first being, the giant Ymir, is created out of the mingling of ice and
fire. Simultaneously the first animal, the Cow, arises, whose milk nourishes the
primordial being. Ymir’s grandsons, Odin, Willi, and We (Loki), create the
world by sacrificing and dismembering the grandfather giant. His skin becomes
the earth, his hair the trees, his blood the rivers and seas, his skull the heavenly
vault, and the gray blob of his brains, the clouds.
The river goddess Sarasvati
In the Celtic creation myth, also, the cosmos is created out of water and fire.
The Roman ethnographer Strabo notes the fear of the otherwise fearless Celts
that someday the world will fall apart again into these two opposite elements.
Water, the feminine counterpart to the masculine fire, heals, cleans, and gives
birth to life’s seeds. Supernatural beings of feminine gender are apt to manifest
at springs, waterfalls, rivers, lakes, and seas. River goddesses, such as the great
white goddess Dana, who gave her name to many Eurasian rivers (Danube, Don,
Dee), nymphs, nixes, and swan maidens, all have their counterpart in India.
Foremost among these are the river goddess Ganga, who flows from Shiva’s
locks, and the river goddess Sarasvati, the queen of muses, who rides a white
swan.
Many holy rituals of humankind aim to symbolically recreate the original
unity of the primordial elements of fire and water (or ice). Whoever has been
enflamed by the fire of the Spirit will seek baptism in sanctified waters. In India,
it is a daily ritual to greet the rising sun with a bath in the river. As part of the
observance, one cups one’s hands and offers water to the rising celestial fire.
Elsewhere, libations of holy water, mead, or blood are poured into the sacred

fire. In the sex act, which—as in Tantra—is often seen as a sacred act, heat and
moisture find creative combination.
A fever is the collision of the two primal elements in the microcosm of the
body, bathing its victim in sweat and shaking him between waves of heat and
cold. A violent fever, which rips the individual out of his mundane routine and
catapults him into madness, is part of the “initiation illness” of the traditional
shaman. In his or her delirium, the initiate into shamanism enters the world of
the spirits and the dead. If the initiate lacks magical strength, he or she will
remain in this other world, that is, die.
A siddhi baba, descendant of shamans
The creation of artificial fevers by means of the sweat lodge is one of the
oldest shamanistic techniques. Going back to Paleolithic times, it can be found
from Scandinavia (sauna) to the tip of South America. Shamans sit naked as the
day they were born, while water ladled onto red-hot rocks produces billows of
blistering steam. When the temperature becomes so fierce that they can stand it

no longer, they plunge into an ice-cold river, lake, or snow bank. In this way,
they purify their bodies and souls so that they can talk to the gods and cure
illnesses.
It should not be surprising that Shiva, who combines all opposites in his
being, is also the lord of fever. The naked sadhus, who have given themselves
totally to their Lord, are clearly descendents of this ancient shamanistic tradition.
Though they do not build sweatlodges, they expose themselves to extreme heat
and cold in order to increase their magical power (siddhi). In the hottest summer
heat, one might see them sitting between “five fires” (a fire to the left, the right,
in front, behind; and the sun above). In the winter they meditate for days in icy
cold mountain streams. Some wander in the fall into the snowbound Himalayan
valleys only to appear, to the utter amazement of ordinary mortals, with the
spring melt.
 KASHI 
It might strike the reader as odd to delve so deeply into the beginnings of human
culture. Yet that is necessary if we want to understand Shiva. Though this
enigmatic god did not scribble his name on the walls of the Paleolithic hunters’
caves in the manner of “Kilroy was here,” nonetheless we sense his presence at
the very dawn of history. In Shiva’s iconography and mythology we find all the
traits of the first gods. Shiva is all, but predominately, he is the lord of the fire.
Myth lets him appear at the beginning of creation as a gigantic pillar of fire, out
of which the world sprung and within which the universe is still, to this day,
contained.
Many Hindus believe that it was in Benares (Varanasi) where the column of
light, the flash of divine lightning, first manifested. This is the city that natives
lovingly and full of gentle devotion call Kashi, “the shining one.” It is said that
those whose eyes are purified and unclouded by worldly illusions can still see
the fire lingam (jyotirlingam) in this auspicious city by the Ganges. Benares is
also called Mahashmashana, “the great funeral pyre,” for here souls are freed
from worldly fetters and their sins are burned away. In the mystical geography of
India, Benares is the blazing “third eye” of Shiva, whose rays will one day
incinerate the creation.

A Shiva temple in Benares (Kashi)
Day and night, one can see the funeral pyres burning on the riverbank of this
most unusual city, the one at Manikarnika Ghat, the other at Harichandra Ghat.
Legend has it that the fire used to cremate the dead has never been rekindled
since it was taken from the first fire on earth. At the last rite, it is always the
eldest son of the deceased whose duty it is to light the pyre on which the corpse
lies, shrouded in silk, garlanded with flowers and drenched in butter. A dom, a
funeral attendant from the caste of the untouchables, hands him the burning
bunch of sacred kusha grass,g which has been lit on the ancient fire. His head
shorn and dressed in the white of mourning clothes, the chief mourner
circumambulates the pyre five times in a counterclockwise direction. (In rituals
for the living, the circumambulation of the fire or of a sacred shrine is always
clockwise, but since this is a ritual for the dead, whose world is the inverse
mirror of the world of the living, the order is reversed.) The five rounds
represent the five elements (earth, water, fire, air, and space, or ether), which
form the sheaths of the mortal body and which are now dissolved and reabsorbed
by the macrocosm. If the skull does not burst of its own accord in the
incandescence, the oldest son or one of the dom attendants cracks it with a tap
from a strong bamboo pole. This is necessary so that the soul (jiva) might be
able to leave the corpse (shava) in the form of a miniature Shiva, complete with
matted hair, trident in hand, three-eyed and naked. The departing soul, dancing
as Shiva, is accompanied by demons and goblins, which personify the sins and

transgressions of the deceased. In a final act, one of the dom attendants rakes the
ashes and sprinkles them into the holy waters of the Ganges. In this fashion, the
final sacrifice is completed.
The doms became the guardians of the sacred fire a long time ago, when they
saved it from defilement by fanatical Muslims, bent on destroying all vestiges of
heathenism in the name of Allah. They hid the embers and nurtured them
secretly for many years. Because of this deed, these untouchables are still the
guardians of the holy flame and have the right to demand a few rupees for their
service at each funeral. But recently their privilege was threatened by Rajiv
Gandhi, the Western-educated prime minister. Embarrassed by the primitive,
superstitious image that this city of Shiva presents to the modern Western
tourist, Rajiv Gandhi decided to clean it up. When he visited the holy city in the
spring of 1985, he placed the cornerstone for a new, ultramodern, “sanitary”
electrical crematorium that fits so neatly with the newly asphalted streets, the
glaring mercury vapor lights, and the cattle guards that keep the holy cows from
soiling the scenic riverfront. Shiva’s city was to have a new face, befitting the
twentieth century. Many Hindus believe that it was this sacrilege that led to the
untimely death of the prime minister when in the year 1991 the “Tamil Tigers”
set off a bomb blast.
 KARTTIKEYA’S STRANGE BIRTH 
Fragments of the earliest beliefs of humanity are found in all cultural and
religious traditions, but seldom are they as transparent as in India. The countless
stories told about Shiva focus on singular aspects of the all-encompassing
archetype. Let us now enjoy one such story, which has a firm place in the oral
tradition and was told to me in several versions. It tells of the birth of Karttikeya,
the savior of the world, born of the love of Shiva and the Goddess. Here, once
again, the dynamic interplay of the polar opposites water and fire are brought
into focus:
For no less than ten thousand years, Shiva and Parvati embraced in the
pleasure of carnal love, forgetting the cares of the universe. The
heavenly hosts, oppressed by an egomaniacal demon named Taraka,
became ever more disheartened. At this rate, they asked themselves,
when would the hero be born who could vanquish the monster under
whose whims all of creation suffered? Finally they could stand it no
longer. In their council, they decided to send Agni, the fire god, to remind

the cosmic lovers that sex does not exist for pleasure only, but also for
the creation of progeny.
Karttikeya
In the guise of a turtledove, the fire god flew to their love nest, hidden
high in the mountains. The sudden fluttering of the bird interrupted their
lovemaking and caused Shiva to spill his seed. It spurted through the air
and entered the open beak of the dove. Parvati angrily cursed the noisy
intruder and the gods who sent him: “May the wombs of the other
goddesses be as fruitless as mine!” Shiva’s seed was so hot that it nearly
burned the fire god to a crisp. Agni’s senses nearly failed him as he
tumbled back to Brahmloka, the hall of Brahma. On the way, he met the
river goddess Ganga. “Woe is me!” he cried. “How difficult is this seed of
Shiva to bear! But if I let it fall, it will burn up all three worlds, heaven,
earth, and the underworld!” Proud Ganga believed that her glacier-fed
waters would be cold enough to cool down the hot seed. “Give it to me! I
shall be able to take it on!” she proclaimed to Agni, whose body hair,
skin, and eyes had taken on a golden glow due to the contact with the
semen.
Alas, Ganga had overestimated herself. After ten thousand years, she
was but a shadow of her earlier self. Brahma, the Creator, seeing her in
such distress, asked her: “Most lovely maiden, with rounded hips and a

full bosom, what has drained thee of thy vigor?” After she told the
grandfather of the gods what had happened, he searched his mind and
finally counseled her to leave the burning seed in the bed of reeds by the
river’s shore. “In ten thousand years hence, a little child will be born in
those rushes, a child who shines brighter than the morning sun.”
And that is exactly what happened. During this time, all the rushes, the
trees, the animals, as well as the human beings that lived in the area, all
took on a golden hue, and the reeds glistened and glittered like
hammered gold. Then suddenly one day, an infant lay there and cried
with the voice of thunder. It just happened that the six sisters, the
Pleiades (Krittikas), played on that same shore. They were delighted to
find the babe. Each wanted to cuddle it and offer it her breast. To please
them, little Karttikeya grew six heads so he could suckle each one of
them at the same time. Thus, Shiva’s son, the vanquisher of demons,
was born. His mothers include all the elements: Parvati (earth), Agni
(fire),h Ganga (water), and the Pleiades (air and cosmic space).

3
THE SHAMAN AND HIS BLACK DOG
Look here, don’t leave me!
If you leave me,
I’ll insult You saying,
“O Madman who wears the fierce elephant’s skin!
O Madman who wears the tiger’s skin!
O Madman who ate the poison!
O Madman surrounded by the fire of
the town’s crematorium!
O Madman who has me as His slave!”
MANIKKAVACAKAR,
TAMIL POET, TENTH CENTURY
After having climbed down from the trees sometime during the early Pliocene,
the hominoid hordes metamorphosed into Paleolithic hunters and gatherers
armed with stone choppers and fire. They roamed the earth freely for an
estimated three million years. The mere ten thousand years humans have spent
as tillers of the soil, tied to small swidden plots, are but a very short time in
comparison. Recorded history started a bare five thousand years ago. The three
hundred years of industrial civilization—which so impresses and, at the same
time, oppresses our contemporaries—what are they in the face of this immense
journey? This brave new world might just be a bubble on the stream of time that
could pop at any moment!
Considering the eons spent at the bosom of Nature, which formed, molded,
and imprinted the body, soul, and spirit of humankind, what weight has this thin
veil of civilization? Too deeply lodged in our racial memory, our collective
unconscious, are the impressions of our ancient life as hunters and gatherers. Our
cults, folk stories, beliefs, dream images, and language are full of its traces.
Every child repeats the long development in its games of hide and seek, tag,
tracking, building huts and hideaways. The bow and arrow were once a way of
life; hopscotch, clapping rhymes, guessing of riddles, running the hoop, and

playing ball were serious magic. With almost religious seriousness, children
repeat the cultural history of humankind, just as in the biological development of
the embryo all the stages of evolution are recapitulated.
Can we not, each and every one of us, sense the savage in our soul?
Underneath the mask of the wellor ill-mannered urbanite, behind the façade of
the suave, domesticated men and women, one discovers the old hunters still
sitting at the campfire. Shamans with horns on their headbands, dressed in the
skins of predatory beasts, ornamented with glittering chips of mica and bird’s
feathers, invite to the dance, to the flight into the magic mountain. Their chants
and drumming still spellbind, as the thin veil of our conditional reality melts and
another world opens to our inner vision. Look at this shaman in your soul! She is
half man, half woman, possessing the powers of both. Her magic allows her to
bear heat and cold, hunger and thirst beyond measure. His single-mindedness
allows him to pick up poisonous snakes and dance with them. Her third eye lets
her look far into the past, far into the distance and even into the future. Its rays
can stop a charging enemy or fleeing game, or calm a raging bear.
 THE OLD HUNTSMAN 
In all the old shamanistic cultures, animals dominated the concepts and
imaginations. To this day, hunting tribes are likely to give animal names to their
children. Furs, pelts, claws, fangs, and feathers—preferably of ferocious
predators such as wolves, wildcats, bears, eagles or ravens— are the favorite
body decorations of the hunter, warrior, or medicine person. Talking animals
appear to them in dreams and visions, teach them the secrets of nature, guide
them as familiars or guardians, and give them the priceless gifts of courage,
endurance, or keenness of senses. (The familiars of medieval witches, the owls,
cats, and toads, are remnants of this ancient form of conceptualization.) The
clans and lineages of these societies trace their ancestry to a totem animal that
mothered/fathered them in a far off dreamtime. To this day they remain brothers
and sisters to such an animal species. These totemic animals are celebrated at
certain times of the year in what anthropologists call rites of increase.


Dancing Siberian shaman
Such rituals, once universal, involve ecstatic dances during which the hunters,
dressed in horn and hide, turn into animal spirits themselves. They dance their
lives in minute detail: the rutting, the coupling, the calving, the searching for
fresh pastures, and finally, their deaths at the hands of the hunter. Such dances
are carried out in a state of pure empathy and complete identification. In the
process, the prey is already killed in spirit before the hunter brings the actual
body of the animal down with his spears and arrows. After the ritual, the animal
has but to be gathered up, for its guardian, the “lord of the animals” or the
“animal mother,” has already released it unto death. The guardians of the animal
souls live deep in the belly of the mountains, accessible only by a few hidden
caves; or they live on the bottom of holy lakes. Only with the permission of the
lord of the animals may the hunter hunt. In order to avoid disaster and
misfortune, the path to this god has to be found so that the taboos and
proscriptions might not be violated.
It is by means of rhythmic, repetitive dancing and drumming, fasting, or self-
inflicted pain (asceticism), along with the use of mind-altering plant drugs such
as mushrooms, nightshades, or hemp, that the ancient hunters achieved contact
with the animal spirits and their guardians. By flooding the nervous system with
more stimuli than the mundane mind can cope with or, on the contrary, by
starving the senses, by concentrating on one single point or one monotonous
sound, the archaic hunters were able to lift off and fly away into the other world.
An individual who mastered these techniques better than anyone else, naturally
became extremely valuable to the group. He or she became the shaman, the
ritual leader and speaker for the tribe vis-à-vis the spirits and gods.
The roots of such practices reach deep into the Old Stone Age. Cave paintings
and rock etchings are their witness. In the caverns of Trois-Frères in the
Pyrenees, deep in the womb of Mother Earth, one finds, for example, next to
paintings of numerous bison, mammoth, and other game, the figure of a dancing
magician, dressed in animal furs, with horns on his head. Some fifteen thousand
years ago, this “great sorcerer” danced hunting dances similar to those recorded
by nineteenth-and twentieth-century anthropologists among the few remaining
hunting tribes of Asia, Africa, America, and Australia. An even older cave
painting is the “Hunting Accident” in the Cave of Lascaux (Dordogne). A man
with an erect penis and a staff with a bird perched on it is shown lying in front of
a wounded bison bull. It is probably not a hunting accident at all, but a
shamanistic trance, which is commonly associated with an erection. The animal
guardian appears in the form of the bull. The bird on the stick (it is more likely a

string!) is a common representation of the flight of the soul (astral body) out of
the physical body, which lies corpselike and rigid, as is common in deep trance.
“Hunting Accident,” upper Paleolithic cave painting (Lascaux, France)
When confronted with the image of Shiva, an anthropologist will most likely
think of a super-shaman. As Nataraja, Shiva appears as the king of dancers with
a drum in one hand and a fire in the other. The drum is the universal mark of the
shaman. With it, he can whip up a rhythm that sends him off into ecstatic dance
or, on the other hand, he can beat so slowly that his heartbeat slows right along
and trance (selfhypnosis) becomes possible. In both cases, the soul is pushed
beyond the normal confines of consciousness.
Shiva, the universal shaman, is equally the master of ecstatic dance and of
deep, deathlike trance. In the latter state, he can sit motionless in the deepest
cold and snow or in the blazing heat of summer noon and wander in inner
worlds. Like many a shaman, Rudra (as he is called in the Vedas) transcends
everyday reason and logic. Thus, to timid souls, he has an awesome aura of the
uncanny and incalculable. He is a mad god, a wild and wily wanderer of the
wilderness. As Ardhanari, “Half-Woman,” he is androgynous like many a
shaman who wears women’s garb and considers himself to be the bride of some
god.
In the Yajur Veda Shri Rudram,1 an ancient account in which the Aryans
stored their memories, Shiva-Rudra is called the lord of fire and water, of trees
and herbs (life), of waking and sleeping (states of consciousness), and of the
high and low (spirits). He is addressed as the wanderer, hunter, healer, holy man,
dweller-in-caves, master thief, and smith. (The smith with his fire, smoke, and
hammering noise, is recognized as a magician and as a reflection of the god of
thunder and lightning in all old cultures.) The image of the tribal shaman, as it
appeared in early humanity, shines through most of these appellations.

Dancing Shiva with a shaman’s hand drum
Nataraja, the king of dancers
In the first verse (Anuvaka I, Rik 1), the Yajur Veda Shri Rudram lauds him:
“Oh, Lord Rudra, unto your anger let there be my salutations, also unto your
arrows, salutations, salutations unto your bow.” Subsequently, he is hailed as the

healer who has might over scorpions, serpents, tigers, and invisible enemies,
such as the host of demons (rakshasas) and evil spirits (I, 6). He is described as
the one with a thousand eyes: shamans often decorate themselves with magic,
all-seeing eyes. Siberians sew hundreds of tiny metal mirrors (a thousand eyes)
onto their coats in which the spirits can see themselves, or with which the
shaman can see the spirits. Other verses describe Rudra as the wanderer in the
wilds and the lord of animals (II, 2), the carrier of the ax (II, 6) and the lord of
forests and trees (II, 8,9). Shamans are traditionally in “vibrational” contact with
all the plants and animals of their home region. Knowing where each species
grows and where the beasts have their hideouts, they are responsible to all.
(These days, it is often only the children who know these things.) Rudra is called
the lord of thieves and swindlers (III, 3,4,5), much like Hermes, the Greek god
of healing, or like Odin, the magician. Shamans are swindlers because they are
masters of legerdemain, pantomime, and tale telling, and the creators of “other
realities.”
Shiva as Ardhanari, the half-woman god
Rudra’s special relation to the canine breed is readily acknowledged:
“Salutations to ye who are in the form of the hunters and the leaders of dogs”
(IV, 16); and “Salutations to ye who are in the form of dogs and the lord of such
dogs” (IV, 17). In further verses he is greeted as the drummer and the drum, as
the magician who kills from afar, and as the one who is in the clouds and
lightning. He is hailed as the one with matted locks, which he piles upon the top
of his head like a crown. It is often the case that shamans let neither scissors nor

razor touch their hair, for each fiber is an antenna into the spirit world. Besides
long hair, tribal magicians often wear unusual headgear studded with feathers,
gems, and the signs of the sun, moon, and stars. These are precursors of the
pointed hats of magicians, like Merlin or the witches, or the crowns of kings.
Shiva’s tower of felted hair, stiffened with the juice of the banyan tree, decorated
with snakes, flowers, nuts (rudraksha or ustram beadsa), and with the waxing
crescent moon, is such a crown or magician’s hat. The moon, representative not
only of the rhythms of growth and decay, but also of imagination and the mind,
is a common feature of the shaman’s costume. As a wearer of the moon, he is
lord of the flow of the tides in the outer world of nature, as well as the inner
world of dream, fantasy, and inspiration. Like all shamans, Shiva is dressed in
the skins of wild animals he has slain (tiger, elephant, and gazelle)—that is,
when he does not appear in a state of “sacred nakedness.”
 PASHUPATI, LORD OF THE ANIMALS 
Of the “thousand and eight” names of Shiva, Pashupati (Sanskrit pasu = animal,
pati = lord), “lord of the animals” is one of the most common. In later times, this
title was applied mainly to his function as guardian patron of the yeoman’s cattle
and as keeper of the souls. All of them, animal and human, the quick and the
dead, are in his hands. Freely he sends them into life and equally freely he deals
them the blow of death. He is the good shepherd, as well as the wolf, which
delights to chase them to their doom.
Pashupati representation—pre-Aryan lord of the animals (Mohenjodaro seal)

Lord of the animals, Illyrian-Roman engraving (Bosnia)
bow and arrow (pinaka, ajagava)
dog (kukur)
axe (parasu)
sling or noose (pasa)

magic staff (yoga danda)
Sharva, “the hunter,” is one of his names. In one folktale, Sharva-Shiva
appears to the Aryan hero Arjuna (the archer we know from the Bhagavad Gita)
in the form of a kirata. Kiratas are savage inhabitants of the jungles and
impenetrable mountains of India. The epic Ramayana portrays them as were-
tigers. As with the Nordic werewolves, the leopard men of Africa, or the
cannibalistic windigo of Canada’s Algonquian, the term must refer to feral
human beings who live outside of the borders of normal, civilized society.
Shiva’s scepter is the first of hunting weapons, the spear. The tip of the spear
has been multiplied by the magical number three into a trident. The trident is so
important in Shiva’s iconography that it can stand for the god. In his two, four,
eight, ten, or thirty-two hands, depending on which theophany we are
considering, he carries the oldest and earliest weapons and tools of humankind:
the ax (parasu), the hand drum (damaru), the staff (danda), the bow and arrow
(pinaka and ajagava), the simple spear (pasupata), the sling or noose (pasa), and
the divining rod (khatvanga); furthermore, he might be shown with a deer in his
hand or a rosary, a discus, a skull, a lotus flower, or a sword.
In the Vedas, Rudra appears as an archer who, like the Greek Apollo, strikes
human and beast with arrows of sickness, fever, and death, as well as with
arrows of healing. The Yajur Veda contains songs beseeching him to direct his
shower of missiles against enemies and wild animals and to spare one’s own kin
and kine. In a legend that we shall see later, an angry Shiva in the form of
Sharva, the hunter, storms the sacrifice of the chief of the priests who has
excluded the unsavory savage from participating in the holy rite. The frightened
sacrificial beast lifts off, and taking the shape of a fleethoofed deer flees into the
southern sky, but the merciless hunter and his dogs bring it down. To this day,
Rudra and his hunting hounds are seen in the constellation of Orion and Sirius
(the dog star), which begins to be visible in the waning half of the year. The
Greeks also saw in that constellation the ranging hunter Orion, chasing the
fluttering doves (the Pleiades) in front of him, followed by his dog Sirius.

Trident (trishula)
bead necklace (rudrakshamala)
fire (dhuni)
Skull (khatvanga)
How ancient this complex of symbols might be can be surmised by the fact
that the Plains Indians also associated the same stars with the Great Hunt. In a
riotous festival of buffoonery, the Cheyenne danced the lives of the animals in
the Massaum celebration. Held just after midsummer, the ceremony recreated
the time when the first shaman, Sweet Medicine, was taught the hunt and the
animals were released from the womb of the sacred mountain. The Grandmother
of Beings, in the form of a horned wolf (Sirius), and her husband, the Thunder
Spirit, in the form of a red wolf (Aldebaran, the red eye of the bull in Taurus),
sponsor the ceremony. They legitimize the right of the Indians to hunt by
sending their daughter, the mistress of the animal spirits, to live with the shaman

in the world of humans. Considering that the Paleolithic ancestors of the Indians
crossed the land bridge that once connected Asia to North America some thirty
thousand years ago, we have some indication of the antiquity of such
associations.b2
 THE NOOSE 
The snare and lasso are an essential part of the hunters’ gear. With them they can
trap their prey, tie it up, and transport it. The looped rope was once the symbol
of Varuna, the ancient god of high heaven and the keeper of the universal law
(Sanskrit rita). With it he binds all those who transgress against the Right and
fetters them with illness, madness, or misfortune. Yama, the god of the dead,
likewise binds his victims with a rope, as the hunter does his slain game. The old
Nordic Odin, the Wodan of the Anglo-Saxons, lord of magicians, hunters, and
fallen warriors, also carries a noose. Sacrificial victims dedicated to Odin were
hung on tree limbs, as were all thieves and criminals, for this god is the master of
the gallows. Continually Odin binds or frees his followers with the cords of
passion, lust, and the fury of battle, with the lariat of mead and hallucinogenic
mushrooms. He ensnares them with his masterful spells. Great Shiva, too, carries
the noose (pasa) as one of his attributes. As the master yogi, he ties his devotees
into the self-discipline of yoga, as the yeoman yokes his oxen to a cart.

Varuna with the noose
 THE BLACK DOG 
In his most terrifying form as Bhairava, Shiva is referred to as the one whose
mount is a dog. It is a black dog, befitting the archetypal image of a god of
shamans, hunters, and the shades.
Wild canines were the first animal companions of humanity, long before
cattle, swine, fowl, sheep, or horses were domesticated. Hoping to relieve their
ravenous hunger with cadaver remains, feces, and bones, they followed the
Paleolithic big game hunters to the four corners of the world. They followed
them into the Americas, perhaps already harnessed as pack carriers. They
boarded the log rafts of the first aboriginals going to Australia. Early on, they
became man’s proverbial best friend: they sniffed out and tracked game; gave
alarm when danger threatened; and in time of famine, when the lord of the
animals was angry, the clan could eat them. Even to this day, the Prairie Indians,
descendents of big game hunters, consider an unweaned, milk-fed whelp a
delicacy. (As the Indian said to his cowboy guest who was ladling himself
seconds of a scrumptious stew, “Dig deep, white man, many puppies on
bottom.”)
Dogs and their close relatives the jackals, coyotes, and wolves are predators
and carrion eaters. It follows that they, along with ravens and vultures, became
associated with gods of battle, destruction, and death. Indeed, one sees dogs and
jackals lurking about the funeral ghats along the rivers of India, where they hope
to snatch bits of charred corpses or bloated cadavers that the river washes ashore.
For the natives, this poses no problem. It is Shiva himself, in the form of a wild
dog, that is freeing the soul from its elemental shells. Indeed, if one regards it in
a meditative way, putting all preconceived, programmed notions aside, one is
awed by the gentle, nearly loving way in which these gnawing animals cause the
mortal remains to disappear.
Often it is a black canine, like the mummy-guarding god Anubis of ancient
Egypt, who guides the departed across the threshold to the “dark side of being.”
Even Saint Christopher, the “Christ bearer,” who carries souls across the
turbulent stream, was once, in pagan times, a dog-faced god and guardian
between the earthly and the spiritual world much like Cereberus, the hellhound
of the Greeks, or Garm, the Nordic guardian of the underworld, or the Mexican
god Xolotl, who guides the dead across the nine streams of hell. Even now, the
funerary rites of the Zarathustrian Parsees of India demand that a dog sniff the
corpse so that evil spirits might flee before it is placed on top of the “tower of

silence.”
Odin, too, has ravens and wolves as his companions, and the warriors sworn
to him are wolf men (ulfhednir) or bear hides (berserkir). Shiva’s retinue is also
replete with such feral beings. The poet Goethe has reached deeply into the
archetypal treasure chest when, in his Faust, he has the warlock and lord of the
flames, Mephisto, appear in the form of a black poodle. Folk imagination,
drawing on images imprinted in early ages, loves to surround magicians and
sorcerers with black dogs. One such beast was reputed to have followed Agrippa
of Nettesheim, the Renaissance magus, wherever he went.
 THE GOD OF THE SHADES 
On behalf of his tribe, the shaman tries to establish a good relationship with the
lord of the animals, who lives far away, “inside of the mountain” or “deep in the
forest,” where he guards the souls. In order to travel there, the shaman must
know how to overcome the strictures of ordinary consciousness by means of
trance, ecstasy, or fury. On his spirit flight, he meets all kinds of supernatural
beings, elemental beings, nature spirits, dwarves, demons, elves, and, of course,
the shades of the dead. Every real shaman, like the witches of the days of yore
and some of the spiritualist mediums of today, is steadily surrounded by a whole
troop of such fantastic creatures.3 Shiva, as god of the dead and of the shamans,
is no exception. Drunken, madly dancing, frolicking ghouls, bhutas (those who
died unexpectedly and who take on animal forms), vetalas (vampires), pretas
(specters), pisachas (flesh-craving ghosts), wicked dwarfs, black elves, and
whatever else one might expect at a witches’ sabbath, surround Shiva
Bhuteshvara, the lord of goblins, wherever he goes.
Techniques of inducing spirit flight, ecstasy (Latin extasis = to be out of it,
beside oneself), trance (Latin transire = to go over), or what we now call altered
states of consciousness (ASC)4 are learned in torturous initiations that might
include hanging for several days suspended upside down from a tree, being tied
up, exposure to the raw elements, swallowing poisons, fasting, and withstanding
deprivations of all kinds. In south Asia, it is Shiva Mahayogi, the patron of
rigorous self-discipline, who makes the stepping into other dimensions of reality
possible. In northern Europe it was Odin, the one-eyed god, who inspired to such
asceticism. Like a bird of the gallows, the grizzly god hung nine days upside
down on a tree to snatch from the depths the Runes of Wisdom. His eight-legged
white steed is but a metaphor for a bier carried by four mourners, for, while the
soul roams in other worlds, the body lies stiff and rigid, as in death. Such eight-
legged shaman’s horses are known throughout Siberia.5 The Gonds, a tribal

people of the Eastern Deccan, know also of the magic horse with eight legs,
which is really the dead man’s bier.6
The shamanic god, Odin on his eight-legged steed
In Indian lore, Shiva himself appears as an eight-legged sphinxlike creature
with a long nose, claws, a horselike mane and tail, and wings. In this awesome
guise as Sarabha, he kills the man-lion, Narasinha, who happens to be no lesser
being than Lord Vishnu in his fourth “descent” (avatara). Whenever evil starts
gaining the upper hand on the earth, Vishnu, the preserver of the universe, takes
on a physical body in order to kill the demons that are threatening the rest of
creation. This time the Preserver appeared as a were-lion. However, after ridding
the world of the tyranny of an arrogant titan, he forgot his own divine origin,
became attached to a wife and family, and in turn, became a world terror, hardly
better than the offensive demon he slew. It was then that Shiva, as the eight-
legged Sarabha, freed Vishnu of his illusion by killing him and letting him return
to his proper place on the heavenly throne.
It becomes obvious that the entry into the “other dimension” is equivalent to
an entry into the realm of the dead. It is, thus, understandable that Asian
shamans often dress like skeletons, showing all the bones. During his initiation,
the shaman travels the other world, where he is hunted by hungry demons,
killed, and stripped of his worldly flesh. Like human hunters, the demons skin
him, scrape his hide, and leave his blank bones behind. Subsequently, a “bird-
mother” gathers these bones, carries them to her nest, and places them in their
right order, so that he may come alive again. (This ancient Paleolithic custom of
arranging the bones is a gesture of respect for the animals and is meant to insure
their survival.) Some icons show Shiva, as well as Buddha, as a skeleton. His
total asceticism has reduced him to mere bones. Tibetan folktales tell how

Buddha became a skeleton because, in his compassion for hungry wild beasts
and ogres, he let them feast on his flesh. Following the footsteps of Shiva, yogis
attempt to imagine themselves as skeletons in their meditations, or to imagine
how the goddess Kali devours their flesh and drinks their blood.
How a yogi proceeds to strip off her worldly attachment and return, reduced to
mere bones, to the Lord, is shown in the south Indian story about Shiva’s
mother, the devotee (bhakti) Punitavatic:
By the grace of Shiva, this saint was born to a wealthy merchant who had
no other children. The girl grew up pure of heart, loving to chant the
names of the Lord and wearing holy ash on her forehead. As she was as
beautiful and industrious as she was pious, she was soon married to a
rich merchant named Paramadatta. The young couple delighted in
feeding 
the 
wandering 
bhaktis 
of 
Shiva—never 
forgetting 
the
commandment of the Vedas, “Let the guest be a god unto you!”—and
enjoyed listening to the chants praising God.
One day a sadhu came by and gave Paramadatta two ripe mangos.
These in turn he gave to his wife to store while he went to town to do
some business. In the meantime, a hungry beggar knocked at the door.
As Punitavati was not yet finished cooking her pulses and rice, she
served him one of the mangos with some milk. When her husband
returned, weary from his work, he desired to snack on the mangos.
Punitavati gave him the remaining one. It tasted so good that her
husband immediately asked for the other one also. The pious wife did not
know what to do other than to send a quick sigh of a prayer to heaven.
Instantly, a ripe mango fell into her lap. When she served it to her
husband, he found it to taste a thousand times better than the first one.
“This is incredible,” he exclaimed. “It tastes like no other I have eaten!
Is this the fruit the stranger gave us this morning?”
“No, my husband,” she confessed, “I prayed for it and it fell from
heaven.”
“Then pray again! I must have another one,” he commanded. And,
upon her wish, more mangos fell from heaven that instant. As he was
gorging himself on the delicious fruit, remorse suddenly struck him.
“Oh, my God, I have sinned! I have treated a devotee of Shiva as my
servant. How can I consider her any longer my wife!” Tormented by inner
anguish, he left home the following day, pretending to go on a business

trip. He never returned but settled in another city and took another wife.
Day after day, Punitavati anxiously awaited his return. Years passed. She
became sadder and sadder. Perhaps thugs have waylaid him, she
thought. One day, she heard rumor that her husband was seen in
Madurai where he had children with another wife. Immediately she went
off in search of him and found him.
Though at first Paramadatta was overjoyed, he fell at her feet pleading,
“What, oh saint, do you want from me? I am a worldly man, vile and
greedy. How can I be your husband? Pray forgive me, oh goddess!”
Tears flooding her eyes, she tried to touch his feet, replying, “My lord, it
is for your sake only that I preserved my youth and beauty! But as you
want me no longer, I shall seek Lord Shiva.”
With that, she gave away all her worldly goods, her silks and jewels,
worshipped the Brahmins, and then, through the power of yoga, shook off
all her flesh from its frame. Reduced to a bleached skeleton, she walked
ever northward toward Mount Kailash, the mountain throne of Shiva. As
she approached the mountain in the middle of the Himalayas, she feared
that touching the holy ground with her feet might be a sin. Again, using
the power that her austerities had given her, she turned upside down and
moved, like a baby in the birth canal, head down up the icy slopes.
The goddess Parvati was stunned and asked of Shiva, “My Lord, who
is that, coming thus our way toward the center of the universe?”
“That pious woman, oh beloved, is my mother, for she feeds all of my
devotees! Once I passed her house and gave her and her husband two
sweet, ripe mangos.”7
Rejection and fear of the spiritual world is actually the fear of death. In order to
overcome this fear, shamanistic initiations often occur at night in graveyards and
cemeteries. Such spooky rites are ancient. The midnight cemetery rites of
European witchcraft are remnants of such initiations. Some tribes of Australian
aboriginals let initiates lie tied up in a graveyard for several nights where wild
animals come to sniff and lick them. Finally, a supernatural appears, who drills a
hole into their skulls with a sharp stick and places magic quartz crystals inside
while, at the same time, instructing them in the magical arts and healing.
India’s holy men and women (sadhus and sadhvis) and the sannyasi, those
who have renounced the world, are often initiated in a similar fashion at the
burning ghats and graveyards, where Shiva and his ghouls and goblins love to
dance. At times, the mysterious god himself appears to the initiate as a vampire,

revenant, or specter, and acts as the initiator into spiritual wisdom, as he did in
the famous Sanskrit tale, “The King and the Specter in the Corpse,” by
Somadeva.d In the ancient rite, the initiate puts aside his worldly vestments and
is wrapped in an unstitched, orange cloth, symbolizing the flames of the fire. He
has become as dead to the world and its elusive ways as the corpses that are
being burned. As one of the living dead, he smears his skin with the ashes from
the funeral pyre. The cremation ground becomes a fitting symbol of the illusions
of existence, which the holy man has reduced to a pile of ashes by means of the
heat generated through his arduous ascetic effort.
The burning ghats of Benares, Shiva’s favorite city, are the most popular
places for such midnight initiations. For tourists coming from societies that try to
hide all the unpleasant sides of life, cremation grounds such as Manikarnika
Ghat are a shock. The image of burning corpses (the smell of which might
remind the American visitor of the Sunday afternoon barbecues in suburbia),
vultures and jackals fighting over entrails and charred bits of flesh, is a “mind-
blower.” Carefully nurtured paradigms of “reality” tend to collapse. But, just as
one is about to turn and flee, a friendly voice, cawing in Hindu English, will
explain, “Don’t be timid. Look carefully and discover the ephemeral nature of
your existence. Cremation is education! Burning is learning! If you learn your
lessons well, Shiva will grant you siddhi (magical) powers, perhaps even moksha
(liberation)!”
The tourist who tries to capture it all on camera is stopped. A snapshot would
fix and keep a tiny portion of the person from totally dissolving into the elements
and would thus prevent the final and full dissolution. This would make the soul
suffer and keep it from reaching its goal.
There is one sect of Shaivite anchorites who call themselves the fearless ones
(aghori). Not only might the Aghori carry the skulls of the dead as their begging
bowls, they are also not above smearing themselves with their own excrements
and devouring bits of charcoaled corpses. To the utter disbelief of the British,
they followed the troops during the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857 in order to gobble
up the casualties.8 It was not brute hunger, apparently, that drove them, but
ideology. With their behavior, they try to demonstrate that Shiva is all and
everything: How can there be anything outside of God? Therefore, there is
nothing horrible or terrible for someone who has overcome all separating
illusions and nothing is impossible for those who have developed their siddhi
powers.f
Here, now, is the story of The King and the Specter in the Corpse from the
Vetalapancavinsati, which tells how the great god appeared to the famous king
Vikramaditya, as a vetala inhabiting a corpse:

Among the visitors who came to the king’s audience each day was an old
mendicant, who offered him a fruit. The king accepted the gift each day
but mindlessly tossed it aside. One day, after such an audience, one of
the royal apes escaped its keeper, snatched the fruit, bit it open, and, lo
and behold, a jewel dropped out. When the king looked into his courtyard
where he had thrown the fruits each day for many years, he discovered a
pile of jewels.
His curiosity roused, he granted the monk a private audience. The
monk, whose quiet patience had endured so long, asked the king for help
in performing a magical ritual. How could the king, having received all
these gifts, refuse? The monk told him to meet him that night in a
cemetery, where he should cut a corpse from a tree and carry it into the
magic circle where the monk would be chanting spells. That night, the
king fearlessly walked amidst the charred bones and hoisted the body of
an executed criminal onto his shoulders.
Suddenly, however, the corpse started to speak, for a specter had
taken possession of it. It posed him a riddle. If he knew the answer, but
did not tell, his head would shatter. Being knowledgeable, the king
answered correctly, but no sooner had he done so than the corpse was
hanging on the tree again. Again and again, he cut it down and carried it;
again and again he was asked to solve a riddle; and again and again the
corpse appeared back on the tree. The twenty-fifth riddle he could not
answer. At this point, the spirit in the corpse said, “Now you may take me
to the magic circle. But beware. The monk is not who he seems to be, but
an evil sorcerer. He will set the corpse into his magic circle and will ask
you to fall down and worship it. With his sword, he will then cut your head
off, in order to make you his slave and to bind me into the corpse. Tell
him that you do not know how to prostrate yourself and have him show
you how. Then you decapitate him instead. That will free me, and it will
make you the master of spirits.”
Done as told, the brave king became the master of the spirits. The
specter in the corpse was none other than Shiva, giving him his initiations
into the occult arts.
 BHAIRAVA 
The Aghori are attracted by Shiva’s most horrible manifestation, that of the

blood-drenched Bhairava (or Bhairab), of whom Aldous Huxley wrote
somewhere that his toys are the galaxies, his playground the infinite space, and
that the span between one finger and the next stretches thousands of millions of
light-years. A common icon shows Bhairava naked but for a loin covering of
skulls, as black as night and with three eyes that bulge out angrily. In one of his
six hands, he holds an arm ripped out of someone’s socket; in another, he holds a
decapitated head; with another hand he swings his sword; and with a fourth he
bears the trident. In his fifth hand, he holds a cup or a skullcap at heart level, as
if he were communicating, “Even if the whole world is torn apart by my rage,
here, in the heart, you shall find peace!” The sixth hand underscores the
statement with an open-palmed gesture of blessing (the abhaya mudra)
indicating, “Fear not!”
As Shiva’s most terrible manifestation, Bhairava can take many different
appearances or forms. These forms have been experienced and named by yogis
and yoginis in states of deep meditation. This sort of imaging is typical in south
Asian mythology, and is found in Buddhism as well. Various Dhyana-Buddhas
can spring forth from Buddha, depending on the level of consciousness and
depth of meditation. All in all, the terrible god Bhairava has some sixty-four
materializations, coupled to sixty-four yoginis, magical female consorts. Kapali,
for example, is the frightening form Shiva took on when, in a fit of anger, he
sliced one of Brahma’s five heads off and was forced to wander the world as an
outlaw. The best known of his theophanies are these eight forms:
1.  Kapali, “the carrier of the skull”
2.  Asitanga, “having black limbs”
3.  Samhara, “destruction”
4.  Ruru, “the dog”
5.  Chanda, “the wild one”
6.  Krodhana, “the angry one”
7.  Unmatta, “the insane one”
8.  Kala, “the black one”
Without female power (shakti) even Bhairava would be totally helpless. In his
energetic female form he is the godesss Bhairavi. Bhairavi plays an important
role in Tantric ritual. The eight female shaktis of Bhairava have the same names
as the forms listed above, except that their names are spelled with feminine
endings.
In the wild, mountainous country of Nepal, where it occasionally happens that
a whole village, with houses and fields, is swept into yawning chasms as the

monsoon rains pour down, and where continual tribal warfare and wild animals
often made life precarious, Bharaiva is vividly alive in the folk imagination, and
tales such as the following are frequently told by the glow of the evening hearth.
This story was told to me in various versions by Nepalese storytellers:
Once upon a time, a rich merchant’s son set out to see the world. The
path he walked followed alongside a mountain stream. He casually
noticed a tree branch drifting down the churning river. All of a sudden, the
branch took the shape of a giant serpent, which swam up to a bathing
woman. Before she could even scream, the beast bit her, and she died in
convulsions. Then the reptile took on the shape of a floating branch
again.
“I must be tired,” the young man thought, rubbing his disbelieving eyes
and continuing his journey. After a little while, the drifting tree limb once
again changed its form. This time it turned into an ogre, which climbed
ashore, swallowed three of the fattest water buffalo grazing there, and
returned to the river to continue floating as an ordinary branch. The
young merchant was now frightened out of his wits but, at the same time,
immensely curious. Suddenly, just as they were passing a herd of
pasturing sheep, the branch changed into a flesh-eating pisacha. In an
instant it devoured the whole herd, including the shepherd.
The sound of a waterfall thundering into a deep canyon interrupted the
uneasy musing of the young traveler. Terrified and yet fascinated, he
watched as the uncanny limb next turned into a wandering monk,
smeared with ashes and wearing orange clothes. He took heart, let his
steps catch up with the sadhu, and addressed him.
“I beg you kindly to forgive my inquisitiveness, but what I have
witnessed is a sheer impossibility! Who are you?”
The sadhu stared at him. “If you really want to know, close your eyes
for a moment and you shall see!”
He did as he was told. When he lifted his lids, he was dazzled by a
blinding light. Then he saw none other than Bhairav in his terrible glory
towering in front of him. The poor lad nearly died of fright but, again, he
mustered his courage and asked, “Great Lord, forgive my curiosity, but
as I am traveling in far and distant lands, please tell me the outcome of
my journey.”
“A rope, in the form of a noose, will be placed around your neck and

you shall be hung!” At that, the apparition was gone. No one was there,
neither a god, nor a sadhu, nor a branch. The merchant’s son shook his
head. “It must be that I am fatigued. That’s all. Anyway, I am decent and
have never committed a crime, so why should my life end on the
gallows?”
After many years traveling in foreign lands, he felt he had learned
enough and started on his long homeward journey. One day, while
walking through a dense forest, near a spring he came across a woman
who was sobbing and weeping bitterly. Having compassion, he asked
her, “Can I help you?”
“Kind sir, I am all alone in the world. I have no family left, no home, no
money, and nothing to eat. My last possession is this diamond, which I
could trade for food, but I am too weak to even move from this spot.
Could you help me? Would you take this jewel to the next city and trade it
for some rice, beans, and bread?”
The young man promised to help, took the gem, and hurried to the city.
He could not have known that it had been robbed from the king’s treasury
a few days earlier. Guards seized him immediately and dragged him
before the magistrate, who condemned him to death by hanging. Nobody
believed his innocence, for when they looked for the woman at the
spring, there was absolutely no one to be found. As the executioner
placed the noose around his neck, the rope whispered to him, “You might
have forgotten the prophecy— but now it shall be fulfilled!”
With that, the young man knew that his fate was sealed. He saw it was
useless to fight against God’s inscrutable ways and went peacefully into
death.
 RUDRA AND ODIN 
Comparing Rudra, “the howler,” to Odin (Woden, Wotan), “the frenzied,” we
meet similar archetypal configurations that most likely have a common Eurasian
origin. Rudra, the wild hunter, sweeping down the mountainsides with his storm
and wind spirits (the Maruts), is really not much different from Odin and his
“wild hunt” of fallen warriors, sorcerers, and wind spirits. To this day, in central
and northern Europe, country folk associate the November storms with the
passing of Wotan’s hosts. They rattle at the doors and shutters and must be fed
so that they might turn into “grateful dead” and not horrible specters. The wild

reveling of delirious crowds, high on drugs and possessed by ghouls and goblins,
celebrating Shiva’s Night (Shivratri) in India, in February, is in essence not
different from the many fool’s festivals, carnivals, masked dances, and Mardi
Gras that have survived even into Christianity in Europe and which are
celebrated in the ritual calendar from late fall into early spring.
When the horned god and his train of witches, warlocks, unbaptized dead, and
hanged criminals passed the thatched farmsteads of Lower Saxony during the
twelve nights of the winter solstice, the prudent peasant made sure that all
windows and doors remained locked, that no beam of light, be it ever so small,
would draw one of the spooky hounds that accompanies the wild hunt. When the
one-eyed hunter passes, he wants to hear no creaking cart wheels, no grinding
millstones, neither the spinning wheel humming, nor the spindle turning. Woe to
the household where this injunction is ignored! Wotan will send one of his dogs.
For a whole year it will sit by the hearth if one does not sacrifice a cow, or at
least a calf.9
The custom that no wheel may turn during a holy time or at a holy place has
its parallel in Kathmandu Valley, Nepal. Here, out of respect for Shiva (who is
worshipped here mainly as Pashupati, the lord of the animals, or as Bhairava), all
the loads must be carried on the back. The wagons, carts, and cars one sees
rolling through the streets belong exclusively to outsiders who are not natives of
the valley.10
In the world of the ancient northern Europeans, the eight-spoked Wheel of the
Year ground to a halt each winter solstice.f It was the sacred moment of the
“mother-night” (the modra niht of the Anglo-Saxons), when the earth is
fertilized by the germs of life descending from the starry, crystalline cosmos.
Then, at the end of the sacred period, Freyr, the fertility God, whose symbol is
the phallus and in whose honor the yule boar was slaughtered and eaten, sets the
wheel in motion once again. The absence of turning wheels during this most
sacred of seasons can be seen as a ritual return to the pristine condition of long
ago, long before wheels of any kind had been invented, long before wagons,
spinning wheels, gins, and mills had disturbed nature. That was the time when
the primordial shaman gods and goddesses and their animal ghost companions
ruled unchallenged.
Shiva’s abode, high up in the eternal snow and ice of Mount Kailash,
represents this very original state of peace and quiescence. It is the motionless
polar star around which the heavens revolve, the resting hub of the cycles of
time, of the dance of creation and destruction. Even now there are holy men or
women, naked as the day they were born, or dressed in the fiery red of the pyre’s
flame, who try to reach this mystical center where samsara, the wheel of birth

and death, turns not. Through meditation and asceticism, they try to bring it to a
standstill.
 THE TREACHEROUS GOD 
The oldest Vedic writings depict Rudra as dangerous, wild, and treacherous. He
shares these traits with many shamanistic gods that roamed the earth since
Paleolithic times, be it Loki, cunning Lugh of the Celts, or one of the countless,
elusive divine tricksters such as Great Hare or Coyote of American Indian tribes.
No laws of reason can fathom him, nor can the spells of priests quell or control
him. One avoids speaking his terrible name and calls him instead, Shiva (the
gracious), Sambhu (the kind), or Shankar (the peaceful) in the humble hope that
such euphemisms might flatter and cause him to act in the preferred manner.
“Fiery-eyed evildoer,” “transvestite,” “confuser,” “instigator,” “double-
natured one,” and “deceiver” are some of the epithets heaped upon Odin, for it is
known that he has lured faithful followers into doom and destruction.11 The same
accusations could be leveled at Rudra. Even his spouse is upset by what she
perceives as his treachery toward his devotees. The story of Rudra’s “treachery”
toward his devotee Ravanna is derived from the Ramayana, and is as common in
India as Judeo-Christian Bible-stories that are told again and again. This version
of the story was related to me orally by Virendra Singh of Varanasi:
The ten-headed king of the demons, Ravanna, captures the divine
Queen Sita and carries her off to distant Sri Lanka where he wants to
make her his wife. Sita’s husband is none other than King Rama, an
avatar of Vishnu. Rama sets out to free his queen with his brother and an
army of allied monkeys but experiences one setback after another. The
campaign is void of success because Ravanna is an ardent devotee of
Shiva. He has gained Shiva’s favor through severe austerities and daily
worship. Countless summers he sat in the blazing heat between fires,
countless winters he stood motionless in icy waters, focusing his mind on
his Lord; and during the monsoons, he practiced headstands by day and
by night.
King Rama and the other gods, frustrated in their effort to topple the
demon, finally proceed to Shiva’s mountainous throne to beg that he drop
his devotee. Apparently without a second thought, Shiva grants their
wish, saying, “On the seventh day of the big battle, he shall fall!”
Upon hearing this, Shiva’s better half, Parvati, becomes angry, “How,

pray tell, can you drop such a fervent devotee just like that? Have you no
conscience? But, of course, your mind is decayed from all the hemp you
smoke! What is to be expected from one who dwells in ashes and dances
on funeral pyres?”
Shiva does not take this tongue-lashing sitting down—so the folktales
of India tell us. “Ha, you are but a stupid woman who does not know a
thing! Anyway, who are you to point a finger at me? Haven’t you been
killing giants and then intoxicating yourself with their blood? And what
about wearing a garland of skulls? What normal woman would do such
an atrocious thing?”
Thus they argued violently for such a long time that the gods became
afraid and had to calm their tempers with soothing songs and the
pleasant smell of incense. Ravanna’s end came as foretold. On the
seventh day, the titan with ten heads was killed on the battlefield. But
there was nothing unjust about his death. All the fruits of his asceticism
happened to have been used up just at that moment when the magic
arrow, released from Rama’s bow, struck him down.

4
GOD’S VIRILE MEMBER
Whoever lives his life without honoring the Lingam
is truly poor, sinful and without luck.
To honor this giver of joy is worth more
Than good works, fasting, pilgrimages, sacrifices
and other virtues.
SHIVA PURANA
O Son of Kunti,
All creatures are born out of the infinite womb,
but I am the father,
I bestow the seed.
BHAGAVAD GITÀ
It is a common misconception that India is a quiet, meditative, phlegmatic
country of silent gurus, gentle cows, and long-suffering peasant masses. Upon
landing, this impression evaporates immediately. Freshly arrived tourists
generally try to flee the noise and confusion by hiding away in their air-
conditioned hotel rooms, if they do not go as far as booking the next flight out of
this jungle of apparent confusion.
India’s streets are a psychedelic journey without LSD. They are a constant
hustle and bustle, a clanging and clattering of sounds, sights, and smells,
crowded with thronging folk, with vendors, rickshaws, cows, dogs, children, and
vintage cars. On top of all this, every step of the way one is confronted by a
multitude of gods and goddesses. For those coming from iconoclastic societies,
it is a trial. They try in vain to hang onto their rationalistic or monotheistic
straws afloat in the raging sea of idolatry.
Deer-eyed, wide-hipped, buxom, multi-armed goddesses sit enthroned on
bright pink lotuses or ride on some animal and smile down from the posters and
placards plastering the walls. A vermilion red, pot-bellied, elephant-headed god
sits above every doorway as a guardian. At merchants’ stands, perfumed smoke

wafts upward toward the glossy prints of the goddess of fortune out of whose
hands gold coins shower upon her devotees. There is hardly a wall or a niche
without a gentle-eyed, blue Krishna, playing his flute while leaning on a white
cow; or Durga riding her tiger while beheading a demon; or Sarasvati riding her
swan while playing a lute; or the long-tailed monkey god Hanuman, who opens
his chest in a sacred-heart gesture showing that God (appearing as Sita and
Rama) lives in his soul. A favorite picture shows chubby baby Krishna snitching
butter from his mother’s pot; another shows the same god as the driver in a
hero’s war chariot just before the great battle that took place in ancient times
and, according to the Bhagavad Gita, still continues to take place in each human
soul. And then there are the countless local gods and spirits depicted plastically
and gaudily. Ancient magic rituals conducted by priests, as well as the faith of
the believers, have animated all these images so strongly that even a Westerner
might have darshana, “a glimpse of the inner reality.”
As if that were not enough, the gods have colonized the movies. Screen idols
play the stories of sages and the legends of the gods with great pathos, in the
biggest film industry in the world, the output exceeding that of Hollywood. The
film stars themselves are worshipped as gods.
To the Western mind, using the divinity to guarantee the quality of one’s
products seems blasphemous: remember what an uproar the “Jesus jeans” of the
Levi-Strauss Company caused! Not so in India. “Shankar,” “Krishna,” “Durga,”
“Devi” are common for brand names or business names. “Uma-Shankar”
produces textiles. “Krishna” sells automobiles. Even India’s most popular rock
group from Calcutta, with charming Cecelia as the lead singer, is decked out
with a name of divinity: “SHIVA.” The band’s name was deliberately chosen as
a symbol of rebellion against restrictive traditions and a sign of the yearning of
India’s young bourgeoisie for the “freedom” they imagine exists in a modern
consumer society.
Shiva as a rock star

The overland trucks and lorries, honking nonstop in order to blast a path
through the cows, peasants, and oxcarts that stuff the streets, look like veritable
temples on wheels. Mudguards and hoods, fenders and trunks are painted with
eyes so that the machines might see. The insides as well as the outsides of the
drivers’ cabins sport colorful Shankars (he gives calmness), Durgas (she gives
power), Hanumans (the flying monkey god gives speed), and other gods. Barrel-
chested, bearded, turbaned Sikhs, veterans of the Indian Army Motor Corps,
who like to steady their nerves while driving by guzzling whiskey, paint their
trunks with images of their guru, Nanak Singh. Muslims like to paint the
mosques of Mecca or the Ka’aba on their vehicles, while Christian drivers from
Kerala display outrageously gaudy Jesuses, Marys, and Josephs on theirs.
Not only idols and graven images crash one’s gates of perception. The senses
are also assaulted by a barrage of signs and symbols such as the swastika. For
the Indians, it is a sun symbol, a sign of good luck (Sanskrit svasti = well-being).
It is the discus (chakra) of Vishnu in whose center he himself dwells, as the
preserver of the universe. The four arms represent the four worlds—that of the
gods, the human beings, the animals, and the demons—that eternally orbit the
cosmic center. It is also the fiery wheel of the universe in whose center Shiva
dances. For Westerners it has, of course, other associations. Young Germans
nervously reach for their cigarettes when they see it. It reminds them of the
hooked cross under whose banner their grandfathers ran amok all over Europe.
An American teacher asked me nervously, “Are the Nazis trying to take over
here?”
Equally common is the pranava (
), the Sanskrit symbol of the OM or
AUM, the first sound vibrating out of the creative void. Chanting this syllable
rhythmically drives all evil spirits away and wears down the results of past deeds
(karma) that still affect the present. The OM is the first syllable of all the holy
mantras and powerful chants, such as the Om Namah Shivaya or the Om Shiva
Mahesvara Mahadev by which God is invoked, or the Om Mani Padme Hum of
the Buddhists. Lucky are the mortals whose last utterance is OM, for they will
obtain liberation no matter how wickedly they have lived.
Panava—the primordial sound: OM

Yet another omnipresent symbol gracing the national flag, the money, and the
walls of buildings is the World Wheel (Dharmachakra) with its eight spokes. An
ancient Indo-European symbol, it was once honored in heathen northern Europe
as the spinning wheel, upon which the three goddesses of fate, the Norns, spun
out the destiny of all existing beings. In India, it is associated with Vishnu or it is
taken as the wheel of the eternal, divine law. For the old “congress men,” the
supporters of Mahatma Gandhi’s movement of nonviolent resistance, it, too,
represents the spinning wheel, as a basis of local autonomy and self-sufficiency
for India’s five hundred thousand villages. For Buddhists, it represents the
dharmachakra, the noble eightfold path (right view, right aim, right speech, right
action, right living, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration). It is the
wheel that the seeker Siddhartha, the onetime Shaivite sadhu, set in motion some
2,500 years ago when he preached his first sermon in a deer park near Benares
after he had become the Buddha, the Enlightened One.
Thus an endless flood of symbols overwhelms us. Added to the religious icons
and emblems are the jingle-jangle of commercial trademarks, the signs of sects,
and the hieroglyphs of a dozen or so political parties. The cow, lotus, spinning
wheel, swastika, hand, tree, and the sheaf and sickle (replacing the hammer and
sickle), along with the bearded face of “Prajupati” Karl Marx, vie for the
attention of the illiterate voter. But none of these signs and symbols is as
powerful as the one marked by grace, simplicity, and quiet dignity: the Shiva
lingam. Like a mountain in the plains, it towers above all the others.
 LINGAM YONI 
The Shiva lingam (or linga) commonly has the appearance of a simple, smoothly
polished, cylindrical or egg-shaped stone. It stands upright, placed into the oval,
flat receptacle that is called a yoni (Sanskrit yoni = vulva). Its plainness can be
taken to indicate the underlying fullness of divine excellence, the
undifferentiated origin and indivisible unity of Being. The concept is similar to
that which ancient Greek philosophers once called pleroma. The lingam contains
all there ever was, is, and will be. There is nothing outside of it. It is the fount of
life and the gateway into death.
The lingam and its base, the yoni

For the orthodox Christian, the bread and wine of the Eucharist are truly the
body and blood of God. It is not a mere symbol. In the same manner, the Hindu
sees the lingam as no mere symbol. It is Shiva! This bit of polished rock is the
tiny point (bindu) out of which springs divine manifestation. It is the ford
(thirtha) over the treacherously turbulent streams of incarnation. It is the bridge
connecting the ephemeral with the eternal, the conditioned with the absolute, the
hidden with the manifest.a
Stone worship such as this is not as unusual as it might seem at first glance.
Since prehistoric times, menhirs,b dolmens, monoliths, stones that fell from
heaven or rose out of the earth have been sanctified as dwellings of spirits,
sources of fertility, or doorways to other worlds. Often they are seen as the
center, or navel, of the universe, such as the Muslim Ka’aba in Mecca, the Greek
Omphalos, the tomb of the sacred python at Delphi, or the Rock of Ages of the
Christians. They are houses of God, as are the Semitic beth-els (like Bethlehem).
All over the world, barren women visit such sacred rocks to become fertile. And
do we not still carry “pet rocks” in our pockets, place tombstones for the dead,
and honor our heroes with marble or granite, sculpted to aid our enfeebled
imaginations? The Shiva lingam expresses such archetypal sentiments. Out of
the lingam, when worshipped, honored, and loved, Shiva can manifest as the
personal Lord and God (Ishvara) of the worshipper. Which form he takes in
doing so depends entirely upon the mental and spiritual predisposition of the
individual devotee, for what he images as his “Self.”
The lingam is at the same time, of course, a phallus, an organ of generation,
containing all the seeds of being within it. It is imagined as resting in the
everlasting embrace of the yoni, the vulva of the Great Goddess. In the rapture of
this union, all beings are generated and, at the same time, all dichotomies and
disharmonies are dissolved. Ajit Mookerjee, expressing a basic Hindu
conception, states, “Bliss (ananda) lets the Cosmos appear, bliss sustains it and
bliss absorbs it again!” 1
How the lingam came to be worshipped is told in a tale from the Padma
Puranas:

Worshipping the lingam/yoni
In ancient times, the holy seers (rishis) held council in order to find out,
beyond a shadow of a doubt, which of the countless gods were equal to
the Brahmins and thus worthy of worship and sacrifice. After long
deliberations about the merits of diverse celestials, only Brahma, Vishnu,
and Shiva remained as contenders. But, as for these three, the rishis
could come to no final consensus. Therefore, they delegated one of their
wisest, Bhrigu, son of the firstborn of Humankind, to travel to each god’s
paradise and to test each of their characters respectively.
First, Brighu went to Mount Kailash. As he wound his way up the steep
slopes, Nandi, Shiva’s bull, suddenly blocked his path, “You cannot see
my master,” he snorted threateningly, “my lord and lady are enjoying the
delight of intimate intercourse and should not be bothered! So, please
wait!”
An eternity passed before wise Brighu lost patience. He stomped back
down the path angrily, turning only to throw a curse at the two lovers,
“Shiva, you are enmeshed in the darkness of your carnal desire. You
gravely dishonor me by preferring the caresses of a woman to the
company of a sage. Therefore, I curse you that you shall be worshipped
only as a lingam and yoni! No decent, upright human beings shall
sacrifice to you, but only social misfits and heretics, covered in ashes!”
When Brighu arrived at Brahma’s hall, he fared no better. The creator
of the universe sat basking in his radiant glory, enthroned among his
creatures full of complacency and self-satisfaction, letting himself be
worshipped and served. He did not even bother to acknowledge the irate
sage at his doorstep.

Finally, Brighu searched out Vishnu and found him fast asleep, floating
in the primal ocean on the cosmic serpent, much like a vacationer on a
holiday. “Bah,” grumbled the sage, as he delivered an angry kick at the
breast of the sleeper, “this one is not worthy of worship, either!”
The swift kick awakened Vishnu. As good manners demand, he quickly
touched the visitor’s feet, rubbing them humbly while speaking salubrious
words of welcome. Brighu was sufficiently flattered. On his return to the
other rishis, he reported that only Vishnu is worthy of the honors
accorded to a Brahmin. (That this was a misjudgment, as far as Shiva
was concerned, we shall find out later.)
The proposition that the lingam holds within it all the beings and all the
worlds is best illustrated by the following story of what happened to Sukra,
Brighu’s son:
Sukra’s path among the celestials is seen, to this day, as the movement
of the planet Venus in the night sky. He inherited enough wisdom from
his father to become the teacher (guru) of the titans, and his advice was
effective enough to leave the gods in dire straights. Indeed, the gods
feared their doom and pleaded to Shiva to help them against Sukra’s
guile and trickery.
Shiva heard their prayers and let his bull, Nandi, charge the guru of the
demons. Like a lion pouncing on a frail deer, Nandi brought him to fall
while Shiva picked him up like a bread crumb, between forefinger and
thumb, stuck him in his mouth, and swallowed him. As terrified Sukra slid
into Shiva’s stomach, he was overwhelmed. There, in front of his eyes, all
the universes unfolded; all the heavens, seas, and underworlds became
visible. There were the adityas, the twelve heavenly gods of the seasons,
the vasus, those eight lords of the elements, who accompany the
thunderbolt-carrying Indra, all the ganas (the heavenly hosts) and the
yakshas, those nature spirits attending Kubera, the god of all the wealth
hidden underneath the earth. Sukra witnessed degenerate, beastly
human beings, the kimpurusas and the corpsedevouring pisachas, as
well as the apsarasas, those most lovely heavenly nymphs and elflike
dancers. He saw the gandharvas, those angelic, divine musicians who
nourish themselves on the fragrance of flowers. All beings were there,
the rishis and common folk, the creatures that live in the air and those

that live on the ground, the cows, the ants, worms, trees, bushes, herbs,
the creatures that swim and those that run, those that blink their eyes and
those that do not, those on two legs, on four, six, eight, and those with a
thousand legs.
Sukra, the guru of the demons
The vision so overwhelmed him that he spontaneously burst into songs
of praise. “Hail, Thee, fulfiller of wishes! Hail Hara, seizer of souls, carrier
of all virtues, giver of life, protector of the world! Thou great ape, devourer
of time, mover of all! Honor to Thee, three-eyed One! Oh, Bhava,c oh
Shankara, oh husband of Uma, rider of clouds, dweller in the cave, lover
of cremations, carrier of the trident, Lord of the Animals, master of the
cows, ash-covered one, highest Lord, thine is the honor and the glory!”
On and on he sang, pleasing Shiva tremendously, causing him to
smile. “Well, you moon of the Bhargavas, you have become my son! You
may leave my belly, by way of my penis. For this reason, you shall be
called Sukra (semen)!”
At this, Sukra popped back into the external world. He made his
obeisance to the Lord, rejoined his army of titans and led them with
renewed vigor against the gods.
This story clearly illustrates that Shiva is not only the God of gods, but of the
demons as well. He embodies the primal oneness, before the world divided itself
into the divine and demonic forces.

 THE LINGAM IS EVERYWHERE 
Countless lingams fill the universes! There are gigantic ones, such as the World
Mountain or the heavenly vault, whose associated yoni is the earth or the sea.
There are minute lingams, as small as the grains of sand. Every pebble in Kashi
(Benares) is considered to be a lingam. There are those molded by the hands of
humans, the rishis, or the gods, and those that formed themselves (svayambu
lingam). There are those that last for eternity and those made for the moment,
kneaded of rice or wheat dough at a festival, or made of mud or sand while
bathing at the riverbank. There are renowned lingams and those that no stranger
would notice, save for telltale grains of rice and a few wood apple leaves or
marigolds indicating someone has worshipped.
Shiva lingams that have spontaneously arisen in nature are often strangely
shaped, menhirlike blocks or rock outcroppings, such as the “Lingam of Light”
at Kedernath in the Himalayas. Then again, they might be natural features such
as stalagmites of ice or stone; an example is the mighty ice pillar in the caves of
Amarnath in Kashmir’s mountains, to which pilgrims climb steep, rocky paths to
pay homage.
Lingam decorated with a wood apple leaf
The very first lingam, appearing at the beginning of time, was a mighty pillar
of fire (jyotirlingam). This original, self-born fire lingam to this day is honored
in twelve different places or different forms. It is worshipped as:
1. Lord of the Moon in Somnath, Gujarat
2. The mountain Shri on the Krishna River
3. The Great Lord of Death in the holy city of Ujjain
4. The Omkara, the sacred syllable OM, at various locations
5. Amareshvara, the God of Gods also at Ujjain

6. Lord of Physicians in Deogarh, Bengal
7. Rameshvara, on the small island between the mainland and
8. Sri Lanka
9. Bhima Shankara in Dakini
10. Vishveshvara, Lord of the Universe in Benares
11. Tryambake, “Three Eyes” on the banks of the Gomati River
12. Lord Gautama
13. Kedarnath in the Himalayas
Lingam (menhir) (European Neolithic)
The fact that the one primordial Lingam of Light has manifested at several
different places bothers the Indian sense of logic as little as the contention that
each god may be worshipped as the one almighty God. In an infinite universe,
the center can be everywhere.
In the first age of the world, the krita yuga, these lingams shone in
indescribably pure light; in the second age, they turned to pure gold; in the third
age, they became silver; but today, alas, they have become mere rock, and some
have even been demolished by fanatical iconoclasts and disbelievers. Still, no
matter what their external appearance, their power remains unbroken.

Lingam with a face (ekmukha-lingam)
There still are fiery lingams everywhere. The flame flickering in the hearth is
a lingam and the stone plate that holds it is a yoni. The brass oil lamp, which
Keralese kathakali dancers place on the stage and worship before each
performance, indicates Shiva’s presence in the form of a fire lingam. The fire of
life’s energy, burning in the body, can also be considered a lingam. The energy
centers it penetrates (the chakras) are its yonis.
Lingam with faces (Pashupathinath, Nepal)
The lingam is, of course, also plainly and simply the erect male member.
More than once has a shocked tourist fled aghast, after having stumbled across a
grizzly yogi, meditatively engrossed in his urdhava linga, which he is
worshipping as an expression of Shiva. Until recently, the Maharaja of Patila
paraded through the streets at an annual festival dressed only in a diamond chest
harness, displaying his upright member. This was no quirk on the part of a
decadent, blue-blooded pervert. Far from it. It is, as Sir James Frazer has shown,
the survival of an ancient ritual during which the king, this “bull among men,”
provides the visible guarantee that he is maintaining the fertility of his realm to

which he is linked with body and soul. Other sovereigns do the same by
fathering numerous progeny with many queens. It was common in prehistoric,
sacred societies that old, impotent kings were killed by young, virile challengers,
for only they could please the Great Goddess and induce her to bless human and
beast with offspring and fields rich with harvests.
Ordinarily, the stone lingam is devoid of any embellishment since it is meant
to be a bridge to the contemplation of God in his formless, “void” essence,
without characteristics projected upon him. Yet sometimes a cobra, the sign of
awakened shakti power, is shown winding its way up the shaft. Sometimes four
or five faces are sculpted into the shaft, one for each direction and a final one
looking toward the zenith. Each face represents an aspect of God: the first face
beams out the forces of creation (srishti); the second indicates preservation
(sthiti) of what has been created; a third, terrible visage, invokes destruction
(samhara); and an equally sinister countenance betokens the concealment
(tirobhava) between the cycles of creation and destruction. The fifth face, on
top, addresses the devotee with its blessing (anugraha). In Nepal, a smooth
transition toward Buddhism lets the faces of meditating Buddhas appear on the
shafts of the Shiva lingams.
 HOW ARJUNA WON HIS MAGIC ARROWS 
Arjuna is the noble archer we know from the “Song of the Lord” (Bhagavad
Gita).d During the long drawn-out war between rival kin groups, Arjuna realizes
that he must have special magic arrows if the tide of battle is to turn in his favor.
In order to obtain them, he makes a pilgrimage to a quiet, forested valley hidden
in the Himalayas where he finds a cove of meditating yogis. To aid his
meditation, he models a lingam out of clay and decorates it with fresh blossoms.
Then, with undivided attention, he begins to chant the holy invocation Om
Namah Shivaya. His meditation becomes so fervent that he heats up as though he
were on fire. The trees around him turn yellow and lose their leaves; the grass
smolders, causing the other meditators to wheeze and cough. His ardent effort
bothers them so much that the holy men leave for Mount Kailash to beg the Lord
that he might satisfy Arjuna`s wishes, whatever they may be. This Shiva
promises to do but first he would test the warrior’s character to see if he is
worthy of such a gift.
Shiva, then, takes on the appearance of a swarthy, muscular chieftain of the
kiratas, those wild, widely feared mountaineers. Parvati, not wanting to miss the
adventure, goes along as the kirata queen, and the clamoring host of ghosts and
goblins change themselves into kirata wenches. Let us join them and see what

happens:
At the very moment the kirata chief and his crowd of women enter the
hallowed forest, a gigantic wild boar comes crashing through the thicket,
grunting menacingly. The terrified hermits flee helter-skelter. Seeing
through the swinish exterior, they recognize the demon (asura) Muka,
coming once again to disrupt their contemplations. But no sooner has it
appeared than two arrows whiz through the air, hitting the bristly beast
simultaneously. Gurgling and hissing, the spirit of the nasty asura leaves
the dying body of the boar. The kirata women clap their hands, shouting
in chorus, “Bravo! Our great chieftain has slain the boar!”
“I beg your pardon,” retorts Arjuna, sure of his skills. “It is I who killed
the boar!”
The sinister headman fixes the young hero with a cold stare, saying,
“Listen, stranger! These women speak the truth. Your arrow hit a boar
that was already dead!”
Soon an argument flares up that becomes ever more heated until
Arjuna, fired by righteous wrath, picks up his bow to strike down the
impudent mountaineer. The arrow fails its mark, for the kirata shoots it in
two as it flies through the air. Arjuna empties his quiver, but none of his
arrows strike their target. Drawing his sword, he charges his dark-skinned
opponent, but as he heaves to split his skull, the blade shatters as though
it were made of plywood. At that, Arjuna loses all constraint. In blind fury,
he uproots a tree with which to pound the enemy into the ground. The
kirata grabs the trunk and flings it, along with Arjuna, into the air. The
hero falls crashing to the ground next to the mud lingam. He is badly
shaken but gathers himself enough to throw a prayer at the Shiva lingam.
Immediately, fresh strength and new courage flood his limbs. Jumping to
his feet, he shouts, “Kirata, your hour has come—”
He cannot finish the sentence, for, lo and behold, the flowers that had
adorned the lingam now deck the long hair of the kirata! Awestruck,
Arjuna realizes that his opponent is none other than the Lord! Trembling,
he falls to his knees, as Shiva and Parvati take on their usual appearance
as a sadhu and a noble lady. Holding their hands open in a gesture of
blessing, they tell him, “Your courage and dedication have pleased us.
You shall have the invincible arrows of the Lord of the Animals and
victory shall be yours!”

 HOW MARKANDEYA BECAME AN IMMORTAL 
The story of wise Markandeya, which was told to me orally in India, illustrates
again the power derived from honoring the Shiva lingam:
Once upon a time, there lived a man and woman who, devoted to the
service of the Lord, fed the poor and honored the cows. But their hearts
were not as glad as they should have been, for they had no children. The
man decided to do severe penance to propitiate Lord Shiva. And, indeed,
after some time, the trident-bearing God appeared in the man’s
meditation.
”Lord, bless us with a son,” the man prayed to the God.
“Tell me,” Shiva asked, “do you want a son who will live a full life span
but is lacking in virtue? Or, would you prefer a son who is wise and
virtuous but will live for only sixteen years?”
“I will have a virtuous son, my Lord!” he answered without hesitating.
Yama, the god of death
Soon thereafter, a babe, whom they called Markandeya, was nursing
at his mother’s breast. He turned out to be even-tempered, kind, and
quick to learn. Already as a child he mastered the holy scriptures, which
pleased the elders tremendously. One day—it was on the eve of his
sixteenth birthday— Markandeya came back from the woods where he
had gathered flowers for the evening worship and found his mother
sobbing and his father’s face frozen with grief. They tried to avoid telling
him what was troubling them so, but they finally revealed to him his cruel
fate. The boy put his arms around them and reassured them, “Please do

not be sad! Shiva is the gracious one. He is master over death. Surely, I
can ask him to spare me!”
Having said that, he went to the seashore where he fashioned a Shiva
lingam out of wet sand, decorated it with fragrant blossoms and, focusing
his mind on it, began to pray. Toward nightfall, as his devotion became
complete, he started tossing and dancing before the sign of the Lord.
Suddenly a harsh, solemn voice interrupted him: “Get ready to die!”
There was Yama, the grim, black god of death, riding his black water
buffalo, holding a bludgeon in one hand and a rope in the other.
“Oh, Lord of Death, please wait a moment, I have not yet finished my
worship!” the youth replied.
“You are a fool! No one can escape me whose hour has come!” Yama
roared, while slipping the noose over the boy’s head. Markandeya tried to
cling to the Shiva lingam, calling on the Lord for help. At that very
moment, Shiva loomed out of the sand lingam and threw Yama to the
ground. Death fell to his knees before his Lord and departed.
“Markandeya,” said Shiva, “your unwavering faith has made you
forever free from death. You are an immortal. Go in peace.”
The sage Markandeya is said to be the author of the Markandeya Purana, a
carefully wrought work of some nine thousand stanzas, in which birds, knowing
right from wrong, tell bits of wisdom, anecdotes, and tales. After that work was
finished, all trace of him was lost. If he has not of his own volition laid his
physical body aside, he is probably still alive, perhaps meditating in a Himalayan
cave, perhaps surfing in southern California.
 THE PHALLIC SYMBOL 
During the twelfth century, the sons of the Arabian Desert descended upon a
fabulously rich and decadent India and put to torch and sword what in their eyes
was lewd, impure, and idolatrous. As Islam spread, the era of great Indian erotic
art, with its voluptuous images of copulating divinities, came to an end. Women
began hiding their body curves, covering their breasts, and finally even pulling
the sari over their faces. The very idea that the lingam referred to a vital and
interesting part of the human anatomy was ever more repressed. “No, no,” the
Brahmins defensively protested, “the lingam is but a symbol, an indication of
God, who is beyond and above any image. It is merely an object without
concrete associations, used as a focus for meditation on the center of being,

which is identical with your Allah!”
After centuries of religious outrage, the Muslims got somewhat used to their
lingam-worshipping neighbors. But then came the Christian missionaries and,
finally, the prudish Victorian scholars, always hot on the trail of the titillating
nastiness of which the “savage and barbarian races” were capable. Again and
again, the Brahmins had to explain that the lingam is not a phallic symbol but an
imageless point (bindu) used by the meditant to concentrate the spirit, similar to
the crystal ball of the fortune-teller. It is a sign of the pleroma, the void that
contains all, the sound not yet heard, the quiet center surrounded by an ocean of
movement, energy, and expression.
“The fact that a few degenerates or primitives, dark-skinned aboriginals
(dasas, adavasis) worship the penis might be so, but it certainly does not apply
to the Aryan caste Hindus,” they hastened to add. Indeed, they were telling the
truth, for the Aryan Vedas left no doubt about nauseating pre-Aryan customs of
worshipping snakes and phalli. Phallic cults belong traditionally to matrifocal
societies of planters in which a mighty Mother Goddess, together with an ever
dying, ever resurrecting phallic son/lover, guards the recurrent cycle of
vegetation, the sowing and harvesting of crops. The patriarchal herders of cattle,
goats, and sheep, like the old Aryans or the Old Testament Hebrews, would have
nothing to do with this; they would have little use for Mother lovers like an
Attis, Adonis, or Tamuz. Even though the synthesis of the Aryan and the older
Dravidian cults has long been accomplished, especially in the Shaivite and
Tantric sects, the orthodox Hindus defend themselves vehemently to this day
against insinuations that the regenerative organs are worshipped in the lingam
and yoni. Gentle Hindu swamis, otherwise given to peaceful smiles, are apt to
loose their temper on this issue. Swami Sri Sivananda, the founder of the Divine
Life Society, is no exception. For him the lingam speaks an unmistakable
language of silence. “Only pure, pious souls can understand this language. A
curious, passionate, impure foreigner of little understanding or intelligence says
sarcastically, ‘Oh, the Hindus worship the phallus, or sex organ. They are
ignorant people. They have no philosophy.’ When a foreigner tries to learn
Tamil or Hindustani languages, he first tries to pick up some vulgar words. This
is his curious nature. Even so, the curious foreigner tries to find out some defects
in the worship of symbol.”2
The conflict between the rather puritan Aryan Brahmins and the followers of
an indigenous, archaic ithyphallic god has been going on for a long time. The
Sanskrit Puranas tell the following story:
Once upon a time, there dwelled a group of pious and devout hermits

hidden deeply in the forests of the mountainous north. They lived
together with their wives in chastity, spending their time praising and
worshipping God. Their pride grew as their meditation became deeper
and their vows more resolute. Then one day, a handsome, naked youth
appeared among the pines, dancing ecstatically, holding his stiff member
in his hands and making suggestive movements. It was Shiva. He had
come to make his pious devotees laugh, to make them merry and happy.
However, they were not only shocked but also thoroughly repulsed by
such a lewd display.
The love-starved wives of the penitents could not help being fascinated
by the beautiful ithyphallic man. Secretly their hearts beat double time at
the thought of being ravished by him. Their husbands noticed this, and it
poured the oil of jealousy into the fire of antipathy. Their outrage swelled
to a terrible curse. “Your vile actions are unheard of! You violate the
commandments of the Holy Vedas! May your phallus drop off!”
The curse of those who have practiced long and arduous austerities
never fails its mark! Immediately Shiva’s lingam fell from his body,
catching on fire as it fell. It fell through all three worlds, heaven, earth,
and underworld, wreaking flaming havoc. The entire creation threatened
to conflagrate. Terrified gods and rishis hastened to Brahma, the wise
Creator, to ask what could be done.
As always, the grandfather of all creation knew the right advice.
“Shiva’s penis must be quieted! Go to Parvati, the beautiful daughter of
the mountain. Sing to this goddess the songs that old custom prescribes.
Draw water from a sacred ford at the river. Then place the water jug,
along with some kusha grass and barleycorns, into a magic circle
(mandala) decorated with eight kinds of flower petals. Chant spells
(mantras) over the water jar. Sing on, without stopping, until the goddess
appears in the form of a vulva. The roaming fire-penis will find cooling
relief in the vulva’s moist embrace. Once it has come to rest, sprinkle it
with more cool water and bind it faster with more spells. Honor the lingam
with flowers, with the smoke of sandalwood, perfume, and sweet spices.
Praise the Lord with songs and musical instruments, with bows and
prostrations. Finally, to conclude the rite, call to the Lord, “Hail Thee, Lord
of Gods, who bringeth peace and happiness to the world. Thou, Creator,
Preserver, and Destroyer, have mercy. Rest Thou here, who are beyond
the OM, who art the core of all. Be at peace, Great Lord, protect all the

worlds.”
The gods and seers completed this for the sake of the world’s dharma. After
the roaming fiery penis found rest in the yoni, both Shiva and Parvati were
content. This was the first time that the lingam-puja, the worship of the lingam,
was celebrated, as it is performed to this day in countless temples and homes.
The swamis tell us that as long as people go on worshipping the lingam, peace
and happiness will prevail in the three worlds.
 THE PILLAR OF FIRE 
The Shiva Purana tells us that the lingam was honored the very first time long
before there were gods and rishis.3 It was before creation began:
Vishnu, in whom the universe rests between cosmic manifestations,
awakened from his sleep. He stretched, yawned, and looked with the
light of one hundred thousand suns, which shone from his eyes, into the
void of the primal chaos. Nothing existed but the glory of his being. But,
suddenly, he became aware of someone else. There was a golden-hued
god with five heads, surrounded by a radiant aura, shining like one
hundred thousand suns. The holy Vedas sounded out of his luminous
center.
“How is this possible?” puzzled the perplexed Vishnu, not realizing that
the other one arose from his very own navel. “I am the only One. Who
are you?”
The other replied like an echo, “I am the only One. Who are you?”

Vishnu as a boar
The world-egg had split in two. A terrific argument ensued between the
two primal beings, as to who was the first and the mightiest. As the
quarrel reached the point where they were about to strike blows at each
other, a gigantic column of fire (jyotirlingam) struck in front of them with a
deafening roar. Glowing like a million suns, it grew and grew, piercing the
heavens above and the underworld below, losing itself in infinity. The two
primal beings were stunned. When they finally caught themselves, they
decided to find out what was behind this perplexing event. They agreed
that whoever found the source of the fiery column would be the greater of
the two. Thus, Vishnu took the form of a rooting boar, to find its roots by
digging into the ground, while Brahma changed into a wild gander to fly
upward, searching for its top.
The strong boar tunneled downward for thousands upon thousands of
divine years but found no end. At some unfathomable depth, he
happened upon Anant (Sanskrit anant = endless), the king of all
serpents.

Brahma rides on a gander or takes the form of a gander
“Give up your quest,” the endless snake advised the exhausted digger,
“for the blazing pillar is a manifestation of Shiva, who has neither root nor
crown.” Vishnu conceded his defeat and surfaced.
In the meantime Brahma had flown upward for many eons without
finding even a hint of a top. On the way through the high heavens, he met
the original cow, Surabhi (or Kamadhenu), who advised him that the
quest was futile, for the column had neither beginning nor end. Proud
Brahma, Lord of the Vedas, wanted, at all costs, to win his contest with
Vishnu. As he was a master of words and a powerful persuader, he
managed to talk the dumb cow into bearing false witness on his behalf.
Hesitatingly, she agreed to say that she saw the gander land on top of
the mysterious column. He also talked three little plants, the century
plant, the bandhuk, and the red-flowering hibiscus, which they met on
their way, into supporting his deceitful claim. When he met Vishnu again,
Brahma lost no time in boasting of his success. The flowers nodded their
heads in agreement. So did the cow, but as she had a bad conscience,
she denied it at the same time by shaking her tail. At that moment, Shiva
Mahadev stepped out of the fiery lingam and put an end to the
squabbling.
“Since thou hast spoken the truth,” he declared, turning to Vishnu,
“thou shalt be worshipped even as I am worshipped!”
Turning to the Creator, he said, “But, thou, Brahma, since thou hast
lied, thou art not worthy of worship!”
The cow, of course, was forgiven for her weakness. But the three
plants may not be used, even to this day, to decorate Shiva’s lingam.

Whoever absentmindedly does so is bound for hell. Having set things
straight, the gracious Lord promised to let the infinite lingam of fire
become so small that human beings might worship it also.
Opinions differ as to where this original fiery lingam, reduced to manageable
size, is to be found on the earth. Most believe it to be in shiny Kashi (Benares).
But the Nepalese insist it pierced the universe at no other place than the
Kathmandu Valley, precisely in the holy district of the lord of the animals,
Pasupathinath. The Tamils of southern India are sure it must have been at the
holy mountain of Arunachala. Then again, it is said that everyone who earnestly
searches for this lingam will find it, not in some far-off place, but very close to
his home.
Ram and Lakshmi worshipping the lingam
The foregoing story is, no doubt, a favorite of the Shaivites, the followers of
the three-eyed god. In their view, the holy trinity (Brahma the Creator; Vishnu
the Sustainer; Shiva the Destroyer) is itself an expression of an all-encompassing
Super-Shiva. The Vaishnavas, on the other hand, claim with equal unerring
confidence that Vishnu is the one and only God of Gods, while all other gods,
including the trident-bearer, are but partial aspects. Thus both Shiva and Vishnu
are equally worshipped. Brahma, the hapless Creator, has no temples nor are
offerings provided to him.
In the usual representations of the lingam yoni, all three aspects of the One are
present. The base, or lower, square (brahagraha) represents the four-headed
Brahma. The rounder middle part (vishnubhaga) represents the femininely
receptive Vishnu, while the rounded shaft (rudrabhaga), which juts out of the
yoni, represents Shiva.
The divine trinity, the central principle multiplied by the sacred number three,
is of early Indo-European vintage, coming also to expression in the triune

Godhead of Christianity and in the three Goddesses of Fate of earlier heathen
Europe. In India, the trinity has found a place in philosophical speculation and
also in art, such as in the monumental sculptures of Elephanta. To the simple
believer, that is all abstract; she generally tends to think of herself as a follower
of Shiva or of Vishnu.

5
SHANKAR, THE YOGI ON THE MOUNTAIN

Being in Samadhi
in the state of supreme bliss
that arises from seedless yoga,

his knowledge free from constraint

he meditates constantly
within himself upon Himself.
UMAPATI SIVACARYA,
TAMIL POET, FOURTEENTH CENTURY
The ever so fine ethereal images witnessed by the seer, as he delves meditatively
into the hidden springs of Being, become eventually transformed into the
imagery of wise sayings, fairy tales, legends, songs, and dances. The seer’s
fellow human beings, who are enmeshed in their many daily cares and worries,
in their work and duties, will be able to understand such images and allegories.
They will be food for their souls and spirits. In return, they will free the seer
from the obligation of labor, gladly filling his bowl with some cooked rice, and
will address him respectfully as “babaji” (honorable father) or “swamiji”
(honorable teacher).
The seer’s images and words accompany the people through the day and into
sleep, guide them through the seasons, through sickness and health and, finally
one day, over the threshold of death. The most moving and most profound
visions make up the spiritual treasure of a people. They are guarded with great
care. Artists represent them and writers fix them on paper and embellish them.
Whole troops of priests and teachers busy themselves to cultivate and propagate,
display and worship such visionary images, for they are religion (Latin re-ligare
= to tie back, to reconnect). They tie us back to the Source. They are upheld and
honored in regular rituals.
Sacred, venerated images (icons) are an integral part of religious cultus. For
the common people, they become keys unlocking the innermost chambers of
one’s soul. Religious icons have little to do with the whim and fancy of so-called
creative artists. Rather, they are the careful rendering of a truly spiritual vision.
The reproduction of the vision has to be correct to the minutest detail. It is far
too sacred to allow for much speculation and extrapolation, which would render
it impotent and lessen its magical effect on the psyche.
Present-day visitors to India, leaving their niche in consumer’s paradise
elsewhere for a few weeks, are first of all shocked at what they perceive as
depressing poverty, filth, and crass superstitions that assault them. If they can
overcome their mass-media conditioning and prejudices and open their eyes,
they will see an immensely rich land. Indeed, they might suddenly feel,
psychologically speaking, like poor beggars who have stumbled into the jeweled
palace of a maharaja. They will find themselves in an ancient treasure house of
the most colorful images, of inexhaustible folklore, endlessly rich in narrative,
mysterious customs, and breathtaking song, dance, and opulent festivals. It is

abundance beyond the measure of anyone’s comprehension, constantly
reminding the soul of its own hidden wealth and its birthright as a citizen of a
spiritual universe.
The icons of Shiva that help to focus the mind and lead the soul in
contemplation are many. But three of them are the most common. First, there is
the icon of Shankara, the peaceful ascetic, sunk deeply into meditation, his body
covered with ashes as he sits in a snowy mountainous landscape. Then, in
contrast, there is Nataraja, dancing in the midst of a ring of fire, drumming the
beat of life with his hand drum. A third icon shows Shiva and Parvati with their
children in an idyllic scene placed in the mountains in the spring. We shall look
more closely at these three images in the following section, for they hold the
keys to the archetype.
 SHANKARA 
As the lord of the mountains (Girisha), Shiva-Shankar sits motionless in deep
contemplation of the universe, which is his inner dream. The skin of his strong
body is as white as the snows on the icy peaks of Mount Kailash, where he
camps.a He is the embodiment of complete peace and quiet. All trace of passion,
all desire to be actively involved in any outside interest has been extinguished
like a fire that has burned down to a few pure white ashes. His athletic physique,
however, lets us surmise that he could spring into action at any moment. He is
not at all dead, but like the quiescence before the storm, a concentration of
potential power.

Shankar
His wild, unkempt mane is piled up high, its topknot held together by a
hissing cobra. His devotees call him Dhurjati, or Jatadhari, “the one with matted,
felted hair.” A jet of water springs from the topknot, cascading to earth in a wide
bow: It is the river Ganges, originating in heaven, personified by the goddess
Ganga, who was called down by the sufferings and austerities of a holy rishi.
Shiva is called Gangadhara, “carrier of Ganga,” for he was willing to catch the
goddess in his hair in order to cushion her fall. As she flows over the earth, she
brings fertility and life. Passing the funeral ghats, she washes the ashes of the
dead into the underworld before rising again into the heavens where she flows as
the Milky Way, on whose banks the original seven rishis (the seven brightest
stars of the Big Dipper) meditate. The goddess represents the cycle of life—and
Shiva-Shankara, who wears her in his hair, is thus the master of this eternal
round.
On the left side of his brow, Shankar sports the delicate silver crescent of the
newborn moon. Scholars like to point out that the moon has a lot to do with the
mind, with measuring and memory, with time and the tides2 In carrying the
moon, Shiva is lord of all these lunar aspects. In Indian mythology, just as in
European folklore, the moon’s cup is filled with very precious liquid. It is the
Water of Life, the soma of the gods, the drink of immortality (Sanskrit amrita),
that the northerners called the Mead of Inspiration and the ancient Greeks called
ambrosia. It is the liquor upon which the gods get drunk with ecstasy, and which
lifts the poets and seers beyond everyday doldrums into the realms where eagles
fly.
Soma, the name of the moon as well as of the divine nectar, is personified in
Indian mythology as a handsome youth whose chariot is speeded along by ten
milk-white horses. He is married to twenty-seven daughters of the demiurge and
lord of priests, Daksha. Brahma installed Soma as the lord of plants (Oshadipati)
who nourishes all seedlings with his refreshing dew; he also made him the
master of elegant speech and poetry (Vacaspati). As a result of these gifts, Soma
became so impressed with himself that he lost all sense of measure. His twenty-
seven wives were not enough for him. He sought to spread his favor to other
members of the fairer sex. He cast his eye especially upon Tara, (the star), the
voluptuous wife of the old rishi Brihaspati (the planet Jupiter). Soma led her to
his hideout, ravished her, and wanted to keep her as his own. Brihaspati was
outraged. Even Brahma’s patient admonishments could not move Soma to return
the beautiful woman to her lawful husband. In the council of the gods the
betrayed husband sought reparation. Indra (the king of the celestials) and his

hosts set out to punish the rash youth’s transgression against the laws of
decency. The antigods (asuras), titans (daityas), giants (danavas) and howlers
(rudras) took the side of the moon, finding it a welcome chance to put a little hell
to the heavenly hosts.
A regular war of the stars ensued, which the “good guys” won, as usual. A
hesitant Tara, who in the meantime had fallen in love with Soma, was returned
to her lawfully wedded husband. She was pregnant. When the old patriarch
Brahma asked her whose child she was carrying, she unabashedly admitted it to
be Soma’s and refused to have the “unclean” fruit of her passion aborted, as
Brahma demanded. In due time, Budha (the planet Mercury) “the clever one,”
was born.
It was during this war that Shiva swallowed Sukra (Venus), the guru of the
antigods, and released him again through his penis. But that story we know
already. It was also during this conflict that Shiva, wielding his trident, whacked
the moon into pieces and placed a sliver of it in his hair. For this reason, Shiva
came to be called Chandrasekhara, “the moon-crested one,” indicating that
Mahadev is lord over Soma and the conqueror of lunar forces, such as the
restless flow of mind and the merciless passing of time and tides.c
Shankar’s other bodily decorations can be understood in a similar way. The
poisonous cobras he wears as armbands, rings, necklaces, and hair decoration,
signify that he has overcome the cold-blooded reptilian nature inside of himself.
He does not fear their power. They do not crawl, stealthily hidden, through the
darkest recesses of his psyche, as they do in so many people who seem,
externally seen, to be so proper and decent. Much like the shaman with his
badges and pendants, or the sailor or warrior with tattoos signaling having left
fear behind, these vipers are the external insignia of inner self-mastery.
 THE TEARS OF RUDRA 
In the same way one must understand the acorn-sized, shriveled brown
rudraksha beads, the seeds of the utrasum-bead tree (Elaeocarpus ganitrus),
which, threaded upon a string, decorate Shankar’s wrists, neck, biceps, and head
gear. They, too, are trophies of victory. In his feminine appearance as the pitch
black, bloodthirsty Kali, he lops off the heads of demons, lets them dry and
shrink (much as the Jivaro headhunter’s tsantsas, or shrunken heads), and strings
them up as the beads of his rosary. With his garland of shrunken demon skulls,
he is Kapamalin, “the carrier of a necklace of skulls.”
Rudra’s worshippers follow the footsteps of their Lord in an imitatio dei. The
victors of the spiritual battles against the vices and weaknesses of their souls

bedeck themselves with rudraksha beads, much like the red-skins of the Wild
West, who adorned themselves with necklaces of the dried fingers and scalps of
their fallen opponents, or the Celtic warriors, who hung the heads of decapitated
enemies on their horses’ collar harnesses. Especially the sadhus, the wandering
saints, like to wear them as a visible sign of having overcome the demons of
egoism, hate, fear, desire, or any other evil. Only someone who has been able to
generate the spiritual heat (tapas) of asceticism may wear them. Tourists might
buy rudraksha beads with money, but for them they will be useless.

Rudraksha beads
When asked about the meaning of these beads, a fiery-eyed sadhu who lived
in the Nepalese jungle explained to me that all our wishes, thoughts, words, and
deeds are like the seeds of a plant sown into fertile ground. They might rest there
in the dark, invisible and forgotten, but sooner or later they will sprout, grow tall,
flower, and finally shoot to seed. Rather than sowing these seeds of suffering
anew, one can string them up and wear them as a sign that one’s karma has
ended.
The Hindus have made a regular esoteric science out of the rudraksha seeds. It
is as sophisticated as the wine cult of the French. Pedantic scholars (pundits)
whose passion for classification exceeds that of the proverbially stodgy German
professor, have classified and differentiated the seeds according to size, color,
weight, place of origin, and the number of rills, facets, or “mouths” (mukhi) each
of the nutlike seeds has. Theoretically, there are white, red, yellow, and black
mutants, each of which stands for one of the four races or castes (varna): the
priest-scholars (brahmins), the nobles (kshatriya), the commoners (vaishya) and
the servants (shudra). Admittedly, the uninitiated have a hard time
distinguishing such fine nuances in the seeds.
Twin rudraksha— a Gauri-Shankar or Shiva-Shakti rudraksha
The ordinary rudraksha seed has five facets. But there are mutants that have
anywhere from one to thirty-two such rills, and these become increasingly
expensive by degree of rarity. The least common is a true biological freak. It is a
banana-shaped, one-mouthed bead (ekamukhi rudraksha). It is so expensive that
it is set in gold. Folklore has it that a tree does not bring forth just one such rare
bead, but always three at a time. When ripened out, one of these shoots directly
into heaven, one sinks into the earth, and some chosen believer finds the third.
The King of Nepal supposedly has several such one-mouthed beads in his
treasure chest. Two such wonders are found in the temple of the lord of the
animals (Pashupatinath) and are shown to the devotees but once a year, on the
night of the dark moon in November. A single meeting (darshana) with a one-
rilled rudraksha seed suffices to free the soul from all its sins.1

Rudraksha beads with various numbered “faces”
A two-faceted rudraksha seed is called “Shiva-Shakti” and promises its owner
the fulfillment of all wishes. One with three furrows is named “Brahma-Vishnu-
Mahesh,” and it bestows intelligence and wealth. One with four mouths is taken
as an epiphany of the four-headed creator god Brahma. It serves human beings in
the attainment of the four goals of life: dharma, satisfying the spiritual law;
kama, pleasure; artha, wealth; and moksha, salvation. Since Brahma is the god of
intellect and speech, the wearing of such a bead will help in cases of poor
memory, 
stupidity, 
or 
stuttering. 
The 
common 
five-rilled 
nut, 
the
“Panchamukhi,” implies the presence of Lord Shiva himself; whoever wears one
will overcome all difficulties. This same bead also represents the former fifth
head of Brahma, which the murderous Bhairava had sliced off. Such a bead can,
therefore, be worn by those guilty of murder or manslaughter to atone their sin.
A bead that has six mouths belongs either to Karttikeya, the god of battle, or
to his brother, Ganesha, the patron of scholars and merchants. The seven-rilled
bead is identified with the seven rishis or the seven mothers of the gods
(Saptamatrika) and provides its wearer with name and fame, honor and health.
The eight-mouthed “Ashta Vasus” pearl promotes long life and prevents the
owner from foolishly uttering untruths. A bead with nine mouths makes the
wearer totally fearless, for it is a manifestation of Durga, the goddess on the lion.
Not even death will frighten someone who carries it as an amulet. It is the gentle
Krishna, god of herdsmen and lover of the souls, who appears in the ten-faced
bead, protecting against negative planetary influences and assuring a long life
and success in even the most difficult undertakings. A bead with eleven rills,

worn in a woman’s hair, will assure a long life for her husband; worn by a man
in the topknot, it will turn him into a victorious conqueror, much like Indra,
whose manifestation it is. The bead with twelve facets is identified with Vishnu,
or with Surya, the sun god, whose chariot passes the twelve regions of the
zodiac. Worn in the hair, it protects against illness and unemployment
(legislators and government agencies take note!). All the powers of the
Vishwadevas, the lesser gods, manifest in the thirteen-mouthed nut, providing
good luck and fulfilling the wish for children. The extremely rare fourteen-
faceted bead heals all ills with the power of Hanuman, the monkey god, or it
provides the magic power (siddhi) of Rudra.d
At this point the reader may sense what a complicated “science” revolves
around these shriveled brown nutlets. The whole of Hindu mythology is
contained therein. We can but scratch the surface. Since all the gods and
goddesses and their divine powers are present in the rudrakshas, it should not
surprise us that they play a significant role in traditional Indian ayurvedic
medicine. The doctor might prescribe, for instance, the wearing of a rudraksha-
mala (rosary) to lower the blood pressure. (Anyone who knows the power of
psychosomatic medicine will appreciate the effect.) A ten-faceted bead might be
pulverized and taken in milk in case of influenza. For women’s complaints,
hysteria, or epilepsy, six-mouthed beads are ground up and taken in milk. For
those suffering from cerebral problems, a four-mouthed bead is prepared in milk
and taken once a day for twenty days.
It should not surprise us that the beads should be handled with utmost
circumspection. They must be strung on an auspicious red, silver, or even golden
thread, not any ordinary string. They must be dedicated by touching them to a
Shiva lingam, by chanting mantras over them, bathing them in milk or Ganges
water, and, finally, rubbing them with costly, scented oils so that the gods may
take residence in them and unfold their demonbanning powers. Whoever deigns
to wear such a mala (bead necklace) must abstain from eating meat, fish, eggs,
onions, and garlic, all of which fire up the passions. If one does not obey these
injunctions, not only will the beads lose their potency, they might actually turn
into a negative harmful force for the wearer. Each day hymns should be sung to
them and, occasionally, they should be bathed and oiled anew, for they are alive
with a life of their own. There are even strict rules as to where and how one must
wear them. The Shiva Purana decrees that three are to be worn in the topknot,
six on each arm, and one hundred and one around the neck, eleven on each wrist,
three on the holy thread, and five around the waist. Of course, there are a number
of such systems but it would take us far beyond the scope of this book to list
more. Commonly, one sees the rudraksha beads worn as a garland of one

hundred and eight pearls (or much more seldom even one thousand and eight),
which the meditant can use to count off holy syllables or the number of breaths.
A rosary should be worn at all times, but if not, at least at the changes of the
moon.

Nepalese saint with rudraksha malas
Rudraksha means, literally translated, “the tears of Rudra.” How Rudra came
into the world is told in the Vishnu Purana:
In the beginning of this age (kalpa) Brahma bore a son from his brow.
The mind-born child was a three-eyed boy, red and blue of color, who
immediately started crying in angry fits.
“Why are you howling like this?” his creator asked him.
“Because I don’t know my name!” he screamed.
“Well, then,” said Brahma, who could not think of anything better, “you
shall be known as Rudra (Sanskrit rud = to cry or howl).” Having found
out his name, the howler split into eleven persons, some dark and
threatening, others light and friendly.
Rudra surrounded himself with wild wind spirits whose howling annoyed Indra,
the king of heaven, so much that he yelled in exasperation, “Ma rodih! Don’t
howl!” And ever since, these furies have been known as the maruts. With his
host of maruts, Rudra demolishes fields, forests, and mountains with storms of
wind and fire and brings fever and the hacking cough to man and beast.
However, if one succeeds in gaining his favor, the lord of these terrors can just
as easily keep them at bay. The best way to do this is to put oneself into the yoke
of conscious breath control (pranayama); then, the uncontrollably raging Rudra
will turn into the peaceful Shankar. The rudraksha beads will help in this effort.
As the master of the air and wind, Rudra is, of course, also the master of life’s
breath, the lord of the eleven pranas (breaths). He can give and take away the
breath of life; thus he is called the lord of those who breathe (the living) and
those who do not breathe (the dead).
Whenever the demons start terrorizing creation, the pleas and prayers of the
suffering gods, human beings, and animals rouse Shankar out of his deep
meditation. Angry at being disturbed, he changes his breathing and turns himself
into one of the wild Rudras in order to end the abuse. It is told that the rudraksha
beads are but the tears of joy Shiva shed when, after having demolished such
demons, the gods and all creatures celebrated him full of loving thankfulness.
 THE GOD CLOTHED IN AIR 
The silent god in the snow is a digambara, that is, he is stark naked, except when
he wears, like Burroughs’s Tarzan, the skin of a wild animal slung loosely

around his loins.2
Miserable fools alone laugh at the conduct of Lord Shiva who tasteth the bliss of his own self; they by
whom this carcass of a body, food for the dog and the wolf, is mistaken for the soul and pampered by
adorning it with clothes, ornaments, garlands and pastes; they do not understand, but scoff at the
strange ways and behavior of Lord Shiva, who knoweth and tasteth the bliss of his own self.
(Bhagavantam, 4,5,13)
Tiger skin and elephant hide, symbols of Shiva
Why should such an ascetic, who finds all he needs in his Self, need to bother
wearing clothes or cutting and combing his hair? On India’s streets and in holy
places, one still encounters Shankar’s friends, who dress themselves “in the
winds,” or “in the four directions,” and whose hair is a wild mass of matted,
bleached tangles. These are not crazies, bums, or antisocials, as one might
suspect. Quite a few of these naked babas had been, in their younger years,
pillars of society, successful businessmen, lawyers, doctors. It is taboo to ask
them about their lives, and if one asks anyway, they will refuse to talk about it,
for they are dead to their past.
When he does not appear stark naked, Shankar might wear a tiger skin or an
elephant hide. The latter belonged to Gajasura, a nasty demon who spent
millions of years mortifying his flesh and torturing himself in order to gain
spiritual power. At last Brahma deigned to listen to him and grant him his wish.
What else would a demon wish for, but absolute power over the entire universe?
As soon as his boon was granted, he humbled the king of the gods and drove the
deities from their heavenly thrones. Then he went to Benares. There, in the form
of a raging elephant demon, he delighted in molesting and ridiculing the rishis
and silent munis, distracting them from their religious observances. Greatly
disturbed, the saints hid behind the walls of the Golden Vishwanath Temple,
which houses a self-manifested Shiva lingam. Just as the elephant was about to
crash into this sacred ground, an angry Rudra jumped out of the lingam. He
hoisted the elephant demon into the air with his trident and made him dance on
the three prongs until he dropped dead of exhaustion. Rudra tore its skin off and
wrapped it around his naked body. Garbed in the bloody hide as a sign of his
victory over the demon of false pride, Shiva danced. Even now he dances this
dance; swinging an elephant prod (ankusha) like a mahout, he shows his mastery

over the overpowering elephant nature in man’s soul.
Shiva sitting on a tiger skin
Many icons show Shankar meditating, sitting on a tiger skin. The head of the
predatory feline is still attached and by no means dead. It fixes the devotee with
a wide-awake, penetrating stare. The tiger, a man-killer, cruel and never satiated,
kills just for the fun of it—at least, so it seems to the Indian peasant whose milk
cow or even child has been mauled and killed by the jungle beast. As such, the
tiger becomes a symbol of irrational hatred, insatiable hunger, and greed, which
only Shiva can master. But it can also be taken as a picture of alert instincts that
range the depths of the jungle of the soul, ready to pounce upon and devour the
hapless ego that happens to venture into these realms. Shiva, our deeper Self, is
not to be approached with the ego.
The Puranas tell that Shiva got ahold of the tiger’s skin when he appeared as
the ithyphallic youth to the rishis’ wives in the pine forest. Using spells and the
powers of concentration, the husbands vented their hatred in the form of a tiger,
directing it to kill the stranger. Shiva skinned it effortlessly with the nail of his
little finger and used it as his sitting blanket.
 THE THIRD EYE 
Tryambaka, “the three-eyed one,” is another one of Shiva’s many names, for he
sports a third eye in the middle of his brow. Fortunately for the world, this organ
remains closed, for it is an eye of cosmic fire. Were it to open, its fiery beam
would annihilate everything in its way. Once, during love-play, Parvati teasingly
held Shiva’s eyes shut. The whole universe plunged into darkness, but at the
same time, a third eye started to grow in the middle of his forehead. When he
opened it, the world turned into a sea of fire. Parvati was stunned. After
overcoming her shock, she started to sing and dance for her Lord. She did this in

order that he might accompany her on his drum (damaru), knowing that its sound
would create the world anew. Indeed, as the OM sounded from the damaru,
everything was restored.
The third eye— a symbol of Shiva
There had been another time also when Shiva, whose hair is the starry sky and
whose two eyes are the sun and the moon, opened his eye of doom. Here is how
that came about:
Lord Brahma, brooding over the depth of his abysmal being at the
beginning of time, beheld a most handsome youth and brought him into
existence. “You are Kama, the god of love,” the Creator told him. “Your
arrows shall excite passion in their victim’s hearts and shall plunge all
beings, from the tiniest bug to the mightiest god, into lust and heated
desire!”
Kama (the Indian version of the Greek god Eros) immediately tested
his power on his creator and, indeed, Brahma became obsessed with
carnal desire for his creation, who stood there in front of him as his
virginal daughter. Shiva, beholding Brahma who was shaking like an
aspen and sweating from all pores, started laughing heartily, ridiculing
the grandfather for his incestuous longings. Brahma remedied his
daunted dignity by cursing the god of desire, “Though you have power
over all, even over Shiva, one day the lord of fire will reduce you to
cinders with his third eye!”

Insane Shiva with Uma’s corpse
As foretold, Kama’s arrow struck the heart of Shiva, the lone meditant.
As a result, the Great God’s contemplation took the form of a woman,
and Shiva, who is the Self of the universe, forgot his Self. He became
obsessed by a longing for the great Maya, the Mother of the Universe.
Her beauty entangled him completely. When the Great Goddess was
born as the youngest daughter of Daksha, the chief of the Prajapatis (the
mind-born sons of Brahma and cocreators), Shiva took her as his lover
and wife. Daksha, however, was not happy with his wild, unkempt son-in-
law. Uma, as the goddess was called, could not bear the insults her
father, Daksha, constantly leveled at her husband. It grieved her so that
in an act of final desperation, she threw herself into her father’s sacrificial
fire and burned herself alive. When Shiva heard of Uma’s suicide, he was
shattered. Pain and anger drove him out of his mind. He made shambles
of his father-in-law’s sacrificial grounds, burning everything with his third
eye. Then, clutching the charred remains of Uma to his chest, he danced
a macabre dance with her, driven by mad rage. Again and again he
kissed her lifeless body and washed it with his tears. The scene was so
heart-rending that Vishnu, his friend, could stand it no longer. Out of
compassion, he threw his discus, striking the corpse and dismembering it
so that pieces of it fell here and there to the ground. At each place where
a part of the goddess fell, a temple arose.e
In the meantime, Shiva, totally enmeshed in illusion, sank exhausted
into the ashes that covered the barren ground. Then he wandered off as
a madman with a crazed look in the eye and filthy, disheveled hair, driven

by hunger and plagued by the elements. He finally came to rest in the
rare air of the northern mountains and, sitting forsaken, sank ever deeper
into stupor. His legs folded under him, his hands resting on his knees,
and his eyes closed, he sat motionless like a rock. He did not notice the
snakes and scorpions that crawled over him, nor the vines that grew up
his limbs, for he was completely selfabsorbed, coming closer and closer
to the realization of his Self.
During all this time, a terrible titan named Taraka was about to cash in
on the fruits of his formidable austerities. Nobody had ever tortured
himself like he had. How could Brahma refuse him the boon of absolute
mastery over the three worlds? Nobody would be able to topple him, for it
was predicted that only a son of Shiva would have this power. But how
could Shiva ever have a son? Shiva’s wife was dead and Shiva himself
had become a fool, last seen erring about in the wilderness. Untroubled
by any qualms, the new master of the universe took pleasure in
sadistically maltreating all creatures, humans and gods included. It
looked bad for the celestials; like deer, they were hunted in the forest or
living in mud huts like wretched beggars.
Compassionate Vishnu dismembering Uma’s corpse with his discus
But as the wheel of time turned, Uma, Shiva’s beloved, was reborn as
Parvati, daughter of the king of the Himalayas and his wife Mena, the
finest of heavenly nymphs. Little Parvati grew like the waxing springtime

moon, unexcelled in beauty and virtue. Absolutely no one would be able
to resist her loveliness! Surely, if Shiva would but get a glimpse of her, he
would not be able to resist her charms and soon the savior, the destroyer
of the titan Taraka, would be engendered and born. That was the
prophecy and the sole hope of the despairing gods. But Shiva was cold
ashes; not even a spark was left that could ignite the necessary fire of
passion. What could be done?
The anxious gods assembled secretly. Grandfather Brahma, as
always, knew what could be done. He called upon the god of love.
“Kama, your hour has come! Awaken the entranced meditant. Shoot your
arrow of fragrant springtime blossoms straight into his cold heart! Arouse
his yearning for the joys of lovemaking!”
Surrounded by colorful parrots, cuckoos, and humming birds, Kama
flew with the mild spring breeze up into the mountains to find Shiva.
Wherever he passed, the flowers burst into fragrant bloom and the air
sounded with glad music and bird’s song. When he saw Shiva, he
stealthily approached the meditant. Carefully placing one of his flower
arrows in his sugar cane bow, he drew the string made of honeybees and
took aim.
Kama, the Indian Cupid, on his cuckoo
It so happened that, at that very moment, the lovely daughter of the
mountain, Parvati, was about to lay some freshly picked flowers at the
feet of her selfabsorbed Lord. A flower that touched his foot brought him
out of his trance and he beheld the maiden in front of him. As holy men

are wont to do, he blessed her and foretold her the future: “God bless
you, sweet maiden! May you find the husband you desire!”
Just as he was about to sink once again into deep meditation, Kama’s
arrow whizzed toward his heart. In a flash of anger at having been thus
disturbed, the ashen meditant opened his third eye and turned the rash
love god, who had dared interrupt his meditation, into a pile of ashes.
Thus, Shiva became known as Smarahara, “the killer of Smara” (Kama).
The goddesses, and especially Rati, Kama’s lovely female companion,
cried in desperation: “What have you done! Without desire, the bull will
forsake the cow, the horse the mare and the bees the flowers. There will
be no homes, no families, for men and women will not love each other.
Society will collapse and life will be devoid of its very essence. Desire
may be the cause of suffering, but it is also the reason behind joy. What
is life without it?”
Rati’s lamentations moved Shiva; he saw the wisdom in her words. “I
destroyed Kama’s body, but not his spirit. Even so he will be able to
shoot love’s darts into everyone’s heart.”3
Shiva tried to sink again into the contemplation of the Self, but the
image of that lovely damsel would not leave his mind. Some storytellers
believe that it was at this point that Shiva, with the poison of erotic
passion cruising in his veins, ran off into the pine forest where he became
a satyr. Be that as it may, young Parvati still had a long time ahead of her
until she could swoon in his arms. Shiva calmed down and continued his
meditations. Her beauty could not budge him. Nothing she tried, no song,
no dance nor tender look, could arouse his interest. Finally, she decided
that, despite her tender youth and beauty, she too would become a
meditant, covering her limbs with rough bark cloth and ashes and
performing the hardest austerities.
Later on, we will get to that part of the story. For now, let us try to understand
this mysterious “third eye” a little better.
The “magic eye,” either as a third eye on the forehead or a single eye like that
of Odin, is a common theme in mythology. The old Irish Celts tell of the
primitive giant Balor, whose evil eye wreaked havoc, fire, and death wherever
its glance might fall. During battle, it was a formidable weapon, but its lid was
so heavy that it took four warriors to lift it. Balor’s cunning grandson, Lugh, a
shamanistic god who himself has a magic eye, shot the monster’s eye out with
his slingshot. The impact of Lugh’s missile was so powerful that it drove Balor’s

fiery eye through the back of his skull, destroying all the giants behind him with
its baneful glance. The restlessly roving eye of Polyphemus, the Cyclops, which
Odysseus pokes out, is another such magic eye. This one-eyed Cyclops is,
interestingly enough, a son of the trident-carrying god of the sea, Poseidon
(Latin Neptunus).
Tibetan demon with open third eye
Rudolf Steiner, the Austrian philosopher of the occult, believes that whenever
one-or three-eyed characters appear in myth or fairy tale, reference is made to an
ancient, atavistic mode of clairvoyant consciousness that dominated the human
soul before a strong, rational ego had developed. “It sent out ethereal sensors and
perceived the environment in a dreamlike manner. It was the ‘eye’ of Atlantian
humanity of old.”4 In mythical symbols, the blinding of the Cyclops by
Odysseus tells of the transition from a primitive, clairvoyant stage of human
cognition to the more rational mind of modern humanity. Odysseus, as the
representative of the modern Homo sapiens, no longer relies on dreamy,
instinctbound, magical awareness, but on a down-to-earth consciousness, based
on clear external senses and logical reasoning. For human individuation to occur,
it was necessary to destroy this atavistic faculty.
Other occultists do not agree. On the contrary, they work hard, using various
techniques, to regain this old magic faculty. For them, the third eye is
symbolized by the horn of the unicorn, with which one can bore into the secrets
of the universe. It is the carbuncle, that dark red precious stone that shines in the
dark, lighting the way back to the hidden, lofty citadel for the knights of the
Holy Grail. It is deemed the organ of spiritual generation, penetrating and
impregnating receptive minds. Medieval alchemists assigned this (to external
eyes) invisible organ to Jupiter, king of the gods. Located in the middle of the
forehead, this Jupiter organ is the occult focal point of sovereignty and
concentration of will. It is no coincidence that magicians and shamans often
place the sun, moon, or an eye at this spot on their hats, or even that officers’

caps sport shiny stars or “bull’s eyes” at this place.
Yogis like to focus their concentration upon this center of ethereal energy in
the middle of the forehead. It is thought of as a fiery whirl (chakra), so hot that it
is often smeared with “cooling” sandalwood paste. After worship (puja), the
priest is likely to place a dab (tilak) of red powder on this point. Since the
Hindus do not like to leave anything to chance, they do not put the tilak just
anywhere on the forehead, but exactly there, where this third eye, this center of
intellectual discrimination, is sensed to be. The more thoroughly one has cleaned
up old karmic entanglements and the closer one has moved to God, the lower
this point will be on the forehead. For someone who is already holy, that is, who
has already achieved samadhi (union with the ultimate reality) in this life, this
point will have sunk to between the eyebrows.
The myths of one-eyed Cyclops and brutish giants like Balor contain racial
memories of archaic, chthonic states of being before Promethian self-
consciousness made us truly human. Polyphemus, the cannibalistic cave dweller,
is the son of the earth-shaking ocean god and, as such, bound up with dark,
chaotic elements. He is crude and ruled by blind, unreflecting instinct, like a
cold-blooded reptile.
Such myths reflect episodes of our immense journey through biological
evolution. It is indeed true that ancestral fish and amphibians, which populated
the seas and littoral swamps of the Mesozoic, were endowed with a light-
sensitive organ (the pineal body), protruding from the forehead and connected
with the midbrain. This extra eye responded to changing external light
conditions, causing a camouflaging skin effect, as in chameleons. It also served
to register increasing light intensities of waxing moons and of the springtime
sun, inducing increased egg and sperm production at these times.5 In the course
of further evolution, this protrusion of the old reptile brain retreated deeper into
the skull. Even so, it still reacts (registering the input from the eyes) to the
changing rhythms of light and dark and helps maintain our “biological clock”
and our sexual biorhythms. Some scientists suspect that the increasingly earlier
sexual maturity of youngsters began with the development of artificial
illumination, which, for the old reptile brain, amounts to a continual full moon.
The covert link of sexuality to this third eye is mirrored in the myth of Shiva’s
third eye, which destroys the god of erotic love.
Shiva, as the god of the whole, has not destroyed his third, magic eye. Like
other shamanistic deities, he has kept its awesome potential at his disposal. But,
for the sake of his creatures, he mercifully keeps it shut. Only on that day when
he desires to destroy the illusions that are the underpinnings of this world, will
he open it and unleash an orgy of fiery destruction.

 THREE LINES OF ASH 
The number three, as we have noted, is the sign of wholeness and is associated
with the highest divinity in all Indo-European cultures. Every curse or every
spell must be repeated three times to work; every holy site, medical herb, or
sacred stone must be circumambulated thrice to be beneficial. Even Christianity
kept the symbolism in the Trinity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
symbolized by an upward-pointing triangle with an all-seeing eye in the middle.
The pyramid with an eye was adopted by the Freemasons as a sign of the new
secular era, and it still graces the almighty dollar.
Saint Patrick reputedly explained the mystery of the Trinity to the old Irish
heathens by use of a cloverleaf. It is doubtful that they were in need of such an
explanation, for Celtic culture was replete with threefold symbolism, from gods
appearing in three aspects to a social order with a threefold caste system of
priests (druids), nobles, and commoners. The cloverleaf has its Indian
counterpart in the trifoliate wood apple leaf (L Aegle marmelos, Sanskrit
shriphala, Hindi bilva or bel), which is frequently placed on top of the Shiva
lingam as an act of devotion.
Lord Shiva’s three eyes are representative of all trinities, as are the eyes of the
three peacock feathers that are stuck loosely into the dark hair of the flute-
playing Krishna. They indicate:
Creation, preservation, destruction
Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva
Past, present, future
Father, mother, child
Heaven, earth, underworld
Time, space, consciousness
Sat, chit, ananda (being, consciousness, bliss)
A U M, the three sounds of the primordial syllable
Sattva, rajas, tamas (the light, the active, the dark), the gunas, or basic principles that permeate all
When one looks carefully at the icon of Shankar, one sees the Three
emphasized by three horizontally drawn white stripes smeared across his
forehead. Using the ashes left from the three supposedly invincible demon
fortresses (tripura), Shiva painted his brow like a victorious warrior. The demon
who had built them had been granted the boon from Brahma that his castles
could not be taken unless a single shot would penetrate all three at once. The
monster felt safe and sound, for such an act seemed to be impossible. However,
as the fruits of his austerities were used up, the fortresses (which represent
simply the three impurities of soul: egoism, or anava; calculating,

nonspontaneous action, or karma; and illusion, or maya) lined up like an
astrological constellation and were zapped by the laser beam of Shiva’s eye of
fire. Since that time, it is said that Shiva’s followers mark their foreheads with
three horizontal stripes of holy ash (vibhuti, bhasma). The upper arms, lower
arms, and throat are decorated with ashen stripes to remind the believers to
develop the power of the third eye or ajna chakra, to burn up the illusion that the
Self and the absolute Brahman are something separate. When the three demonic
strongholds in the soul have been turned to dust, then one will realize that one is
identical with Shiva.
The tripundra, as the three white lines are called, are the mark of Shiva’s
disciples. The Vaishnavas, the devotees of Lord Vishnu, on the other hand, are
recognized by a vertical V-or U-shaped mark (urdhavapundra) on the forehead
with a red dot in the middle. It represents the footprint of Vishnu.
The ashes used are obtained from a consecrated fire or from a funeral pyre.
The ash from Manikarnika, the main burning-ghat of Benares and Shiva’s
favorite dancing ground, is especially auspicious. The ashes left in a sanctified
ganja pipe (chilam), this mini-Manikarnika that immolates the spirits of madness
and illusion, can also be used. The sacred white powder can be made from cow
dung as well, using a complicated alchemical ritual. As we know, in all Indo-
European cultures, the cow is the epitome of what is sacred. For the Hindu, the
cow embodies all the gods of the universe. Its five gifts—milk, butter, curd,
urine, and dung—are food, medicine (including urine and dung), fuel (dried cow
pies), and building material (dung mixed with daub is used to plaster the wattle),
and ritual (butter is used to annoint the corpse in the cremation rites).
Three lines of holy ash— symbol of Shiva
A story from the Bhasma Jabala Upanishad tells of a holy man who took a
pilgrimage to the mountain of salvation, Mount Kailash, where God appeared to
him in the form of the omkara (the lingam as OM) and initiated him into the
mystery of the sacred ash. With trembling knees, the yogi received this recipe:
To make the holy ash out of dung, one must, first of all, pick an auspicious
astrological time, making sure the planets, especially evil-eyed Saturn (Sani), are

aspected favorably. The cow pie has to be scooped onto a plate made from the
leaves of the palasa tree (Butea monosperma, “flame of the forest”) exactly at
sunrise and then dried in the sun. All the while, the venerable “Tryambakam
Manra,” the hymn to the three-eyed god, must be intoned. When it is dry, it is
given into the fiery mouth of the god Agni. As it burns, an offering of one
thousand and eight morsels of sesame seed, rice meal, and clarified butter is
made into the fire. The butter (ghee) must be dripped slowly from a leaf, not
poured, for that would constitute a sin. When the calcification is completed, the
ash is sprinkled with Ganges water and kept in a jar of silver, gold, copper, or
pottery. Finally, the alchemist is obligated to give a great feast to all the
Brahmins of the area.
The right use of the thus obtained ashes demands of the devotee that he rise
daily before sunrise, take his bath, and recite the Vedic Gayatri Mantra (“We
meditate on that excellent light of the divine sun; may it illuminate our minds!”).
Then he may, in the morning, at noon, and in the evening, using three fingers of
his right hand, apply the ash to his body and drink a little ash dissolved in
Ganges water. If whoever has vowed to do this fails to remember any aspect of
the ritual even once, he is considered unclean and may neither recite the Gayatri
as usual nor perform a sacrifice (yajna). To purify himself again, he must fast the
whole day and stand in water up to his neck, reciting the Gayatri Mantra one
hundred and eight times in a row. If he fails to do so, Rudra’s jackals and wolves
will hunt him down and tear him to pieces.
Again, the ceremonial use of ashes is common in nearly all cultures. In the
West, a festival of ashes is celebrated in Catholic communities on Ash
Wednesday. In many areas Lenten fires are lit to conclude the time of feasting
and merrymaking. On Ash Wednesday, the priest dubs ashes on the heads of the
parishioners, uttering the mantralike biblical quote: “Dust thou art, and unto dust
thou shalt return.” This signals the beginning of the time of penance and fasting,
reminding them of the brevity and illusionary nature of our existence. Since
heathen times, ashes from the yule log and the Easter or midsummer fire have
been valued as medicine for house and barn and as an antidote for witchcraft.
 THE BLUE NECK 
Covered as it is by stripes of ash, a winding cobra, and several rudraksha
garlands, one might not notice at first glance that Shankar’s neck is of bright
blue color. How he came to be called Nilakanta, “the blue-necked one,” is
recounted in the frequently told story of the churning of the Ocean of Milk:

One day, an ill-clothed sage named Durvasas, who was an emanation of
Shiva, was walking down a forest path when a heavenly nymph gave him
a sweet-scented garland. Its fragrance was so intoxicating that he
danced with delight. Just then, Indra, the king of the gods, rode by on his
elephant. To please the mighty thunderer, the sage gave him the
precious garland, which Indra put on his elephant’s neck. The rude
pachyderm became drunk from the sweet smell, seized the wreath with
his trunk, threw it to the ground, and trampled it. The sage, thinking that
his gift had been slighted, became very angry and cursed the god, telling
him that his might would wane and that he would be defeated by the
demons.
Not long after, the age-old battle flared up anew between the eternal
antagonists, the gods and the demons. Things went from bad to worse
for the hosts under the command of Indra. At the same time, Sukra
(Venus), the guru of the demons, had found a powerful mantra, which,
when chanted, raised the fallen asuras and daityas, demons and titans,
back to life. As their ranks lightened, the gods soon found themselves
hopelessly outnumbered. To stave off total disaster, old Brahma let the
conches be sounded for an emergency council.
Vishnu as a turtle (kuma)
“Only the Water of Life, the nectar of immortality (amrita) hidden deep
in the Ocean of Milk, can save us from total disaster,” he advised them,
“but our strength does not suffice to churn it out. It would take the
combined efforts of ours and those of the demonic hordes. Let us make a
truce with our enemies and have them help us.”
The truce was made. After some negotiating, the demon kings agreed
to help, but only under the condition that they would receive half of the
ambrosia, which gives eternal life. They then went to work churning the
primordial waters, much as herdsmen churn milk to butter. They used
Meru, the worldmountain, as the churning stick. Vishnu changed himself
into a turtle and dove down to the bottom of the bottomless sea in order
to serve as a pivot for the stick. Vasuki, the world serpent, also called
Shesha or Ananta, lord of the underworlds, agreed to let himself be used

as the rope that turns the buttering stick. Taking Vishnu’s advice,
Brahmins cast sacred herbs into the milk and chanted. Then, with the
demons holding the tail end and the gods the head end of the endless
serpent, they pulled to and fro, as in a tug-of-war, churning the liquid.
The first thing that appeared on the surface of the boiling, bubbling
broth, was the mother of cows, Surabhi, who fulfils all wishes and blesses
the world with milk, butter, curd, urine, and dung. Or, was it the poison of
the world, the raunchy, acrid halahala, that first floated to the top? It is not
clear which came first. In any case, the rank bane crept out of the vessel,
threatening all of creation. Horrified, both gods and demons fled. Vishnu
tried to stop the venom but could not. Its vapors turned his skin blacker
than the night. Daunted, Brahma and Vishnu hastened to Mount Kailash
to wake Shiva out of his meditation.

Churning the Ocean of Milk
Calmly the great yogi cupped his hand and drank the halahala with one
draught. No doubt, the poison—leftovers of which are found in poisonous
spiders and snakes, and in the hearts of wicked men and women—would
have done in the creation had not Shiva taken it upon himself. No one
else could have done so! Parvati, worried about her lord, clasped her
hands around his throat and pressed it shut. Thus, the poison got stuck in
his neck, coloring it aquamarine blue.
Shiva drinks the poison of the world
The venom having been dealt with, the gods and demons went on
churning. Wonderful things now appeared: the white horse, which both
Indra and the demon king, Bali, coveted; and the elephant, Airavata,
which Indra now rides. Up came Kaustubha, the precious gem now
embellishing Vishnu’s chest. Next appeared the tree of paradise, whose
fragrant blossoms perfume the entire world and under whose flowering
branches the heavenly nymphs dance their rounds. Then came the
moon, which Shiva fastened to his hair as a shining diadem. Then, to
everyone’s wonder and awe, there was born from the ocean’s froth,
floating on a lotus bed
A maiden fair and tender-eyed,
In the young flush of beauty’s pride.
She shone with pearl and golden sheen,
And seals of glory stamped her queen.6

This foam-born goddess of love, beauty, and wealth was none other
than Lakshmi, who became the beloved of Vishnu. Finally, there
appeared the physician of the gods, Dhanvantari, who revealed
ayurvedic medicine to the human race. In his hands he bore the cup of
nectar that the gods and demons had worked so hard to obtain.
Indra on the elephant that arose out of the Ocean of Milk
The gods, their attention being distracted by Lakshmi’s radiant beauty,
did not notice that the demons were about to grasp the cup and make off
with it. Were it not for Vishnu’s vigilance, they might have succeeded.
Instantly, the great god turned himself into the loveliest of all heavenly
nymphs, appearing as Mohini, the greatest seductress of all. It is said
that Brahma was so struck by her dazzling beauty that he gave himself
four heads in order to be able to watch her from every direction. The vile
demons too, of course, became victims of Vishnu’s power of illusion and
chased after her, driven by desire, thus losing their rightful portion of the
drink of immortality. (The theft of the heavenly nectar by the gods is a
common motive recurring in all Indo-European mythologies.)
Even Shiva lost his senses at the sight of seductive Mohini. Even
though an ash-covered ascetic, he became so excited that his seed
spurted, raining silver and golden lingams all over the earth.

Lakshmi, the goddess of good luck
In a south Indian version of the story, Shiva chases the nymph, overpowers her,
and begets a son with her, who is known as Hariharaputra (son of Hari = Vishnu
and Hara = Shiva), or as Ayyappan. The extensive cult and large following of
Ayyappan in Dravidian southern India can be seen as an attempt to overcome the
continual rivalry of the two great gods, Vishnu and Shiva. It is a syncretism of
Shaivism and Vaishnavism, each of which like to proclaim the supremacy of
their particular god-vision. For example, the Hare Krishna sect, whose
shavenheaded, saffron clothed members sang, danced, and begged in the
metropolises of the West during the 1960s and ‘70s, see in Shiva but a minor,
somewhat ill-mannered sidekick of Vishnu. In Ayyappan, this opposition is
overcome.
The imagery of the churning of the primordial sea can be interpreted as a
symbol for the process of meditation. Centered in the worldmountain (the
backbone), which pivots on the back of the turtle (representing the oldest,
reptilian level of consciousness in us), the meditant fathoms the oceanic depths
of the unconscious mind. The gods and demons (the sympathies and antipathies)
work together harmoniously to bring the wonderful spiritual gifts (siddhi) to the
surface, that is, into the light of consciousness. These gifts are represented by
such archetypal images as the wish-fulfilling cow, the tree of life, the dancing
heavenly maidens (apsarasas), the magic white horse and elephant (vehicles of
divine powers within the soul), the goddess of good fortune and beauty and,
finally, the divine physician with his cup filled with the nectar of immortality.
However, note that only when we accept Shiva— that unsavory outsider, living
on the outer edge in the permanent ice of the north or in the hell fires of the
south—can we enjoy these gifts. For he must be there to drink up the vile
poisons of old karma that have settled on the bottom of our souls. Like Jesus in

the Christian myth, so Shiva drinks the bitterness of the world (the cup of
perdition) to the very last drop.
For educated Westerners, these stories are parables and images in depth
psychology on the complexes and forces of the psyche. For the Hindu peasants,
however, the stories are absolute reality. They do not separate the world into a
subjective inner world and a real, objective external world (as defined by
science). For them, all experiences are real and natural, and at the same time,
illusory and supernatural. What our scholars, somewhat condescendingly, label
myth, beliefs, and fairy tales, are for the ordinary Indians, “facts” that are seen
and experienced. For them, the external reality is transparent. Every mountain,
river, and city is evidence of some divine happening: “Shiva sat on these rocks.”
“This lake is one of Vishnu’s footprints.” “On this hill, the goddess killed a
demon.” Or, “In this city a great hero was born!”
Myth is timeless; it transcends time and space. Therefore, it is eternally
present and can be experienced in a state of grace, when one has a darshana, an
experience of the divine. The “once upon a time” is in the here and now and can
be witnessed ever anew: the demons and gods are still churning the ocean of
milk; Shankar, the peaceful ascetic, is even now meditating on Mount Kailash;
Shiva-Nataraja is even now dancing in a ring of fire; right now, the world is
being destroyed at the end of the dark age and reborn simultaneously from the
navel of Vishnu into a new golden age. The battle of the gods and demons is
raging and, after the gods have quaffed the nectar of eternal life, it turns in their
favor. But then the penance and iron self-discipline of the demon king, Taraka,
become so powerful that the dark forces triumph again and only a son of Shiva
can restore the balance. Even now, the gods hold council as to how to mate the
virginal daughter of the mountains to the ascetic on Mount Kailash and, thus, our
story begins again where it has ended—and we, if we open our third eye, are the
living witnesses of the cosmic drama, which is also our own story.
 SHIVA AND BUDDHA 
His legs folded under him, like a lotus, and steady of breath, Siddhartha Gotama,
a Shaivite ascetic, sat under a mighty pipal tree (Ficus religiosa, the bodhi tree).
Like Shankar, silent and unmoved he sat, absorbed in his own being, at the base
of the cosmic tree, the axis mundi, which bridges the heavens, the earth, and the
underworlds. He watched the fire of karma, the fateful chain of cause and effect,

flicker and finally die out. Thus he reached nirvana (Sanskrit “to blow out”) and
became the Buddha, “the Enlightened One.”
The cosmic tree, its three mighty roots piercing the netherworld and its crown
touching the highest heaven, plays a central role in the mythology of nearly all
people.7 It is the navel and center of the world, the pillar that supports the
heavens, the ladder upon which seers climb into other dimensions. To emphasize
its supernatural nature, it is sometimes imagined as growing upside down from
heaven,8 as in the Bhagavad Gita (Song XV, verse 1) where it is stated:
The rishis know of the tree Asvattha,
Rooted in heaven, its trunk growing earthwards,
Its leaves, each one, bringing forth the Vedas.
He who knows this, knows all.
The icon of the meditating Shankar shows this world tree in its most archaic,
runic form—as a trident. Its three roots are turned upward. Like Buddha, Shiva
sits in deep samadhi, absorbed into himself. He, too, is “blown out” (nirvana).
The ice and snow of the eternal Himalayan winter symbolize the ashes that are
left after the flickering flame of illusions has been extinguished. Shankar is a
picture of nirvana, or as the Hindus prefer to see it, of satchidananda (pure
being, consciousness, bliss).
Between the cycles of active creation, Vishnu rests, selfabsorbed in the
pregnant world of his own being, sleeping on the back of the world serpent,
sheltered by its thousand flared hoods. In much the same manner, the Buddha,
sunk into samadhi, is sheltered from the cosmic storm by the thousand-headed
king of serpents, Mucalinda. Like the Midgard serpent of the old Nordics, this
wise, jewel-crowned ruler of the underworld has his realm underneath the three
roots of the world tree. It is the same serpent that enthrones in Shankar’s piled-
up hair. Over it, the jet of Ganga’s torrents shoot out like a fountain, reminding
one of the torrential rains that would have inundated Buddha, had not Mucalinda
sheltered him.


Buddha under the bodhi tree
As the ascetic Gotama sat in meditation, just before he became the
Enlightened One, Mara-Kama (death lust), the master of delusion, appeared in
his inner vision and tempted him with all the riches and power of the world and
all the joys provided by fair dancing maidens, in order to distract him. Like
Shankar, who reduced Kama to a pile of cinders, Buddha pierced the tempter’s
illusion with the eye of spiritual insight. Not much different is the iconography
of the Jains. The Tirthankara (maker of the ford across life’s treacherous stream),
having pierced the veil of illusion, is shown sitting in lotus posture underneath
the cosmic tree, passionless, silent as a plant, his head protected by the wide-
open hoods of a giant multiheaded snake.9
According to the tantric and yogic schools of philosophy, the cobra
symbolizes the “serpent power” (kundalini), the energy potential centered in the
lower regions of the body. When awakened by meditation and yoga, the energy
starts winding its way up the backbone until it reaches the highest consciousness
center, at the top of the cranium. When this happens, the energy becomes
conscious; in other words, “enlightenment” occurs. The serpent’s head flaring
out above the meditant’s crown is thus the iconographical rendering of spiritual
illumination. This is what is symbolized by the shiny golden crowns of royalty—
the right to rule. The god-kings of ancient Egypt wore a cobra with extended
hood on the front of their crowns, evidencing their cosmic wisdom and divine
power.10 In myths throughout the world, serpents appear as guardians of the tree
of life, the fountains of wisdom or youth, or of golden apples. The divine,
impeccable human being who has dealt successfully with the serpent nature will
come into possession of these treasures.
Like Shiva, Buddha, who walked India’s dusty roads, is a homeless wanderer.
Even though dressed in the saffron orange of a begging monk, his elongated
earlobes indicate that he is a noble. Shankar too has long ear lobes (pulled down
by heavy gold earrings), showing, among other things, the yogic faculty for
clairaudience.
Some illustrations show Shiva holding a deer in his hands. This lithe, nervous
animal represents the restless mind, ever ready to jump hither and thither. But
here, it rests calmly, like the mind of a yogi. Likewise Buddha, preaching his
first sermon about the cause and the overcoming of suffering while resting in the
deer park (Sarnath) near Shiva’s city of Benares, is shown surrounded by a herd
of peacefully grazing deer. The Buddhist folktales, the “Jataka Tales,” tell that
Sarnath was once the forest in which Buddha had been the king of the deer in a
former incarnation.f

The imago of Shiva-Shankar and the associated stories and legends are
presumably older than those of historical personages, like Gotama Buddha or
Mahavir, the founder of the Jains. Stone seals carved by the Bronze Age people,
who built the cities of the old Indus civilization (Harappa, Mohenjo-Daro) some
4,500 years ago, show a naked, sometimes three-faced god, sitting with his legs
crossed under him, heel to heel, toes pointing down, arms outstretched, and
hands turned thumbs outward. This prehistoric yogi is surrounded by animals
and under his seat are two deer (or gazelles), similar to the later icons of the
preaching Buddha at Sarnath.11 Apparently he has an upright phallus (unless it is
a belt strap) and on his head is a pair of horns, looking like the crescent moon.
The similarity to the Shankar icon is so pronounced that the archaeologist Sir
John Marshal had no qualms about referring to a “proto-Shiva.” It must be seen
as the prototype of later imagery.
After Buddha had traveled up and down the Ganges Valley for many decades
preaching his “noble path” (arya dharma), and after his selfless, dedicated
monks had brought the message to the ears of many kings, it seemed as though
all of India would convert to Buddhism. Mahavir’s Jains were not quite as
successful. But India is like a giant digestive apparatus, an immense compost
that sooner or later turns all the ingredients into new humus, upon which the
strangest and most elaborate fantasies of the human mind can sprout, bloom, and
shoot to seed. Nothing is destroyed, but everything is metamorphosed. Historical
facts quickly become myths, and simple, straightforward thoughts take root and
grow like jungle vines, seemingly into infinity. Even now, Mahatma Gandhi and
Indira Gandhi are turning into deities with all the trappings of cultlike devotion,
just as the leader of the armed rebellion against British rule and commander of
the Japanese-supported Indian National Army, Subhash Chandra Bose, is being
worshipped as an incarnation of Ganesha, the elephant-headed son of Shiva.
Even popular film stars like M. G. Ramachandran, Sivaji Ganesan, or Amitabh
Bachan are raised to the rank of avatars of God in the minds of illiterate peasants
and derive political power from their position. The politician N. T. Rama Rao,
for example, who played the role of Krishna, is worshipped as an aspect of that
deity. It would be nonsense to assume that Buddha and his teachings have
escaped the mythomanic passion of the Indians. Indeed, it was not long before
the Vaishnavas declared Buddha to be the ninth incarnation or avatar of Vishnu.g
In his incarnation as Buddha, Vishnu appeared to mislead demons and wicked
men and women. By teaching them to disregard the caste system, to ignore
blood lines, to deny the existence of the gods and other such falsehoods, he
assured their eventual destruction.
In the Brahmanda Purana, however, Buddha is expressly celebrated as a

manifestation of Shiva.12 It is said that in the first age (Krita Yuga), when the
earth is a paradise, Shiva appears as a yogi. In the following age (Treta Yuga),
he is embodied as Kratu, one of the “world creators” and keeper of the Vedic
sacrifice. In the third age (Dvapara Yuga), he appears as the doomsday fire; and
in our present age (Kali Yuga), so lacking in virtue, he manifested as
Dharmaketu (Buddha).
In south India, Buddha went through the greatest metamorphosis, as we shall
see in the following story:
Durga, the great goddess who rides a tiger and holds the weapons of all
the gods, is in reality none other than Parvati, Shiva’s faithful spouse.
She destroyed the great buffalo-demon, Mahisasura, by beheading him.
At that, Mahisi, the buffalo-demon’s wife, swore revenge, cost what it
may. For eons, she suffered the hardest austerities in order to gain merit.
Finally, Brahma had to comply with her insatiable desire and grant her a
boon. She wished that neither Shiva, nor Durga, nor Vishnu, the
mightiest of all the gods, might be able to vanquish her in battle. To
prevent the demoness from wrecking the universe, Vishnu took on the
form of the enchantress, Mohini, and slept with Shiva. Together they
produced a son called Ayyappan, who they abandoned in a jungle in
Kerala just after he had been born. He happened to be found by a king
and his entourage. Since the king had no children of his own, he was
glad to bring the infant up as his own flesh and blood. As he grew up, the
beautiful child performed many wonders. One day, for example, he
brought a female leopard into the royal chambers, knowing its milk would
cure the headaches of his foster mother. At the age of twelve, he met and
quickly dispatched the demoness, Mahisi. At that time, he revealed his
divinity to his father and asked him to build a temple on the exact spot
where an arrow released from his bow struck the ground. That happened
to be on top of the mountain Sabarimalai. To this day, each year
hundreds of thousands of pilgrims dressed in black lungis hwalk barefoot
to the temple on the mountain. For forty-one days they abstain from sex
and obey strict taboos concerning eating, sleeping, and speaking.


Durga destroying the demon Mahishasura
Ayyappan (Hariharaputra), the son of Shiva and Vishnu, is also called Shastra or
Dharmashastra, which means as much as “holy law.” It is a name commonly
applied by the Buddhists to Buddha, referring to his role as guardian of the Arya
Dharma, the noble path. Ayyappan, whose name derives from the Dravidian
mispronunciation of the Sankrit arya, rides a white elephant named Yogi. Since
Buddha appeared to his mother as a white elephant, the conjecture that
Ayyappan is none other than Buddha, having been worked over by the
mythomanic genius of the south Indians, seems likely. Ayyappan is the
Enlightened One dissolved back into the ocean of Hinduism.13
The ubiquitous icon of Shankar and the worship of the lingam seem, thus, to
go back partially to the old pre-Aryan civilizations now covered by the dry sands
of the Indus Valley. As we can read in the Vedas, the cults of lingams, nagas
(serpent deities), mother goddesses, and sex magic, did not find favor with the
Aryan invaders. But the decree of the Brahmins did not have the power to banish
images and beliefs from the minds of the non-Aryan masses, the lower castes
and untouchables, and, slowly, they crept into and populated the Aryan universe.
Gradually, emerging from the shadows, aspects of proto-Shiva transferred
themselves onto Rudra, the Vedic god of storms and wild beasts. When the
reform movements of the fifth century B.C., centering around Buddhism and
Jainism, challenged the Brahmanic orthodoxy, what lay slumbering in the souls
of the Indian masses rose to new life.
During the first century A.D., proto-Shiva’s likeness came to new life in the
hands of the Bactrian Greek sculptors, in the form of statues of the meditating
Buddha. The icon of Shankar became popular somewhat later, in the fifth
century, during the reign of the Gupta kings, when modern Hinduism emerged.
The icon of Shiva as the dancer in the flames developed even later, when south
Indian Tamils cast Nataraja in bronze in the eleventh century.
There is a brief but interesting biographical note concerning Siddhartha
Gotama, the later Buddha: After he had left wife and family, he joined a group
of sadhus who were devotees of Shiva. Even the name of his Shaivite guru is
known. It was the wandering ascetic Makkhali Gosala (560-484 B.C.), of whom
it is said, he practiced dance and divine drunkenness.14
 THE TRIDENT AND THE “BÂTON-DE-COMMANDEMENT” 
Sitting straight-backed on his tiger skin, the meditating master of yogis rests his
left hand loosely on his knee, sometimes fingering a rudraksha rosary. Stuck in

the snow next to his right arm, the trident is in ready reach, while the elbow rests
sovereignly upon a T-or Y-shaped armrest. An ethnologist is immediately
reminded by this armrest of the bâton-de-commandement, which is a symbol of
sovereignty among Siberian shamans. Sometimes, these scepters are decorated
with animals and magical runes, and an “eye” is drilled into the top so that it can
see. Occasionally, it can be used as a drumstick for the shaman’s drum, to call
the spirits. The T-shaped instrument is ancient, having been found among the
refuse left by the mammoth and bison hunters of the Old Stone Age. The late
Paleolithic magicians who painted the walls of the Pyrenean caves would,
presumably, not have been puzzled by such “armrests” that long-haired, ash-
covered siddhi babas, who populate the “places of power” in the Indian
landscape, carry around with them.
The “bâton-de-commandement”
The trident (trisul) is also an ancient scepter of overlordship. Its antiquity is
indicated by the fact that it is the symbol of the pagan god of the sea, Poseidon,
as well as the “pitchfork” of the old Eurasian shamanistic god who sank into the
(psychic) abyss to become the devil. Because of this association as a witch’s or
devil’s attribute, the Church resisted for a long time the addition of the fork,
alongside the spoon and knife, as an eating instrument.15
To this day, the natives of the Siberian taigas and steppes consider the trident
as a symbol of the world tree. They fasten it to their boats and to the tent of the
shaman or set it up to mark graves.16
Basically, the trident is a spear, whose power is multiplied threefold. It is the
oldest hafted weapon, the hunting implement par excellence, older than the
javelin or the bow and arrow. The Neanderthals (living in the interglacial period
of the Middle Paleolithic) already knew how to fasten razor-sharp, chipped hand
axes onto slotted shafts, giving them power over even the biggest quarry, even
over mastodons, rhinoceroses, bison, and cave bears. This tool, like no other,
became a fetish, giving its yielder sovereignty, as though he carried the
thunderbolt itself. It has ever since been the insignia of kings and lords. Nearly
all tribes honored hallowed spears or “ceremonial lance blades,” out of which
the gods, ancestors, or spirits speak. The Nordics knew of the magic spear of
Odin, whose shaft was made from the “World-Ash” itself. The Celts of Ireland

knew of a “spear of light.” Christian legend tells of the lance of the Roman
legionnaire Longius, who pierced the side of Jesus with it as he hung on the
cross, gathering the blood in a cup which was to become the Holy Grail.
This lance of Longius became the spear of Amfortas, the guardian king of the
Grail. It was wrested from him by the trickery of the evil magician Klingsor and
not restored until Parsifal, “the pure fool” seized it again and closed the wound
of Amfortas with its healing power. The Habsburg emperors made this blade
their own symbol of power, believing themselves invincible and destined to rule
the world as long as they kept it in their treasury in the Hofburg Fortress in
Vienna. At the end of the Second World War, this spear of destiny fell
temporarily into the hands of the Americans.17 It has since been returned to
Austria.
The trident is, of course, the cosmic tree of the shamans. At the same time, it
is a symbol of the human microcosm. The symbol is applicable on the physical
as well as the ideational plane: it is the upright body, with the head and both
arms stretched upward, as though they were the three roots of a tree growing into
the heavens, drawing life and light out of the heavenly ether. Theologians speak
of this posture as the “orate position.”18 This prayer posture is so archetypal and
universal that it easily developed into such basic symbols as the cross, the
trident, the fleur-de-lis, and the old Nordic man-rune, also called the elhaz- or
algiz-rune (
), symbolizing also the elk or Odin.
When Shankar is meditating on the inner glory of his being, the thrice-
powerful weapon rests stuck in the snow with its blades pointing skyward. But
then, when the measure is full and the time of doom and dissolution is at hand,
he hurls the trident’s prongs earthward. Again, we are confronted by universal
symbolism: the sacred spear, resting and pointing upward, indicates dignity, rule,
harmony, peace, and ritual purity. The spear turned upside down betokens
bloodshed, war, hunt, disgrace, physical or sexual violence, and ritual pollution.
It signals chaos, revolution and, at the same time, a new beginning, a new
impulse.
The Plains Indians made sure that their lance tips never touched the earth. In
the rare case that the unthinkable happened, only a long, complicated ritual,
involving chanting and incensing with prairie sage, could restore purity. In
European history, also, surrender and defeat were indicated by touching the
standards and lances to the ground. (The sexual symbolism is evident—by
touching the motherly earth, the weapon loses its purity and thus its magical
potency. The lightning in it becomes grounded.)
It is significant as well that the man-rune (
), which Odin picked up as he

hung upside down on the world-ash, is associated with thinking, making,
measuring, and ordering—when turned upright. But when it is turned upside
down (
), it conjures destruction, dissolution, and madness.19 It then becomes
a “crow’s foot,” belonging to those black, carrion-eating birds that are at home
on the battlefield and the execution grounds. It is contained in the anarchistic
“peace symbol”(
). Though intended as a symbol of peace and disarmament,
those who congregate under its auspices would like to undo the present
establishment, which they consider aggressive, imperialistic, and warmongering.
People in archaic, animistic societies, our forebears included, felt that all tools
and weapons have a spirit, which can be called by name. Shiva’s trident is
personified in a similar manner. Its name is Vijaya, “Victory.” In the Puranas,
the seers describe it as a young hero who carries in his hands a sharp ax, the sun,
and also a noose. He is said to glow threateningly, like a smokeless fire, and
shine out like the rising sun. His brows are knitted somberly, like those of a
warrior scanning the horizon.
An unusual cornucopia of symbolic associations clings to the three tips of the
trident. Swamis, vying with each other for the most spiritual interpretation, liken
them to the three primal qualities (gunas), the three hills of Benares, or the
Trimurti (Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva—the three reflections of the One, the Sada-
Shiva.) Swami Swahananda interprets the three prongs as the three weapons of
victory over the ego-demon’s three apparently invincible castles (the physical,
ethereal, and emotional armor of the human being). The three blades are:
vairagya (nonattachment), jnana (gnosis, true knowledge), and samadhi
(spiritual concentration).
For the simple Hindu, however, the trident is just what it appears to be,
namely, a weapon with which God jabs and kills nasty demons. One such demon
who felt the power of the trident was Andhaka. Blinded by lustful desire, he
thought he would be a better mate for lovely Parvati and tried to carry her off.
Shiva scooped him up with his fork and made the demon dance until he became
so hot that his sins burned off. While dancing, however, he became ecstatic and
began to praise the lord with a loud voice. Shiva, who is easy to please, was so
delighted that he adopted Andhaka as his son.

The symbol of the Sikh faith
The Sikhs, an old warrior caste from the Punjab, have also taken the trident,
though in modified form, as their symbol. For them, the three prongs are
composed of two crossed scimitars with a double-edged blade in the middle.
Like Shiva sadhus, they let no scissors touch their head hair or beards and have
sworn by this sign to be ever ready to defend dharma, if need be at the cost of
their lives.

6
THE GODDESS
Why does the God-lover find such pleasure in addressing
the Deity as Mother? Because the child is more free
with the mother, and consequently she is
dearer to the child than anyone else.
RAMAKRISHNA, NINETEENTH CENTURY
In the sacred lore of the Aryan herdspeople who colonized the Indus Valley,
female divinities play nearly as insignificant a role as in the sacred writings of
the Hebrews. Pastoralists, the anthropologists have found, live in a patriarchal
universe.a In the course of time, however, all the Vedic gods find themselves
married to illustrious goddesses and, finally, with the rise of the Bengali Mother
cult and Shakti cult, the Goddess becomes equated with the entire universe. She
becomes the personification of maya, the illusion of an infinite multitude of
separate existences, forms, and names, and of kala, the illusion of the coming
and going of time. She is worshipped as the energy (shakti) that sets everything
in motion, sustains it, and lets it dissolve.b In all this, Shiva is only
consciousness. He is the Self, while she is his Being, which he contemplates in
his meditation. He is the resting pole around which she dances her seductive
dances. Her infinite number of masks and veils that simultaneously reveal and
conceal, totally fascinate and spellbind the observer, plunging him into a
kaleidoscope of sublime beauty, abysmal horror, unfathomable sadness, or
peaceful gladness.

Shiva appearing in his female form as Maheshvari
Since Shiva is only the silent, immobile witness, whereas she is the power
herself, the devotees of Shakti and Devi have concluded that it might be best to
direct one’s attention and prayers exclusively to the Goddess. Not the distant
Father, but she, the Mother of All, protects her children and fulfills their wishes.
Periodically, Christians have followed a similar mode of thought, turning
foremost to Mary the Virgin, who bore God and who is the Mother of the
universe.
Indian monism demands that there be only one ultimate reality. Therefore,
Shiva and the Goddess are not really two, but one: he is the center of being and
she is the energy radiating from it. They cannot be separated, yet her (illusive)
forms and expressions are without number. Consequently, the universe is filled
with more gods and “realities” than there are grains of sand on the seashore. At
the same time, the One (which is many) is threefold, expressing itself in the
trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva-Rudra. How Shakti arose from this triune
Godhead is told in the Varaha Purana:
Once, the Creator, the Upholder, and the Destroyer met on Mount
Kailash. They were heated with anger at the uppity demons that plagued
them like lice in the hair. As their angry glances met, a column of smoke
rose in the focal point and in its midst stood a most beautiful maiden, as
fresh as a blue lotus bud opening to the gentle, warm caress of the
morning sun. Shyly she bowed her comely head before them. When the
perplexed gods asked who she might be and why her color was white,
red, and black, the radiant woman replied, “Don’t you know me, noble

Lords? I am the concentration of your energies. I am your Shakti!”
All three wanted to possess her. Brahma, who overcame his confusion
first, commanded her to divide into three parts, according to her colors.
Thus, the three great goddesses came into being: snow white Sarasvati,
whom Brahma took as his wife; Lakshmi, who is of auspicious red color
and was taken by Vishnu; and Parvati, the black goddess, whom Shiva
chose as his companion. The three goddesses who appear in this image
are, of course, the three primal elements (gunas) that make up the
creation: the light, sattva; the active, rajas; and the dark, dull, tamas.
They are the primordial Mothers, the thrice-dynamic matter, out of which
the world of appearance (existence) is woven. In principle, they are the
same three ancient Mothers that spin out the fate of the world in Celtic,
Germanic, and other Indo-European mythologies.c

Sarasvati
Sarasvati, the white goddess who rides a swan, is a river goddess who inspires
the flow of thoughts, words, and imaginings of poets, thinkers, and speakers. As
the muse of artists and healers, she is shown holding a lute (vina), a rosary, and a
book. Her relationship to other Indo-European white goddesses and swan
maidens, who can foretell the future and heal the ailing, is unmistakable. The
Celts knew her as Brigit or Birgit, or simply as the White Goddess.

Shiva and Parvati
Lakshmi, the red-complexioned, faithful wife of Vishnu, who tenderly
massages his feet as he awakens from his sleep on the world serpent, Sesha, is
the personification of good fortune, or luck. She is the Fortuna, whose
cornucopia pours out the riches for which every merchant and householder
prays. As we have seen elsewhere, she appeared during the churning of the
ocean and is, like the Greek Aphrodite, the foam-born goddess of beauty as well.
Like the Greek Athena, her animal companion is the owl.
As happens with beautiful women all too often, the white and the red
goddesses are jealous of each other and refuse to live under the same roof. Thus
the artist or poet who loves the muse, Sarasvati, might draw the ire of Lakshmi
and will often have to go without material wealth. On the other hand, the
successful businessperson might swim in money but will have little time or
attention from the muse. Rare is the blessed soul who has the favor of both
goddesses.
But now we shall turn to the black goddess, who became Shiva’s bride. Many
more stories are told of her, for she is the Goddess!
 DEVI 
We have already gotten to know Devi, “the radiant one” or simply “the
Goddess,” as the self-immolated daughter of righteous Daksha. According to the
Kurma Purana, she always was, and always is, the other half of Shiva.1 The
story tells of a grumpy grandfather Brahma, who was very upset when he
discovered that his mind-born sons had no intention of being fruitful,
multiplying, and thus populating the earth. As his angry thoughts concentrated,
they took on the form of a hermaphroditic being, which he commanded to split
into two. The masculine half he called “Rudra” and the feminine half, “Sati
(Uma).” The Creator gave Sati to his foremost son Daksha to be born as his
youngest daughter, whom Shiva was destined to wed.
After Sati had entered the flames and removed herself from existence, Rudra’s
power and glory waned until he was no better than a mangy dog. It is obvious
that no god can be without his female half, his shakti. In the Vaivarta Purana,
Shiva, maddened by the pain of separation, admits this when he cries of Uma’s
loss:

Icon of Uma-Mahashvara
“Arise, arise, my beloved Sati! I am Shankara, your Lord! With you I am
almighty, the foundation of all, the giver of all bliss! But without you, my
animation, I am but a corpse, powerless and unable to act! Let your
smiles and glances, let your words, sweet as ambrosia, rain upon my
pain-scorched heart. Why, oh mistress of my soul, will you not speak to
me? Mother of the Universe, do you not see me weeping? Why are you
disobedient to me? Why have you forgotten your marriage vow?”
After having thus lamented, he lost his senses completely. He even
forgot who he was. Exhausted by fatigue and anguish, he collapsed at
the foot of a pipal (fig) tree. Vishnu, who found him in the forlorn state,
started to cry bitter tears of compassion as he tried to console him, “Oh,
Shiva, Shiva, come to! You will find your Sati again, for you and she are
inseparable like fire and heat, like snow and cold, like sun and light!”
Shiva managed to open his tear-swollen eyes, “Who are you, you light
of splendor? Are you God? Where am I? Who am I?” was all he
managed to utter before sinking into darkness. (The tears that both shed
filled a lake that is, to this day, a place of pilgrimage.)
As Shiva’s despair reached the limit of what was bearable, Sati’s voice
was suddenly heard from the heavens, saying, “Be strong, oh Mahadeva,
Lord of my soul! Wherever I may be, I am never really separated from
you. Soon I shall be reborn as the daughter of the mountains and again I
shall be your wife! Grieve no longer!
Indeed, in due time, what the voice had foretold came to pass. The

king of the mountains, Himalaya, and his wife, Mena (whom swamis take
as a personification of the ether, or akasha,) had two daughters. The
elder one they named Ganga, and the younger one, who had been Uma-
Sati in her former life, they called Parvati. We shall soon see how she
conquered the heart of the ascetic meditant, Shankar, and how she
became the mother of the demon-killer, Skanda.
Shiva and Parvati often wander unrecognized, as beggars, throughout the world,
testing the souls of people. Most of the time, however, they live in a simple
abode on Mount Kailash, where Shiva loafs around while Paravati busies herself
with household chores, like any good Hindu mother. But it is not just endless
matrimonial bliss. Quarrels, fights, and then tearful making up are as common
with them as with most married couples.
Many husbands like to read interesting excerpts from the Sunday newspapers
to their wives. In the following Keralese folktale, Shiva is no exception. He
loves to read and explain the Vedas to Parvati. Parvati enjoys this, but, as with
most women, her mind sometimes drifts to more immediate concerns.
Once, having read the Vedas out loud for several hundred years, Shiva
glanced up and happened to notice that Parvati was not listening. Being
more than annoyed, he lashed out at her.
“I see that the Vedas are too difficult for you! You should have married
a rude, illiterate fisherman! That would have been more your level of
intelligence!”
At that very moment, Parvati disappeared from Mount Kailash and
reappeared as a squalling infant under a tree, somewhere near the south
Indian seashore. Just then, a group of simple fishermen happened to
walk by and find her. The chief of the fishermen took the baby home and
put it in his wife’s arms. They decided to call her “Parvati” and raise her
as their own daughter. Being cared for tenderly, she grew up as the
prettiest child in the little thatch village.
In the meantime, Shiva was as miserable as a dog in the premonsoon
heat. He was sorry to have scolded her and felt depressed and alone. His
faithful bull, Nandi, not able to bear his master’s decline of spirits,
proposed, “Dear Lord, why don’t you just go down there and fetch her
again?”
“How would that be possible? She is about to be married off to one of
these fishermen!” Shiva replied in a voice that betrayed immeasurable

self-pity.
Suddenly Nandi had a flash! He jumped down into the sea, turning
himself into a huge white shark, and started to terrorize the coast by
attacking the boats and ripping up the fishing nets. The fishermen held an
emergency council, trying to find a way to get rid of the menace. Finally,
the chief of the tribe rose and spoke. “Any young man who manages to
kill this shark shall have my daughter as his wife!”
Since Parvati’s grace, beauty, and industry were unequaled, young
fishermen from far and near were eager to risk life and limb in order to
have her. But none of them were able to catch the white sea monster. At
long last, with all their reserves exhausted, they decided to ask for God’s
help. They formed a large lingam out of wet sand, decorated it with
flowers, and poured milk and coconut juice on it while they prayed to
Mahadev. The chief’s pretty daughter prayed as fervently as any of them.
Shiva heard their prayer. Slipping into the appearance of a black-
skinned youth from a far away village, he walked in upon the scene.
Overjoyed that his plan had worked, Nandi let himself be easily caught
and killed by the youth. After the white killer shark was dead, the
marriage feast was celebrated. During the sacred rites, the couple took
on their radiant divine forms. They blessed the astonished, simple fishing
folk, climbed on Nandi, who had changed back into his bovine form, and
departed for the northern mountains.
Often the divine couple plays dice as a pleasant pastime. Shiva wagered his
trident, Parvati wagered her jewels. One time he had a bad streak of luck. He lost
not only his weapon, but his snake, his skull bowl, his drum, his smoking pipe,
and finally even his loincloth. Peeved, he went alone into the pine forest. There
he met Vishnu, who felt sorry for him. “Play another game,” his friend advised
him. “I will slip into the die.”
Not only did he win all his belongings back, but he won Parvati’s jewels, and
even her shawl. As she stood there, shivering in the cold mountain air, she
became suspicious and called him a cheat. Shiva was outraged by her accusation
and demanded an apology. As they quarreled Vishnu appeared and revealed to
Parvati the secret of Shiva’s gambling luck. In order to pacify her, he explained:
“The dice rolled not according to your wishes, but according to my wish, for my
spirit had entered them. So neither one of you really won or lost. The game was
an illusion and your quarrel a product of delusion.” On hearing this, Parvati and
Shiva realized that life was like their game of dice.2

That was not the first time they quarreled over a game of dice:
Once, as they were rolling the dice, they got into a heated argument, for
they had forgotten to keep track of their scores. Shiva was sure that he
had won, but Parvati insisted that she had the higher score. In order to
cool his temper, Shiva left the house and took a walk in the forest. The
sage Narada, who loves stirring up trouble among the gods, could not
help but notice the bickering and decided to spice it up somewhat. In his
honey-sweet voice, he told Parvati that he had just seen Shiva as a
handsome young Bhil tribesman, roaming the forest and looking for one
of those affectionate, seductive native women. At the very thought,
Parvati’s blood boiled, for she was as jealous as she was beautiful.
Instantly, she herself took on the form of a sexy young Bhil maiden and
went walking in the same forest. The heavy silver rings around her arms
and legs shone like moonlight on her smooth, black skin. Colorful
feathers of forest birds were woven into her full black hair, and her
slender body swayed to her singing like a bamboo reed in the wind.
Kama’s flowery arrows hit the bull’s eye of Shiva’s heart when he saw
her. Instantly he turned himself into a Bhil forester and stepped up to her.
He became mere putty in the forest girl’s hand.
“Oh, most beautiful maiden, marry me on the spot!” he said.
The almond-eyed native girl smiled teasingly. “But, sir, you already
have two queens: Ganga, who lives in your hair, and faithful Parvati at
home!”
“Don’t let that bother you, my little forest flower. I shall send Parvati
back to her parents and make Ganga your maid servant!”
“But,” retorted the Bhil maiden, “you are so ugly with your matted,
unkempt yellow hair, your horrid snakes and ashes. Anyway, your home
is but a lean-to and you carry a beggar’s staff!”
“Darling, I will get a haircut, shave, and shower. I’ll chase the vipers off
and throw the stick away. I will build you a palace of jewels, ivory, and
gold!”
“Well, all right,” she smiled, flashing her perfectly white teeth, “but it is
the custom of our tribe that in order to woo a maiden, the suitor has to
dance a dance to win her heart!”
Nothing was easier for Nataraja. On the spot, he started dancing like
crazy. He was sure she would be impressed. But just as he went to grab

her hand, he saw Parvati standing in front of him and froze in shame.
Another time, as Parvati tenderly wrapped her arms around Shiva’s neck,
he commented, in his way, “Sweetheart, your supple body is like a black
snake wrapping itself around the white trunk of a sandalwood tree. I am
pale white, but you are as black as the dark half of the moon. You are
Kali, the black one, black as coal, black as a crow.”
Parvati took these intended compliments in the wrong way and her
feelings were very hurt. As tears rolled like pearls down her cheeks, she
sobbed, “How can you insult me so meanly, calling me black! As if you
have no faults of your own! But have I ever even hinted at them? The
whole world knows your choleric temperament, how you knocked out
poor Pushan’s teeth… you monster! And your creepy companions, your
snakes and skulls… how you run around shamelessly naked!”
She worked herself into a real rage. No “but, darling” could bring her
out of it. Finally, Parvati convinced herself that she should leave him. She
made up her mind to go into the wilderness and do penance until Brahma
would be forced to grant her wish for a lighter skin color. As she turned
her back on Mount Kailash, all the ghosts and goblins and everyone,
including Nandi and Ganesha, ran after her, crying, “Mother, dear
mother! Where are you going? Don’t leave us! You know that when you
are not here we can barely stand Shiva’s moods.”
“Don’t worry, my little darlings. When your Mommy has finished her
austerities and her skin has turned light, then she’ll be back,” she said to
calm them, and then, turning to Nandi, she said, “You, my son, are the
gatekeeper. Guard the door until I come back. Don’t let any strange
woman enter, so that this lecherous playboy of a husband does not
diddle around while I am away!”
Lifting baby Ganesha into her arms, she said, “I’ll take you with me, for
I know he makes just as much fun of your elephant head as he does of
my dark complexion!”
At that, she hurried on her way. Halfway down the mountain she came
upon her aunt, the old mountain giantess Kasumamodini, and told her
everything that had happened. They gossiped until the rocks started
sweating and then, just before going on, she asked her aunt to throw an
eye on Mount Kailash once in a while, to see if her husband was carrying

on with another woman. Finally, after a journey of many days, Parvati
found a hidden forest suited for meditation. She dressed in bark cloth and
fasted. In the summer, she sat between four fires in the scorching sun
and, in the winter, she stood in icy cold mountain streams.
In the meantime, Adi, a wicked demon, had found out that Parvati was
out of the house. He saw it as a unique opportunity to avenge his father,
Andhaka, whom Shiva had slain. Adi was not afraid of Shiva, for
Brahma’s boon had made him invincible, that is, as long as he stayed in
his proper form. But already in order to sneak past Nandi the watchful
gatekeeper, he’d had to turn himself into a snake. Then, again using the
power of illusion, he took on the appearance of Parvati. Every hair, every
pore, every curve, every smile, the tinkle in her voice and the twinkle in
her eyes were exactly copied. The only difference was that this false
Parvati had teeth hidden in her vagina.
Smiling sweetly, she approached Shiva. “Darling, don’t be upset that I
went away angry. I have forgiven and forgotten your insult. Now I long for
your kisses!”
Icon of Uma-Shankar as half-woman/half-man
Though she was Parvati’s splitting image, Shiva became somewhat
suspicious, for he knew that once Parvati’s mind was made up on a plan,
she was bound and determined to carry it out. Again he scrutinized her
carefully, investigating every detail. No doubt, this was Parvati. But

suddenly he noticed a tiny hair out of place and, seeing through the
illusion, recognized the dangerous demon in front of him.
“Might as well turn the demon’s destruction into sport,” he thought, as
he strapped a thunderbolt onto his penis. Then he jumped on the false
Parvati and bore into her so that the monster died, screaming.
Unfortunately, just at that moment, Parvati’s old, gossipy aunt passed
by Mount Kailash. Thinking she had caught Shiva carrying on with a
strange woman, she turned herself into a breeze of air and flew straight
to the grove where her niece was doing penance. Parvati was as hurt as
any woman can be when a husband is unfaithful. She cursed Nandi who
had failed to guard the door as he should have. “May he turn into a
heartless, cold stone for not obeying me!”
Her fierce anger, energized by the rigorous ascetic exercises she had
done, sprang out of her in the form of a fiery lion. She was just about to
plunge herself into its roaring jaws in order to commit suicide as she had
done when she was Uma-Sati, but grandfather Brahma, her guru,
stopped her. He told her not to be rash and act foolish. Knowing that it is
a grave sin not to obey one’s honored spiritual teacher, she just stood
there, trembling. Now Lord Brahma granted her a boon: the darkness left
her body and took on an independent form, that of Kali. And Parvati
shone with the light, golden complexion of the rising full moon. Thus she
received her new name, Gauri (the brilliantly shining, or golden, one).
Before giving his student her final blessing, Brahma reassured her, “My
child, you and your husband shall be so close that you will melt into each
other, becoming one person, known as Ardhanarishvara, or Uma-
Shankar.” The mighty lion, born of her rage, became her mount, on which
she would ride out against demons anywhere in the world.
All her wishes having been fulfilled, the Goddess, Gauri, hurried back
to Mount Kailash. Just as she was about to enter the portals of her home,
Nandi, who did not recognize the transformed Goddess, lowered his
horns, blocking her path. “Be gone, strange woman,” he bellowed. “No
one may enter, but Parvati, our dear Mother! A wicked demon, taking on
her appearance, stealthily wormed his way past me. After my Lord killed
the intruder, he ordered me to let absolutely no woman pass this
threshold!”
At these words, Parvati’s heart melted, and she realized that her aunt
had not observed correctly. Now she was sorry to have cursed Nandi to

become a silent stone. But the white bull, who finally recognized her,
said, “Dear Mother, even your curse is a blessing! I won’t mind becoming
a stone!” Ever since, one sees a stone Nandi in front of every Shiva
temple. Some say that Nandi was actually born the son of a woman
named Stone and spent a lifetime serving Shiva in human form.
 DURGA 
Like Shiva himself, his Shaktis have light and dark sides. They can take on
gentle or fierce appearances. In her manifestation as Durga, “the inaccessible,”
the Goddess partakes of both. Noble Durga is neither the gentle mother and wife,
like Parvati, nor is she the terrible, violent ogress like Kali; rather she is a
sovereign, independent amazon. As is the Greek Athena, who sprung fully
armed from the forehead of Zeus, and the valkyries, the shield maidens of Odin,
she is a warrior. As Simhavahini, “the lion-rider,” she is associated, like Kybele,
Freya, and other ancient goddesses, with predatory cats. Like a cat, she hunts her
prey: the demons of hate, vanity, and egoism. She is the nemesis of all those who
violate dharma.
The warrior goddess received her name from one of her victims, an asura
named Durga. Because of his pitiless self-torture, this asura had gained so much
power that he could drive the gods from their thrones. The Puranas tell that:

Durga on her lion
The celestials were reduced to homeless beggars, dressed in rags,
picking through the garbage to survive. Demonic “Durga” forbade the
worship of the gods, for only he was to be worshipped. Temples were set
up in his honor. Soon chaos spread throughout society and throughout
nature, for the Brahmins were afraid to recite the holy mantras from the
Vedas. Not satisfied with how the world had been created, the mighty
asura changed the weather patterns, drained swamps, leveled
mountains, and rechanneled the rivers. The stars could no longer be
seen as the sky was filled with dust and smoke. The seasons became
irregular so that there were fruits and flowers in the winter. Nonetheless,
Earth brought forth record harvests, mountains of grain and butter, but
only because she was afraid of the mighty demon Durga.
The increasingly loud anguished cries of the maltreated animals, the
overworked human beings, and the fearful gods finally rose to Mount
Kailash and woke Shiva from his meditation. As he enjoyed resting in his
bliss, he turned the task over to the Goddess. She mounted her lion and
rode against the asura, who countered by sending tens of thousands of
snorting giants to meet her. Their monster arms ripped out mountains
and tall trees with which they wanted to bludgeon her. At that, she split
the ogress Kalaratri “black night,” from her being. Kalaratri’s breath was
so hot that it burned the monsters to ashes. New fiends appeared, as
thick as hail, and pounded upon the goddess on the lion. Shakti
destroyed them all and then went after the asura king, Durga, himself.
Using his power of illusion, he constantly changed his appearance. He
turned into a huge buffalo, then he became smaller than a fly, only to
change into an elephant bigger than a mountain; but each time, she
thwarted him. Finally she killed him, in his original form of a thousand-
armed giant. In memory of this brilliant victory, Parvati takes on the name
Durga whenever she goes to battle riding her lion.
The Vamana Purana tells of Durga’s greatest battle. It tells how she freed the
black buffalo-demon, the king of the asuras, Mahisha, from his evil karma by
dispatching him:
No asura had ever been as powerful as Mahisha. Not only had he
enslaved the three worlds, but no god, even among the great gods, could

undo him. When the divinities met to deliberate, the terrible anger
flashing out of their eyes met in midair, forming a fiery focal point,
causing a giant conflagration in the midst of which arose a virgin shining
brighter than all the heavens. She had three eyes, dark, flowing hair, and
eighteen arms that whirled like the spokes of a rapidly revolving wheel. In
each one of her hands she held a weapon, or a lordly insignia, of one of
the anguished gods. She held Shiva’s trident, Vishnu’s discus, Brahma’s
beads and water pot, Varuna’s noose, Agni’s lance, the wind god Vayu’s
bow, the sun god Surya’s quiver of arrows, and Indra’s thunderbolt.
Kubera, the god of the underworld, provided her with a heavy metal club.
Yama, the god of the dead, gave her his sword and shield.
Vishwakarman, the divine architect, handed her his battle-ax. On and on,
the gods bestowed all their powers upon her. Armed in this way, she
knocked the asura down and, standing on his back, cut off his head with
her sword.
Durga’s victory over the buffalo demon is a favorite icon for all those who need
or seek strength and energy, such as truck drivers and soldiers. She is depicted as
a radiant maiden sitting astride a lion whose fangs and claws are sunk into a
bleeding buffalo bull. One hand grasps the severed head of her adversary by its
scalp, while the other hands hold the weapons and insignias of the gods. All the
while, her face is calm and gentle, as if nothing out of the ordinary were
happening. She is the peaceful eye in the middle of the storm. The chaos and
destruction surrounding her seem to be of no interest to her.
Once upon a time, somewhere toward the end of the last world age, the
Dvapara Yuga, two asuras named Sumbha and Nisumbha, incarnations
of extremely sophisticated egoism, gained power. The Markandeya
Purana tells how they submitted to ten thousand years of the most horrid
selfcastigation—hanging upside down over fires, holding up their arms
until they resembled withered bird’s claws, lying on beds of nails or hot
coals, and completing all the martyrdoms one still occasionally sees
being performed by fakirs and ascetics on the banks of the Ganges or in
the Himalayas.

Apsara—a heavenly dancer
The gods trembled at their implacable determination. In order to hinder
these asuras, they sent the love god, Kama, and two of the most
bewitching damsels of heaven to distract the penitents. Kama’s flower
arrows hit their mark. As Sumbha and Nisumbha looked up, the
seductive image of the voluptuous, dancing apsarasas burned itself into
them. Momentarily, they forgot themselves and were filled with desire.
After some five thousand years of carnal pleasure, however, they
regained their senses, realizing that they were about to be cheated of the
fruits of their suffering. Enraged, they drove the lovely apsarasas from
their forest lodgings and continued their self-martyrdom more
determinedly. Slowly, piece by piece, they cut strips of flesh from their
bones and sacrificed it to Shiva. For a thousand years they did this, until
they were but bleached skeletons. Everything they possessed, they
sacrificed to Shiva—everything save their pride! With extreme devotion,
they forced Mahadev to descend personally from his throne and listen to
their pleas. They felt they had gained enough merits to warrant
immortality. But Shiva explained to them that only if they could bring their
last sacrifice, that is, letting go of their egotistic pride, could their wish be
fulfilled. Then, they would merge with his Being and attain immortality.
But being demons, they were not capable of abandoning themselves fully
to the Lord, so they had to settle for lordship over the entire universe.
Their boon having been granted, they immediately cast the gods into
the dust, for nothing was allowed to shine except they themselves. Their
arrogance became so unbearable that even Brahma and Vishnu could
stand it no longer. The Creator and the Upholder hastened to Mount

Kailash to voice their concern. When Mahadev finally rose out of his
trance and listened to them, he had to explain that nothing could be
done, for the accumulated merits of Sumbha’s and Nisumbha’s sufferings
permitted them to continue wielding power. He was not going to interfere!
Before fading into bliss again, he told them they might try talking with
Durga. Perhaps, if all the suffering creatures prayed to her, she would do
something.
As one might expect, the Mother of the Universe had compassion with
her offspring. Taking the form of a simple country girl, she walked
through the mountain valleys, carrying a water jug on her head. No
sooner had she appeared than the spies, who served as the eyes of the
demon lords throughout the world, sighted her. As she was beautiful
without measure and apparently innocent and unspoiled to boot, they
quickly gave report to their masters, hoping to be rewarded for finding
such a delightful morsel, which promised to satisfy the debauched lusts
of their lords. The asuras sent messengers to the maiden, inviting her
with flattering words to the palace, where the jewels and fineries of the
world would be laid at her feet. The maiden merely laughed a cheerful
laugh at this offer and told them, much like proud Brunhilde of the
Nibelungen Saga, “Whoever wants to have me, must first defeat me in
battle!”
The messengers became piqued at her haughty answer. “Don’t you
know, young lady, with whom you are dealing?”
She only continued laughing and went merrily on her way. Sumbha
was infuriated when he heard what had happened. It was time to teach
that wench some manners and respect! He ordered one of his captains to
go and simply seize her. When the captain and his henchmen were about
to lay hands on her, the tender maid roared like a lion so that their
eardrums broke and their bones shattered. Only a handful of those who
had not come so close managed to escape and tell their lords what had
happened.
Now the asuras sent out a large troop to catch her and put her in
chains. She met them sitting on a donkey, laughing. As they were about
to bind her, she suddenly turned into a raging beast that pounced upon
the warriors and devoured them, like a monkey devours ripe mangos.
Gleefully, she sliced off the head of the commander and drank his blood,
from which she became so drunk that her eyes started glowing madly.

Now a general alarm was sounded. Huge armies of rakshas, asuras,
giants, and other allies were drummed up and set in motion. The titanic
empire resembled a stirred up anthill. They surrounded the Goddess,
who was now seated on her lion, and launched an attack from all sides
simultaneously. She killed them all with ease until the only one that was
left was the supreme commander, Raktavijas, a master of black magic.
He challenged her to a duel. Immediately, he fell under the pranks of her
lion and bled from a thousand wounds. He should have died instantly; but
lo and behold, each drop of his blood turned into a new demon, as large
and as strong as Raktavijas. The gods, watching from afar, shook like
aspens in a storm, for they were sure that this would be Durga’s end.
By now, the goddess was raging! Her anger leaped out of her in the
form of a heinous black fury who is called Chandi (Kali).d She was made
of the same poison that had discolored Shiva’s neck. Lusting for blood,
she pounced upon the wounded demons and sucked them dry. She
lapped up every drop of blood that sprayed before it hit the ground and
turned into another demon. Finally, after having dispatched the black
magician, Durga killed the asura kings, Sumbha and Nisumbha, while
another aspect of her, black Kali, ate the corpses that littered the
battlefield, ripping them like a jackal. Radiant in victory, Durga rose back
into the highest heaven while the universe sang her praises.
 KALI 
Black goddesses—mistresses of the night, the earth, and the dark of the moon—
have been honored throughout history all over the world. In the Occident, they
survived into Christianity as the Black Madonna, worshipped from Spain to
Russia. The Black Madonna of Czenstochow, the patroness of the Polish people,
is the best known. (In modern secular culture, her archetype seems to shimmer
through the image of the matterdevouring “black holes” which astrophysicists
have discovered in outer space, or, on a more mundane level, in the black-clad
femmes fatales such as pop singers like Madonna.) However she appears, she is
an expression of the dark, fertile, unknowable abyss of Being out of which all is
born and into which all is again reabsorbed. None of the black goddesses,
however, is as terror inspiring as Kali, Shiva’s most awesome Shakti.
Kali Ma, “the black mother,” is bloodthirsty and cruel like a maneating
tigress. She is time (kala) that mercilessly devours everything that dared
manifest itself in the world of existence. She absorbs all, destroys all. For is it

not true that every moment is immediately destroyed by time, every present
becomes in an instant the past? Her ravishing hunger devours each second. Who
can withstand her? Truly, she is sheerest evil for the ego, that sense of personal
identity that longs to build itself a monument, give itself some hold, some sort of
permanence.

Kali
How desperately humanity has tried to escape her clutches! Egyptians
mummified their bodies, alchemists searched tirelessly for the “elixir of life,”
Hernando de Soto looked for the “fountain of eternal youth” in far-off Florida.
And even now, laboratory chemists are trying to synthesize “the pill” that would
extend life indefinitely, while genetechnologists place their hopes in the miracle
of genetic engineering. In California, those who can afford it let themselves be
quick-frozen in dry ice at the moment of death, in the hope that future scientists
will be able to raise them from the dead. Others place their hope for personal
continuance in sperm and ovum banks. In every case, it is the ego that wants to
remain, that struggles heroically against all odds. Yet the struggle is hopeless.
Like a vampire, black Kali sucks life’s blood and devours the corpses.
A common icon shows Kali drunk on blood and gore, dancing madly in the
midst of a battle and doomsday fire over the bodies of the slain. There is no one
to stop her! Even Shiva lies as a pale, bloodless corpse under her feet. With one
of her four arms she is swinging the severed head of her opponent, and another
hand is twirling a bloodstained scimitar. Except for a girdle of hacked-off arms,
a necklace of fifty skulls, and earrings made from the corpses of children, she is
stark naked. Wild, disheveled hair swirls around her head, while her three
bulging, bloodshot eyes roll about in lunatic frenzy. A long, lolling red tongue,
eager to lap up blood, hangs down her chin.
For the ethnocentric Westerner, Kali and her cult (including the sacrificing of
buffalo bulls and billy goats) remain an abomination. British imperialists found
in the colorful excesses of Kali worship welcome proof of their own moral and
spiritual superiority. (That focus provided a ready pretext for ignoring their own
dubious role in the exploitation of an entire subcontinent, under the guise of the
civilizing mission of the white man.) But the swamis raise an admonishing
finger, not to be too hasty in judgment. Is the image of a maltreated dead man,
nailed upon a cross, not equally gruesome, and yet, the signpost of one of the
most sublime spiritual mysteries?
It is the nature of such symbolism to transcend common reason and sense.
Kali stands for the dark mystery out of which all arises and into which it
disappears again. The ego, bound and limited by reason and the five senses, is in
no position to be the judge. In a deeper sense, Kali is the loving Mother, who,
through the power of time, graciously destroys the monstrous egoillusion. “Fear
not!” she gestures with her right hand as she blesses her devotees with the
abhaya mudra, while her other hand, extended in the varada mudra, indicates the
fulfillment of one’s true wishes.

Chamunda—one of Kali’s many forms
According to Swami Harshananda of the Sri Ramakrishna Ashram in
Bangalore, the fifty skulls of Kali’s necklace are the fifty sounds of language,
which cause the ether to vibrate and through which the entire universe will
remanifest.3 Nothing is lost. The destruction is but making the way for constant
re-creation. The severed arms dangling from her belt stand for the selfless, and,
hence, karma-less, deeds we have dedicated to the goddess. The loose, wild hair
is expression of her unfettered freedom. Shiva, the core of Being, is clothed in
his Shakti, which emanates from him, but there is nothing that can cover Shakti;
therefore, she is shown completely naked (digambara) and black.
Naturally, not everybody interprets the icon of Kali in such a sublimated
manner. Bengalese and Nepalese peasants celebrate the Black Mother in a much
more concrete way. They satisfy her blood lust by sacrificing black billy goats or
water buffalo bulls in front of her idol. The devotion shown during such
ceremonies stands in stark contrast to the efficient butchery at our Western meat
factories. As the earth drinks the blood, she will bring forth rich harvests. (The
association of blood sacrifice and soil fertility is anthropologically common
enough that it needs no further comment.)
Since there is no resisting the power of such a goddess, one can but submit to
her will and soothe her with sacrifices.e In the Kalika Purana, Shiva tells his
sons, the bhairavas, that Mother Kali can be pleased for five hundred years with
the blood of a gazelle or of a rhinoceros, but the blood of a human being satisfies
her for a thousand years.
Calcutta, the city of Kali, in the heart of Bengal, appears to the Western visitor
as strange as the goddess herself. No one remains neutral about it: one loves it or
one is appalled by it. In the midst of a slum, crowded with homeless Hindu

refugees from Muslim persecution in Bangladesh, Kali has her main temple.
There, sensation-seeking tourists who dare run the gauntlet of cripples, beggars,
and thieves, may witness one of these animal sacrifices. This is the
neighborhood where the white-robed nuns of Mother Theresa swarm out like
vultures, collecting the dying and destitute. For many Bengalis, there was little
doubt that the old nun, dressed in a white sari (white, as the color of death in
Asia), was none other than the goddess herself, for who else would care so much
for the dead?
With Sri Ramakrishna (1834–1886), the Bengali saint who started as a temple
servant at Kali’s temple in Calcutta, the cult of the Black Mother reached new
ethical heights. He honored every woman as Kali. In contrast, there are occultists
for whom Kali worship has degenerated into pure black magic. As they slash the
sacrificial animal, they call out the enemy’s name, assuming that he’ll die in the
same manner. Murderers and criminals, like the thugs, often dedicate their
atrocities to the wild goddess.
The thugs (also phansigars = stranglers) were ordinary peasants who belonged
to a secret endogamous society that worshipped Bhowani-Kali by periodically
going on expeditions during which they joined pilgrims and travelers, whom
they strangled and robbed, when Kali provided them with favorable omens.
Strict ritual and taboo regulated the undertakings of these were-tigers of Kali.
The thugs trace their origin back to Kali’s battle with the demon Raktavijas,
whose every drop of blood turned into a new monster. When Kali got tired of
licking up so much blood, she made two men out of the sweat of her arms. She
gave them knotted handkerchiefs and told them to continue killing the demons
she pointed out to them, by strangling them and not shedding any blood.
The cult of the stranglers seems to be old indeed. Already the carvings in the
Ellora Caves show thugs doing their work; and Old Persian legends tell of them.
Villagers tolerated them, while some maharajas even taxed their loot. They
carried on undisturbed until a clever British officer, William Sleeman, uncovered
their activities and brought many hundreds to the gallows. The thugs themselves
believed that Kali was punishing them for having abandoned their dharma by
wantonly killing holy men, women, and a certain class of merchants that the
goddess had tabooed. Sleeman was quite surprised to find out that most of the
thugs were formally Muslims. When asked how they could worship a Hindu
goddess, they told him that Kali was none other than Fatima, Muhammad’s
daughter—another example of Indian syncretism. Ever since the partition of
India in 1947, there have been isolated rumors of a revival of the thuggees.4
The dacoits—armed gangs of peasants who plunder trains and the villas of the
rich and ambush the police—operate also under the auspices of Kali. The female

dacoit leader, Phoolan Devi, who terrorized the wild hinterlands of Uttar Pradesh
during the late 1970s and early ‘80s, was worshipped by the local peasantry as
an expression of the goddess. For several years, they hid the “dacoit queen,” and
fed her and her gang, making it impossible for the four-thousand-man security
force to apprehend her.
Kali dancing on Shiva’s corpse
The most common iconographical representation of the uncanny goddess
shows her in frenzied dance on Shiva’s lifeless, bleached body. The
interpretation generally forwarded by Hindus is that Kali, inebriated from the
blood she drank, was dancing her victory dance. Her gyrations were so wild that
the earth threatened to come unhinged. In order to bring her back to her senses,
Shiva laid himself under her feet. Being a normal Hindu woman, she was
thunderstruck with shame when she saw her husband at her feet, for a woman’s
place is at the feet of her husband, not vice versa. Feeling ashamed, she stuck out
her tongue. Historians of culture venture another interpretation. The icon
represents the final victory of the indigenous black Mother Goddess of the
originally matriarchal Dravidian cultures, over the male pantheon of the white,
Aryan invaders. But there is another interpretation possible. Though he looks
lifeless, Shiva, the archetypal shaman, is in a state of deep trance (samadhi). His
anima has left its physical body in the form of Kali in order to accomplish
wonderful, world-saving deeds in the supersensible world of gods, demons, and
spirits. At the same time, the icon makes some of the basic tenets of Hinduism
visible. It shows Shiva as the unmoved ground of being, upon which the ever
changing, shimmering, endlessly varied play of divine energy (shakti) unfolds.
Shiva is the resting pole around which Kali dances the dance of illusive
existence.

 ANNAPURNA 
Like many of his devotees, Shiva lives as a beggar on earth. His daily round of
begging keeps his poor family alive. Often, however, he cannot even get that
together, for he is given to smoking hemp or eating bhang, which helps him
forget his earthly misery. Whatever meager crumbs or few grains of rice that
might be left from the day before are usually eaten by Ganesha’s rat or
Karttikeya’s peacock. Often Parvati and the children must go hungry as in the
following common folkloric story, which was related to me by a sadhu.
One day, Narada, the roguish messenger of the gods, came by the hovel
they called home. Shaking his head in feigned indignation, he teased the
poor woman. “Yes, indeed, your old man is a bhola (fool). He smokes
dope while his wife and children are starving!”
That was more than Parvati’s pride could bear. Taking Ganesha on her
arm and leading little Karttikeya by the hand, she decided to go and do
the begging herself. After a few hours, having sobered up a bit, Shiva
finally started his rounds, only to find his pleas unheeded and the doors
slammed in his face. How could he have known that his wife had been
everywhere before him? Utterly disappointed and close to tears, he came
home with an empty begging bowl. Parvati, however, met him on the
doorstep with a full bowl of rice and started to feed him with a spoon.
Ever since, this manifestation of the goddess became known as
Annapurna, “she who is rich in food.” Shiva was so overjoyed at her
kindness that he hugged her, pressing her so hard to his side that they
melded together to form one being. In this halfmale, half-female form,
they are known as Ardhanarishvara.

Annapurna feeding Shiva (Nineteenth century)
There is another version of the story:5
One day Shiva lectured his wife: “ The world is an illusion. Nature is an
illusion. Even food is just maya.”
That was too much for Parvati to bear; after all, she is the mother of all
material things, including food.
“All right,” she shouted as she walked out the door, “If you think I am
just an illusion, let’s see how you and the rest of the world get along
without me.”
Her departure caused havoc in the universe. Time stood still. The
seasons did not change, the earth became barren. There was no food to
be found in all the three worlds. Gods, demons, animals, humans
hungered and cried like children who had lost their mother. Even the
sages cried, “Salvation makes no sense to an empty stomach.”
News reached Shiva that Parvati had reappeared in Benares and set
up a kitchen for hungry pilgrims. He ran there as fast as he could, and
joined the endless line of hungry creatures waiting for alms. As he held
up his begging bowl in front of her, he said, “Now I realize that the
material world, like the spirit, cannot be dismissed as an illusion.”
Parvati smiled and fed him with her own hands.

Annapurna— the goddess of food
In Varanasi, the city of beggars and saints, Annapurna has a famous temple. The
kind goddess is shown as a light-skinned matron holding a bowl of rice and a
serving spoon. Anyone who worships her, as Shiva did, will never have to go
hungry. It is said that because of her constant presence in the holy city, no one
has ever starved in Varanasi. She herself will not eat unless everybody else has
been fed.
Annapurna seems to be an ancient Indo-European goddess. The Romans
worshipped an Anna Perenna, whose feast they celebrated in springtime with
wine-drinking excursions into the countryside. Legend tells of the time when the
plebeians battled with the patricians and the Romans had to flee to the
surrounding hills. They were about to die of hunger when suddenly the goddess
appeared and fed them cakes she had baked.6
 GANGA 
The Indo-Europeans of the days of yore experienced all rivers as female
divinities. In India this is still so. For the Hindus, Mother Ganges, or Ganga Ma,
as they lovingly call her, is the purest and most heavenly of all river goddesses.
Like Parvati, her younger sister, she is the daughter of the king of the mountains.
Stories tell that after Sati had immolated herself in the fire and was about to be
reborn to the mountain lord and his wife, she split herself into two persons,
Ganga and Parvati, both of whom were married to Shiva. In some Bengali
accounts, Ganga is even made out to be the first wife of Shiva. He has to sneak
out of the house at night to meet with his dark lover, Parvati, in the garden. In

any case, both goddesses play the role of a mother for Shiva’s son, Karttikeya. In
many popular folktales, the beautiful river goddess appears as Parvati’s rival.
Parvati is so jealous that she heaps abuses upon her, calling her a harlot and
cursing her to be born as a chandali, an untouchable prostitute, a status equal to
that of a dog or a pig. But Ganga pays her back often enough. She washes away
the sand lingams Parvati builds or even tries to sweep her sister away in her
floods.
Once, in the beginning of time, Ganga, a proud, independent maiden,
frolicked in the wide, flowering fields of heaven. She had no desire to go down
to earth. Indeed, she was vehemently opposed to the idea. How the meditation of
a saint brought her down will be told in the following story, which is related in
the Ramayana and frequently told as part of the oral tradition:
Sagara was an ancient king who had two queens. One queen bore him a
son and the other queen bore him a gourd, which contained sixty
thousand seeds— which, after they had been placed in milk, also turned
into sons. One day, in order to thank the gods for all the boons he had
received and also to increase his realm even further, the king decided to
stage a great horse sacrifice.
Such an ashwamedha was by no means a simple affair. The stallion
chosen was allowed to roam where it pleased for a span of one year.
Armed nobles and princes had to follow it to make sure it was not lost or,
even worse, abducted by another king. In the latter case, it meant war.
The loss of a consecrated horse was an omen of the greatest misfortune.
Sagara’s sixty thousand sons took it upon themselves to follow the
sacred horse. However, despite their vigilance, the unthinkable
happened: the horse disappeared without a trace. Indra, fearing the
impeccable king might become too powerful, had abducted the animal
and hid it in the deepest region of the underworld (Patala). The thunder
god knew that a monarch who succeeds in completing one hundred such
sacrifices would automatically become the next Indra, the next king of the
heavens.
The sixty thousand princes had no choice but to search all worlds to
find the stallion. They combed all lands, searched the wide seas, and
climbed all mountains. It was of no avail. Finally, they started digging
deep into the earth, down to the mighty elephants that hold it up.
Disturbed, the elephants shifted weight, causing the earth to tremble and
quake. This, in turn, bothered the rishis and the gods, making them very

angry. At long last, the searchers reached Patala, deep, deep under the
earth, and saw their horse grazing peacefully next to a meditating sage.
Wasting no thought, they took him for the culprit who had abducted their
animal and rudely roused him from his contemplations, threatening him
with their weapons.
“Hand over our horse, you thief!”
They should have known better! One simply does not get away with
disturbing a meditant! His anger took the form of a ball of fire that shot
like lightning from his forehead and burned all sixty thousand to ashes on
the spot.
King Sagara waited for many years, but his sons did not return.
Nobody knew what had happened to them. However, the ritual, once
begun, had to be completed, for it amounted to a promise made to the
gods and, if word is not kept, the consequences are unspeakable. Thus,
the king sent out his last son to find both the horse and his brothers.
For many years he searched and searched. In the meantime, old king
Sagara died. Finally, the son died also, and the grandson continued the
nearly hopeless search. But being keen of senses, he picked up the trail
of his sixty thousand uncles into the underworld. At long last he reached
Patala, where he came upon the old, meditating rishi and the
consecrated horse peacefully grazing next to him. Being more polite than
his predecessors, he waited and did not speak until the holy man
addressed him first and revealed to him the fate of his uncles: “They were
rude and deserved their fate! Now, they are bound in hell!”
“Great rishi,” the young man asked carefully, “Is there no way to save
them? For how shall the ancestors gain peace if there are no grandsons
to sacrifice and pray for them?”
“There is only one way. If heavenly Ganga can be made to flow from
heaven into hell and wet the ashes and bones, then only will they be
cleansed from their sin and may go to heaven!” Then, gruffly, as is the
manner of rishis, he told him, “Now, take the horse, and be gone!”
To bring the river of heaven down to the lower world would not be
easy. It would take more years of strict penance than were left in the
young king’s life. Only his noble son Bhagiratha, Sagara’s great-
grandson, had the ability, purity, and will to undertake this difficult task.
He traded the palace for the wilderness, his silks for bark cloth, and he
meditated for ten thousand years without losing concentration until

Brahma appeared, asking him which boon he desired. When Lord
Brahma heard his wish, he sadly shook his head and told him, “What you
desire is impossible! The earth could not bear the impact of that mighty
stream cascading down upon her. Only if Shiva were willing to brake her
fall by letting her flow through his hair, might it be possible.”
Shiva catching Ganga in his dreadlocks
Bhagiratha’s filial piety and devotion to dharma left him no choice. For
another ten thousand years he centered his mind on the god with the matted hair,
while performing the most difficult ascetic exercises. Finally Shiva appeared to
him and promised to help.
Ganga, the proud maiden, was in no way pleased to trade the pleasures of
heaven for a journey to the underworld. But the power of the sage’s austerities
left her no choice. Sullenly, she looked down upon Shiva, who was ready to
catch her in his mountain of matted, tangled curls.
“I shall wash him away!” she thought to herself gleefully. But Shiva read her
thoughts. He caught her in his felted hair, like a fish in a net, and held the
struggling maiden there for another ten thousand years, in order to dampen her
pride. Bhagiratha nearly despaired. Finally, Shiva loosened but a single hair and
she came rushing down his head and down the mountainsides as the seven main
rivers of Earth. Since that day, Shiva became also known as Gangadhara,
“carrier of Ganga,” and the river is lauded as Harasekhara, “Shiva’s crown.”
The young river flooded the once dry plains. Wherever she passed, the land
greened and blossomed. Happiness spread among humankind and the beasts.
Rippling, splashing, gurgling, clapping her wave-hands, she followed the sage

Bhagiratha, who was guiding her way to the underworld, where the bones of his
fallen ancestors awaited her reviving touch.
Ganga and dreadlocks— attributes of Shiva
Then, an incident occurred that almost doomed Bhagiratha’s effort. In her
careless passing, Ganga’s singing and splashing disturbed the meditations of the
powerful rishi, Jahnu. Using his unspent ascetic power, he simply drank her up,
swallowing the entire river, and returned to his contemplations. All creatures,
great and small, but, above all, Bhagiratha, pleaded that he release her again.
Finally, moved out of respect for Bhagiratha’s penance, he let her spurt out of
his ear. Her sojourn through the rishi made her even purer than she had been
before. Finally, her waters reached the enormous pit that Sagara’s sixty thousand
sons had dug and filled it with her flood. It became the ocean. On and on she
flowed until, at long last, she reached the underworld where her mere touch
brought the dead back to life.
Ganga is an ancient Indo-European name related to such words as going and
gang, indicating constant movement. The sacred river is an external picture of
the stream of life’s energies, the flow of wisdom, and the constant flowing of
Shiva’s shakti energy. Indeed, to the natives, the river does not flow with mere
water, but with liquid shakti. The patient, selfless sacrifice of a saint and the
divine grace of God, in combination, brought this virginal stream from heaven in
order to heal and purify a sorrowful world. Whoever bathe in her stream not only
wash the dust from their body, but also the sins from their soul. Descending into
the deepest depths, she reconnects that which is dead with the stream of life and
carries it upward again into heaven. The Milky Way shows her path across the
sky. And, way up there, in the northern sky, we can still see the seven great
rishis, the seven stars of the Big Dipper (Arctos major), meditating on her
“riverbank.” The eternal cycle completes itself when she descends again to the
earth as fertilizing rain and bubbling mountain streams.


Kashi on the Ganges
Ganga’s water is the soma offering poured on the ever hot Shiva lingam, to
cool it down. In this way, Ganga belongs as much to the lingam as the more
earthen yoni of dark Parvati. Together, Ganga and Parvati are Shiva’s
companions. For a lingam puja (worship of the lingam), nothing is better suited
than libations of water from the river Ganges.
The Ganges also stands for the ever flowing stream of consciousness, in
whose passing, master meditants— fishermen in the spirit—watch the eternal
archetypes glide past their third eye. It is the original “television,” which wiser
souls once watched to find out the ways of the gods. On Earth, there is no better
place to watch this television than in the holy city the Indians call Kashi, “the
shiny one.” It is Shiva’s favorite place on earth. Anyone who still has an inkling
of spiritual vision will notice it immediately when sitting on the banks of the
Ganges in Benares. Effortlessly, like schools of golden and silver fish, the
archetypal images that live in the soul, will pass in front of one’s inner eye. It is
no puzzle that every year hundreds of thousands, even millions, of pilgrims visit
this thirtha (ford) to the higher worlds. It is a lifechanging experience to join the
multitudes bathing in the early morning hours when the rising sun turns the
water into liquid gold.
A Brahmin teaching on the banks of the holy river
Countless old people come to Benares to await death on the banks of the holy
river, for it is said that all who die here, with the name of God on their lips, will
achieve salvation. For thousands of years the funeral pyres have burned here and
constantly the chant of the pallbearers is heard: “Rama nam satje heh!” (God’s
name is truth.) Gently, Mother Ganga takes the dead into her bosom. Innocent
souls, those of cows, children, and saints, as well as those, like lepers, whose
suffering during life has purified them, are put directly into the water. All others,
because of their sins, must pass through the portal of the fire of the pyre. Their
ashes are then put into the waters of the river.

Yogi on a platform in the middle of the Ganges
Ashrams and thousands of temples flank the shore of the glistening river.
River dolphins surface and submerge again, gracefully and rhythmically, giving
the impression of the passing of gigantic river serpents. Wooden boats pass.
Little boys drive herds of water buffalo to their daily, refreshing bath. Pilgrims
bathe and build little lingams of mud along the shore, decorating them with
marigolds and sweet-smelling incense. Black-skinned fishermen cast their nets.
Washers, standing in the water up to their knees, wash the city’s clothes and lay
them to dry on the shore. Jackals hurry along the bank, hoping to find an edible
morsel, while eagles and vultures turn majestic circles high up in the sky.
Barbers squat in the shade of pipal trees, waiting to shave the crania of mourners
or pilgrims. Brahmins, having taken their purifying bath, read loud and
ostentatiously out of some holy scriptures. At the same time, boatloads of pious
pilgrims, singing “OM Shiva Mahesvara Mahadev,” pass on their way to have
darshana with a 226-year old yogi who has installed himself on a platform in the
middle of the wide stream.
No harsh motor noises desecrate the atmosphere. Because of the drifting,
submerged sandbanks, no steam or motor ship can safely pass. The British had
tried to introduce regular steamship travel between Benares and Allahabad, but,
it is said, a yogi, disturbed by the smoke and noise, merely pointed his finger at
the monstrosity, at which it instantly rammed into a hidden sandbank. It is,
indeed, a special place, a good place for finding one’s Self. A common saying is
that only a fool would ever leave Shiva’s wonderful city on the Ganges once he
has found it. But again, it is also said, “You can leave Kashi, but Kashi will not
leave you!”

At Varanasi, Ganga turns for a short while northward, toward her origin,
much like a newly wed bride who turns back to take one last look at her native
village before going off to her husband’s home. In this gesture, the river curves
like a crescent moon. This, too, it is claimed, is the moon that sparkles as a
diadem from Shiva’s locks.

7
THE DANCER IN THE FLAMES
This is my greatest desire: without fail,
one day you’ll show yourself to us,
My father with locks twisted like the
flames of a lighted fire
the place where you dance, in full night,
over the high flames…
ARPUTA TIRUVANTATI,
TAMIL POETESS, FOURTEENTH CENTURY
Let us visit once again the hidden pine forest, where honorable hermits and their
chaste wives are meditating and practicing asceticism, and see how Shiva makes
fools of them. In this version of the story, there are not just seven rishis but tens
of thousands. They have shaven their heads in penance; they despise all
mundane joys and passions. Unremittingly, they preach to the common people
that the universe is infinite having no beginning and no end and that there is no
God who saves souls, but that each must work diligently on one’s own salvation.
(The suspicion rises that this story tells of the struggle of emerging Hinduism
with the dogmas of the Buddhists and Jains.) Gracious Shiva, seeing the damage
these fanatics were doing, decided to free them of their delusions. Using the
power of his magical illusion, he stepped into their world as a most handsome
young yogi. Vishnu was with him in the form of a beguiling Mohini, a heavenly
nymph. At the sight of the young Adonis, the rishis’ wives were dazzled.
Forgetting their duties, like silly girls, they daydreamed of being caressed by his
strong, white arms and kissed by his full lips. They let the water jugs slide from
their hands and break; they let the food scorch in the pans.

Nataraja, the cosmic dancer
Their husbands made fools of themselves likewise. Unthinkingly, they
threw away the fruits of thousands of years of hardest penance in order
to feast their longing eyes on the voluptuous curves of the heavenly
maiden. But then, they suddenly regained their senses and were terrified
to realize that their resolves had so weakened. Their shock quickly turned
into hateful anger, which consumed the rest of the fruits of their
asceticism. They meanly rebuked their wives and began to hurl the vilest
curses at the handsome yogi and his seductive female companion.
Combining their magic powers, they ignited a fire into which they chanted
mantras of death and destruction. On and on they chanted, fanning the
flame into the form of a monstrous, murderous tiger. This they directed to
tear the strange, naked interloper to pieces. But the yogi skinned it with
the nail of his little finger. Next, the hermits let a gigantic poisonous viper
rise from the magic fire; but Shiva wrapped it around his neck as though
it were a silk shawl. Seeing their efforts fail, the furious ascetics
combined all their remaining strength to conjure the most terrible weapon
of which they could conceive. It was a wicked, black, misshapen dwarf
with an invincible club. But as soon as he leaped out of the flames, Shiva
bowled him over and began to dance light-footedly on the squat torso,
taking on his divine emanation as Nataraja, the king of dancers, revealing
himself as the lord of the universe and of eternity.
At this, the poor rishis fell to the ground, trembling with fear, while all
the gods of the universe appeared to behold the wonder of the dancing

god. The world serpent Anant-Shesha, on whose back Vishnu sleeps in
the intervals between creations, was so enthralled by the splendor of the
spectacle, that he asked Vishnu for leave. His reptilian heart was filled
with only one wish, and that was to be allowed to go on a pilgrimage to
Mount Kailash. There, he wanted to engage in severe penance so that he
might find out the meaning of this overawing cosmic dance.
Ganesha worshipping Shiva

The holy family: Shiva, Parvati, and Ganesha

Nandi, Shiva’s Bull (Godowlia, Varanasi)

Stone nagas in a temple park (Tirumakudal Narsipur, near Mysore) 
Ardhanarishvara, the half-man/half-woman god (Kumbakonam, Tamil Nadu) 
Nataraja, the king of dancers (bronze sculpture, South India) 

Swami Ganapathi Sachchidananda worshipping the Shiva lingam (Mysore) 
Sadhus on the banks of the Ganges (Varanasi)

Worship of Bhairava (Batuk Bhairav Temple, Varanasi) 
A
l Shi
dh

An unusual Shiva sadhu
Bhairava (Kathmandu, Nepal)

Kali in a small shrine at a Durga Temple (Durga Kund, Varanasi) 

Durga killing the buffalo demon (popular statue) 
Durga in a festive garment (Durga Kund, Varanasi) 
Lingam worship (Assi Ghat, Varanasi)

101 Lingams in a small shrine (Talakad, near Mysore) Thus it happened that the thousand-
headed, jewel-crowned primordial serpent spent eons in single-minded devotion. Nothing
distracted him, until one day, Shiva, appearing as Brahma riding on the gander, told him, “Your
devotion is perfect! I shall reward you with eternal paradise!”
But the snake refused paradise. Instead, it wanted to be allowed to
continue watching Shiva’s dance forever. At this, Shiva took on his own
radiant form and taught Ananta the essence of wisdom, which are the
Vedas, and promised him, “You will shed your serpentine form and you
will be born of a human couple. When you are old enough to leave your
parent’s home, your footsteps will lead you to Chidambaram. There, in
the shade of a hallowed grove, you shall find my lingam, which is cared
for by an old meditant. You may help him in his duties, for here, at the
Chidambaram Lingam, I reveal my eternal cosmic dance to all who have
eyes to see.”
Ever since, Chidambaram, a town on the coast south of Pondicherry, is a much-
visited place of pilgrimage. It was here that the now world-famous bronze
casting of Shiva-Nataraja, dancing in a ring of fire, originated.
Let us now look at this dancing god. Like Shankar, his face is calm and
collected, and cobras and rudraksha beads decorate his limbs. But otherwise, he
is in total motion, his hair swirling wildly around his head. Ganga is no longer

visible as a jet of water, but as a tiny, hard-tosee female figure, riding the waves
of his hair. The hand drum (damaru) no longer hangs silent on the trident, but
vibrates energetically in his upper right hand. Every one of his four hands is
flashing a special gesture, or mudra, expressing esoteric meaning. The upper left
hand, held cupped like a half moon (ardhachandra mudra), contains a blazing
fire. A third arm, bent like the trunk of an elephant (gajahasta mudra), reminds
the worshipper of Ganesha, the clever bull elephant who overcomes all
resistance. It points down toward the uplifted left foot, indicating cosmic
lightness and nonattachment. The fourth hand stretches its open palm toward the
beholder in the abhaya gesture, signaling, “Fear not! May peace be with you!”
The damaru, Shiva’s hand drum
Shiva’s right foot presses upon the demon-dwarf Muyalaka, “the relentless
one,” trodding him to the ground. The brutal dwarf is the symbol of the
smallness of egoism, caught in samsara, the illusion of life and death. He is also
called Apasmara, “the epileptic,” for our egoism and spiritual blindness cause us
to continually stumble and fall. Gravity, graveness, and heaviness of soul have
pulled him down, for he has forgotten the cosmic joy and lightness of divine
laughter and light. But when the divine feet touch him, the dwarf begins to sing
ecstatically, much as the Tamil Shaivite poet, Pampitti Chittar:1
The Good Foot
which is lifted up
I’ve seen.
I’ve seen the Light too:
I’ve seen the dancer inside
the Pure Space:
the feet imprinted on
the attacking head
are the True Guru’s Feet,

so
dance snake!
Dance!
Of course, the downtrodden pygmy can also be interpreted as the mortal body
of a shaman, lying entranced, witnessing the glory of his immortal, higher Self.
Indeed, the dwarfish ego, which continuously seems to trouble those trying to
follow a spiritual path, is a necessary precondition, in order that the Divine
might manifest itself. The problem of most mortals is that they identify
themselves with this ego, instead of realizing their divine Self.
 SHIVA’S DANCES 
In Shankar, resting motionless in meditation, the three primal principles, the red,
white, and black gunas, are in harmonious, undisturbed balance. But when Shiva
becomes Nataraja, these elements are swirled into motion, churned and infinitely
mixed and remixed. When he starts the drumbeat, the Oneness of Shankar’s
silence is shattered. The countless trillions upon zillions of rhythms and pulses
of Creation start their beat, for all of Nature is dance: the dance of wind and
waves, the rounds of seasons and tides, the swirl of planets and galaxies, the
reveling of elves, elemental beings, and angels, the frolic of the animals, the
coming and going of thoughts and feelings, going on endlessly. At long last,
even the scientists cannot ignore the metaphor and begin to talk meaningfully of
the dance of subatomic particles swirling through the cosmos as ever
transforming fields of matter and energy.2
What is dance, but the continual loss and instantaneous regaining of balance?
Shiva’s dance is the fine edge of the universe tumbling into chaos and
destruction and the simultaneous recreation of poise, in a continuous, ecstatic,
spontaneous whirl of creation-destructioncreation-destruction.
Holy men drunk on God, and lovers caught in the contagion of Shiva’s bliss,
start dancing through life in a similar way, moving lightly on the razor’s edge
between life and death, petrifaction and conflagration, dissolution and new
creation; they dance ecstatically along, in the here and now, between the past
and the future. Only those persons, apparently mad, who have discovered their
own “Shiva-nature” can dance so freely, gracefully, and fearlessly; otherwise
they would fall into panic and stumble in terror like Muyalaka the dwarf. Shiva’s
liberated souls are berserkers, high on the sword dance of existence, dervishes
twirling out of the fetters of ego and high-wire artists stepping across the
yawning chasm of the void. They are surfers on the crest of the steadily rushing,

rolling, cascading wave of their life. Any instant, they could be dropped into the
abyss of death. Even to think about it constitutes a “wipe-out.” But they do not
think, like the encapsulated ego-pygmy thinks. For them, there is no subject, no
“other” to think about, for they are one with the wave, here and now, one with
the entire ocean! They have understood the meaning of the abhaya gesture of
Shiva’s open hand. Thus, they dance the dance of liberated souls. Like Nataraja,
they are surrounded by a mantel of blazing flames: it is their aura of light, their
shimmering rainbow cloak, and it is the glow that accompanies all saints.
As Nataraja shakes his drum, the first sound (shabda) arises. Like the
proverbial Buddhist’s sound of one hand clapping, it is the sound originating
from the One, not from the interplay of two opposites. It is the Ur-sound, the
primordial vibration upon which all other vibrations follow. It is the OM, the
first syllable, which, if it fell silent, would mark the end of the universe. It is the
all-moving Logos, which generates all phonetics, all languages, starting with the
first of all languages, Sanskrit, developing into the Babylonian babble of the
multitude of tongues and finally into the growling, grunting, snorting, and
chirping of the animals.
The sound of the drum moves the ether (akasha), which in turn sets the
elements into motion—the air, then the fire, then water and the solid matter.
Now Brahma begins to breathe. Out of his forehead the “creators of the world,”
the demiurges or prajapatis, are born, and from them arise all the creatures and
things that fill existence. With the sound of the drumbeat begins the cosmic
game, the lila of the One and his Shakti. Shakti, God’s feminine energy nature,
comes alive as a tiny point (bindu) or as a golden egg (hiranyagarbha) and
begins to expand into infinity, populating the universe with countless ever
changing forms and names, which multiply, thrive, wither, and die, only to
reappear metamorphosed.
Like all icons, the one of Nataraja’s dance has a multitude of interpretations.
For the Hindu believer, it is a symbol of the totality of being: the drum
represents the continuous process of creation (srishti), the open hand stands for
the preservation (sthiti) and the hand pointing downward, for the destruction
(samhara) of the universe. The foot that grinds the dwarf into the dust represents
the veiling (tirobhava) of the universe in darkness, while the uplifted foot shows
God’s grace (anugraha).
Another way of interpreting the icon is as a visual expression of the most holy
Shaivite mantra: OM NAMAH SHIVAYA. The hand holding the fire is the NA,
the resting foot is the MA, the hand with the drum is the SHI, the hand pointing
downward is the VA, and the open palm is the YA. 3
The Ananda Tandava (Sanskrit ananda = joyful, tandava = vigorous, dynamic

dance), shown in the Chidambaram representation, is the best known of Shiva’s
dances. But, as the god of dancers (Nateshvara), he dances many different
dances—one hundred and eight, say the swamis. On the burning ghat of
Manikarnika, on the banks of the Ganges, he dances a wild, crazed dance with
his drunken imps and ghouls, devouring the mortal remains of the deceased,
freeing them of their material husks. In Benares also, he dances the dance of
victory over the elephant demon who took pleasure in vexing the saints and
mocking the holy Vishvanath Lingam. Before skinning the elephant monster and
freeing him from his demonic incarnation, Shiva danced, eight-armed, on his
head, drumming wildly, swinging his trident, twirling the sling in which sinners
ensnare themselves, and wielding a sword and a skull. Other dances show him
holding the restless deer or the double-bladed ax, indicating steadiness and
keenness of spirit. Hissing vipers entwine his limbs even as he dances. These
reptiles can be interpreted as the fascinating tremendum his being radiates, or as
the five external senses that can poison the soul, or even as aspects of Shesha,
the cosmic serpent to whom it was granted to watch the dance forever.
In the Urdhva Tandava, Shiva dances in a contest with naked Kali to see who
is the better dancer. Since Kali represents the blind, unfettered, black, absolute
energy (shakti) of the universe, she is sure that she is the very best dancer. As
they dance, she is able to imitate Shiva’s each and every movement perfectly.
But, then, one of Shiva’s earrings falls, which he effortlessly catches with his
foot and replaces on his ear in a single swoop without her even noticing it. That
establishes him as the king of dancers once and for all.
His dance steps mark the creation and the destruction of the universes. In the
Kodu Kotti dance he rocks destructively in heavy-metal style, bringing about the
fall of civilizations. In the Pandam, he levels the three fortresses of the demonic
ego forces. In the Kodu Kapalan, a demented Shiva swings the severed head of
the Creator (Brahma) in his hands. In the Samhara Tandava, he dances, as the
dreadful Bhairava, the total destruction of the universe and its disappearance into
the void (pralaya) that separates the cycles of creation. All these themes find
expression in the beautiful classical dances of India (the Kathak, Manipuri,
Bharata, Natyam, Kathakali, Kuchipudi). Though often not understanding the
complex symbolism, the tourist can nonetheless appreciate the aesthetic beauty
of the movements.
Above all and foremost, however, Shiva dances in the fiery ring of our hearts.
Here, in the center of our being, he, who is our own true Self, dances the joy of
being, as well as the dance of doom that turns ego, greed, hate, false pride, and
jealousy into pure ash. This, our flaming heart chakra, is his true burning ghat
and funeral pyre.

 THE DRUM 
Indian cosmogony abounds with creation myths and creators. They create the
world out of their sweat, out of their semen, out of their mind. They bring it forth
by budding like plants or by chopping up the original sacrifice into many
separate parts. The most common story of creation is one that tells of Vishnu. He
is sleeping on the world serpent, drifting in the ocean of chaos. As he awakens, a
delicate stalk starts to grow from his navel, forming a lotus bud. When the
tender, fresh pink petals of the lotus blossom open, one sees therein the fouror
five-headed, bearded grandfather of all creatures sitting in deep contemplation.
In his meditation, the new universe is born. The gods spring from his brow while
the demons escape his colon as farts.
Shamans “creating” the universe with dance and drum The complex of creation myths surrounding
Nataraja provides a very different picture. After Shiva has finished his meditations, he rises and begins to
drum and dance. As the beat shatters the fathomless silence, the scintillating, illusory “reality” (maya)
starts to manifest itself, twirling like a dancing girl dressed in veils of colorful silk, bewitching the senses
and enthralling the mind. Only a shaman goes about manifesting his inner visions in this way. Using the
power of song, dance, and drum, he conjures an entire universe for his spellbound audience. He lets the
gods, ghosts, ancestors, demons, magic plants, and animals appear, and then he releases them into the
stream of existence, into Time/Space on this side of Being. The worlds thus drummed into substantiality are
not mere entertainment gigs, which catch the attention until “real” reality asserts its dominance once
again. No, the shaman conjures the very matter of fact of existence itself, as far as the tribe is concerned!
He is not a mere entertainer but a creator, a “thinger,” lifting all things that be out of the abyss of the dark
unconscious, the void, the “unthought of.” Whatever his voice, drumbeat, and mime pushes into existence,
remains. It remains for generations, as a basis for future thought, dreams, decisions, hopes, and

expectations.
Every human being knows the mesmerizing power of the drumbeat. Already
as a fetus in the womb, every individual has her mother’s heartbeat as a steady
accompaniment, long before a conscious sense of ego has developed. (In the
same way, all string and wind instruments are reminiscent of the rushing of the
blood through the mother’s veins and of the mother’s breathing.) Every
drumbeat is a transmutation, permutation, or metamorphosis of the mother’s
oceanic heartbeat, which resonates at the basis of our soul for our entire life.
Because of this, the clever shaman can use the drum as a bridge to the deeper
layers of our psyche. With it, he can sound out the depths, penetrating to archaic
layers of the soul, where there is not yet thought or reflection, where fine,
pristine ethereal/astral vibrations have not yet jelled into solidity, where an ego
consciousness has not yet hardened the flow of these vibrations into final, rigid
forms. The drum can produce what psychologists call “hypnotic regression” and
touch the deeper, archetypal self that is still one with the cosmos, open to all
other forms of being and connected with the most distant stars. It can take one on
the magic journey to Shiva himself, ferrying the initiate through wonder worlds
and fairy tale realms, past the elemental beings, the gods and archetypes. A real
shaman knows the paths that lead through these dimensions to the Source, for he
is fearless, knowledgeable, and respectful. As he is not just a lunatic, he also
knows the way safely back and brings with him the treasure of new creations.
His drum guides his steps. It is his “mount.” Does the prattle of the drum not
echo like the hoof beat of horses or reindeer? Because it is his riding animal, the
shaman’s drum is usually made from the hides of just such fleet-footed herd
animals. In northern Eurasia, reindeer hide is stretched over the drum ring. Thus,
it is said that he rides a reindeer through the air on his magic flights. The
symbolism is still alive in the Nordic Santa Claus, who rides from the North Pole
on a reindeer sled at the holy tide of winter solstice, to climb down the chimney
into the hearth (heart!) where he leaves magical gifts and the nuts and seeds of
new fertility.
In the right setting, at dusk, by the flickering campfire or in the light of the full
moon, the gifted drummer can drive her companions into complete abandon or
frenzy. These states, often amplified by psychedelic herbal drugs, lift the soul
out of the restrictions of the mundane, ego-centered personality, allowing for
“reprogramming” to occur. Such techniques, developed way back by the early
Stone Age hunting societies, are not really completely foreign to us. Rock
concerts and Holy Roller (Pentecostal) revivals exhibit many of these traits. The
rhythm possesses body and soul, pushing the critical, rational, recently evolved

cerebral function aside, while making room for the old reptilian brain to connect
the person with the instincts and the collective consciousness that is the basis of
the group spirit. All too often, such an altered state of consciousness seems to the
cool, objective observer to be primitive, bizarre, and because of its sexual
undertones, perhaps even obscene.
Drumming takes on new importance when the established cultural patterns
wear thin and lose their adaptive function, when traditional modes of acting and
cognizing lose their meaning, as happened when native, preliterate societies
clashed with world colonialism. Creative energy and fresh courage is drummed
out of the depths of the collective (or racial) unconscious. When this occurs,
colonial administrators, traders, and missionaries become ill at ease. The natives
are restless! It is time for a punitive expedition of the colonial military force,
which in its turn also churns its drums to muster courage. In any time of war or
crisis, the drum rules the movement of the people. The marching of troops is also
a form of dance, a virile tandava, preparing the people for self-sacrifice in the
name of values (God, Fatherland, Democracy) that transcend the individual
concern for safety. In this way, societies master life-threatening crises.
The master drummer not only can excite and rouse to action, but she can slow
the rhythm to the point that it puts the listener to sleep, hypnotizing him. Instead
of exploding into ecstasy and rage, the participant is driven into himself in a
form of “enstasy,” or trance. In this manner, inner landscapes open up before the
mind’s eye and lift beyond mundane reality. This phenomenon has been
researched thoroughly enough by now to be used commercially: there are
soothing tapes for stressed business managers, gentle beats that help soothe the
pain and anxiety at the dentist or put critical faculties to sleep while spending
money at the supermarket. Then there is the slow, somber beat of the death-
tolling drum, accompanying the coffin to the grave and putting the mourners in a
contemplative mood.
A further inheritance from our Stone Age ancestors is the knowledge of
arhythmic drumming, with a beat that counters the heart rhythm. Sorcerers used
this arhythmic beat as a part of death-magic. For a long time, scientists, those
curious priests of the Enlightenment, considered such death-magic impossible,
pitching it, together with flying witches, voodoo dolls, and zombies, into the
garbage heap of superstition. But a modern medical science has revised itself. It
knows all too well how chaotic rhythms can induce subliminal anxiety, which
might intensify to the point of panic. This occurs when the signals of the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system (those “switch-on” and
“switch-off” systems responsible for heartbeat, breathing, and endocrine
glandular activity) are driven to chaos as a response to such asynchronic

drumming. If the victim is subjected to this long enough, the organs are
tremendously stressed. This, accompanied by frightful mental imagery, may
actually lead to death. It is the rhythm of Nataraja’s Samhara Tandava dance!
The slow, steady thumping of the drum skin can create hypnotic half-trance. A
common event in any town on the Subcontinent can serve as an illustration: An
emaciated man, covered with ashes, his matted, bleached hair piled up on his
head like a turban, is wending his way through the crowded market. A small,
silver Shiva-trident pierces each cheek and another fixes his outstretched tongue,
like a butterfly in a collector’s case. His hands hold a garlanded picture of
Shankar, along with a mirror. As though he were saying, “Look at your Self,” he
invites to a Shiva darshana. All the while, his wife, one child at her breast and
another child clutching the seams of her beggar’s dress, is sounding a drum in a
slow, steady, haunting beat, maintaining her husband’s half-trance.
Another illustration from Nepal: An elderly jhankrie (Nepalese shaman) calls
upon Lord Shiva as he steadily rattles the damaru. The little boy next to him
starts rolling his eyes as he fades away into trance. When he is fully entranced,
the shaman pushes the blade of a hunting knife through his neck. The youngster
does not seem to notice; only his fingers and toes twitch uncontrollably and a
small rivulet of blood trickles to the ground. Now he is ready to soothsay for the
assembled peasants, answering his “yes” and “no” in a strange creaking voice
that seems to come from far away. All the while, the damaru’s rattle serves to
maintain the trance.
The drum—the shaman’s horse—is so vital that nothing regarding it is left to
coincidence. When, for example, a Siberian magician proceeds to make himself
a drum, he searches out a special tree, one that has been struck by lightning.4 Out
of its wood he will carve the frame of the drum. Often he sets up camp
underneath this tree, or he might fell it and set it up in his lodge as the supporting
pillar. It becomes his ladder upon which to climb into the upper and lower
worlds, during his spirit séances. Upon this pole, symbolizing the middle of the
universe, he ties his spirit horse, that is, he hangs his conjuring drum. In a similar
way, Shiva hangs his damaru on the trident next to his seat. The Shankar icon
shows the drum hanging just below the prongs, at what would be the level of the
heart. This makes good sense, for the drum is but an externalized heart. The
symbolic complex involving the trident, the tree, the bolt of lightning, and the
heart must, indeed, be ancient.
Some representations show a buffalo horn also hanging from the trident. The
horn, a lunar symbol, is, like the drum, a spirit caller. At the same time, it is the
original drinking vessel, the holder of mead or soma. Today’s sadhus identify the
horn next to Shankar’s drum as the chilam, the pipe for smoking ganja.

But now it is time to leave this shaman god, who dresses in the pelts of wild
beasts and dances with ghosts and goblins, to his visions and his ecstasy.
Reverently, we bow before this archetype of all shamans and the lord of the
animals, sitting alone in the snow or dancing in a ring of fire. Turning to more
recent times in the history of humankind, we shall meet Shiva again, this time as
a happily married family father, as the companion of the Great Mother of the
Universe!

8
THE IDEAL FAMILY

When the little children ask
to sit on their father’s knee,
then even the dirt on their bodies,
seems a blessing to him.
KALIDASA,
INDIAN POET, FOURTH/FIFTH CENTURIES
A poster or wall painting that frequently smiles at passers by from the gaudy
blue walls of stores, chai shops, and the stands of betel nut sellers, shows the
“Holy Family.” Arranged in the manner of a classical family portrait, one
beholds a friendly Shiva sharing his throne with his wife Parvati and their two
children. Mount Kailash is no longer a barren, frozen waste, but a green, sunny
mountain meadow in springtime’s bloom, as pretty as anything shown in a
prospect advertising holidays in the Alps! Even though snakes still dangle in his
hair, ash covers his forehead, and rudraksha beads garland him, he is no longer
the homeless drifter, the harsh penitent, or the wild shaman. With a golden,
jeweled crown and leggings of saffron silk, he presents himself as the pater
familias. The trident in his right hand is now the scepter of a king. His left hand,
if not holding a shell or the drum, lies gently around Parvati’s shoulder. A third
hand is extended in the teaching pose (varada mudra), while a fourth hand holds
an unfolded lotus at heart level. No longer grayish white like that of an ash-
besmirched sadhu, or dark like the Tamilian Nataraja, Shiva’s skin glows in an
auspicious blue, like the color of a clear summer sky. His eyes are gentle and
mild, no longer shut in inner ntemplation or bulging out angrily like Bhairava’s.
“The holy family” from an Indian comic

The holy family  from an Indian comic
Parvati, sitting to his left, as is becoming of a Hindu wife, ogles him tenderly
with soft, doe-like brown eyes. She too shines regally in her colorful silk sari,
golden crown, and jewelry gracing her ears, nose, arms, ankles, fingers, and toes.
Like her lord, she has flexed one leg, pressing its heel to cover her private parts,
while the other foot is firmly planted on the ground.
She is holding her pudgy, fourarmed, elephant-headed son on her lap. It is
baby Ganesha. His beady eyes twinkle merrily and confidently, as though he
knows that he is the most popular of all the gods for the common Indian masses.
In his upper right hand he carries a trident or an elephant goad (ankusha), in his
upper left, he holds a noose (pasa). The open palm of his lower right hand
communicates the gesture of blessing (abhaya mudra), while his lower left hand
clutches a large bowl of caramel candies (modaka, burfi). It must be noted that
he owes his bulk to his hopeless addiction to such sugary delights. Beneath his
gargantuan feet hunches a little mouse or rat, his riding animal (vahana)!
In some renderings of the family portrait, the other son, the sixheaded
Karttikeya, is shown standing next to his father. He is a stout little fellow decked
out with a helmet and shield, while holding a sword and a bow and arrow. A
bright peacock parades at his feet, ready to carry the warrior child—who is none
other than the god of war—to any battlefield wherever he may be needed.
A milk-white bull lies at Shiva’s feet and a lion brushes against the legs of the
Mother Goddess. Thus, all the gods have their riding animals, which are, at the
same time, expressions of their lower (animal) nature. In the same manner,
Brahma rides the swan (or gander) Hamsa, the personification of life’s breath.
Vishnu flies on the sun-eagle Garuda, when he is not sleeping on the world
serpent; Yama, the god of death, rides a black water buffalo, whereas Kama, the
love-inducer, rides a parrot; Agni, the fire god, rides a ram; and Saturn rides on a
vulture. (Our heathen Western ancestors were equally at home with such
symbolism for we find Zeus, like Vishnu, flying on an eagle, Odin riding an
eight-legged steed, while Thor’s chariot is drawn by goats, Freya’s by cats,
Nerthus’s wagon is pulled by cows, and that of the spring goddess Oestra
(Easter) by bunnies.)
 KARTTIKEYA 
Karttikeya, also known as Skanda or in southern India as Subrahmanya or
Murugan, had a most difficult time being engendered and born, as we have
already seen. The story tells us that the egocentric demon, the asura Taraka,
undertook everything he could to become master of the universe. In merciless

self-torture, he stood on one leg for years, balancing on one toe, while staring in
the sun and refusing all food. For years he sat on red-hot coals or on nails, stood
on his head, balanced on one hand, let himself be hung upside down from a tree
and, finally, be buried alive by his disciples—all without losing concentration.
Brahma, the boon giver, had no choice but to grant him his mad wish. Since
there has to be a loophole in every boon, he wished that, if he were to fall, then,
only by a son of Shiva. Ha, did he think himself clever! He felt safe and strong,
for how could Shiva, the otherworldly meditant, engender a son? Besides,
Taraka had read in the great epos, the Ramayana, that Shiva was not even
capable of having children. It was recorded there that at the beginning of time,
the gods had done everything possible to prevent Shiva and Parvati from
reproducing, for they feared that any child of that mighty pair would be too
much for the universe to bear. It had been easy for the gods to find Shiva in a
good mood and to extract the promise from him, that he would remain childless.
They knew that it is difficult for Shiva to say no. Parvati, however, became
extremely angry with them for taking advantage of his goodness and cursed their
wives to be barren, also. And that is how it is to this day that the immortals
cannot have natural issue, born in labor from a maternal womb, but only
illusionary, magically wrought offspring, born of their minds or formed from
various bodily excretions.

Karttikeya
Kubera, the lord of the elemental beings
So Taraka, cocksure of himself, commenced to maltreat the gods, stealing
Indra’s eight-headed horse, robbing the thousand sea horses of Kubera, the
hunchbacked king of the elemental spirits and guardian of the earth’s treasures,
stealing the heat from the sun, turning the summers cold, changing the courses of
rivers, and disrupting the normal succession of the seasons. In short, the asura’s
whims became unbearable. Now the gods bitterly regretted the promise they had
elicited from Shiva and tried everything to bring about a fruitful union of the
divine ascetic and the young daughter of the mountain, anyway. But, as we have
already heard, the unequaled charm of youth did not move the naked meditant
with the bleached yellow hair. Even Kama, whose arrows of passion no one can
resist, was burned to ashes by Shiva’s angry eye.
Young Parvati doing penance to gain Shiva’s love
Tender Parvati, who loved Shiva from the moment of her birth and since

all eternity from the bottom of her heart, had to realize that beauty, youth,
and charm were not enough. Perhaps, though, if she joined him in deep
meditation, he would finally reward her with a glance. With that resolve,
the maiden left the gilded palace of her parents and wandered into the
wilderness, where she exchanged her silks and satins for rude bark cloth.
Refusing to eat even a morsel, she meditated day and night on the image
of her beloved, which she had always carried in her soul.
Then one day, a handsome young Brahmin saw her and demanded of
her why she, a young, noble maiden of unequaled beauty, would torture
herself so cruelly.
“You are the flower of youth,” he reminded her. “You could have
everything your heart desires!”
A young Brahmin taunts Parvati by mocking Shiva
Her ladies in waiting, who, because of their devotion, had accompanied
Parvati into the forest, let the stranger know that the princess was doing it
in order to gain the favor of Shiva. At that, he burst into roaring laughter.
“How is that possible? How can this beautiful child want anything to do
with that dirty, monkey-eyed fool whose family and background are
unknown, who smears his body with ashes, who plays with poisonous
vipers, and wraps himself in bloody hides?”
Gone was Parvati’s tranquillity of mind! Her face flushed as she turned

away. “It is a great sin to say such horrid words, but an even greater sin
to listen to them!”
But barely had she spoken than the rash Brahmin changed his
appearance: There stood Shiva! He had only been testing her resolve.
And thus, the great love came about after all.
A lot of arrangements had to be made. Shiva sent Narada, the
honeytongued messenger of the gods, to the palace of the mountain king
Himalaya and his queen, Mena, to ask for the hand of their daughter in
his behalf. The mother was hesitant, for not all she had heard about
Shiva had been positive. But finally, at the urging of the gods, and
because she knew her child’s innermost desire, she gave her assent.
The parents hired the architect of the gods, Vishvakarman, to build the
marriage platform. Stores of pastries, sweets, wine, curds, and barley
cakes were stacked up and invitations to the gala festival were sent to all
the guests. All the rivers and mountains, all the gods, heavenly
musicians, and dancers were invited.
Finally, on the day that astrologers had determined to be most
auspicious, the festival began. The gleaming chariots of the lords and
princes of the universe, accompanied by troops of dancers, jugglers,
elephants, and soldiers, started pouring into the city. Mena, mother of the
bride, held watch from her tower, eager to see her son-in-law arrive.
Once, she saw a hero, shining brighter than the sun, riding a white
elephant bull, leading a drumming and trumpeting host of most noble
companions, dancing maidens, and heavenly musicians.
“How beautiful,” Mena sighed. “That must be Shiva, my future son-
inlaw!” But, alas, she was told that it was merely Indra, lord of the
heavens, one of Shiva’s servants. As one procession followed another,
each more grandiose than the one before, Mena had to be told again and
again that its leader was not Shiva, but just another of his vassals.

Shiva with his entourage on the way to the wedding
All of a sudden, toward evening, a train of wildly drunken goblins, trolls,
evil spirits, and bhutas (fiendish creatures) appeared. Howling or singing
discordantly, fighting among themselves, grunting, huffing, slobbering
and pissing on other guests, and carrying on in a most indecent manner,
they rushed down the street. A dirty, unkempt beggar covered with
snakes and powdered with ashes rode in their midst, bearing a skull in
one hand and a trident in the other. Mena was about to call the guards—
but then fainted when told that this was Shiva. When she came to, she
was inconsolable. She would rather poison or drown her daughter than
bear the disgrace of giving her to such a misfit!
Her husband agreed. “Lock the gates! The marriage is called off! He
may be a great god, but he will not marry my daughter!”
Parvati started to cry.
At that, her father tried to console her. “Don’t worry, child, we will find a
better groom for you!”
She sobbed, saying, “No, I want only Shiva!”
Her mother could not believe her ears. “Oh, how terrible. I think that
terrible yogi must be a sorcerer. He has cast a spell on our child!”
The gods had to work hard to calm her mind and to make Shiva
promise to show himself in a more favorable light. Parvati herself prayed
to Shiva: “Do it for me, my lord. Show them what they want to see!”
Shiva heard her prayer and appeared as the personification of all that a
mother could wish for in a son-in law. Mena was astounded. “Is that the
same one who rode the bull, who was dressed in a strip of elephant

hide?”
“The same one,” assured Vishnu.
“And who are those handsome boys and girls standing behind him?”
“Those are the ganas, the heavenly hosts, the groom’s party.”
Before she could ask more questions, Vishnu, Shiva’s best man,
admonished her that they must proceed, for the astrologically auspicious
hour for the ceremony might soon pass.
Thus, at long last, the elaborate marriage ceremony began. The drums
and horns were sounded. The Brahmins began their chants. Difficulty
arose again when the groom was asked to attest to his genealogy, his
caste, and his Vedic ancestors, and tell of his guru and his education.
Full of shame, Shiva turned his head aside. But he was saved by
honeytongued Narada, who told them that, as the Primal Being, Shiva
has neither ancestors, nor caste, neither guru, nor education, for he is the
origin of all.
During the ceremony, old Brahma, functioning as the main priest, kept
his glance fixed to the ground, for he dared not look into the radiant
beauty of Parvati’s face. But even Parvati’s toes were so beautiful that he
lost his selfcontrol. Though he tried to squeeze his genitals between his
legs to hide his shame, drops of sperm fell to the ground. This
impropriety enraged Shiva and, again, the gods had to restore peace.
(Out of Brahma’s spilled seed, pygmy sages no bigger than a thumb
were born. To this day, they are devoted to Shiva.)
Apart from such minor near-disasters, the festival was loud and gay,
not much different from any normal Indian wedding. There was also
plenty of bawdy joking. Vishnu, knowing how frightened snakes are of
birds of prey, sent his eagle, Garuda, into the women’s chambers at the
very moment Shiva was being presented to his mother-in-law there. As
soon as the vipers saw their enemy, they fled hissing into the darkest
corners of the room, while the tiger-skin loincloth that they held in place
slid from Shiva’s body. The groom found himself standing exposed amid
screeching women. Vishnu burst out in boisterous laughter, while Shiva
grinned embarrassedly. Parvati could not keep a smile from her lips.
Mena quickly extinguished the light. Later on, the women, who had fled
the room like a flock of excited chickens, began to needle each other:
“Well, I dare say, it certainly took you a long time to take your eyes off of
him!”1

When they were finally alone, the innocent bride turned out to be extremely shy.
India’s greatest poet, Kalidasa, describes the honeymoon in his poem “Kumara
Sambhava.” Even though they ate betel and camphor together, her face turned
scarlet red and she lowered her eyes when her husband was near. When he tried
to touch her, she frightened like a bird. Only when she believed that he was
sleeping did she dare throw a glance his way. Of course, he was a bit
disappointed, for he would have loved to close her in his arms, caress her skin,
bite her lips and breasts tenderly, and let his passions run free. But he loved her,
so he was patient.
However, it did not take the blushing bride all too long to throw off her
innocence and learn the art of lovemaking. Once, after she had taken a little too
much wine, so that her eyes turned glassy and she could no longer pronounce her
words clearly, with her sari disheveled and her rouge smeared, she lost the last of
her girlish inhibitions. Soon she was better at it than the best courtesan. Soon the
two did not leave their love nest day or night. They loved each other as mare and
stallion, as bull and cow, as boar and sow, as wolves, as flies, as bees in the
flower, as lecherous demons, as tender angels. They tried ever new, exciting
positions that no other creatures had ever managed. Shiva’s drive was that of a
continuously erupting volcano underneath the sea. And thus they melded for a
near eternity.
In the estimation of the gods, this near eternity of lovemaking endured a little
too long. After all, they were suffering at the hands of Taraka and were yearning
for a savior. They agreed to send the fire god, Agni, to spy on the divine lovers.
In order not to be detected, Agni took the form of a turtledove and approached
the love nest cooing and chortling, imitating Parvati’s pleasure. Shiva, noticing
the intruder immediately, lifted off from Parvati just at the moment of orgasm.
We have already heard what happened then. Poor Agni, receiving the full load of
hot sperm in his beak, was nearly burned to a crisp and staggered off to the river
Ganga. The river, in turn, deposited the seed in a bed of reeds. There the
sixheaded infant was born, just in time for the Krittikas (Pleiades)a to find the
baby and suckle it. Not long after, Shiva and Parvati came walking along the
shore. Mahadev recognized his son and placed him in Parvati’s arms. Because
the Krittikas nursed him, he is called Karttikeya. As Parvati’s child, he is known
as Skanda; some swamis insist that Scandinavia is named in his honor. As a son
of Ganga, he is known as Gangeya; as the son of Agni, he is called Agnibhu; and
as the offspring of the reed grass thicket, he is Sarabhu. A mere seven days after
his miraculous birth, he ended the demonic reign of Taraka by killing him.
Scholars surmise that, originally, Skanda might have been an ancient Aryan
war god whose cult merged with that of a Dravidian forest deity. Today, he is

worshipped mainly in south India under the name Subrahmanya, “dear one of
the wisdom seekers.” His temples are found on forested mountaintops and he is
wed to the forest goddess, Valliamma. As supreme commander of the heavenly
warriors, he has long replaced the old Vedic god Indra. Subrahmanya’s troops
are accompanied by a host of dancing girls and prostitutes, as any great army of
old, going off on its campaigns. Even now, the temple girls of south India, the
devadasis, belong to him. They are his brides, much as the Catholic nuns are the
brides of Christ.
As always in Indian mythology, there are a number of versions to the story of
Karttikeya’s birth. According to one legend, he came about when a shower of
fiery sparks sprayed out of Shiva’s eyes and fell into a lake. Six boys were born
out of the sparks. Again, the heavenly sisters, the Pleiades, found them and
nursed each one of them. But when Parvati saw these darling children, she
hugged them hard, pressing them so strongly to her heart that their bodies melted
together, leaving one infant with six heads and twelve arms.
Another story is told in the Mahabharata.2 Since Shiva and Parvati are
incapable of reproducing normally, they engendered a child by proxy, namely by
fire and water, personified as Agni and Ganga. Shiva, taking on a Rudra-aspect,
slipped into Agni and filled him with ardent desire, so that his seed might bring
forth the longed-for hero. At the same time, Parvati took possession of the
virginal Swaha, whose name means “the offering, or oblation,” one of the many
lovely daughters of Daksha, the chief sacrificial priest. The following version of
the story was told to me by my good Indian friend Virendra Singh:
All this happened once upon a time, when the rishis were celebrating a
great soma offering. All the gods had been invited to participate for the
welfare of the world. Naturally, Agni was there, for his countless flaming
mouths had to receive the soma libations poured for the gods. As Agni
was flickering and dancing on the altar, he happened to notice the
immaculate beauty of the rishis’ smooth-limbed wives. He could not
withstand such beauty and his passion flared up as high as his flames. In
order to be closer to the women, he slipped unnoticed into their cooking
fires. This way he could observe them in the privacy of their homes and
occasionally lick the soft skin of their arms with his fiery tongues. Agni
was so taken in by them that he did not notice beautiful young Swaha,
who loved him dearly and longed to be with him.
As Agni’s passion was not returned by the rishis’ wives, he became
restless and, at times, took on human form to work off his frustration by

roaming in the forest. Swaha noticed this and thought of a way to trick
him. By means of her magic power of illusion, she took on the
appearance of one of the rishis’ wives and let herself be surprised while
collecting wood. Giving her womanly charms free play, she did not miss
the mark. Agni ravished her with flaming passion. The next day,
disguised as another one of the wives, she let herself be waylaid while
hauling water from a forest spring. In this manner, she mimicked each
and every one of the women he so fervently desired. After each
rendezvous, Agni turned himself into an eagle and swooped out of the
forest, so as not to be discovered by the cuckolded husbands.
Clever Swaha carefully collected all the semen her ardent lover had
spilled during the trysts and placed it into the fecund waters of the
Ganges. Soon thereafter, a sixheaded baby was born out of Ganga’s
watery womb. The rishis, sensing a disturbance in the astral atmosphere,
suspected that their wives had betrayed them and cast them out.
Skanda, however, took pity on his six mothers and permitted them to
enter heaven, where they shine as a cluster of stars to this day. He also
fulfilled Swaha’s one and only wish: to be forever united with her lover,
Agni. Ever since, when the Brahmins carry on an offering ceremony or
the housewives cook the daily food, they call out the auspicious name
“Swaha” (or “Svadha”) as they feed Agni’s flames with oblations of butter
or rice meal.
Esoterically, Karttikeya can be seen as the heroic principle of the soul that
overcomes the outrages of egoism, anger, and illusion. The swamis interpret his
six heads as our five senses plus a discriminating spirit working harmoniously
together in mastering ego illusions. Swami Sivananda speaks of six rays
emanating from the god and penetrating the world with spears of wisdom,
dispassion, strength, fame, wealth, and divine powers.3 The peacock, strutting
vainly and puffing out his gaudy plumage, is as fitting a symbol of the blustering
ego, as of the pretentious, proud warrior. Karttikeya shows that he has mastered
these qualities and put them as servants at his feet.
An entire month, from the waning October moon to the November full moon,
when the moon passes the Pleiades, is dedicated to this heroic son of Shiva, as
are Fridays and the sixth day of each waxing moon. When times are especially
hard, as in war or famine, or when an impending disaster has to be averted, some
brave souls may take it upon themselves to swear the kavadi vow. Like the sun
dancers of the Plains Indians, who attach themselves with thongs to the sun pole,

or like medieval flagellants who, during plague or famine, martyred themselves
with whips and carried heavy crosses to stay God’s wrath, the Kavadis try to
move Subrahmanya to mercy by self-imposed martyrdom. Like Shaivite
beggars, they dress in red, do not shave or cut their hair, wear rudraksha-malas
and pointed hats like magicians. They fast or take only a little fruit and milk
once a day and pierce tongue, cheeks and other parts of their body with replicas
of Subramanya’s spear. They walk hundreds of miles barefoot, carrying two
baskets (kavadi) suspended from a pole, decorated with peacock feathers. Into
these, they receive the rice and other offerings people give them and bring the
load to the Lord’s temple on some distant mountaintop. Under their burden,
some of the kavadi bearers become ecstatic and start to sing and dance, praising
the lord. Those who vow the Agni-kavadi even walk over pits of red hot coals
with their load, indicating that the Lord has taken total possession of them—at
that moment, they are Karttikeya.
 GANESHA 
Skanda’s baby brother, Ganesha, is surely the most popular of Hindu deities.
Skanda is worshipped mainly in southern India and Ceylon, but the corpulent
elephant god is known far beyond India’s borders, being honored from
Afghanistan all the way to Indonesia. The image of an elephant deity most likely
has its roots in the Stone Age, when big game hunters confronted and were awed
by the power of the mighty mammoth bull. At least there are plenty of
Paleolithic cave paintings of such Ice Age elephants.
Like Skanda, who is basically a clone of Shiva, Ganesha is not a naturally
born child; rather he was created parthenogenetically by Parvati. Of the stories
of his origin, this one (likely to remind the American reader of the comic figure
Baby Huey) is perhaps the most common. It can be found in both the Matsya
Purana and the Shiva Purana:
Stone age engraving of a prehistoric elephant (grotto “Les Comberelles,” France)

Parvati feels lonely and neglected, as Shiva is always gone into his
meditation and Skanda, as usual, is off demolishing some fiend or other.
Thus, the Great Goddess decides to pass her time with a bath, washing
herself in her own luminous glory. However, a constant stream of
uninvited visitors keeps interrupting and annoying her, so that she finally
decides to do something about it. Scraping some scum and dirt off her
skin with her fingernails and mixing it with sandalwood and clay, she
kneads a pretty little figure. Happy at the prospect of not being so alone,
she breathes life into it and tells it, “My dear little son, you shall be the
guardian of my threshold. You shall be mightier than all. Let no one enter
these portals whom I have not personally invited!”
“Yes, Mother,” quacks the little fellow, as Parvati departs to indulge in
her bath.
In the evening, Shiva, having meditated long enough, comes home and
is dumbfounded to find some little pipsqueak of a stranger barring his
way. Neither friendly words nor threats can budge him from the threshold.
At first Shiva thinks it is rather funny, but at last he loses his temper.
“Don’t you know who I am!” shouts Shiva, the Lord of the Universe.
“Even if you were Brahma, I would not care. You can’t come in.”
Flushed with anger, Shiva turns into Rudra and orders his horde of
goblins and ghouls to remove this stubborn little ass. But the tiny
guardian knows no fear, for that had not been put into him during his
creation. He resolutely grabs an iron rod and bashes his opponents
mercilessly, smashing their skulls and breaking their bones until they flee
in panic.
Shiva is increasingly embarrassed, for how will he be able to save face
when the other gods and goddesses realize that his wife is not letting him
enter his own house and home? Finally, he asks his best friend, Vishnu,
what to do. Vishnu agrees that it is indeed a difficult matter, “Only if we
trick this rogue will we be able to beat him, for he is clever and filled with
dark, tamasic power!”
With that, Vishnu charged the mysterious gatekeeper but was received
with such a heavy blow that he faltered. But, at the same moment, Shiva
jumped him from behind and lopped his head off with his trident. The
severed head rolled down the slope and disappeared; perhaps it was
even eaten by one of Shiva’s ghouls. All the gods and ganas (heavenly
hosts) started cheering the victory of their lord over the tamasic stranger.


Ganesha
When the Goddess emerged from her bath and realized what the
clamor was about, she became inconsolable. “My darling child! My
darling child!” she screamed, tearing her hair and beating her breast.
Shaken by pain and anger, she emitted bursts of destructive energy,
which took the form of hundreds of thousands of raging furies. Wherever
one looked, these female demons of vengeance, with names like Gape-
Jaw, Cripple, Hunchback, and Droop-Head, raced about the world,
blindly attacking the gods and the demons, the rishis and the nature
spirits. Shiva felt as though he had stepped into a hornet’s nest!
Soon, all the battered beings—the gods and rakshas, the rishis,
gandharvas, apsarasas, humans, and beasts—joined in beseeching the
Goddess to show mercy. Piously folding their hands, they fell down
before her and sang her soothing songs. Finally she relented, telling
them, “Only if you bring my son back to life will I be satisfied; otherwise,
my grief will destroy the world.”
At once, all the gods, prajapatis (creators), and Brahmin priests
assembled in order to revive the corpse by means of ancient magical
ritual. The effort seemed doomed to fail, for the head of the body was
missing. But Shiva knew how this could be remedied.
“Go north,” he told them, “and bring the head of the very first creature
that crosses your path!”
It happened to be an elephant bull whose head was taken. Combining
all their radiant energy (tejas), the gods and seers concentrated on the
body, putting the heavy cranium in place while singing powerful Vedic
spells and sprinkling the corpse with holy water. Then, suddenly, the little
red-skinned boy started to quiver. He stretched and yawned as if nothing
had happened. Parvati’s sorrow passed like a dark cloud from the sun’s
face. She folded the child in her arms and once again let her maternal
love beam out through the universe.

Yakshini—a nature spirit serving the Goddess
The story just recounted is not likely one that the drumming shamans of the old
Paleolithic hunters acted out around the campfires. It belongs, rather, to the great
cycles of myth of the Neolithic agricultural civilizations. The livelihood of these
matrifocal planters had sensitized them to the Earth Mother, whose offspring, the
crops, are removed from her, thrashed, chopped up or ground up, partially to be
eaten and partially to be replanted, to grow whole once again. It is the mystery of
the flora, which appears as the Mother’s child, son, or lover, who is maltreated,
killed, buried, cried over, and magically resurrected. It is the Goddess as Creatrix
and Mater Dolorosa, “the Mother of Sorrows.” It is the archetype appearing in
the “Pieta,” Mary with Christ’s corpse. It is Isis, who cries for her dismembered
husband/son/lover Osiris. Osiris too is raised from the dead by priests who fit his
body parts together and enliven him with powerful magic spells.
Demeter, the Mother of Sorrows of classical antiquity, is a figure similar to
Parvati. Her beloved child, Persephone, was abducted by Pluto, the black lord of
the dead and of the underworld, while she picked flowers on a sunny meadow.
Inconsolable, Demeter searches all the worlds for her. When the Sun tells her
that the child had been robbed with the consent of her husband Zeus, her
bitterness knows no end. Overwhelmed by her maternal sorrow, she withdraws
from creation. In her absence, the earth is dry and barren, famine breaks out, and
the fertility of humans, plants, and animals vanishes. The gods and priests do all
they can to soothe her anger, but she has sworn that not a blade of grass shall
grow unless her child is resurrected from the dead. The northern goddess,
Frigga, experiences a similar sorrow when Loki kills her son, Baldur, the sun
god.

A story that always elicits chuckles, when it makes the rounds at eventide by the
flicker of the fire, is that of the race between soft, pudgy Ganesha and his
athletically inclined brother, Skanda:
The boys, in a bout of sibling rivalry, agreed to race around the earth.
Whoever got to Mount Kailash first would be the winner and would get
the prize of the two beautiful shaktis,b Riddhi (prosperity) and Siddhi
(success,) as wives. The spartanic hero, Skanda, immediately jumped on
his peacock and disappeared in a cloud of dust on the western horizon.
Fat Ganesha, on the other hand, struggled to get on his poor, squeaking
mouse, nearly crushing it. The moon, peeking out from behind a cloud,
burst out laughing at this charade, vexing Ganesha even more. “May you,
too, get fat and then skinny, then fat, then skinny for all eternity!” cursed
the elephant-headed boy.
Ganesha, being stubborn, did not give up; and being clever, he
stopped to think, reasoning, “My mother and father are the universe. So,
if I walk around their throne, I will have walked around the universe!”
The argument was acceptable; thus he easily won his two wives. When
Skanda returned, huffing and puffing, a few months later, to find out that
he had lost, he denounced his jumbo brother as “the lord of cheaters!”
(Gamblers have picked up the epithet, for they devote their vice to the
elephant god.) Peeved, Skanda refused to speak to his parents or
brother, and left for the south, to live in the mountain wilderness of
Krauncha. Like many a macho warrior, he never married.3
The story of a race between gods (such as this one) or animals (such as Aesop’s
fable of the turtle and the hare), where the smarter one overcomes the faster one,
is common folklore in many cultures.
Another popular story is that of Ganesha’s birthday (Ganesh Chaturthi), which
falls on the fourth day of the waning moon in August (Bhadrapada):
On the morning of that day, Ganesha merrily saddled his mouse in order
to ride to town. There, his devotees—who are many-had prepared large
bowls of sweet rice balls, pudding, and other goodies for him to eat. After
a while, having eaten like a gluttonous pig, his guts became so heavy
that his mouse started groaning and moaning under the load. Suddenly,
a snake crawling across the path frightened the mouse so that it
stumbled, spilling the rider. As Ganesha crashed to the ground, his

bloated belly burst open, spilling all the rice balls and candies. Quickly,
he stuffed it all back in and grabbed the snake to use as a belt to hold his
stomach together. Seeing this, the moon burst into laughter and, again,
Ganesha was disgruntled. He swore that whoever looks at the moon on
his birthday, even for a second, would be hounded by bad luck. Since
that day, no sensible Hindu will look at the moon on Ganesh Chaturthi.
The stubborn elephant is, like the double-faced Roman Janus, a guardian of the
threshold and god of beginnings. His bright vermilion red figure decorates the
main entrance of every orthodox Hindu home. Since elephants are said to have
an excellent memory, as well as being clever, this lovable pachyderm becomes
the patron of all thick-skulled scholars and writers. Every book written by a
scholar (this one not excepted) begins with the mantra honoring the first of all
pundits, Om Shri Ganeshaya Namah. The sacred white thread (yajnopavita)
draped over his shoulder indicates that he is a Brahmin. Of our physical body, he
guards the lower entrance, the anus. (The dangling penis is taken as his trunk.)
For this reason, he is also associated with “dirty,” left-handed (vamacara), and
esoteric magic. (The left hand is used to wash the anus after defecating.)
Ganesha using his tusk to write the epic Mahabharata
Having only one tusk, he is called Ekadanta, “one tooth.” He lost his second
tooth in an argument with Parasurama, “Rama with the ax.” Parasurama—who is
none other than Lord Vishnu in his sixth incarnation—was a devoted follower of
Shiva. His battle-ax and bow were Shiva’s personal gifts to him. One day, Rama
took a pilgrimage to Mount Kailash to touch his lord’s feet and to pray to him.
But there at the gate the stodgy thick-skulled one stood and refused to let him

enter, whereupon Parasurama struck him with the ax, splitting his tusk off. Later
on, the severed ivory tusk served as a style for writing down the epic
Mahabharata, which the sage Vyasa dictated to Ganesha.
Ganesha and his two wives, Riddhi and Siddhi
Otherwise, the cozy elephant god is recognized as the cause of all hindrances,
as well as the remover of them. As the lord of obstacles, he is known as
Vighnaraja. No one whose soul is not purified will get past him and his two
Shaktis, Success and Prosperity. Many souls who have started their pilgrimage
to Shiva and Parvati to obtain salvation have been held up by the temptations of
wealth and fame, for it is Ganesha who sends these dubious blessings. In that
sense, the corpulent lover of sweet goodies is a dangerous tempter and seducer.
It is not by mere coincidence that he was formed from the scurf and dirt of the
goddess’s skin. Only those souls who have washed away the dirt from
themselves and have become one with Shiva, realizing Shivoham (I am Shiva),
can pass this formidable gatekeeper.
One story illustrating this point tells of a time at the beginning of this age,
when barbarians, savages, unclean women, and others who knew nothing of
offerings, penance, charity, or the study of the Vedas, were able to gain easy
access into heaven. They had learned that all they had to do was to visit the
Shiva temple at Somnathpur, for all their sins to be forgiven. After all, Shiva is
easy to please! Soon, the heavens were filled with teeming rogues and rascals,
while the seven hells were becoming depopulated. The gods, Yama first and
foremost, were quite irritated and begged Shiva and Parvati to do something
about it. The Mother took heed of their complaints. She scratched black, oily
scurf from her arms and molded it into the fourarmed, elephant-faced god. When
he had dried sufficiently and his senses were awakened, she gave him this order:
“When people make their way to the Shiva temple of Somnathpur, put the

following obstacles in their path: money and property, wealth, fame, success,
power, sex, and progeny. But all those who see through your tricks and worship
you, let them enter!”
Ganesha’s tusk symbolizes insight as does the horn of the unicorn in Western myth
The sling, which Ganesha-Vighnaraja holds in his right hand, symbolizes all
the temptations of wealth and success in which people are apt to get ensnared
and miss their true purpose of living. The prod in his other hand is the sign of the
compulsions and constraints that dominate our lives, but also of the goading
necessary to lead us toward God realization. His huge elephant ears are but
winnowing fans for separating the grain from the chaff or our wordy prayers.
The curvature of his trunk reminds us of the sacred OM.
His singular tusk is, like the horn of the unicorn, the symbol of single-minded
concentration, of penetrating insight, and of esoteric mastery. The double-bladed
battle-ax he sometimes carries was a common emblem of Bronze Age
agricultural societies (it shows up in the hands of the Cretan goddess) and is
associated with the waxing and waning halves of the moon, perhaps being also
an intuitive visualization of the left and right halves of the brain.4
Contrary to all expectations, considering his body size, Ganesha loves to
dance, being almost as light-footed as his father. Just as surprising is that he
rides a tiny mouse. The little, gnawing rodent, Musaka (from Sanskrit mus = to
steal) is a fitting symbol for that diminished aspect of the mind that scurries here
and there, gathering its data, facts, and information. It is a picture of the restless,
nervous intellect, which cannot find the quiet depth of true insight. It is
important to put this “Mickey Mouse” in its right place: under foot, as Ganesha
has done.
Ganesha is Gajamukti, the elephant face. Swamis read mystical significance in
the very name gaja (elephant), for its component syllables, ga and ja, mean

“end” and “beginning,” respectively. In this way, Ganesha is the alpha and
omega of creation. Auspicious swastikas decorate his (and Vishnu’s) temples,
where he is served with incense, red flowers, and sweets.
 NANDI THE BULL 
A common icon shows the divine family of Shiva, Parvati, and the little rascal,
Ganesha, riding on a massive white bull. This gentle beast is Nandi, “the
fortunate one,” Shiva’s faithful servant and chamberlain, leader of his hosts
(ganas), guardian of the Shiva lingam and gatekeeper to all of Mahadev’s sacred
sites. In perfect devotion and love (bhakti), he honors his master, for he is the
expression of dharma (the right path, duty). In his anthropomorphic form as
Nandikeshvara, he appears as a youth with a bull’s head, much like the ancient
Cretan Minotaur. Like Shiva, he has three eyes. Two of his four hands are placed
together in a devout Namaste (I greet God in you), the third hand holds a deer,
and the fourth holds a double-bladed battle-ax.
That Nandi is indeed a very old being is obvious when one knows his
parentage. His father is the archaic turtle, Kasyapa, one of the primal creators
(prajapati), who created the celestial gods as well as the first man, the lawgiver,
Manu. His mother is none other than Surabhi, the cow, which contains all the
gods and fulfills all wishes. Both the cow and the turtle figure as primal beings
in many old mythologies.
Nandi, Shiva’s bull
The hunters of the Old Stone Age were already impressed by the power of this
bovine, as a number of cave paintings showing aurochs and bison bulls indicate.
The Plains Indians saw in the white buffalo bull the incarnation of wakan, the
power that sustains the universe. Anyone who has worked on a farm and had to
deal with these veritable mountains of muscle will share that traditional respect.
These mighty sires of the herds are concentrations of sheer power and sex drive,
providing a most handy universal symbol of masculinity. Literally “bull-

headed,” they are ready to gore their rivals, charging them blindly with horns
lowered, in order to defend their territory and their herd of females. There is no
reasoning with such snorting, stamping, drooling hulks, for their essence is the
pure, unmediated will to rule and fecundate. Such absolute drive and will,
unadulterated by thinking or even feeling, makes the bull, Nandi, a fitting
symbol for the unwavering, unerring desire to follow dharma, to realize one’s
true nature.

The sacred bull
For the Indo-European tribes, whose livelihood depended upon their livestock,
the concept of wealth coincided with the number of cattle owned. To this day, a
capitalist is a rich person, owning lots of heads (Latin capita) of symbolic cattle.
Words like fee (Old English feoh = cattle, property) and pecuniary (Latin pecus
= cattle) confirm this connection. The bull, as multiplier of the herds, was held in
highest esteem and was mentioned in one breath with the sun, the cosmic law,
and the king. The bull fertilized the herds, just as the sun fertilized the earth and
the king—the grand sire—fructified his realm. The bull actualizes the Law
(dharma) on the pastures just as the king actualizes it in the commonwealth and
the sun does so in the sky. They are each in their own realm the upholders of
divine law and are, thus, incarnations of the same essence.
It is meaningful that according to tradition, Gotama Buddha, a son of an
Aryan king, was born in the astrological sign of Taurus (Vrishabha). In the
Vedas, the greatest of the seers are addressed as “bulls among men” and the
most powerful gods are called “bulls among the gods.” Even today, older and
respected males are addressed as “Sir” (from Middle English sire = procreator,
sire bull). In order to see whom the gods had chosen to be the next king and
upholder of the law, the Indo-European Celts sacrificed a white bull, cooked him
in a cauldron, and let a druid bathe in the broth in order to obtain clairvoyant
confirmation.
The ancient Persians, also an Indo-European people, associated the white bull
with the sun, the eternal law of right and wrong, and Mithras (Sanskrit Mitra),
the “friend of humankind.” This god of the light and companion of the heaven
god, Varuna, was the embodiment of law and order and the guardian of oaths
and contracts. His cult grew, over time, far beyond the borders of Iran.
Everywhere in the Middle East and in Asia Minor, we come across his name.
Roman legionnaires brought the cult of Mithra and his white bull back to Rome,
where it fell on fertile ground, especially among the soldiers. The old Romans
were no strangers to the cult of the bull, for already in their earliest days they
had sacrificed white bulls on Capitol Hill. The cult of Mithras (who sacrifices
the bull in order to renew the world)—with its baptismal and communion rites
and its festival of the invincible sun (sol invictus) on the 25th of December—
became a formidable rival to early Christianity.
Among the Zoroastrian Parsees of Bombay, the archaic cult of the white bull
continues to this day.5 Priests consecrate albino bulls in special temples. Their
hairs are considered to be accumulators of a mysterious divine force, and so,
after a week-long prayer, they are clipped, wrapped around spools (thought of as

energy condensers), and sent to the outlying parishes. The pure white animal is
taken to be an expression of the archangel Behman, guardian of the animal
kingdom. He represents also the world soul, tormented by Satan. When God on
high perceived its anguished cries, he took pity and sent Zoroaster to reestablish
Truth and Peace.
It comes as no surprise that Hindus also see a connection between the white
bull and the eternal cosmic law. Nandi is none other than Dharmadevata, lord of
dharma.
Once upon a time, as the sage Dharmadevata sat meditating, he was
overwhelmed with awe and fear at the realization of the never-ending
cycles of creation and dissolution. What seems so permanent to the
mind, he realized—the mountains, the oceans, and the heavens of the
gods—were all but bubbles on the stream of eternity, as ephemeral and
doomed to destruction as everything else. Is there nothing that endures?
Surely, one day of the Creator Brahma lasts 12,000 heavenly years, or
4,320,000 human years (as one heavenly year equals 360 human years).
When Brahma sleeps, the world dissolves; when he awakens in the
morning, it is created anew. One hundred years Brahma lives—for us
human beings, an inconceivable span of time! Then he dies. But, the
entire life of Brahma is but one day for Vishnu, and every day as Vishnu
awakens from sleep on his serpent bed, he brings forth a brand new
Brahma. Finally, however, when the Great Night of Being absorbs
everything, even Vishnu must pass, only to reappear and set the
unfathomable cycle in motion once again, and so on infinitely.
Dharmadevata shuddered at this realization. The cruel prospect of
endless repetition of suffering existence made him a restless wanderer.
At long last, his feet took him to Kailash, Shiva’s throne. Using his yogic
power, he took on the form of a white bull and threw himself at
Mahadev’s feet, pleading, “Lord, take me as thy vehicle! For only in thy
constant presence can I bear it!”
Shiva was pleased. “Gladly, my dear Dharma,” he said. “This is how
you shall pass through the ages: in the first age, the Golden Age, you
shall walk with ease on all four legs. In the second, the Silver Age, you
will limp on three legs. In the third, the Copper Age, you shall hobble on a
mere two legs and finally, in the dark Iron Age, the Kali Yuga, you shall
stand insecurely on one leg only!”

Shelves with the skulls of holy bulls (Neolithic, Catal Hüyuk, Asia Minor)
The mighty cosmic bull rules the imagination of not only the nomadic,
patriarchal, pastoral peoples but equally that of the rather matrilineal, sedentary
societies of planters and peasants. In the earliest agricultural civilizations, the
white bull accompanies the Great Goddess of the earth, the heavens, and the
moon as her fecundator, her impregnator. Late Stone Age hunters in the Zagros
Mountains, flanking the Fertile Crescent, must have first captured and penned
wild oxen (Bos primigenius) for ritual and sacrificial purposes. By Neolithic
times, a fullfledged Bull-Mother-Goddess cult flourished in the region. In the
early Neolithic settlement of Catal Hüyük (Anatolia, 6000 B.C.), archaeologists
have discovered plastered walls with paintings of bulls and women giving birth,
as well as shrines with sculpted ox heads and horns.

Shiva and Parvati on Nandi
Mother goddesses, youths dancing on the backs of bulls, and the halfhuman,
half-bull Minotaur (born of Poseidon’s white bull and a king’s wife) confront us
in the pre-Hellenic Mediterranean cultures. In Memphis, on the edge of the
Egyptian Sahara, one can still marvel at huge underground chambers in which
embalmed, mummified bulls were entombed. They were the Osiris-Apis bulls,
representative of the ever dying and resurrecting god who was worshipped along
with the Great Mother Isis. Into late antiquity, the baptism in the blood of a
sacrificial bull was part of the initiation into the cult of the lion-riding mother
goddess Cybele, whose lover is the dying/resurrecting phallic youth, Attis. Even
the thunderbolt-hurling Godfather Zeus of the Indo-European Greeks took the
form of a white bull to rape Europa, while the oriental god of inebriation and
wine, Dionysos, entered the Mediterranean world riding a white bull, surrounded
by clamoring women, satyrs, nymphs, and sprites. His followers, the maenads
and bacchanalians, ran wild in intoxicated frenzy, carrying cymbals, snakes,
swords, leaving their hair wild and uncombed and occasionally tearing living
bulls apart and devouring their flesh raw.
The cult of the Great Mother and the fertilizing bull that is sacrificed to her
covered nearly the entire ancient, civilized world. India is no exception. The
motives carved upon the soapstone seals and the statuettes of the pre-Aryan
Harappa Empire along the Indus River indicate this. To this day, there are
remnants of this ancient cult of fertility: in the Occident, the Spanish bullfights,
under the auspices of the Virgin Mary; in the Orient, the sacrifice of buffalo
bulls to the Black Goddess in Bengal. Given all this, we can appreciate that the
icon of Shiva and Parvati riding a white bull represents a successful synthesis of
age-old Indo-European and pre-Aryan cultural elements.
In the rural villages of the Subcontinent, stories and fables make their rounds.
The most popular of all are those telling of Shiva and Parvati traveling incognito
through the world, either on foot or riding their bull:
Once Shiva and Parvati were riding through a town on Nandi, when they
heard people whispering behind their backs, “Will you look at that! My,
that’s cruelty to animals, those two fat people sitting on that little bull!”
Shiva, not wanting to offend anyone, got off and walked next to Nandi.
Again, nasty comments could be heard. “Look at that henpecked
husband. He has to walk, while she plays the big lady and rides!”
That was a little too much for Shiva’s pride, so he changed places with
Parvati. However, that did not stop the slander; another barrage of

vicious tongues assaulted their ears. “That male chauvinist pig! He rides
comfortably while his poor wife has to walk in the dust!”
At that, they both agreed to walk. Perhaps then, the people would be a
bit kinder to them. But now the townspeople laughed and pointed their
fingers at them. “Look at these fools! They have a strong animal, but they
are too stupid to ride it!”
Shiva and Parvati were baffled.
“Now what?” they thought, as they stood there. Nandi smirked and
winked. “How about this? I’ll ride on you. Maybe that will please these
people!”
At that Shiva and Parvati realized that in society, no matter what one
does, one cannot please everybody. So, why not do what one thinks is
right in the first place? With that realization, they both climbed on Nandi’s
back and rode on undisturbed.
Lord Shiva not only rides a bull, but sometimes he turns himself into one. It is
well known that he likes to meditate up north in the Himalayas, at a scenic spot
called Kedara, or “the field” (where salvation grows). One day, as he quietly sat
there, he heard the five Pandava brothers, the heroes of the Mahabharata,
clamoring up the path to see him. They came to worship him in order to atone
for sins they had heaped upon their souls by slaying blood kin in battle. But
Shiva had no desire to see them. He changed into a bull and ploughed into the
earth. However, his hindquarters got stuck and were promptly adored by the five
penitent warriors. These haunches and hooves can still be seen there, but in this
dark Kali Yuga age, they have turned into mere crumbling rock, their true
essence being visible only to a clairvoyant. Shiva’s bovine head came out in
Kathmandu Valley in Nepal, where one can still worship his horns at
Pashupathinath, the temple of the lord of the animals.
Other storytellers claim it was Brahma from whom Shiva fled at Kedara in the
form of a bull. Brahma knew that if he took a pilgrimage to Kedara and achieved
a vision (darshana) of Shiva’s lingam, he would find instant liberation. But
Shiva, who never got along very well with the Creator, took on a bull’s form and
charged into the ground. Brahma managed to catch him by his hind hooves and
hold him there. The bull’s penis, however, surfaced at Kashi (Benares) as a great
lingam. When its power became known, Brahma hurried to Benares, sacrificed
ten horses (at Dashashwamedha Ghat) and then was allowed to worship the
lingam.6


Temple in Kedara
The mounts (vahanas) of the gods are commonly interpreted as the negative
side of the deities’ personalities, as their lower nature, which must be put into the
proper place and dominated in order that universal harmony can be maintained.
Ganesha’s mouse, as we have seen, is the personification of the nervous,
covetous intellect; the lion or tiger of the goddess is wanton cruelty; and
Skanda’s peacock is the vanity of the victorious warrior. Nandi, too, can be seen
in this perspective. One legend has it that he once was a powerful demon, against
which Shiva had to struggle hard to bring him under foot. Nandi stands for
aggressive male sexuality. The very words bull and phallus can be traced
etymologically to the same Indo-European root word, bhel = to swell. Related is
the English use of the word balls, referring to testicles, as well as to having
courage (to “have balls”). Related also is the bel, the tropical wood apple tree,
whose round, swollen fruits look like a bull’s scrotum and are dedicated to Shiva
and used in his worship. Shiva, as the king among ascetics and as the master of
yoga, has perfect control over the powerful sex drive. To him, this bull is not a
problem, but a faithful servant.
For the Hindu, even to this day, any white bull is a manifestation of Nandi.
Some ashrams keep a herd of purebred white Zebu cattle, which have not been
mongrelized by crossbreeding with Jerseys, Holsteins, or Swiss Simmentals
(from the sperm banks of international development and foreign aid
organizations). Such holy Zebu bulls are kept immaculately clean, and their
majestic horns are painted red and tipped with gold.
Free-ranging sacred bulls in Benares (Varanasi)
At the funeral of an important person, a “bull among men,” it is the custom in
India and Nepal to release a bull calf, dedicated to Shiva, and allow it to roam as
it pleases. This practice of bull-freeing (vrisosarga) is said to please the
ancestors (pitri). Places such as Benares that are auspicious for cremation

abound with such cud-chewing beasts. Standing like meditants, motionless in the
streets, they help slow the traffic to a tolerable, relaxed speed. Leading an
unfettered existence, they browse on what they find— garbage, paper, weeds,
and an occasional gift from a devotee. If they are still hungry, they might steal
fruits or vegetables from the stands of street merchants. Unlike Spanish fighting
bulls, they are unbelievably gentle, moving calmly through the bazaars as if each
and every person is just another cow of the herd. They are not even upset by
street urchins teasing them or throwing rocks at them, but tolerate them like
feisty calves. Only at the sight of a rival bull or of a nervous, camera-laden
tourist, who smells and acts different, might they lose their calm. The owners of
the sacred cows let their animals also wander the streets to look for fodder and
are happy when such a bull regularly bestows them with a calf.
When one of these colossi dies, his last rites are performed in style: He is
adorned with flowers, smoked with incense, and given a drink of Ganges water
before boatmen tug him to the middle of the current where fish, river dolphins,
ravens, and vultures feast on him. His soul will be reborn as a human being.
Because he rides a bull, one of Shiva’s thousand and eight names is
Vrisavahana, “the bull rider.”

9
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE SACRIFICE
The sacrificial lamb brought for the festival
ate up the green leaf brought for the decoration.
Not knowing a thing about the kill,
it only wants to fill its belly:
born that day, to die that day.
But tell me:
Did the killers survive,
O Lord of the Meeting Rivers?
BASAVANNA,
SOUTH INDIAN SHAIVITE POET, TENTH CENTURY
Almost imperceptibly, yet steadily, the stars shift their relative position. In a
little over two thousand years, the sun’s spring position, the vernal equinox, will
have moved into another sign of the zodiac, giving its radiations a qualitatively
new impact. The changes one observes in nature are connected with the beat of
these great cosmic rhythms, as are the major transformations of human culture.
The scholars call this evolution. Thus, with the passing of the great herds of
mammoths, woolly rhinoceroses, wild horses, and bison, the roving bands of
Paleolithic hunters and their “Atlantean” magic began disappearing also.
Animals were tamed and peasants started to grub the earth to raise corn and
tubers. A growing population organized itself into castes and classes, and built
cities and temples, while philosophers contemplated the succession of ages: the
Golden Age became the Silver Age, the Silver Age turned into the Bronze Age,
and now we find ourselves in the grip of an Iron Age.
Just like the external world, the inner world of the soul also changed. The
immediate vision available to all, the “seeing God eye to eye,” gave way ever
more to priestly authority and ritual, which in turn was replaced by ever more
rational, 
ego-oriented 
thinking. 
The 
dancing, 
drumming, 
immanent,
androgynous, shamanistic trickster-god was replaced by regal, celestial deities
who control the seasons and the waxing and waning of vegetation and by a life-

giving, yet bloodthirsty, Earth and Mother Goddess. The animal god of the
hunters faded or metamorphosed into a number of persons, such as the phallic
lover of the goddess, the fire god, the god of the herds, or the devil. But in recent
times, even these images faded, being replaced more and more by a
transcendent, virgin-born Logos, whose brilliant light ever more vaporizes into
thin air, leaving in its void an apparently absurd universe of matter/energy.
But let us see what happens to the old shaman god of the hunters in India. He
metamorphoses into Rudra, the Aryan storm god, who, in turn, absorbs the
indigenous, Dravidian lord of the animals. In this combination, he gains ever
more power in the minds of the common folk, so much so, in fact, that it
becomes uncanny for the Aryan sacrificial priests and Brahmins. Like a sponge
he soaks up all the other gods, until they are merely his masks, which he can
change at will. He expands into the infinite, becomes identical with Purusha, the
fatherly primordial spirit, while the goddesses are but the rays of his fiery aura of
energy. They become his active power (shakti) and his magical force of illusion
(maya). He becomes all encompassing, so that the Aryan gods of sky, light, and
cattle are but mere dwarves next to him. Finally, the Brahmins, who at one time
possessed godlike powers and whose minds brought forth the worlds, are forced
to bow to him, who was once the howling god of storms and of the dead, and to
appeal to his mercy, calling him Shiva, “the gracious,” Shambhu, “the kind” or
Shankar, “the peaceful.”
The old folktales, the Puranas, witness his rise to sovereignty and his conflict
with the Aryan seers and sacrificial priests. In this section we shall see how they
tried to block his rise to power and how, step-bystep, Shiva reveals himself as
Mahadev, the God of Gods. On the dizzying heights of Shaivite metaphysics, he
becomes absolute Being/ Consciousness/Bliss (Satchidananda), which is the sum
total of all and everything. All oppositions of day/night, good/evil, I/Thou,
being/non-being, male/female, and life/death are but the ethereal, spontaneous
game (Sanskrit lila = play of the gods) of his Shakti, his feminine power, his
dancing mistress, whose gestures bring forth universes and absorb them again.

Vishnu, Shiva’s best friend
Since Mahadev is all, he is not jealous of a God—like Jehovah or Allah—who
tolerates no other gods. Shiva is pleased by all cults and all religious devotion.
The multitude of religions, churches, and sects reflect only the various stages
toward realization of his being. Souls enmeshed in the pangs of illusion need
loud, colorful, bloody rituals and gaudy idols. Others need sackcloth and ashes,
sermons and soda water, while still others need anemic philosophical
speculation. Shiva is gracious to all, no matter under what name or in what
tongue they call upon him. They are all right, for they are all Shiva. They are but
Shiva himself praying to Shiva.
With this kind of thinking, it is no wonder that in Hinduism every religious
expression is tolerated, from the primitive cults of local deities to the archaic
Vedic rites at meal preparation, weddings, and funerals. There is no real conflict
even with the Vaishnavas, who honor Vishnu as the God of Gods. He, too, is
Shiva. As Hari-Hara or Shankaranarayana, Vishnu and Shiva have melted into
one person of whom the right, masculine side is more Shiva and the left,
feminine side is more Vishnu. The Sanskrit Puranas tell the following anecdote
about Hari-Hara:1
Once upon a time, the gods approached Lord Vishnu because they were
upset and at a loss to explain why the world was in such a mess. They
wanted to know why everywhere war, hatred, unhappiness, and vice
seemed to hold sway. When the delegation, led by Indra, arrived at
Vishnu’s palace, the Preserver told them, “Let us go to Shankar, for he is
wise!”
They climbed the icy slopes of Kailash but saw no one. Amid the
glaciers and rocks, there was no sign of either Shiva or Parvati, nor of

Nandi the white bull. Vishnu told them, “Beloved, your selfishness has
made you blind, for Hara is here! You must purify yourselves, bathe in
milk, sing the Satarudriya hymn, take only hot milk, hot butter, or hot
water as food and then, after three days, your eyes shall be opened.”
Vishnu and Shiva as one person (Hari-Hara)
The dumbfounded gods followed the instructions, but still their vision
was as though they were snow-blinded. “Oh, Jaganatha, Lord of the
World,” they cried out, “Where can we find the trident bearer, that we
might honor him?”
At that, Vishnu pointed at his chest, “He is in me, as I am in him; can’t
you see?”
As he spoke, he revealed his lotus heart. As its petals opened, the
sacred lingam was revealed. The gods hastened to worship it by pouring
milk over it, covering it with vermilion, fragrant sandalwood paste,
trifoliate bilva leaves, flowers, herbs, and lotus blossoms while chanting
the 1008 names of Shiva. But at the same time, their minds were
disturbed—for how could Hari (Vishnu) and Hara (Shiva) be one and the
same? Did not Vishnu have light, sattvic qualities, while Shiva had dark,
tamasic qualities? Reading their thoughts, Vishnu took on Ishvara’s
(Shiva’s) form. They could no longer tell the difference between the
three-eyed god with the matted hair and cobra necklace and the other
one with the disk (chakra) and seashell. Capitulating before the mystery,
they prostrated themselves and worshipped.

 THE ARYAN BACKGROUND 
The Aryan (Iranian) tribes of Persia and their Vedic cousins in India honored the
same nature deities, as did other Indo-Europeans of the Eurasian steppes. Above
all, they worshipped the bright, radiant Devas, “the shiny ones” (Persian daeva;
Latin deus = god, dies = daylight; Sanskrit dyaus = day, sky; Greek Zeus;
Anglo-Saxon Tius) and the soma-quaffing Suras. At their head stood the god of
high heaven, Varuna (Persian Uruwna; Greek Ouranos; Latin Uranos; German
Urahne) the ancestor of all and kingly guardian of the eternal law, the Rita (Old
Persian arta; Latin ritus; English right), to which all creatures, even the gods,
have to submit. Equally sacred was Varuna’s companion, or son, Mitra, the god
of light and guardian of fidelity and all oaths and contracts.
All personifications of light were worshipped. Among the first and foremost
was the sun, Surya. He was the leader of the soma-inspired Suras. In his honor
the Hindus of the “twice-born” castes still recite the Gayatri Mantra mornings
and evenings. Sacred was Ushas (related to Greek Eos; Latin Aurora; Anglo-
Saxon Eastre, or Easter, the spring goddess), the virginal light of dawn. Sacred
were the heavenly twins, the Ashvins, the physicians of the gods, whose swift,
shiny horses pull the sun on its course.a
Sacred were a number of atmospheric gods, such as Indra, the thunderer, and
the prototype of the hard-drinking, hard-fighting Aryan warrior whose
thunderbolt gashes the gut of the cloud demon and releases the fertile water for
the fields and pastures. Not to be forgotten was the Mother Earth, Prithiva Mater
(the Gaia Mater of the Greeks), the wife of Dyaus Pitar, or Father Sky.
What unfolds in front of our eyes is the picture of an unspoiled nature
religion, which perceived the Sacred in word, water, blood, and above all, in
light and fire; and which had no need of temples or idols, but worshipped out of
doors. In everything, the Indo-Europeans felt an all-pervasive, cosmic, magical,
numinous force, the Brahman, which was personified as 33 or 3339 gods. (In
modern India, the number has inflated to 300,000,000.) By means of the sacred
word, in the form of the mantric chants, and by the ritual of sacrifice, this
numinous force could be manipulated.
The sacrificial rite (Sanskrit yajna) was the bridge leading to the gods. It was
a great cosmic sacrifice that had created the world in the first place and each new
sacrifice was a continuation of the creation, bringing new boons. Under the open
sky, on a platform strewn with fresh grass, between three fires, the Aryans
offered their most sacred possessions— horses, bulls, rams (in that order)—as
the “graceful tongued” hymn singers (hotar) sang out, as the fire priests puffed
and churned the fire, as the “gentle handed” magicians (atharvan) prepared the

offerings, as the soma priests pressed the magic plant and poured libations, and
as the Brahmins, the presiding priests, cast their spells. Agni (related to Latin
ignis and Lithuanian ugnis = fire), the ever famished, flaming “mouth of the
gods” received the gifts and transported them to the celestials.
The sacrificial rites of the Indo-Aryans, like those of the related Celtic druids,
generated a magic force that was meant not merely to please or placate the gods
but to control them, to force them to fulfill wishes and demands. Such a
priesthood that could be compulsory upon the gods was indeed very powerful.
The blessing or curse of such a Brahmin, who, besides having mastered esoteric
knowledge, also led a virtuous life in line with the cosmic law, was feared by
man, god, and demon alike. To this day, a large number of Indians fear and
respect the mantraknowledgeable, ascetic and Brahmin and are careful not to
rouse his ire.
The Aryan dead went to the realm of Yama (Persian Yima, related to the
Nordic Ymir), the primordial human, who was the first mortal to die and, thus,
the king of the realm of the dead. For that purpose, the common dead were
buried. Nobles and priests, however, were cremated, like an offering received by
Agni and carried into the world of the heavenly light, to become godlike. Valued
possessions like horses, weapons, and servants were often sent along. The wife
who entered the blazing funeral pyre of her husband of her own free will was
giving proof of the nobility of her character. Such a woman was revered as a
Sati, a “virtuous one.”b2 This old Indo-European custom of voluntary
widowimmolation was practiced in heathen Scandinavia up to the tenth century
A.D. The Arab traveler Ahmed Ibn Fadlan gives a detailed description of the
practice among the Vikings (Rus) who had anchored their dragon ships on the
banks of the Volga in the tenth century.
Pieces of meteoric iron, falling from the sky as “thunderstones” with blazing
tails, were magic fetishes since the Early Stone Age; and wild horses were
among the favorite game of all early hunters. However, it was not until the
second millennium B.C. that a new epoch of history unfolded—when some
unknown Indo-European tribe of the Asian steppes tamed the horse and
harnessed it to light war-chariots; and the Indo-European Hittites (who
worshipped Vedic gods) smelted and smithed iron, somewhere south of the
Black Sea. Soon Indo-European tribes, inspired by the terrible god of horses,
war, and iron (who the Greeks called “Ares” and the Romans “Mars”) spread in
successive waves throughout central Asia, Europe, and Asia Minor, and spilled
over into the Indus River valley. Wherever they went, they took their gods, cults,
spells, rites, and language. Confronted by subjugated tribes and civilizations

everywhere, they tried every means possible to retain the purity of their culture.
The Aryan priests of India did their utmost to keep non-Aryan (anarya) elements
from polluting their culture and their blood. The conquered Dravidian natives
were enslaved and excluded from all rites, including those of marriage, meal
taking, and funerals.
History records similar attempts of the early Indo-European Greeks and
Romans to maintain the purity of cult and blood. (Ancient Greek democracy was
meant only for the aristocrats.) These ideas are the direct historical antecedents
of apartheid, racial segregation, Indian reservations, caste arrogance, and,
equally, the atavistic concepts that a half-educated Hitler tried to superimpose on
a modern, twentieth century industrial society in Central Europe.
Sooner or later, the Aryan priesthood had to acknowledge that despite their
efforts, slowly but surely, the non-Aryan elements were being absorbed and
integrated. Stealthily, changes crept into the pronunciation and intonation of the
all-important Brahmanic spells, while the complexion of the dominant
population darkened. At the same time, indigenous gods and spirits that the
Brahmins had banned into the underground rose and gained power in the popular
imagination, demanding their own cults and mingling with their Aryan
counterparts. It was the uncanny fear that the ancient Sanskrit mantras might
lose their effectiveness by being mispronounced that led the sage Patanjali (in
the sixth century B.C.) to write his famous treatise on phonetics and grammar,
which, in its thoroughness, satisfies even modern scientific criteria. It was the
fear of losing racial purity, of “thinning out the blood,” which they believed
carries the spirit, that led the Brahmins to transform the rather loosely structured
Indo-European three-class system (priests, nobles, commoners) into the
absolutely rigid, endogamous caste system. Though even now the upper castes
are lighter in skin color than the lower castes, the segregation must not have
functioned too well, for there is no break, only a sliding continuum. Even now
the wish for partners with a “wheatish complexion” is frequently voiced in the
want ads for marriage candidates in the Sunday papers of India.
At the same time that they were imposing racial and social segregation, the
Brahmins fixed the, up until then, verbally transmitted sacred lore into writing to
guard against heretical changes. In this way, the books of wisdom, the holy
Vedas, came about. But even at that, it took numerous Upanishads to explain to
later generations what was meant by the Vedas. Later on, in the folktales, or
Puranas, the amalgamation of native Dravidian traditions and Aryan lore is
nearly complete. In them, old Indo-European gods frequently shrink to
insignificance or sink altogether into oblivion. Indigenous deities take on Aryan
symbols and attributes, declaring themselves to be the guardians of the Vedas.

The story that is about to be told is an echo of the mighty struggle between the
Brahmanic priests of the Vedic sacrificial religion and the newly emerging,
synchretistic image of the God of emerging Hinduism. This is a central tale in
Hindu folk mythology, found in the Taittiriya Upanishad, the Mahabharata, and
the Ramayana. The story is told with various embellishments by village
storytellers, who were my main source.
 DAKSHA’S GREAT SACRIFICE 
Daksha is the son of the creator god, Brahma. He was born of Brahma’s mind,
or, in another version, of his right thumb, for Daksha means “the right” (related
to Latin dexter). For some ten thousand years this noble son of Brahma heated
himself in strenuous ascetic exercises and, as a result, was made the chief of the
prajapatis, who are the minor creators (demiurges) and patriarchs.
Since Brahma’s mind-born creatures could not multiply, he ordered his son
Daksha to invent sexual intercourse so that creation might multiply as it should.
Thereupon Daksha, as chief priest, sacrificed the androgynous cosmic unity,
creating males and females among the gods, titans, nagas (serpent deities), cattle,
birds, heavenly singers and dancers, and all other creatures.
Brahma, the Creator, the father of Daksha
But when Daksha’s sons heard of the mysterious, three-eyed god, they lost
their sexual desires and refused to multiply. Instead, they followed Shiva’s
footsteps as wandering monks, losing themselves in the infinity of the universe.
At that, the chief priest and cocreator became very annoyed with the ascetic god.
But he went on creating many other creatures, including sixty very beautiful
daughters, of whom ten are married to Dharma, twenty-seven to Soma (the

moon), and the rest to various gods.
The youngest and most lovely daughter is shiny Uma (light). Already as a
child, she had fallen in love with the mysterious three-eyed god. When the
maiden mentioned her heart’s desire to her father Daksha, he would not even
hear of it. Had he not already had enough trouble with this madman? In no way
could he approve of a dirty beggar, an uncombed long-hair with snakes dangling
from his ash-covered body, and a dope fiend, to boot, as his future son-in-law!
When Uma became of marriageable age, her marriage was not arranged,
as is the custom with common people. Being a princess, she had the
right of swayamvara, that is, the privilege of choosing her own husband.
All the princes and outstanding bachelors of the three worlds were invited
to the swayamvara festival, in order that she might pick one as her proper
and fitting mate. Naturally, Shiva, the social outsider, was not invited.
Uma looked about the great hall where thousands of young, eligible
nobles, one more handsome than the next, vied for her attention. But as
she looked, she became ever sadder. Her tear-filled eyes could not
discover her one and only true love among them all, so that she might
place the flower garland around his neck to indicate her preference. With
a gesture of desperation, she finally flung the wreath into the air, as she
was unable to choose another. Miraculously, Shiva appeared all of a
sudden and caught the wreath. Daksha was aghast. Grandfather
Brahma, however, told the irate father that it was destined and that he
should bless the marriage. When the elaborate wedding ceremony was
completed, he presented his new son-in-law with a milk-white bull, as
Aryan custom demands. Then, mounted on the back of the animal, which
they named Nandi, the divine pair rode north.
As they approached Kailash Mountain, Shiva’s wilderness home, the
wolves began to howl and the ghosts to wail. Forest devils and rock
gnomes rolled down the slopes, laughing insanely and merrily. With wild
dancing, drinking, and buffoonery, they celebrated the honeymoon
couple. Finally, the god and goddess retired to the mountaintop where
they lived without a roof over their heads (today we would probably say
without running water, electricity, television, or central heating) and spent
their days in blissful lovemaking.
One day much later, Daksha, the chief priest, staged a gigantic
sacrificial celebration, a yajna, to which all the celestials, the rishis, and

the seers were invited. As the proud prajapati, Daksha, entered the
sacred, grasscovered arena, all the gods and goddesses, even great
Vishnu, rose from their seats. Only Shiva did not stand up. That apparent
slight grievously upset Daksha. Never again would he invite this
shameless son-in-law to a sacred ceremony! Neither this mischief-maker,
nor that ruined wench who was once his daughter but now was seen
dancing in the company of ghouls in graveyards, should ever again
receive a portion of the sacrifices reserved for the gods. This Daksha
swore by all that was holy.
Sometime thereafter, Daksha organized one of the greatest of Aryan
sacrifices, the ashwamedha (horse sacrifice). Shiva and Uma did not find
out about it until they saw all the brilliant chariots of the gods whizzing by
on their way to the sacrificial fields and a relative stopped to tell them
what was going on. Uma was quite upset. “How dare my father refuse
Thee, who art the Universe itself, thy proper share of the offering! How
canst Thou sit there so calmly as though it concerneth Thee not?”
Shiva tried to calm her gushing anger. “What difference does it make,
my beloved! These bloody sacrifices mean little to me. Those who sing to
me in their hearts and offer their souls to me in devotion are dearer to me
than these arrogant Brahmins with their burnt meat and monotone
chanting!”
But these wise words did not appease Uma. She insisted on her right
as a goddess to be part of the horse sacrifice. Uninvited, she went to the
ceremonial ground with a small retinue. Her reception was frosty. Though
she humbly touched her parent’s feet, her greeting was not even
acknowledged. She, nonetheless, demanded to know, in the assembled
presence of the gods, why she and her husband had not been invited.
The impudence of his daughter caused Daksha to explode angrily, “That
horrible man of ashes! That chief of all that is ugly and contemptible! Not
Shiva, the gracious one, but Ashiva, the wicked one, should he be called!
Let it be known once and for all, this devil is banned from all the rituals of
the righteous!”
This curse was too much for lovely Uma to bear. Some say that her
anger heated her so much that she burst into flame. Others say that she
jumped into the ritual fire and burned like a sacrifice. In this way, she
became the first suttee (sati). Ever since, it has been the custom of
honorable Hindu widows to cremate themselves voluntarily on the funeral

pyre of the husbands (at least until British colonial law put a stop to it).
After this dreadful event, the priests drove Uma’s retinue off, hurling
curses, and then continued the ceremony.
When Nandi and the sadhus told Shiva what had happened, it was his
turn to become angry. His wrath exploded volcanically. In a burst of rage,
he tore a bunch of hair from his scalp and thrashed the ground so hard
with it that it split and turned into the two most terrible creatures the world
had ever seen. Towering infernally, there stood a thousand-headed,
thousand-legged, pitch black monster, dripping with blood and armed
with invincible weapons, including huge fangs. It was Virabhadra: outrage
made visible! Next to him loomed black Bhadrakali, hunching on a
murderous tiger, naked except for a necklace of severed heads and a
skirt of ripped-off arms, terrible and bloodthirsty: the picture of destructive
revenge! They silently awaited Shiva’s orders. “Go! Destroy the sacrifice
of the Brahmins!” was his command.
Shiva’s hordes attacking the sacrifice of the priests (from an Indian comic)
In the meantime, at the sacrificial ground, ill omens indicated that
things were going awry. Jackals were heard howling between the uttering
of the sacred spells. Daksha felt a stinging pain in the left side of his
body. Black thunderclouds, out of which threepronged lightning bolts
flashed, darkened the blue sky.
Suddenly, with a roaring din, the wild storm broke out over the field
and, with it, the terrible horde of howling storm spirits (rudras and
maruts), with Virabhadra and Bhadrakali at their head, descended upon
the celebration. Reaching for their weapons, the gods swung themselves

on their mounts, only to be battered and scattered by the attacking horde.
Meanwhile, the mighty rishi Bhrigu, pouring libations into the sacred
flames while uttering powerful spells, raised a magical army of demons to
fend off the attacking rudras. But it was all in vain. Finally, after Indra had
fallen wounded from his elephant and Vishnu was knocked unconscious,
the gods fled to Mount Kailash to beg Shiva to restrain his anger and
show mercy.
All the while, Shiva’s unsavory hordes lay waste to the ceremonial site.
They set the tents aflame and threw the priests and singers, as well as
the sacrificial posts, to which the horses were still tied, into the river. They
knocked the eyes out of the head of the old Aryan guardian of private
property, Bhaga. (For this reason, one of Shiva’s thousand and eight
names is Bhaganetraghna, “destroyer of Bhaga’s eyes.”) Virabhadra
rammed his foot into the mouth of the Aryan god of cattle, Pushan,
breaking all of his teeth out so that, henceforth, he could only eat mush
and bananas. They urinated into the holy fire, thus defiling it. And finally,
Virabhadra sliced off Daksha’s head.
There is another version of the story, which tells how an enraged Shiva takes
personal part in the battle. Stepping out of the southern sky from the region of
the constellation of Orion, he appeared as Sharva, the archer. The frightened
sacrificial altar, taking the shape of a deer, fled into the sky. Finally, it fell back
to earth and took refuge in Sati’s (Uma’s) corpse. As Sharva chased his quarry, a
drop of sweat fell from his brow in the form of a fireball. As it descended, it
transformed into an ugly, cramped, swarthy man with the bristling hair and the
bloodshot eyes of a rabid dog. He has horrendous jaws and wears the red garb of
someone condemned to death. His name is Jvara, “fever.”

Shiva placing a goat’s head on Daksha’s body (from an Indian comic)
Long after the battle was over, fever raged over the land. Brahma appealed to
Lord Shiva to do something about this dreadful, sweat-born creature, for it was
depopulating the earth. When something is created, it is impossible to make it
disappear again, so Shiva decided to dilute it by splitting this Jvara into many
lesspotent portions. It turned into the headaches of elephants, the lava flow of
volcanoes, the green slime on the surface of waters, the laziness of snakes, the
infertile, alkaline spots on fields, the blindness among cows, the constipation of
horses, the eye ailments of cuckoos, the hiccups among parakeets, the liver
diseases among sheep and, of course, the hot and cold flashes that humans call
fever. In this way, evenly distributed, fever became tolerable.
The gods acknowledged their defeat and lay prostrate at Shiva’s feet. Their
hands folded, they accorded him first rank, praising him as Mahadev, “God of
Gods.” At that, he was very pleased. He threw off his manifestation of wild
Rudra and turned into friendly, peaceful Shankar. Now the gods begged him to
bring their fallen comrade, Daksha, back to life. Being in a happy mood, Shiva
fulfilled their request. But, since the cocreator’s head was missing, having been
either burned in the fire or devoured by one of the ghouls, Shiva took the head of
a billy goat and, with superb surgical skill, fastened it to Daksha’s body. From
then on, this prajapati is always shown with the head of a goat. Having been
raised from the dead, he prays to Shiva without cessation, bleating “bom, bom,
bom,” as (Indian) goats are known to do.
Now that Daksha’s illusions of grandeur had been destroyed and his spirit,
formerly clouded by false pride, had cleared up, his father, Brahma, could
initiate him into the truth. He told his goat-headed son, “Surely, the Gracious
One, whose banner is the white bull, has freed you from your illusion. It is he,
Shiva, who dwells in all hearts! It is to him that the singers of the Vedas, who

are one with Brahman, have sung their verses. He is the Self, the Seed, and the
Goal. To him all mantras are directed. Truly, those who think that Vishnu,
Womb of the Universe, is someone other than Shiva, are mistaken and do not
understand the Vedas!”
Some of the priests and rishis, who were scorched by the conflagration of the
battlefield, or who had swum to safety, still cling to the mistaken notion that
Shiva is unclean and of little worth. They continue to believe, to this day, that
only Vishnu is worthy of worship. Though they are reborn as Brahmins again
and again, as a result of their asceticism and impeccable lives, they remain in
error. Only at the very end of this Kali Yuga will they achieve insight.
 SHIVA THE SINNER 
As we already know, after the battle the berserker god sank into gloom and
depression over having lost his beloved Uma-Sati. Forgetting his true nature, he
wandered and erred through desert and wilderness. Ever deeper did he glide into
mental darkness (tamas), so that, by the time he reached the Himalayan pine
forest where the hermits and their wives meditated, he was but a madman. At
least, that is how the pious anchorites saw him. To the holy men who were so
proud of their brahmacharya (ritual sex abstention), he was but a naked, filthy
devil with a constantly erect virile member. Their wives, on the other hand, with
the exception of only one, saw in him a temptation, a magnet of lust.
The rishis and their wives really stand for the human spirit and the human
soul. Both are caught up in illusion and cannot recognize God when they see
God. The thinking (the masculine side of the psyche) projects its own
weaknesses and fears upon him, while the feeling (the feminine side) falls into
unwholesome fascination. But Shiva is really void of characteristics. He is but a
mirror of their state of being. He is the symbol for the Self, which really cannot
be made into an object, either of thinking or feeling. The Self is always beyond
these. In the same way, no magic, no theurgy, no rite, and no offering can
compel the Self.
The stories of Daksha’s sacrifice and of the hermit’s austerities in the pine
forest express the tension between the Vedic Brahmins, eager to compel the
powers of the universe, and Shiva, who cannot be compelled and who seems
dangerous and terrible because of it.
This tension is also mirrored in the following story, in which Shiva kills
Brahma, the foremost of the Brahmins. The murder of a Brahmin was one of the
most heinous sins of which the mind of a true-blooded Aryan could conceive.
The murder of a noble (kshatriya) could be atoned for with a wergild of a

thousand cows, the killing of a commoner (vaishya) with a hundred cows, the
killing of a slave (shudra) with ten cows, but that of a Brahmin could not be
atoned at all!3 How the sacrilege of Brahma’s slaying came about is told in the
Sanskrit Puranas:
Lord Vishnu rested in the infinite void between creations, in dreamless
sleep, floating on the dark sea of chaos. At the dawn of a new cycle, he
stirred. Keeping the pure, light nature (sattva) for himself, he let his
active, creative nature (rajas) take the form of the lotus-born, five-headed
Brahma; while his dark, sluggish nature (tamas) took the form of a three-
eyed being with matted hair and a bead rosary in his hand.
Simultaneously, Ahamkara, that terrible force of egoism, arose from the
world soul and took possession of the latter two figures. That is why
tamasic Rudra, blinded by egoism, assaulted grandfather Brahma with
abrasive words: “You senile old gray gander, where do you come from?”
The Creator, his dignity having been slighted, replied in an equally
harsh, provocative tone. His fifth face distorted in a horrible grimace, he
sneered at Rudra, saying, “I’ll tell you who you are and where you come
from! You are pollution and darkness! You are nothing but a destroyer!”
(Today, old Brahma would surely have used such an expression as
“terrorist, punk, and anarchist.”)
Rudra responded accordingly. He fixed him with his third eye and then,
using the nail of his little finger, he sliced off the Creator’s fifth head. The
skull of the murdered primordial Brahmin stayed stuck to his hand. He
could not shake it off.
That is how great Shiva exteriorized the luckless personage of
Kalabhairava, the murderer of Brahmins, who is also known as Kapalika,
“the one who carries a skull.” Upon this unfortunate being, who was really
a part of himself, Shiva lay the following curse: “Misshapen, stinking, and
limping, you are condemned to restlessly wander and beg. People will
spit at your shadow and, wherever you go, you will be pursued by an ugly
fury of vengeance, a flaming ogress with gaping jaws and crocodile teeth,
Brahmahatya (murderer of Brahma). She will always pursue you until you
reach my holy city, Benares. There, where all sins are turned to ashes,
the skull, the symbol of your shame, shall drop from your hand.”
Having been thus cursed, the malefactor roamed the three worlds
without respite. Whoever was able to see God in him was blessed. But,

for the most part, nothing but hate, fear, and loathing greeted him, and
people avoided him like the plague. One day, he and the unsavory
company of ghouls, goblins, and other creatures of hell that had joined
him stood before the portals of Vishnu’s jeweled palace. He held out the
skull, which served as a begging bowl, and asked for a handful of rice.
But the gatekeeper, Vishvaksena, would not even tolerate him near the
gate and was about to unleash the hounds on him. Again the murderer
committed a murder. With his iron trident, he decapitated Vishvaksena.
When Vishnu rushed to see what the ruckus was about, he immediately
saw through the filthy, misshapen beggar’s exterior and recognized
Mahadev. Using his disk, the great god whose mount is the eagle split
open his very own head so that the blood streamed forth like a mighty
river.
“Mahadev, great Lord,” he said to the beggar with the trident, “Let this
blood be my alms to fill your bowl!”
For a full thousand divine years, the blood gushed into the skull but
could not fill it. Next, Vishnu commanded the horrible fury, which had
pursued Kalabhairava wherever he went, to be gone. But the spirit of
vengeance would not let go, for it was her dharma to pursue the sinner. It
was not until later, when they reached the sacred city where, at the
beginning of time, the column of light had manifested, that the demoness
plunged back into hell, departing with a blood-curdling scream. At that,
the skull dropped from Kalabhairava’s hand.
Having freed the great sinner from his burden, Mahadev burst into
spontaneous dance at the place where the skull fell. All the gods watched
in awe and went into ecstasy. Since that time, any sin, no matter how
grave, can be cleansed in Varanasi. Kapalamochana, “the pool or place
where the skull fell,” is to this day a place of pilgrimage. It is a place of
power, where one can wash away the most heinous sins.
Before Shiva repaired to his home on Mount Kailash, he installed Kalabhairava
as the city magistrate and chief of police. The Baranasi, that is, the citizens of
Benares, refer to him respectfully as the “devourer of sin” and believe that he,
like Yama, writes all their transgressions into a book. In order to please him,
they celebrate a festival in his honor during the cold nights of the waning moon
of Margashirsha (November/December).
All murderers, robbers, thieves, and other criminals adore Shiva-Kalabhairava

—or his black female counterpart, Kali—for no other deity would be able to
understand or have as much compassion for their own suffering, hardship, and
fear as the god who was himself guilty of murder and hated by society as an
outcast. Which god would grant them forgiveness, if not this one who himself
had to wait so long to atone for his guilt?
As the god of sinners, Shiva is easily moved to grant mercy at the slightest
sign of penance. There is, for example, the story of a certain culprit named
Durdhara:
This Durdhara was about as low and nasty of character as can be
imagined. He did not even respect the holy cow but ate beef without
batting an eye. The money he gained through theft and extortion, he
squandered on wine and women. He did not refrain even from raping his
mother-in-law or from planning to murder a Brahmin. One day, a
gardener surprised him as he was about to steal flowers, which he was
going to use to seduce the wife of another man. As he jumped over the
garden fence, he flung the bouquet to the ground, hissing, “These are for
Shiva!” These mere words earned the culprit enough merit that he was
allowed to throw a glance into heaven for a mere second. During that
moment, he glimpsed a heavenly maiden looking back down at him. Her
compassionate glance struck him to the core. In that instant, he regretted
all the misdeeds he had ever done. But, despite his rue, he was
hellbound, for the consequences of one’s deeds follow inexorably.
Nonetheless, the heavenly maiden pleaded on the sinner’s behalf that he
might be able to take a pilgrimage to Benares before the jaws of hell
were to snap shut on him. As Durdhara approached the city gate, the
gatekeeper stopped him, telling him that because of his vile nature, he
stunk so much that he would not be allowed to enter the holy city. Once
again the angel helped him. She let holy water rain from the sky to wash
away the odor. As he set foot on the sacred grounds, his sins caught fire
and enveloped him in flame. His misdeeds burned off his soul and rose
into the sky, coloring it blue.
Since Shiva is proverbially easy to please, miscreants believe to this day that
they can circumvent punishment and avoid harvesting the bitter fruits of karma
by dedicating their crimes to Shiva or to Kali. Even today, goons and
professional terrorists (gundas), pocket thieves, robbers, and even the dacoits
(armed peasant bandits) are devotees of Shiva. Weatherbeaten hippies, the

flotsam and jetsam of the psychedelic sixties who still hang around the tourist
spots in Goa, Bombay, or Kathmandu and survive dealing drugs, like to tattoo
themselves with Shaivite motives: tridents, cobras with flared hoods, or
Shankar’s visage. Indian petty criminals like to slip into the red gowns of
Shaivite sadhus and, pretending to be holy men, engage with the careless, nosy
Western tourists and take them for all they are worth.
The swamis and gurus, however, warn against facile interpretations. Shiva’s
grace cannot be taken as license to commit crime. Stories like that of Durdhara
are only allegorical, much like the story of Krishna’s secret love affairs with the
herdsmen’s wives: they tell of God’s love for each individual soul. When the
Puranas call Shiva the “lord of thieves,” it refers to the act of grace that steals
our hearts at an unexpected hour, much as a thief in the night. It does not mean
that he will protect burglars from the law. In the same way, Shiva’s wanton
cruelty is not a license for brutality, nor is it directed at human souls, but at the
demons that plague the souls of his devotees.
Swamis, probably worried about the moral implications of Shiva as a Brahmin
killer, have tried to move the story into a better light.4 The fifth head of Brahma,
they explain, was a god-devouring Moloch. The frightened gods begged Vishnu
to free them from this terrible ogre. But Vishnu, who is the Preserver, was
unable to do it. Shiva, who had already drunk up the poison that would have
destroyed the world, declared himself willing to take on the portentous deed. In
the form of Kalabhairava, he severed the monstrous head and agreed to carry it
wherever he went for it was too heavy for the earth to bear and its heat would
have dried out the ocean. He suffered it all out of his love for the earth and its
creatures until, finally, he deposited it at Kapalamochana, the place of the skull.
(It is interesting to note that Golgotha, the place where Jesus died as a “sinner”
and redeemed the world, also means “the place of the skull.”)

10
SHIVA AS THE DEVIL
You can make them talk
if the serpent has stung them.
You can make them talk
if they’re struck by an evil planet.
But you can’t make them talk
if they’re struck dumb
by riches.
Yet when Poverty the magician enters,
they’ll speak at once,
O lord of the meeting rivers.
BASAVANNA,
SOUTH INDIAN SHAIVITE POET, TENTH CENTURY
By the first millennium B.C., in Persia as well as in India, the Aryan sacrificial
cult had petrified into formal ritualism, no longer capable of satisfying the
spiritual needs of the populace. It could deal with neither the tensions of a
society in transition from pastoralism to sedentary agriculture, nor with the
external threat of marauding tribes (Turanians) from central Asia. The inevitable
revitalization of the social order took a totally different turn on the Iranian
plateau, than it did among the Vedic cousins settled in the Indus and Ganges
river basins.
 ZARATHUSTRA 
Sometime nearly three thousand years ago (scholars are still squibbing about the
exact date), Zarathustra (Greek Zoroaster), “the man rich with camels,” herded
his beasts in the sparse desert of eastern Iran. In that wasteland he experienced a
vision, an overawing new revelation of God, so powerful that, in its wake, the
world has not to this day come to rest. There, in the loneliness of the wild
mountains an angel of white light, a messenger of the “Wise Lord,” Ahura

Mazda, appeared before the trembling herdsman, revealing to him “Truth.” This
Truth concerns all of us, for it is the primogenitor of all the great monotheistic
religions of the West. The inheritors of Zarathustra’s vision are not only the
Persian fire worshippers and their priests, the magi (magicians), along with their
descendents in India, the Parsees; but also among its children are Judaism,
Christianity, Islam, and numerous esoteric cults. It is by no means mere
coincidence that the three Zarathustrian astrologer priests, the socalled “Wise
Men of the East,” were present at the birth of Jesus at Bethlehem.
Ahura Mazda—the great God of Zarathustra
The east Asian religions do not treat good and evil as totally distinct
ontological realities, for they are nothing but illusion (maya) or the play (lila) of
God. Therefore it poses no great theological dilemma that Shiva can appear as
God or as Devil. The form in which God appears is but a reflection of the soul of
the beholder.a Zarathustra, however, saw the nature of reality differently. In his
awesome 
vision, 
the 
universe 
becomes 
fundamentally 
divided 
into
truth/falsehood, good/evil, white/black, and God/Satan. An unbridgeable chasm
splits the two halves of the universe, and the individual human being, caught in
the middle, is called upon to make her own ethical, moral choice between them
—a choice of either/or. Threatening God’s (Ahura Mazda’s) perfect creation is
the spirit of Evil, Angra Mainyu (Ahriman). While Ahura Mazda guards the
asha (the eternal Law and Order, Truth, Justice), which the Hindus call dharma,
Ahriman spreads lies and illusion (druj). The uncompromising battle between
the two principles rages throughout the universe, ripping apart macrocosmic
Nature as well as the microcosm of each soul.
Ahura Mazda is Lord and Master. He has no need of a wife, like the Hindu
idols. Nor is his image of pure light sullied by a miasmic jungle of colorful and
lewd tales and legends or graven images. He is the Creator, who brought forth all
that is good: the starry sky, the primordial white bull, the human beings, cows,
dogs, the earth, the elements, the angels, and all the virtues.
His satanic opponent, however, tries to spoil the Creation wherever he can. He

perverted some of the stars, turning them into malefic planets; he ruined many of
the animals, turning them into snakes, rats, reptiles, amphibians, flies, and other
unclean, creepy crawly things. He brought all impurities and sicknesses, all
things mean and ugly, all lies and illusions into the world. At the beginning of
time—that is, at the beginning of the Four Ages, some twelve thousand years
ago—Ahriman entered Creation. His first evil act was to kill both the primordial
bull and Gayomard, the androgynous primordial human being, with the result
that physical matter, sexuality, and all the painful passions came into existence.
These he stirred into the perfect Creation, mixing it up so that good and evil,
light and dark were hopelessly intertwined. Like a sorcerer stirring his cauldron,
adding the vile to the pure, he planned to ruin the Creation completely; but God
and his heavenly hosts, the amesha spentas, the angels and archangels, thwarted
his efforts.
Zarathustra’s followers believe that the situation became ever more desperate
as time wore on. Then the merciful God heard the sighing and moaning of his
maltreated creation and sent a prophet—Zarathustra—to bring the right teaching.
He was born of a virgin who, upon bathing in a holy lake, received the unspoiled
sperm that had been kept hidden in its waters since the beginning of time.
Despite the devil’s efforts to destroy the infant, he managed to grow up to be a
simple herdsman and then to spread the right teaching.
Zarathustra was a champion of sobriety, condemning self-torture and
asceticism as much as inebriated ecstasy. The best way for human beings to
escape the clutches of the devil and to separate the good particles of light from
the hold of darkness is to live the simple, natural country life, working at tilling
the soil, raising grain, growing fruits, rooting out weeds, draining marshes,
irrigating deserts, treating one’s animals well, especially the cows and dogs, and
always speaking the truth. (Because of the high rank accorded agricultural
husbandry, the theosophists, anthroposophists, and other occultists see
Zarathustra as “the great initiate of the second post-Atlantean period,” whose
divine inspiration inaugurated the culture of sedentary farming communities.)
Zarathustra condemned all the magic and idolatry that had, in his eyes, polluted
Aryan worship. He preached against blood sacrifices, established cow protection
and the maintaining of the purity of the elements. Ever since, in order not to
pollute the elements, the dead may neither be buried in the earth, nor dumped
into water, nor burned in fire. The Parsees have built “Towers of Silence,” where
the dead are laid out, to be eaten by vultures.
For the end of time, Zarathustra prophesied a final battle between the forces of
good and evil, in which Ahriman and the damned hosts will be defeated and
banished forever into the pits of fiery hell. Another deliverer (Saoshyant), a

savior like himself, will appear just before this apocalypse. Then the dead shall
rise for their final judgment. As they cross a razor-sharp bridge over into
paradise, their own conscience will appear to them as an angel if they are good,
or as a demon, terrifying them and causing them to plunge into a lake of fire
below, if they have been wicked. Another image is that of a molten stream of
metal that will torment the evil but will feel like soothing, warm milk to the just.
Finally, the earth will disappear in a great conflagration.
What is especially interesting in Zarathustra’s vision is his redefinition of the
old Vedic gods, the daevas (Sanskrit devas). They are turned into devils,
companions of evil Ahriman. Ancient Indo-European deities, such as Indra, the
wielder of thunder, the Ashvins (the heavenly twins), and Sharva, who is none
other than Shiva-Rudra, are expressly mentioned as evil spirits. Daeva
worshippers are threatened with eternal hellfire.1 The ahuras, led by Ahura
Mazda (who is really a metamorphosis of the old Aryan lord of high heaven and
guardian of the moral and cosmic order, the god Varuna), become the heavenly
hosts opposing the evil daevas.
The ahuras appear in the oldest Indian writings as the asuras (from Sanskrit
asu = breath, air, hence divine; related to Nordic asir). In the Vedas they are
divine lords, neither especially good nor bad. Only later Indian writings
(Brahmanas) speak of them as foes of the devas, or gods. The Upanishads
confirm that, at first, the asuras and devas were equal in virtue and vice; but
because the devas loved the truth, they became divine, while the asuras, who
loved advantage above truth, became demonic. Popular folktales tell that the
gods derived from Prajapati’s breath but the asuras from his stinking intestinal
winds. At one time, they had all cooperated. They had churned the ocean of milk
together, dividing their work equally. But when it came to the prize to be won,
the nectar of immortality, the antigods were cheated. They were deprived of the
divine, inebriating soma, which is also called sura. Thus, say the tales, the
antigods are a-suras, glum nondrinkers, while the gods are suras, drinkers, drunk
on divine bliss and ecstasy.
We can see that Zarathustra turned the sociology of the supernatural worlds
topsy-turvy. To him and his followers, the worshippers of the daevas (devas)
became nonsober, idol devil worshippers. There was little doubt as far as they
were concerned that the devotees of Shiva-Sharva were worshippers of the Evil
One.
The image of Satan, which spooks through all Western religions, has its roots
in Zarathustra’s condemnation of the old gods, specifically of Shiva. Shiva is the
arrogant Lucifer, who refused to stand up and bow at the presence of the Creator
(Daksha) and is, therefore, cast out of the heavens to dwell as an outcast in the

wilderness with demons, ghosts, and goblins. Shiva, the ashcovered ascetic who
loves to dance on burning funeral pyres (the symbol of the passing worlds of
illusion), was turned into the filthy devil, dancing in the sulfurous fumes of
hellfire, in which the souls of the damned are roasting. His trident became the
devil’s pitchfork. The animal skins he wears became the devil’s own hairy skin.
His seemingly uncontrolled, volcanic sexuality, his phallus, his passionate
indulgence in drugs, especially witches’ drugs like hemp and thorn apple, his
proverbial unwillingness to work, and his habit of begging were all thoroughly
condemned. His shiny diadem, the crescent moon, was easily turned into horns,
identifying him with other horned, shamanistic gods that savage heathens are apt
to worship.
Mahadev’s adders and vipers became, in Zarathustrian eyes, the very insignia
of evil. In older cultures these long-lived reptiles, with their ability to shed their
skins, were respected as the symbol of life renewing itself, as omens of fertility,
of wisdom, and of healing (e.g., Aesculapian serpents of ancient Greece). The
divine serpent belongs to the Mother Goddess, like the lingam to the yoni. Often
the masculine divinity takes on an ophidian form to slip into the moist, dark
caverns under the earth, to fertilize the Earth Mother.2 Even Odin turned into a
snake in order to enter the abode of an earth giant, seduce the giant’s daughter,
and make off with the mead of immortality. In India to this day, women worship
nagas in order to be blessed with children. When the Bible speaks of the
seduction of the Mother of Humanity by the clever serpent, Lucifer, at the tree of
paradise, it is in line with ancient tradition. However, it is given a negative twist
and order is not restored until the immaculate, heavenly virgin, Mary, crushes
the old serpent under her heel. A Persian folk story, reflecting the Zarathustrian
bias, tells that women were cursed to menstruate because of Eve’s illicit
intercourse with the serpent.
Worship of the nagas (snakes)
The Zarathustrian imagination that discovered the devil and hellfire also
brought forth the popular image we have of angels and archangels, as

messengers of God and as personifications of the virtues. They were shown in
long, white robes, fluttering through the air with dovelike, feathery wings, doing
the bidding of Ahura Mazda, their heavenly Father. Even our common image of
the good Lord as a strict but loving old man with a long, white beard, wearing a
white robe, approximates Old Persian icons of Ahura Mazda.
Western Devil with pitchfork
To Westerners born and raised in a Judeo-Christian cultural setting, these
images and ideas are quite familiar. There is a good reason for this—our
Western worldview was nurtured by the Old and the New Testament, both of
which are replete with Zarathustrian contents. In the year 587 B.C. Jerusalem
was besieged, looted, and burned, its temple razed to the ground by the armies of
the orgiastic, goddessworshipping Babylonians. The Chosen People were
scattered, many taken into captivity where, as the Psalm tells:
By the rivers of Babylon
There we sat down and wept
When we remembered Zion.
Some fifty years later, the Persian warlord Cyrus the Great overran Babylon in
the name of Ahura Mazda, freed the Jews, and let them rebuild their destroyed
temple city, Jerusalem. During these years of crises, the cult of Yahwe, the
tumultuous god of Mount Sinai, took on new dimensions. The synagogue and a
calendar of festivals appeared and, equally important, many of Zarathustra’s
teachings entered the beliefs of the Hebrews: the belief in God as a universal, not
merely tribal deity; the belief in a hierarchy of angels serving God; the doctrine
of the existence of Satan (Shaitin) and his fallen hosts as the opponents of God,

in an absolute dualism of Good and Evil; the belief in the inevitability of the
final battle (Armageddon) and the longing for a coming messiah; the dogma of a
day of judgment, of the resurrection of the dead and their final reward in
everlasting heaven or their punishment in everlasting hellfire. Heaven and hell
became clearly defined, in contrast to the previous belief in a sheol, a shadowy
place for the dead.
During the hardship of the Roman occupation, the yearning for the arrival of
the Messiah was especially strong. The Essenes, a group of monks dressed in
plain white, like the magi, built agricultural communes in the desert near the
Dead Sea. Given to serving God by performing purification rites, fasting, and
working the soil while awaiting the “Teacher of Righteousness,” they bear full
evidence of Zarathustrian influence. John the Baptist seems most certainly to
have been associated with them, and Jesus of Nazareth also.
The towering image of Zarathustra, the moral prophet and voice in the
wilderness, possessed by righteousness, stands in sharp contrast to the image of
the Shaivite sadhu, the ecstatic shaman, the Taoist mystic, or the Buddhist
begging monk. He is the model for all the Biblical preachers and prophets to
follow, and for the Christian and Muslim zealots that have been hammering their
message into the brains of the western half of humanity ever since. We see him
reappear as readily in Muhammad as in Jean Calvin, the father of the Puritans, in
American revivalists (à la Jerry Falwell or Billy Graham) and hard-line
conservative politicians; he is alive in the fanatic fundamentalism of Osama bin
Laden as well as in the moralism of Karl Marx. In the person of Ayatollah
Khomeini, who struggled to purify his people and refused to compromise with
the Great Satan, the bearded prophet had appeared once again in his land of
origin, Persia.
After the heathen warlord “Alexander the Damned” (as the Parsees still call
the Macedonian conqueror) demolished the proud empire of the Zarathustrian
Persians and burned all their sacred writings, the brilliant star of this religion
started to set. Covertly, though, the great river of vision lives on, not only in
Judaism and Christianity, but also in other streams, such as Manichaeanism, with
its ample influence on occultist and esoteric movements (e.g., Rudolf Steiner’s
anthroposophy).b Islam, too, which has declared total war on Satan and all idols,
proves itself a grandchild of Zarathustra with its concern for ritual purity, its
obsession with body fluids and excretions, and its mandatory five daily prayers.
In each case, the message remains the same, created by the same dramaturge
but enacted differently on different stages. The cosmic drama is a linear,
historical one. It starts with a creation and concludes with a happy end.
Sandwiched in between is the treachery of the villain, the battle between the

good creator and the evil destroyer, the arrival of the messenger of the good (a
prophet or savior) and the moral injunction to all and everyone to personally
engage in the battle for the good. Even Marxism proves to be but a modern,
secular expression of the same spirit, enacting the same drama: original paradise
(primitive communism), the fall (temptation of property and profit), the struggle
between the good (working class) and the bad (parasitic exploiters), the arrival
of the true prophet (in the form of the trinity, Marx/Engels/Lenin), the great
battle (class war, revolution), the final judgment (return of the means of
production to the creative working masses), and the final victory of the good (the
happy communist utopia).
 THE EARTH RUNS WELL 
Suppose we are missionaries and we happen upon one of these ashcovered, long-
haired Shaivite sadhus, sitting in the shade of one of those mighty fig trees.
Suppose we try to lay this grandiose drama before his mind and tell him that this
is Reality. If he would answer at all, he might smile and shake his head. “My
dear friend, what you call Reality is but one of the infinite illusions flooding
finite minds. And if the masses believe this doctrine, then it is simply mass
illusion, mass insanity. What appears as history is but part of the eternal turning
of the wheel of samsara, the endless cycle of joys and sorrows; it is the lila
(game, play) of Shiva. How can there be a beginning or an end, or even a final
perfection? Everything is perfect already, anyway. The earth runs well as it runs.
He who has eyes, can see!”
Somewhere in his rambling lectures, the rather unorthodox Indian guru
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (Osho) claimed that there are basically two religions in
the world and that the Iranian Plateau is the dividing line between them. Indeed,
west of the divide, the diverse Judeo-Christian-Islamic confessions dominate,
while east of the divide, the worldview of Hinduism-Buddhism-Jainism-Taoism
holds sway. On the one side, good and evil are seen as irreconcilable opposites,
calling for a strenuous effort to root out the evil pole. On the other side, the
absolute opposition of good and evil makes no ultimate sense, being but a
reflection of the state of the isolated ego, which sees all threats to its continuity
as evil. The inflated ego, even when it wears an altruistic mask as a national,
group, racial, or family ego, is bound to see its existence as a merciless struggle
against death, darkness, and obliteration. From its perspective, everything is
wrong with the world. But the real Self is not the limited ego. According to the
Hindus, the true Self, identical with Shiva, rests eternally in total Being,
Consciousness, and Bliss (Sat-Chit-Anand). Once freed from our ego prison,

whether one is incarnated in a physical body or not (Shaivite philosophy
considers even that to be an illusion, for our being is eternal), then everything is
as it is—that is, everything is Shiva.
This is easily said, but difficult to realize. Ramakrishna (1834–1886), the
Bengali saint and ecstatic devotee of Kali, once told this story to illustrate the
divine nature of all existence:3
The Master said: “Everything that exists is God.” The pupil understood it
literally, but not in the true spirit. While passing through the street, he met
with an elephant. The driver (mahut) shouted aloud from his high place,
“Move away, move away!” The pupil argued in his mind, “Why should I
move away? I am God, so is the elephant also God. What fear has God
of Himself?” Thinking thus, he did not move. At last the elephant took him
up by his trunk, and dashed him aside. He was severely hurt, and going
back to his Master, he related the whole adventure. The Master said, “All
right, you are God. The elephant is God also, but God in the shape of the
elephantdriver was warning you also from above. Why did you not pay
heed to his warnings?”
All is Shiva; all is God. But each form, each appearance has its own power, its
own character, its own potential. When one is not enmeshed and attached to the
fascinating dance of Maya and her countless forms of illusion, then one can
realize this. Then sinner and saint, good and evil are equally part of Being.
From such a perspective, all appearances are but the child’s game that the
greater Self plays for its own entertainment. In this game, it can take on any role
and any state of being. Thus God can put on the mask of the Savior, the good
shepherd, Mother Mary, the Great Goddess, the Ahura Mazda, the Good God;
but he can just as well wear the mask of a murderous Bhairava or a frenzied
Kali, and thus, by the drama of confusion and suffering, show those who have
also violated their dharma, the way to Benares, where the fires of purification
burn and the waters of cleansing flow. This is how Shiva can be the “devil” and
still be worshipped with loving devotion, just as Ramakrishna worshipped black
Kali as his “loving Mother,” or, in Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhism, Buddha
can appear as a bug-eyed, fire-breathing demon and still be honored by the
devout. These terrible appearances are only mirrors placed in front of the mad,
illusion-driven ego. For Shaivites, all the wonderful, terrible, and awesome
images that magically make up our reality are but facets of the one Self.
For the devotees of Shiva, the ultimate goal is not just to be good, to heap up

the merits of good karma and go to heaven—though there is nothing to speak
against such worthy aspirations; it is self-understood that one follows the path of
virtue. For the Shaivites the goal is to see through the divine masks and
recognize the Self; the goal is moksha, liberation from the bondage of finite
existence, the release from the incessant wheel of illusion, samsara. Or as
Allama Prabhu, the south Indian mystical poet of the tenth century, puts it:4
Feed the poor
tell the truth
make water-places
for the thirsty
and build tanks for a town—
You may go to heaven
after death, but you’ll get nowhere
near the truth of Our Lord.
And the man who knows Our Lord,
He gets no results.
 THE RIGHTEOUS BATTLE 
Ever since the great Persian magus cast his spell, the occidental cultures have
taken desperate, heroic efforts to rid the world of evil, sickness, and pain, to ban
or even kill the terrifying “old serpent.” This deeply rooted sentiment is perhaps
the single most important motor for the ideology of progress and for the
scientific drive to wipe out hunger, poverty, disease, and even death itself.
Again, our sadhu would shake his head: How, in the world of appearance, can
the good and pure exist without its dialectical opposite? How can “chosen ones”
exist, if there are no “damned ones”? What is a puritan, without a sinner? What
is the day without the night? The existence of one conjures the other. The
opposites are halves of the whole. For that reason, “evil” is ever present in the
world as long as the “good,” the “chosen ones,” are constantly fighting against it.
In Indian mythology this dialectical necessity is expressed as the ceaseless
struggle of the good devas against the vile asuras. Woe to the soul that is caught
up in this struggle and has forgotten that it is but maya and lila.
It is all too easy to get caught up in it and to identify with the good (it flatters
the ego), while seeing the bad in the other, the stranger, the outsider, or misfit.
Sometimes such a discovery of evil literally forces itself upon the beholder. How
must the Christians have felt when drunken, howling Vikings, who wore horns

on their helmets and worshipped that one-eyed devil, Odin, descended from their
dragon ships to pillage, rape, and burn their peaceful villages? They probably
felt much the same way that the peaceful Californian citizens feel when Hell’s
Angels roar into town for a weekend party!
There is always somebody to play the devil’s role. In the Late Middle Ages, it
might have been the Gypsies, for example. Suddenly these colorful, dark-
complexioned, vagabond people who told fortunes, prayed to the “devil” and the
moon, and cheated the honest peasant, appeared in Europe. “Wherever they pass,
it was believed, children die and the animals get sick. In their wake, they leave a
smell of sulfur, an undertow of hell. They have been sent by the devil.”5
(Actually, the Roma or Rom, as the Gypsies call themselves, are a migrant tribe
of Indian untouchable musicians and jugglers. They are related to the Dom, the
untouchables who guard the sacred funeral fire of Benares.)
But one need not look even that far to find the henchmen of the devil. They
are found within one’s own ranks. Especially women, “by nature weaker,” fall
prey to the guile of the wicked one. Only think of the witches, those wortcunning
hags, midwives, and nymphs, who met in heaths, uninhabited moors, or on the
top of wild mountains, to intoxicate themselves with salves and to celebrate lewd
orgies in honor of a stinking buck (Old English buc = he-goat, stag), with an ice
cold phallus.6 Such sinister, spell-brewing devil worshippers could never be
tolerated by Daksha’s or Zarathustra’s spiritual descendents, the officials of civil
society, the upholders of Church and State. Indeed, the socalled witches still
celebrated an archaic fertility rite and paid tribute to the old shamanistic horned
god, who lived in Celtic lore as Cernunnos, lord of the animals, and in the
Mediterranean lore as Pan, the nature spirit. Commonly, the horned god or
“devil” was called Bogy or bogey man, an appellation related to the bock of the
central European witches. That “buck” and “bock” refer to the he-goat is a
significant linguistic convergence, for they are equally related to the Slavic
bogu, meaning a god, and the old Indian bhaga (lord, the giver), which we know
in such words as Bhagavad or Bhagavan.
Periodically, when the pillaging hordes of heathens from the East— the Huns,
the Mongols, the Magyars, the Turks, or most recently the atheistic Bolsheviks
—swept over Europe, there was no doubt the devil was on the loose, trying to
undo Christianity. They were seen as the hordes of Gog and Magog that the
Bible had prophesied would appear at the End of Time. For the Puritan settlers
of Massachusetts, the devil was in the redskins, “those tawny snakes and
children of Satan,” as the Calvinistic preacher Cotton Mather characterized them
when calling for their eradication.7 Such examples could easily fill an entire
book.

However, it was not only the stranger or the nonconformist in one’s own ranks
one had to be on guard against, but the evil tempter was apt to slither into one’s
very own soul if one lost vigilance. He could appear as sexual desire, as
undercurrents of jealousy, greed, fear, or cowardice, and would have to be
purged by confession, self-castigation, and prayer as the Christians prescribe; or
by absolute submission under God’s will, as Islam demands; or by the most
careful observance of ritual purity, as orthodox Judaism prescribes.
With this in view, it is no surprise that Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (Osho), who
taught a clever mix of Shaivite Tantra and humanistic psychology, was nearly
killed by the puritanical, fundamentalist Christians that surrounded his rural
commune, Rajneeshpuram, in Antilopeville, Oregon. The commune was
founded in August 1981. Bhagwan lived there until November 14, 1985, when
United States marshals deported him for violation of the U.S. immigration laws.
How dare he teach his belated flower children that they should not resist
temptation or repress their desires, but live them out, while dedicating them to
God. He preached that only after the burning desire for sex, power, money,
drugs, or pleasure has been allowed to exhaust itself, can Shiva be realized and
the overwhelming primordial drive be sublimated and transformed into spiritual
wisdom. This primordial energy is identified as the kundalini-serpent slumbering
in the lower guts. When the touch of the spirit awakens it, it begins to rise,
changing slowly from a reptile into a goddess as it unites with consciousness in
ultimate bliss. Whoever fights this old serpent, turning its very power against
itself in order to repress the desires of the organism, is bound to fail. Forever will
he stand in fear of it, like a bird mesmerized by an approaching snake; he will
remain frustrated, dissatisfied, aggressive, with no peace of mind. In repressing
them, forbidden desires can never be overcome and purified but will continue to
exert a fatal fascination.
Further Rajneesh taught his followers, the orange-clad “Neo-Sannyasins,” that
anyone who is busy repressing her own shakti-power will not stop with herself.
On the contrary, it is always easier to locate the enemy at the other end of the
index finger. When a number of likeminded repressors get together, the likely
result is a whole system of repression. A new church, sect, political party, or
movement, complete with laws, prescriptions, taboos, suspicious priests and
functionaries, and an inevitable shadow of corruption and hypocrisy will make
its debut.
Rajneesh advised his followers not to do that, but to let the kundalini-serpent
rise, and to accept and love the dark, fear-inducing shadow that lurks in the
darkest dungeon of the soul, for he too is Shiva! He counseled Daksha—we all
are Daksha, for we are the creators of our own universe—to accept the uncanny,

frightening rebel who dared make claim on our youngest, most lovely daughter,
as our proper son-in-law. After all, she, who is the symbolic image of our soul,
has long given her heart to him. Fairy tales show that the prince (the symbolic
image of our Self) does not necessarily appear in silks and satins, but often as a
stranger clothed in a bear’s rough hide. Only when he is accepted can there be
peace in the kingdom of our soul, as well as in the external world.
Indeed, Rajneesh must have been crazy to preach such a message in God’s
own country, where the fires of a puritan, Zarathustrian spirit burn brightly and
where presidents contemplate “star wars” against “empires of evil” or lead
crusades against an “axis of evil.” In the community churches around
Rajneeshpuram, the prayers for the lost souls never ceased, while billboards
were erected on the highway leading to the demonic community with the
warning from Dante’s Inferno: “Let all who enter, abandon all hope.”
It is doubtful that the former philosophy professor from Pune (India) knew
much about the place where he was. Certainly he was unaware of what
anthropologists call the “cultural construction of reality” of the society in which
he was agitating. He must not have watched too many Westerns, those mystery
dramas of the American Way of Life, where the good guy, dressed in white,
guns down the swarthy bad guy at high noon and restores order. (In pluralistic
India things might not have gone so far. Of course, there are tensions when
money and power are involved, or when a Muslim injures a holy cow, but who
would get upset about the kundalini rising?) Eventually the scene in Oregon
became so heavy, so bizarre, that nervous Neo-Sannyasins became paranoid.
They collected guns for self-defense. Inner tensions split the commune, and they
themselves, despite themselves, were caught up in the old dualism of “we versus
them.” Finally, the bald-headed guru was apprehended. U.S. marshals paraded
him in chains, bound like the devil, across the television screen, the modern
public pillory for offenders. After his devotees paid his bail and sprung him out
of prison, he mumbled into his beard that “America is not a democracy but a
hypocrisy,” and left for good.
Worldviews or “cultural constructions of reality” are not just a matter of belief;
they affect and form the “reality” in which one finds oneself. When Zarathustra
declared total war on the old gods—especially the lord of the animals (Sharva)—
and tried to ban them into the abyss forever, things took a different turn in
Nature also. The minds of Zarathustrian priests, sharpened on the whetstone of
dualistic conceptualization to a razor’s edge, dissected the organic unity of life

into a good half and a bad half. The Avesta, the holy scriptures of the
Zarathustrians, sunders the children of Mother Earth into clean and unclean
creatures, into useful ones and pests. It is a division that, to the chagrin of
ecologists, affects our thoughts and acts to this day. The plants and animals
serving the herdspeople and farmers, the cattle, sheep, and dogs, the fruit and
grain, were considered good, useful, and pure creatures of Ahura Mazda. On the
other hand, weeds and useless plants, predators such as wolves and bears, creepy
and crawly things such as snakes, frogs, worms, spiders, and crop pests, as well
as those abominations that feed on cadavers such as flies, maggots, or ants, were
considered to be ahrimanic, evil and impure. Persian magi (priests) dressed in
white gowns and face masks like those of our laboratory scientists made it an act
of piety, pleasing to God, to kill thousands of such pests every day. Of course, in
those days, such wanton destruction of life could not cause too much
environmental damage. Today, however, the conceptual paradigm bequeathed to
us by the old prophet, coupled with our chemical arsenals of pesticides,
herbicides, and fungicides, has devastating effects.
Such fanaticism is hardly possible for the Shiva-conscious Hindu, nor for the
Jain or the Buddhist, for every living creature, even the smallest bug, has the
right to live, and in its life to work out a bit of its karma on its long path toward
ultimate God-realization (or, in the case of the Buddhist, on its way to nirvana).
In Ganesha’s temples even rats and mice are fed and adored, and at certain times
of the month, Hindu housewives sprinkle rice flour on the floor for the ants.
It was the contact with the spirit of India, where the lord of the animals still
holds sway in people’s hearts, that gave the Western ecology movement during
the 1960s a major impulse. The idea of ahimsa, “live and let live,” entered the
popular imagination. It was finally realized—at least among a few—that every
little weed and each tiny worm or bug have their meaningful place in the whole
of Nature. Each one is a vital link in the chain of life (human life included). It
was realized that the cruel war against Nature, coupled with an exploitative
economic system that wastes resources and overproduces unneeded goods, is on
a dead-end road.
In Shaivite eyes, the battle against Nature is a battle against our Self. And it is
time to learn to accept the unloved part of creation and to metamorphose it with
our love. It is time for Daksha to invite the seemingly uncouth Shiva to the great
sacrificial feast that is Life. Will the princess with the golden ball, the princess of
our soul, be able to kiss the ugly cold frog and watch it turn into a handsome,
shiny prince, or will the sclerotic, intellectualistic goat-head of Daksha, with its
rigid morality, prevail?

Note: All that precedes has been written in full awareness that the author himself
unwittingly falls into a dualistic view of things: the “good” monist, on one hand,
the “bad” dualist, on the other hand. Such is the nature of living in a conditional
world, where the gods and the demons churn the primordial ocean. And
sometimes it is hard to tell the difference between the two. What more can be
said than that Shiva dwells in all, and to reach him, one must go beyond the
rending duality?
Suppose you cut a tall bamboo in two;
make the bottom piece a woman,
the headpiece a man;
rub them together till they kindle:
tell me now,
the fire that’s born,
is it male or female
O Ramanatha?
DEVARA DASIMAYA,
WEAVER AND SOUTH INDIAN SHAIVITE POET,
TENTH CENTURY

11
TANTRA: THE SERPENT’S PATH
The sensual pleasure women provide,
the joy of wine, the taste of meat:
It’s the undoing of fools,
but for the wise, the pathway to salvation.
KALARNAVA TANTRA
Lovers should be pure of heart
And only think of love,
For Love is no sin, but virtue!
Love makes the bad good,
and the good better.
Love makes truly chaste.
MONTANGAGOL,
OCCITAN TROUBADOUR
It is never easy for the guardians of an old order. During the time that
corresponds to the European Middle Ages, the Brahmins beheld the strange
plants sprouting from the fertile soils of the Indian mind. After gestating for a
thousand years, indigenous cults emerged that bore little resemblance to the
venerable Vedic sacrificial ceremonies of old. What times were these, when
tradition was trampled, rules of caste ignored, when untouchables received
initiation, and women were given sacred mantras! Bhaktis, forgetting their
everyday duties, swarmed the land, raving about God’s love, while other heretics
claimed that Shiva had revealed to them the “fifth Veda,” the rules and
regulations called tantra (warp, weavings), Where would this lead to? Had not
the false doctrines of the Buddhists and Jains caused enough problems? The
Brahmins could only speak of the emergence of a dark age.
At this juncture of history, Brahmanism and its eclipsing gods were going
through a major crisis. Magical, theurgic chants and offerings were no longer the
single, infallible bridge to the gods. A new metaphor of divine love defined the

relation between God and man. God and the Soul loved each other like Shiva
and Devi, or Krishna and Radha, in an eternal honeymoon, according to the
heretics. Playing his enchanted flute, Krishna lures the lovely milkmaids (the
souls) from their husbands’ (the worldly concerns) beds and makes intimate,
tender love to them. In such a way, God loves us totally and personally, and we
may love him back in complete devotion. We may love him as best we can
imagine it: as a man loves a woman or a woman loves a man, or as a mother
loves her child or as a child loves its mother. We can take baby Krishna in our
arms and cuddle him, or we can become babies suckling at Mother Kali’s
breasts. We can receive God’s love like a temple prostitute or like a lover at a
secret rendezvous. (Convergent sentiments are evident in Christianity, from the
devotion of Mary Magdalene to the sensual cantatas of Johann Sebastian Bach,
in which the soul is the yearning bride of Jesus.)
The devotional (bhakti) movement eventually gained respectability. Tantrism,
however, especially the so-called “left-handed” tantrism, still upsets many an
orthodox pandit or swami, for in its ritual context, all kinds of age-old taboos
and prescriptions (such as injunctions against eating meat, drinking alcohol, or
indulging in nonprocreative sex) are deliberately violated. Whoever knows
Hindu Puritanism’s panic fear of ritual pollution will understand this anxiety. It
was not so long ago that untouchables had to ring little bells when they walked
down the street, lest the touch of their shadow or a hint of their breath pollute a
higher-caste Hindu. How shocking the idea that in tantric rites, it is precisely the
pariah woman, the street sweeper or washer maiden that is the preferred sexual
partner and is to be honored as the Goddess herself. How shocking, the practices
of abnormal sex (including its anal and oral variations), coupled with the eating
of meat and the drinking of wine. Does not the commandment of ahimsa (non-
injury) preclude the killing of animals, and does not the consumption of
spirituous liquors dull the sensible, ethereal nerves that take lifetimes of clean
living to develop?
Indeed, that is so. Even the Tantrists know that. But is it not proverbial that
forbidden fruits taste the sweetest and excite the most? Like flies drawn to rotten
meat, the souls of this confused, materialistic age are drawn to just such
forbidden, crude pleasures. It is precisely here, at the focal point of modern
man’s obsessions, interests, and fascinations that the Tantrist master has a handle
by which to grasp the lost soul and pull him toward salvation. The old, venerable
rituals, the commandments and ceremonies simply do not interest the human
being of the Kali Yuga anymore. If religious exercises are done at all these days,
they are, more often than not, performed listlessly, automatically, or out of a
sense of duty or social expectation. What really excites the fervor, on the other

hand, is not the sattvic, or divine concerns, but sex, the stomach, external
appearance, and personal power. Instead of condemning and repressing these
tamasic (dark, nonspiritual) drives and enchantments from the start, Tantra tries
to sanctify them, weave them into ritual, dedicate them to Shiva and, thus, take
the first steps on the long path toward Self-recognition.
That, in a nutshell, is what most Tantrist masters today try to do. Bhagwan
Shree Rajneesh is perhaps the best-known recent heterodox Tantrist. In a genial
manner, he dressed his Tantrism in concepts he borrowed from the new
humanistic, transpersonal psychology (transactional analysis, Gestalt therapy,
human potential movement, etc.) and from Western occultists such as G. I.
Gurdjieff and Wilhelm Reich. But despite their bright new clothes, his teachings
became as upsetting to the Western establishment as they were to the orthodox
Hindus. His Neo-Sannyas movement ended in disaster. Back in Pune, Hindu
militants from the Radhtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) threatened to
assassinate him. Generally, though, most Indians consider him to be a clown or
charlatan at best, and a swindler and con artist at worst. Serious students of the
tantric tradition, however, respectfully refer to Shree Rajneesh as “Acharya,”
(Teacher).
Despite their notoriety, the Tantrist masters continue to propagate their
method as the only one suited to the Kali Yuga. Renunciations and self-denial
might have been the proper way to salvation during the preceding world age, just
as in the one before that, it was the sacrificial ceremony. But none of those work
anymore. And just as the Vedas were the proper scriptures during the first age
(Krita Yuga), the Upanishads during the second age (Treta Yuga), and the
Puranas during the third age (Dvapara Yuga), so the unorthodox Tantras, or
Agamas, are the trail-blazing writings of this dark, chaotic age (Kali Yuga).
 THE HERESY OF THE AGAMAS 
The basic message of classical Hinduism is that, despite the multidimensionality
of appearances and ever-changing phenomena, despite the endless number of
gods, there is really one, and only one, reality. This singular reality is indivisible
(advaita). The infinite diversity is but deceptive appearance. The world is a gaily
woven veil of illusion that hides the One (be it called God, Shiva, Self, Vishnu,
Brahman, or whatever), a veil that fools the unenlightened soul and leads it into
ever new activity (karma). The souls are caught in this deception, like flies in a
spider’s web. The hallucination of being separate individuals causes them to
seek advantage over others, to secure pleasure and power, and to try to avoid
death. But all their mad effort just entangles them all the more in a never-ending

cycle of births and deaths, each generating new hopes and new suffering.
It is only a resolute “No!” in answer to the restless pursuit of fleeting
happiness, power, and hope that allows the human being to escape the monstrous
fantasy prison of existence. It is only through self-denial and asceticism that he
may escape the binding chain of deeds (karma). Like a turtle withdrawing its
head and limbs into its shell, the wise man has to withdraw his five senses from
the bewitching dance of Maya. His spirit must become as still as a lake on a
windless day. It must become a dustless mirror reflecting the One, the Purusha,
while merging with him. Even though the seeker might still be clothed in mortal
flesh, such recognition and merging with God is possible. Then he will be a
delivered soul (jivanmukta). His separate ego will have vanished and he will
make no new karma. Only remnants of his old karma (prarabdha karma) remain
to be sloughed off. He is like an old civil servant with no pending duties,
counting the days toward his retirement.
Such yearning for deliverance was quite foreign to the life-affirming Aryan
nomads when they entered India, that “continent of Circe.”1 Was it the humid
jungle, the monsoon, or the wiles of the natives that eroded their primitive
optimism? Escape from the world of illusion and merger with the One became
the goal of Patanjali’s yoga, as much as of the teachings of the arch-anchorite
Shankaracharya,a not to mention of the Buddhists and Jains. This is the often
cited “Indian escapism,” the flight from reality, with which Western scholars
often patronizingly finish the phrase, “The trouble with India is… ! ”
Tantrism, however, has none of this. Like India itself, it bubbles over with a
joyous life affirmation that no visitor to the subcontinent will have failed to
notice. Tantrism has no quarrel with the monistic (advaitin) arguments of the
world-denying monks. It agrees that all is One, all is Shiva. But that “All”
includes also the grand “illusion” and the “world.” How could it not? The
carnival of illusion is but Shiva’s game and pastime (lila), the spontaneous
outflow of his limitless energy (shakti). The Tantrist does not seek to escape this
cosmic masquerade ball, but to accept it, to enjoy it. This enjoyment, however, is
not possible as long as one clings defensively to one’s separate ego identity. But
when one has learned not to separate I and Other, good and evil, wisdom and
stupidity, then the divine opens up. The jivanmukta, the released soul, accepts all
and loves all as her Self (Shiva). Love, not renunciation, frees the soul!
Everything is divine and worthy of worship, though there is no compulsion to
worship it.
In the orthodox, advaitin view of things, the All-Spirit (Purusha), whose
nature is considered to be masculine, is in a state of constant contemplative rest.
Nature (prakriti), on the other hand, is like a seductive woman, the dancing

courtesan of the world illusion, enveloping him in hallucinations. Much like a
Saint Paul, the arch-conservative advaitin monk Shankaracharya utters the dire
warning, “Beware! The gateway to hell is the woman! She stands between the
soul and God (Shiva) realization!”2
The Tantrist seeker finds such a statement preposterous. Is not every woman
the goddess? Do not people exclaim, when a girl is born, that Devi has entered
the house? Is material wealth not a blessing of Lakshmi, one of God’s Shaktis?
Are not music, art, poetry, and fine scholarship gifts of the goddess Sarasvati? Is
a good, wholesome meal not the blessing of Annapurna? Why demean these
blessings? Richness (artha) and sensual pleasures (kama) do not necessarily
constitute a hindrance to a correct conduct of life (dharma) or to salvation
(moksha). They are, rather, gifts of Shiva’s Shakti, to be accepted with gratitude.
Bhoga—the joyful game of existence
On the other hand, sickness, war, poverty, and hunger are also the play of
Shiva’s Shaktis. Shitala, the goddess of smallpox who rides a gray donkey;
Dhumavati, the ugly widow in gray rags; Bhairavi, the ogress who teaches
humankind to fear; and, of course, bloodthirsty Kali—all are honored as Shiva’s
Shaktis. To despair at their presence and to curse creation as unjust and the
world as a torture chamber betrays lack of understanding. For the worshipper of
Shiva-Shakti, they, too, are the divine Mother.
The Irish Celts believed that only the hero who had the courage to sleep with
an ugly old hag could become the king. If he was capable of making love to her
without reserve, she would transform into the most lovely maiden that walked
the earth, for she was none other than the ancient, ever young soul of the
Emerald Isle herself. But only the clarity of a royal mind would be able to pierce
her ugly veils and see through her essence. In the same manner, the seeker
(sadhaka) must learn to love these terrible Shaktis and see through their magic.

To call the world bad and to reject it, amounts to rejecting Shiva—and thereby,
rejecting one’s own true Self.
For the austere monk of orthodox persuasion, pleasure (bhukti) and liberation
(mukti) are opposites, as are worldly experience (bhoga) and self-discipline
(yoga), active engagement (pravritti) and quiet withdrawal (nivritti), or stupidity
(avidya) and wisdom (vidya). The one is to be sought out, the other to be
avoided. The Tantras teach, however, that we need both: We need wisdom to
achieve enlightenment, but innocence to pass through this mortal world.
Everything has its role in God’s play. Why, otherwise, would there even be a
creation?
The grand game of life is like a child’s game. While playing hide and seek,
the child strives to tap itself “free” on the home base. In a similar manner, the
religious seeker tries all means to achieve liberation. But what happens when all
players are “free”? The fun ends and, after a short rest, a new game starts.
The neurotic child cannot fully enjoy the game. It has ego problems, taking
winning and losing all too seriously. It feels hurt, angry, insulted, and reacts by
sulking or cheating. How different are the adults in the game of life? Most have
forgotten the true nature of both the game and its player and have become
disillusioned, disappointed, desperate, hopeless, or fear-filled. Through its
rituals, Tantra tries to lead the seeker back to a proper understanding and reveal
the true nature of this illusive world of Maya—the bliss of her dance—and the
enjoyer of this dance, the Self (Shiva). It tries to teach us that all we see and all
we experience is our Self.
But, alas, how difficult this is for the mind to accept. The intellect surgically
divides the whole into self and other and tries to avoid, suppress, or block out
what is felt to be unpleasant. Transcendence of the mind or ego, however, does
not imply that one does not notice the “other” anymore, that one avoids the
unpleasant and ugly by sticking one’s head into the sand like an ostrich. On the
contrary, one is still completely aware of it, but no longer as an “other” (Tat
twam asi = That is you).
Accepting one’s sexuality, for example, does not turn one into a sex maniac or
porno freak, but implies that from then on, sex is seen as something holy (part of
the whole) and the partner as a sacred being. The man becomes Shiva and the
woman Devi. Shit, sweat, piss, menstrual blood, semen, any bodily excretions
remind the defensive ego of its creature likeness and are handled
euphemistically. Acceptance, however, does not imply that one does not wash
and stay clean. Feces are filthy, but not unholy. Members of the Aghori sect
demonstratively smear themselves with filth and go as far as to call urine “holy
water.”b Vipers and poisonous spiders, too, are aspects of the Self, but again that

does not imply that one should not pay them proper respect and keep clear of
them. The untouchables and lepers (in the West, the bums, drug addicts,
derelicts, and AIDS-infected) are Shiva also, but that fact is no invitation to
unnecessarily involve oneself with them. The enlightened one’s spirit is like the
sun, whose warmth and light touch all—the tender flower as much as the dung
pile—without discrimination. Her spirit is like the fire; it feeds on all sorts of
refuse, but it remains pure.
The goal of the tantric rites and exercises is to overcome the fear and rigidity
of the ego, to unblock the frozen energies and let them flow afresh in the divine,
blissful game of being. All the energy (shakti) comes from the Self (Shiva), not
from the ego or mind.
Even the awful demons of Indian mythology know that. In order to get what
they want, they pray to Shiva and chastise their egos. Piece by piece, they cut the
flesh from their bones, sacrificing it to Shiva until they are mere skeletons. This
voluntary self-castigation automatically sets creative energy free, which enables
them to temporarily dominate the three worlds. But despite their self-imposed
sufferings and austerities, they remain demons, for they refuse to sacrifice
themselves entirely to Shiva, the higher Self. Instead, they use the power gained
to enhance their own individuality and to dominate the “other.”
 OVERCOMING THE EGO 
The struggle against egoism (ahamkara) is the hardest battle a human being has
to fight. In a sense, it is the only battle. The ego dwarf has the nasty habit of
seeing everything exclusively in relation to itself and, at the same time, it
projects itself on all other things, distorting and discoloring them. Because of its
distortion of reality, it entangles itself increasingly in error, loneliness, and fear.
The spontaneous play of God’s lila becomes deadly serious; it turns ever more
into a sheer horror trip. It is at that point that Shiva has forgotten his true nature,
drifting as a filthy, crazed madman through the wilderness of existence. Ecce
Homo!
We all personally know this wretch, who hallucinates that his Sati is dead, that
his shakti (God’s divine energy) has abandoned him. What should the poor fool
do to find himself and his one and only beloved Shakti, so that he may be
Mahadev again, united with her in Being, Consciousness, and Bliss
(satchidananda)? What does Shiva in the Indian mythology do?
At first, he errs about the dark pine forest where he stumbles upon the
neglected, love-starved wives of the rishis. He is so opposite to their rigidly self-
controlled, austere husbands that he becomes an object of fascination and lust for

them. Who are these women, but the unsatisfied, repressed, denied desires
lingering in the dark recesses of the soul (the pine forest). Only a madman would
dare satisfy them! But he is a madman, and thus, without second thoughts,
rushing in where angels fear to tread, he is able to violate all restrictive
conventions and social etiquette (symbolized by the rishis) and fulfill the wives’
urgent desires.
This disregard of the conventional norm, necessary for coming to terms with
one’s hidden, frustrated desires, is the first step of tantric initiation. There is no
way around it. All the filth and nastiness that has been locked away and chained
to the dank, dark dungeon walls of our unconscious must be confronted. As our
psychoanalysts have found out, these captives represent quantities of energy.
They are immortal shaktis, which, if ignored, will one day emerge as furies and
erinyes, as destructive compulsions and perversions. Many a would-be saint has
been undone by their rage. Before any spiritual progress is possible, the
repressed needs and desires must be lived out and exhausted, like a fire that
exhausts its fuel or like seeds sprouting on rocky ground that exhaust their
reserves. It was for this reason that the Tantrist master Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh
let his “patients” spend themselves in mad “sex orgies” (as the yellow press
referred to it) and in wild psychodramas before meditation began.
Before the madness of total rationalism took hold of the Western world, merry
seasonal festivals (whose roots go to ancient heathen times), carnivals, and
Mardi Gras fulfilled the same function. During the buffoonery and merrymaking,
the devil was given his due. Let the priest and the man of reason shudder: People
wrapped themselves in furs or colorful costumes, wore masks and horns; they
exposed themselves indecently, drank excessively, teased old maids and virgins,
and produced the next crop of babies. In this way, all kinds of psychic
complexes and kinky notions were dissipated, removing potential disruptions of
the harmonious flow of social life, while at the same time, so it was believed,
helping nature maintain the fertility of the fields and the animals.c
After the crazed, ithyphallic Shiva fulfills the frustrated desires of the rishis’
wives, the hermits curse him to lose his phallus. At that, he comes to his senses
and wanders beyond the dark pine forests, up the slopes of the mountains. There,
on higher ground, in the high icy desert, where the air is pure and crystalline, he
sinks into quiet meditation. From the tantric point of view, this indicates that the
sadhaka, the student of Tantra, has raised his spirit above the carnival of sensual
and worldly desires, as well as beyond false piety, and now engages in the yogic

effort of transforming his drives. On all levels of being—physical, mental, and
spiritual—he has tied himself into the yoke of yoga. Accompanying his spiritual
exercises are the difficult body postures of hatha yoga, breathing exercises
(pranayama), and special hand positions (mudras). In this manner, knots and
tensions in body and soul are eliminated and the shakti energy flows more freely.
There are three kinds of meditation (dhyana) that the seeker practices:
1. Concentration (savikalpa) on one point. Shree Rajneesh calls it “centering”
and refers his students to the Vigyana Bhairava Tantra where Parvati poses
this question: “Oh Shiva, what is your reality? What is this universe filled
with wonder?” Shiva answers, by indicating 112 methods for concentrating
or centering the mind on one single point.3
2. Bringing thinking to a standstill (nirvikalpa). For modern human beings,
trained from early on to constantly cerebrate, this is indeed difficult.
3. Witnessing the spontaneous free flow of the mind without interfering,
censoring, guiding, or manipulating in any way. This is a kingly meditation,
raja yoga. In the Occident, it is the fisher king, the guardian of the Holy
Grail, who does this meditation. A fisher is someone whose vision reaches
beyond the mirroring surface (the phenomenal world). He casts his net into
deep waters from which he gains his sustenance. It is no mere coincidence
that Jesus chose fishermen as his disciples.d
The meditating sadhaka unconditionally surrenders to Shiva, his true Self. He
considers himself as a shivadasya, a slave of Shiva. Though externally he seems
to be still a separate person, he is in reality already one with all. As his yoga
deepens, the darkness (tamas) leaves him along with the blemishes of the soul.
Ever more shakti flows into his consciousness.

An Indian yogi practicing meditation
Then one day, the meditant will open his eyes and see the most beautiful,
radiant maiden standing in front of him. She, too, is covered with the ashes of
bitter asceticism. She, too, has traveled a long, arduous road. Now Shankar
recognizes his Parvati! Now the heavenly marriage, the hierogamy, can be
celebrated. In their mutual love, all oppositions and dichotomies disappear. In
bliss, Shiva and Shakti melt into one and become Ardhanarishvara, combining
the masculine with the feminine.
Hieros gamos—tantra as the union of opposites (Nepalese print)
The melding together of the God and the Goddess is the fusion of matter and
consciousness, of being (sat) and knowing (chit). The more complete the fusion,
the greater is the resulting bliss (ananda). Satchidananda is always present,
eternal in the here and now. Shiva and Shakti are always united in bliss. They
are one, just as in the mystical theology of Christianity, the Father (being), the
Son (becoming), and the Holy Ghost (wisdom) are eternally one. Their
separateness is only apparent, it is an illusion belonging to a state of ego
existence.
 SHAKTI 
Shakti is the sea of stars revolving around the polar star. She is the warm, moist

monsoon wind blowing from the south, melting the ice of Shiva’s north, causing
the frozen waters to flow like heavenly nectar, reviving the desiccated land and
letting life’s seeds sprout. Shakti is also the rich, dark womb of the earth that lies
at the feet of Shiva’s ethereally blue mountain. As Kuja, “the earthborn,” the
Mother of All is blacker than coal; but in union with Shiva, she becomes golden
Gauri. Shakti is also the sea and the rivers that feed it. The pilgrim bathing in a
holy river does not dip into H2O, as the scientist sees it, but into the living
stream of divine energy. Though sewage, industrial wastes, or cadavers are
dumped into the river, Shakti remains ever pure, virginal. Her serpentine nature
is reflected in the flow of the water.
Everything in southern India, where Shakti arose as a pure virgin (kumari)
from the foaming surf, carries her signature: steaming, lush jungles; the
luminescent fresh green of young rice; the ever present cobras and vipers; the
stone carvings of mythical serpents (nagas) set under mighty trees under which
peasants and cattle seek shelter from the sun. Here, Nagaraja, the lord of the
serpents and Manasa, the goddess of snakes hold court as the stewards of the
Goddess. Numerous naga temples bear witness to the fact. Not far from Cape
Cormorin, in the famous temple of Nagarcoil, Nagaraja, the five-headed king of
the snake folk—flanked by Shiva, Krishna, and Jain Tirthankaras—reigns
supreme. The temple’s sanctum sanctorum is a simple wooden building thatched
with palm fronds and set into a swamp full of cobras.
Shakti in the form of a serpent goddess
It is commonly believed that Shakti lives as a snake at the root of sacred trees,
or at springs and wells. Similarly, she lives in each individual, coiled tightly at
the base of the spine. When this inner shakti serpent awakens, it slowly winds its
way upward in the direction of the dome of the skull where, in the human

microcosm, Shiva meditates in the cool heights. Again, in a similar way, the
Virgin, after having stepped out of the sea at Kanyakumari, moves north,
traversing sacred India, on her way to Mount Kailash.
According to south Indian tradition, it was at Suchindrum, not far from the sea,
where young Parvati performed her severe penances to win the heart of the one
she loved. The divine wedding took place at the edge of the inhabitable world,
on the shore where the Gulf of Bengal meets the Arabian Sea. It is indeed an
uncanny, mysterious place. The sea is a translucent emerald green, constantly
churning and boiling, the whitecaps running parallel to the shoreline. It is the
only place in India where one can see the full moon and the sun at the same time,
peering like two titanic eyes over the rim of the world. Once, a simple monk, a
devotee of Ramakrishna, swam out into the dangerous waters in order to
meditate on the OM on an outlying rock. By the time he finished his meditation
he was enlightened, and he returned to shore as a great philosopher and reformer
who brought the Vedanta to the World Parliament of Religions in Chicago, in
1893. His name was Swami Vivekananda.
The rocky beach of Kanyakumari is permeated by veins of red, yellow, white,
black, green, and brown sands. For the pilgrims who come here for blessings and
darshana, these sands are remnants of Parvati’s wedding feast. The legend tells
that Devi Kumari (the Virgin Goddess) was terribly disappointed when the long-
awaited groom did not show up at the auspicious hour the astrologers had
determined for the ceremony. As the favorable hour passed, she gave vent to her
feelings by exclaiming, “Woe me! All these fine foods, these cakes and colored
rice, may they turn into stone and sand!” Ever since, each pilgrim takes a
handful of the colorful sand with him, as his portion of the wedding feast.
As Parvati waited, dressed in her finery—in a red and golden sari, adorned
with sparkling earrings and bangles, decorated with fresh blossoms and jewels,
her face painted with white sandalwood paste—she shone out so brightly that the
skippers and boatmen who passed the Cape were struck with awe and wonder.
Much like the boatmen on the Rhine when they pass the Lorelei combing her
golden hair, their ships dashed onto the cliffs. To this day, when a ship sinks in
the turbulent waters of the Cape, it is said that the helmsman was blinded by the
sight of Devi Kumari’s sparkling nose ring.
As she waited there in her radiant glory, an asura spied her out and desired to
possess her on the spot. Brahma’s boon had made him near invincible. Nobody
except a virgin would be able to kill him. At the sight of her beauty, he forgot

this condition and, literally, lost his head.
At long last, the tardy groom and his reveling troop appeared. After the
wedding ritual, they rode northward on a milk white bull. At every single step of
the way, temples, shrines, holy lakes, and other auspicious places appeared in
their tracks.
Another legend tells that, with each step, Devi shed more of her serpentine
nature. The image of the primordial reptile slowly transforming into the divine
woman might seem odd at first, but it is an archetypal picture of the
transformation that occurs when the soul becomes one with the spirit, when the
marriage of the Anima and the Animus is being consummated. Christian
mythology, too, begins with the woman, Eve, who is under the sway of the
clever serpent, and culminates with the image of the star-crowned Queen of the
Heavens who stands sovereign above the serpent. In the Middle Ages, this
archetypal theme found expression with the innocent princess who is rescued
from the clutches of the lindworm by the brave knight, Saint George.
(Sometimes the transformation seems to reverse itself, as, for example, when the
years of marriage drag on and the once pretty young thing turns into a fire-
breathing house dragon that drives the poor husband into the local pub for
refuge.)

Naga
When Shakti is united with Shiva, she is a radiant, gentle goddess; but when
she is separated from him, she turns into a terrible, destructive fury. She is the
endless Ouroboros, the dragon biting its own tail, symbolizing the cycle of
samsara. As such, she is Mahamaya, the great illusion, the fascinating,
treacherous mirage of an endless chain of birth, suffering, and death, of time and
space, and of a separately existing ego.
The cobra—guardian of Shiva’s lingam
In all her aspects, whether that of the innocent virgin, the gentle mother, or the
raging beast, Shakti devotees find her worthy of worship. Any trouble that might
beset the soul, any fear, need, or sorrow can be placed at her feet. For there is no
power greater than hers, no one can deal with these things more effectively than
she. She is both the source and the deliverance from all disaster, be it drought,
flood, or earthquake in the macrocosm, or be it madness, cancer, AIDS, or
whatever terrifies the individual microcosm. She appears in the form of dark,
unpredictable drives, aggressions, and passions that enmesh the frail human soul
like a boa constrictor its prey. There is no running or hiding to escape her. For
this reason, her devotees try to unite her with Lord Shiva, that she might become
peaceful and friendly. For this reason, the lingam is placed into the yoni, bound
there with spells, and worshipped so that her power might be beneficial. In the
light of Shiva’s consciousness, she becomes beautiful. The image of Vishnu
resting calmly on the world serpent, or of Krishna dancing freely on its jeweled
head, tells the same truth, namely, that all Being rests upon the creative-
destructive dual nature of Shakti.
Sigmund Freud was on the path to a similar realization. He labeled the all-

permeating energy libido and understood, also, that one cannot merely suppress
it. Surely the old master from Vienna looked deeply into the mysteries. His
beard was long; but that of Tantra is much longer and older. The Tantrists
believe that the science of the serpent power and its mastery were revealed
personally by Shiva himself. This “science” allows one to transform the
shimmering, rainbow-colored scales (of multifold illusion) into wisdom, the
poisonous fangs (of life’s terrors) into bliss, the hissing, split tongue (of dualism)
into unity, and the periodical shedding of skin (of incarnations and discarnations)
into realization of eternal Being. In order to achieve this metamorphosis, the
Tantrists start at the lowest, crudest, rudest animal level: feeding and breeding.
In the same way, the alchemist of old started with feces and rot in order to make
gold; and the gardener uses urine, dung, and compost to bring forth the most
delicate, nectar-filled flowers and sweet fruits. Nobody can start at the goal and
bypass the frightening shakti serpent. In the following folktale, which is
frequently told in the south of India, we shall see how a virtuous merchant had to
find this out the hard way:
Manasa Devi, India’s Lady of the Serpents, is a personification of Shakti.
According to legend, Shiva, on one of his sojourns on earth, begat her
with a mortal woman. As Shiva’s daughter, Manasa believed she had the
right to live as a goddess among gods on Mount Kailash. But Parvati
would not hear of it and drove the ophidian stepdaughter back down to
earth. But Manasa still had an unquenchable desire to be recognized as
a divinity and be worshipped by all human beings. She was especially
infatuated with a rich young merchant named Chanda. She thirsted for
his devotion. Chanda, however, was not impressed by the serpent
woman, for he worshipped Shiva, and only Shiva. Enraged by his
rejection, she devastated his gardens and orchards and, when that did
not help, she bit and killed many of his friends. Still, he paid her no heed.
Once, by the power of her illusion, she appeared to him as the most
ravishing maiden he had ever seen. Though happily married, he instantly
fell in love and wanted her.

Manasa Devi— the snake goddess
“You may have me,” she told him, revealing her split tongue, “but only
if you worship me as a goddess!” This price was more than he was willing
to pay.
Another time, as he sailed the high seas in his merchant ship laden
with valuable trade goods, Manasa conjured up a terrific storm. The
vessel sank, the crew drowned, and Chanda was just about to go under
the waves himself, when the snake-goddess appeared, floating above
the tempest on a lotus throne, and offered to save him if he prayed to
her. But the merchant would rather lose his life than his virtue. Though
Manasa was deeply disappointed, she saved him anyway, by causing a
large wave to sweep him ashore. But now she was vexed! Stealthily, she
lay in wait for his sons, and sinking her venomous fangs into their heels,
she killed them, spitefully, one by one. The sixth and last son, however,
was on guard and had himself a snakeproof steel building built in which
he and his new bride would live. The goddess, in turn, threatened the
builder, telling him in a dream that she would wipe out his entire family if
he did not leave a hole big enough for a cobra to slide through. On the
wedding night, as the sixth son lay asleep with his bride in his arms,
Manasa Devi entered the steel house and killed him.
Unbeknown to him, Chanda’s wife and his mother secretly worshipped
the snake goddess. Now that the last son had died an untimely death,
they openly begged and pleaded with the unyielding merchant to accept
Manasa’s divinity before another disaster would strike the family. Their
sighs and sobs softened his heart enough that he apathetically flung a

wilted flower at Manasa’s picture as he turned to walk away. But even
this miniscule amount of worship made the snake goddess happy.
Immediately, she raised all six sons from the dead. (As we know from the
Aesculapian healers, a snake’s poison is also medicine!) Ever since that
time, Manasa Devi has been venerated by human beings as a
protectress against snakebites and worshipped as Vishahara, the
destroyer of poison.
 THE PATHWAY OF THE  KUNDALINI SERPENT
In the great macrocosm, the jewel-crowned, thousand-headed world serpent rests
deep in the waters underneath the three roots of the world tree, or at the base of
the world mountain. In a similar way, the kundalini serpent lies curled tightly, its
head hanging downward, at the root chakra (muladhara chakra) between the
anus and sexus in the human microcosm. Her slumbering energies are enough to
satisfy the crude, animal needs of eating and digesting, reproduction and
defense. For the God seeker, the yogi or tantric sadhaka, this does not suffice. He
tries to awaken the dangerous serpent and let it rise, sending its energy upward
through all ethereal organs (chakras) and vitalizing every level of being, until it
unites with Shiva in the highest center.

The nadis and chakras
In order to arouse the snake, it must be touched with the breath of life (prana),
which flows through the body in invisible, ethereal channels (nadi). The two
main channels are the moon channel (ida) and the sun channel (pingala), whose
doorways are the left and right nostrils and which meander around the spinal
cord, much like the Aesculapian serpents around the staff of Hermes.
Unfortunately, the filth of our bad habits and the encrustations of our old karma
block these channels so that they must be cleaned and cleared. This is achieved
by hatha yoga exercises, involving correct breathing (pranayama), body postures
(asanas), mantra chanting, and gestures (mudras). Many a perplexed tourist will
have observed and perhaps photographed the “human pretzels” sitting along the
Ganges, breathing alternatively through one and then the other nostril. They are
clearing their ida and pingala!

Sahasrara

Ajna Chakra
Touched by the vital breath, the awakening reptile raises its head. The
muladhara chakra, imagined meditatively as a red lotus blossom with four petals,
starts to vibrate and open up. Gradually, as the exercises intensify, the serpent
moves up the spinal cord (sushumna) on its way to the thousand-petaled, royal
purple sahasrara lotus chakra. As it winds from root to crown, the snake passes
five other chakras, causing them to vibrate and radiate. On its journey, the arch-
reptile climbs the ladder of the elements and transverses the abodes of the gods,
which make up the microcosm as well as the macrocosm.

Visuddha Chakra

Anahata Chakra
The root chakra belongs to the element Earth and is the realm of the god of
beginnings, the Creator, Brahma. It is also the doorway to the labyrinth of the
body and of the cosmos, which stubborn Ganesha guards. It represents an
archaic level of consciousness, dull, stubborn, and sluggish. Imagination places a
yellow square (the Earth element) enclosing a downward-pointing triangle (yoni)
in the middle of the four red lotus petals of this chakra. In the middle of the
triangle sits a lingam, around which a snake twists in eight loops. The snake’s
jaws are tightly clamped over the opening of the sushumna channel.

Manipura Chakra

Svadisthana Chakra
If the snake is enlivened enough to overcome the inertia of the lowest realm, it
can rise to the “favorite place,” the svadhishthana chakra. On this rung of the
ladder, an orange-yellow lotus with six petals blooms. A white crescent moon is
in the middle of the lotus, holding a seed (bija). This center of ethereal energy,
located in the proximity of the genitals, belongs to the element Water and
represents the realm of Vishnu. Consciousness on this level is akin to sexual
bliss.

Muladhara Chakra
If the serpent is fed even more life breath, it will enter the “jeweled city,” the
manipura chakra, located in the region of the navel. Its element is Fire. When its
ten smoke-colored lotus petals unfold, one beholds Rudra riding a bull. The type
of consciousness associated with this center is akin to hunger and digestion,
expressing itself in bullish self-assertion, greed, and aggression. A conqueror
like Napoleon, an aggressive businessperson, or a Western cattle baron pull their
force out of this chakra.
The pilgrim who is not seduced by the tremendous power that the “jeweled
city” might bestow can goad her magical snake to higher levels. She can reach
the heart center, the anahata chakra, from which mystical sounds arise, even
though it is “untouched,” that is, the sound is not the result of two objects
striking together. In its core, one finds a reddish-golden twelve-petaled lotus. As
it opens its petals, one sees a six-pointed “Solomon’s seal,” in whose center
Ishvara, Shiva as the personal Lord and God, enthrones. The corresponding
element is Air and the associated level of consciousness is that of a philosophical
and compassionate temperament, at home with symbolism and imagination.
Whoever remains unattached to the wonders revealed by the heart chakra and
is not taken in by a desire for the magical powers (siddhi) it conveys, may guide
the kundalini serpent higher, into the “place of purity,” the vishuddha chakra,
located in the region of the larynx. At this level, the four lower elements are
distilled into their quintessence, into pure ether (akasha). In the middle of the
sixteen lilac-colored lotus petals sits enthroned the half-silver, half-golden Sada-
Shiva. The mystic, whose spiritual ear can perceive the holy syllable OM, draws
his power out of this chakra.
If the shakti serpent rises even higher, it arrives at the “center of command,”
the ajna chakra, which blooms as a two-petaled white lotus between the eyes at
the root of the nose. In this sphere reigns the “highest” Shiva, the Parama-Shiva.
Here, the cleansing fire of Mahadev’s third eye reduces all sins to ashes and all
seeds of old karma to cinders. Here, far beyond the elemental world, the seeker
may see God “face to face.” It is the highest level of consciousness before
reaching nirvana.
When the serpent power finally surges to the roof of the skull and floods the
thousand-petaled sahasrara chakra, all oppositions, names, and forms melt into
the original, primal, uncreated unity. What could one possibly say about it?
Buddha, whose strangely tufted hair is not a coiffure at all, but a symbol of the
flowering sahasrara, just smiles an enigmatic smile that is reminiscent of the
smile of the Sphinx or the Mona Lisa.

This system of chakras, for Westerners so abstruse and complicated, integrates
all levels of being, both macrocosmically and microcosmically, into one
grandiose scheme. In that sense, it is similar to the system of planetary
signatures and correspondences of the medieval and Renaissance philosophers
and alchemists of Europe, or to the Taoist Chinese system of elements, organs,
and seasons.4 Such systems are holistic, relating the external to the internal, the
human being to nature, the body to the soul, and the microcosm to the
macrocosm. Since all the cosmological realms—the elements, the spirits,
demons, and god—are located in the body, they become attainable to the initiate.
Like a musician with her tuning fork, the Tantrist master can use powerful
mantras, mystical syllables, gestures, and rituals to set this or that string
vibrating. Starting at the bottom of the scale, he can tune each one and cause it to
sound, until his entire universe is a harmonious symphony.
The caduceus (“the staff of Hermes”)— the ancient Greek version of the kundalini
The mystical correspondences are found everywhere, in the geography of the
land as well as in the body or in the sacred architecture. In this way, the
Subcontinent is a divine body: sacred Bharata. Its head (sahasrara) is composed
of the high Himalayas and its feet are the southern tip of Tamil Nadu. Places of
pilgrimage in between these poles represent the mystical lotus blossoms, each
having their corresponding element and residing deity. The Ganges, the Jamuna,
and the mystical (invisible) Sarasvati are the three streams, representing the ida,
pingala, and sushumna. Prayaga (now Allahabad), a famous place of pilgrimage
a few miles upstream from Varanasi, is the confluence of these three divine
rivers, the ajna chakra, where they merge just as they do in the microcosm, at the

root of the nose.
The theme replicates itself in sacred architecture. The stone temple represents
the body with its seven ethereal centers. The core of the structure, the innermost
sanctuary (garbhagrha) where God reveals his presence in the lingam and yoni,
is associated with the heart chakra (anahata). The gateway to the temple,
guarded by Ganesha, represents the root chakra. Then, at ground level, follow
the “favorite place” and the “jeweled city.” The higher centers rise vertically
above the inner sanctuary (heart chakra) up the tower, the dome of which
represents the thousand-petaled sahasrara lotus. In a concrete way, thus, each
temple is a sacred body and each body is a temple.5 With its wide plains and then
the sudden rise of the Himalayas, the sacred land of Bharat becomes itself a
giant temple.
The sacred geography of India—holy places as chakras
The path a worshipper takes in the temple is like that of the kundalini serpent

through the chakras. At the threshold, she respectfully presses her forehead to
the ground, or at least touches it with her right hand. In so doing, she touches the
feet of the deity, much as she would honor elders or teachers by touching their
feet. Then she moves toward the inner sanctum, the equivalent of the heart
chakra, where her spirit soars upward into higher planes. In this way, common
folk who cannot find the way to their heart chakra through meditative exercises,
do so externally by visiting a temple or going on a pilgrimage.
 RETURNING TO ONENESS 
The outpouring of shakti, symbolized by the flow of Ganga’s waters from
heavenly heights into abysmal depths, is the process of becoming, unfolding
(pravritti)e, creation, multiplication, evolution, and fertility; it is a sacrifice,
ultimately culminating in exhaustion, confusion, rigidity, illusion, and death. The
yogi, searching for his Self, is in every sense odd, a contrary and a renunciant.
He wants to stop the cascading river of creative energy and force it to flow in the
opposite direction back to its source, to Shiva. He wants to reverse Ganga, that
is, the flow of breath, of thought, of speech, and of the white and red seed
(seminal and menstrual emissions). He wants to unite Shakti again with Shiva
and prevent her outpouring, because only then will the dizzying wheel of
suffering (samsara) be overcome and the unity of satchitananda be maintained.
Kali—the destroyer of illusion—manifesting herself during a tantric ritual
With the awakening of the kundalini, the energy moves again from the dull,
dark, lower regions upward toward its origin. In the process, semen, words,

deeds, and breath are reabsorbed and returned in order to be reunited with the
unmoved observer beyond name, beyond form, and beyond mind. Some babas
drive a little plug into their penis, showing they have stopped the shedding of
seed. Others become muni,f refusing to speak, while others might let their
fingernails grow through their hands, indicating that they have stopped doing.
Still others practice holding their breath for extended periods of time, perhaps
even letting their disciples bury them alive for a number of days as proof of their
mastery.
The yab-yum icon (Tibetan)
Other yogis, closer to the tantric tradition, unite in sexual rituals with a
yogini.g Imitating the lingam and yoni, they let the erected penis rest blissfully
but motionlessly in the vagina. The semen must not be ejaculated. Instead, it
must rise, shooting as energy up the spinal cord (sushumna), where it explodes
the roof of the skull, causing the thousand-petaled lotus to burst into radiant
blossom.
Breathing plays a major role in the yogi’s meditations. He learns to equate the
outflowing and the inflowing breath with the rhythm of day and night, light and
dark. As the meditation deepens, the exhaling and inhaling become the rhythm
of summer and winter, life and death, of the light, pleasant ages (yugas) and the
heavy, dark ages. Finally the realization dawns that a universe disappears every
time it is drawn back in. In between the breaths, there are pauses of rest
(pralaya). Here, at this very point of quiescence, sits Shankar. Here the human
being touches the unconditioned void, the timeless primal state, Shiva himself,
who is beyond creation and destruction. This is the goal into which the yogi
wants to be absorbed, like a drop in the ocean, for he has realized that wishes
make for disappointments and that the very seed that generates life makes death

possible.
The old Vedic sacrifices were deliberate acts of creation. By the magic power
of chants, spells, theurgic gestures, and libations, the priests conjured the
conditions they deemed favorable and necessary. The gods were coerced into
giving children and cows, rich harvests, good weather, victory, success, and
wellbeing. But then, slowly, the vigorous optimism of the Aryans seemed to
vanish, giving way to the insight that everything that comes into being must go
out of being again. The grandiose work set in motion by Daksha’s horse sacrifice
was bound to be undone again by the opponent force, by Rudra, the God of
destruction. Why, then, reasoned the later thinkers of the Upanishads, continue
this senseless carousel? Why not rest beyond the wearying cycles of doing and
undoing?
Sri Yantra—the tantric mandala
Such reflections provided the soil for the terrible asceticism to flourish. Even
now, the one who has chosen the harsh taskmaster of yoga and renunciation
(sannyas), commands respect. Not wasting his shakti energy, by closing the door
to the outflow of seed, word, or deed, he becomes laden with potential power. If
such pent-up force is released in the form of a curse, it is terrible indeed! Did not
the single look of the sage Kapila suffice to reduce the sixty thousand sons of
Sagara to ashes on the spot? On the other hand, the blessing of such a penitent
will find unconditional fulfillment. The ordinary man or woman, harried by the
daily cares of life, can only worship such an ascetic as a god, for he has become
godlike. Even the celestials fear his might. His accumulated power might suffice
to knock them off their heavenly thrones. Therefore, they try every means
possible to distract him, tempting him with wordly fame, riches, power or, what
proves more effective, with seductive, passionate, heavenly maidens who cause
him to spill his seed and involve him again in the cycles of life and death.

To many of the orthodox giants of renunciation, who have withstood the lures
and temptations of woman and world, the Tantrists are but shameless heretics,
for they seem to deny the need of such selfmartyrdom. The Tantrists proclaim
that an enlightened soul can remain in samadhi, experiencing the blissful union
of Shiva and Shakti, and still be fully involved in the world. He can talk, sing,
dance, make love, think, eat, and drink as it pleases him. His actions create no
new karma, for he is not attached. There is no one there to be attached. The ego,
which otherwise would entangle itself, has been dissolved into Shiva. He is
“God-realized.” Never abandoning the highest bliss, never losing total samadhi,
Mahadev descends into his universe, which is his pastime and game (lila). In so
doing, he takes on infinite forms. He is you, he is I, he is the cop and the robber,
he is this stone and that cow. Enlightenment, according to the Tantrists, accepts
all. It accepts all wishes, passions, words, and deeds, but lets them be pure and
without problem, lets them partake of the whole, makes them holy.

12
THE SAINT, THE HERO, AND THE BEAST
Till you’ve earned
knowledge of good and evil
it is
lust’s body
site of rage
ambush of greed,
house of passion
fence of pride
mask of envy.
Till you know and lose this knowing
you’ve no way of knowing
my Lord white as jasmine.
MAHADEVIYAKKA,
SOUTH INDIAN POETESS, TWELFTH CENTURY
Tantric teachings, meant to guide the human soul into the harmony and
spontaneity of God-realization, are recorded in the form of dialogues between
the two cosmic lovers, Shiva and Devi. Some of these writings fly on the wings
of sublime spirituality, while others degenerate into vile, sinister black magic.
An aura of dubiousness clings to the many Tantrist gurus, as well. The Tantrist
master seems to unabashedly contradict himself. At one time he might say this
and, at another time, that—an inconsistency that is bound to ruffle the logician.
However, the guru is not necessarily as illogical as he first seems; neither is he a
liar. Each soul is different, and everyone is enmeshed in the spider web of
illusion in a distinct way; hence a variety of methods are needed.
Basically, there are two paths available to the Tantrist devotee of Shivta-
Shakti. There is the proper, “righthanded” path (dakshinmarga) and the secret,
“left-handed” path (vamarga). While the righthanded Tantrists interpret the five
forbidden things (the five M’s: madya = wine, mamsa = meat, matsya = fish,
mudra = magical gesture, and maithuna = coitus) in a purely symbolic manner,
the left-handed devotees take them quite literally.

The followers of the left-handed path, the Kaulikas, who use the Kaula
Upanishad as their sacred text, teach abominations that make the hair of the
orthodox Hindu stand on end. Claiming that the injunctions of the holy Vedas no
longer suffice in this dark, materialistic age, they propose that the very
temptations that lead the soul like a moth to the flame of destruction must be
used to lure the soul to liberation. It is written in the Kaulnava Tantra:1 “The
Lord of Tears (Rudra) has shown in the leftist doctrine that spiritual
advancement is best achieved by means of those very things which are the cause
of man’s downfall.”
Tantric taboo-breakers meet in secret circles, hidden from the public eye, “like
the sweet juice in the rough coconut,” in order to ritually indulge in alcohol,
drugs, and dishes of fish and meat—and to practice magical postures of
copulation. Sex is experienced in a sacred, not a profane context, for otherwise,
“any animal in rut would become enlightened!” During the ceremony, the man is
none other than Shiva and the woman is none other than Parvati. Their naked
bodies are transmuted into the temple in which all the gods of the universe and
all the spheres of heaven are contained. The Kaulikas experience themselves in a
totally sanctified, divine state before they return as normal mortals back to the
everyday world. Once returned to the triviality and hustle bustle of daily
existence, they conform to the social norms like any other citizens. Deep inside
of the soul, however, glows the wondrous knowledge of their true, divine,
magical nature. They are initiates into divine mysteries.
There are reports of debauched, degraded Tantrist sects that do not shrink
from perversion, gore, and murder, claiming that the terrifying goddess of this
age, Kali, craves blood. There are reports of secret meetings under the cloak of
the night, in cemeteries and at burning ghats that bring to mind the blackest
masses of Satanists. Some tantric texts, like the Buddhist Guhyasamaja Tantra,
are totally repulsive if interpreted literally: A diet of human flesh, excrement,
urine, menstrual blood, and semen is prescribed for the sadhaka. The men should
learn to kill without a tinge of conscience, use any woman freely for their carnal
pleasure, and mock those who cling to conventional moral prescriptions.
Interpreted correctly, these injunctions are meant as shock therapy to free
seekers from their moral and social conditioning, to expose its arbitrary nature,
to free the mind from mistaking its programming for “reality,” and thus, lay bare
the deeper ground of being, revealing the One hidden underneath the veils of
good/evil, right/wrong, pure/impure, and male/female.
It is easy to see how dangerous such eccentric paths can be, how they could
lead to complete physical, moral, and mental disaster. Especially for Westerners,
such a path can turn into a poisonous fascination. There are reports that quite a

few of the Neo-Sannyasi of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, having undone their
social conditioning and overcome their inhibitions, have slid into criminal
activity, insanity, drug abuse, or spiritual vacuum. But even in Asia one comes
upon mental wrecks who lost their senses when, during tantric initiation, their
minds balked at having to swallow their own feces or to engage in some
unspeakable perversion. The energy liberated by removing inhibitions lashed
back at them. Shakti unchained turned into an ogress and took possession of
them, for they were not strong enough to guide this force into the right channels.
Psychoanalytically, one might say that the unleashed libidinal energy flooded
and swamped their psyche. The archaic, archetypal forces they conjured but
could not master, took hold of them and now feed on them like vampires.
Tantra is obviously not to be taken lightly. Basically there are three ways to
approach this secret knowledge, corresponding to the three types of human
beings, types that are a reflection of the three basic principles or qualities (gunas)
that pervade and constitute the universe. First of all, there are those who are
permeated by light, spiritual qualities (sattva); they are the “holy ones,” the
divya. Second, there are the men and women of deed and action, filled with the
dynamic quality of lively animation (rajas); they are the “heroes,” the vira.
Finally, there are the commoners, the followers of the herd, the pashu, whose
sluggish, dull nature (tamas) puts them under the sway of their desires and fears
and whose life runs in boring routine. For each type, Tantra must, perforce, have
a different meaning.
 THE RITUALS 
The divya, the holy man of God, has no need of external ritual. He knows that
the wine (madya), “which makes drunken to the point of falling,” is but the flow
of shakti energy back to the center of being, causing the devotee to become
inebriated with bliss, and dumb and unsteady on his feet in matters concerning
the “world.” The meal of meat (mamsa) indicates the unreserved offering of
one’s own body, one’s flesh and blood to the Lord. The fish (matsya) represents
the five senses, which dart about in the ocean of the sensory world.a These are
offered to Shiva. For the divya, the magical gestures (mudra) are but the
spontaneous, natural demeanor of doing the right thing at the right time. The
sexual union (maithuna) indicates the bliss of successful yoga, the union of
thought and action, of inside and outside, of spirit and soul, of Shiva and Shakti.
The saints, who have achieved all this, have no need to perform special rituals.
They have no need to try to transform the blind sexual drive by means of the
symbolism made available through tantric lore. They have no need to imagine

the passage of the kundalini snake and the unfolding of her lotus buds, for they
are already in full bloom, overflowing and open to the cosmos.
The man of action, the hero (vira), has left his faintheartedness and fears
behind, while at the same time maintaining his virtues. But since he does not
have the wisdom of the divya, he sees neither the arbitrary nature of social
conditioning nor the cultural construction of reality and cannot grasp the subtle
esoteric secrets. In order to understand the mysteries, he must be given concrete
(pakka), down-to-earth points of reference. He must directly confront the
apparently repulsive and tabooed aspects of existence. He must look them in the
eye, accept and integrate them into the whole, so that they might become
wholesome and holy. For the vira, the hero, the forbidden five M’s consist very
concretely of the experience of drinking wine, eating fish and meat (sometimes
urine and feces), taking on magic postures, and engaging in intimate intercourse.
Neither the path of the divya, nor that of the vira is fitting for the “man of the
herd,” the pashu, whose first striving is his security and the satisfaction of his
needs and desires. He is much too bound up with his drives to fathom the
sublime spirituality of all things. The direct physical enjoyment of the forbidden
M’s would only cruelly confuse him or leave him addicted to them. Thus, for the
pashu the tantric ritual is not much different from the ordinary worship service,
the puja. In devotion he offers coconut juice or cow’s milk, which stands for
wine; he offers white beans, ginger, sesame, salt, or garlic, which stands for
meat; he offers red radish, red sesame seed, or eggplant in place of fish; he
sprinkles roasted grains and seeds as mudra; while his childlike submission at
the lotus feet of the Goddess betokens the maithuna. In doing so, he believes that
the gods will be pleased and will bless him. There is no reason to doubt the
effectiveness of his service, for by means of his symbolic gestures, the
archetypes, the gods dwelling in his soul, are truly moved and become
responsive.
Thus, it is actually only the heroes who engage in the genuine tantric rite.
They will have prepared themselves for a long time through yoga exercises and
meditation. In some schools, only husband and wife participate as maithuna
partners, but more traditionally, a very young woman, a virgin or a prostitute,
becomes the Goddess at “Shiva’s wedding.” As in all sacred rites, the
participants purify themselves by bathing. The secret place is decorated with
flowers and candles and perfumed with incense. The bodies are rubbed with
musk, sandalwood, cinnamon, camphor, and other enlivening essences. The
participants eat fish to generate the red, rajasic power (commonly associated
with the woman’s menstrual blood) and meat to invigorate the white soma of the
male fluid. Step by step, the man transmutes into Shiva and the woman into

Parvati. With fragrant smoke, flowers, sacred words, and morsels of food, they
serve and worship each other.
During puja, the ordinary devotional service, as it is celebrated daily at the
temples and home altars, the sleeping goddess is awakened by the devotees with
song and music, the clanging of bells and cymbals, and the blowing of conch
shells. By virtue of the power of imagination, the living image residing deep in
the soul is projected onto the stone idol or icon, which becomes animated with
the living divine presence. This externalized archetype is greeted reverently with
folded hands, graciously welcomed and worshipped. The devotees treat its
numinous presence like a beloved and honored guest. They bathe its image in
water and fragrances, feed it choice tidbits of food, garland it with flowers, and
entertain it with song and dance. Then, after a certain time, after it has blessed
the devotees with a glimpse of higher reality, it returns to its divine origin. The
same thing happens during a tantric ritual, only, instead of using a lifeless
picture or a stone statue, the divine manifests itself in the living bodies of the
participants. The foods and wine are thus not enjoyed by ordinary mortals, but
by the divine pair themselves, by Shiva and Parvati.
Food and sex are basic to survival. They are of such fundamental concern that all
societies surround them with a tight network of prescriptions and proscriptions.
Deliberate violation of social conventions regarding food and sex is portentous
for both society and the individual. Violation blasts open the image people
normally have of themselves and of the world, and allows a temporary
manifestation of the awesome void beyond time, norm, and ego. The Tantrist
guru, as an initiator, uses such shock techniques to let the individual glimpse the
divine ground of all existence. The use of alcohol and of psychedelic herbal
substances (aushadhi) intensifies this process, as does the total nakedness of the
body, for clothes are part of the personality’s masks.
A jar of aphrodisiacal and consciousness-changing substances is frequently
offered as “food” to the kundalini serpent, by ceremonially placing it in the
middle of a mystical geometric design (yantra) drawn on the floor. With the help
of these substances, the naked pair levitates into ever higher realms. The steps of
transformation into the god and goddess are punctuated by ritualized hand
gestures or mudras.b The mudras can perhaps be understood by comparing them
to the spontaneous gestures people flash at each other in our own society: the
raised hand, its palm opened outwardly, indicates happy surprise or signals a
greeting to a friend; the balling of the hand to make a fist indicates a

concentration of potential power; the flicking of the middle-finger or the making
of a “fig” counters the “evil eye” or wards off a curse; the pointing of the index
finger indicates something or releases a directed flow of energy. Such
spontaneous, partially instinctive, partially culturally conditioned hand
movements can pierce the psyche profoundly. Some such gestures highlight
those special moments when everything comes together effortlessly and
harmoniously, as for example, when the French chef curves his index finger and
thumb to form an “O,” while smacking his lips, at the very moment he has given
his exquisite chef d’oevre just the right pinch of spices.
Each chakra on the body of the goddess, starting with her yoni (vulva), the
fiery seat of shakti, is gently and reverently touched, while holy mantras are
spoken for each part. During the ceremony the man draws a yantra with rice
flour on the ground. It consists of abstract geometrical lines that represent all the
gods and energies pervading the universe. Squares represent the earth, circles
stand for the heavens, triangles pointing upward signify masculine energies,
whereas triangles pointing downward indicate feminine energies. Now Shiva sits
himself in lotus posture in the middle of the yantra. The goddess worships his
linga, and then slips her yoni over the erect member, as the hieròs gámos, the
celebration of the sacred marriage, takes place. Thus united, face to face, without
hasty, animalistic movements, without passion, in total meditative nonactivity
and not wasting energy, they experience the primordial Unity, the
satchitananada, out of which everything is born and into which everything
returns.
During this union, the fiery shakti power starts to rise. At first it is but a thin
flicker of a flame. As it is fanned by prana-breath and as it passes the chakras, it
gains in intensity, until the whole body is a conflagration, a funeral pyre for the
ego. Finally, the entire universe transforms into an ocean of fire, consuming all
created forms. And now, the soma, which had been held in the cup of the
crescent moon that decorates Shiva’s hair, starts to melt, slowly releasing drops
of nectar. The gentle dribble of heavenly fluid becomes a trickle, then a stream,
and finally a mighty torrent that plunges into the ocean of fire, cooling it and at
last extinguishing it.
Now the holy ceremony, which only true heroes can complete, is finished.
The sadhakas have experienced their indwelling divinity, without denying their
“lower animal instincts”; they were carried to the throne of God and overcame
the polarities that rend the world.
 TANTRIC INFLUENCE 

The cult of tantric love challenged Brahmanic orthodoxy at the same time that
the courtly romance of the knights and their chosen ladies flourished in Europe
and that Omar Khaiyam composed his love lyrics. Was it mere coincidence?
Was it an auspicious constellation of stars, the Zeitgeist, cultural diffusion, or a
sudden flowering out of the collective unconscious?
In contrast to conservative Hinduism, the tantric ritual respects neither race,
caste, nor sexual differences. The tantric texts, the Agamas, could be read by
women as well as men, untouchables as well as twice-born Hindus, by heretics
(i.e., Buddhists) as well as by the orthodox. This is not to say that race, sex
discrimination, or caste were abolished. In everyday society they continued to
play their role as always. It was merely recognized that they were irrelevant in
relation to opening up to the divine, eternal Self. Being beyond such social
barriers, it is easy to understand how tantric rites could spread as far as Ceylon,
Cambodia, China, Japan, and even to the far north of Siberia.c
The temple sculptures of Konarak and the Shaivite temples of Khajuraho,
whose lively in coitu representations elicit the constant clicking of tourist
cameras, bear witness to the vitality of tantric inspiration in India.
The hearty traveler who manages to visit one of those nearly inaccessible
cloisters perched on the rock ledges on the Himalayan roof of the world, can
discover ancient paintings and sculptures, covered by layers of soot from
centuries of burning butter lamps. The faded paintings, whose quality equals that
of the finest of Western medieval art, reveal intertwined couples, locked in
love’s embrace. Somehow, these delicate erotic yab-yum (mother-father) figures
do not seem to fit the dark, cold monastery halls and the litany-chanting, celibate
monks. Here in Tibet, Shiva and Parvati have transformed into the Buddha and
Prajna-Paramita, the goddess of supreme wisdom, or into the thousand-armed,
thousand-eyed bodhisattva of compassion, Avilokiteshvara (the lord who looks
down in compassion) and his female consort, the savioress, Tara.
Avilokiteshvara, 
the 
highest 
bodhisattva, 
the 
meditation-Buddha
(Dhyanaibodhisattva) of our times, refused to enter nirvana because of his
compassion for all the suffering creatures. He vowed to remain in the sea of
illusion (samsara) until all were saved. Since his own separate identity had long
been extinguished, like a candle burned out, he can take on any form (at least,
according to the followers of the diamond vehicle, the Vajrayana.) Thus he can
appear as Vishnu to the Vaishnavas, as Shiva to the Shaivites, as Jesus to the
Christians. In Tibet he is worshipped in the incarnation of His Holiness, the
Dalai Lama.
Since a bodhisattva is “empty” or “void” (shunya), that is, free from residual,
old karma, the three worlds become his free game, his lila. He is no longer

attached, therefore he can pass through virtue and vice, poverty and wealth, and
suffering and joy without a snag. A future Buddha, having achieved this
evenness of mind, will not be thrown off course by the five forbidden fruits, the
five M’s. He can indulge freely in them, but does not need to, for he sees
through their empty nature. There is no ego involved, no mirror upon which the
dust can settle.
All duality is overcome in the embrace of yab-yum: nirvana and samsara are
one! The infinite void (mahashunya) and the infinite energy of shakti balance
each other out, melding together into the great bliss of “suchness, of “just-so-
ness” (tathata). This blissful state of nonseparateness finds expression in the
ever present Buddhist mantra Om Mani Padme Hum (the jewel in the lotus
blossom). In its tantric interpretation, the jewel or thunderbolt (vajra) is the linga
resting in the yoni, which is frequently symbolized as a lotus (padma).
Enlightenment occurs when the linga is brought to rest in the yoni.d
Nowadays, Tantrism has come into vogue in the industrialized societies of the
West. It is no longer the secret passion of a curious handful of anthropologists
and Indologists. As the social norms and traditional patterns of behavior reel
under the blows of supertechnology, as social roles become ever harder to
define, due to the chaotic changes induced by numerous factors (economic,
environmental, informational, etc.), more and more people have great difficulty
finding out who they are, why they are here, what is expected of them, in short,
what kind of universe is it in which they live. Parents and grandparents—the role
models in traditional society—cannot provide answers, for they themselves
cannot keep up with the changes. Their store of experience becomes as quickly
irrelevant as yesterday’s newspaper headlines. Surely, for many there is at
present enough food to eat, plenty of stylish clothes to wear, and nonstop media
entertainment; but when it comes to finding out the purpose of life, the proper
role behavior, or the right way to handle the drives and emotions, Babylonian
confusion reigns.
This state of norm confusion is especially true in the relation between the
sexes. Seldom have men and woman been as alienated from each other as in
today’s “urban singles” society. Despite liberalizing the laws concerning
marriage and divorce, free relationships, abortion, prostitution, homosexuality,
and pornography, the industrialized societies are ever more at odds with human
sexuality and emotion. The liberalization has shifted the racing engine into a
higher gear: The abreaction of accumulated frustration has merely become more
frantic, more zesty (Erica Jong’s “zipless fuck”), more commercialized, and
more expensive. But the participants give less of themselves and are lonelier
than before. However, in the final analysis, economic growth (and the associated

exploitation of the environment and resources) can only move with the motor of
programmed dissatisfaction and frustration of the natural drives: Only the
unsatisfied are driven to consume so desperately, in order to make up for the
deficits of an empty life. Increased frustration translates into more sales.
Whoever is loved needs less candy and sweets, new cars and the latest fad
clothes. Whoever has gotten a glimpse of her cosmic self needs not to bolster her
bruised ego with status symbols and conspicuous consumption. It follows, like
night follows day, that those who live contrary to cosmic harmony (dharma) will
feel afraid and lost in a hostile, aggressive environment. Then one’s energies and
wealth are poured into arming and fortifying oneself. On a larger, collective
scale, this becomes the biggest of big business. Cannons and rockets become
ersatz lingas. On the personal level, even sex becomes a weapon of the cornered
ego.
In such a setting it is no wonder that many glossy books on the subject of
Tantrism fill the book shops. The many seminars on tantric sexuality are but a
symptom of the yearning of love-starved souls, of those wounded and maimed in
the war of the sexes. Tantra becomes interesting, for it promises reaching the
divine ground of Being, not by the exclusion of the basic carnal level, but by its
inclusion in the loving union of the sexes.

13
POLLEN DUST AND ASHES
Take these flowers, take my song:
You, sitting on a tiger’s skin,
unshakable in your meditation,
your eyes, red and heavy from hemp’s fumes,
turned inwards, seeing all,
all that was, that is and that which will not be.
Your tears, Rudra, garland my neck;
all one hundred and eight of them
I have caressed.
For you are the last before Nirvana,
you, the greatest joy, giver of life,
terrible enemy of all evil.
NEPALESE DEVOTIONAL SONG,
FIFTEENTH CENTURY
Every moment the mortal human being ought to sing Shiva’s praises in his
heart.1 But there are certain times of the day when chanting the Lord’s name and
performing Har puja (Shiva worship) is especially auspicious. such times are at
sunrise, noon, and sunset. of the seven days of the week, it is on Monday
(Somavara), the day of the moon, that he draws nearest to his devotees.
The Hindus still observe the cycle of the old Indo-European double month,
starting with the fourteen days of the “dark,” waning moon and continuing with
the fourteen days of the “light,” waxing moon. During this span, it is always the
evening of the thirteenth and all of the fourteenth day, that belong principally to
Shiva. Especially when the full moon rounds out, one finds Mahadev in a good
mood, easy to please, and therefore with a willing ear for one’s concerns. Then it
is Pradosha Vrata, a time for staying awake and fasting.2
An old legend tells of a hermit who taught a banished queen and her two
sons, who were hiding in the forest, the secret of the proper observation
of this watch. He exhorted the two princes to fast the preceding day, take

a bath in the river before sunrise, and then worship the five family gods,
namely, Shiva, Parvati, Ganesha, Skanda, and Nandi. The water with
which the idols are bathed should be placed into a magic circle, a
mandala, drawn on the floor. This water they should drink the following
morning, after having kept vigil throughout the night. All the while, hymns
to Shiva-Mrityunjaya, “the conqueror of death,” should be sung and the
forehead smeared with three stripes of ashes.
After the princes had celebrated the Pradosha Vrata eight times in this
manner, they had accumulated enough merit to win back their kingdom
and eventually enter Shiva’s heaven. One of the young men was blessed
with a drink of the nectar of immortality and the other won the hand of
one of the most beautiful heavenly princesses. When other people
became aware of their success, they too began to worship Shiva on
those auspicious days of the month in exactly the same manner. Even
the gods began worshipping thus.
Such a festival on the eve of the full moon was not just thought up abstractly by
the priests and politicians who were eager to fill the calendar. Rather, it is based
on a finely tuned perception of a cosmologicalbiological event, namely, the
interplay of electromagnetic and “ethereal” forces of the moon, the sun, and the
earth. Any naturally sensitive person, as well as those who have developed their
“antennae” through meditation, a meatless diet, and abstinence from alcohol,
will be able to notice the special quality of this time, the increase in energy and
vitality. Exact scientific experiments, as well as old-fashioned peasant wisdom
and farmer’s rules concerning the best times to sow and plant, confirm that
during this time, starting on the eve of the full moon, seeds germinate and sprout
with special vigor.3 At this time, worms, mollusks, amphibians, fish, reptiles,
and insects are more lively and sexually active. Barn animals become restless
and go more readily into heat. Human beings, not excepted, suffer sleeplessness,
vivid dreams, increased sexual desire, poetic flights, and heightened
aggressiveness (as police statistics prove).
In all of this, the third eye (the pineal body, that remnant of the archaic
reptilian brain) plays a role. It registers the increasing light intensity of the
moonlit night (and probably other factors, such as lunar gravity) and, in turn,
induces the endocrine glands to work harder. The biorhythms, tied to lunar
cycles, evolved in our phylogenetic biography long before the conscious,
reflective ego. Using these rhythms in connection with meditative techniques,

occultists are able cross beyond the threshold of normal ego-consciousness.
Especially on the approach of the full moon, it is easiest to kindle fantasy and
induce love-magic. The moon, eroticism, and the power of imagination are
linked. To this day, one considers poets, lovers, and madmen as moonstruck, or
lunatic. All this brings us back to Shiva’s third eye. By burning the god of the
sex drive with its glare, he transformed the animal drive into spiritual fertility,
into the power of the world-engendering, creative imagination. At the conclusion
of the full moon celebration, the devotees rub ashes over their foreheads. The
connection with Eros is shown in another legend, which tells that on that day,
Shiva and Parvati, swooning in the afterglow of lovemaking, are in an especially
good mood and will fulfill any wish asked of them. This festival, anchored in
cosmologicalbiological rhythms, was also celebrated by our Indo-European
ancestors, especially by the Celts, whose lore has so much in common with the
Vedic Aryans.4 It was the original “Friday” of the double month, or fortnight, on
which the Celts fasted and sacrificed to the gods. Germanic tribes, such as the
Anglo-Saxons, dedicated the day to Freya, the goddess of love, vegetation, and
divination. The Catholic Church took over the ancient custom of Friday fasting,
but severed it from its cosmic context and applied it to the seven-day week.
Now, “Friday the thirteenth” has degenerated into a vague superstition as a day
to exercise special caution.
Every day of the Hindu double month is dedicated to, and reflects the nature
of, a certain divinity. (For a long time, even in the Christian West, the days
reflected the nature of the god for which they were named. Even now in Catholic
regions, the saints provide each day of the year with a unique quality.) Thus, the
fourth day of the waxing moon belongs to elephant-headed Ganesha, the sixth to
his brother, Skanda, and the eighth to Durga. Each day is, as well, a meditative
step toward Shiva-realization, as it leads from ordinary waking consciousness to
dream consciousness, then to deep-sleep consciousness, and finally, breaking
through to the “fourth state,” or superconsciousness. Thus, in Shiva-raja yoga,
the days progress from new moon to full moon in the following manner:5
First day: everyday waking consciousness (new moon)
Second day: waking dreaming Third day: waking deep sleep
Fourth day: waking superconsciousness (Ganesha’s day)
Fifth day: dreaming everyday consciousness
Sixth day: dreaming dreaming (Skanda’s day)
Seventh day: dreaming deep sleep
Eighth day: dreaming superconsciousness (Durga’s day)

Ninth day: catatonic everyday consciousness
Tenth day: catatonic dreaming
Eleventh day: catatonic deep sleep
Twelfth day: catatonic superconsciousness
Thirteenth day: superconscious everyday consciousness (Shiva’s day)
Fourteenth day: superconscious dreaming
To the casual observer, these steps seem to be but another of the prescientific
systems of ordering time. To the yogi, however, they indicate steps leading into
the depths of the macrocosmic, as well as microcosmic, being. On the thirteenth
day of the waxing moon, the macrocosmic “superconscious level” of being
comes closest to our everyday, mundane consciousness. On this blessed day, it is
easiest to experience the flash of white light in front of the spiritual eye. The
feeling is that of awakening out of deep catatonic sleep and being immersed in a
radiant ocean of light. In order to reach this point, one has to go with nature,
following the lead of the moon.a
 LINGAM PUJA 
By worshipping the lingam/yoni, human beings connect themselves with the
divine ground of being. The ancient ritual helps them come closer, step by step,
to their own divine nature. At the same time, Ishvara (God in his personal form)
approaches the soul of each worshipper, step by step, until that fleeting glimpse
of divine truth (darshana) is possible. In this way, Shiva worships Shiva.
In preparation for the puja, the devotees take a bath and wear freshly washed
clothes, preferably of natural fibers like silk or cotton. After rinsing their feet,
they enter the meditation room singing hymns. Sitting in front of the lingam,
they blow the conch, rings bells, and call upon God to seat himself on the throne.
A libation of five holy fluids (panchamrit abhishek) is gently poured over the
lingam, as an expression of veneration. The libation consists of Ganges water,
honey water, sugarcane juice, or of one of the sacred gifts of the cow: milk,
yogurt, or rendered butter (ghee). Seawater, coconut milk, fragrant oils, rose
water, and other such precious liquids are also acceptable. It should be noted,
though, that each liquid has its special merit. For example, washing the lingam
with cow’s milk (never water buffalo’s milk!) moves God to grant children, and
washing it with ghee opens heaven’s doors.
The pouring of the essence upon the lingam is accompanied by singing
Shiva’s name 108 times, or 1008 times. Finally, the Lord is rinsed in pure
Ganges water, smeared with cooling sandalwood paste, and decked with flowers.

It is believed that the water and sandalwood cool the lingam, which is ever hot
and inflamed because Shiva has a fiery eye and is chafing from having drunk the
poison. In some temples, cooling liquid constantly drops from a perforated
copper pot onto the feverish lingam.

Harpuja
During the ceremony, the Lord is constantly entertained by singing, the
offerings of water and fire (arati), and the invitation to taste the slices of coconut
meat, sweets, and fruits.
His nose is pleased by the smell of sweet incense and camphor. Like a great
king, he is fanned with a fan of yak-tail hair, which is cooling and drives the flies
away. As the puja comes to its climax, it swells to a crescendo of clanging bells
and cymbals and the blowing of conch shells. Finally, white ashes (vibhuti) are
rubbed on the foreheads of the pious, and fruits, sweets, and bits of coconut are
distributed and eaten as prashad (blessed food), in a manner similar to the bread
and wine taken by Christians after the celebration of the Eucharist. In this
manner, the Hindu believer has a daily experience of the Lord’s presence.
 SHIVA’S FLOWER GARDEN 
In a deep, esoteric sense, the soul is God’s garden of delight. The flowers with
which one honors his sign, the lingam, are but externalizations of what grows in
the inner garden. They are the thoughts and dreams, wishes and hopes, virtues
and vices all of us hold. The lingam puja demands that one take only the
freshest, most beautiful blossoms, preferably those grown by one’s own toil.
They must not be stolen or begged for, nor should their fragrance be inhaled, for
that is the food upon which the gandharvas, the angels, subsist. Flowers grown in
one’s own garden equal Vedic horse sacrifices in moving the favor of the gods.
Since “those born of bud and stem” are living beings incarnated in the cycle of
samsara, their dedication is a genuine sacrifice. In every plant, all the deities are
present: Brahma lives in the roots, Vishnu in leaf and stem, and Shiva in flower
and seed. Pollen and seed mark the end of the plant’s life cycle and belong,
consequently, to the God of dissolution. They are, in a sense, the fire and ashes
of the vegetable kingdom. They are consigned to Shiva so that they may rest in
him before a new cycle of life, a new season, causes them to reincarnate.
In the European Middle Ages, each flower had a mystical significance. For
example, the rose spoke of the five red wounds of the Savior, the lily of the
immaculate Virgin’s purity, and the violet of the soul’s humility. Similarly,
Hindu folklore attributes special meaning to each and every flower. Nothing is
arbitrary; each species has its definite purpose and time at which it is to be
offered. The system is so complicated that one must almost be born a Hindu to
understand it. Very generally, one offers white blossoms to achieve peace and
quiet for they have light, positive (sattvic) qualities. Red flowers give strength

and provide energy for any undertaking, for they have a rajasic (active) nature.
Dark flowers are tamasic and help realize dark desires and negative passions,
such as revenge and destruction of foes. Yellow flowers fulfill the wish for food
and are offered during famine.
Holy scriptures, like the Shiva Dharma Samgraha, give exact directions
regarding the use of flowers. If, for example, one places an indigo blossom
(Indigofera enneaphylla; Sanskrit nilivrksha) on the lingam, many obscure
wishes come true. A garland of sweet-smelling oleander (Nerium oleander;
Sanskrit karavir), which may only be offered in the dark of the night, opens the
treasury of the god of wealth. As the saying goes: No enemy as great as sin;
Nor friend as good as devoutness;
No god as great as Rudra;
No flower as good as Karavir.
The white, funnel-shaped flowers of the thorn apple (datura) sound the
trumpet of salvation. With a red lotus one conquers kingdoms, with the white
lotus one becomes a ruler, and with a blue lotus, given with a pure heart, one
opens the gates to Shiva’s heaven. The lilac blooms of the giant milkweed
(Calotropis gigantea; Sanskrit arkah) replace a course with Dale Carnegie, for
their effect is one of “making friends and influencing people.” The earnest swain
who pleases God with jasmine blossoms (Jasminum grandiflorum; Sanskrit jati)
will be able to marry the damsel of his dreams within six months. Separated
families can be reunited when they decorate the lingam with the bright red
flowering sprigs from the asok tree (Saraca asoka; Sanskrit ashokah) The
flowers of the chaste tree (Vitex negunda; Sanskrit nirgundi) free one from
servitude. (Christian monks used this plant to free themselves from the bondage
of carnal desire). One is cured of jaundice when one places sweet flag (Acorus
calamus; Sanskrit vaca) on the lingam. Whoever desires horse, oxen, or work
elephants should offer Shiva musk rose (Rosa moschata; Sanskrit kubjaka).
Whoever wants her enemies wasted, can offer camphor laurel (Cinnamomum
camphora; Sanskrit kapur).6 The list of plants and their application can be
extended indefinitely but, since our purpose is not a study of ethno-botany, we
shall stop here.
It must only be added that Mahadev is pleased by most plants, but not by all.
Especially taboo are the mendacious trio of flowers that, at the beginning of
time, bore false witness on behalf of Brahma, who claimed to have found the end
of the infinite column of fire. Recall how Vishnu and Brahma, quarreling as to
who was the greatest between them, decided to find the end of the great column

of fire that suddenly descended into their middle. Vishnu, diving into the depth,
admitted he could not find the bottom of the fiery column, which was Shiva’s
fire lingam. Brahma, however, lied, claiming to have found the top. He coerced
three flowers to bear false witness in his behalf. The three floral culprits in
question are the white fragrant blooms of the spiny screw pine (Pandanus
odoratissimus; Sanskrit ketaki), the bandhuk (Pentapetes phoenicea; Hindi
dopahariya), and the bitter, thorny vervaine, called ganiyari (Premna
integrifolia; Sanskrit agnimanthah).
Naturally, one could not expect these plants to sincerely carry one’s wishes to
Shiva. If one uses them, one is bound to remain stuck in whatever hell one finds
oneself in. The pandanus or screw pine flower has, nonetheless, a most
wonderful fragrance, so that to this day, women like to put a sprig of it in their
hair. Its essential oil is used to perfume soaps, shampoos, and hair oil, and its
fragrance belongs, along with patchouli and jasmine, to the typical odors of
India. Although the plant raised his ire, even Shiva cannot resist its magical
scent. On his wedding night, Shivratri, he put a flowering sprig of pandanus in
his matted hair. On that sacred night in February, it is acceptable to worship him
with this flower, but only then.
There are other plants, such as neem (Azidirachta indica), white roses, and
some kinds of jasmine and mimosas that are equally unacceptable to Shiva. The
flower of the century plant (Agave americana; Hindi kantala) is also unsuited
for worship, for it resembles the screw pine. The red hibiscus is never offered to
Shiva, but instead to Kali, for it symbolizes her angry, bloodshot eyes. Shiva
does not like dill. In India as in Europe, dill is considered a remedy against
ecstasy, including the ecstasy of love. Does this account for his dislike of the
plant, or is it that he is afraid of being henpecked by Parvati? In any case, there
was a curious custom in peasant Europe by which women sought to obtain the
upper hand in marriage. During the wedding ceremony, the bride secretly carried
mustard and dill seeds with her and whispered the following magical words:
Husband, I’ve got mustard and dill,
You must obey my every will.
Not only the kinds of flowers and the time of day to offer them are ritually
prescribed, but also the seasons and months to use them. Thus, during the month
of Jyeshtha (May/June), the lingam should be washed with buttermilk and
worshipped with lotus blossoms in order to achieve happiness. In the preceding
month of Vaishakha (April/May), one may acquire the merit of a horse sacrifice
by washing the Lord’s member in clarified butter and decorating it with the

white blooms of the mandara (Nyctanthes arbortristis). If one worships the
lingam during the spring month of Chaitra (March/April) with the flowering
risps of the kusha grass (Desmostachya bipinnata), one becomes wealthy.
During the month of Phalguna (February/March), one can claim half of Indra’s
throne by honoring Shankara with perfumed water and the flowers of a kind of
mimosa (drona). During the cool month of Margha (January/February), one may
fly in the wagon of the sun and the moon if one places the flowers of the wood
apple, or bel, tree on the Lord’s member. The highest social rank awaits him
who worships with the thorn apple (datura) during Pausha (December/January).
One shall cross the three worlds like a streak of lightning and arrive at Shivalok,
“Shiva’s heaven,” when one offers him indigo blossoms during the month of
Margashirsha (November/December). Whoever washes the lingam with milk
and decorates it with jasmine at Karttika (October/November) will be blessed
with a darshan of Mahadev. A light in the celestial chariot bearing the banner of
the peacock awaits the devotee who offers the giant milkweed (Calotropis
giganta) at Ashwina (September/October). During the preceding month of
Bhadrapada (August/September), a ride in the chariot bearing the banner of the
swan is assured for those who offer silver sprigs of a common weed of the
amaranthus family (Achyranthes aspera). Those who but for a meal a day fast
during Shravana (July/August) and give oleander blossoms, will be rewarded
with a thousand cows. And, finally, if one offers sandalwood flowers during
Ashadha (June/July) and bathes in the river during the dark of the moon, one
will reach the realm of Brahma one day.7
The preceding by no means exhausts the endless elaboration of India’s
esoteric plant lore. Not only flowers, grasses, herbs, and shrubs cross-relate to all
gods, planets, seasons, and times of day, but there is even a spiritual science of
the leaves of these plants, telling when and how they are to be used in Shiva’s
worship. We can safely ignore them but for one: the bel or bilva leaf.
 BEL: SHIVA’S TRIUNE LEAF 
Western visitors to an Indian temple might have noticed a cloverlike leaf resting
on a Shiva lingam and, if they thought anything at all, they might have supposed
the wind blew it there. It is, however, a very special leaf, purposely placed. It
belongs to the bel, bilva, or wood apple tree (Aegle marmelos), called in Sanskrit
the shriphala, the “tree rich in fruit.” Like orange and lemon, it belongs to the
citrus family and has, indeed, a large green, orange-sized fruit with a very hard,
woody rind. Its orange marrow is made into a refreshing sherbet, which no
miserable globetrotter, suffering from the “Bombay bomber blues” (dysentery,

diarrhea) should ignore. It is an effective remedy for loose bowels of any kind,
as well as for piles.
Because Shiva loves this tree more than any other (the sacred fig tree, or pipal,
belongs to Vishnu), it is frequently planted next to Shaivite shrines. One of
Shiva’s 1008 names is Bilvadandin, “carrier of the woodapple staff.” As part of
their morning ablutions, believers splash some river water (which they carry in
small brass pots used for ritual purposes) on the tree’s roots while chanting
mantras. Others honor the tree with rice, orange powder, (sindur), or by lighting
small butter lamps at its trunk. Women might hug the trunk, wrap red string
around it clockwise, or braid a few of its trifoliate leaves into their tresses, in
order that their wishes be fulfilled and their husbands stay strong and healthy. In
order not to anger Shiva, the tree is never felled and its wood is never burned.
(However, if it is absolutely necessary for some reason to chop it down, to do it
one hires a Muslim, who is hell bound, anyway!) 
The three-leaved bilva or bel plant (Aegle marmelos)
The main thing about the tree is its threefold leaf. Like the clover of Saint
Patrick, it is the symbol of the triune God, the threefold nature of the universe,
the three gunas, the trinity of creation, sustenance, and dissolution. An oath
sworn on such a leaf is equivalent to our swearing on a Bible. Because of its
cooling nature, it is placed on Shiva’s hot lingam. Sometimes the cooling is
augmented by writing the word Ram (God) with sandalwood paste on it.
 BANGERI BABA 
Shiva-Aushadhishvara is the lord of herbs and consciousness-changing drugs.
Hemp (Cannabis) and thorn apple are his favorites. He is the only god of the
entire pantheon who is constantly “high.” In many folktales (puranas) he appears
as a “lord of fools” (Bholanath) who is easy to please, who can’t say no, and
who often gets into trouble because of his habit of getting stoned. In this aspect,

he plays the role of the divine trickster, much like Coyote of the American
Indian or Rabbit of African lore. Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, in his lectures on the
Vigyana Bhairava Tantra, calls Shiva the original hippie.8 The Bhagavata
Purana tells that, in order to save a worshipper out of the clutches of a demon,
he “assumed half the body of Parvati, fastened up his matted hair, rubbed his
body over with ashes, ate a large quantity of hemp, swallow-wortb and thorn
apple; and wearing a Brahmanical thread composed of white snakes, clad in an
elephant’s hide, with a necklace of beads and a garland of skulls, riding upon
Nandi, accompanied by ghosts, goblins, specters, witches, imps, sprites and evil
spirits, Bholonath came forth. On his forehead was the moon; he placed the
Ganges on his head and his eyes were very red.”9
Bhang—Shiva’s holy plant
The tales told by storytellers about this disheveled trickster, whose eyes are
always red because he smokes too much hemp, fill the evening hours in the
villages with much merriment. It is said that he is lazy, does not shave, stinks
like an old billy goat, and just can’t get himself positively motivated. He is so
addicted that he even hocked Parvati’s wedding dowry—her jewels and golden
ring—in order to buy himself more dope.
However, we should not feel too sorry for her, for in part, she is also to blame.
After they were married, Shiva continued his habit of rambling through the
forests and mountains, being gone from home for long stretches of time. The
new bride felt quite neglected. Since she was versed in the magic of herb lore,
she decided to brew him a drink from the flowering tops of the female hemp
plant. That did the trick! After having taken a couple of draughts, he looked at
her and suddenly realized that there was no woman more beautiful than she and
no place as fine as the simple hut that was their home.
Another version of the same story tells of Parvati as an overworked housewife
with two squalling brats hanging onto her, and a lazy husband. Not only was he

slothful, but always hungry. Constantly he nagged her to cook him something,
even though the larder was usually empty. Finally, she simply cooked him a
batch of bhang (hemp leaves), and although he might have become totally
indolent, at least he was satisfied and left her in peace.
Another story tells of a sensitive Shiva who became a drunkard because he
took the curse of his father-in-law, Daksha, too much to heart. But, however he
acquired his bad habits, Parvati still loves him and tenderly calls him her bhola,
her dear fool.
Shiva’s devotees, the sadhus, roam about the Subcontinent in imitatio dei.
Like their master, they cover themselves in ashes, avoid work, let their hair grow
long and matted and bleach it yellow with lye, smoke immense quantities of
ganja and thorn apple, and refer to their Lord as “Bhangeri Baba.” It is easy to
understand that the modern Indian government is not on best terms with them.
The sadhus take the drug in order to “lift off” and see the world from a
philosophical perspective, and as an aid to meditation. They claim it is an
important help in maintaining brahmacharya (sexual abstinence), which is so
important in accumulating shakti power.
The “madness,” the constant state of being “high” of Shiva and his devotees
can be interpreted in another manner. It is the drunkenness with the divine spirit,
the ecstasy of his presence. Shiva fills his followers with “holy madness.” As
though pouring away putrid water, he empties their minds of mundane common
sense, and, in turn, fills them to the marrow of their bones with heavenly
ambrosia, with the joy of liberation.10 The devotee is a liberated soul, but in the
eyes of those caught in the endless cycle of illusion, the wheel of samsara, he
appears to be a madman (pittar), a hysteric, a drunk, or a mental case. How is the
ordinary citizen of the world to understand the utterances of such a pittar? His
words sound as absurd as the statements of the dervish to the orthodox Muslim,
or as the poems of the Dadaist poet to the ears of the European bourgeoisie.
Emily Dickinson expressed this illusive paradox by writing: Much madness is
divinest Sense
To a discerning Eye—
Much sense—the starkest Madness—
Tis the Majority
In this, as All, prevail—
Assent—and you are sane—
Demur—you’re straightway dangerous—
And handled with a Chain.11

One of the great Shaivite saints of Tamil Nadu, Manikkavacakar (ninth
century A.D.), who was repudiated for his weeping, laughing, rolling on the
ground, and incoherent babbling, sings out: Though the world mocked me
calling me “demon,”
I abandoned shame.
The local people’s despising talk
my mind bent
into ornaments of praise.12
Ecstatically, this ecstatic poet and upholder of Shaivite philosophy proclaims:
We’re not subject to anyone.
We don’t fear anything.
We’ve joined His devotees.
We’ll dive (into the sea of bliss) again and again
And cavort there with His devotees.13
The madness and intoxication of the Shaivites (especially in south India) is
one of having completely fallen in love (prema-bhakti) with Shiva, the lover of
souls. The divine fool sees no problem of sustaining his flight of soul with song
and dance and, possibly, underscoring it with drugs. Why, otherwise, would
Shiva-Aushadhishvara have given human beings songs and magical herbs? Is it
not so that they help break down the prison walls of our rigid, ossified minds? In
the guise of a guru, Shiva appeared to Manikkavacakar in the port city of
Perunturai and made him his bhakta (devotee of the yoga of divine love): While
unperishing love melted my bones,
I cried,
I shouted again and again,
Louder than the waves of the billowing sea,
I became confused,
I fell,
I rolled,
I wailed.
Bewildered like a madman,
intoxicated like a crazy drunk,
so that people were puzzled

and those who heard wondered.
Wild as a rutting elephant which cannot be mounted,
I could not contain myself.14
Apart from the outbursts of Pentecostalism, such God-drunkenness remains
rather suspect in Western cultures. Already the Old Testament, the cornerstone
of our Zarathustrian, Judeo-Christian worldview, rejects inebriation and ecstasy
as a form of worthy worship. They smack too much of the drunken religious
orgies of the Canaanites, the Baal, and Mother Goddess worshipping enemies of
the Chosen People. Again and again, the call is made for sobriety and
moderation. Loss of self-control is feared. A drunken man is beside himself,
without being in God.15 Despite the debaucheries of Dionysian bacchants,
despite licentious Saturnalias and the Hilaria,c ancient Greece and Rome ranked
the logos (reason, logic, ordered speech) and ratio (reason, computation) higher
than “divine madness.” The infamous “bread and circuses” were spectacles
designed to control the masses, rather than expressions of religious fervor.
Christianity has continued this emphasis on sobriety, and saints have always had
to beware that their rapture not be taken for demonic possession. Saint Paul
(Galatians 5: 12) warns against drinking and feasting, telling his flock that those
who indulge will not inherit the kingdom of God.
The murderous persecution of witches at the close of the Middle Ages was
basically a crusade against remnants of an ecstatic nature religion that also used
consciousness-changing drugs (witches’ salves). The French Revolution,
marking the victory of the rational Enlightenment over archaic authorities, went
even as far as putting up a statue of the “Goddess of Reason” on one of the
Parisian places. It signals the attempt to establish the rule of the rational intellect
once and for all. It is a major marking point of what the famous German
sociologist 
Max 
Weber 
called 
the 
Entzauberung 
der 
Welt 
(the
demythologization of the world). The current “war on drugs” is entirely in line
with this cultural tradition. Alcohol might be permitted, might even be necessary
to occasionally let steam off, but moderation is the citizen’s first duty. She is
reminded to mind her P’s and Q’s (pints and quarts of alcohol). Life is
proverbially serious.
Given the complexity and speed of the modern technological civilization, we
can only agree that, apart from uppers (drugs such as coffee or tobacco) and
downers (such as barbiturates or alcohol), psychedelic substances have no place
in our cultural cosmos. They would, indeed, subversively undermine it. In a
largely agrarian society like India, however, drugs like hemp and thorn apple are
fully integrated. Though their use is generally not approved of for young people

or those in the full of life, these psychedelics are readily available for the world-
renouncers (sannyasins), the holy vagabonds (sadhus), and the old, who are
preparing their souls for the journey beyond.
 SHIVA’S GARDEN OF MADNESS 
Let us subject the plants that play such an important role in the cult of Shiva to a
little closer scrutiny. First of all there is hemp (Cannabis indica), the seed of
which Shiva, at the beginning of creation, personally planted into the soil. Ever
since, it has had a long history as a useful fiber plant and as one of the chief
remedies of Ayurvedic medicine. The Shaivites, who are above all interested in
its consciousness-changing potential, refer to it as subjee (vegetable), vijaya
(victory), unmatti (madness), siddhi (magic power, since it is used to heighten
paranormal faculties such as telepathy, levitation, invisibility, seeing spirits,
reading thoughts, and other such things that the rational citizen of modern
materialistic civilization places into the realm of fable or psychiatry), Harshini’s
weed (Harshini is the god of the funeral rites), Shivapriya or Shankarpriya
(Shiva’s beloved), Shivamuli (Shiva’s root), angaj (cream of the body), and
many other colorful names. Already in the Brahmanas, written some 2800 years
ago, the sacred entheogenic plant is referred to as Vijaya (Victory) or as
Indracarana (the food of Indra, the constantly inebriated god of thunder).16 Most
familiar to Westerners is the name charas, referring to the plant’s resin mixed
with pollen, which Muslim merchants smoke as “hashish” in their water pipes,
and which is trafficked all over the globe by criminal organizations such as the
notorious “Bande Française,” or by various “liberation movements.”
The Hindus prefer bhang, a simple concoction of leaves and female flowers of
the dioecious plant species. These are finely minced, mixed with yogurt, spiced
with black pepper, and drank as a liquid, or rolled into marble-sized balls and
eaten. At major social events such as Shaivite holidays, at weddings or funerals,
two or three such bhang balls are taken with a glass of water or hot, sugared,
milky tea (chai). During the wedding festival, the bride and the bridegroom are
taken to be the living incarnation of Shiva and Parvati. Like Shiva at his own
wedding, the groom arrives with a dancing, singing, jesting following of friends
and relatives, coming to fetch his bride. The drug helps all participants to elevate
their minds into a sacred reality, so that the event becomes a re-enactment of the
original divine wedding.
Bhang can be baked into sweets (mithai) or drunk with buttermilk or fruit
juices (sherbet), or prepared as a refreshing summer drink called thandai. The
ingredients—including spices, nuts, and chicory seeds (kasni)—must always be

ground and stirred in the auspicious clockwise direction, in correspondence with
the movement of the sun, before they are mixed, together with bhang, into milk
or rose water. Such a drink is commonly compared to the stream of ambrosia
that gushes as a jet from Shiva’s topknot. It is Ganga, the heavenly river, which
floods the soul with colorful pictures. A folk saying from Bihar draws the
connection:17
Ganga and Bhanga are sisters
Who live in Gangadharae
Ganga will give you wisdom,
Bhanga will show you the way to heaven.
Before taking a drink, the brew is dedicated to Shankar by lifting it to the
forehead and invoking his name. Having thus been consecrated, it is received
back from God as prashada, as an “agent of God’s grace.”

Intoxicated Shiva with chilam
Ganja is the name given to the better quality of hemp flowers, which are often
baked into sweet pastries or smoked in hollow clay pipes called chilam or
chillum. The holy men and women, the yoginis, may indulge in smoking this
herb as much as they want to, for having broken all social bonds of family,
region, or caste, they no longer belong to the world, but entirely to Shiva. As a
sign of their status, they walk about naked or dressed in simple red or orange
wraps, the color of the flames of the funeral pyre. Smoking hemp is also
condoned with very old men, the poorest of peasants, and the untouchables on
the bottom of society. Anyone else who indulges is looked at askance. Chronic
ganja-wallahs enjoy about the same degree of respect as the chronic alcoholics
or junkies do in Western society, and the Indians are quite upset when their
youth imitate the hippies.
Chilam—an attribute of Shiva
Sadhus and sadhvis (female sadhus), however, no longer live in the world of
mortals. As they wander from one holy place to the next, they live in “dream
time.”f At every step, they witness the deeds and wonders of the living gods. The
chilam accompanies their journey through a “mythological” universe. Generally
they smoke twice a day, once “when the crows are cawing,” in the morning
hours just after the mandatory bath and the round of begging, and once in the
evening hours. The sadhus smoke the pure dried herb, without any admixture of
tobacco or other substances.
The chilam, their only possession apart from beads, a begging bowl, and a
sleeping blanket, is honored as a Shiva lingam. Some chilams are very simple
tubes of red, baked clay; others, like the black clay pipes from Manali, are
decorated with magical designs and runes. Some show a cobra wrapped eight
times around the stem, a sign of shakti energy rising through the chakras.
More often than not, smoking the chilam is a social, not a private affair.
Sitting under the sheltering branches of a pipal or banyan tree, or on a river
bank, the holy man or woman will share the ritual with other sadhus, devotees,
or even foreigners. Casually talking, telling witty stories, profound parables, or
even jokes, he will wait until the “vibrations” are just right (shanti). Then he’ll

pull the magic funnel out of its bag. He might stroke it, maybe even talk to it, or
put it to his lips like a horn and blow a long sustained, steady tone. Like a
shaman, with his spirit caller, he invites the helping spirits and gods to
participate.
Now the magic weed is stuffed into the pipe. Before lighting it, the sadhu
might growl like a wild animal or a demon. Sometimes it is lit with two matches,
one for Shiva and one for Shakti. The fire hits the dry herb like lightning from
Shiva’s third eye. The flame is Kali reducing the world to ashes, for the
enjoyment of Shiva. The red glow in the funnel is Shakti; it is the funeral pyre of
Manikarnika, Shiva’s favorite dancing ground in Benares.
Just before taking the first long draught, the sadhu shouts “Bom Shankar!”
“Bom, bom Bholanath!” or simply, “Bom! Bom!”g These invocations have their
equivalent in Western cultures, when we raise our glasses of spirituous liquors
with the toast of “Cheers” or “To your health!” In both cases, the hope is
expressed that the impending change of mood and consciousness may take a
good turn. For the Indians, “bom, bom” (or “bam, bam”) signifies the bleating of
a goat. Why that? It is the “bah, bahs” of the goat-headed cocreator or demiurge
Daksha. He represents the unintelligent, mundane rationality that is, compared to
the higher universal wisdom, but the stupid bleating of a hardheaded, sclerotic
animal. Ever since Shiva-Rudra destroyed the self-satisfied sacrifice of Daksha
and placed a goat’s head on him, this archpriest has been praying to Shiva
continuously in his monotone “bom, bom,” and has been rewarded with grace.
Now the smoking funnel circulates in the auspicious clockwise direction
among the participants. When one receives the pipe, one lifts it with both hands
to one’s forehead, pressing it on the third eye (ajna chakra), while calling out
“Bom Shankar,” or a similar invocation. At this moment the mind must be
absolutely centered; nothing must distract it from its essence, from Shiva. It is
not an ordinary mortal who raises the chilam, but it is Shiva himself, dedicating
it to himself. And now, fully concentrated, he takes a strong, steady toke. What
fills his lungs and then permeates his whole body from head to toe is not the
smoke from a burning weed, but heavenly ether (prana). The tourist, who thinks
of “smoke” or, for that matter, who bothers to think at all, will inevitably start to
cough. Coughing, however, is not considered to be a good omen: it reveals
disharmony or perhaps a bad conscience. In that case, the resulting visions might
be confused or distorted; Shiva might appear as an unpredictable Rudra or even
as a wild, paranoid, maniacal Bhairava.


Daksha
For the genuine sadhu, however, such problems do not exist. He sucks prana
into his being, holds it for a long time, and then releases it in an even, steady
stream. One or two such draughts suffice to “arrive,” to enter the sacred realm.
Now he is Shiva! He is Narayana, “God in human form.”h Shivoham (I am
Shiva) is no longer an empty formula. The breath he releases becomes the very
life-breath of creation. He looks at his World and loves it. She is his dancing
Shakti. He is pure consciousness. He has pierced the veil of illusion and is no
longer attached. Nothing more needs to be said, nothing to be done, nothing to
be thought. In his total awareness, everything is blessed, everything is eternal.
And now, they may come to him, his children, the villagers, the young and old,
the animals too. Full of respect and full of trust, they lay their hopes and wishes,
their worries and sorrows at his feet. Since he is Shiva, and since they have
approached him with pure hearts, their wishes will be fulfilled, in miraculous,
unforeseen ways.
 SACRED ASHES 
Smoking the chilam constitutes a dissolving, an annihilation, a process of dying.
In this little pyre circulating form hand to hand, the manifold veils, shells, and
husks enveloping our being catch flame. The rotting cadavers of past
misdemeanors, the corpses of past deeds (karma) are turned into snow-white
ashes. The cold, rigid, unkind, illusionary world of Daksha dissolves in the
smoke and is returned to an unfixed, floating, nonrigid, youthful state. The
mental complexes barricading the “supersensual” world are shattered, and the
demonic hordes accompanying Shiva dance and frolic in front of the eyes of the
initiate. They are but etheric images of the spirits of nature. Suddenly, the dead
appear also, and the gods! In a deeper state of samadhi (religious trance;
absorption in the ultimate reality), all these “supernatural” beings disappear,
making way for unspeakable “suchness” (or tathata, as the Buddhists call it).
Now Shankar sits in total absorption in absolute bliss, consciousness, and being
(satchitananda) on Kailash, the mountain of pure snow, the mountain of white
ash, the mountain of salvation.
Somehow, imperceptibly at first, the snow softens and starts to melt. Single
droplets form trickles, and these in turn become crystalclear, bubbling mountain
streams. Now Ganga spills down Mahadeva’s matted locks. As a mighty stream
she reaches the earth and inundates the underworld. Her touch revives the bones
of the dead and raises the doomed sons of Sagara, who were cremated by the

fierce fire of an ascetic’s eye, back to life. Kama, the lust for existence and the
joy of the lila of life, is resurrected. Thus the sadhu returns to the world. After
the chilam is cold and the meditation has come to an end, he may dab his
forehead with some of the chilam’s ashes, or taste them, placing them on his
tongue as prashad. The grayish white powder is said to be one of the best
medicines, a heal-all. The Tirujnanasambandar declares: The holy ash, which
gives back to us our life,
The holy ash, which brings salvation,
What has one to fear, whose forehead is dabbed with white ash?
Some sorcerers empty the remains of the smoked pipe into a polished coconut
bowl or a bit of a skull. They then scry these ashes, much as the tea leaf reader
“reads” the leaves at the bottom of the teacup. The different shapes and shades
of the flakes and globules, which roll like tiny rudrakshas in the bowl, turn into
faces and beings—dwarfs, goblins, giants, landscapes, and events—becoming
alive, only to fall into gray formlessness again. Pure white ash indicates used-up
karma; dark, incompletely burned rests indicate the fateful seeds of unredeemed
karma, springing into external reality, seeking further salvation.
The ritual is concluded with a scrupulous cleaning of the pipe. It constitutes a
purification, analogous to the meticulous cleaning rituals Hindus perform on
their bodies after such activities as eating, excreting, sleeping, or having sexual
intercourse. Ceremoniously, the chilam’s owner pulls a strip of cloth through the
funnel. While his neighbor holds the other end of the strip, he moves the chilam
rhythmically, hypnotically, back and forth, polishing it until it is shiny. Other
sadhus simply take a handful of grass and clean the pipe without much ado.
Finally, the clean chilam, the cloth strip, the coconut shell, and the stone that
serves as a stopper to prevent the ganja from falling out at the bottom, are
carefully stored in their proper bag. To the anthropologist it becomes obvious
that the chilam and its container are, as far as their ritual importance and sanctity
are concerned, on a par with the medicine pipe and medicine bag of the
American Indians, and with similar magical paraphernalia of shamans
everywhere. One senses the great antiquity of these things.
The place value of ashes in Shaivite mythology comes to expression in the
following statements from the Brahmanda Purana. After the jealous and
embittered hermits of the pine forest had cursed the youthful, virile Shiva, along
with their seemingly unfaithful wives, they practiced even harder austerities. But
all their self-torture did not help them, for they got ever further from the right
path and became ever more dissatisfied and confused. At long last, their father

Brahma admonished them to swallow their foolish pride and to worship Shivas’s
linga. They bathed, and then rubbed their bodies with ashes until they looked
bleached white, like ghosts. Now Shiva appeared to the penitents, telling them:18
I am Agni and Devi is Soma. The ashes are my seed, and I bear my seed on my Body. I am Agni, the
maker of Soma and I am Soma who takes refuge in Agni. When the universe is burned by my fire, and
reduced to ashes, I establish my seed in ashes and sprinkle all creatures.
As the rishis calmed down and completed their penance, he explained further:
The supreme purification of this entire universe is to be accomplished by ashes; I place my seed in
ashes and sprinkle creatures with it. One who has done that which is to be done by fire will master the
three times. By means of ashes, my seed, one is released from all sins. When ashes illuminate anything
brightly and make it fragrant, from that moment on it is called “ash” and ashes alone remain from all
evils.…
Therefore, illustrious ones, ashes are known as my seed, and I bear my own seed upon my body as is
my custom. Henceforth, ashes will be used for protection against inauspicious people, and in the
houses where women give birth. And one who has purified his soul by bathing in ashes, conquered his
anger, and subdued his senses will come into my presence and never be reborn again.19
Once upon a time, many, many years ago, the great rishi Mankanaka cut
his finger on a blade of kusha grass. His tapas (the heat generated by
ascetic exercises) had been so strong that his blood had clarified. What
flowed from the cut was no longer red blood, but a clear greenish juice,
like plant sap. The sage became so happy that he danced for joy, and
everybody who saw him started to dance, until all creatures of the forest
were dancing. Then, a young Brahmin, a stranger, came along and
asked: “Why all this excitement?”
“Don’t you see, worthy Brahmin,” jubilated the rishi, “green sap is
flowing in my veins! How formidable my penance has been!”
The stranger just laughed. Taking a blade of kusha grass, he also
scratched his skin. Ash, white and pure as driven snow, came trickling
out. Mankanaka, recognizing his Lord, fell on his knees.
The Occident is quite familiar with the mystery of ashes. The ancient Greeks
performed magic with the ashes of sacrificial animals. For the alchemists, ashes
belonged to Saturn, the oldest of the planetary gods, he who marks the periphery
of the visible world. Though his cruel scythe spells death, in his sack he carried
the seeds of the future. The alchemists reinterpreted the inscription I.N.R.I.
above Christ’s cross as Igne natura renovatur integra (Nature is completely

renewed by fire); with that, Golgotha, the mount of salvation, becomes a mount
of ashes. In the athanor, the oven used for transmutation, the alchemists
“calcinated” the “black raven” into the “white dove.” In some European fairy
tales, such as Cinderella, the heroine (representing the human soul) has to be
humbled by ashes and cinders before she is ready to become the bride of the
prince (the symbol of the spirit).
The Christmas season especially bears within it the holy mystery of the ashes.
Like the Phoenix, the mythical Egyptian bird that consumes itself in flames and
is reborn from the ashes, the Christ Child is born each year again in the darkest
night of the year, amid the snows (ashes) blowing fiercely from the north. Along
with the spirit-child comes Santa Claus, traditionally an old, haggard man
dressed in fiery red like the Indian sannyasi, carrying a sack of apples and nuts,
the seeds of future life. In Lusatia (Lausitz), in Slavic central Germany, he
appears as a rider on a white horse, carrying a sack of ashes.
In the Scandinavian North at this time of the winter solstice, the yule log is
burned. Its ashes were considered holy and were made into medicine for house,
barn, and field. And finally, there remains with us the Ash Wednesday custom,
when after the buffoonery of Mardi Gras the priests preach penance and dab
ashes on the head of the believers. An Indian sadhu would have no difficulty
understanding this custom.
By now, the implementers of the rational Enlightenment have successfully
wiped away most of the cobwebs of such old “superstition.” Apart from
sentimental value or satisfaction of the intellectual curiosity of folklorists, they
have little place in the modern world. And yet, the colorful imagery of myth,
ritual, and fairy tale are the food of the soul, and as such a human birthright. It is
no wonder that during the 1960s and ‘70s, when cheap jet transportation made it
possible, the youth of the industrialized world flocked to India, gorging on the
smorgasbord of religious imagery and ritual. The sadhus, being beyond the rules
and taboos of caste, class, or race, did not have to worry about ritual pollution in
dealing with these mlechhas, these unclean foreigners. As the hippies and flower
children streamed over the Kyber Pass and poured into Bharat (India), many
natives thought they might be refugees from drought and famine, and freely fed
and sheltered them according to the Vedic rule: “Treat the guest as God!”
In some way, the Indian peasants were not wrong in their assumption. Indeed,
the young travelers were fugitives—refugees from a spiritual drought. They
were starved for meaning; their schools and colleges taught them only scientific
agnosticism and philosophical nihilism. Now they sat hungrily at the feet of
gurus or joined the roaming sadhus. Along with smatterings of Hinduism, they
learned the ritual of the chilam. Under the guidance of the sadhus, they learned

to elicit totally different dimensions from the illegal herb than those they were
used to from puffing a marihuana joint. The joint, which had entered the scene in
the States via black jazz musicians and Mexican braceros (migrant workers),
was capable of taking some of the hard edges off the technological nightmare
and opening the ears to the sound of cool jazz or good rock and roll. The chilam,
however was different. It opened the door to Shiva.
 THE SHADOW OF THE NIGHT 
Another plant plays an important role in the cult of Shiva. It is called the thorn
apple, devil’s trumpet, or jimson weed; it is one of the most poisonous plants
known. The Indians call this nightshade Shivashekhara (Shiva’s crown) or
dhatura (from Sanskrit dhat = gift), a term that Linnaeus borrowed as the
scientific nomenclature for the genus Datura. A few seeds from the thorny apple
or a morsel of its rank-smelling foliage in the smoking mixture can send the
mind of the sadhu cruising through his body or through the astral world. For the
uninitiated, it confuses the senses and is apt to throw the autonomic nervous
system into a spin. It can turn a man into a raving satyr and a woman into a
nymphomaniac, but it can just as easily terminate life. For Shiva, the master of
poisons, the drinker of the Halahala, the conqueror of death (Mrityunjaya) this
herb poses as little a problem as it did to his Thracian counterpart, the god of
inebriation, Dionysos, whose locks were also adorned with the perfumey, white,
trumpetshaped flowers.
Thorn apple (dhatura)— another sacred plant of Shiva
At their major festivals, Shaivites take a few seeds of dhatura together with
bhang, in order to join the ghosts, goblins, and elemental spirits in their riotous
abandon. Anyone who has experienced a celebration such as Shiva’s Night

(Shivratri) in Mahadev’s city on the Ganges, will inevitably think of descriptions
of the Dionysian hosts, the satyrs, nymphs, and frenzied maenads who,
according to some authors, used thorn apple to spike their wine.20 It is possible
that Shiva and Kali are historically connected with Dionysos and his mother—
legend has it that the latter two traveled to India riding a white bull—and that
datura was the nexus of their cults.21 More likely, the tropane-alkaloid
responsible for ancient Greek Dionysian revelry was derived from mandrake or
henbane. The datura plant seems to have come from India to Europe much later
with the Gypsies, whose occult powers, it is believed, are based primarily on
their exact knowledge of its use. The Thugs, too, are said to ritually indulge in
this nightshade in preparation for their strangling expeditions.22
The power of the thorn apple is not to be taken lightly. It unfetters inhibitions
and gives vent to whatever is hidden in the deepest, darkest recesses of the
psyche. It can be truly demonic. Many curious and careless hippies have come to
a bad end after trying this treacherous drug.h Native sorcerers treat the plant with
utmost respect. The Nepali shaman (jhankrie) dares approach it only in the
framework of an elaborate ritual. He fasts and abstains from sex before seeking
out the plant, on the evening of an auspicious day, such as when the new moon
(Shiva moon) reappears. He goes either totally nude or merely wraps his loins
with an unstitched orange cloth, upon which are printed sacred symbols
(tridents, chakras, swastikas, the OM, suns, etc.). He offers a few grains of rice,
water, or beer, and lights a butter lamp. All night long, his songs laud Shiva,
whose manifestation the dangerous nightshade is. As the morning dawns, he
finally plucks the leaves he needs and takes them to give to his patients as
medicine.
In tantric tradition the thorn apple and hemps are the Divine Couple in plant
form. The dhatura is the uncontrollable Rudra; the ganja is gentle Devi.

14
SHIVA’S FESTIVALS AND HOLIDAYS
To the utterly at-one with Shiva
there’s no dawn,
no new moon,
no noonday,
no equinoxes,
nor sunsets,
nor full moons;
his front yard
is the true Benares,
O Ramanatha.
DEVARA DASIMAYYA,
SOUTH INDIAN POET, TENTH CENTURY
Like Europe during its feudal period and India today, where 80 percent of the
population are still rural folk, traditional peasant societies are tied to the flow of
the seasons, to the annual cycle of sowing and harvesting, and to the natural
rhythms of the plant and animal kingdoms. These rhythms, in turn, are tied to the
movements of the heavenly bodies, the sun, the moon, and the planets. Peasant
society’s existential link to the rhythmic pulses of nature is mirrored in a rosary
of colorful seasonal festivals, worshipping the gods that stand behind the ever
recurring phenomena.1 The dates are not set according to some abstract or
utilitarian considerations (like nationalistic holidays), but flow out of the natural
cosmic order themselves.
The solar and lunar cycles provide the framework for Hindu holidays. The old
Indo-European double month, consisting of the waxing and waning lunation,
plays a major role. The dark and light halves of the month are seen as the nights
and days of the pitris, the fathers, or ancestors.
Here, we shall mainly investigate the Shaivite festivals. The many colorful
birthdays of the gods (jayanthis), the countless regional celebrations, and the
caste-specific holidays we must leave aside, and even such great annual events

as the Ramlila, celebrating Rama’s victory over the ten-headed demon king
Ravanna.
 THE DESCENT OF THE GODDESS 
The traditional Indian year starts in the spring with the waxing moon, in the
second half of the month of Chaitra (March/April). It begins with a nine-day
homage to the Goddess. The winter crops have just been harvested and now, for
nine days and nine nights, Durga, the mother of all beings, appearing as nine
Shaktis, dwells among the people. She is feasted and entertained like a visiting
queen. Songs are sung, her pictures and statues are garlanded and her name is
ever repeated (japa) in the hope that she may reveal her divine essence in
darshana.
These nine days remind the worshipper of Durga’s nine-day struggle with the
demon Bhandasura. Ganesha’s roguery had brought the demon into existence.
The little rascal with the elephant head wanted to make himself a little toy
monster with which to play. Out of the dust that was left of Kama after Shiva
had zapped the god of lust, Ganesha kneaded a lumpy figure and breathed life
into it. Quickly the new demon developed into an ambitious egomaniac. Right
away, he began with the hardest austerities, which eventually gave him the
power to threaten the three worlds. Nobody, except Durga, could destroy the
monstrosity.
Esoterically, the terrible nine-day battle stands for the nine steps the individual
soul (jiva) has to take on its way to realizing its higher nature (Shiva). For three
of the days, the devotees worship the goddess as the wild, demon-killing, lion-
riding Durga; for three more days, they worship her as Lakshmi, the provider of
prosperity; for the final three days, they honor her as Sarasvati, the goddess of
light, who inspires wisdom. On the tenth day, the day of her victory, the goddess
leaves the world of manifestation and returns to her husband on Mount Kailash.
The thrice transformed goddess represents the three major steps taken in the
transformation of the human soul: It starts with the victory over demonic forces,
goes on to worldly prosperity and then to the gentle wealth of wisdom, and
reaches its goal in the return and unification with the Self. It is a threefold
alchemy, metamorphosing step by step from the tamasic, to the rajasic, to the
sattvic state of being, before regaining wholeness.
 FESTIVALS OF THE HOT SEASON AND THE RAINY SEASON 

Now, the goddess having returned to higher regions, the month of Vaishakha
(April/May) arrives. The temperature rises daily; hot, desiccating winds blow
billows of fine dust over the parched land. People and animals become irritable,
the monkeys languish, and the cattle hunger. Finally it is so hot that the flies and
mosquitoes die off. It is understandable that, under these conditions, the “cool”
goddesses, such as Ganga and the goddess of the pox, Shitala “the refreshing
one,” is paid homage. On the seventh day of the waxing moon, Ganga Saptami
(Ganga’s seventh) is celebrated with refreshing dips into the kunds (water tanks)
and rivers. It marks the day Shiva released the headstrong goddess from his
tangled locks.
During the following month of Jyeshtha (May/June), during the first ten days
of the waxing fortnight, the great bathing festival of Ganga Dussehra (Ganga’s
tenth) is celebrated. The holy stream, now swollen with clear, fresh waters from
the melting ice and snow of the high Himalayas, invites millions of bathers.
Those who do not live near the Ganges sprinkle themselves and their household
belongings with holy Ganges water, which can be bought in small sealed copper
pots. Such pots are often kept and worshipped the whole year, much as European
peasants used to keep “Easter water,” to which they attributed magical and
healing powers. Dussehra, the “tenth,” is associated with the ten sins, which the
holy dip will wash away as surely as the sins of King Sagara’s sons were washed
away. Some claim the bath will cleanse the sins of ten lifetimes; others specify
ten sins as follows:
1. Usury
2. Theft
3. Extramarital sex
4. Bad words
5. Slander
6. Senseless prattle
7. Greed, jealousy
8. Bad thoughts concerning others
9. Useless wishing
10. Killing, murder
As Ganga passes over the land, she triumphantly rides her makara, which is a
strange beast, a fanciful combination of dolphin, shark, and crocodile, with the
legs of a goat in front and a fishtail in back. (It is associated with the
constellation Capricorn in the sky.) Leading her along is the chariot of
Bhagiratha, the long-suffering sage whose penance brought her from heaven. On

the last of the ten days of the bathing festival, some devotees stretch garlands of
red and golden-yellow flowers across the quarter-of-a-kilometer-wide stream.
Others, who are more athletically inclined, swim, jubilating loudly across to the
opposite bank.
The river goddess, Ganga, on her mythical crocodile (makara)
Mountains of gray, billowing clouds rent open by Indra’s thunderbolt release
torrents of water and put an abrupt end to the hot, dusty season. The monsoon
removes the tattered, dusty rags of Mother Earth and dresses her in new, verdant
clothes. Every wheel track and hoof print fills with water teeming with the
wriggly life of hatching mosquito larvae. The air is like a sauna. Roving
sannyasins flee the rains, retreating to the monasteries (ashrams). Now, during
Ashadha (June/July), women wearing their prettiest saris form processions and
swing in tree swings, just like the goddess enjoys doing, as they honor Parvati.
Ganesh Chaturi—at the conclusion of the festival, the idol is dissolved in the water
The snake folk of the underworld have their day of honor during the month of

Shravana (July/ August). It is Naga Panchami (Naga’s fifth). The peasants fast
on this day and catch thousands of cobras, which are taken as guests of honor to
the Shiva temple where they are treated with milk and showered with flowers.
Mahadev, who loves these cold-blooded creatures, is very pleased. In return, he
blesses the barren with issue and protects the worshippers from snakebites. All
day, colorful snake dances are performed in the street, and snake charmers
exhibit their art. Those who cannot manage to capture their own live specimens
can buy gigantic cloth snakes or worship the nagas’ images in stone, metal, or
plaster. At the end of the festival, all the slithering guests are released unharmed.
Ganesh Chaturthi (Ganesha’s fourth) follows on the waning fortnight during
the following month of Bhadrapada. It is the official birthday of the thick-
skulled elephant, renowned for his intelligence and stubbornness. As
Vighneshvara, the cause and remover of all hindrances and obstacles, he is
everyone’s concern and is, consequently, enthusiastically feted with music,
mountains of rich sweets, and street processions of his garishly decorated
plaster-of-paris idol. This is the day when everyone is careful not to look at the
moon, for Ganesha cursed it for laughing at him. As the visiting deity leaves the
world of manifestation, the colorful statues are sunk into the tanks and rivers to
dissolve.
During the same month, on the third day of the waxing moon, on Haritalika
Tij, Hindu wives fast and pray for their husbands that they may live long and
stay healthy. The Brahmins, known for their hearty appetites much as our portly
Western monks and parsons, are invited to sumptuous meals on this day, while
the women who serve them may not even take a drink of water. The intention is
to remind the womenfolk of the austerities of Parvati, which she undertook in
order to win Shiva as her husband.
 FESTIVALS OF THE FALL SEASON 
During the month of Ashwina (September/October), as the sun’s arch noticeably
diminishes, the Hindus remember their departed. In the waning half of the moon,
shraddhas, rites for the deceased, are performed and the dead are fed in order
that they may become benevolent ancestors (pitri), instead of turning into wicked
ghosts (pisachas).
Then, after the dark of the moon has passed and its light starts to wax anew,
worshippers celebrate Navaratra, “the nine nights of the Goddess,” the
counterpart to her spring festival. Once again the great Mother of Creation
descends from her lofty throne to spend nine days and nine nights with her
devotees. Like any young bride living far from her childhood home with her

husband, she desires to see old friends and family once again. Shiva, being a
kind husband, allows her thrice three days. He would get too lonely if she stayed
away any longer. Indian households receive her correspondingly like a married
daughter and spoil her with devotion, good food, and song.
For the celebration, artists will have fashioned stately plaster statues of the
Goddess and her lion and painted them with glowing colors. Dressed in fine
silks, garlanded with flowers, she will be serenaded, incensed, and fanned. On
the tenth day, after she has decapitated the buffalo demon, the masses pour into
the streets to accompany her as she leaves the external world once again. Kin
groups, guilds, and groups of friends throng to the river or tank where the statue
is sunk into the water. It seems that these hundreds of veritable works of
iconographical art, reminiscent of classical sculptures, ought not just be
dissolved in a watery grave but should find a place in museums or as home
decorations. But, to the Indian, it is absurd to hang on to the dead, external form
when the spirit inhabiting it has long departed.
Women worshipping a tree during the fall festival
The appearance and transfiguration of the Great Goddess during the fall
harvest season is an archetypal motive in traditional peasant societies. Not so
long ago, Christians celebrated Mary’s ascension to heaven at the August full
moon. Now the Ascension is fixed on August 15 in the ecclesiastical calendar. In
rural areas of the Alps, women still bundle seven or nine magical and medical
herbs, which they have gathered for the year’s use, and bring them to church for
the blessing. In much the same manner, Indian women dedicate a bundle of nine
herbs (navapatrika) to Durga.2 Ancient Mediterranean cultures also celebrated
the departure of the vegetation goddess in the fall, when Persephone repaired to
the underworld to be united with her black husband, Pluto, only to reappear in
the spring.

Twenty days later, on the dark moon of the month Karttika
(October/November), the Goddess is honored as Lakshmi in a festival of lights.
Thousands of butter lamps are set afloat in the river, sparkling like the stars in
the sky. On the very next day, the first day of the waxing moon, the Goddess is
worshipped in her world-nourishing manifestation of Annapurna, on the festival
of Annakuta, which means “mountain of food.”
A very long time ago, the wise rishi Vyasa walked the narrow lanes of
Varanasi, begging for his daily food. The citizens must not have been
especially generous, for his stomach was constantly growling with
hunger. Grumpy, as rishis tend to be, he placed a curse on the city. For
three generations, he doomed the inhabitants to be without wisdom,
wealth, or salvation. Lord Shiva, who loves his city, was not at all pleased
by this turn of events. Quickly, he took on the form of a Varanasi
householder and Parvati appeared as his matronly wife. When the
disgruntled sage passed with his horde of disciples yelling, as beggars do
to this day, “Ma, anna do!” (Mother, give me food), Parvati invited the
whole troop into her house and dished up a delicious mess of rice, lentils,
and curd. At that, Vyasa completely forgot his curse and just shook his
head, mumbling, “What a wonderful city where one finds liberation, while,
at the same time, being able to eat the tastiest of foods!”
Ever since, Annapurna manifests in the thousands of housewives who gladly fill
the bowls of the many sannyasi, sadhus, sadhvis, poor widows, and sometimes
even stranded hippies who make their daily rounds. The festival of Annapurna is
part of the overall harvest festival and is celebrated by piling up mountains of
rice, pigeon peas (dal, and other pulses in the courtyards of the temples.
The next full moon, falling on the last day of the month of Karttika, is the day
celebrating Shiva’s manifestation as a column of fire (tejolingam). This blazing
pillar, radiating the eternal light of truth throughout the universe, is the very one
that appeared when Vishnu and Brahma were battering each other’s egos in the
battle of their relative importance. The light of this primal lingam shines on in
the sun, the moon, the stars, in lightning and fire, as well as in the glow that fills
all souls. The Tamils are convinced that the original manifestation of this
column of light occurred on the red hill of Arunachala, near Tiruvannamalai. It
was here that the maiden Parvati sat in bark cloth and practiced austerities that
were to melt Shiva’s heart. And it was here where Saint Maharishi Ramana,
whom the peasants regard as an incarnation of Lord Shiva, had his hermitage.3

Every year at this time, devotees fill a hollow on the summit with butter, oil,
camphor, and other offerings, and light it. The fire of this “spiritual beacon”
burns up to three months and is visible for up to sixteen miles. Anyone who sees
it is freed from future births into the world of samsara, for this light drives away
the darkness of ignorance.4
After Karttika, the cooler season, pleasing to the European tourist, begins. The
first important festival in this winter season, at least in Varanasi, is Bhairava’s
eight days, falling on the first eight days of the waning moon of Margashirsha
(November/December). Pilgrimages are the expression of obeisance to this
terrible lord during this time. Only on the last day of the festival
(Bhairavashtami) is his face revealed to his devotees in his temple and a chain of
silver skulls placed around his neck.
The winter sun reaches its lowest point during the month of Pausha
(December/January), as it moves through the constellation of Capricorn, which
is identical with the fabulous chimera Makara, who serves as Ganga’s vehicle. It
follows that devout Hindus bathe at this time in the Ganges, despite the nippy
air. In south India, the Arudra festival honors Shiva-Nataraja, the lord of
dancers, at this season.
 FESTIVALS OF SPRING 
Processions of scrubbed, combed, and neatly dressed school children welcome
the goddess of light and learning, Sarasvati, and her swan, on the fifth day of the
waxing moon in the month of Margha (January/February). It is the first spring
festival, like Our Lady’s Candlemas (once the festival of the Celtic goddess of
light, Brigit), with which it is connected by ancient Indo-European roots.
Now it is not long until Shivratri, the night of Shiva, sets everyone in motion.
It marks the night of the new moon on the fourteenth day of Phalguna
(February/March), on which Shiva and Parvati were married. Mahadev is in such
a good mood on that night that he will fulfill any wish, as long as the devotee
does not eat or drink anything and stays awake the whole night, washing the
lingam every three hours, first with milk, then with yogurt, then with clarified
butter, and finally, with honey water, all the while chanting Om Namah Shivaya.
Placing thorn apple or wood apple (bel) leaves on the lingam will please the
Lord more than heaping gold and diamonds upon it. Feeding Brahmins and
beggars after the watch is part of the worship.
In Varanasi, the bathing ghats are jammed with hundreds of thousands of
eager bathers on Shivratri. After the dip, they squeeze through the narrow alleys
to get to the Golden Temple, to experience darshana with the Lord, who is never

closer than on that day. To accrue merits, young men run at jog trot the twenty-
five miles of the famous pilgrim route, the Panch-kroshi Road. (Panch kroshi
refers to the five elemental shells that surround the city, in analogy to the five
elemental “bodies” that clothe the human soul.) Shortly after midnight one hears
them running, chanting Shiva’s name, as their shadows hush through the dark.
At about 3:30 A.M. all the temple bells are clanging wildly. The thronging
masses, meanwhile, have turned, with the help of bhang and datura, into ghosts,
goblins, sprites, animals, and beasts that make up Shiva’s reveling company. The
magic, lunatic world of Shiva wipes out the mundane, everyday reality. The
Muslims, in the meantime, hide anxiously behind the walls of their ghetto, as the
frenzy of the pagans peaks out. Among the crowds, joining the procession, as
Shiva goes to pick up his bride, are hundreds of fierce Shiv Sena warriors,
swinging iron tridents. All kinds of miracles occur on this night: the sick are
healed, saints levitate or walk on water, and some fly magically across the
Ganges and receive divine revelations.
During the three days leading to Shivratri, the greatest classical musicians
meet for a Drupad Mela. Years of practice and yogalike discipline have turned
the artists themselves into finely tuned instruments. Because they have
diminished their egos, Shiva himself can play and improvise through them for
his own pleasure and joy. Divinities can incarnate into the sound forms and
communicate with the listeners. The patter of the pakhavaj hand drums becomes
the sound of Nataraja’s dancing feet.
The Mahabharata tells how the celebration of Shiva’s night came about:5
One day, a wise man visited the court of King Chitraghanu. Finding the
king fasting, he became curious and wanted to know the reason for his
abstinence from food and water. The noble king, whose mind was so
clear that he could remember his previous lives, told him the following
story:
“Once, in my former life, I was a hunter, a pariah, living on the outskirts
of Varanasi. In order to feed my wife and children, I had to kill animals
and birds and sell them on the market.
“One day, as I was ranging the jungle far from the city, night overtook
me. In order to escape the prowling wild animals and other dangers of
the night, I climbed up a tree, which happened to be a bel tree, and tied
my game into one of the branches. Though fatigued, it was impossible to
even think of sleep. I was very hungry and thirsty. As I thought of my poor
family, which was starving and did not know what had happened to me,

teardrops rolled down my cheeks and fell to the ground. To pass the
time, I plucked the trifoliate leaves and let them float down. Finally, as the
new morning dawned, I could climb down and go home. On the way, I
sold the deer I had shot the day before and bought some food to take to
my family. On the way, I met a poor beggar. I fed him even before I
myself had eaten anything.
“Many years passed and I had long forgotten the incident, when, one
day, two angels came to me. Even though I was an outcaste, they carried
me to Shiva’s abode, and then I realized what had come to pass that
night. Without my having known it, that very night was Shiva’s wedding
night. Unintentionally, I had honored the three-eyed God with my fasting
and waking. Underneath the bel tree, there had been a Shiva lingam,
which I had inadvertently washed with my salty tears and decorated with
bel leaves I had mindlessly plucked. Through these acts, I earned
enough merit that I could enjoy the bliss of Shiva’s heaven for many,
many years. Having to take care of remaining karma, I had to come back.
Thus, incarnated as a king, this is my last incarnation.”
The wise man was moved by the wonderful story. Wherever he went, he told
others about it, and that is how the observance of Shivratri came about. By now,
the learned scholars have understood that the story is a parable: The dangerous
jungle in which the archer got lost was his mind, and the wild beasts that
threatened him in that long, dark night were his passions, drives, and desires.
The fact that the hunter lived near Varanasi makes him out to be a yogi, for
Varanasi stands for the ajna chakra, the third eye, upon which yogis learn to
concentrate. It is the place where the three energy streams (ida, pingala,
sushumna) flow into one. His climbing into the crown of the bel tree signifies
the rise of the kundalini up the spine. The deer he had shot and tied securely into
the branches stands for the unsteady intellect tied and calmed by the bonds of
yoga. The tears he shed for his wife and children are the compassion and love a
yogi has for all creatures still caught in the wheel of suffering (samsara). The
threefold bel leaves, which he picked during the night, also stand for the three
streams of energy, the combination of the force of the sun, the moon, and the
fire, focusing on the chakra on the forehead. The rising sun, after the long, dark
night, is but a symbol of the dawning of full enlightenment, the flaring up of the
crown chakra (sahasrara), the daybreak of the “fourth state of consciousness”
(turiya). This new, total awareness allowed the hunter to recognize that there was
a Shiva lingam at the foot of the tree. He had a vision of the truth (darshana)

before turning back to the world to do his duties (dharma). The beggar whom he
met on the path was none other than his everyday earthly self, the mortal human
being of this one, unique incarnation. The food he was able to give to the beggar
and bring to feed his family was spiritual food. It was derived from the yogic
transformation of old karma, old sympathies and antipathies that the arrows of
his meditation had shot down. But a tiny morsel had been left uneaten,
betokening that there was still a bit of karma left. In order to take care of it, he
had to incarnate just one more time, as king Chitrabhanu, before he could
completely enter the Lord.
Shortly after Shiva’s night, the third great spring festival is celebrated. It is the
Holi festival, falling on the next full moon, which marks the transition from
Phalguna (February/March) to Chaitra (March/April). It is in line with other old
Indo-European spring celebrations, like Laetare Sunday, when the winter demon
is driven out or burned as an effigy of straw and rags, wood and pitch, on a
public fire. For the worshippers of Vishnu, this joyous day recalls Krishna’s
killing of the child-devouring witch, Holika. The story, somewhat reminiscent of
Hansel and Gretel, tells of an arrogant king, who demands from his subjects that
they worship him and only him. His only son, however, continues to be devoted
to Vishnu. The angry king hires the witch Holika to do the boy in. The old hag,
fireproof due to her black magic, grabs the child and jumps into the fire with
him. As the boy cries to God, a miracle happens: the fireproof witch burns, while
he remains unscathed. Every year at Holi, she burns anew.a

Shiva incinerates Kama, who disturbed his meditation
The Shaivites interpret the spring fire in a different manner. For them it is the
flame shooting from Shiva’s third eye, which incinerates the lecherous god of
carnal passion who arrives with the spring. Swamis, intent on sublimating their
passions, interpret the image as the dissolving of desires and egoism in the heat
generated by yogic exercises. For the common people, it is just the highlight of a
colorful carnival. Day by day, as the celebration approaches, the tension and
excitement mount. Boys, unable to await the time, start squirting each other with
red paint and snitching old boards and branches to put on the growing pile of
combustibles. Finally, on the night of the full moon, a Brahmin walks seven
times around the Holika and then lights the bonfire.
That night and into the next morning all hell breaks loose. Youths with eyes
red from drugs and sleeplessness race through the streets, pelting everyone and
everything in sight with bags and balloons filled with orange and red colors. It
looks as though it has rained blood. It is a fool’s paradise, punctuated by
hilarious laughter, the blaring out of the grossest obscenities, and by pranks and
tomfoolery. The fools hug and kiss, or fight with each other. No one who dares
to step out on the street is excepted or respected; not even the constables,
Brahmins, or landlords are spared. Women tend to hide in the houses and watch
at a safe distance, from behind the curtains. Tourists are advised under no
circumstances to leave their hotels, for it has frequently happened that they were

pelted with flying excrement and that they were pummeled, their hair pulled out,
stripped naked, dumped into the river, and ridiculed. On the other hand, it is just
as possible that the tourist will be given generous bear hugs, called bhai,
(brother), and treated to some bhang and datura, which will instantly turn the
world into a mad fantasia. What will happen depends mainly on the personality
of the visitor—whether he is frightened and bothered or has good humor.
Holi—the festival of colors— in the morning
The Holi celebration has never lost its character of an old springtime fertility
festival. Grotesquely large wooden penises with bright red glans and scrotums
are set up in the streets. Sexual bravado is pronounced and demonstrated with
suggestive, undulating hip movements during improvised dances. The fellows
brag of their virility, promising to make their women scream with delight until
they beg for mercy.
Holi—the following afternoon
Toward noon, finally, the wild frolic ceases. The mythological beasts, the mob
of goblins and horny satyrs disappear. People wash their red stains off and dress
in fresh clothes. In the afternoon, the men, dressed in fresh, white dhotis or
pajamas, and the women in their finest saris, promenade the streets. Friends visit
each other, embrace three times, kindly smear red powder on each other’s

foreheads, and exchange smiles and sweet milk candies (burfi). Masters bow to
their servants and gurus to their pupils in order to receive the red powder from
their hands on their forehead. The atmosphere is relaxed and friendly as at no
other time of year, for the buffoonery acts like a catharsis, providing a vent for
all the stored-up frustrations that accumulate like old dust on furniture.
During this holiday in Varanasi, Shiva’s idol in the Golden Temple gets to
wear a golden mask. In the evening and the next day, many people go to worship
the sixty-four yoginis, the sorceresses who attend Durga.
 KUMBHA MELA 
Every twelve years, the planet Jupiter passes through the constellation of the
water carrier, Aquarius, who empties his pitcher upon the earth. At this time,
millions of worshippers congregate at one of four auspicious places for the
Kumbha Mela, the “fair of the pitcher,” Hinduism’s greatest festival. Halfway in
between the major melas are the Ardha-Kumbha Melas the “half pitcher fairs.”
The pitcher in question is none other than the famous jar containing the nectar
of immortality, which the gods and demons churned, in common toil, from the
depth of the Milk Ocean. As the devas and asuras struggled for the pitcher, four
drops of the precious liquid spilled and fell to the earth. The places where they
fell became thirthas, fords, leading to the other side, to the higher worlds. One
drop touched the feet of the Himalayas, at a place now called Hardwar (Doorway
to God). It was at this very place that the rishi Bhagiratha forced Ganga to
descend to earth by virtue of his strong asceticism. Another precious drop fell at
Prayaga (today’s Allahabad), where the three streams, the Ganges, the Jamuna,
and the mythical, invisible Sarasvati flow together. A third drop came down near
the city of Ujjain, where a lingam of light also manifested, and the fourth one
dropped at Nasik, on the Godavari River.
Every twelve years, masses of people, millions strong, congregate at one of
these sites to celebrate for one whole month. A procession, as colorful and
bizarre as if it sprang from the canvas of a surrealist or a Hieronymos Bosch,
opens the mela. Naked babas, carrying tridents, have the honor of leading the
huge parade. Following them are various sadhus, holy men, god-possessed
fakirs, yoginis, ash-and-sack-cloth penitents, and gurus in palanquins, or on
horse, camel, or elephant. They are eager to take the holy dip, perform ablutions,
give evidence of their siddhi power, have darshan, or offer to their ancestors
(shraddha) on these astrologically auspicious days.
The crowds are so huge that there is danger of being trampled if a panic
breaks out. In 1954, the onrush was such that some five hundred people were

trampled to death. During a half-mela, at Hardwar in 1986, some fifty pilgrims
met their deaths. Besides the energies generated by such masses, problems of
health and hygiene give the authorities headaches, for it is all too easy for
cholera, dysentery, or some other contagious disease to break out. Nowadays,
medical centers are set up to inoculate the visitors.
The most violent mela must have been at Hardwar early in the nineteenth
century, before the British were in firm control of northern India. Armed with
their iron tridents, the nagas (naked babas) fought with other sannyasi orders for
the right to lead the procession. Reports tell of some eighteen thousand holy men
who were disembodied in the bloody battle. But ever since then, no monk, be he
ever so learned or devout, has questioned the right of these wild, naked Rudras
to take first place!
Whatever may happen, the atmosphere of a mela is so strong that anyone who
has experienced one will not forget it for a lifetime. The colorful chaos blows the
rigid concepts of the mind to pieces, in terms of what is possible and what is not.
One meets holy men who, many years ago, thrust an arm into the air, shouting,
“For Shiva!” and have never taken it down. Now it sticks out like a bird’s claw,
rigidly frozen into position. Others might have sworn to stand on one leg for the
rest of their lives, dedicating this deed to Mahadev, the chief of yogis. Then
there are those who sit on nails, thorns, or glowing coals. One baba carries a
boulder suspended from his scrotum. Next to walking skeletons who subsist on
leaves, water, or merely air, might be a guru fat enough to top the Guiness Book
of Records, hoisted up onto a comfortable litter by sweating devotees. The
smells of wafting incense, burning hemp leaves, the bluish smoke of dried cow
pies used as cooking fuel, the din of songs, chants, prayers, bells, conch shells,
mooing cattle, the talking, clanging, and clattering, are part of the overall
atmosphere that constitutes the transforming power of a mela. Overwhelmed,
one can but mutter, “Shiva, Lord, have mercy!”

Footnotes

Chapter 1
a Zarathustra = Greek Zoroaster

Chapter 2
a Brahman refers to the all-pervading numinous power that permeates the Universe. The concept is not to be
confused with Brahma, the creator god, nor with the Brahmins (or Brahmans), the caste of priests who have
the power to wield and manipulate Brahman.
b The Rütli Oath, that marks the birth of the Swiss nation, was spoken into the bonfire of the first of August,
a day that formerly celebrated the Celtic fire god Lugh or Lugus. The biblical story of Pentecost, when fiery
tongues descended upon the faithful, causing them to “speak in tongues,” illustrates also the connection
between fire and speech.
c S. L. Miller’s now classic experiment (1953) of synthesizing amino acids by reconstructing an early
atmosphere of hydrogen, helium, methane, and ammonia, along with saltwater and electrical charges, lends
support to the “dilute organic soup” hypothesis.
d The tribal council held under a mighty tree is, according to historians of religion (Eliade, Campbell),
nearly universal. Here, however I refer primarily to Indo-European or, specifically, northwestern European
tradition.
e The word hammer, interestingly enough, is derived from the Indo-European *akmen, which signifies a
“stone fallen from heaven.” Related are the Sanskrit ashmen (stone, heaven), Greek akmon (anvil, meteor
stone, heaven), and Slavic kamen (stone).
f Indeed Brahma, the Creator, was the original golden egg (Hiranyagarbha), which he divided with his own
heat, separating it into two parts, which now form heaven and earth.
g Desmostachya bipinnata L.; Eragrostis cynosuroides, a kind of Bermuda grass
h In the Hindu construction of reality, the genders are not as fixed as in the current Western worldview. The
Hindu gods can appear in male or female forms, as does Shiva himself. Gods can give birth and goddesses
can impregnate their devotees. Brahma gives birth to children from his brow, Vishnu often appears as the
beautiful enchantress Mohini, so that gods and demons fall in love with him. Thus, there is no discrepancy
in the male Agni being a “mother.”

Chapter 3
a The nuts of the Himalayan tree (Elaeocarpus ganitrus)
b That tribal myths can indeed be very old is shown, for example, in the Ojibwa tales of a monstrous buffalo
with legs like tree trunks, two long protruding teeth, and a nose with a hand on its end. It obviously refers to
a mammoth elephant.
c This version of the story comes from Sri Swami Sivananda, Lord Shiva and His Worship
(Shivanandanagar, Distt. Tehari-Garhwal U.P., India: The Divine Life Society, 1984), 226.
d This story from the Sanskrit classic Vetalapancavinsati is recounted at the end of this section.
e This theme crops up again in an anecdote told by Nirad C. Chaudhuri, to illustrate the avarice of the
Bengalis. He knew of a young man, who, for the sake of obtaining five rupees, wagered a bet that he could
eat a pile of “night soil.” He won his five rupees. But from that moment on his life changed. People
thronged to worship him, for anyone who could eat feces without regurgitating, must be a powerful siddha,
a master of occult arts. Soon he even had disciples. Cf. Nirad C. Chaudhuri, The Continent of Circe
(Bombay: Jaico Publishing House, 1983), 214.
f The spokes of this wheel making up the old Indo-European ritual calendar are: the solstices, the equinoxes,
and the midpoints between them, namely, the full moon days of February, May, August, and November.

Chapter 4
a For those who worship Vishnu in place of Shiva, the salagrama, a black fossil of a prehistoric ammonite
or seashell, plays the same role as the lingam.
b Menhir (Breton men = stone, hir = long), a single upright monolith of prehistoric times
c Sanskrit bhava = being
d The Bhagavad Gita is contained in the great Indian epic, the Mahabharata, written some time around 300
B.C. It tells of the wars between rival Aryan kin groups, the Kauravas and the Pandavas. The latter had been
unjustly banned from rulership by the former. Lord Krishna, as an avatar of Vishnu, is neutral, but he lets
the contenders choose between all his power and glory on one hand, or himself on the other hand. Arjuna,
the hero of the Pandavas, chooses Krishna in person. Thus God becomes his charioteer. Before the big
battle starts, however, Arjuna is hesitant to participate in what seems to be a meaningless slaughter, for he
sees kinsmen and former teachers on the opposing side. Krishna exhorts him to act anyway, to do his duty
as a warrior as correctly as possible and not to calculate the result. He teaches him that total surrender of
one’s deeds to God, doing right for the sake of right, not for the reward, leads to liberation. At the same
time, Krishna reveals himself in all his power and glory, letting the hero glimpse the mysteries of God,
Universe, and Soul.

Chapter 5
a Shiva’s external appearance is white, but his inside is darker than night. In that, he is the inverse of Vishnu
(Krishna), whose skin is black, but his inside is white light. Etymologically, the Indo-European root men (=
thinking, mentally active) or menon (moon) leads to a whole complex of semantics: Skt man (thinking,
minding), L mens (mental activity), L mentiri (to make up, lie), L mensis (monthly period), L memor
(memory), etc.
c In some iconic representations, the OM shines forth from the lunar crescent that decorates Shiva’s brow. It
is interpreted as follows: The primordial sound OM results from the union of Shiva with his Shakti. The
OM becomes the seed (bindu), or the door through which the fecund void (shunyata) releases manifestation
into existence, just as the black night sky suddenly lets the fine sliver of the new moon appear. In human
beings, this point (bindu) is located between the brows, just below the middle of the forehead. Sometimes
the bindu is shown split into two halves, like a pea. The vertical line thus formed represent the “I.” The two
halves, in turn, represent the “other,” the dichotomous world, in which this “I” finds itself. Shiva and Shakti
in union are likened to the dark of the moon, to unmanifested unity. The OM, as the first dawning of
existence, is likened to the new crescent moon, while the whole split bindu represents the full moon. See
Swami Swahananda, Hindu Symbology and Other Essays (Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1983), 6.
d Hanuman, the monkey chief, became a god of healing during the battle of Sri Lanka, after he had been
sent off to find a handful of healing herbs and came back with a whole mountain of medical plants. He is
said to be the son of the wind and of a monkey woman. Shaivites, however, have turned him into a son of
Shiva: Once, when Shiva caught a glimpse of the enchanting nymph Mohini, he shed his sperm. The seven
rishis gathered the precious seed and put it into the ear of a monkey woman, who conceived and gave birth
to Hanuman.
e Even now millions of pilgrims travel to these temples.
f The owner of the Sarnath Forest, a maharaja who was a cruel and passionate hunter, had finally made an
agreement with the king of the deer to take only one animal per day. One day, he ensnared a pregnant doe,
who cried out: “Whom shall you kill, my kid or me?” Seeing that killing one would kill the other also, the
deer king (the future Buddha) volunteered to give his own life instead. The maharaja was so moved by this
act of compassion that henceforth he devoted himself to a life of nonkilling (ahimsa).
g Whenever evil threatens the continuity of the world, Vishnu, the Preserver, takes compassion and appears
physically in order to restore Dharma. He has appeared as a fish (Matsyavatara), a turtle (Kurma), a boar
(Varahavatara), a man-lion (Narasimha), a dwarf (Vamana), as Rama-with-the Ax, as King Rama, husband
of Sita, as Krishna, as Buddha, and at the end of this era, he will appear as Kalki, the warrior with a blazing
sword on a white horse.
h Lungi = a piece of cotton cloth, tied around the waist
Chapter6
a The relative “weight” of male or female function in society is more or less determined by ecological and
economic factors. Pastoralists moving over wide, often hostile terrain with their herds tend toward a more
patriarchal organization of their daily life, whereas planters and simple horticulturists tend more to a
matriarchal organization. With the latter, the land was “owned” by the matrilineages (female line of
descent). This made sense, not only in that the fertile earth itself was seen as a “mother of life,” but also,

because groups of related women did the work of planting and tending the crops. This was also the case in
pre-Aryan, pre-Muslim India. The cult of the Divine Mother is very ancient in India and preceeds
pastoralist invaders. In the course of time, Indian culture has arrived at a synthesis of both traditions.
Indeed, the cult of the Great Goddess is, within popular Hinduism, still increasing in importance.
b The relation of maya and shakti is like that of the clay to the potter’s wheel. The one is the substance or
matter of creation, the other is the formative force.
c The three goddesses of fate of the Nordic legends—Urd, Wierd, and Skuld—or the three moerae of the
Greeks, are expression of this archetypal female trinity. In most cultural traditions in the Old and the New
World, the colors white, red, and black are recognized as primal, magical colors. White is the color of the
beginning; it is milk and semen. Red is the color of life, of blood, and of living fire. Black is the color of
death, of excretion, humus, and decay. The same colors (made from chalk, ochre, and soot) were used in the
Paleolithic cave paintings. The color symbolism lived on in alchemy: the black raven is decay (negrido), the
white lily is resurrection, and the red lion is the symbol of life.
d The Great Goddess has many aspects. As a warrior woman, she is Durga riding a lion. Chandi is one of
Durga’s “personalities” or aspects. Popular Indian imagination identifies Chandi with Kali.
e The sacrifice to Kali can also be an expression of atonement. For example, in Autobiography of an
Unknown Indian, the Bengali writer Nirad C. Chaudhuri tells readers that when he returned from England
as a young man, after having finished his studies, his uncle sacrificed a bull in front of the idol and bathed
him from head to toe in the warm blood, in order to purify him of the moral and spiritual filth he had picked
up in the land of the mlechhas, the unclean foreigners.

Chapter 9
a The Ashvins, the Vedic twin gods of healing, are related to the Greek Dioskouroi, the Gemini of the
zodiac. They live on in Christian mythology as the twin saints Cosmas and Damian, the patrons of doctors
and pharmacists.
b The practice of the voluntary self-immolation of widows is occasionally still practiced in northern India,
even though it is illegal.

Chapter 10
a The spiritual traditions of indigenous peoples do not generally split the world into absolute dichotomies.
In their “cultural construction of reality,” tribal peoples such as the American Indians attribute to each
being, be it a stone, a plant, an animal, or any other phenomenon, its own unique power. Depending on the
situation or in what manner one approaches it, this power can be helpful or harmful. Good and evil are thus
not absolute, but situation bound.
b The message of Mani (third century A.D.), another Persian prophet, may also be seen as a later edition of
Zarathustrianism. Mani, who posed a serious threat to emerging Christianity, taught that good and evil are
hopelessly mixed together in the world and in each soul. To liberate the sparks of Spirit from the mixture,
moral action (such as abstinence from meat eating, alcohol, sex, and foul language) is demanded from each
individual. “Holy ones” capable of this are to serve as teachers of others and will enter the Divine Light
after death. “Auditors,” on the other hand, who hear the message but cannot live it, need to be reborn until
they too can enter the Divine Light. It is interesting to note that in his youth, Saint Augustine was a
Manichaean auditor. Even though this church father became an enemy of Manichaeanism, his ideas remain
influenced by these doctrines. During the Middle Ages Manichaeanism reared its head again in southern
France with the Cathars (Greek katharikos = the pure ones). It took a Crusade and an Inquisition to crush
them. Nonetheless, the ideas of the Cathars live on in many streams of the psychic-occult underground.

Chapter 11
a The great sage Shankaracharya (788–820 A.D.) was, as his name indicates, a great devotee of Lord Shiva.
He is the formulator of Hinduistic monism (Vedanta) and founder of the orange-clad order of monks, the
Sannyasi. His Vedanta is based on the idea of advaita or nondualism, from which it follows that the soul
(atma) and the All-Spirit (Brahman) are identical, whereas the apparent multiplicity of beings is but illusion
(maya). To this day, his doctrine is celebrated as the “crown of all teachings.” He himself is taken as an
incarnation of Shiva, and is said to have been born supernaturally of a Brahmin’s widow.
b Urine is also commonly used as a remedy in traditional Indian medicine.
c The ethnographic record shows that such safety valves were nearly universal. The Iroquois, for example,
believed that all desires and wishes that surface in dreams should be made public and fulfilled. Only then
would both society and nature remain in a state of harmony. A guessing game for finding out such secret
wishes developed. Once guessed, they were enacted, even if this implied a sex orgy or the burning and
rebuilding of the village.
d There are other parallels of Shiva’s story in the Celtic Christian legend of the Holy Grail. Like Shiva,
Parsifal, the future fisher king and guardian of the Grail, starts as a fool wandering the wilderness. He too
becomes inadvertently guilty and is cursed. Illusive flower maidens tempt him. Finally he brings the
fountain of grace to flow once again and becomes the king of the Grail castle, located in high ethereal
realms above the earth.
e Pravritti is a Sanskrit concept that has no direct English equivalent. It includes the ideas of opening,
engaging, progressing, being active, flowing forth.
f Sanskritmuni = silent hermit
g Sanskrityogini = female yogi, sorceress

Chapter 12
a The fish can also be interpreted as the streams of energy—the ida, pingala, and sushumna—which have
been led to their confluence.
b According to the ethnobotanists Claudia Müller-Ebeling and Christian Rätsch, mudras can also be
understood as the energizing, roasted aphrodisiacal seeds (poppy, cardamon, pine, hemp, datura, or anis)
that the lovers hand each other. See Claudia Müller-Ebeling and Christian Rätsch, Isoldens Liebestrank
(München: Kindler Verlag, 1986), 32.
c The influence of tantric philosophy was evident even in Siberia in the early twentieth century in the
teachings of Grigorij J. Rasputin.
d As Shiva, in the form of bodhisattva Avilokiteshvara, traveled further north, he changed his gender.
Emphasizing his gentle, compassionate nature, he became the heavenly Virgin of the Chinese, the beloved
goddess of mercy, Kwan-yin (Japanese Kwannon).

Chapter 13
a The full moon after equinox is instrumental in determining the date of Easter each year. This is one case
where awareness of the synchronicity of lunar rhythms and states of spiritual consciousness has been
maintained in the West. Thus, at the time of Christ’s resurrection, plant life grows more vigorously than at
most other times of the year.
b What is referred to as the swallow-wort is generally taken to be a milkweed, an asclepiadaceae with white,
sticky juice, which, because of its Avestan name haoma and its ritual use by the Parsees, is believed to be
the Vedic soma. However, as this plant has no psychedelic properties whatsoever, the “swallow-wort” could
conceivably refer to opium, which also produces a milky sap.
c Saturnalia = a licentious, orgiastic Roman festival in December in honor of Saturn. Hilaria = a “hilarious”
festival in honor of the goddess Cybele, held at the vernal equinox to celebrate the renewal of life on earth,
symbolized by the resurrection of the youthful god Attis.
d Shiva, as the upholder of Ganga
e This is a frame of mind similar to that which Australian Aborigines call altjira.
f Shankar = Shiva in his peaceful, gentle form. Bolanath (Hindi, bhola =simple, innocent, dumb; nath =
lord, protector) is an aspect of Shiva who is uncomplicated, who cannot say no, and who fulfills every wish
of his devotees.
g OM namo narayana, “Hail God in human form”—with these words sadhus greet each other when their
paths cross.
h Without knowledge of exact dosages and without prior psychic catharsis, datura can be lethal. Two cases
are known to the author personally. In Kovalam, Kerala, where the plant grows wild, a young Italian
woman chewed a few seeds. She became so heated that she stripped and ran naked through the nearby
Muslim fishing village, where the inhabitants stoned her. In her delirium, she ran off the cliffs and drowned.
Another case occurred in Ladakh (West Tibet), where a young Swiss man wandered off after having
chewed datura seeds. His companions found him days later in a mental hospital. His personality was
permanently changed.

Chapter 14
a Some versions of the story tell how the demon witch Putana tried to give baby Krishna suck from her
poison breast. Indeed, he sucked so hard, that he sucked her very life out of her. Her lifeless remains were
burned in the Holi fire.

NOTES

Chapter 1
1.  Charles Wesley, “Hark! The Herald Angels Sing” (1739).
2.  Nirad C. Chaudhuri, Hinduism, A Religion To Live By (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), 240.
3.  Hansferdinand Döbler, Die Germanen, Legende und Wirklichkeit von A bis Z (Barcelona: Prisma
Verlag, 1975), 215.
4.  Karl Jettmar, “Skythen und Haschisch,” in Rausch und Realität, vol. 2 (Hamburg: Rohwohlt Verlag,
1982), 531.
5.  Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophie und Religion Indiens (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Taschenbuch,
1973), 450.
6.  Alain Daniélou, Shiva et Dionysos (Paris: Librairie Artheme Fayard, 1979), 32.
7.  A. L. Basham, The Wonder that Was India (Calcutta and New Delhi: Rupa Paperback, 1967), 358.
8.  Basavanna, in Speaking of Siva, translated with an introduction by A. K. Ramanujan (Harmondsworth,
England: Penguin Classics, 1979), 19.
9.  Ibid, p. 69.
10.  Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, The Book of Secrets, vol. 2 (London: Rashneesh Foundation, Thames &
Hudson, 1974).

Chapter 2
1.  U. P. Arora, Motifs in Indian Mythology (New Delhi: Indika Publishing House, 1981), 62.
2.  Haralds Biezias, “Baltische Religionen,” in Germanische und Baltische Religionen (Stuttgart: Verlag
W. Kohlhammer, 1975), 340.

Chapter 3
1.  T. R. Rajagopala Aiyar, Sri Rudram and Chamakam (Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1985), 9 ff.
2.  Karl Schlesier, Die Wölfe des Himmels (Köln: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1985), 112.
3.  Wolf-Dieter Storl, Shamanism among Americans of European Origin (Berne, Switzerland: Inaugural
dissertation, University of Berne, 1974), 83 ff.
4.  Erika Bourguignon, Psychological Anthropology (New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston, 1979), 233-
268.
5.  Mircea Eliade, Le chamanisme et les techniques archaiques de l’extase (Paris: Editions Payot, 1951),
430 ff.
6.  H. R. Ellis Davidson, Gods and Myths of Northern Europe (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1969),
147.
7.  Sri Swami Sivananda, Lord Shiva and His Worship (Shivanandanagar, Uttar Pradesh: Divine Life
Society, 1984), 226.
8.  Nirad C. Chaudhuri, Hinduism, 185.
9.  Hermann Lübbig, Oldenburgische Sagen (Oldenburg: W. Kohlhammer, 1980).
10.  Eugen Jung, Swiss collector of Nepalese folktales, personal communication with author, 1986.
11.  Åke V. Ström, “Germanische Religion,” in Germanische und Baltische Religionen I(Stuttgart: W.
Kohlhammer, 1975), 121.

Chapter 4
1.  Ajit Mookerjee has taken the quote from the Mundaka Upanishad and placed it in the book Ritual Art
of India (London: Thames and Hudson, 1985). I have taken the quote from the German translation of
this book: Rituelle Kunst Indiens (Munich: Kösel, 1987), 154.
2.  Swami Sivananda, Lord Shiva and His Worship, 144.
3.  Shiva Purana: Vidyeshvara Samhita, 6.

Chapter 5
1.  T. R. Majupuria and Indra Majupuria, Pashupathinath (Lashkar, Gwalior, India: M. Devi Lalipur
Colony, 1982), 221.
2.  Aiyar,Sri Rudram and Chamakam, 173.
3.  Devdutt Pattanaik, Shiva: An Introduction (Mumbai: Vakils, Feffer & Simons, 1997), 23.
4.  Rudolf Meyer, Die Weisheit der Deutschen Volksmärchen (Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch,
1985), 82.
5.  Wolf-Dieter Storl, Von Heilkräutern und Pflanzengottheiten (Braunschweig: Aurum, 1997), 120.
6.  Griffith’s Ramayana i. 204; quoted in W. J. Wilkins, Hindu Mythology (Calcutta, Allahabad, Bombay,
Delhi: Rupa, 1982), 132.
7.  Eliade,Le chamanisme, chapter 5.
8.  Wolf-Dieter Storl, Culture and Horticulture: A Philosophy of Gardening (San Francisco: Bio-dynamic
Farming and Gardening Association, 2000), 123.
9.  Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophie und Religion Indiens (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp 1973), 192.
English original, Philosophies of India, (New York: Bollingen Foundation, 1951).
10.  Gopi Krishna, The Dawn of a New Science (New Delhi: Kundalini Research and Publication Trust,
1978), 60.
11.  Basham,The Wonder that Was India, 23.
12.  Wendy D. O’Flaherty, Hindu Myths (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books, 1976), 145.
13.  Swami Harshananda, Hindu Gods and Goddesses (Mysore: Sri Ramakrishna Ashrama, 1982), 182-183.
14.  Alain Daniélou, While the Gods Play (Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1987), 17-19.
15.  Oswald A. Erich and Richard Beitl, eds., Wörterbuch der Deutschen Volkskunde (Stuttgart: Alfred
Körner, 1974), 247.
16.  Hans Findeisen and Heino Gehrts, Die Schamanen (Köln: Diederichs Gelbe Reihe, 1983), 116.
17.  Trevor Ravenscroft, The Spear of Destiny (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1973). The same theme is
also mentioned in Harvey Rachlin’s Lucy’s Bones, Sacred Stones and Einstein’s Brain (New York:
Henry Holt, 1996).
18.  Kardinal Franz König, Der Glaube der Menschen (Bonn: Borromäusverein, 1985), 14.
19.  Rudolf John Gorsleben, Hoch-Zeit der Menschhei. (Leipzig: Koehler & Amelang, 1930), 475.

Chapter 6
1.  Wilkins,Hindu Mythology, 292.
2.  Pattanaik,Shiva, 32.
3.  Harshananda,Hindu Gods and Goddesses, 292.
4.  David Annan, “Thuggee,” in Secret Societies, edited by Norman MacKenzie (London: Collier Books,
1967), 55-70.
5.  Pattanaik,Shiva, 33-34.
6.  Emil Nack, Götter, Helden und Dämonen (Wien, Heidelberg: Carl Ueberreuter, 1968), 175.

Chapter 7
1.  Fred W. Clothey and J. Bruce Long, Experiencing Siva (New Delhi: Manohar 1983), 62.
2.  Zukav, Gary. The Dancing Wu Li Masters (New York: Bantam Books, 1979), 217.
3.  Sivananda. Lord Shiva and His Worship, 70.
4.  Eliade,Le chamanisme, 169.

Chapter 8
1.  The retelling of the story of Shiva’s wedding is based on the compilations of Chaudhuri, Hinduism,
225; and Pattanaik, Shiva, 26-28.
2.  W. J. Wilkins, Hindu Mythology (Calcutta, Allahabad, Bombay, New Delhi: Rupa Paperback, 1982),
335f.
3.  Sri Swami Sivananda, Hindu Fasts and Festivals (Shivanandanagar, India: The Yogi-Vedanta Forest
Academy Press, 1983), 107.
4.  Alan Bleakley, Fruits of the Moon Tree, Chapter 7 (London: Gateway Books, 1984).
5.  D. K. S. Dabu, The Message of Zarathustra (Bombay: New Book Company, 1959), 155.
6.  Diana L. Eck, Benares, City of Light (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983), 140.

Chapter 9
1.  C. Dimmit and J. A. B. Van Buitenen, Classical Hindu Mythology (New Delhi: Rupa, 1983), 216.
2.  Basham,The Wonder that Was India, 188.
3.  Ibid., 118.
4.  Wendy D. O’Flaherty, Siva: the Erotic Ascetic (London and New York: Oxford University Press,
1981), 282.

Chapter 10
1.  Ervad S. D. Bharucha, Zoroastran Religion and Customs (Bombay: D. B. Taraporevala Sons, 1979),
170.
2.  Mircea Eliade, Patterns in Comparative Religion (New York: Meridian Books, 1963), 164f.
3.  F. Max Mueller, trans., “The Sayings of Ramakrishna,” in A Book of India, edited by B. N. Pandey
(Calcutta, Allahabad, Bombay, New Delhi: Rupa Paperback, 1981), 321.
4.  Ramanujan,Speaking of Siva, 167.
5.  Maurice Magre, La clef des choses cachées (Paris: Fasquelle Edieurs, 1935). German translation, Die
Kraft des frühen Himmels (Bad Münstereifel und Trilla: Edition Tramontane. 1985), 157.
6.  Claudia Müller-Ebeling, Christian Rätsch, and Wolf-Dieter Storl, Hexenmedizin, 4th edition (Aarau,
Switzerland: AT-Verlag, 2002), 54. American edition, Witchcraft Medicine (Rochester, Vt.: Inner
Traditions International, 2004).
7.  Storl,Shamanism among Americans of European Origin, 21.

Chapter 11
1.  Nirad C. Chaudhuri, The Continent of Circe (Bombay: Jaico Publishing House, 1983).
2.  Kamalakar Mishra, Significance of the Tantric Tradition (Varanasi: Arddhanarisvara Publications,
1981), 45.
3.  Rajneesh,The Book of the Secrets, 1974.
4.  Storl,Von Heilkräutern und Pflanzengottheiten, 147 f.
5.  Swami Harshananda, All about Hindu Temples (Mysore: Sri Ramakrishna Ashram 1981), 9 ff.

Chapter 12
1.  T. C. Majupuria and I. Majupuria, Erotic Themes of Nepal (Lashkar, Gwalior, India: S. Devi
Madhoganj, 1986), 185.

Chapter 13
1.  The devotional song at the beginning of the chapter is found in Hans-Georg Behr, Von Hanf ist die
Rede (Frankfurt am Main: Zweitausendeins, 1995), 44.
2.  Sivananda,Hindu Fasts and Festivals (Shivanandanagar: The Yoga-Vedanta Forest Academy Press,
1983), 125.
3.  L. Kolisko, Agriculture of Tomorrow (London: Kolisko Archives, 1939), 13 ff. Also see Storl, Culture
and Horticulture, 197f.
4.  Martha Sills-Fuchs, Wiederkehr der Kelten (München: Knaur, 1983), 105.
5.  Sivananda,Hindu Fasts and Festivals, 129.
6.  The author is indebted for much of this information to Professor R. Rao of the Department of Botany,
Benares Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh.
7.  Majurpuria and Majupuria, Pashupathinath, 202 f.
8.  Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, Das Buch der Geheimnisse (München: Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, 1983), 84.
This is a translation of the English original The Book of Secrets (London: Thames & Hudson, 1974).
9.  W.J. Wilkins, Hindu Mythology (New Delhi: Rupa & Co., new ed. 1982, first ed. 1882), 279.
10.  Glenn Yokum, “Madness and Devotion in Manikkavacakar’s Tiruvacakam,” in Experiencing Shiva,
edited by Fred W. Clothey and Bruce Long (New Delhi: Manohar Publications, 1983), 20.
11.  Arthur M. Eastman, ed., The Norton Anthology of Poetry (New York: W. W. Norton, 1970), 847-48.
12.  Yokum, “Madness and Devotion in Manikkavacakar’s Tiruvacakam,” in Experiencing Shiva, 22.
13.  Ibid., 28
14.  Ibid., 20
15.  Aldo Legnaro, “Ansätze zu einer Soziologie des Rausches” in Rausch und Realität, Bd. 1, 104.
16.  Wolf-Dieter Storl, Bom Shiva (Solothurn, Switzerland: Nachtschatten Verlag, 2003), 15.
17.  Erika Moser-Schmitt, “Soziokultureller Gebrauch von Cannabis in Indien” in Rausch und Realität, Bd.
2, 938.
18.  O’Flaherty,Siva, the Erotic Ascetic, 161.
19.  O’Flaherty,Hindu Myths, 147-149.
20.  Harold A. Hansen, Der Hexengarten (München: Trikont-Dianus, 1983), 66.
21.  Daniélou,Shiva et Dionysos, 112 ff.
22.  Hansen,Der Hexengarten, 63.

Chapter 14
1.  Storl,Culture and Horticulture, 197.
2.  Swahanada,Hindu Symbology, 51.
3.  Arthur Osborne, Ramana Maharshi and the Path to Self-Knowledge (Bombay: Jaico Publishing House,
1982), 40 ff.
4.  Paul Brunton, A Search in Secret India (London: Rider, 1934), 153.
5.  Sivananda,Hindu Fasts and Festivals, 141.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aiyar, T. R. Rajagopala. Sri Rudram and Chamakam. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1985.
Annan, David. “Thuggee.” In Secret Societies, edited by Norman MacKenzie. London: Collier Books,
1967.
Arora, U. P. Motifs in Indian Mythology. New Delhi: Indika Publishing House, 1981.
Basham, A.L. The Wonder that Was India. Calcutta and New Delhi: Rupa Paperback, 1967.
Behr, Hans-Georg. Von Hanf ist die Rede. Frankfurt am Main: Zweitausendeins, 1995.
Bharucha, Ervad S. D. Zoroastran Religion and Customs. Bombay: D. B. Taraporevala Sons, 1979.
Biezias, Haralds. “Baltische Religionen.” In Germanische und Baltische Religionen. Stuttgart: Verlag W.
Kohlhammer, 1975.
Bleakley, Alan. Fruits of the Moon Tree. London: Gateway Books, 1984.
Bourguignon, Erika. Psychological Anthropology. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1979.
Brunton, Paul. A Search in Secret India. London: Rider, 1934.
Chaudhuri, Nirad C. Autobiography of an Unknown Indian. New York: MacMillan, 1951.
____. Hinduism, A Religion to Live By. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979.
____. The Continent of Circe. Bombay: Jaico Publishing House, 1983.
Clothey, Fred W., and J. Bruce Long. Experiencing Siva. New Delhi: Ramesh Jain, Manohar Publications,
1983.
Dabu, D. K. S. Message of Zarathustra. Bombay: The New Book Company, 1959.
Daniélou, Alain. Gods of Love and Ecstasy:The Traditions of Shiva and Dionysus. Rochester, Vt.: Inner
Traditions, 1992.
Davidson, H. R. Ellis. Gods and Myths of Northern Europe. Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin
Books, 1969.
Dimmitt, C., and J. A. B. Van Buitenen. Classical Hindu Mythology. New Delhi:
Rupa Paperbacks, 1983. Döbler, Hannsferdinand. Die Germanen, Legende und Wirklichkeit von A bis Z.
Barcelona: Prisma Verlag, 1975.
Eck, Diana L. Banaras, City of Light. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983.
Eliàde, Mircea. Le chamanisme et les techniques archaiques de ì’extase. Paris: Editons Payot, 1953.
____. Patterns in Comparative Religion. New York: Meridian Books, 1963.
Erich, Oswald A., and Richard Beitl. Wörterbuch der deutschen Volkskunde. Stuttgart: Alfred Kröner
Verlag, 1974.
Findeisen, Hans and Heino Gehrts. Die Schamanen. Diederichs Gelbe Reihe. Köln: Eugen Diederichs
Verlag, 1983.
Gorsleben, Rudolf John. Hoch-Zeit der Menschheit. Leipzig: Koehler & Amelang, 1930.
Hanson, Harold A. Der Hexengarten. München: Trikont-Dianus Verlag, 1983.
Harshananda, Swami. All about Hindu Temples. Mysore: Sri Ramakrishna Ashrama, 1981.

____. Hindu Gods and Goddesses. Mysore: Sri Ramakrishna Ashrama, 1982.
Jettmar, Karl. “Skythen und Haschisch.” In Rausch und Realität, Band 2. Hamburg: Rowolt Verlag, 1982.
Kolisko, L. Agriculture of Tomorrow. London: Kolisko Archives, 1939.
König, Kardinal Franz. Der Glaube der Menschen. Bonn: Verlag des Borromäusvereins, 1985.
Krishna, Gopi. The Dawn of a New Science. New Delhi: Kundalini Research and Publication Trust, 1978.
Legnaro, Aldo. “Ansätze zu einer Soziologie des Rausches.” In Rausch und Realität, Band II, edited by
Gisela Völger and Karin von Welck. Hamburg: Rowohlt Verlag, 1982.
Lübbig, Hermann. Oldenburgische Sagen. Oldenburg: Heinz Holzberg Verlag, 1980
Magre, Maurice. La clef des choses cachées. Paris: Fasquelle Editeurs, 1935.
Majupuria, T. R., and Majupuria, I. Pashupathinath. Lashkar, Gwalior, India: M. Devi Lalipur Colony,
1982.
____. Erotic Themes of Nepal. Lashkar, Gwalior, India: S. Devi Madhoganj Publications, 1986.
Meyer, Rudolf. Die Weisheit der Deutschen Volksmärchen. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch.
1985.
Mishra, Kamalakar. Significance of the Tantric Tradition. Varanasi, India: Arddhanarishvara Publications,
1981.
Moser-Schmitt, Erika. “Sozio-ritueller Gebrauch von Cannabis in Indien.” In Rausch und Realität, Band II,
edited by Gisela Völger and Karin von Welck. Hamburg: Rowohlt Verlag, 1982.
Nack, Emil. Götter, Helden und Dämonen. Wien, Heidelberg: Verlag Carl Peberreuter, 1968.
O’Flaherty, Wendy D. Hindu Myths. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books, 1976.
____. Shiva, the Erotic Ascetic. London and New York: Oxford University Press, 1981
Osborne, Arthur. Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge. Bombay: Jaico Publishing House,
1982.
Pandey, B. N. A Book of India. Calcutta, Allahabad, Bombay, New Delhi: Rupa & Co., 1981.
Pattanaik, Devdutt. Shiva: An Introduction. Mumbai: Vakils, Feffer and Simons, 1997.
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree. The Book of Secrets, vol. I. London: Thames & Hudson, 1974. Copyright of
Rajneesh Foundation.
Ramanujan. A. K. Speaking of Siva. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Classics, 1979.
Rätsch, Christian, and Claudia Müller-Ebeling. Isoldens Liebestrank. München: Kindler Verlag, 1986.
Ravenscroft, Trevor. The Spear of Destiny. New York: G. P. Putman’s Sons, 1973.
Schlesier, Karl. Die Wölfe des Himmels. Köln: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1985.
Sills-Fuchs, M. Wiederkehr der Kelten. München: Knaur Taschenbuch, 1983.
Sivananda, Sri Swami. Lord Shiva and His Worship. Shivanandanagar, Uttar Pradesh, India: Divine Life
Society, 1984.
____. Hindu Fasts and Festivals. Shivanandanagar, India: The Yoga Vedanta Forest Academy Press, 1983.
Storl, Wolf-Dieter. Shamanism among Americans of European Origin. Berne, Switzerland: Inaugural
Dissertation, University of Berne, 1974.
____. Von Heilkräutern und Pflanzengottheiten. Braunschweig: Aurum Verlag, 1997.
____. Culture and Horticulture. San Francisco: Biodymanic Farming and Gardening Association, 2000.
____. Bom Shiva. Solothurn, Schweiz: Nachtschatten Verlag, 2003.
Ström, Ake V. “Germanische Religion.” In Germanische und Baltische Religion. Stuttgart: Verlag W.
Kohlhammer, 1975.
Swahananda, Swami. Hindu Symbology and Other Essays. Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1983.
Wilkins, W. J. Hindu Mythology. Calcutta, Allahabad, Bombay, Delhi: Rupa & Co., 1982.

Yokum, Glenn, Madness and Devotion in Manikkavacakar’s Tiruvacakam.” In Experiencing Siva, edited
by Fred W. Clothey and Bruce Long. New Delhi: Manohar Publishing, 1983.
Zimmer, Heinrich. Philosophie und Religion Indiens. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Taschenbuch, 1973.
Zukav, Gary. The Dancing Wu Li Masters. New York: Bantam Books, 1979.

About the Author
Wolf-Dieter Storl, Ph.D., is a cultural anthropologist and ethnobotanist
who has taught at Kent State University as well as in Vienna, Berne, and
Benares. He is coauthor of Witchcraft Medicine and has written a number
of books on indigenous culture and ethnobotany. He lives in Allgäu,
Germany.

About Inner Traditions • Bear & Company
Founded in 1975, Inner Traditions is a leading publisher of books on indigenous
cultures, perennial philosophy, visionary art, spiritual traditions of the East and
West, sexuality, holistic health and healing, self-development, as well as
recordings of ethnic music and accompaniments for meditation.
In July 2000, Bear & Company joined with Inner Traditions and moved from
Santa Fe, New Mexico, where it was founded in 1980, to Rochester, Vermont.
Together Inner Traditions • Bear & Company have eleven imprints: Inner
Traditions, Bear & Company, Healing Arts Press, Destiny Books, Park Street
Press, Bindu Books, Bear Cub Books, Destiny Recordings, Destiny Audio
Editions, Inner Traditions en Español, and Inner Traditions India.
For more information or to browse through our more than one thousand titles
in print, visit www.InnerTraditions.com.

