
Sadhguru
SHIVA
Ultimate Outlaw

Breaking the laws of physical 
nature is spiritual process. 
In this sense, we are outlaws, 
and Shiva is the ultimate outlaw. 
You cannot worship Shiva, 
but you may join the Gang.
- Sadhguru

Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Sadhguru
©2014 Sadhguru
First Edition: February 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form 
without the written permission of the publisher, except in the case of 
brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Cover design, typesetting, book layout and compilation done by the 
Archives of Isha Yoga Center. All photographs used in this book are the 
copyrighted property of Isha Foundation, unless otherwise noted.
Published by: Isha Foundation
15, Govindasamy Naidu Layout,
Singanallur, Coimbatore - 641 005
INDIA
Phone: +91-422-2515345
Email: info@ishafoundation.org

Table of Contents

◊  Who is Shiva?
3
◊  Dawn of Yoga
7
The Presence of Shiva
10
◊  Kailash – Mystic Mountain
15
◊  Velliangiri – Kailash of the South
16
◊  Kashi – Eternal City
21
◊  Kantisarovar – Lake of Grace
26
Shiva’s Adornments
32
◊  Third Eye
34
◊  Nandi
35
◊  Trishul
37
◊  Moon
38
◊  Serpent
40
Ultimate Outlaw
42

1
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
T
here is a beautiful incident that happened when Shiva and 
Parvati were to be married. Theirs was to be the greatest 
marriage ever. Shiva – the most intense human being that anyone 
could think of – was taking another being as a part of his life. Everyone 
who was someone and everyone who was no one turned up. 
All of the devas and divine beings were present, but so were all the 
asuras or demons. Usually, if the devas came, the asuras would refuse 
to come, and vice versa. They just could not get along with each 
other. But since it was Shiva’s wedding, they decided to put aside 
their differences and sit together this one time. And because Shiva is 
Pashupati, the Lord of all creatures, all the animals, worms, insects 
and every other living creature showed up for the wedding. Even the 
goblins, ghosts and demented beings arrived as guests.
As it was a royal wedding – the wedding of a princess – it was preceded 
by an important ceremony: the bride and groom would each have 
their ancestral lineage announced. For a king, his lineage is the most 
important thing, the pride of his life. So with great pomp, Parvati’s 
lineage was announced. This went on for quite a while, and when 
they finally finished recounting all the details, they turned towards 
where the groom, Shiva, was sitting. 
All the guests waited for someone to rise and speak about the glory 

2
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
of Shiva’s lineage, but no one said a word. The family of the bride 
wondered, “Isn’t there someone in his clan who can stand up and 
talk about the greatness of his lineage?” But there was no one. No 
parents, relatives or family of the groom had arrived because he had 
none. He had just come with his companions, the ganas, who looked 
like distorted beings. They could not even speak human language and 
made a strange cacophony of noises. They all seemed to be drunk and 
in all kinds of different states. 
Parvati’s father, Parvat Raj, then requested Shiva, “Please tell us your 
antecedents.” 
Shiva just sat there silently, with a faraway look, neither looking at 
the bride nor excited about the wedding. He simply sat surrounded 
by his ganas, staring into nothingness. Repeatedly they asked him, 
because nobody would give their daughter in marriage to a man 
without knowing his ancestry. And they were in a great hurry because 
the auspicious time set for the wedding was quickly passing. But Shiva 
remained silent. 
People of the society, the highborn kings and priests, looked at Shiva in 
great disdain and the gossip mill began to churn: “What is his lineage? 
Why is he not speaking up? Maybe he comes from some shameful, 
low-caste background.”
Then, sage Narada, who was present in the assembly, saw the turn 
that events were taking, picked up his veena and started plucking at 
a single string of the instrument. He kept playing the same note – 
“toing, toing, toing.” Irritated by this, Parvati’s father, Parvat Raj, lost 
his temper: “What is this nonsense? We want to hear the lineage of the 
groom, but he just ignores us. Am I supposed to marry my daughter to 
a man like this? And why are you making that annoying noise? Is that 
supposed to be an answer?”
Narada replied, “This one does not have parents.”
The King asked, “Do you mean to say he does not know who his 
parents are?”

3
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
“No. This one has no parentage. This one has no heritage. This one has 
no gotra. This one has nothing. All he has is himself.”
The assembly was confused. Parvat Raj said, “We know people who 
don’t know who their father or mother is. Such unfortunate situations 
can happen. But everyone is born of someone. How can he not have 
a father or mother?”
Narada replied, “Because he is swayambhu, the self-created. He has 
neither father nor mother. He has neither lineage nor parentage. He 
belongs to no tradition and does not have a kingdom to back him. He 
has neither gotra nor nakshatra, and no lucky star watches over him. 
He is beyond all that. He is a yogi who has embraced the existence 
as a part of himself. For him, there 
is only one lineage – sound. The 
primordial, non-existent nature, 
when it began to find existence, the 
first thing that came into existence 
was sound. His first manifestation 
is in the form of a single sound. 
Before that he was nothing. That is 
why I am plucking the string.”
Who is Shiva?
When we say “Shiva,” there are two fundamental aspects that we 
are referring to. The word “Shiva” literally means “that which is not.” 
Today, modern science is proving to us that everything comes from 
nothing and goes back to nothing. The basis of existence and the 
fundamental quality of the cosmos is vast nothingness. The galaxies are 
just a small happening – a sprinkling. The rest is all vast empty space, 
which is referred to as Shiva. That is the womb from which everything 
is born, and that is the oblivion into which everything is sucked back. 
Everything comes from Shiva and goes back to Shiva.  
So Shiva is described as a non-being, not as a being. Shiva is not 
Shiva is described as 
a non-being, not as 
a being. Shiva is not 
described as light, but 
as darkness.

4
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
described as light, but as darkness. Humanity has gone about eulogizing 
light only because of the nature of the visual apparatus that they carry. 
Otherwise, the only thing that is always, is darkness. Light is a limited 
happening in the sense that any source of light – whether a light bulb 
or the sun – will eventually lose its ability to give out light. Light is 
not eternal. It is always a limited possibility because it happens and it 
ends. Darkness is a much bigger possibility than light. Nothing needs 
to burn, it is always – it is eternal. Darkness is everywhere. It is the only 
thing that is all pervading.  
But if I say “divine darkness,” people think I am a devil worshiper or 
something. In fact, in some places in the West it is being propagated 
that Shiva is a demon. But if you look at it as a concept, there isn’t 
a more intelligent concept on the planet about the whole process of 
creation and how it has happened. I have been talking about this in 
scientific terms without using the word “Shiva” to scientists around the 
world, and they are amazed, “Is this so? This was known? When?” We 
have known this for thousands of years. Almost every peasant in India 
knows about it unconsciously. He talks about it without even knowing 
the science behind it.  
On another level, when we say “Shiva,” we are referring to a certain 
yogi, the Adiyogi or the first yogi, and also the Adi Guru, the first Guru, 
who is the basis of what we know as the yogic science today. Yoga does 
not mean standing on your head or holding your breath. Yoga is the 
science and technology to know the essential nature of how this life is 
created and how it can be taken to its ultimate possibility.
“Shiva” refers to both of these because in many ways they are 
synonymous. This being, who is a yogi, and that non-being, which 
is the basis of the existence, are the same, because to call someone 
a yogi means he has experienced the existence as himself. If you 
have to contain the existence within you even for a moment as an 
experience, you have to be that nothingness. Only nothingness can 
hold everything. Something can never hold everything. A vessel cannot 
hold an ocean. This planet can hold an ocean, but it cannot hold the 
solar system. The solar system can hold these few planets and the sun, 

5
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
but it cannot hold the rest of the galaxy. If you go progressively like this, 
ultimately you will see it is only nothingness that can hold everything. 
The word “yoga” means “union.” A yogi is one who has experienced 
the union. That means, at least for one moment, he has been absolute 
nothingness.  
When we talk about Shiva as “that which is not,” and Shiva as a yogi, in 
a way they are synonymous, yet they are two different aspects. Because 
India is a dialectical culture, we shift from this to that and that to this 
effortlessly. One moment we talk about Shiva as the ultimate,  the 
next moment we talk about Shiva as the man who gave us this whole 
process of yoga. 
Unfortunately, most people today have been introduced to Shiva only 
through Indian calendar art. They have made him a chubby-cheeked, 
blue-colored man because the calendar artist has only one face. If you 
ask for Krishna, he will put a flute in his hand. If you ask for Rama, he 
will put a bow in his hand. If you ask for Shiva, he will put a moon on 
his head, and that’s it! 
Every time I see these calendars, I always decide to never ever sit in 
front of a painter. Photographs are all right – they capture you whichever 
way you are. If you look like a devil, you look like a devil. Why would 
a yogi like Shiva look chubby-cheeked? If you showed him skinny it 
would be okay, but a chubby-cheek Shiva – how is that? 
In the yogic culture, Shiva is not seen as a God. He was a being 
who walked this land and lived in the Himalayan region. As the very 
source of the yogic traditions, his contribution in the making of human 
consciousness is too phenomenal to be ignored. This predates all 
religion. Before people devised divisive ways of fracturing humanity to 
a point where it seems almost impossible to fix, the most powerful tools 
necessary to raise human consciousness were realized and propagated. 
Every possible way in which you could approach and transform the 
human mechanism into an ultimate possibility was explored thousands 
years ago. 
The sophistication of it is unbelievable. The question of whether people 

6
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
were so sophisticated at that time is irrelevant because this did not 
come from a certain civilization or thought process. This came from 
an inner realization. This had nothing to do with what was happening 
around him. It was just an outpouring of himself. In great detail, he 
gave a meaning and a possibility of what you could do with every point 
in the human mechanism. You cannot change a single thing even today 
because he said everything that could be said in such beautiful and 
intelligent ways. You can only spend your lifetime trying to decipher 
it. This transmission of the yogic sciences happened on the banks 
of Kantisarovar, a glacial lake a few miles beyond Kedarnath in the 
Himalayas.
In the yogic lore, Shiva is not seen as a god, but as the Adiyogi, 
the first yogi, and the Adi Guru, the first Guru.

7
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Dawn of Yoga
Over 15,000 years ago, Adiyogi appeared in the upper regions of the 
Himalayas. No one knew where he came from or what his origins 
were. He just came and went into intense ecstatic dance upon the 
mountains. When his ecstasy allowed him some movement, he 
danced wildly. When it became beyond movement, he became utterly 
still. People saw that he was experiencing something that nobody had 
known before, something that they were unable to fathom. So they 
gathered around him wanting to know what it was. But no one had the 
courage to go near him because he was so intense, like a blazing flame 
of fire. So they waited, hoping something would happen.
Nothing happened. 
He did not even seem to know that they existed. He was either in 
intense dance or absolute stillness, paying no attention to what was 
happening around him. So people came, waited a few months, and left 
because the man was oblivious to the presence of others. 
Only seven hardcore seekers stuck on. These seven were insistent that 
they must learn from him, but Shiva ignored them. They pleaded and 
begged him, “Please, we want to know what you know.” 
Shiva dismissed them, “You fools, the way you are, you are not going 
to know in a million years. You need to prepare. A tremendous amount 
of preparation is needed for this. This is not entertainment.”  
But they hung on. Seeing their perseverance, he said, “I will give you a 
preparatory step. Do this for some time. After that, we’ll see.”  
So they started preparing. Days rolled into weeks, weeks into months, 
and months into years; still, he ignored them. Then, one day, after 
eighty-four years of sadhana, when the sun’s run with relation to this 
planet was shifting from the northern run to the southern run – known 
in this tradition as Uttarayana and Dakshinayana – Adiyogi happened 
to look at these seven people and saw that they had become shining 
receptacles of knowing. After eighty-four years of intense, involved 
sadhana, they had built their systems to such power and capability 

8
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
that they were absolutely ripe to receive. He could not ignore them 
anymore. 
He watched them closely for the next twenty-eight days, and when the 
next full moon rose, he decided to become a Guru. That full moon day 
is known as Guru Pournami because the Adiyogi transformed himself 
into the Adi Guru – the first Guru was born on that day. He took the seven 
disciples to Kantisarovar and started a systematic exposition of yoga 
in a scientific manner. He began propounding the whole mechanics 
of life to these seven people, not intellectually as a philosophy, but 
experientially. He explored 
every nut and bolt of creation 
with them. He brought forth 
yoga as a technology with 
which every human being 
can 
evolve 
himself. 
For 
every human being on the 
planet, there was a way. This 
is the science of the human 
mechanism, to be able to 
dismantle it or put it together. 
The transmission went on for 
a long period of time. After 
many years, when it was 
complete and had produced 
seven 
fully 
enlightened 
beings, 
who 
are 
today 
celebrated as the Sapta Rishis, 
Adiyogi sent each one of 
them to different parts of the 
world. One went to Central 
Asia. Another went to North Africa and the Middle East, where certain 
schools exist even today. Another went to South America, and that is 
one culture that imbibed it in a deep way and made something big out 
of it. One went to East Asia. His work is never mentioned anywhere, 
but he remained with his eyes closed all his life and did a very subtle 
A reminiscence of this 
knowledge can still be 
seen in various forms and 
distortions in anything 
that you see as religious 
or spiritual on the planet, 
whether it is East or West. 
If you look deep enough, 
it was all taken from this 
basic body of knowing 
which was created by this 
one being.

9
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
form of work. One stayed right there with Adiyogi. He just sat, because 
his path was such that he became utterly still, and his presence exuded 
across the Himalayas. Another one came to the lower regions of the 
Himalayas and started what is known as Kashmiri Shaivism. Another 
one went south into the Indian Peninsula. This one is very important 
for us because he is Agastya Muni. Of the seven Sapta Rishis, Agastya 
Muni has been the most effective in terms of bringing the spiritual 
process into practical life, not as a teaching, philosophy or a practice, 
but as life itself. It is the benefit of what he did that the Indian people 
are still enjoying because he produced hundreds of yogis who were 
like fireballs. 
He made the spiritual process a part of everyone’s life. They say he 
made sure every human habitation in the region was touched. You can 
still find the remnants of his work in every family in this country. They 
are unknowingly doing some kind of yoga, though it is in distorted 
forms sometimes. If you look carefully at an Indian family, the way they 
sit, the way they eat, the way they do many things, whatever is being 
done traditionally are the remnants of Agastya’s work. 
The Sapta Rishis became the basis of the seven basic schools of yoga. 
Even today, these seven schools are still distinctly there. Adiyogi created 
this spine of knowledge, not in the form of books or teachings, but as 
an energy-based knowledge. If one knows how to access it, it is always 
there. A reminiscence of this knowledge can still be seen in various 
forms and distortions in anything that you see as religious or spiritual 
on the planet, whether it is East or West. If you look deep enough, it 
was all taken from this basic body of knowing which was created by 
this one being.

10
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
The Presence of Shiva

11
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw

12
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Whatever temples and places may be there in the world – 
and I have been to many truly sacred places and seen many 
powerful beings – when I bow down to them I am genuine, but 
I bow down to them a little less than I would bow down to my 
Guru, always. When I bow down to Kailash, I bow down to it 
the same way I would bow down to my Guru. Never before 
have I done that to anything or anyone in my whole life.

13
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
The strangest of the strange, the weirdest of the weird I have 
seen in my life. But Manasarovar was well beyond anything 
that I have seen till now. “Sarovar” means “lake.” “Manas” 
means “mind” or “consciousness.” Manasarovar is a Lake of 
Consciousness. Energy-wise, I see a very deep connection 
between Manasarovar and Kailash. 

14
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
The idea of creating a whole nation dedicated to spirituality 
and human consciousness and not to physical well-being is a 
very unique thing in the world. Tibet and Nepal are probably 
the only nations which happened like that. Both these 
countries imported all their technology from India and tried to 
establish and dedicate the whole nation just for this purpose.

15
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Kailash – Mystic Mountain
When Adiyogi found that each one of the Sapta Rishis had grasped one 
aspect of the knowing and he could not find another human being who 
could grasp all seven dimensions, that is when he decided to deposit his 
knowing into Mount Kailash so that all seven dimensions of yoga, all 
seven dimensions of knowing the mechanics of life are preserved in one 
place and one source. Kailash became the greatest mystical library on 
the planet – a live library, not just with information, but alive!
This is why in the Hindu way of life, it is said that Kailash is the Abode 
of Shiva. It does not mean he is still sitting up there dancing or hiding in 
the snow. It means he deposited his knowing there. 
When a person realizes himself and his perception goes far beyond what 
is considered normal perception, what he has perceived cannot always 
be transmitted to people around him. Only a small part of it may be 
transmitted. It is very rare for any master to find people to whom he 
can transmit all of himself. Most masters go without ever being able to 
transmit what they really want to. I would say even in my life, what I am 
doing in terms of imparting is just 2% of what I am. If I can increase it 
by one percentage point before I fall dead, that’s a great achievement.  
So where do you leave all this? You don’t want this to become lost. So 
for thousands of years, realized beings always traveled to Kailash and 
deposited their knowledge in a certain energy form, using the mountain 
as a basis. It is because of this that South Indian mysticism always says 
that Agastya, who is the basis of this form of mysticism, lives in the 
Southern face of Kailash. The Buddhists say three of their main Buddhas 
live in the mountain. The Jains say Rishabh, the first of the twenty-four 
Teerthankaras, lives in Kailash. He came to Kailash wanting to grasp all 
that is there and take it to the world. Rishabh planned a three-month trip 
but the three months stretched into seven years. He endlessly gobbled 
the stream of knowledge that is there. He was never satisfied. He wanted 
to take it all. He made a phenomenal effort, but when he tried to take 
all of it, it took him. That is the only way it could happen. You cannot 
contain it, but it can easily contain you. In my opinion, no individual 

16
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
human being can ever grasp all of it. It’s too much. We can take quite 
a substantial amount, but not all of it. The only way to grasp it all is to 
become one with it. 
For a spiritual seeker, Kailash is like touching the ultimate source on this 
planet. For one who is in pursuit of mysticism, this is the place. There is 
no other place like this. 
Velliangiri – Kailash of the South
Very close to where we are in South India, we have another repository 
of mysticism – the Velliangiri Mountain. This is referred to as the Kailash 
of the South. It is a phenomenal space. The biggest heap of knowing 
is Kailash. But various mystics and yogis in the South used Velliangiri 
when they wanted to store knowing. Nothing is comparable to Kailash 
as a library in terms of volume, but in terms of quality, Velliangiri is just 
as good. 
The mountain is known as the Seven Hills because if you climb, there 
are seven undulations that make you feel like you are going up seven 
hills. The last peak is totally wind-blown – nothing grows there except 
grass. There are just three very huge boulders that have formed a shelter 
between themselves that is like a little temple with a small linga. It is an 
incredibly powerful place.
For many, this mountain became sacred because a long time ago, there 
was a young maiden in the southernmost tip of India who aspired 
to hold Shiva’s hand as his wife. Her name was Punyakshi. She was 
a woman of great perception and an oracle in her society. She started 
working towards making herself suitable to draw him, and she remained 
absolutely focused upon him. She set up a deadline: “If I am not married 
to him by sunrise on this day, I am going to leave my body.” Shiva came 
to know of this and started hurrying down to South India. But all the 
elders of her village conspired. They did not want to lose her oracular 
abilities. So, when Shiva was just a few kilometers from the place where 
Punyakshi was, the village elders created a false sunrise by setting up 

17
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw

18
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Right from my infancy, there were always certain mountains 
in the background of my eyes. When I was sixteen years old 
and discussed this with my friends, they said, “You’re crazy! 
Where are mountains?” That was when I realized no one had 
mountains in their eyes except me. It was only much later 
when a whole flood of memory came back to me, and when 
I was looking for a place to establish the Dhyanalinga, that I 
started looking for that particular peak in my eyes. 

19
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
The very idea behind a pilgrimage is fundamentally to subdue 
the sense of who you are. It is a way of getting yourself out of 
the way. If you do not budge, it is a way of wearing yourself 
out. It is to become nothing in the process of just walking and 
climbing and subjecting yourself to various arduous processes 
of nature. A process of destroying all that is limited and 
compulsive and arriving to a boundless state of consciousness.

20
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Velliangiri’s lap has been more than my mother’s
for many lives has kept me nurtured and
above all focused upon my master’s will.

21
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
a huge mound of camphor. When the mound lit up, the early morning 
dew acted like a magnifying glass and multiplied the light so that it 
looked like the sun had risen. Shiva was so close, just 22 kilometers 
away, but he thought it was over and turned back. When she heard that 
he wasn’t coming, Punyakshi was furious and heart-broken. Being an 
accomplished yogi, she walked to the edge of the land and left her body 
standing. Even today she stands as Kanyakumari. There is a shrine at the 
very tip of the Indian landmass which is the maiden’s shrine.
Shiva, having turned back, was despondent and frustrated with himself 
for not having made it in time. He started walking back, and needed a 
place to sit and work out his despondency. So he climbed up Velliangiri 
and sat at the peak. It is a very strange kind of place because he was not 
sitting there in blissfulness, he was not sitting in meditation – he sat in a 
certain kind of despondence and anger about himself. He stayed there 
for a considerable amount of time, slowly settled himself, and left. But 
he left his energies here.    
For thousands of years, those who came seeking used these energies as a 
way to know. The yogis and siddhas who came down this mountain were 
completely of a different kind – extremely fierce and intense people. So 
many beings – the kind of men that gods would be envious of because 
they lived with such grace and dignity – have walked this mountain. 
These great beings let the whole mountain imbibe what they knew, and 
it can never be lost. This is also a mountain where my Guru walked and 
the place he chose to shed his body. So this is not just a mountain, this 
is a temple for us.
Kashi – Eternal City
Essentially, there are two fundamental ways of looking at the existence. 
One way is, people believe there is a god somewhere and when he has 
nothing to do, he will create a creation. This is one kind of belief system. 
In other words, that which people refer to as God is transcendental. 
It is not associated with creation; it is something that he throws out. 

22
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
If you have the necessary technology, you can make the simple 
space around you into a Divine exuberance. You can just take 
a piece of rock and make it into a God or a Goddess. This is 
the phenomenon of consecration.  An enormous amount of 
knowledge about this dimension of life was perpetuated in 
India, and this was held as the most important thing. 

23
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Kashi was the center of rituals. These were for people who 
did not know how to do anything with themselves, but they 
knew enough that something needs to be done with them. 
When that is the case, an instrument like this is very useful. 
But there is nothing as sure-fire as doing something internally. 
That is the best way. Once you have been initiated into a 
process, that is more important than anything.

24
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Another name for Kashi is Mahasmashana – the great cremation 
ground. The core of Kashi is Manikarnika, where at least one 
corpse will always be burning. The point is that the necessary 
atmosphere was created for those who died and for those 
who were burnt there because people were looking at life and 
death as a means of rising beyond the elemental play created 
in the form of the individual body and the cosmic body.

25
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Another way of looking at the creation is that it is cosmogenic. The 
word “cosmogenic” comes from two words, “cosmos” and “genesis.” 
Cosmos, in Greek, literally means, “made to order.” Or in other words, it 
is made to a plan, not a random happening. It is not something that fell 
out of somebody’s mouth or hands, but something that is consciously 
created. Anybody who pays a little attention will clearly know that it is 
not happening haphazardly. It is in a process of genesis or evolution, 
always from within itself.
When the yogis saw the nature of the cosmos – as to how it is evolving 
from within itself, and how its ability to evolve is quite limitless – they 
were tempted to make their own. In Kashi, they built a kind of instrument 
in the form of a city that brings a union between the micro and the 
macro. This little human being can have a phenomenal possibility of 
uniting with the cosmic reality and knowing the pleasure, ecstasy and 
beauty of becoming one with the cosmic nature. Geometrically, Kashi 
is a perfect manifestation of how the cosmos, or the macrocosm and the 
microcosm, can meet. There have been many instruments like this in the 
country, but to create a city like Kashi is a mad ambition. And they did it 
thousands of years ago. There were 72,000 shrines – the number of nadis 
in the human body. The whole process is like a manifestation of a mega 
human body to make contact with a larger cosmic body. It is because of 
this that the whole tradition came up: “If you go to Kashi, that is it.” You 
don’t want to leave the place because when you get connected to the 
cosmic nature, why would you want to go anywhere else?
The legend of Kashi goes one hundred percent by the fundamental that 
Shiva himself lived here. This was his winter place. He lived as an ascetic 
in the upper regions of the Himalayas, but when he got married, he 
decided to move to the plains and took the effort to consecrate the space 
into a powerful field of energy that still lives. There are stories about how 
he sent people to Kashi, one after another, and they never came back 
because it was so fantastic. But maybe the story is saying that he sent 
people to build it, and they took a long time. After it was built, he came 
and he liked it, and decided to stay. 

26
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
People have been travelling to Kashi from across the world for thousands 
of years. Gautama came here to give his first teaching. The Chinese 
travelled here after Gautama’s arrival. Nalanda University – which is 
recognized as the greatest place of learning – is just a small drop of 
knowledge that fell out of Kashi. All the people that you hear of, like 
Aryabhata and so many others, came from this region, all generated by 
the culture that was alive in Kashi. This level of intelligence and human 
competence came because of this instrument, which allowed them to 
make contact with dimensions that are not usually available to a human 
being. It was not something that they logically thought of. They saw 
the existence the way it is. By seeing the nature of the creation, human 
intelligence matured in ways that nobody had ever imagined possible.  
In the last few centuries, Kashi was razed to the ground thrice. How 
much of it is alive today is a question mark, but definitely something is 
still on – it is not all gone. It is a misfortune that we were not alive when 
it was in full glory. It must have been the most phenomenal place to have 
drawn people from across the world.  
We have survived the past, but the question is, will we survive the future? 
When I say “we,” I am not talking about a particular religion. I am talking 
about those populations on the planet who are willing to look at life the 
way it is, not trying to impose their opinion on someone else. The world 
does not need dogma, philosophies or belief systems. What it needs is 
for human ability to go beyond our sense organs and be able to perceive 
something that is right now considered “beyond.” This is the only way 
a human being will know. This is the only way human consciousness 
will expand. This is the only way a human being will evolve beyond the 
narrow divisions that have happened in human societies.
Kantisarovar – Lake of Grace
Many years ago, I used to travel alone for a month or two every year in the 
Himalayas. The first time I went to Kantisarovar was in 1994. Kantisarovar 
is the lake that burst out and came to Kedar during the 2013 floods. 

27
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
For a person who is seeking some kind of spiritual uplift, 
Kedar is a boon whose proportions you cannot imagine. 
That is how it is, if one is open to this. It is very difficult to 
explain to you what it means. After all, it is just a mountain, an 
outcrop of rock. But it is the type of people who lived here 
and what they have done to the space for these thousands of 
years that makes the enormous difference.  

28
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Ganga is not just a river to people, it is many more things. 
Certain parts of the river were consecrated over a period of 
time by certain people, and if you are open to it, it can be very 
powerful. Though my approach to spirituality and the inner 
dimensions of life is very scientific, still, I cannot help being 
emotionally associated with the Ganga because of the nature 
of how the river is. This is not something that can be described. 
A person has to experience the river as a live force.  

29
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Today,  it is being called Gandhi Sarovar. It is actually Kantisarovar. Kanti 
means grace, sarovar means a lake. It is a lake of grace. The legend goes 
that Shiva and Parvati lived on the banks of Kantisarovar, and in Kedar 
lived many yogis whom Shiva and Parvati would visit.
Kedarnath itself is a tremendous space. The utterance of the sound 
“Shiva” attains a completely new dimension and significance in Kedar. 
It is a space which has been specially prepared for this particular sound. 
It is not right to say this, but it is almost like on this planet, the sound 
“Shiva” emanates from this place. For thousands of years, people have 
experienced that space as a reverberation of that sound. 
When I got to Kedar after a long trek, I heard about Kantisarovar, so one 
afternoon, I decided to go there. I set forth around 2 or 2:30pm and got 
there in a little more than an hour’s time. There was the lake and snow-
capped mountains around it. In terms of nature, it is fantastic – this huge 
lake of absolutely still water, no vegetation and all the snow-covered 
peaks reflecting in the totally still water. It was an incredible place.  
I just sat there, and the serenity, silence and purity penetrated my 
consciousness. The climb, the altitude and the desolate beauty of that 
place left me breathless. I sat in that stillness on a small rock with my 
eyes open, imbibing every form around me. The surroundings gradually 
lost their form and only nada – sound – existed. The mountain, the lake 
and the whole surroundings, including my body, did not exist in their 
usual form. Everything was just sound. Within me a song arose: “Nada 
brahma vishwa swaroopa.”  
I am somebody who always avoided learning the Sanskrit language. 
Though I like the language very much and I know the depth of the 
language, I avoided learning it because the moment you learn Sanskrit, 
you will invariably end up reading the scriptures. My own vision has 
never failed me in anything even for one moment, so I did not want to 
clutter myself with scriptures and all these traditions. So I avoided the 
Sanskrit language.  
While I was sitting there, my mouth was definitely closed and my eyes 
open, and I heard this song in a big way, in my voice. It was my voice 

30
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Nada Brahma Vishwaswaroopa  
Nada Hi Sakala Jeevaroopa  
Nada Hi Karma Nada Hi Dharma  
Nada Hi Bandhana Nada Hi Mukti  
Nada Hi Shankara Nada Hi Shakti  
Nadam Nadam Sarvam Nadam  
Nadam Nadam Nadam Nadam  

31
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
singing, and it was a Sanskrit song. I heard it clearly, loudly. So loud, it 
was like the whole mountain was singing. In my experience, everything 
had turned into sound. That is when I perceived this song. I didn’t make it 
up, I didn’t write it – it just descended upon me. The whole song flowed 
out in Sanskrit. The experience was overpowering.  
Slowly, after some time, everything fell back into its earlier form. The fall 
of my consciousness – the fall from nada to rupa – filled my eyes with 
tears.  
If you just give yourself to that song, there is a kind of power to it. It has 
a power to dissolve a person, if you really throw yourself into it.

32
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Shiva’s Adornments

34
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw

34
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Third Eye
Shiva has always been referred to as Triambaka because he has a third 
eye. The third eye does not mean someone’s forehead cracked and 
something came out! It simply means another dimension of perception 
has opened up. The two eyes can see only that which is physical. If I just 
cover them with my hand, they cannot look beyond that. That is how 
limited they are. If the third eye opens, it means another dimension 
of perception, which is inward-looking and looks at life completely 
differently, has opened up and everything that can be perceived is 
perceived.
If your perception has to evolve and enhance itself, the most important 
thing is that your energy has to evolve and enhance itself. The whole 
process of yoga is to evolve and refine your energies in such a way 
that your perception is enhanced and the third eye opens. The third 
eye is the eye of vision. The two physical eyes are just sensory organs. 
They feed the mind with all kinds of nonsense, because what you 
see is not the truth. You see this person or that person and you think 
something about him, but you are not able to see the Shiva in him. You 
see things the way it is necessary for your survival. Another creature 
sees it another way, as is necessary for its survival. This is why we say 
this world is maya. Maya means it is illusory. We are not saying that 

35
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
existence is illusory. We are only saying the way you are perceiving 
it is illusory. So another eye, an eye of deeper penetration, has to be 
opened up. The third eye means your perception has gone beyond the 
dualities of life. You are able to see life just the way it is, not just the 
way that is necessary for your survival.  
There is a scientist who recently published a book where he talks about 
how much of the physical existence is visible to the human eye. He 
says 0.00001% is all that the human eye sees of the physical existence. 
So if you look with the two physical eyes, you will see what is manifest. 
If you look with the proverbial third eye, you will see what is yet to 
manifest and what could manifest.
In this country and tradition, knowing does not mean reading books, 
listening to someone’s talks or gathering information from here 
and there. Knowing means opening up a new vision into life. On 
Mahashivarathri, somehow, nature is bringing that possibility very 
close. It is possible every day, it is not that we have to wait for this 
particular day, but on this day, nature makes it more available to you.  
Nandi
Nandi is a symbolism of eternal waiting, because waiting is considered 
the greatest virtue in Indian culture. One who knows how to simply sit 
and wait is naturally meditative. Nandi is not expecting Shiva to come 
out tomorrow. He is not anticipating or expecting anything. He is just 
waiting. He will wait forever. That quality is the essence of receptivity. 
Nandi is Shiva’s closest accomplice because he is the essence of 
receptivity. Before you go into a temple, you must have the quality of 
Nandi – to simply sit. You are not trying to go to heaven, you are not 
trying to get this or that – you simply sit. 
People have always misunderstood meditation as some kind of activity. 
No – it is a quality. That is the fundamental difference. Prayer means 
you are trying to talk to God. Meditation means you are willing to 
listen to God. You are willing to just listen to existence, to the ultimate 

36
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
nature of creation. You have nothing to say, you simply listen. That is 
the quality of Nandi – he just sits, alert. This is very important – he is 
alert, not sleepy. He is not sitting in a passive way. He is sitting, very 
active, full of alertness, full of life, but just sitting – that is meditation. 
Meditation essentially means the individual person is not doing his 
own thing. He is just there. Once you are simply there, you become 
aware of the larger dimension of the existence that is always in action. 
You become aware that you are a part of it. Even now you are a part of 
it but becoming aware that “I’m a part of it” is meditativeness. Nandi 
is the symbolism of that. He just sits and reminds everyone, “You must 
sit like me.” 
“Even outside the Dhyanalinga, we have set up a big bull. 
The message is very clear, ‘You must leave your “bull” outside 
and then go.’ Even Shiva did it. You also do the same thing.” - 
Sadhguru

37
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Trishul
Shiva’s trishul represents the three fundamental 
aspects of life. In the yogic tradition it is called Rudra, 
Hara and Sadashiva. These are the three fundamental 
dimensions of life that are symbolized in many ways. 
They can also be called Ida, Pingala and Sushumna. 
These are the three basic nadis – the left, the right and 
the central – in the pranamaya kosha, or the energy 
body of the human system. Nadis are pathways or 
channels of prana in the system. There are 72,000 
nadis that spring from the three fundamental ones. 
These nadis don’t have a physical manifestation. If you 
cut the body and look in, you will not find them. But 
as you become more aware, you will notice the energy 
is not moving at random, it is moving in established 
pathways. There are 72,000 different ways in which 
the energy, or prana moves.  
The Pingala and Ida represent the basic duality in 
the existence. It is this duality which we traditionally 
personify as Shiva and Shakti. You can simply call it 
masculine and feminine, or it can be the logical and 
the intuitive aspect of you. It is based on this that life 
is created. Without these two dualities, life wouldn’t 
exist as it does right now. In the beginning, everything 
is primordial, there is no duality. But once creation 
happens, there is duality.  
When I say masculine and feminine, I am not talking 
in terms of sex – about being male or female – but in 
terms of certain qualities in nature. Certain qualities 
in nature have been identified as masculine. Certain 
other qualities have been identified as feminine. You 
may be a man, but if your Ida is more pronounced, 
the feminine may be dominant in you. You may be a 

38
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
woman, but if your Pingala is more pronounced, the masculine may 
be dominant in you.  
Bringing a balance between the Ida and Pingala will make you 
effective in the world; this will allow you to handle life aspects well. 
Most people live and die in Ida and Pingala. Sushumna, the central 
space, remains dormant. But Sushumna is the most significant aspect 
of human physiology. Life really begins only when energies enter into 
Sushumna. You attain to a new kind of balance, an inner balance 
where whatever happens outside, there is a certain space within you 
that never gets disturbed and cannot be touched by outside situations. 
Only if you create this stable situation within yourself, you will dare to 
scale the peaks of consciousness.
Moon
There are many names for Shiva. 
One name that is very commonly 
used is Soma or Somasundara. 
Soma could literally mean the 
moon, but soma essentially means 
inebriation or intoxication. If one 
does not get inebriated, not with 
outside substances but with the 
life process itself, the simple 
process of waking up in the 
morning, attending to your body’s needs, eating, earning your living, 
protecting yourself from all the predators around you and going back 
to bed every day can take such a big toll. That’s all that is happening 
to most human beings right now. The simple process of life has turned 
into a hell. This is simply because they are just trying to live life without 
drinking from it.
The moon is referred to as soma, which means the source of intoxication. 
If you have gone out on a moonlit night somewhere where there are 

39
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
no electric lights, or if you just look at the moonlight, slowly, you will 
get lightheaded. Have you noticed this? We can do it without the 
moonlight also, but moonlight does it very well! It is because of this 
quality that the moon is referred to as the source of intoxication.  
Shiva uses the moon as a decoration because he is a great yogi who 
is intoxicated all the time, but he sits in great alertness. To enjoy the 
intoxication, you must be alert. Even when you drink, you try to stay 
awake and enjoy the intoxication. And that is how yogis are – totally 
drunk, but fully alert.
The science of yoga gives this pleasure to you to be internally drunk all 
the time. Yogis are not against pleasure. It is just that they are unwilling 
to settle for little pleasures. They are greedy. They know if you drink a 
glass of wine it just gets you a little buzz, and tomorrow morning, you 
get a headache and the works. They are not willing to settle for that. 
With yoga, they can be totally drunk all the time, but one hundred 
percent stable and alert. This cannot happen by drinking something 
or taking in a chemical. This can happen only if you are producing 
and consuming your own narcotic! And nature has given you this 
possibility.
There has been a lot of research in the last couple of decades, and a 
particular scientist found that in the human brain, there are millions of 
cannabis receptors. If you simply keep your body in a certain way, the 
body will produce its own narcotic, and the brain is waiting to receive 
it. It is only because the human body produces its own narcotic that 
feelings of peace, pleasure and joy can happen within you without any 
stimulus from outside. 
When the scientist wanted to give this chemical an appropriate name, 
he went through various scriptures around the world and could not 
find anything that he was satisfied with. Then he came down to India 
and found the word ananda, or bliss. So he called it Anandamide. If 
you generate a sufficient amount of Anandamide in your system, then 
you can be drunk all the time, but fully awake, wide awake.  

40
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
	
	
	
    
Serpent
In the yogic culture, the snake 
is a symbolism for kundalini, 
which is the unmanifest energy 
within you. The nature of 
kundalini is such that when it 
is still, you do not even know it 
exists. Only when it moves, you 
realize there is so much power 
within you. Until it moves, it is 
almost non-existent. Because of 
this, kundalini is symbolized as a 
snake, because a coiled-up snake is 
so hard to see unless it moves. Similarly, 
you do not see this coiled-up energy unless it 
moves. If your kundalini is aroused, miraculous 
things that you cannot believe possible will 
happen with you. An unleashing of a completely 
new level of energy begins and your body and 
everything behaves in a completely different way.   
This is the reason for the symbolism of Shiva and a snake. It indicates 
that his energies have reached the peak. Mysticism and snakes cannot 
be separated because this creature has come endowed with a certain 
dimension of perception. This is a reptile that must be crawling on the 
ground, but Shiva has got it over his head to indicate that it is above 
even him. The indication is that in some ways, the snake is even better 
than Shiva. 
The snake is one animal that is very comfortable with you if you are 
at ease. It just won’t do anything to you. A snake is also very sensitive 
to certain energies. Shiva has the snake around his throat. It is not 
just symbolic. There is a whole lot of science behind it. There are 114 
chakras in the energy body. You can see them as 114 junction boxes or 

41
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
the confluence of nadis. Out of these 114, people are usually talking 
about the seven fundamental chakras in the system. Among these 
seven fundamental ones, the vishuddhi chakra is located in the pit of 
your throat. This particular chakra is very strongly associated with the 
snake. The vishuddhi is about stopping poison, and a snake carries 
poison. All these things are connected.
The word vishuddhi literally means “filter.” If your vishuddhi becomes 
powerful, you have the ability to filter everything that enters you. 
Shiva’s center is supposed to be vishuddhi, and he is also known as 
Vishakantha or Neelakantha because he filters all the poison. He 
doesn’t allow it to enter his system. Poisons are not necessarily that 
which you may consume through food. Poisons can enter you in so 
many ways: a wrong thought, a wrong emotion, a wrong idea, a wrong 
energy or a wrong impulse can poison your life. If your vishuddhi is 
active, it filters everything. It saves you from all these influences. In 
other words, once vishuddhi is very active, that person is so powerful 
within himself that whatever is around him does not influence him 
anymore. He is established within himself. He tends to become a very 
powerful being.   

42
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
Ultimate Outlaw

43
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
G
enerally, in most parts of the world, anything that people 
refer to as divine is always referred to as good. But if you 
read through the Shiva Purana, you cannot identify Shiva as a good 
person or a bad person. Nobody can be more horrible than Shiva! 
The worst possible descriptions have been given to him. There are 
descriptions of Shiva having walked around with human excrement 
on his body. He went through everything any human being could ever 
go through. A complex amalgamation of all the qualities of existence 
has been put into one person because if you can accept this one being, 
you have crossed life itself. The whole struggle with one’s life is we are 
always trying to pick out what is beautiful and what is not, what is good 
and what is bad. But you would have no problem with anything, if only 
you could accept this man who is a terrible combination of everything 
put together.

44
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
He is the most beautiful, but he is also the ugliest. He is a great 
ascetic, and also a family person. He is the most disciplined, but also 
a drunkard and a drug addict. He is a dancer, and he is also absolutely 
still. Gods, demons and all kind of creatures in the world worship him. 
The so-called civilization has tried to conveniently eliminate all those 
un-digestible stories, but this is where the essence of Shiva is. There 
is nothing that is repulsive for him. Shiva sat on a dead body to do 
sadhana as an aghori. Ghora means “terrible.” Aghori means that which 
is “beyond terrible.” Shiva is an aghori – he is beyond the terrible. The 
terrible does not touch him, nothing repels him. He is an all-embracing 
kind, not out of compassion or any other emotion as you might like to 
think, but simply because he is like life. Life is naturally all-embracing. 
The problems of whom you can embrace and whom you can’t are 
only psychological problems, not life problems. Even if your enemy 
is sitting next you, the life in you has no problem. What your enemy 
exhales, you inhale. Your friend’s exhalation does not feel any better 
than your enemy’s. The problem is only psychological. Existentially, 
there is no problem. 
So an aghori is not in a state of love. The spiritual process in this part 
of the world never taught you about being loving, compassionate, kind 
or anything like that. These not even considered spiritual – these are 
social aspects. Being kind and smiling at people around you is a family 
and social business. A human being is supposed to have that much 
sense, so no one thought it was necessary to teach such things. An 
aghori is an embrace with the existence, not out of love – he’s not so 
superficial – he is in a life embrace. He treats food and his excrement 
the same way. He treats the dead and the alive the same way. He treats 
a well-preserved body and a rotting body the same way simply because 
he wants to become absolute life. He does not want to be trapped in 
his own psychological process.
Some time ago, I had a guest from Australia. I was driving him around 
in Mysore to show him a few places. The way this person was, if I drove 
fast, he would say, “Shit!” If I braked, he would say, “Shit!” If he saw 
something beautiful, he said, “Shit!” If he saw something ugly, “Shit!” 
If he liked something, “Shit!” If he didn’t like something, again, “Shit!” 

45
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
I was just listening to this, thinking, “Why do they go on chanting this 
like a mantra throughout the day? Maybe they are constipated and they 
are trying to invoke themselves? That should be over in the morning, 
why are they dragging it through the day?” Then I observed this person. 
When he was worked up, he said, “Shit,” and he settled down. So I 
did not want to disturb it. Anything that is working for anyone, I do not 
want to disturb it. If it works, it is fine.
We say Shiva, he says, “Shit!” The difference is only cultural. “What? 
Are you equating Shiva and shit? This is the highest, that is the lowest. 
Are you equating these two?” I am not equating the two. It is just that 
in your mind, can you store Shiva in one place and shit in another 
place? In your mind, everything is together, especially if it is stored 
alphabetically, Shiva and shit must be next to each other.
It is with a very deep understanding of life that we have arrived at the 
sound that we call as Shiva. We know the sounds “Shi-va” can do 
incredible things to you. If you are receptive enough, this sound can 
be explosive – just one utterance will explode within you in such a 
powerful way. It has that kind of power. This is a science that has been 
understood from a very deep experience within ourselves. We have 
looked at it in great depth.
The sound shi in “Shiva” fundamentally means “power or energy.” In 
the Indian way of life, we have always symbolized the feminine as 
power – Shakti. Somehow, the English language found the same word 
to describe the feminine as “she.” Shi fundamentally means Shakti, or 
“energy.” But if you just go on doing too much shi, it will take you off 
balance. So va in the mantra is added as a damper to slow it down and 
keep the balance. Va comes from vama, which means “mastery.”
In the mantra “Shi-va,” one energizes it and the other balances or takes 
control of it. Undirected energy is of no use, it could be destructive. 
So when we say “Shiva,” we are talking about directing the energy in a 
certain way, in a certain direction.
The word “shit” also starts the same way. Somehow, accidentally, they 
discovered the word and held onto it. We have looked at it in great 

46
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
depth as a science and we know the sound can do incredible things 
to you. 
So when you say “Shiva,” it is not about religion. Today, the world is 
divided in terms of which religion you belong to. Because of this, if 
you utter something, it looks like you belong to some “party.” This is 
not religion, this is the science of inner evolution. You don’t have to 
worship Shiva. I don’t. I am worshipful towards everything, but I have 
never said a prayer in my whole life. When I say “Shiva,” for me it’s 
everything. When I utter “Shiva,” whatever I wish to know is here for 
me. If I sit here long enough, just with one word I will know the whole 
existence. It is because of this that I walk through life with such ease 
– just Shiva. You must know the strength of that. Don’t get lost in your 
logical mind. This is not that kind of nonsense. This doesn’t belong to 
that genre. This is a way of going beyond where you are. This is a way 
of stepping beyond the boundaries that human beings are supposed to 
stay within. 
We are vagabonds who will not go by the rules set by nature. Nature 
has set some laws for human beings – they have to be within that. 
Breaking the laws of physical nature is spiritual process. In this sense, 
we are outlaws, and Shiva is the ultimate outlaw. You cannot worship 
Shiva, but you may join the Gang. 


48
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
About Sadhguru
Yogi, mystic and visionary, Sadhguru is a spiritual master with a 
difference. An arresting blend of profundity and pragmatism, his life 
and work serve as a reminder that yoga is not an esoteric discipline 
from an outdated past, but a contemporary science, vitally relevant 
to our times. Probing, passionate and provocative, insightful, logical 
and unfailingly witty, Sadhguru’s talks have earned him the reputation 
of a speaker and opinion-maker of international renown. With a 
celebratory engagement with life on all levels, Sadhguru’s areas of 
active involvement encompass fields as diverse as architecture and 
visual design, poetry and painting, ecology and horticulture, music 
and sports.
Sadhguru is also the founder of Isha Foundation, a non-profit 
organization which has been dedicated to the wellbeing of the 
individual and the world for the past three decades. Isha Foundation 

49
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
does not promote any particular ideology, religion, or race, but 
transmits inner sciences of universal appeal.
Sadhguru’s Official Website       Sadhguru’s Youtube Channel
       @SadhguruJV                           Sadhguru
 
Isha Foundation
Isha Foundation is a non-profit human-service organization, supported 
by over two million volunteers in over 150 centers worldwide. 
Recognizing the possibility of each person to empower another, 
Isha Foundation has created a massive movement that is dedicated 
to address all aspects of human wellbeing, without ascribing to any 
particular ideology, religion or race.
Isha Foundation is involved in several path-breaking outreach 
initiatives: Action for Rural Rejuvenation (ARR) enhances the quality 
of rural life through healthcare and disease prevention, community 
revitalization, women empowerment, the creation of sustainable 
livelihoods, and yoga programs. Isha Vidhya empowers rural children 
with quality education. Project GreenHands (PGH) initiates mass tree 
planting and creates a culture of care for the environment to keep this 
planet liveable for future generations.
Isha’s unique approach in cultivating human potential has gained 
worldwide recognition and reflects in Isha Foundation’s special 
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) 

50
Shiva – Ultimate Outlaw
of the United Nations.
The Foundation is headquartered at the Isha Yoga Center, set in the lush 
rainforest at the base of the Velliangiri Mountains in southern India, and 
at the Isha Institute of Inner-sciences on the spectacular Cumberland 
Plateau in central Tennessee, USA.
Isha Foundation Homepage
       @IshaFoundation                           Isha Foundation
Isha Offerings
Mystic Quotes
Sadhguru’s quote in your inbox everday.
Sadhguru Spot
Sadhguru shares his latest musings on life, from wherever he is at the 
moment. Every Wednesday in your inbox.
Isha Downloads
Purchase and download Sadhguru’s books, videos and photos.
Isha Shoppe
Exquisite handicrafts, garments, bodycare items and lots more.
The Isha Blog

