

  I
 II
III
Contents
Note from the author
Introduction: Phallic, but not fertile
Isolation of Shiva
Seduction of Shiva
Grace of Shiva
Conclusion: Deconstructing Destruction
About the Book
About the Author
Copyright

Note from the author
Hinduism is not a static religion. It has evolved with history.
In its earlier form, it was known as the Vedic religion, a religion of a pastoral
people, commonly identified as the Aryans. Their primary religious activity
involved invoking a primal abstract force known as Brahman through a ritual
known as yagna to satisfy various material aspirations. Hymns were chanted and
offerings made into a fire altar in the quest for fertility and power. That the ritual
involved no permanent shrine suggests its followers were a nomadic people.
Hinduism today is very rooted to the land. It revolves around a shrine, often a
vast temple complex. This shift is ascribed to the mingling of the Aryans, over
4,000 years ago, with agriculturists, city dwellers and forest tribes, a process
which continued over a thousand years. Tantalizing glimpses of the assimilation
process emerge from chronicles and epics written only in the last millennium.
The most spectacular shift in the nature of Hinduism has been the move from
almost agnostic ritualism to unabashed theism: from belief in a host of gods and
spirits to belief in an all-powerful God.
But like all things Indian, this belief was not so simple. Hindus visualized the
all-powerful God in various ways. For some, God was the world-affirming
Vishnu. For others, God was the world-rejecting Shiva. And then there were
those for whom God was feminine, the Goddess. God coexisted with Goddess
and the gods and the spirits. Nothing was rejected. This was the Hindu way. The
Indian way.
The first evidence of Shiva comes from the pre-Vedic era, from a seal from
the Indus Valley civilization. It shows a naked man with an erect penis, sitting in
the yogic ‘throne’ position or Bhadrasana, wearing horned headgear, surrounded
by animals. Since the script has not been deciphered one can only speculate what
this image represents. But most scholars believe it is an early form of Shiva
because it captures at least three attributes of Shiva: Shiva as Pashupati, lord of
animals; as Yogeshwara, lord of yoga; and as Lingeshwara, lord of the phallus.

In early Vedic scriptures, conservatively dated 1500 BC, Shiva is known as
Rudra. He is a god who is feared. He howls and shoots arrows that spread
disease. He is appeased and requested to stay away. In the Shatarudriya hymn of
the Yajur Veda there is a sense that he is considered highly potent and highly
dangerous. In the Brahmanas one is told: ‘His name shall not be spoken.’ He
remains an outsider god—a god to whom the leftovers of the yagna have to be
offered. This and the existence of pre-Vedic representations of Shiva have led to
speculation that Shiva is perhaps not a Vedic god. Perhaps he was a tribal god or
perhaps a god of settled agricultural communities, the Dravidians, who were
overrun by Aryans. The reluctant, and perhaps violent, entry of Shiva into the
Vedic pantheon is believed to have given rise to the tale of the desecration of
Daksha’s yagna by Shiva. It represents the uneasy relationship between exoteric
Vedic rituals on one hand and esoteric Dravidian practices such as yoga,
asceticism and alchemy on the other.
In the fifth century BC, Buddhism and Jainism posed a great threat to Vedic
ritualism. Members of the merchant classes patronized these monastic
ideologies. Threatening even the Buddhists and the Jains was the idea of an all-
powerful personal Godhead that was slowly taking shape in the popular
imagination. The common man always found more comfort in tangible stories
and rituals that made trees, rivers, mountains, heroes, sages, alchemists and
ascetics worthy of worship. The move from many guardian deities and fertility
spirits to one all-powerful uniting deity was but a small step.
Being atheistic, or at least agnostic, Buddhism and Jainism could do nothing
more than tolerate this fascination for theism on their fringes. In a desperate bid
to survive, Vedic priests, the Brahmins, did something more: they consciously
assimilated the trend into the Vedic fold. In their speculation they concluded and
advertised the idea that Godhead was nothing but the embodiment of Brahman,
the mystic force invoked by the chanting of Vedic hymns and the performance
of Vedic rituals. Adoration of this Godhead through pooja, a rite that involved
offering food, water, flowers, lamp and incense, was no different from the
yagna. Vedanta metaphysics was allegorized so that paramatma was not just an
abstract concept; it was personified in Godhead. In the Shvetavastra Upanishad,
Shiva is without doubt Brahman, the cosmic consciousness. With this
association, Vedism transformed into what is now known as classical Hinduism.

It was a transformation that ensured that Vedic ideology survived the Buddhist
and Jain onslaught.
The Vedic gods, such as Indra and Agni, were sidelined. All attention was
given to Shiva and Vishnu, forms of Godhead, whose story was told and retold
and finally compiled in Sanskrit chronicles known as the Puranas.
The middle ages saw great rivalry between Shiva-worshippers and Vishnu-
worshippers. In the Shiva Purana and Linga Purana, Shiva is often shown as the
real force behind the power of Vishnu. The theme is reversed in the Vishnu
Purana and the Matysa Purana. So great was the rivalry that Vishnu-
worshippers wore vertical caste marks while Shiva-worshippers wore horizontal
caste marks; Vishnu-worshippers painted their house with vertical strokes while
Shiva-worshippers painted their houses with horizontal strokes; Vishnu-
worshippers kept the Tulsi in their house while Shiva-worshippers kept the Bilva
plant. People who worshipped Vishnu refused to marry or dine with those who
worshipped Shiva.
There were, of course, many attempts at reconciliation such as the cult of
Hari-Hara, the simultaneous worship of Vishnu and Shiva, that become popular
around the fifteenth century. Even the sixteenth-century classic, Tulsi
Ramayana, makes an overt attempt to show that Shiva and Vishnu are one and
the same Godhead that cares for humanity.
Today, the rivalry between Shiva-worshippers and Vishnu-worshippers is not
very evident except perhaps in the temple complexes of Tamil Nadu and in the
traditions of the Iyers and the Iyengars. Though both Shiva and Vishnu are
considered forms of Godhead, no Hindu will ever interchange Shiva for Vishnu.
Stories, symbols and rituals, especially the ones deemed sacred, construct for
a people a way of making sense of the world. The concept of Shiva constructed
by sacred stories, symbols and rituals is quite different from the idea of Vishnu.
Shiva is always a reluctant groom whom the Goddess has to force into marriage.
His children are not produced ‘normally’. Vishnu, on the other hand, is
surrounded by women. As Rama, he protects them. As Krishna, he flirts with
them. While Shiva is associated with snow-capped mountains and caves and
crematoriums, Vishnu is associated with meadows and rivers and battlefields.
Whereas Shiva surrounds himself with dogs, bulls, ashes, skulls, animal skins
and narcotics, Vishnu is found amid cows, horses, silks, flowers, pearls, gold and

sandal paste. Shiva does not want to be part of society; Vishnu, on the other
hand, establishes the code of conduct for society. In temples, Vishnu is
visualized as a king. His anthropomorphic image is bedecked with gold and
devotees can see him only from afar. Shiva, on the other hand, is enshrined in
open temples. Devotees are free to walk in and pour water on the oval stone or
cylinder that represents him. Vishnu is offered butter and sweets, Shiva is given
only raw milk. Clearly, Shiva is associated with ascetic ideals while Vishnu is
associated with worldly thoughts.
Disdain for the material world is a dominant theme in philosophical schools
that consider Shiva as their patron deity. This disdain manifests in two ways:
asceticism and alchemy. The former seeks to outgrow all things material and
reunite with Shiva. The latter seeks to control the material world and make it do
its bidding. Kashmir Shaivism of Nepal, Shiva Siddhanta of Tamil Nadu, and the
Lingayat and Vira Shaiva movements of Karnataka tilt towards ascetic
ideologies while tantric sects such as the Pashupatas, Kapalikas and Kanphatas
tilt towards alchemical principles. In the former, sexual activity is shunned; in
the latter sexual activity is merely an occult ritual. Neither gives much thought to
the pleasurable and procreative aspects of sex.
And yet, Shiva is represented by a very sexual symbol: the male reproductive
organ placed within the female reproductive organ. Why? The quest for the
answer has made me write the book.
Of course, the easy route is to accept the most common and simplistic
explanation: it is a fertility symbol. But to make sense of a mythological image
one has to align the language heard (stories) with the language performed
(rituals) and the language seen (symbol). All dissonances have to be removed so
that the real meaning can be deciphered.
Any attempt to seek ‘true’ meaning behind the sexual imagery may be seen as
an exercise in prudishness. Hindus have long been embarrassed by Shiva’s
phallic representation. For centuries it has been used to make people defensive
and apologetic. Society has always been uncomfortable with sex, terrified by its
primal nature. This book can be seen as yet another effort to shy away from the
obvious. Maybe it is. Or maybe it is a chance to discover a deeper meaning in a
manner not explored before.

Devdutt Pattanaik
4500-year-old Harappan seal with image of Shiva-like deity

Introduction
Phallic, but not fertile
Hindus describe Shiva as Mahadeva, the great god who is none other than God.
While most Hindu gods are worshipped in iconic forms, he is worshipped in a
non-iconic form, the linga.
A linga is either a natural rock projection pointing skywards, a smooth oval
stone collected from a riverbed, or a well-carved cylindrical shaft, placed in a
leaf-shaped basin. When a devotee enters the shrine and faces the linga, he finds
the snout of the basin always pointing to the left of the linga draining water that
drips continuously on the shaft from a perforated pot hanging from the ceiling.
What does this linga mean?
Here is one story: The primal artisan, Vishwakarma, stood before a cylindrical
shaft, intent on carving the perfect form of God. But he realized the
magnificence of divinity could not be contained in an icon, so he placed the shaft

in a basin and declared this non-iconic representation as the ‘linga’—which
literally means ‘attribute’—of that which has no attribute.
Here is another story: Shiva needs Shakti, the Goddess, to enliven his divinity.
He lies dormant as a corpse until she sits on him, arouses him and forces him to
copulate. The copulation is so intense that Shiva does not pause even when sages
pay him a visit. Unable to realize the significance of this continual—and rather
immodest—union, the sages decided to meditate on Shiva, visualizing him in his
phallic form, the linga.
Thus we have two stories: one Vedantic and one tantric, one that makes Shiva
linga the form of the formless, the other which makes Shiva linga the phallus—
womb of Shiva—Shakti. What is the truth?
Millions of devotees who pour water on the linga with great affection and
veneration fail to associate the linga with anything erotic. Yet, most scholars,
and scriptures, whether Vedic or tantric, identify the linga as a representation of
Shiva’s manhood. The basin, they say, represents the yoni or womb of the
Goddess.
Hindu women seeking a husband or children are advised to worship Shiva in
this form. So it is easy to equate Shiva with the Egyptian Min or the Roman
Priapus whose erect penis was venerated. Such a comparison, though
convenient, is inconsistent with ideas expressed in the imagery, narratives and
philosophy of Shiva. For Shiva is not a fertility god. In fact, he is associated with
the very opposite idea—asceticism, withdrawal from the mundane world of birth
and death.
If Shiva were simply a fertility god, would his abode not be a sylvan retreat
rather than a snow-clad mountain? Would he not be associated with romance and
delight rather than meditation and austerity? Would he not be called ‘creator’
rather than ‘destroyer’? Would he not be represented by life-sustaining water
rather than life-claiming fire? Clearly, there is more to Shiva than meets the eye.
It is easy to get confused by simply looking at the images superficially
without an understanding of underlying metaphysics or philosophy. Let’s first
look at typical fertility images from ancient Greece and Egypt.

These fertility images reveal unbridled sexuality, masculine aggression,
feminine capacity, and nature’s urge to reproduce. In Greece, nature was wild in
its sexuality, and needed to be tamed by culture. In Egypt, sexual union of earth
and sky created the world. In fertility images, the point is for the deity to pour
semen downwards, into the soil or the womb, to give birth to children. But in the
tantric images, the erect phallus indicates the very opposite! Let us take a look at
these images.

This is Shiva Ekapada from a tantric shrine of the sixty-four yoginis found in
Hirapur, Odisha, which clearly depicts an erect phallus. The deity has only one
foot, indicating rejecting of the other half of the world, the feminine, the
material. It has nothing to do with reproduction. It is a metaphor for urdhva
retas, that resists the charms of the world, and of women, and instead through
various exercises starts moving up the spine to reveal the mysteries of the
universe and grant the yogi the magical powers called siddhi. Apsaras enchant
the tapasvi to give up his quest for siddhi. But they fail before Shiva. So the
Goddess in the form of sixty-four yoginis dance and sing around him and appeal
to him not to withdraw from the world, but to participate in it. This is
symbolically represented as the Shiva linga placed in a yoni trough, whose spout
points in the northern direction.
Thus the phallus has layers of meaning: a journey away from casual fertility to
urdhva retas to finally the response of God to Goddess, and the transformation of

Shiva to Shankara.
Eroticism flavours Shiva’s narratives, symbols and rituals. This grabs the
attention, rouses the senses, primes the mind, and, after the initial titillation—
and outrage—has passed, allows for the effortless understanding of complex and
perplexing metaphysical ideas encoded within this rich mythical vocabulary.
What blossoms eventually is an enchanting understanding of life, free from the
angst of existence, filled only with peace—with the world, with oneself and with
divinity.
This book seeks to decode the mystery of Shiva’s linga by exploring
narratives, symbols and rituals associated with him, firm in the belief that:
Within infinite myths lies an eternal truth
But who sees it all?
Varuna has but a thousand eyes
Indra has a hundred
You and I, only two

I
Isolation of Shiva
The hermit withdraws from the world in
the quest for serenity and stillness

T
here is a force in the cosmos—one that has neither name nor form yet
nourishes all that has a name or a form. It is neither contained by space nor
bound by time. Yet, it makes space three-dimensional and time sequential.
Ancient Indian seers, known as rishis, called this power Brahman. They accessed
this power through the Veda, a body of self-created, self-communicating,
mystical hymns.
Four thousand years ago, priests known as Brahmins incorporated these
hymns in a ceremony known as the yagna. Offerings were made into fire so that
the smoke carried the power of Brahman to a race of celestial beings known as
devas, who dwelt in the skies. Energized by this ritual, the devas drew out life-
giving sap or rasa in the form of water, minerals and plants from beneath the
surface of the earth.
For the Brahmins, devas were ‘gods’ because their action nourished and
sustained living organisms or jiva. Their pantheon was populated by the sun god
Surya, the moon god Chandra, the wind god Vayu, the fire god Agni and the
king of devas, the thunderbolt-hurling rain god Indra. There were hymns and
offerings for each one of them during the yagna. But there were none for asuras,
subterranean beings who were deemed ‘demons’ because they withheld rasa
under the earth’s surface in the form of inorganic elements, the ajiva.
Then there was Shiva, sitting in absolute isolation on top of a snow-capped
mountain at the centre of the universe, unmindful of the cycle of rasa around
him. His eyes were shut, his body still, his hair matted, his limbs smeared with
ash. Shiva defied categorization. Unmoved by the blooming and withering of
life, the drawing and withdrawing of rasa, he seemed neither god nor demon. He
appeared passive, inert, cold and lifeless, like the icy mountain he sat on. Who
could love or hate a being such as Shiva who seemed to live a purposeless
existence, who possessed no standards, and hence valued nothing?

Daksha insulted
(Shiva Purana)
Shiva is not part of this world. He does not want to be part of the world. He is indifferent to its niceties. He
has transcended human values and hierarchies. For members of society, he appears a beggar. But beggars
want alms. Shiva wants nothing.
Daksha, the patriarch of Vedic culture, commanded the respect of all.
One day, he was invited to a gathering of gods. As Daksha entered, proud
and noble, all the gods rose. They joined their hands to salute this
supreme patron of the yagna. Daksha was pleased. He swept a glance
around the assembly, accepting the salutations of the gods. Then his
glance fell upon a solitary, seated figure and his expression darkened. He
looked upon Shiva who continued to remain seated. Shiva did not want
to insult Daksha, but he remained seated because he was oblivious to
Daksha’s exalted position. He was not impressed by the arrival of the
patriarch, nor was he disdainful. He was simply indifferent, untouched by
it all.
Daksha, however, was not amused. He expected the same reverence
from Shiva that he received from the other gods. At that moment, he
swore never to invite Shiva to any yagna. He deemed Shiva, the outsider,
unfit for prayer, praise or sacrifice.
For all his indifference to the world, Shiva’s manhood stood firm and erect.
This conventionally suggested arousal by external stimuli, and it confounded
many.

Castration of Shiva
(Linga Purana)
One day, Shiva came out of meditation and wandered into the forest. As
he walked along, he chanced upon a hermitage. This hermitage, tucked
away in a quiet nook of the forest, was home to a sage.
When Shiva came to the hermitage he found that there was a yagna in
progress. Many sages had assembled there along with their wives. The
flames of the sacrificial fire leapt high amid the chanting of sacred
mantras. Shiva stepped forward and his presence was noticed at once.
Shiva was naked and his penis was erect. The assembly gaped in
astonishment. As the sages looked on in consternation, unsure of what to
do, their wives decided to abandon all modesty. They were so smitten by
Shiva’s beauty and powerful presence that they ran after him and sought
his embrace.
Slowly coming out of their stupefaction, the infuriated sages rushed at
Shiva. They attacked him, wanting to castrate him for the wanton
behaviour of their wives. Suddenly, Shiva’s manhood transformed into a
pillar of fire that threatened to set ablaze the hermitage and the world
with it.
The sages and their wives were so distracted by Shiva’s erect penis that they

did not pay attention to the man behind it. They failed to see that Shiva’s body
lacked the tension of a man who seeks to embrace, penetrate and spill semen.
Hindu artists have long used the penis or linga to represent the mental state,
while storytellers have used the flow of semen as a metaphor for the mental
process. Erection represents a mind drawn to things material; flaccidity
represents the reverse. Spilling of seed indicates submission to sensory stimuli;
its retention indicates the reverse. Shiva’s phallus is aroused but his eyes are
shut. According to scriptures, his semen moves in the reverse direction, a
condition known as urdhva retas. Thus, in Shiva, the mind is stirred, but not by
external stimuli.
Shiva’s linga is svayambhu, self-stirred, spontaneous, resulting from the
realization of ‘sat’, the true nature of all things. This realization happens when
chitta or consciousness has been purged of the ego, memories, desires, and all
sources of conditioning that delude the mind. What follows is ananda, tranquility
unconditioned by external influences. Shiva’s spontaneous and autonomous
erection, unaccompanied by any sign of excitement in the rest of his body, is an
artistic expression of the state of sat-chitta-ananda, the state when one is in touch
with Brahman. Immersed in the state of sat-chitta-ananda, Shiva is self-
contained; he feels no urge to react to worldly enchantments or shed his semen.
Semen, according to tantra, is nothing but a form of rasa. Rasa in minerals is
transformed into sap by plants. Devas facilitate this process while asuras oppose
it. Hence, they battle constantly. In the bodies of animals and humans, the sap of
plants is transformed serially into plasma, blood, flesh, bone, nerve and, finally,
seed. The seed of woman is known as egg while the seed of man is known as
semen. Unshed seed, transformed into ojas or energy in the human body, is spent
as the jiva interacts with the environment. Thus, rasa which enters living
creatures in the form of food—be it the nutrients of the soil, the sap of plants, or
the flesh of animals—returns to the environment as energy spent during any
worldly interaction. This cyclical flow of rasa sustains the wheel of life.
Rasa, that enters the body through food, re-enters the world when it is shed to
produce new life. Women shed the egg involuntarily at the time of ovulation,
like plants at the time of pollination and animals when they are in heat. But men
control the flow of seed by will. The human male can be a bhogi, submit to
desire and shed his seed following sensory stimulation, or he can be a yogi,

triumph over desire and retain his seed. This unique physiology of the human
male (contradicted by modern science though) made him, in the eyes of Hindu
seers, the perfect symbol of the ‘individual’ in Hindu mythology. Just as the
human male can control the flow of semen, every individual—man or woman—
can choose his/her responses to the world around. Acceptance of this metaphor
transforms the impassive ithyphallic Shiva into that individual who has
overcome all worldly stimuli, represented by the reverse semen flow, and has
attained that much-desired goal of self-realization and self-containment or sat-
chitta-ananda, the self-stirred phallus.
Shiva neither sheds seed nor spends energy. Energy simply accumulates in his
body as heat, as he stays away from all worldly interactions until it sets alight the
spiritual fire known as tapa. The practice of churning tapa is known as tapasya
and the fire churner is known as tapasvin. Tapa throws light on the true nature of
reality, burns all that deludes the consciousness, and stills the mind with
tranquility. Tapasya thus leads to the triple goal of sat-chitta-ananda.
When the sages tried to castrate Shiva, the greatest of all tapasvins, the linga
revealed its true form—not a tool of material pleasure but the churn of spiritual
fire.
Every jiva inhabits samsara, the world experienced through the five senses. This
world seems like a miserable and unhappy place; everything is uncertain and
temporary. To allay suffering, a jiva performs actions, acts of self-preservation,
self-propagation and self-actualization that offer life the promise of certainty,
hope and meaning. Each action is, in metaphorical terms, ‘shedding of semen’,
and involves expenditure of rasa. The jiva hopes that interaction with samsara
will ultimately bring shanti, peace, a coming to terms with the apparent
meaninglessness of existence. Shanti is the layman’s word for the rather
metaphysical phrase: sat-chitta-ananda.
But when semen is shed, a child is born. For every response to stimuli, there is
a reaction, one that the jiva is obliged to experience either in this lifetime or the

next. So states the universal law of karma. The jiva is thus dragged through
lifetimes of experiences until the karmic debt is repaid. The cycle of rebirth
rotates ceaselessly as the jiva keeps responding to the tantalizing provocations of
samsara in the perpetual quest for shanti.
The fire of tapa, churned by the tapasvin, seeks to give the jiva the power to
pause between stimulus and response. Rather than spilling the seed because of
conditioned reflexes, the mind ponders on the stimuli and chooses the response
that will bring shanti. Tapa thus trains the mind to yoke instinct with intellect.
The act of yoking the mind is known as yoga. Yoga is tapasya. It lights the fire
of tapa. In the light of tapa, the jiva realizes that an event is a reaction to past
events. It is identified and valued depending on one’s experiences and
expectations. If the experience and expectation are different, the same event
comes to have a different identity and value. With the gradual incineration of
delusions, the chitta is purified, sat is realized, and ananda is experienced. The
jiva feels no urge to contribute to the cycle of reactions and rebirths. As a result,
no more karma is generated. There is nothing that binds the jiva to the external
world. With this comes shanti and ultimately moksha, liberation from the cycle
of rebirths.
Food–Fluid Cycle
According to the Upanishads, the whole world is food, feeding on each other. This flow of matter and
energy from inorganic to organic and back to inorganic form is the cycle of rasa. One can be part of this
cycle by depending on it for sustenance and by contributing to its sustenance. Or, like Shiva, withdraw from
it totally. Not eating. Not breathing. Not spilling semen. This withdrawal is expressed as the reverse flow of

•
•
•
semen that lights the spiritual fire of tapa.
According to tantra, the body or sharira that is reborn has three components:
The sthula sharira or physical sheath, made up of five sense organs (eye,
ear, tongue, nose and skin) and five action organs (hands, legs, mouth,
anus and genitals)
The sukshma sharira or mental sheath, made up of the mind, which
houses the intellect, the ego, learning, memories and desires
The karana sharira or causal sheath, which retains all memories of
actions performed by the jiva

Karmic Cycle
The material world is governed by the law of karma according to which nothing in the world happens
spontaneously. All events are reactions to actions done in the past. Every action has a reaction that one is
obliged to experience, if not in this life then in the next. One has the choice to either react to an event or be
indifferent to it. The householder reacts; the hermit stays indifferent.

Shiva destroys the three cities
(Shiva Purana)
Once, three asuras, in their attempt at invincibility, built three flying
cities called Tripura. The cities were engineered in a remarkable way:
they all flew in different directions, making them totally impregnable.
The only way to destroy the cities was by a single arrow in the brief
moment when they were aligned in a single line. Delighted with their
invention, the asuras went berserk. They rushed around causing terror
and wreaking havoc. They rested secure in the knowledge that it was
almost impossible for anyone to defeat them.
The gods turned to Shiva, asking for help against the terror inflicted by
the asuras. Shiva mounted a chariot made of the earth. The sun and the
moon served as its wheels. The axis of Mount Mandara served as his
bow. Adi Sesha, the serpent of time, made up his bowstring and Vishnu
himself became his arrow. Shiva was ready to take on the task of
destroying Tripura. He followed the three cities for eons, until finally the
moment arrived when they were aligned in a single line. In a flash, Shiva
drew his bow and let loose his powerful arrow. It found its mark and
Tripura, the three flying cities, were destroyed in seconds. Shiva then
smeared his body with the ashes of the smouldering cities.

•
•
•
•
•
•
When a person dies, what dies is his physical body that can be seen and the
mental body which animates the physical body. What does not die is the causal
body, the seat of memories, that propels the soul into the next life. The practice
of tapasya aims to destroy the third body too, an idea that is expressed
allegorically in the following narrative.
Shiva’s bow, made up of space and time, is the symbol of poise, while his
arrow, made up of consciousness, is the symbol of focus and concentration. The
act of shooting the arrow is no different from the fire churning of the tapasvin.
Both destroy delusions and standards—clearing the consciousness so that it can
realize the truth and experience bliss. When the arrow hits its mark, sat-chitta-
ananda is attained.
Besides the three bodies, the three worlds Shiva destroys also represent the
three subjective worlds: the microcosm (the private world), the mesocosm (the
social world) and the macrocosm (the rest of the world). They also represent the
three objective worlds: the sky populated by gods, the earth populated by man
and the nether world populated by demons.
The symbols of the number ‘three’ recurring in Shiva’s mythology and their possible meanings
Symbols
Possible meanings
Three eyes of Shiva
Three horizontal ash lines on Shiva’s forehead
The aim of tapasya: Sat-chitta-ananda, i.e.,
absolute truth, purified consciousness, perfect
bliss
The mundane goals of self-preservation, self-
propagation, and self-actualization (overridden
by the spiritual goal of self-realization)
The three characteristics of matter: inertia,
agitation and harmony (tamas, rajas, sattva)
The three bodies: physical, mental and causal

•
•
•
•
Three leaves of the Bilva sprig used in worship
Three blades of Shiva’s trident
The three subjective worlds: the microcosm (the
private world), the mesocosm (the social world)
and the macrocosm (the rest of the world)
The three objective worlds: the sky populated
by gods, the earth populated by man and the
nether world populated by demons
When the fire of Shiva’s tapa destroys the three worlds or bodies, all that
remains is ash. Ash is what remains when anything is burnt. Ash cannot be
destroyed further. Ash is thus the symbol of the soul, the common indestructible
essence of all things that outlives death, and surfaces when external differences
dissolve. The soul or spirit is known as purusha in tantra and as atma in Veda. It
is the true identity of all beings, the destination of tapasya. Scriptures believe
that the soul is the essence of God. In its realization lies the state of sat-chitta-
ananda.
Shiva smears his body with ash to become Vibhutinath, the lord of ash,
directing all jivas to look beyond death and differences, towards the soul. The
ash is applied to make three lines to remind one of the three bodies and the three
worlds that need to be destroyed in the quest for self-realization. The lines are
horizontal to express passivity and inertia, since the only way to truly learn about
oneself and one’s world is not by reacting to events but by contemplating on
them. When the soul is realized, there is no more restlessness. One comes to
terms with one’s world. There is only peace.
The Vedic yagna also aimed for peace. Hence all ceremonies concluded with
the chant, ‘shanti, shanti, shanti’. But unlike tapasya, which looked inwards for
both peace and divinity, yagna looked outwards. Shiva’s fire was churned within

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the consciousness, while Daksha’s fire was churned at the altar. For Shiva,
shanti is attained when the mind is purged of all delusions, experiences and
expectations. For Daksha, shanti is attained when nature is reorganized to satisfy
one’s desires.
To Daksha, tapasya was an unproductive, even destructive, exercise. Daksha’s
primary objective through the ritual of yagna was to ensure a constant flow of
rasa from nature into culture to enrich human life. His hymns and offerings
empowered devas to release the life-giving sap hoarded by the asuras. Shiva’s
fire churning diverted the flow of rasa away from the cycle of life. As Shiva
withdrew heat from the environment into his body, his surroundings became
cold and barren—a snow-capped mountain—incapable of nourishing life or
sustaining a civilization. In Daksha’s eyes, Shiva was worse than the asuras who,
by converting rasa from organic to inorganic form, were at least part of the
cyclical flow of rasa. Shiva’s actions worked against the cycle of life. He did not
contribute to samsara. He was therefore termed ‘the destroyer’.
Difference between yagna and yoga-tapasya
Yagna
Yoga-Tapasya
Documented in the Brahmana scriptures
Documented in Aranyaka scriptures
Seeks to appease gods
Seeks God within
Vedic mantras are chanted
Vedic mantras are contemplated upon
Outward-looking
Inward-looking
Involves rituals
Involves austerities
Seeks to change the world
Seeks to change perception of the world
Popular among householders
Popular among hermits
Aligned to social structures such as caste
Rejects social structures such as caste
Involves lighting an outer fire
Involves lighting an inner fire
World-affirming
World-renouncing
Daksha’s world view was populated only with rasa-distributing devas and
rasa-transforming asuras. Through the ritual of yagna, he sought to invoke the
magical power known as Brahman that would tilt the balance of the cosmos in
favour of the devas, enabling them to harvest the world’s wealth for the benefit
of all jivas. He believed that contentment follows the movement of nature’s
resources in one’s favour. For him, the secret of shanti lay in the control of the
world. He sought resolution to the angst of existence through acts of self-

preservation, self-propagation and self-actualization. This approach of life
brought him, and other performers of yagna like him, in conflict with Shiva.
In the following narrative, Shiva communicates the wisdom of life through
dance. Just as one can get lost in the outer symbols of a yagna and not realize the
deeper meaning of the ritual, one can easily get lost in the beautiful movements
of Shiva’s dance without realizing that there is enlightenment beyond the
entertainment. Shiva, who enlightens through dance, is known as Nataraja, the
lord of dance. In the narrative, the performers of yagna are identified as
followers of Purva Mimansa. They represent the old school of Hinduism that
was ritualistic and focused on the magic powers of Vedic hymns and tantric
alchemy. Shiva’s dance represents Uttara Mimansa, the new school that looked
at the meaning beyond the hymn and the ritual. This meaning was not restricted
to priests and philosophers but was communicated to the common man through
dance and theatre. The dancing Shiva, in effect, represents a revolution that
brought cosmic wisdom from the classes to the masses.

Enlightenment through dance
(Skanda Purana)
A group of sages performed yagna and acquired power from it without
appreciating the wisdom inherent in the chants and the ceremonies. To
enlighten them, Shiva took the form of a handsome youth and wandered
naked into the hermitage of the sages. Such was his beauty that the wives
of the sages abandoned their husbands and ran after him. Angry, the
sages used the magic of the rituals to create a tiger, a venomous snake
and a goblin. Shiva flayed the tiger alive and wrapped the skin around
him. He caught the snake and wound it around his neck like a necklace.
Then, leaping onto the goblin’s back, he began to dance. Watching him
dance, the sages realized he was God and his dance was a discourse in
the meaning of existence. The tiger, the snake and the goblin represented
their desire for self-preservation, self-propagation and self-actualization.
What Shiva offered was the chance of self-realization. In one hand he
rattled the drum of death to produce the music of life. In the other he held
the flames of destruction that cast the light of learning. Around him
emerged a corona of fire representing the impersonality of nature, the
unending merry-go-round of births and deaths. One foot rested on the
firmament, within the circle, while the other sought escape. Pointing to
the latter, he offered the sages a chance to escape the matrix of delusions

and find the truth.
The shift from the old ritualistic school of Hinduism to the new theistic school
of Hinduism perhaps followed the meeting of two peoples several thousand
years ago. The patrons of yagna identified themselves as Arya, ‘noble’, because
they had access to the secrets of the Veda. That the yagna did not need a fixed
shrine suggests that the Aryas were nomadic herdsmen. As they established
themselves in the Indian subcontinent, they came in touch with more settled
communities—loosely termed the Dravidas or southerners—who admired
hermits and ascetics, masters of alchemy.
As the two groups of people mingled and merged, there was a rich exchange
of customs and beliefs. Tensions between the two groups were inevitable. More
and more seers questioned the true nature of the Veda and the magic of the
tantra: Did the hymns and rituals concern themselves with the workings of the
material world or the workings of the mental world? Was Brahman a magical
force of the cosmos or merely the dormant divinity within all things?
Those who believed in the former put down detailed instructions of rites and
rituals in manuals known as Brahmanas while those who believed in the latter
gathered their thoughts in scriptures known as Aranyakas. The dialogues,
discussions, deliberations and debates between the two schools of thought were
documented in scriptures known as the Upanishads.
Daksha—the supreme patron of the old ritualistic school—saw Shiva’s
tapasya as working against the cycle of life. While asuras hoarded rasa, tapasvins
diverted the flow of the life-giving sap into the flames of tapa. The withdrawal
of energy into the body made the world icy and bleak like Shiva’s abode, the
snow-capped Kailasa. And the fire within produced nothing but ash that
nourished no life. So Daksha refused to patronize asceticism. He forbade
offerings in favour of Shiva. The yagna was restricted to gods who harnessed
rasa for human society. Unfortunately, Daksha faced opposition within his own
family.
Daksha’s youngest daughter
(Shiva Purana)

Daksha offered the gods not only hymns but also his daughters’ hands in
marriage. His youngest daughter, however, was not interested in any
deva. She had given her heart to the mendicant called Shiva, much to her
father’s dismay. She left her father’s side and followed Shiva wherever
he went. She became his obedient consort, never questioning his actions,
always by his side. She therefore became renowned as Sati, the perfect
wife.
Sati, perhaps like many in the Vedic fold, questioned the orthodox ways that
gave more importance to the mechanical execution of ceremonies than to the
needs of the heart and the questions of the mind. But Shiva’s cold detachment
from things worldly did not impress her either. She yearned for the middle path
where there was husband’s love and father’s affection.

Daksha insults Shiva
(Kalika Purana)
Once Daksha organized a large yagna and invited all the gods to
participate. Sati saw the gods and their wives making their way to the
patriarch’s house. To her great surprise, she and Shiva had been excluded
from this elite gathering. Deciding that they had probably been left out
erroneously, she decided that she would go. After all, it was her father’s
house!
Shiva, though, was not so sure that Daksha had actually meant to
invite them to his yagna and he expressed this thought to his wife. ‘No, it
must have been an oversight,’ Sati insisted, unable to accept that her
father did not want them to attend his yagna. Seeing Sati’s determination,
Shiva let her go, preferring to stay where he was. He shut his eyes and
went into deep meditation.
Sati reached her father’s house. As she entered she saw all the gods
gathered there to receive the offerings of the yagna. She swept a glance
around the huge pavilion and found that all the seats were occupied.
There was no seat reserved for Shiva, her husband! Sati was upset and
very angry. She realized that her father had deliberately not extended an
invitation to her lord. He had insulted her beloved Shiva. Her fury
mounting, she turned questioning eyes upon Daksha. ‘Your husband is
unworthy of any offering,’ her father calmly retorted. Sati gazed upon
her father for a moment, her body trembling with rage, her eyes blazing
like burning coals.
Then she turned her back upon him and before anyone could
comprehend her intention, she leapt into the sacred fire, immolating
herself. There was a shocked silence in the assembly. The gods looked on
in dismay—the sacred precinct had been polluted and the yagna had to
grind to a halt, leaving it incomplete.
In some narratives, Sati burns herself not by the external fire of her father’s
yagna but by the inner fire she kindles by mental concentration. She thus uses

the ascetic route to destroy her father’s ritual. The death of Sati set the stage for
a violent confrontation between the world-rejecting Shiva and the world-
affirming Daksha. Shiva experiences emotions that he never had before. There is
loss, pain and rage. The fire withheld in his body for centuries explodes like a
volcano of emotions taking the form of Virabhadra.

Shiva attacks Daksha
(Linga Purana)
The news of Sati’s death at once reached Shiva at Mount Kailasa. He was
devastated. His wife’s death broke his heart. His serenity was shattered.
And he was enraged. His anger knew no bounds and he went into action.
He was intent on taking revenge upon Daksha for the thoughtless action
that had led to the death of Sati, his wife and Daksha’s own daughter.
In his fury, Shiva pulled out his hair and from that hair, he created a
monster—a fanged warrior called Virabhadra, whose sole purpose was to
draw blood. Virabhadra rushed to Daksha’s house, followed by the
ganas, the hordes of ghosts and goblins riding on rabid dogs. The gods
were still assembled there, the remains of the yagna strewn around in
mute testimony to its abrupt and ill-fated end.
The air was filled with the howl of death as the frightened gods stood
by helplessly. Virabhadra and the followers of Shiva went on a bloody
rampage. They leapt on the assembled devas, ripping out their hearts and
gouging out their eyes. They drank their blood and bedecked themselves
with limbs and entrails. The sacred precint of the yagna was transformed
into a gory killing field.
Virabhadra then looked around for Daksha, his chosen target. He saw

him hiding behind the altar, stunned disbelief on his face. Virabhadra
rushed at him, and with one mighty swoop of his axe, he beheaded
Daksha. The noble head of the great patriarch was unceremoniously
tossed and left lying at the altar. Having destroyed the yagna, Virabhadra
returned to Shiva’s abode.
Sati had brought Shiva in touch with his feelings. In her company he had
experienced love. In her absence, he experienced sorrow. Her death made him
realize the cruelty of social rules and regulations that often ignore feelings in the
quest to establish order. His outrage manifested itself by the overpowering need
to destroy the fabric of society itself. His followers, the ganas, spread mayhem
wherever they went. They destroyed the yagna, and thus attacked the very
foundations of Vedic society.
But the rage and retribution, the destruction of society, did not take away the
pain. Shiva clung to Sati’s corpse and wandered across the three worlds, howling
in agony. His tears turned into sacred beads known as Rudraksha, meaning ‘from
the eyes of Rudra, who is Shiva’. The beads thus represent the reaction of Shiva
when he finally came in touch with samsara.

Shiva calms down
(Vishnu Purana)
Virabhadra had killed Daksha. Shiva had his revenge, but it did not bring
back Sati to life. After destroying Daksha’s sacrifice and bringing death
and destruction to the sacred precinct, Shiva picked up the charred
remains of Sati’s body and wandered around the world howling in agony.
The world had become a miserable place, full of suffering and agony.
Shiva could not be consoled, and bemoaned the loss of his wife.
Vishnu was alarmed. He feared for the well-being of the cosmos.
Shiva had to stop grieving. Vishnu raised his serrated discus that destroys
all negativity, and hurled it in the air. It cut Sati’s body into 108 pieces.
The physical form of Sati did not exist anymore. With Sati’s body gone,
Shiva regained his senses. He restored the gods to life and revived
Daksha by replacing his cut head with that of a goat.
Daksha completed his yagna and empowered the devas so that the
cycle of life could rotate once more. This time an offering was made to
Shiva too, at the end of the ritual. Shiva let his dogs consume it. He
simply withdrew into a cave, shut his eyes, and immersed himself in his
inner world where he relit the fire of tapa and destroyed his ties with the
outer world.

Vishnu is that aspect of God that sustains order in nature and culture. While
he could understand Shiva’s rage against the nature of civilization, he could not
let Shiva destroy society. By destroying Sati’s corpse, he was able to make Shiva
detach himself from the stimulus of pain. With Sati gone, Shiva was able to
overcome his grief and sense of loss. He could even let go of his outrage. He
resurrected Daksha by replacing his head with that of a goat and let him continue
as before, as the patriarch of Vedic civilization.
Shiva, however, remained an outsider. He disengaged himself from the world,
seeking freedom from those stimuli that cause pain and suffering. Sitting
peacefully atop Mount Kailasa, he shut his eyes, withdrew his senses inward,
relit the flames of tapa, and let his phallus stir in self-containment.
Self-containment invalidates the need for the outer world. Shiva’s tapa directs
the flow of rasa inwards until there is nothing left to rotate the wheel of samsara.
The result is entropy, the dissolution of the world. Shiva is therefore Samhara
murti, ‘the destroyer’.
Implicit in the word ‘destruction’ is a sense of something negative. But
Shiva’s destruction brings peace, or shanti. It leads to sat-chitta-ananda, the state
of tranquility when the mind, purged of all delusions, can see the truth. It is the
state of godhood. Shiva, in effect, deconstructs the matrix of delusions that
enchants the mind of the jiva leading to yearning and suffering that forces him to
act and react. Shiva liberates all beings from the fetters of karma.
Tapa destroys karma. It stops the flow of rasa. Without karma and rasa there is
no samsara. Without samsara—its turbulence and limitations—the stillness and
boundlessness of Brahman make little sense. Just as light cannot be defined
unless it is contrasted against darkness, just as the inside of a house cannot be
defined unless it can be contrasted against the outside of the house, the idea of
spirit cannot be defined unless it can be contrasted against matter. Unless there is
an observation, there cannot be an observer, even one who has shut his eye. Thus
the idea of God needs the existence of an equal but opposite: the Goddess.

The Goddess is the embodiment of samsara. She is rasa. She flows. God is
Brahman. He is fire—the outer fire of yagna, the inner fire of tapasya. He burns.
God is the observer of life while Goddess is the observation that is life. Shiva
shuts his eyes to the Goddess because her actions stir emotions in his heart and
destroy his peace of mind. Brahma, on the other hand, chases the Goddess and in
doing so, he creates the world. This action brings Shiva in direct confrontation
with Brahma.

Birth and beheading of Brahma
(Brahmanda Purana)
In the beginning, on the ocean of milk, within the coils of the serpent of
time, Vishnu stirred from his dreamless slumber. From his navel rose a
lotus in which sat Brahma. Brahma opened his eyes and realized he was
alone.
Lonely, confused and frightened, he wondered who he was and why he
existed. In his quest for answers he went about creating the world. From
his mind he moulded four sons, the Sanat Kumars. They were mere boys.
They were unwilling to multiply and populate the world. They ran away.
So Brahma created another set of sons, the ten Prajapatis. These were
willing to multiply but did not know how. So Brahma split himself into
two. From his left half emerged a woman called Ushas, the dawn. As
soon as Ushas appeared before Brahma, Brahma experienced an
insatiable sensory thirst that needed to be quenched. Overwhelmed with
yearning, Brahma lunged at his daughter, desperate to unite with her. She
ran away from the incestuous gaze of the father, taking the form of
various beasts: cow, mare, goose and doe. He pursued her, taking the
form of the corresponding male: bull, horse, gander and stag.
The sons of Brahma realized that the father was doing what he should
not do. They cried out in disgust. Out of their cry emerged Rudra, the one

who moans, a terrifying archer who shot an arrow and pinned the father
to the sky.
A fundamental principle guiding Hindu thought is that nothing exists unless it
is perceived by a conscious being: there is no observation without an observer.
This makes the idea of ‘awareness’ or ‘consciousness’ central to Hindu thought.
Thus, God destroys the world by shutting his eyes as Shiva. God creates the
world by opening his eyes.
The period ‘before the beginning’ does have a sentient being in it: Vishnu. But
he is in a dreamless slumber, unaware of himself or his surroundings. This
unawareness is ‘nothingness’ in the Hindu world view, a period of irrelevance, a
time called pralaya or dissolution when both the observer and the observation are
formless, like the placid ‘ocean of milk’. All that remains, perhaps, is time—
represented by the coiling and uncoiling serpent whose name Adi Sesha, primal
remainder, or Ananta Sesha, endless remainder, draws attention to the idea that
time remains both after the world comes to an end and before it re-emerges.
The waking up of Vishnu, the blooming of the lotus, the birth of Brahma, his
first set of four sons, and his second set of ten sons, represent the quickening of
the consciousness and the evolution of the mind. The mind evolves because
Brahma seeks to understand his true nature and identity. If Brahma had no
questions, if Brahma felt complete, if Brahma had been totally self-contained, he
would never have ‘looked’ for answers: the observer would have had no
observation, and life would never have been ‘created’.
That the first four ‘mind-born’ children or manasaputras of Brahma are called
‘ancient’, yet visualized as pre-pubescent boys, indicates that they are four
aspects of the primal mind—the discriminating intellect and the three containers
of experiences, desires and learning—before the mind was exposed to any
sensory stimulation. Their lack of sexual maturity suggests that they have no
knowledge of, or desire for, external stimulation. They are in a state of sat-chitta-
ananda and have no wish to shatter this primal purity. Hence they disappear soon
after birth.
The next ten ‘mind-born’ sons of Brahma are the five sense organs (eye, ear,
nose, tongue and skin) and the five response organs (face, hands, legs, anus and
genitals). They are the channels that connect the mind to the external world. But

the presence of organs that can sense and react are useless without a source of
stimuli and a destination for responses.
In the Hindu creation myth, all characters are male up to this point. Then
comes the girl child. Her name, Ushas, means the ‘dawn’ because her arrival
marks the dawn of life. Life happens only when matter stimulates the mind. In
Hindu symbolism, male forms have been used to depict the intangible inner
realities of life while female forms have been used to depict the tangible outer
realities of life. Only when Brahma acknowledges the outer world can he begin
his journey to explore his inner world. She, the embodiment of matter, is the
non-self, without whom Brahma’s self cannot be defined or distinguished. She is
thus the personification of Brahma’s world, Brahmanda. She is the object, he is
the subject. She is the observation, he is the observer. She is the source of
stimuli, the destination of responses, the fountainhead of experiences, desires
and learning. She is the Goddess.
Two sides of reality
 
The Divine Within
The Divine Without
Meaning
Consciousness
Manifestations
Mythological gender
Male
Female
Tantric terminology
Purusha
Prakriti
Vedic terminology
Atma
Maya
Nature
Spiritual
Material
State
Still
Ever-changing
Form
Spirit
Substance
Metaphysical qualification
Subject
Object
Metaphysical role
Observer
Observation
The Goddess is Brahma’s ‘daughter’ because the existence of the material
world presupposes the existence of a sentient being who is aware of the material
world. Brahma, the observer, must exist before Ushas, the observation. It is his
motivation that leads to her discovery, hence creation. She is supposed to answer
his questions about himself. But at this point, something else happens.
The awakening of Vishnu is predetermined by the fact that he did go to sleep.
What follows—the rise of the lotus from his navel, the birth of Brahma, his
primal question, the creation of his sons and his daughter—seems orchestrated; it
lacks spontaneity. This changes the moment Ushas appears. Brahma’s reaction is
not spontaneous. It is a choice. Ushas was created out of Brahma’s desire to

know himself. By desiring to possess her, he abandoned this primal quest. His
attention shifted from discovery of the inner world to the conquest of the outer
world. The response Brahma chooses arouses disgust. It is ‘incestuous’. Instead
of ‘learning’ from the daughter, he seeks to ‘copulate’ with her. Ancient seers
thus linked a spiritual outrage with a social judgement.
Ushas’s transformations are not spontaneous. They are induced by Brahma’s
‘incestuous gaze’. Thus the transformations of the world are determined by the
perceptions of the observer. Since the law of karma dictates that every action
must have a reaction, the first transformation induced in matter by Brahma’s
desire leads to subsequent transformations. The fleeing Ushas metamorphoses
into a cow, a mare, a goose, a doe. Because of her transformations, she comes to
be known as Shatarupa, one of infinite forms.
Watching the primal jiva losing himself as he seeks to possess rather than
learn from his daughter, the sons of Brahma are horrified. They realize that
Brahma’s actions will pollute the chitta, distort the vision of sat, and take away
ananda. They seek someone who will prevent these mental modifications. So
they call for help. Shiva appears as Pinaki, the archer. He shoots the arrow and
pins Brahma to the celestial sphere, just as he once shot an arrow to destroy the
three cities.
The deer is the symbol of the restless mind. In art, Shiva is shown holding a
deer in his hand. He calms it down. The bow used to do so represents tapasya. In
the centuries that followed, tapasya became popular as yoga. The term yoga has
its roots in the Sanskrit verb yuj that means ‘to yoke’. Yoga is all about bridling
the mind so that it stands firm, unaffected by the world. Shiva has yoked his
mind and his semen (and those of Brahma) by purifying his consciousness,
shattering all delusions, and realizing unconditional bliss. Shiva is therefore
known as Yogeshwara, lord of yoga.
Allegorical counterparts of metaphysical concepts
Metaphysical Concepts
Mythological
Characters
Gender
Unmanifest consciousness (the spirit)
Vishnu
Male
Mind’s capacity to discern and distinguish things
Brahma
Male
Mind’s constituents: the intellect and the containers of experience, desire
and learning
Four Sanat Kumars
Male
Mind’s inward and outward channels: five sense organs and five
response organs
Ten Prajapatis
Male

espo se o ga s
Fifth head of Brahma
Ego
Male
Material world, the source of stimuli and destination of responses, the
external matrix
Ushas
Female
In the pursuit of his daughter, Brahma forgets the original purpose of creating
her. Rather than using her as the medium to reflect on his identity, he begins
adopting new and false identities—becoming the male complement of every
female form she takes. These are ‘mental modifications’, the gradual acquisition
of memories, desires, learning and, finally, the ego, that take Brahma away from
Vishnu. In the following narrative, the dance of matter enchants and influences
the mind so that the one head of Brahma becomes four, then five. But none look
below towards the reclining Vishnu: the inner self, the Vedic atma, the tantric
purusha.
Brahma’s fifth head
(Shiva Purana, Narada Purana)
Such was Brahma’s desire for his daughter when she circumambulated
him that he sprouted four heads, facing the four cardinal directions, so
that he could look upon her at all times. When she flew skywards, he
popped a fifth head on top of the other four. This display of unbridled
passion disgusted Prajapati’s children. They cried. In response, Shiva
took the form of a terrifying being called Bhairava, who wrenched off the
fifth head of Brahma. Thus sobered, Brahma began to sing the four
collections of Vedic hymns, each emerging from one of the four
remaining heads.
The link between man and woman is desire, as is the link between the internal
self and the external non-self. This makes life an affair between Brahma, the
divine within all sentient beings, and Ushas, the divine without. Ushas is
Shatarupa as she appears in myriad forms. Ideally, she should be Vidya, the
goddess of knowledge, helping Brahma know himself. Instead, swept away by
the transformations of the world, failing to realize that each of her forms is
merely a projection of his own experiences and expectations, she becomes
Maya, the goddess of delusion. The father who creates the daughter ends up

being controlled and contorted by her. He comes to possess three more heads.
And finally the fifth head—the ego.
The fifth head rests atop the other four. Implicit in the upward orientation of
the head is arrogance born of ignorance, just as the downward orientation of the
head implies humility born of wisdom. The fifth head looks skywards, away
from Vishnu. It takes Brahma away from the goal of existence, which is self-
realization.

The Pillar of Fire
(Shiva Purana)
Brahma, the father of sentient beings, and Vishnu, the upholder of
cosmic order, both claimed to be the creators of the world. Suddenly,
there appeared before them a pillar of fire. It seemed to have neither a
base nor a tip. Brahma took the form of a swan and rose into the sky, but
could not find its tip. Vishnu took the form of a boar and burrowed into
the earth, but failed to find its base. The pillar had neither base nor tip,
neither a beginning nor an end, neither an origin nor a destination. It
seemed self-created, self-sustained and self-contained. Brahma and
Vishnu concluded that this pillar of fire was greater than the two of them
and all the gods put together. It was the symbol of a great god or
Mahadeva. It was the symbol of the ultimate form of the divine. From
this pillar emerged Shiva. Both Brahma and Vishnu saluted Shiva and

sang songs in his praise.
The narrative clarifies that the ego has no independent existence like Vishnu.
It needs the ‘daughter’ for its creation. The ego validates its existence by seeking
control of, and acknowledgement from, the material world. When neither is
forthcoming, there is suffering.
A cycle of yearnings and frustrations comes into being. Freedom from this
endless, meaningless cycle is possible only when the false identity, the ego, is
completely destroyed. This is what Shiva does as Bhairava.
Bhairava means ‘he who evokes terror’. Bhairava represents the terror of life,
the endless anxiety and uncertainty that threatens existence when the mind is
dominated by the ego. In this form, Shiva severs Brahma’s fifth head to become
Kapalika, the bearer of the skull. Shiva uses the skull to drink the nectar of sat-
chitta-ananda.
In many narratives, the pillar of fire does not emerge from Shiva; Shiva
emerges from the pillar of fire.
The narrative visualizes Shiva not only as the supreme tapasvin but also as the
embodiment of tapa and the final goal of sat-chitta-ananda. Shiva is not merely
the fire churner. He is the fire. He is not simply the seeker of God. He is God.
Beyond the allegory is a clear sectarian tilt. As ancient Hinduism, which was
rather agnostic and ritualistic, transformed and became more theistic, God was
visualized in three ways: Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. The priest-like Brahma
was associated with the God accessed through mechanical rites known as yagna,
the king-like Vishnu was the God approached through the devotional and
emotionally charged ritual of adoration known as pooja, while the hermit-like
Shiva was the God realized through intellectual ascetic practices such as tapasya.
These became the three tributaries of Hinduism.
There was great conflict between the followers of the three forms of God and
the superiority of one over the other often expressed itself through narratives.
For some, the answer of life lay in rituals. For others, it came by adoring God in
temples. And then there were those who believed that all answers lay in
meditation and contemplation.
While the approach varied, the goal of all these paths was the same: the
intention was to realize God. For through God, in God, one obtains that eternally

elusive state of shanti or peace.

II
Seduction of Shiva
The hermit finally marries the Goddess
and engages with the world

T
he world exists because sentient beings perceive it and respond to it. With
each reaction, rasa is spent. Every time rasa is spent, it flows. As rasa flows,
samsara blooms, and the wheel of existence turns.
Shiva does not react. He does not spend rasa. He withholds it. He shuts his
eyes, bridles his senses, and refuses to perceive the world. The world around him
therefore ceases to be. There is no flowering or fruition. Shiva’s abode is
therefore a mountain of ice. Cold. Lifeless.
While Shiva churned the inner fire of tapa, the gods looked forward to the
outer fire of yagna which empowered them in their battles against the asuras.
Each time they won, rasa gushed out of earth’s every pore: Rivers flowed, plants
bloomed, rocks melted to release metal, and mountains cracked to spill out
gems. The earth became bountiful, her wealth displayed in all its splendour for
the world to see.
But while the gods could release and redistribute the earth’s treasures, they
did not have the power to regenerate them once spent. That power rested with
the demons. The asuras knew how to bring the dead to life. They could
rejuvenate the earth and restore its fertility. They could replenish subterranean
stores of water and minerals. All thanks to Shukra, lord of the planet Venus, the
guru of the asuras, who possessed the science of renewal known as Sanjivani
Vidya. Shukra obtained the secret lore of the Sanjivani Vidya from none other
than Shiva himself.

Secret of regeneration
(Mahabharata)
The devas continued to perform yagnas to gain strength. The hymns
chanted during the performance of the yagnas empowered them. With
this recharged power the gods were able to slaughter the asuras and win
every combat.
The yagnas were always performed to gain advantage for the gods. No
one performed yagna favouring the asuras. The balance of power was
therefore heavily tilted in favour of the gods and the asuras needed to
find some way of overcoming them. Finally, Kavya-Ushanas, guru of the
demons, turned to tapasya. By lighting the inner fire of tapas, he hoped to
overpower the outer fire favouring the gods. He undertook severe ascetic
measures to achieve his aim. He hung himself upside down from the
branch of a tree over a raging fire, breathing nothing but smoke for a
thousand years. When these austerities reached their climax, Kavya-
Ushanas came face-to-face with Shiva. Shiva opened his mouth and
swallowed Kavya-Ushanas, trapping him within his body. Kavya-
Ushanas tried to escape but found that Shiva had closed all his orifices,

all except the penile passage. As Kavya-Ushanas slipped out of this
aperture, he came to possess all the knowledge associated with renewal,
regeneration and reproduction.
Kavya-Ushanas’s journey through the body of Shiva made him realize the
interdependence of tapa and rasa. Just as Shiva transformed rasa into tapa by
withholding it in his body, tapa could be made into rasa by causing it to flow
outwards. Shiva’s inner fire was thus a vast reservoir of energy into which
anyone could tap to restore life on earth. To acknowledge Shiva as his teacher
and father, the eternal and exhaustible source of life-giving energy, Kavya-
Ushanas took on the title of Shukra, the ‘seed’, keeper of fertility. With this
science of regeneration, Shukra was able to revive asuras killed in battle. The
asuras, in turn, were able to recreate plant and mineral wealth that the devas
could draw and distribute, but never generate. This is why in art Shiva is always
shown surrounded by demonic, asura-like, frightening beings. In his presence,
they are ganas, minions of God.
But while the asuras knew how to transform tapa into rasa, they did not share
their wealth with the world. When they were powerful, the earth was barren. The
Aryas therefore despised them as niggardly hoarders. By performing yagna they
empowered devas, who released rasa hoarded by asuras. Hoarded rasa nourished
no one. Hoarding was therefore a crime. Daksha, patriarch of Aryas, opposed
Shiva for withholding his semen. He admired Indra for shedding his semen
freely. He even cursed Chandra, the moon god, with the wasting disease because
he refused to share his semen with all his wives, thus behaving as a hoarder no
different from an asura.

Waxing of the moon
(Somanath Sthala Purana)
Daksha was the father of many daughters. He gave twenty-seven of his
daughters in marriage to Chandra, the moon god, who was renowned for
his beauty and virility. Each of Daksha’s daughters was a nakshatra, or
lunar mansion. Of all the nakshatras, Rohini was the most beautiful and
alluring. Chandra preferred the beautiful Rohini to his other wives and
found himself seeking her out more than the others. His other wives felt
neglected and complained to their father who threatened Chandra with
dire consequences if he did not treat all his wives with equal affection as
was expected of any polygamous man. Chandra, however, disregarded
Daksha’s threat and continued to love the beautiful Rohini to the
exclusion of his other wives. Daksha’s threat took effect and Chandra
was cursed with a degenerating disease.
As the days passed, the moon god lost his potency, and began to wane.
Terrified, he did not know what to do. Finally, he took refuge with the
only god who had opposed Daksha: Shiva. He housed himself on Shiva’s
head. There, he found the power to regenerate himself: his potency
returned and he began to wax. With joy and gratitude he addressed Shiva
as Chandrashekhara, he who saved the moon by placing him on his head.
A sobered Chandra thereafter decided to devote one night to each of his

twenty-seven wives. He waxed on the days that he approached Rohini
and waned on the days that he moved farther from her. On the new moon
night he had no wife by his side. On the day before, when he was just a
crescent, the moon celebrated Shivaratri, the night of Shiva, and took
refuge in Shiva’s locks, safe in the knowledge that he would have the
power to regenerate and wax again.
The restoration of Chandra made the devas realize what Shukra had already
known: that Shiva’s tapa could nourish life too. Just as Shiva drew on the rasa of
the outer world to light the inner tapa, the outer world could sustain itself by
drawing energy from Shiva. Clearly, Shiva was no mere ascetic god of the
Dravidas. He was not merely the teacher of yoga and tapasya. He was much
more than an alchemist. He was the embodiment of the Brahman invoked in the
yagna. Worship of Shiva was no different from performing yagna. This
realization caused Vedic society to abandon ritualism in favour of theism. The
fire altars were abandoned and shrines were built where Shiva was adored as
Mahadeva, the greatest of gods, God. The asuras worshipped him because a
passage through Shiva’s body revealed the science of regeneration to their guru.
The devas worshipped him because he helped the waning moon wax by simply
placing Chandra on his head.

Karmic Cycle
Fire can be spent interacting with the outer world of rasa or retained by withdrawing into the inner world.
The former process is called bhoga while the latter is called yoga.
The asuras were not content with being restored to life by their guru. They
wanted to defy death and control the flow of rasa. To do this, they began
performing tapasya and lighting the inner fire of tapa—just like Shiva.
But Shiva performed tapasya to burn the fetters of conditioning and throw
light on the true nature of things. His aim was sat-chitta-ananda. His goal was
samadhi, liberation from samsara. The aim of the asuras’ tapasya, however, was
siddhi, manipulation of samsara by unlocking the mysteries of rasa. The asuras
accumulated tapa, not to burn the fetters of worldly life, but to control the
substance of the cosmos in order to hoard wealth and survive any onslaught of
the devas.

Churn
Devas and asuras represent the force and counter-force of nature. Devas draw rasa upwards, out of the
earth. Asuras withdraw rasa downwards, into the earth. The action of the devas draws the earth’s bounty
towards man. Hence, they are deemed gods. The hoarding asuras are rejected as demons.

A boon for Taraka
(Shiva Purana)
Once, an asura named Taraka was desirous of attaining power to be able
to defeat the gods and control the world. He decided to perform tapasya
to achieve his goal. He sat still, completely absorbed in his penance,
refusing to react to any worldly stimuli, with no thought of time. Such
was his concentration that God appeared before him in the form of
Brahma. ‘What boon do you seek, Taraka?’ asked Brahma. Taraka’s
single-minded pursuit was to acquire siddhis and material gains that
would enable him to be master of all he desired. Rather than use the
moment to liberate himself from the cycle of rebirth, Taraka asked
Brahma to make him immortal. When Brahma firmly replied that it was
not possible since all living organisms must eventually die, Taraka asked
for a boon that would make him almost immortal. ‘If I must die, let it be
at the hands of a child who can fight battles when he is six days old, on
the seventh day of his life.’ Brahma granted him his wish, adding that
such a child would only be a son of Shiva. Taraka was satisfied.
Empowered by this boon, he went about his mission with zeal. He drove
the gods out of the celestial realms and became master of the three
worlds.
The triumph of Taraka led to cosmic chaos. Wealth was regenerated and
hoarded, not distributed. It was time for the gods to assert themselves. But the
gods did not know how. No yagna was powerful enough to produce such a
hyper-masculine warrior-child. According to tantra, a child is born when the
white seed of man mingles with the red seed of woman during the fertile period.
The biology of the child conceived depends on the power of the respective seeds.
A male child is conceived when the white seed is powerful and a female child is
conceived when the red seed is powerful. When both red and white seeds are
equally powerful, the child is neither male nor female. Asceticism and
continence make a seed powerful, sometimes so powerful that it does not need
the support of a red seed or the warmth of a womb. Since Shiva was the greatest

tapasvin, who had remained continent for eons, the gods concluded that his seed
was the most powerful of all, capable of producing the hyper-masculine warrior-
child who could kill Taraka. Energized by tapas, Shiva’s semen moved upwards.
It was time to make Shiva’s semen move downwards and produce a child out of
it. It was time to make Shiva a father.
So they invoked the Goddess. She was once Sati who had provoked Shiva into
action. Though she had died, they believed they could resurrect her like all
things material and make her enchant Shiva again. She was Yoganidra, formless
and unobserved when consciousness was withdrawn. She was Yogamaya, full of
forms when consciousness gave her attention. Goddess worship became part of
the Hindu mainstream centuries after the nomadic Aryas settled in the Indian
subcontinent. In early Vedic scriptures, there are references to goddesses such as
Aditi, the mother of the devas, and Prithvi, who embodies the earth. But these
female deities are reduced to insignificance by their male counterparts such as
the thunderous rain god Indra, the effulgent fire god Agni, and the radiant sun
god Surya. In later Vedic scriptures, female deities play a more central role. Like
the ascetics, the goddesses perhaps made their entry into Hinduism after the
Aryan tryst with the Dravidas.
That yagna, the primary Vedic ritual, did not demand a permanent shrine
suggests that the animal-herding nomads were not as rooted to the soil as the
Dravidian communities, who in all likelihood were farmers tuned to the rhythm
of fertility. The latter saw the earth as the Goddess who nourished living things
with milk, demanding nourishment of blood in return. This Goddess had two
mutually dependent forms—the docile, loving, maternal aspect called Mangala
Gauri and the wild, bloodthirsty, killer aspect called Chandika Kali. The former
was given flowers and incense; the latter was offered blood through animal
sacrifices.
With the mingling and merging of Aryan and Dravidian world views, the
Goddess had been acknowledged by the Aryas as Sati, the daughter of a yagna-
performing Daksha and the consort of a tapasya-performing Shiva. Both
relationships were fraught with tension: the father sought to control the daughter,
the husband preferred to ignore the wife. She was the battleground where the
world affirmer and the world rejecter met and clashed.
As Sati, the Goddess had forced Shiva to feel and respond to worldly stimuli.

Then she had died, childless. As the embodiment of all things material, the gods
were sure they could make the Goddess return once again and make Shiva open
his eyes. Because of her transformations, she came to be known as Shatarupa,
one of infinite forms. Since her forms were enchanting and deceptively
unchanging, she was called Maya, the embodiment of delusions. She was also
Shakti, the energy, whose form was determined by the gaze of the observer. She
was Prakriti, nature, the individual’s world. She was Saraswati, the medium of
enlightenment as well as Lakshmi, the source of nourishment.
Ushas, Shatarupa, Maya, Shakti, Prakriti, Saraswati and Lakshmi are all titles
of the Goddess. Brahma ‘creates’ her by becoming aware of her. This may not
be entirely true. For when Vishnu sleeps, the world continues to exist albeit in a
dissolved state as the ocean whose waters serve as Vishnu’s bed. Only Vishnu is
not aware of this Goddess bed. Since Hindu seers were concerned with
subjective, not objective, worlds, for them awareness of the Goddess was a
prerequisite to her existence. For Goddess-worshippers, the Goddess exists
always: when Vishnu is asleep and when he is awake. When Vishnu is asleep,
when consciousness is not sensitive to life, the Goddess exists as Yoganidra, the
great slumber. When Vishnu awakens, when consciousness is sensitive to
experience, the Goddess exists as Yogamaya, the great delusion that is life.
When there is enlightenment, Vishnu experiences the Goddess as Yogavidya, the
wisdom of experience.
Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva are all manifestations of God. In Hindu mythology,
the term ‘God’ indicates the divine within while the term ‘Goddess’ represents
the divine without. God ‘creates’ the Goddess by becoming aware of her. The
Goddess enables God to realize his godhood. Thus, in her, he is truly born. This
explains the Vedic verse: ‘Out of God was born Goddess and out of Goddess
was born God.’
In narratives, Saraswati is said to be Brahma’s consort, Lakshmi is Vishnu’s
consort and Shakti is Shiva’s consort. Thus God cannot exist without the
Goddess. In other words, the inner subjective world cannot exist without the
outer objective world. Brahma cannot create anything without Saraswati, who is
knowledge. Vishnu cannot sustain anything without Lakshmi, who is wealth.
Shiva cannot destroy anything without Shakti, who is power. The symbol of man
and woman, and their mutual interdependence, helped ancient seers explain with

great simplicity complex ideas of interdependence of concepts. It was impossible
to explain the concept of ‘subject’ without the concept of ‘object’ just as it was
extremely difficult to explain the concept of ‘man’ without the concept of
‘woman’. And so it came to pass that man came to represent subject and woman
came to represent object. He was intangible spirit; she was tangible matter.
Of course, one may wonder why the male form was associated with the still,
serene, permanent soul, and the female form with the ever-changing, restless,
permanent matter. Perhaps the seers saw in the regular transformation of the
female body, in the menstrual tides, a link with the regular transformations of
nature—the waxing and waning of the moon, the rising and ebbing of tides, the
change of seasons. This made the female biology, which created life within
itself, more suitable to represent ideas of fertility and worldliness, whereas the
male biology, which created life outside itself, was more suitable to represent
ideas of monasticism and other-worldliness.
The Goddess took birth as Parvati, the daughter of the mountains. Her father
was Himavan, god of the Himalayas, the great snow-clad mountain range that
borders India’s northern frontier. He was the king of all the mountains. And like
all mountains, he represented stability and permanence. Shiva meditated on these
mountains. So great was Shiva’s tapasya that all the heat was absorbed into his
body making the mountains cold and devoid of life. It was up to the daughter of
the mountains to bring life into this barren, desolate landscape.
At first, she tried seducing Shiva, making herself beautiful and presenting
herself before the ascetic as a nymph. This trick had worked with other ascetics.
Whenever the gods had seen an ascetic perform tapasya, they had sent down a
nymph to seduce him. The nymphs always succeeded in making ascetics shed
seed and stay rooted to earth.
Menaka’s charms
(Mahabharata)

Sage Vishwamitra was born King Kaushika. One day, marching at the
head of his troops, he reached the ashram of the sage Vashishtha, where
he was warmly received. Vashishtha was the owner of a celestial cow
called Kamadhenu—the one who fulfils all desires—and was able to
extend hospitality and satisfy every request made by the king. Kaushika
was overtaken by envy and greed. He wanted to possess the wonderful
cow but the sage refused to part with it. Thereupon, Kaushika used force
to try to acquire the cow but his army and weapons were no match for
Vashishtha’s spiritual powers. The defeated Kaushika decided to undergo
penance and obtain supernatural powers.
He spent years in meditation, finally gaining the power he sought. His
years of penance transformed him, and he decided to give up his
kingdom and live the life of an ascetic. As sage Vishwamitra, he churned
the fire within and became so powerful that the gods were afraid. Indra,
king of the gods, decided to send the nymph Menaka to distract
Vishwamitra and seduce him. Menaka was an apsara, beautiful and
voluptuous. She danced before Vishwamitra, flaunting her charms,
finally forcing him to open his eyes and submit to her.
Nymphs in Hindu mythology are known as apsaras. The word has its roots in
apsa or water. They are embodiments of rasa. They make the world go round by
drawing energy out of tapa and channelling it towards samsara. Nymphs are thus
the water that puts out the fire of tapa. The water nymph is thus in eternal

conflict with the fire ascetic. While he seeks to withdraw from the world, she
seeks to draw out the ascetic. She is the womb that seeks to milk the seed out of
the body so that it can rotate the cycle of life. She is the obstacle to tapasya, the
greatest enemy of the tapasvin.
Symbolism of Fire and Water
Fire
Water
  Tapa
Rasa
  Masculine
Feminine
  Inner reality
Outer reality
  Spirit
Matter
  Shiva
Shakti
  Hermit
Nymph
  Phallus
Womb
  Staff
Pot
  Pestle
Mortar
If indifference is the path that ignites tapa, desire is the tool to make rasa flow.
‘Desire,’ proclaims the Rig Veda, ‘transforms the unmanifest idea, asat, into the
manifest form, sat.’ The world becomes manifest and life begins only when the
individual desires to know his true self. So says the Upanishad. To know the
self, the individual needs to know what the self is not. For without perceiving the
other, one cannot distinguish and establish oneself. To perceive the other, one
must open his eyes and let energy flow in the direction of samsara. To make
Shiva open his eyes and interact with the world, the gods summoned Kandarpa,
the love god, the lord of sensory arousal.
This is how the scriptures describe Kandarpa: a winsome dark god, who rides
a parrot, who wields a sugar-cane bow whose bowstring is made of bees, who
has five flowers serving as his five arrows with which he arouses the five senses.
His companions are gandharvas and apsaras, who are fairies born of the perfume
and nectar of flowers. They dance and sing, serenade and seduce, as he shoots
his merry arrows. Rati and Priti, the goddesses of erotic craving and emotional
yearning, are his consorts. They ride mynah birds and hold aloft his banner,
which carries his symbol, the zodiac Capricorn known in Sanskrit scriptures as
makara. Every year when the sun enters the house of makara, it is spring. The
time of love and longing. Of flirtation and romance. Of birds and bees. But
Shiva holds him in disdain and looks upon him with a fiery glance.

The fiery glance
(Shiva Purana)
The asura Taraka, empowered by Brahma’s boon, was creating havoc.
He unleashed terror in all the three worlds. The gods were alarmed. They
realized that Taraka was invincible. The only way to annihilate him was
to get Shiva to procreate a son. The gods decided that his beloved Sati
had to be reborn as the daughter of King Himavat. Thus was born
Parvati, with the mission of marrying Shiva and begetting a son to put an
end to the menace of Taraka.
Time went by and a young, beautiful Parvati went to Shiva’s abode
and began to tend to him. However, in spite of all her efforts she was
unable to attract his attention. In despair, the gods asked Kandarpa to
enchant Shiva, make him open his eyes and shed his seed. Kandarpa’s
presence filled the air with romance: Shiva’s snow-capped mountain
transformed into a pleasure garden full of flowers, bees and butterflies.
Flowers bloomed to greet Kandarpa, they made offerings of pollen and
nectar at his feet. Nymphs danced, while fairies sang, cheering Kandarpa
who raised his sugar-cane bow, drew his bowstring of bees and shot five
arrows at Shiva. The arrows stirred the yogi’s senses. He was not
amused. He opened his third eye and let loose a fiery missile that set
Kandarpa ablaze and reduced him to ashes. Having destroyed the lord of

sensory indulgence, the lord of sensory discipline resumed his
meditation.
Shiva had no interest in the cycle of renewal. He was blissfully immersed in
tapasya when Chandra took refuge on his head and when Shukra passed through
his body. The benefits that the two deities derived from their contact with Shiva
were purely incidental. Shiva remained an indifferent outsider. If anything,
Shiva opposed the fertility cycle.
To Shiva, the unending transformations of nature brought anticipation and
frustration with unfailing regularity. They reminded him of the joy he felt when
Sati danced on his lap and the misery he experienced when he held her corpse in
his arms. To him, the world was merely a matrix of delusions that took the mind
away from the state of sat-chitta-ananda. So he severed all association with the
material world, shut his eyes, withdrew into cold, dark caves and meditated on
sterile snow-clad mountains, warming himself with the inner fire of tapas.
When Shiva opened his third eye and destroyed the love god Kandarpa, it was
clear to the gods, and to the Goddess, that Shiva was no ordinary ascetic who
could be seduced. He had to be forced to abandon his ascetic ways through a
display of unshakable resolve and absolute devotion. So the Goddess decided to
make Shiva open his eyes, not as a nymph, but as a hermit.
According to Hindu metaphysics, since all creatures—animate and inanimate,
temporal and divine—are linked by karma, it is possible to change the course of
life by introducing one’s desire into the cosmos. Desire has to be introduced with
stubbornness until the cosmos has no choice but to yield and give in to one’s
wishes. This is hatha yoga or the yoga of unshakable resolve. Unshakable
resolve was expressed through acts of austerity and self-mortification. It was not
mere meditation or contemplation. Sometimes it involved giving up food, sleep
and comforts, and sometimes, outright torture—sitting on fire, sleeping on
thorns, or standing on one foot with upraised arms.
Parvati’s actions are different from Shiva’s. Shiva’s meditation is an
expression of indifference to worldly life; her austerities are an expression of her
determination to have her way. He lights the inner fire, one that burns everything
around. Parvati uses the accumulated energy to force an event around her. She
creates a stimulus to which Shiva has no choice but to respond. It is not a

stimulus that enchants Shiva. It is a stimulus that demands his attention.
Parvati wins Shiva’s heart
(Shiva Purana)
To help Parvati, the mountain princess, win the heart of Shiva, the gods
had enlisted the help of Kandarpa but Shiva reduced him to ashes by a
single glance of the third eye. Parvati, however, continued to visit
Shiva’s cave every day with a basket of food and flowers. She cleaned
the cave and took care of the ascetic but he remained totally indifferent to
her affection. Determined to marry the stubborn hermit, Parvati
eventually left her father’s house and took to living like an ascetic in the
forest. She withdrew into herself and withheld all thought, action, breath
and seed. So great was her tapasya that it threatened the foundations of
the mountains. In the wake of such determination, Shiva was forced to
open his eyes. He tried to dissuade Parvati—informing her that life with
a hermit would be nothing like the life she had with her royal father. He
suggested she marry a prince or a god, someone young and handsome
and virile. But Parvati would not budge. She was adamant. Shiva was
forced to acknowledge that he had met his match. He agreed to marry
Parvati. Bent on making a householder of this hermit, the mountain
princess insisted he marry her in the ritually prescribed manner.
In India, women seeking good husbands emulate Parvati. On particular days
of the week such as Monday, associated with the moon god and Shiva, they fast
in the hope of getting the husband of their choice. This fasting is called vrata or
observance, an abbreviated form of Parvati’s penance that enables one to get
what one desires. A vrata is a personal ritual, not one that is performed by
priests. It involves not just ritual acts but also complete focus of the mind and the
heart on the desired result. Vrata is considered to be a ritual act through which
one can manipulate the workings of the cosmos. It is an internalized yagna. The
aim is not to change one’s view of the world but to change the world itself.
Shiva opened his eyes and agreed to be Parvati’s groom. But there was a
problem. Shiva did not know the rules of social conduct—what was considered

appropriate or inappropriate, what was auspicious and what was inauspicious.

The hideous groom
(Linga purana)
In the sacred scriptures, it has been stated that the groom must come to
the bride’s house with his family and seek her hand in marriage. Shiva,
the ascetic, had no family, so he invited his companions to his wedding.
To the horror of the gods, the retinue comprised ghosts, goblins, gnomes,
witches, vampires and dwarfs. Shiva himself rode a bull. He smoked
hemp and drank poison. His companions, who did not know the ways of
the world, bedecked him with ash, skulls, bones, serpents and animal
hide. When he arrived at the gates of the mountain king’s palace, the
women who had assembled to welcome him ran away in fright. Mena,
Parvati’s mother, refused to accept this man, who looked like a beggar
and resided in crematoriums, as her son-in-law. Parvati pleaded with
Shiva, ‘You promised to marry me. Please take the form that pleases my
parents, at least until they have given consent to our marriage.’ So Shiva
let the gods bedeck him as they deemed fit. Shiva was bathed with
celestial waters and dressed in silks, flowers, gold and gems. When the
gods had finished, he looked more handsome than Kandarpa himself. He
was as fair as the full moon. His limbs were as lithe as those of a dancer.
All the assembled women fell in love with him. They declared him
Sundareshwara, the lord of beauty. Even Mena was impressed. Joyously,

she let Shiva marry her daughter. In the presence of the gods, in a
ceremony presided over by Brahma himself, Shiva and Parvati
exchanged garlands to become husband and wife.
This is Shiva’s second marriage. In both weddings he was the reluctant
groom. In the first, he married the daughter of Daksha, the primal priest. In the
second, he married the daughter of Himavat, the mountain king. In the first, he
annoyed his father-in-law when he did not bow to him. In the second, he scared
his father-in-law when he appeared dressed as a beggar and mendicant. In the
first, the Goddess had merely walked out of her father’s house to marry Shiva. In
the second, the Goddess had insisted that Shiva come to her father’s house to
claim her. There is a conscious effort by the Goddess to bring together the
patrons of yagna and the followers of tapasya through love and understanding.
For both aspired to peace, one by churning the outer fire and the other by
churning the inner fire. The Goddess finds merit in the path of the priest-kings
who seek to establish a peaceful society as well as the path of hermits who seek
an inner peace. She bridges the gap between the outer way and the inner way.
With bhaktiyoga, the path of devotion and understanding, she unites karmayoga,
the path of action, and gyanayoga, the path of introspection. The heart succeeds
in uniting mind with matter.
In the southern traditions, Parvati is described as Vishnu’s sister. Vishnu is the
keeper of cosmic and social order, the upholder of natural and cultural values.

He is the champion of the gods, who ensures the rotation of the cycle of life. He
knows that this marriage of Shiva with Parvati will result in the birth of children
who will ensure that Shiva’s power becomes part of the world, not indifferent to
it. Their children will kill demons, remove obstacles, and bring material
prosperity. In art, he is shown as giving the Goddess’s hand in marriage to
Shiva.
In tantra, Shiva is visualized as a white, ashen corpse with an erect penis. He
is so internalized that his body does not sense the outer world—it is like a dead
body. His semen flows upwards, lighting the inner fire of inner wisdom, born by
deconstructing the outer world. The flames leap up and stir his phallus. The
Goddess appears in the form of Kali, who is dark, bloodthirsty, naked with
unbound hair—sexual and violent simultaneously. She cuts her own head and
drinks her own blood, indicating her autonomy. At the same time she sits down
to copulate with Shiva, indicating her dependence. By copulating with Shiva she
is forcing him to acknowledge the outer world where matter manifests in various
forms. She seeks to draw out his energy, his semen. Her womb is the pot of life-
giving water. By sitting on Shiva’s phallus, she encloses the fire of the inner
world with the waters of the outer world.
A more abstract representation of the sexual union is the Shivalinga enshrined
in Hindu temples. If one takes away the body of the copulating Shiva and Shakti
except for the genitals, what remains is an upward-pointing phallic shaft of
Shiva who lies on his back surrounded by a leaf-shaped trough, the lips of the
Goddess’s vagina. Thus the devotee stands within the womb of the Goddess. The
entities around are manifested forms of rasa. Life happens when the Goddess
tries to draw God into the world, transforming his world-denying fire into her
world-sustaining sap. The pot hanging on top of the linga in Hindu temples is yet
another representation of the yoni of the Goddess. The water hopes to douse the
flames of Shiva’s fire and transmit its energy into the material world.
In geometry, the union is depicted as the union of the downward-pointing
triangle (the womb) with the upward-pointing triangle (the phallus). The six-
pointed star indicates the union of Shiva and Shakti. It is a geometric depiction
of the Shivalinga, with the upward-pointing triangle representing the shaft of the
linga and the downward-pointing triangle representing the yoni trough. These
geometrical representations of metaphysical ideas are known as yantras.

Types of Yoga
Gyana
Bhakti
  Phallus
Womb
  Manliness
Womanliness
  Spirit
Matter
  Soul
Substance
  Seed
Soil
  Brahman
Samsara
  Inner reality
Outer reality
  Divine within
Divine without
  Intangible divine
Tangible divine
  Tapa (spiritual fire)
Rasa (material sap)
  Mind
Matter
In Goddess worship, autonomous forms of the goddess such as Kali are
represented by downward-pointing triangles without the upward-pointing
triangle. This is reinforced by several such triangles, one within the other. When
the Goddess is visualized as a mother, her yantra includes both the upward-
pointing and downward-pointing triangles, such as in the Shri yantra.
The sexual act was more than just a sexual act to the seers. In its simplest
form it was the union of man and woman, an act of fertility. The meanings
transcended biology and evolved with the seeker’s understanding of the world.
The gods wanted a hyper-masculine child to kill Taraka; they wanted a being
who was ageless so that even on the seventh day of its life, when it was six days
old, it was powerful enough to fight the demon. In other words, they wanted an
embodiment of tapa that was not bound by the rules of samsara. They wanted the
Goddess to milk out Shiva’s seed but not nurture the seed in her womb. So they
charted an elaborate plan to prevent the red seed of the Goddess from mingling
with the white seed of God.

Birth of Skanda
(Vamana Purana, Skanda Purana)
Skanda
The gods interrupted the love-making of Shiva and Parvati. Embarrassed,
Parvati turned away and Shiva’s semen spurted out. The fire god Agni
caught the semen in his flames but found its radiance too powerful to
bear. To cool it down, he gave the seed to Vayu, the wind god, who,
having failed in this endeavour, plunged it into the icy waters of the
River Ganga. The river water started to boil, such was the energy
contained in Shiva’s seed.
Six forest virgins, the Krittikas, wives of the seven celestial sages, who
were bathing in the river, became pregnant with that one seed. Their
husbands declared them unchaste. In shame, they cleared their wombs
and abandoned the unborn foetuses in Saravana, the forest of reeds.
No sooner did the foetuses touch the ground than the forest of reeds
was set ablaze. In the forest fire the six foetuses united to become one
child with six heads. The Krittikas wanted to kill this child as he
embodied their shame. But as soon as they came near him, their breasts
started oozing milk. Overcome by maternal affection, the Krittikas
nursed this child whom they named Kartikeya, the son of the Krittikas.
The child born of Shiva’s seed, that had been milked by Parvati and
incubated by Agni, Vayu, Ganga and Saravana and nursed by the

Krittikas, was also named Skanda. When Skanda was six days old, on the
seventh day of his life, he was strong enough to pick up a lance and lead
the gods into battle against Taraka. After a fierce fight he triumphed over
Taraka.
By defeating Taraka, Skanda helps the devas draw out rasa from beneath the
earth’s surface. He restores the cycle of rasa. Thus, through Skanda, Shiva
participates in worldly affairs. In art, Skanda is represented by symbols of
masculinity such as the lance, the rooster and the peacock. He is associated with
the planet Mars. Skanda is popularly worshipped in south India as Murugan, the
boy god, and as Kumara, the eternal child. He is Subrahmaniam, the helpful god,
who stands atop mountains and protects mankind. He has two consorts: Sena, the
daughter of the devas, and Valli, the daughter of local tribes. According to some,
his wives are symbols of his army and his weapons to whom he is married. In
north India, he has no consorts. He is a virile war monger who takes men to
battle and makes widows of women.
But the Goddess is not satisfied with this offspring of Shiva. He had been
neither nurtured in her womb nor nursed on her breasts. Though this child of
Shiva had helped the world, he did not represent Shiva’s direct interest in
worldly events. Shiva remained as indifferent as ever. The marriage had been
forced on him. Even their love-making, with her on top, seemed one-sided. His
semen had spurted out rather unintentionally. While the gods had got their
champion, the Goddess wanted more from Shiva. She wanted him to truly father
a child and through him, contribute to the workings of the world.

Birth of Ganesha
(Shiva Purana)
Ganesha
Parvati wanted Shiva to father a child. But he refused. An exasperated
Parvati created a child on her own using the turmeric paste she anointed
herself with. The child was called Vinayaka because he was born without
the intervention of a man. Parvati asked her son to guard the entrance to
her bath and not let anyone in. Vinayaka obeyed, blocking even Shiva’s
entry, not knowing he was his mother’s consort. An otherwise detached
Shiva lost his cool, raised his trident, and beheaded the stubborn lad.
Parvati was inconsolable in her grief and threatened to transform from
Gauri, the life-giving goddess, to Kali, the life-taking goddess, if her son
was not resurrected. Shiva therefore ordered his followers, the ganas, to
fetch him the head of the first living being they encountered. They
brought back the head of an elephant, which Shiva placed on the severed
neck of Parvati’s son and restored him to life. By giving him life, Shiva
became the boy’s father. He acknowledged his fatherhood by naming the
lad Ganapati, lord of the ganas.
Parvati’s fury at the death of her child forces Shiva to act. When he resurrects
her creation and appoints him as leader of his followers, he consciously becomes
father and thus part of the material world. The resurrected Ganapati, with a body
created by the Goddess and a head given by God, represents the transformation
of Shiva, the hermit, into Shiva, the householder.

The choice of an elephant’s head is interesting. In Hindu symbolism, the
elephant represents material abundance. Indra, king of the gods, rides an
elephant. Elephants flank Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and prosperity. Shiva,
who rejects material pleasures, is described as Gajantaka—he who flays the
elephant and uses its thick skin as his upper garment. By using the elephant’s
head to resurrect the child of his consort, Shiva in effect demonstrates his
participation in the world of rasa. He uses the power of tapa to bring to life the
child he killed. Ganapati’s head represents tapa; his body represents rasa. He
reconciles God and Goddess. He becomes the doorway through which Shiva
enters samsara.
Although living with his wife and two children, Skanda and Ganapati, Shiva is
a reluctant householder. He does not find material life to be meaningful. Though
the Goddess manages to make him a father, she finds it difficult to make him a
true householder. He does not appreciate the meaning of a home.

A house for Parvati
(Folklore)
Parvati once begged Shiva to build her a house. ‘Why do we need a
house?’ Shiva wondered. In summer when it is hot, I sit under the shade
of the Banyan tree. In winter, when it is cold I warm myself in the
crematorium beside funeral pyres. In the rainy season, I simply fly and sit
on the clouds above the rain.
Parvati suffers her husband’s idiosyncrasies, taking care of her children on her
own. She becomes Gauri, the radiant mother, who takes care of her household
without any help or support from her husband. In India, women worship Gauri
as she represents marital resilience.

Infidelity
(Folklore)
Parvati often fought with Shiva because he never paid attention to his
children. He withdrew constantly, either meditating or smoking cannabis.
She was left to fend for the family all by herself. Once, tired of her
constant nagging, Shiva went to the pine forest. Parvati followed him
there, taking the form of a tribal girl. Shiva began to miss Parvati. He
pined for her. Suddenly, he realized he was being watched by a tribal
girl. She reminded him of Parvati. Overwhelmed by desire, he chased the
girl and forced her to make love with him. The girl laughed, then cried,
then revealed her true identity and accused Shiva of infidelity. Shiva tried
to reason with her but she was inconsolable. To calm down, Parvati
decided to bathe in Lake Mansarovar. When she returned to the banks,
she discovered that mice had chewed her blouse. To her delight, a tailor
was passing by. He agreed to darn her blouse if she paid him for it. ‘But I
am the wife of a penniless hermit,’ she said. ‘In that case, pay me with an
embrace,’ said the tailor. Parvati agreed. When the blouse was darned,
the tailor demanded his payment and Parvati obliged. After they had
made love, the tailor burst out laughing. It was none other than Shiva.
‘You are no different from me,’ he said. ‘I am,’ she cried. ‘You were
unfaithful because of lust. I was unfaithful because of poverty.’
From time to time, however, the Goddess ensures Shiva knows her value as
the following narrative shows.
Annapoorna’s kitchen
(Kashi Sthala Purana)

Once, Shiva said that he did not need a consort. So Parvati walked out of
Mount Kailasa. Some time later, Shiva felt hungry. At such times he
usually went to Parvati. But this time she was not around. And there was
no food in the kitchen. The hunger pangs became unbearable with the
passage of time; Shiva could neither meditate nor sit still. Desperate, he
wandered through the three worlds in search of food. As the days passed
he realized the value of the Goddess, how she sustained the body in the
jiva’s quest for self-realization. When he heard that Parvati had set up a
kitchen in the city of Kashi he rushed there with his begging bowl. He
apologized and requested her to feed him. She filled his bowl with food
and he ate to his heart’s content. Shiva declared Parvati to be
Annapoorna, the goddess of food, and took her back to Mount Kailasa so
that she could set up her kitchen on its icy slopes.
According to one narrative, Shiva was so pleased with Parvati when she fed
him that he embraced her tightly, so tightly that his left half became one with the
Goddess. This gave rise to the form known as Ardhanarishwara.

Bhringi cursed
(Tamil temple lore)
Bhringi was a devotee of Shiva, so he wanted to circumambulate the lord
but not his consort. ‘We are two halves of one,’ said Parvati who sat on
Shiva’s left lap and prevented Bhringi from going around Shiva alone.
Bhringi took the form of a flea and tried to fly between their heads.
Parvati fused her body with that of Shiva so that she became Shiva’s left
half. Bhringi then took the form of a worm and tried to bore between the
two halves of Shiva’s body. Angered by his refusal to acknowledge her,
Parvati cursed Bhringi. ‘You shall lose all those parts of the body that
come from a woman,’ she shouted. Instantly, his body was stripped of
flesh and blood. He was left with nothing but bones and nerves. Bhringi
collapsed on the floor and realized he could not even stand. He
understood the value of the Goddess. To remind him and others like him
that Shiva was incomplete without his consort, Parvati refused to restore
his body to its original state. Instead, Shiva gave Bhringi a third leg so
that he could stand like a tripod.
Shiva’s purity tempered with Shakti’s pragmatism balances the world order.
He is the Truth, free of restrictive definitions. She is the Reality, where space
and time give the world name and form, and determine what is spiritual and

what is material, what is appropriate and what is inappropriate. She takes his
seed into her womb and transforms the mystery of the divine into tangible
manifestations of wealth and wisdom, brains and brawn.
The Goddess sits beside Shiva and tempers his innocent ways so that it helps
society. She introduces divisions and standards into his vision. She makes him
appreciate the divide between the seer and the scenery, the subject and the
object. When his innocence lands him in trouble, she works hard to rectify the
damage.

III
Grace of Shiva
The hermit becomes the accessible and
benevolent householder called Shankara

W
ith the Goddess by his side, Shiva is no longer indifferent to the woes of
the world. His eyes are open. He sees, he listens, he reacts. His radiance
nourishes samsara. Devotees acknowledge him as Shankara, the source of joy; as
Shambhu, the abode of joy; and as Ashutosh, the one who is easy to please.

A leaf from a thief
(Shiva Purana)
The thief was not so lucky this time. The villagers had laid a trap for him
and nabbed him red-handed. He managed to escape their clutches
somehow, but they gave chase, determined to teach him a lesson. They
chased him through the village and across the fields, all the way into the
forest. He finally managed to throw them off his trail by hiding in the
dense, dark undergrowth.
But his troubles were not over yet. He had barely caught a breath when
he heard a low, ferocious growl. Soon he was on the run again, this time
being chased by a hungry beast. His legs were beginning to give away
underneath him and he scrambled up a tree to escape the hungry jaws
that were snapping at his heels.
All night long he stayed up there in that tree, afraid to sleep in case
wild animals climbed up and made a meal out of him. When he heard
them prowling beneath the tree, he shook the branches vigorously,
hoping that would scare them away.
What he did not know was that he had climbed a Bilva tree that had a
linga installed under it. As he shook the branches, the Bilva leaves fell in
a gentle shower on to the linga. Moreover, that night was the thirteenth
night of the waning moon and all the gods and the demons were invoking

Shiva, as was the custom.
Unknowingly, the thief too was making offerings to the Lord, by
showering the linga with Bilva leaves. That was enough to please the
Lord and earn him a place in his heart.
According to Ayurveda, the Hindu science of health and healing, Bilva is a
coolant. Its leaves transform Shiva’s tapas into rasa that seeps into the material
world as his grace. Bilva leaves are also believed to be the physical symbols of
the Goddess’s love for Shiva.
Lakshmi’s breast
(Odiya FolkLore)
Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and prosperity, once decided to make an
offering of a thousand tender lotus buds to Shiva. The gods in the
heavens were impressed by her devotion but they were also keen to know
how far she would go to keep her pledge. They decided to put her to test
and ensured that she found only 999 lotus buds. Try as she might,
Lakshmi could not find just the one additional bud that would complete
her offering.
Now, Lakshmi was a picture of beauty and grace, with many a poet
having sung her praises. She recalled how one of them had described her
breasts as tender lotus buds. Determined to keep her promise at all costs,
she offered one of her breasts to the Linga. Shiva was deeply moved by
her devotion and transformed her breast into a round and succulent Bilva
fruit. He declared that henceforth, he would not accept any prayer unless
it was accompanied by an offering of Bilva sprigs.
Lakshmi is a form of the Goddess. She is visualized as a golden nymph,
bedecked in red silk, gold, pearls and diamonds, who holds in her hand the pot of
bounty and sits on a lotus. According to folk traditions of Bengal, she is the
daughter of Parvati. Her husband is none other than Vishnu, the more worldly
form of God. Vishnu brings peace to the world and Lakshmi brings prosperity.
By accepting Lakshmi’s breast as an appropriate offering, Shiva reaffirms his

grace to the material world.
Shiva also supports Vishnu in his quest to establish dharma in the world.
Shiva gives Vishnu his most feared weapon, the Sudarshan Chakra. When
Vishnu incarnates as the priest, Parashurama, it is Shiva who teaches him the
martial arts so that Vishnu can kill all the unrighteous kings who populate the
earth. Legend has it that Parashurama taught the martial art known today as
Kalaripayattu to Nair warriors of Kerala. Nair warriors, in turn, taught it to
Buddhist monks who travelled to China and transformed it to the now popular
martial art called Karate.

The guardian god
(Virabhadra Mahatmya)
Tired of being constantly attacked by rakshasas and asuras, the people of
earth prayed to Shiva and begged him to protect them. Shiva plucked a
hair and placed it on the ground. Out emerged a great warrior,
Virabhadra, carrying a sword, a bow and a human head in his hand. He
was given the task of protecting the frontiers of the village from harm.
For people of earth, Virabhadra was Shiva.
In many parts of India, village guardians and village heroes such as the
Mallana of Andhra Pradesh and the Khandoba of Maharashtra are considered to
be local manifestations of Shiva. With Shiva participating in worldly affairs, the
common man saw Shiva as a guardian god. He became renowned as Vireshwara,
lord of the brave, protector of the weak, and destroyer of villains. In the epic
Mahabharata, warriors such as Drupada and Arjuna invoke Shiva to destroy
enemies and procure weapons.

The Pashupata missile
(Mahabharata)
The Pashupata missile contained the power of a thousand wild beasts. It
was no wonder then that Arjuna, the greatest of warriors, coveted the
missile. His armoury was incomplete without it. Firm in his resolve to
obtain it, he installed a Shivalinga of sand and began to invoke Shiva. He
was the picture of concentration and devotion as he sat there, day and
night, breathing the name of the Lord. The gods were impressed with his
determination and they hoped Shiva would grant him the boon he sought.
One day, a wild boar wandered close to the Shivalinga, snorting and
grunting as he foraged for food. Arjuna was enraged at this intrusion.
Reaching for his bow, he shot the boar down. When he approached the
stricken beast though, he was surprised to find that two arrows had
pierced its body. As he stood there perplexed, the wife of a tribal warrior
came up, claiming it was her husband’s arrow that had killed the boar.
She also claimed that the boar’s tusks were theirs by right.
Arjuna was incensed. He refused to part with the animal and
challenged the tribal warrior to a fight. His opponent was more than a
match for him and apparently had boundless energy as well. He bounced
back from every blow that Arjuna struck, ready for more. Arjuna now
began to tire. In desperation, he grabbed some wild flowers and threw
them on the Shivalinga that he had been worshipping. Instantly, he was
energized and he rushed to challenge the tribal warrior afresh.
He froze in his tracks, however, when he saw that the flowers he had
thrown at the linga were on the head of the warrior. It was then that he
realized that the warrior was none other than Shiva himself and his wife
was the Goddess Parvati. Throwing his bow down, he bowed to Shiva
with great humility and respect. Shiva was pleased with his devotion and
his valour. ‘You are truly a great warrior. You are worthy of possessing
the Pashupata,’ he said.
This narrative views Shiva as a tribal hunter and links him with forest

dwellers, people who were considered by the Vedic priests to be lowly outcastes
because they did not value the rules of the yagna. It reflects the period when
Shiva, the outsider god, was slowly being accepted within the Vedic pantheon.
The distant mendicant, shunned by Daksha’s Vedic priests, eventually became
the patron of Vedic warriors. He wanted no elaborate chant or ritual, just sincere
devotion expressed through simple offerings.

An eye of the hunter
(Tamil Periya Puranam)
Deep in the forest was a cave with a linga. Every day, a priest made his
way to the cave and worshipped at the shrine. In the forest, there lived a
hunter called Kanappan, who was a Shiva devotee too. Unlike the priest,
who made his offerings in the manner prescribed in the scriptures, the
hunter always offered the Lord the choicest part of his game.
The hunter was ignorant and illiterate. He had no knowledge of the
purification rites nor was he aware that certain acts would pollute his
offering. As his hands were full of the game that he had killed, he carried
the water for the offering in his mouth and the flowers on his head.
Neither the priest nor the hunter wavered in their devotion to the Lord.
The gods, watching from the heavens above, were intrigued by these two
and wondered which one of them was the greater devotee. Shiva decided
to put them to the test.
One day, as they entered the shrine, the two devotees found that the
linga had sprouted two eyes. They could not contain their joy, for it could
only mean that the Lord wanted to see them. Their delight soon turned to
horror, however, as one of the eyes began to bleed. The priest cried out in
terror and ran away, convinced it was a bad omen.
The hunter was distraught at the sight, believing his Lord to be in pain.

He ran into the forest, gathered some medicinal herbs and placed them on
the bleeding eye. But they were of no use and the eye continued to bleed.
The hunter could not bear the sight and decided to transplant his own eye
on to the linga.
Using his knife, he carved out one eye and fixed it on the linga. No
sooner did he do this than the other eye began to bleed. The hunter did
not hesitate even for a second. He decided to carve out his other eye too.
Placing his foot on the linga so that he would know where to fix the
second eye, the innocent devout cut his second eye out.
In that instant, Shiva appeared before Kanappan and clasped him to his
heart, assuring him of a place by him forever.
In many parts of India the Shivalinga is encased in a metal mask with the face
of a virile, moustachioed man on it. Clearly, not everyone was pleased with the
non-iconic (and phallic) symbol of Shiva. They wanted Shiva to possess a form:
that of a virile warrior.
Shiva’s association with low-caste people and his disregard for formal ritual
made him popular among the masses. In narratives, his devotees came to include
ghosts, goblins, gnomes, vampires, witches and other wild spirits, shunned by
all. Shiva’s entourage of ganas is described as an unruly and rowdy bunch of
wild ogres who obtain true unconditional acceptance from Shiva. He drinks with
them, smokes with them, and never gets annoyed with their rather antisocial
behaviour.
This is perhaps why Shiva became the patron deity of hippies and flower
children in the 1960s. He gave space to all non-conformists. He accommodated
all those who did not fit in. The ganas were so fond of their lord that they
happily did whatever he told them to do without question.

Kirtimukha
(Linga Purana)
One of Shiva’s hordes, the ganas, wanted to eat the asura Rahu. When
the gods heard of this, they ran to Shiva and pleaded with him to stop the
gana somehow. ‘Rahu is critical to preserving the order in the universe,
Lord. He is one of the nine astrological bodies that determine the
influence of time on destiny. Please save him from the hungry gana!’
Shiva agreed to intervene. Summoning the gana into his presence, he
forbade him from eating Rahu. ‘But I am hungry, Lord! I must eat
something,’ the gana pleaded. ‘Eat yourself,’ was Shiva’s curt reply.
The gana did not stop to think. Without any hesitation, he began eating
his own legs, his arms, his trunk … until all that was left of him was his
head. Shiva was moved by this display of total obedience. Praising the
gana, he said, ‘From now on, your face will be atop pavilions, gates and
entrances. You are Kirtimukha, the face of glory. You will look into
everyone’s heart and mock the pretenders. You will scare away those that
are unwelcome.’
Shiva’s devotees include ganas like Vyaghrapada, one with the feet of a tiger,
who, when offered a boon, begged for tiger feet so that he could walk through
the forest and collect Bilva leaves for his lord without worrying about thorns and
sharp stones. There is also Kubera, the king of yakshas, and the rich treasurer of
the gods who sometimes needs to be taught a lesson.

Food for Ganesha
(Himalayan folk tale)
Shiva, the ascetic, had become a householder after marrying Parvati.
Though he was devoted to his family, his ways had not really changed.
And it upset Parvati enormously that he did not provide for his children.
They went hungry often and Parvati would fight with Shiva about his
indifference to their plight.
Kubera watched the goings-on and felt sorry for his lord. One day, he
visited Parvati and offered to feed Ganesha at his own house. Parvati’s
face flushed with humiliation, but Shiva did not notice anything amiss.
Ganesha was delighted at the prospect of a good meal and Parvati
eventually allowed him to go.
Kubera ordered an enormous meal for Ganesha. It was wolfed down in
no time and Ganesha asked for more. He attacked his second helping
with enthusiasm and again asked for more. This went on till they had run
out of supplies in the kitchen and even in the palace storehouse. But still
Ganesha’s hunger was not satiated.
Kubera was not to be outdone, though. He spent vast sums of money
and had food delivered from all the corners of the world. Ganesha gladly
ate it all. And still he asked for more. Soon Kubera had emptied his
treasury and he was in tears. ‘I have nothing left to offer,’ he wept,
humbled by poverty. ‘Oh,’ said Ganesha, his elephant face beaming in a
wide grin, ‘this is just like my father’s house.’
An enlightened Kubera bowed to him as he realized that no amount of
material wealth can truly satisfy hunger.
Like ganas and yakshas, Shiva’s devotees include rakshasas and asuras. In the
Vedic scheme of things, rakshasas were demons because they followed the law
of the jungle and asuras were demons because they were niggardly hoarders of

cosmic bounty. Shiva is unable to judge his devotees as gods or demons. He
simply responds to sincere devotion, much to the irritation of the devas.

Moving Kailasa
(Ramayana)
Ravana, the king of the barbarians, was a ferocious enemy of the gods.
With ten heads and twenty arms, he could see and attack in all directions.
But like so many others, he too craved the favour of the lord.
One day, he cut off one of his heads and one of his arms, to fashion a
lute. Using the head as a resonant gourd, he fixed the arm on it, plucking
the nerves to make divine music. He played this lute every day, singing
the praises of Lord Shiva.
Shiva was moved by his devotion and appeared before Ravana. ‘Ask
what you will and it shall be granted to you,’ he said to the demon king.
‘There is nothing more precious to me than you, my Lord. I want you to
reside permanently in my kingdom,’ replied Ravana. Shiva agreed, much
to Ravana’s delight. He picked up Mount Kailasa and headed south, to
his island kingdom of Lanka.
The gods watched these developments in horror. They knew that with
Shiva by his side, Ravana would become truly invincible. If Ravana
acquired the power to rule the world, it would spell doom for the gods.
He had to be stopped somehow. The gods sought the intervention of
Varuna, the god of the sea.
As Ravana was transporting Mount Kailasa to his kingdom he felt his

bladder filling up. The pressure became so enormous that he was afraid
he would soil himself. He just had to put the mountain down and run into
the bushes to relieve himself. In that moment his devious plan was foiled
and the abode of Shiva was restored to the Himalayas.
Shiva’s boons make demons powerful. But his sons, especially Skanda, lead
gods in their battle to overpower demons and liberate cosmic bounty. The
tension between the force and counter-force of nature rotates the wheel of life. In
the following narrative, Shiva helps a powerful barbarian king and creates
anarchy on earth. To repair the damage, the gods need the help of Vishnu.

Bana
(Bhagavata Purana)
When Shiva retreated into meditation, he would be gone for years at a
time. Parvati would be alone at home and she was often tearful, longing
for a companion. Bana, the king of the barbarians, saw an opportunity to
please Shiva and sent his daughter Usha as a companion for Parvati.
Sure enough, Shiva was greatly pleased and he gifted a thousand arms
to Bana as his reward. Bana crowed in delight and used his arms to
terrorize earth. The gods watched all this in dismay. Unable to withstand
the suffering they witnessed, they approached Vishnu and begged his
help in vanquishing Bana.
Vishnu came down to earth, incarnated as Krishna. Usha, Bana’s
young daughter, was smitten by Krishna’s grandson, Aniruddha. Bana
was enraged when he discovered this, however, and he imprisoned
Aniruddha. That was the moment Krishna was waiting for—he attacked
Bana’s kingdom and a fierce battle was fought, in which Bana was killed.
Krishna liberated his grandson and the marriage of Aniruddha and
Usha was celebrated with great pomp and festivity. They were made king
and queen of Bana’s kingdom and, together, they established the rule of
dharma.
While Shiva represents that aspect of God which is closer to nature,
transcending social codes and cultural constructions, Vishnu represents that
aspect of God that is closer to culture, instituting and maintaining dharma, the
code of righteous conduct. His laws determine what is appropriate and what is
not, in nature and in society. Unlike Shiva, therefore, Vishnu has standards and
values. He participates in worldly affairs with what some may consider greater
responsibility. This is best expressed in their individual forms. While Shiva
appears as a hermit who makes no attempt to be part of society, Vishnu appears
as a warrior king who is very much part of society.
Difference between Shiva and Vishnu
 
Shiva (Hara)
Vishnu (Hari)

Abode
Snow-capped mountain
Ocean of milk
Clothes
Animal skins
Silk robes
Cosmetic
Ash
Sandal paste
Jewellery
Snakes and beads
Flowers and gold
Association with the creative
aspect of God, Brahma
Carries Brahma’s skull as
his begging bowl
The lotus that rises from his navel
gives birth to Brahma
Offering
Raw milk
Butter
When Hinduism became less ritualistic and more theistic, and old Vedic gods
such as Indra and Agni waned in significance, two schools emerged, based on
the deity chosen to represent God. For Shaivas, the ascetic Shiva was the
absolute manifestation of God. For Vaishnavas, the worldly Vishnu was the
absolute manifestation of God. The rivalry between the two schools was great.
Vaishnavas refused to eat with, or marry, Shaivas. The Vaishnavas identified
themselves with a caste mark that was painted vertically on the forehead.
Shaivas identified themselves with a caste mark that was painted horizontally. In
narratives, many attempts were made to show Shiva as being greater than
Vishnu.

Sharabha
(Shiva Purana)
The demon Hiranyakashipu was invincible. He had obtained a boon from
Brahma that made him extremely powerful. After practising severe
austerities to please Brahma, he had been granted his wish by the Creator
—he would die only at the hands of a creature that was neither man nor
beast. Aware that such a creature was not to be found on earth,
Hiranyakashipu unleashed a reign of terror.
Vishnu appeared on earth in the form of Narasimha, a creature that
was part man, part lion, in order to vanquish Hiranyakashipu. But after
killing the demon, Vishnu refused to abandon the terrible avatar. He was
as if possessed by the demon he had killed and his fury spread mayhem
in the world.
Narasimha had to be stopped somehow and the gods pleaded with
Shiva for intervention. Shiva took the form of Sharabha, a monster that
was part animal, part bird, with eight feet and enormous claws. Sharabha
took to the skies with a mighty roar that shook the earth. Grabbing
Narasimha in his powerful talons, Sharabha subdued him.
Shiva thus forced Vishnu to shed an incarnation that had outlived its
purpose.

Vaishnavas, in their scriptures, were equally determined to position Vishnu as
being greater than Shiva. The rivalry between them became fierce and intense.
Even today major Vaishnava shrines like Tirupati do not have an image of Shiva
or his children. Even Ganesha is not acknowledged at the start of a ceremony.
Instead, Vishnu’s herald, Vishwaksena, is invoked.

The Ash Demon
(Vishnu Purana)
An asura harboured great ambition in his evil heart. He sought to be all-
powerful but he knew he would need special powers. He performed
severe penance and invoked Shiva.
‘You have pleased me with your devotion,’ said Shiva. ‘Ask what you
will and it shall be granted.’ That was what the asura was longing to hear.
‘If I so much as place my hand on the head of another, may he be
reduced to a heap of ashes, my Lord,’ he asked. Bound by his promise,
Shiva said, ‘So be it.’
The wily asura was keen to test his new-found power and he decided
to try it out on Shiva himself! Shiva realized his intentions too late and
had to run for his life, with the demon in hot pursuit. Vishnu watched in
dismay and knew Shiva was in grave danger. He decided to intervene
and took the form of the alluring enchantress, Mohini.
Mohini waylaid the asura as he chased Shiva. Her beautiful smile and
shapely form enticed him. Overwhelmed with desire, he begged the
nymph to marry him. ‘Not unless you dance like me,’ she said coyly and
the asura agreed willingly. Mohini began to sway and dance, with the
asura following her movements. He copied every move she made, every
expression, even the movement of her eyes.

At one point in the dance, in a graceful move, Mohini placed her palm
upon her own head and the asura, blinded by desire, followed suit.
Instantly, he was reduced to ashes. Vishnu, in the form of Mohini, had
rescued Lord Shiva from Bhasmasura or the ash demon.
In the following narrative, Shiva is such a simpleton that he cannot distinguish
between man and woman. This earns Shiva the title of Bholanath, the guileless
god. Rather than make Shiva seem weak, this quality makes him more endearing
to his devotees. They realize that Shiva is so evolved that the difference between
man and woman is of no consequence to him. He recognizes differences
imposed by society on gender as being ephemeral and, often, artificial. His
attention is on the sexless, gender-less soul rather than on the biology that
envelops it. This leads to encounters that make Shiva sexually ambiguous to the
onlooker. Reading homo-eroticism into the narratives—either positively or
negatively—depends on the perception of the onlooker, born of prejudices that
are based on social standards. Shiva projects nothing. His mind is clear of any
and all social standards.

Son of Shiva and Vishnu
(Sabarimalai Sthala Purana)
Vishnu had taken on the form of Mohini, the enchantress. So alluring
was her form, so graceful her every move, that even Shiva was seduced.
He embraced her and spilt his semen. From their union was born a son,
Manikanta.
Mohini gave the baby Manikanta to the childless Chera king, who was
delighted to have a son to rule after him. Manikanta was raised a prince.
He was a talented boy and became a gifted warrior. But he had also
inherited the ascetic character of Shiva.
A few years after he had been adopted, his foster-mother bore the king
a son. Now she no longer wanted Manikanta to succeed the king to the
throne. Eager to secure power for her own son, she feigned a severe
illness. She was in terrible pain, she cried, and did not have long to live.
The only thing that could save her life was the milk of a tigress, she said.
Manikanta offered to get her the milk of a tigress and at once set off on
his quest. He had to travel far and through dense forests where he was
attacked by many demons. Undaunted, he overpowered them all and
returned to the palace with the milk of a tigress for his mother.
In order to make sure that she was completely cured, he happily gave
up his right to the throne. In keeping with his character, he became an

ascetic and spent the rest of his life on the top of a hill that overlooked
his father’s kingdom.
Vishnu takes the form of Mohini or the celestial enchantress in his capacity as
protector of the world. He needs heroes to rid the earth of troublemaking
demons. By taking advantage of Shiva’s innocence, by stirring the unfettered
desire of his loins, Vishnu makes the fire-churning ascetic shed his semen out of
which are born warrior gods such as Manikanta.
In the Shiva Purana, Hanuman is the son created when Shiva and Mohini
unite. Hanuman is the monkey god in Hindu mythology, associated with
superhuman strength, intelligence, humility and discipline. The sons of both
Shiva and Vishnu kill demons and serve as guardians of the earth. Both are
hyper-masculine yet celibate, avoiding female company. Hanuman is the ascetic
warrior who protects the chastity of women and gives strength to men to follow
the monastic ideal. Manikanta is the ascetic warrior who blesses men only after
they display control over their senses.
Demons once sought to take advantage of Shiva’s inability to differentiate
between man and woman in order to cause a rift between Shiva and Shakti. The
attempt was a failure.

Death of Adi
(Matsya Purana)
The demon Adi was on a murderous mission. He wanted to kill Shiva.
He took the form of Parvati and sought Shiva’s embrace. He had come
well prepared, having implanted poisonous teeth in his ‘vagina’ that
would kill Shiva with potent venom. Shiva knew that this was not his
wife Parvati but that it was the demon Adi, laying a trap for him. He
started making love with such intense passion that Adi was not able to
cope with his ardour. Shiva’s virility thrust into him like a thunderbolt
and soon, Adi lay dead in Shiva’s arms.
Shiva is so innocent that he sees no difference between sandal paste and ash,
between ox and bull, between garden and crematorium, between poison and
milk. His exasperated consort also realizes that her guileless consort does not
appreciate the meaning of a wife and the exclusivity of her affections for her
husband.

A wife for Ravana
(Folklore)
Ravana, the ten-headed demon king, was an ardent devotee of Shiva. He
performed sincere tapasya to invoke Shiva. The innocent lord was
pleased by his devotion and granted him a boon.
‘I want the Goddess as my wife,’ Ravana demanded audaciously.
‘So be it,’ replied Shiva.
When Parvati heard of this, she was enraged. But not with Shiva. She
knew her lord was innocent and he had behaved exactly as she had
expected him to. He had responded to a devotee’s penance, without
giving a second thought to the implications of his boon. No, it was not he
who incurred Parvati’s wrath—it was the vile Ravana who had taken
advantage of her innocent husband.
Parvati decided to teach him a lesson. She transformed a toad into a
damsel who was the very likeness of herself. She let the toad damsel
loose on Mount Kailasa. Ravana met the damsel on the slopes of the
mountain and believed her to be Parvati. He whisked her away to his
island.
Marriage is a social construct. Fidelity is a cultural demand, not a natural urge.
Though willing to participate in the world, and make love to the Goddess, Shiva
stays out of social structures. When social structures collapse, taboos like rape,

infidelity, incest and homosexuality can hold no ground. Society bridles the
sexual urge. Society channels the desires of men and women in ways it deems
fit. But what is fit varies from society to society.
While incest may be taboo in most societies, polygyny (one man with many
wives), polyandry (one woman with many husbands), sex hospitality, or
homosexuality may be accepted in one society but not in another. Rules accepted
by a society in one period of history change in another. What is appropriate once
may not be appropriate always.
This explains why Shiva’s narratives portray him simultaneously as monastic,
monogamous, polygamous and even sexually ambiguous. He is one who is
always distant from society. He is unaffected by its rules and is therefore always
challenging them.
Shiva’s sexual spectrum
Monastic
Kills Kandarpa, the god of sex, love, lust and longing
Monogamy
Makes his consort, Shakti, who is the Goddess, the left half of his body
Polygamy
The mountain goddess, Parvati, sits on his lap while the river goddess, Ganga, sits on
his head
Sexually
Ambiguous
Spills semen at the sight of Mohini, the female form of Vishnu, a male deity
In the following narrative, Shiva is unable to appreciate a woman’s horrified
reaction when he blesses her with five husbands.
Draupadi’s husband
(Skanda Purana)
Draupadi once invoked Shiva and asked for a husband with five ideal
qualifications:
He should be king.
He should be strong.
He should be a skilled archer.
He should be handsome.
He should be knowledgeable.
Shiva granted her wish, saying, ‘You will have all the five husbands

that you desire.’
Draupadi was horrified but Shiva’s boon had been granted. He was so
removed from things mundane that he failed to see any difference
between a husband with five ideal qualifications, and five husbands, each
with an ideal qualification! And that is how Draupadi came to be married
to the five sons of Pandu.
Yudhishthira was a king.
Bhima was a mighty wrestler.
Arjuna was an archer without parallel.
Nakula was the most handsome man in the world.
Sahadeva was the most knowledgeable of all.
Shiva’s mind is purified of all standards and divisions. So, on his wedding
day, he feels no qualms about offering snakes, skulls, and skeletons as gifts to
the mother of his bride. She faints of course. And Shiva stands bewildered while
his consort-to-be, Parvati, looks on with endearing affection at the God unused
to worldly ways.
The third eye is perhaps the greatest symbol of Shiva’s transcendent nature,
one that is unfettered by ideas that differentiate beauty from ugliness, left from
right, top from bottom, past from future, men from women, minerals from
plants, and plants from animals. This eye has no eyebrow; it looks neither to the
left nor to the right, neither to the top nor to the bottom. It has no orientation.
Shiva opens his third eye and reduces Kandarpa, the god of desire, to ashes. This
is because desire presupposes a division between the subject who desires and the
object that is desirable. Desire also presupposes a division between objects that
are undesirable and objects that are desirable. Shiva is beyond such divides. He
therefore cannot succumb to the love god’s arrows. The love god fails, and
ceases to be, as Shiva has no frame of reference through which to peep into the
garden of sensual delights. A creature born of this third eye possesses the
characteristics of the very same eye: though born of a god, it is demonic and it
cannot distinguish between a mother and a woman.

Killer of Andhaka
(Vamana Purana)
Parvati was in a playful mood. She crept up on Shiva and closed his eyes
with her palms. Instantly, the world was plunged into darkness, as
Shiva’s left eye was the sun and the right eye was the moon. Shiva knew
that the beings on earth would not survive without light and he opened
his third eye.
The third eye was extremely powerful and the heat it radiated made
Parvati perspire profusely. From the beads of her perspiration, a child
was born. He was called Andhaka—the one born of darkness, because he
was born when Shiva’s eyes were covered.
Shiva gave Andhaka to the childless demon king Hiranyaksha.
Andhaka was raised among the demons and he eventually became their
ruler. He had performed great tapasya and Brahma had granted him a
boon—he would be killed only if he looked upon his own mother with
lust. Andhaka was sure that would never happen, as he believed he had
no mother.
Andhaka derived great power from his boon and led his armies into a
fierce battle with the gods. He defeated them and became the ruler of the
three worlds. His kingdom now stretched to all corners of the universe.
Such a vast and powerful kingdom needed a queen, he thought. He was
told there was none more fit to be queen of the universe than the
beautiful Parvati.
Andhaka knew Parvati was a mountain princess who had given up the
comforts of her father’s palace to win over and wed Shiva, the ascetic
god. Andhaka went to Shiva’s abode at once and began to woo Parvati.
He made extravagant pledges of love, promises of gifts and riches, but
Parvati was not interested. Refusing to take no for an answer, Andhaka
decided to take her away by force.
Parvati cried out to Shiva for help. Shiva was enraged when he saw
Andhaka dragging his wife away. He roared in anger and impaled
Andhaka with his trident. Andhaka bled till his body was reduced to a

bag of bones. Shiva kept him imprisoned and impaled for eons. As he lay
there, floating between life and death, he realized that he was the son of
Shiva and Parvati. He begged their forgiveness and spent the rest of his
life singing praises of the divine couple.
Andhaka, like Ravana, wants to make Shiva’s wife his queen. In the Padma
Purana, another demon king called Jalandhara wants to kill Shiva so that he can
marry Parvati. Since Shiva’s consort is the Goddess who embodies the material
world, the desire to marry the Goddess seems like an allegory to lord over the
material world. Tapasya is the common method used to achieve this goal. Unlike
Shiva, who uses tapasya to know himself and attain sat-chitta-ananda, demons
use tapasya to control the world. These narratives bring out the conflict between
the ascetics, who are philosophers and metaphysicians, and those who are
alchemists and sorcerers. The former want samadhi, liberation from the cycle of
rebirths, understanding of the true nature of things, and union with the divine.
The latter want siddhi, control over the cycle of rebirths, and manipulation over
the forces of nature.
In early Hinduism, both samadhi and siddhi could be achieved either by the
intellectual Vedic way or the more sensual tantric way. As Hinduism evolved,
the Vedic way became more monastic and inward-looking while the tantric way
continued its focus on the outer, alchemical realities, which included sex and
violence. Eventually, the spiritual goal of samadhi was identified with the Vedic
way while the latter material goal of siddhi was identified with the tantric way,
causing tantra to fall into disrepute in later Hinduism.
As Hinduism transformed, the Vedic way saw the material world as Maya,
enchanting delusion. They craved for Vidya, liberating wisdom. Both Maya and
Vidya are forms of the Goddess. The tantric way saw the Goddess as Shakti or
power. Through her and in her, they found both, spells to control the world and
knowledge to break free from the world.
The Goddess embodies the problem that is life. She is also the medium of the
solution. It is she who makes Shiva a teacher—first by provoking him into

confrontation and then by questioning him about the means by which he
overpowers her. After turning the hermit into a householder, the Goddess
repeatedly questions her husband, forcing him to reflect on the reality that he had
shut his eyes to, and to share his wisdom with the world. The conversations
between God and Goddess were occasionally overheard by seers and sages and
transmitted to the world in the form of scriptures now known as the Veda and
the tantra.

The Birth of Matsyendranath
(Navnath Charitra)
Shiva’s consort Parvati was also known as Uma or Gauri. One day, she
asked Shiva to explain the reason for the existence of the world as
experienced through the senses. She begged him to enlighten her. Shiva
was wary, as this was deep and profound knowledge. But he did not want
to displease her either, so he agreed to enlighten her, on the condition
that she would not reveal the secret to anyone.
To ensure complete privacy during the transmission of the knowledge,
Shiva took her to a cave, buried deep in a valley of the Himalayas. He
spoke to her at length, explaining how the world comes into being, how it
transforms, and why it transforms.
Now, in that cave, there was a little pond, which was home to a tiny
fish. He overheard the divine conversation and having gained the
knowledge, he was able to transform himself into a man. He climbed out
of the pond and walked out of the cave. He travelled the earth, sharing
with everyone what he had heard Shiva tell Parvati. He was known as
Matsyendranath. He had eight disciples who went to the eight corners of
the world, carrying the word of Shiva.
On the southern wall of many temples in south India one finds Shiva sitting
under a banyan tree, giving a discourse to ascetics; his right foot crushes a
demon while the left one rests folded on his lap. This form of Shiva is called
Dakshinamurti—the teacher who faces the southern direction.

The teacher of teachers
(Dakshinamurti stotra)
Everyone was afraid of death. So Shiva decided to give a discourse on
immortality, revealing the secrets of Vedas and tantras. So all the sages
travelled north to Mount Kailasa where Shiva gave his discourse under a
banyan tree, located beneath the Pole Star. He sat facing south, the
direction of death, governed by Yama, king of the dead. His students
faced north, the direction of immortality, governed by Kubera, king of
yakshas. There was not much weight in the northern part of the world
and so the earth tilted. To restore balance, Shiva told his son Kartikeya
and the sage Agastya to move south.
In east India, the Goddess is popularly worshipped as Dakshinakali—the
wanton goddess who approaches from the south. The Goddess is visualized as a
naked, dark woman with unbound hair, drinking blood, brandishing a sickle, and
bedecked with human heads. Shiva Dakshinamurti thus sits facing the
approaching Goddess. In narratives, he stops her march.
According to Hindu geomancy or Vastushastra, the south is the realm of
Yama, god of death. North is the realm of Kubera, god of abundance. South is
thus associated with the passing away of things while north with the permanence
of things. Hence, the Goddess, who embodies the temporal world of senses,

comes from the south, simultaneously projecting ideas of creation (naked and
erotic) and those of destruction (bloodthirsty and violent). Looking upon her
creates anxiety and excitement—anxiety, because in a changing world nothing is
certain; excitement, because her naked body holds the promise of pleasure and
rebirth.
Shiva, on the other hand, looks calm, composed and serene, as he imparts
wisdom from the north under the banyan tree, which is renowned for its
longevity (permanence) and its shade (wisdom). Most people deny, repress and
turn their backs on Kali. Shiva, however, confronts and subdues Kali.

The Upraised Leg
(Tamil Temple Lore)
Kali had been created to destroy the demons. And she revelled in her
role, killing them all and drinking their blood. But having finished her
task, she did not stop. She continued killing and destroying everything in
her path. The gods were terrified at the wanton destruction but even they
were powerless to stop her. Along with Brahma and Vishnu, they
approached Shiva and sought his help.
Shiva agreed to stop her. He blocked her path as she roamed the world
in a wild frenzy, and challenged her to a dance competition. ‘If you can
defeat me in dance, you can behead me and drink my blood too,’ he told
the wild goddess. Kali bit the bait. She channelled all her energy and fury
away from destruction and into dance. The gods watched Shiva and Kali
dance with bated breath. The earth trembled with the passionate stamping
of their feet. The sun and the moon ducked for cover behind the hills as
the divine couple moved their arms and legs to a frenzied beat.
Shiva and Kali danced for eons. Their skills were well matched. Kali
could do what Shiva could. Shiva could replicate each of Kali’s moves.
Neither was able to outshine the other. Then suddenly, Shiva raised his
left leg so that his left knee was behind his left ear and his left foot was
over his head. Kali began to follow him but was stopped by her innate

feminine modesty. She could not attain that stance without exposing her
private parts to the whole world. Smiling shyly, she conceded defeat. The
gods applauded Shiva’s ingenuity, as Kali was now transformed into a
modest maiden. Shiva became known now as the lord of dance, Nataraja.
The pose he had struck was called the Urdhva Nataraja, the posture that
tamed a wild goddess.
By overpowering Kali, Shiva empowers those who feel overwhelmed by the
sheer power of nature. From indifferent ascetic, he transforms into the informed
teacher whose wisdom enables one to fearlessly face the reality of material life.
Water is the most common Hindu symbol of the material world. Life is fluid,
ever changing, never still, like water. It takes the shape of the container. But the
essence of water does not change. If water is the world, the vessel is the mind.
Vessels can change shape; they can break; but the water continues to flow.
When the world was in its infancy, when there were no ‘things’ in the world,
matter existed as a formless and nameless mass poetically described as the
‘ocean of milk’. The world seemed bleak, meaningless and purposeless. It lacked
joy. There were no stimuli to delight the senses.
The father god, Prajapati, had two sets of sons, Adityas and Daityas, born of
two wives, Aditi and Diti. They set about churning the ocean, determined to
create things with name and form that would transform the cosmos into a
container of myriad experiences. But they did not bargain for what emerged
from the ocean.
With the joys came the sorrows; with the nectar came venom. Fearing that the
sorrow and venom would destroy the world, they turned to the supreme ascetic
teacher, Shiva. He was indifferent to what was desirable and what was not. He
was beyond positive and negative. Only he could accept what no one else could.
Only he could deliver them and ensure that the world was not overwhelmed by
misery.

The blue throat
(Shiva Purana)
Once Lakshmi, the Goddess of wealth and fortune, disappeared from the
three worlds. She jumped into the ocean of milk and dissolved into it
completely. But both the gods and the demons wanted her back at any
cost. They decided to churn the ocean with Mount Mandara as the
spindle. They wound Vasuki, the serpent, around Mandara, to serve as
the churning rope. In order to provide Mandara with a stable base, they
used the king of turtles, Akupara. He would keep Mandara afloat on his
back.
The demons then grasped Vasuki by the tail end, while the gods
grasped the neck. They pulled and tugged, providing force and counter-
force for the churning action. They churned the ocean of milk for eons.
Eventually, their efforts were rewarded and Lakshmi emerged from the
ocean, along with many wonderful things that included Amrita, the
nectar of immortality.
The gods and demons were delighted at having retrieved Lakshmi
from the ocean. They were examining the other fruits of their labour,
when suddenly the ocean spewed out the deadly venom, Halahal. There
was panic among both sides. They were desperate to possess everything
that they had churned out of the ocean but neither side wanted the

venom. In fact, they wanted to get rid of it as fast as possible. In their
desperation, they cried out to Shiva for help.
Shiva, the ascetic, made no distinction between poisons and elixirs. He
took Halahal and raised it to his lips. The Goddess saw her lord
swallowing the poison and feared its effects. She ran towards him,
pressed his neck, and tied a serpent around it tightly. The poison
remained in his throat and could not enter Shiva’s body. That is how he
came to be known as Neelkantha, one with the blue throat.
In order to enjoy the pleasures of life, one must have the ability to endure or
overcome the pains of life. Neither the Adityas nor the Daityas know how. Only
Shiva does. He has the power to swallow Halahal. The Goddess, however,
prevents the poison from leaving his neck. For if it enters his stomach, he will
destroy it with his inner fire. And if pain is destroyed, pleasure has no meaning.
And without the experience of pain and pleasure, life has no meaning.
Shiva could drink the poison only because he is Yogeshwara, the lord of yoga.
Yoga frees the mind and makes it pliant enough to experience life without being
overwhelmed by it.
Left to himself, Shiva would have destroyed Halahal completely. And in
doing so, destroyed the experience of life. The Goddess does not let him do that.
The Goddess is both Kali and Gauri, the dark and the fair one. She embodies
both Halahal and Amrita. One form makes no sense without the other. To
destroy one means to destroy the other. The purpose of life is to experience and
accept both forms of the Goddess and to discover the God who enables one to do
so. Thus, the paradoxical nature of the divine without stirs one to discover the
divine within.
Symbols of permanence and impermanence
Permanence
Impermanence
  Banyan tree
Grass
  Mountain
River, ocean
  Turtle
Serpent
  Ash
Water
The material world of Shakti is terrifying, because it is impermanent. Yet, in

its impermanence lies the promise of renewal. In samsara, even death is
impermanent. All things are reborn. One may not be able to step into the same
river twice, the waters may slip between clenched fists, but rivers are life-giving.
They sustain civilizations on their banks. This is affirmed by the Hindu practice
of throwing the ashes of the dead into a river to ensure their rebirth. A banyan
tree may offer shade and hold the promise of permanence, but it does not let
even a blade of grass grow around it, nor does it provide life-sustaining fruit.
Thus the material world is characterized by opposite values. The river is
impermanent and constantly flowing, yet it sustains life. The banyan offers
shade, but does not permit any life to flourish around it. In the following
narrative, Shiva reconciles the two sides of the river of existence.

Descent of Ganga
(Ramayana)
Bhagirath’s grand-uncles had once mistakenly accused an ascetic of
theft. In a terrible rage at the insult, the ascetic had used the powers
gained from continence to burn them alive. Unfortunately for the men,
however, they had died before their time. As a result, Bhagirath’s grand-
uncles were not granted entry into the land of the dead and they lingered
unhappily between the world of the living and the world of the dead.
They begged Bhagirath to find a way of restoring them into the cycle
of rebirths. This was possible only if their ashes were cast into a river
known as Ganga. Ganga was a mighty river that flowed in the celestial
realms, as the Milky Way, and Bhagirath had no way of taking their
ashes to the plane that was the abode of the gods. But he was moved by
the plight of his grand-uncles and he decided to make the river flow on
earth.
He performed such severe austerities that the gods were compelled to
let Ganga come down from the heavens and flow on earth. But the river
nymph who embodied Ganga scoffed at the idea, for she knew that the
power of Ganga’s flow was so strong that it could wash away the entire
earth. Bhagirath thus decided to seek Shiva’s help. Shiva stood atop
Mount Kailasa, his arms akimbo, ready to catch Ganga in his matted

locks before she touched the ground. Ganga leapt from the heavens in all
her glory, ready to flow on the earth, but no sooner had she come in
contact with Shiva’s head than she found herself trapped in his mighty
locks, unable to break free. She writhed in agony like a caged bird and
was only allowed to leave when she agreed to a gentler flow.
As Ganga gurgled her way out of Shiva’s locks through the mountains
and across the plains towards the sea, she brought life and laughter on her
banks. Bhagirath immersed the ashes of his ancestors in the Ganga. As
foretold, his grand-uncles were allowed into the land of the dead, ready
to be reborn.
Shiva uses his hair to tame the river of life. According to tantra, physical
strength comes from mental strength, and mental strength comes from sexual
continence. Shiva, who withholds his seed for eons, has so much strength in his
hair that it can contain water or restrain a river.
Ganga embodies the world perceived by the senses; but Shiva is not swept
away by the force of Ganga’s swirling waters, the symbols of material
transformations. He withstands it all with ease and ends up controlling the flow.
Shiva’s thick matted locks are indicators of his mental strength. Through
meditation and yoga, Shiva has the mental strength to withstand the force of the
river of life and transform it into a nurturing force. Had the Goddess not been in
his life, Shiva would have destroyed Ganga. But with the Goddess by his side,
he is sensitive to the value of the material world. Rather than burning the river
nymph as he did the love god, he makes her his second wife. In other words, he
does not withdraw the mind from all things material; he merely controls his
response to its transformation.
By catching Ganga, Shiva makes her flow gently, sustaining life along her
banks. Thus the energy withdrawn by tapasya is released through the binding of
Ganga. Ganga’s threat to destroy the world forces Shiva to use his bottled-up
tapa for the good of the world. Tapa thus transforms into the life sap, rasa, and
sustains the world. In temples, a pot dripping water continuously from a hole in
its base is placed atop the Shivalinga. It represents Ganga, the water of samsara
that forces Shiva to release his tapa for the benefit of the world.
For those who still do not want anything to do with the material world, Shiva

continues to serve as deliverer. In the following narrative, the devotee wants
liberation from samsara. The technique used is not tapasya, but bhakti or
devotion. The devotee is doomed to face death and change; yet, through Shiva,
he finds absolute liberation from the merry-go-round we call life.

Rescue of Markandeya
(Shiva Purana)
Markandeya’s parents had been childless for a long time. Distraught at
the thought of having no heir, they prayed to Shiva. Shiva had mercy on
them and granted them a wish—they could have one stupid son, who
would be blessed with a long life, or they could have an extremely
intelligent child, who would be short-lived. After much soul-searching,
they chose the latter.
Thus, Markandeya was born of a boon from the great lord, but was
destined to die at sixteen. On the eve of his sixteenth birthday,
Markandeya decided to spend his last remaining hours in the land of the
living by praying to Lord Shiva. Yama, the God of death, appeared at the
appointed hour. But Markandeya asked him to wait, as he had not yet
finished his prayers. Yama laughed at the boy’s ignorance. ‘Death waits
for no man!’ he shouted, and threw his noose around Markandeya’s neck.
As Markandeya felt his life’s breath being forced out of him, he
surrendered to Shiva with a final cry.
Shiva heard the boy cry out and appeared at his side. He kicked Yama
aside and took Markandeya to Mount Kailasa where he lived forever as a
young boy.
Shiva’s abode, Kailasa or Shivaloka, the highest heaven for Shiva’s devotees,
is higher than Indra’s heaven where all material wants are fulfilled, and higher
than Vishnu’s heaven where one is free of all material wants. It is the place that
one reaches by devotion. And through devotion we are able to unravel the knots
in the consciousness that delude us and keep us from comprehending the true
nature of things. By staying in samsara, through devotion to Shiva, by accepting
every moment of life—good or bad—as the gift of Shiva, one can still attain sat-
chitta-ananda, the goal of tapasya, and find that which eluded every yagna:
shanti-shanti-shanti.

S
Conclusion:
Deconstructing Destruction
hiva is the divine within us—the observer of life. Shakti is the divine around
us—the observation that is life. Without either there is neither. Hindu seers
have expressed this mutual dependence through the symbol of the linga. Just as
the linga cannot be distinguished from other cylindrical shafts without the yoni-
like basin, just as the front of the linga can only be identified by the leftward
orientation of the yoni’s snout, one cannot understand or define oneself without
understanding and defining one’s world.
In the linga, the phallus does not point downward as in the missionary position
of copulation. This is because Shakti is visualized as being on top of Shiva,
facing north, while he lies on his back facing south. This position is known in
tantra as viparita rati, reverse copulation. The water basin of the linga represents
the entrance of Shakti’s womb—which is the world we inhabit—into which
Shiva’s phallus, hence his energy, is being drawn. Shiva is the inward-looking
inert consciousness, whom Shakti stirs and excites so that life can happen. Shakti
comes from the south, the direction associated with death and change. Shiva’s
wisdom gives him the power to look towards her with absolute serenity. Shakti
wants Shiva to be Shankara. She wants him to acknowledge and know her, and
through her, know himself.

Decoding various elements that constitute Shiva’s shrine. The aim is to symbolically represent various
elements that make up Shaiva philosophy.

The Goddess as Kamakshi holding in her hands the symbols of Kama or Kandarpa: the sugar cane, the
flower, the parrot and the pot. She sits on Shiva and forces him to engage with the world.
Shiva knows Shakti to be that river of endless transformations and
stimulations that can sweep away all peace of mind. Initially, for the sake of
tranquility, Shiva turned away from her, withdrawing all his attention into
himself like a turtle in its shell. The resulting self-containment generated
indifference to outer reality. The physical form became unappealing to the eye
(ash-smeared body). The surroundings became inhospitable to life (snow-clad
mountains). Distant from the tribulations of the world, Shiva regressed into
blissful inertia, a state expressed in art as an erect penis. This was not a reaction
to sensory arousal; it was not intent on shedding seed, but was svayambhu or
self-stirred.
By refusing to ‘observe’ and react to the external world, Shiva invalidated the

need for external reality. In doing so he threatened his own existence for there
cannot be an observer without an observation. Shiva’s concentrated tapa
transformed him into fire whose all-devouring flames needed to be contained.
Hence, the water pot above the linga and the water basin below. These are
symbols of the Goddess who redirects Shiva’s attention outwards, transforming
the destructive heat into creative energy with her waters for the benefit of all.
Devotees join Shakti in this beneficial transformation by reverentially pouring
water on the linga during worship and collecting the water that flows down the
yoni’s snout. They want Shiva to become the benevolent, boon-giving Shankara.
The endless copulation of Shakti and Shiva represents the eternal struggle
between our inner and outer worlds—our desire to be Shiva and withdraw from
it or our desire to be Shankara and embrace it. There is ‘shanti, shanti, shanti’—
peace with oneself, one’s world, and everything around—when the rhythm is
perfect, when neither dominates the other. The purpose of yoga—whether it is
hatha yoga of the ascetic, gyana yoga of the philosopher, bhakti yoga of the
devotee, or karma yoga of the householder—is to unbind the consciousness and
establish harmony with the material world so that we experience the eternal
principle of Being, sanatana dharma:
The divine inside you is God
The divine around you is Goddess
Without either there is neither
In their discovery lies wisdom
In their harmonious union lies eternal bliss

 
 
 @HarperCollinsIN
 @HarperCollinsIN
 @HarperCollinsIN
 HarperCollins Publishers India www.harpercollins.co.in

Harper Broadcast
Showcasing celebrated authors, book reviews, plot trailers, cover reveals, launches and interviews, Harper
Broadcast is live and available for free subscription on the brand’s social media channels through a new
newsletter. Hosted by renowned TV anchor and author Amrita Tripathi, Broadcast is a snapshot of all that is
news, views, extracts, sneak peeks and opinions on books. Tune in to conversations with authors, where we
get up close and personal about their books, why they write and what’s coming up.
Harper Broadcast is the first of its kind in India, a publisher-hosted news channel for all things publishing
within HarperCollins. Follow us on Twitter and YouTube.
Subscribe to the monthly newsletter here: https://harpercollins.co.in/newsletter/
 Harper Broadcast 
@harperbroadcast www.harperbroadcast.com
 
Address
HarperCollins Publishers India Ltd
A-75, Sector 57, Noida, UP 201301, India Phone
+91-120-4044800
 

Celebrating 25 Years of Great Publishing
HarperCollins India celebrates its twenty-fifth anniversary in 2017. Twenty-five years of publishing India’s
finest writers and some of its most memorable books – those you cannot put down; ones you want to finish
reading yet don’t want to end; works you can read over and over again only to fall deeper in love with.
Through the years, we have published writers from the Indian subcontinent, and across the globe, including
Aravind Adiga, Kiran Nagarkar, Amitav Ghosh, Jhumpa Lahiri, Manu Joseph, Anuja Chauhan, Upamanyu
Chatterjee, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, Shekhar Gupta, M.J. Akbar, Satyajit Ray, Gulzar, Surender Mohan Pathak
and Anita Nair, amongst others, with approximately 200 new books every year and an active print and
digital catalogue of more than 1,000 titles, across ten imprints. Publishing works of various genres
including literary fiction, poetry, mind body spirit, commercial fiction, journalism, business, self-help,
cinema, biographies – all with attention to quality, of the manuscript and the finished product – it comes as
no surprise that we have won every major literary award including the Man Booker Prize, the Sahitya
Akademi Award, the DSC Prize, the Hindu Literary Prize, the MAMI Award for Best Writing on Cinema,
the National Award for Best Book on Cinema, the Crossword Book Award, and the Publisher of the Year,
twice, at Publishing Next in Goa and, in 2016, at Tata Literature Live, Mumbai.
We credit our success to the people who make us who we are, and will be celebrating this anniversary with:
our authors, retailers, partners, readers and colleagues at HarperCollins India. Over the years, a firm belief
in our promise and our passion to deliver only the very best of the printed word has helped us become one
of India’s finest in publishing. Every day we endeavour to deliver bigger and better – for you.
Thank you for your continued support and patronage.

About the Book
We live in times where people have extreme views. On the one hand, there are
scholars who describe Shiva’s linga literally as a phallus, and see all metaphoric
meaning as embarrassed apology of the uneducated. On the other hand, we have
puritanical Hindus who want to strip the Shiva linga of all sexual meaning and
sanitize Shiva’s lore. In both cases, a symbol is reduced to a sign.
In Shiva to Shankara, Devdutt Pattanaik, India’s leading mythologist, seeks to
bridge the gap. As he explores the layers of meanings embedded in Shiva’s
linga, we discover why and how the Goddess transforms Shiva, the hermit, into
Shankara, the householder.

About the Author
Devdutt Pattanaik is a medical doctor by education, a leadership consultant by
profession, and a mythologist by passion. He has written and lectured
extensively on the nature of stories, symbols and rituals, and their relevance in
modern times. He is the author of over thirty books, which include 7 Secrets of
Hindu Calendar Art (Westland), Myth=Mithya: A Handbook of Hindu
Mythology (Penguin), Book of Ram (Penguin) and Jaya: An Illustrated Retelling
of the Mahabharata (Penguin). To know more, visit devdutt.com.

TALK TO US
Join the conversation on Twitter
http://twitter.com/HarperCollinsIN
Like us on Facebook to find and share posts about our books with your friends
http://www.facebook.com/HarperCollinsIndia
Follow our photo stories on Instagram
http://instagram.com/harpercollinsindia/
Get fun pictures, quotes and more about our books on Tumblr
http://www.tumblr.com/blog/harpercollinsindia

First published in 2006 by Indus Source Books
This revised and updated edition
co-published in hardback in India in 2017 by Harper Element
An imprint of HarperCollins Publishers
and
Indus Source Books
Copyright © Devdutt Pattanaik 2006, 2017
P-ISBN: 978-93-5264-195-6
Epub Edition © April 2017 ISBN: 978-93-5264-196-3
2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1
Devdutt Pattanaik asserts the moral right
to be identified as the author of this work.
The views and opinions expressed in this book are the author’s own and the facts are
as reported by him, and the publishers are not in any way liable for the same.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without the prior permission of the publishers.
Cover design: Special Effects Design Studio
Cover illustration: Devdutt Pattanaik
HarperCollins Publishers
A-75, Sector 57, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201301, India
1 London Bridge Street, London, SE1 9GF, United Kingdom
Hazelton Lanes, 55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900, Toronto, Ontario M5R 3L2
and 1995 Markham Road, Scarborough, Ontario M1B 5M8, Canada
25 Ryde Road, Pymble, Sydney, NSW 2073, Australia
195 Broadway, New York, NY 10007, USA

Indus Source Books
PO Box 6194
Malabar Hill PO
Mumbai 400006
www.indussource.com

