
 
 
 
Aum Ganeshaya Namaha!
Salutations to Lord Ganesha!
Who removes and overcomes all obstacles,
And grants success in every endeavor.
“GANASHTAKAM”


 
Aum Mrityunjayaya Namaha!
The recompense that a son makes to the mother who bore him is to make
people exclaim, “What austerities did this man’s mother perform to
beget such a son!”
THIRUKKURAL BY THIRUVALLUVAR
Dedicated to my beloved son Janardan,
with all my blessings

 
Aum Jagatpitre Namaha!
In youth, the venomous snakes of sound and sight,
Of taste and touch and smell,
Fastened on my vitals and slew my discrimination.
Alas! My heart, bereft of the thought of Shiva,
Swelled in arrogance and pride!
Therefore, O Shiva!
O Mahadeva! O Shambho!
Forgive me, I pray, my transgressions.
Now in my old age, my senses have lost the power of proper judgment and
action.
My body is weak and senile from afflictions,
But even now, my mind, instead of meditating on Shiva
Runs after vain desire and hollow discussions.
Therefore, O Shiva! O Mahadeva! O Shambho!
Forgive me, I pray, my transgressions.
I bow to Him who bestows on the sages direct  knowledge of ultimate Truth.
I bow to the teacher of the three worlds,
Dakshinamurthy, the Lord Himself,
Who dispels the misery of birth and death.
ADI SHANKARCHARYA

Contents
Title Page
Dedication
Foreword by Swami Dayananda
Introduction
Part One: The Divine Aspects of Shiva
Chapter 1: The Great Universal God
Chapter 2: Creation
Chapter 3: Sandhya, the Evening Star
Chapter 4: Durga’s Promise
Chapter 5: The Courtship of Sati
Chapter 6: Sati and Shiva
Chapter 7: Daksha’s Yajna
Chapter 8: The Wrath of Shiva
Chapter 9: Parvati Seeks Her Lord
Chapter 10: The Defeat of Kama
Chapter 11: Parvati’s Penance
Chapter 12: The Cosmic Wedding
Chapter 13: The Cosmic Couple
Chapter 14: Kartikeya Defeats the Demon
Chapter 15: Ganesha, Remover of Obstacles
Chapter 16: The Three Demonic Cities

Chapter 17: Downfall of the Demons
Chapter 18: Churning the Milky Ocean
Chapter 19: The Descent of the River Ganga
Chapter 20: Destroyed by His Own Hand
Chapter 21: Markandeya and Agniswara
Chapter 22: The Manifestations of Shiva
Chapter 23: Shiva, the Beloved
Chapter 24: The Jyotirlingas
THE TWELVE JYOTIRLINGAS
Part Two: Those Who Worship Shiva
Chapter 25: Devotees of Shiva
Chapter 26: The Great Four
THE FRIEND OF SHIVA
THE SON OF SHIVA
THE SERVENT OF SHIVA
THE KNOWER OF SHIVA
Chapter 27: The Violent Votaries
Chapter 28: Women Devotees
Epilogue
Appendix One. Method of Worshipping Lord Shiva
Appendix Two. Names of Shiva
Appendix Three. Names of Other Characters in the Hindu Pantheon
Appendix Four. Alphabetical List of Mantras
Appendix Five. Vedic Invocations for World Peace
Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
Footnotes

Index
About the Author
About Inner Traditions • Bear & Company
Books of Related Interest
Copyright & Permissions

 
Aum Shivaya Namaha!
Foreword The Vedas present the cause of the
entire jagat—the material world—as Mayin,
wielder of maya, who does not come under the
spell of maya, or cosmic illusion. The Mayin is
Maheswara—Lord of all. Not only is he the
intelligent cause of the jagat, but he is also in
the form of the jagat. Space, time, and
everything in space and time are his
manifestations and therefore not separate
from him. He is therefore both father and
mother of the universe. Every form is his
form and he can be invoked in any given
form. If you look at this Maheswara from the
point of view of any manifest force or law, he
becomes a devata (deity). If you give a name
in Sanskrit to this devata, the name will be
descriptive of the form. Thus the name
Vishnu means that the Lord is all-pervasive.

The name Brahma means the one who is
infinite and all-embracing. The name Rudra
means the one who is the cause of tears, in
that he causes actions to bear fruit, and also
the one who removes all tears. In any of the
names and forms of worship, you can invoke
the Maheswara as the one who is the cause of
manifestation, sustenance, and dissolution.
In the Shiva Purana*1 the whole lila (play) of Maheswara is presented in a
style that offers readers a scope to explore and discover—one gets to know what
it takes to be almighty. An insight into every virtue in its infinite measure is
unavoidable as one goes through any Purana. The author, Vanamali, presents the
Lord as one who is invoked as Shiva, as depicted in the Shiva Purana. The
author’s devotion to the Lord imbues her pen with facility of expression, helping
the reader to discover the glories of the Lord and inspiring devotion. As the
author is a recipient of the Lord’s blessings, and by using these blessings to
present the glories of the Lord, she once again receives the Lord’s blessings in
abundance.
SWAMI DAYANANDA
DAYANANDA ASHRAMA
RISHIKESH
 
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Panchavaktraya Namaha!
Introduction
Trayambakam yajamahe sugandhim pushtivardhanam, Urvarukamiva
bandanath, Mrityor mukshiya-mamritath.
I worship the fragrant, three-eyed one in hopes of being granted perfect
health, release from the coils of mortality as effortlessly as a ripe gourd
falls from its stalk, and immortality.
YAJUR VEDA
Puranic literature springs from a deep need in the heart of the human being for
fulfillment. It plumbs the depths of our psyche, which cradles an unconscious
and indescribable longing for the Supreme, and reveals the most fantastic images
and concepts that have baffled the mind of contemporary man. Those who have
been brainwashed by modern scientific preconceptions, whose imaginations
have been stifled by strict adherence to a truth limited by what the senses can
perceive, may find it difficult to read the Puranas and understand their deep
insight into human nature. But those whose intellects have not been stunted by
such constricting notions will delight in the absolute freedom of expression and
amazing flights of imagination to which the human mind can soar. What must be
remembered is that the forms of the gods are not mere flights of fancy, but are
meant to reveal the many facets of truth that are not perceivable to the five
senses. These five senses are limited at best and deceitful at worst, for their
primary aim is to conceal a truth that is incomprehensible to them. The modern
worldview knows only heat and motion—energy that burst forth in the Big Bang
some fourteen billion years ago and expanded into a system of galaxies that are
disintegrating from a state of maximum heat and concentration to a state of cold
stillness and fragmentation over a vast period of time. Life and consciousness—
which has no special significance in this view of the cosmos—are secondary

phenomena that will pass into the cold ambiguity of death in this meaningless
dance of the elements. The scientific outlook is quite skeptical about ultimate
values. There is no purpose, no plan in the universe, and intelligence itself is
only a by-product of matter, condemned to perish over the course of time. For
one who is convinced of this view, the Puranas will be only a source of
amusement, because what modern mind can believe in oceans of milk and five-
headed gods?
The Puranic view of creation, unlike the modern scientific view, has its basis
in the will of the Supreme Being. The ancient sages, or rishis, of India knew that
matter is only a derivative of consciousness and contains within it the
fundamental knowledge, or seed, of its own inner spiritual potency, just as the
whole of the mighty banyan tree is contained in its tiny mustardlike seed. There
is an invisible field of energy that precedes and underlies all that we can see. The
entire field of visible objects is only a projection of this energy, which is
unmanifest and not within the grasp of our five senses. The rishis were well
aware of this. Lord Krishna calls this field avyaktha, or the Unmanifest from
which all manifestation has sprung.
Beyond even avyaktha is the vast field called chidakasha, or the field of
consciousness that has the power to create. This field is also called Shakti, or the
creative aspect of the Divine. It is the feminine principle that is capable of all
action and creation, hence it is known as the Divine Mother. The universe and all
the phenomena of material life cannot really be called a creation, but a projection
of the Divine Consciousness that appears inert, but which is actually pulsating
with life. The creation is not a creation by someone of something out of nothing,
but a projection of that which has eternally existed. Science may have
discovered many physical and chemical laws that govern the universe, but it has
yet to discover those transcendental laws that are fundamental to it. These
eternal spiritual laws are inherent in nature.
Based on a cyclical conception of time, Puranic history has a much wider
scope than our limited concept of human history. Modern history, being linear,
has no idea of where and when the line started and where it might end. What was
there before the beginning, and what will come after the end? These are
questions the modern historian cannot answer. Only the unthinking mind will be
satisfied with such a concept of history. The Puranas, however, give us cosmic
history. An intelligent reading of them enlarges our vision and gives us a totally
new understanding of the history of the universe. We become aware that the
history of the human being is not as simple or as short as modern historians

would have us believe. Science fiction author H. G. Wells, who was quite
Puranic in his thinking, wrote, “Amongst the ancient people, the Indian
philosopher alone seems to have some perception of the vast ages through which
existence seems to have passed.”
The modern concept of history may have something meaningful to say about
the recent past of Homo sapiens, but it can throw no light on our distant past, our
future, or our significance in cosmic history. The Puranas, on the other hand,
give the right interpretation of the human being as comprised of consciousness
evolving toward higher levels of perfection that will be shared with other
intelligent and conscious beings. It raises the history of man from a meaningless
episode in the infinity of time to a meaningful progression from man to god. The
Puranas are based on the intuitions, inspirations, and revelations of the
enlightened sages of ancient India, and thus have more value culturally and
spiritually than copperplate inscriptions and stone tablets. Modern history has no
spiritual value. Puranic history, on the other hand, is based on the intangible
verities of life that will lead us to the best and highest spiritual core within us.
The Hindu deities, such as Shiva, Vishnu, and Shakti, never had a location in
earthly space and time, except in images. But they are spiritual verities—
manifestations of the Supreme Being. Material objects are mere shadows
compared to these.
“In whatsoever way a man approaches me, so shall I approach him,” is what
Lord Krishna says in the Sreemad Bhagavad Gita. God is willing and capable of
molding himself into whatever form his devotee imagines him to be. Here there
is no question of whether something or someone has taken place in a particular
form, at a particular place, in a particular moment in time. Faith transcends the
bonds of time and space, and the Infinite Being is capable of molding himself
into infinite forms to delight the hearts of his devotees. To limit him to one form
and one mold is to set boundaries to his infinity and omnipotence. Just as the
great rivers, mountains, and oceans of this country are an expression of the
natural forces working from within the earth, so also our Puranas are expressions
of the Indian mind that saw in the most trivial incident an expression of the
immense variety of the Supreme. The Puranas seek to give a meaningful
interpretation of the omniscience and omnipotence of the Supreme Being, a
loving, spiritual reality who can be communed with, prayed to, and visualized in
various forms of spiritual glory. Thus the Puranas provide valuable glimpses of
eternal truths that transcend the scope of modern history.
The forms of the various gods are really condensed books of spiritual wisdom.

The seers, or sages, of the Puranas who saw these forms were actually scientists
of a high order whose investigations were not limited by their preconceptions. To
consider their findings as childish nonsense, fit for the ignorant, is the same as
considering algebraic symbols to be the scribbling of a lunatic. No other
literature in the world has succeeded as well as the Puranas in making the
formless God into a tangible reality, using vivid and realistic descriptions.
Modern physics has blasted the theory that matter is static and inert. The atom
was discovered to be not a solid block, but a nucleus of empty space surrounded
by whirling energy particles. Even these particles were found to be not things,
but interconnections between other things. Quantum physics thus reveals a basic
oneness of the universe: We cannot decompose the world into independently
existing small units. The more we penetrate into matter, the more we realize that
it is a complicated web of relationships among the various parts of a unified
whole. This network of relationships is intrinsically dynamic and not static; it is
always in a state of motion. This is very similar to the Indian concept of matter,
which states that matter must be understood as having dynamic equilibrium. The
seers understood this perfectly and tried to bring it forcibly into the minds of lay
people by means of vivid descriptions of the gods and their interactions with the
world. Very often these ideas would be given graphic form, as in the case of the
dancing Shiva, which depicts the dance of creation and destruction that goes on
all the time.
The Vedas speak of the Supreme as Brahman, who is the Absolute in its
unmanifest, formless aspect. The Puranas, however, bring the indescribable
glory of the Absolute into the din and clamor of this earthly existence by giving
it a million forms and names. The rightness or wrongness of such an experiment
is not the question here, but whether it has any utilitarian value. The mind of the
human being is incapable of visualizing the formless and the unmanifest; it is not
accustomed to thinking in abstractions. Some path, some way, however strange,
had to be devised to reveal a path to the infinite, formless Absolute. The ancient
rishis of the Puranas found such a way in the creation of the gods. The Divine in
its multifarious forms has become a living reality in the minds of the Hindus by
the depiction of the gods as given by the sages. Who is to say with absolute
certainty what is real and what unreal? Einstein’s theory of relativity—that
everything in the world is relative and nothing is absolute—shattered the
Copernican theory that matter alone is real. The sages of the Upanishads said the
same thing in a different way: They said that the Absolute alone is real and
everything else is relative. The mind has a thousand mansions, and each of these

has its own reality. In every state of consciousness—waking, dreaming, and deep
sleep—our experience of reality is totally different, just as the biologist sees a
completely different view of reality when examining a leaf under a microscope.
The rishis of the Puranas in their heightened states of awareness discovered
many, many gods and their forms, each of which is only a pointer to the supreme
reality. The names of the gods are all mantras, or special sounds that give clues
to their forms. Each of these forms and names has a particular part to play in the
spiritual evolution of humankind. Each Purana speaks of the Bhagavan, the
supreme person, but each Purana calls him by a different name. This is because
the Bhagavan is not an individual but an archetype, capable of taking on any
form used in invocation. An anthropomorphic veneer is necessary to
accommodate the highest and most idealistic concept that the human mind is
able to conceive. In this way, the seer saw to it that no fixed form was given to
that Absolute, for he/she is formless. The great sage Vyasa wrote all of the
eighteen Puranas, but in each of them he extolled that particular deity alone as
being Supreme. In the Bhagavata Purana, Krishna is the Supreme incarnate. In
the Devi Purana, the goddess is the Supreme incarnate. In the Shiva Purana, it is
Shiva who is the Supreme. Thus the mind is conditioned to realize that the
Supreme, being formless, is capable of taking any form and any of these forms
can take us to the ultimate truth. Thus the great efficacy of Puranic literature
allows the human mind to make the quantum leap from form to formless. It does
this by shaking up our usual human conceptions and propelling us to the
unknown via a vast array of symbols and strange descriptions. Like the Buddhist
koans, which defy our usual concepts and activate us to think in a different
fashion, so also the forms of the gods defy the norms of common thought and
impel us to leap into the unknown and discover the reality underlying this
amazing array of mind-boggling descriptions. This creates a tremendous impact
of divine consciousness on the mind.
The ancients saw that just as the sun, moon, and planets weave intricate
patterns in the sky, they also weave the same intricate patterns in the tissues of
our bodies and the fabric of our minds. In this way they discovered the science
of astrology, to show how the planets rule our physical and psychic bodies. So
also within us are all the gods, and it is because of their existence that the
slightest movements of our bodies and reflexes are implemented. These gods can
heal both body and soul. All philosophy and art, and even all scientific
knowledge, must be based on knowledge of these gods, who form the energy
particles of the spiritual field that was known to the ancient seers. They had

knowledge of past and future because of their intimate connection with these
gods, and therefore they knew the secret of molding human life into a living,
spiritual present. The modern sceintific mind has forgotten this path and is no
longer able to commune with these vibrating gods of the universe; this is the
cause of our deep-rooted unrest and anxiety despite all the comforts rendered by
science. Modern science has provided us a wonderfully fashioned and
comfortable chair, but the floor on which the chair rests is shaky, so how can we
relax comfortably on it? Consciousness alone is the foundation of all existence,
and the gods are the spiritual essences that comprise it. It is only by discovering
these gods within ourselves that we will be able to see this fabric of the universe
as a divine tapestry, on which is woven the constellation of life.
Panchakshari Stotram*2
Nagendraharaya Trilochanaya, bhasmangaragaya Maheswaraya, Nityaya
Shuddhaya digambaraya,
Tasmai nakaraya, Namashivaya!
He who wears the snake as a necklace, he who has three eyes, who is
smeared with ashes, who is ever pure and sky clad, who is the Lord of
All, to him, the mantra Namashivaya, which starts with the letter “na.”
Mandakini salila chandana charchitaya, nandiswara pramatha natha
Maheswaraya,
Mandarapushpa bahupushpa supuchitaya,
Tasmai makaraya Namashivaya!
He who is anointed with the sandal powder, wetted with the water of the
Mandakini river, he the Lord of All,who has the bull Nandi as his
foremost servitor, who is offered worship with the white Mandara
flowers, to him, the mantra Namashivaya, of which the second letter is
“ma.”
Shivaya 
Gauri 
vadanabja 
vrinda-suryaya 
dakshadwaranashakaya,
SriNeelakantaya vrishadwajaya,
Tasmai shikaraya namasivaya!

The blue-throated one who sits on his bull vehicle along with his consort
Gauri, who destroyed the yaga of Daksha, to him, the mantra
Namashivaya, of which the third letter is “shi.”
Vasishtakumbhodbhava Gautamarya, munindra devarchita shekharaya,
Chandrarka vaishwanara lochanaya,
Tasmai vakaraya Namashivaya!
He whose three eyes are the sun, moon, and fire, who is worshipped by
the great sages, like Vasishta, Gautama and many others, to him, the
mantra Namashivaya, of which the fourth letter is “va.”
Yajnaswaroopaya jatadharaya, pinakahastaya  sanatanaya, Divyaya devaya
digambaraya,
Tasmai yakaraya Namashivaya!
The ancient divine, sky-clad god who is the very form of all sacrifices,
with matted hair, wielding the bow, to him, the mantra Namashivaya, of
which the fifth letter is “ya.”
Panchaksharamidam 
punyam 
ya 
padeth 
Shiva 
 
sannidhau,
Shivalokamavapnothi Shivena  saha modate.
If this most holy five-lettered mantra of Shiva is chanted in his presence,
he will be very pleased and will take the devotee to his divine abode.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Sri Gurave Namaha!
Invocation to the Supreme Guru
Guru Brahma, Guru Vishnu, Guru Devo Maheswara!
Guru Sakshatha Param Brahma, Tasmai Sri Guruva Namaha!
The Guru is none other than
Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva!
The Guru is verily the Parabrahman itself.
To that divine Guru do I make my prostrations!
Gurave sarva lokanam,
Bhishaje bhavaroginam,
Nidhaye sarvavidhyanam,
Dakshinamurthaye Namaha!
I bow to Lord Dakshinamurthy, preceptor of the whole universe, Who
removes the ills of mortal existence and confers supreme wisdom.
““DAKSHINAMURTHY STOTRAM”
ADI SHANKARA

 
Aum Giripriyaya Namaha!

PART ONE
The Divine Aspects of Shiva
Karana charana kritam vaak kaayajam karmajam va.
Shravana nayanajam va manasam vaparardham,
Vihitamavihitam va sarvametath kshamasva,
Jaya Jaya karunabdhe Sri Mahadeva Shambo!
Hail to thee O Mahadeva! Thou art the ocean of compassion!
Pray forgive me for whatever wrong actions I may have done, either
knowingly or unknowingly,
Through the organs of my action and perception, or through my mind.
“SHIVA STOTRAM,” HYMN TO SHIVA

Aum Mahadevaya Namaha!
1
The Great Universal God
Behold Him,
With a rolled palmyra leaf stuck into His earlobe,
The rider on the bull,
The wearer of the pure white moon on His locks,
Smeared with hot ashes from the cremation ground,
The stealer of my heart . . .
SAINT SAMBANDAR
In the bewildering galaxy of gods of the Hindu pantheon, Lord Shiva stands out
as one of the oldest and best loved. He is as old as the Indian culture, perhaps
even older. At the time of the cosmic dawn, before the creation of man, he
appeared as the divine archer, pointing with his arrow to the unrevealed
Absolute. The world is his hunting ground. The universe resounds with his
presence. He is both sound and echo. He is intangible vibration as well as
infinitesimal substance. He is the rustling of the withered leaves and the glossy
green of the newborn grass. He is the ferryman who ferries us from life to death,
but he is also the liberator from death to immortality. He has innumerable faces
and eleven forms as described in the Vedas. The sky and the seasons vibrate with
his intensity and power. He grips, supports, releases, and liberates. He is both the
disease and the destroyer of the disease. He is food, the giver of food, and the
process of eating. His divine majesty and power are depicted through symbolic,
yet highly realistic descriptions of an awe-inspiring figure, far, distant, and cold
in his remote Himalayan fastness as well as close, kind, and loving, a living,
throbbing symbol of the Divine.

He was worshipped as the divine shaman by wild tribes that roamed across the
subcontinent before the dawn of history. They contacted him by the use of
certain psychoactive compounds and various esoteric rituals. Later we see him
on the terra-cotta seals of the Indus civilization. There he is shown as Pasupati,
Lord of beasts, surrounded by the wild creatures of the jungle. He is also shown
as the yogi sitting in various meditative postures. The rishis of the Vedas looked
up at the Himalayas and saw in them his hair; they found his breath in the air,
and all creation and destruction in his dance—the Thandava Nritta. The Rig
Veda, the oldest religious text known to humankind, refers to him as Rudra, the
wild one, who dwelt in fearful places and shot arrows of disease. Sacrifices were
constantly offered to appease him.
At that time religion was dominated by female deities, so the cult of Shiva
soon fused with that of the great Mother Goddess Shakti, who later came to be
known as Durga, Uma, Parvati, and so on. Male and female are but
complementary halves of the whole truth, and some images portray Shiva as
Ardhanareeswara, a form half male and half female.
He is also mentioned as lswara, the enigmatic first emanation from the
Brahman. Thus he is the Great Lord, Maheswara, and the Great God, Mahadeva.
He is one of the Immortals, Unborn and Deathless. The Shiva Purana equates
him with the Supreme Brahman of the Vedas.
He is also the endearing personal god, Shambunatha, and the innocent Bhola
with a naive nature. On the other hand he is Dakshinamurthy, the supreme
teacher who gave the teachings of the Vedas, the Shastras, and the Tantras to the
rishis. He is also master of every art, the supreme dancer, Nataraja, the supreme
musician, composer of the Sama Veda. Though normally pictured in his fierce
aspect, he can also take the form of Sundaramurti, the handsome one, and
entrance anyone. To the wicked he is Bhairava, or Rudra of fierce aspect.
Depending on the needs of the devotees he is capable of taking on many forms.
His forms, attributes, decorations, weapons, attendants, and activities are given
in great detail so that he becomes a living reality. As Rudra he is full of wrath
and destruction, but as Shiva he is filled with all auspiciousness. He has two
natures—one wild and fierce, the other calm and peaceful. Of all the deities, he
is the one most easily propitiated. Moreover, in compassion there is none to
compare with him. He is the friend of the unfortunates—the blind and the lame,
the goblins and the ghouls. Those who are despised by others find a place in his
entourage. Demons, vampires, ghosts, and goblins who are feared by all are his

close attendants. Snakes, which usually people dread and run from in horror,
wind themselves lovingly round his neck. His companions are the deformed and
the ugly; he is averse to none. He does not belong exclusively to the gods or the
sages. His greatest devotees are Kubera, king of the yakshas (demigods who
guard the treasures of the netherworld); Ravana, king of the rakshasas (demons);
and Shukra, guru of the asuras. Wizards, sorcerers, witches, and magicians also
worship him. Every spirit, malefic or compassionate, seeks Shiva’s grace. His
attendants are the ganas, a wild bunch of hooligans and social misfits. They are
ugly, deformed, and misshapen. They drink intoxicating liquor and take drugs
such as bhang (a cannabis preparation). They are a totally lawless set of beings
that only Shiva can control. Instead of curbing their eccentricities, Shiva joins in
their wild revelries and sings and dances with gusto to the accompaniment of
their cacophonous music. But he also keeps them in check. Because of him they
are forced to desist from doing too much damage in the world. He is the supreme
yogi, uncaring of material wants, ever immersed in the immensity of his divine
bliss. Death stands in dread of him and the word inauspicious does not exist in
his dictionary. Bedecked with skulls and bones, Shiva wanders in cremation
grounds dancing to the light of funeral pyres, smearing his body with the ashes
of the dead. Dangerous forests infested with cannibals and wild beasts, as well as
the icy, inaccessible peaks of the Himalayas, are his favorite haunts. In the
forests he is adored by the wild tribes as Kirata, the hunter. Shiva means the
auspicious one, yet everything about him seems inauspicious. He dwells in dark
and gloomy caves and jungles and dances in cemeteries lit by the fire of burning
pyres, rattling skulls, and drums. He smears himself with ash from these pyres,
drinks poison and smokes narcotics, and enjoys the company of ghosts, ghouls,
and goblins. The unorthodox and the casteless, outside the traditional fold, saw
in him the nonconformist who sought ultimate truth beyond ritual, beyond
society, beyond matter. He was the first tantric (follower of  Tantra), as well as
the first siddha (one with supernormal powers). The casteless ones sought his
blessings before dabbling in their magic rites, their sorcery, and their alchemy.
The Brahmins, who were the orthodox priest caste, thus found it difficult to
accept this wild and fearsome god. As the priest-king Daksha did, they held him
in contempt. They refused to offer him any portion of their yajnas, or sacrifices,
given to the other gods. The story of the Daksha yaga (yajna) shows how by the
sheer power of his truth, which is the truth of all creation, Shiva came to be
accepted as the Great God. He transcends the duality of good and evil, right and
wrong, auspicious and inauspicious. The Sanatana Dharma, which is the actual

name of Hinduism, forces the human mind, time and time again, to accept the
fact that the Divine is all that exists, both clean and unclean, pure and impure,
auspicious and inauspicious. The same code that gave us the caste system also
gave us the image of Shiva, the nonconformist, who challenged all social codes
and sought a truth that lay beyond all apparent dualities. There is nothing and no
person who can be said to be unacceptable to society. The Divine accepts every
creature, however ugly or malformed. All the rites and rituals that are employed
by the human being groping a path to godhead have to be accepted by the
Divine, for that also comes from him alone. Shiva is a symbol of this all-
inclusive universality of the Hindu view of the deity, thus the Brahmins were
forced to accept him into the fold of their conservative beliefs. By the time the
Upanishads were written, Shiva had become a most important deity. Although
initially considered to be inauspicious and impure, he eventually came to be
known as Shiva, the auspicious one. He became the inspiration for theatre,
dance, and drama and was a favorite figure for painters and sculptors.
In the Hindu trinity, or Trimurtis, Brahma is the Creator; Vishnu, the Sustainer;
and Shiva is the Destroyer. The divine trinity thus ensures the cycle of existence.
The Shaiva Siddhanta School of philosophy, however, does not accept Shiva as
being just one of the Trimurtis. To them he is the Supreme Brahman to whom
both Brahma and Vishnu offer obeisance. He is called Pati, or Master, with the
five important functions of godhead: creation, maintenance, destruction, veiling,
and grace. The human soul is called pasu, or creature, which is tied with the
pasa, or rope of bondage. This bondage consists of three types of impurities: The
first is avidya, or primordial ignorance. Next comes karma mala, the bondage
accruing from our actions. Last is maya mala, or impurity caused by attachment
to the world of maya.
To eliminate the last two impurities, four types of approaches are prescribed:
The first is the way of the servant, or dasa marga. This consists of performing
external acts of worship, such as gathering flowers for worship, cleaning the
vessels used in worship, sweeping the temple, and so on. This leads to salokya,
which means the devotee will be taken to the abode of Shiva at the time of death
and reside there forever. The second way consists of intimate service to God by
conducting rituals, having intimate communion with him, speaking about him,
writing about him, and so on. This is called the satputra marga, or the path of
the good son. This leads the devotee to samipya, or close proximity to God. The
third way is called sakhya marga, or the path of friendship, and includes internal
worship, such as meditation and communion, which leads to sarupya; in this the

devotee attains the form of the deity at the time of death. The last is jnana
marga, or the path of wisdom; by following this, the devotee attains sayujya, or
union with God.
As said before, these disciplines can remove only the first two impurities
caused by action and attachment to the world—karma mala and maya mala. The
bondage of ignorance, or avidya, can be removed only by the grace of God. Thus
Shiva is known as Pasupati, or the Lord of all human creatures who are bound by
these impurities. Shiva accepts all those who are despised and rejected by others.
He destroys the negativity in all and purifies them. He is the regenerator and
reformer. He destroys pomposity by his simplicity and prudery by his defiance
of orthodoxy. He is the destroyer of the ego, which is what traps the human
being in the ocean of life and death. He can also destroy sorrow, pain, and
misery. Though he seems a fearsome figure, he is the one who can remove all the
fearful influences that threaten our lives. Just as the lotus, rising from the slime
of the pond, is still the symbol of purity, so Shiva is the symbol of purity despite
dabbling in impurity.
His physical body, clothing, and ornaments are also unique. He is white as
camphor and wears his hair in matted locks, coiled in the shape of a shell. He has
a blue neck because he drank deadly poison in order to protect the world from it,
keeping it in his throat rather than swallowing it, and it made his neck turn blue.
He has three eyes. The third eye on his forehead denotes him as the Lord of
yoga. This inner eye distinguishes truth from illusion and conquers lust. He is
Chandrachuda (wearer of the moon), for he wears the crescent moon as an
adornment for his hair. Like the waxing and waning of the moon, he is in tune
with the rise and fall of the cosmic rhythm. He is Krittivasa, wearer of animal
hides. His upper body is covered with the skin of the black antelope, the elephant
hide covers his loins, and the tiger skin is his seat. By wearing the male kundala
(a man’s earring) in his right ear and the female tatanka (a woman’s earring) in
his left, he reveals his androgynous nature. He wears a garland of skulls and
carries a skull in his hand as his begging bowl, and often drinks out of it in order
to show the frailty of mortal life. He also bedecks himself with rudraksha beads,
seeds from a medicinal tree. His vehicle is the bull Nandi, which represents
restrained power. The bull also represents dharma, or righteousness. In his right
hand he holds the antelope representing all creatures under his protection.
Verminous mongrel dogs scorned by all chase after him in his wanderings.
Snakes slither up and down his body. His weapon is the trident, with three
prongs representing the trinity. He also carries a staff and a noose—the pasa that

binds all creatures to mortality. His two bows are known as Pinaka and Ajagava.
He is the source of the primeval sound, aum, and carries his drum, damaru,
while dancing. The boom of the drum represents the vibrations of cosmic energy.
He is the master of music and plays on the rudravina, or lute, designed for him
by Ravana. He also carries a bell. He is prepared to make enormous sacrifices
for the protection of the world. Though depicted in the trinity as the Destroyer,
he is the one who protected the world by swallowing the dreaded poison that the
serpent expelled. He is the one who contained the fall of the divine River Ganga
when she tumbled down to earth from heaven, thus saving the earth from being
deluged by her waters. There is no end to his mercy and his kindness; he is
prepared to sacrifice himself for the sake of the world.
Modern physics describes matter not as passive and inert, but as continuously
dancing and vibrating. Physicists speak of the continuous dance of subatomic
particles and use the words “dance of creation“ and “energy dance.” When we
look at a sculpture of the dancing Shiva, the Nataraja, this description of the
physicists comes forcibly to mind. The Nataraja is the personification of this
cosmic dance. Modern photographic techniques have been able to project the
particle tracks emanating from the dancing image of Shiva. This image is a
concrete symbol of the great principle that the seers tried to portray—that life is
a rhythmic interplay of birth and death, creation and destruction. Scientists have
shown this in their particle accelerators. Shiva’s cosmic dance depicts the mad
gyrations of energy particles. His damaru beats to the rhythm of the cosmic
vibrations, and his energy, or shakti, is activated by the Divine Mother,
personified by many goddesses in the Hindu pantheon, including Durga and
Parvati. The Divine Mother is the enchantress who creates and nourishes and
gives suck to all beings, human and subhuman. All are infants of this Divine
Mother.
The Greeks who came to India around 300 BC saw in Shiva a reflection of
their own god, Dionysius. He was the rebel who opposed their classical
divinities and sought salvation in esoteric rituals. By the time of the Christian
era, the cult of Shiva had captured the minds of all and had spread from Kashmir
in the north to Kanyakumari at the very tip of the Indian subcontinent. Now we
will look at how the concept of Shiva is dealt with in Puranic literature.
O head of mine, bow down to the Head (of the universe) who wears a
crown of heads on his head. Who receives alms in a skull, O head of
mine! Bow down to him!

SAINT APPAR
O Destroyer! By that supremely peaceful form of yours, which is
auspicious and blissful and destroys sin, give us the knowledge supreme.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
 Aum Maheshwaraya Namaha!
2
Creation
Salutations to the Supreme Person, the boundless Being who wields His
triune power for the purpose of creation, preservation, and dissolution,
the indwelling Spirit within all beings and the unseen director of
everything.
“SRI SHUKA” IN THE SREEMAD BHAGAVATHAM (STORY OF KRISHNA)
It was Mahapralaya—the night of Brahma when nothing existed. There was
neither night nor day, no light or darkness, neither joy nor sorrow. All animate
and inanimate creation had merged into the infinite essence. There was neither
sun, nor moon, nor planets. The whole firmament was one complete void,
pulsating with life.
That alone existed. That which the Vedas call Brahman, the One without a
second. That One alone existed—the one Existence, the one Consciousness, the
one Bliss—Satchidananda. It is incomprehensible by the mind. It has neither
beginning nor end. It has no second. It has no decrease or development. It is
immeasurable, changeless, formless, and without attributes. It is the all-
pervasive sole cause of the changing universe, filled with forms. That alone
existed, and that alone exists. That is the only reality; all else is mythya, or
illusion. In the course of its own sport, or lila, it emanated out of itself an
auspicious form of its own, endowed with all power, qualities, and knowledge.
This was the form of Iswara. It is the form of pure sattva (harmony, essence)
undiluted by rajas and tamas (gunas, or fundamental attributes of activity and
inertia). It is a form that can go everywhere and take on all forms. It sees all and

is the cause of all, and it sanctifies everything.
In the Puranas, creation is cyclic in nature. A vast period of shrishti, or
creation, is followed by another vast period of pralaya, or dissolution. There is
no absolute beginning for creation, and thus no absolute end. Time is, therefore,
not linear as in modern thought, but cyclic. Brahma is the creative aspect of the
Supreme Being. It is he who conducts the work of creation. Shiva is known as
the destructive aspect of that same consciousness, and Vishnu is the harmonizer
who keeps the balance and sustains creation. A cycle of the creative activity of
Brahma is only one day of Brahma, and an equally long cycle constitutes his
night. The immensity of Brahma’s life span can be imagined only if we convert
it into human years. One human year of 365 days corresponds to just one day of
the gods. So 365 human years is only one year for the gods. Twelve thousand
such celestial years make one chaturyuga, or the four yugas (epochs) into which
cyclic time is divided. One thousand such chaturyugas constitute one day of
Brahma, and an equal number make his night. Each cycle of creation has its own
Brahma, whose total life span is one hundred such years. The immensity of the
period of time involved, in human calculations, cannot be imagined. It will come
to forty billion plus 311 human years. The human mind can scarcely imagine the
period of Brahma’s life. A cycle of creation is only one day to Brahma, and of
dissolution, his one night. The inherent tendencies generated by the jivas
(embodied souls) in one cycle remain latent during his night and return to that
avyaktha from which they have come, and sprout into existence at the
commencement of his day.
In every cycle of creation it is time that commences the act of creation. The
first principle to be manifested is the Lord’s power, as time. In itself, time is
without any modification. It is insubstantial and without beginning or end. It gets
its expression at the beginning of creation when it causes the stirring of the three
gunas—sattva, rajas, and tamas—or modes of Prakriti, or nature. Time is the
basis of the sport of the Supreme for his creative manifestations. It is without
beginning and without end. A period of evolution is followed by a period of
involution, called pralaya, in which all things remain in a latent state. At the end
of one cosmic cycle, the Lord’s power of illusion, maya, withdraws all things
into itself. At the commencement of a new cycle of evolution, the Lord’s power
as time starts a new process by which all things come into existence once again.
During pralaya the universe is in a state of latency, and after pralaya it is in a
state of manifestation. This is all a play of the Supreme Lord.
The dissolution of the universe takes three forms based on time, substance, and

the attributes of Prakriti. The first is called nitya-pralaya, which is a daily
dissolution based only on time, experienced every day by all of us when we go
to sleep. Each night is a pralaya for each individual soul. When we sleep there is
no world and no individuality; both are in a latent state, submerged into
consciousness. The moment someone awakes, the world appears and
individuality reasserts itself.
The second type of dissolution is called naimittika-pralaya, or Mahapralaya,
which is the night of Brahma, when the Creator, Brahma, goes to sleep. This
happens after one day of Brahma’s time, which lasts for a thousand chaturyugas.
In the night of Brahma the Creator sleeps for another thousand chatturyugas and
the whole universe goes into a state of involution up to Satyaloka, or the highest
heaven (world of Brahma). After this cosmic night is over, the Lord’s power
begins to operate as time, and creation and evolution continue as described at the
beginning of this chapter.
The third type of dissolution is called prakritika-pralaya, when all the
categories and attributes of Prakriti go into total dissolution into their ultimate
cause, Prakriti, which itself reverts into the Iswara and then into the Brahman.
This will last for eons, with all things remaining in a latent state. When creation
begins once again, all things come out in reverse order. By the fiat of the
Absolute, as mentioned earlier, the first to appear is the Lord’s power as time. It
stirs the gunas of Prakriti at the beginning of each creative cycle. Next, out of
the cosmic womb of Prakriti comes the cosmic ahamkara, or cosmic ego, which
splits into the three gunas. The third aspect is the appearance of the tanmatras,
or the subtle energy of the elements, which are capable of evolving into the
bhutas, or gross elements. The fourth aspect of creation is the projection of the
ten indriyas—the five organs of knowledge and the five organs of action. The
fifth is the formation of the mind and the presiding deities of the organs, all from
the guna of sattva. The sixth is the creation of avidya, or ignorance, which
clouds and distorts the minds of living beings.
In his sportive manifestation, Iswara assumes the limitation of rajas and
creates, in the form of the Creator, Brahma. From then on it is Brahma who
creates all things. In the seventh aspect of creation Brahma brings into existence
the six types of unmoving beings. These are plants that bear fruit without
flowering, vegetation that is destroyed when the fruits are destroyed, creepers
that climb when supported, the grass family (including bamboo), shrubs that
stand without support, and trees with flowers and fruit. Their common
characteristics are that they appear insentient but have internal reactions, they

come in infinite varieties, and they draw nourishment upward from the roots.
The eighth creation is that of beasts. Tamas is predominant in beasts so they do
not think of the morrow and are interested only in food and other physical needs.
Their sense of smell is acute. They are without reasoning capacity. There are
twenty-eight categories of such species moving on the earth, and twenty-eight
flying in the sky.
The ninth creation is that of the human species. Humans are dominated by the
guna of rajas and are compelled to act through desire.
Next comes the creation of the gods, or superhuman beings, who are eight in
number. Brahma brings into existence these four types of creation at the
commencement of every cosmic cycle of creation. The universe existed as it is
now even before each pralaya and will continue to exist as it is now after each
pralaya. During pralaya it is in a latent state, and after pralaya it is in a
manifested state; that is the only difference.
The Supreme Purusha is known as Sadashiva, according to the Shiva Purana.
He is the Iswara, or supreme embodiment of the godhead, and is of pure sattvic
form. Together with his Shakti, or the feminine principle within himself, he
decided to create a third one, in order to enjoy the bliss of his own Being. In the
nectarine essence of the ocean of his mind, where thoughts were the waves,
where sattva was a precious gem, where rajas was the coral and tamas the
crocodile, there appeared the most charming of all persons, who appeared to be a
veritable ocean of immeasurable majesty. He had the luster of a blue sapphire.
His glorious eyes were like the newly opened petals of a lotus and were filled
with love. He wore silk garments that were golden in color, and he had infinite
patience and love.
In a golden, mellifluous voice he asked, “What is my name and my task?”
Iswara answered, “As you are all-pervasive and all-expansive, you will be
known as Vishnu. You will have many other names as well. By the performance
of tapasya (practice of austerities, including meditation) you will acquire all
knowledge.”
Then Vishnu performed severe penance for a thousand celestial years and from
his body, water currents of various types began to flow. The twenty-four tattvas,
or tangible aspects of creation, also emanated from him. The Supreme Brahman,
in the form of divine waters, pervaded the entire void. Vishnu reclined on the
body of the celestial serpent and went to sleep on these cosmic waters. Hence he
acquired the name Narayana, or the one who reclines on water. Except for that

primordial Being, there was nothing else.
Lord Narayana lay alone on his serpent bed absorbed in blissful self-
awareness. It was the cosmic slumber in which all creation remained in a subtle
state. After a period of a thousand chaturyugas, his power as time stimulated his
suspended powers and he opened his brilliant eyes. The whole universe was
within him, lying in cosmic dissolution. As his inner gaze turned to these
latencies within himself, they burst out of his navel in the most wondrous form
of a lotus. It had the brilliance of a million suns, and it illuminated the expansive
wastes of the cosmic waters like the rising sun illuminating the quarters—north,
south, east, and west, northeast, northwest, southeast, and southwest. The all-
pervading Being entered the lotus, and immediately there appeared the form of
Brahma, who thus came to be known as the lotus-born and the self-born and is
the embodiment of the Vedas. As Brahma turned his head in all of the four
directions, he sprouted four faces, and when he looked up he got his fifth face.
His complexion was ruddy. He looked around and saw himself seated on the
lotus surrounded by the cosmic waters, knowing neither who he was nor where.
The lotus stalk waved to and fro in the midst of the gigantic waves, lashed by the
winds of dissolution.
Alone and helpless, he became afraid. “Who am I and where have I come
from?”
Thinking thus, he climbed down the stalk for a hundred divine years and could
not find its beginning. Despondent, he climbed back up and heard a celestial
voice telling him to perform tapasya. Thus for another hundred divine years he
performed severe penance, and then in his purified mind the truth of the Lord as
the Indwelling Spirit dawned on him. Brahma had been unable to find this truth
in his search in the outside world, for it is only within that this truth can be seen.
He saw the Lord Narayana, lying on adishesha, his serpent bed. The serpent’s
thousand-jeweled hoods cast their glow over the cosmic waters, dispelling the
darkness. He saw the incredibly beautiful form of the Lord that included within
itself the whole universe. His clothes were like the evening clouds covering the
mountains. His floral wreaths were made of all the various blossoms of the
world. He saw him whose smile removes the sorrows of the world and all his
wondrous accoutrements. Simultaneously Brahma saw the lotus coming out of
the Lord’s navel with himself sitting in it, amidst the turbulent cosmic waters.
Seeing that wondrous form of brilliant hue, Brahma was suffused with delight
and asked him, “Who are you? Who am I? Pray enlighten me.”

Lord Narayana enveloped him with his brilliance and said, “Welcome to you,
O grandsire. Do not be afraid. I shall confer on you all that you desire.”
Then Brahma, provoked by the quality of rajas, was filled with pride and said,
“Who are you to confer anything on me. I am the self-born, the eternal, all-
pervasive Brahma, the grandfather of the whole of creation.”
Lord Vishnu said, “I know you as the Creator. For this purpose you have been
born from the lotus, sprung from my navel. But you are not to be blamed for not
knowing me. You have fallen prey to my illusion and forgotten your source.
Know me to be the Supreme Brahman and the only truth.”
Spurred by the Lord’s power of rajas, a terrible anger rose in Brahma’s mind,
and he fought a wordy duel with Vishnu. At that moment Sadashiva appeared in
the form of a huge column of fire before them, having neither beginning nor end.
Both Vishnu and Brahma were bewildered at the sight of this enormous column
of fire and decided to seek its source. Vishnu, the soul of the universe, took the
form of a boar and sped to the netherworlds in order to discover the origin of that
wondrous column. For many aeons Vishnu penetrated to the bowels of the
universe in this form and thus acquired the name Svetavaraha, or the white boar.
At last, exhausted, he returned.
Brahma took the form of a swan and flew toward the top of the column, trying
to gauge its summit, but though he soared for many aeons, he failed to see it. He
had decided to return and admit his defeat to Vishnu when suddenly he noticed
the beautiful keora flower, which is famous in the worship of the gods, drifting
down. Although it had been on its downward course for many years, it had lost
neither its fragrance nor its luster. Brahma asked the flower where it was coming
from and the flower answered that it was coming from somewhere in the middle
of that primordial column and had been traveling for vast ages. Then Brahma
thought of a perfect way of convincing Vishnu that he had indeed seen the top of
that mysterious Being. He asked the flower to accompany him and to swear that
it had met him at the top. The flower agreed, and he returned triumphantly.
Vishnu took his word, especially since he had a witness to prove the fact. But
suddenly out of the column the mighty voice of the mysterious Lord pronounced
these words, “Thou O Vishnu will in the future be considered as equal to me.
Thou shalt be worshipped as the Supreme himself.”
Then from that fire appeared the fearful form of Kala Bhairava, who was
commanded by Sadashiva to chastise the deceitful Brahma. Bhairava pounced
on him and caught hold of his fifth head, threatening to cut it off, but that

compassionate and deeply forgiving soul, Vishnu, begged the Lord to forgive
Brahma. Sadashiva relented and told the repentant Brahma, “O Brahma, in order
to assume the role of Supreme Lord you resorted to deceit. In future you shall
not be honored by anyone and you will not have any temples.” Thus it is that to
this day Brahma, the Creator, has no temples or devotees.
Then turning to the keora flower, Sadashiva said, “Due to the fact that you
have been an accomplice to this deceit, you will no longer be used in my
worship.”
The flower begged for forgiveness, saying, “If I’m not to be included in thy
worship, O Lord, the very purpose of my existence will be lost. Pray forgive
me.” Then Sadashiva relented and said that though his words could not be
withdrawn, the flower could continue to be used in the decoration of temples.
And so it is, to this day.
This column of fire was in the shape of a linga. The word “ linga” actually
means “a sign,” or a characteristic. Brahman, the cosmic spirit, has no linga, but
since the mind needs something concrete to hold on to, Shiva is depicted in the
form of the linga. Shiva’s linga is the divine phallus, the source of the seed of
the cosmos, containing within it the entire universe of living and nonliving
beings. All life is created from it and returns to it. The yoni, or sign of the
female, forms the base of the linga and together they represent the union of man
and woman, Shiva and Shakti, the cosmic spirit combined with the cosmic
Prakriti, or nature, through which the whole of creation comes into being.
Usually a pot of water is suspended above the linga in order to cool it, since its
origin is the fiery linga that stretched to infinity and whose nature none could
fathom.
The day on which Sadashiva thus manifested as a column of fire was the day
on which the constellation Ardhra was in ascendance, in the month of
Margashirsha, November/December. Those who worship Shiva on that day will
be blessed. The place where that great Being manifested himself as the column
of fire was on the hill of Arunachala, where a holy center of worship sprang up
over the course of time.
To Brahma and Vishnu, who had been humbled, Sadashiva explained, “I am
the Supreme Brahman. My form is both manifest and unmanifest. I am both
Brahman and Iswara. My form as Iswara can be known through all the forms of
the various deities, and my form as Brahman can be known through this formless
linga. Shiva can be worshipped through his formless aspect as the linga, as well

as his aspect with form. All other gods, including both of you, will have aspects
with form.”
When Shiva takes on a form, he has five faces corresponding to his five
powers of creation, maintenance, annihilation, concealment, and liberation. The
syllable “A” comes from the northern face, the syllable “U” from the western,
the syllable “M” from the southern, and the bindu, or dot, from the eastern face.
The nada, or cosmic sound, comes from the middle face. These five all unite to
form the mystic sound of aum. From these five sounds is born the five-syllabled
mantra, “Na·ma-shi·va·ya.” Aum indicates all knowledge, and the entire set of
mantras and all the four Vedas have sprung from it. Different things are achieved
by different mantras, but omkara (the sound of aum) alone achieves everything.
Through repetition of this root mantra, both enjoyment and salvation can be
attained.
At that time, AUM, the sound of eternity, which is the form of the Lord as
nada, or sound, filled the air in every quarter. It filled the hearts of Brahma and
Vishnu with indescribable bliss. The sound manifested in a luminous form
before the clear gaze of Vishnu, who was pure and free from all negative
thoughts. The first syllable “A” blazed like the sun to the right of the column of
fire, then the sound “U” appeared in the middle, and finally the sound “M,”
glittering like the lunar sphere, appeared to the left. Enveloped by that sound
Vishnu meditated on the universal Being and asked to examine the column of
fire once again. The truth was revealed to his calm mind. The column of fire was
the Supreme Brahman. Nada is one of his forms. The sound “A” is expressed by
the Creator, or Brahma; the sound “U” is expressed by the Enchanter, or Vishnu;
and the sound “M” by the Rudra, or Shiva.
Both Brahma and Vishnu eulogized the Great Supreme. “Obeisance to thee, of
the bodiless form. Obeisance to thee, of the formless luster. Obeisance to thee,
Lord of everything. Obeisance to thee as the perfect sound, aum.” Thus they
praised their preceptor and prayed that he would take on a form that could be
worshipped. The voice said that he would incarnate through the body of the
Creator, Brahma, and would be known as Rudra; Shiva and Rudra would be the
same principle. The voice also declared that Brahma should engage himself in
the work of creation, and Vishnu, of protection. Rudra would be the cause of
dissolution. Vishnu would be the bestower of salvation on all. In order to please
Brahma and Vishnu, Sadashiva took the form of Dakshinamurthy, the preceptor
of the world. He faced south, or dakshina, while Brahma and Vishnu faced
north. He placed his lotus hands on their heads and slowly taught them the great

mantra and the supreme knowledge.
The Iswara’s Shakti, or power, manifested in three forms: As Saraswati,
goddess of speech, she became the consort of Brahma; as Lakshmi, goddess of
wealth, she was to become the wife of Narayana, or Vishnu; and as Kaali, she
would stay with Rudra.
The voice continued, “Know Me to be the Supreme Brahman, the eternal, the
endless, the perfect, and the unsullied. Vishnu has tamas within but sattva
outside; he will be the protector and sustainer of all the worlds. Brahma, who
creates, will have rajas both within and without, and Shiva, who causes
dissolution, will have sattva within but tamas outside. This is the position of the
gunas in the three deities. O Vishnu! Spread your glories far and wide by taking
up various incarnations. Remember that there is no difference between you and
Shiva. He who worships you worships Shiva, and vice versa.”
Both Brahma and Vishnu again eulogized the form that now disappeared from
view. Brahma looked around to find that he was alone once more and was
puzzled as to how he should proceed with the work of creation. So he meditated
once again on Vishnu, who appeared before him in all his glory. When Brahma
told him of his predicament, Lord Vishnu blessed Brahma and told him that the
knowledge of creation would come automatically to him. He would be able to
create all things without any external aid, for everything was contained in seed
form within the lotus on which he was seated.
Brahma now created the seven sages: Marichi from his eyes, Brighu from his
heart, Angiras from his head, and Pulaha, Vasishta, Kratu, and Daksha from his
vital breath. Narada was created from his lap and Kardama from his shadow.
Dharma (righteousness) came from his right breast. From his back came
adharma, or unrighteousness, which is the seat of death, the terror of the worlds.
From his heart came desire; from his eyebrows, anger. From his lower lip came
greed and from his mouth, speech. From his urinary tract came all the oceans
and from his anus the spirit of evil. From his mind were born the four boy sages
known as Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and Sanatkumara. He begged them to
proceed with the task of creation, but these pure souls were ever established in
atmic consciousness (identification with all life) and refused to obey their father.
At this disobedience on the part of his offspring, Brahma frowned with rage, and
from that frown there appeared a boy with a ruddy complexion. He cried out, “O
father, give me names and places of positions.” Because he cried as soon as he
appeared, Brahma called him Rudra, which means “don’t cry.” This is the story

as given in the Bhagavatha Purana. Brahma gave him eleven names and forms,
along with appropriate consorts, and told him to create. Unfortunately Rudra’s
creations were as fierce looking as he was, so Brahma told him to stop creating.
He told him to do tapasya, and thus Rudra did tapasya and came to be known as
Shiva, or the auspicious one.
Since the work of creation was not progressing at all, Brahma prayed to the
Divine to help him. At that time his body became divided into two halves, one of
which was a man, called Swayambhu Manu, and the other a woman, called
Shatarupa. They became husband and wife, and from that time onward, creation
proceeded by way of sexual relationships.
O Resident of the mountains! We sing this hymn to you to propitiate you.
Be pleased to make our world prosperous, our minds peaceful, and our
bodies free from disease.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Let the blue-necked one make us happy, He who rises in crimson
splendor in full view of the cowherds, the water maidens, and the
creatures of the world.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
O thousand-eyed One! O many quivered One! May you be pleased to
unstring your bow, flatten the tips of your arrows, and become peaceful
and well disposed toward us.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Let the arrows of your bow liberate us from pain and your quiver be
directed against our enemies.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Aum Namashivaya! Aum Shambave Namaha!

 
Aum Shambave Namaha!
3
Sandhya, the Evening Star
He in whom this universe, prior to its projection,
Was potentially present: like a tree in a seed,
And by whom it came into existence by the magic of  His own will,
Or like a great yogi creating out of His own power,
To that Dakshinamurthy, the Supreme Being,
Who came in the form of a benign Guru,
I offer my profound salutation.
“DAKSHINAMURTHY STOTRAM” BY ADI SHANKARA
The Shiva Purana says that after having created the seven sages, Brahma
reflected within his mind and from his mind there arose the fascinating form of a
woman. She was called Sandhya, which means “twilight,” since she appeared at
the time when day meets night. She was the perfection of womanly beauty and
upon seeing her, the minds of Brahma and of all the other sages became
extremely agitated. When Brahma felt the pangs of the emotion called love,
another handsome being appeared out of his thoughts. He had a golden
complexion, a fine nose, wonderful sensuous lips, and fine eyes with exciting
eyebrows. On seeing Brahma, this person bowed before him and asked Brahma
to give him a name and some occupation.
Brahma’s mind was already agitated by the pangs of love and he spoke thus,
“You will be known as Manmatha, since even at your birth you have begun to
torment all our minds with thoughts of love. You will also be known as Kama
since you will be able to take on any form you wish. Your power will be greater

than the powers of all the gods put together. With this form of yours, as well as
five flower arrows with which you have been born, you will be able to enamor
and captivate the minds of men and women and thus ensure that creation will
continue. No living being, not even the gods, will be able to defy you. Even I, as
well as all the sages who are assembled here, have come under your sway. The
minds of all living beings will be an easy target for your flower arrows. You will
be able to invisibly enter the hearts of all people, thrilling them and making them
lose their reasoning capacity. You will be able to arouse ecstasy in everyone.”
Kama’s five arrows, which even sages are unable to resist, are the abilities to
delight, to appeal, to delude, to wither, and to kill. When he was given all these
powers, Kama decided to try them out immediately in the presence of Brahma
and the sages. He fitted an arrow to his bow, and immediately a beautiful,
fragrant breeze started to blow, churning the minds of all those present, and as
the arrow sped from his bow, those present started gazing at Sandhya and
wishing to possess her. Kama did not stop shooting his arrows until all had
completely lost their power of reasoning. Sandhya was also a victim. She started
glancing shyly at each of them in turn, and looking provocatively at them. Kama
was delighted at the success of his first venture. Brahma, however, had enough
sense to realize that he was behaving badly; in his mind he begged the Lord to
help him control his emotions. Lord Shiva appeared and chastised him for
harboring sensual feelings for his own daughter.
(The same story is told in another way in the Bhagavad Purana. Brahma
created Saraswati, the goddess of speech, and then fell in love with her. When
his sons reprimanded him for his incestuous feelings, he forsook his body and
took another body and then married Saraswati.)
Brahma felt ashamed of his emotions. He directed his anger against Kama,
who was the perpetrator of all the misdeeds. “Since you are the cause of all our
shame, O Kama, one day you will direct your arrows at the great Lord Shiva and
then you will be severely punished for your crime!”
Hearing this Kama became quite despondent. “Why, O grandfather, have you
cursed me like this? I have done nothing wrong, I have only carried out your
orders. You, yourself, said that all of you, including Vishnu and Shiva, would
become targets for my arrow. I merely wanted to test the efficacy of your
words.”
Brahma was pacified by this and said, “Your mistake was to have made me fall
in love with Sandhya, who is my own daughter. However, don’t be afraid. Even

though Shiva will curse you, you will be reborn soon after.”
Saying this, Brahma vanished from view. The patriarch, Daksha, who was one
of those born from Brahma, now presented his daughter Rati to Kama and asked
him to accept her as his wife. On seeing the beautiful daughter of Daksha, Kama
was pierced with his own arrows and happily agreed to marry her. She was
indeed a fitting wife for him. She was capable of charming the whole world and
was expert in all the varieties of lovemaking.
After watching all these proceedings, Sandhya felt sad and bereft. She felt
most ashamed at her own behavior, for the feelings of lust that had churned up
her mind. She decided that she could no longer bear to remain in the body that
had cast a spell on her own father, as well as the Lords of the quarters, and went
to the Himalayas to do tapasya. Brahma sent the sage Vasishta to instruct her.
The sage took on the body of a young brahmachari (celibate) and taught
Sandhya how to worship Shiva, the three-eyed God.
“O dear Lady,” he said, “worship Lord Shiva, Lord of all the devas (lesser
gods), with this mantra, ‘Aum Namashivaya.’ Perform all rites in silence and
fast at the end of each period of worship.” Having advised her thus, the sage left.
After Sandhya performed severe penance, Shiva appeared before her and
blessed her. He told her to cast off her body in the sacrificial fire of the sage
Medatithi, after which she would be reborn as Medatithi’s daughter. The man on
whom she fixed her mind at the time of death would be the person she would
marry in her next life. Having blessed her thus, the Lord disappeared from view.
Sandhya went to the hermitage of the sage Medatithi as instructed by Shiva,
and just before she entered the fire, she thought of the young brahmachari who
had instructed her in the worship of Shiva and wished that she would have him
as her husband in her next life. Her body became the sacrificial offering, and
once it was totally purified by contact with fire, it was taken up to the heavens
where it was divided into two portions. The upper half of her body became
pratah sandhya, or dawn, which is a time especially propitious for the gods. The
lower half became shyama sandhya, or dusk, which is especially pleasing to the
manes (ancestors). At the end of the sacrifice, the sage Medatithi found a baby
lying in the heart of the fire. He lifted her up tenderly and cared for her as his
own child. Fire had cleansed Sandhya of all her sins, and she shone like molten
gold. The sage gave her the name Arundhati. She grew up in the hermitage and
when she came of age, her father gave her in marriage to the sage Vasishta, the
young brahmachari on whom she had concentrated her mind at the time of

entering the fire. Arundhati became famous for her chastity and purity and is still
seen shining in the sky as an evening star—at the time known as sandhya.
O Lord Eternal like a mountain! On the very day you enslaved me, did
you not appropriate my soul, my body, and my belongings! Today if
anything untoward happens to me, be it good or be it bad, have I any
mastery over this?
SAINT MANIKKAVACHAGAR
Prostrations to the golden-armed commander of cosmic forces, Lord of
the four quarters. Prostrations to the source of all the green-leafed trees
of Nature, Lord of all creatures. Prostrations to the golden-hued one, the
self-effulgent, the Lord of all paths.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Prostrations to the one seated on the bull, the giver of food, destroyer of
sins. Prostrations to the evergreen one, wearer of the sacred thread,
chief among the healthy and strong. Prostrations to the Lord of the
universe, the shield against the phenomenal world.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
 Aum Ambikanathaya Namaha!
4
Durga's Promise
If one could but be privileged to see
The arched eyebrows, the rosy red lips,
The budding smile, the wet matted locks,
The milk-white sacred ash on the body of coral hue,
And the sweet lifted foot,
Even human birth on this earth would be desirable.
SAINT THIRUNAVUKKARASAR
 
Brahma was unhappy that Lord Shiva had reprimanded him for harboring sexual
feelings for his own daughter, Sandhya, and consulted Daksha and his other sons
about what should be done. Shiva’s lack of understanding about sexual feelings
originated from the fact that he was a yogi and had no knowledge of women or
passion. In order to make Shiva suffer the pangs of love, Brahma asked for help
from Kama and his wife, Rati.
“Unless that primordial being Shiva indulges in sexual sport, creation will
continue to be mediocre. In the case of Shiva, who is extremely detached, only
Kama’s power can prevail.” Thus saying, Brahma requested Kama to try his
wiles on Lord Shiva. He also created Vasanta, or spring, to be Kama’s permanent
companion and thus aid him in his exploits. “O Kama, for the benefit of the
world, please go and try to enchant Shiva. Wherever Shiva goes, follow him and
shoot your arrows at him so that he will be inclined to take a wife. Over
mountains or lakes, through forests or peaks, follow him wherever he goes and

charm him. You alone have the power to do this. He is averse to women and is in
full control of himself.”
Hearing these words of the Creator, Kama, accompanied by Vasanta and the
gentle malaya breeze, left for the harsh mountains, caves, and dales throughout
which Shiva roamed. Wherever Kama went, the season changed. No longer did
the cold winds blow against the icy fastness of the Himalayan regions. Instead,
the gentle malaya breeze, fragrant with the perfume of a thousand flowers, swept
the region. All the trees bloomed simultaneously as spring burst into a profusion
of flowers, but Shiva was not beguiled; he was immersed in atmic bliss. Arrow
after arrow sped from Kama’s sugarcane bow. Both he and Rati tried all their
tricks. All living beings succumbed to their charms, but not Shiva. He alone was
unaffected and did not even notice what was happening. Kama’s ego was
squashed, and he returned dejectedly to Brahma.
“O Brahma! Listen to me. Though I tried my best to enchant Shiva, he
remained unaffected. In complete control of his senses, he continued to remain
in a state of samadhi (superconsciousness) despite all my efforts to shake him
out of it. Wherever Shiva went, Rati and I followed him closely and darted arrow
after arrow at him, but neither he nor his ganas (followers) were moved by them.
Whenever he came out of samadhi, I placed many pairs of birds and animals
before him, all engaged in mating games. He remained unmoved. Never did my
arrow find a vulnerable point in him. Vasanta, who accompanied me, also did her
best. He covered the mountain slopes with fragrant flowers and the lakes with
lotuses. Seeing all this abundance of nature, even the sages fell prey to passion.
Need I then speak about the state of ordinary mortals? But there was no
wavering to be seen in the demeanor of Lord Shiva. He did not even evince
anger at me. What could I do but return? I assure you that there is no one in the
whole world who is capable of arousing lust in him. If you want him to marry,
you will have to produce someone who is capable of arousing his love.” So
saying, Kama returned to his abode followed by his wife, Rati, and his troupe of
helpers.
Brahma was quite dejected at this news and did not know what to do.
Brahma’s nature was rajasic, active and energetic, while Shiva’s was tamasic,
passive and contemplative. In between stood Vishnu, the cosmic savior, totally
sattvic, always interested in maintaining the cosmic order. He preserved the
cosmic balance between the aggressiveness of the Creator, Brahma, and the
regressiveness of the Destroyer, Rudra. Thus the three—Brahma, Vishnu, and
Shiva—represent shrishti, sthiti, and samhara, or creation, preservation, and

destruction. Brahma realized that if Shiva became totally dispassionate about the
world, the cosmic balance would be destroyed, since a certain amount of tension
is always necessary to maintain the work of creation. Suddenly he thought of
calling on Lord Vishnu, who was the primary cause of Brahma’s own creation.
The moment he thought of him, Vishnu, the lotus-eyed one, four-armed and blue
in color, appeared before him and smilingly asked what he wanted. Brahma
repeated his tale of woe, that he had sent Kama to enchant Shiva and failed
miserably.
Vishnu smiled at hearing this tale and said, “O Brahma! How is it that this
delusion has befallen you? Do you not know that Shiva is the Mahayogi, free
from all illusion, ever immersed in the bliss of the self? How could you ever
think of making him fall prey to Kama’s wiles? O Brahma, if you really want
Shiva to marry, then you will have to pray to Shiva himself. You know his Shakti
is a part of him. Shakti is his feminine counterpart and is known as Shivaa. If
that goddess takes on a human birth, she will definitely become his wife, for she
is a part of him. Command your son Daksha to do penance and propitiate that
goddess, and induce her to take birth as his daughter; then ask Daksha to give
her to Shiva in marriage. Remember, at the time when all three of us came out of
that formless Brahman, it was declared that Lakshmi would be my feminine
counterpart, Saraswati yours, and Sati would be Shiva’s. Sadashiva incarnated
himself as Rudra and came out of your brows. He is now residing in Kailasa
awaiting the advent of Shivaa in the form of Sati, daughter of Daksha. Therefore
make all preparations for her advent.” Thus saying, Lord Vishnu blessed Brahma
and vanished from view.
As soon as Vishnu left, Brahma began to meditate on Shivaa, or Durga, the
feminine counterpart of Shiva. The goddess is vidya and avidya, both knowledge
and ignorance. She is nothing but the Supreme Brahman. Pleased with his
penance, the goddess Durga appeared before Brahma. She was dark as night and
had four divine arms, one of which carried the blue lotus and the other a sword.
The third was raised in the mudra (mystic symbol made with the fingers) of
blessing. Her eyes were dark and lustrous and gleamed like the pearls that
adorned her disheveled tresses. The mystic third eye on her forehead was closed.
She was as beautiful as the autumn moon, and the crescent moon bedecked her
broad forehead. She was seated on a magnificent lion that gazed at her lovingly
with its tawny eyes.
On seeing this wondrous apparition of the divine Shakti, Brahma, folded his
palms and sang her praises: “Obeisance to Thee, O Goddess! You are the eternal

energy of Brahman who has manifested herself in many forms. In the form of
Lakshmi you have found a place beside Vishnu; in the form of the earth you hold
everything within yourself. You are both action and nonaction; you are the cause
of both creation and destruction. You are that primary energy of both movable
and immovable objects, and capable of enchanting everyone. Though
unmanifest, you are capable of taking on infinite manifestations. You are eternal
time that holds the worlds in thrall.”
Hearing this hymn of Brahma’s, the goddess was pleased and asked him what
he wanted from her. Brahma replied, “O goddess, the great God Shiva, who has
manifested himself as Rudra through my forehead, is now residing in Kailasa.
He performs penance all alone and refuses to take a wife. You are his eternal
Shakti. He is the Lord of yoga and cannot be tempted by any woman. But as you
know, the path of yoga, or restraint, has to be balanced by the path of bhoga, or
pleasure. You alone in the entire world are capable of exciting Lord Shiva, as
you enchanted Vishnu in your form as Lakshmi. O mother of the universe, I pray
you to be born as Daksha’s daughter and bewitch the Lord, who is totally
detached from worldly life. At the moment Daksha is performing penance with
his mind directed to you. Be pleased to grant his wish that you should be born as
his daughter, Sati.” The goddess agreed to his request and after blessing him, she
vanished from view.
She appeared before Daksha, who was practicing penance on the seashore as
directed by Brahma. Her beauty charmed Daksha and bowing low, he sang a
hymn of praise to her. She was pleased by his devotion and asked him to choose
a boon. Daksha said, “O mother of the universe! As you know, Rudra has
incarnated himself as Shiva but so far has not taken a wife. You alone are
capable of enacting this role, so kindly deign to be born as my daughter and
become Shiva’s wife. This is the boon that I crave.”
Hearing these words the goddess replied, “O Daksha! You have spoken rightly.
I’m the only fitting mate for Shiva. I am his beloved in every manifestation, so I
shall incarnate myself as your daughter. Return to your abode and remain in
prayer. Your wish will soon be fulfilled. But there is one condition, O Daksha. If
at any time in the future you show disrespect to me or to Shiva, I shall withdraw
into myself and cast off my body.” Thus saying, the goddess disappeared from
Daksha’s view.
Prostrations to the robber chief, armed with quiver and arrows.
Prostrations to the deceiving, elusive chief of marauders. Prostrations to

the wandering, ever-evasive chief of forest thieves!
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Prostrations to the chief of thieves, ever-alert in defense and eager to
strike. Prostrations to the chief of dacoits (bandits), who moves about in
the night carrying swords. Prostrations to the red-capped resident of the
mountains, who steals our belongings.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Prostrations to you who are both seated and reclining. Prostrations to
you who are both sleeping and awake. Prostrations to you who are in the
static and the dynamic. Prostrations to you who are in both the chiefs
and the assemblies.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Pinakine Namaha!
5
The Courtship of Sati
Young doe is she, or tender bud of a divine flower.
Or the early stage of fragrant honey,
Or the beautiful tendril of the young coral beneath the waves of the sea.
Or the early streaks of the rays of the moon.
Or the miniature bow on which Cupid practiced.
SEKKIZHAR IN THE PERIYA PURANAM
Daksha now retired to his own hermitage, and Brahma asked him to get married
and beget progeny in order to increase the population of the world, which was
woefully underpopulated in those times. He married two women, Asikni and
Virini. By his second wife he begat many sons, all of whom he sent west with
instructions to create. When they reached the famous holy lake known as
Narayana Saras and touched the waters, they changed their minds and decided to
perform austerities at that beautiful spot. Hearing of this resolve of the sons of
Daksha, the sage Narada went to that place and advised them to abandon their
desire for children and concentrate on the Lord, and thus enlighten themselves.
The intelligent sons of Daksha, realizing the truth of his words, gave up their
intentions to marry and instead wandered about as yogis in search of truth.
Hearing of the fate of his sons, Daksha, undaunted, begat another thousand sons
by his other wife. When they came of age they also went to the lake called
Narayana Saras. As soon as they touched the holy waters of the lake, their minds
changed. Once again Narada went to them and advised them to search for God
rather than wives, and they went the way of their brothers and roamed about as

yogis.
Daksha was grief stricken at the loss of all of his wonderful sons. Hearing of
the dastardly trick Narada had played on him, he cursed Narada and said, “Since
you have made my sons into homeless vagabonds roaming about in search of
God, you, O Narada, will never have a proper home for yourself. If you stay
longer than a few hours at any one place your head will burst. You are
condemned to be a cosmic wanderer, never resting for long at any place, always
on the move.”
Narada was not a whit disturbed by this curse, but thanked Daksha for his
kindness in having cursed him thus. The curse ensured that he could always
roam about the world singing the praises of Lord Vishnu on his lute, which was
just what he liked to do. The devotees of Lord Vishnu are always peaceful of
disposition and never given to violent outbursts of temper, even if they are
abused.
Having lost all his sons, Daksha decided that he would try his hand at
begetting daughters, who were not as likely to wander off as his sons had done.
He then begat sixty daughters and as soon as they came of age, he arranged their
marriages. Ten were married off to Dharma, Lord of righteousness; thirteen to
the sage Kashyapa; and twenty-seven to the moon, Chandra. The rest were
married off to various people, and the progeny of these daughters slowly started
to fill the world.
It was at this time that Daksha had a quarrel with his son-in-law, the moon. It
appears that Daksha made a habit of quarreling with all his sons-in-law, as we
shall see. Chandra, the moon god, had married twenty-seven of Daksha’s
daughters. These are the twenty-seven lunar asterisms (small groups of stars),
but Chandra showed a marked preference for Rohini, the fairest amongst them.
The others complained to their father, and Daksha cursed Chandra that his
beautiful body would weaken and wither. As the curse took effect, the moon
became weaker and weaker. He was terrified and went to Vishnu, who advised
him to go to the supreme physician, Vaidyanatha, or Shiva, custodian of the
sacred herb, soma, for which he is also known as Somnatha. Shiva cured
Chandra, but each time Chandra returned to his own abode the dreaded malady
struck again. At last Chandra begged Shiva to cure him completely. Shiva agreed
to do so and gave him a place in his own tresses. The crescent moon,
chandrakala, adorns the locks of Shiva, and thus Shiva acquired the name
Chandrashekara. However, Daksha would not forgive Shiva for saving one

whom he had cursed.
It was now that Daksha remembered the promise made to him by the goddess
Durga, that she would be born as his daughter. Therefore, he and his wife prayed
to the goddess and she appeared. She told them to do certain purification rites
and she would soon take birth in the womb of Virini, Daksha’s wife. True to her
word, the goddess Shivaa, also known as Durga, Kaali, and so on, was born to
Daksha. At the time of her birth there was a gentle shower of rain and flowers
from the sky. She showed her divine form to her parents, and they eulogized her
with many hymns. She then became a baby once more and started to cry, as all
newborn babes do. She was called Sati. As a child her favorite pastime was to sit
in one place and draw portraits of Shiva, whom she had never seen in this birth.
All her songs were of Shiva or Rudra.
One day Brahma, accompanied by the sage Narada, went to Daksha’s abode
and told Sati that her desires would be fulfilled and she would secure Lord Shiva
as her husband. She approached her mother and informed her that she was going
on a year’s penance in order to secure Shiva as her husband.
She then started to do severe penance in order to propitiate Shiva. Every
month she worshipped Shiva in various ways, undergoing rigorous tortures of
her body until one full year had passed. At the end of the year she concluded her
worship and sat concentrated on the three-eyed Lord, the all-merciful. Even the
sages came to see Sati, for she had reached an exalted state that even they had
failed to reach after many years of tapasya. The sages approached Lord Vishnu
and begged him to intercede with Shiva on Sati’s behalf. Accompanied by
Brahma and Vishnu, they went to Kailasa and praised Shiva. He was delighted
and asked them to name their desire and he would fulfill it. They jointly begged
him to accept a wife, just as Vishnu had accepted Lakshmi, and Brahma,
Saraswati.
Hearing this Shiva spoke, “O Devas! Only a person of imperfect knowledge
will desire marriage. It is a great bondage. I am a yogi, ever delighting in the
bliss of the self. I’m always engaged in tapasya and totally detached from the
world. What interest would I have in marriage? Moreover I’m the friend of
ghosts and goblins. I visit the burning ghats and crematoriums. My body is
covered with the ashes of cremated bodies. Serpents and reptiles are my
ornaments. What woman would want to marry me?”
Again the gods begged him to reconsider their request, for it was imperative
for the good of the world that he have a consort. Hearing their words, Shiva

smiled and said, “All right. I can never refuse the requests of my devotees so I
shall take a wife, but remember she will have to be a very special type of
woman. When I am a yogi, she will have to be a yogini, and when I desire her
she will have to be a wife. When I go into samadhi, she should not approach me
for she will be burnt to ashes in the fire of my austerity. If she refuses to believe
in what I say, I will abandon her. Consider all these factors, O Brahma, and then
tell me if such a woman can be found amongst your creation!”
Brahma was delighted at these words and said, “Indeed, O Lord, such a
woman has been born, as the daughter of Daksha. She is known as Sati and is a
fitting mate for you. At present she is performing rigorous penance in order to
secure you as her husband. She is the same mother Goddess who has taken on
the form of Lakshmi and Saraswati.” Vishnu also spoke highly of Sati’s qualities
and urged Shiva to grant their request and Sati’s wish. Shiva agreed.
On the eighth day of the bright half of the month of Asvini, Sati observed her
final fast, which concluded her one-year worship of Shiva. She was sitting in the
forest engrossed in meditation on his form when Shiva appeared before her. He
showed her his incomparable form with five faces, three eyes, and crescent
moon adorning his locks. He was holding the trident and drum. His face was
brilliant, and Sati could hardly gaze at him. She lowered her eyes shyly and knelt
at his feet.
Although he knew her desire, he asked her to choose a boon, for he wanted to
hear her express her wish boldly to him without any reserve. But she was very
shy and would not speak. Again he urged her to openly express her desire. At
last she whispered, “O Lord, why do you play with me? You know my desire.
Let me have the bridegroom of my choice.”
Hardly had she finished when he replied, “You shall indeed be my wife, O
Sati!” Delighted to hear these words, she could not speak a word but could only
smile sweetly at him. Looking at her fascinating form, even the stern, ascetic
heart of Shiva melted with the emotion of love and he gazed tenderly at her. At
last Sati spoke, “O Lord, be pleased to approach my father and ask him for my
hand in the accepted mode of conduct.” Shiva agreed, and she bowed to him and
returned to her parents’ palace with great joy. Her friends informed Virini that
Shiva had granted Sati the boon for which she had been doing tapasya. Both
Daksha and Virini were very happy to hear this. They were wondering how to
proceed in this matter when Brahma appeared before them accompanied by his
consort, Saraswati. Shiva had asked that he go to Daksha and formally ask for

his daughter’s hand in marriage, for that was her wish. Brahma said, “O Daksha!
That which we have all desired has now come to pass. He who could not be
tempted by Kama’s arrows has now fallen prey to your daughter, Sati. The great
Lord has now abandoned meditation on the self and is now thinking only of Sati.
Therefore allow me to go and let Shiva know that you have given your consent.”
Daksha readily gave his consent, and Brahma went and reported the matter to
Shiva, who was waiting in a fever of impatience about the outcome of his
proposal. Shiva was delighted to get the news. When a devotee gives all her
heart to him, the Lord in turn becomes equally impatient to give his love to her.
Without further debate, Shiva collected his fearsome-looking attendants and told
Brahma and the sages to accompany him.
On a Sunday in the bright half of the month of Chaitra, Shiva, accompanied by
Brahma, Vishnu, and all the sages, as well as his own ganas, proceeded to the
kingdom of Daksha. The bridegroom was clad in the hides of an elephant and
tiger. He had matted locks with the crescent moon peeping from them, and
serpents adorning his neck.
Daksha and his wife welcomed the party with great delight and asked Brahma
to conduct the marriage rites. Brahma complied with the request and gave Sati to
Shiva. It was a union of Shiva and Shakti, the ideal couple. Shiva firmly grasped
her trembling hand in his and led her three times round the sacred fire, as was
customary. The rest of the ceremonies were concluded, and Shiva left the place,
seated on the bull Nandi, with Sati placed on his lap in front of him. All the gods
accompanied the bridal party to a certain distance. Then Shiva and Sati, escorted
by his ganas, proceeded to the Himalayan range, which was his abode.
Prostrations to you who are in the forms of carpenters and chariot-
makers. Prostrations to you who are in the forms of hunters and
fishermen. Prostrations to you who are in the forms of hounds and their
keepers.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Prostrations to the resident of the mountains, who is present in all
beings. Prostrations to the one with the bow, which rains heavily through
the clouds. Prostrations to the short one, who is beautiful. Prostrations
to the ancient one, who transcends time, space, and matter. Prostrations
to the venerable old one, who expands through prayers.

“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Unattached, unattached, unattached am I (to the body, mind, and intellect).
I alone and changeless exist in the form of consciousness and bliss.
I am ever pure and free, without change of form and nature.
I am ever full . . . I alone exist, changeless.
I am eternal and without boundaries,
Immutable and unshakeable.
I alone exist,
Changeless in the form of consciousness and bliss.
“DASISLOKA” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Shashishekaraya Namaha!
6
Sati and Shiva
Be attached to Him, who is without attachment.
Hold on to that attachment.
Only then will you be able to leave other attachments.
SAINT THIRVALLUVAR
Sati was the perfect mate for Shiva. She had no interest in anything other than
following him and pleasing him, but this did not mean that she had no mind of
her own. On the contrary, though she was Sati, she was also Durga and Kaali,
and when she made up her mind nothing could deter her, as we shall see. But for
the moment she cared not for the loss of the luxuries of palace life, where she
was waited upon, hand and foot. All she wanted was to roam about wildly in the
wake of her strange husband, across the desolate Himalayan ranges and peaks
inhabited by wild animals, followed by his horde of goblins, the ganas. At first
he hardly glanced at her, but she cared not for his apparent lack of interest and
continued to follow him.
One day he suddenly asked her, “Why do you follow me?” She answered,
“Because I’m your wife.”
“Why did you marry me?” he queried.
“Because I’m incomplete without you,” she replied.
“I have nothing to offer you.”
“But I ask for nothing but you,” she countered.
“I have no parentage or lineage or possessions. These strange creatures alone

are my kith and kin.”
“I want nothing but you. Those whom you consider your own are also my
own,” was her reply.
Her tenacity and love at last won him over completely, and he ordered his
ganas to leave them in peace, that he would call them when he needed them.
Then the Lord took Sati into his arms and sported with her as any man with a
newlywed wife. He never left her side even for a moment, and even if he did, he
would return suddenly and close her eyes from behind, so that she would tremble
and cling to him for support. He would suddenly become invisible and then
catch her and make her shriek with fright, and then appear before her so that she
would again rush into his arms in apparent terror. Sometimes he gathered
flowers for her hair and adorned her with garlands. Sometimes when she looked
into a deep pool in order to admire her own face, he would come behind her and
gaze into the water. She was the dark monsoon cloud from behind which the full
moon was peeping, for Sati was the color of ebony and Shiva, fair as the moon.
Then he would gather lotuses from the lake and decorate her dark body with
flowers. Very often he would help to dress her after her bath and anoint her with
sandalwood perfume and apply musk on her breast.
When winter set in, Shiva thought of Kama, and Kama arrived accompanied
by Vasanta. With the arrival of spring, trees and creepers bloomed and
blossomed in the Himalayan glades in accord with the inclination of the Lord.
Lakes were covered with blooming lotuses and the gentle malaya breeze
drenched the air with perfume. Spices such as cloves and cardamom added to the
fragrance, making the bees dizzy with delight. The nights were bright with the
moon, in a sky devoid of clouds. In this enticing atmosphere, Lord Shiva
consorted with Sati for many years. Just as ropes bind an elephant, he seemed to
be bound by the loveliness of her face and her charming, provocative ways. On
the ridges and in the caverns of the Himalayan ranges, Lord Shiva sported with
Sati for twenty-five years, according to the calculation of the gods. But despite
all this play of love, never once did he lose his seed.
Once, with the advent of the monsoon season, Sati complained to Shiva, “O
dearest husband, this is a most unpleasant season for wanderers like us who are
without a fixed abode. These fearful rumblings and streaks of lightning frighten
me. Neither the sun nor the moon is visible. The huge devataru trees are falling
down with crashing sounds. The day appears as night. See my body, lacerated by
cruel hailstones that fall mercilessly on me. Only the peacocks are delighted with

the sound of thunder and dance with delight. In this season even crows and
chakora birds make nests. We alone are homeless. O my dearest Lord, please
make a residence for us without delay.”
Hearing these words of Sati, Shiva said, “O my beloved one! Let it be as you
wish. Choose the place in which you would like to stay and a fitting abode shall
be made for you. Do you wish to reside in Mount Meru where the gods reside?
Perhaps your preference is for Kasi. Name it and it shall be yours without further
delay. Your beauty will rival the beauty of the heavenly damsels and make them
blush with shame. Or do you wish to abide in the realm of Himavan, the king of
the Himalayas, with the mountain women and the daughters of the nagas
(serpents) to attend to you? Even the beasts of prey are peaceful there, for it is
the abode of many sages and saints. Perhaps you wish to dwell on my own
mountain of Kailasa, close to the abode of Kubera, the god of wealth? Make
your choice. It is all yours.”
Sati chose to go to the country of Himavan, so the Lord took her there and
made a beautiful residence for her and stayed with her for many divine years. He
was never bored of her company, and she was always enchanted with his. Lord
Shiva, who had once delighted only in the atman, now delighted only in Sati.
Day and night they gazed with delight into each other’s eyes, oblivious to the
world, wrapped in their own love.
At last one day Sati freed herself from his embrace and started questioning him
on many subjects that only he could answer. This she did for the sake of the
world, for she herself was the Divine Mother and knew all the answers.
Sati asked, “O great Yogi! I wish to know that principle from which all
creatures can find release from their misery. What is it that will enable people to
free themselves from worldly bondage and attain the supreme region?”
“O goddess Sati, listen carefully for I shall give you that knowledge that shall
free all souls in bondage. O goddess, know that the supreme knowledge consists
in experiencing the great truth, ‘I am Brahman’ (aham brahmasmi). In a perfect
intellect, nothing else is remembered. This sort of consciousness is very rare in
the world. But, O beloved, remember that I myself am the Supreme Brahman, as
is Vishnu. Devotion to him or to me is the easiest method of attaining salvation.
Supreme devotion is the same as supreme knowledge and is easier to practice.
One who is engrossed in devotion enjoys perpetual bliss. Devotion has the
power to attract me as nothing else can. I go even to the home of the outcastes if
they are devotees. The nine qualities of devotion are listening to the glories of

God, praising him, remembering him at all times, serving him, surrendering the
ego to him, worshipping him in various ways, prostrating to him, dedication to
him, and friendliness and kindness to all his creatures. The devotee always
believes that whatever I bestow on him is for his good. He dedicates everything
to me and keeps nothing for himself. One who attains these nine qualities attains
everything—perfect knowledge and worldly success, and eventual salvation. In
this Iron Age of Kali, there is no path so easy and pleasing to me as the path of
devotion. In this decadent age, jnana, or spiritual knowledge, and vairagya, or
detachment, have become misused and neglected. People who can grasp them
are rare. But O beloved! Devotion can give all the benefits of the other two and
is most pleasing to me. Remember that both Vishnu and I are subservient to
those who are devoted to us.”
Sati was very happy to hear this discourse on devotion. She continued to
question him on many matters relating to the sastras (rules), to ethics, morality,
and religion, the conduct of different people at different times, and knowledge of
yantras (mystical diagrams) and mantras (sacred sounds).
These wonderful dialogues between Shiva and Sati on all these various topics
are the basis of much of the great knowledge that is found in Hindu philosophy.
All the sacred lore relating to such sciences as astrology, medicine, herbal lore,
palmistry, and so on was given to her. Shiva explained many things with the help
of yantras and mantras. Thus Sati and Shiva, who are intrinsically nothing but
the Supreme Brahman, who are omniscient and are always determined to give
help to human beings, carried on their discourses in the Himalayan regions in
order to help the afflicted and enable human beings to rise out of the ocean of
samsara, or the wheel of human existence.
Once Shiva, accompanied by Sati and seated on his bull, wandered over the
earth. This was the time of the Sri Rama avatara (incarnation), when Lord
Vishnu had taken on the form of the prince of Kosala in order to rid the world of
the demon Ravana. Rama had been exiled to the forest by his stepmother. While
they were residing there his beloved wife, Sita, was abducted by Ravana. Rama
was bereft and wandered, lamenting the loss of his wife. It was at this time that
Shiva and Sati came to the forest known as Dandaka and saw Rama totally
bereft, bemoaning the loss of his wife as would any lovelorn husband.
Seeing Rama and his brother, Lakshmana, Sati asked Shiva, “O Lord, who are
these two persons who seem to be greatly distressed over some loss? How is it
that you are so delighted to see them and have even gone down and bowed to the

blue-complexioned one?”
Shiva smiled and explained, “O goddess! These two are brothers called Rama
and Lakshmana. They are the sons of Dasaratha, king of Ayodhya, and belong to
the solar dynasty. The elder one, Rama, is the avatara of Vishnu. He is incapable
of being harassed. The Lord has incarnated on earth for the welfare and
protection of the good. In his human form he merely plays the role of the grief-
stricken husband. Actually he is ever immersed in the bliss of the self.” Seeing
Rama’s extreme sorrow, Sati could not quite believe Shiva’s explanation. Seeing
her doubt, Shiva told her to go and test Rama. Sati was all too ready to put him
to the test and decided to take on the form of Sita and go before Rama. “If he is
indeed Vishnu,” she thought, “he will be able to penetrate my disguise.”
Rama immediately saw through her disguise and bowed to her, saying, “O
goddess Sati, obeisance to you. Why have you thrown off your own form and
taken on this guise? Where is your Lord, Shiva? Have you come alone?”
Sati was delighted to hear Rama’s words and became convinced of his divinity.
She told him the whole story of how she had doubted Shiva’s word and had
wanted to test Rama. But she still had a doubt. She had always thought that
Shiva and Vishnu were on par with each other, so why did her husband worship
Rama? This was her next question.
Rama answered, “Once Shiva made the divine architect Visvakarma erect a
fantastic hall in which was placed a throne of great beauty. He invited all the
gods, sages, and celestial beings to congregate there. Then he invited Vishnu
from Vaikunta and made him sit on that exquisite throne, and at a most
auspicious hour, to the accompaniment of Vedic chants, he placed the golden
crown on Vishnu’s head and announced to all that from then on, Vishnu was
worthy of worship equal to that given to him.
“At that time, Shiva said, ‘You are Lord of the universe. You are the one who
is supremely worthy of worship by all. You will be invincible in battle even
against me. I shall personally give salvation to your devotees.’ Thus did Lord
Shiva speak and from that time onward he worships me and I worship him.”
Sati was satisfied when she heard this, but she was feeling troubled at having
doubted her husband’s words. When she returned to Shiva she was pensive and
sad. Seeing her in this mood, Shiva inquired after the cause of her distress. She
voiced her doubt to Shiva, and he immediately thought of the promise he had
once made to Vishnu, that if Sati ever doubted him or his teachings, he would
abandon her. Although he did not say a word of this to her, she guessed that

some disturbing thought had arisen in his mind, and while he continued to
behave with the greatest of love to her, both of them realized that soon some
incident would occur that would enable him to keep his word.
When all beings are realized as one’s atman [self], that seer of oneness
has no delusion of sorrow.
“YOGA VASISHTA” BY SAGE VASISHTA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Rudraya Namaha!
7
Daksha’s Yajna
More fiery is He than fire,
More cool is He than water,
None fully understands His mercy.
Aloof He may be but close to His devotees,
More than a mother, tenderhearted is He.
SAINT THIRUMOOLAR
Once a great yajna, or fire sacrifice, was performed by the sages who assembled
at the sacred confluence of the three rivers, Ganga, Yamuna, and Saraswati,
which is known as Prayaga. Lord Shiva had also come there, accompanied by
his wife Sati. All those assembled there rose from their seats and paid obeisance
to him. They seated him with great honor and eulogized him with great devotion.
Soon after, Daksha came into the hall, and everyone rose to honor him. Shiva,
however, remained in his seat. Daksha, who had become arrogant due to his
status in the world, was incensed by this mark of disrespect from his own son-in-
law.
Angrily he spoke, “How is it that when the rest of the world gives me respect,
only this man who is my son-in-law arrogantly refuses to honor me? He is totally
uncultured and mannerless. But then, what can you expect of one whose
attendants are goblins and ghosts? He lives in cremation grounds and wears
serpents for garlands. He may be my daughter’s husband, but I’m going to curse
him.”
Then turning to the others he proclaimed, “Listen, all of you. From this day

onward, let this Shiva, who lacks nobility of birth and pedigree, who frequents
cemeteries and burial grounds, be expelled from all sacrifices. Henceforth none
of you should give him a share of any sacrifice!” Brighu was one of the sages
who acquiesced to these stupid words of Daksha. Shiva said nothing, but his
beloved attendant Nandi, who could take on the form of his vehicle, the bull,
rose and denounced Daksha in forcible terms.
“O foolish Daksha,” he said, “how dare you curse Lord Shiva, whose very
presence sanctifies all the worlds. He is Mahadeva, the great Lord by whom the
universe is created, sustained, and destroyed. One glance from him is enough to
reduce you and your entourage to ashes. The fact that he doesn’t do it now
shows the extent of his mercy. But beware! You will soon have your pride
reduced to ashes!”
Daksha was furious with Nandi for daring to rebuke him publicly, and cursed
him as well as all of Shiva’s attendants. “All of you will be condemned as
heretics and will be cast out of Vedic society. Matted hair, ashes, and skulls will
be your ornaments. You will be expelled from all Vedic rites.”
Hearing this, Nandi was furious and cursed them all in return. “O foolish
people, the great Lord Shiva has been cursed by evil-minded sages like Brighu
because of their pride in being Brahmins. But I tell you, these Brahmins who are
indulging in lust, anger, covetousness, and pride will become shameless beggars.
They will be perpetually poor and will go even to the houses of the Shudras for
the sake of money. Due to their greed for money they will fall into hell and be
born as rakshasas (demons). Daksha’s handsome face will soon disappear and be
replaced by the face of a goat.”
On hearing this exchange of curses, there was a hue and cry amongst those
assembled. Only Shiva was unperturbed. Very sweetly he turned to Nandi and
asked, “O dear one, why have you become so angry? Daksha cannot curse me
for I myself am the sacrifice, the sacrificial rite, the adjunct of the sacrifice, and
the very self of the sacrifice. Who is Daksha? Who are you? Who are all these
people? In reality I am all. Knowing this you should not grieve, nor should you
curse anyone. Daksha has done this through his ignorance, for which he will be
forced to pay a heavy price. But you are my devotee and should be free from
anger and other negative emotions.”
Hearing these wise words of his master, Nandi became calm and free from
anger. After this unpleasant scene, Shiva returned to his abode accompanied by
Sati and the ganas. Daksha and his followers also returned to their respective

abodes. He was seething with anger against Shiva and waiting for an opportunity
to put his curses into practice.
In order to insult Shiva, Daksha started a great yajna to which he invited all
the gods, sages, and celestial beings. Needless to say, he deliberately avoided
sending an invitation to Shiva. Brahma and Vishnu were invited and brought in
state to the grand yajna, the likes of which had never been seen by anyone
before. The place where Daksha held his sacrifice was called Kankhala, near
modern Haridwar, presently known as Kankhal. Since Shiva was not invited, his
daughter Sati was also left out, though formerly she had been Daksha’s favorite.
To house the august assembly of gods, sages, and emperors, Visvakarma, the
divine architect, created many beautiful mansions.
The sage Dadichi, a devotee of Shiva, spoke forcibly to Daksha, “O Daksha!
This sacrifice will be incomplete and imperfect unless Shiva is invited. Go
immediately with the sages and bring the great Lord along with Sati to this
place. He is the source of all auspiciousness. Without him, everything will be
inauspicious and imperfect.”
Daksha replied haughtily, “Vishnu, who is the prime cause of this cosmos, who
is the source of all virtues, has graced this place by his presence. Brahma, the
grandfather of all the worlds, has come, along with the Vedas and the
Upanishads. Indra, the king of gods, as well as the celestial sages have come
with their retinues. What is the necessity of having Shiva here? He is of ignoble
birth, the Lord of goblins, ghosts, and spirits. I gave my beloved daughter to him
only at the bidding of Brahma. He is totally unworthy of being invited to this
noble assembly.” Dadichi cursed Daksha, told him that his destruction was
imminent, and stalked out of the yajna, followed by some of Shiva’s other
devotees.
In the meantime, on the mountain of Gandhamadana in the Himalayas, Sati
was engrossed in sport with her friends. Suddenly she saw her sister, Rohini,
traveling in an aerial vehicle accompanied by her husband, Chandra, the moon
deity. She asked her friend Vijaya to find out their destination. They told her of
the details of Daksha’s sacrifice to which all beings had been invited, and to
which they were now proceeding. Now Sati saw that all the rest of her fifty-nine
sisters and many other celestial beings were also proceeding in the same
direction. “Why has my father not invited my husband and me?” she thought to
herself. “It must be an omission on his part. Let me go and ask Shiva about this.”
So thinking, she ran to Shiva and told him the whole story. Shiva, who knew

everything, looked pityingly at his beloved Sati, took her lovingly on his lap, and
asked her what was troubling her. She said excitedly, “My Lord, my father is
conducting a great sacrifice to which everybody is going. Why are we not going?
Please let us go. I earnestly request you to go with me.”
“My dearest one, don’t you realize that those who go uninvited to another
person’s house are sure to be shown disrespect. We have not been invited, and so
we should certainly not go for the yajna.”
Sati’s normally dark color became even darker and her black eyes flashed
brilliantly at hearing these words of Shiva, and she said, “If you, O Lord, by
whose presence all sacrifices become auspicious, have not been invited, then my
father is surely guilty of a terrible crime. I must go to this sacrifice and ask him,
as well as all those present there, why they have gone to a sacrifice to which you,
Lord of all the worlds, have not been invited. So please give me permission to
go.”
Shiva realized that if he denied her, she would pine and die. He also knew that
if she went, death awaited her. Sadly, he gave her permission to go. He told her
to mount his own vehicle, the bull Nandi, and sent sixty thousand of his
attendants to wait upon her and guard her if need arose. Sati bedecked herself
and set out for her father’s home with all the paraphernalia of royalty. The
attendants followed her, holding the white umbrella of royalty above her head,
waving gaily-colored banners and yak fans, and blaring conchs and trumpets.
Shiva sadly watched her departure, knowing that he would never see her in this
form again.
Sati reached her father’s mansion, which was abounding with wondrous sights,
and descended from Nandi and went inside alone. Her mother, Virini, and sisters
greeted her with great delight, but Daksha pretended not to see her. Sati looked
around and saw all the great souls of the world assembled there. She saw that
seats had been allotted to all the deities except Shiva, and she became furious.
Her eyes burned like red-hot coals and flashed with blue fire. Her tresses that
had been tied became loose and disheveled. Her third eye, normally invisible in
the middle of her forehead, opened and began to throb and quiver. Her aspect
was fully that of Kaali, or the Destroyer.
In a thunderous voice she asked Daksha, “How is it that my husband, whose
presence alone can make all functions complete, has not been invited? Any rite
performed without him will be impure. I am ashamed to see how senseless and
mean my own father has become.” Turning to Vishnu, Brahma, and the other

gods, she unleashed the full power of her anger on them, “Are you all so dense
that you don’t realize the greatness of Shiva? How could you come to a place
that has been defiled by not having his holy feet step there?”
All kept quiet, but Daksha retorted, “Who asked you to come here when you
were not invited? Knowing Shiva to be a coarse and uncultured type with
indecent apparel and rude manners, I deliberately refrained from inviting him
here. I rue the day that I gave you to that barbarian. However, now that you have
come, you may stay. Kindly calm yourself and take your share of the sacrifice.”
Sati was filled with anger and sorrow. “I scorn to accept your offer, O
Daksha!” she flashed at him with fiery eyes. “My husband told me not to go. He
warned me that I would be insulted but alas! I did not heed his words for love of
you, my father. But now I see that you are despicable. I cannot bear to remain in
this body that has come from you. No longer can I bear to be called Dakshayani
(daughter of Daksha). Therefore I shall give up my body here and now, in front
of all of you. I can never return to my beloved Lord with this body that has now
become defiled. All those who reproach Shiva and all those who listen to these
reproaches will go to hell, unless they remove themselves instantly from this
hall.”
Repentant, she thought of how she had overridden her Lord’s advice not to go
to the sacrifice. Turning to her father once again she said, “Shiva has matted hair,
carries a skull in his hands, and resides in cremation grounds, but even the gods
and sages keep the dust of his feet on their heads. You are wicked in every
respect. I will have nothing further to do with this body born of you. This body
born of your seed, I shall cast off as a corpse. It is worthy of contempt.” So
saying Sati retreated into silence. Turning to the north, she sat in yogic trance,
covering her entire body with her upper garment. Fixing her mind on her Lord,
she balanced the prana (inward breath, life force) and apana (exhalation) within
her body, and lifted the udana (upward moving air) from her navel, taking it
through her heart chakra and then into her throat chakra, and finally fixing it in
the ajna chakra (spiritual center) in the middle of her forehead between her
brows. Remembering her Lord alone, she left her body and entered the celestial
regions.
There was a big commotion when Sati left her body. Everybody cried, “Fie on
Daksha! Fie on this sacrifice!” and so on. Hearing the loud lamentations, the
ganas of Shiva, who had been waiting at the door, now rushed in and started to
shout and cry. With furious upraised weapons they charged Daksha and others

and started to kill them. Some killed themselves because they feared Shiva’s
wrath if they returned without Sati. On seeing this, the sage Brighu invoked
many fearful spirits in order to stop the onslaught. Thousands of powerful spirits,
called Rbhus, rose up, and a terrible fight ensued between the two parties, which
ended in the ganas of Shiva being routed. They were forced to run for their lives
back to Kailasa. At that time, a celestial voice declared that Daksha’s sacrifice
was doomed to end in a terrible way.
“Since Sati, mother of the universe, and Shiva, father of the universe, were not
propitiated by you, misfortune shall befall you.” Hearing this ethereal voice,
everyone was stunned and stood aghast. Most of the people left the place. Others
advised Daksha to propitiate Shiva immediately before further harm came to
him.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
 Aum Viroopakshaya Namaha!
8
The Wrath of Shiva
O Destroyer of sin and sorrow!
Prostrations to your anger!
And then to your arrow, your bow, and your hands.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
The frightened ganas ran back to Shiva and begged him to save them. They told
him the whole sad story of how Sati had given up her body, because it had been
born of a man who had insulted her Lord. Hearing this dreadful news Shiva
became filled with sorrow, and out of his sorrow was born a terrible anger. He
became Rudra, the Destroyer. His eyes were frowning and furious and emitted
red and blue sparks of fire. Thus he got the name Virupaksha, the malignant-
eyed. Jumping up from the rock on which he had been sitting, he wrenched out a
lock of his matted hair and struck the mountain with it. A loud, explosive sound
was heard, as of a huge rock being cleft. From one half of Shiva’s locks there
appeared an enormous being with the visage of Rudra, with thousands of hands
blazing like firebrands; his name was Virabhadra. From the other half was born
the goddess known as Bhadrakaali. She was dripping blood, fearsome to behold,
with matted hair falling like a cape over her back, fiery red eyes emitting sparks
like hot coals, red tongue lolling out, and many hands brandishing upraised
weapons.
In a thunderous voice Virabhadra spoke, “O Rudra of terrific appearance, with
sun, moon, and fire for your eyes, command me quickly. What should I do? One
who is devoted to you will always be victorious. With your favor there is nothing

I cannot accomplish.”
Shiva ordered Virabhadra and Bhadrakaali to march with the ganas to
Daksha’s sacrifice and destroy it completely. Virabhadra, who had the same
features, dress, and embellishments as Rudra, went ahead in a chariot drawn by
lions. Bhadrakaali went with him, accompanied by the nine Durgas (navadurgas)
—Kaali, Kartyayani, Isani, Chamunda, Mundamardini, Bhadra, Mahakali,
Twarita, and Vaishnavi—and many goblins. A host of angry furies, ghosts,
ghouls, genies, monsters, dragons, demons, freaks, fiends, and spirits
accompanied them. Three crore (10 million) of rabid canine species were born of
the hair of Shiva. A virulent type of fever accompanied each of them.
As soon as this awesome contingent set out, many bad omens were noted in
Daksha’s yaga. The whole earth went into convulsions at the very spot of the
yaga. Falling stars and comets were seen, and the sun became spotted and had
terrifying circles around it. Thousands of vultures hovered around the spot.
Jackals and dogs howled while a fierce tornado tore the yajnashala to pieces.
Seeing the approach of Virabhadra’s army, the earth with its oceans and
continents shuddered in terror. Daksha ran to Vishnu and begged for mercy.
Vishnu replied that he would have to pay for the insults he had dealt to Shiva,
the great Lord—Maheswara. Daksha begged Indra and the other gods to help
him, and they set out to fight the macabre army, but Virabhadra made short work
of them and they fled in terror.
Then the horrific army began a methodical annihilation of the yajnashala.
Some of them hacked the beams and superstructure while others attacked the
inner apartments. One group destroyed the sacrificial fireplace, another the halls,
and some the kitchens. Others shattered the sacred vessels and sacrificial
hearths. Then they bound the officiating priests and chased the fleeing gods.
Virabhadra pulled out Brighu’s beard, because he had ridiculed Shiva by twirling
his moustache. He plucked out Bhaga’s eyeballs, for he had rolled his eyes and
encouraged Daksha to insult Shiva. He knocked out Pushan’s teeth, for he had
laughed, displaying all his teeth when Rudra was insulted. Then he tried to
behead Daksha but found it impossible. He thought for a while and then realized
that since Daksha had acted in a beastly way, he had to be tied to a stake and
slaughtered like a sacrificial beast. Bhadrakaali dragged Daksha by the hair to
the altar, and Virabhadra raised his axe and beheaded the patriarch. His lifeless
corpse fell on the ground with a thud. Bhadrakaali drank the blood, and
Virabhadra offered Daksha’s head to the sacrificial fire. Bhadrakaali made a
garland of the other heads that were rolling on the ground, while Virabhadra

smeared his body with the blood. The two of them danced a macabre dance of
victory in the eerie light of the dying embers, accompanied by the shouts and
claps of the delighted ganas. Then, after setting fire to the whole campus, they
returned victorious to their master. Shiva now came to be known as Hara, the
ravisher.
In the meantime, the defeated gods went to Brahma and requested that he help
them restore Daksha’s sacrifice, since he had started it only after getting their
promise that they would help him. Brahma as usual went along with them to the
abode of Vishnu to beg, “O Lord of Lakshmi! O Lord of gods! We have come to
invoke your aid in completing the yajna of Daksha.”
Vishnu said, “O Brahma, since the gods have committed a sin in taking part in
a yaga to which Shiva had not been invited, the only thing you can do now is to
propitiate him by falling at his feet. Since I also have been guilty of attending the
sacrifice, I will also accompany you. I attended the yaga only because Daksha is
my devotee and I can never let down a devotee.”
Thus all of them set out to the abode of Shiva in order to placate him. They
saw him seated under the banyan tree with his left leg placed over his right thigh
and knee. A garland of rudraksha beads was suspended from his left wrist and
he was showing the tarakamudra, or teaching position, with his right hand. This
was the posture of Dakshinamurthy that he had shown Brahma and Vishnu at the
time of creation. Seated on a mat of darbha grass, he was imparting the
knowledge of the eternal Brahman to the sages. The crescent moon peeped
through his matted locks, and his body was covered with ashes. He looked like
the god of peace, for all his anger was spent. Friend of the world that he was, he
always engaged in the practice of austerities for the good of all. Vishnu and the
other gods approached him and made obeisance to him.
They said, “Obeisance to the great Lord, who is calm and peaceful, who is the
benefactor of the universe. Noble souls always show extreme tolerance and
never take revenge against those whose minds have come under the sway of the
Lord’s maya. Therefore, O Lord, it behooves you to forgive those who have been
infatuated by maya. Kindly do what should be done to complete the yajna of
Daksha, which has been defiled by your ganas. May the patriarch Daksha be
revived and all those who have been wounded be made whole once again. O
Rudra, may the entire remaining portion of the yajna be given over to you.”
Hearing this, Rudra was pleased and said, “I did all this to purify Daksha and
not out of revenge. That patriarch whose head was burnt will have the head of a

goat in its place; Bhaga, whose eyes were gouged out, will have to see with the
eyes of Mitra; and Pushan, who had his teeth knocked out, will have to eat
powdered rice or eat with the teeth of the master of the yajna. Brighu will have
the beard of a goat to replace the one he lost. All those priests and others who
lost their limbs will have them restored.”
Then at the request of the gods, Rudra proceeded with them to Kankhala, the
place of the sacrifice. He commanded Virabhadra to bring Daksha’s body to him.
He did so, and Shiva told the gods to bring the head of the sacrificial goat and
join it with Daksha’s trunk. When Shiva cast his benign glance at the corpse, it
came to life. Daksha, who had acted like a goat, now got the head of a goat. As
soon as he saw Shiva standing before him, Daksha’s mind, which had been filled
with hatred, became purified, and he started to extol him, even though his voice
choked with emotion at the thought of his beloved daughter, who was no more.
Daksha said, “I thank you for giving me the punishment I deserved or else I
would have been condemned to hell for having insulted such a noble personage
as you. You are indeed Shankara, the benevolent one.”
Daksha was now commanded by Rudra to complete the yajna with the help of
other priests. All the gods extolled Shiva, and Daksha completed the yajna with
all formality. At the conclusion of the yaga, Iswara himself, in the form of Sri
Hari, appeared and blessed the participants of the yaga.
Sri Hari spoke, “O learned ones! Know me to be the supreme cause of the
world, the sole witness of everything, the self-effulgent being, attributeless and
undecaying. I assume different names, such as Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, for
the purposes of creation, maintenance, and destruction. This is done through my
yoga-maya, which has the three gunas of sattva, rajas, and tamas. The ignorant
man sees Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra as different, even though they are all in
me, the all-comprehensive Brahman. Just as a man will not see the different parts
of his body as different from himself, so also one who has taken refuge in me
will see all beings as parts of me. He attains eternal peace who does not perceive
any difference among the three—Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva—who are one in
nature and who pervade all beings.”
Thus blessing all those who were there, Sri Hari vanished from view, and the
gods returned to their respective abodes. Though he had forgiven Daksha, Shiva
was filled with agony at the loss of his beloved Sati. Picking up her lifeless
corpse, he wandered over the whole universe carrying her lifeless body in his
arms. His ganas followed him silently, tears rolling down their cheeks, not

knowing how to console their Lord. Their mournful cries rent the galaxies and
created havoc in the world. Brahma realized that this had to stop or else the
whole universe would be drowned in Shiva’s sorrow. He appealed to Vishnu,
who wielded his discus, the Sudarshana Chakra, and let it fly with great
precision toward Shiva. It cut the corpse of Sati into 108 pieces. Those places
where the pieces fell are known as Shakti peethas and are spots of great psychic
power, capable of granting boons to all who worship there.
When the body of Sati was destroyed, there was nothing left but memories to
remind Shiva of his beloved. With his divine insight he knew that Sati could
never be destroyed for she was Shivaa, a part of his own being, and that she
would resurrect herself in another place at another time. In the meantime he
could no longer bear to live in the place where he had enjoyed all types of
pleasures with Sati. He isolated himself in the icy mountain caves of the
Himalayas and became a recluse once more.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Kapardine Namaha!
9
Parvati Seeks Her Lord
He rejoices in having as His lifemate the Mountain Maid, whose gait is
like the female elephant and the female swan.
SAINT SAMBANDAR
As mentioned earlier, Daksha had sixty daughters, of whom Svadha was given in
marriage to the manes. Svadha had three daughters, of whom Mena was the
eldest, Dhanya was second, and Kalavati, third. Once the three sisters went to
the abode of Vishnu in order to have darshan (a vision) of the Lord. A great
concourse of sages and yogis was there. It so happened that the four boy sages
known as Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and Sanatkumara also arrived to pay
obeisance to the Lord. Seeing them, the entire assembly of sages rose up in
respect. Submerged in their own thoughts, the three sisters did not rise. Seeing
this lack of respect, Sanaka and the others, though steeped in bliss always,
became angry in order to fulfill the inscrutable purpose of the Lord. They cursed
the sisters that they would be born as human beings on the earth. On hearing
this, the sisters became very sad and fell at their feet begging for forgiveness.
Sanaka then said, “The curse of a sage is always for the benefit of the world,
so you should not worry. Mena will become the wife of Himavan, who is
actually a part of Lord Vishnu. The goddess Shakti will be born as Mena’s
daughter and will be known as Parvati; she will become the wife of Lord Shiva.
The second, Dhanya, will become a great yogini and wife of the great saint-king
of Videha known as Janaka. Lakshmi herself will be born as her daughter and
will be called Sita. She will become the wife of Vishnu in his incarnation as

Rama. The third sister, Kalavati, will be born into a Vaishya family of cowherds
and will be married to Vrishabhanu; Radha will be born as her daughter. This
Radha who is now a resident of Goloka will be the beloved of Krishna.” The
sisters were very happy when they heard this and thanked the sages for their
curse, which was actually a blessing, not only to them but also to the whole
world.
Along the northern boundary of Bharatavarsha stands the great mountain
known as Himalaya, or the abode of snow. It has a twofold aspect: one is the
achala, or immovable aspect, and the other aspect has form. In this human form
he is known as Himavan and is king of all mountains. The Himalaya is the
storehouse of various gems and medicinal herbs, and many fierce animals live
there. Even the gods love to sport amongst the lofty peaks. Sages from ancient
times have found that these regions are saturated with spirituality. It is no
wonder the place came to be called the Land of the Gods.
Himavan, Lord of the Himalayas, desired to marry and asked the gods to find a
suitable mate for him. The gods approached the manes and asked them to give
their daughter Mena to him, since great benefit would accrue to all beings from
this alliance. Remembering the words of the sages, they agreed joyfully, and the
beautiful Mena was given in marriage to Himavan. Vishnu and the other gods
attended the grand function.
Soon after that, Shiva married Sati and the divine couple took up their abode
near Himavan and Mena. As soon as she saw Sati, Mena wished for a daughter
just like her and offered Sati many delicacies. Sati knew of Mena’s wish, and at
the time of casting off her body, made the wish to be reborn as Mena’s daughter.
Seeing Shiva take to the life of a recluse, the gods decided to persuade him to
get married once again.
They eulogized Durga, or Shivaa, the feminine counterpart of Shiva and asked
her to take birth as the daughter of Himavan and Mena. “O goddess! You are
Gayatri, mother of the Vedas; Savitri, glory of the sun; and Saraswati, goddess of
knowledge. To those who perform good actions you are Lakshmi, goddess of
fortune; to sinners, you are the goddes of ignominy. Your smile brings peace for
the universe and your frown, war. You are the Divine Mother of all creatures.”
The goddess appeared before them seated in a bejeweled chariot drawn by
lions. Her luster surpassed that of a crore of suns. Seeing this wondrous form,
the gods bowed and begged her to take on a body once more. “O divine Mother!
Formerly you were born as the daughter of Daksha and married Shiva. Ever

since you cast off your body, Shiva has been inconsolable. The purpose of your
incarnation is still to be fulfilled, so please deign to take birth once again as the
daughter of Himavan and Mena, so that all may be happy.”
The goddess promised to comply with their request, and the gods asked Mena
to do rigorous austerities in order to have the goddess as her daughter. Mena
passed twenty-seven years observing vows and fasts in order to propitiate the
goddess, who eventually appeared before her and blessed her, and promised to
incarnate herself as her daughter.
As soon as she became pregnant, Mena shone with a divine radiance. Her
husband, Himavan, was bent on satisfying her every wish and loaded her with
gifts of love. At the time of the divine birth, all the stars and planets were in
auspicious positions. The gods rained flowers from above as Himavan’s wife
gave birth to the divine child. The whole of Himavan’s country rejoiced, and the
happy father gave many gifts to the poor. The child was called Kaali, as well as
Parvati. She shone in dark splendor like a blue lotus.
As a child she used to play with her friends on the banks of the Ganga with
balls and dolls, as would any ordinary child. Though the parents had many
heroic sons, their fond gaze always followed the antics of their beloved daughter.
Once the sage Narada went to their abode. Seeing the sage, Himavan was very
happy and asked him to look at his daughter’s palm and foretell her future.
Narada did so and said, “O Mena! O Himavan! There is no doubt that this
daughter of yours has a remarkable future. She has all auspicious signs. She will
heighten the glory of her parents and delight her husband. But there is one
abnormal sign on her palm—her husband will be a naked yogi without any
qualities. He will have neither mother nor father and will be quite indifferent to
honor or dishonor. He will be free from lust, and his manner and dress will
appear inauspicious.”
Hearing the words of the sage, the parents were most distressed, but Parvati
was delighted for she knew the description to be true of Shiva, whom she had
already wed in her mind.
Seeing the distress of the parents, Narada comforted them with these words,
“O Lord of mountains, don’t be unhappy. Lord Shiva will be her bridegroom,
and he fits in with all that I have said. In him there is neither good nor bad,
neither auspicousness nor inauspiciousness. Let her propitiate him with
austerities and no doubt he will agree to marry her. Love such as is found
between the two of them will not be found anywhere else. With Parvati as his

consort, Shiva will become Ardhanareeswara, or half-male and half-female, with
Parvati forming part of his body. By propitiating Shiva with her penance, she
will acquire the luster of gold and be given the name Gauri.”
Himavan had another doubt. “O celestial sage, I have heard it said that Lord
Shiva is totally immersed in tapasya and abhors all contact with anyone,
especially women. I have heard that he made a promise to his wife Sati that he
would never take another wife, so how will he agree to marry my daughter,
Parvati?”
Narada smilingly replied, “Have no fears, O Himavan! This daughter of yours
was formerly the daughter of Daksha and was known as Sati. It is she who has
now reincarnated herself as Parvati. There is no doubt that she will become
Shiva’s wife. You have now placed her on your lap, but her permanent abode
will be on Shiva’s lap.” Thus comforting the Lord of the mountains, Narada took
his lute and departed on his perpetual errand of going from world to world,
singing the praises of the Lord.
Even though Mena wanted a handsome husband for her daughter, she heeded
her husband’s advice and encouraged Parvati to do penance in order to secure
Lord Shiva as her husband.
Himavan said, “The word ‘inauspicious’ cannot be used in connection with
Shiva. He is the soul of all auspiciousness. So advise your daughter to do
continuous tapasya with the aim of getting Shiva as her husband. Only good will
accrue to her from this.”
Mena went to her daughter to advise her, but on seeing her slender frame, the
mother’s heart was filled with pity, and she was unable to tell her to perform
tapasya. Parvati understood her mother’s reluctance and said, “O mother,
yesterday I had a dream in which a sage came and asked me to perform penance
for Shiva.”
Himavan also said that he’d had a dream in which an ascetic, whom he later
came to recognize as Shiva, came to his city and stayed there. So the parents
decided to wait till the dream came true. Sure enough, soon after, an ascetic, who
was none other than Lord Shiva, came to Himavan’s territory with a few of his
ganas in order to do penance. Himavan went to welcome him and told him of his
desire to serve him to the best of his ability.
Shiva was pleased and said, “I have come to this mountain to perform
penance, and the only service you can render me is to see that I am left
undisturbed by everyone.”

Himavan agreed and gave an order that no one should disturb the Lord. Then
he took some fruits and flowers and, accompanied by his daughter, went to the
Lord and said, “My Lord, my daughter is very eager to serve you. Please consent
to accept her service along with her two maids.”
Shiva took one look at Parvati, who was beautiful beyond words in the first
flush of youth, and hurriedly closed his eyes. Her complexion was like a blue
lotus, her budding breasts ended in a slender waist that could be spanned by his
two hands, and her black curls shone with a divine luster. Turning to Himavan,
he said that in future he should come alone, without his daughter, “A woman is a
phase of illusion. A young woman is a hindrance to ascetics. I am an ascetic, a
yogi, what use would I have for a young woman as beautiful as your daughter?”
Himavan was dumb and did not know what to say. But Parvati spoke up with the
courage of love.
“O Lord,” she said, “have you considered the fact that all activity comes under
Prakriti? Even this activity of tapasya can be done only because you are under
the sway of Prakriti.”
Shiva replied, “I am destroying Prakriti with my penance. In reality I am
without the attributes of Prakriti.”
Parvati replied, “Don’t you know that I am Prakriti and you are Purusha?
Without me you are actionless, attributeless, and qualityless. You are also
incomprehensible.”
Shiva laughed and said, “O Parvati! I see that you are a champion of the
Sankhya system, but seem to know little of Vedanta. Know me to be the
Supreme Brahman, unsullied by illusion, beyond the workings of Prakriti,
comprehensible only through spiritual knowledge. You cannot affect me, even
though you are Prakriti.”
Parvati replied, “If, as you say, you are superior to Prakriti, then why should
you do tapasya at all, and why should you be afraid of my being near you?”
Shiva was delighted with her quick repartee and said with a smile, “Very well,
Parvati. See what you can do to me! You may render me whatever service you
please.”
Elated with her success, Parvati returned home with her father. After that she
went daily with her maids and served the three-eyed God, her chosen deity, with
great devotion. She washed his feet and drank the holy water and wiped his feet
with a cloth warmed by fire. She worshipped him with the prescribed sixteen
types of offerings. Sometimes she sang exquisite songs and sometimes danced.

After cleaning the glade in which he was doing tapasya, with her own hands
with a wattle broom, she returned to her own abode. Many years elapsed like this
with the Lord immersed in tapasya and never noticing what she was doing. At
last one day he came to know of her activities and thought to himself, “She is
acting with perfect self-control and great devotion, but there are still some traces
of ego left in her. These can be erased only after she herself performs penance.”
Thinking thus, the Lord reverted to his state of samadhi and did not notice her
any more. Parvati continued to serve him, day after day, unperturbed by his
apparent indifference.
In the meantime Brahma and the other gods were getting a bit worried. They
were being harassed by the demon Taraka and knew that the only one who could
destroy him was the offspring of Shiva and Parvati. But a consummation of their
union seemed to be a remote prospect, so they decided to employ Kama, the god
of love, to aid them.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Kamaraye Namaha!
10
The Defeat of Kama
He dances while the host of ghouls stand round Him and sing.
A river has He atop the matted coil of His locks.
The Vedas set to the notes of music does He sing.
SAINT SAMBANDAR
As has been mentioned before, thirteen of the daughters of the patriarch Daksha
were married to the great sage Kashyapa. Of these, the eldest, Diti, had an evil
mind and was the mother of all the demons. Aditi, her sister, who was of a noble
disposition, was the mother of the gods. Once Diti approached her husband and
begged him to give her a son who would be capable of defeating the gods who
were the sons of her sister, Aditi.
Kashyapa was a man who knew that it was useless to try to reason with his
wife Diti, who had a crooked mind, so he did not try to argue with her but
advised her to perform certain austerities. She did this with alacrity and
eventually gave birth to a son called Vajranga, who had adamantine limbs
resembling the hardness of diamonds, as his name implies. At the bidding of his
mother he captured Indra and the other gods and punished them. Aditi, who was
the mother of the gods, complained to Brahma, who approached Vajranga and
begged him to release the gods. Vajranga was a devotee of Shiva and, pleased
with Brahma’s gentle approach, he released the gods. “I did this only to please
my mother,” he said. “In reality I have no desire to conquer the worlds. I would
rather be instructed by you on the essence of life, by which I can always remain
happy and free from fear.”

Brahma was very pleased with this son of Diti, and he created a beautiful
woman called Varangi, whom he gave to Vajranga as his wife. They lived
happily for some time, and Varangi delighted him with her service and love. He
asked her to choose whatever boon she wanted. She immediately asked for a son
who would conquer the three worlds and cause misery to Vishnu. Vajranga was
in a dilemma when he heard this strange request from his dutiful wife. He
certainly did not want enmity with the gods, neither could he afford to displease
his wife. He decided to do tapasya to Brahma and ask him for the boon of a
good son and thus please his wife without harming the gods. At the end of the
period of austerities, Brahma appeared before him and granted the boon. His
wife conceived and delivered in due time. The child had an enormous body, and
at the time of his birth, many evil portents were seen in the world. Vajranga
realized that his son was a demon as wished by his wife and named him Taraka.
The demon performed severe penance for many years to Brahma, and when
Brahma appeared, Taraka requested from him two boons. One was that none
should equal him in strength in all the three worlds, and the other was that only a
son of Shiva could kill him. He knew Shiva to be a yogi and thought the
possibility of Shiva begetting a son was remote. As usual, Brahma weakly
agreed to both requests.
The demon then started committing atrocities in all the three worlds and
afflicted gods and humans alike. Whatever he wanted he took by force, whether
from gods, sages, or humans. Since he had all the three worlds under his control,
he declared himself to be Indra, king of gods. Dismissing the gods, he installed
demons in their places. As usual, the gods with Indra as their leader approached
Brahma and begged him to do something. Brahma was the cause of all their
troubles due to his indiscriminate giving of boons to fiends like Taraka. Brahma
said that it would not be proper for him to kill Taraka, since Taraka was his
devotee.
“But I have a remedy for you,” he said. “The only person who is capable of
killing him is the son of Shiva. This is the boon that I myself have given him.
However, as you know, at the moment Shiva is deep in samadhi and refuses to
look at Parvati, the daughter of Himavan, who is serving him with great
devotion. It is up to you to see that he weds Parvati and begets a son. Only the
offspring of his seed is capable of killing Tarakasura.”
Hearing this, Indra immediately thought of Kama, who appeared before him in
all his beauty, accompanied by his wife Rati and Vasanta, the spring season.

Indra requested him to go to the Himalayas and use all his wiles in order to
persuade Shiva to look on Parvati with favor. “Go and fill Shiva’s heart with
desire for Parvati. Force him to give up his tapasya and embrace the entrancing
princess of the mountains,” said Indra.
Kama was very conceited. He was proud of his prowess and thought himself to
be superior to the gods, since even they fell victim to his fatal arrows. He told
Indra proudly that he was capable of accomplishing certain things that even the
king of gods could not do.
He proceeded to Himavan’s abode and stationed himself at a place close to
where Lord Shiva was doing tapasya. Spring spread her exquisite carpet of
flowers and covered the trees with fragrant flowers and fruits. The warm malaya
breeze swept across the icy peaks, enfolding them with the scent of exotic
blooms. The snow melted and turned into gurgling rivers and limpid pools in
which lotuses blossomed. All the birds were busy making nests, and their excited
love calls filled the air. The cooing of cuckoos and the buzzing of excited,
inebriated bees, drunk with nectar, caused waves of delight to course through the
minds of even the sages who were meditating there. The apsaras (celestial
dancers) who had accompanied Kama danced in joy and abandon. The full moon
rose in splendor, scattering its brilliance, inviting lovers to dally beneath its
gentle glow. When Shiva opened his eyes and observed this untimely intrusion
of spring into his austere, wintry hermitage, he was a little puzzled, but perfect
yogi that he was, he closed his eyes and slipped into samadhi once more. Then
Kama, who was usually to be felt only in the minds of people, took on his
exquisite form and stood on Shiva’s left side with Rati beside him. The loving
couple then began their dalliance, using all sorts of enticing gestures. With music
provided by the celestials, they started to dance in front of the great yogi, but
they could not find any difference in his demeanor. Kama felt the beginnings of
fear that this might be his first defeat. So far he had never come across anyone
other than Shiva who could resist his wiles. Just then Parvati came along with
her maids, bringing various kinds of flowers for her morning worship of the
Lord. As usual she approached Shiva timidly, bowed to him, and placed flowers
one by one at his feet. Then she stood shyly before him, hoping he would open
his eyes and look at her. Shiva opened his eyes for a split second, and Kama took
the opportunity to shoot his arrow of flowers from his mango bow straight at the
trident-bearing Lord. Usually, even if Shiva happened to open his eyes for a few
moments, it was his practice to close them again and return calmly to his
meditation. Such was his control. But this time, thanks to Kama’s intervention,

he was unable to tear his gaze away from Parvati’s intoxicating form. He stared
at her as if mesmerized, and Parvati, who had been longing and waiting for this
day, gazed deep into his eyes.
Shiva thought to himself, “She is indeed a storehouse of perfection. There is
no one to equal her in beauty in all the three worlds. If I feel so much pleasure
just by looking at her, think of the pleasure to be derived from embracing her!”
He was on the point of stretching out his hands to touch her when he stopped
and thought, “How is it that I have fallen prey to the pangs of love? Who has
caused my fall?” Thinking thus he turned his head and saw Kama standing
proudly on his left with Rati beside him. He was holding his bow taut, ready to
discharge a second arrow. As the arrow sped fearlessly from his bow, he felt the
full blast of Shiva’s anger sweep over him. Kama trembled with fear and
mentally invoked the help of Indra. The gods with Indra appeared immediately
on the scene, but before they could say anything to appease the wrath of Shiva,
he opened his third eye and a great flame of fire sprang from the middle of his
forehead and shot up to the sky like a fiery meteor. It dropped to the earth and
covered the ground, engulfing the trembling Kama and reducing him to a heap of
ashes in a trice. Rati, the consort of Kama, fell to the ground in a swoon. Parvati
was trembling with fright and was led away by her maids. The gods were
frightened out of their wits and did not know how to comfort the sorrow-stricken
Rati. She was groveling on the ground trying to gather the remnants of the ashes
that the wind had not swept away. They begged Shiva to restore her husband to
life.
“What have you done to my husband?” cried Rati. “You have condemned all
creatures to live a life devoid of love. Society will collapse if love is destroyed.
The bull will forsake the cow, the horse the mare, the bees the flowers, and man
his wife. Desire is not just the cause of suffering but is also the basis of all joy.
What is life without desire? It is mere existence alone with no flavor, like a
flower without perfume. The essence of joy can be known only by one who has
experienced suffering. Life has its price, which is suffering, but it also has its
reward, which is joy, and neither can exist without Kama.”
Shiva’s anger was always short-lived, and he admitted the truth of Rati’s
words. “I destroyed Kama’s body but not his spirit. He will live on as Ananga,
the bodiless one, in the heart of every creature. He will also be born with form as
Pradyumna, the son of Krishna, during the time of the Krishnavatara and you, O
Rati, will once more become his wife.” So saying Shiva returned to his austere

practices. Parvati did not dare to go there any longer for she was fearful of the
consequences of his wrath, which she had just seen.
Prostrations to the one who is in white autumn clouds and the sun.
Prostrations to the one who is in storms and deluges. Prostrations to the
protector of land and cattle.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Prostrations to the one present in cowsheds and houses. Prostrations to
the one in homesteads and palaces. Prostrations to the one in thorny
bushes and mountain caves. Prostrations to the one in whirlpools and
dewdrops.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Shankaraya Namaha!
11
Parvati’s Penance
The pure One who abides eternally in the heart of the soul dear to Him,
And who pays obeisance to Him.
The Lord of the four cardinal points and of the noble Devi.
SAINT THIRUMOOLAR
Parvati returned home highly agitated and disturbed in her mind. Of what use is
physical beauty, she thought, if it cannot affect my Lord? He is a true yogi, and I
see that the only thing that can affect him is the power of austerity and not that
of physical charm. Her parents and brothers tried to comfort her, but all in vain.
At last the celestial sage Narada came to her and told her:
“O Parvati! Do not be despondent. You will surely win Lord Shiva as your
husband. He did not accept you because you still have some traces of ego. In the
pride of your youth and beauty, you thought you could subjugate the three-eyed
one by your charm alone. But remember, he is the Mahayogi. He can be beguiled
only by the force of intense penance. I will impart to you the knowledge of the
sacred mantra that is especially dear to Shiva. It is the five-syllabled mantra,
‘Aum namashivaya.’ Those who repeat this with faith and assiduity will
undoubtedly be able to please him.”
Parvati then went to her parents for their consent to go to the forest in order to
do penance. Her father gave his consent, but her mother, Mena, was most
reluctant to allow her daughter to go. “Can you not perform penance in the
house?” she asked. “All conveniences are here. It is not correct for a young
woman such as you to go alone and perform tapasya in the forest. That is meant

only for ascetics.” Parvati acquired the name Uma, meaning “don’t go,” from
these words of her mother. She was crestfallen at Mena’s words and could not
eat or drink for thinking of Shiva. Seeing her daughter in this miserable
condition, Mena reluctantly gave her consent.
Discarding all her finery and jewels, Parvati donned the bark of a tree, tied at
the waist with a belt of grass. Accompanied by her two maids she went to the
high ridge where Shiva had been doing tapasya and where Kama had been
reduced to ashes. Seeing that place where Shiva used to sit, she was filled with
sorrow and wept aloud, crying out his name again and again. At last, controlling
herself with difficulty, she made preparations for worship. She built an altar on
which she kept a linga of Shiva. There she sat and repeated the five-syllabled
mantra, constantly keeping Shiva in mind. In summer she sat in the midst of five
fires. In the monsoon she sat in the rain, and in winter she sat amidst the snow,
all the while chanting the sacred mantra without respite. She bore with fortitude
the heat of summer, the icy gusts of the autumn wind, and the harsh snowfall of
the Himalayan winter. For the first year she subsisted on only fruits, and the next
year, only on leaves, thus acquiring the name Aparna, or one who exists on
leaves. In the third year she gave up even leaves and fasted on ether alone. Clad
in bark, with matted hair, restraining all her natural instincts, she surpassed even
the sages in her austerity.
Even nature was thrilled by the power of her penance. Abundant flowers
bloomed so that she was never short of blossoms for worship. Natural-born
enemies in the animal world became friendly and shed their animosity, and
roamed freely in the vicinity of the sacred grove. Year after year passed, and still
Shiva did not appear. Himavan and Mena came to Parvati and tried their best to
dissuade their daughter from continuing this fruitless tapasya, but she would not
listen to them; she was confident that Shiva would succumb to the power of her
penance. Her parents returned to their home, and Parvati redoubled her tapasya
until all the worlds became unbearably hot due to the force of her penance. The
gods could not understand the reason for this terrible change of climatic
conditions. They approached Brahma and begged him to do something, so
Brahma went with them to the abode of Vishnu and requested that he help them.
Vishnu smiled and said, “The change in seasons has been caused by the
intensity of Parvati’s tapasya. Therefore I shall go with you to the place where
Lord Shiva is sitting in samadhi and request that he go to Parvati and grant her
desire.”

The gods were frightened of approaching Shiva, fearing his anger, but Vishnu
assured them of his protection, and they accompanied him with great trepidation.
Shiva was in deep samadhi, so the gods asked his attendant, Nandi, to apprise
him of their arrival. Shiva was pleased to grant them audience, and they placed
their request to him.
Vishnu spoke, “O Lord! All the gods are being harassed by the asura Taraka.
Considering you to be a confirmed celibate, he secured a boon from Brahma that
he cannot be killed by anyone except a child born of your loins. Parvati, the
daughter of the mountains, is at present doing severe penance in the hope of
getting you as her husband. You alone can save the world from the harassment of
the demon Taraka by accepting Parvati’s hand in marriage. Due to her intense
tapasya, all the three worlds are being heated. Save us all, O Lord! Desist from
your penance, for the good of the world.”
Shiva replied with a sly remark, “If Parvati were to be accepted by me, Kama
would come alive once again, and this would prove injurious to all of you as
well as the sages, for his presence is bound to spoil your meditation. As you
know, lust always leads to hell. From lust comes anger, from anger comes
delusion, and delusion destroys penance. Why do you still insist on my marrying
Parvati?” So saying, Shiva remained silent.
Vishnu spoke once again. “Do you not know that Parvati is none other than
Sati, who has been born again as the daughter of the mountains? She is
performing intense penance, and all the three worlds have been engulfed in the
heat of her tapasya. We are all anxious to see the consummation of your
marriage with Parvati. Only the son of this union is capable of killing the demon
Taraka. So kindly accede to our request and bring joy to us as well as to Parvati.”
Shiva now spoke, “O Vishnu! Marriage is a great fetter for a yogi. There are
many bondages in the world, but association with women is the strongest of
them all. Salvation is inaccessible for one who is drawn to worldly enjoyment.
My reason tells me not to accede to your request, but my heart says otherwise. I
have always been a slave of my devotees and can refuse them nothing. I am
willing to give up my own interests in order to serve yours. Although I am not
interested in marriage, I shall marry Parvati in order to please you and beget a
son.”
So saying, he lapsed into silence, and the gods returned to their respective
abodes. Shiva then called the seven celestial sages and asked them to go and test
Parvati’s resolve. They proceeded to the peak called Gaurishankar, in order to

test her. Seeing her emaciated form shining with the brilliance of intense
austerity, they bowed to her and advised her to give up her penance, for Shiva
would never yield to her request.
“The sage Narada, who advised you to do tapasya, is a beguiler. He always
tries to turn people away from the worldly path to a life of austerity. He stopped
the thousand sons of Daksha and forced them to follow the path of asceticism,
much to the chagrin of their father, who had sent them forth in order to propagate
children. He even advised the asura boy, Prahlada, to be devoted to Vishnu, with
the result that he was forced to undergo great pain and censure from his father.
Now he is doing his best to divert you also. Shiva is indifferent to women and
not capable of giving love. In fact, he is the enemy of Kama. His looks are most
inauspicious, and he has neither name nor pedigree. Stop this fruitless task,
therefore, and return to your parents and marry someone more suited to your
gentle nature.”
Parvati laughed and replied, “O sages, no doubt what you have said is true
according to your understanding, but it cannot affect my determination in the
least. As you know I’m the daughter of the mountains, and I cannot be moved so
easily. Hence my name is also Achala. Shiva is the supreme yogi. He is not
interested in embellishments. He is the Supreme Brahman, and if he does not
marry me, I shall remain a virgin. I swear to this. The sun may rise in the west,
fire may become cool, and Mount Meru may be seen to move and lotuses to
bloom on rock, but my words shall never be false. I shall continue to worship
Shiva until He comes to me. Or else I shall give up my body here and now.”
The sages were delighted at Parvati’s determination. They returned and
reported the whole dialogue to Shiva. Now Shiva himself set out for Parvati’s
hermitage in order to test her. Actually he was quite convinced of her tenacity
but wanted to have a glimpse of her in her ascetic’s garb. He appeared before her
in the guise of a very old sage carrying an umbrella and staff. Parvati rose up to
honor the old man and worshipped him with all due reverence, and he inquired
about her birth and parentage and why she was undergoing such severe penance.
Parvati replied, “I am Parvati, daughter of Himavan and Mena. I am doing
penance only with a view to getting Lord Shiva as my husband. But it looks as if
my tapasya has been in vain, for he has not come. I have decided to consign this
body of mine into the fire and hope to be born again. In every birth I will
continue to do penance until Lord Shiva accepts me.”
Shiva was secretly delighted by her reply, but in order to test her resolve

further, he urged her to desist from this extreme act. Undaunted, Parvati merely
smiled and after saluting him, she jumped into the fire that she had kept ready.
But the fire became as cool as sandalwood paste. The old man smilingly stopped
her from making another fire and urged her to repeat the whole story to him.
Parvati could not speak due to tears choking her voice. Her friend Vijaya
narrated the sad tale.
The ascetic then demanded to hear it once again from Parvati’s lips. Parvati
repeated it and begged the old man to advise her.
The old man said, “O gentle lady, why do you wish to get Shiva as your
husband? His body is always smeared with ashes from the cremation ground.
His hair is matted, and he has snakes twining round his neck. Sometimes he is
clad in the hide of a tiger and an elephant, and sometimes naked. He moves
about either in isolation or followed by ghosts and goblins. He is a most
unsuitable husband for one as beautiful as you. He had a wife called Sati, the
daughter of Daksha, who was discarded by her father due to her association with
Shiva. At last the poor girl had to give up her life. You are a jewel among
women. Why do you want to wed this strange man? Why do you reject the
pleasures of a palace in hopes of roaming in the forest with such a man? He
doesn’t have a single quality that could appeal to a woman. He killed your friend
Kama and insulted you by going off somewhere else. I advise you to turn your
mind away from him and find a more suitable bridegroom.”
Parvati was furious when she heard this and retorted, “Why have you come
here with these insufferable insinuations against my Lord? You will never be
able to turn me away from my course of action. A person as devoid of
discrimination as you are can never know the true form of my Lord, which is
that of the Supreme Brahman, devoid of attributes. You say he is full of
inauspicious qualities, yet I know that just by thinking of him everything will
become auspicious. I have done great wrong in giving hospitality to one who
obviously hates my Lord. Whatever Shiva may be, I love him. He alone is my
Lord, and I want none other.”
Averting her face, she asked her friend to chase away this base prophet who
would no doubt continue to pour calumny on her Lord. She turned away in
disgust and was on the point of running from him when Shiva assumed his own
form and caught her hand.
“Where are you going, leaving me alone? I will not be discarded by you so
easily, O Parvati!” he said, teasingly. “I am delighted by your persistence, and

I’ve come here only to grant you all the boons you desire. You have paid the
price for my love by your penance. From today onward, I am your slave.
Command me and I shall oblige. You are my eternal companion and have always
been so. Forgive me for testing you unbearably like this, but you have passed all
the tests, and I am your ardent slave. Come with me to my abode in the
Himalayas.” So saying, he pulled the hand that was already clasped in his.
Parvati was delighted and replied, “My Lord, formerly I was Daksha’s
daughter but at that time our marriage rites were not properly performed. The
planets had not been propitiated. This time I beg of you to approach my father
and ask for my hand, and let our marriage be performed with all due rites and
paraphernalia.”
“O sweet Parvati,” said Shiva, “this entire world is a world of illusion. I stand
above all prophecies and planets, but if it is your wish to perform our marriage
rites by propitiating all the planets in the customary way, it shall be done, for
there is nothing that I can refuse you. I shall go to your father and beg for your
hand as you wish.” Parvati returned joyfully to her home and Shiva to his. The
gods and ganas rejoiced.
Parvati was welcomed back with all due honors after her successful
completion of her mission. Soon after, Shiva assumed the guise of a mendicant
dancer and came to Himavan’s court. He sang and danced so beautifully that
everybody was thrilled. He blew the horn and played the drum. Mena was
entranced. So was Parvati, but suddenly he allowed her to see his wonderful
form as Shiva. On seeing this, she fainted and had to be revived. It seemed to her
that he was asking her, “Do you want a boon or a groom?”
She whispered, “I have already chosen the boon. I want you as my groom.” No
one else was privileged to hear this intimate dialogue.
Mena was delighted with the dancer and offered him money as well as many
precious gems. But he refused all. At last she asked him what he wanted, and he
replied that he wanted her daughter. She was furious when she heard this and
ordered her attendants to drive him out of the town, but none could touch him.
He was burning to the touch. Suddenly he vanished before their astounded eyes.
The gods were bewildered by Shiva’s lilas and begged him once again to
accede to their wishes and ask Himavan for his daughter’s hand. This time Shiva
went in the guise of a noble Brahmin, a member of the priest caste. He had a
garland of crystal beads in his hands and a saligrama (stone typifying Vishnu)
round his neck and was repeating the name of Vishnu. Only Parvati saw through

his disguise and mentally bowed to him, and had a good laugh at the joke. The
Brahmin strongly advised Himavan not to give his daughter to a mendicant such
as Shiva. He then left as he had come. Hearing this, Mena begged her husband
not to give her daughter to such a strange person.
In the meantime Shiva called the seven celestial sages and commanded them to
go to Himavan and urge him to give his daughter to Shiva, for that was her
desire and he had already granted her this boon. They joyfully went to Himavan
and said, “Shiva is the father of the universe and Parvati, the mother. Hence it
behooves you to give your daughter to him alone. By this gift your life will be
fulfilled.”
Himavan replied, “I, too, am anxious to do this, but ever since a certain
Brahmin came here and denounced Shiva, my wife has been against it and
refuses to give our daughter to him.”
Then Arundhati, wife of Vasishta, approached Mena and advised her to give
Parvati to Shiva, for that was the wish of the gods and only by the consummation
of this union could the terrible demon Taraka be killed.
The sages told Himavan, “Parvati was born to be the wife of Shiva. She is the
great cosmic intellect, mother of the universe. You will gain honor and glory
only if you give her in marriage to Shiva.” After hearing all this Mena was
pacified and agreed to the betrothal. The sages returned and gave the news to the
great god, and all preparations were started for the consummation of this joyful
event.
Prostrations to the one in stones and dust. Prostrations to the one in dry
grass and green. Prostrations to the one in deserts and fields.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
He whose existence and reality shine always and uniformly in all the
states of the body, such as infancy, and so on. And of our mind, such as
waking, and so on. And who reveals the highest knowledge of the Atman
by merely showing the jnanamudra [spiritual knowledge symbol], to that
Dakshinamurthy, the Supreme Being, embodied in the benign Guru, I
offer my profound salutation.
“DAKSHINAMURTHY STOTRAM” 
BY ADI SHANKARA

Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Srikandaya Namaha!
12
The Cosmic Wedding
Shore, sea, and mountains, and my words as well He permeates,
The unique one, He of the land of Rudra,
Husband of the handsome hill maid,
King of the heavenly ones.
SAINT VANTHODAR
Himavan was determined that the wedding should be the grandest event ever
held in the universe. All the gods and the sages, as well as the mountains and
rivers, were invited. The entire city was decorated in a fantastic manner. The
roads were swept and watered. Plantain trees, silken festoons, and mango leaves
lined the streets. Auspicious items were placed at every street corner, and
jasmine buds and lotus flowers strewn on the ground. Himavan invited the
divine architect to design a special dais with images of all the gods, to seat the
bridal couple. He did this so realistically that everyone thought the gods had
already arrived. Different mansions were made for each of the gods with the best
one reserved for the bridegroom, Shiva.
On the appointed day, all the gods assembled at Kailasa in order to accompany
the bridegroom. They begged Shiva to dress as befitting a bridegroom. He
smiled and complied with their request. The crescent moon took the place of a
crown, his third eye became a beautiful jewel on his forehead, the serpents near
his ears turned into earrings, and the serpents round his neck into necklaces. The
ashes became sweet-smelling sandalwood paste, and the elephant hide became a
silken garment. Thus they set out with great joy. Ganas from all the worlds

joined the procession, dancing and prancing in front. The gods, too, were in a
very jovial mood and sang and danced. The tumultuous sound of damarus
(drums), dundhubhis (percussion instruments), and conchs filled the quarters.
Vishnu, seated on the Garuda (eagle vehicle of Lord Vishnu) accompanied by
Lakshmi, went first; Indra on the Airavata (white elephant) followed, as did
Brahma on the swan with Saraswati beside him. The mothers of the universe, the
celestial virgins, and the wives of the gods all went ahead with great joy to
attend Shiva’s wedding. Lord Shiva, seated on his white bull of crystal purity
and beauty, the symbol of dharma, shone with a divine luster in the midst of this
auspicious crowd.
When they reached the outskirts of the city of the mountains, Himavan came
out with a large retinue to meet them. He was enchanted to see the divine form
of Shiva, totally unlike what he had been expecting. The Lord looked wonderful
in his form as Sundaramurti, the handsome one. He was smilingly seated on the
bull, bedecked with ornaments and clad in delicate silk garments. His smile
illuminated the entire place with its charm. Himavan was delighted and
welcomed the divine entourage with all devotion.
Mena, curious to see the person for whose sake her daughter had done so much
penance, watched from the balcony as the bridegroom party entered. Shiva knew
of her pride and, in his usual fashion, decided to play a joke on her; his lilas
were always directed at reducing the pride of his devotees. He requested Vishnu
and the others to go ahead and promised to follow. Mena was delighted to see
the splendid procession. First came the gandharvas, the celestial musicians who
were noted for their sartorial elegance. Heavenly nymphs waving banners of
brilliant hues accompanied them. Mena thought one of the gandharvas must be
Shiva and exclaimed in delight, but she was told they were only his attendants.
Then came the yakshas, custodians of all treasures, and again Mena thought that
their chief must be Shiva. Again she was told that these were only his attendants.
“How handsome he must be if his attendants are so fantastic,” she thought.
Then came Agni, god of fire, shining like molten gold; and Yama, god of death,
of matchless splendor, and each time Mena was disappointed to hear that this
was not Shiva. When Vishnu came, Mena almost fainted, so handsome was he.
She was sure that this must indeed be Shiva, the bridegroom most suited to her
lovely daughter, but again she was disappointed.
Next came Shiva accompanied by the ganas. “Here comes the bridegroom
whom your daughter wanted,” someone whispered in her ear. Mena stared

aghast at the motley crew that now appeared. The bhutas, pretas, and pishachas
came first—the spirits, ghosts, and ghouls. Some were making hissing sounds in
the form of violent gusts of wind, some had crooked faces and deformed bodies,
some were lame and others blind, some hobbled on one leg, and others carried
staffs and tridents in their hands. Some had no faces, while others had deformed
and distorted visages. Some had no eyes, and some had many eyes. Mena was
terrified when she saw these mutilated and horrible creatures who were supposed
to be escorting the bridegroom. She was sure there must have been some mistake
and begged someone to point out Shiva to her.
“There is Shiva! There is the bridegroom!” came the shout.
On seeing him Mena trembled and nearly fainted. “Is this the person my dear
daughter did tapasya for?” she wondered.
He had five faces and three eyes. His hair was matted and had the crescent
moon on it. His body was smeared with ashes. He had ten hands with a skull in
one, the trident and sword and many other gory weapons in the others. His upper
cloth was a tiger’s hide, and the lower one, an elephant’s. He was utterly
disheveled and untidy, with odd eyes and wild look as if he were inebriated. The
entire bridegroom party appeared to be intoxicated and was rolling about in a
drunken orgy. Now and again they shouted, “Glory to Shiva! Glory to Shiva!”
and flung skulls and bones and reptiles into the air instead of flowers.
“This is the bridegroom,” whispered a voice behind her. Mena gave one look
and fainted. As soon as she recovered she wept and wailed and swore that she
would certainly not give her daughter to such a creature.
“What shall I do? Where shall I go?” she wailed. “My family is shamed. My
life doomed. Where are those sages who call themselves celestial? I shall pluck
out their beards with my own hands. They are the ones who cheated us.” Turning
to her daughter, she cried out, “Is this the fruit of your penance? Surely your
intellect has been deranged. You have cast away sandalwood paste and smeared
yourself with mud. Setting aside cooked rice you are bent on eating the husk! O
what have I done to deserve such a fate?” So saying the poor lady wept
uncontrollably and bewailed her lot.
Narada and the sages tried to reason with her, but she would not listen. At last
her husband came and told her that this was all a sport of Shiva and he was only
trying to test her. Parvati was desperate at seeing the condition of her mother and
said softly to her, “O mother! Why has this delusion overtaken you? Please give
me to Lord Shiva. I have wooed him, mentally, verbally, and physically. I will

never marry another.”
Brahma came and spoke to Mena, “Lord Shiva has many forms and names. He
delights in indulging in different sports. He is the master of illusion. Knowing
this you shouldn’t hesitate to give your daughter to him.”
Still Mena refused, and so Vishnu himself came and said to her, “You are the
beloved daughter of the manes, yet I’m afraid you have no conception of the
greatness of Shiva. He has done this only to test you. He is possessed of all
attributes, yet devoid of them. He is both form and formlessness. He is hideous
as well as handsome. No one can describe his real form. It is only because of
your daughter’s great penance that he has agreed to become your son-in-law.
Consider yourself to be most fortunate that he has blessed you in this fashion.
Hence, O wife of Himavan, stop your tears and accept him as your son-in-law.
All will be well.”
Hearing these pleasing words of Lord Vishnu, Mena relented a little and said,
“I will give my daughter to him only if he assumes a pleasing aspect. Otherwise
whatever any of you might say, I will not consent to this marriage. This is my
firm resolve.” So saying she averted her face and kept a strict silence.
Vishnu went and gave the news to Shiva while Parvati prayed to Shiva with all
her heart and begged him to come in a form that would delight her mother. Shiva
laughingly agreed, and as the palace doors were flung open, he strode in, and to
Mena’s surprise, his form was wondrous to behold.
Every part of his body was exquisite. He was fair and handsome and shone
with a divine radiance. His dark, lustrous eyes turned toward Mena and
penetrated to the depths of her soul. She thought he was the personification of
masculine beauty. His dark, silky hair flowed to his broad shoulders. His long,
lithe limbs were clad in silk. His neck was adorned with many ornaments, and he
was wearing a garland of fragrant jasmine flowers. In fact he was Sundaramurti
himself, the most handsome man she had ever seen. There was a glimmer of a
smile on Shiva’s face when he saw Mena’s discomfiture.
The eight siddhis (supernormal powers) danced in front of him, showering the
path with rose petals. The rivers Ganga and Yamuna walked on either side,
fanning him with yak tail fans. Vishnu, Brahma, and the other gods followed
him.
Mena went forward with Himavan to welcome him and said, “O great Lord,
my daughter is indeed blessed. It is only by virtue of her penance that you have
now come to our threshold.” Thus saying, Mena worshipped him with

sandalwood paste and whole rice grains mixed with turmeric. Other married
women came with ghee lamps and camphor lights and waved these auspicious
flames before him. The gandharvas sang exquisite songs while the apsaras
danced in gay abandon.
After this the wives of the sages ceremoniously escorted Parvati to the temple
of their family deity. Her beauty entranced all those present. Her complexion
was dark as collyrium; her thick black hair was plaited and covered with flowers
and jewels. Necklaces covered her breasts, and bangles and bracelets her hands.
Her lips, which had been colored with red lacquer, opened slightly to reveal her
lovely teeth that had the sheen of pearls. Sandalwood paste, musk, and saffron
had been smeared over her body. Her pink feet tinkled with the sound of anklets
as she walked. She carried an exquisite gem-set mirror in one hand and a play
lotus in the other. On seeing the fascinating form of the mother of the universe,
all the gods bowed. For one split second her eyes met those of Shiva, and she
gave a small secret smile as an unspoken message of love between them. Then
she went out of the city to worship the family goddess. When she returned she
was given another auspicious bath and bedecked with ornaments Shiva had
brought for her.
In the bridegroom’s house similar rites were being performed for Shiva. After
having been bathed and anointed, he rode on the bull to the wedding hall. The
white umbrella of royalty was held above him, and dancers and singers went
ahead. He was followed by the gods and ceremoniously seated on the highly
decorated stage reserved for the bridal couple. Then at the auspicious time,
Parvati was escorted to the stage and seated on the specially prepared altar. The
ceremony began at a time when all the planets were in a favorable position.
Himavan took his daughter’s hand in his and repeated these words, “O Lord
Shiva, I’m giving this young girl, my daughter, to you as your wife. Be pleased
to accept her.” With these words he placed Parvati’s hand in Shiva’s and repeated
the mantra “Tasmai Rudraya Mahate.”
Shiva grasped the lotuslike hand of Parvati in his own and repeated the
appropriate mantras. At the request of the officiating priest, Shiva applied the
auspicious red powder to Parvati’s forehead. Grasping her trembling hand in his,
he took her thrice round the sacred fire to plight their troth. Thus, with the
chanting of the pertinent Vedic mantras, Lord Shiva as Sundaramurti wed the
divine goddess Parvati. Afterward they were seated on the same decorated seat
while all the guests came and worshipped the cosmic couple, who were really

two halves of a whole.
After the ceremony was completed there were great celebrations and rejoicing
in the land. The final rite was when the bridegroom was led to the beautifully
decorated bridal chamber. Parvati was brought by the sixteen celestial mothers
and handed over to him. Thinking this to be the appropriate time, Rati, wife of
Kama, came near them and begged Shiva to resuscitate her husband. Shiva
smilingly agreed, and much to Rati’s delight, Kama appeared before them in his
previous form.
As was the custom, after staying four days in the bride’s house, the marriage
party set out for the bridegroom’s abode. Mena wept and begged Shiva to take
great care of her beloved daughter. The celestial mothers advised Parvati about
the duties of a chaste wife. Parvati bowed to her parents and shed a few tears at
the thought of the coming parting. Accompanied by the gods and his ganas,
Shiva returned to Kailasa with Parvati. After ceremoniously leaving the couple
there, the gods returned to their own abodes.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Shivaapriyaya Namaha!
13
The Cosmic Couple
I saw Him, I saw Him,
The heart’s desire of the beautiful Uma.
He enslaved me, He enslaved me,
I adorned my head with the feet of the Lord.
SAINT SUNDARAR
Parvati was transported from the comfortable palace of her parents to the chilly
caves of the Himalayas. Henceforth these caves would serve as her boudoir. She
had no regrets; she had chosen her path, and in her eyes everything was perfect.
The faultless, brilliant peak of Kailasa was the place chosen by Shiva for his new
abode. Close by was the scintillating lake called Manasarovar, or lake of the
mind, where celestial damsels sported with their lovers. In these icy waters
Parvati would bathe. She was enthralled by the austere beauty of her new
residence. The lack of comforts did not put her off in the least. She was prepared
for it. With her beauty and wit she conquered the heart of this great yogi, this
strange ascetic whom she had married. She sported with him on the mountain
peaks and slopes of the Himalayas and bathed in the cold waters of the lake
amidst the lotuses and the royal swans. She was as gentle and graceful as he was
wild and forceful. Her soft and slow lasya, or woman’s movements, and his
forceful and masculine thandava, or cosmic dance, together enraptured the entire
universe. Her beauty inspired him to create all forms of art, song, and dance. He
became master of all kalas, or art forms.
They danced and made love to the vibrations of the universe. Wrapped in his

arms she traveled on the bull Nandi across the skies.
When it rained he took her above the clouds and when it was hot, he took her
into caves. Thus aeons passed while the cosmic couple sported with each other
on the peak of Kailasa and in various other celestial spheres.
As time elapsed two demons were born into the world, brothers named
Shumba and Nishumba. As a result of their tapasya, Brahma granted them the
boon that they requested. They insisted that they should meet with death only at
the hands of a woman. She should be a virgin, born of a part of Shiva, and she
should be so beautiful that they would fall in love with her. Brahma agreed, and
the brothers became so bold that they began to harass both gods and humans;
they were quite sure that no such woman would be forthcoming. The gods went
to Brahma and he in turn went to Shiva and begged him to create a woman who
would be a part of him and extremely beautiful. Shiva agreed and bided his time
to get Parvati into a rage, so that she would shed her color and become the virgin
goddess, Kaali, who alone would have the qualifications to kill the demons.
Many years passed while the great yogi appeared to be totally tamed by
Parvati’s exquisite beauty and charm. Her wit and wisdom stimulated him to
share with her all the knowledge that he had gained by his intense tapasya.
Because of her the whole world gained this knowledge, which has come down to
us through the Puranas and the Shastras and Tantras. There was no end to her
thirst for knowledge and no end to his wisdom. She was the perfect student and
he, the perfect teacher, Dakshinamurthy. She asked many questions pertaining to
society, nature, life, marriage, the duties of all types of people; about music,
dance, palmistry, astrology, occult sciences; about birds, beasts, and life after
death, as well as different methods of freeing oneself from mortal coils. There
was no subject she did not touch upon and no question that he could not answer.
The wealth of their divine discourses has come down to us in various ways
through the minds of the sages who have meditated upon him.
Parvati seduced him in subtle ways, and he realized that one who ran away
from life without dealing with and overcoming the dualities would never attain
liberation. On the other hand, one who was totally immersed in worldly
pleasures without a thought of the supreme truth underlying everything was a
fool who would never attain peace of mind, much less liberation. Harmony, or
balance between these opposites, was what led to truth—harmony between
Purusha and Prakriti, matter and spirit; harmony between the cosmic couple,
Shiva and Parvati.

Once they had a dance contest in which she had to imitate all his poses. She
could perform as perfectly as he could, but in order to tease her, he took the
difficult posture known as urdhva-thandava. In this pose he lifted his right leg
straight up above his head. She had to declare herself to be the loser for she
could not do this. Then she adopted a perfectly beautiful feminine pose in front
of him. She was so dark that she looked as if she were a statue made from ebony.
Shiva laughed and teased her about her color. This was a good opportunity to
enrage her, he thought.
“You are indeed Kaali,” he said, “goddess of the night, goddess of death,
goddess who removes all the evils of the age of Kali.”
Hurt by his words, she decided to change her color. Bidding goodbye to him,
she went to the same forest where she had done tapasya in order to get him, as
her husband. Shiva allowed her to go since he knew that this parting was part of
the plan to kill the two demons. In the forest she started rigorous tapasya. Once a
huge tiger approached her with a view to satisfying its hunger, but as it came
near her, its body became numb, and it could not move. It froze in the crouching
position in which it had rested before pouncing on her. The tiger stayed in that
position, never taking its eyes from her form. After a long time she opened her
eyes and seeing it, felt pity and conferred her grace on it. The tiger repented and
realized the nature of the divinity on which it had unknowingly meditated for so
long by fixing its gaze on her. The numbness disappeared, and from then on it
became her faithful slave and stayed close to her, guarding her from attack by
other wild animals.
Seeing her engaged in rigorous penance, Brahma arrived on the scene and
praised her. He begged her to take another form and rid the world of the two
demons, Shumba and Nishumba, who were terrorizing everybody.
“O Mother! I have granted a boon to these arrogant demons, and only you are
capable of vanquishing them. I beg you to destroy them. You alone can do this.”
Hearing this, the goddess Parvati cast off her dark skin and became fair in
color, thus acquiring the name Gauri, or the radiant one. The dark outer skin took
the form of Kaali, the virgin goddess, with the luster of a black rain cloud. She
held the conch and discus of Vishnu as well as the trident of Shiva in her various
arms, for she had the strength of both. She had three eyes and was moon-crested
like Shiva. She had three natures—gentle, terrible, and a mixture of the two. She
was a virgin, beautiful and invincible. Parvati told her to go with Brahma in
order to slay the demons. Kaali took a huge tawny lion that appeared on the

scene as her vehicle. Bowing to her mother, Parvati, she rode on the lion and
went to the Vindhya Range of mountains that were to be her abode.
The two demons, Shumba and Nishumba, came to the place where she had
taken up residence and were smitten by her beauty. They tried to molest her, but
she killed them easily, as had been prophesied by Brahma.
Part of Parvati’s dark color is said to have gone into the river Yamuna, or
Kalindi as it was later called, when it made its way from the Himalayas to the
forest of Vrindavana, where Krishna was to sport with the gopis (milkmaids) in
an age yet to come, the age of Dwapara.
Gauri returned to Kailasa and delighted her lord once more in her new role as
the goddess with the color of molten gold.
Seeing that she was still a bit annoyed at him for having allowed her to go to
the forest without protest, he said, “O my beloved one! Do you not know that we
can never be parted from each other? It was only for fulfilling the request of the
gods that I ridiculed your color. This universe of forms is known only through
words. You are the form of the words, and I am the meaning of the words. How
can meaning be separate from word? You are the form of knowledge, and I am
the object of all knowledge. Who can separate us?” Thus by his gentle teasing
and rational talk he won her over until she became her usual happy self. Once
again they indulged in all their favorite sports.
Sometimes they played dice in their mountain retreat. In one of their games
Shiva wagered his trident and Parvati, her jewels. He lost and then staked his
serpent and lost again. Parvati seemed to be on a winning spree, and soon Shiva
had lost everything. He pretended to be quite disgruntled and walked off by
himself into the forest. Vishnu met him there and promised to help him win if he
could entice Parvati to another game.
Parvati agreed since she was sure her luck would hold, but she began to lose
steadily, and Shiva was able to win back all that he had previously lost. Parvati
was highly suspicious of this sudden change of luck and warned him of the
consequences of cheating. In the middle of their heated argument, Vishnu
appeared and pacified Parvati by telling her the truth. He admitted that he had
entered the dice, thus ensuring that Shiva won. He also reminded them that life
was like a game of dice—sometimes we win, sometimes we lose, but both life
and dice games are unpredictable. We should not set much store by either gain or
loss but should carry on with the game. This bit of salutary advice pacified both
Shiva and Parvati. Shiva pronounced a blessing on all those who chose to play

dice on that particular day. This day came to be known as Diwali, the festival of
lights.
Once, the cosmic pair had an argument about the reality of the world. Shiva,
the perfect renouncer, held the advaitic view that the world was only an illusion
and nothing existed except Brahman. Parvati advocated the Sankhya view and
insisted that Prakriti was equally real. She herself was Prakriti, so nothing could
exist without her. To prove her point she chose to leave the icy peaks of the
Himalayas and withdraw into her own subtle nature. Naturally her disappearance
caused havoc in the world. Everything came to a standstill. The earth became
barren, the seasons did not change, and there was no food for anyone. Animals,
humans, demons, and gods all starved. They cried to Prakriti to save them from
this cruel fate. Even the sages declared that without food nothing was possible,
least of all the realization of Brahman. The Divine Mother was unable to resist
the pleas of her children and chose to manifest herself in the holy place called
Kasi, or Varanasi. There she set up a kitchen to feed her hungry children, and all
of them came in different forms and were given plenty by her. Even Shiva, the
perfect yogi, came to her in the form of a bhikshu, or beggar, and begged for
alms. She fed him with her own hands. Thus she came to be known as
Annapurna, or giver of food.
Many were the lilas enacted by the cosmic couple in order to enthrall the
world. Once, it is said, Shiva wearied of so much conjugal bliss and retreated
into the forest to resume his tapasya. Parvati followed, but he took no notice of
her. She prayed to Vishnu for help, and he advised her to take on the form of a
tribal woman and entice her husband. Thus, she distracted Shiva, and he
followed her back to their own cave. Inspired by her beauty, he composed many
tunes on his favorite instrument, the rudra vina.
Another time when Shiva was teaching her, he found her attention wandering
to fish in the lake. “If contemplating fish is more interesting to you than my
words, you might as well become a fisherwoman,” he said. His words came to
pass, and Parvati was born as the daughter of the chief of a fishing village. She
was wild and beautiful and could fish and handle boats better than any man. Her
father, the chief, was delighted and wondered how best he could find a husband
to match his beautiful daughter, for she was quite unlike the rest of the
fisherfolk. From the peak of Kailasa, Shiva watched the progress of his beloved
with interest and wondered how he could get her back. One of his ganas,
Manibhadra, decided to help his master. He took on the form of a shark and
began to harass the fisherfolk in the ocean off the coast where Parvati lived. He

overturned boats and ate all the unwary fishermen who ventured into the water.
The fishermen were dejected and afraid to go fishing because of this terrifying
creature. At last the chief declared that his daughter would be given as the bride
of anyone who killed the shark. Shiva, disguised as a fisherman, went to the
village and easily killed the shark. He then married Parvati and took her back to
their Himalayan retreat.
It was Shiva and Parvati who taught the world the secrets of the kundalini
Shakti, the coiled serpent of spiritual power that lies at the base of the spine.
Parvati herself was the energy of the kundalini, the primary spiritual energy in all
humans that seeks union with Shiva, the pure spirit. It lies coiled at the base of
the spine at the bottom of the passage known as the sushumna (channel for
psychic energy). Shiva, the pure spirit, is stationed at the top of this passage at
the energy vortex, or chakra, called the sahasrara, on the crown of the head.
Parvati is Shakti, the manifestation of all energy, and Shiva, the manifestation of
pure spirit. She is matter, or Prakriti, and he, consciousness. He is known as
Bhava, or eternal being, and she Bhavani, or eternal transformation. They are the
opposite and complementary poles of existence. When they join with each other
in cosmic union, the individual soul, or jivatma, ceases to exist and melts into
the paramatma, or cosmic soul. Parvati uncoiled herself and rose up through the
sushumna nadi like a snake that unwinds itself and darts toward its prey.
Piercing the six chakras, or whirls of spiritual energy situated in the spinal
column known as mooladhara, swadhisthana, manipura, anahata, vishuddhi,
and ajna, she rose to join her Lord, the pure cosmic consciousness, in the
seventh chakra, the sahasrara, the thousand-petaled lotus on the crown of the
head. These seven chakras are the psychic centers for fear, desire, hunger, anger,
communication, and introspection, and one who has pierced all these rises
beyond these emotions and becomes the pure consciousness that is Shiva. As
Parvati touched each of these chakras, they bloomed like lotus flowers with
petals of different hues. When she reached the last chakra she no longer existed
as a separate being. In that state of perfect union there was bliss. There was no
duality, only unity—Shivoham, Shivoham (I am Shiva). Thus aeons passed while
the cosmic couple was submerged in the blissful union of Purusha with Prakriti,
which was totally unproductive in terms of progeny. In that state there was
neither creation nor destruction; everything was bliss alone. When there is
neither lust nor desire, how can offspring be begotten? The gods were troubled.
They were anxious for the union of Shiva and Parvati to produce a son who
would kill the asura, Taraka, and it looked as if the couple had completely

forgotten the purpose of their marriage. The gods approached Vishnu and begged
him to intercede on their behalf and remind Lord Shiva of his promise.
Aum Namashivaya

 
 Aum Laladakshaya Namaha!
14
Kartikeya Defeats the Demon
I bow to Subramanya, son of Shiva, general of the gods, Who has six faces
and is adorned with sandalwood paste,
And who rides the peacock as a vehicle.
“SRI SUBRAMANYA PANCHARATNAM”
Creation and destruction are the opposite poles of existence. They are
complementary to each other and both are necessary for living a complete life.
Duality is the very nature of existence; without having experienced darkness we
will never be able to appreciate light. Thus we see that the Puranas are filled
with stories of the wars between the gods and the demons, the devas and the
asuras. The devas are creatures of light; the asuras, of darkness. Their mutually
antagonistic roles ensure their eternal enmity. Sometimes the gods are victorious,
and at other times, the demons prevail. This seesaw provides the dynamism by
which our dualistic cosmos sustains itself. The prayers and sacrifices of human
beings sustain the power of the gods and in general manage to maintain the
cosmic balance between good and evil. Sometimes, however, when the world is
passing through a particularly negative period, when the evil propensities of
human beings tower above the good, then a demon of extraordinary power and
wickedness is born. When this happens the gods are forced to take recourse of
Vishnu and Shiva to help them. However, even the gods never have direct access
to these cosmic beings but can only approach them through the mediation of the
Creator, Brahma. The asura Taraka was born at such a period in cosmic history,
when negativity was at a peak. He was a demon of extraordinary might whom

the gods could not defeat by themselves, so they went to Brahma, who
approached Vishnu, and that is how the union of Shiva and Parvati came to pass.
Now, once again they approached Brahma, who placed their request before
Vishnu, and all of them went to Kailasa to ask Shiva to fulfill his promise to
beget a son, the only one who could kill Taraka.
The ganas, who were stationed outside the cave where Shiva and Parvati were
consorting, had orders not to let anyone enter, so they forcibly blocked the gods.
Standing outside the entrance, the gods began to praise Shiva.
Shiva and Parvati had been in cosmic bliss for many aeons and were unaware
of the passage of time. At last Parvati roused herself from this cosmic embrace
and the thought darted into her mind that it would be wonderful to have a child
by Shiva. Shiva guessed Parvati’s desire and was prepared to fulfill it. But at this
precise point in time the gods arrived at their doorstep. When Shiva heard their
distressed cries, he controlled himself and went outside. As soon as he heard
their request, he discharged the seed that he had been withholding for so many
aeons. The fiery seed fell on the earth. The earth could not bear the heat and
begged Agni, the god of fire, to help her. Agni took on the form of a dove and
swallowed the fiery seed.
In the meantime Parvati was left totally bereft. She came out angrily and
cursed the gods, “O you selfish ones! You are only interested in getting your
own ends and never think of the unhappiness of others. Thanks to you, I have
become barren. I curse all of you that all your wives will also be barren!”
Agni found the heat of the potent seed to be unbearable. He discharged it in the
Himalayas amidst snow and ice, in the hope that it would cool, but it continued
to scorch the mountain. Himavan, king of the mountain, was unable to bear the
fierce heat of the seed and hurled it into the River Ganga. The river transported
the seed to its banks and deposited it on a clump of grass. This grass became the
womb for the seed of Shiva and nurtured the fetus. On the sixth day, in the bright
half of the lunar month called Margashirsha, the son of Shiva was born. The
gods played celestial music and rained flowers on the divine child, who was as
bright as a flame.
At this time, when the divine child was gurgling and kicking his legs in the
clump of grass, the great sage Visvamitra came upon him and was amazed to see
his brilliance. The sage understood that the child wanted him to perform the
essential purification rites performed on newborns. The sage grasped the
message, which was transmitted mentally, and forthwith did all that had to be

done. The child blessed him and said that in the future he would be known as a
brahmarishi. On being asked about his parentage, the child replied, “Know me
to be Guha (the mysterious one), and let this be kept a secret.” He also came to
be known as Sarabhu (born among reeds).
Soon after, Agni came to the spot and recognized the boy to be his son, since
he had carried the seed within himself. He presented him with a javelin, or vel,
which then became Guha’s weapon. Thus he was known as Velayudha (the one
with the spear). He was also known as Pavakatmaja (son of fire).
Meanwhile six ladies known as the Krittikas, who are really the constellation
known as the Pleiades, descended to the earth, saw the boy, and were enchanted
by him. All of them wanted to nurse him and started an argument among
themselves as to who should suckle him first. Knowing their desire, the child
assumed six faces and drank milk from all their breasts. Hence he came to be
known as Shanmukha (sixfaced). The Krittikas took him to their own abode and
fed and fondled him to their heart’s content. Since they were his virtual mothers,
they called him Kartikeya. He became their dearest treasure, and they never let
him out of their sight, even for a minute.
In the meantime, Parvati went to her Lord and begged him to find out what
had happened to his seed that had fallen on the ground, which she knew could
never be destroyed. Shiva called the gods and told them to discover what had
happened to it and who was concealing it. Agni confessed that he had swallowed
it, since the earth could not support its heat, but that he himself had been unable
to bear the heat and had deposited it on the mountain, which in turn had thrown
it into the Ganga. Even Ganga could not cool the fiery seed and had deposited it
on the banks amidst a clump of saras reeds. The wind god now took up the tale
and told Parvati that the maidens known as the Krittikas had taken the child to
their abode, where he was in their custody. They were nurturing him as lovingly
as if he were their own son. Hearing this, Shiva sent his ganas to the abode of
the Krittikas. The emissaries of Shiva surrounded the residence of the Krittikas,
who became terrified at the sight of these extraordinary creatures and begged
Kartikeya to save them. He told them not to be afraid since he could easily
conquer the ganas. Before he could confront them, Nandiswara, commander of
the ganas, stood before him and recounted the whole story of his birth and urged
him to return to Kailasa where Shiva and Parvati and the whole concourse of
gods were awaiting him. Kartikeya agreed and took leave of his foster mothers,
the Krittikas, and went with Nandiswara to Kailasa. A huge entourage was there,
ready to welcome him and escort him into the assembly. Eulogizing him, they

took the boy, also known as Kumara, to the presence of his divine parents. As he
strode into the assembly everyone was astounded to see his amazing presence.
He was the color of molten gold and had the brilliance of the sun, with a halo
round his head. Both Shiva and Parvati were filled with joy when they saw their
son and embraced him with great love. Parvati kept the boy on her lap and gave
suck to him and fondled him. Then Kumara sat on Shiva’s lap and played with
the snakes round his neck.
After a while the gods urged Shiva to crown the boy, so Shiva seated him on a
jewel-studded throne, and the sages worshipped him with Vedic chants. Jeweled
pots filled with water from all the holy rivers of the land were brought,
consecrated by mantras, and poured over the boy’s head to the accompaniment
of Vedic chants. Brahma performed his upanayanam ceremony and gave him the
holy thread, a water pot, the invincible arrow called the brahmastra, and the
famous Gayatri mantra. He also gave him all knowledge of the Vedas.
Vishnu presented him with a crown and many bracelets, including his own
vanamala (garland). Shiva gave him a trident, the bow called the pinaka, an axe,
and the missile called the pasupata. Indra, king of the gods, gave Kartikeya his
own weapon, the thunderbolt, and a royal elephant. Varuna, king of the waters,
gave him the white umbrella of royalty and a necklace of gems. The sun gave
him a chariot swift as the mind and a coat of invincible armor. The moon gave a
vessel filled with nectar. Kubera gave him a club, and Kama, the weapon of love.
His mother, Parvati, blessed him with all power and prosperity. Lakshmi,
goddess of wealth, gave him divine wealth, and Savitri, the goddess of siddhis,
or supernormal powers, gave him the knowledge of these powers. The powerful
rooster was given to Kartikeya as his insignia and became the emblem on his
flag, and the peacock, his vehicle.
Thus blessed by all the gods, Kartikeya was ready to face the demon. Shiva
told the gods to take him as their general and kill the demon Taraka. Thus he is
also known as Devasenapati (general of the gods). Seated in a celestial aerial
vehicle, Kartikeya led the gods to the region of the asuras. Taraka led out the
demons, fully armed with all types of weapons. Virabhadra, leader of the ganas,
rushed at the asura and fought a terrific battle with Taraka. At last Virabhadra
was defeated, and the asuras exulted. Then Indra came forward and fought with
Taraka and was defeated. The apparently invincible Taraka defeated all the gods,
one by one. When Vishnu set out to fight with him, Brahma advised him not to
fight, for only the son of Shiva could kill him; that was the boon that Brahma
had given Taraka. The gods eulogized Kartikeya and begged him to save them

from the scourge of this terrible demon. Thereupon ensued a terrific duel
between Kartikeya and Taraka. They charged at each other like maddened bulls
with their spears raised. As they grappled with one another, the wind held its
breath, the sun became dim, and the earth quaked. At last, when the specified
time for Taraka’s death had come, Kartikeya brandished his spear and struck him
hard on the chest. The asura fell with a tremendous roar and died before the gaze
of all the astounded spectators. The rest of the asuras fled in fear, as Shiva and
Parvati came to congratulate their beloved son and the whole world rejoiced.
Bana, another demon, had fled from the battle. He now started harassing the
mountain Krauncha, who came to Kartikeya for help. Kartikeya killed Bana and
delivered the mountain. In order to commemorate the killing of all these asuras,
Kartikeya installed three lingas of Shiva. He then delivered Kumuda, the son of
the serpents, from harassment by the asura Pralamba. After this, the jubilant
gods escorted Kartikeya back to Kailasa, the abode of his father, Shiva. He was
received with great delight by his parents and stayed with them for a while on
the mountain.
The esoteric meaning of Kartikeya’s birth and life are worth investigating. He
was born to destroy the demonic forces of the world; therefore he had to come
from the seed of Shiva, who personifies the destructive aspect of the trinity. His
birth actually is an allegoric representation of the story of creation. In the
beginning the light of Brahman filled everything. From there it passed on to
become air, fire, water, and earth. This is the etymology of Kartikeya’s birth—
the descent of the formless Brahman (embodied as Shiva) into the forms of the
five great elements (pancha bhutas) of nature. He was born from the seed of
Shiva that was ejected into etheric space and transported through the air (vayu)
to Agni (fire), who dropped it into the waters of the River Ganga. She deposited
the seed upon her banks in a clump of reeds. Thus the five elements of ether, air,
fire, water, and earth combined in order to nurture the seed of Shiva. The two
great forces of nature are gravity and electromagnetism. Ganesha is the force of
gravity and Kartikeya the god of electromagnetism. His power is electric. His
vel, or spear, works deeply within us like the powerful force that binds electrons
and neutrons together. This power is said to emanate from his spear like energy
particles expanding and filling the universe in the form of sound and light waves.
The seed was strengthened by contact with fire and then cooled in the purity of
the Ganga. The baby was nurtured by the heavenly constellation called the
Krittikas. His six faces represented the six seasons, thus he was master of time.
He sucked from the breasts of heavenly damsels and was thereby sustained by

the power of their heavenly bodies. His weapon was the spear, with which he
routed all demonic forces. His vehicle, the peacock, is noted for its vanity.
Kartikeya is eternal youth, most handsome to behold, but his vanity is totally
under control, for he rides on it. His insignia is the cock, noted for its virility and
arrogance. The man of strength and beauty who has mastered himself has no
pride in either of these personality traits and is ever immersed in the bliss of the
Supreme. He is wedded to a tribal girl, for he sees all humans as the same. The
king of gods rewards him with his own daughter as consort. Heaven itself
rewards one who is above the lure of physical beauty and strength and who
concentrates only on the supreme truth, which is the source from which all of us
have come.
The moving and nonmoving universe is but the manifestion of his subtle
and unmanifest form. He by whose glance all these manifestations
disappear with the realization that nothing exists except tbe Supreme
Brahman: to that Dakshinamurti, the Supreme Being embodied in the
benign Guru, I offer my profound salutations.
"DAKSHINAMURTHY STOTRAM” 
BY ADI SHANKARA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Sharvaya Namaha!
15
Ganesha, Remover of Obstacles
I bow to the single-tusked Lord Ganesha,
Who has a huge body, shining like gold,
And a large belly and beautiful eyes.
“GANASHTAKAM”
One day while Parvati was taking a bath, Shiva entered the premises without
requesting permission. Parvati felt rather shy and gently rebuked Shiva for
having entered without permission. Soon after, her two friends, Jaya and Vijaya,
came to her and urged her to keep an attendant who would be totally subservient
to her and to no one else. In light of the previous incident, she decided that this
was just what she should do. Moreover, she longed to have a child of her own,
since Kartikeya was always busy with wars. The next time she went for a bath,
she smeared herself with turmeric and saffron powder and then scraped it all off
her body into a ball, and she shaped the ball into the form of a little boy and
breathed life into it. The child was big and handsome, filled with strength and
valor. She named him Vinayaka, “the leader,” and gave him clothes and
ornaments and said, “You are my son, and from now on you will also be my
bodyguard.”
The boy was very happy to hear this and asked his mother to command him.
She told him that his first job would be to guard her door while she took her bath
or wanted to be alone in her apartments. She also presented him with a staff to
ward off intruders. The next day when she went for her bath she stationed the
boy outside and told him that no one should be allowed to enter. Soon after, it so

happened that Lord Shiva came on the scene and tried to enter. The boy blocked
him with his staff. Shiva could not believe that a small boy could be so
audacious and asked him sternly, “Who are you, and who gave you permission
to stop me from entering my wife’s apartments?”
The boy replied, “Sir, my mother is taking her bath, and she has kept me here
and asked me to keep out all intruders.”
Shiva replied, “Do you not know me? I’m Shiva, and Parvati is my wife. Now
let me pass.” The boy politely refused and barred the way once again. At first
Shiva was quite amused by this and tried to move the staff and enter, but the boy
hit him with the stick. This was too much. Shiva controlled his temper and went
back to his apartments and told his ganas to go and forcibly remove the boy. The
boy confronted the ganas fearlessly and told them he would not let anyone
inside, even Brahma, the Creator himself. They were forced to retreat since they
did not feel like killing such a charming boy. The disgruntled ganas returned to
Shiva and informed him of the proceedings. Shiva told them to return and try all
their arts of persuasion, but Vinayaka could not be subdued with words.
Hearing the altercation going on outside the bathroom, Parvati sent her maids
to inquire into the matter. They reported that Vinayaka was bravely confronting
the whole regiment of ganas. She was delighted when she heard this and told
them to encourage Vinayaka.
Vinayaka was happy to hear these words of encouragement and fearlessly told
the ganas, “You are the ganas of Shiva, and I am the gana of Parvati so we are
equal. My mother has told me that no one should enter this apartment, either
forcibly or humbly. So you may all go back.”
At this, the ganas returned to Shiva and asked for further orders. Shiva was not
happy at having to admit defeat at the hands of his wife’s single gana, so he
accompanied his guards back to the spot, and there ensued a terrific skirmish
between Vinayaka on one side and Shiva and his ganas on the other. Seeing that
his ganas were all being defeated, Shiva hurled his trident and neatly severed the
boy’s head from his shoulders.
When Parvati learned of this she was furious and created many Shaktis and
ordered them to go and fight with the ganas. The gods now entered the fray and
came to help the ganas. The battle that ensued was terrible, and at last the gods
begged Parvati to forgive them and end it.
She replied, “My son has been killed, and I shall never forgive unless he is
revived.” The gods relayed this message to Shiva, who told them to go in a

northerly direction and chop off the head of the first creature they saw, and affix
it to the body of Vinayaka. It so happened that the first creature they encountered
was an elephant. They promptly cut off its head and affixed it to the headless
body. They chanted mantras for the resuscitation of the body and sprinkled holy
water on it, and immediately the body rose up with the body of Vinayaka and the
head of an elephant.
Parvati was happy to see her son come back to life, even though he had the
head of an elephant. It is said that once long ago she had gone to an art gallery of
the gods. When she came to the glorious figure of 
, she was entranced and
stood spellbound in front of the mantra. It was at that moment that the figure of
Vinayaka came to her mind, and she, being the Mother Goddess, brought the
figure into being. Thus Vinayaka’s figure is a dynamic, anthropomorphic
representation of the mantra of 
, the symbol of Brahman. She was delighted to
see how closely her conception aligned with his form.
She kissed Vinayaka and blessed him and told the gods that he would in future
be the remover of all obstacles in worldly life and spiritual undertakings, and
thus should be worshipped first, before the commencement of any other worship.
Shiva and the others agreed, and thus it is that to this day Vinayaka must be
worshipped before the commencement of any ritual. Parvati also insisted that he
should become the Lord of the ganas, and thus he came to be known as
Ganesha, or Ganapathy. Since he was born on the fourth day of the dark half of
the month of Bhadra (Bhadra is the name of a month which corresponds to
August/September), Shiva declared that from then onward that day would be
celebrated by all as Ganesha’s birthday, and the fourth day of each lunar
fortnight would also be known as a special day for him. Shiva, Parvati, and all
the other gods showered many other boons upon Ganesha.
Once, as a child, Ganesha was playing with a cat. He pulled its tail and rolled
the cat in the mud. The irate animal gave a pained howl and dashed off. Ganesha
ran back to his mother and climbed on her lap but found to his dismay that she
was quite muddy and had tears in her eyes. Anxiously he asked her the cause of
her distress, and she taught him an important lesson about the unity of all life.
“You alone are the cause of my distress,” she said.
“How can that be? I never did anything to harm you.”
“Didn’t you pull my tail and roll me in the mud?” she asked. Then Ganesha
realized this great truth, that any harm done to any creature was tantamount to
harming his mother, who was also the Cosmic Mother.

Before going further into the story of Ganesha, it would be good to explore the
meaning of his form and origin. Parvati is Shakti, or the power of Lord Shiva,
the Supreme. Ganesha’s origin is from the dirt and other materials scraped from
her body. As such, he represents the consciousness that evolves from matter and
expands to its highest state of spiritual freedom. In the form of Ganesha we find
the symbol of the emergence of life from earth and the unfoldment of
consciousness from matter. He represents the initiating spiritual power that
underlies everything; hence he must be worshipped first. He is the first letter of
the alphabet of the gods. He is also the initiating spiritual power at every stage of
evolution. If we look closely at his figure with the curling trunk we can see the
figure 
. The figure of Ganesha symbolizes the idea of the emergence of life
from earth and the unfolding of consciousness from matter. His dual form of
animal and human points out that we too can aspire to a supramental level, even
though we have evolved from the animal. As Lord of the ganas, he controls the
subtle, obstructive forces of this universe. Since he is their overlord, he is also
Vigneshwara, the Lord who clears all impediments or obstructive forces that act
as an obstacle in the way of our spiritual progress. In the human being he is
situated in the mooladhara chakra at the bottom of the spine, potent with
spiritual powers. The kundalini Shakti can only awaken when Ganesha’s grace is
given.
Ganesha’s vehicle is a rat, which is really surprising. Imagine the mighty
figure of the elephant seated calmly on a tiny rat! What is the meaning of this? A
rat is born of the earth and has its existence in burrows and holes in the earth.
Consciousness, according to Indian belief, is ingrained even in grains of sand; it
merges into an intelligent state after passing through the rudimentary forms. The
rat is a fitting symbol for this. It has a primitive intelligence encased in
ignorance and is thus restless, avaricious, and worried.
On the other hand, the elephant is the symbol of strength and wisdom and is
said to have a remarkable memory and power of discrimination. The elephant’s
trunk is a symbol of discriminating wisdom that can separate grain from chaff.
Its trunk can pick up a tiny pin lying on the ground as well as lift the heaviest
logs in the forest. The elephant’s head suggests strength, expansion, and
reverence for the mighty powers lying hidden in nature.
The figure of Ganesha on the rat thus suggests that the human being embodies
both characteristics: the elephant, calm and composed, a majestic creature with
immense potential power; and the rat, a restless animal, constantly running here

and there in its frenetic quest for food. The human being has the power to be
calm and majestic with ever-expanding consciousness stretching to the infinite,
but he continues to be a rat and rush about in the “rat race” of life, fighting and
squabbling over trivialities. These two animals symbolize the two stages of
consciousness, the primitive state and the expanded state. The human body is
between these two and connects them.
The noose in Ganesha’s hand is for controlling the senses that run hither and
thither like unbridled horses. In another hand he holds the hook, which is
generally used by mahouts (elephant keepers) to control animals on the rampage.
Our passions can be compared to mad elephants, and the hook alone can subdue
them and bring them to order.
The snake around Ganesha’s belly suggests the arousal of kundalini energy in
the human, the psychic energy that rouses itself when certain techniques of yoga
are used. The two tusks represent the pairs of opposites in life, and the broken
tusk shows that the man of perfection is not under the sway of these opposites.
He holds this tusk in his right hand like a pen, denoting the creative capacity of
the man of wisdom. The modaka, or round sweet that he holds in another hand,
indicates the bliss and real sweetness of life, which the enlightened person alone
can savor.
One day the sage Narada came to visit the cosmic couple and see the divine
children. He brought a pomegranate and offered it to the children, but since this
was a very special fruit, the fruit of cosmic wisdom, it could not be cut. Only one
of them could have it. So Shiva told their children, Ganesha and Kartikeya, that
the one who could circle the whole universe and return first would get the fruit.
Kartikeya immediately set off on his peacock mount, quite sure of getting the
fruit. Ganesha’s mount was the lowly rat that could never outdistance the
peacock, but he was not in the least concerned. He calmly circled his parents and
held out his hands for the fruit.
“In what way have you qualified for this fruit?” asked his amused parents.
“Both of you together constitute the entire universe. Why should I go round
the material universe?” he inquired.
Shiva and Parvati applauded him for his wisdom and presented the fruit to
him. When Kartikeya returned he was shocked to find his brother eating the
fruit. He angrily questioned his parents about this and was told the reason for
their apparent partiality. Kartikeya was quite angry at this trick that his brother
had played on him and declared that he would leave Kailasa and go to meditate

elsewhere in order to acquire supreme wisdom. He asked Shiva’s permission to
go, and in Tamil literature it is said that Shiva gave the answer, “Palam nee,”
which means, “You yourself are the fruit.” This is the great upanishadic
statement, “Tat twam asi,” or that thou art. Legend has it that Kartikeya left
Kailasa and went to the hill in the South known as Palani, where he practiced
penance in order to discover this truth.
There is another version of this story that explains Subramanya’s departure. In
this version, when their two sons had reached marriageable age, Shiva and
Parvati wanted to get them married. Now the question arose as to which son
should marry first. Shiva declared that the one who went around the world first
would have first choice. Kartikeya immediately set off on his peacock, whereas
the intelligent Ganesha took his purificatory bath, solemnly circled his parents
thrice, and demanded that he should have first preference. When questioned
about the propriety of his conduct, he declared that Shiva and Parvati contained
within themselves the whole universe of movable and immovable things, hence
going around them was tantamount to going around the universe.
Ganesha’s marriage was celebrated even before his brother returned. Prajapatti
Viswarupa had two daughters, Siddhi and Buddhi, and he requested that Lord
Shiva accept them as wives for Ganesha. Thus Kartikeya was quite angry with
his parents and departed to the mountain known as Palani, despite his parents’
earnest request not to go.
The esoteric meaning of Ganesha’s two wives is as follows: Ganesha
represents the liberated human, the sthithaprajna of the Bhagavad Gita; and such
a person is wedded to Buddhi, or the discriminative intellect, and acquires
Siddhi, or superconscious powers. The evolved person will be blessed by having
both of these as consorts.
Both the wives of Ganesha had offspring. Buddhi’s child was called Kshema,
or well-being and prosperity; and Siddhi’s child, Labha, or gain—the attainment
of a higher state of consciousness. One who has realized the supreme self lacks
for nothing, not even material prosperity.
Kartikeya, in the meantime, lived on the hill called Palani, in the southern
range of mountains. There he came to be known as Muruga, or the divine youth.
While living amongst the tribals, he fell in love with a beautiful tribal girl named
Valli and married her. Later Indra, the king of the gods, gave his own daughter,
Devayani, to the great hero who had won the war for the gods.
Once when Shiva gave a discourse on yoga, every creature in the world rushed

to Kailasa. As a result of this mass exodus, the whole world started to tilt toward
the Himalayas. All wisdom and knowledge had gone to the North, and there was
nothing to keep the balance of the world. Shiva told Agastya, the wisest of his
disciples, to proceed south, carrying with him all the sacred and secular lore that
he had taught him. Agastya agreed but begged Shiva to give him something that
would remind him of the Himalayas. Shiva gave him two huge mountains to take
to the South. The demon Ettumba was designated to carry them. He made a huge
bow and tied the hills on either side and carried them across his shoulders. When
he reached Palani he put the mountains down and went to the river. When he
returned he could not pick them up again. He looked around and found a
beautiful young boy sitting on one of the mountains. The demon became very
angry and told the boy to get off the mountain so he could carry it to its
destination. The boy refused, and Ettumba was furious. Just then Agastya came
on the scene and recognized the boy to be none other than Kartikeya. He bowed
low before him, and Kartikeya said, “I shall keep these mountains here, for they
remind me of my home in the North.” Agastya agreed, and thus Kartikeya
resides on the hills and Agastya on the plains. The balance of the cosmos was
restored.
It is said that Parvati was so unhappy at the separation from her eldest son that
she begged Shiva to go south. He agreed, and they came to the famous
jyotirlinga (one of the twelve shrines of Shiva) at Sri Shaila, called Mallikarjuna.
From this place it was easy for them to go and visit their son Kartikeya.
Descriptions of the marriage of the sons of Shiva vary. In North India,
Kartikeya is supposed to be the elder son, and in the South, Ganesha. In the
North, Kartikeya is supposed to be a celibate because he saw his mother in every
woman. In the South, Ganesha is the nityabrahmachari, or eternal celibate,
because he never found a woman anywhere to compare with his mother. In the
South, Kartikeya, or Muruga, is worshipped everywhere. He is seen as the
personification of masculine beauty and virility and is always flanked by his two
wives, one from heaven and one from the earth. This again has a lesson, no
doubt. In the North the worship of Kartikeya hardly exists any more. Ganesha,
however, has a special place in both North and South, and his wives, Siddhi and
Buddhi, are considered an essential part of him. The two sons of Parvati, the
Cosmic Mother, denote the two aspects of the evolved human being—strength
and wisdom.
I bow to Sri Dakshinamurthy, Lord and teacher of the three worlds, Who

cuts asunder the painful shackles of birth and death and who is to be
meditated upon, As sitting beneath a banyan tree and bestowing His
grace of supreme knowledge on the sages.
"DAKSHINAMURTHY STOTRAM” BY ADI SHANKARA
I am not the prana or the five vital forces, I am not the seven elements of
the body nor the five sheaths, I am not the organs of speech, or
procreation or excretion, I am the essence of consciousness and bliss—
Shivoham! Shivoham!
“NIRVANASHTAKAM” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
I bow to the pure, effulgent Shiva linga, which eradicates the sorrows of
many lifetimes and which is worshipped by Brahma and Vishnu.
“LINGASHTAKAM,” ANCIENT HYMN TO SHIVA’S LINGA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Tripurantakaya Namaha!
16
The Three Demonic Cities
Prostrations to the great Lord, master of the universe, the great God, the
three-eyed one, destroyer of the three cities, extinguisher of the three
fires as well as the fire at the time of death, the blue-necked one,
conqueror of death, Lord of all, the ever-peaceful one, glorious God of
all gods!
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
The three sons of the demon Taraka were named Tarakaksha, Vidyunmali, and
Kamalaksha. Furious at their father’s death, they decided to propitiate Brahma to
receive some boons from him, by which they could annihilate the gods. They did
tapasya for many years, and at last Brahma appeared and promised to give them
the boons they craved. With true asuric mentality, they immediately asked for
immortality of the body. Brahma said it was not in his power to grant this, that
everything that has a birth has to have a death at some time or other, and advised
them to ask for something else. After pondering awhile they came up with
another brilliant scheme. Each asked to have a wonderful city of his own that
would be impregnable and never be destroyed by anyone. Tarakaksha asked for a
golden city that would traverse the heavenly regions, Kamalaksha asked for a
silver one that would move about in the skies, and Vidyunmali opted for a
magnetic, steel city that could move about freely on the earth. But in order to
comply with Brahma’s decree that no one and nothing could be totally
indestructible, they agreed that the three cities could be destroyed when they
came in line with the other two. This phenomenon would happen only once in a
thousand years, at midday, when the constellation Pushya was in ascendance.

They also insisted that only a single arrow that could pierce all three cities at the
same time could destroy them. This arrow had to be discharged by Shiva alone.
Brahma, in his usual weak fashion, agreed to all these conditions, and the divine
architect Mayan built three impregnable cities and gave them to the three
brothers.
Asuras are egoistic and cruel by nature, so when their strength was enhanced
by the acquisition of these miraculous cities, it was only to be expected that the
three brothers would start to wreak havoc in their respective regions—the earth,
sky, and heavens. At last the frustrated gods went to Brahma and asked him to
rescue them as well as the earth and the terrestrial regions from the rampages of
these cruel brothers. Brahma, of course, could only give these absurd boons; he
was quite incapable of undoing them. So they went to Shiva, as usual, and
placed their request before him. Shiva told them he would not be instrumental in
destroying his devotees, and the cunning demons, who knew that Shiva was the
one ordained to kill them, had started the worship of Shiva in all their three
cities.
So the gods, with Brahma at their head, went to Vishnu, savior of the world.
Vishnu, too, said he was powerless to destroy the devotees of Shiva. Every time
the asuras committed some crime, they immediately propitiated Shiva through
some sacrifices and thus eliminated the effects of their karma. In this way they
became invincible. The only way to make them weak was to stop them from
performing these rites.
Vishnu created an ascetic who went to the three cities and spread heretic lore,
totally at variance with the ancient Vedic cult. The sage advised the city dwellers
to stop worshipping gods like Shiva who were, he said, really weak when
compared to the asuras. He initiated the demons into this dogma and soon all
worship of Shiva was forbidden in the cities; the rites of the virtuous came to an
end, and evil conduct reigned supreme. In each of the three regions where they
dominated, the demons swooped down on their hapless victims and ground them
to death. Once again, the gods approached Shiva and told him about the latest
developments and begged him to rescue them from their plight. Shiva agreed,
but there were many obstacles to killing the demons of the cities. Brahma
reminded the gods that the demons could be killed only with a single arrow,
which would have to pierce all three cities at the same time. This was quite a
difficult task since they were always flying about in different spheres. The gods
were sorely perplexed by this dilemma. Vishnu, as usual, came to their aid and
told them that the cities would be aligned once in a thousand years, and that time

was soon to come.
Shiva agreed to kill them if he was provided with a suitable chariot and arrow.
Visvakarma, the divine architect, made a cosmic chariot incorporating all the
forces of nature. It was golden in color and brilliant to behold. The right wheel
was the sun and the left, the moon. The right wheel had twelve spokes for the
twelve months of the year and the left had sixteen, corresponding to the sixteen
digits of the moon. The six seasons were the rims of the wheels. Time itself was
its velocity. All the great mantras hung as bells on the spokes. Lord Brahma was
the charioteer, and the gods, with Indra at their head, held the bridle. Vishnu
penetrated the arrow, and Agni, the spearhead. The Vedas were the four horses.
Shiva, or Sharva, was the cosmic archer.
As he got into the chariot, the earth quaked and the mountains trembled. All
the gods sang his praises. Brahma drove the chariot with the speed of the mind,
with the gods following. Shiva chased the three cities from sphere to sphere, but
they did not come into a single line. Then came a celestial voice that told him to
worship Ganesha if he wanted victory. Shiva duly recalled his own son Ganesha
and requested him to remove all impediments from his path. As soon as he did
this, the three cities came into alignment. A thousand years had passed, and the
time specified by Brahma had come. Shiva stood up in the chariot, fixed the
arrow on his bow, and drew the string taut. At the auspicious moment called
abhijit, he discharged the arrow, which flew with a tremendous hissing sound.
Since Vishnu himself was in the arrow, and Agni was its steelhead, the arrow
blazed forth like a meteor and burned the cities where the demons were lurking.
Thus Shiva got the name Tripurantaka, slayer of the three cities. The gods
extolled him, but Shiva’s face was stern. Taking the ashes from the charred
remains of the flying cities, he drew three horizontal lines across his forehead
and proclaimed, “Mark my words! One day, the whole world will become as
corrupt as these three cities. On that day I shall wield my bow once again and
destroy the whole cosmos. Let these ashes on my forehead remind everyone of
death, the Destroyer. In the future, all my devotees shall have this mark on their
foreheads.”
The story of the Tripuras is the story of human redemption from the demonic
to the divine life. Shiva is the divine archer, or Supreme Spirit, residing within
this fortress. The three cities represent the three sheaths—the body, mind, and
intellect. They also illustrate the three gunas, or modes of nature—sattva, rajas,
and tamas. The golden city stands for sattva, the silver for rajas, and the iron for
tamas. They have to come to a state of equilibrium in a straight formation before

the divine archer can shoot the arrow of knowledge and kill all three and thus
give redemption to the jivatma, or embodied soul. When the time is ripe for such
liberation, all the gods or cosmic forces will come to our aid and the human soul,
imprisoned within the fortress of the body, will be liberated.
Once Shiva and Parvati went to the Mandara mountains and sported among the
peaks. Parvati playfully closed Shiva’s eyes with her lotus-like palms. As soon
as she did this, a deep darkness spread over the whole universe. Since his eyes
had the scorching heat of fire, her hands started to perspire. Beads of sweat
dripped to the ground. Out of this heat and sweat there appeared an inhuman and
terrible being, black, deformed, and blind. It had matted locks of hair all over its
body. It howled, danced, and flicked its tongue here and there like a serpent and
roared like a lion. Parvati removed her hands from Shiva’s eyes and light came
to the world once again. She was terrified at the sight of this strange creature and
asked her Lord what it might be.
Shiva replied, “When you closed my eyes, O beloved, your sweat flowed to
the ground and combined with the heat of my eyes and produced this creature.
So you are the cause of this creature. He shall be called Andhaka, or the blind
one, and you shall care for him like your own son.”
Parvati agreed, and the boy was brought up by the ganas. At this time the
asura Hiranyaksha was doing tapasya to Shiva in order to get a son. At the end
of his tapasya Shiva appeared before him and Hiranyaksha asked him for the
boon of a son. Shiva was pleased with his austerities but told him he was not
fated to have a son; however he, Shiva, would present Andhaka to him as his
son. The asura was delighted and returned to his kingdom with Andhaka in tow.
At a later time, Lord Vishnu killed Hiranyaksha and his brother
Hiranyakashipu. Although Prahlada was the son of an asura, Hiranyakashipu, he
was a great devotee of Lord Vishnu and became the king of the netherworld after
the death of his father. Hiranyaksha had been the elder brother, but his son,
Andhaka, was blind and thus could not become king. Andhaka was teased by his
cousins for his inefficiency and inability to rule his father’s kingdom. Unable to
bear these taunts, Andhaka set out to the forest and started doing severe penance,
swearing to cut off parts of his flesh and sacrifice the pieces into the fire if
Brahma did not appear. At last Brahma appeared and asked him to choose a
boon.

Andhaka immediately asked for immortality and invincibility in warfare. Of
course, Brahma was powerless to grant him immortality and could only give him
a choice as to the method of death. Andhaka thought for a minute and came up
with a brilliant idea. He agreed that death could befall him if ever he coveted a
woman like his mother, who was the fairest in the whole world. Brahma agreed
and touched his emaciated body, which immediately became strong and
handsome. He also gained his sight. Andhaka was delighted. He roamed about
from the heavens to the netherworlds, conquering every region, and made Indra
and the gods subservient to his will. Proud of his prowess, he slighted the Vedas,
the gods, and the Brahmins. He indulged in sexual sport with diverse, beautiful
women. Once, as luck would have it, he decided to spend some time in the
Himalayas on the Mandara peak. His ministers came and told him of a
wonderful sight they had seen.
“O Lord of demons,” they said, “living in a cave not far from here we saw a
sage in deep meditation. His matted hair was topped with the crescent moon and
he wore an elephant hide round his hips. Serpents were twined round his body
and a necklace of skulls adorned his neck. He was smeared with ashes. But what
is of interest to you is the fact that the most divinely ravishing lady was seated
close to him. What is the use of your having gained eyesight, if you are unable to
feast your eyes on her? However, we should warn you that two creatures guard
their cave. One is an old bull and another, a creature with simian features.”
On hearing this, the demon was thrilled and ordered his emissaries to go and
ask the sage to give his wife to him peacefully or else be prepared to fight. The
yogi was none other than Shiva, and the emissaries of the demon went and told
him that it was not befitting for a yogi to keep a young woman by his side. They
ordered him to relinquish her immediately and hand her over to the king of the
asuras.
Shiva smilingly told them to go back to their master and tell him to mind his
own business. Shiva then announced to Parvati that he was going to an
impenetrable forest in order to perform severe penance. While performing this,
he would have to be celibate, and so it would be better if Parvati did not
accompany him. Leaving his ganas to guard her, the Lord left for the dense
forest. Precisely at this time Andhaka came with his army and fought a fierce
battle with the ganas who were stationed at the door of the cave. When Parvati
saw that the battle was going against them, she prayed to Vishnu to come to her
rescue. Vishnu took numerous forms of thousands of ravishing women who
immediately surrounded Parvati, so that Andhaka was unable to distinguish

which was Parvati. He didn’t know what to do and beat a hasty retreat. Soon
after this Shiva returned and once again a fierce battle ensued between the ganas
and asuras. At last Shiva decided that the hour for Andhaka’s redemption had
come, for he had coveted his own mother, Parvati, who was the fairest in the
whole world. Shiva impaled Andhaka on his trident and hoisted him in the air.
Shiva’s trident is known for its cleansing qualities, and as soon as Andhaka was
impaled on it, he came to his senses. All the evil was wiped out of him, and he
begged Shiva and Parvati to forgive him. Shiva was never one to bear a grudge,
so he readily forgave him and asked him to choose a boon. Andhaka begged
Shiva to make him his constant companion. Shiva agreed and made him chief of
the ganas. The ganas, as we have seen, were a motley crew of the forlorn, the
ugly, and the unwanted, so Andhaka was a fitting candidate for this post.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Shoolapanaye Namaha!
17
Downfall of the Demons
O Lord with matted locks on which is kept the Ganga,
O Lord of ghouls, and death to Death!
O destroying fire of Cupid.
O Lord with throat filled with poison,
O Lord of the elements,
Be gracious unto me.
SAINT SUNDARAR
Once Indra and the other gods, accompanied by Brihaspati, preceptor of the
gods, went to Kailasa to see Lord Shiva. The latter wanted to test them and
assumed the form of a huge yaksha (treasure guardian) and lay in their way.
When the giant refused to move, Indra, with the arrogance born of power, raised
his weapon, the thunderbolt, in order to kill him. The yaksha, who was none
other than Shiva, wanted to humble their pride. He held up a blade of grass in his
hands and asked the gods if any of them could dislodge the grass from his hands.
The gods were quite scornful of this childish request, and each of them thought it
would be a simple matter to crush the grass. One by one they tried to dislodge it.
The wind god, Vayu, tried first, but blow as he might he was unable to make the
blade of grass sway in the gust. Next, Agni, god of fire, tried his best to burn the
little blade with his flame, but it remained unscorched. At last Indra hurled his
thunderbolt at the blade of grass, but neither the yaksha nor the grass seemed in
the least affected.
The gods were perplexed and asked the yaksha, “What is the meaning of this?

Who are you?”
The yaksha replied, “Have you forgotten that there is another power above
you? Without the support of that power, none of you can do anything.”
Indra was enraged and raised his vajra once more and hurled it at the yaksha.
Shiva opened his third eye. The fierce flame that shot out of his eye would have
reduced Indra to cinders had not Brihaspati intervened and begged Shiva to
forgive Indra. Shiva forgave him, but the fire that had emanated from his third
eye would have scorched the world had it dropped on the earth, so Shiva cast it
into the sea at the confluence of the Ganga and the ocean. Here the flame took
on the form of a handsome demon boy. Hearing the fierce howls of the child, all
the three worlds quaked in fear. The gods ran to Brahma and told him to do
something about this strange creature. Brahma went to the ocean and took the
boy in his lap. Immediately the demon put his arms round Brahma’s neck and
tried to throttle him, till tears started to come out of the Creator’s eyes. He had
hard work to extricate himself from the demon boy’s strangling embrace. The
ocean, which appeared to have a parental interest in the boy, now asked Brahma
to perform the postnatal rites for the child and give him a name and foretell his
destiny.
Brahma, whose eyes were full of tears caused by the demon’s stranglehold,
replied, “Since he was able to make my eyes water, he will be known as
Jalandara. This name is doubly appropriate since he took birth in the water. He
will be invincible, heroic, and majestic like the ocean itself, and he will become
the emperor of the demons. No one except Shiva will be able to slay him. He
will have a wife who will be exquisitely beautiful and noble in all ways.”
The ocean was very pleased and took the boy to his own abode and nurtured
him with great affection. He grew up into a handsome and splendid youth. The
ocean requested the asura, Kalanemi, to give his daughter Vrinda to the young
man in marriage.
Jalandara became king and ruled over the demons for many years. Once he
decided to conquer the gods and sent Indra an order to submit to him or else be
prepared to fight. Indra decided to fight but was routed by Jalandara. As usual,
Indra rushed to Brahma for aid, but the latter told him to go to Vishnu and seek
his help. The gods approached Vishnu, but Vishnu said that Jalandara was his
brother-in-law and so he could not kill him. Vishnu’s consort, the goddess
Lakshmi, was born of the ocean just as Jalandara was, and Jalandara claimed
that Lakshmi was his sister and Vishnu, his brother-in-law. Thus Jalandara had

got a boon from Vishnu that he would not kill him. The gods now requested the
celestial sage, Narada, to go to Jalandara and try to persuade him to infuriate
Shiva; otherwise the great Lord would not agree to kill him.
Narada immediately proceeded to Jalandara’s abode, stringing his lute. He
lauded him and congratulated him on his great good fortune in having subdued
all three worlds. Narada continued, “I see that there is no one to equal you in all
these worlds, but I have just come from Kailasa, the abode of Lord Shiva, and I
have to confess that Lord Shiva’s wife is the most beautiful woman I have ever
seen. I know you to be a connoisseur of feminine charms, and I am sure you will
want to possess her.”
Hearing this, Jalandara was terribly excited. If there was one thing that all
demons had in common, it was their lust for beautiful women, and invariably,
unbridled passion was what brought them to ruin.
Jalandara was no exception to this even though his own wife, Vrinda, was a
paragon of all virtues. He sent his emissary to Shiva and demanded that he
surrender his wife willingly to him or face the consequences of his wrath. Shiva
was amused at his audacity and sent the emissary away with a stiff reprimand to
his master. When Jalandara heard this he sent his army to fight with Shiva.
Taking this opportunity, Jalandara took on the form of Shiva and entered
Parvati’s private apartments, where she was seated with her attendants. Seeing
her Lord enter, she came forward. When he looked at her divine beauty,
Jalandara could not control himself, and his disguise fell from him. Parvati
immediately transported herself to the banks of the lake Manasarovar and prayed
to Vishnu to come to her aid. The gentle Lord came to her and asked her what
she wanted of him. She recounted the tale of how the asura Jalandara had tried
to flout her modesty and capture her. She begged Vishnu to do the same to
Jalandara’s wife, Vrinda. Vishnu promised to help her and went to the forest near
Vrinda’s palace in the guise of an ascetic. While Vrinda was walking in the park,
she was frightened by the sudden appearance of two fierce-looking monkeys.
The ascetic, who was none other than Vishnu, saved her. Later the ascetic
assumed the form of her husband Jalandara, just as Jalandara had assumed the
form of Shiva in order to confuse Parvati. He went near Vrinda and put his arms
round her. When Vrinda realized that this was not her husband but Lord Vishnu,
she cursed him that one day his wife would be abducted by a rakshasa in the
guise of an ascetic, and he would have to roam about the forest searching for her.
Monkeys and bears would be his only helpers. The Lord laughed and accepted

the curse for he knew that all this was bound to happen in his avatara as Rama.
Vrinda then immolated herself in the fire. Her spirit rose up in a flame and joined
the aura around Parvati. All the gods rained flowers round her and applauded her
for her great chastity and purity.
In the meantime, unable to see Parvati, Jalandara returned to the battlefield and
challenged Shiva to battle. Shiva started to churn the ocean with his big toe. As
he rotated his toe, a huge wheel came out of the waters. This was the famous
Sudarshana Chakra, which he later presented to Vishnu.
Shiva now told the demon, “O Jalandara, if you wish to fight with me you will
have to lift this wheel with your toe. Only then will you be deemed competent to
fight with me.”
Jalandara laughed in scorn and insulted Shiva and boasted of his own prowess.
But try as he might, Jalandara was unable to lift the wheel. Shiva’s eyes emitted
sparks of red and blue flame, and taking up the wheel, he whirled it in the air and
cut off the head of the arrogant monster. The splendor that came out of
Jalandara’s body merged with the splendor around Shiva, just as Vrinda’s spirit
had merged in Parvati’s aura. The entire universe now returned to its former state
of normalcy, and the gods and other celestial beings returned to their own abodes
fearlessly.
Another similar story about Shiva concerns the demon Shankachuda. An asura
called Dambha had no sons. He went to his preceptor, Shukra, and asked his
advice. Shukra gave him the great mantra of Lord Krishna and told him to repeat
it and perform austerities at the lake called Pushkar. Lord Vishnu was pleased
with his devotion and appeared before him and asked him to choose a boon.
Dambha asked for a son. Soon after, his wife conceived, and a baby was born to
them. In his previous birth this soul had been a close comrade of Lord Krishna
and had been called Sudama. He had been cursed by Radha and was now forced
to take birth as a demon. His name was Shankachuda, and when he came of age
he followed his father’s example and went to the lake Pushkar and performed
severe tapasya in order to propitiate Brahma. The Creator appeared before him
and asked him to choose a boon. Shankachuda said that he wanted to be
invincible and able to defeat the gods. Brahma agreed and presented him with
the divine amulet of Sri Krishna to wear on his arm. He advised him to go to the
holy spot called Badrikashrama in the Himalayas, where he would meet a lady
called Tulasi, who would be the perfect match for him. Shankachuda followed
his advice and married Tulasi. Shankachuda now became chief of the asuras.

With the blessings of his guru, Shukra, he defeated the gods and took over the
heavens and all the three worlds and became a great emperor. Everyone was
happy for he was a wonderful ruler. Only the gods were unhappy, for they had
been ousted from heaven. They went with their complaints to Brahma, who went
with them and requested Lord Vishnu to help them.
Vishnu spoke to them: “Listen, O gods!” he said. “This Shankachuda was a
great devotee of mine in my avatara as Sri Krishna. He was called Sudama and
was a great friend of Sri Krishna. He was cursed by Radha and has now taken
the form of an asura. Krishna has ordained that he will be killed by Shiva’s
trident, so you should approach Shiva and request his help.”
The gods went to Kailasa and asked Shiva to help them. The Lord agreed and
sent his emissaries to Shankachuda and ordered him to give heaven back to the
gods. Shankachuda refused to do so and told them they would have to fight for
it. Thus war was declared and Shiva’s ganas marched to Shankachuda’s
kingdom.
At this point Shankachuda started to remember his previous birth and knew
that the appropriate time for his release had come. He installed his son on the
throne and parted lovingly from his beloved wife, Tulasi, before proceeding to
the battlefield. A mighty battle ensued between the opposing armies, in which
Shankachuda showed himself to be invincible. At last Lord Vishnu approached
Shiva and told him the secret of Shankachuda’s invincibility—he had been given
impenetrable armor. Moreover he had a spotlessly pure wife who was constantly
praying for his safety, and as long as she did so, he would not die.
Shiva requested Vishnu to delude Shankachuda with his maya. Vishnu
forthwith took on the disguise of an old beggar and went to Shankachuda, asking
that he give him his armor. Shankachuda could never refuse a mendicant and
immediately ripped off his armor and gave it to him. Wearing this armor, Vishnu
approached Shankachuda’s wife, Tulasi, and made love to her, pretending to be
her husband. Immediately, Shankachuda was bereft of all his powers and could
easily be killed by Shiva’s trident. Shankachuda was released from his curse and
regained his previous form and returned to Goloka to be with his beloved Sri
Krishna. It is said that all conches in the world that are used in the worship of
Vishnu are made of Shankachuda’s bones. When Tulasi heard of Vishnu’s
deception, she was totally bereft and decided to give up her own life. She cursed
Vishnu that he would be turned into a rock. At that time Shiva appeared and told
her not to worry, for Vishnu had done this only to aid the gods, who were his

devotees.
“O gentle lady,” he said, “cast off this body of yours and you will be given a
most virtuous form. On this earth you will become the holy basil plant known as
tulasi. You will be beloved by Krishna and Vishnu and worshipped by all. The
conch and tulasi leaves will be essential parts of the worship of Krishna and
Vishnu. Your body will also take on the form of the River Gandaki. Due to your
curse, Vishnu will become a rock in this river. Scores of sharp-toothed worms
will penetrate and erode this rock, and the pieces will be known as saligramas
and will be used in the worship of Vishnu. One who keeps a saligrama, a conch,
and tulasi leaves in his house will be loved by Vishnu.” With this
pronouncement Shiva vanished and Vishnu took Tulasi with him to his abode.
She cast off her body, which became the River Ganadaki, and Vishnu became a
rock on its banks.
The great sage Atri was the son of Brahma. He was married to the most perfect
of all women, Anasuya. Since the couple had no children, they went to the forest
and meditated on the great God, whomever he might be, in order to get progeny.
After many years of penance, Atri’s body emitted a brilliant flame that
threatened to consume the whole world. The gods approached Brahma as usual,
and he in turn went to Vishnu, and they all went to Shiva’s abode. Since Atri had
not mentioned the name of any one god in his tapasya, all three of them decided
to visit him and grant his request. The sage was rather surprised to see all of
them and politely asked the reason for their visit.
They replied, “You have meditated on the great God, and since we are all
equally great, we decided to grant you three sons, each of whom will have a part
of our glory.” Thus saying, they returned to their own abodes. Very soon
Anasuya conceived. The child who was a part of Brahma became the moon,
Chandra. The part of Vishnu born as their son was famous in the world as
Dattatreya; he taught the world the greatness of the path of renunciation. The
part of Shiva born as their son was known as Durvasa, and he became a great
sage, famous for going around the world testing people. It is true that he was
known for his bad temper, but one will notice that every time he lost his temper
it was for some good reason, and the person he cursed gained something from it.
For example, the sage king Ambarisha became famous for his piety due to
Durvasa’s temper. At the end of Sri Rama’s life on earth, Durvasa tested even

Rama in order to show the world how the king was prepared to renounce his
beloved brother in order to keep his word.
There is another interesting story concerning Atri’s wife Anasuya, who was, as
we have seen, a model of chastity. One time Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva decided
to test her chastity. They took the form of mendicants and went to her hermitage
to beg for alms. She came out to give them some food, but they said very
politely that they had taken a vow that they would be served only by a naked
woman. Anasuya was in a dilemma. It was considered most improper to refuse
to give food to a holy man; moreover they looked noble and would perhaps curse
her if she refused. On the other hand it would be totally against the vows of
chastity for her to go naked in the presence of three men. She thought for a
while. Then, by the power of her great chastity, she turned the three gods into
three small babies and took them inside the house. She then took off her clothes
and calmly proceeded to feed them.
Thus they were forced to remain in her ashrama for a long time. In the
meantime, Lakshmi, Saraswati, and Parvati, who were the consorts of the three
gods, became rather worried at the prolonged disappearance of their husbands.
At last they discovered that they were in Atri’s ashrama. When they went to the
hermitage they found three babies playing with Anasuya. When questioned, she
admitted that the three were not real babies but wandering mendicants who had
come for food. The three goddesses shamefully confessed that the mendicants
were none other than their husbands. With her yogic powers, Anasuya returned
the mendicants to their original forms. They were very pleased with the success
of their test, blessed Anasuya and Atri, and returned to their respective abodes.
I do not gain any merit by the performance of good, nor do I lose
anything by the performance of evil. I have neither happiness nor
unhappiness. I gain nothing by chants, pilgrimages, yajnas, or the study
of Vedas. I am not the eater, the food, or the act of eating. I am the
essence of consciousness and bliss—Shivoham! Shivoham!
“NIRVANASHTAKAM” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
I have no death, or birth, or caste. I have no father or mother, for I am
unborn. I am neither friend nor relation, neither guru nor disciple. I am
the essence of consciousness and bliss—Shivoham! Shivoham!
“NIRVANASHTAKAM” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA

Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Neelakandaya Namaha!
18
Churning the Milky Ocean
O Dispenser of mercy,
Who consumed the strong poison
So that the dwellers of heaven might regain their youth,
Have mercy on me and restore my eyesight.
SAINT SUNDARAR
Once it happened that Indra, king of the gods, was cursed by the sage Durvasa.
The sage had received a divine garland from Vaikunta and presented it to Indra.
Not realizing the profound value of this gift, Indra threw the garland carelessly
over his elephant’s head. The elephant shook its head, and the garland fell to the
ground and was trampled in the mud. When Durvasa saw this he was furious and
cursed Indra that he, along with his retinue of gods, would become old and
decrepit. Immediately all the gods lost their youth and supernormal powers. As
usual, they ran to the Creator, Brahma, and requested him to intervene with Lord
Vishnu on their behalf. They went en masse to Vaikunta and begged Lord Vishnu
to help them.
The Lord appeared in all his glory and spoke to them. “O gods,” he said, “time
is the master controller of all things. At the moment, time is favorable to the
asuras who are your arch enemies. The wheel of time turns slowly, but one day
it will turn in your favor. That will happen only if you churn the milky ocean and
get the elixir of life, the amrita. Anyone who drinks it will gain eternal youth,
but in your state of decrepitude you will never be able to do this by yourselves;
you will have to get help from the asuras. In desperate situations there is no

harm in taking the help of even your confirmed enemies. After you gain your
objective you can return to your original state of enmity.
“One who drinks amrita will become immortal, so waste no time in doing this.
Go immediately to the asuras and solicit their assistance. You have no option but
to agree to whatever terms they suggest. Many precious objects will come out of
the ocean when it is churned. Have no attraction or repulsion to whatever comes.
Take only what is given to you, and don’t lose your temper if you are prevented
from possessing any of them. You may use the Mandara mountain as the
churning rod and the serpent Vasuki as the rope. Consign all types of medicinal
plants, shrubs, and creepers into the milky ocean in order to curdle it. Only then
will it yield the desired benefits.” So saying, Vishnu vanished from view.
The gods went and solicited the demons, who agreed to help them provided
they were given a fair share of the amrita. Imbued with confidence in their
abilities, both parties went and lifted the mountain, Mandara, and started to carry
it to the ocean. Very soon they could not bear the weight, and the golden
mountain came crashing down, killing many gods and demons alike. Lord
Vishnu appeared on his eagle vehicle and lifted it up with one hand. Balancing
the mountain easily on the eagle’s back, he took it to the ocean and placed it in
the correct spot. The gods then requested Vasuki, the Lord of snakes, to act as
the rope for churning the rod, on the understanding that he, too, would get a fair
share of the amrita. With great enthusiasm the gods and demons wound the
snake round the mountain and started to pull this mighty churning rod this way
and that. Since the gods were too old and weak to do much, Lord Vishnu himself
caught hold of the snake’s head, and the demons were told to take the tail. The
demons were quite mortified at this apparent insult. They refused to touch the
tail and declared that it was most demeaning for noble people like them to be
forced to catch the posterior of the snake! Lord Vishnu smilingly gave up the
head and lifted up the tail with the help of the gods behind him. Thus both sides
started to churn the mighty ocean with great vigor. Unfortunately, since the
mountain was not supported beneath, it started to sink. A great cry rose up in the
ranks of the devas and the asuras. Lord Vishnu comforted them, took the form of
an enormous tortoise, and swam beneath the mountain, lifting it up so that it had
a firm base. This was Lord Vishnu’s incarnation known as the Kurmavatara. This
primeval tortoise of infinite length and strength bore that huge mountain on its
back as easily as if it were a mere pebble. It is said that the Lord, as the tortoise,
was delighted with the pleasant sensation of scratching on his shellback as the
mountain rotated rhythmically over it, while the two teams churned vigorously.

Despite their best efforts the work was still proceeding very slowly, so Lord
Vishnu took a dual form, that of a deva and of an asura, and entered both their
ranks in order to encourage both sides to greater efforts. He also entered the
snake, Vasuki, in the form of a type of anesthesia in order to shield it from the
torturous churning that it had to endure. When the vigorous rotating movement
seemed to upset the balance of the mountain, the Lord took a gigantic form and
stood on top of the mountain to maintain the balance, pressing down each side
when needed. Thus, the Lord took on various manifestations in order to
strengthen the resolve of all concerned. The fumes and hot breath being emitted
by the tired snake were now scorching the asuras, who had stupidly opted for
the head. The devas, too, got their fair share of the fumes, which began to spread
everywhere. Then the Lord made rain pour down on them, cooling both sides
and giving relief to the snake as well.
However, despite their best efforts, no amrita appeared, and both parties began
to lose hope. In order to encourage them, the Lord took an enormous form with
thousands of hands and stood in the middle of the two parties and started to
churn the ocean with five hundred hands on either side. It was a wonderful sight,
and both devas and asuras watched, spellbound. At last things seemed to be
moving. Many aquatic creatures began to surface.
By now the poor snake was quite weary of the whole affair and started to
throw up the dreaded halahala poison, also called Kalakuta. Its fatal and
penetrating fumes began to spread everywhere. Crying loudly in terror, the gods,
urged by Lord Vishnu and led by Indra, ran to Shiva and begged him to save
them from this new horror. If it fell on the ground, the whole universe would be
destroyed. Shiva, the ever-merciful one, immediately appeared on the scene with
Parvati, caught the lethal poison before it dropped to the ground, and drank it
without hesitation.Thus he was known as the savior of the world. He was
prepared to sacrifice his own life in order to save the universe. Parvati knew only
too well that his powers were immeasurable and that nothing could harm him,
yet her love for him made her weak. She exclaimed in horror and caught her
husband’s throat in order to stop the poison from slipping down. The poison thus
stuck in his throat and made it blue in color. Lord Vishnu extolled Shiva as
Neelakanda, or the blue-necked one, while the gods and demons joined in
praising him.
The ability to sacrifice one’s own welfare for the sake of others is the highest
form of the worship of the Supreme, and all the devas and asuras extolled Lord
Shiva. It was a common belief that one who consumed poison should not be

allowed to sleep during the night, so all of them remained awake through the
different watches of the night, singing the praises of Lord Shiva. Even now this
night is celebrated as Mahashivaratri, or the great night of Shiva, and all
devotees of Shiva keep watch during this night, singing hymns to the all-
merciful Lord. The few drops of poison that happened to drop from the Lord’s
hands turned into snakes, scorpions, and other poisonous plants and creatures.
The next day, the devas and asuras once more enthusiastically began to churn
the milky ocean. First to appear was the heavenly cow, Kamadhenu. This was
presented to the rishis for their rituals. Then came the white horse, Ucchaisravas.
Though the devas eyed it greedily, the Lord urged them to give it to the asura,
Bali. Next emerged the four-tusked white elephant, Airavata, which was grabbed
by Indra. Then came the jewel, Kaustubha, which was given to Lord Vishnu to
adorn his neck. Next came the celestial wish-fulfilling tree, known as the
Parijata, as well as the celestial nymphs called the apsaras. All these were taken
by the gods.
Finally the goddess Lakshmi, seated on a shining red lotus, rose out of the
ocean. She was the personification of beauty, filled with auspiciousness. Seeing
her dazzling appearance, both the devas and the asuras stopped their work and
ran after her and stood gazing at her with great admiration. The gods of all the
quarters brought precious articles for her adornment. When she was elaborately
adorned as befitting a bride, they begged her to choose a husband from amongst
them. Clad in royal raiment, she carried the wedding garland in her tender hands
and undulated around the host of august personages crowding the banks of the
ocean. But she did not find anyone who appealed to her! According to her all the
gods had some defect. At last she spied Lord Vishnu seated nonchalantly on the
banks of the ocean, dabbling his feet in the water, totally unconcerned about her.
She realized that he alone was the fitting consort for her and shyly went toward
him, placing the beautiful garland of lotus flowers round his neck. The Lord
graciously accepted her and gave her a most coveted position in his heart, from
which position she cast her gracious look on all his devotees and blessed them
with all worldly and spiritual goods. Thus it is said that Lakshmi, goddess of
wealth, does not go to those who run after her but only to those who run after her
husband.
Next came Vaaruni, the deity of intoxication. The asuras happily took her into
their midst. After more strenuous effort, there suddenly emerged the handsome
figure of a man holding the pot of nectar, the divine amrita, in his hands. Known
as Dhanwantari, he was a partial avatara of Lord Vishnu and is the father of the

science of ayurveda. As soon as the asuras saw him they realized that this was
the immortal drink for which they had been waiting. They greedily decided to
appropriate the whole thing for themselves and immediately grabbed the pot and
ran off with it. The devas were too weak and stunned to respond. After having
gone through such backbreaking labor, they were bereft to find that their efforts
were in vain and the asuras, as expected, had not kept their part of the bargain.
They rushed to Lord Vishnu with their tale of woe.
He comforted them and promised to help. “All those who worked for the
accomplishment of the task must get their just reward and a share of the nectar,
but since the asuras have greedily grabbed the whole pot for themselves, they
will be punished and will get nothing. This is the eternal law of dharma, which
cannot be gainsaid.” Saying this he vanished from their view and in his stead
there appeared a most fascinating woman, lovely beyond description. With
undulating movements of her broad hips she glided into the midst of the asuras,
who were now quarrelling amongst themselves as to who should get the
maximum amrita. When they saw the beautiful damsel they left the pot of nectar
and rushed to her, inquiring as to who she was and why she had come, and
begged her to distribute the nectar impartially amongst them and thus put an end
to their quarrels.
She said that her name was Mohini, and with a seductive sidelong glance of
her lovely eyes she said teasingly, “I’m actually a woman of a very low type, a
harlot as you might say. How can you possibly trust me?”
The asuras laughed merrily at her pleasantries and swore that they trusted her
implicitly. Mohini said, “I shall divide the nectar amongst you only if you
promise to abide by my decision, whatever it may be, and not start quarreling
afterward.”
They agreed happily, and the maiden made them sit facing east on mats of
kusa grass. She called the devas and asked them to sit on the opposite side,
facing the asuras. The asuras did not dare to murmur a word, since she had
already made them swear implicit obedience. When both parties were ready and
sitting meekly in two neat rows, Mohini entered carrying the golden pot of
nectar. All eyes were fixed on her as she appeared. They were so fascinated by
her looks and flirtatious behavior that they forgot to look at what she was doing.
Vishnu did not want to give the nectar of immortality to the asuras, who were
cruel by nature. To give them immortality would have been fatal. As Mohini
passed through the ranks of the asuras, all she gave them was loving glances.

The nectar she gave only to the devas. The demons did not even notice what was
going on, for they were mesmerized by her looks and deportment. Each one
thought that she had fallen in love with him. At last, when the whole of the
nectar had been consumed, Mohini reassumed her original form, to the
consternation of the asuras who realized they had been neatly tricked.
Immediately they started to attack the devas. The latter had by now gobbled up
the nectar and regained their lost youth, and they fought back with redoubled
vigor and eventually defeated the asuras, who returned home to lick their
wounds and plot further ways to defeat their arch enemies.
This story, as most of the stories of the Puranas, has an esoteric meaning. The
milky ocean is the mind. The gods and demons are the negative and positive
thoughts in the mind, which churn it so forcefully. The Mandara mountain is the
load of nescience that we carry from birth to birth. The rope of the snake is our
pride. When we try to subdue this mind by some form of sadhana, or spiritual
practice, such as meditation, the first thing to emerge is the accumulated poison
of passions—lust, greed, anger, fear, and so on—that can be removed only by the
Lord himself. Only then will the ambrosia of wisdom arise. Even at this point,
great care must be taken to keep the ego in check, or else this wisdom will be
snatched from our mouth by our negative emotions. Our asuric ego will grab this
opportunity to declare itself to be supreme. Once again it is only the Lord who
can save us. Sincere prayer and effort can help us to regain this lost wisdom, and
only then can we become liberated beings.
It has another esoteric meaning. The Mandara mountain stands for space and
the snake for time. Using the rod of space and the rope of time, each one churns
out their own world from the “field (sea) of all possibilities” as it is referred to in
quantum physics.
Lord Shiva had returned to Kailasa after having saved the world by
swallowing the poison. There he heard how Vishnu had saved the day by taking
on the form of Mohini, the most fascinating woman in the world. He became
very desirous of seeing this alluring form of the Lord. Accompanied by Parvati
and his host of goblins, he went to Vaikunta in order to see this enticing form.
Shiva said, “I have had occasion to see many of your wonderful incarnations
but have never seen you as a woman. I’m most anxious to see this, so please
show yourself to me as Mohini.”
Vishnu smiled and said, “Are you sure you want to see it? It is a form that is
calculated to arouse passion in every person, but of course you are a perfect yogi

so it might not harm you.” So saying, the Lord vanished from view. Suddenly
Shiva felt that he was in a beautiful garden into which spring had just come.
There, in the midst of the riotous blooms, he beheld a most charming young
woman playing with a golden ball. Her doelike eyes darted hither and thither
following the movements of the unpredictable ball, which was flying around as
if bewitched by her beauty. The ball was not the only one to be thus bewitched.
Shiva found that he had even forgotten the existence of his spouse standing
beside him. He forgot everything except the entrancing young lady playing with
the ball before him and started to chase her. The damsel cast him a bashful,
sidelong glance as she darted past him, trailing her transparent garments that
seemed to be slipping off her tantalizing breasts. She made a show of trying to
hold up her slipping garments with her left hand while bouncing the ball with her
right and danced off with a provocative glance at Shiva. Even Shiva, the great
yogi, was totally carried away by Vishnu’s maya, rhe great illusory power of the
Lord, so how can ordinary mortals be blamed for falling under the spell of this
maya? Before the astonished gaze of Parvati, Shiva ran after Mohini. At last,
tiring of the game, Vishnu as Mohini allowed herself to be caught in a fierce
embrace by Rudra, whose passion had been inflamed by her beauty. She broke
free and ran on, and Shiva’s divine seed dropped on the ground as he followed in
hot pursuit. Wherever Shiva’s seed dropped, gold and silver mines sprang up.
Suddenly Shiva came into possession of his senses and realized how he had been
duped by the great Vishnu maya. He became serene once more, and Mohini
resumed her original form as Vishnu.
Vishnu congratulated Shiva on having been able to overcome his maya that
was so difficult for anyone to overcome. He asked, “Who but you can overcome
the infatuation of my maya by his own efforts and come back to his original
senses?”
It is said that out of this union of Hara and Hari, or Shiva and Vishnu, the
avatara of Dharma Shasta was born. The boy was supposed to have been born
from the thigh of Lord Vishnu, and combined in him the qualities of both of
these deities.
Even Hanuman is said to be a manifestation of Shiva. The rest of the divine
seed of Shiva was taken up in a leaf by the seven sages and given to Vayu, the
wind God, to deposit in a suitable womb. Vayu carried the seed with him to the
southern mountains. There he saw the maiden known as Anjana, who belonged
to a family of monkeys. He deposited the seed in her, and the child she got from
this came to be known as Hanuman. He is the one who helped Lord Vishnu in

his incarnation as Sri Rama to defeat the demon king, Ravana.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Gangadaraya Namaha!
19
The Descent of the River Ganga
O eyes of mine, behold Hara,
With the throat that swallowed the sea-spawned poison, the Lord who
eternally dances,
Swinging rhythmically His eight arms,
O eyes of mine,
Behold Him!
SAINT APPAR
There was once a king of the solar race called Sagara, who performed the
aswamedha yaga, or horse sacrifice, in order to worship the Supreme Being. The
sacrificial horse for the yaga was allowed to wander freely throughout the
country and had to be followed closely by the king’s army. Anyone who wanted
to question the king’s prowess would have to obstruct the horse and fight with
the king’s men. It is said that anyone who performed a hundred aswamedha
yagas would be able to rule over the gods. When Sagara started his hundredth
yaga, Indra, the king of the gods, became afraid that he would oust him from his
position, so he stole the sacrificial horse and hid it away in the nether regions
next to the place where the great sage Kapila was meditating. When the horse
disappeared, Sagara sent his people to search for it, but it was nowhere to be
found. The hundred sons of the king now went forth to look for the horse and
dug up the entire earth in their efforts. At last they found the horse in the
netherworld, grazing happily beside the great sage Kapila. Their minds
bewildered by their own evil propensities, they thought the sage to be the thief

and pounced on him. Kapila opened his eyes, and the fire of austerity that blazed
from his eyes, immediately consumed them. Hearing this news, the king’s
grandson, Amsuman, went forth to reprieve his uncles. He came to the place
where the horse was tethered, immediately recognized the sage to be an
enlightened soul, and begged him to release the horse and forgive his uncles. The
sage blessed him and told him to take away the horse and complete his
grandfather’s sacrifice.
“Your uncles can be purified only by the holy waters of the River Ganga,
which resides in the heavens,” said Kapila. Amsuman returned and completed
the yaga, but he was unable to do anything about bringing the Ganga to the earth
in his lifetime. His son Dileepa also performed great tapasya but was unable to
get the Ganga to the earth.
Next in the line of the glorious Ikshvaku dynasty was Prince Bhagiratha, son
of Dileepa. When he heard of the great efforts made by his father and
forefathers, he was determined that he would succeed where the others had
failed and force the celestial Ganga to come to the earth and thus give salvation
to his ancestors. Filled with determination, the young prince went to the
Himalayas and performed rigorous penance for many years at the place now
known as Gangotri.
At last the goddess Ganga was pleased and told him that she was willing to
come down to the earth. “I’m pleased with your penance, O Bhagiratha,” she
said, “but if I come down, the force of my descent will crush the earth and she
will not be able to survive the impact of my tremendous weight. So you will
have to find someone who is capable of breaking my fall and bearing my weight.
Moreover, when I come to the earth, all human beings will wash off their sins in
my pure waters and I will become polluted. Who will be there to purify me?”
Bhagiratha humbly replied, “O goddess, whenever a holy man comes and
takes a bath in your waters, he will cleanse you from your contact with sinners.
A holy man is a repository of all purity. The Lord, who is the essence of purity,
ever lives in the hearts of the holy, and no impurity can remain in their presence.
As for your first difficulty, Lord Shiva alone is capable of breaking your fall. He
is the epitome of compassion. When he hears of the great benefit that would
accrue to all humankind if you were to come to the earth, he will surely agree to
help me.”
Thus saying, Bhagiratha started on another bout of terrible penance by which
he propitiated the compassionate Shiva and begged him to help him in this

endeavor. Shiva agreed, and Bhagiratha once more begged Ganga to come down.
The celestial Ganga is normally retained in the kamandalu, or water pot of the
Creator, Brahma. In his avatara as Vamana, Vishnu took on a universal form in
which one of his feet thrust its way into the world of Brahma. The Creator was
overjoyed to see the lotus feet of the Lord and reverently poured Ganga water
over the feet of Vamana. This was the holy water, purified by washing the feet of
Lord Vishnu, that now came dashing down with all its force on to the earth.
Playfully Ganga decided to test Shiva’s strength and bore down with all her
might on the planet. Shiva opened his locks and caught her in her impetuous fall
so that not a drop remained, thus subduing her pride; she disappeared completely
into his hair. Struggle as she might, not a drop could manage to squeeze out of
Shiva’s hair, which he calmly knotted up again. Poor Bhagiratha! Once again he
was forced to meditate on the three-eyed Lord and beg him to release at least one
portion of the heavenly Ganga so that his ancestors could gain peace. Having
curbed Ganga’s pride, the Lord was pleased to grant Bhagiratha’s request and
allowed a small trickle to escape from his topknot.
This is the Ganga we see today. What was only a small trickle to Shiva is a
mighty torrent to us. The Ganga came out of the glacier known as Gomukh,
which is in the form of a cow’s mouth, in the lofty regions of the Himalayas.
Since the Ganga was brought down by Bhagiratha, her name in those regions is
Bhageerathi. Since she is kept in Shiva’s hair, she became his second wife, and
Shiva came to be called Gangadhara.
Bhagiratha rode his horse swiftly down the Himalayan slopes with the river
following closely behind. He had a long way to go before reaching the sea,
where the ashes of his ancestors lay. On the way it is said that he passed the
hermitage of the sage Jhanva, and since the river was about to destroy his
ashrama, the sage calmly took her into himself through his left ear. Bhagiratha
looked back to find that Ganga had disappeared, and guessing the cause, he
returned and begged the sage to release her. Jhanva was only too happy to
oblige, and he allowed Ganga to come out of his right ear. Thus she acquired the
name Jhanavi, or daughter of Jhanva.
The stories of the sages are only meant to give us an inkling of the greatness of
these holy men who were in such perfect control of themselves that they could
manipulate the forces of nature. These sages were one with the supreme center
of the universe and thus there was nothing they could not command. Ganga was
reminded of the assurance of Bhagiratha that if any pure soul touched her, all the
sins she had accumulated due to the sinners who had washed their sins off in her

waters would in turn be destroyed. Thus the Ganga surged after Bhagiratha,
purifying everything on her way until she reached the ocean near modern
Calcutta. The ashes of the sons of Sagara were lying there, and she flowed over
them and redeemed Bhagiratha’s pledge of giving salvation to his ancestors.
Despite their sin in having insulted a most holy person, these princes attained
heaven through the indirect contact of their ashes with the holy waters of the
Ganga. Bhagiratha’s name has come to be synonymous with superhuman effort
and valor in order to achieve impossible ends. It is to his glory that the Ganga is
here with us today, ready to bless all those who bathe in her waters or pray to her
with devotion. All devout Hindus hope that after death their ashes will be
immersed in the heavenly Ganga by their children, for in that lies ultimate
salvation.
I am formless and without any modification or attributes. I am all-
pervading and free. I am ever the same all the time, neither bound nor
liberated. I am the essence of consciousness and bliss—Shivoham!
Shivoham!
“NIRVANASHTAKAM” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Somaya Namaha!
20
Destroyed by His Own Hand
Henceforth O Father!
Instead of contemplating Thy divine feet day and night, I shall brood on
shedding this body on earth,
And enter the haven of your feet.
This is my serfdom.
SAINT  MANIKKAVACHAGAR
Once there was a demon by the name of Bhasmaka who wanted to get control
over the whole world. He decided to propitiate Lord Shiva by his tapasya. When
the demon had practiced severe austerities for many years, Shiva was pleased to
grant him any boon that he might choose. Bhasmaka, who had only one thought
in his mind, immediately said, “Grant me the boon that anyone on whose head I
place my hand will instantly become a heap of ashes. The very word “bhasma”
means ashes, and perhaps his name might have prompted him to ask for this
strange boon. Shiva, who is noted for his love of his devotees, granted the boon
without thinking of the consequences of such an act. With the true asuric nature
that does not hesitate to bite the hand that feeds it, the demon immediately
decided to try out the efficacy of the boon by placing his hand on his
benefactor’s head! He took two steps forward before Shiva realized his
intentions. The only thing to do was to take to his heels, and this he did with
Bhasmaka in hot pursuit. Shiva rushed to Vaikunta and begged Vishnu to help
him. Vishnu immediately took on the form of Mohini, the temptress of the entire
world, and stood before the advancing demon, who held his hand aloft in eager

anticipation of the kill. When he saw Mohini blocking his way, he forgot his
intentions and begged her to marry him. Vishnu, the arch deluder who can entice
the whole universe with his maya, looked coyly at the lusty demon and hung her
head in apparent bashfulness.
“I have taken an oath, O noble one, that I will bestow my favors only on the
person who can defeat me in the art of dancing.”
“O I’m an expert dancer,” cried the infatuated asura, even though he was as
“graceful” as a buffalo.
“Very good,” said the damsel. “I will strike some poses, and you should follow
them as best you can.”
“Certainly!” said the demon, “but please make it short since I’m in a hurry to
gather you up in my arms!”
Mohini smiled her secret smile. Without wasting time in further talk, she
began striking pose after pose. She looked so ravishing in these beautiful,
statuesque poses that Bhasmaka could hardly restrain himself from seizing her,
but he managed to control his ardor and tried to imitate her as best he could. He
was in such a hurry to get on with it and so entranced by her beauty that he
hardly looked at what she was doing, but simply tried his best to copy her. At
last Mohini struck a pose with her right hand on her own head. Without thinking,
Bhasmaka did the same and was reduced to a heap of ashes.
Shiva is noted for his impetuosity, generosity, and gullibility. He is said to
forget his own safety in his anxiety to serve his devotees. He blesses everyone
and does not try to curb anyone, not even the demons. He is quick to anger and
as quickly appeased. Vishnu, on the other hand, is noted for shrewdness and his
ability to contrive all situations, so that he was always the master of the situation
and never the victim. Thus Vishnu saved Shiva, and Shiva was very grateful.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Sadashivaya Namaha!
21
Markandeya and Agniswara
O Pure One, O Virtuous One!
O Lord with the proud bull of bloodshot eyes!
O limpid honey!
O water of life!
O Lord of beautiful eyes!
O lion among the immortals!
Pray tell me who is my kin here?
SAINT SUNDARAR
There was once a poor Brahmin named Mrikandu, who was childless. He and his
wife prayed to Lord Shiva to give them a son. Shiva appeared before them in a
dream and asked, “Would you prefer to have a child who is brilliant in every
way but who will die at the age of sixteen, or would you prefer a long-lived
fool?”
After much consideration, the parents opted for the noble child. The baby who
was born to them was indeed an exceptional child. Everyone who saw him was
struck with wonder and delight. But as the child grew older, he noticed that his
parents were always overprotective of him. At last he questioned them about
their extraordinary anxiety, and they told him the reason.
The boy answered, “Lord Shiva is said to be the cause of both mortality and
immortality. Isn’t he the one who granted your desire for a son? Will he not be
able to grant me the boon of immortality if we pray to him?”

The parents were amazed by the young boy’s faith. They encouraged him to do
daily worship of the linga, which was installed in their little temple. The boy
faithfully performed the worship of the linga in the prescribed manner. At last
the day of his sixteenth birthday dawned. The anxious parents were loath to let
the boy out of their sight, but the child was not in the least bit worried. He
proceeded as usual to their family temple followed by his anxious parents. Just
then he saw the frightening figure of Yama, Lord of death, striding beside him,
carrying the noose in his hand. The boy ran toward the linga, and it is said that in
each one of his footsteps a Shiva linga sprouted, blocking the path of the god of
death. The boy ran into the temple and clasped the linga tightly with both his
arms. Yama came forward and swung his noose round the boy, but since he was
clutching the linga the noose went round both the child and the linga.
The frightened boy cried aloud, “O Shambho! Save me! Save me! I’m alone
and helpless!”
Immediately the lord appeared out of the linga and spoke to him. “Fear not,”
he said gently, “I will not allow death to take you away.” Then turning to Yama
he said, “O Yama! You may now return to your abode. The child was given only
sixteen years of life, and you have come at the appointed time to do your duty.
You may take it from me that it has been done. Now I will take over.”
Yama bowed to the Lord and said, “O Lord! You are the giver of both
mortality and immortality. You are the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer. What
can I do but obey your commands?” So saying, he departed.
Shiva lifted up the child, who had closed his eyes since he was too frightened
to open them and watch the proceedings. “My dear child,” said the Lord. “Have
no fear. My devotee can never fall. Death himself will be helpless against my
devotee. Your faith and devotion will not go unrewarded. I grant you a very, very
long life. You will live for the whole of this manvantaram (cycle of time) and be
acclaimed as a great sage. You will take up your residence in the Himalayas in
the Kedar Kanda, at the holy spot of Badrikashrama. There you will live and do
tapasya for the whole of this cycle of creation, and then join the formless
essence at the end of that time. Have no fear. No one can harm you any more.”
Thus saying the Lord departed. After staying with his parents for some time,
Markandeya, as he came to be called, left for the Himalayas, for he realized that
the sole aim of life was to contemplate the Supreme Lord. Many aeons passed
with the sage in deep contemplation. As usual, Indra, the king of gods, became
jealous of him, for he thought Markandeya’s desire was to usurp his position. In

order to entice the sage and make him fall prey to passion, Indra sent his retinue
consisting of Kama, god of love, the apsaras, and other celestial maidens.
Everywhere that Kama went, spring followed, accompanied by the perfumed
malaya breeze. They went to the holy spot known as Badrikashrama, where the
sage had his hermitage, and transformed that bleak spot into one of beauty. The
vernal season set in. The crescent moon decorated the evening sky. Flowers
bloomed in profusion, and the thick creepers were laden with blossoms dripping
with honey. Inebriated bees buzzed around, intoxicated with the nectar that
flowed in abundance. The atmosphere was enough to arouse pangs of love in the
heart of the sternest ascetic. Kama arrived, carrying his bow of sugarcane and
followed by a troupe of apsaras strumming their lutes and singing sweetly.
The sage was sitting in meditation with half-closed eyes after having finished
offering his oblations into the flames of the sacrificial fire. He looked as lustrous
as the fire itself. The apsaras came forward and started to dance. The musicians
strummed their instruments softly, as Kama drew his five-pronged arrow taut on
the bow. The heavenly dancer Punjikasthali advanced slowly and sensuously and
swayed in time to the music just in front of the sage. Her transparent clothes
were coming loose and her whirling hair trailed over his face. It was at this
opportune moment that Kama shot his arrows.
Markandeya opened his eyes. Indra and his companions, who were discreetly
watching the proceedings from behind the safety of a bush, turned pale, for they
had not forgotten what had happened to Kama when he had dared to do such a
thing to Lord Shiva, at their own behest. This time Kama was trying the same
stunt on one of Shiva’s devotees, and they were a bit uncertain of the
consequences of his action. They were ready and poised for flight if things
appeared to be getting out of hand, but strangely enough, the sage was the
gentlest of all souls. He saw the dancers standing bashfully in front of him and
smiled at them. He was one with the Supreme, and he knew what was passing
through their minds. He beckoned to Indra, who was peeping from behind the
bush. Indra came forward shamefacedly and prostrated before him, asking
Markandeya to forgive him. The sage assured Indra that he had not the slightest
desire to usurp his position and that his only desire was to worship God without
interference.
When Indra departed, the incarnations of Vishnu known as Nara and Narayana
approached Markandeya in order to bless him. They told him to ask for any
boon, and after much persuasion, the sage asked to be shown a glimpse of the
Lord’s divine maya. This was indeed a strange request. All of us are in the habit

of asking the Lord to take away the veil of maya but Markandeya, who was ever
immersed in atmic bliss, did not know the meaning of maya. The Lord smiled at
this surprising request and agreed to comply.
As soon as they left, Markandeya found that black, glowering clouds were
beginning to gather in the sky. Torrential rains came pouring down, and though
he was sitting on the peak of a mountain, the ocean appeared to be rising up on
all sides, so that Markandeya found his ashrama in danger of being washed
away by flood. He was unable to save himself from drowning in the waters, and
for the first time since his sixteenth birthday he felt the emotion called fear. He
floated for an infinite length of time on the waters of the deluge, tortured by
pangs of hunger and pain, unable to find any hope of reprieve. He felt as if he
had been swimming in this ocean of samsara for all time. He lost all recollection
of his former life. At times he was totally submerged, and at times he was afloat.
He cried out piteously to the Lord to help him, and suddenly he saw a delicate
banyan leaf floating on the waters. Lying on the leaf was a glorious infant, blue
in color and eyes filled with love. The baby had taken up one of his own tiny feet
with his two little hands and was sucking his big toe. It was a silent message to
Markandeya that the only recourse for those who were drowning in the ocean of
samsara was the lotus feet of the Lord. At the sight of this wondrous infant, the
sage forgot his woes and was irresistibly drawn to the babe. As he stretched forth
his arms to embrace him, he felt himself being drawn into the child through his
breath. Within the child he saw the vision of the universe as he remembered
having seen it before the deluge. The sky with all the galaxies, the heavens, the
earth, the oceans, the forests, and the mountains were all there inside the heart of
this wondrous infant. His own ashrama was also there. As he watched the scene
in wonder, he was forcibly expelled from the child’s stomach through his breath.
Once again he was floating on the floodwaters, and the wondrous infant was
lying on the water, cradled on the banyan leaf, just out of his reach.
Overpowered by the loving sidelong glances of the infant, the sage swam
forward to embrace him, but just as he stretched his arms out, the Lord
disappeared, and Markandeya found himself back in his ashrama in the
Himalayas and realized that the enormous passage of time that he had imagined
to have passed was nothing but an instant. He had just experienced the glory of
Vishnu’s maya. All time is but an instant to the Lord. For him there is neither
past nor future; there is nothing but a glorious present.
Seeing his devotee in this exalted state, Lord Shiva and his consort, Parvati,
came down to bless him. The sage was sitting with closed eyes, meditating on

the form of the divine baby, when he found the vision to have been replaced by
the forms of the divine couple. He opened his eyes and saw them standing before
him. Shiva was the color of lightning. His matted locks were adorned with the
crescent moon, and he was clad in an elephant hide. He was holding the trident,
club, shield, sword, and bow, as well as the rosary of rudraksha beads. Parvati,
mother of all the worlds, was standing beside him. Rising up in haste,
Markandeya prostrated before them and extolled them. Shiva asked him to
choose any boon.
Markandeya, who had just suffered from the effects of one boon, replied, “I
have just experienced the drastic effect of Vishnu’s maya. I want nothing more
from this world. All I want is firm devotion to your feet and to the feet of Lord
Vishnu and to all your devotees.”
Lord Shiva replied, “O great and noble soul! All that you have asked for will
be given to you. You will be free from the trammels of old age and death. Your
lifespan shall extend to the length of the cosmic dissolution, as I already told you
when I saved you from Yama’s noose. You shall have knowledge of the past,
present, and future, as well as complete renunciation and total illumination. The
very sight of a holy man filled with renunciation is enough to purify a soul. The
gods themselves yearn to have the sight of a holy person. Just by beholding you,
all people will become purified. Your fame shall last for all time.”
Thus blessing him, Lord Shiva and Parvati left the place. The sage,
Markandeya, is said to be still meditating in the lonely regions of the Himalayas
to this day, ready to bless all devotees of the Lord.
On the banks of the River Narmada was the beautiful city of Dharmapura. A
Brahmin by the name of Visvanara lived there with his wife Suchismati. Both
were great devotees of Lord Shiva and prayed to him for the boon of a son. In
fact, they begged that Shiva himself would be born as their son. The Lord
agreed, and a son was born to the couple and was named Grahapati. When the
boy was in his eleventh year, the celestial sage Narada read the boy’s hand and
foretold that some doom would come to him in a year’s time, and it would be in
the form of fire. The parents were grief stricken, but when he heard the cause of
their sorrow, the young boy comforted them and told them to stop lamenting, for
he would propitiate the Lord and thus avoid the doom awaiting him. Taking
leave of his parents he proceded to the famous town of Kasi, or Varanasi, which

is supposed to be Lord Shiva’s favorite resort. There he bathed in the famous
Manikaran ghat (bathing steps) and worshipped the linga of the Lord for one full
year. When the time foretold by Narada arrived, Indra, king of the gods,
approached him and told him to ask for any boon. The boy refused and said that
he would ask for boons only from Lord Shiva. Indra became furious and raised
his thunderbolt to make an end of the impudent boy.
The boy raised his arms in supplication to Lord Shiva and begged him to save
him. Shiva appeared before him and said, “O child, don’t be afraid. It was I who
appeared before you in the form of Indra in order to test you. No one can molest
my devotee—not Indra, or his thunderbolt, or even death. I shall now give you
the name of Agniswara. You will be made the guardian of the quarter of the
Southeast. One who is devoted to you will never have fear of fire, or lightning,
or premature death.” Fire is said to be another form of Shiva. It is the third eye
of the Lord.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Kripanidaye Namaha!
22
The Manifestations of Shiva
O Heart of mine! Meditate on the immaculate one
With upstanding golden locks,
The consort of Devi,
Daughter of the cloud-capped mountain,
O heart of mine! Meditate on Him.
SAINT APPAR
Normally one does not associate Shiva with incarnations, but it is a fact that he
has taken many manifestations at the behest of his devotees. We shall now try to
describe a few of them.
One of the incarnations of Lord Vishnu was the man-lion Narasimha. After he
had killed the demon Hiranyakashipu, it is said that his fury did not abate, and
the entire world trembled with fear at the fire of destruction that was emanating
from Narasimha’s mouth. The gods approached Shiva and begged him to
intervene, so Shiva took on the fierce form called Sharabha. He looked like a
gigantic bird with an enormous curved beak and huge wings. His fangs jutted
out, and his neck was black. He had powerful arms, four legs, and adamantine
claws. His three eyes were wide and blazing like the fires of destruction at the
end of the world. Like a vulture seizing a serpent, the creature caught hold of the
Narasimha in its claws and killed him. Then all the gods sang his praises.
Shiva assumed his own form and said, “Just as there is no change in
constitution when milk is poured into milk, or water into water, or ghee into
ghee, so also Vishnu and I are one, and it makes no difference whether I kill him

or he kills me. In actual fact we are both immortals, and neither of us can be
killed. It is only our lila. Like actors who don different costumes to amuse the
spectators, we play different roles for the sake of our devotees.”
Once there was a sage named Shilada. He did tapasya to Indra to be blessed with
a son. When Indra appeared, Shilada asked for the boon of a son who would be
immortal, but Indra said it was impossible for him to grant immortality. The only
person who could grant him such a boon was Shiva, so Shilada started to
meditate on Shiva. After many years, when his body was reduced to a mere
skeleton, Shiva appeared and told him that he himself would be born as his son.
Shilada now started a yajna. At the end of it a child emerged from the fire. He
had three eyes and four arms and held a trident and mace. He wore armor made
of diamonds. The gods showered flowers on this new incarnation of Shiva. Since
the child had brought joy to everyone, he was named Nandi, which is the short
form for ananda, or bliss. However, as soon as the child was taken to Shilada’s
hermitage, his divine appearance vanished and he became an ordinary human
child. He also appeared to have forgotten his divine origin. Though Shilada was
disappointed, he controlled himself and concentrated on giving the child a good
education.
One day two gods, Mitra and Varuna, appeared in the hermitage. They looked
carefully at the boy and told the father that although he appeared to have all
auspicious signs, he would not live beyond the age of eight years. Shilada was
naturally most upset at this bit of news and started to weep. When Nandi heard
the reason for his father’s grief, he prayed to Shiva. The Lord appeared and told
Shilada not to cry, for the child was immortal. He promised to keep the child
with him always. Shiva took off his necklace and put it round the child’s neck.
Immediately Nandi resumed his divine form, and Parvati adopted him as her
own child. He was elected as one of the ganapatis, or the leaders of the ganas of
Shiva. Thus you find that Nandi, in the form of a bull, is always seated in front
of Shiva.
Countless are the manifestations that Lord Shiva is said to have taken to test his
devotees and bless them. We will narrate only a few here. Once in the village of
Nandigrama, in the Madurai district, there lived a very beautiful prostitute called

Mahananda who was a great devotee of Shiva. She was an adept in all the arts,
especially the art of love. Despite her nocturnal activities, she still found time to
dance and sing for the Lord of her heart, who was Shiva. Outside the
bedchamber she would don only simple clothes and wear rudraksha beads,
which are loved by Shiva, and smear ashes on her forehead. She had as pets a
monkey and a rooster that she decorated with rudrakshas. She had taught them
to dance when she sang songs to the Lord. Her strange vocation coupled with her
devotion to him intrigued Shiva and he decided to test her. He went to her house
in the guise of a merchant named Vaishyanatha. Wearing a necklace of
rudraksha beads, he entered the house chanting the names of Shiva. Mahananda
was delighted to receive him, not only because he was a handsome man but also
because he seemed to be a devotee of her Lord. As she seated him and paid
honor to him, her eyes were drawn to a beautiful gold bangle studded with gems
on his wrist.
“What a beautiful bangle you have,” she said, eyeing it greedily. The merchant
guessed her desire to possess it and said, “You can have it if you want, but let me
warn you that it is a very valuable bit of jewelry. What price can you pay for it?”
She answered, “I come from a family of harlots. How else can I pay you but
with the coin of love?”
“Very well,” said the merchant. “How much do you think this is worth?”
She answered, “If you give it to me, I will be your wife for three days and
three nights.”
The merchant readily agreed and asked her to repeat the oath three times with
the sun and the moon as witnesses. She did so, and the merchant handed over the
bangle to her. He also gave her a linga of Shiva covered with scintillating gems
and told her to keep it in a very safe place since it was most precious to him. She
took the image and kept it devoutly on an altar in the center of the stage where
she danced. The cock and the monkey kept guard. Mahananda and the merchant
spent the night together but at midnight they were awakened by the crowing of
the cock and the crying of the monkey. A big fire was blazing across the stage
and the whole place was consumed, along with the image.
The merchant was bereft when he saw this and bewailed his loss. “I have no
desire to live after having lost my precious idol,” he said, “Prepare a pyre for me
immediately, and I shall jump into it and end my useless life.”
Though Mahananda cried and pleaded, the merchant was adamant, and after
going round the fire thrice, he took a flying leap into the flames. The woman was

desperate when she saw this. Though she was only a prostitute, she was a great
devotee of Shiva, and she had given her word to the merchant to be his wife for
three days and three nights, and now she could no longer keep her faith.
“Greedy for a mere jewel, I took an oath that I would be his wife for three days
and three nights. Now that he is dead I can no longer keep my word. My only
recourse is to keep to the vow of a chaste wife and enter into the flames with
him.”
Despite the pleas of her relatives, she was firm in her resolve and prepared to
jump into the fire after her husband. Fixing her mind on the feet of her Lord,
Shiva, she took a step back in order to jump. Just then Shiva appeared before her
in all his glory and stopped her.
Catching hold of her hands he consoled her, “It was I who came to you in the
form of a merchant in order to test your piety, courage, and devotion to me. It
was I who produced the burning fire that consumed your stage and the linga.
You have passed your test admirably. Now you can ask for any boon you wish.”
The prostitute was overwhelmed by the Lord’s grace and said, “I have no
desire for the pleasures of this earth or the heavens or anywhere else. All I desire
is the touch of your lotus feet. My servants, maids, and relatives are all your
devotees. Please take them along with me to your holy abode and take away
from us the terrible fear of repeated births.” Hearing this, the Lord was very
happy and took her and her kinsmen and attendants to his abode.
This story shows us how the Lord is more aware of our intentions than our
actions. The woman was a prostitute by birth. To her, prostitution was a job like
any other job, but her private life was dedicated entirely to the Lord. She had no
choice where her work was concerned, but her heart was always fixed on Shiva.
The Lord who sees into our hearts judges us not by our external show but by our
internal purity.
Another delightful manifestation of Lord Shiva is Kirata, the hunter. The
Pandavas, and Arjuna in particular, were all devotees of Shiva. Their cousins, the
Kauravas, exiled them to the forest. At that time Lord Krishna came to them and
advised Arjuna to make the best use of his time in the forest by placating Lord
Shiva and asking for his powerful missile, the pasupata. With this weapon
Arjuna would be able to defeat the Kauravas in battle, which Krishna knew to be
inevitable.

Thus advised by Krishna, Arjuna went to the mountain called Indrakila, in the
Himalayas near the place called Badrikashrama. While he was meditating with
closed eyes and matted locks and subsisting only on leaves and berries, his
wicked cousin Duryodana instigated a demon called Muka to go and molest
Arjuna and distract him from his tapasya. Muka took the form of a wild boar and
charged into the forest. But Lord Shiva never forsakes his devotees. Taking the
form of a hunter, or kirata, he went into the forest and chased the boar. Parvati
accompanied him in the form of a huntress, or kirati. Hearing the tremendous
sounds made by the boar and the hunter, Arjuna opened his eyes and saw the
boar rushing into the clearing where he was sitting. Immediately Arjuna strung
his bow and shot the beast as it charged toward him where he sat before a mud
linga of Shiva that he had made for his worship. At the same moment, the kirata
also shot the boar; both arrows found their mark simultaneously. Arjuna went
forward to retrieve his arrow, and at the same time, Shiva, in the form of the
kirata, strode out of the thicket into the clearing. Shiva always enjoyed teasing
his devotees, and Arjuna was especially beloved by him. In an angry voice Shiva
said, “Halt! Don’t touch the beast. It’s mine. Shot by my arrow.”
Arjuna was quite indignant when he heard this and retorted scornfully, “Do
you know who I am? I am Arjuna, the famous archer. How can you, a mere
forest dweller, ever hope to equal my prowess in archery? Of course it was my
arrow that shot the boar.”
The heated verbal argument soon led to a fight, and they decided to test their
prowess with bows. A dreadful battle ensued between the Lord and Arjuna in
which Shiva mentally applauded his devotee’s dexterity. But despite all his skill
Arjuna was no match for the divine archer. Arjuna was amazed that a lowborn
tribal could beat him in archery. He did not know what to do and asked for a
short respite. This was granted, and Arjuna quickly made a garland of wild
flowers and adorned the neck of the linga he had been worshipping faithfully for
many months and begged Lord Shiva to save him. Fortified with renewed hope
and courage, he turned round to face his opponent and was astonished to see the
garland that he had just placed round the linga adorning the neck of the fake
hunter. It was only then that Arjuna understood that it was all the Lord’s play. He
ran forward to prostrate himself at the divine hunter’s feet and beg pardon for the
great offense he had done in daring to fight with him. Shiva now revealed his
true form with Parvati by his side and the ganas frolicking around them. Arjuna
prostrated again and again and begged Shiva to forgive him.
Shiva laughingly declared, “It was a great experience to fight with you. I’m

proud of your prowess. You may now ask me for any boon you wish.”
Arjuna was so ashamed that he did not dare to ask for the weapon for which he
had been doing tapasya. “All I want is to have devotion to your holy feet all my
life,” he said. Shiva, who could see into his heart, insisted that he could ask for
anything he wished and it would be granted to him. At last Arjuna asked for
Shiva’s weapon, the pasupata.
Lord Shiva answered, “I shall certainly present you with my own missile, the
powerful pasupata, by which you will become invincible. You will be able to
defeat your enemies and regain your kingdom.” After having thus blessed
Arjuna, the Lord returned to his own abode, and Arjuna rejoined his brothers and
their wife, Draupadi, in the forest.
The beautiful temple of Kanyakumari is situated at the southernmost tip of the
Indian subcontinent. It is dedicated to the virgin goddess and has a beautiful
story connected with it. At the request of the gods, Parvati, the consort of Shiva,
was once forced to take birth on earth in order to kill some demons. Her name in
her earthly form was Punyakshi, and she was naturally a great devotee of Lord
Shiva. She longed with all her heart to marry him. However, the gods did not
want her to marry, since only a virgin had the power to kill the demons. She
begged Shiva to intercede with the gods on her behalf and come and take her as
his bride. Ever ready to comply with the wishes of his devotee, Shiva asked the
gods to allow him to marry her. The gods could not refuse the request, but they
thought of a trick by which they could stop the wedding.
“Anyone who marries her will have to pay the bride price,” they said.
“What is this price?” asked Lord Shiva.
“The bride price is a sugarcane stem without rings, a betel leaf without veins,
and a coconut without eyes,” they said.
Shiva laughed at their tricks and conjured up these gifts in a trice. “Now you
can fix the time for the wedding,” he told the astonished gods.
They were determined to thwart him somehow, so they said, “You will have to
marry her before the cock crows tomorrow, or else you will have to wait till the
end of this age.” This was quite a challenge, since Punyakshi lived at the very tip
of the Indian peninsula and Shiva at the very top, in Kailasa. Shiva agreed and
set out immediately for the South. Just before he reached Kanyakumari, he heard
the cock crow. The gods had duped him by making the cock crow at midnight.

Thinking it to be dawn, Shiva decided that there was no point in proceeding
further, since he would not be able to reach his bride before the appointed time.
He broke his journey and decided to stay in the form of a linga in the town
called Suchindram, close to Kanyakumari. There he remains, waiting for the end
of this epoch in order to keep his promise to his beloved Punyakshi.
Punyakshi was told of the time of the nuptials, and she decked herself out in
all her bridal finery and waited for the Lord to appear. The guests arrived, and
even the food had been prepared for the feast that would follow the wedding.
Unfortunately, Shiva was unable to keep his promise since the gods had seen to
it that he was obstructed on the way. The cock crowed as the sun rose, and there
was no bridegroom. Punyakshi was terribly disappointed. She burst into tears,
kicked the pots of food into the sand, and threw away her ornaments.
The demons teased her and said, “Why don’t you marry us instead!” She was
so furious that she picked up a sickle and threw it at them and killed the whole
lot of them, much to the delight of the gods, who had gleefully planned the
whole coup. Punyakshi took up her abode at the very tip of the subcontinent of
India and came to be known as the virgin goddess—Kanyakumari. There she
waits to this day for Shiva, her betrothed. The gods promised her that at the end
of this cycle of cosmic evolution she would be united with her Lord. The food
she overturned mixed with the sand, and even today we find sand of many
different colors and shapes on the beach of Kanyakumari.
Meenakshi, princess of the ancient Tamil kingdom of Madurai, was born with
three breasts. The astrologers foretold that she would lose her middle breast only
when she came face to face with the man she would marry. It seemed most
improbable that Meenakshi would marry at all, since she had a very masculine
temperament and preferred to learn the art of warfare over the accomplishments
of a princess. She became the general of her father’s army. She led them north,
south, east, and west, to all four corners of the country, conquering the whole
land right up to the Himalayas and overcoming all the intrepid kings who dared
to oppose her.
While in the Himalayas she heard of a hermit who was very powerful and
refused to bow to the dictates of the kshatriyas (warrior caste). No king had yet
been able to vanquish him. She was determined that she would be the one to do
so. She charged ahead of the rest of the brigade but was suddenly accosted by a

handsome hermit who blocked her path. She ordered the man to move out of her
way. He merely smiled and refused to budge. Infuriated by his behavior, she
jumped off her horse and ran toward him with upraised sword. He laughed in her
face and did not flicker an eyelid. As she raised her indignant eyes to glare at
this upstart, she was startled into immobility. Her third breast dropped of its own
accord, and she felt as if she were melting in the penetrating gaze of the ascetic.
Her upraised arm came down, and the sword dropped to the ground. She bent
low at the feet of the handsome hermit, who was none other than Lord Shiva.
She herself was Parvati, who had taken on the form of Meenakshi in order to
play out the divine lila. The gods rained flowers on the couple and the wedding
of Sundareswara, as this manifestation of Shiva was called, and Meenakshi was
presided over by Vishnu himself. To this day the divine couple is worshipped in
the temple of Meenakshi in Madurai, in Tamil Nadu.
There was a time when the sages who lived in the forests and practiced severe
austerities became filled with ego and thus fell from their high code of conduct.
To teach them a lesson, Shiva took on the form of a handsome young hermit,
which apparently was a role he loved, and went into the forest. When they saw
him the sages and their wives ran after him and begged him to stay with them,
promising to change their ways and do whatever he wished them to do. Shiva
laughed contemptuously at their request. They were furious at the lack of respect
shown to them by the young hermit, and with their magic powers they created a
tiger, a serpent, and a goblin, and set them on the young man. Shiva killed the
tiger and took the skin for his garment, twined the serpent round his neck, and
jumped on the goblin’s back and started to dance. It was a macabre dance,
shaking the very foundations of the earth. His flying locks crashed into the
heavenly bodeis, his footstep split the mountains, and his arms whirled amongst
the stars. The gods descended from the heavens, and the demons abandoned the
nether regions in order to watch this awe-inspiring dance. As the dance went on
and on to the accompaniment of celestial music, the sages realized that what
Shiva had done was to flay the tiger of their ambition, tame the serpent of their
passion, and crush the goblin of their ego. His wild dance was the very essence
of life, the cosmic cycle of creation, organization, and destruction. It was the
mad dervish dance of the protons, neutrons, and all the energy particles that
make up this world of matter, throbbing with energy. He was the Creator, the
Preserver, and the Destroyer. In his right hand he held the rattle drum, which

produces the sound that emanates from the throat at the point of death, and also
the reverberation at the onset of birth. In his left hand he held the fire that burns
and destroys, yet illuminates and cooks the food that supports life. Around him
revolved the huge wheel of time, the wheel of samsara, the cycle of infinite
births and deaths. The gods, sages, and other celestial beings watched spellbound
at this awesome spectacle of the Lord as Nataraja, the cosmic dancer. It was this
dance that inspired the great treatise on Natyashastra, or the science of dance, by
the sage Bharata. This event is immortalized in bronze in the awe-inspiring
figure of Shiva as Nataraja, in the temple of Chidambaram in South India.
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Bhaktavalsalaya Namaha!
23
Shiva, the Beloved
I am not the intellect, mind, ego, or perception,
I am not the sense of hearing, taste, smell, or sight,
I am not the sky, earth, fire, or air,
I am the essence of consciousness and bliss—Shivoham!
Shivoham!
“NIRVANASHTAKAM” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
The tales of Vishnu and Shiva intermingle with each other so that sometimes
Vishnu is said to be worshipping Shiva, and vice versa. Once, it is said, Vishnu
promised to worship Shiva with one thousand and eight lotuses. Lotuses are
normally used in the worship of Vishnu himself. Vishnu said that he would
repeat the 1,008 names of Shiva and offer one lotus for every name. In order to
test Vishnu, Shiva removed one lotus from the bunch so that at the end of the
puja it would be one flower short. Not in the least put out, Vishnu, the lotus-eyed
one, plucked out one of his own beautiful eyes and placed it on the linga. Shiva
was so pleased with this gift of love and sacrifice that he presented the
Sudarshana Chakra (sharp-edged, spinning weapon of time) to Lord Vishnu.
Ravana, the demon king, was a great devotee of Shiva. Every day he traveled
in his aerial car from his island city of Lanka, which lay off the coast of India in
the extreme south, to Shiva’s abode in Kailasa, which was in the Himalayas in
the extreme north. After a time he wearied of these daily trips and hit upon a
master plan: He decided to bring Shiva and his entire entourage to Lanka. The
easiest way, thought Ravana, was to uproot the whole mountain of Kailasa and

bring it to his own city. He put his hands under the mountain and started to shake
it. Parvati was quite annoyed at this outrage and begged Shiva to stop Ravana’s
impudence. Shiva simply pressed the ground down with his big toe and the
mountain crashed on Ravana’s hand. Ravana howled with pain and begged Shiva
to release him, but Shiva refused to listen. It is said that Ravana then composed
the famous Shiva Thandava hymn that impressed Shiva so much that he released
Ravana’s hand and allowed him to go, with his blessing.
Ravana next designed a musical instrument known as the rudravina and
presented it to Shiva. The latter offered him a boon. The demon king, true to his
nature, immediately asked for Parvati herself!
Shiva laughed and said, “So be it. Go and get her. She is bathing in the lake of
Manasarovar.” With his usual impish humor, he wanted to know how his wife
would deal with this situation.
Ravana rushed to the lake, but Parvati’s attendants had already informed her of
these odd happenings, so she was quite ready for Ravana. She picked up a frog,
or manduka, and transformed it into a beautiful female and called her
Mandodari. When Ravana arrived he found this fascinating woman sitting on a
rock beside the lake. Never having seen Parvati before and having no occasion to
doubt Shiva’s words, he thought the woman to be Parvati and carried her off to
Lanka to be his wife.
Kubera, a great devotee of Shiva, was actually Ravana’s brother. Kubera,
Ravana, and Vibhishana were the three sons of the sage Vaisravana. Lanka had
originally belonged to Kubera, but Ravana defeated him, threw him out of the
city, and appropriated all of Kubera’s possessions, including his marvelous aerial
vehicle, Pushpaka. The displaced Kubera roamed the world, unhappy and
forlorn. At last he came to the city of Kasi, which is famous for the temple of
Shiva, and there he meditated on the three-eyed Lord, who appeared before him
and gave him many boons. Shiva fell for Kubera in a big way, since he was short
and misshapen with a big potbelly and only one eye; Shiva delighted in helping
those whom everybody else shunned. He told Kubera that he could go and live
in the city of Alakapuri in the Himalayas near Kailasa and made him the
overlord of the Yakshas and Kinnaras, and custodian of all the wealth of the
netherworld.
Kubera was so fond of Shiva that he wanted to please him by giving him gifts.

Since he was guardian of all wealth, he wished to present Shiva with a large
amount of money and jewels. Shiva laughed at the enormity of Kubera’s pride in
thinking that he could actually please Shiva, the Great Lord of the worlds, with
wealth. When Kubera insisted, Shiva told him that if he was so anxious to do
something for him, he could feed his son, Ganesha, who was never satisfied with
the food he got in Kailasa. Kubera agreed, thinking this was an easy task. The
next day Ganesha went to Alakapuri, where a huge feast had been specially
prepared for him. Kubera welcomed him with all honors and placed an
enormous repast before him consisting of every type of delicacy one could
imagine, all prepared in gargantuan quantities. Ganesha polished off all that was
put before him and asked for more. Much more was prepared and served, but
that also disappeared in a trice. Kubera was frightened that Ganesha’s belly
would burst.
Ganesha guessed what was passing through his mind and pointed to the snake
that was encircling his stomach and said, “Look at this snake. It will ensure that
my stomach will not burst, so you don’t have to worry about that. Please prepare
more food, since my hunger has not been appeased. You promised my father that
you would satisfy my hunger, and now you seem to be backing out of your
bargain.”
This feast went on until Kubera exhausted all his wealth, and still Ganesha’s
appetite could not be appeased. At last Kubera realized his mistake and fell at
Ganesha’s feet. Kubera begged Ganesha’s pardon for having been so
presumptuous as to suppose that his wealth was so great that he could buy
anything with it, including the gods. Ganesha is known for teaching people to
keep their egos in check.
The demon Bana was another great devotee of Lord Shiva. He had a thousand
hands and he often pleased Shiva by playing a thousand percussion instruments
while Shiva danced the thandava. Shiva was pleased with Bana’s devotion,
which took the form of this unusual accompaniment to his dance, and told him to
choose a boon. Bana, with true demonic guile, immediately asked Shiva to be
the watchman of his palace.
One day Bana came to Shiva and told him that his thousand arms were itching
for a good fight. He could not find anyone in all the worlds who would be able to
defeat him.

“The thousand arms that you have given me have become a burden to me. I’m
longing to have a good fight with someone, but anyone I approach runs away
upon seeing my many arms. In my eagerness for a fight I have crushed
mountains to powder, sent elephants to their quarters, and smashed the earth into
bits, but still I’m dissatisfied. I want a worthy opponent.”
Shiva said, “O Bana! Know that when your flagstaff breaks in two, you will
find someone to match your mettle, but remember that he will also be the one to
extinguish your pride.”
Bana was delighted to hear that he would find someone who would be able to
grapple with his thousand arms. He watched his flagstaff daily for any sign of
breakage. He did not pay much attention to the second half of Shiva’s prophecy.
Bana had a beautiful daughter called Usha, who fell in love with Lord
Krishna’s grandson, Aniruddha. They had a clandestine affair, and the prince
stayed in her private apartments without the knowledge of anyone except her
close friend. However, after some time the news leaked out. When Bana heard
this, he was furious and had Aniruddha put into prison. Hearing of his
grandson’s fate, Krishna marched with the Yadava army to Bana’s capital, and
there ensued a glorious combat between Bana and Krishna, in which Bana was
helped by Shiva and his ganas, since Shiva had promised to guard him. Bana’s
flagstaff came crashing down as soon as Lord Krishna arrived, and Bana realized
that he would soon meet his match, as foretold by Shiva. After a terrific fight in
which Bana’s army was completely routed, Krishna had Bana at his sword point.
Krishna spared his life but methodically proceeded to chop off all Bana’s arms,
since it appeared that they were directly responsible for his inordinate pride.
When only two pairs were left, Shiva intervened and begged Krishna to spare
Bana’s life and the remainder of his arms, since Bana was his devotee.
Lord Krishna said, “O worshipful Lord! Whoever is dear to you is dear to me.
I will never kill this asura. No doubt I chopped off all his extra arms that were
proving a burden to him, but I will spare the four that are left and give him the
boon that these arms will never age and will retain their adamantine strength till
the end of his days.”
Bana was delighted when he heard this and was happy to give his daughter,
Usha, to the handsome Yadava prince, Aniruddha. Thus we see that in the lilas
of Shiva and Vishnu, at times one defeats the other and at other times the roles
are reversed, thus enabling both to keep their devotees happy.

The Atman is all-pervading and self-revealed. It has no support. The
universe of name and form is insignificant and is separate from Me, the
one Atman without a second, attributeless and indestructible, even when
the whole of creation is destroyed. It is of the nature of supreme bliss and
purity.
“DASISLOKA” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
O Resident of the mountains and giver of all good, make your arrow
peaceful; do not destroy the people of the material world.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
From food all creatures are produced, as many as on earth are found.
By food they live and food they become, when at last they are buried in the
earth.
There is another self than this one consisting of food.
That is the one consisting of vital energy.
There is still another self than this one consisting of vital energy—The one
consisting of mind.
Verily there is another self than this one consisting of mind—
The one consisting of consciousness—
The one consisting of bliss.
TAITTIRIYA UPANISHAD
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Haraya Namaha!
24
The Jyotirlingas
O Destroyer!
The burning ghat is your playground,
Your companions are monsters,
Besmeared are you with the ashes of funeral pyres,
Your garland is a string of skulls,
Your name and nature seem inauspicious.
Yet, O giver of blessings!
Those who meditate on you,
Are supremely auspicious.
“SHIVA MAHIMA STOTRAM”
The thirteenth night of the dark half of every lunar month is special to Shiva and
is known as Pradosha, or Shivaratri. Normally gods are not worshipped in the
dark half of the lunar month. This period when the moon is waning is usually
considered inauspicious for starting anything. Demons and ghosts move about at
this time, and only Shiva can control them. As we have seen, Shiva always
proved that, to the yogi, the word “inauspicious” has no meaning. So on those
days when the crescent moon is out, people pray to Shiva to keep all evil from
them. The thirteenth night of the waning phase of the moon, which comes in the
month of Phalguna, February/March, is known as Mahashivaratri. This was the
day when Shiva drank the dreaded halahala poison during the churning of the
milky ocean. It is said that all the gods kept vigil with him, singing his praises.
So on this particular day in the month of Phalguna, when the winter mists are

melting into spring, all the devotees of Shiva keep awake, chanting and praying
to the great Lord and offering worship to him. Ganga water is poured on the
linga to cool him from the heat of the poison.
On one such Mahashivaratri day, a hunter who had none of this esoteric
knowledge lost his way in the jungle. Frightened of wild animals, he took shelter
on top of a bel tree. The leaves of this tree have three segments corresponding to
the three eyes of Shiva, and they are very special in his worship. To keep himself
from falling off the tree, the hunter continuously plucked the leaves of the tree
and threw them to the ground. It so happened that there was a linga just below
this tree, so that without his knowledge he worshipped the Lord on that
particular night, fasting and keeping awake and offering the leaves of the bel tree
to the linga. In the morning Shiva appeared before him and blessed him.
Adoration of Shiva on Mahashivaratri day, even though performed without
knowledge, brings its own reward.
The story about this festival as told in the Mahabharata features a king named
Chitrabhanu, who was said to have observed the fast with great enthusiasm. In
his previous life he had been a hunter named Suswara. Once, as night fell over
the forest, the hunter could not return home, so he climbed to the top of a bel tree
and took shelter. Tormented by thirst he started to cry, and his tears fell on a
linga of Shiva, which was beneath the tree. In order to keep awake and not fall
off the tree, he started to pluck the leaves of the tree and drop them down. That
night happened to be the night of Mahashivaratri, and the hunter inadvertently
worshipped the Shiva linga throughout the night, fasting and keeping vigil. As a
reward for this he was born as the king Chitrabhanu in his next life.
In a dialogue between Shiva and Parvati, the latter asked Shiva which ritual
pleased him most.
Shiva replied, “The fourteenth night of the new moon in the dark fortnight of
the month of Phalguna is my favorite day. My devotees who fast on this day and
worship me during the four periods of the night with bel leaves are most pleasing
to me. These leaves are more precious to me than jewels. Abhisheka (ritualistic
bathing) should be done in the four watches of the night. During the first watch I
should be bathed in milk; during the second watch in curd; in the third, in ghee;
and in the fourth, in honey. On the following day the devotee should break his
fast only after feeding the poor. O Parvati! There is no ritual that pleases me
more than this!”
The cosmic primeval condition of the divine before creation is a state that

resembles night or darkness. This is Shiva’s night, or Shivaratri, and this is the
state of Shiva. Therefore he is worshipped during the night and is known to be
the representative of tamas, the third guna. This darkness, or tamas, is due to the
excess of light and not to the absence of light. When the frequency of light is
intensified to a very high level, it is incapable of being seen by human eyes.
Some lights are called blinding lights. This is because when we look at such a
light, our eyes see only darkness. God is really the light of all lights and thus
invisible to human sight. The owl cannot look at the sun; it can only see in
darkness. So the human soul, which has not realized the greatness of God,
cannot see the blinding light of God. Shiva, the compassionate one, thus takes
the form of night and extols us to worship him as darkness, in order to train our
mystical eyes to develop and see him in all his splendor. This is the esoteric
significance of Mahashivaratri, the night of Shiva.
Worship of the linga is one of the most important aspects of devotion to Shiva,
since it is believed that he is present in the linga. The word linga actually means
“a sign,” or “characteristic.” The Absolute Brahman is formless and has no
attributes, so it has no linga. However, human beings need some form that makes
it easier for the mind to concentrate, so the linga, which is a rounded, upright
stone, is used as a symbol of Brahman.
At one point, Shiva is said to have stood for thousands of years on one foot
making himself into an axis for the revolving universe. This figure has no
beginning and no end and is the cosmic linga of Shiva. The Shiva linga is also
considered to be the divine phallus, containing within it the seed of the universe;
from it all life is created. Together with the yoni, or seat on which it rests and
which corresponds to the female vulva, the yoni-linga represents the union of
man and woman, Shiva and Shakti, the cosmic Spirit in union with the cosmic
Prakriti, which brings everything into existence.
It is said that one time the sage Brighu went to Kailasa and found Shiva and
Parvati so lost in love that they did not even notice his presence. The sage cursed
Shiva that in the future he would be worshipped without form, as a linga trapped
within a yoni.
Another story describes how Shiva, the handsome hermit, roamed amongst the
devataru (deodar) forests of the Himalayas. Seeing his irresistible body, the
wives of the hermits ran after him. The sages cursed Shiva that he would lose his
handsome form. Shiva immediately turned into a fiery jyotirlinga (a column of
light shaped like a linga) that threatened to annihilate the entire universe. The

sages were terrified and ran to Parvati to save the world. She immediately took
the form of a receptacle, or yoni, and captured the jyotirlinga. Shiva’s fury
abated, and he asked the sages and their wives to worship the linga-yoni and
curb their lust and anger. The yoni represents the Divine Mother. It has a
utilitarian aspect also. It acts as the base for the linga and collects the water,
milk, and so forth that are poured over the linga during puja.
THE TWELVE JYOTIRLINGAS
There are thousands of lingas all over India, but some of them have special
importance. The most important of these, the jyotirlingas, are twelve in number:
Somanatha, Mallikarjuna, Mahakala, Omkara, Kedara, Bhimashankara,
Vishvanatha, Tryambaka, Vaidyanatha, Nagesha, Rameshwara, and Ghushnesha.
Most of them have sprouted up of their own accord. Others have been installed
by human hands.
1. Somanatha
We have already seen how Chandra, or Soma as the moon god is called, was one
of Daksha’s sons-in-law. Daksha had cursed him that he would waste away and
die, and Soma had appealed to Lord Shiva to save him from this curse. The place
where Soma prayed to Shiva is known as Somanatha. It is the first of the
jyotirlingas.
2. Mallikarjuna
We also heard the story of how Shiva’s son Kartikeya left Kailasa and went to
live on a hill in the southern regions. Parvati was bereft at his departure and
begged Shiva to take her to her son. Kartikeya refused to have them live on his
hill, so Shiva and Parvati took up their residence on the hill of Mallikarjuna, and
this is the second jyotirlinga.
3. Mahakala
The ancient city of Avanti, modern Ujjain, is situated on the River Kshipra.
There were four Brahmins in that city who were great devotees of Shiva. On one
of the hills opposite the city lived a demon called Dhushana, who killed anyone
who practiced Vedic rites or worshipped Shiva. When he heard of the four
Brahmins of Avanti, he went there to kill them. Not in the least disturbed, the

brothers continued praying to the linga. Suddenly the linga split open with a
tremendous sound, and Shiva leapt out, brandishing the weapons of destruction.
His form was that of Mahakala, the great Destroyer. Dhushana was burnt to
ashes, and his men took to their heels. The Brahmins begged Shiva to stay there
forever. The Lord agreed, and this is the jyotirlinga known as Mahakala.
4. Omkareshwara
Once the celestial sage Narada visited the mountain Vindhya. The mountain
offered worship to the sage, but Narada knew that Vindhya was puffed up with
pride, so in his usual bantering fashion he told Vindhya that the mountain
Sumeru was superior to it. Vindhya wanted to become the equal of Sumeru and
began doing tapasya to Lord Shiva. When Shiva appeared, Vindhya begged him
to remain there all the time to make it the equal of Sumeru. Shiva agreed, and
this is the fourth jyotirlinga, Omkara, which is situated on the banks of the
Narmada River.
5. Kedarnatha
There are two stories connected with the fifth jyotirlinga, Kedara, which is in the
Himalayas. One is associated with the Pandavas. At the end of their sojourn on
earth, the five Pandava brothers, along with Draupadi, proceeded to that part of
the Himalayas known as Kedarkanda. On their way they found that a wild-
looking dog and a noble buffalo had joined their party. Recognizing the buffalo
to be none other than their personal deity, Lord Shiva, the Pandavas chased him.
Eventually Shiva allowed himself to be caught. Each of the five brothers caught
one part of the animal and to their consternation, it came apart into five pieces in
their hands. They threw the pieces far and wide, and the places where the pieces
fell came to be known as the Panch Kedars, which are all very important places
in the Himalayas for the worship of Shiva. The hump of the buffalo fell at the
most important of these places, and this is the jyotirlinga known as Kedara.
Unlike other lingas, the linga at Kedara is in the shape of the hump of a buffalo.
The second story pertaining to Kedara is connected with the dual incarnation
of Vishnu, known as Nara-Narayana. These two sages were said to be constantly
meditating in Kedarkanda in the place called Badrikashrama, which is an
important place of pilgrimage for the devotees of Vishnu. After a long time,
Shiva appeared to the sages and offered them a boon. They requested that he
always be present as a linga on the peak of Kedara.

6. Bhimashankara
During the time of the avatara of Vishnu as Rama, he had killed both the demon
king, Ravana, and his brother, Kumbakarna. The latter’s wife was Karkati, and
she had a son named Bhima. After Kumbakarna’s death she lived alone with her
son on a mountain. When Bhima asked who his father was and why they were
staying on that mountain in solitude, his mother told him the whole sad story of
how his father had been killed by Rama. Bhima swore vengeance on all the
devotees of Vishnu. His first target was the king, Kamarupa, who was a great
devotee of Vishnu. Bhima attacked the city and destroyed everything and threw
the king and his wife into a dungeon. They then prayed to Shiva to save them.
When he heard this, Bhima rushed to the dungeon with sword upraised to behead
the king. At that moment Shiva jumped out of the linga and killed Bhima by the
mere utterance of the sound “hum.” This is the sixth jyotirlinga, known as
Bhimashankara.
7. Visvanatha
The seventh jyotirlinga is known as Visvanatha and is located in the most holy
city of Varanasi. Brahma himself is said to have performed tapasya at this spot,
and it is said that Varanasi will not be destroyed even at the time of
Mahapralaya, when the rest of the world goes into dissolution. Shiva is foretold
to raise the city on the point of his trident and protect it while destruction rages
all around.
There is another story connected with Varanasi. Once Shiva and Parvati had
gone to Brahmaloka. Brahma began reciting hymns through all his five faces in
praise of Shiva. But one of the mouths was making mistakes, so Shiva, who was
a perfectionist where music was concerned, plucked off the head that was
making mistakes. However, since this was a crime against a Brahmin, Shiva
found that he could not shake off the head, which had stuck to his back. It was
only when he went to Varanasi that the head fell off, so Shiva decided to stay
there in the form of a linga. This linga is called Visvanatha, or the Lord of the
universe. The first humans to worship there were Swayambhu Manu and his
wife Shatarupa, the first couple ever to be created by Brahma.
8. Tryambakeswara
The eighth jyotirlinga, known as Tryambakeswara, is situated on the banks of
the Godavari River. This place is associated with the sage Gautama and his wife,
Ahalya. They prayed to Shiva for a long time, and when he appeared, Gautama

asked him for a boon. He begged that the Ganga would flow beside his
hermitage so that he could bathe in her purifying waters and thus expiate his sin
in having killed a cow by accident. Shiva granted the boon, but Ganga insisted
that she would go there only if Shiva took up residence. Thus, Shiva agreed to
stay there in the form of a linga. Ganga flowed beside him and took the name
Godavari.
9. Vaidyanatha
The ninth jyotirlinga is known as Vaidyanatha. Ravana, king of the rakshasas,
was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. He started practicing tapasya in the
Himalayas. Shiva did not appear, so Ravana came down to the foothills of the
Himalayas. He dug a pit and placed a linga inside and started doing tapasya
there. When Shiva refused to appear, Ravana, being a rakshasa, decided to
sacrifice his heads—of which he had ten—in the fire. He lit a fire and started
throwing his heads into the flames one by one. When the ninth head had been
chopped off, Shiva appeared and asked him to choose a boon, since it was fairly
obvious that if he sacrificed his last head, there would be no one left to give the
boon to. Ravana prayed for superhuman strength and for the restoration of his
nine heads. Shiva granted this boon, for he was Vaidyanatha, the Lord of healers.
He also gave him a wonderful jyotirlinga and told him to take it straight to
Lanka and never put it on the ground. Ravana started on his journey back to his
capital, Lanka, carrying this radiant linga. The gods feared that he would
become invincible if he took the linga to his island, so they asked Ganesha to
thwart him in his attempt. Ganesha took the form of a young brahmachari and
appeared before Ravana just as he felt a terrible urge to answer the call of nature.
Ravana gave the linga to the boy and told him to hold it until he returned.
However, Ravana took such a long time that Ganesha put the linga down. When
Ravana returned he found no trace of the brahmachari and try as he might, he
could not budge the linga. It was rooted to the spot, and this linga, which Ravana
inadvertently installed, is known as Vaidyanatha.
10. Nagesha
The tenth jyotirlinga is known as Nagesha. There was once a merchant called
Supriya, a great devotee of Lord Shiva. He had to travel through a forest that
was owned by a rakshasi named Daruka, who harassed him constantly. Supriya
begged Shiva to help him, so Shiva came with his serpents, the nagas, and drove
Daruka away. Daruka then appealed to Parvati, who gave her a dense forest of

her own where she could reside peacefully without troubling anybody. The linga
worshipped by Supriya is known as Nageshvara, Lord of serpents, and Parvati’s
name here is Nageshwari.
11. Rameshwara
The eleventh jyotirlinga is in the south of India and is known as Rameshwara. In
Lord Vishnu’s incarnation as Rama, Ravana the demon king had abducted his
wife Sita and taken her to his island fortress off the coast of India, known as
Lanka. Rama built a bridge to cross the straits that separated India from Lanka,
but before he crossed, he made a linga of Shiva and worshipped it. Shiva
appeared and blessed him with all success, and Rama asked Shiva to remain
there forever. This linga on the banks of the ocean is known as Rameshwara, and
it is one of the most famous places of worship in India.
12. Ghushnesha
The twelfth and last of the jyotirlingas is known as Ghushnesha. A very
charming story is connected with this linga. Once there was a Brahmin named
Sudharma, who had a wife called Sudeha. They were very unhappy because they
had no children, so Sudharma decided to conduct an experiment to find out if
they were fated to have a son. He plucked two flowers and mentally associated
one with a son. He asked his wife to choose one flower. Unfortunately she chose
the other one, so Sudharma concluded that he was indeed not fated to beget a
son. Sudeha felt very unhappy at this and begged her husband to marry her
niece, Ghushna, in order to have a son. At his wife’s insistence, Sudharma
married Ghushna, who was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. In order to get a son
she took a vow that she would make 101 lingas out of clay every day and
worship them. At the end of the daily puja she would immerse the lingas in the
pond nearby. When she completed the worship of one lakh of lingas, she
conceived and gave birth to a lovely baby boy. As might be expected, the first
wife’s nature changed as soon as the child was born, and she began to be very
jealous of Ghushna. One night she killed the baby and threw the corpse into the
pond where the lingas had been immersed.
The next morning, Ghushna got up as usual and started to prepare for her daily
worship of Shiva. In the meantime her husband found out that the baby had
disappeared, but Ghushna was not distracted by this and continued with her puja
of the linga. Shiva was impressed by her devotion and restored the baby to her.
As Shiva raised his trident in order to kill Sudeha, Ghushna, who had a most

forgiving nature, begged him to spare the life of her aunt. Shiva was very
pleased by her generous and forgiving nature and offered her a boon. She begged
that Shiva would always be present in the linga near the pond, which she
worshipped daily. He granted this boon, and this linga is known as Ghushnesha.
Devotees of Shiva consider it a rare good fortune to be able to make a
pilgrimage to all twelve of the jyotirlingas.
Lord Shiva is called Bhuteswara, or Lord of the elements. There are five
temples to Shiva in Tamil Nadu, South India, which correspond to these five
elements. The five elements are akasha, or ether; vayu, or air; tejas, or fire; apas,
or water; and prithvi, or earth. The akasha-linga is found in Chidambaram, the
vayu-linga at Sri Kalahasti, the tejo-linga at Arunachalam in Tiruvannamalai, the
apas-linga at Jambukeshwara in Tiruchirapalli, and the prithvi-linga at
Ekambaranath at Kanchipuram.
Prostrations to the one who is the eldest and the youngest. Prostrations
to the primordial cause and the subsequent effect. Prostrations to the
eternal youth who is also the infant. Prostrations to the one who is in the
loins and in the seed. Prostrations to the one who is present in vice and
virtue!
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
There are three things that are rare indeed in this world: birth in the
human body, desire for liberation, and the care of a perfect master.
Having by some means obtained a human birth and a male body and
mastery over the Vedas, the foolish person who does not strive for
liberation verily commits suicide. He kills himself by clinging to things that
are unreal.
KATHA UPANISHAD
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Sookshmathanaye Namaha!

PART TWO
Those Who Worship Shiva
The Perennial Philosophy is primarily concerned with the one divine
Reality substantial to the manifold world of things and lives and
minds. But the nature of this one Reality is such that it cannot be
directly and immediately apprehended except by those who have
chosen to fulfill certain conditions, making themselves loving, pure
in heart, and pure in spirit. . . . But in every age there have been
some men and women who have chosen to fulfill the conditions upon
which alone, as a matter of brute empirical fact, such immediate
knowledge can be had. And of these, a few have left accounts of the
reality they were thus able to apprehend, and have tried to relate in
one comprehensive system of thought the given facts of this
experience with the given facts of their other experiences. To such
firsthand exponents of the Perennial Philosophy those who knew
them have generally given the name of “saint” or “prophet,”
“sage” or “enlightened one.”
ALDOUS HUXLEY
The devotees of Shiva who are described here belong to this class of
beings.

 
Aum Jagatgurave Namaha!
25
Devotees of Shiva
O mouth of mine, note that you praise the Lord,
Who, donning the hide of the rutting elephant,
Dances in the cremation ground,
Where dwell the ghouls.
O mouth of mine, note that you praise Him!
SAINT APPAR
No story of Shiva can be complete without mention of the great Shaivite
devotees of Southern India, who were known as Nayanmars. References to
Shiva and his worship are extant even in the earliest Tamil literature, but the
theology was systematized only in the late thirteenth century by Meykanda Deva
in his Shiva-jnana-bodham; this became the basic text of the Shaive Siddhanta
philosophy, which considers Shiva to be the supreme deity. The golden age of
Shaivism dawned at the time of the sixty-three canonical saints, called the
Nayanmars, or Adiyars. They pointed out the perfect way of devotion to Shiva,
the Supreme Lord. The Periya Puranam of Sekkizhaar is a literary masterpiece
dealing with the lives, deeds, and sayings of these devotees of Lord Shiva. It was
composed in the eleventh century AD.
In the spiritual history of the world it would be difficult to find such matchless
devotion to God as evinced by these sixty-three saints. Since we cannot deal
with all of them, we will touch upon the lives of some of the greatest. Of these,
four are without parallel. They are popularly known as Appar, Sambandar,
Sundarar, and Manikkavachagar. Three of them were really child saints, but

within the short period of time allocated to them, they performed miracles of
piety. Sambandar died at the age of sixteen, Sundarar when he was eighteen, and
Appar when he was past eighty. But these facts mean nothing. All of them were
infinities scooped out of infinity, and their names are hallowed for all eternity.
Although these four belonged to the Brahmin caste, many of the Nayanmars
did not belong to the upper castes. They hailed from various castes and
communities, rich and poor, high and low. One was a hunter who killed a boar
and roasted the carcass and not only ate it but also offered it as a fitting food for
Shiva, the Lord of his heart. Another was a fisherman. A third was an
untouchable who belonged to a community whose staple diet was the flesh of
dead cows. None of them had the type of life one would expect of a saint. Most
of them had no learning or pedigree. All they had in common was an uncommon
love of God. The lives of these saints are examples to us of how devotion to the
Supreme alone can emancipate the human being from the coils of karma. By the
purity of their love, the childlike innocence of their faith, and their firm will to
attain the object of their devotion, they were able to bind the boundless one, like
the gopis of Vrindavana did to Lord Krishna. How we understand the stories of
these saints depends on the mind-set of the reader. If perused with faith and
devotion, these stories will help to elevate our own lives to a high degree.
In the history of the human race we find that along with the biological
evolution of mankind, a cultural and spiritual evolution simultaneously occurred.
This took place mainly by devotees imbibing the ideas, codes, and conduct of
the saints. India has produced many such great souls who have helped to
maintain the eternal verities of the Sanatana Dharma, or the eternal religion of
the Hindus. The Nayanmars belong to this category. They understood the true
nature of the world and of God, and opted for God alone. Their devotion did not
stem from ignorance and fear of the unknown, but from the wisdom of those
with inner sight who are established unshakably in the truth. Love of God
completely removes attachment to the body. It also cuts at the root of our
attachment to the world. These saints were ready to sacrifice everything,
including their own bodies and those of their dear ones, if they stood as an
impediment to the worship of their beloved deity, Shiva. Some of the astonishing
incidents described in the lives of these saints may be difficult for the modern
mind to accept. However, those whose hearts have not been clogged with
materialism will be able to understand that in the realm of God-love, there can
be no second to the Divine and miracles become commonplace, since God alone
pulls the strings of our lives. All problems melt in the burning fire of his grace.

These saints of Tamil Nadu never asked God for a favor, not even for liberation.
All they prayed was to be admitted into the galaxy of devotees.
One of Sundarar’s songs begins, “I am the servant of the servants of the
servants of the Lord of Thillai (Shiva).” The devotee is considered as even
superior to the Lord. This interesting fact is brought out in many stories, even in
the Sreemad Bhagavad Mahapuranam. This is because the true devotee is one
who has been able to subjugate the divine through the intense power of his
devotion. It is easier for us to worship such a devotee and receive his blessing so
that we may accomplish the same feat.
All sixty-three saints of the Periya Puranam were ascetics, but not of the usual
order. What these saints renounced was not their kith and kin, or their villages
and houses, or their occupations. What they gave up was anger, theft, violence,
pride, hurting others, attachment, and desire. What they donned was not the
external clothing of the ochre robe but the internal habits of nonviolence,
endurance, truth, and austerity. Externally they seemed to be no different from
their neighbors, but in their hearts they were ascetics. According to the popular
notion of how saints should behave, none of them appear to have done anything
spectacular that would have qualified them to gain mukti, or liberation, but the
fact is that all of them did gain it. The trap that every one of these saints laid for
God was the trap of love. Maybe this type of love is not developed in a day or
even in a lifetime. It may need lifetimes before one can develop the type of love
that makes a prisoner of God in one’s heart.
Manikkavachagar sang, “Behold God who falls into the net called love.”
Though this type of love, or bhakti as it is called, might be difficult to achieve,
it is the one thing all human beings can acquire, without exception of sex, caste,
creed, language, nationality, profession, poverty, or wealth. No externalities can
stand in the way of a human being acquiring this one qualification, by which one
can imprison the Divinity in one’s own heart. It is a love without reservations—a
total love, a love that does not try to possess or be possessed. It is a love that
alone is worthy of merging in the very source of love, which is God. The
separate entity known as the individual disappears, and what is left is God and
God alone—Shivoham, Shivoham. The devotee melts into the arms of the Divine
Beloved and nothing is left of the separate ego. The message of all these saints
was simple: “Give up all attachments and love God alone, serve him in all
humanity, and liberation is yours.”
Shiva himself is supposed to have said of his devotees, “Shortcomings, they

have none!”
Let us find out how this bhakti was evinced by the different saints. Did they
follow the same standard or was there any variation in their devotion? Seven of
them followed the accepted mode of conduct and sang their way to liberation.
Nine persisted in their worship despite the difficulties of old age and poverty.
Seventeen performed righteous acts of violence; they gave up their lives rather
than their worship. One gouged out his own eye and placed it on the profusely
bleeding eye of an idol of Shiva. Another was prepared to sacrifice his only son
to Shiva, who came in the guise of a devotee. One rubbed his elbow on a stone
in place of a piece of sandalwood and used it in the worship of the Lord. Another
flung a stone instead of a flower at a linga of Shiva every day, on his way to take
his food. One rewarded a thief for stealing rice from the public granary in order
to feed the devotees of the Lord. One regularly prostrated at the feet of a
washerman whose body was covered with earth, who reminded him of the body
of Lord Shiva, covered with ashes. Some chanted the Rudri—the garland of
hymns to Shiva. Some chanted the five-syllabled mantra of Shiva constantly.
Some took the vow of feeding the devotees of Lord Shiva through days of plenty
and poverty before partaking of any food themselves. Thus we see that the
criteria for mukti ranged from the sublime to the ridiculous, and from the heroic
to the mundane. The truth that emerges from this is that the Lord does not look
into the act, but the love behind the act. Lord Krishna accepted the sweat-soaked
bundle of rice flakes from his poverty-stricken friend Kuchela and showered him
with all the riches of Dwaraka. So also Lord Shiva did not notice how ridiculous
some of the acts of his devotees were, but looked into their hearts overflowing
with love.
Prostrations to the one who is present in death and liberation.
Prostrations to the one who is present in the green fields and the
barnyards. Prostrations to the one who is present in the Vedic mantras
and the Upanishads. Prostrations to the one present in trees and
creepers. Prostrations to the one who is both sound and echo!
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Prostrations to the one present in marshes and ponds.
Prostrations to the one present in rivers and lakes.
Prostrations to the one present in wells and pits.

Prostrations to the one present in rains and drought.
Prostrations to the one present in thunder and lightning.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Devaya Namaha!
26
The Great Four
He grabbed me lest I go astray,
Wax before an unspent fire,
Mind melted, body trembled,
I bowed, I wept, I cried out loud,
I danced and praised Him.
SAINT MANIKKAVACHAGAR
 
The four great saints, or Nayanmars, whose lives are given below are known in
Tamil literature as the “Fathers of the Faith.” Each of them followed a different
path in his approach to God. They are popularly known as Sundarar, Appar,
Sambandar, and Manikkavachagar. Sundarar followed the sakhya marga, or path
of friendship. Appar followed the dasa marga, or path of the servant. Sambandar
followed the satputra marga, or path of the good son, and Manikkavachagar
followed the jnana marga, or path of knowledge.
THE FRIEND OF SHIVA
The life of Sundaramurthi Nayanar, who lived in the eighth century, shows us
how one can lead a householder’s life and still be an ardent devotee of God. It
also shows us that the Lord is deeply interested in all our problems. There is
nothing in our lives that God considers small or petty; we are the ones who fail
to approach him for what we consider to be petty household problems. This is

the great lesson, that Sundarar did not hesitate to involve the Lord in every
single incident of his life, even his love affairs. He lived for only eighteen years
but in that short span of time he composed some of the most beautiful songs
about Lord Shiva, known as thevarams. Shiva loved Sundarar’s songs so much
that he constantly tested him and made him sing to pass the test.
In his previous life Sundarar had been a servant of Lord Shiva and had lived
beside him on Mount Kailasa. It was his duty to offer the Lord sacred ashes to
anoint his body, and a garland of honey-laden flowers. One day it so happened
that as he was plucking flowers in Parvati’s garden, he fell in love with her two
attendants, Kamalini and Aninditi. Knowing his desire, Lord Shiva told him to
incarnate himself in the world along with the women and thus fulfill his wishes.
“You have set your mind on these damsels, therefore you will be born with
them in the southern region. After consorting with them in the pleasures of love,
you may come back to me.” These were the words of the Lord.
Another reason why Sundarar had to take a human birth was that he had not
totally exhausted all the bonds of his karma. In the theology of the Sanatana
Dharma, God’s grace does not take the form of absolution of all sins, even for
the greatest devotee. If that were the case there would be an end to the game of
life. Life is a game in which the jivatma (embodied soul) for some reason thinks
itself to be separate from the paramatma and has to find its way back to its
original status. The paramatma is our unseen companion, constantly
encouraging us. The Lord stands beside the devotee and illumines him about the
working of the law of karma. He strengthens his will to surrender totally to the
will of God, thereby eradicating his desire for the fruits of karma and severing
his link in the chain of births and deaths. The other reason for Sundarar’s
incarnation was that the Lord wished him to compose divine music that would
be an inspiration for all those in the world. He was thus born into a noble
Brahmin family.
The king of the land saw the beautiful child and adopted him. At the age of
fourteen he wanted to get him married, but to the great consternation of all
concerned, an old Brahmin with ashes on his body and a garland of rudraksha
beads round his neck stormed into the wedding hall and declared that the boy
was his bonded slave and had no right to marry without his permission. He took
Sundarar to his own town and before an assembly of elders he produced a
document that proved that the boy was indeed his slave. Having thus established
his rights over the boy, the old Brahmin entered the temple of Shiva and

vanished, at which point Sundarar realized that this was none other than the Lord
himself. Later the Lord appeared to him in a dream and ordered him to compose
songs about him. From that day on, Sundarar wandered from temple to temple
singing the praises of the Lord. At the temple of Tiruvarur, a heavenly voice told
him, “Sundarar, I have made you my friend. From now on you will be a
bridegroom for the rest of your days on earth.”
Parvati’s attendant, Kamalini, with whom Sundarar had fallen in love, had
been born as a beautiful woman named Paravayar. They met at the temple of
Tiruvarur and fell in love. Lord Shiva, who had halted Sundarar’s previous
attempt at marriage, now became his marriage broker and arranged for the two to
be wedded the very next day after their first meeting.
Together they helped their people by interceding with Lord Shiva. One time
when their town was afflicted by famine, Sundarar begged the Lord to appease
the hunger of the people and miraculously, heaps of grain were found in the
village. Paravayar was in the habit of distributing money to the poor on the
festival of Holi and requested her husband to give her the necessary funds.
Without hesitation, Sundarar went to the temple of Shiva and asked him for gold.
In the morning when he awakened, he found that the bricks on which he had
rested his head during the night had turned into gold, so Paravayar was able to
distribute as much gold as she desired.
Another time when he was traveling, Sundarar once again asked the Lord for
gold to feed the needy. The Lord gave him a heap of gold coins, but Sundarar did
not know how to transport it to Tiruvarur, so Shiva told him to throw the lot into
the lake and collect it when he returned to Tiruvarur. Sundarar kept one gold
piece back for identification. When he returned to his hometown he dove into the
lake and found coins, but they were inferior in value to those that had been given
to him. This was another trick of Shiva’s to encourage Sundarar to sing. After
Sundarar composed another divine song, the Lord changed the gold to its
original value.
The other woman Sundarar had loved in Kailasa, Aninditi, had been born as a
great devotee of Lord Shiva and was called Sangiliyar. She refused to marry the
man of her father’s choice and took up her residence in an ashrama, where she
made garlands daily and took them to the Lord in the nearby temple. On one of
these temple visits Sundarar saw her, and due to their past association, he fell in
love with her. With the familiarity of an intimate relationship he asked Lord
Shiva to solve his problem, since he had heard that Sangiliyar was celibate.

Shiva spoke to Sangiliyar in a dream and told her to marry Sundarar. She was
willing, but when she knew that Sundarar was already married she made him
promise not to desert her under any circumstance. Lord Shiva told her to make
him take this oath under a nearby tree and not in the temple. Sundarar did as he
was told, and they married. When spring came, Sundarar remembered how his
first wife would be singing and dancing before the Lord in the temple of
Tiruvarur, and was filled with a desire to see her again. For a long time he
refrained, remembering his promise to Sangiliyar, but at last he could not help
himself and left without a word to Sangiliyar. Just as he crossed the border of the
town, he lost his eyesight and fell to the ground. Sundarar realized that the Lord
was teaching him a lesson since he had broken his promise to his wife. He burst
into song and with his devotional fervor unabated, and went from temple to
temple begging the Lord to restore his eyesight. He knew the Lord had tricked
him into making the promise outside the temple near a tree, and with the
intimacy born of close friendship, he pestered the Lord to forgive him and give
him back his eyesight. At the temple of Kamakshi, goddess of the beautiful eyes,
in Kanchipuram, Parvati, who knew his distress, restored the sight of one eye.
He was delighted and composed many songs to her. Before he reached Tiruvarur,
he begged the Lord once more to restore his vision. Shiva asked him to go and
bathe in the temple tank, or reservoir. When he emerged he was the color of
gold.
But Sundarar was not satisfied with this and begged the Lord to give him both
eyes so that he could feast them once more on the vision of the Lord in the
temple. At last Shiva relented and gave him back his eyesight.
In the meantime Paravayar had heard of Sundarar’s bigamous behavior and
refused to allow him into her house. Once again Sundarar approached his one
and only friend, Shiva, to help him in this new predicament. Shiva went as a
Brahmin to Paravayar’s house and pleaded Sundarar’s case. At first she refused
since she did not recognize him, but when Shiva showed her his real form, she
fell at his feet and happily agreed to take Sundarar back. Thus the two were
reunited.
There are many stories about how the Lord saved Sundarar from every
predicament and granted his every request. But each time, before granting his
desire, Shiva would ask him to sing for him. It is said that on three occasions,
Lord Shiva himself suggested the first line for his song. Once when Sundarar
was struggling with the first line, Shiva prompted him, “O Thou who are
difficult of being experienced in the mind and of being expressed in words.”

On the second occasion, when Sundarar could not decide on a suitable word to
begin his sonnet, Lord Shiva suggested with a smile, “What is the difficulty
about this? You once called me pitthan (madman) when I came to rescue you
from the marriage hall, so why not start your stanza with that word.”
The third time the Lord told him to start with the famous words, “I am the
servant of the servants of the servants of the Lord dwelling at Thillai.”
Sundarar thus joined the galaxy of the servitors of the Lord and became a jivan
mukta, or one who was liberated even while living in the human body.
The Lord treated Sundarar as his friend. This is known as the sakhya marga.
The greatness of this path is that the Lord tolerates all the familiarities presumed
by the devotee. As the great poet Thiruvalluvar wrote, “If you ask what intimate
friendship is, it is that which does not object to the liberties taken by a friend.”
One day when Sundarar was praying at the temple, the sight of the idol made
him crazy with longing to return to Kailasa. He rolled on the ground with sorrow
and begged the Lord to take him back to his abode. He sang one of his most
plaintive melodies. He was only eighteen at that time, but in his short span of
time on this earth, he had composed some of the most heartrending songs to the
Lord, which are sung even today in all Shiva temples. The Lord was equally
anxious to have him back in Kailasa and ordered the divine white elephant to go
and bring him. His physical body was discarded then and there, and those who
happened to look at the sky saw Sundarar mounted on the white elephant sailing
across the sky to Kailasa. His two wives also shed their mortal coils and returned
to their divine abode.
THE SON OF SHIVA
Another Nayanar who wrote a collection of thevaram songs to Lord Shiva is
Tiru Jnana Sambandar. He is called the Son of God, an Iswarakoti, or avatara—
divine incarnations who can liberate themselves whenever they choose.
Sambandar’s departure from the earth at a very young age of sixteen and all the
miracles he performed in his short life prove that he was indeed an avatara, God
descended to the earth in the form of a man. At the time of his birth, Jainism was
becoming popular in Tamil Nadu, and Sambandar’s parents had prayed for a son
who would bring the land back to its original Vedic beliefs.
Once at the age of three, Sambandar was left on the banks of a lake while his
father went in for a bath. The child, who was filled with love and desire to see

his true father, began to cry piteously as he looked up at the heavens. Lord Shiva
sent Parvati to comfort him. She came and fed him from her own breasts. When
his earthly father returned, he found the child drooling milk and wondered who
had fed him. The child stood with one foot raised like a statue of Shiva, and
pointing one finger to the heavens, he sang his immortal song, “Behold Him
with an earplug of a rolled palmyra leaf!” Obviously he had the beatific vision of
Lord Shiva at that time and began his ministry even at that tender age. At an age
when many children cannot lisp more than a few words, Sambandar sang this
song of eleven stanzas conforming to the rigid rules of Sanskrit grammar, set to
an ancient Tamil melody. No doubt this was due to the milk imbibed from the
breasts of Parvati, the Divine Mother of all arts.
Like Sundarar, he also went from temple to temple singing songs in praise of
the Lord, which melted the hearts of all who heard him. The Lord is supposed to
have presented him with a pair of gold cymbals to keep time.
At his sacred investiture ceremony at the age of seven, well before he’d had
any formal education, he astonished the priests by standing up and reciting all
the Vedas. He taught the priests that the panchakshari mantra of Lord Shiva,
“Namashivaya,” contained all the Vedas, and that this alone was his source of
knowledge.
Since he had so little time to accomplish all that he had come to do, he was
carried on his father’s shoulder from place to place, from the age of three
onward. At many of the temples he visited, he performed miracles and alleviated
the troubles of the devotees. Once the wife of a devotee died of snakebite, and it
is said that Sambandar revived her with one of his songs. At this time the Jain
influence was growing all over Tamil Nadu, and in the city of Madurai, even the
king had been converted. Only the queen and the chief minister were ardent
Shiva bhaktas. When she heard of the child-saint, the queen sent the minister
and begged him to come to the city. The Jain monks were perturbed at the
minister’s coming and decided to set fire to his camp using black magic, but they
were unable to do so, and the fire, which had been sanctioned by the king, traced
its path back to him. He was seized with a dreadful burning sensation all over his
body. The queen urged him to call Sambandar. The Jain monks came, along with
the child-saint, and challenged him to demonstrate his powers. The king
promised to accept Sambandar’s faith if he could cure him. The monks told him
to cure the right side while they attempted to cure the left. The monks chanted
mantras and passed peacock feathers over the king’s left side, but the burning
continued unabated. Sambandar sang a song in praise of the sacred ashes of Lord

Shiva and smeared the king’s right side with ash, and immediately the king was
free of the disease. He begged him to do the same for his left side, and this was
done with the same result. The king and his consort fell at his feet. But the
stubborn Jains insisted on more tests. They ordered him to throw the leaves of
his song into the fire. Both parties threw their respective palm leaves into the
flames, and the leaves of the Jains were burned to cinders. They insisted that
both sets of leaves should be thrown into the river, and that which floated against
the current should be considered superior. Sambandar was victorious in this test
also, and the whole land was converted back to Shaivism.
After undertaking a number of pilgrimages, Sambandar returned to his
hometown at the age of sixteen. His father wanted to see him married.
Sambandar agreed and participated with secret amusement in the wedding
ceremony. It is to be noted that Sambandar sang of the glory of the panchakshari
mantra for the first time during his investiture ceremony and for the last time at
his wedding ceremony, dressed gorgeously as a bridegroom. As he went around
the ceremonial fire with his finger entwined in the little finger of his child bride,
the fire grew into effulgence and engulfed him, along with his bride. The
wedding guests were also consumed by this effulgence and reached the abode of
Lord Shiva. In his brief lifetime Sambandar did as much for Shaivism as Adi
Shankara did for Advaita. Through his thousands of songs, he rekindled
religious faith and ancient modes of worship in the heart of his people.
THE SERVANT OF SHIVA
Saint Appar’s role was to be a forerunner to the son of God—Sambandar—just
as Kumarila Bhatta was to Adi Shankaracharya, and John the Baptist to Christ.
His life revolved round the life of Sambandar. He lived at the same time as
Sambandar, even though the historic meeting between the two of them took
place only when Appar was in his fifties and Sambandar but a boy of seven. At
that time Jainism had taken strong hold over the people of Tamil Nadu, and
Appar decided that he should learn more about the religion so that he could help
Sambandar in his mission. He went to Pataliputra and entered the Jain monastery
in order to study its precepts. He was branded as a defector from the true faith,
but the fact was that Appar was a mystic who knew of the coming of Sambandar
and the purpose for which he was coming. He understood that he would have to
learn something of Jainism if he wanted to be able to help Sambandar, whom he

knew would live for only sixteen years.
For twenty years Appar lived as a Jain monk, but when Sambandar was seven
years old, Appar knew that the time had come for him to leave the monastery
and go to his aid. He was wondering how he could leave the monastery without
antagonizing the Jains, when Shiva came to his aid by giving him a severe colic
that the Jains could not cure. He went to his sister, who cured him by using the
five-syllabled, panchakshari mantra of Shiva.
Appar himself sang thus, “O Lord, who roams about receiving alms in a dry
skull, do graciously rid me of the colic that is inside my body.”
At this time the king of the region had become a Jain, and the Jain monks
compelled him to kill Appar, since he had defected from their order. They
imprisoned him in a burning kiln of limestone. When they opened the kiln after
seven days they found Appar alive and in deep samadhi. They attributed it to the
mantras he had learned from them and gave him poison. Appar repeated the
panchakshari mantra and drank the poison as if it were the elixir of life, and he
survived.
Then they put him in the way of a rampaging elephant. When Appar faced him
with a beautiful verse on Shiva, the elephant bowed before him and turned its
fury on the monks. Lastly, they tied a granite stone round his neck and flung him
into the sea. The stone started to float as Appar began to sing, “He is the Word,
He is the savior, He is the Veda incarnate, He is the effulgence . . .” He ended
with the words, “The name of the Lord is nothing but Namashivaya.”
The amorphous state of the Godhead as represented by the linga is Nada, or
sound, which is the word “Namashivaya.” The stone carried him to the shore,
and as he walked into the town, his form was brilliant with ashes on his body
and rudraksha beads round his neck.
However, even the orthodox Shaivites were angry with him, for they thought
he was a traitor and boycotted him, so he decided that it was better to leave the
town and go and meet Sambandar. At the historic meeting, the great ones
recognized each other. Without a moment’s hesitation they prostrated at each
other’s feet, since each was aware of the other’s greatness. Appar recognized in
the child the savior of Shaivism and stayed several days with Sambandar.
At their second meeting, a famine was raging in the land, and both of them
prayed to Shiva to end the suffering of the people. The Lord promised to give
them one gold coin daily to buy food for the people. Daily they would find a
gold coin at the eastern and western entrances of the temple and used it to buy

food for the poor. After this, they traveled together for some time, visiting
shrines and performing many miracles.
Their third and last meeting was when Sambandar was returning from Madurai
after having defeated the Jains. Appar saw the procession approaching, and with
the humility of a true saint, he quietly helped to carry the palanquin in which
Sambandar was seated. When Sambandar saw him, he jumped out of the
palanquin and embraced him with the greatest of love. They stayed together for
some time and parted, never to meet again.
It was at the temple of Tiruppunthuruthi that Appar sang his famous song, “O
head of mine bow down to the Head of the universe . . .” in which he
commanded every limb of his body to worship Lord Shiva.
Once while Appar was digging in the temple gardens, Lord Shiva tested him.
Gems and gold came up with the dirt. Appar dug them out with his spade and
flung them, along with the dirt, into a lake filled with lotuses. Then heavenly
damsels descended on him and tempted him with their alluring charms, but he
was totally unmoved by them and was intent on his repetition of the five-
syllabled mantra.
He sang, “Thinker that I am, what should I think of, but of the holy feet of the
Lord . . . I see nothing but Thy anklet-girded feet. . . . Here and now O virtuous
One, I am coming to Thy feet.” So saying, Appar abandoned his body at the age
of eighty-one. His motto was “humble service,” and he always carried a hoe,
which he used to work in all the temple gardens.
THE KNOWER OF SHIVA
Manikkavachagar was born to Brahmin parents. Even as a child he was so bright
that the king of the land made him his prime minister. But very soon the youth
realized the ephemeral nature of the world and decided to seek his guru. At that
time the cavalry was becoming depleted and the king ordered his prime minister
to go and secure horses. Manikkavachagar was delighted and took this as an
opportunity to find his guru. When he reached a temple, he found a Brahmin
seated beneath a tree holding the book, Shiva Jnana Bodham (The knowledge of
Shiva). As soon as he saw him, Manikkavachagar realized that this was, indeed,
his guru. He ran forward and prostrated at his feet and begged him to accept him
as his disciple. The Lord himself had come in the form of a Brahmin in order to
initiate Manikkavachagar into the mysteries of the knowledge of Shiva.

Manikkavachagar immediately surrendered all his wealth to his guru and sang a
melodious song to him. This was the garland of jewels he offered to his guru,
and thus Lord Shiva called him Manikkavachagar, since his words were like
gems. Soon after, the Brahmin vanished and Manikkavachagar realized that this
was none other than Lord Shiva. He was filled with sorrow at the disappearance
of his guru and forgot the mission for which he had come. Moreover, all the
money meant for the horses had been surrendered at the feet of the guru, who
had given it for the reconstruction of the temple. He sent word to the king that he
would come within a month.
The month went by, and the angry king sent another message.
Manikkavachagar reported the matter to the Lord in the temple. Shiva came in a
dream and told him to return to the king, and he himself would bring the horses.
Manikkavachagar returned and told the king that he had already arranged for the
horses, and they would be brought to the palace on an auspicious date. In the
meantime, the other ministers reported to the king all that had actually occurred
in the temple and that Manikkavachagar had given to his guru the money meant
for the horses. The king was furious and ordered him to be tortured.
Manikkavachagar bore the agony patiently for he was sure that the Lord would
keep his promise. Seeing his devotee being tormented, Lord Shiva changed all
the jackals in the nearby forest into horses and sent his own messengers as
riders. He himself took the form of a horse trader, and they reached the city of
Madurai on an auspicious day, as promised. When the king saw the horses, he
felt very sorry for having inflicted this unnecessary punishment on his prime
minister and apologized profusely.
As soon as he saw the horse trader, Manikkavachagar realized that he was
none other than Lord Shiva and prostrated to him. The horses were led to the
stables. However, with his usual puckish humor, Shiva decreed that during the
night the horses would regain their previous forms, and they fled howling to the
forest.
The king was furious with Manikkavachagar and ordered that he should be
caught and tortured once again, since he felt that Manikkavachagar had made a
fool of him once more. The saint prayed to the Lord to help him, and
immediately the river next to the town began to rise. There was panic in the city,
the soldiers fled, and Manikkavachagar went to the temple and prayed for help.
In the meantime the king ordered everyone in the city to go and help in the
construction of an embankment to stop the floodwaters from rising further. There

was an old woman in the town who was unable to carry anything, and she prayed
to the Lord to help her. Shiva came in the form of a laborer and started to throw
mud at the breach with such force that it opened again. The king, who happened
to be there at that time, was furious when he saw this. Taking a stout stick he
beat the man on his head. Everyone in the world, including the king, felt these
blows. It was only then that the king realized this was all a play of the Lord. An
invisible voice told him to go and beg Manikkavachagar’s pardon for all the
injustice done to him. The king ran to the saint, apologized profusely, and
begged him to accept the ruler-ship of the country. Manikkavachagar refused and
took leave of the king once and for all. He had had enough of politics and
realized that he had come to this earth for a higher purpose. All he wanted was to
meet his guru once again. He wended his way through all the temples of South
India, in the hope of seeing the Lord once more in the form of his guru. In order
to please him, Lord Shiva appeared to him in the form of his guru at every
shrine. At last he reached the glorious temple of Chidambaram, where Shiva is
in the form of Nataraja. This is the place where he composed his famous song
called the “Tiruvachagam.”
At that time a Buddhist monk from Sri Lanka, accompanied by the Sri Lankan
king and his mute daughter, came to Chidambaram to inquire about the existence
of a god other than the Buddha. The king of the land decided to arrange a debate
between the Buddhist and a Shaivite. Manikkavachagar was chosen to represent
Shaivism, since he was the one who was most knowledgeable. At the end of the
debate, the Buddhist monks were literally struck dumb.
The Sri Lankan king was amazed and said to Manikkavachagar, “You have
made my eloquent teachers mute. Now if you are able to make my mute
daughter speak, we will all renounce our faith and join yours.” Manikkavachagar
requested the Lord to help him, and the mute girl started to speak fluently and to
faultlessly refute the arguments of the Buddhist monks. Needless to say, the king
was converted.
One day Lord Shiva came to Manikkavachagar in the form of a Brahmin and
asked him to sing “Tiruvachagam” for him. The Lord proceeded to write down
the song on palm leaves as Manikkavachagar sang. Manikkavachagar was so
overwhelmed by the Lord’s love and grace that tears started rolling from his
eyes, and he prostrated himself on the temple steps and could not rise. When the
temple priests came they found the palm leaves written by the Lord on the steps
of the temple, and Manikkavachagar in a state of ecstasy. Of the Brahmin there
was no sign. The temple priests approached Manikkavachagar and asked him to

explain the meaning of what was written on the leaves and who had written
them. With trembling hands, Manikkavachagar pointed to the idol within the
temple and said, “He alone is the subject matter of these songs. He alone has
written them!” He was so overcome with emotion as he uttered these words that
he could not rise from the feet of Lord Nataraja. He literally merged into the idol
of the Lord and was never seen again.
O hands of mine! Join together
And worship that transcendent Being,
Who has a snake with the poisonous mouth as a waistband.
Strewn at His feet are fragrant flowers. O hands of mine!
Join together and worship Him.
SAINT APPAR
Words cannot express that state; the mind cannot grasp it,
The senses cannot perceive it
Except through firm belief in God and Self,
It cannot be understood.
“YOGA VASISHTA” BY SAGE VASISHTA
 
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Anaghaya Namaha!
27
The Violent Votaries
His birth was in a family of hunters
Who robbed honeycombs and ate flesh.
He roamed about the forest in the mountains, where roamed the tiger.
He bred red-eyed dogs and decoy animals.
He wielded the cruel bow, the spear, the sword,
And dwelt with butchered carcasses.
His form, a brawny forearm chewed by a tiger.
A rock-like chest hacked with mighty weapons, face marked by the teeth of
bears.
Thigh slashed by the sharp-tusked boar.
Dense upstanding tuft, bloodshot, terrifying eyes,
Resounding harsh speech!
SAINT NAKEERA
This was written about Kannappa Nayanar, who was one of the earliest of the
saints. He was a brutish creature, born the son of a brutish chieftain of an
aboriginal tribe, living in brutish terrain. It is said that he was the incarnation of
Arjuna, who had dared to fight in the guise of a hunter with Lord Shiva; because
of this he was born a hunter.
On his maiden hunt, Kannappa chased and killed a boar. While his friends
roasted it, he went to visit the temple at the top of the hill. When he reached the
temple and saw the linga, a remarkable change came over him. He ran toward

the linga in ecstasy and began to hug and kiss it, for therein he saw his beloved
Lord. A simple hunter, Kannappa was totally devoid of all knowledge of
ritualistic worship, but his friend told him that the method of worshipping Shiva
was to pour water over the idol (abhisheka) and then offer flowers and food.
Though he was loath to leave his beloved alone, he sped off and took the best
portions of the pork that had been roasted, and after tasting each piece to see if it
was nicely done, he laid the pieces lovingly on a bed of leaves. Then he ran to
the river and took some water in his mouth since he had no vessel, and gathered
some flowers and kept them in his hair since he had no basket, and rushed back
to the temple. He spat the water in his mouth over the idol as abhisheka and
brushed aside the flowers in his hair with his sandals so that they fell over the
linga. He then placed the pork on its bed of leaves in front of the linga and said,
“Here is meat that I have roasted to a turn and tasted with my experienced
tongue. Pray be gracious enough to eat it.” He waited anxiously, never taking his
eyes off the idol, like a mother watching her beloved child. When the sun set, his
friends did their best to make him go back home, but he refused to budge from
the side of the idol.
The next day while Kannappa was hunting, a Brahmin priest who came for
daily worship of the deity arrived and was horrified to see the desecration of the
temple. He noticed the imprint of sandals and the pug marks of dogs inside the
sanctum sanctorum and the strange flowers on the idol, and the stench of meat
everywhere. He performed the necessary purificatory rites. He then brought
water in a copper vessel for the Lord’s bath with a cloth tied round his mouth,
lest his breath pollute the water. He brought flowers in a rush basket and made a
delightful concoction of milk and rice for the offering, untasted by anyone. After
finishing the ritual he returned home.
Kannappa came back soon after and disturbed everything that the priest had
done and performed the rites in his own unorthodox fashion. This went on for
five days, much to the chagrin of the priest. On the fifth night the Lord appeared
in a dream to the priest and told him to hide himself if he wanted to see
something special. The priest hid himself behind the linga. On the sixth day
when Kannappa returned with his hoard of fresh meat he saw a dreadful sight. A
stream of blood was gushing out of the right eye of the Lord in the linga.
Kannappa ran forward and tried to stem the flow, but it continued unabated. He
found some herbs and applied them to the bleeding eye but without any effect.
At last he had a brilliant idea. He gouged out his own eye with the tip of his
arrow and placed it lovingly over the bleeding eye and stanched the wound, but

immediately the other eye also began to bleed. This time Kannappa knew
exactly what to do, but the problem would be finding the exact spot of the eye on
the idol, without his second eye. Then he thought of a splendid idea. He placed
his left foot on the bleeding eye to mark the place and put his arrow to his
remaining eye.
The Lord could bear this no longer. He jumped out of the linga and caught
Kannappa’s hand and said, “Stop, Kannappa!”
Three times he cried thus, and Kannappa was thrice blessed. From that day
onward he was known as Kannappa. His sacrifice was equivalent to the one
made by Vishnu, the lotus-eyed one who had given his own eye to the three-eyed
Lord. Unparalleled was Kannappa’s love, and to this day, poets sing his glory.
Arivattayar Nayanar was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. Daily he offered cooked
red rice, red spinach, and some mango pickle to the Lord. To test him, Lord
Shiva took away all his wealth, but Arivattayar worked in someone else’s field
and with the wages that he received there, he continued to offer the same things
to the Lord. He and his family ate inferior rice and offered the best quality to
Shiva. But a time came when only red rice was available, so Arivattayar ate only
the greens from his garden and not the rice, which was offered to Shiva. One day
as he was carrying his usual offering to the temple, his legs faltered due to
weakness, and he fell on the ground, spilling the food.
He began to weep bitterly and said, “O Lord, if it is true that you are
omnipresent, you must be here on this spot, right now. Pray accept my offering,
which has fallen on the ground. If you do not eat it I will give up my life.”
With these words he took up a sickle and started to hack his throat. Just then he
heard the crunching sound of someone biting into the mango pickle.
Simultaneously the holy hand stretched forth and caught the sickle and
prevented him from killing himself.
Murthi Nayanar used to adore the idol of Shiva by anointing it daily with
sandalwood paste. A time came when a Jain king ruled the land and began to
persecute the followers of Shiva. Murthi Nayanar continued his worship
undaunted. In order to convert him, the king declared that no sandalwood should
be used in the land. Murthi prayed to Lord Shiva to give them a king who would

be favorable to Shiva devotees. He was fast exhausting his stock of sandalwood,
and the day came when he did not have even a small piece for his daily worship.
He searched the whole city without being able to find a single block of
sandalwood. When the time came for his daily worship, he went to the temple
and in desperation, began to rub his own elbow on the grinding stone, in lieu of
sandalwood. It started bleeding profusely. Lord Shiva appeared and stopped him
and told him that he had accepted his sacrifice and that he would be made king
of the land. That night the cruel king died, and in accordance with their ancient
custom, the ministers sent the palace elephant to choose a worthy successor. The
elephant went unerringly toward the temple and, seeing Murthi Nayanar, bowed
to him and returned to the palace carrying him on its back. The ministers begged
Murthi to accept the kingship. He agreed, but on certain conditions. He said that
he would not be anointed with perfumes but only with ashes, he would not wear
any jewels but only rudraksha beads, and his crown would be his matted locks.
The ministers agreed. Murthi became king, and once again Shaivism flourished
in the land.
Chandeswar Nayanar was a child prodigy. One day he saw a cowherd beating a
cow and was so unhappy that he offered his own services to the householders
who employed the cowherd. The cows prospered under the care of the child and
yielded milk of their own accord. The boy used to make a mud linga on the
riverbank and pour milk over it every day, since there was a surplus. One day his
father caught him in the act and angrily kicked the linga that the child was
worshipping. The boy looked up and saw that it was his own father who had
obstructed his puja. He took up a stick, which turned into an axe in his hands,
and chopped off his father’s feet. He continued with his worship, unmindful of
his father lying on the ground. The Lord appeared and blessed him for his
extreme devotion that could not tolerate an insult to the linga and would not let
any personal attachment stand in the way of his convictions.
Sakkiyar was a Shaivite who became a Buddhist monk, but he could never
eradicate the ingrained love of Shiva from his heart. Even though he did not
change his garb, he used to worship a linga on the way to his bhiksha—a
Buddhist monk is supposed to beg for his food and this is called bhiksha. Every

day he had to pass the linga on his way and would throw a stone at it as an
offering to Lord Shiva. A large heap of stones grew up in this barren place as a
result of his strange floral offering. He continued this unique form of worship
every day. The flinging of the stone became an act charged with love, and the
Lord accepted it as such. Once when he was just sitting down to eat, he
remembered that he had not made his usual offering to the Lord and, leaving his
food, ran back to the linga. Just as he flung the stone, the Lord appeared and
blessed him.
Siruthonda Nayanar was a bhakta who never ate his meal without first feeding a
devotee of Shiva. One day Shiva came to him in the guise of a bhakta just before
his mealtime. Siruthonda was delighted and begged him to be seated. Shiva said
that he had taken a vow that once in six months he would eat the meat of a five-
year-old child who was the only son of his parents, and this happened to be the
right time. Siruthonda realized that his son met both these requirements and
agreed without a moment’s hesitation. His wife agreed that it was their great
good luck that they were given the opportunity to serve a devotee of Shiva in
this unique fashion. The unsuspecting child was brought and kept lovingly on his
mother’s lap. The father chopped off his head and the meat was cooked and
served to their guest. The Shiva devotee insisted that the host eat with him, so
Siruthonda sat to feast on the flesh of his only son. Then their demanding guest
insisted that the son of his host should also eat with them. Siruthonda stammered
excuses, but the guest insisted that the wife should go out and call their son. To
the astonishment of the parents, the boy came running in as soon as he was
called. When they returned to the kitchen with the son, they found the place
empty. Neither the mendicant nor the meat was there, and they realized that the
Lord had tested them to the utmost.
The Atman is self-existent, all pervading—pure.
It is beyond the concept and range of sin.
It has no form or body and hence cannot be hurt by weapons.
The Atman in its personal or individualized aspect is God, the omniscient
and all-inclusive One.
It is the inspirer of saints and seers.
It is omnipotent and is the final refuge and bestower of the fruits of actions.

The one who does not know the truth of the Atman and leads a life wedded to
the senses falls into blinding darkness.
But the one who knows the truth of the Atman, yet leads a sensual life, falls
into deeper darkness.
FROM THE VEDAS BY CHANDRAMOULEESWARA SARASWATI
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Shaswathaya Namaha!
28
Women Devotees
She who, saying, ‘I will not tread with my feet, the sacred mountain of the
Lord,’
Walked on her hands with both her feet pointing to the sky,
Who was privileged to be hailed ‘My mother’ by the Lord of red-golden
body,
When Uma laughed at the sight,
She is the treasure of the family of Karaikkal,
Where pure honey seeps from the boughs of trees.
SAINT NAMBIYANDAR NAMBI
Punithavathi, the daughter of a rich merchant, was a devout wife. Once her
husband sent two mangoes from the market with instructions to keep them for
his lunch. In the meantime a visitor came for lunch, and she served one of the
mangoes to him. When her husband came home, she brought the other mango
and gave it to him. It was so delicious that he asked her for another. She was in a
dilemma and dared not tell him the truth lest he be angry with her for having
given his mango to a guest. She went and begged the Lord to help her. He gave
her a mango, which she happily cut and placed before her husband. But this
mango was truly otherworldly, so the husband naturally asked her where she had
gotten it. She had to tell the truth. The husband did not believe her and asked her
to get another one from the same source. She went to the prayer room and
begged Lord Shiva to save her from the ignominy of being called a liar. He gave
her another mango. When the husband saw this miracle, he concluded that his

wife must be some sort of a goddess and decided to leave her, since it would be
sacrilegious to have any sexual relationship with her. He set out on a mercantile
expedition and never returned to her.
When he came back, he settled in a different part of the country, married
another woman, and had a daughter by her whom he decided to call Punithavathi
after his first wife. Very soon the parents of the first Punithavathi heard of his
whereabouts. They took their daughter to him and demanded that he take her
back. As soon as he saw Punithavathi, he prostrated at her feet, a most unusual
thing for a husband to do, and begged her to forgive him. He explained to the
irate parents that in his eyes, Punithavathi was a goddess and he could not regard
her as a wife any more. When she heard this, Punithavathi decided that all
worldly ties were a bondage and the only one to whom she was really bound was
Lord Shiva. She decided to go to the holy mountain of Kailasa in order to see her
true Lord. When she reached the mountain she could not bear to tread the holy
ground with her feet so she began to climb it on her hands. She was nothing but
skin and bone by this time, and Parvati laughed when she saw this strange
apparition coming up the mountain.
Lord Shiva chided Parvati and said, “Note, O Parvati! She who is coming up
in this odd fashion is the mother who cherishes us.” As she approached them,
Shiva addressed her as “O Mother!”
In response Punithavathi cried, “O Father” and fell at his feet.
He asked her to choose any boon, and she chose to have undying love toward
him. He told her to return to the world and see his thandava dance and sing
about his glories. She did this until the end of her life, when she was taken up to
his abode. She has the unique privilege of being the only one of the devotees
mentioned here who returned home after having gone to Kailasa.
Sundarar’s mother, Isai-gnaaniyaar, as well as Mangayarkkarasi, the queen of
Madurai who was responsible for getting Sambandar to Madurai to defeat the
Jains in debate, are two other women saints who have been mentioned by
Sekkizhaar in the Periya Puranam.
Thilagavathi, the sister of Appar, was a saint in her own right. Without her help
the world would never have known about Appar. She was his only relative, and

she was the one who raised him and saved him from an untimely death.
She had been betrothed to a warrior, but before the wedding could take place,
both her parents died. Soon after, the man to whom she was engaged also died in
the war. She decided to end her life when he died, but at the pleas of her younger
brother, Appar, who begged her to stay alive for his sake, she desisted and
parented him. When her brother decided to join the Jains she was quite
devastated. She dedicated herself to Lord Shiva and spent her days in his divine
service. She begged the Lord to save her young brother from the clutches of the
Jains. It is said that Shiva agreed and gave Appar a severe colic pain, as we have
seen, which the Jain monks could not cure. He was forced to take refuge with his
sister, who cured him purely by the repetition of the five-syllabled mantra of
Lord Shiva and by the application of sacred ash over his body. Then she told him
to enter the temple of Shiva and beg his pardon. We have seen from the story of
Appar what happened to him after that. Thus, his sister, who was already mother
and father to him, now became his guru. She not only cured his physical disease
but also gave him spiritual redemption. She was indeed a gem amongst women.
Another woman saint was the wife of a Brahmin named Neelanakkar, whose
name we do not know. She accompanied her husband daily to the Shiva temple
and offered worship along with him. One day while her husband was uttering the
five-syllabled mantra with great concentration, the lady noticed that a spider had
fallen on top of the linga. Impelled by her motherly instincts, without thinking of
what she was doing, she blew off the spider. When the Brahmin saw this he was
shocked. One should never blow on an idol, lest it be defiled with our spit. He
shouted at her for her foolishness and declared that he would not have her in his
house again. The poor woman was forced to stay the night in the temple. That
night her husband had a dream in which Shiva appeared and showed him his
body, which had been totally affected by the poison. The only place that was free
from the effects of the poison was the place where the spider had fallen, from
which it had been removed by his wife’s breath. Needless to say, the stupid
husband rushed to the temple and begged his wife to return home with him. Her
spontaneous action had been inspired purely by maternal love, and the Lord took
it as such. We have seen that Shiva had a friend, a son, and a servant, but this
was the first time we heard that he, who was never born of a woman’s womb,
acquired a mother.

Of course, all the doings of these women pale to insignificance in comparison
to the great sacrifice made by the wife of Siruthonda Nayanar. As we have seen
in his story, she took her only son into her lap to make it easy for her husband to
chop off his head! She also cooked and served the flesh of her child to the so-
called Shiva bhakta without batting an eyelid. Such a sacrifice can hardly be
surpassed, and she certainly deserves a prominent place in our account of
women saints.
We might wonder how it is that Shiva sanctioned such apparently heartless
actions by his devotees. A culture and religion perish due to the apathy and
indifference of its followers, rather than by their excesses. Shaivites have always
been known for the violent way in which they expressed their intense love for
Shiva, and he seems to appreciate it. The devotees of Vishnu, however, are
known for their calm, peace-loving natures akin to the nature of Lord Vishnu
himself. Hinduism, with its great ability to accept all natures, has no difficulty in
allowing people of different types to follow the paths best suited to their
temperaments. There is no fixed rule or law of conduct that is mandatory for all
human beings without exception. God has no favorites! What he values above all
is the bhavana, or the feeling with which the devotion is given.
There are many, many more saints who have been mentioned in the Periya
Puranam and whose names are sung even today in Tamil Nadu. For lack of space
we have touched on the lives of just a few.
We will conclude with the words of Thomas Merton: “A mystic is one who
surrenders to a power of love that is greater than human. He advances toward
God in a darkness that goes beyond the light of human reason and conceptual
knowledge. When we speak of mysticism, we speak of an area in which man is
no longer completely in command of his own life, his own mind, and his own
will. Yet at the same time his surrender is to a God who is more intimate to him
than his very self.”
The devotee reaches a peak of realization in which she does not even want to
be in control of her life. She has no separate life or mind or will. She has
surrendered herself body, mind, and soul to the core of her being, which is God,
and remains content that his grace and intelligence will carry her on the waves of
his divine compassion to the farther shore of existence. In this path of total
submission, there is no fall and no mistake, for the Master of her Being, who is

also the beloved of her heart, accomplishes all.
I have neither hatred nor attachment, nor greed or infatuation. I have
neither pride nor a competitive spirit, I am not after duty, wealth,
passion, or liberation. I am the essence of consciousness and bliss—
Shivoham! Shivoham!
“NIRVANASHTAKAM” BY ADI SHANKARACHARYA
Prostrations to you who are formless and manifested in diverse forms.
Prostrations to you who manifest as the noble and the lowly.
Prostrations to you who are in those who ride the chariots and in those
who do not. Prostrations to you who are both the chariots and their
owners.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
Day by day, a man comes closer to death,
His youth wears away.
Transient as the ripples on a stream is the goddess of  fortune.
Fickle as lightning is life itself.
O Shiva! O giver of Shelter!
Protect me who has taken refuge at Thy feet.
ADI SHANKARACHARYA
Aum Namashivaya!

 
Aum Anantaya Namaha!

Epilogue
Prostrations to the source of bliss, earthly and heavenly. Prostrations to
the auspicious one, more auspicious than anything else. Prostrations to
the one present in holy rivers and in idols installed on their banks.
“SRI RUDRUM,” YAJUR VEDA
The Vedas are the great storehouses of philosophy, the oldest spiritual treatises
known to humankind. They are the cornerstones of the Hindu philosophy and are
four in number: Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, and Atharvana Veda. Of
these, the first three are considered more important. In this threefold
classification we find that the Yajur Veda comes in the middle. The “Sri
Rudrum,” which is a hymn dedicated to Lord Shiva, comes in the center of the
seven cantos of this Veda. The panchakshari, or five-syllabled mantra of Shiva,
comes in the center of the “Sri Rudrum.” The name Shiva comes in the center of
the panchakshari, as can be noticed when it is written in Sanskrit. The “Sri
Rudrum” is thus considered to be the eye of the Veda-Purusha, who is Lord
Shiva. The five-syllabled mantra then becomes the pupil of this eye. The “Sri
Rudrum” is chanted at all fire sacrifices, or yajnas. There are eleven forms of
Shiva as Rudra, and at these yajnas, eleven priests chant the “Sri Rudrum”
eleven times, invoking Lord Shiva in eleven pots of sanctified water. Shiva is
also Bhuteswara, or Lord of the elements. So the five letters of the mantra stand
for the five elements. When the mantra is chanted it takes us from the gross
element of earth to the subtle aspects and eventually to the Supreme Spirit,
which is here known as Shiva. Hence we end our chapters with this unique
mantra, by the chanting of which all people will be released from the cycle of
births and deaths.
We will end this book on the play of Lord Shiva by initiating all readers into
the mystery of the sacred panchakshari, the five-syllabled mantra of Lord Shiva:
“Na-ma-shi-va-ya.” It is always preceded by the pranava mantra, which is
“aum.” So the whole mantra reads as Aum Namashivaya. Those who chant this
mantra regularly with faith and devotion to Shiva will undoubtedly be blessed
by him and attain all happiness, prosperity, and liberation.

It is usual to end all pujas, or ritualistic worship of Shiva, with an arati, or
waving of camphor lights. A little verse is chanted while the lights are being
waved in front of the linga of Shiva. This book itself is a puja to my three-eyed
Lord, Vanamali. So we will end it with the usual arati to Lord Shiva.
Karpoora 
gauram, 
karunavataaram, 
Samsarasaaram,
bhujagendrahaaram Sada vasantam, hridayaravinde, Bhavam Bhavani
sahitham namaami.
I bow to Shiva along with Parvati,
Who resides ever in the lotus of my heart,
Who is the color of camphor, who is filled with kindness,
Who is the support of the world and who wears a snake as a garland.
YAJUR VEDA
Hari Aum Tat Sat

APPENDIX ONE
Method of Worshipping Lord Shiva
Now fragrant flowers, incense, lamps, materials for the bath of the Lord,
With these in hand go to a suitable place and make a seat for the Lord.
Install the image therein and meditate on His form and the light that is
God.
Invoke Him to descend and occupy the image.
Worship Him with great devotion,
With flower offerings, songs, and obeisance.
Perform with ardor all the religious acts.
Those who do these acts daily
Will abide by the side of the Lord.
SHIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR

APPENDIX TWO
Names of Shiva
Adi-Purusha
The first Lord
Ardhanareeswara
Half-male, half-female form of Shiva
Ashutosha
One who is easily propitiated
Bhairava
One who brandishes a blood-soaked sword
Bhava
Eternal Being, source, origin
Bhola
The simple one
Bhuteswara
Lord of the elements
Chandrachuda
He whose head is adorned with the crescent moon
Chandrashekara
He who wears the crescent moon in his hair
Dakshinamurthy
Cosmic teacher, one who faces south
Gangadhara
One who upholds the Ganga
Girisha
Lord of mountains
Guhesha
Lord of caves
Hara
One who removes the sorrows and sins of the world
Ishana
Supreme Lord of the universe
Kalakanta
Devourer of time
Kapalin
One who carries a skull
Kirata
The hunter
Krittivasa
One who wears animal hides
Kumbakarna
Brother of the demon king Ravana
Mahadeva
The great God
Mahakala
The great Destroyer
Mahayogi
The great yogi
Maheswara
The great Lord
Nageswara
Lord of serpents
Nataraja
The cosmic dancer
Natesha
King of dance
Neelakanda
The blue-throated one
Pasupati
Lord of all creatures; divine herdsman

Rudra
The fierce one
Sadashiva
Name for Shiva as given in the Shiva Purana; refers to Brahman
Shambho
The auspicious one who brings peace and joy
Shambunatha
One who grants prosperity and success
Shankara
One who is benevolent and confers happiness
Sharabha
Tamer of Narasimha (a fierce avatar of Vishnu)
Sharva
The cosmic archer
Shiva
The auspicious one
Somasundara
One who is as beautiful as the moon
Somnatha
Lord of the sacred herb
Sundaramurti
The handsome one
Tripurantaka
Slayer of the demons of the three cities
Tryambaka
The three-eyed one
Vaidya
Keeper of the Vedas; the physician
Vaidyanatha
Lord of physicians
Veda-Purusha
The Supreme personality of the Vedas
Vireshvara
Lord of martial arts
Virupaksha
The odd-eyed one
Vishveshvara
Lord of the cosmos
Visvanatha
Lord of the universe

APPENDIX THREE
Names of Other Characters in the Hindu
Pantheon
Achala
Parvati; the immovable one
Adishesha
Serpent couch of Lord Narayana
Aditi
Mother of the gods
Agastya
Sage
Agni
God of fire
Agniswara
Devotee of Siva; guardian of the Southeast quarter
Ananga
Kama
Anasuya
Wife of Atri
Andhaka
Blind son of demon Hiranyaksha
Angiras
One of the seven celestial sages
Aniruddha
Lord Krishna’s grandson
Annapurna
Manifestation of Parvati; giver of food
Aparna: Parvati
One who subsisted on dry leaves
Arundhati
Wife of sage Vasishta
Asikni
Wife of Daksha
Atri
A sage
Bana
Demon
Bali
Demon
Bhadra
One of the nine Durgas
Bhadrakaali
Destructive aspect of the goddess
Bhasmaka
Demon
Bhavani
Parvati, eternal transformation
Brahma
One of the trinity; the Creator
Brighu
One of the seven celestial sages
Brihaspati
Preceptor of the gods
Buddhi
Wife of Ganesha
Chamunda
One of the nine Durgas
Chandra
Moon

Dadich
A sage
Daksha
Father of Sati
Dakshayani
Sati, daughter of Daksha
Dambha
Demon
Dasaratha
Father of Rama
Dattatreya
Son of Atri; manifestation of Vishnu
Devasenapati
Kartikeya, general of the army of the gods
Devayani
Kartikeya’s wife; daughter of Indra
Dhanwantari
Father of the science of ayurveda
Dhanya
Daughter of the manes
Dharma Shasta
Avatar of both Vishnu and Shiva
Diti
Mother of the demons
Draupadi
Wife of the five Pandava brothers
Durga
Parvati
Durvasa
Son of Atri; manifestation of Shiva
Ettumba
Demon
Ganapathy
Ganesha, Lord of the ganas
Ganesha
Son of Shiva; elephant god
Ganga
The river; wife of Shiva
Garuda
Vishnu’s eagle vehicle
Gauri
Parvati; the radiant one
Gayatri
Mother of the Vedas
Guha
Kartikeya; the secret one
Hari
Manifestation of Vishnu
Himavan
King of the Himalayas
Hiranyakashipu
Demon, brother of Hiranyaksha
Hiranyaksha
Demon
Indra
King of the gods
Isani
One of the nine Durgas
Jalandara
Demon
Janaka
Father of Sita
Jaya
Parvati’s maid
Kaali
Goddess of destruction
Kala Bhairava
Fierce manifestation of Shiva
Kalanemi
Demon
Kalavati
Daughter of the manes
Kama
God of love

Kamadhenu
Heavenly cow
Kamakshi
Goddess of the beautiful eyes
Kamalaksha
Son of Taraka
Kapila
A great sage who immolates the hundred sons of King Sagara
Kardama
One of the patriarchs
Kartikeya
Shiva’s son; son of the Krittikas
Kartyayani
One of the nine Durgas
Kashyapa
A sage
Kratu
One of the seven celestial sages
Krishna
Incarnation of Vishnu
Krittikas
The constellation Pleides; foster mothers to Kartikeya
Kshema
Ganesha’s son by his wife Buddhi
Kubera
Lord of wealth
Kumara
Kartikeya; young boy
Kumuda
Son of the serpents
Kurmavatara
Vishnu’s incarnation as a giant tortoise
Labha
Ganesha’s son by Siddhi
Lakshmana
Brother of Rama
Lakshmi
Wife of Vishnu; goddess of wealth
Mahakali
One of the nine Durgas
Manibhadra
One of Shiva’s ganas
Manmatha
God of love, Kama
Marichi
One of the seven celestial sages
Mayan
Architect of the demons
Medatithi
A sage
Meenakshi
Three-breasted Tamil princess; an avatar of Parvati
Mena
Wife of Himavan; mother of Parvati
Mohini
Female avatar Vishnu who tricks the asurasinto giving the elixir of immortality to thedevas
Mundamardini
One of the nine Durgas
Muruga
Kartikeya
Nandi
Bull vehicle of Shiva
Nandiswara
Bull vehicle of Shiva
Nora
An incarnation of Vishnu
Narada
The celestial sage who roamed the world singing the praises of Vishnu; he is known for
meddling
Narasimha
Fierce man-lion avatar of Vishnu
Narayana
Vishnu; he who sleeps on the cosmic waters
Nishumba
Demon

Parvati
Wife of Shiva; daughter of the mountains
Pavakatmaja
Kartikeya; son of fire
Pradyumna
Son of Krishna
Prahlada
Son of Hiranyakashipu
Pralamba
Demon
Pulaha
One of the seven celestial sages
Punjikasthali
Heavenly dancer
Punyahshi
An earthly avatar of Parvati
Radha
Krishna’s childhood sweetheart
Rama
Avatara of Vishnu
Rati
Kama’s wife
Ravana
King of rakshasas; king of Sri Lanka
Rohini
Wife of Chandra
Sanaka
One of the four boy sages
Sanandana
One of the four boy sages
Sanatana
One of the four boy sages
Sanatkumara
One of the four boy sages
Sandhya
Brahma’s first creation; twilight
Sarabhu
Name of Kartikeya; born among reeds
Saraswati
Wife of Brahma; goddess of learning
Sati
Shiva’s first wife
Savitri
Glory of the sun; goddess of siddhis
Shakti
The active power of the Lord
Shankachuda
Demon
Shanmukha
Kartikeya; having six faces
Shatarupa
The first woman; wife of Swayambhu Manu
Shivaa
Shiva’s consort; Parvati
Shukra
Preceptor of the demons
Shumba
Demon
Siddhi
Wife of Ganesha
Sita
Wife of Rama
Soma
Moon; sacred herb used in yajnas
Sradha
Wife of the manes
Sri Hari
Incarnation of Vishnu
Subramanya
Kartikeya
Sudama
Friend of Krishna
Svetavaraha
Incarnation of Vishnu as the white boar

Swayambhu
Manu
The first man
Taraka
Demon
Tarakaksha
Son of Taraka
Tulasi
Wife of Shankachuda; the sacred basil plant
Twarita
One of the nine Durgas
Ucchaisravas
White horse given to the demon Bali
Uma
Parvati; literally translates as “do not go”
Vaaruni
Goddess of intoxication
Vaishnavi
One of the nine Durgas
Vajranga
Demon
Valli
Kartikeya’s wife
Vamana
Avatar of Vishnu
Varangi
Vajranga’s wife
Varuna
King of the waters
Vasanta
Spring
Vasishta
Sage; preceptor of the royal house of the solar dynasty
Vasuki
Serpent used as a rope to churn the milky ocean
Vayu
Wind god
Velayudha
Kartikeya; one who carries the vel as his weapon
Vidyunmali
Son of Taraka
Vigneshwara
Ganesha; remover of obstacles
Vijaya
Parvati’s maid
Vinayaka
Ganesha
Virabhadra
Manifestation of Shiva
Virini
Wife of Daksha
Vishnu
One of the trinity; the harmonizer
Vishwarupa
One of the patriarchs
Visvakarma
Architect of the gods
Visvamitra
A sage
Vrinda
Wife of Jalandara
Vrishabhanu
Radha’s father
Vyasa
Author of the Mahabharata and all the Puranas
Yama
God of death

APPENDIX FOUR
Alphabetical List of Mantras
The mantras that open and close every chapter of this book have been listed here
in alphabetical order to facilitate location of their translations.
Ambikanathaya Namaha!
Salutations to the Lord of Ambika
Anaghaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one without a blemish
Anantaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one without an end
Bhaktavalsalaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one who is kind to devotees
Bhoothapathaye Namaha!
Salutations to the Lord of all creatures
Devaya Namaha!
Salutations to God
Ganeshaya Namaha!
Salutations to Sri Ganesha
Gangadaraya Namaha!
Salutations to the one who carries  the Ganga
Giripriyaya Namaha!
Salutations to the lover of mountains
Haraya Namaha!
Salutations to the one who takes away (sins, minds)
Jagatgurave Namaha!
Salutations to the preceptor of the world
Jagatpitre Namaha!
Salutations to the father of the world
Kamaraye Namaha!
Salutations to the enemy of Kama
Kapardine Namaha!
Salutations to the one who ties his hair in the form of a conch
Kripanidaye Namaha!
Salutations to the one who is a storehouse of compassion
Laladakshaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one with an eye on his forehead
Mahadevaya Namaha!
Salutations to the great God
Maheshwaraya Namaha!
Salutations to the great Lord
Mrityunjayaya Namaha!
Salutations to the conqueror of death
Namashivaya!
Salutations to Lord Shiva. The fivesyllabled mantra of Shiva
Neelakandaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one with a  blue neck
Panchavaktraya Namaha!
Salutations to the five-faced one
Pinakine Namaha!
Salutations to the wielder of the  bow Pinaka
Rudraya Namaha!
Salutations to the wild avenger
Sadashivaya Namaha!
Salutations to the ever-auspicious one
Shambave Namaha!
Salutations to the one who grants prosperity
Shankaraya Namaha!
Salutations to the one who confers  happiness

Sharvaya Namaha!
Salutations to the cosmic archer
Shashishekaraya Namaha!
Salutations to the one who wears the moon on his head
Shaswathaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one who is eternal
Shivaapriyaya Namaha!
Salutations to the beloved Parvati
Shivaya Namaha!
Salutations to Lord Shiva
Shoolapanaye Namaha!
Salutations to the one who carries  a trident
Somaya Namaha!
Salutations to the guardian of the sacred herb—Soma
Sookshmathanaye Namaha!
Salutations to the one with a subtle body
Sri Gurave Namaha!
Salutations to the guru
Srikandaya Namaha!
Salutations to the one with a  beautiful neck
Tripurantakaya Namaha!
Salutations to the Destroyer of the three cities
Viroopakshaya Namaha!
Salutations to the odd-eyed one
Vishveshvaraya Namaha!
Salutations to the Lord of the  universe

APPENDIX FIVE
Vedic Invocations for World Peace
Aum sarvesham swasthir bhavathu,
Sarvesham shantir bhavathu,
Sarvesham poornam bhavathu,
Sarvesham mangalam bhavathu.
Sarve bhavanthu sukhinaha,
Sarve santhu niramayaha
Sarve bhadrani pashyantu,
Makaschid dukhabav bhaveth
 
Let everyone be healthy,
Let everyone enjoy peace,
Let everyone live in fulfillment,
Let everyone be filled with auspiciousness,
Let all be happy,
Let all be free from pain,
Let all see only auspiciousness,
Let not anyone be unhappy
MUNDAKA UPANISHAD
 
Aurn asato ma sad gamaya
Tamaso ma jyotir gamaya
Mrityor ma amritam gamaya.
From the unreal lead me to the Real,
From darkness lead me to light,
From death lead me to immortality.
BRIHADARANYAKA UPANISHAD

 
Aum Poornamadam poornamidam,
Poornath poornamudachyathe,
Poornasya, Poornamadaya,
Poornamevavashishyathe.
Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti!
That is full and this is also full,
From the full comes the full.
From the full if you take away the full,
Fullness alone will remain.
Aum Peace! Peace! Peace!
BRIHADARANYAKA UPANISHAD

Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
abhijit: Propitious time
abhisheka: Ritualistic bathing of an idol or a king
achala: Immovable, constant
adharma: Unrighteousness
adishesha: Serpent bed of Narayana
advaita: Nonduality
advaitic: Pertaining to advaita
aham brahmasmi: I am Brahman; Vedic mantra
ahamkara: Ego
ahimsa: Nonviolence
Airavata: Mythological white elephant; vehicle of India
ajna chakra: Spiritual center between the brows
akasha: Ether
amrita: Nectar of immortality
anahata chakra: Heart chakra
ananda: Bliss
apana: The downward breath, exhalation
apas: Water
apsara: Celestial dancer
arati: Waving of lights before a deity
ardhra: A star
ashrama: Hermitage
ashtakam: A type of poem written in eight stanzas
asura: Demon
asuric: Demonic
Asvini: Name of month—September/October
aswamedha yaga: Horse sacrifice
Atharvana Veda: The fourth Veda
atma: Soul
atman: Self
atmic: Pertaining to the soul; undifferentiated awareness, identification with all
life

aum: Mantra denoting the Supreme
avatara: Divine incarnations who are born with full knowledge of their powers
avidya: Ignorance
avyaktha: Unmanifest
bel: A type of leaf used in Shiva’s worship
Bhadra: Name of month—August/September
Bhagavan: God
bhakta: Devotee
bhakti: Devotion
bhang: A cannabis preparation
bhasma: Ashes
bhavana: Attitude
bhiksha: Food gotten by begging
bhikshu: One who begs for food
bhoga: Path of pleasure
bhogi: One who lives to eat
bhutas: Five gross elements; spirits
bindu: A dot
brahmachari: A celibate
brahmastra: Very powerful atomic weapon
brahmin: Member of the priest caste
Chaitra: Name of a month—February/March
chakora: A bird
chakra: Wheel; energy center in the body
chandrakala: Crescent moon
chaturyuga: The four epochs, or yugas
chidakasha: Divine creative consciousness
crore: A unit equal to 10 million
dacoit: Bandit
dakshina: Fee given for any spiritual benefit
damaru: Shiva’s drum
darbha: A type of grass
darshan: Vision, auspicious sight of God
dasa: Servant

dasa marga: Way of the servant
deva: One of the lesser gods
devata: Deity, the divine consciousness manifesting in each thing
devataru: Sacred tree growing only in the higher realms of the Himalayas
Devipurana: A scripture about the Divine Mother
dharma: Eternal law of righteousness
dundhubhi: A percussion instrument
ganapatis: Leaders of the ganas
ganas: Assorted followers of Shiva
gandharvas: Celestial musicians
Garuda: Eagle vehicle of Lord Vishnu
ghat: Bathing steps leading into a river
gopi: Milkmaid, or woman of the gopalas (cowherds)
gunas: The three modes, or fundamental attributes, of nature
guru: Spiritual preceptor
halahala: A type of virulent poison
indriyas: Sense organs; five organs of knowledge and five organs of action
Iswara: God
jagat: The material world
jiva: Individual soul
jivan mukta: Liberated soul, fully illumined sage
jivatma: Embodied soul
jnana: Spiritual knowledge
jnana marga: Way of knowledge
jyotirlinga: Shrine, one of the twelve lingas of Shiva
kala: Art; phase
kamandalu: A water pot carried by sannyasis (wandering mendicants)
karma: Action
karma-mala: Impurity accruing from action
keora: A type of cactus flower
kinnaras: Celestial beings
kirata: Hunter, forest person

Krittivasa: Wearer of animal hides
kshatriya: Warrior caste
kundala: A man’s earring
kundalini: The spiritual energy coiled at the base of the spine
kusa: Type of grass
lakh: Hundred thousand
lasya: The slow movements of a woman
lila: Play
linga: Rounded stone signifying Shiva; sign; token; phallus
Mahapralaya: The night of Brahma when all worlds up to the world of Brahma
dissolve
mahayogi: Great yogi
mahout: Elephant keeper
malaya: Warm southern breeze
manduka: Frog
manes: Ancestors
manipura chakra: Third chakra at the navel
mantra: Sacred word, sound form of deities
manvantara: The lifetime of Manu, the progenitor of the human race
manvantaram: A cycle of time, eon
marga: Path; way
Margashirsha: Name of a month—December/January
maya: Cosmic illusion
maya-mala: Impurity caused by maya
modaka: Round sweet loved by Ganesha
mooladhara chakra: First chakra at base of spine
mudra: Mystic symbol made with the fingers
mukti: Liberation
mythya: Illusion
nada: Cosmic sound
nadi: Astral channel that is a conduit for psychic energy, such as kundalini
naga: Serpent
naimittika-pralaya: Same as Mahapralaya
namashivaya: Five-syllabled, sacred mantra of Shiva

navadurgas: The nine Durgas
nitya: Constant
nitya-brahmachari: Eternal celibate
nitya-pralaya: Dissolution of personality experienced during sleep
nritta, nrittya: Dance
omkara: Sound of aum
pancha bhutas: The five great elements of nature—prithvi (earth), apaha
(water), vayu (wind), agni (fire), and akasha (limitless space)
panchakshari: Na-ma-shi-va-ya; five-syllabled mantra of Shiva
paramatma: The cosmic soul
pasa: Rope of bondage
pasu: Creature
pasupata: Missile of Shiva
Pati: Master
peethas: Spiritual seats
Phalguna: Name of month—February/March
pinaka: Divine bow of Shiva
pishachas: Ghouls
pitthan: Madman (Tamil word)
Prakriti: Nature
prakritika-pralaya: Total dissolution of everything, including Prakriti, into its
ultimate cause—Brahman
pralaya: Dissolution; deluge
prana: Vital breath, life force
pranava mantra: Aum
prasad: Leftovers from offering to God
pratah sandhya: Morning twilight, dawn
pretas: Ghosts
prithvi: Earth
puja: Ritualistic worship
Purana: Scripture
Puranic: Pertaining to the Puranas
rajas: One of the gunas of nature; activity
rajasic: Passionate, lusty

rakshasa: Demon, unrighteous spirit
Rbhus: A type of powerful spirit
Rig Veda: One of the four Vedas
Rishis: Saints, sages
rudraksha: Seed of a tree loved by Shiva
rudravina: Type of lute designed by Ravana
Rudri: Hymn to Shiva in the Yajur Veda; short for Sri Rudrum
sadhana: Spiritual practice
sadhu: Holy man
sahasrara: The seventh chakra, at the crown of the head
sakhya marga: Way of friendship
saligrama: A round stone typifying Vishnu found in the Gantaki river in Nepal
and sometimes in the Narmada River
salokya: Staying in god’s world (the god you normally worship)
Sama Veda: One of the four Vedas, which is normally sung and not chanted
samadhi: Superconscious state
samhara: Destruction
samipya: Staying near to god (the god you are devoted to)
samsara: Transmigratory (human) existence
sandhya: Twilight
Sankhya: One of the six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy, which regards
the universe as consisting of two realities, Purusha and Prakriti
saras: Type of grass
sarupya: Having the form of god (the god you normally worship)
sastra: Rules, knowledge based on timeless principles
satchidananda: Existence-consciousness-bliss; definition of Brahman
satputra marga: Path of the good son
sattva: Harmony; essence; goodness; one of the gunas
sattvic: Pertaining to sattva
Satyaloka: The highest heaven
sayujya: Entering into the godhead
Shakti: Force or energy of the goddess
shastras: Scriptures
shrishti: Creation
shyama sandhya: Evening twilight
siddha: One with supernormal powers

siddhis: Supernormal powers, eight in number
soma: Sacred herb
sthithaprajna: Person of firm intellect; name given in the Bhagavad Gita for the
enlightened soul
sthiti: Preservation
stotram: Hymn addressed to a divinity
Sudarshana Chakra: The wheel of time; Vishnu’s weapon
sushumna: Astral channel, or nadi, that runs along the spinal column
swadhisthana: Second chakra
tamas: Darkness, inertia, lethargy; third guna
tamasic: Pertaining to tamas
tanmatras: Subtle energy underlying the elements
Tantras: Esoteric scriptures
Tantrik: One who follows the Tantra tradition
tapasya: Spiritual force acquired by the practice of austerities, including
meditation, for gaining spiritual and material powers
tarakamudra: Position of the fingers when the tip of the forefinger touches the
tip of the thumb
tat twam asi: Vedic mantra; that thou art
tatanka: Earring worn by a woman
tattvas: Elements of reality, twenty-four in number; tangible aspects of creation
tejas: Glory
thandava nritta: Cosmic dance of Shiva
thevaram: Songs to Lord Shiva
Trimurtis: The trinity; three forms of God—Brahma the creator, Vishnu the
sustainer, and Shiva the Destroyer
udana: Upward moving air, a part of the five vital breaths
upanayanam: Ceremony of the investiture of the sacred thread
Upanishads: Last portion of the Vedas dealing with the philosophy of advaita
urdhva-thandava: Shiva’s cosmic dance in which one foot is raised vertically
beside the ear
vairagya: Detachment
vajra: Thunderbolt
vanamala: Garland of Vishnu

vayu: Wind
Vedanta: A synonym for the part of the Vedas known as the Upanishads; one
who has mastered all four of the original Vedas
Veda-Purusha: Lord of the Vedas, which is the Brahman itself
Vedas: Earliest spiritual scripture of the Hindu religion; four in number
vel: Javelin, spear
vidya: Knowledge
vishuddhi chakra: Chakra at the base of the throat
yaga: Fire sacrifice
yajna: Sacrifices; same as yaga
yajnashala: Place where the yaga/yajna is performed
Yajur Veda: One of the four Vedas
yaksha: Demigods; guardians of the treasures of the netherworld
yantra: A mystical geometrical diagram
yoga: Any activity that leads to union with the supreme
yoga-maya: Lord’s power of illusion
yogi: One who practices yoga; one who is in union with God
yogini: A female yogi
yoni: Seat; base; vulva; the base of the linga
yuga: Epoch

Footnotes
*1. Shiva Purana is a shortened form of Shiva Mahapurana and refers to the
same work.
*2. Panchakshari means “five-syllabled mantra of Shiva” because it has five
letters—na-mashi-va-ya. Stotram means “hymn.” In this hymn, a small verse
is based upon each letter of the five-syllabled mantra. This is the most
popular hymn to Shiva. It is quite difficult to translate literally because of the
plays on words in the original Sanskrit verses, but I have done my best to
elucidate the meaning of each verse in English following the Sanskrit
transliteration. Each verse begins with the letter it is trying to emphasize. For
example, the first verse opens with nagendraharaya, which begins with “na.”
The next letter in the mantra is “ma,” so the next verse begins with
mandakini, and so forth.

Index
All page numbers refer to the print edition of this title.
Absolute, the, 5, 23
Adi Shankaracharya
   “Dasisloka,” 50, 180
   hymn to Shiva, 227
   “Nirvanashtakam,” 123, 140, 154, 176, 226–27
Adi Shankara (“Dakshinamurthy Stotram”), 10, 33, 92, 114, 123
Aditi, 78–79
Agastya (sage), 122
Agni, god of fire, 109, 110, 111
Agniswara (devotee of Shiva), 164
amrita, 142, 146–47
Anasuya (wife of Atri), 138, 139–40
Andhaka (son of Shiva), 129–31
Annapurna, 105
Appar (saint), 19, 150, 165, 194, 208–10, 213, 224
Ardhanareeswara (Shiva), 13, 74
Arivattayar Nayanar, 217–18
Arjuna, 169–71, 215
Arundhati (wife of Vasishta), 36, 91
astrology, 6–7
asuras (demons)
   churning the milky ocean, 142–43, 146
   described, 108
   devotees of Shiva, 126, 176–77, 179–80
   downfall of, 132–40
   three cities of, 125–28
aswamedha yaga (horse sacrifice), 150–51
Atri (sage), 138–39
aum (pranava mantra), 18, 28–29, 229
avatara, 205

avyaktha (Unmanifest, the), 2, 21
Bali (demon), 145
Bana (demon), 113, 179–80
Bhadrakaali, 65–66, 67
Bhagavan (Supreme Person), 6
Bhagavata Purana, 6, 31
Bhagiratha (prince), 151–52, 153
Bhasmaka (demon), 155–57
Bhimashankara (jyotirlanga), 188
bhoga (pleasure), 42
Bhuteswara (Shiva), 192, 229
bondage, 54
Brahma (Creator)
   creation and, 26–27, 30, 31
   creation of, 25–26
   creation of Kama, 33–34, 35
   creation of Sandhya, 33
   Daksha and, 48, 67
   described, ix, 16, 21, 22
   as Iswara, 22
   Mahapralaya of, 20, 22, 188
   Taraka and, 79–80
Brahman (Supreme Being)
   described, 5, 20–21
   Shakti as energy of, 41–42
   symbol of, 184–85
Brahmins, 15, 16, 59
Brighu (sage), 59, 63–64, 67, 68, 185
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 245
Buddhi, 121–22
chakras, 106–7
Chandeswar Nayanar, 219
Chandra (moon god), 45–46, 138, 186
Chandramouleeswara Saraswati, 221
chariot of Shiva, 127

chidakasha, 2
Chitrabhanu (king), 183
churning the milky ocean, 141–49
conches, 137, 138
creation
   cyclic nature of, 21–23
   destruction and, 108
   Puranic view of, 2–3
   story of, 20–32, 111
curse of a sage, 71–72
Dadichi (sage), 60, 61
Daksha (father of Sati), 35, 40, 42, 44–46, 48, 49, 58–64, 66–69
Dakshinamurthy, 13, 29, 67–68, 101
“Dakshinamurthy Stotram” (Adi Shankara), 10, 33, 92, 114, 123
dance of Shiva (Thandava), 13, 102, 179, 223
Darma Shasta (avatara), 149
“Dasisloka” (Adi Shankaracharya), 50, 180
Dattatreya, 138–39
demons (asuras)
   churning the milky ocean, 142–43, 146
   described, 108
   devotees of Shiva, 126, 176–77, 179–80
   downfall of, 132–40
   three cities of, 125–28
devas, 108, 144–45, 146, 147
Devi Purana, 6
devotees of Shiva
   Agniswara, 164
   demons as, 126, 176–77, 179–80
   disciplines of, 16–17
   Ghushna, 191
   Kubera, 177–79
   Mahananda, 167–69
   Nayanmars, 194–98
   overview, 14
   Punithavathi, 222–24

   Shiva’s regard for, 160
   testing and blessing, 167–69
   Vajranga, 78–79
   violent ways of, 225–26
   Visvanara, 163–65
   women devotees, 222–26
devotees of Vishnu, 45
devotion, nine qualities of, 54
Dhanwantari, 145–46
Diti (wife of Kashyapa), 78
Divine Consciousness, 2–3
Divine Mother, 2, 18–19, 73, 105, 185
Diwali, festival of lights, 104
duality, 107, 108
Durga (Parvati), 41–42, 46, 51, 73
Durvasa (sage), 139, 141
ego, 84–85, 147
Ettumba (demon), 122
five elements, Lord of, 192, 229
five-syllabled mantra (Namashivaya), 28–29, 84–85, 208, 224, 228–29
“Ganashtakam,” 115
ganas (Shiva’s goblins), 14, 51, 63, 64, 109, 131
Ganesha (Vinayaka), 115–24
   creation of, 115–18
   as force of gravity, 114
   form and origin, 118–20
   Kubera and, 178–79
   marriage to Siddhi and Buddhi, 121–22
   rat as vehicle of, 119–20
   Ravana and, 190
Gauri, 74, 103, 104
Gautama (sage), 189
Gayatri mantra, 112
Ghushna (devotee of Shiva), 191

Ghushnesha (jyotirlanga), 191
God. See Brahman (Supreme Being)
gods, forms of, 1–2, 4, 5, 6
good and evil, 108–9
Guha (Kartikeya), 110
gunas, 21, 22, 23, 30, 69, 128
Hanuman, 149
Hari (Vishnu), 69
Himavan (father of Parvati), 53, 72, 73, 74, 75, 91, 93, 94, 98, 110
Hiranyaksha (demon), 129
history of mankind, 3
horse sacrifice (aswamedha yaga), 150–51
human soul, 16, 128, 184
Huxley, Aldous, 193
Invocation to the Supreme Guru, 10
Isai-gnaaniyaar (saint), 224
Iswara (God)
   Brahma as, 22
   form of, 21
   names of, 69
   Shiva as, 13, 24, 28
Jainism, 208
Jalandara (demon), 133–36
Jhanva (sage), 153
jivan mukta, 205
jivatma (individual soul), 106
jyotirlingas, 185–92
Kaali, 51, 62, 73, 101, 102, 103
Kama
   creation of, 33–34, 35
   defeat of, 80–82
   Markandeya and, 160, 161
   resuscitation of, 99

   Shiva and, 38–40, 86–97
Kamadhenu (heavenly cow), 145
Kamalaksha (demon), 125, 126
Kannappa Nayanar, 215–17
Kanyakumari (Parvati), 172–73
Kapila (sage), 151
Kartikeya (Shiva’s son), 108–14, 120, 121, 122, 123
Kashyapa (sage), 78
Katha Upanishad, 192
Kedarnatha (jyotirlanga), 187–88
Kirata, the hunter (Shiva), 169–71
Krishna, 4, 6, 137, 169, 179–80
Krittikas, 110–11
Kubera (devotee of Shiva), 177–79
Kumara (Kartikeya), 111
kundalini Shakti, 106, 120
Kurmavatara (Vishnu), 143
Lakshmana, 55
Lakshmi (wife of Vishnu), 29, 40–41, 42, 134, 139, 145
liberation, 102, 128, 196, 197
linga
   jyotirlingas, 185–92
   Shiva as, 27, 28, 172
   worship of, 183, 184–85
“Lingashtakam” (hymn), 124
lust, Shiva on, 87–88
Mahakala (jyotirlinga), 186
Mahananda (devotee of Shiva), 167–69
Mahapralaya (night of Brahma), 20, 22, 188
Mahashivaratri (great night of Shiva), 144, 183–85
Mallikarjuna (jyotirlinga), 186
Mandara mountain, 146, 147
Mangayarkkarasi (saint), 224
Manikkavachagar (saint), 36, 155, 195, 197, 200, 210–13
mantras

   five-syllabled (Namashivaya), 28–29, 84–85, 208, 224, 228–29
   Gayatri mantra, 112
   list of, 241–43
   as names of the gods, 6
   pranava mantra (aum), 18, 28–29, 229
Markandeya (sage), 158–63
matter, concept of, 4–5, 18
maya, 22, 148–49, 161–62, 163
Medatithi (sage), 36
Meenakshi, 173–74
Mena (mother of Parvati), 71, 72, 73, 75, 85, 86, 90–91, 94–97, 99
Merton, Thomas, 226
Meykanda Deva, 194
milky ocean, churning, 141–49
Mohini (Vishnu), 146–47, 148–49, 156
Mrikandu (brahmin), 158
Mundaka Upanishad, 244
Murthi Nayanar, 218–19
Muruga (Kartikeya), 122
Nagesha (jyotirlanga), 190
Nakeera (saint), 215
Nambiyandar Nambi (saint), 222
Nandi, the bull, 17–18, 59–60
Nandi (Shiva), 166–67
Narada (sage), 44, 45, 74–75, 84, 120, 134, 187
Narasimha (man-lion), 165–66
Narayana (Vishnu), 24, 25–26
Nataraja (cosmic dancer/Shiva), 18, 174–75
Nayanmars, 194–98
Neelakanda (Shiva), 144
Neelanakkar (saint), 225
nine Durgas (navadurgas), 66
“Nirvanashtakam” (Adi Shankaracharya), 123, 140, 154, 176, 226–27
Nishumba (demon), 101, 103
Omkareshwara (jyotirlinga), 187

Panchakshari Stotram (hymn to Shiva), 7–9
paramatma (cosmic soul), 106
Parvati (wife of Shiva)
   creation of Andhaka, 128–29
   creation of Vinayaka (Ganesha), 115–18
   discourses with Shiva, 101–2
   marriage to Shiva, 73–77, 100–107, 109, 111–12
   penance of, 80, 81, 84–91
   Sati reincarnates as, 74
   wedding of, 93–99
pasupata (missile of Shiva), 112, 169, 171
Pasupati (Shiva, Lord of Beasts), 13, 17
Periya Puranam (Sekkizhar), 44, 194, 196–97, 224
physics, 4–5, 18
Prakriti (nature), 22, 23, 28, 76, 102, 105, 107
pralaya, 21, 22–23, 24
pranava mantra (aum), 18, 28–29, 229
Punithavathi (devotee of Shiva), 222–24
Punyakshi (Parvati), 171–73
Puranas, 1–7
rajas, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 30, 40, 128
Rama (Vishnu), 55–56, 139, 188, 190
Rameshwara (jyotirlinga), 190
Rati (wife of Kama), 35, 82, 99
Ravana (demon), 55, 176–77, 189, 190
reality of the world, 104–5
rishis (ancient sages), 2
River Ganga, descent of, 150–53
Rudra (Shiva)
   creation of, 30–31
   Daksha and, 68–69
   described, 65–66
   name of, ix
   Sadashiva as, 41
   Shiva as, 13, 14, 42
rudravina, 177

Sadashiva (Shiva)
   as column of fire, 26–27, 28
   as Dakshinamurthy, 29
   described, 24
   as Rudra, 41
Sagara (king), 150–51
sakhya marga (path of friendship), 16
Sakkiyar, 219
saligrama, 91, 138
salokya, 16
salvation, 54, 87
Sambandar (saint), 12, 71, 78, 205–8, 209–10
samsara, 55, 162
Sanaka (sage), 30, 71–72
Sandhya (“twilight”), 33–37
Sankhya system, 76
Saraswati (consort of Brahma), 29, 34, 41
Sati (wife of Shiva)
   Daksha’s yajna and, 61–63
   death of, 63, 69–70, 72
   penance of, 42, 46–48
   reincarnation as Parvarti, 74
   Shiva and, 47, 48–49, 51–57
satputra marga (path of the good son), 16
sattva, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 40, 128
seed of Shiva, 109–10, 111, 113, 149
Sekkizhar (Periya Puranam), 44, 194, 196–97, 224
servant (dasa marga), way of, 16
seven celestial sages, 87–88, 91
Shaive Siddhanta, 194
Shaivites. See devotees of Shiva
Shakti
   described, 2
   as energy of Brahman, 41–42
   forms of, 29
   as part of Shiva, 40
   Sati as, 70

Shakti peethas, 70
Shankachuda (demon), 136–38
Sharabha (Shiva), 165–66
Shatarupa (first woman), 31
Shilada (sage), 166–67
Shiva
   attributes of, 96–97, 156–57
   blue neck of, 17, 144
   body, clothing and ornaments, 17–18
   as column of fire, 26–27, 28
   compassion of, 14
   dance of, 13, 102, 179, 223
   dialogues with Sati/Parvati, 54–55, 101–2
   discourse on devotion, 54
   functions of, 16–17, 21
   as Iswara, 13, 24, 28
   Kama and, 38–40, 86–97
   manifestations of, 13, 28, 96, 165–75, 231–33
   nature of, 40
   pasupata (missile) of, 169, 171
   Sati and, 47, 48–49, 51–57
   as Sundaramurti, 94, 97, 98–99
   trident of, 131
   wedding of, 93–99
   wrath of, 65–70
   See also devotees of Shiva; linga
Shivaa, 40, 41, 46, 70
Shiva-jnana-bodham (Meykanda
Deva), 194
“Shiva Mahima Stotram,” 182
Shiva Purana, ix–x, 6
Shivaratri, 182–85
“Shiva Stotram” (Hymn to Shiva), 11
Shiva Thandava hymn, 177
Shumba (demon), 101, 103
Siddhi, 121–22
Siruthonda Nayanar, 220

Sita (wife of Rama), 55
Somanatha (jyotirlinga), 186
Sreemad Bhagavad Gita, 4
Sreemad Bhagavatham (“Sri Shuka”), 20
“Sri Rudrum” (Yajur Veda), 19, 31–32, 37, 42–43, 49–50, 65, 83, 92, 125, 181,
192, 198–99, 227, 228–29
“Sri Shuka” (Sreemad Bhagavatham), 20
“Sri Subramanya Pancharatnam,” 108
Sudarshana chakra, 135–36
Sundaramurti (Shiva), 94, 97, 98–99
Sundarar (saint), 100, 132, 141, 158, 195, 196, 200–205
Sundareswara (Shiva), 173–74
Supreme Being, 4, 6, 21. See also
   Brahman (Supreme Being)
Taittiriya Upanishad, 181
tamas, 21, 22, 23, 29–30, 40, 128, 184
tapasya, 76
Taraka (demon), 77, 79–80, 86, 109, 112–13, 125
Tarakaksha (demon), 125–26
“Tat twam asi,” 121
Thandava (dance of Shiva), 13, 102, 179, 223
Thilagavatha (saint), 224
Thirumoolar (saint), 58, 84
Thirunavukkarasar (saint), 38
Thiruvalluvar (poet), 205
Thirvalluvar (saint), 51
trident, Shiva’s, 131
trinity (Trimurtis), 16. See also
   Brahma; Shiva; Vishnu
Tryambakeswara (jyotirlinga), 189
Tulasi, 136, 137–38

Ucchaisravas (white horse), 145
Upanishads, 5
urdhva-thandava (cosmic dance), 102
Usha (daughter of Bana), 179–80
Vaaruni (Goddess of intoxication), 145
Vaidyanatha (jyotirlinga), 189–90
vairagya (detachment), 54
Vaishyanatha (merchant/Shiva), 167–69
Vajranga (devotee of Shiva), 78–79
Vanthodar (saint), 93
Varangi (wife of Vajranga), 79
Vasanta, 38–39
Vasishta (sage), 35, 36, 57, 214
Vaskui (Lord of snakes), 142–43
Vayu (wind God), 149
Vedanta, 76
Vedas, ix, 5, 221, 228
Vidyunmali (demon), 125, 126
Vinayaka. See Ganesha (Vinayaka)
Virabhadra (Shiva), 65, 66–67, 68, 112
Virupaksha (Shiva), 65
Vishnu
   attributes of, 40, 157
   creation and, 24–25, 26, 30
   devotees of, 226
   Lakshmi as wife of, 145
   name of, ix
   as Narasimha (man-lion), 165–66
   role of, 21
   worshipping Shiva, 176
   See also creation
Visvakarma (divine architect), 56, 60, 127
Visvamitra (sage), 110
Visvanara (devotee of Shiva), 163–65
Visvanatha (jyotirlinga), 188–89
Vrinda, 134, 135

Vyasa (author of the Puranas), 6
wedding of Shiva and Parvati, 93–99
white horse (Ucchaisravas), 145
women devotees, 222–26
yajna of Daksha, 58–64, 68, 69
Yajur Veda
   about, 1, 228
   “Sri Rudrum,” 19, 31–32, 37, 42–43, 49–50, 65, 83, 92, 125,
181, 192, 198–99, 227, 228–29
yaksha (treasure guardian), 132–33
Yama (Lord of death), 95, 159
“Yoga Vasishta” (Vasishta), 57, 214
yoni, 27, 185

About the Author
Mataji Devi Vanamali has written seven books on the gods of the Hindu
pantheon, including Hanuman, The Play of God, The Song of Rama, and Shakti,
as well as translating the Bhagavad Gita. She is the founder and president of
Vanamali Gita Yogashram, dedicated to sharing the wisdom of Sanatana Dharma
and charitable service to children. She lives at the Vanamali ashram at Rishikesh
in northern India.

About Inner Traditions • Bear & Company
Founded in 1975, Inner Traditions is a leading publisher of books on indigenous
cultures, perennial philosophy, visionary art, spiritual traditions of the East and
West, sexuality, holistic health and healing, self-development, as well as
recordings of ethnic music and accompaniments for meditation.
In July 2000, Bear & Company joined with Inner Traditions and moved from
Santa Fe, New Mexico, where it was founded in 1980, to Rochester, Vermont.
Together Inner Traditions • Bear & Company have eleven imprints: Inner
Traditions, Bear & Company, Healing Arts Press, Destiny Books, Park Street
Press, Bindu Books, Bear Cub Books, Destiny Recordings, Destiny Audio
Editions, Inner Traditions en Español, and Inner Traditions India.
For more information or to browse through our more than one thousand titles in
print and ebook formats, visit www.InnerTraditions.com.

BOOKS OF RELATED INTEREST
The Complete Life of Krishna
Based on the Earliest Oral Traditions and the Sacred Scriptures
by Vanamali
Hanuman
The Devotion and Power of the Monkey God
by Vanamali
Shakti
Realm of the Divine Mother
by Vanamali
Shiva
The Wild God of Power and Ecstasy
by Wolf-Dieter Storl, Ph.D.
Kali
The Feminine Force
by Ajit Mookerjee
Indian Mythology
Tales, Symbols, and Rituals from the Heart of the Subcontinent
by Devdutt Pattanaik
Chakras
Energy Centers of Transformation
by Harish Johari
The Myths and Gods of India
The Classic Work on Hindu Polytheism from
the Princeton Bollingen Series
by Alain Daniélou
INNER TRADITI ONS • BEAR & COMPANY
P.O. Box 388

Rochester, VT 05767
1-800-246-8648
www.InnerTraditions.com
Or contact your local bookseller

Inner Traditions
One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.InnerTraditions.com
Copyright © 2002, 2013 by Vanamali Gita Yogashram Originally published in
India in 2002 by Aryan Books International under the title Sri Shiva Lila
Mythological stories sourced from the Shiva Mahapurana and the Sreemad
Bhagavata Purana. Lives of the saints sourced from the Periya Puranam by
Sekkizhar.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Vanamali, 1935– [Sri Shiva
lila]
   Shiva : stories and teachings from the Shiva Mahapurana / Vanamali.
   pages cm
   “Originally published in India in 2002 by Aryan Books International under the
title Sri Shiva Lila.”
   Includes index.
   eISBN 978-1-62055-248-3 (pbk.) — ISBN 978-1-62055-249-0 (e-book)
1. Siva (Hindu deity)—Cult. I. Cekki_lar, active 12th century. Periyapuranam. II.
Puranas. Sivapurana. III. Puranas. Bhagavatapurana. IV. Title.
   BL1218.2.V35 2013
   294.5'2113—dc23
2013014779
To send correspondence to the author of this book, mail a first-class letter to the
author c/o Inner Traditions • Bear & Company, One Park Street, Rochester, VT
05767, and we will forward the communication, or contact the author directly at

www.vanamaliashram.org.

 
 
 
Electronic edition produced by
 
www.antrikexpress.com

