A Purely Arithmetical, yet Empirically Falsiﬁable, Interpretation of
Plotinus’ Theory of Matter
Bruno Marchal, IRIDIA, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, marchal@ulb.ac.be
Mars 2007
R´esum´e
The self-analysis abilities of formal theories or theorem provers are outstanding. We show that the study
of self-observing “ideal” machine leads to natural arithmetical interpretations of the hypostases that Plotinus
discovered by looking inward. Those corresponding to his “Matter Theory” are compared with the logic of
empirical current physics.
Keyword : G¨odel, mechanism, modal logic, provability, consistency, quantum logic, intuitionist logic, Plotinus, hypo-
stases.
1
Incompleteness and Mechanism
There is a vast literature where G¨odel’s ﬁrst and second incompleteness theorems are used to argue
that human beings are diﬀerent of, if not superior to, any machine. The most famous attempts have
been given by J. Lucas in the early sixties and by R. Penrose in two famous books [53, 54]. Such type
of argument are not well supported. See for example the recent book by T. Franz`en [21]. There is also a
less well known tradition where G¨odel’s theorems is used in favor of the mechanist thesis. Emil Post, in
a remarkable anticipation written about ten years before G¨odel published his incompleteness theorems,
already discovered both the main “G¨odelian motivation” against mechanism, and the main pitfall of
such argumentations [17, 55]. Post is the ﬁrst discoverer1 of Church Thesis, or Church Turing Thesis,
and Post is the ﬁrst one to prove the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem from a statement equivalent to Church
thesis, i.e. the existence of a universal—Post said “complete”—normal (production) system2.
In his anticipation, Post concluded at ﬁrst that the mathematician’s mind or that the logical process
is essentially creative. He adds :
“It makes of the mathematician much more than a clever being who can do quickly what a
machine could do ultimately. We see that a machine would never give a complete logic ; for
once the machine is made we could prove a theorem it does not prove”(Post emphasis).
But Post quickly realized that a machine could do the same deduction for its own mental acts, and
admits that :
“The conclusion that man is not a machine is invalid. All we can say is that man cannot
construct a machine which can do all the thinking he can. To illustrate this point we may
note that a kind of machine-man could be constructed who would prove a similar theorem for
his mental acts.”
1A case can be made that Babbage could have discovered it too, through his invention of a functional notation capable of describing
his analytical engine. According to Laﬁtte 1932 the old Babbage was more proud of his language than of his analytical engine [32].
2The informal but rigorous proof can be given in a footnote : let N be the set of natural numbers {0, 1, 2, 3, ...}. Let us say that a
function from N to N is computable if we can describe in a ﬁnite way how to compute it, in a language with a checkable grammar. Church
thesis asserts the existence of a universal language, that is, a language in which we can describe all, but not necessarily only, computable
functions from N to N. Suppose now the existence of a complete theory T about Arithmetic, or, more easily, about machines or codes.
We will get a contradiction. Given the checkability of the grammar, we can enumerate all the codes : C0, C1, C2, C3, ... accepting one
input, in the universal language. If T is a complete theory, T would be able to decide, for each i, if Ci is deﬁned on each n or not.
From this, by the use of the complete theory T, we can now enumerate the total (always deﬁned) computable function f0, f1, f2, f3, ...
which, by Church thesis are all among the functions deﬁned by the codes C0, C1, C2, C3, .... But then the diagonal function g deﬁned
by g(n) = fn(n) + 1 is computable. Thus, there is a number k such that g = fk. But then g(k) = fk(k) = fk(k) + 1. Given that the fk
are total functions, fk(k) is a well deﬁned number, and we can subtract it on both sides, so that 0 = 1. So, either there is no universal
language and thus no universal machine capable of understanding them—and Church thesis is false—or there is no complete theory for
numbers or machines.
1

This has probably constituted his motivation for lifting the term creative to his set theoretical
formulation of mechanical universality [56]. To be sure, an application of Kleene’s second recursion
theorem, see [30], can make any machine self-replicating, and Post should have said only that man
cannot both construct a machine doing his thinking and proving that such machine do so. This is what
remains from a reconstruction of Lucas-Penrose argument : if we are machine we cannot constructively
specify which machine we are, nor, a fortiori, which computation support us. Such analysis begins
perhaps with Benacerraf [4], (see [41] for more details). In his book on the subject, Judson Webb
argues that Church Thesis is a main ingredient of the Mechanist Thesis. Then, he argues that, given
that incompleteness is an easy—one double diagonalization step, see above—consequence of Church
Thesis, G¨odel’s 1931 theorem, which proves incompleteness without appeal to Church Thesis, can be
taken as a conﬁrmation of it. Judson Webb concludes that G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem is a very
lucky event for the mechanist philosopher [70, 71]. Torkel Franz`en, who concentrates mainly on the
negative (antimechanist in general) abuses of G¨odel’s theorems, notes, after describing some impressive
self-analysis of a formal system like Peano Arithmetic (PA) that :
“Inspired by this impressive ability of PA to understand itself, we conclude, in the spirit of
the metaphorical “applications” of the incompleteness theorem, that if the human mind has
anything like the powers of profound self-analysis of PA or ZF, we can expect to be able to
understand ourselves perfectly”.
Now, there is nothing metaphorical in this conclusion if we make clear some assumption of classical
(platonist) mechanism, for example under the (necessarily non constructive) assumption that there is a
substitution level where we are turing-emulable. We would not personally notice any digital functional
substitution made at that level or below [38, 39, 41]. The second incompleteness theorem can then be
conceived as an “exact law of psychology” : no consistent machine can prove its own consistency from a
description of herself made at some (relatively) correct substitution level—which exists by assumption
(see also [50]). What is remarkable of course is that all machine having enough provability abilities,
can prove such psychological laws, and as T. Franz`en singles out, there is a case for being rather
impressed by the profound self-analysis of machines like PA and ZF or any of their consistent recursively
enumerable extensions3. This leads us to the positive—open minded toward the mechanist hypothesis—
use of incompleteness. Actually, the whole of recursion theory, mainly intensional recursion theory [59],
can be seen in that way, and this is still more evident when we look at the numerous application of
recursion theory in theoretical artiﬁcial intelligence or in computational learning theory. I refer the
reader to the introductory paper by Case and Smith, or to the book by Osherson and Martin [14] [46].
In this short paper we will have to consider machines having both provability abilities and inference
inductive abilities, but actually we will need only trivial such inference inductive abilities. I call such
machine “L¨obian” for the proheminant rˆole of L¨ob’s theorem, or formula, in our setting, see below.
Now, probably due to the abundant abuses of G¨odel’s theorems in philosophy, physics and theology,
negative feelings about any possible applications of incompleteness in those ﬁelds could have developed.
Here, on the contrary, it is our purpose to illustrate that the incompleteness theorems and some of their
generalisations, provide a rather natural purely arithmetical interpretation of Plotinus’ Platonist, non
Aristotelian, “theology” including his “Matter Theory”.
As a theory bearing on matter, such a theory is obviously empirically falsiﬁable : it is enough to com-
pare empirical physics with the arithmetical interpretation of Plotinus’ theory of Matter. A divergence
here would not refute Plotinus, of course, but only the present arithmetical interpretation.
This will illustrate the internal consistency and the external falsiﬁability of some theology. Here the
term “theology” can be interpreted in some general, albeit non necessarily physicalist, sense of “theory of
everything”, or “truth theory”, including what subjects can prove, or known, or guess about themselves
and their possible neighborhoods, and what is true about them but which they cannot prove, but still
guess, or not. This could hopefully help to eventually unify fundamental ﬁelds like some axiomatic
theologies, theoretical physics, theoretical computer science and number theory4. By incompleteness
machine’s (pure) theology could already have been deﬁned by true computer science minus computer’s
computer science. This will be made more precise below by the use of Solovay theorem [61].
3I identify Peano Arithmetic, Zermelo Fraenkel and other axiomatisable theories with their theorem provers. A theorem by Craig
can justify this move, see Boolos and Jeﬀrey [7]. Thus I will say that p is proved by PA, instead of saying the usual “p is proved in PA.
4The number theoretical aspect of computer science is beyond the scope of the present paper, but the basic bridge has been provided
by the works of Davis, Robinson and Putnam and Matiyasevich which singles out the existence of universal diophantine polynomials,
see [47]. Note that Diophantus is contemporary of Plotinus. Both have been taught by Hypatia one century later in Alexandria [18].
2

2
Plotinus and Machine’s Methodologies
Plotinus makes clear that its methodology belongs to those among the platonists who are both ratio-
nalist and mystic (looking inward). His basic methodology consists in self-analysis together with rational
analysis and communication in a way inspired mainly by Plato and Aristotle. Our own methodology
will consist in studying what “platonist” universal machine, the deﬁnition is given below, having enough
deducibility and inferability abilities, can discover by self-analysis.
It is hard to be fair with Plotinus, third century A.D., by summing up his work in a paragraph5. At
the same time Plotinus is enough clear and so much diﬀerent from the current widespread Aristotelian
conception of reality, that this project will not suﬀer too much from the obvious simpliﬁcation it is asked
for, and for which I apologize in advance. It is hoped that the self-observing machine’s discourses will
appear to be near neoplatonists like Plotinus or Proclus [63, 69].
Plotinus’ view of “reality” can be given in term of three main hypostases. According to MacKenna,
those hypostases are generalized and abstract notions of Persons [34]. Each hypostasis can be considered
as a view of “reality” or “truth” from a personal, although “divine” (i.e. true but non eﬀective, see below),
points of view.
The three main primary hypostases are : the One, the Divine Intellect or Intelligible Realm (Plato’s
Nous), and the All-Soul or Universal-Soul. And there are also what I will call, to be short, the two
secondary “hypostases” : the Intelligible Matter and the Sensible Matter. If we take into account the
diﬀerences between the discursive, terrestrial, discourses and the true or divine possible discourses, this
makes a total of a priori 5 times 2 = 10 “hypostases”, in a more general sense than Plotinus’ use of
that word6. Note that Plotinus considers that the One and the Matter, associated to the secondary
“hypostases”, are above, respectively below, the realm of “existing things” or “authentically existing
things”, which concerns mainly the divine intellect’s ideas (Plato’s Nous).
The One can be considered as the ineﬀable, non necessarily eﬀective, transcendental origin or source of
everything. The word “origin” is closer to a mathematical or arithmetical origin than to a spatiotemporal
cause7. As a person, the One can be considered as sustaining a degenerate zero person point of view,
comparable to Nagel’s point of view from nowhere [51]. The One is thus the ultimate fundamental
“reality” responsible of the existence of anything capable of existence. It contains implicitly the other
primary hypostases, sometimes described as diﬀerent phases of the One. The One is also called “Good”
in the sense that it will serve as a sort of universal attractor of the (terrestrial) souls. This implies
a kind of two-way cosmogony. The One produces originally the divine intelligible which produces the
universal and discursive souls which produce, by contemplation, Nature and eventually Matter—most of
the time identiﬁed with “Evil” by the Platonist ; but, from the inside personal views, it looks the other
way round. Somehow the terrestrial souls feel as if they were extracting themselves from Evil-Matter
to tend toward the One. This is probably why Plotinus was an optimistic philosopher—Porphyry called
him once the happy Plotinus.
The second hypostase, the “Intelligible” or “Divine Intellect” is mainly Plato’s Nous, i.e. his world
of intellectual or immaterial ideas. It is related with the logos, as either terrestrial or divine verbs or
discourses. What is considered as “existing”, or “authentically existing” are the ideas belonging to the
divine intellect. Plotinus is priviledging some passage of Plato’s Parmenides, by making the intelligible
realm second to the One, and argues, against Aristotle, that the ultimate One cannot be a thinking
subject. Plotinus argues indeed that thinking already needs some more primitive reality, by having to
divide it into thinking subject and object of thinking.
The third hypostase, the “All-Soul” hypostasis, appears as a way of combining both the One and
the Intellect, and thus allowing them to participate in one principle. Somehow the All-Soul is a version
of an intellect which keeps better its ground through a direct link with the innefable One, and as such
inherits part of its ineﬀability. The All-Soul is responsible for the existence of (subjective) time and of
the creation of Nature and eventually Matter through a process of contemplation. This is the opposite of
the Aristotelian metaphysics where somehow, mind and person arise or emerge from the organisation of
some primitive or primary matter8. As a rationalist, Plotinus does not hide some diﬃculties entailed by
his approach, notably concerning the rˆole of the soul and its relative place with respect to the secondary
“hypostases”.
5We have used the new, unabridged, translation of Plotinus’ Enneads by MacKenna (Larson Publications, 1992), together with the
classical translation of A.H. Amstrong 1966 (Classical Loeb Library, Harvard University Press) and the older french translation by
Emile Br´ehier (Collection Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1924q).
6Note that Plotinus strictly reserves the term “hypostasis” for the three primary, and divine, hypostases.
7See [72] for a physicist argument that the origin of the physical laws can hardly be physical.
8See [41], see also [10].
3

The material or secondary “hypostases” corresponds to the “Two Matters” of the second Ennead9
(II, 4) : the intelligible matter and the sensible matter, most of the time described as the matter “there”,
meaning in the divine Nous, and the matter “here”, meaning that it has a sensible component for the
terrestrial, intellectual, or discursive souls. Matter itself is then, following Aristotle, described by indeter-
minateness and/or privation. Plotinus departs from Aristotle by deﬁning literally that matter, exclusively
and quasi-axiomatically, by this very notion of privation or indeterminateness. This makes matter prone
to acquire or to represent distinctive and possibly alternate incidental (contingent) qualities, but in a
such a way that matter itself remains invariant and separated from any of those qualities. This makes
Matter literaly the opposite or the negation of the intelligible. Plotinus refers to Plato’s Timaeus for the
need here of a “bastard” or “spurious” reasoning to operate on that theoretical Unintelligibility.
I will illustrate that, thanks to their outstanding self-reference powers, the correct or honest L¨obian
machine cannot escape the discovery of an arithmetical version for each of those hypostases, mainly as
intensional variants of provability10. Such intensional variants are made necessary by the incompleteness
phenonomena. Such variants will include the “material” hypostases. They will be described in a precise
way through their transparent arithmetical interpretations, and they will justify some precise and em-
pirically testable logics of observability, where the “spurious reasoning” should lead to an arithmetical
measure of probability or credibility. In fact each arithmetical hypostasis will give rise to weak logics11
structuring diﬀerently, “from inside”, or from “personal points of view”, the arithmetical reality.
Now, physicists have been led in the last century to non boolean logics of observability, known as
quantum logics [15, 16, 26, 49, 3]. Such logics capture many counter-intuitive propositions for which
we were not prepared by the observation of the “macro-world” which provides an apparent canonical
boolean phase spaces relating classical physics to classical logics. Like the whole of quantum physics, such
logics are not easy to interpret, but our approach is mainly formal so that we will avoid any prematured
interpretation problems. This is made possible by a result of R. Goldblatt (see [23]) showing that a
minimal (propositional) quantum logic MQL can be translated in the classical modal logic, known as
B.
Theorem 1 : MQL proves A iﬀB proves tmql(A).
B is generated by the closure of the set {K, 2p →p, p →23p} for the modus ponens rule MP and
the necessitation rule NEC (derive 2p from a derivation of p). K is for the “Kripke formula”
2(p →q) →(2p →2q), and tmql is a translation, called quantization [57], from quantum proposi-
tional quantum formula to classical modal formula : the quantization tmql(p) of an atomic formula p is
given by the classical modal formula 23p, where “3p” is an abbreviation of ¬2¬p. The quantization
of ¬A is given by the application of the box 2 applied to the negation of the quantization of A, and
quantization commutes with conjonction.
This result is similar to the presumption by G¨odel [22] that the typical “introspective knower” modal
logic S4, which follows from {K, 2p →p (incorrigibility), 2p →22p (introspection) }, by application
of the Modus ponens and necessitation rules, formalizes soundly and completely, in the classical frame,
the Heyting-Brouwer (propositional) intuitionist logic INT. The result has been proved by McKinsey
and Tarski[48] :
Theorem 2 : INT proves A iﬀS4 proves tint(A),
and has been made still stronger by Grzegorczyk[25] :
Theorem 3 : INT proves A iﬀS4Grz proves tint(A),
where S4grz is the system S4 with the addition of the Grz formula 2(2(p →2p) →p) →p.
tint(A) is G¨odel 1933 translation [22] : tint(¬p) = ¬2p, tint(p →q) = 2p →2q,
tint(p ∧q) = p ∧q, tint(p ∨q) = 2p ∨2q.
This is very appealing for the present approach, mainly due to a theorem by Solovay generalising
G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem by two startling completeness theorems : the modal logics G and G*
9See [13, 68] for a larger treatment.
10A case can been made, through an analysis of his insightful treatise on number (Ennead VI,6) that Plotinus could have welcome
such or similar enterprise.
11A propositional logic is weak when the set of its theorems is properly included in the set of the classical tautologies.
4

formalise completely the provable provability logic, and the true provability logic. Omitting usual sub-
stitution rules, here is a formal presentation of G, build on classical propositional calculus. L denotes
the formula of L¨ob12 [33]. Note the absence of the necessitation Rule NEC for G*. G is given by :
AXIOMS
:
2(A →B) →(2A →2B)
K
2A →22A
4
2(2A →A) →2A
L
RULES
:
A , A→B
B
MP
A
2A
NEC
and G* is given by :
AXIOMS
:
Any Theorem of G
2A →A
T
RULES
:
A , A→B
B
MP
Let us deﬁne an arithmetical realisation R by a function which assigns to each propositional letter
p, q, r... an arithmetical sentence. An arithmetical interpretation i of a modal formula is given recursively
by a realisation R, for the atomic letter, i.e. i(p) = R(p), i commutes recursively with the boolean
connectors, and, i(2p) = Bew(⌜p⌝), i.e. G¨odel celebrate provability (beweisbar in German) arithmetical
predicate. Solovay ﬁrst completeness theorem asserts that G proves A if and only if PA proves i(A) for
any arithmetical interpretation, i.e. for any arithmetical realisation R of the atomic letter. The second
completeness theorem is that G* proves A iﬀi(A) is true, i.e. true, for any realisation R, in the usual
number theoretical sense, or true in the so-called standard model of PA.
G captures the provable sentence by the machine ; and G* captures the true one, including the non
provable one. The propositions belonging to the set diﬀerence G* \ G are still inferable by the machine.
Indeed, G* can be shown to be decidable. Solovay proved that G* proves a formula F if and only if
G proves that the conjunction of the “reﬂection formula” 2g →g implies F, where g is any boxed
subformula of F (boxed means having the shape 2x), see [61]. Some of those provable/truth splittings
are inheritated by some of the intensional variant of provability. Indeed, with 2p interpreted as Bew(⌜p⌝)
with p an arithmetical proposition, although 2p∧p, 2p∧3p, 2p∧3p∧p, are truly equivalent (as G* can
prove), none are always, for any arithmetical p, provably so by the machine. This makes them obeying
diﬀerent modal logics having diﬀerent weak logic interpretations.
Plotinus’ hypostases will be (re)deﬁned arithmetically through the use of those intensional nuances.
This can be translated in the language of some universal machine similar to Peano arithmetic, and
Goldblatt’s theorem will give us a way to measure the degree of plausibility of this arithmetical version
of Plotinus, by comparing the arithmetical interpretation of Plotinus matter hypostases with quantum
logic.
Note that we do not allow the presence of free variable in the scope of the provability predicate. We
contend ourself here with the “propositional” provability logic for which those completeness theorems
hold. See [6] for proofs that the quantiﬁed version of G and G* are as undecidable as it can possibly be.
3
Weak Computationalism
Our strategy consists in interviewing a platonist “suﬃciently introspective” chatty universal machine.
By saying that the machine is “platonist”, we mean that the machine asserts (or proves, believes, etc.)
the principle of excluded middle, among the classical tautologies. The letters p, q, ... will always represent
arithmetical propositions. Those correspond to the ﬁrst order logical formula together with the usual
symbols of formal arithmetic. By saying that the machine is universal, we mean that the machine is
able to prove all true Σ1-proposition p, i.e. arithmetical propositions which are provably equivalent (by
the machine) to a proposition with the shape : ∃xP(x) where P is a primitive recursive arithmetical
predicate. Put in another way, it means that for any Σ1-proposition p the proposition p →2p is true
for the machine. It can be shown that such a machine has the full power of a Universal Turing Machine.
By saying that the machine is “suﬃciently introspective” we mean that, for any Σ1-proposition p, not
only p →2p is true for the machine, but is actually provable by the machine. Given that the G¨odelian
provability predicate, represented by the box 2 is itself Σ1, the machine is able to prove 2p →22p for
12See [44] for the importance of the L¨ob formula, which is a genuine generalisation of G¨odel’s second incompleteness, in a setting
similar to the present paper.
5

any p. By “chatty” machine, we mean that the machine is so programmed that it dovetails on its proofs,
and thus asserts soon or later all its provable propositions. Being classical and suﬃciently rich, such a
machine is L¨obian, and its provability predicate, deﬁnable in its own language, is correctly formalized
by the logics G and G*.
By “interviewing” some machine, we are implicitly assuming a very weak version of the computatio-
nalist hypothesis, or digital mechanism, in the cognitive science. But, a priori the machine itself is not
supposed to assume the computationalist hypothesis. Still, during the interview itself, we will have to
translate it explicitly in the language of the machine. Some thought experiments can justify that the
available veriﬁable sort of reality for universal machine are determined by the true Σ1 sentences13. So
we get a computationalist version of G and G* by adding the axiom p →2p to the logic G and G*. This
gives the corresponding logics V and V* which have been proved sound and complete for the (provable
and true respectively) logic of provability and consistency of the Σ1 sentences by A. Visser [67].
Our interview is an inﬁnite conversation, made ﬁnite through the use of Solovay and Visser theorems.
To say that G (resp V) proves 2p →22p, means that the chatty machine asserts 2p →22p for any
arithmetical (resp. Σ1 arithmetical) interpretation of the formula p. It means for example that the
machine tells us 2(⌜1 + 1 = 1⌝) →2(⌜2(⌜1 + 1 = 1⌝)⌝), but ⌜1 + 1 = 1⌝can be substituted by any
(false or true) arithmetical formula.
For reason of simplicity, we will conﬁne to machine “talking arithmetics” ; but it is easy to generalized
the result for richer machine like a theorem prover for ZF (Zermelo Fraenkel Set Theory), or even for
non-mechanical entities like axiomatized version of second order logic with the (inﬁnite) ω-rule. This
follows from results easily accessible in the 1993 book by Boolos [6].
Actually we can associate, hopefully functorially14, a Plotinian theology for each L¨obian machine,
but we could conﬁne ourself to the “theology of a Peano Arithmetic machine”, with PA seen as a generic
typical simple L¨obian machine. All the sound recursively enumerable extensions of PA admit the same
formal modal theology. To be sure, G ang G* remains sound and even complete for much more general
L¨obian entity, see again [6] for more information.
4
The arithmetical interpretation of Plotinus’ hypostases
Each hypostase will be interpreted by a set of arithmetical sentences.
Plotinus’ One is interpreted by Arithmetical Truth, i.e the set of all true arithmetical sentences. In
case we were interviewing ZF, we would have needed the more complex set-theoretical truth. In any
case, it follows from Tarski theorem that such a truth set is not deﬁnable by the machine on which
such truth bears. Nevertheless, she can already, but indirectly, point to its truth set by some sequence
of approximations, and there is indeed a sense to say that L¨obian machines are able to prove their
own “Tarski theorem”, illustrating again the self-analysis power of those theorem prover machines. See
Smullyan’s book [60] for a sketch of that proof and reference therein. In this sense we recover the “One”
ineﬀability, and it is natural to consider arithmetical truth as the (non-physical) cause and ultimate
reality of the arithmetical machine. This is even more appealing for a neoplatonist, than just a platonist,
given the return of the neoplatonist to the Pythagorean roots of platonism [52]. The atomical veriﬁable
“physical” proposition will be modelized by the Σ1 sentences. Note that the machine can deﬁne the
restricted, computationalist, notion of Σ1-truth.
Plotinus’ discursive intellect is interpreted by the machine G¨odelian provability predicate Bew itself.
The corresponding set of arithmetical sentences is the set of provable (by PA, or some L¨obian machine
M) arithmetical modal sentences. This set is captured by the modal logic G by the ﬁrst half of Solovay
theorem. By the second half of Solovay’s theorem, there is a notable second set to consider : the set
of the true15 arithmetical interpretations of the modal formula, as single out by the modal logic G*.
This provides a natural arithmetical interpretation of the “divine intellect”. G play the rˆole of discursive
reason, or science about oneself as seen (or conjectured) as a ﬁnitely formal entity. G* plays the rˆole
of the whole (propositional) truth about the machine, including what is true but unprovable by the
machine. This corresponds to a notion of true inference, as G* is decidable, and thus trivially “correctly
13Mainly the Universal Dovetailer Argument. The argument shows that the computationalist hypothesis entails self-duplicability, from
which follows a notion of ﬁrst person indeterminacy. It is shown that whatever means are used, if any, to quantify that indeterminacy,
the quantiﬁcation remains invariant for some transformation, making physical predictions relying on a (relative) measure on true
Σ1-propositions, [38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45].
14In that case we have to consider some interpretability logic [19]. Those logics constituted reﬁnements of the provability logics.
Algebraic approaches should help here [35].
15In the usual sense of elementary school. Equivalently p is true if p is satisﬁed by the “standard model of PA”.
6

inferable”, although it needs an act of faith, as the machine can prove to herself16. It is remarkable
that, in this setting, reason (G) is included in faith (G*), so that only bad faith can fear reason. This
is coherent with the scientiﬁc attitude of the pagan neoplatonist, and thus rationalist, theologians. The
corona set G* \ G can represent the pure theology. This is a set, closed for the modus ponens rule, of the
true but unbelievable, unprovable, unassertable by any self-referentially correct machine, propositions.
Plotinus believed that the divine intellect has self-referential complete knowledge, but we cannot follow
him here : only the discursive machine, capture by G has self-referential but incomplete knowledge. G*
has complete knowledge, but not about itself, just about the machine it talks about. Actually, in the
mechanist or arithmetical setting, Plotinus’ critics about Aristotle attribution of self-thinking to the
One can be repeated on the level of the divine intellect. This can perhaps be considered as a serious
departure between the L¨obian entities and Plotinus.
It is important to realize that both G and G* talk about the machine in a third person way. It cor-
responds to a situation where a computationalist practicionners is reasoning about himself after betting
on some level of digital formal self-description, for example in term of a giant rational complex matrix
(represented in the arithmetical language say) representing, hopefully, a reasonable approximation of its
“brain” quantum state, whatever that brain is supposed to be.
Plotinus’ All-Soul, at least in its discursive form, is captured by Plotinus, according to Br´ehier, by
the classical traditional and Theaetetical way for deﬁning knowledge by true justiﬁed opinion : to know
p is to believe (prove) p and p is true [11]. Such a stratagem is very much debated [12] and it can be
related to both the mechanist hypothesis and the use of dream in metaphysics [36, 37, 2, 40, 41]. This
arithmetical “All-Soul” cannot be represented directly in the (arithmetical) language of the machine.
For example Tarski non deﬁnability of truth theorem forbids to deﬁne the knower by some expression
like Bew(⌜p⌝)∧True(⌜p⌝), given that the truth predicate “True” bearing on the machine cannot be
deﬁned by the machine. More generally, it can be shown that no predicate of knowledge (obeying for
example the S4 modal axioms) can be deﬁned formally in any self-referentially correct way [28], [62].
But we can deﬁne for each arithmetical p, the knowledge of p by the provability of p and, simply, p. In
the formal mathematical setting this has been done independently by Boolos, Goldblatt, and Kuznetsov
& Muravitsky in the USSR [31, 5, 24]. Eventually Artemov makes this “deﬁnition” a thesis and defends
that it is comparable, as a thesis, to the Church thesis (which bears on computations), for the notion
of informal proof [1]. It has indeed much in common with Brouwer “unformalizable” notion of creative
subject [8, 9, 65, 41] which plays some rˆole in the foundation of intuitionist mathematics.
Now, PA, in particular, is a suﬃciently simple machine so that we know it is correct, and self-
referentially correct when talking about itself. So, is it not obvious that 2p →p is always (for all p)
true ? Yes, it is, but PA can neither prove or know that. G* does indeed prove that 2p is equivalent with
2p∧p, for any arithmetical (realisation) of p, but G does not prove it. For many arithmetical sentences,
such equivalence belongs to the corona of true but unbelievable and thus unknowable, but still inferable,
truth. It is also obvious that (2p ∧p) →p, so we see that 2p ∧p deﬁnes an “incorrigible” ﬁrst person
notion of knowledge, and it has been proved that the logic S4Grz, see above, is sound and complete
for both the provable and true point of view (see [6]). G and G* have exactly the same discourse about
the ﬁrst person, like if the knower, attached in this way to PA, was confusing truth and provability, in
a manner similar to an intuitionist philosopher [6]. This can been made precise : by using the G¨odel’s
translation (see above) we do ﬁnd indeed an arithmetical interpretation of intuitionist logic. Semantical
considerations about the Grz formula can be used to argue that this knower logic can be related to a
subjective (antisymmetrical and possibly bifurcating and fusing) temporal logic, quite natural in view
of the Plotinus’s idea that the “Soul” generates time.
An intensional variant of the provability logic like S4Grz provides also a tool for reconstructing
diverse uses of G¨odel’s theorem in the philosophy of mind. See [41] for an analysis of Lucas’s “errors”
and Benacerraf’s reconstruction, through intensional variant of G and G*. Many confusions in this ﬁeld
can be recasted in term of confusion between third person point of view (treated by G and/or G*) and
ﬁrst person, singular or plural, points of view, treated through the S4Grz variants or those presented
below.
16A “rich” L¨obian machine, like ZF, can prove the whole (propositional) theology of a less rich L¨obian machine, like PA, but has still
to make an act of faith to lift that theology on itself.
7

5
Arithmetical Quanta and Qualia
Plotinus’ theory of matter is mainly a recasting of Aristotle’s theory in the platonist framework.
Plotinus deﬁned matter as the receptacle of the contingency and the possible, making it essentially
undeterminate. His platonist constraints forces him to distinguish matter “there” which appears to be
deﬁnable and intelligible, and matter ”here” which has a sensible counterpart somehow related to the
(discursive or not) soul(s). Now, by incompleteness, any possibility is, from the machine point of view,
already something undeterminated. The logic G, for example, is closed for necessitation, and the logic
G* \ G is closed for possibilitation, i.e. if A is provable in G*, automatically the arithmetical possibility
of A, i.e. the consistency of A, 3A, i.e. ¬2¬A, is provable in G* too, and is never provable in G. No
formula with the shape 3# is ever provable by G. Thus, a natural way to address the logic of certainty
in this indeterminate frame will consist in deﬁning a new intensional variant 2p∧3p. This can be shown
equivalent with 2p ∧3t, where t represents some classical tautology (or arithmetical “tautology” like
“0 = 0”). Actually this can be generalized by using 33t instead of 3t, or even transﬁnitely by 3αt with
α denoting a constructive ordinal, so that the material hypostases are inﬁnite in number, but for the
sake of simplicity I will treat only the simple case of 3t. Using 3αt can be related to the autonomous
progressions, see [20] for an introduction. Motivations which are not based on Plotinus, but based on
thought experiments in mechanist philosophy of mind, can provide supplementary reasons to quantify
the “material indetermination” by such new arithmetical connectors. The modal formula, where the
box 2p is deﬁned by 2p ∧3t, gives rise to a logic called Z ([41, 42]. Unlike S4Grz, due to the presence
of the true but unprovable consistency 3t, the logic Z, like the logics G, splits into a provable and
unprovable but true parts, named naturally Z and Z*. The candidate for the arithmetical interpretation
of the “intelligible matter” hypostases is the set of arithmetical interpretations of the logic Z (discursive,
terrestrial) and Z* (true, divine).
To get the sensible matter hypostasis, which are more “soul-like”, we have to reapply the theaetetical
idea, and deﬁne again a new box by (2A ∧A) ∧3t. This gives again a couple of splitting logic X and
X*.
To be sure the status of those logics is still rather mysterious, but we are not done yet : we must
recall that we are not only interviewing a platonist universal, suﬃciently introspective machine, but
also a computationalist one, where the possible “mind states” have to belong to recursively enumerable
sets of states (see section 3 above, see [44] for further motivations). This means we have to consider the
intensional variants no more of G (and G*) but of V, or G1, that is G + “p →2p” (see above). The
corresponding logics will be denoted by the same name + “1”, to remember that they are intensional
variant of G1 = V. The “1” is a reminder of the computationalist Σ1 restriction. So we get S4Grz1,
which again is a non splitting logic, that is (cryptically) : S4Grz = S4Grz1*, and the splitted logics17
Z1, Z1*, X1, X1*. The question we must address now is how close those logics are to a quantum logic
of observation, as the empirical world seems to dictate. Let us deﬁne the modal logical system B−. It
is the same system as the system B described above, except that the substitution rule is weakened so
that in the formula p →23p, p can be substituted only by sentence letters, and also, B−is not closed
for the necessitation rule. We have the following theorem [41, 42] :
Theorem 4 : B−provides a sound logical system for arithmetic (or any L¨obian entity) by having
its theorems proved in the three logics S4Grz1, Z1*, X1*.
This can be shown to be enough for deﬁning three diﬀerent arithmetical interpretations of some
quantum logic. This is done in the Goldblatt way, where the quantization of atomic formula p are
described by 23p (see above, see also [57]), This, optimistically perhaps, could reﬂect the physicists
doubts about which quantum logic would be correctly operating in nature [64, 58].
We have not yet been able to verify typical “quantum questions”, like the question of (or-
tho)modularity, violation of Bell’s inequality, etc. Some more technical considerations provides hints
that a quantum “not” can be interpreted in one of those arithmetical “quantum logic” in a manner si-
milar to Rawling and Selesnick [57]. Although all those propositionnal logic are decidable, by translating
everything in G makes most such questions still intractable today. As far as we know, it seems to us
that S4Grz1, Z1* and X1* provides the closer possible arithmetical interpretation of possible quantum
logics18. Much work remains to dig on the signiﬁcance of such, embryonic for sure, arithmetical and
17The logic Z, Z*, Z1, and Z1* have been recently axiomatized [66]. Unfortunately the technics used cannot be lifted to the X logics.
18We currently hope to get, from this arithmetical quantization, a suﬃciently well behaved arithmetical projection operator, providing
some relevant Temperley Lieb algebra [29] so as to justify the exploitability of a universal quantum computer in the vicinity of all L¨obian
8

physical,in some neoplatonist sense, reality.
The main interest of such an arithmetical“introspective” approach relies in the fact that the gaps
Z1* \ Z1 and X1* \ X1, provides kind of quantum logic for the non-communicable beliefs i.e. the non
provable true statement corresponding to “physically” (in a sense close to Plotinus) self-inferable and
measurable, like intensities, qualities, providing good candidates for “machine notion of qualia”. If this
happens to be correct, the quanta would appear to be deﬁnable as sharable (machine communicable)
qualia. It should give a path from bits to qubits, with the advantage of justifying the communicable and
uncommunicable assertion in the realm of what is observable. This could help to prevent mechanism
from its common usual person elimination interpretation. An absence of justiﬁcation of some universal
quantum machine, from the lobian self-observing machine, or a mathematical proof that there are none,
or any empirical diﬀerence between this arithmetical physics and the empirical physics, would refute,
not Plotinus, but the present arithmetical interpretation.
R´ef´erences
[1] S. Artemov. Kolmogorov’s logic of problems and a provability interpretation of intuitionistic logic.
In R. Parikh, editor, Proceedings of the Third Conference on Theoretical Aspect of Reasoning about
Knowledge (TARK 90). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1990.
[2] E. Barnes. The causal history of computational activity : Maudlin and Olympia. The Journal of
Philosophy, pages 304–316, 1991.
[3] J. L. Bell. A new approach to quantum logic. Brit. J. Phil. Sci., 37 :83–99, 1986.
[4] P. Benacerraf. God, the Devil, and G¨odel. The monist, 51 :9–32, 1967.
[5] G. Boolos. Provability, Truth, and Modal Logic. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 9 :1–7, 1980.
[6] G. Boolos. The Logic of Provability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[7] G. S. Boolos and Jeﬀrey R. C. Computability and Logic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1989. Third Edition.
[8] L. E. J. Brouwer. Leven, Kunst en Mystiek. Waltman, Delft, Holland, 1905. La Vie, l’Art et le
Mysticisme.
[9] L. E. J. Brouwer. Consciousness, philosophy and mathematics. In P. Benacerraf and Putnam H.,
editors, Philosophy of Mathematics, pages 90–96. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, second
edition, 1983. premi`ere ´edition chez Prentice-Hall 1964.
[10] M. Burnyeat. Idealism in Greek Philosophy : What Descartes Saw and Berkeley Missed. Philoso-
phical Review, 3 :3–40, 1982.
[11] M. Burnyeat. The Theaetetus of Plato. Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis, Cambridge,
1990. Translation by M. J. Levett.
[12] M. Burnyeat. Socrate et le jury : de quelques aspects paradoxaux de la distinction platonicienne
entre connaissance et opinion vraie. In M. Canto-Sperber, editor, Les paradoxes de la connaissance,
essais sur le M´enon de Platon, pages 237–251. Editions Odile Jacob, Paris, 1991.
[13] W. J. Carroll. Plotinus on the Origin of Matter, pages 179–207. Volume 8 of Wagner [68], 2002.
[14] J. Case and Smith C. Comparison of Identiﬁcation Criteria for Machine Inductive Inference. Theo-
retical Computer Science, 25 :193–220, 1983.
[15] M. L. Dalla Chiara.
Quantum Logic and Physical Modalities.
Journal of Philosophical Logic,
6 :391–404, 1977.
[16] M. L. Dalla Chiara.
Quantum logic.
In D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, editors, Handbook of
Philosophical Logic, Vol. III, pages 427–469. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1986.
[17] M. Davis, editor. The Undecidable. Raven Press, Hewlett, New York, 1965.
[18] M. Dzielska. Hypatia of Alexandria. Revealing Antiquity 8. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 1995. Translated by F. Lyra.
machine, relatively to their most probable computational histories, as seen from some ﬁrst person plural person point of view, i.e. through
some arithmetical version of the Intelligible Matter hypostasis. To be sure, the quantum entangling phenomenon remains hard to capture
arithmetically, for the same reason that traditional quantum logic cannot represent the needed tensor product, but see [27] for some
possible nuances on that question.
9

[19] S. Feferman. Arithmetisation of Metamathematics in a general Setting. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
XLIX :35–92, 1960.
[20] T. Franz`en. Inexhaustibility, a Non-Exhaustive Treatment. Association for Symbolic Logic, Massa-
chusetts, 2004.
[21] T. Franz`en. G¨odel’s Theorem, an Incomplete Guide to its Use and Abuse. Cambridge University
Press, Massachusetts, 2005.
[22] K. G¨odel. Eine interpretation des intuitionistischen aussagenkalk¨uls. Ergebnisse eines Mathemati-
schen Kolloquiums, 4 :39–40, 1933.
[23] R. I. Goldblatt. Semantic Analysis of Orthologic. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 3 :19–35, 1974.
Aussi dans Goldblatt 1993, page 81–97.
[24] R. I. Goldblatt. Arithmetical Necessity, Provability and Intuitionistic Logic. Theoria, 44 :38–46,
1978. Aussi dans Goldblatt 1993, page 105–112.
[25] A. Grzegorczyk.
Some relational systems and the associated topological spaces.
Fundamenta
Mathematicae, LX :223–231, 1967.
[26] G. M. Hardegree. The Conditional in Quantum Logic. In P. Suppes, editor, Logic and Probability in
Quantum Mechanics, volume 78 of Synthese Library, pages 55–72. D. Reidel Publishing Company,
Dordrecht-Holland, 1976.
[27] C. J. Isham.
Quantum logic and the histories approach to quantum theory.
J. Math. Phys.,
35(5) :2157–2185, May 1994.
[28] D. Kaplan and R. Montague. A Paradox Regained. Journal of Formal Logic, 1 :79–90, 1960.
[29] L.H. Kauﬀman. Knots and Physics. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1991. 2ed. 1993.
[30] S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1952.
[31] A. V. Kuznetsov and A. Y. Muravitsky. Magari algebras. Fourteenth All-Union Algebra Conf.,
Abstract part 2 : Rings, Algebraic Structures, pages 105–106, 1977. En Russe.
[32] J. Laﬁtte. R´eﬂexions sur la Science des Machines. Vrin, Paris, 1932.
[33] M. H. L¨ob. Solution of a problem of Leon Henkin. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 20 :115–118, 1955.
[34] S. MacKenna. Extracts from the Explanatory Matter in the First Edition, in Plotinus Enneads,
pages xxvi–xli. Penguin Books, London, 1991.
[35] R. Magari.
Representation and duality theory for diagonalizable algebras.
Studia Logica,
XXXIV(4) :305–313, 1975.
[36] N. Malcolm. Dreaming. Routledge Kegan Paul ltd., London, 1959.
[37] N. Malcolm. The conceivability of mechanism. Phil. Review, 77 :45–72, 1968.
[38] B. Marchal. Informatique th´eorique et philosophie de l’esprit. In Actes du 3`eme colloque interna-
tional de l’ARC, pages 193–227, Toulouse, 1988.
[39] B. Marchal. Mechanism and personal identity. In M. De Glas and D. Gabbay, editors, Proceedings
of WOCFAI 91, pages 335–345, Paris, 1991. Angkor.
[40] B. Marchal. Amoeba, planaria, and dreaming machines. In P. Bourgine and F. J. Varela, editors,
Artiﬁcial Life, towards a practice of autonomous systems, ECAL 91, pages 429–440. MIT Press,
1992.
[41] B. Marchal. Conscience et M´ecanisme. Technical Report TR/IRIDIA/94, ULB, 1994.
[42] B. Marchal. Calculabilit´e, Physique et Cognition. PhD thesis, Universit´e de Lille, D´epartement
d’informatique, Lille, France, 1998.
[43] B. Marchal. Computation, Consciousness and the Quantum. Teorie & Modelli, 6(1) :29–43, 2001.
[44] B. Marchal. The Origin of Physical Laws and Sensations. In 4th International System Administra-
tion and Network Engineering Conference, SANE 2004, Amsterdam, 2004.
[45] B. Marchal. Theoretical Computer Science and the Natural Sciences. Physics of Life Reviews,
2–4 :251–289, 2005.
[46] E. Martin and Osherson D. N. Elements of Scientiﬁc Inquiry. The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998.
[47] Y. V. Matiyasevich. Hilbert Tenth Problem. The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[48] J. C. McKinsey and A. Tarski. Some theorems about the sentential calculi of Lewis and Heyting.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 13 :1–15, 1948.
10

[49] P. Mittelstaedt. Quantum Logic. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland, 1978.
[50] J. Myhill. Some philosophical implications of mathematical logic. The review of Metaphysics, VI(2),
1952.
[51] T. Nagel. The View from Nowhere. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986.
[52] D.J. O’Meara. Pythagoras Revived. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989.
[53] R. Penrose. The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989.
[54] R. Penrose. Shadows of the Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994.
[55] E. Post. Absolutely unsolvable problems and relatively undecidable propositions : Account of an
anticipation. In Davis [17], pages 338–433. 1922.
[56] E. Post. Recursively enumerable set. In Davis [17], pages 338–433. 1944.
[57] J. P. Rawling and S. A. Selesnick. Orthologic and Quantum Logic : Models and Computational
Elements. Journal of the ACM, 47(4) :721–751, 2000.
[58] M. R´edei. Quantum Logic in Algebraic Approach. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1998.
[59] C. H. Smith. Applications of classical recursion theory to computer science. In F. R. Drake and S. S.
Wainer, editors, Recursion Theory : its generalisation and applications, pages 236–247. Cambridge
University Press, 1980.
[60] R. Smullyan. G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem. Oxford University Press, New York, Oxford, 1992.
[61] R. M. Solovay. Provability Interpretation of Modal Logic. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 25 :287–
304, 1976.
[62] R. H. Thomason. A note on syntactical treatment of modality. Synthese, 44 :391–395, 1980.
[63] J. Trouillard. L’Un et l’ˆame selon Proclos. Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1972.
[64] B. C. van Fraassen. The labyrinth of quantum logic. In R. Cohen and M. Wartosky, editors, Boston
Studies of Philosophy of Sciences, volume 13, pages 224–254. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1974.
[65] W. P. van Stigt. Brouwer’s Intuitionism, volume 2 of Studies in the history and philosophy of
Mathematics. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1990.
[66] E. Vandenbussche. Axiomatization of the logics Z, Z*, Z1, Z1*. Unpublished Manuscript, 2005.
[67] A. Visser. Aspects of Diagonalization and Provability. PhD thesis, University of Utrecht, Depart-
ment of Philosophy, The Nederland, 1985.
[68] F. W. Wagner, editor. Neoplatonism and Nature, Studies in Plotinus’ Enneads, volume 8 of Studies
in Neoplatonism : Ancient and Modern. State University of New-York Press, New York, 2002.
[69] R. T. Wallis. Neoplatonism. Gerald Duckworth and CO.Ltd, London, 1972. Second Edition 1995
by Gerald Duckworth and CO.Ltd (London) and Hacket Publishing Company (Indianapolis).
[70] J. C. Webb. Mechanism, Mentalism and Metamathematics : An essay on Finitism. D. Reidel
Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland, 1980.
[71] J. C. Webb. G¨odel’s Theorems and Church’s Thesis : a Prologue to Mechanism. In R. S. Cohen
and M. W. Wartofsky, editors, Language, logic, and method, pages 309–353. D.Reidel Publishing
Company, Dordrecht, Holland, 1983.
[72] J. A. Wheeler. Law without Law. In P. Medawar and Shelley J., editors, Structure in Science and
Art, pages 132–154. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
11

