
 
SIVA PURANA
The ancient book of Siva
Ramesh Menon

Copyright©Ramesh Menon 2006
Copyright this Kindle edition©Ramesh Menon 2012
All rights reserved
Cover painting ‘Pradoksha Nritham’ by Suresh Muthukulam
Reproduced with the permission of the artist
Copyright©Suresh Muthukulam 2002
http://www.keralamurals.com/  

To Sri Ramana Maharishi

Contents
 
 
Acknowledgement
A Word
Introduction
The Beginning: Rudra, Sati
Amrita
The Sarabha and the Sudarshana
Three Incarnations
Twelve Jyotirlingas
The Sarabha and the Sudarshana
Uma
Karttikeya and Ganesha
Yuddha Khanda:the cantos of war
Antah:in the end

Acknowledgement
 
The late Parameshwara Iyer, who translated the entire Siva Purana into
English from the Sanskrit for Motilal Banarsidass, was my teacher for a time.
Except for his painstaking endeavour, this book, which is based upon his
scholarly translation, would have never been written.

A Word
 
The length and breadth of India is strewn with temples that have a startling
commonality of themes. Increasingly, I do not believe the Puranas, the books
that describe these themes, are merely fictions of men of old. Rather, they seem
to describe a human history more primal than the one of a few thousand years to
which we habitually think of ourselves as belonging. In the Puranas, we see
reflections of a cosmic history, when this earth was open to the universe.
It is difficult to accept that the greatest glory of ancient India was the
drainage system of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa. We know, from modern
cosmology, that the universe is much older, vaster and more complex than we
imagined a hundred years ago. We know our own history is less than a speck
against universal horizons of space and time. It is absurd that we pass any
judgement whatever on a universe in which we are such infants: that we dare say
‘This is so and this not in the cosmos’. Surely, our human history is an
infinitesimal part of the history of the universe, not vice versa; and our ignorance
is far more profound than our knowledge.
The characters in the Purana are ‘cosmic’ in dimension, even the lesser
ones; as is the sweep of time, space and spirit we encounter here. We can easily
dismiss it all as the exaggerated fantasies of nameless writers of the dim past. Or
else, we begin to suspect there is more to learn here than we dreamt: that human
history is fundamentally different from what we have been taught.
The beings we meet in the Puranas are godlike, grandly demonical and
incomprehensible when we compare them to ourselves. They live for thousands
of years, fly in sky chariots, vimanas fleet as thought, command great astras:
weapons that consume whole cities in a wink.
This book is the Siva Purana condensed, rearranged and retold, I hope in
more contemporary and imaginative style than is generally available in English.
Much of it deals with characters and events that are incredible by our humdrum
perspective. But is it possible that beginningless Siva, of the eight cosmic
bodies, the fire from whose third eye ends the universe, Brahma, the four-headed
Creator and four-armed Vishnu, who sleeps on an infinite sea, are not imaginary
beings, but inconceivable Masters of the stars?
In the Purana, we find this description of time, which is hardly the
invention of brutish man scrabbling to create the spoke and the ploughshare:
 
The basic unit of life is the nimesha, the instant. Fifteen nimeshas make
one kastha, thirty kasthas one kaala, thirty kaalas one muhurta and thirty

muhurtas one day. Thirty days is a maasa, a month, which is one day of the gods
and ancestors; six maasas make an ayana, two ayanas a year. One human year
is a day and a night for the celestials, uttarayana being the day and
dakshinayana the night. Three hundred and sixty-five human years make a
divine one.
Four are the yugas in the land of Bharata: the krita, treta, dwapara and
kali. The pristine krita lasts 4,800 divine years, the less perfect treta 3,600 years,
the half-corrupt dwapara 2,400 and the almost entirely evil kali 1,200.
A chaturyuga, one cycle of four ages, is 12,000 godly years long, 12,000 x
365 human years. 71 chaturyugas make a manvantara, 14 manvantaras a kalpa.
A kalpa, of 1000 chaturyugas, 12 million divine years, is one day of Brahma, the
Creator.
8,000 years of Brahma make one Brahma yuga; 1,000 Brahma yugas
make a savana. Each Brahma lives for 3,003 savanas.
A day of Brahma’s has 14 Indras, his life 54,000 Indras.
One day of Vishnu is the lifetime of Brahma.
One day of Siva is the lifetime of Vishnu…
 
Can it be that our past was more than what we think? Was it, in its way,
inconceivably superior to the present?
By the Puranic calendar, we live today at the outset of a kali yuga. Thus,
Rama lived in the world more than 800,000 years ago and Krishna 5,000, at
least: at two ends of the last dwapara yuga. According to the Purana, it is natural
for men of the kali yuga to be puny and short-lived and for them to forget the
Sanatana Dharma and the eternal Gods. For this is the very nature of the evil
age. It is also the sinister ‘Iron Age’ of Greek legend, when the Gods seldom
visit the earth, anymore, or beget sons on the daughters of men. It is the time
when our darkling planet is sealed from the rest of the universe.
However, my purpose in writing this book was not to rearrange the
reader’s notion of history, but to present the Spirit of Siva, auspicious, complex
and immortal God, as best as I can, with as much devotion as I have, from
material found in the Siva Purana.

Introduction
 
The sacred Puranas have come down to us in the great oral tradition of the
rishis, the sages of Bharatavarsha. Once, the peerless Vyasa composed them
from ‘ancient material’: ancient for him. Traditionally, a Purana deals with five
subjects, called panchalakshana: the primary creation of the universe; secondary
creation after periodic destruction; the genesis of the Gods and rishis; great
epochs of time, the kalpas, manvantaras, yugas; and the history of some royal
dynasties of the earth.
More recently, after BC 4000, until AD 1000, roughly, a lot of other
material has grown around the central Purana. These concern rituals for
sacrifices, other customs, festivals, caste customs, specifications for temple
construction, etcetera. There are 18 principal surviving Mahapuranas, great
Puranas. The Siva Purana is one of these. They are collections of revelations, in
the form of stories, or otherwise, usually narrated to some rishis by a Suta, who
heard them from Vyasa, who heard them from Narada, Brahma or another
fabulous raconteur, in time out of mind. They have come down, invariably, in
Sanskrit couplets.
The Siva Purana is considerably longer than the portions of it I have
included in this book. My aim was not to undertake a scholarly translation, of
which there are a few, but to write as readable a version as I could, without
diminishing the spirit and the scope of the original. For example, large sections
of the original deal with intricate rituals and others list all of Siva’s thousand
names, with their meanings. I have only touched upon these, which hold little
narrative appeal for the ordinary reader.
Also, the sequence of tales in the recorded Purana is often different from
mine; but I have retained all the important legends of Siva. In some sections, I
have taken stylistic and fictive liberties: but never changing the meaning and
flavour of the original. No doubt, generations of pauranikas, in the oral tradition,
did the same.
The Puranic tradition is mainly lost to those of us that do not know
Sanskrit and lack the patience to plough through scholarly translations, many of
which tend to dispense with the poetic magic of the originals. These luminous
stories are our race’s very soul. The days when we would hear them at our
grandmothers’ knees are over. We know less of them than our parents did and

our children shall know even less than we do. My book seeks to restore the Siva
Purana to the English-speaking Indian in some small measure and, hopefully, to
preserve it for a time in our consciousness. It also seeks to introduce the non-
Indian reader to another, perhaps rare, facet of our heritage. I am aware that an
English rendering cannot remotely approach the Sanskrit in depth or resonance: I
pray that I have not trivialised the Purana.

The Beginning: RUDRA, SATI.

ONE
 
On the Yamuna
 
Once, the celibate Parasara, immortal rishi on his pilgrimage, arrived on
the banks of the Yamuna. It was a crisp winter morning. The river sparkled as if
a million jewels were strewn across its water. In his hut, the fisherman sat at his
morning meal of last night’s fish and rice, when the austere figure loomed in his
door.
"Take me across the river, I am in a hurry!" said Parasara ungraciously.
It was not the first time the sage had passed this way and the fisherman
recognised him. He called to his daughter, "Matsyagandhi, take our Muni
Parasara across."
She appeared at the corner of the hut, sixteen and bright as a bit of winter
sun. Breast buds strained like young lotuses against her green blouse; eyes like
saucers on her lean dark face gazed frankly at Parasara. Without a word,
Matsyagandhi led the illustrious one to the wooden boat tethered to a stake on
the riverbank.
As he followed her, the smell of the girl’s body invaded him: the raw smell
of fish with which she was born. That sage, who had felt no twinge of desire for
fawning apsaras in devaloka, was overcome by the earthy whiff of the fisher-
girl; instead of being repulsed, Parasara lost his heart to her.
When she helped him into the boat, he held her hand longer than he
needed. She freed herself quietly and cast off.
However, he would not so easily be denied. As they moved out, Parasara
again reached for her hand on the oar at which she rowed. She smiled at him, her
great eyes twinkling. She stopped rowing and they drifted in midstream; but she
did not withdraw her hand. His hand quivered on hers.
In a husky voice, she said, "You are a high brahmana descended from
Brahma and I am a nishada’s daughter. Between us this isn’t proper, holy one."
Then she trembled: suppose he cursed her. At that moment, her father
hailed them faintly from the bank. He stood washing his hands outside the hut
and wanted to know why they had stopped. Parasara released the girl’s hand.
She rowed again while the rishi kept a watch on the fisherman. Soon, the sage
took Matsyagandhi’s hand once more.

She said, "Brahmana, aren’t you repelled by my smell? Muni, don’t you
know the Vedas say one should not have sexual intercourse during the day?
Besides, my father can see us."
When Parasara leaned forward awkwardly to kiss her, she was reminded
sharply of his great age; and both excited and dismayed by it. He waved a
slender arm over his head in an occult mudra. Instantly, they were shrouded in
mist and the fisherman could not see them any more. Then it began to snow!
It was dark on the boat on the river.
"Is that night enough?"
Little Matsyagandhi cried out in wonder. But being a virgin and afraid, she
said, "You will enjoy me and go your way, Yogin, but I will become pregnant.
Whatever will I tell my father?"
He cried hoarsely, "Give me your love and you will have fame forever
among the devas and the rishis. They will call you Satyavati in heaven. Look."
Another wizardly mudra from him and she saw her body glow with new
beauty. Her limbs were lustrous, her features finer and now she smelt of wild
jasmine, lotus and other unearthly fragrances. In a moment, they spread from her
for a yojana. Her original, fishy musk had not vanished either; it became a
sublimely erotic scent, making his ardour fiercer!
Still, she hesitated. She restrained his wandering hand, so he cried, "Say
whatever you want and it shall be yours. Quickly, you are driving me mad!"
After a moment’s reflection, she said, "If no one ever knows this
happened, if my virginity is restored, if the son born of our love is a magician
like you and if I always smell as sweetly as I do now, then take me, Muni!"
Parasara laughed like rolling thunder. "This is God’s will. All your
conditions will be met and your son shall be the greatest poet the world has ever
known."
He took her in his arms in the boat on the Yamuna, while his snowstorm
held its opaque curtain around them. Impatient for him, now that her fears were
allayed, she rowed to an island in the stream and moored there. They lay
together, unlikeliest lovers, heating the pale sand dry.
After he drank deeply of her youth and she of his age, Parasara rose away
from her to bathe in the Yamuna. With a last kiss on top of her head, he walked
upon the water and out of her life.
 
In that mystic dimension, she went into labour as soon as she conceived.
Her delivery was miraculous and she felt no pain. Immediately as he was born,
her boy, bright as the sun, handsome as Kamadeva, grew into a full-grown rishi,
with a kamandalu in one hand, a smooth staff in the other and his tawny hair lit

in a halo. The new-born and exceptional hermit said to his mother, "I must go
my way. But if you ever want to see me, think of me and I will appear before
you" and he walked away.
Since he was born on the dwipa in the Yamuna, Satyavati’s son was called
Dwaipayana. Later, he was to divide the holy Veda and to compose the sacred
Puranas from ancient revelations. He was to become renowned as Veda Vyasa.
It is from Vyasa that we first hear about the Auspicious One, about Siva.

TWO
 
In the Naimisa vana
 
Obeisance to Siva with Uma beside him, his ganas and his sons.
Obeisance to the Lord of Prakriti and Purusha, the cause of creation, nurture
and destruction.
I seek refuge in Siva whose power is unequalled, whose glory spreads
everywhere, who is Un-born!
 
*
 
Some rishis from the six noble families begin a yagna in the Naimisa
forest, at Prayaga, confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna, from where a
subtle path leads to Brahmaloka. The Suta Romaharshana, peerless raconteur,
whose sacred lore can make one’s hair stand on end, hears about the sacrifice.
He is one of Vedavyasa’s five sishyas to whom his guru imparted the Purana he
composed from antique revelations. Romaharshana is a most erudite pauranika, a
master of syllogisms, who can answer the metaphysical queries of Brihaspati
himself. This Suta, who is a seer and a poet, a mahakavi, arrives in the Naimisa.
Saunaka’s rishis are delighted. They receive him with honour; they
worship him. They settle him into a darbhasana and say, "Omniscient
Romaharshana, ocean of the eldest lore, tell us the holy Siva Purana."
Romaharshana begins in his majestic voice, "I bow to the splendid Rishi
Vyasa, who blessed me with the Purana. Vedavyasa said to me,
‘When a long time had elapsed after the Beginning, when many kalpas had
come and gone and this one’s civilisation was established, a dispute arose among
the rishis of the six clans. One said "This is the greatest God," and another
disagreed. They set off to see Brahma, the Creator. They went to Mount Meru, to
Devaparvata where devas and asuras, siddhas and charanas, yakshas and
gandharvas roam, to Sumeru, four-armed swastika, mountain at the crux of the
world, Ratnasanu, jewel peak, Hemadri, the golden mountain.
They came to a Brahmavana there, ten yojanas wide and a hundred long,

luminous with lakes and rills. They saw a city brilliant as the midday sun, its
portals and ramparts licking the sky. Golden and silver mansions lined its
thousand streets: each one as big as a palace, every one embedded with unearthly
jewels. At the heart of the secret city, the Lord Brahma lived in the greatest
edifice.
In his ineffable court, the rishis saw the Creator like molten gold, wearing
white silk. He was utterly gentle, his eyes large as lotus petals, his body draped
with celestial garlands. His lustre was everywhere; his fragrance was like a river
flowing kalaharas in spring. Saraswati sat at his side, the cowries of fate in her
hand. The rishis glowed to see the four-faced Lord. They joined their palms
above their heads; they hymned him, "Obeisance to you, ancient Purusha, source
of creation, life and death. Obeisance, O Brahma, great Atman. Obeisance to you
who has the universe for his body!"
In his oceanic voice, Brahma said, "Welcome, Rishis of splendour. Tell me
why you have all come here together."
The leader of the sages said, "We are taken with darkness, we don’t know
who the greatest God is. You are the creator of the universe, the cause of all
causes; nothing is hidden from you. Tell us, Lord, who is the most ancient one of
all? Who is the greatest Purusha? Who is the purest, most perfect being?"
Brahma shut all his eyes and was lost briefly in himself. Opening them
again, the Pitama said softly, "Rudra."
Plucking a wheel of light from the air, like a sliver of the sun, he cast it
down into the world. "Where the hub of the wheel breaks offer your worship to
Siva."
The blinding wheel whirled down the mountains. It broke against an age-
smoothed and auspicious crag in a forest: this Naimisa vana! Ever since, this has
been holy ground, sanctified for revelation. Here the first Purana was given to
men,’ said my guru Vyasa."
Thus, the Suta begins, his body swaying to the rhythms of his plumbless
tale.
"Incomparable Suta, tell us how Siva is worshipped," says Saunaka, chief
among those sages of the forest, thirsty for the occult Purana.
"Siva is worshipped both as murti and linga," says Romaharshana gravely.
Saunaka says, "All the other Gods are worshipped just as idols. Why is
only Siva worshipped as both image and phallus?"
Suta says, "Siva alone is nishkaala, nameless and formless, as well as
sakaala, embodied. In his formlessness, he is worshipped as the linga. Long ago,
in the first kalpa, Siva revealed his nishkaala form as a linga and since then is he
worshipped so as the eternal Brahman. Listen.

Once, blue Vishnu, thousand-headed, thousand-armed, with his sankha,
chakra and gada, lay asleep with Mahalakshmi on Anantasesha upon the naara,
the primordial sea. The universe lay dissolved. As he slept, a lotus with an
endless golden stalk and a blue corolla thrust itself out from his navel. Brahma,
grandsire of the worlds, was born within this umbilical lotus, from Vishnu’s
golden womb. Brahma roamed that lotus for a hundred years but could not climb
out of it. He began to climb down the infinite stalk, but he did not reach the
place from where the flower grew. Then a disembodied voice said to him,
"Tapasya is your way."
Brahma sat in meditation inside the lotus for twelve of his interminable
years; one day, he found himself at his father Mahavishnu’s side. Narayana lay
asleep but he shone like kaala as he breathed, like chasmal Time. Striking the
sleeping Blue God with his hand, Brahma said, "Who are you? You lie there
haughtily even when you see me. Don’t you know who I am?"
Vishnu was furious. However, controlling himself, he said calmly,
"Welcome, my son. Tell me where you have come from and why you are so
agitated. Sit here and tell me," said Vishnu, patting his serpent bed.
"I have come as swiftly as time! I am the Creator. How dare you call me
‘my son’ as a guru does his sishya? I am the Pitama, yours as well. I create,
protect and destroy the universe."
Vishnu replied languidly, "You, my son, were born from me. Brahma, I
am your father. The lotus in which you were born sprouted from my navel. But
no matter, my own maaya deludes you."
At which, Brahma struck him again and a terrific fight erupted. They first
fought like common men, with fists and rough punches. Then Vishnu mounted
his eagle and Brahma his white swan and they fought with astras, cosmic
weapons. The devas gathered in the sky in their silvery chariots to watch the
battle. Vishnu hurled the Maheswarastra at Brahma, who unleashed the
unfathomable Paasupatastra. These missiles spumed into the sky and, blazing
like ten thousand suns, locked on high.
As the devas watched in horror, flames from the astras began to consume
the three realms. Suddenly, between the two maddened Gods, a column sprang
up through the ground: a column from nowhere, without top or base, a column of
light and fire into which the apocalyptic astras were absorbed like two sparks. It
was a linga! With thousands of garlands of flames, flames like galaxies spewing
in every direction: an incomparable, incomprehensible linga. Awe-struck,
Vishnu and Brahma fell quiet.
Brahma breathed, "What is it?"
Mahavishnu whispered, "It is beyond me. You find its head, while I seek

its root."
Turning into a golden boar, he dived down through the ground of that first
battlefield to seek the root of the mysterious linga of fire. Brahma became a
swan and flew up at the speed of time, quicker than light, to seek the top of that
manifestation. For longer than we can conceive, the boar dived and the swan
flashed up; but, above or below, there was no end to the blazing phallus.
Exhausted and frightened, Vishnu came back to the battlefield. Brahma flew on
up.
When Siva saw them distraught in their arrogance, he laughed and
dislodged, the ketaki flowers on his head fell down that infinite column. Down
wafted those flowers, turning about one another, falling countless divine years,
like a blessing, with neither fragrance nor brightness dimmed. They fell over
Brahma, the flashing feathered ascender, in petal rain.
Perplexed, Brahma the swan said, "Lord of flowers, from whose head do
you fall down this column? Why do you fall, good flowers?"
The flowers said, "Friend, we have been falling forever and we do not
remember where we began. How will you find the column’s pinnacle?"
Tired and annoyed as he was, Brahma had a thought. He bowed to the
ketakis and said humbly, "Friends, a small favor for me: tell Vishnu I saw the
top of the linga and that you bear witness to it." In dire straits, falsehood is
recommended by even the oldest lore.
They found Mahavishnu in distress and Brahma smiled. Like a eunuch
confessing his inability, Vishnu said ruefully, "I could not find the root of the
linga."
Brahma replied smugly, "I found the column’s head. These ketakis are my
witness."
Hari bowed to Brahma; he worshipped him with all the sixteen homages.
When he lay in the dust to worship Brahma’s feet, a tremendous AUM
resounded in that place, a thunderclap that would shatter the universe. Siva
stepped out of the linga, taller than the phallus of fire, a wild, matt-haired Yogin
bright as a billion suns. He stood before the terrified Gods, with bow and trident,
wearing tiger-skin, a shining serpent the sacred thread around his body. He
seemed to swallow the heavens with his million mouths, the AUM still dying in
his blue throat like the battery of thunder that heralds the final deluge in which
the stars drown. From that Vision’s brow, from his third eye, sprang the dreadful
Bhairava.
Bhairava knelt at Siva’s feet, "Command me, almighty Lord!"
Siva said, "Here is Brahma, the first God of creation. Worship him with
your sword."

With a roar, Bhairava seized the tuft on Brahma’s fifth head, the one that
lied to Vishnu and raised his curved blade. Brahma howled; he sweated, he
trembled and fell whimpering at Bhairava’s feet. Bhairava’s arm was drawn
back to take off the lying head. Then Vishnu knelt at Siva’s feet. "Lord! You
gave him five heads. Pardon him in your infinite mercy, this is his first offence."
Siva blessed Vishnu, "Hari, you were truthful though you also wanted to
be the Lord of all things. From now, you will have as much worship as I do. But
this liar shall not be worshipped any more, or have a temple of his own in the
world."
Bhairava released Brahma and the chastened God prostrated before Siva,
"Lord, I am humbled. Now bless me."
Siva said musingly, "The universe is ruined without the fear of a king.
Rule the universe from now, Brahma and be the lord of sacrifices."
That day, Brahma and Vishnu first worshipped Siva. Ever after, the day of
the Ardra nakshatra in the month of Margasirsa is when Mahadeva is
worshipped, as both linga and murti. The bhakta who fasts day and night on holy
Sivaratri, who worships the Lord and deceives no one, he shall have the
blessings of a year of ordinary worship. Siva made the blazing linga, without
root or tip, diminutive and quiescent. He installed it upon a yoni pedestal, which
is Uma!’
Said Vyasa,"
Says the Suta Romaharshana.
 
Never again did Siva wear the ketaki on his head.

THREE
 
Gunanidhi
 
Wealth accrues from virtue and from wealth, enjoyment. Vairagya,
detachment, is enjoyment’s fruit. I bow to Sambhu, father of the universe, Sivaa
its mother and Ganadhisa their son, before I recount this.
 
*
 
Once in a certain kalpa, Saunaka, eldest among the rishis of the Naimisa
vana, says to Suta Romaharshana, "Maheswara is Aguna; he has no attributes.
Sinless Suta, tell us how he became Saguna; tell about Siva and Sati, your
Purana is nectar to us."
Suta says,
"My master Vyasa said to me,
‘In the city of Kampilya, there was a dikshita, a priest, called Yajnadatta.
He was a Vedanta scholar, famous and respected by the king. He invested his
son Gunanidhi, a handsome boy bright like the moon, with the sacred thread and
taught him the eight lores. However, the boy had a secret vice: he was a gambler.
His vice corroded him and soon Gunanidhi despised the sandhya vandana
and even blasphemed against the Vedas. He shunned all things religious and
brahmanical and godless heretics were his nearest friends. He took money from
his indulgent mother and spent his time gambling. The mother was afraid she
would break her husband’s heart if she told him the truth about their only child.
Yajnadatta was a busy man. When he came home tired and asked after his son,
who always avoided him, his wife would say, "He was studying all day and I had
to coax him to go out for a stroll with his friends. He is too conscientious."
In her gentle way, she often told her son, "If your father ever learns about
your gambling he will beat you within an inch of your life and me too. I beg you,
mend your ways."
The boy did not mend. His father performed his kesa karma when he was
sixteen and got him married. Gunanidhi still did not reform. Now he stole from

his parents to pay his gambling debts. Once he stole a ring set with diamonds
from his father to pay his losses to a professional gambler. The dikshita saw the
ring on the gambler’s finger, stopped the fellow in the street and demanded,
"Where did you get that ring?"
At first, the man would not answer him; but when Yajnadatta called him a
thief, the gambler retorted, "Your son is the thief. He is the worst gambler in this
town, but he must play every day and lose."
Yajnadatta reeled. He bowed his head and went home. He asked his wife,
"Where is the ring you took from my finger when you massaged me before my
bath yesterday?"
Used to covering for Gunanidhi, she said from inside the house, "I am in
the puja room. We had unexpected guests yesterday, remember? I can’t think
where I put your ring. But I will find it, as I do everything else."
"Like you did the golden vase with emeralds? The ivory trinket casket?
The bell-metal jar? The silver statuette? Woman, whenever I asked after my son
you said ‘He just went out for a stroll after studying all day.’ No, it is futile
being angry with you. I will not eat until I marry another wife."
The same evening, Yajnadatta married another dikshita’s daughter.
Gunanidhi heard this and fled the town. He wandered long and far. Pangs of
hunger tormented him. As the sun set, the young wastrel sat wearily at the foot
of a spreading tree. Though he did not know it, it was Sivaratri that day.
At dusk, a party of bhaktas came to the temple that stood near Gunanidhi’s
tree. They came laden with sweets to offer the stone linga within. Gunanidhi
crouched behind the tree waiting for the worship to be over and the devotees to
leave, so he could creep inside and steal their offerings to appease his ravening
hunger. As he sat dozing now and again, the bhaktas inside sang Siva’s thousand
names; they worshipped him with ecstatic dances. It was past midnight when
they finished their devotions; even then, they did not leave. To Gunanidhi’s
chagrin, they lay down to sleep on the wide stone steps.
Gunanidhi waited. When he saw they were all asleep, he crept out from
behind his tree and stole into the temple. All was still in there and the lamp
burned low, throwing flickering shadows on to stone walls. Gunanidhi could not
see the food he wanted to steal. Cursing softly, he tore a strip from his loincloth
and added it to the wick in the lamp. At once, the inside of that shrine was
brightly lit up. Grabbing the offerings left by the worshippers, he came out.
But Gunanidhi’s luck had run out and he stepped squarely on one of the
sleepers. The man woke with a cry and caught the thief in the night by his ankle.
The others awoke. Incensed when they saw what he had stolen, those bhaktas
beat Gunanidhi to death. Not a morsel of the offerings for Siva passed the thief’s

lips.
When he died, Yama’s awful soldiers arrived. They bound Gunanidhi hand
and foot to take him to the dark city of the Lord of Death. In a flash of light, a
knot of Sivaganas appeared there as well: trident-wielding, brilliant, bell tinkling
amulets on their arms, their hair wild jata.
"Yamadutas," said the Sivaganas, "leave this righteous brahmana, his sins
have been made ashes."
The Yamadutas said, "Apart from all his sins against his parents and
dharma, look what he did this holy night: he desecrated the offerings for Siva! If
this wretch has any shred of virtue to his name, let us hear of it."
The Sivaganas said, "The Lord says that before he died he heard the
Kotirudra sung. Moreover, he fasted all this Sivaratri day. Most of all, like the
truest bhakta, as if his soul commanded and the food was a pretext, on this
sacred night Gunanidhi made the dim lamp burn brightly; then no shadow fell on
the linga anymore. Yamadutas, ancient, inscrutable and of many lives unknown
are the reasons of Siva."
Yama’s horde had to give way. The Sivaganas took Gunanidhi to Sivaloka
where, by the Lord’s grace, he shone like the purest of the pure.
 
Gunanidhi was reborn as Dama, the son of Arindama, king of Kalinga. In
his youth, his father died and Dama ascended the throne. He was the greatest
Sivabhakta on earth of his time. The only form of worship in his kingdom was
the lighting of lamps. Death was the punishment for a dimly lit temple and
Kalinga was always aglow with bright lamps for Siva.
When he saw how effectual the lamps were, Dama went to Kasi, now to
illumine his mind. He planted a linga before him and worshipped it with an
awesome tapasya. Like a rising sun, Siva appeared before Dama, with Parvati
beside him. Dazzled by the Lord, Dama shut his eyes.
Siva said, "Dama, choose any boon."
Dama said, "Give my eyes the power to be able to look at you without
blinking, for no boon is greater."
Smiling, Siva touched Dama’s head with his palm. Dama opened his eyes
and saw Uma first. He squinted at her wickedly, his face twisting in a vicious
snarl from Gunanidhi’s worst days.
"Who is this beautiful woman," he rasped, "so near my Lord? What
tapasya did she perform more perfect than mine? How lucky she is. How
beautiful she is. Devi, you make my penance shine!"
He squinted and squinted, apparently in grotesque envy. He circled round
her, mumbling the same words, sometimes aloud, sometimes under his breath.

His left eye burst in his face. He squinted on with the right, "Devi, you make my
tapasya shine!"
The annoyed Parvati said to Siva, "Who is this muni that squints enviously
at me and mutters ‘You make my tapasya shine!’"
Siva laughed. "He is your son, Uma! It’s just his way. He is not envious or
angry, only praising you as he knows how."
Smiling, he blessed Dama again, "You shall be the master of the mountain
city Alaka, lord of yakshas and guhyakas, king of the asvamukha kinnaras. You
shall be the guardian of the nine treasures. Gunanidhi, this is your mother Uma;
take her blessing."
Gunanidhi lay at Parvati’s feet. Seeing now that he was only devoted, she
raised him up and blessed him. "May Siva’s boons to you bear rich fruit! Since
your left eye burst, we will call you Ekapinga; and Kubera of the twisted body
since you stared at me. You will be devoted to Siva forever and he will come to
stay near you: the Lord himself will be your friend."
By Uma’s blessing to Kubera, master of treasures, Siva incarnated himself
as Rudra on the solitary mountain of the earth. He came to Kailasa to be
Gunanidhi’s neighbour; white Kailasa and the secret city of Alaka, where
Kubera rules, are next to each other.
He who reads or hears this story attentively,’ said Vyasa, ‘will enjoy every
worldly pleasure and have moksha hereafter.’"
Says the gifted Suta in the Naimisa vana.

FOUR
 
Sandhya
 
AUM. Just as Siva is always locked with Parvati, the linga clings to its
yoni, forever.
Mahavishnu said to Viswakarman, the divine craftsman, "Create
auspicious Sivalingas and give them to all the devas!"
So Indra had a linga of ruby, Kubera had one of gold; Dharma had one of
bronze, Varuna one of lapis lazuli. Vishnu was given a linga of sapphire,
Brahma had a golden one; the Vasus had silver lingas, the Asvins earthen and
brazen ones. Mahalakshmi had a crystal linga, the Adityas twelve copper ones;
Soma the Moon took a linga of pearl, Agni one of diamond, Maaya had one of
fragrant sandalwood and Anantasesha got one of coral. The Goddesses had
lingas of butter, the yogins of ash; Saraswati worshipped a linga of ratna and
Bana one of mercury.
 
*
 
In the solemn clearing at the heart of the sacred forest, the Suta says to
Saunaka’s sages,
"Vyasa said to me,
‘Once Narada asked Brahma, "God with the lotus face, Father, I am never
sated hearing the lore of Siva from you. Tell me more about Rudra, tell me about
him and Sati."
Brahma said, "Siva himself told this to Vishnu once and it was Narayana
that told it to me. Listen closely, hearing this ancient tale fulfils all desires.
Originally, when Siva was separate from Shakti, he was pure
consciousness. He was without qualities, without form, beyond being and
unbeing. When he was united with Shakti, he had attributes, O Brahmana. He
had a form and divine features; he was with Uma forever.
Vishnu was born from his left side and I, Brahma, from his right. Rudra
was born from his heart. I was the Creator, Vishnu was the Sustainer and Rudra

was the Destroyer.
It was after worshipping Sadasiva that I, Pitama of the worlds, began
creation. I created the devas of light, the asuras of darkness, human beings who
are of both light and dark and their guardians the prajapatis, Daksha and the rest.
I was delighted, Narada, I thought I was the loftiest God.
When I had created Marichi, Atri, Pulaha, Pulastya, Angiras, Kratu,
Vasishta, you Narada, Daksha and Bhrigu, my noble sons, a woman was born
from my mind. She was the first woman, stunning Sandhya. Not in the human
world or in the devas’ realms, not in the under worlds or any of the three times is
there a woman so perfect. When I saw her, my heart was seized by unthinkable
thoughts and my sons as well. When she appeared, we rose to our feet,
overcome.
For the first time, desire’s unfamiliar pang tormented our minds. We saw
another being born from me in the sky and oh he was beautiful! His skin was
golden, his nose was perfect, blue wavelets were his hair. His eyebrows were
heavy; his face shone like the moon, his chest was as broad as a door. He was as
great as Indra’s Airavata and he wore a diaphanous blue robe. His hands, eyes,
face and legs were ruddy, his waist was slender and his teeth were like pearls.
He had the heady scent of the ichor of an elephant in rut; his eyes were two
petals of a blooming lotus and his neck was like Vishnu’s sankha. He rode the
Makara fish, his breath was a fragrant breeze; he carried a sugarcane bow and a
quiver with five flowery arrows. His gaze roved over us and he smiled, dazzling.
Bowing to me with that haughty smile on his lips, he said, "Brahma, what
honourable karma do you have for me? What shall I be called and who will be
my wife?"
I steadied myself before speaking to that enchanter; I was already his
victim. I said, "No one in the three worlds will turn aside your flower arrows, not
men, not the devas; not Vishnu, Siva or I will defy your sweet dictates. Be the
God of love and your karma to increase creation. As for your names, let my
sons, the Brahmarishis, name you and say who will be your wife."
I sweated with shame at the feelings he evoked in me. You rishis said, "At
your very birth, you seduced our hearts. We will call you Manmatha: roiler of
minds. Since you can assume any form you like, you shall be Kama. You
ensnare with delight, so you will be Madana; because you are so haughty you
shall be Darpaka and Daksha’s daughter will be your wife."
No sooner had they spoken than Kama, finest of archers, vanished from
our sight. Invisible now, he strung his bow and drew an arrow from his quiver.
Lithely, he assumed the posture of the bowman: alidha. He bent his bow in a
flowery circle. Mad breezes billowed there and he pierced us all in a moment

with his soft, ineluctable shafts. Oh, his enchantment seized our souls and now
we stared with naked lust at Sandhya, their sister, my daughter. For the first time
in creation, there was such desire.
Kama’s subtle sorcery pierced her, too. She rippled with temptation, with
sidelong, seductive glances at us; the forty-nine animal instincts were born hotly
from my dharmic body. Sandhya walked around me, her father, in pradakshina. I
hated to stare at her as I did in front of my sons. I knew the seething lust was
plain in my eyes. As she walked around me, a face appeared from my neck to
my right, pale cheeks quivering, another behind me, another at my left, all to
gaze helplessly at her. Blushing, she flew into the air to avoid my burning
regard. At once, a fifth head grew above me, which I hid in my jata.
I could not contain myself any longer. I said to my sons, "You must
assume the task of creation with Kama’s help, for all my punya is about to be
lost."
They went obediently from there, rapt in their own fantasies of her; in rut,
they poured forth all kinds of worlds and beings. I lifted up my beautiful
daughter, prostrate before me now and in tears. For the first time in creation, I,
Brahma, coupled recklessly with her within the pavilion of the golden lotus.
One son of mine was not smitten, or at least not entirely: Dharma, the
protector of virtue. He saw his father’s lust and his brothers’; but he himself felt
more sorrow than desire. In fear, he invoked Siva.
Dharma prayed, "Siva free from the three gunas, O Turiya, the fourth
Being. You who are beyond Prakriti, save me from this sin."
Siva materialised there and saw me with Sandhya. He began to laugh
softly. Trembling with both shame and arousal, I extricated myself from my
daughter’s arms. He arched a fine brow and said, "With your daughter,
Brahma?"
I, grandsire of worlds, was speechless. Still, my body and my soul burned
for her: for the life of me, I would only join with her again at once, even while
Siva gazed at us. I shook with lust and my seed sprang from me in an
uncontrollable ejaculation. The ancestors called the Bhrisadas were born, sixty-
four thousand of them from my retas.
Daksha and the others had returned in secret, to watch my primal
fornication. Seeing Siva there in glory, they came shamefaced from hiding. Now
they could not contain themselves. From Daksha’s seed, spilt helpless on to the
ground, Rati was born naked. Her body was as golden as Kamadeva’s. Her hips
were flaring and perfect and we saw the place between her thighs embellished
with dark, piquant hair. Bewitched in his turn, the hunter snared, Kama came
crooning to her. He took her hand and began to kiss her a thousand times.

Marichi and some other sons of mine struggled resolutely and held their
virtue back with yoga. Kratu, Vasishta, Pulastya and Angiras were overcome by
what they had seen and ejaculated onto holy ground. The manes called the
Kavyahas, who are the receivers of oblations, sprang up from their seed.
Thus, Sandhya became the mother of the pitrs, the manes. His soft,
mocking laughter still ringing in our minds, Siva vanished. My desire faded as
suddenly as it had gripped me; in a rage, I cursed Kama, "One day, you will
shoot your arrows at Siva himself and he will consume you with fire from his
eye! Then your arrogance will perish and you with it."
He grew stiff with fear and he whimpered, "Father, why do you curse me
so savagely? You yourself said ‘Vishnu, Siva, I, all of us shall be targets for your
arrows’. I only did what you ordained. Is it just that you curse me for it?"
I said to him, "You made me commit incest with my daughter! Yet, what
you say is true. So when Siva takes a wife to him forever, he will restore your
body, which he shall first make ashes."
Shame searing my heart, I staggered from that place to perform a tapasya
such as the stars had not seen, to expiate my original sin," said Brahma wistfully,
reminiscing of the oldest, grandest days, the first of creation.
Narada scratched his head thoughtfully for a moment. Then he asked,
"And what became of Rati? I do not remember clearly, Father, it was so long
ago."
Brahma said,
"Daksha said, ‘Kama, this daughter of mine already loves you. Take her to
be your wife, she has been born just for you.’
Rati could charm the world. Her eyebrow was more arched than Kama’s
sugarcane bow. Her glances at him were more deadly than his petal arrows.
When Kama went near, her breath made him forget the fragrance of the first
malaya breeze. He saw her face was a full moon. Her breasts were lotus buds,
their black nipples the bees hovering over the golden flowers. She wore a slim
necklace with stones that were the eyelets of a peacock’s tail; his gaze dwelt
there, his eyes turning red as plums. Her crimson hands had nails like kimsuka
flowers, her arms and wrists were as fine as lotus stalks. Her hair was blue like
his; her navel was a deep eddy. When he looked below to where the dark soft
locks nestled like river moss, Kama was lost.
Kama took his ecstatic delusion Rati to himself as the yogin does his
gyana. My curse was forgotten and Daksha, the father-in-law, was the most
pleased. Kama and Rati were like a sunset cloud shot with brilliant lightning,
even like Lakshmi and Hari!"
Said Brahma to Narada, who adored these tales of old and never tired of

them though he had heard them many times from that perfect raconteur.’
Said Vedavyasa to me," says Suta to Saunaka’s rishis in the Naimisa vana.

FIVE
 
Brahma plans revenge
 
The linga is of two kinds, the outward and the inner; the outer is sthula,
gross and the inner sukshma, subtle. The subtle linga in the hearts of yogins is
the purest  blissful, auspicious, immanent and undying!
 
*
 
Pressed by the eager rishis of the Naimisa, Suta Romaharshana tells them,
"Narada asked Brahma Pitama, ‘What happened after Kama married
Rati?’
His great eyes glowing in remembrance, Brahma said, ‘I decided I must
take revenge on Siva. His laughter echoed in my mind, searing me. I thought,
"He scoffed at me only because he is such a Yogi. If he were to fall in love
himself, take a wife, he would laugh out of the other side of his face."
All my tapasya failed to assuage the fire in my heart. I came back to my
children. I felt hopeful when I saw the beautiful Kama and Rati. I said to Kama,
"Remember, Manmatha, only when Siva falls in love will you have redemption
from my curse. You must follow him everywhere and cast your enchantment
over the Ascetic."
He replied, "My arrows are my lesser weapons. To delude Siva we must
first have a woman with whom he will fall in love."
When Daksha and I considered this, we wondered which woman could
capture that passionless heart. Dejected, I sighed.
Spring was born from that sigh and I scarcely knew how. He came decked
in a riot of flowers and scents. His complexion was a red lotus’, he had long
black ringlets of hair and his face was like a full moon at dusk. He was dark,
nearly maroon, sensuously fine-featured. The trees burst into bloom, koyals sang
and clear lakes were suddenly heavy with lotuses. I felt a new surge of hope,
surely this magical being could make my endeavour succeed! A malaya breeze
blew coolly around us and I said to Kama, "This one will be the inducer to

permanent love, marriage. I name him Vasantha. Let him be your companion
and help you beguile Siva."
With a colourful and romantic train, they went off to Kailasa, where Siva
lived, bewitching every creature on their way into abandon. The earth bloomed
in a spring of love. Yet, though they followed him everywhere, from Kailasa to
Meru to Naagakesara, bringing divine desire with them, Siva was not moved
from his dhyana: not even to anger. Men succumbed to the charms of Kama and
his friends; rishis of grave celibacy gave in to temptation. Devas, asuras,
kinnaras, yakshas and gandharvas, all the immortal mountain folk were in mad,
rutting love. But not Siva, or his ganas.
Kama came back to me vanquished. "Brahma, this One is fearful to even
look at! Who can seduce him? When he decides to emerge from samadhi who
will dare stand before his blazing eyes? I cannot beguile Siva. My arrows fell
around him like garlands of ash; not one pierced the armour of his dhyana."
I despaired, Narada; but I knew what I must do. Swallowing my pride, I
went to Vishnu, the sleeper on the waters of infinity, which are all the mandalas.
Wearing refulgent yellow, smiling at me, not without mockery, blue Narayana
said, "Brahma of the fathomless intellect, why have you thought of me today,
Father of the worlds? What misery has overtaken you?"
I said, choking, "Your power is the highest; the universe is in its thrall,
Kesava. By your maaya, I embarked upon my destiny!"
I told him about Sandhya and Kama; and of Siva’s laughter, which lay like
a molten serpent in my memory. I told him about my plan to seduce Siva into
love and of how Kama, Rati, mistress of the sixty-four fine arts of desire and
Vasantha, together, had failed to move him. Vishnu’s smile grew wider and he
said indulgently, "Brahma, whom do you think you are trying to seduce? This is
Siva, the Un-born. There is only one Goddess in creation that can help you. If
Durga takes a body of flesh and blood, then perhaps Rudra will take a wife."
Leaning closer, he whispered, "Tell Daksha to go to the Kshirasagara, the
sea of milk and perform a tapasya to the Devi. All will be granted."
Hope sprang alive again in my heart: here was the perfect solution. Had
Kama not said his arrows were only his lesser weapons and we must first have
the woman to captivate the Yogin? I bowed to Mahavishnu and left Vaikunta.
I began an unequalled worship of Durga, Devi of vidya and avidya,
knowledge and ignorance, mother of the three great Gods: Durga, grossest of the
gross, who is yet so subtle she has no form. She appeared in coruscating light
before me, indescribable Chandika! Her black skin shone like kohl; she was
eight-armed and blessed me with one of her hands. She rode a lion; pearls
glowed in her dishevelled hair. She was wildest of the wild, gentlest of the

gentle; the crescent moon was upon her brow, she had three eyes. Muni, I bent in
two to worship her, who was as bright as ten suns. I lay on my face at her feet.
"I bow to you who came as Lakshmi, the garland around Vishnu’s throat!
You hold the earth within yourself. You are kutasta, avyakta and ananta; you are
eternal kaala in whom the worlds abide. You are the cause of the three gunas and
are beyond them; you create, protect and devour the universe. Obeisance, O
great female seed of all things, who are knowledge and knower. I bow to you,
Mother!"
Kaali said benevolently, "Brahma, what you want must be difficult to have
that you worshipped me with such a penance. Tell me what it is. I will give you
anything."
I looked into her shining face and said as bravely as I could, "Siva the
Yogin lives upon Kailasa as Rudra. The Lord of goblins lives alone and ascetic,
O Shakti. Not Vishnu or I, not Lakshmi or Kama, no one but you can seduce him
to love. Be born as a woman, Devi and become his wife."
The Goddess seemed startled. She said mischievously, "Oh, this is
extraordinary! He is the creator of the universe, the reciter of the Veda, a God of
divine gyana: and this is what he asks. Yet, having given my word, I must grant
you any boon you want."
I said to Mahakaali, "Mother, my son Daksha sits in tapasya in your name
on the shores of the Kshirasagara. I beg you, be born as his daughter to fascinate
Rudra."
The Mother said, "So be it" and vanished.
Daksha’s tapasya lasted three thousand years; imbibing only air, he
worshipped her. At the end of that time, she manifested before him: Kaalika on
her lion: dark, beautiful and eight-armed, holding a blue lotus and a curved
sword.
Daksha said, "Primordial Durga, wielder of illusion over the universe,
bless me!"
She smiled at him, "Daksha, I am pleased with your worship. Ask me for
any boon you want."
"Be born as my daughter, Devi and become Rudra’s wife."
The Goddess shone like the sun before Daksha. She was as tall as the sky
on her ferocious mount and he trembled before her. She raised a crimson hand in
benediction, "So be it, Prajapati."
A shadow flitted across her face for an instant, as if a pang of darkness
touched her cosmic mind. Then she was gone. Daksha returned to the mandala
that was his asrama and began his task of creation. He created myriad beings
from his mind; but when he saw they did not grow, he came distraught to me.

"Father, these children of my mind are inert."
I said to my son, "Virana, lord of the earthly tribes, has a daughter called
Virini. Take her for your wife and people the world by copulation."
Daksha begot the five thousand Haryasvas on his wife Virini. These had
separate bodies but scarcely separate identities or lives: they were all so alike.
Daksha told them to go west and perform tapasya, so the children of creation
could emerge from their inertness and flourish. The Haryasvas came to the holy
lake called the Narayana, where the Sindhu meets the ocean. As soon as they
touched those sacred waters, they were cleansed of the impurity with which they
were born. Fettered by their father’s command, they began a tapasya to enliven
the children of nature.
But, Narada, intuiting Vishnu’s subtle scheme behind the Haryasvas’
tapasya, you came to your brother’s sons and said, "Nephews, how can you even
think of becoming creators without first seeing the ends of the universe?"
What you said stirred them! They worshipped you and then set off on a
quest from which they never returned, the quest to find the ends of the universe.
Daksha mourned his sons; often he muttered, "A multitude of sons brings only
disaster."
Time healed him; and again, upon his wife Virini, called Asikni, daughter
of Panchajana, lord of the five original tribes of the earth, with great coition
Daksha Prajapati begot another thousand sons to fructify creation, sons named
Sabalasvas. They, too, came to the sacred lake Narayana and were purified. They
also began a fervent tapasya to become fruitful creators. Again, Narada, you
came to them and subverted their minds by reminding them of the unknown ends
of the universe. They were also seduced; and went off on the eternal journey,
never to return.
Daksha learnt who was responsible for what happened to his sons and fate
brought you to him just then. Your brother cursed you, "Shameless corrupter of
children’s minds, be an eternal wanderer like my sons! Narada, I curse you to be
homeless for what you have done. May your heart and your feet never have
peace unless you are on the move."
You received the curse with a smile; indeed, what else could you do?
Meanwhile, I grew impatient. I saw Daksha was not going about creation in a
sensible manner or with any order: we were no nearer fulfilling my plan to
seduce Siva. I cajoled him, I blessed him and now Daksha begot sixty daughters
upon his wife. Ten of them he gave in marriage to Dharma, thirteen to Kashyapa
and twenty-seven to Soma the Moon. He gave two daughters each to Bhrigu,
Angiras and Krisava. The rest he gave to Tarkshya. The children born from
those first marriages peopled the worlds.

Some say Sivaa was the eldest of Daksha’s daughters and some that she
was the youngest. Some say she was born in the middle and all three are true for
different kalpas. When Virini shone forth during her pregnancy like the Devi
herself, Daksha knew Kaali had kept her word to him. He was ecstatic; he
performed the pumsavana rites that are usually done only for the birth of a son.
The devas visited Daksha and Virini; the asuras came to pay homage.
In the tenth month of Virini’s pregnancy, Sivaa suddenly appeared before
her, scintillating. The quarters had grown profoundly tranquil; there was a fine
shower of rain and flowers from the heavens. The devas had gathered in the sky
with sublime music and dance. Yagna fires burned strong and serene that day.
The moon, the stars and the planets were all perfectly auspicious.
Daksha joined his palms in homage to fabulous Kaali. He said,
"Obeisance, Mother of all things. I bow to you who told Brahma to create the
worlds, Vishnu to sustain them and Rudra to destroy them. You are the Mother
of the Trimurti. O Kaali of vidya and avidya, of rajasika, sattvika and tamasika
forms, Bhavani, Jaganmaya, O Durga, I worship you!"
"Daksha, your wish is granted," said she and she was an ordinary infant
wailing at her mother’s side: but oh, she was lovely, a blemishless baby. Seeing
her unearthly face, Daksha and Asikni’s joy was complete. Vishnu and I went
there to bless the holy child. We found her feeding hungrily at her mother’s
breast. How luminous she was, she the essence of the three worlds!’ said
Brahma, overcome at the memory,’
My Guru Vyasa said to me."
Suta also pauses in his narration to the rishis.

SIX
 
Siva and Sati
 
He had sat in tapasya for thousands of interminable, cosmic years; yet, his
mind grew unsteady with compassion for the world. His eyes fluttered half open
and tears fell from them as if at a vow broken. From those precious drops the
first rudraksha plants sprouted.
Siva has said to the Goddess, the rudraksha is the holiest bead in this
world. Wearing rudraksha, Siva’s tears, destroys the most heinous sins.
 
*
 
Suta says,
"My guru Vyasa said to me, ‘Narada urged his father Brahma to continue
with the Purana, after the birth of Sati.
Brahma resumed, "The goodness of that child, who was Parashakti
incarnate, grew like the moon on its way to fullness. Even as a small girl, she
drew pictures of Rudra, of uncanny likeness, though she had never seen him. Her
songs of childhood were of Siva; the melodies and lyrics came to her, inspired
and incomparable.
Almost before we knew it, she reached puberty. Do you remember Narada,
you and I went to visit her in her father’s house? How entirely exquisite she was.
I can still see her in my mind, as if it was just this morning. She took no
convincing, did she, of what we wanted of her? She knew she was born to be
Siva’s bride. Daksha had been delighted at the thought; he had always
encouraged her to draw her pictures of Rudra, to sing of him. Now, when he saw
her a young woman, perfect-faced, perfect-bodied, he thought, ‘How will I give
her to anyone, even Siva?’
Perhaps, that was the germ of his sin; seeing Sati, who could have blamed
him? Though what he did later was unforgivable.
You and I said to her, ‘Sati, with tapasya you can make him yours, who
has never taken a woman.’

Sati worshipped Rudra in her home. In Asvina, she prayed to him with an
unflickering mind, on the first, sixth and eleventh days of the dark half of the
Margasirsa moon. She was awake all night on the seventh day of the bright half
of Pausa and worshipped him at dawn with cooked rice and krishara. On the
riverbank, her clothes soaked through, she worshipped him on the paurnima
night in Magha. On the amavasya day of the dark half of Phalguna, she stayed
up all night again and on the chaturdasi day of Chaitra, offering palasa and
damana flowers. She fasted a month in Jyeshta, in Ashada she invoked him with
brihati flowers, wearing only a black cloth. In Sravana, she prayed to him with
sacred threads. She drank no water, save on the fourteenth day in Bhadra. Every
day and soon every moment, she spent in devotion to him. Nothing else made
her happy and he was established in her passionate heart.
After these rituals, Sati began her bhakti in earnest: she thought of nothing
but him. So single-minded was her dhyana, the devas of light came to watch her;
Hari and I came to watch her. We marvelled at her immaculate tapasya! Then we
went to austere, magnificent Kailasa, Vishnu with Lakshmi, I with Saraswati and
all the devas in entourage. We said to him, "Obeisance Mahesa, O Purusha
beyond Prakriti! Obeisance, Parabrahman: your realm unknown to the sages and
gods. Obeisance, three-eyed, always radiant, pervasive Lord. Obeisance, Lord of
yogins, all merciful Siva!’
Siva gave us an ambiguous look, Muni and my heart gave a lurch. Surely,
he divined our intention as clearly as a father does his child’s. He said in his
slow, deep way, "Vishnu, Brahma, O Devas, I am delighted by your stotra. Tell
me, what brings you to Kailasa?"
Always the quickest of us, Vishnu inclined his head at me. So of course, in
Siva’s awesome presence, I became our spokesman. "Ocean of mercy," I began,
avoiding his gaze for I was afraid, "we have come to petition you. O
Vrishabhadhvaja, though Vishnu, you and I are One in truth, we are three and
separate in the universe of forms. Vishnu has Lakshmi for his wife and I,
Saraswati. We beg you to also marry: if not for your own pleasure, at least for
the sake of creation," said I, trembling.
He was not a bit put out. "Vishnu and Brahma, the sight of you both
quickens my joy, O masters of worlds! But of what use is a wife to me? I have
bliss in my yoga: to me marriage can only be bondage. Yet, since you have come
to petition me, how can I refuse?"
He was so sure of himself. "But tell me who I can marry, Brahma. Which
woman do you know who can bear my golden seed in her body?" He paused,
then said thoughtfully, "She must be a yogini when I am a yogin, an ardent wife
when I am a grihasta. When I am absorbed in my Atman, she will be damned if

she distracts me.
And a final condition, O best of Gods: if she ever doubts me for even a
moment, I will abandon her. Find me such a wife and, if for nothing else, to
please you both I will marry her.’
He laughed. He was certain we could never find or even create the woman
he described. By our secrecy and her maaya, he did not yet know about the
Devi’s incarnation. It was true, which other woman could bear his terrific seed
within her womb. His blazing, golden hiranyaretas!
I smiled and Mahavishnu also. Now he had committed himself, I said to
Siva, "We know the woman for you."
He arched a long brow, but I met his gaze levelly; at that moment, he knew
of the Devi’s birth. There was not a flicker from Rudra, no ripple on the sea of
calm that was his face. Encouraged, I went on eagerly, if now a little ashamed of
my petty scheming against this noblest God. I did not realise all this was his
doing, beginning with Sandhya, my daughter in the lotus. Siva saw deeper and
farther in time than I ever did.
"She is Daksha’s child, my grand-daughter. She is called Sati and she is
Durga born into the world just for you," I said triumphantly. "She already
worships you with a fierce tapasya. Take her for your wife, Siva, let the three
worlds rejoice."
Vishnu put in, "Do so, my Lord. The universe will be ennobled when you
marry Sati."
Siva said quietly, "If my conditions are met, so be it."
Then he looked at me piercingly for a moment, deep into my eyes, my
soul, where I hardly knew myself but felt him gaze. I broke into a fine sweat as
an ominous foreboding stirred within me, a dark thing. Even in that moment of
victory, I remembered that the reason why this had come about was hardly pure.
I thrust the thought away as inauspicious and Siva murmured, "All will be well
at last."
Vishnu, the others and I came away happy.
During the month of Asvina, Sati observed her fast as usual on the eighth
day of the bright half. The next night, Siva appeared before her. He came in
light. He was supremely handsome, fair, five-faced, three-eyed; the crescent
moon was in his topknot, his neck was blue where he had once quaffed poison.
He carried the trisula and wore an emerald serpent as an amulet of protection.
His body shone with an ascetic’s sacred dust: a cosmos of infinitesimal stars.
The Ganga sparkled in his jata; he was lustrous as a hundred Kamas. His
staggering beauty pierced Sati through; he had assumed a most ravishing form
for this devotee. She bent her head shyly and knelt at his feet.

Gently and forever, he touched her head with his palm. His grace entered
her like fire of galaxies. Siva said tenderly, "Dakshayani, I am pleased with your
tapasya. Ask me for anything you want."
He wanted, Narada, to hear her speak. Having seen her face and her form,
he already imagined her voice. She was so overcome, she was speechless; she
stared mutely at the ground.
"Choose your vara, girl," he urged her again.
She managed to whisper, "As you are pleased to give me: either the boon I
want or the husband I desire."
He laughed, delighted now at what we had committed him to, that Sati
stood blushing and so lovely before him. He said, "You be my wife."
She raised her great eyes up to his and smiled into his heart like the
beginning of a new creation. They stood for a long while, locked in that gaze,
lost in sringara. He shone like the finest crystal and she like glossy kohl. She was
as lambent as the moon on a dark night, or the Chitra nakshatra. She lowered her
eyes: if she stared any longer, she would never tear herself away.
She joined her palms to him, "Siva, take me to be your wife in my father’s
house."
In a daze, Siva replied, "So be it."
Trembling with joy, Sati went home to her mother. Siva went back to his
asrama and tried to return to his dhyana; but his life had changed. He tried to
invoke the Sabdabrahman, the Pranava, AUM, in his heart, but Sati’s voice
whispered there instead. He saw her watching him with such love he thought she
had come to his ice cave and his eyes flew open. Shaking his head when he saw
she was not there, he summoned me with a thought.
With Saraswati, I went to him, pining on his mountain. He was like any
other man in love. He did his best to hide his feelings. They shone through his
every artifice like the sun through morning mist. Awkward as I had never seen
him, he said, "I have been worshipped by Daksha’s daughter Sati. She observed
the sacred Nanda rites and, having given Hari and you my word, I was bound to
honour her worship. She said to me, ‘Be my vara, Siva,’ and I replied, ‘Sati, be
my wife.’"
Was that entirely the truth he spoke, Narada? He who cursed me to be
forever without worship in the world because I told one small lie. I did not care
anymore: he was no longer calm and I was pleased. Did he remember how he
had mocked me when he found me in Sandhya’s arms; did he recall how cruelly
he had laughed? He was the mockable one now, great Siva, the laughable one
the Mahayogin lovestruck and in such a hurry to send me off to his prospective
father-in-law, to finalise his wedding!

While I smiled to myself in satisfaction, he said, "Brahma, you must ask
Daksha to give me his daughter."
He drew me aside, away from the others. Shedding every pretence of
detachment, he said hoarsely, "As quickly as you can, Brahma, I cannot bear
being apart from her!"
That was such a delicious moment. All the planning, the waiting, the
penance, was worth that moment. Then, compassion for great Maheswara moved
me: didn’t I know how he felt? I said, "I will go to Daksha at once. He will offer
you his daughter himself."
Meanwhile, Sati had come home to her parents. Seeing her, Virini knew
what had happened. She clasped Sati to her and mother and daughter wept for
excitement. To be fair to him, Daksha also was happy when he heard the news
and he announced a celebration to mark the day.
He began to wonder how to take the next step. Siva had gone back to his
mountain. Would he come again? What course was proper in the circumstances,
which was expedient? Should he send a messenger to the Yogin? No. If Siva
spurned an offer of Sati’s hand, the humiliation would be unbearable. Who could
believe the Ascetic’s legendary disdain of women had vanished overnight? Yet,
Rudra had promised Sati he would be her husband.
"Shall I worship Siva myself?" wondered Daksha Prajapati, his mind a
whirl. Even as he longed for a mediator, I appeared before him, coming straight
from Siva.
He was shrewd enough to guess this was no routine visit by a father to his
son; also, the triumph on my face must have been plain. After welcoming
Saraswati and me with due homage and making us comfortable, as a son should,
Daksha asked, "Pitama, is there any special reason why you are here?"
I laughed aloud, so exhilarated was I. I grasped his hand and cried,
"Without being pierced by Kama’s arrows, Siva is smitten with your Sati!
Excited as any young lover, he no longer meditates on the Atman but upon your
daughter’s face. He imagines her coming to him and asks his ganas, ‘Is she
here?’ When they answer ‘No’, he sits grave for a while, then asks again, ‘Is she
here?’ Love has vanquished great Siva! I have just seen him and he worships
Sati today exactly as she worshipped him."
Clapping my hands, I laughed again. I did not know that, sooner than I
thought, I would pay for the unseemly merriment. Not quite sharing my elation,
Daksha waited in silence. He knew I would tell him how to proceed.
When I controlled myself, I said, "I will tell Narada to bring Siva here.
When he comes, offer Sati to him without delay."
Leaving Daksha bemused, I flew back to Siva waiting anxiously for me.

"What happened, Brahma? Eldest of devas, did Daksha refuse to give her to me?
You must convince him that she and I are meant to be together. You must tell
him as his father to change his mind."
So he babbled for a while, without letting me get in a word. He was in
such a state: wringing his hands and mine from time to time. Finally, raising my
voice before him as I had never dared or had reason to before, I managed to gain
his attention. "Daksha did not refuse what you asked."
"What do you mean?" he cried, not believing his fortune.
"What I say, my Lord. Daksha said, ‘Now that he asks for her, my
daughter shall go to him. Why else did she worship him? It is my wish, also, that
she becomes his wife. Let him come to me at the time of an auspicious
conjunction of the stars and I will give her to him.’ So Daksha said to me, Siva,"
said I, hiding a smile.
He actually whimpered in delight, Narada! He beamed like a new-born
star, the mighty Yogin and I scoffed at him silently; though I could not help
rejoice with him, as well, so infectious was his joy. Inscrutable fate recorded my
scorn.
Siva said, "With you and Narada and all your other sons, I will go to
Daksha’s house with my ganas. Summon the rishis, Pitama of the universe. The
stars already spin into their houses of exaltation."
With a thought, I summoned my children, you among them, Narada. They
arrived in glory: the manes Marichi, Atri, Pulaha, Pulastya, Kratu, Angiras,
Vasishta and Bhrigu. Then, called by Siva’s wish and most glorious of all, with
their limitless army, came Mahavishnu and Mahalakshmi, flying on golden
Garuda. It was the thirteenth day of Chaitra, the bright half of that month. The
moon was in the Uttara Phalguni nakshatra. It was the Sun’s day, when Siva and
his train set out for Daksha’s abode.
The devas celebrated on the way and, most of all, the Lord’s ganas did.
Siva rode on his bull, Nandiswara, at the head of a motley and brilliant wedding
party like the world had never seen.
If you remember, Daksha received us with ceremony. He came out himself
to escort Siva, Vishnu and me, the devas and rishis into his home. He
worshipped us all and gave Siva pride of place to sit. Then he came and knelt
before me.
"Father, perform the marriage rites as prescribed in the Veda."
From wounded pride, I had once begun what was culminating this day.
Joyfully, I began to perform the sacred rituals. The stars and the planets were in
exceptional harmony, as if they were sensitive to the love of Siva and Sati.
Daksha gave his daughter to Mahadeva; but in our eagerness, we did not worship

the heavenly ones, the planets and the constellations, as we should have. In his
impatience, even Siva was happy to have the ceremonies over. Being the priest, I
should have been more meticulous. Guilty for the secret scorn I had enjoyed at
his expense, I wanted to please Siva now by hurrying through the solemn rites of
marriage.
Almost at once misfortune struck me; but that was nothing compared with
what followed. When I think of it now, it was all a trial and Siva came through it
with the most dignity, though he was the most severely tried. I have also
wondered how much Vishnu knew, but did not tell.
At that wedding, Narayana said, inscrutably, "Siva, look at the four of us!
You are fair and Sati dark as twilight; I am blue and Lakshmi white. Auspicious
One, Lord of all the living, promise me you will kill the man, whoever he is, that
looks at your Sati with lust."
Siva agreed, "I shall!"
I performed all the kriyas prescribed in the grihyasutras. I asked the bride
and groom to circle the sacred fire. As they walked round the pit where the fire
crackled, fate punished me.
They circled slowly, for this is the ordained way. Siva walked in front,
saying, "To thee they did carry Surya round with the bridal procession at first.
May you return Agni to them and children."
I saw Sati’s dark foot, bow-like arch, arrow-straight toes and curved nails,
protruding past the hem of her garment; suddenly I was paralysed with lust. I
stood there, the priest for the occasion, feeding the fire, chanting holy mantras,
overcome. Helplessly, my eyes roved over her body. I kept my face turned
down, but a shameless fever in my loins coupled lewdly with me beside the altar.
I stood crooked and awkwardly, to hide my arisen manhood.
I had to see her face; but she walked behind Siva with her head bent in
modesty. I threw damp twigs onto the fire. Clouds of black smoke spewed up
and engulfed us. Coughing, Siva covered his face with his hands for a moment.
In a trice, I lifted the uncomprehending Sati’s veil and gazed at her with a moan.
At that moment, a climax of ineffable power wracked me. I staggered back,
holding my seed within me as best I could with dhyana. Four drops dripped from
my penis and fell on the ground.
At first, if he saw me lift his bride’s veil, Siva might have assumed I was
helping her adjust it. Now he saw my guilty emission. He sprang forward with a
roar and seized my throat. A trisula from nowhere blazed in his hand, raised to
behead me.
"Wretch! On my wedding day, as we circled the holy fire."
I was too stunned to speak, it had all happened so swiftly. I only

whimpered and prepared to die. Marichi, you and the others began to shout and
quick-wittedly to hymn wrathful Siva. Fortunately, Daksha had the courage to
run forward and seize the hand with the trisula.
Siva said, "Daksha, you heard what Vishnu asked and I granted: that if any
man looked lustfully at Sati, I would kill him. I cannot break my oath to Vishnu.
And look here!"
Before that august, divine congregation, he pointed out the moist place on
the ground where my seed had fallen. How can I describe the terror and shame
of that moment? Some gasped at my sin; others, especially the women, tittered
savagely, clicking their tongues. Then, just in time, Vishnu was at Siva’s side,
restraining him.
"Siva, he is your bhakta, don’t kill him. For my sake, do not kill him. If
you do, who will carry on creation? Moreover, Lord, it was Brahma that prayed
for Sati to be born as Daksha’s daughter."
Terrible Rudra was adamant. Eyes blazing, he cried, "Don’t stop me, Hari,
I must kill this four-faced dog. I will assume the task of creation myself, or
create another Creator!"
He raised the smoking trident again and I shut my eyes. I heard Vishnu
say, so calmly, "Siva, one cannot kill oneself. We three are one and it is absurd
to think of killing yourself."
The bridegroom demanded, "This wretch and I one? How Vishnu? He
stands brazen out there, quite distinct from me."
"Brahma is not apart from you, nor you from him. I am not separate from
you or you from me. Siva, you are the primeval Being, the supreme Brahman
and everything is part of you," declared Mahavishnu in a clear voice, so the
assembly of rishis and devas heard him. I felt Siva grow calm. His grip on my
throat relaxed; he dropped me on the floor in a heap. Suddenly he smiled and his
face radiated the sea-like calm of old. I sighed in relief and thanked Vishnu with
all my heart: none but the Blue Saviour could have stopped Siva from killing me
that day.
Terror vanished from there like magic. Siva stood kindly again, you would
scarcely believe this was the same God of a moment ago. He gave me his hand
to pick myself up from the floor. I fell on my face at his feet. I cried,
"Paramasiva, no one but you would have spared my life after what I did. How
can your ever forgive me?"
He smiled. "Brahma, touch your head with your hand."
The moment I did, I became the bull on which he rode. I bent my head.
"Forgive me, forgive me! If I must die to atone, so be it."
Siva pronounced, "As this bull, you will do penance to seek my

forgiveness. The world will know you as ‘the head of Rudra’. Spilling seed is the
way of humans, so you will also be born as a man and wander the earth.
Wherever you go, people will ask, ‘What is on Brahma’s head?’ You will reply,
‘Siva’. Adulterers will be forgiven their sin if they hear your story.
As people in the world recount your tale, your own sin shall be worn away,
bit by bit and gradually you will become pure again. Brahma, ridicule is the
atonement for you."
Everyone there laughed at me and their derision entered my ears like fire.
Siva pronounced, "The four drops of your seed that fell on the earth shall be the
stormclouds of the end of the ages, the clouds of the dissolution. Behold the
Samvartaka, the Avarta, the Pushkara and the Drona!"
A clap of thunder and, roaring, four black clouds rose out of the ground.
My seed had made the smoke from the damp twigs fruitful. Crackling
dreadfully, those clouds hung overhead as Doom: his newest and most terrible
servants, incredible mushrooms blotting out the sun. They erupted into jagged
displays of blinding, many-hued lightning, or brief, lashing showers, as Siva
waved his elegant hands at them like some unimaginable wizard. Then, at his
dismissive wave, they flew out of the sky quick as thoughts. They vanished
before we knew it, those lost children of my loins.
They that noticed saw how entirely calm young Sati was, while the
Apocalypse hung above us and even the devas quailed.
I was quiet again. I accepted Siva’s judgement gratefully: I realised how
easily I could have died instead. We concluded the ceremony as if nothing
untoward had happened. The devas rained flowers on the newlyweds. The
gandharvas and kinnaras broke into resonant songs. Beautiful Rambha and her
apsaras danced in sublime celebration. The other matter a thing of the past, Siva
folded his hands to me and said, "Eldest of Gods, what would you have of me as
dakshina for the wedding priest? Ask for anything."
I said, "Siva, stay here forever in this altar to remove the sins of men. I will
build an asrama here and sit in tapasya. If a man visits this shrine on the
thirteenth day of the bright half of Chaitra, when the day is the Sun’s and the
nakshatra Uttara Phalguni, let his every sin be quelled and all his ailments
disappear."
Siva said, "So be it. For the sake of the people, Sati and I will remain here
forever."
With his bride, he stepped into the heart of that altar and lo, a holy image
appeared for the ages to worship. Then, because the subtle stars urged him, Siva
hastily took Daksha’s blessing for himself and his wife, Vishnu’s blessing and
mine. Setting Sati before him on Nandin, he set out for his Himalayan home of

ice and silence.
I wonder if Daksha’s resentment began there; he seemed put out by the
inordinate haste. Then, he did not see how long and painful the way ahead was.
As Siva embraced Vishnu in farewell, I thought I saw them exchange a smile of
conspiracy, with a knowing look in my direction. It flashed through my mind
that they had planned my humiliation together. But I had richly deserved it, my
son," said Brahma of the marriage of Siva and Sati in the manvantara of
Svayambhuva Manu,’
"My master said to me," says Suta to the enraptured rishis of the forest.

SEVEN
 
On Kailasa
 
‘Rud’ means misery and ‘dravayati’ means to root out. Rudra is the
destroyer of our misery. Rudra’s body is fiery and terrible. Shakti is of the moon.
Nectarine, her body is the font of calm.
 
*
 
‘Brahma said,
"They arrived at his dwelling, a labyrinth of caves and an enchanted
garden on the loftiest mountain. Siva dismissed his ganas and Nandiswara so he
could be alone with Sati. He said to them, ‘You will come to me only when I call
you.’
They vanished from there. He was a novice at love, the great God
Maheswara. Though inflamed by her presence, he began his courtship shyly. So
far, she had been bashful, not even looking into his face along the journey,
except when she could not help herself for the beauty of him. Now, as soon as he
came and perched himself at her side, she took the passionate lead at love. She
took his white, ash-smeared hand and brought it to her breast, dark as night.
Siva drew a sharp breath at the first touch of her velvet skin, her nipple
alive against his palm. She cried out softly and Rudra bent to kiss her. First her
hand, then fluttering tiny kisses all the way up her bare arm, he came to her neck
and kissed her there; she trembled in her storm of love. Her red mouth found his
lips and they remained like that for an eternity, oblivious.
Daylight faded outside the cavern. Gasping, they broke away from each
other. Rising in the vast mountain silence, he led her out into the dusk to watch
the sun set iridescent over fabled peaks.
As they stood enraptured, he wove sylvan flowers into a wild garland for
her and laid it around her slender neck. He began to whisper into her shell ear,
sweet nothings brushing delicate ridges. She shut her eyes and leaned against
him, lost. Her fragrant breath heaved like the universe.

As the sun sank lower, he whispered, ‘What is my name, do you know my
name?’
She had yet to say a word to him. Not opening her eyes, she smiled and
shook her head slightly. He insisted, ‘Say my name.’
Still without opening her eyes, she caressed his face with one hand,
standing there as darkness stole over them. Her other hand she sent down like
fire over his body, down madly to the root of him, his sacred maleness, her
small, black, red-nailed hand. Siva shook with her fever. The stars, which now
pinpricked the twilight sky, quivered.
The sun had set. He carried her back in, light as a large lotus. When she
opened her eyes again, she found she was alone in the cavernous chamber.
Sculpted stalactites hung, breathtaking, from the lofty ceiling. The warm cave
was strewn with a riot of garlands; soft lamps cast shadows on rock walls. She
saw a mirror in a corner and, fearful lest she had spoilt herself for him, crossed
to it to study her face. She smiled in the glass: never had she seen herself so
radiantly beautiful. Even he, she allowed herself, would be pleased with her.
Suddenly, someone covered her eyes. She gave a little scream, but his
touch was familiar. He stood behind her and his hands were on her face, her
arms and her body: inhibition gone, the male in him in charge now. She melted
in the laval desire licking her spine, waking the coiled serpent there; it fled up
that stem to the thousand-petalled bloom unfurling in her head. His hands were
everywhere, stroking her into a flame. Abruptly he stopped. Her breath came
breathlessly and, opening her eyes, she saw his great chest also heaved.
She took his hand and stroked it to calm him: so they could begin all over
again. She said her first words to him now, ‘Siva, shall we wait a while?’
There was no reply, only his gaze. The silence in this place was deeper
than any she had known. She was frightened; fear gave edge to her desire.
‘Siva hold me, I’m afraid!’
‘You said my name,’ he smiled.
His hands began to undo the straps that fastened her robe. His breath
caught in his throat when her breasts were naked in the lamplight. The garment
he had peeled from her fell from his hands. He sat her upon a couch of down.
Her wedding necklace sparkled on her dark chest; she felt his kisses travel down
her throat. She felt his hands slide down her body, those great and fine hands all
over her, making her delirious.
He drank from her. She rippled in waves: out from the singing, rapturous
point of her breast, down past her violet navel to the knot of her below, washing
down to the soles of her red petal feet and up in a tide again to her head,
exploding there in bursts of legend’s bright foam. She was sobbing now, Narada,

seeking him blindly with her fingers.
The sweet nectar of her was unbearably heady. He pulled away again,
gently folding back her hand. With musk, he made marks like bees on her
breasts. Laughing, he said of a mole on her, "This kaalika is a tiny you, as black,
as irresistible!"
Beside himself, he drew away, but her hand still sought him recklessly. He
cupped it in his own, stopped it, whispering hoarsely, ‘Wait.’
And she, ‘I cannot, my Siva!’
The Goddess in her would not be denied this experience of incarnation: the
loving for which they had taken human form. He let her have her way with him
in the worshipful dark."
Brahma paused, as if trying to fathom what happened in the Himalayan
cavern.
Narada cried, "Don’t stop, Pitama."
Shutting his eyes to better recall that sacred lovemaking, Brahma went on,
"Now she called his thousand names, the Kotirudra with which she had once
worshipped him. Her fingers were in his matted jata, holding him down to her
without shame. Everywhere her hands flew over him, birds freed from a cage.
She was no more her own mistress than he was master of himself. Another thing
held them in its frenzied clutch, a love older than the sky or stars.
At last, he rose from where he knelt. With a hundred kisses, he pushed her
gently onto her back; neither of them could wait anymore. Like a flower
opening, she raised her legs and draped them over his shoulders, while she
smiled sweetly at him though a haze filmed her eyes. She took his linga, radiant
as a deity, in her hands. She breathed, ‘My blood is for you, Siva, mark yourself
with it.’
At that moment, Siva was lost in her ocean, in the tide that surged deeper
than he knew. With a cry, he thrust into his beloved and the blood of her
maidenhood greeted him like aradhana. Her scream uncurled the nebulae and
Siva was installed in the temple of Sati’s divine body.
The universe breathed anew, as if born again, as he began to crest her
waves and her wild cries pierced everything." said Brahma, peerless raconteur,
to Narada muni,’
Matsyagandhi’s great poet son, Vedavyasa, told me once, long ago,"
Says the Suta to the rishis.

EIGHT
 
She doubts him
 
The basic unit of life is the nimesha, the duration of a blink. Fifteen
nimeshas make one kastha, thirty kasthas one kaala, thirty kaalas one muhurta;
thirty muhurtas make one day. Thirty days is a maasa, a month, one day of the
gods and the ancestors. Six maasas make one ayana; two ayanas, solstices,
make one year. One human year is one day and night for the devas, uttarayana
being the day and dakshinayana the night. Three hundred and sixty human years
make a divine one.
Four are the yugas in the land of Bharata: krita, treta, dwapara and kali.
The krita is four thousand celestial years long and four hundred years more is its
sandhyamsa, its dawn and twilight cusps. The treta yuga is three thousand godly
years long and three hundred more its sandhyamsa. The dwapara yuga is two
thousand years long and two hundred years its dawn and dusk. Finally, the kali
yuga lasts for a thousand celestial years and a hundred more its cusps.
A chaturyuga, a cycle of four ages, lasts for eleven thousand years of the
devas. Seventy-one chaturyugas make a manvantara; fourteen manvantaras, a
kalpa. Thousands of manvantaras have already been, hard to estimate in proper
order. A kalpa of a thousand chaturyugas, twelve million divine years, is one day
of Brahma. Eight thousand Brahma years are one Brahma yuga. A thousand
Brahma yugas make one Brahma savana. Brahma’s life is three thousand and
three savanas long.
A day of Brahma’s life contains fourteen Indras, their lives and deaths; his
whole life five hundred and forty thousand Indras.
A day of Mahavishnu’s is Brahma’s lifetime. A day of Rudra is as long as
Vishnu’s life. Siva’s day is as long as Rudra’s life. A day of Sadasiva is as long
as the life of Siva. A day of Sakshatsiva spans Sadasiva’s life. This
Parameswara, this primal God, controls Mahakaala, Time, from which
everything originates and by which all things are destroyed, Kaala, caught in
whose mouth the universe turns like a wheel. Kaala belongs to Siva who is
known as Kaalatman, the Soul of Time.
Kaala is inscrutable; only Siva is beyond Prakriti, Purusha and Kaala.
 

*
 
‘Brahma said,
"Narada, the lovemaking of Sivaa and Siva, who never spent himself,
lasted twenty-five divine years. For most of this time, he was inside her: the
jewel was in the lotus! Yet, on occasion, he went off to gather lilies with slender
stalks that glimmered with jewels like dewdrops, to drape over her nakedness.
Among the mountain gardens they made love and in fine grottoes. She would not
allow him to be apart from her for long, while they voyaged through mysterious
realms of darkness and light in the crystal ship of their love.
Kama and Vasantha came there and everything around them bloomed out
of season; a perennial, magic springtime came to Kailasa. Moons dipped in
twilight; palasa blossoms like Kama’s arrows at the feet of the trees. Like
Kama’s banners were the golden naagakesara trees in flower. Wafted on the
malaya breeze, the scent of the clove on its vine was spice to love in that place.
Mango and sali blossoms glowed like flames. Festive with lotuses, mountain
lakes shone still and clear: like the minds of rishis where the reflection of the
atman is immaculate.
Such were the days of their loving, what can be said of the nights? Every
one with a full moon risen hypnotic into the sky, Sati’s black skin glistening in
the supernal light. Sometimes under her beloved, sometimes above him, moment
by moment she grew into a profound mistress of love and satisfied him in his
soul. She entered his body with loving, Muni; she drank of him and was never
quenched. He too drank the nectar from her face; and drank on.
Then, once, out on a sheer precipice where they lay as one watching the
stars appear, she said to him, ‘Siva, look how the clouds scarred me with
hailstones as I lay oblivious in your arms. The swans have flown to the Manasa;
high on the mountain, crows and chakoras are building nests to shelter from the
coming season. My love, spring is over; even here, time flits by. Trees uprooted
by the wind seem to dance in the sky. Gashes of lightning wear the faces of the
Badavamukha and I fear the gathering stormclouds.
Siva, make a home for us on Kailasa, upon the higher Himalayas, or in
Kasi down in the world.’
Siva stroked her satin side and she, distracted, fondled him absently in her
lotus hand. He saw that, like any woman, she was bent on the home of which she
dreamt. The crescent moon in his hair shone a beam down on them. He said
softly, ‘Of Kailasa, Sumeru or Jambu, choose any mountain. No raincloud, not
Avartaka or Pushkara, ever rose to their summits. We will live on the one you

choose.
Siddha women will be your sakhis and the naaga girls, the serpent lords’
daughters and the turanga mukhis. Seeing you they will forget their own beauty
and come to be near you. Mena, the mountain’s wife, will be as a mother to you.
Sati, will you go to the Himalaya, where it is spring forever, where the
ancient trees are kalpa vrikshas, where the rishis of peace live, where even beasts
of prey are calmed? The home of devas, resplendent with ramparts of gold,
silver and crystal, with lakes in which lotuses grow, stalks encrusted with jewels,
where the sarasa and the chakravaka roost? Or will you go to Meru, where the
apsaras Rambha, Sachi and Menaka shall have their beauty paled by you? Or
will you stay on lofty Kailasa, near Kubera’s secret city? You only have to tell
me, my love.’
Looking into his face, Sati said, ‘On Himalaya.’
Neither of them, adrift on the sea of their love, realised fate’s long hand
had touched her so she chose that mountain.
Siva and Sati went to a pinnacle of the Himalaya and were welcomed by
the holy and ravishing siddha women. That peak had as many colours as the
rainbow, with unearthly lakes and undreamed-of dark lotuses. The place glowed
as if it was always dawn here. Crystal, rainless clouds hung in the lucid sky.
Asvamukhas, apsaras, guhyakas, vidyadharas and kinnaras roamed free here:
immortal folk as various and wonderful as the birds, the golden deer, the trees
and flowers. For a thousand perfect, intoxicated years, Siva and Sati lived there,
lost in each other. Until the day came, the unimaginable day, when Sati woke at
dawn beside her lord and said to him, ‘Siva, I am sated with lovemaking, tell me
about the atman today.’
Painstakingly, he discoursed for a whole day on that profoundest guru, the
soul. As the sun set, they were ragged for each other again and fell together as if
it was their first night once more. There was no more asking after the atman
from her, for a long time, but only the renewed passion: as if with that break of a
day, they had begun again at virginity. But how long would fate leave joy like
theirs untried?
One day, Sati said to Siva, ‘We have lived long enough in this place. Let
us roam the world below, I have not seen it at all.’
Siva called Nandiswara to carry them down the mountain. Just then,
something dark and furtive stirred in the depths of his mind; he could not put his
finger on what it was. Down came Siva and Sati, onto the plains of
Bharatavarsha. They roamed the ocean-girt world, illumining every place they
visited with their grace.
Once they came to the numinous Dandaka vana. Marvelling at the richness

they saw as they went along, Siva pointed out many old secrets of the vana to
her; and she often noticed tiny, precious lives in the undergrowth and branches
that escaped him. Then, they came upon Rama and Lakshmana, panic-stricken in
the heart of that forest: Ravana had abducted Sita. Repeatedly, Rama cried out
his love’s name. His hands were clenched; his face was a mask of despair.
Mangala shone a baleful light into his fortunes. Lakshmana was so distraught
tears coursed down his noble face. He never spoke: he felt bitterly guilty that he
had left Sita alone when his brother had told him not to leave her side for a
moment.
Siva materialised before Rama in that glade of sorrow. He bowed to
Dasaratha’s son.
‘Jaya vijayi bhava!’ said Siva to Rama, blessing him.
Sati stayed invisible, watching and amazed by what her husband did.
Rama bowed low to Siva and the brothers resumed their quest. Sati asked, ‘Who
are the two archers, Rudra? How did you bow to the blue and older one? Siva,
how did you bow to a mortal?’
Siva smiled, he caressed her cheek. ‘That was Rama and his brother
Lakshmana. Ravana, the rakshasa, has carried Rama’s Sita away to his island
Lanka. Rama is the Sleeper on the Waters, Narayana incarnate. So I bowed to
him, Sati.’
For a moment, Sati’s face clouded with doubt: mortals were strange to her
and she did not believe Siva. The dark thing in his heart clutched at Rudra again.
Without pause to think, he said to his wife, ‘Look, Rama has come full circle in
anguish. If you doubt what I said, go and test him for yourself.’
Siva could have bitten his tongue the instant those words were out. He
could not recall them. Sati accepted what seemed a playful challenge. What did
she know about Siva’s oath to Vishnu and Brahma, ‘If she doubts me for even a
moment I will abandon her.’
Sati assumed Sita’s form and face, exactly and approached Rama. She
flung her arms around him and wept as if she had been lost in the jungle. Rama
did not see his wife there at all. He bowed low to the Goddess, ‘Devi, where has
Siva gone? Why, Mother Shakti, have you taken Sita’s form? Do you mock my
grief?’
Ashamed, Sati was herself again. She blessed Rama and went back to
Siva.
Rudra asked her, ‘Are you satisfied?’
Sati bent her head and said nothing. Yet, if only for a moment, she had
doubted him. She had plunged after her doubt and now destiny must take its
course. Siva said nothing of his rash vow to Vishnu; instead, he pacified his

love, she was so disconsolate. She pined for a while; she seemed almost to be
dying of guilt. It took all his tenderness to restore her spirits. Even when they
made love in the vana that night she shook with sobs," Brahma said to Narada,
his son.’
My guru Vyasa told me," says the knowing Suta.

NINE
 
Daksha’s pique
 
Once, king Bhagiratha performed an ineffable prayatna to rescue his
ancestors’ souls from patala, where they had languished for an age. His father
and grandfather had died in the same effort before him. So great were the sins of
their ancestors, Sagara’s wild sons, that only the waters of the Ganga, river of
heaven, could purify the ashes to which Kapila muni had reduced them and
grant them a place in swarga. For ten thousand years, Bhagiratha sat
unflinching on the icy mountain. One day, when the power of his tapasya had
grown irresistible, the Goddess Ganga manifested herself before him.
"Bhagiratha, tell me the boon you want."
Bhagiratha told her what he wanted. Ganga said, "Who will bear my
descent if I fall into the world? I would plunge through the crust of the earth and
down into rasatala. Besides, if I flow on bhumi, men will wash their sins in me
and where would I purify myself?"
Bhagiratha answered, "Maharishis, seers of the Brahman, will dissolve the
sins by bathing in you. And Rudra will bear your fall."
Down the pathway of the devas, Milky Way teeming with galaxies, rushed
Ganga, past the moon. She fell squarely on Kailasa like the end of the ages,
when the sky implodes on the earth. Siva caught the river in his jata and
contained her easily. For ten thousand years, she was lost in his locks for her
arrogance.
Bhagiratha performed another tapasya, for ten thousand years more: so
heinous were his ancestors’ crimes; at last, Siva released the river of three
streams into the world, along a single hair of his head. Bhagiratha took one
stream and went down to patala, where his uncles lay as ashes. The touch of her
holy water renewed them; they were saved.
The first name given to Ganga on earth was Alakananda. When she falls
down to Haridwara, she becomes Vishnupada. When a person bathes at
Haridwara, a difficult place for even the devas to come to, he is purified of the
sins of a million births. For this is one of the holiest tirthas in the world.
Siva says he once bathed at Haridwara and at once, he had Mahavishnu’s
blue form!

 
*
 
‘Brahma said to Narada, eager for him to continue his Purana,
"A great yagna was held at Prayaga once. The siddhas were all there, the
divine rishis, the devas of light and the prajapatis. I went there too, with the
agamas and nigamas, my train splendid around me. The enlightened asuras were
present and Siva arrived with Sati and his ganas. We naturally offered him the
seat of honour, Mahadeva greatest of Gods and the rishis explained the
intricacies of the yagna to him.
Then, Daksha came to Prayaga. He had grown peculiarly arrogant after
Sati married Siva. It was perhaps at root only grief at losing his daughter and a
little pique that she had married someone greater than him. Daksha arrived with
his wife Asikni and was formally welcomed. It was a solemn occasion and
correctness in all things was in order. The rishis and all the others paid Daksha
elaborate homage.
Siva did not rise or bow when his father-in-law entered the yagnashala and
neither did Sati: here she was the Devi and Siva’s wife, not just Daksha’s
daughter. Moreover, they would have brought sin on him if they, his superiors,
paid him obeisance in that assembly.
Daksha was furious. He strode up to Siva and cried, ‘The suras and asuras,
the mightiest in the universe, these rishis, the wisest in creation, bow to me. How
is it that this man surrounded by bhutas and pretas does not even get up? Is the
smasanavasi so full of lust that he forgets the holy conventions of the yagna? I
curse you in this august sabha of brahmanas and devas. You shall not get your
share of the havis, Ugly One, Siva of no pedigree. I, Daksha, expel you from the
yagna!’
The rest of us were thunderstruck. Not I, who had noticed my son’s pride
growing for some time, expected such insanity from him. But Bhrigu and some
others supported Daksha; they mocked Siva.
Rolling his eyes, Nandiswara closed on Daksha, ‘Witless Prajapati, how
can you expel my Lord from the yagna? He is the yagna; his blessing makes the
sacrifice fruitful. How can you, worm, dare curse the Sire of the universe?’
Daksha was beside himself. ‘I curse Siva’s upstart ganas: you are all
expelled from the ritual! You will be abandoned by everyone that follows the
Vedic path. You shall be heretics, outcasts from convention and society. You
will be winebibbers, debauches, with filthy dreadlocks. Ashes and bones shall be

your ornaments!’
Bhrigu and the others applauded. Nandin flashed at them, ‘Daksha you
fool, your vanity deludes you. You, Bhrigu and the rest will be punished. You
may prate about the Vedas, but you are ignorant of their inner truths. Dogs, you
will be beggars in the world and sit over the yagnas of sudras. Lust, rage and
greed will master you. The lustre will fall from your faces, Brahmanas and the
bestial darkness in your hearts will replace it. Daksha, for your sin here, one day
you will wear the face of a rutting animal!’
There was an outcry at this, but Siva remained calm. He saw clearly
beyond the wrath of the moment, into Time’s deeper designs. He pacified
Nandin, saying nobody could curse the atman. Daksha stormed out of that yagna
with malice in his angry heart.
Some time elapsed, but the imagined insult rankled in the proud prajapati;
and finally destiny overtook us all, softly. When Sati had almost forgotten the
yagna at Prayaga, Daksha decided to hold a yagna of his own at Kanakahala,
Gangadvara on the banks of the holy river. To share in that sacrifice came
Agastya, Kashyapa, Atri, Vamadeva, Bhrigu, Dadichi, Vyasa, Bharadvaja,
Gautama, Paila, Parasara, Garga, Bhargava, Kakubha, Sumantu, Trika, Kanka,
Vaisampayana and many others, all sublime ones. They came to Daksha’s yagna
with their families. The devas and asuras were there and the lokapalas, the
guardians of the quarters of rising fortune. I went to my son’s yagna from
Satyaloka, with the embodied Vedas. Duly invited like the rest, Vishnu came.
But Daksha did not call either Siva or Sati to his sacrifice.
With his thought, Viswakarman created splendid mansions for the guests
and we settled into them. Vishnu and the maruts sat over the yagna; I was the
Vedic guru. The guardians of the directions were the dwarapalakas and at the
altar the Devi Yagna herself, Sacrifice personified, reigned in all her beauty.
Agni revealed himself in his diverse, flaming guises to receive Daksha’s fine
offerings. There were eighty-six thousand ritviks at the yagna at Kanakahala,
sixty-four thousand udgatirs and you went there, Narada and the other munis, as
adhvaryus and hotris. The saptarishis, Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu and Vasishta, intoned the saaman hymns in sonorous voices. The
gandharvas were there, the vidyadharas, siddhas, adityas, all the nagas with their
people, the brahmanical and the celestial rishis, the kings of the world with their
armies and the eight vasus: Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Apa, Anila, Anala, Pratyusa
and Prabhasa. How radiant Daksha and his wife were in that august assembly.
When the svastyanana was performed and the sacred thread tied around
Daksha’s wrist and Asikni’s, Dadichi stood up, his face like thunder. He said
angrily, ‘Lord Rudra is worshipped by every being from Brahma down to the

pisachas. Why is great Sankara not present here? Why is Sati not here? Go and
fetch them, Daksha, or let Brahma and Vishnu. Otherwise, your yagna shall be
damned.’
Daksha retorted, ‘Mahavishnu, cause of all the Gods, is here. Brahma, the
Pitama, is here and so are the devas and the rishis. Whoever is worthy of being
here, has been invited and is present. Siva is not Sankara; he is far from benign.
He is only the wretched Rudra, a killer full of tamas. He is naked and deformed,
a kapalin, a skull-carrier. He has neither father nor mother and he is a lord only
of ghouls and goblins. He is mannerless and vain and I rue the day my father
persuaded me to give Sati to Siva. He is unworthy and I have not chosen to call
him here.’
All the others agreed, Muni: they chanted, ‘This is true.’
Dadichi stormed, ‘Those that revile Mahadeva will lose the three Vedas
when they are born in the kali yuga. Fools, all your tapasya will desert you then
and you will go straight to hell. As for you Daksha: your doom is closer than you
think. I say to you, you will meet it at this very yagna.’
Dadichi stalked out from that sacrifice.
 
Meanwhile, a day ago, under the canopy of the fountain house on fragrant
Mount Gandhamadana, Sati saw her sister Rohini with her husband Soma the
Moon and a colourful train. Sati asked her sakhi Vijaya, ‘Where are Rohini and
Soma going in such a hurry without calling on us?’
Vijaya went to Soma and said, ‘My mistress Sati wants to know where you
are going in such haste without seeing her."
Soma said, ‘We are on our way to Daksha’s yagna. Are Siva and Sati not
going?’
Vijaya came back to her mistress with the news. Sati ran to Siva’s cave
where he sat among his ganas. He took her hand and set her on his lap.
‘What is the matter, my love?’ he asked.
Sati’s eyes were full of tears. She bit her lip and said desperately to him,
‘Daksha is my father; Virini is my mother. Why have we not been invited to
their yagna, to which all the devas and rishis are going?’
Siva stroked her face, without replying. She cried, ‘Siva, come with me to
the yagna. I am their daughter, so they did not think they needed to invite me as
they would an outsider. Come, my Lord, let us go to Gangadvara.’
Siva said, ‘Daksha is your father, but you must realise he thinks of me as
his enemy. He has not invited us to his yagna because he does not want us.
Relatives’ taunts are sharper than arrows. I will not go to this sacrifice.’
But fate laid a hand on Sati. She said, ‘Oh my Siva, how will Daksha’s

sacrifice succeed without your presence? Yet, how do the devas and the
brahmarishis attend it? If you allow me, I will go to my father’s yagna and see
for myself.’
Siva’s heart skipped a beat: did she doubt him again? It was difficult to say
Narada. Rudra said, ‘Go to your father’s yagna, if you want. Take your sakhis
with you in the pushpaka vimana, go with Nandin and my ganas.’
She set out with her companions, in the ship of the sky. That vimana was
wrought from molten gold, embedded with jewels mined deep in the heavens
and canopied with pearls from the ocean, each the size of a man’s head. Flowers
festooned the craft, which flew as quick as thought; coral steps led into the
shining disk, windowed all around for breathtaking views when it was aloft. At
the vimana’s helm, a flagstaff flew the emblem of the bull. Inside, was a gemset
throne for Sati; Rudra virgins fanned her with diamond-hafted chamaras.
Sumalini held a pearl-stringed parasol over Sati; Subhavati sat before her
with a dice board. Suyasa carried her mirror, another sakhi her betel-box,
another bouquets, another the talking parrot she loved, another the jewel-box.
She shone among them like the full moon in August among the stars.
Sati wept when Siva embraced her before she left. She thought her heart
misgave her only because it was the first time she was leaving him even for a
day. All too quickly, when he had kissed her fragrant mouth in farewell, the
conch sounded and a hundred bugles, the war drum and a thousand hands
clapped together to mark the hour of departure. The chief of the ganas mounted
Nandiswara and went ahead of Sati. The pushpaka vimana trembled for a
moment, like a flower stirring in a breeze. Soft as a whisper, it lifted into the air.
Sati flew through the sky swiftly as a wish and arrived in Gangadvara in the
world below, at her father Daksha’s yagna."

TEN
 
Daksha’s yagna
 
Once, Hari said to Brahma, "Splendid Guru, come down from your lotus, I
cannot support you anymore."
Brahma came down the infinite stalk; he merged with the chakra-bearer
and fell into the sleep of Vishnu. Thousand-headed and thousand-eyed, Brahma
slept, at one with Narayana upon the primordial sea of bliss, immersed in the
Brahman without beginning or end. The next morning of eternity he resumed his
yoga; four-faced again, he poured forth Creation.
Having emanated the waters, fire and air, sky, wind and earth, rivers,
oceans, mountains and budded trees, instants, moments, minutes, hours, days
and nights, fortnights, months, years and yugas, he made, from dark tamas, the
asuras from his anus. Then he cast off his body; it became the night. From sattva
he made the devas, from his face, then cast aside that body as well and it became
the day. With yet another sattvika body, he created the pitrs. When he
abandoned that body, twilight was. From a body of rajas came human beings,
passion born, passionate; and from the sacrifice of this body came the dawn.
From another body, of rajas and tamas both, the rakshasas were spawned, the
nagas, the gandharvas, the kinnaras, the vidyadharas and the others that are
half-divine.
At the beginning of Creation, Brahma emitted Sananda, Sanaka,
Sanatkumara and Sanatana. But they were yogins, free from delusion, abiding in
supreme indifference. For the first time, Brahma was filled with anger and tears
of rage sprang in his eyes. When they fell on the ground, the bhutas and pretas
were born. He was so distraught, hating himself, that he began to leave his body.
Rudra was born from his dying breath and leapt out of Brahma’s mouth, shining
like a thousand suns, blazing like the fire at the end of the yugas. He came
howling horribly and all creation trembled.
"Stop your roaring!" cried Brahma. "You will be known as Rudra for it."
The Pitama gave him seven other names: Bhava, Sarva, Isana, Pasupati,
Bhima, Ugra and Mahadeva. He gave Rudra eight forms also: Sun, Water,
Earth, Fire, Wind, Space, the consecrated Brahmana and the Moon.
The blue and red God Rudra drank the immortal nectar known as AUM

and he entered the passionless and blissful Brahman. At Brahma’s instance, he
created three-eyed Rudras exactly like himself in every way. They were all
joyful, fearless, with tangled jata and blue throats; they wielded trisulas and
rode bulls. All of them were free from ageing and death. When Brahma saw
those hosts he grew perturbed and said to Rudra, "You must not create such
awful beings free from death. Create others that are mortal."
Rudra replied, "Such awful creation is not for me, O Brahma: that I leave
to you! These Rudras shall henceforward be my ganas."
Rudra was never again a Creator.
 
*
 
‘Brahma said,
"Sati arrived at her father Daksha’s yagna, which shone for yojanas with
the presence of devas, apsaras and celestial beings of every kind. Her mother
Virini and her sisters welcomed her with strained joy. Daksha was livid that she
had come. He did not greet her; he did not even look at her. He signalled angrily
to his wife and his other daughters, so they also drew away from Sati.
Now Sati saw her father’s mood clearly. She saw the great shares of the
yagna given to Vishnu, to me and the others; and none for Siva. She went up to
Daksha. She addressed her father in a ringing voice, ‘Why do you slight me,
your eldest daughter? Why do you slight my husband, who is the Lord of the
universe? This insult to Siva will ruin you and yours.’
Daksha said, ‘My younger daughters are more worthy than you are. Their
husbands deserve my respect, they are not like your Kapalin,’ and he laughed
savagely.
Sati turned away from him and gazing fiercely round that yagnashala,
cried, ‘How did Vishnu and Brahma, the devas and rishis agree to attend a yagna
to which Rudra was not called? Vishnu, you sing of him as being saguna and
nirguna; Brahma, he made you four-faced; Indra, have you forgotten how he
made ashes of your thunderbolt? Atri, Vasishta, what have you done by coming
to this sinful sacrifice?’
We squirmed to hear her, but what could we say? Even now, Daksha did
not hold his tongue.
‘Why did you come here, woman? Don’t speak to me of your husband.
Siva is inauspicious. He is not wellborn or noble. The naked, skull-carrying
upstart is a king of bhutas and pramathas. This yagna is to repent for my sin of

giving you to him.’
Then, more softly, ‘But you are our daughter. If you like, you can stay here
and as my child I will give you your share of the havis.’
Sati said in deadly calm, ‘He who speaks thus of Siva, the dust from whose
feet the devas wear on their heads, will go to hell: and those that listen
unprotesting to him. My Lord was right when he said you were his enemy.
Father, I am defiled by your arrogance. I should not have come here. I should
have stayed with my husband, because now I can never go back to him. I am still
your daughter; I am of your race, your flesh and blood, though I would not be.
Evil Prajapati, how I hate myself that I am your child.
Her eyes blazed with rage and sorrow in equal measure. ‘Look, I cast off
this body born from your loins as if it were a corpse. When I am born to a father
I can love, I shall be Siva’s wife again.’
Sati grew awesomely still. She sipped holy water, she covered herself,
head and face, with her garment and, thinking of Siva, entered a yogic trance.
She balanced the winds, pana and apana. She lifted the third wind, udana, from
her umbilical chakra up through her heart, up through her throat and fixed it
between her eyebrows. In a flash, a fire from within consumed her body and it
fell apart as ashes.
I knew it was time to make an exit. I vanished back to Satyaloka. I was
shaking; I dared not think what Rudra would do when he heard what had
happened. At the yagnashala, they were rooted in shock when Sati immolated
herself. The devas, the rishis, even the darkest asuras were horrified. What she
did was so sudden, Narada, so irretrievable.
Earth and sky resounded with the cries of Sati’s ganas! Then, wonder of
wonders, instead of attacking anyone, they began to kill themselves, hacking off
their own limbs in grief, until they fell dead beside their mistress. But those that
were not quite so overcome began to make threatening noises. They clashed
their weapons together and cried, ‘Death to Daksha!’
At which, Daksha’s friend Bhrigu poured occult libations onto the
dakshina fire, reciting the yajur mantra to quell the desecrators of the yagna.
Demons of flame, ten thousand blazing ribhus, issued in a horde from the pit.
Fire was their body, fire their weapon; and screaming horribly, they fell on the
Sivaganas, while the guests at the sacrifice shrank back in terror. That battle was
quick and one-sided. The ribhus burned the ganas like blades of dry grass and
the few that escaped with their lives fled back to Kailasa.
Even as the devas stood and watched the bloodshed, tacitly acquiescing on
Daksha’s part, a voice of thunder spoke in the sky above them.
‘Daksha, look what you have done. Couldn’t you listen to Dadichi’s

warning? Let your yagna be ruined and your face burnt up by your sin. Vain
Prajapati, this day shall be your last. And anyone that helps you: they too shall
burn like moths!’
The devas and rishis stood stunned, the bravest of them quaked to hear that
voice. But it was too late to relent; their lot was cast with Daksha.
Mortified, you, Narada, went with the ganas to Kailasa and they babbled
incoherently to Siva about what transpired at Daksha’s yagna. He raised a hand
to silence them. Then he turned to you, Muni.
‘What happened, Narada, where is Sati?’
Though you were never a coward, your knees turned to water and you
trembled. Somehow, not looking into his great face, while his eyes never left
yours, stammering, you told him about the tragedy. By the time you finished,
you sobbed like a child. If Siva was sorry, he did not show it by crying. He grew
quieter and quieter; his stillness was a thing of untold menace. At last, raising his
face to the sky, Rudra howled like a beast of the wild that had lost its mate. It
seemed the sun might fall out of the sky with that sound. His body shook in
paroxysms, as shock struck him through. He fell down; he rolled in the dust.
Then sorrow turned to wrath.
With a terrible yell, Siva sprang to his feet. He tore a long tuft of hair from
his head. His grief was a grotesque dance that contorted his limbs in manic
snatches of rhythm, while his bloodshot eyeballs rolled in their sockets,
reminding you uncomfortably of the third eye, which so far, mercifully,
remained shut. In the throes of that wild dance, he struck the mountain top with
the jata. Even the ganas shut their ears at the report. The tuft split in two, Narada,
the earth cracked open in two places; or was it the sky, the very stuff of reality?
From the first cleft, sprang Virabhadra, towering over the mountain, with a
thousand faces, a thousand arms and two thousand staring eyes. He stood before
Siva. You had never seen the likes of that Rudra. He held a thousand weapons
aloft, clubs, swords, maces, arrows, the bow Saringa, axes, a chakra, a vajra and
a conch. He was an army by himself. He blazed like the fire at the end of time.
His hair shone like the sun; his mouth was a chasm, with enormous, curved
fangs. His belly was as big as the earth. His lips were thick as planets, hanging
down. His tongue was a streak of dark lightning, darting this way and that. The
crescent moon decked his jata, adorned with garlands from the heads of the great
Gods. He wore a tiger-skin dripping fresh blood. He was resplendent in golden
shoulderlets and anklets; he shone with a million precious jewels spangled
across his body. His measureless chest bore ten thousand priceless necklaces. He
was white as the moon, the lotus stalk or the chowrie. He was a mountain draped
in pearls from ocean deeps. Countless flames licked around him like his skin,

smeared from his head to his feet with ashes.
From the other half of Siva’s jata, sprang horrible Bhadrakali. Her skin
was black and thick; her face was hideous. She wore a necklace of human heads,
not all of them dead. She dripped snakes from her body and her fangs dripped
blood. She held a curved scimitar, her black mouth gaped wide; her tongue
lolled red and she came howling so even Virabhadra backed away from her at
first. She nuzzled the top of his head, as though he was her favourite child. Both
visions of terror bowed low to Siva, who still stood shaking with wrath.
Virabhadra, who was only just born, said in a voice fathomless as the
oceanic sky, ‘Rudra, the sun, the moon and the fire your eyes, shall I drain the
seas for you? Shall I smash the mountains into dust? Shall I ash the universe, or
devour the devas? Lord, my right side throbs: with your blessing, today I can
conquer the galaxies. Almighty Siva, command me.’
Siva blessed Virabhadra in a truly awesome voice, ‘Jaya vijayi bhava!
Daksha performs a yagna at Gangadvara. Go and raze that sacrifice. Kill the
sacrificer. If there is any deva, gandharva or yaksha there, burn him. If Vishnu or
Brahma, Indra or Yama stands against you, kill them. Go now. Come back to me
only when you have destroyed.’
Siva’s breath was fire. Thousands of Rudras more were born from that
breath, flaming ganas, to be Virabhadra and Mahakaali’s soldiers. Mounted on a
bull among a guard of lions, Virabhadra marched at the head of that dreadful
force. In the ranks, marched bhutas, pramathas, guhyakas, kusmandas, parpatas,
chatakas, brahmarakshasas, bhairavas and kshetrapalas. With Mahakaali, went
the nine Durgas: Kaali, Katyayani, Isani, Chamunda, Mundamardini,
Bhadrakaali, Bhadra, Tvarita, Vaishnavi and the goblins, too.
Durga’s yoginis went with that legion, sixty-four and terrible.
Bhasitprabha was there, holding a pearl-handled parasol above Virabhadra and
snow-white chowries in his hand. Bhanukampa blew a conch the colour of foam;
Shankukarana marched with Virabhadra. Kekaraksha was there, Vikrita, Visaka,
Pariyatraka, Saravanakaka, Vikratanana, Jvalakesa, Dhiman, Dudrabha,
Kapalisa, Kotikunda, Vistambha, Sannada and Pippala, Avesana and
Chandrapana, Mahavesa and Kundi, Pavataka and a hundred others, each with
their thousands of ganas. Majestically, that army swept towards Gangadvara.
When Virabhadra set out to kill Daksha, the kalpa vriksha showered unearthly
flowers on him out of Amravati.
After Bhrigu’s fire-demons routed Siva’s ganas, the ceremonies and
celebrations at Daksha’s yagna were underway again. As soon as Virabhadra set
out from Kailasa, all the guests, the devas and the rest, felt a tremor of fear. Evil
omens thronged the sacrifice. Daksha’s left arm, that thigh and eye, throbbed

sharply.
An earthquake shook sacred Gangadvara. As in a dream, Daksha saw a
mysterious and malignant cluster of stars at noon. The sun was blotched with
black patches; a dark ring glowed balefully around the star. The quarters were
squalid and gloomy, strange comets fell out of the dim heavens. Vultures circled
low over the yagna, darkening the sacrificial platform; jackals howled at the
perimeters of the conclave of rishis and devas. Like a pale scorpion, the evil
nakshatra Netraka fell from the sky, into which it should never have risen at this
time. Meteors fell steaming; gusts of air blew swarms of moths and locusts into
that tranquil place; Daksha’s wonderful yagnashala bent and creaked in those ill
winds.
Convulsions gripped Daksha and the devas. They vomited blood and
pieces of raw flesh. Their spirits trembled like lamps about to be put out. They
panicked as if they had been struck with weapons. Tears coursed down Daksha’s
face, his eyes were like the dying lotuses of summer. To those eyes, the devas
appeared to drip blood from all their limbs. The four quarters grew dark as night
though it was midday and all around glowed a sinister aura of doom. Even
Vishnu was touched by the moment’s fear.
In that fear the devas cried, ‘We are cursed!’
They fell on the ground like trees growing beside a river in spate.
Terrified, Daksha ran to Vishnu, who alone seemed mainly unaffected by the
elemental omens.
‘What are these evil portents, Lord? You must protect me. Guardian of
everything, don’t let my yagna be ruined!’
Vishnu said, ‘This terror is because Siva has not been worshipped here.
Your daughter killed herself in that sorrow. You have sinned, Daksha, it will be
hard to save you.’
Daksha sat on the ground and bent his head low. His face turned deathly
pale. Then they heard the distant roar of the advent, by earth and air, of
Virabhadra and his army. Quaking in every limb Daksha fell at Mahavishnu’s
feet. ‘Only you can save me now!’
Vishnu said dully, ‘We cannot stop Virabhadra even with worship. Be
consoled, Daksha, I too will pay for being here. I will also burn.’
Virabhadra was at the gate. Led by haughty Indra, the devas were ready to
fight. Indra laughed at Vishnu’s fear. Then, from the air, Virabhadra saw the
sattra with the devas’ colourful flags flapping above it. He saw the freshly cut
grass laid in neat, straight piles on the earth. He saw the thousands of golden
sacrificial vessels. He saw the yagna fire kindled, burning high and bright.
Virabhadra saw a thousand apsaras dancing; he heard sweet music dripping from

gandharvas’ flutes; he heard the soft, ceaseless chanting of Vedic mantras.
Above him darkening the sky, around him in black tides, his Rudraganas
swarmed. Virabhadra stamped his foot, rocking the earth. He roared so the devas
nearest him shrank from the sound. Even the wind lurched in fear when
Virabhadra roared.
Now the moment of reckoning was here, Daksha stood queerly unafraid at
the altar and faced Virabhadra calmly.
Daksha said, ‘Who are you and what do you want?’
Virabhadra still rumbled like a thundercloud, but a ghostly smile curved
his lips. He fixed Daksha with a glare. Bhadra growled, ‘We are the followers of
Sarva of endless splendour. We have come for our share of the yagna.’
Daksha said, ‘The mantras are our authorities. No mantras prescribe your
share in the yagna.’
Before he finished, the mantras cried, ‘Devas, your minds are taken with
tamas. You do not deserve the first share in the yagna: let it be Siva’s.’
None of the devas paid any heed and the mantras fled into the sky.
Virabhadra said to the devas, ‘You are so arrogant with power you do not accept
even the authority of the mantras. Vain Devas, I will drive out your hubris. I will
drive out your arrogance with your lives!’
With a flash of fire from his eye, Virabhadra burnt up the vedi, the altar.
The gana lords, big as hills, uprooted the posts of the sattra and flung them away
like wisps of straw. They seized the hotr priest, the prashtotr priest and the
sacrificial horse and cast them into the Ganga. They smashed the golden vessels
of the sacrifice and waded into the foodstuffs piled high for the guests, gorging
themselves and throwing the rest on to sanctified ground.
Those pramathas were macabre beyond believing. They laughed; they ran
about like children, they prattled nonsense. They leapfrogged over one another
and turned cartwheels. When they had desecrated the sacrifice and stuffed
themselves to bursting with food and drink, some leapt high into the air,
swearing to bring the sun down. Others yelled they would catch the clouds and
others that they would capture the wind.
Seeing all this, most of the devas fled towards their heaven without
pausing to give fight. Only Indra and the lokapalas stood firm, with any stomach
for battle. Virabhadra was furious when he saw the devas in flight, unengaged,
uninjured. He roared again. He spewed flames from his mouth, colours from his
tremendous body as white light, when split, does the spectrum. A wild elephant
charging, he chased the fleeing devas, his trisula aloft. Shrieking in delight,
Bhadrakaali pierced the devas in the sky with a thousand flaming spears.
Swifter than time, Virabhadra kicked Surya and his horse on the head. He

struck Varuna with a sword; he smote Yama and Nirriti with an iron club. He
hewed at Vayu with an axe. The gods in flight encountered Virabhadra as they
would a cosmic army. He sang tunelessly and made other bizarre noises of joy as
he fell on the devas of light.
‘Indra, O Agni,’ sang Virabhadra. ‘Come Surya, Soma, Kubera, Varuna,
Vayu, Nirriti, Yama, Sesa: O clever ones, come to me! You came here for
worship. Come to me, I will give you avadana.’ Avadana, of course, meant both
worship and dismembering.
He clipped off the tip of Saraswati’s nose with his nails that he turned into
glittering scissors and Aditi’s, too. He lopped off Vibhavasu’s arm and his
tongue with a dagger. He plucked the nipple off Svaha’s breast, he gouged out
Bhaga’s eyes; he knocked out Pusana’s teeth from his mouth and he ground
Soma into the ground like a glow-worm under his heel. Bhrigu was smashed
down and Manibhadra the gana pulled out his moustaches. Svadha, Dakshina,
the mantras and tantras and all the women in that gathering, daughters, wives,
daughters-in-law, were molested. Some were held down, screaming and raped
by the odd-bodied bhutas and vetalas with monstrous phalluses.

Quickly, that yagnashala was devastated. The silver domes were smashed,
the rishis killed, the devas who had not died put to flight. The yagna himself
assumed the form of a golden deer and fled into the sky with Virabhadra in
pursuit. The twang of Virabhadra’s bow rent the heavens and he beheaded the
stag in the air.
At last, Vishnu came to face Virabhadra. Virabhadra’s face grew dark
when he saw the Blue One. He knit his brows and stood growling like a lion. He
taunted Narayana, ‘Hari, how did you become the guardian of this Siva-less
yagna? Didn’t you see what Sati did for her Lord’s honour? Did Dadichi not
leave? Yet, you stayed to protect Daksha’s sacrifice. You, too, are greedy for
worship, long-arms and I will give you avadana.’
Mounted on Garuda, the Sudarshana humming at his finger, Vishnu faced
Virabhadra in the sky. Bhadra rode a dazzling chariot given him by Siva,
stocked with all kinds of weapons. He was bright as ten suns. Heartened by
Vishnu sallying forth, the devas turned and came back to fight. Bhanukampa
sounded Virabhadra’s conch, which glowed like moonlight. The devas quailed at
the blast; they prepared to flee again. At once, in reply, Vishnu blew a deafening
note on the Panchajanya, rallying them. He froze the gana army for a moment on
its murderous, rapacious spree: Virabhadra’s forces stopped their ears with
bloody palms.
The two armies fell roaring at each other. Indra faced Nandin. The king of
the devas struck Siva’s gana in the chest with his Vajra and Nandin pierced Indra
with his trisula. They laughed in exhilaration at the equal contest, intoxicated
with war. Asmana and Agni battled with spear and trident. Mahaloka locked
with Yama, Munda with Varuna, Bhringi with Vayu.
Then, Bhadrakaali was among them like a conflagration. She came
wearing wild elephants for earrings and she let flow the devas’ blood in rivers.
Thirstily, she quaffed that gore in the air and on the earth and the yagna grounds
shone scarlet.
The quarters teemed with yakshas and vidyadharas, green nagas and wise
siddhas, who braved the tumultuous battle to watch the duel between Vishnu and
Virabhadra. As a cloud may the earth with livid rain, Narayana covered the gana
army with arrows from the Saringa. The ganas screamed; they fell back in waves
from the ferocious Blue Kesava. Now Virabhadra flew into the fray. He struck
Vishnu with an arrow like a serpent, blazing like the sun. Mahavishnu fell in a
faint, for the power of dharma was against him now and the enemy irresistible
because his cause was just. When Vishnu fell, a dark and eerie lustre arose
everywhere, like the shadow of the Apocalypse!
In a moment, he awoke with a roar that shook the quarters. His eyes

crimson, he raised the inexorable Sudarshana and cast it at the chortling lord of
the ganas. But Khestrapala leapt up and caught the incendiary chakra in his
mouth! Vishnu took Kshetrapala by the throat and forced out the wheel of
flames. He strung his bow with an arrow that had his name emblazoned on it in
letters of fire, a weapon that had never been resisted. When he shot that arrow at
Virabhadra, the Rudra cut it in slivers with his own wizardly shaft. He broke the
Saringa in Hari’s hand with a silver volley and he singed Garuda’s wings with
two more astras.
With yoga and wrath, Mahavishnu now spilled a hundred Haris from his
body, all with sankha, chakra and gada. Virabhadra made them ashes with fire
from his eye. Vishnu raised the Sudarshana again; crying out an occult mantra,
the Rudragana lifted his hand above his head and Vishnu’s arm was numbed.
Like serpent venom, the numbness spread through all his limbs. He gasped for
breath, he trembled with rage and impotence: but he stood paralysed, as if he had
turned to stone. Indra and the other devas rushed to Vishnu’s side. With a mad
laugh, Virabhadra froze Indra’s hand with the Vajra; he froze all the others with
just a look.
A thousand-armed, every hand aiming weapons in different directions,
Virabhadra was like Brahma emitting the creatures. He covered the quarters with
his arrows. The devas fell like flies on that battlefield, arms hewn off, faces
pierced, eyes exploded. Roaring insanely and still laughing like the thunder at
yuganta, the Mahagana now sought Daksha who had hidden among the ruins of
the altar.
Whimpering, his clothes soiled in terror, Daksha was dragged by his
cheeks from hiding. Virabhadra raised his sword and hewed at Daksha’s neck.
By the power of the prajapati’s yoga, his head could not be severed. With his
bare hands, then, Virabhadra tore my son’s head from his neck and kicked it like
a ball to Mahakaali. For some time, to the screams of those who watched, the
pair kicked Daksha’s head back and forth between them. Until, satisfied with his
revenge, Bhadra kicked the ruined head into the yagna fire.
As soon as this was done, Narada, Siva appeared in the sky above. His hair
the galaxies, his eyes the sun and the moon, Siva was calm again, smiling down
on Virabhadra and the frozen devas. He freed the devas from Bhadra’s spell and
they fell on their faces before Mahadeva, the God of Gods.
Vishnu said feelingly, ‘Obeisance, O Hidden Secret of all lore! We have
been punished for the sin of coming to Daksha’s yagna. Forgive us, Siva, for the
due has been paid in full: with dishonour and with death. Now be merciful.’
I, too, appeared in that place sodden with devas’ blood and Siva laughed. I
folded my palms to that boundless Deity. I said humbly, ‘Rudra, destroyer of

misery, forgive us.’
The devas that had survived the battle chimed in with some contrite
worship. Gone was every vestige of pride, only shock remained with Indra and
his kind.
‘What had to be has been,’ Siva said quietly. ‘Besides, you are all my
children.’
He made a mystic mudra of life-giving with his high hands and all the
dead devas and rishis rose as if from a deep slumber: their limbs restored by his
grace, their wounds healed. They prostrated before Siva, who chided Virabhadra
kneeling before him, ‘You have been too harsh to the rishis and the devas.
Where is Daksha whose yagna this was?’
Virabhadra brought Daksha’s headless body and flung it in the dust at
Siva’s feet.
‘Where is his head?’ asked Siva mildly.
‘I threw it into the fire, Lord,’ answered Bhadra anxiously, as if expecting
to be reprimanded.
Siva said, ‘Let Daksha be revived. Let him have the head of a goat.’
A sacrificial goat was beheaded and Daksha was revived with its head
joined to his neck. Hands folded, he stood before Siva, ‘Greatest of Gods!
Forgive me, wretched sinner that I am, deluded by vanity: forgive me a thousand
times for not remembering who you are. You are the Lord even of Vishnu. Siva,
you are the first Creator and the Pervador. I wounded you with evil words.
Ocean of mercy, may I pay for each one with a life of penance.’
Placing his hand on Daksha’s goat head, Siva said gently, ‘Fear no more,
Daksha, complete your yagna.’
That yagna was completed and Siva had pride of place as the foremost
Deity. He presided over the fateful sacrifice and the main offering was made to
him.
 
Only when Rudra returned to Kailasa, did he show any grief for Sati. He
called his main ganas to him, Nandin and a few others and told them about his
short and blessed time with her. Tears ran down Siva’s face and he sobbed
bitterly, ‘The only lasting bliss is in the atman. This would never have happened
if I had not allowed Brahma and Vishnu to distract me from my tapasya. My
friends, I vow it shall never happen again.’"
Said Brahma,’
Said Vyasa, great poet of the Purana."

AMRITA

ELEVEN
 
The Goddess once asked Siva, "Lord, how are your bhaktas liberated in
the kali yuga, when the world is enveloped in sin, when the people have turned
away from Vedic rites, when danger is always imminent, when the land is
perverted by alien cultures and customs, when the sacred order of guru and
sishya has disappeared?"
Siva said, "When ancient rituals are not available to them, the five-
syllabled mantra purifies the people of the kali yuga. AUM Namah Sivayah
protects those of the evil age that turn to me: though they are sinners, perverted
in mind and body, in thought, word and deed! Devi, it is my sacred promise to
the world that through my mantra the fallen shall rise and be free from their
sins.
Uma, those who subsist on air and water, emaciate themselves with
austerities, do not reach me. But those that worship me with the simple mantra
of five syllables do!
It is by the wonder of the five-syllabled mantra that the worlds, the Vedas,
the rishis, the dharma, the universe and the devas exist. AUM Namah Sivayah is
the seed of all the living. It is you, the Goddess, my beloved, that mantra. It is the
Goddess whose skin is molten gold, your breasts perfect, the moon your crown,
your hands like tender lotuses, forming the mudras of granting boons and giving
protection, wearing jewels from heaven, sitting in the white lotus, tresses
shimmering wavy and blue: the Devi of yellow, black, gray, gold and vermilion!
The mantra is adorned with naada and bindu: naada like the crescent
moon, bindu the flame of the lamp. This mantra is the mulavidya, the sacred
root. It is my own heart.
AUM Namah Sivayah is the raft on which my bhaktas cross the ocean of
samsara," said Siva.
 
*
 
Once, a gazelle-eyed vidyadhari of the forest gave the rishi Durvasa,
believed by some to be an incarnation of Siva, an unearthly garland of santanaka
flowers that she got from Vishnu. Riding Airavata, Indra met Durvasa wearing

the garland round his neck. Out of affection and to bless Indra to be sovereign of
the three worlds forever, Durvasa threw that maala up to the king of the devas.
Haughty Indra caught the garland and draped it around his elephant’s neck. The
flowery thing buzzed with intoxicated black bees. In terror, Airavata plucked it
off with his trunk and, before the shocked Durvasa, the white elephant dashed
the precious garland on the ground and trampled on Vishnu’s gift.
Durvasa cried in wrath, "Arrogant Indra, even if that garland were just a
gift from me, you should not treat it like this. It was a gift from Hari, a blessing
and look what your beast has done to it. I curse you and the three worlds you
rule, to lose your wealth. I curse the immortal denizens of your realms to old age
and death!"
In a trice, Indra was on the ground and at the rishi’s feet. He begged for
mercy, but Durvasa thundered, "I am not compassionate!" and the curse
remained.
Came the next war between the devas and the asuras. When struck by
asura arrows, the devas fell dead and did not revive, as they always had before.
Varuna and Indra conferred, but found no remedy for the curse. They flew to
Brahma, who advised them to visit Vishnu. Narayana appeared before them as a
towering mass of light, impossible to look at. Then, for the first time ever, he
stepped out from that pure and formless refulgence: four-armed with sankha and
chakra, blue and tremendous.
Vishnu said, "Devas, churn the Kshirasagara, until it gives up the amrita.
Let the asuras be your allies in the endeavour, at least until the nectar of
immortality rises to the surface. Agree to any condition they want and I promise
you none of them will drink the amrita. Befriend them as the serpent does the
mouse: to fetch it out of its hole!"
The devas went to Bali, the demon king enthroned in splendour after his
recent conquest of swarga, bhumi and patala. The false devas bowed low. Indra
said, "Bali, monarch of three worlds, your sovereignty is incomplete without the
twin blessings that lie submerged under the Kshirasagara: the amrita and the
most precious treasures in creation. Neither the devas by themselves, nor the
asuras alone, can hope to churn the plumbless sea so both treasures and ambrosia
are swirled to the surface. But together, we can surely accomplish this thing."
Just as the daitya’s eyes began to gleam with interest, a disembodied voice
spoke into that psychological moment. "Your labour shall be fruitful if you use
Mount Mandara as your churning-rod and Vasuki as your rope."
Into the milk-white foam of that measureless sea, the devas and asuras cast
emetic herbs to make the nectar rise from the ocean’s bed. Crying out and
singing in great voices, with matchless sinews they uprooted golden Mandara

and began to carry it to the sea of foam. The burden proved more than they could
bear. Less than halfway to the ocean, they had to set the mountain down
suddenly. A thousand devas and asuras were crushed and the survivors set up a
loud wailing. Vishnu came down from the sky and, with just a finger, lifted
Mandara. With a glance, he revived the dead asuras and devas. He hoisted the
mountainous churning-rod onto Garuda’s back and, climbing onto his eagle,
flew to the Kshirasagara.
Bali and Indra went to Vasuki, the king of serpents in deep patala. They
offered him a share of the amrita in return for being their churning rope.
Tempted by the nectar of immortality, Vasuki came to the Kshirasagara and he
was wound about Mandara. The devas seized Vasuki’s throat to begin the
churning, but Bali’s demons would not have it.
"We routed these weakling devas on the battlefield, we are the lords of the
universe. We were Brahma’s firstborn sons. We will not hold the snake’s tail!"
Vishnu smiled warningly at Indra, who at once begged Bali’s pardon and
took his devas round to the serpent’s tail. They churned slowly at first,
awkwardly: none of them had done this before. However, soon enough a rhythm
was established and the churning grew expert and rapid. But the golden
mountain began to sink into the sea and, try as they would, they could not churn
swiftly enough to keep it afloat.
Vishnu became the primal Kuurma, strangest beast and he dived under
Mandara and supported in on his stupendous shell so it stayed afloat. Singing for
joy, they churned again with new equilibrium and greater speed, swirling the sea
around like a milkmaid making cheese. Mahavishnu the Tortoise, big as a
continent, laughed softly: the armies of darkness and light tickled his back with
their frantic churning.
Now the mountain wobbled precariously, swaying this way and that, so the
churning was not as effective as it could be. Vishnu came again to that shore of
enterprise, thousand-armed and tall as the sky, blue as thunderheads and he
placed a vast hand on the mountain’s peak to steady it as the elementals churned.
The mountain held straight. The churning grew faster and faster as, shouting
exhortation to each other, challenging one another, the two sides heaved the
serpent king’s awesome length back and forth. Golden Mandara spun like a top,
now one way and then the other, with a whirring that deafened the churners.
At being hauled so violently, Vasuki began to vomit fire, smoke and
venom over Pauloma, Kaleya, Bali, Ilvala and the other asuras at the head of the
demon churners. He burned their gaudy clothes and garlands; he scalded their
fine ornaments. Indeed, he would have consumed them with his flaming breath
but Vishnu extinguished his exhalations with a fragrant thundershower from one

of his thousand hands. At the Blue One’s bidding, the sea of foam swelled with
breezes, which blew the smoke away from the snake’s hundred mouths.
They churned again. For ten thousand leagues around the golden
mountain, the water stood stiff as froth, halfway to the summit of Mandara. Yet,
no amrita was churned up. Unknown to deva and asura, Mahavishnu’s own
destiny lay below the white waves. So now, he took Vasuki’s tail-tip in one
immense hand and helped the asuras with another: he bent to churn the
Kshirasagara himself. The churning was like prodigious lightning as Vishnu
poured his infinite strength into it, also holding the mountain steady from above
and below.
Unsettled from the deeps, teeming shoals of fish swam to the surface:
dolphin and shark, swordfish and tuna, sea serpent and sea horse, sea elephant
and alligator, whale and giant squid, colourful as another world. They swam up
in terror, for the original venom, the halahala, stirred from its long slumber under
the sandy ocean floor. It rose to the surface, smoking, staining the pale waves
dark. The kaalakuta, bane of time, swirled straight up into the air: threatening to
put out the sun in the sky, to burn up creation in a day!
Then deva, asura and rishi flew to Siva, with Vishnu himself at their head,
he the one that first cried, "Only Siva can save us from the halahala."
"God of Gods," they begged him, high on Kailasa, "only you can deliver
us from the kaalakuta. You are Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara, O Master of the
universe, Source of the Vedas, O Pranava!"
In their dire need, all this was not just to worship him, but to placate
Bhavani at his side. She was pleased at her husband having to quell the virulent
kaalakuta. Siva glanced at her from the corner of his eye.
Vishnu said, "O Creator with agni your mouth, the earth your feet, time
your motion, the cardinal points your ears, O Soul of all the devas, the sky your
navel, Vayu your breath, Surya your eyes, Soma your mind, the swargas your
imagination, the first ocean your semen, the first sea your belly, the mountains
your bones, dharma your heart, the advent of evil your shadow!"
Therefore, of course, it seemed that no poison, even the terrible halahala,
could affect such a One. Parvati still shifted uneasily beside her husband and
looked askance at the petitioners.
Siva said, "It pleases Hari to help the devas and the asuras to churn the
sagara. What pleases Hari pleases me."
Laying his hand on her arm, restraining Uma from any protest, Siva rose
tall from Kailasa. Cupping his lotus-white hands, he drained the steaming poison
from sky and sea. He quaffed it in a gulp, smiling. That poison burned even him;
it burnt his throat blue. From then on, he wore it as an ornament on his neck and

he was called Nilakanta since.
A few drops of the poison, which dribbled from his lips, were shared
between the serpents, scorpions, spiders, lizards and the insects of the earth, to
be their venom.
The devas, the asuras and Vishnu returned to their churning and now the
sea yielded its treasures. First, from the churned waters came Surabhi:
Kamadhenu dappled and lustrous, the first cow, of wishes. The devas stood
staring at her and the asuras unwinkingly.
Varuni, the goddess of wine, rose from the foam, so lovely, her eyes
rolling drunkenly. Next rose the lambent parijata tree and, in a moment, swept
the worlds with its fragrance, capturing the hearts of the devastris. Then came
Ucchaisravas, horse of light. From the spray of the amrita, rising slow and
majestic from the deeps, from the very drops of flying nectar, arose the apsaras
of matchless beauty, bright as fire, their skins translucent, bewitching all with
their sidelong glances. To shine on them and the earth, came the Moon; and
Sura, wine embodied and the bow Saringa, the hunting conch Panchajanya,
foam-made and the scintillating ruby, the Kaustubha. Last of all, brilliant blue
and long-armed like Vishnu, his eyes the hue of a red lotus, youthful, richly
adorned, clad in fulvid yellow, rose Dhanvantari the physician: in his hands was
a crystal chalice brimming with the amrita.
But everything that came so far was put in the shade when perfect Sri,
Lakshmi, rose from the Kshirasagara: exquisite, naked and vibrant! A luminous
lotus in her hand, she stood before them, all stunned by her; she lit up the
quarters. She was utterly auspicious, she who is worshipped as the source of
fortune, grace and affluence. The devas were smitten; Indra offered her his
throne; the asuras were beside themselves. The rishis were lost: they hymned her
loudly, babbling the inspired Srisukta. There was music in the air.
Led by Ganga, the holy rivers came, embodied, bringing their waters in
golden pitchers for her bath. Airavata-sired elephants poured those sacral waters
over her out of pale trunks, while Bhumidevi appeared, bringing ineffable
Lakshmi the five precious ablutionaries. Vasantha brought her fruit and flowers
of the vernal months of chaitra and visakha. The gandharvas arrived and sang in
inspiration, while the apsaras danced as they were born to, this first time ever
just for her, to the pulsating rhythms of mridanga, panava, murga, anaka and
gomukha. The Vedas were chanted, while Lakshmi bathed, laughing softly with
the joy of it all, the rapture of being. The amrita was forgotten when
Mahalakshmi was born.
When she had finished bathing, Varuna brought two pieces of silken
yellow raiment for her as an offering. He gave her the original vaijayanti

garland, made from unfading blue ocean lotuses. Viswakarman brought
ornaments for her flawless body, now anointed with sandal and saffron. She rose
out of her bath, clad in Varuna’s silks, sparkling with divine jewellery and the
garland of wild lotuses in her hand. Now she looked around her for a sanctuary
for herself, a home. She saw Vishnu, waiting with a quizzical smile on his face.
Unhesitatingly, she walked up to him and draped the vaijayanti around his neck,
resting her face, herself, against his chest. He put an arm around her, taking her
to him forever. The heavens rained flowers down on them.
The rishis took Kamadhenu, the asuras took Sura and the humans took
Dhanvantari. Vishnu took Lakshmi, the Saringa, the Panchajanya and the
Kaustubha, which he wore round his neck on a golden chain. Surya took the
horse Ucchaisravas, Indra the parijata tree and Siva took the Moon and wore it in
his jata as a crescent ornament. Varuna took Varuni for himself; the amrita-born
apsaras were shared by deva and asura alike, hereafter, depending on which race
ruled the worlds.
When Lakshmi walked up to Vishnu and draped the vaijayanti around him,
the asuras woke rudely from their daydream of keeping the Goddess for
themselves. Bali snatched the chalice of amrita out of Dhanvantari’s hands.
Inevitably, the demons began to fight among themselves: who should have how
much of the nectar, who should drink it first and who last? They snatched the
chalice, one from the other and the devas joined the fray. Suddenly, a woman,
such as they had not dreamt of, appeared among them. Not even Sri could match
her beauty; but while Lakshmi was a vision of purity, this dusky one came
among the asura warriors with undisguised lasciviousness.
In contrast to the fair Lakshmi, the seductress was as blue as the lotus of
the forest. Her skin was satin; her breasts were heavy, straining against each
other in the bursting ebullience of youth. Her waist was a reed, her behind
ample; her jet-black hair was profuse and adorned with white mallika flowers.
Her nose, her bones, her cheeks, her ears, were all absolutely delicate; her neck,
her bare arms were dreams. Her navel showed deep as a well above a golden
girdle draped sensuously over hips that flared maddeningly. For all her
loveliness, her eyes were like frightened birds, darting this way and that. The
asuras gaped at her, the devas stood spellbound: both stared, hearts on fire.
At last, Bali cried hoarsely, "Vision of perfection, whose daughter are
you? Surely, you are no man’s child. You are not tainted by the touch of deva or
asura, gandharva or siddha, or you could not be so immaculate. Peerless one,
share this amrita even-handedly among us."
He handed the chalice of nectar to Mohini; for so she was, an enchantress.
She laughed at him as she reached out to take the precious thing from Bali’s

hands, which trembled just to brush against hers. In her breathy torment of a
voice, she said, "Sons of Kashyapa, how do you come near a wanton woman like
me? Haven’t you heard the friendship of loose women is just for the moment?"
Grinning vacantly, Bali still thrust the amrita at her. Throwing back her
head, she laughed huskily. With such a coquettish smile, she said, "Only if you
accept whatever I do, whether it seems right or wrong, will I divide the amrita
among you."
"So be it!" cried the asuras in one voice. She sent them to bathe, to purify
themselves before she gave out the nectar. When they returned, she made them
sit in an incense-fragrant hall, which appeared there miraculously. She sat them
on mats of kusa grass, whose blades pointed to the auspicious east. When they
were all silent in the hall lit by soft butter lamps, she came among them,
enchanting them with her gait slowed by the weight of her hips. Her glances
were shy, yet so brazen and the nectar was in her hands.
In that lustful quiet, her anklets sang like a forest of birds. She made them
sit, devas and asuras, across the hall from each other. As she showed the asuras
to their places, as if by accident the silken cloth fell away from her naked
breasts. She took it up again, but none too quickly. With a velvet giggle, full of
promises, she whispered, "Let the niggardly devas drink first, I will save the
most for the end."
She winked at them, promising not only the amrita. Then, hips swaying,
she crossed to the devas; smiling over her shoulder at the demons, she began to
pour out all the nectar just for the gods of light. She took her time. Though they
grew restive, the asuras dare not cross her: they waited, all of them except Rahu.
With maaya, he assumed the form and raiment of a deva; he stole across to the
other side of the hall and into the line of nectar drinkers, between the Sun and
the Moon. Mohini served Rahu and Surya and Soma cried that he was not what
he seemed. But Rahu had drunk the nectar and, becoming himself in a flash,
Vishnu, for he was Mohini, struck off Rahu’s head with the Sudarshana chakra
before the amrita went down his throat.
chakra-borne, Rahu’s head flew immortal into the sky, while his body fell
dead on the ground. Vishnu granted planethood to Rahu. Each day of the new
and full moon, Rahu tries to swallow both Surya and Soma Deva, between
whom he sat to drink the amrita.
The devas had drunk all the nectar and, smiling triumphantly, Vishnu was
himself again. Realising they had been tricked, roaring, the asuras attacked the
devas. Vishnu drove them back with his chakra and down into patala, killing
many; while the devas were now immortal and rose to fight again even if they
were hewn down. In terror, the asuras fled to the under-worlds.

 
Some say that when Siva hears how Vishnu tricked the asuras, he comes
with Uma to Narayana’s garden in Vaikunta. He says to the Blue God, "Hari, I
have seen all your Avataras, but not this one of the woman Mohini."
Vishnu laughs. "I wanted to excite the asuras, to deceive them. Siva, what
would you do seeing the Mohini, who was seduction personified?"
Siva insists and Vishnu vanishes before their eyes in that garden. Siva and
Parvati wait there for a while, but there is no sign of either Vishnu or Mohini.
They are about to leave, when they see her under some flowering trees, amidst
red foliage, playing with a ball: Mohini, enchantress. With each step she takes,
she appears to break in two at her waist, so slender is it; and her breasts so full,
throbbing with youth, while a string of great pearls lies over them like small
moons. Her eyes swimmingly follow the lively ball.
Those who tell this tale say that, seeing Mohini, Siva loses control of
himself. When the blue ball bounces away from her, she stands fidgeting with
her dishevelled braids and her silken garment that fell away before the asuras. As
in a dream, leaving Uma and his ganas, Siva goes to retrieve her ball for Mohini.
A thing of enchantment itself, the ball bounces and rolls a long way and chasing
it, Mohini and Siva are soon at some remove from the others, who stand
dumbfounded.
When Siva picks up the ball for her, a hot gust of wind blows the
diaphanous garment away; her girdle slips away from her waist to around her
ankles. The scent of her naked body pierces him like an astra and Siva seizes the
seductress and tries to ravish her even as Parvati stands watching!
Mohini vanishes out of his embrace. She reappears behind another tree,
laughing in her tinkling way. Hopelessly aroused now, under her spell, Siva runs
to her. Behind the tree, he pierces her with a thrust of fire; then moves in
lightning flashes while she screams: the great Lord Siva, groaning like any lost
man.
She weaves out of his embrace and runs from him, long hair streaming
behind her ravishing nakedness. Like the wind, she runs from him. Rudra chases
her witlessly, his seed spilling in copious spurts. Over the mountains she flies,
him hot on her heels, across rivers and their soft banks: he ejaculating in geysers
in the heat of the chase. Until, all his seed is spilt onto the earth and he stops his
frenzied careen. Mohini changes back into Vishnu and confronts Hara. Siva
begins to roar with laughter: they hug each other and dissolve in mirth.
There are also those who say that Mohini does not run far from Siva; but
he catches her and from their loving and from Vishnu’s thigh, Ayappan the tiger-
rider is born: the bachelor God of Sabarimala, Hari-Hara putra.

 
Another story tells of how, at first, the apsaras are shared by deva and
asura alike. But when Lakshmi attaches herself to Vishnu, Bali’s demons
forcibly take all the nymphs for themselves and wrest the amrita from
Dhanvantari’s grasp. Certain of having imminent immortality, the demons
swear, "If we are vanquished by the devas we will never touch these women."
When Mohini tricks them and the devas drink all the amrita, the demons
bay for blood; they attack Vishnu and the gods of light. After the asuras are
routed and flee down into the patalas, Vishnu becomes intensely sensible of the
exquisite, haughty nymphs. He dallies with those nectar maidens: very willing to
make love with the Blue God, to hone the genius with which they are born.
He loves them all, goes the legend and begets myriad sons on them, every
one a blue kshatriya and, like him, a master of knowledge and war. Vishnu is
lost. He descends into the under-worlds with his seraglio of apsaras.
Brahma comes to Kailasa and begs Siva, "Pervador of the stars, Narayana
is lost in the lust of the apsaras and no longer protects the worlds. His sons run
riot through the universe, only you can save us."
They say Siva becomes a mighty bull and, bellowing so the sky quakes,
confronts the sons of Vishnu. Arrogant by their birth, those warriors are furious
that this mere animal dares challenge them. With fierce yells, they rush at the
bull. They rain arrows on him, they strike him with sword, spear and mace; but
he is proof against their every ferocity. Rudra the bull turns on the apsaras’ sons.
He kicks them with awesome hooves; he rends their divine bodies with his horns
and kills the lot.
Hearing the uproar of this battle, Vishnu rises from his patala of lubricity
and attacks the bull with arrows of light and time. He covers the Vrishabha with
a storm of shafts that fall tamely off the animal’s hide. The beast charges Hari
and strikes him to the ground. It gores his chest open, spilling his blood onto the
earth like rain: only then, Mahavishnu remembers himself. Hands folded, he says
to Siva, "Ocean of mercy, forgive me! I did not know it was you."
Smiling a little, Siva says, "You were not yourself for a while, Saviour of
the galaxies."
Meanwhile, Vishnu has already advised the other celestials that in the
under-worlds live the innumerable apsaras, who have been born for the
enjoyment of all and that they are mistresses of pleasure like no other women.
The devas plunge down as a man to the patalas to seek untold satisfaction in the
arms of the nymphs. After bringing Mahavishnu back to his senses and
Lakshmi’s bed, Siva warns them with a curse, "Except a quiescent rishi or a
danava born of my body, any man that enters the apsaras’ realms, will find his

death."
So, following Vishnu back into heaven stream all the forlorn vidyadharas,
apsarases, yakshas, rakshasas, kinnaras, gandharvas, pichasas, guhyakas, siddhas
and bhutas. And all is well again in the worlds, say those who relate the story of
Siva the bull.

THREE INCARNATIONS

TWELVE
 
The devout harlot
 
Once, Vishnu and Brahma stood humbled before the linga of fire
manifested between them, linga without beginning or end. When they flew down
as the Boar and up as the Swan and failed to find the linga’s root or head, they
returned and stood wondering, ‘What might this be?’ For the first time, they
heard the holy noise AUM!
Vishnu, purest of the pure, saw the Sabdabrahman materialise. He saw the
syllable A first, to the south of the linga, a blazing sun. Then he saw the U,
dazzling like fire, to the north; in the midst of the linga he saw the M, like the
moon; at last, he saw the Naada at the brow of that linga. Beyond it, he beheld
the Bindu, the Singularity and beyond that, the supreme Brahman, the deepest
refuge, with the lustre of pure crystal, the being beyond the fourth: the Turiya,
one, void, without beginning, middle or end. It was the truth, the bliss and the
nectar!
Yet, neither Brahma nor Vishnu could comprehend Pranava divided in
four; so, Pranava became the Veda. The A became the Rigveda, the U the
Yajurveda, the M the Saamaveda and the Naada at the end became the
Atharvaveda. Brahma came from the Rig, with the qualities of rajas, Vishnu
from the Yajur, which was sattvic and Rudra from the Saama, tamasic. The
Atharvaveda was beyond the gunas.
Brahma emerged from the right side of Mahesa, Vishnu from the left and
Nilarudra from his heart. In the beginning, intoning AUM, Sadasiva created the
universe. Siva is Pranava and Pranava is Siva.
 
*
 
A human birth is rare even for the devas and asuras. If one does not strive
for moksha after being born a human being, one rues it long when one is dead.
Once, in Nandigrama, there lived a courtesan called Mahananda. She was
a great beauty and a Sivabhakta. Mahananda was a most talented woman,
charming and gracious, brilliant, adept at singing and even more at voluptuous

love. Queens and kings were delighted by her; fortune smiled on her and she was
counted among the wealthy of the town. With devotion and joy, Mahananda
worshipped Siva. She wore ashes and rudraksha and chanted the Lord’s
thousand names. She danced like a dream for him, none else, though the people
thronged to watch her.
Mahananda kept a monkey and a cock. She hung rudraksha on them; she
taught them to dance while she sang, keeping time by clapping her hands. With
its red rudraksha earrings, the monkey danced like a gifted child and the bright
cock with the sacred beads tied around its comb. Those who watched were swept
by unworldly delight, while Mahananda filled the house with her clear laughter,
verging on ecstasy. For the song and the dance were always for Siva.
Her loving too, at which she was so uninhibited and generous, was for
him, in bhakti: to please his creatures, men, to give them as much delight as she
could. Mahananda would do anything a man wanted and so willingly and
exquisitely that no man ever boasted of the pleasure he had with her; as men
frequently do when they have had no pleasure at all. Love with Mahananda was
a precious experience. Everywhere, even into the realms of the gods, spread the
fame of Mahananda the devout harlot.
One day, a stranger made his appearance in Nandigrama: a merchant and
obviously a bhakta. The tripundra marked his brow, rudraksha was round his
neck, his body was ash-smeared, his hair matted in jata and around his wrist was
a priceless, gemset bracelet. Mahananda welcomed the traveller as if they were
blood relatives by their common bhakti. She brought him in to her home,
ensconced him in her best chair and fed him like a king, though he was a
stranger.
Mahananda had a weakness for jewellery and she could never resist the
temptation of frequently adding to her rich collection. Her eyes grew round
when she saw the bracelet the merchant wore. Mahananda was a connoisseur;
she knew a great piece of jewellery when she saw one.
Shyly, but unable to help herself, she said, "Sir, your bracelet is worthy of
being the ornament on an apsara’s wrist."
The merchant replied suavely, "It can be yours, gentle lady. But what price
will you pay for it?"
He was rewarded by Mahananda’s gayest laughter. She cried, "Sir, we are
not chaste women in our family, but whores. If I take the bracelet from you, I
will be your wife for three days and nights."
The merchant cried, "With the Sun and the Moon as witnesses, say
‘Satyam’ thrice and touch my heart with your hand. Then be my wife for three
days and nights and I will give you the bracelet."

Mahananda said, "Satyam, Satyam, Satyam! I will be your wife in body
and soul for three days and nights."
The merchant took the bracelet from his wrist and tied it round her slender
one. Thus, he married her and kissed her passionately. Then he gave her a
brilliant, jewel-studded linga and said, "This is the dearest possession I own.
Keep it carefully for me until I leave."
Reverently as any wife would, she took the linga and locked it away in a
niche in the dance hall in her courtyard. She went back to him and they spent a
torrid night of love. Never before had Mahananda known a man of such
tenderness and virility as this rough and elegant merchant. She wondered if their
‘wedding’ had anything to do with the night’s magic, this rapture. No one had
ever made love to her as this vaishya did.
At midnight, they fell asleep in each other’s arms and she dreamt of being
his wife forever. That night, Mahananda whose mothers had been courtesans for
generations, every trick they knew, had cried out again and again in her fierce
lover’s arms, with no trace of pretence. Why, he had done what no other man
could boast of: he had got her drunk, while he drank twice as much she did and
not a slur from him.
In the small hours, a fire broke out in the courtyard. Fuelled by an uncanny
wind, it blazed through the dance hall, burning it down. Woken by a nightmare,
Mahananda sat up in a sweat of fear. She smelt smoke; she shook the merchant
awake. They ran out together to see the monkey and the cockerel aflame,
shrieking, running round the yard like a twin omen. As they watched, the two
creatures blazed briefly and fell. Among the smouldering embers of the dance
hall, the merchant and his harlot wife for three days found the holy linga. The
freak fire had destroyed it, extinguished its jewels.
The merchant cried, "There lies my soul, dead. I cannot live anymore. Tell
your servants to make a pyre for me, I must burn myself tonight. Don’t try to
restrain me; not Brahma, Vishnu or Indra can."
After his lovemaking, she knew the tenacity of his spirit: he surely meant
to kill himself. Quietly, she ordered her servants to heap the pyre. Thrice, the
grim merchant walked around it, chanting Siva’s name; then he walked into the
flames, as calmly as if he was wading into a river to bathe. Quickly, he was ash.
Mahananda grew terribly disconsolate. She said, "He died because of me
and I was his wife when he perished. Though all too briefly, I loved him. Now I
am his widow and I will follow him into death. My truth lies there and there is
liberation only in truth."
Her mother and her sisters cried, "You have gone mad! We are whores, we
do not marry or become wives."

Mahananda was adamant. She willed all her considerable wealth and
property to her family and to charity. She too called fervently to Siva and
circling the fire that had claimed the body of her husband for three days, she
walked into its flames. Siva stepped out of that fire before it could touch her. He
was three-eyed, the crescent moon scintillated on his head; he was bright as a
hundred suns and he took her hand. She was stunned: the Lord had the
merchant’s face! She was confused and terrified by his irradiant presence.
He said tenderly, "I came to test you, lovely woman. I was the merchant. I
burned the dance hall and the crystal linga; I walked into the fire. Mahananda,
your virtue is immaculate, your faith perfect. I will give you whatever you want,
pleasures the devas cannot dream of, anything."
When she found her voice, Mahananda the pure harlot said to Vaisyanatha,
the merchant Siva, "Lord, all I want is to touch your lotus feet. My family here
and my servants, are your bhaktas. Siva, take us to your world, free us forever of
the terror of rebirth."
For love of his devout whore, Siva took them all to moksha in Sivaloka.
He revived the monkey and the cockerel and liberated them as well.

THIRTEEN
 
King Bhadrayu of old
 
The sannyasin rose during the Brahma muhurta, the hour before dawn; it
was still dark in the world. He meditated on Siva within his head: the guru in the
thousand-petalled lotus, the master like transparent crystal, hands raised in the
twin mudras of protection and boon, the perfectly beautiful guru. The sannyasin
bowed, his palms folded to Siva; he worshipped him with fragrant flowers of his
imagination.
"Lord, let whatever I do from sunrise until sunset and from sunset to
sunrise, be worship of you."
He controlled his breath, brought every sense under his will and meditated
on the six mystical chakras in his body, from the muladhara to the
brahmarandhra. He thought deeply on the Nirguna Sadasiva, the Brahman
whose body with the splendour of a billion suns is Satchitananda: existence,
knowledge and bliss.
He thought, "I am He!"
He covered his head and nose with a square of cloth; he laid some grass
on the ground and emptied his bowels. Holding his penis in his left hand, he rose
and went to the pool where he washed himself. Intoning Pranava in his mind, he
faced north and cleaned his teeth with a neem twig. He bathed, scrubbing
himself with clay. Joining his hands in a sankhamudra, shell-like, he poured
water over his head twelve times, saying AUM. He wiped himself dry and tied a
clean loincloth round his waist. Chanting the Sadyadi mantra and the Agniriti,
he smeared holy ashes over himself. Touching his navel, elbows, shoulders and
back, he washed both his hands and performed achamana twice, rinsed his
mouth.
He scooped up some water in his right hand: covering that hand with the
left one, he intoned Pranava twelve times. He sprinkled the water thrice on his
head and drank three sips of it, meditating on Omkara, on Siva who lives in the
heart of the sun, God of all glory, eight-armed, four-faced, half of him female. A
hundred and eight times, the sage offered the Gayatri japa, tarpana twelve times
and, after another achamana, he controlled his breath in pranayama twice.
Then, he went to the mantapa of worship and entered right foot first. The

sun had not yet risen.
 
*
 
In ancient times, Siva blessed the devout king Bhadrayu. The Lord came to
him in a dream as a bull and then on, Bhadrayu conquered all his enemies easily
and extended his sway far. He married the chaste and pious Kirtimalini. Once, as
spring came over the land, Bhadrayu and his wife went into the forest to sport: in
that vana, Siva sported with them.
Bhadrayu was proud that he was a protector of his people, their refuge at
all times; he often boasted of this. Suddenly, in a clearing in the forest, a
brahmana and his wife came running headlong through the trees, screaming for
help: they were being chased by a tiger that was a demon, he was Yama
incarnate. Bhadrayu seized his bow and cried there was nothing to fear. With a
shattering roar, the tiger bounded into the clearing, pounced on the brahmana’s
wife and carried her off. She screamed, "Save me, O King!"
Bhadrayu shot a quiver of devastras at the beast, but they fell off his
striped hide like bits of straw. He was a mayic tiger, made of illusion by Siva!
Such a bewailing the widower brahmana set up. Tears streaming down his face,
he turned accusingly on Bhadrayu.
"What avail are your weapons now? What use is your legendary strength,
your great bow, your sword, or your devastras? A kshatriya’s first dharma is to
protect his people with his very life. Your family’s honour is lost, Bhadrayu. It is
better you drink poison or walk into a fire than live a life without dharma."
The brahmana’s every word pierced Bhadrayu’s noble heart, a flaming
truth. The king fell at the brahmana’s feet, he cried, "My manliness is lost, my
ancestors’ virtue has perished. My fame is ashes; I have committed an awful sin
today. Brahmana, I am a base, weak kshatriya; have mercy on me. You can have
whatever you want from me. This kingdom is for you; I am your slave. My
wealth, everything that is mine shall be yours. Do not grieve!"
The brahmana said, "What will a blind man do with a mirror? What will a
fool do with a book? What will I do with wealth when I have lost my wife? If
you truly mean what you say, there is only one possession of yours for which I
have any use, just one that can repair my loss. Give me your queen!"
Bhadrayu cried out as an animal struck by an arrow. "My kingdom is
yours, my horses, my elephants, my army, my riches, even my life. But I cannot
give you my queen. Brahmana, dreadful is the sin of sleeping with another

man’s wife."
The brahmana scoffed at this. "Let it be the murder of a brahmana, let it be
perpetual wantonness and wine: I wash these sins away easily with tapasya.
What then is the sin of enjoying another’s wife? No, Kshatriya, if you don’t want
me to curse you, give me your queen."
Bhadrayu knew dharma demanded he gave his queen to the widower. He
thought, "I will give my Kirtimalini to the brahmana and walk into a fire. Then
my honour will survive and I will escape sin."
With a ritual of holy water, he gifted a tearful Kirtimalini to the brahmana.
Then he bathed. He prayed to the Gods. Fixing his heart on Siva, he walked
thrice in pradakshina around the fire he had kindled. Bhadrayu was about to step
into those flames when the brahmana took his hand.
Siva stood revealed before the king! His brahmana’s guise abandoned, the
Lord stood there: five-faced, three-eyed, the Pinaka in his hand, glinting by the
light of the moon on his jata. He was brilliant as a star, white as a lotus. He wore
Gajasura’s elephant-hide, his hair was wet with the Ganga’s waters and he had
living green serpents for necklaces. He stood smiling indulgently, with the
exquisite Sivaa beside him.
The heavens marked Bhadrayu’s bhakti with a shower of unearthly petals.
The king himself stood stunned, his skin crawling, his head bowed before the
Vision, tears coursing down his face. Siva and Parvati blessed Bhadrayu, they
told him to ask for any boon.
In a quivering voice, Bhadrayu said, "Lord, my greatest boon is that I see
you before me, amidst this samsara. But if you would grant me another boon,
Siva, let my father and my mother, Kirtimalini and I, my friend the vaishya
Padmakara and his son Sanaya, all live near you forever."
Kirtimalini asked Sivaa, "Devi, let my father Chandrangada and my
mother Simantini live near you too."
For ten thousand years, with Siva’s blessing, the ancient king Bhadrayu
ruled, peacefully and wisely. Then, he left his kingdom to his son and went to
eternal bliss with his Kirtimalini, at the Lord’s feet.
He who reads or tells the tale of Siva’s incarnation as Dvijeswara, the
brahmana, never swerves from dharma and he surely attains moksha one day.

FOURTEEN
 
Arjuna’s boon
 
When the sannyasin entered the mantapa, he tested the ground by smelling
it, he inspected its color by lamplight; he also tasted the earth. He had erected a
canopy above. Now he scrubbed the floor of that mantapa, until it was smooth as
a mirror. Carefully he drew a square, with each side two aratnis long. Inside the
square, he drew others, the width of a palm leaf, so there were thirteen squares
in each column, every way, a hundred and sixty-nine in all. The leaf he used to
measure the small squares he placed within the large one and he sat down
facing west.
Beginning with the east, on short sticks he tied a red and yellow thread,
which he wound all round the large square. The small square at the heart of the
large one was the corolla of the mystic lotus. The eight squares immediately
around it were the petals. He painted those petals perfectly white; the corolla he
painted yellow and drew a flame red circle inside it. Beginning with Indra’s
petal on the right, he coloured all the petals alternately black and red.
He inscribed the yantra for Pranava within the pericarp and drew the
yonic pedestal beneath. He drew Srikantha above it, Amaresa above this, with
Mahakaala in the middle. On top, he drew the staff the danda  and beyond that,
Iswara. The Pitha he painted blue, Srikantha yellow, Amaresa red and
Mahakaala in resonant black. He coloured the staff gray and smoky and Iswara
white. After he drew the yantra, the AUM, he encompassed the red Amaresa in
sadya.
He painted the four corner squares white. With red mineral chalk, he
inscribed the first four letters of the alphabet, a aa i and ii, and they were the
four doors. The two squares next to each of these, he painted yellow. Within the
yellow square at the southeast, he drew a red lotus of eight petals, with a yellow
corolla. In the midst of this lotus, he inscribed the letter ha, with the bindu. In
the south western square also he drew the lotus and inscribed the third suspirant
within with the sixth vowel and the fourteenth, AU and M, decorated with the
Naadabindu.
The leaves of the lotus he carefully painted red, the background was black.
With six bindus, he drew a hexagram in black in the east. He drew triangles in

different colours and a crescent moon in the west, in yellow. He entered the four
bijas in their proper places. When the mystic diagram in yellow, red, black, blue
and white was complete, the sannyasin restrained his mind and worshipped the
rising sun.
 
*
 
Like any rishi, Arjuna stood on one foot in the heart of the Dvaita vana,
with one eye fixed on the sun, chanting the five-syllabled Siva mantra, Namah
Sivayah. So impeccable was his tapasya the devas themselves went to Siva and
begged him to grant Arjuna what he wanted. This was a weapon to use against
the Kauravas, the evil Duryodhana and his brothers. Most of all, Arjuna needed
an astra to kill Jayadratha, whose father had a boon that his son could be killed
only with the greatest of all astras. Siva assured the devas he meant to help
Arjuna, since his cause was just.
Suddenly, sent by Duryodhana who had truck with such demons, the asura
Muka stormed into that jungle as an immense wild boar. Like a tornado came
Mukasura, uprooting old trees with his tusks. Just then, Siva himself appeared
there as a Kirata, a hunter and his ganas as Bhilla tribals.
The boar saw Arjuna and charged him. At the same instant, Arjuna and the
Kirata loosed arrows at the beast. The hunter’s arrow pierced the great pig’s rear,
came out through its snout and burrowed down into the earth. From the other
side, Arjuna’s arrow flashed in at the snout, came out through the boar’s back
and lay bloody on the ground. Muka fell dead and resumed his natural,
monstrous form.
The Kirata sent one of his tribesmen to fetch his arrow. Arjuna also arrived
beside the dead demon to retrieve his missile. Arjuna picked up his shaft before
Siva’s gana. The Bhilla said, "Rishi, give back my arrow."
Arjuna had not seen the Kirata shoot at the boar and retorted, "I shot the
daitya. Can’t you see the arrow has my name engraved on it? Do you think you
will get it from me just for the asking?"
The gana laughed. "You are no sage, but a liar. The arrow is my master’s.
He saved your life and you steal from him? Your tapasya will be ruined if you
steal.
My master waits with our hunters. He can bless you or kill you, as he
pleases. If you are so keen to have an arrow, Rishi, come and meet him. He has
many arrows like this one and some better."

Arjuna said, "You are true to your nature, forester and to your low birth. I
am a kshatriya while you are a thief. Your master is also just a hunter. How can
he hope to fight me? If you beg me for this arrow, I may give it to you.
Otherwise, let your master come and beg to fight me."
His face darkening, the tribal said, "You are no sage, but a fool that courts
his death! Give me the arrow and go peacefully with your life."
Arjuna snarled, "Bhilla, a fight between a lion and a jackal is always
unequal. Go and send your master to me. I hope he is less of a jackal than you
are."
The Bhilla went back to his master and told him what had happened.
Laughing, the Kirata came towards Arjuna with his army of hunters. Calmly,
Arjuna stood his ground. The wild man shouted from some way off, "Your
brothers are in distress, your wife is grief-stricken: why do you court death?
How will you recover your kingdom if you die? Give my arrow back to me and
go in peace."
Arjuna lost his temper altogether. He roared back at this forester who
knew too much, "The lion never fears the jackal pack. Come and fight!"
The tribe of hunters attacked Arjuna. He shot them down swiftly, splitting
their bows with a tremendous volley of light-like arrows. Grinning stain toothed,
the black, ash-smeared Kirata came to face the Pandava warrior. A scathing duel
broke out and Arjuna was amazed by the wild man’s prowess. Then, in an
eyeflash, the Kirata shot Arjuna’s bow out of his hands; he shot his armour off
his body, leaving him naked. Arjuna ran at him, dived low and, seizing the
hunter’s feet, hefted him high and whirled him, queerly unresisting, above his
head. The puzzled Arjuna looked up and saw Siva above him.
Arjuna laughed: ecstatically, like a child. He prostrated himself before
Siva. He cried, "You deceived me, Lord. Oh, curse me that I fought you!"
Siva raised him up tenderly, "You have worshipped me, my fine bhakta, as
you know best, with arrows and fists. I am glad! Ask for any boon, it shall be
yours."
Overwhelmed, tears streaming down his face, Arjuna said, "Devadeva,
obeisance! Obeisance, Kailasapati, Sadasiva, Sadyojata, Nilakanta. Obeisance,
Kapalin, with the garland of bones. I bow to you, camphor-bodied Pinakin,
Vyalin, O Nirguna, Saguna Siva. Lord, I am your slave and you are my master."
Siva said, "Choose your boon, my son, your time is short."
Arjuna said, "It is a worldly siddhi for which I did tapasya: to save my
family from our enemies."
Knowing what was in his heart, Siva gave Arjuna the Paasupatastra:
profound and inexorable weapon. He said, "This is my own astra. Win back your

kingdom with my power."
Siva and his ganas vanished and Arjuna returned to his family, with the
weapon of their destiny in his quiver. How excited they were when he told them
what had happened. How many times they made him repeat his tale, savouring it
like amrita, especially the part when the Lord stood revealed before their brother.

TWELVE JYOTIRLINGAS

FIFTEEN
 
Hatesa
 
The sannyasin spread a tiger-skin to the south of the mystic diagram. He
chanted the Astra mantra, sprinkling pure water over the striped hide. AUM
Sivayah Namah! He chanted and sat on the tiger-skin, facing north. He filled
the conch shell with sacral water and gently set down it on the yantra. He said
Pranava seven times, while offering flowers around the shell. With his right
hand, he made the dhenu mudra and the sankha mudra. He sprinkled the pavitra
jala everywhere.
He said the Surya mantra and called the names of the rishis. He
worshipped Kaalagnirudra, Adhara Shakti, Ananta, Prithvi, Ratnadvipa, the
devas of knowledge, detachment and supremacy. Beginning with the eastern
quarter, he adored the Gods of Evil, the lower lid of maaya and the upper lid of
vidya, sattva, rajas and tamas. Slowly, he raised the Shakti through the path of
the Sun, through the pingala nadi. He made it emerge with a handful of flowers.
For Siva, red as vermilion, who is Ardhanaari, who bears the mace Khatvanga,
the sannyasin uttered Pranava first, AUM, then Hraam, Hriim and Sah.
He worshipped the Sun and the six organs in the petals of the mystic lotus.
Aditya, Bhaskara, Bhanu and Ravi he worshipped, Akra, Brahma, Vishnu and
Rudra. He worshipped the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn and
Rahu, the seven oceans, the seven Gangas, the maharishis, the devas, the
gandharvas, the nagas, apsaras, yakshas, the Vedas. He set the arghya vessel
with holy water in it before him and blessed it with flowers and perfumes; he
raised it to the point between his eyebrows. He hymned Surya, "Obeisance to
you, vermilion-hued, O diamond-adorned. Be pleased to accept this arghya, my
offering."
He worshipped Siva; he worshipped Durga and Kshetrapala. He recited
the Apsarapantu, to keep asuras away: "Apsarapantu Bhutani Sarvatodisham.
Sarvesam Virodhan Samarabhe. Apsarapantu. Apahata Asura Rakshamsi
Vedipadah. AUM Astrayah Phat!"
Thrice he clapped his hands; thrice he kicked his feet to clear his way. He
controlled his breath, he recited the Hamsa mantra silently; through the Brahma
nadi he brought the living consciousness into his heart. Slowly, he raised the
chita from the muladhaara, up his spine, to the cerebral cortex. His body was

drenched in the sublime, ambrosiac current flowing from the lunar zone of the
chita. Within the lotus of the thousand petals, within the twelve, his body thrilled
to the taintless ecstasy of the sattvic current; it was a profound thing now.
Knowing Tat Tvam Asi, the ultimate union, he brought the atman down gently
into the lotus of his heart. He thrust the atman into the Atman, through the
current of nectar; piously, he made the vital breath stable. Thinking of Siva, he
dedicated himself in quietude.
The sage of Pranava was Brahma, the meter was Gayatri and the Deity
was the great Atman: Sadasiva who is the I, the Self. A was the seed, U was the
Shakti and M the Kaalika. Pranava was the way of moksha.
 
*
 
The three worlds, of the devas, the asuras and human beings, are pervaded
by Siva in the form of sacred phalluses; these are innumerable. Indeed, the
Universe has the form of a linga! Everything that exists is in Siva’s image; yet,
the main Jyotirlingas on earth are twelve: where Siva himself incarnated at one
time or other, then remained as a holy linga to bless the world.
Just hearing about these lingas of grace rids a man of his sins. They are
Somanatha, Mallikarjuna, Mahakaala, Parameswara, Kedara, BhimaSankara,
Visvesa, Tryambaka, Vaidyanatha, Nagesa, Ramesa and Ghusmesa. Those who
repeat these names daily achieve their every desire; and those who chant them
with no trace of desire are released forever from birth and rebirth.
When eaten, the prasada offered to these Jyotirlingas makes ashes of the
sins of a thousand births. The mere sight of a Jyotirlinga can cause moksha; but
these lingas were not always upon the earth.
 
Once, long ago, his bhaktas the rishis worshipped Siva incessantly within
the daruvana, the cedar forest. Their devotions were so intense, that Siva decided
to visit them. One day, leaving their women behind, the learned brahmanas went
deep into the vana to gather dry twigs and branches for their sacrificial fire. Siva
chose that hour to visit their settlement. He came in a misshapen form, his
twisted and brilliant body red and blue: naked he went, ash clad. Siva came
holding his penis in his hand; he drew its foreskin back and forth. He waved his
organ about, grinding his hips in a surreal dance, crooning to himself all the
while, it seemed in irreparable sorrow.
The rishis’ wives were overcome, first with fear, then quickly with a

frenetic excitement that they could not understand or contain. In a throng, they
accosted that weird person. Their soft hands moved in fever over his crooked
body, mad to touch him. They stroked his hand; in awe and delight, they fondled
his marvellous phallus. Soon they were rivals, each one trying to be nearest him,
out of their wits with love for the wild stranger. He never said a word, but
continued the rhythmic gyrations of his pelvis: mystic and unfathomable
lewdness.
The rishis returned and found their wives with the vulgar stranger. They
cried, "Who is this? What is this?"
Siva only swayed his hips bizarrely and fondled himself; he spoke no
word. In fear of their husbands, the women shrank away from him. The eldest
rishi cried, "Disgusting wretch, defiler of the Vedas, may your phallus fall off!"
At the curse, Siva’s tumid linga dropped out of his hand and fell to the
earth. Blazing cosmic fire, it plunged through the ground. That linga began to
burn everything in its path. It burnt the earth, it burnt heaven; plunging into the
under-worlds, it burnt the patalas. High and low, it blazed; nowhere did the
terrible phallus rest and soon no calm place remained in creation. The rishis were
panic-stricken; the devas had no peace. They flew to Brahma and told him what
had happened.
Brahma said, "Brahmanas, what a foolish thing you have done. As long as
Siva’s linga ranges the worlds there will be no peace anywhere."
The rishis and the devas cried, "How can we make the blazing thing still?"
Brahma pondered a moment; then he said gravely, "Worship Uma: only
she can make Siva’s organ quiet. Place a jar of water from a holy tirtha on an
eight-petalled yantra, with sprouts of barley and durva grass. Cast a spell on the
jar with mantras from the Veda. Drench the wild linga with the water from the
sacred jar, chanting the Satarudriya as you do."
When this was done, the devas and rishis saw the mighty linga materialise
before them beside the Goddess’ yantra. It was quiet for the time, but throbbed
as if it would take flight again any moment. They lifted the linga onto the
pedestal that was the mountain girl’s yoni, her sacred vulva and vagina. Along
with an auspicious arrow, they installed it there. Again, they chanted Vedic
hymns; they worshipped Siva with offerings of food, perfumes, sandal, flowers
and incense, with music and prostrations. They chanted svastyanana mantras; the
rishis cried, "Jaya! Jaya! O Siva, be still and protect the worlds."
Siva grew quiescent within Parvati, who ecstatically assumed the form of
the cosmic yoni. He came incandescent before those rishis and said, "Only the
mountain daughter can bear my linga within her body. Now there shall be peace
and fruitfulness: let the worlds prosper."

 
That first phallus, the original linga that fell out of Siva’s hand, is
renowned across the three worlds as Hataksema, Hatesa or Siva-Siva. Where the
Hatesa is worshipped, there is joy in this life and moksha hereafter.

SIXTEEN
 
Somalinga
 
The sannyasin sat to the right of the mystic yantra; he worshipped it with
AUM. He meditated on the Guru, saying, "AUM Gum Gurubhyah Namah!"
He worshipped Ganapati with incense and flowers, seating him on the
lotus to the southwest of the diagram. He invoked Ganesa. He saw him red and
mammoth-bodied, with the perfect elephant’s face, holding a noose, a goad and
giving boons. He offered him naivedya: plantains, coconuts, mangoes and sweet
jaggery balls.
In the northwest, he conceived Skanda’s form. He chanted the
Skandagayatri and thought deeply on Kumara: like a sun, peacock-mounted,
four-armed, magnificent, with a spear and a cockerel, crowned and his hands
raised in the mudras of granting protection and boons. He worshipped him with
incense and mantras.
He worshipped Nandin, chief of the harem, in the right wing of the eastern
doors: Nandin with the lustre of the golden hill, wearing luminous ornaments,
the crescent moon his crown, gentle, three-eyed, four-armed, wielding a trident,
with a hind, an axe and a golden staff. To the north, he worshipped Suyasa, the
Maruts’ daughter, Nandiswara’s consort.
He sprinkled the yantra with water from the conch shell. On the ground,
he saw holy Adhara Shakti, blue as a dark lotus. Before her, with five unfurled
hoods licking the sky, he saw Vasuki. Above this, he conceived the throne of
dignity with the lion’s four feet, virtue, knowledge, detachment and prosperity,
coloured white, yellow, red and dark blue. He conceived adharma and the evils,
from east to north. He conceived the eight siddhis in the petals, the Shaktis in the
filaments, vairagya in the corolla, the nine Shaktis in the seeds, Siva’s dharma in
the bulb of the root, the Saivic gyana in the stem and the zones of Agni, Surya
and Soma above the crown. Above this, he saw the throne of the Deity,
resplendent with the Lord Pravyomavakasa. Travelling upwards in spirit from
the Adhara Shakti to the throne of Siva, the ascetic chanted AUM Sivayah
Namah. He invoked the Lord, standing with a handful of flowers.
He meditated on the Lord in Omkara: pure as crystal, pervasive,
incomprehensible even to Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and Rudra, essence of the

Vedas, without beginning, middle, or end: Mahaushadhi, panacea for every
sickness. He meditated with obeisance upon Siva, Sakaala and Nishkaala, of
time and timeless. He conceived him, transparent-bodied, cool, crystalline, with
a moon crown and thick jata, his eastern face bright as the rising sun, with three
lotus eyes, his western face blue as a cloud, terrible with fangs and out-thrust
throbbing lips, with three round and red eyes. The northern face is red as coral,
blue-haired, with three long, graceful eyes. The southern face has the lambency
of the full moon: tender, three-eyed, smiling. The fifth face is the gentlest of all
and the most softly radiant, with three eyes shining out fondly.
In his right hands, Siva holds the trident, the axe Khatvanga, the
thunderbolt, a sword and blinding fire. In his left hands, he has the bow Pinaka,
an arrow, a bell, a noose and a goad. The Nivritti kala is up to his knees, the
Pratishta kala up to his navel, the Vidya kala up to his neck, the Shanta kala to
his brow and the Shantyatita kala is beyond that. Thus, with his body of five
kalas, the transcendent arts, he pervades the five paths. He has Isana for his
crown, the primal lord Purusha. He has Aghora for his heart, Vamadeva his
genitals, Sadyojata his form. He is the same as the Omkara, the five-and six-
syllabled sacred mantras, the six mountains and the jatis.
Now, the sannyasin conceived of the Goddess, Siva’s consort, as
Manomani, on the Lord’s left side. He chanted Pranava and then the mantra
Gaurimimaaya; he prostrated himself in front of the Devi. She had the sheen of a
lotus in bloom, huge eyes set wide apart, dark and curly hair, blue, round and
high breasts, plump buttocks, smooth and protuberant and she was clad in fine
yellow silk. On her forehead was a tilaka and many-coloured flowers were in her
braided hair. Her face was bent in bashfulness; a golden, thousand-petalled
lotus was in her hand: symbol of the soul.
He said, "Bhave Bhave Natibhave!" offering padya; "Vaamaya
Namah!" offering water for achamana; "Jyeshtaya Namah!" offering a fresh
cloth; "Shreshtaya Namah!" offering the sacred thread; "Rudrayah Namah!"
offering water again; "Kaalayah Namah!" offering perfumes to Siva and
Parvati. He then began the avarana puja.
 
*
 
Daksha gave his twenty-seven daughters, Aswini and the others, in
marriage to Soma the Moon. How radiant they were when they had one another.
How bright the Nakshatras were now, how much more brilliant was the Moon:

as the jewel set in gold is more resplendent; as the gold in which the jewel is set
is more golden.
But of his twenty-seven wives, Soma loved none as he did Rohini. The
others complained to their father that they were neglected. Daksha came to the
Moon and said, "How can you make such a difference between one of your
wives and the rest? You must stop this, or you will find hell for yourself."
Soma fell at his father-in-law’s feet and begged forgiveness. He swore that
never again would he make the slightest difference between his wives; satisfied,
Daksha returned home. How does someone fated to court disaster suddenly
befriend fortune? How does even the Moon change his destiny? Nature had her
way: Soma still made love only to Rohini and neglected her sisters. Again,
Daksha’s other daughters complained to their father and again the prajapati came
to the Moon.
Daksha begged Soma to be reasonable. Again, tearfully, the Moon fell at
Daksha’s feet; again, he swore to treat all his wives equally. Daksha decided to
give him another chance to mend his ways. Before the month was over, his
twenty-six unhappy daughters sent a messenger to their father, saying their lives
were still intolerable, Rohini’s was the only bed in which the Moon slept.
In a towering rage, Daksha cursed Soma, "Waste with consumption!"
At once, Soma contracted the dread disease. He began to lose his lustre
and fade in all his digits. The devas, the rishis, the asuras of night: everyone was
miserable. Life itself, especially the life of the heart wasted away. Love wasted
with the Moon; its enchantment waned. Soma’s condition was quickly so
wretched that it was painful even to look at him. Indra and the devas, Vasishta
and the maharishis came to Brahma. With many a sigh between them, full of pity
for Soma, they told him what had happened. Brahma snorted at their
compassion.
Seeming quite pleased to hear about the Moon’s misery, the Creator said
to the devas and rishis, "Your pity is misplaced: you have forgotten what Soma
is like. Let me refresh your memories how he first came among us and what he
did."
Once, the majestic rishi Atri performed an unprecedented tapasya. He
stood stiff and straight as a staff, his arms raised above his head. For three
thousand years of the devas, he stood in the tapasya known as Atikatora, the
Most Difficult. As he stood unwinking, his semen held inside him for all those
years, his body turned into Soma rasa.
The Soma welling in Atri flowed out in waves through his eyes, illumining
the ten directions. The effluence impregnated the ten golden Goddesses of the
directions. None of them could bear that virile life alone: so they bore it together

and it shone from them like the cool-rayed moon shining down on the worlds.
Those Goddesses could not bear the brilliant embryo for long and they let it fall
on to the sacred earth as moonlight.
When Brahma saw illustrious Soma falling softly, he gave him his own
chariot, fashioned by the devas and drawn by a thousand horses: so he could ride
through the sky and give succour to the world.
Wherever Soma’s power fell upon the earth, green things, plants and trees,
bushes and flowering creepers sprang up. With them, he nurtured the four kinds
of creatures. When he performed a fervent tapasya for a thousand lotus counts of
years, Brahma gave Soma sovereignty over the seeds, the plants, the brahmanas
and the waters. He became a king of kings and nourished the worlds; his glory
was ineffable.
Then, he held a royal coronation for himself. Hiranyagarbha was the
udgatr, Brahma was the brahmana priest and Hari was the guest. Led by
Sanatkumara, all the original brahmanas were present. Soma gave those
brahmanas the three worlds as dakshina. Nine Goddesses attended on him: Sini
and Kuhu, the days of the new moon; Vapus, beauty; Pushti, prosperity; Prabha,
splendour; Vasu, wealth; Kirti, fame; Dhriti, resolution; and Lakshmi, great
fortune herself. After that fabulous crowning, Soma became vain.
He abducted guru Brihaspati’s lovely wife Tara and sided with the asuras
against the devas. Out of affection for Angiras, Rudra joined the fray and
attacked Sukra, who had attacked Angiras on Soma’s behalf, when Brihaspati
came to beg Tara back. It was because of Soma’s reckless pride that the first, the
original, Great War, Taraka maya, was fought between the devas and the
daityas; and it destroyed the world.
Brahma said, "That is what Soma did, if you have forgotten. I made peace
between Siva and Sukra; I returned Tara to Brihaspati. But Tara was pregnant
and, seeing her, the guru cried in anguish, ‘You shall not give birth to that child.’
Tara retorted, ‘I will have this child no matter what.’
In that ancient sabha, you devas, aghast, asked Tara to say if the child in
her womb belonged to Soma or Brihaspati. Tara would not tell. When her son
was born, he began to attack the devas like a terrible enemy. Only then, she
confessed to me that Soma was the father of her child. How pleased Soma was,
how proud! He set the mercurial boy up in the sky and called him Budha, not
caring a whit for Brihaspati’s feelings."
Brahma sighed, as over a favoured child gone astray. "One cannot count
all Soma’s intransigence. Now Daksha has cursed him and I suppose, for the
earth’s sake, we must find a cure for his consumption."
He paused ruminatively, then said, "Let the Moon go to the shrine at

Prabhasa with the devas. Let him worship Siva there with the mrityunjaya homa.
Only Siva can cure him."
After they mollified Daksha, the devas took Soma to Prabhasa. They
invoked the holy waters of the Saraswati and the other rivers and they
worshipped a parthiva linga, an earthen phallus. Having shown him his way, the
devas returned to their heaven. Soma chanted the mrityunjaya mantra a hundred
million times and one day Siva stood before him.
"I am pleased with you, Soma, choose your boon."
Soma prostrated before the blinding Vision; he remembered the old war
over Tara that he had fought against Siva. Humbled now, he said in a low voice,
"If you are pleased with me, Sankara, there is nothing I cannot have. Pardon all
my sins, Lord, remain benevolent to me always. O Siva, let my body not waste
from Daksha’s curse."
Siva found a fine solution: "Soma, let your digit wane steadily, day by day,
during one fortnight. And let it wax during the next."
When they heard, the devas and the rishis flocked to that place and fell on
their faces in delight before Siva. They pleaded with him, "Mahadeva, remain
here forever with Uma."
Soma sang Siva’s praises as Nirguna and Saguna and, laughing
indulgently, Siva stayed there as Someswara, Lord of the Moon. The devas
created a sacred pool there to worship Siva and Brahma, as well, who sent Soma
to Prabhasa in the first place. It is renowned in swarga, bhumi and patala as the
pool of the Moon.
A man who sees the Somalinga at Somanatha has his sins taken from him.
He who bathes in the velvet waters of the Moon’s pool is cured of consumption,
even leprosy, even as Soma Deva was.

SEVENTEEN
 
Mahakaala
 
He worshipped the Lords Ganesa and Karttikeya where he did before.
He worshipped Ananta within the eastern petal, Sukshma in the south,
Sivottama in the west, Ekanetra in the north, Ekarudra in the northeast, the
Trimurti in the southeast, Srikantha in the southwest and Sikhandisa in the
northwest.
He worshipped the Emperors: Vrishesana in the middle of the eastern
door, Nandin to the south of it and Mahakaala to the north, Bhringisa to the
west of the southern door, Vinayaka to the east of that with wild fragrances,
Vrishabha in the northwest and Guha in the southern square. To the east of the
northern door, he prayed to Bhava, Sarva, Isana, Rudra, Pasupati, Ugra, Bhima
and Mahadeva. This was the third avartana.
In the east, above the corolla of the lotus, he invoked Siva with the mantra,
"Yo Vedadau Svarah!" and worshipped Siva in the eastern, Visvesa in the
southern, Paramesana in the northern and Sarvesa in the western petals of the
lotus. He called to Rudra invoking him with "A Vo Rajanam”, with flowers,
perfumes and incense. He worshipped Siva in the east, prayed to Hara in the
south, Mrida in the north and Bhava in the petal in the western quarter. He
called, "Pra Tad Vishnu!" and worshipped Hari in the north, Vasudeva in the
east, Aniruddha in the south, Samkarshana in the north and Pradyumna in the
west. Saying, "Hiranyagarbha Samvartata!" he worshipped Brahma in the
western lotus. He invoked Hiranyagarbha in the east, Viraja in the south,
Pushkara in the north and Kaala in the west.
Then the fifth avartana: in the topmost row of squares, the Lokapalas were
worshipped, beginning with the last and in the way of pradakshina. With the ten
bijas, he worshipped the Lokapalas. He worshipped Brahma and Vishnu. He
worshipped the trident in the northeast, the thunderbolt in the east, the axe in the
southeast, the arrow in the south, the sword in the southwest, the noose in the
west, the goad in the northwest and the bow in the north. He worshipped all
these as standing with palms joined reverently, their faces wreathed in brilliant
smiles, looking up devotedly at Siva and Uma.
The sannyasin performed the sashtanga namaskara. He circumambulated

the mystic lotus; he made an offering of flowers.
 
*
 
The Jyotirlinga Mallikarjuna is where Siva and Sivaa remained upon the
Krauncha Mountain next to the Manasa Sarovara, to be near their estranged son
Kumara. At the end of each fortnight, they visit him: Siva on amavasya and
Parvati on the day of paurnima.
The third Jyotirlinga is Mahakaala, the sight of which burns up a man’s
sins and can even bestow moksha: for Siva surely dwells in it.
There was a brahmana, a Vedic scholar called Vedapriya, in the beautiful
city of Avanti. Vedapriya was devoted to the Lord. He kept the fire of sacrifice
lit in his home and worshipped Siva austerely and lovingly. The brahmana had
four sons as pious as himself: Devapriya, Priyamedhas, Sukrita and
Dharmavahin; by their combined bhakti, the city of Avanti was awash with
grace.
Some leagues away, on the Ratnamala hills, lived Dusana, the asura.
Dusana had a boon of invincibility from Brahma, but he loathed the Vedas,
worship and all things sacred. Between his tireless conquests and unfailing
desecration, Dusana heard of the glory of Avanti and came to the blessed city
with an army of daityas.
Mad Dusana called four of his savagest demons and said, "I have
vanquished the devas and the most powerful kings of the earth. Yet, this puny
family of brahmanas defies me. Go and tell them Dusana says they must give up
either the worship of Siva or their lives."
Led by those four asura commanders, like the fires of the Dissolution,
Dusana’s army laid siege to peaceful Avanti. Not when the demon forces
stormed its streets, did the brahmana family stir from its quiet devotions. The
asuras slaughtered the men of that city; they raped its women. The people came
in panic to Vedapriya, crying, "If you don’t stop your worship we will all perish
today."
Vedapriya said, "We have no army to protect us anyway, only Siva. He
will watch over us."
The brahmana and his sons sat on before the earthen linga they worshipped
with Siva’s thousand names. Dusana rode up; he saw them defying him. He
screamed, "Bind them, drag them, kill them!"
Vedapriya and his sons were so absorbed they did not hear the demon’s

cry. Howling, Dusana rushed into the sanctum. He raised his sword to hew off
Vedapriya’s head, when the ground beside the parthiva linga caved in with an
echoing report, to reveal a chasm. From that crevasse, Mahakaala stood forth:
tall as the stars, more terrible than imagination, blood dripping from his fangs,
growling low and louder than thunder. "I am Time and Death come to finish
you!"
As the sun dispels darkness, with just a humkara, long hum from his
hideous lips, Mahakaala made ashes of Dusana and his army. Vedapriya and his
sons stood, with their heads bowed before the awesome Vision. The old
brahmana said, "Siva, stay forever in this place to protect your bhaktas."
Mahakaala dwindled in blessing: he sank back not into the chasm but the
earthen linga, where he remains. They say the yonic pedestal of earth for this
linga’s support extends for three yojanas in every direction and if a man sees this
icon, evil does not approach him even in his dreams.
 
When, generations later, the Sivabhakta Chandrasena became king of
Avanti, now called Ujjain, the great chief of ganas, Manibhadra, gave him the
precious Chintamani, bright as the Kaustubha. The jewel was a philosopher’s
stone and turned copper, brass, tin, even common rocks, into gold. Chandrasena
wore it round his neck and nothing would induce him to part with it, not for a
day, for a moment. The covetous kings of the earth did their utmost to have that
stone from him: in vain.
Those kings conspired, brought a combined army to the gates of Ujjain
and laid siege to it. When Chandrasena saw the vast army at his gates, he went to
Mahakaaleswara within his city, to worship Siva who was his only refuge now.
Without sleep or food, Chandrasena worshipped Hara in the parthiva linga of
old.
A widowed cowherdess, her five-year-old boy with enormous black eyes
on her hip, wandered into Mahakaaleswara from her gypsy camp on the outskirts
of Avanti. The woman stood watching the king at his prayer. She stood for an
hour, then bowed to the God of the linga and returned to her camp.
Back in the settlement, her son found a smooth long pebble and installing
it as his own Siva linga, began to imitate Chandrasena’s worship. Stones and
twigs were his jewels and incense, a little mound of earth was his lamp; leaves
and flowers became sacred cloths and bits of grass the rice grains for his ritual.
The child danced for Siva and prostrated himself, repeatedly, as he had seen the
king do.
His mother called out to him from her hut, to come to eat. The boy was so
absorbed he did not hear her. After calling a few times and receiving no

response, she strode angrily over to what she thought was his nonsensical game.
She found her little one entranced before his pebble linga. Even when she called
his name from a few feet away, he did not answer. With a cry, she dragged him
up and began to beat him. Still, his eyes remained shut; when she let him down
again, he walked straight back to the linga, as in a dream. Losing control, his
mother kicked away the pebble, the small stones and leaves of worship and
stamped back to her hut.
The child fell on the ground and sobbed; he fainted in a paroxysm of grief
at losing his temple. When he awoke, he found himself on the floor of a
magnificent shrine, which that gypsy camp had become. The doorway was solid
gold; huge blue diamonds encrusted a bright dais within; jewelled columns of
unearthly craftsmanship supported the gold-domed ceiling and the floors were
paved with slabs of transparent crystal. At the heart of the temple was a great
and wonderful linga of rock, glowing with unearthly gems.
The boy saw the gypsies’ humble kutilas had become fine mansions. He
toddled into his mother’s suddenly resplendent home and found her asleep: now
she was an apsara-like beauty. She lay on a silver bed, wearing divine clothes
and ornaments. Excitedly, he shook her awake and told her about Siva’s
blessing. She gazed at the transformation around her, doubting that she had
woken at all.
The cowherdess sent word of the miracle to the pious Chandrasena at his
worship. The king came running to the place and he knew Siva had blessed
Avanti again. In the midst of a siege by envious enemies, Ujjain marked the
night with frenzied celebrations, which seemed to last an eyeflash and forever.
Camped outside the city gates, the besieging kings heard about the
miracle. They called an anxious conference and, chastened by the tale of the boy
Siva blessed, decided that attacking Chandrasena would be foolhardy. They sent
a messenger to the king, hoping he would forge an alliance with them. He
responded graciously and welcomed them into his city. He took them to the gopa
boy’s golden shrine.
Those kings made that boy chief of all cowherds throughout their lands; as
they sat praying in his temple, dazzling Hanuman appeared in their midst!
Blessing them and the city of Mahakaaleswara, the Vanara God prophesied, "In
the eight generation of the family of this boy of wonder, Vishnu himself shall be
born as Krishna: dark saviour of the world. Let this child Srikara’s name be a
legend in the world and he will find moksha at the end of his life."
Those who hear the story of Mahakaala, Chandrasena and Srikara truly
become bhaktas of Siva, ocean of mercy.

EIGHTEEN
 
Parameswara, Kedareswara, Bhimeswara
 
In a tide of creation, Brahma poured forth his creatures; but they were
barren and did not multiply. Brahma was distraught. A heavenly voice spoke to
him, "Make a creation born from coupling."
There were no women in creation yet, only sons: how could there be
copulation? Brahma knew he needed Siva’s help. The Lotus-born One
performed a tapasya to Siva, who is always conjoined with Shakti. Assuming the
wish-yielding form of Isana, Siva appeared before Brahma as an
Ardhanaariswara: half God and half Goddess, the Cosmic Androgyne.
Palms joined, Brahma hymned that apparition. In his magnificent voice,
both male and female, as rumbling clouds, Sambhu the Ardhanaariswara said,
"Brahma, I grant your wish."
In a thunderclap and for the first time ever, Siva and Shakti stood apart
before Brahma, two distinct beings: one male, the other female. Brahma lay on
his face before great Shakti. He said to her, "In the Beginning, your Lord emitted
me and commanded me create. From my mind, I made the creatures; but they do
not flourish, nor reproduce. So I have to create them over and over. I want to
make a creation that multiplies by coition. The race of women is not yet born
and I have no power to begin it myself. I beg you, Devi, origin of all Shaktis,
give me the supreme Shakti that is the mother of every other.
Glory to you, Sivaa. Grant me the power create the race of women. And
one more boon, O Mother of the world, hallowed because you are its source:
when Siva is born on earth as Rudra, you be born as Daksha’s daughter!"
From between her brows, the Goddess extruded a single Shakti, whose
lustre was like her own. When Hara saw that splendorous being, he said to her,
smiling, "You are pleased with Brahma’s tapasya, Devi, grant him his desire."
With just a nod, the awesome Goddess agreed to be born as Daksha’s
daughter. Having given Brahma the power to create the race of women, Sivaa
re-entered Siva’s body and the Ardhanaariswara vanished. From that time, the
female sex became part of creation, which then on perpetuated itself by
copulation between male and female.
 

*
 
Once, peripatetic Narada muni worshipped the Gokarna linga and then
came to Vindhya, the august mountain. The mountain honoured him; and when
they sat together, Vindhya said smugly to the maharishi, "Narada, I am so
content: everything abides in me, nothing is missing."
Narada sighed sympathetically, but made no other reply. Vindhya asked
sharply, "Why do you sigh, Rishi?"
Narada said slowly, "It is true everything abides in you, Vindhya, but
Meru is loftier. He is counted among the devas, but not you."
Vindhya had no answer to this and knowing he had sown a deep seed,
Narada said it was time for him to be on his endless way again. Long after the
rishi left, his words rankled in the mountain’s heart; until he could bear it no
more and decided to worship Siva. Before an earthen idol, Vindhya sat in a fine
tapasya for six months and Siva came before him, glorious.
Siva said, "Ask me for a boon, Vindhya."
Vindhya replied, "Siva, give me an intellect lofty enough to achieve
whatever I want."
Siva was dismayed; he knew the arrogant mountain would abuse his
blessing. Yet, having asked Vindhya to name his boon, he could not break his
word. He said, "The boon is yours, do as you please with it."
Siva was about to vanish, when a host of devas and munis appeared there,
Narada among them. They implored the Lord, "Stay in this place, Siva, for the
weal of us all."
Caught unprepared, Vindhya echoed their sentiment. Siva stays there, as
the Jyotirlinga Parameswara; and that mountain dare not exceed himself with the
Lord so near him.
 
Listen to the greatness of the Jyotirlinga Kedareswara.
Nara and Narayana, the twin incarnations of Vishnu, performed a tapasya
in Bharata Khanda, in Badarikasrama. Once Siva came to them and said, "Any
boon you want shall be yours, O my spiritual sons."
Thinking of the welfare of the worlds, they said, "Remain here, Siva, to
bless the earth."
Siva stayed in Kedara on Himavan as a Jyotirlinga. As Kedareswara, he is
worshipped alongside Nara and Narayana in Badarikasrama. Though he is lord
of the universe, Siva is particularly the Lord of Bharatavarsha! Bhaktas of
Kedareswara who die on their pilgrimage are never reborn; so, also, those

fortunate enough to reach that shrine and drink the sacred water there.
 
Hear the greatness of Jyotirlinga Bhimeswara, hearing which a man
obtains whatever he wants.
Rama killed Kumbhakarna. The savage Rakshasa Bhima, who was
Kumbhakarna and the rakshasi Karkati’s son, lived with his mother on the Sahya
Mountain, source of the Kaveri, the Krishna and the Nirvindhya. When
Bhimarakshasa was still a boy, one day he asked Karkati, "Who is my father?
Why do you live alone? Tell me the truth, mother, I want to know everything."
The rakshasi said wistfully, "My husband was Viradha whom Rama killed.
I was childless and lived with my parents, Krikata and Pushkasi and they were
burnt alive by Agastya’s sishya. However, Viradha was not your father. Once,
Ravana of Lanka’ brother, Kumbhakarna, came to this forest. He saw me alone
and forced himself on me there. He left me after taking his pleasure and went
back to Lanka. Rama killed him, also. Bhima, you are Kumbhakarna’s son. Oh,
though he was cruel, I will never forget how magnificent that Rakshasa was!"
Bhima thought, "It was Vishnu, as Rama, that killed my father. I will have
revenge on him. I will make my mother the happiest rakshasi in the world."
Bhimarakshasa performed a tapasya in Brahma’s name. He stood on one
foot, staring unwinkingly at the sun; until a fiery light blazed up from his head
and, scorched by it, the devas fled to Brahma. Indra cried, "Pitama, the
Rakshasa’s tapasya sears the worlds. Grant his boon before he consumes us with
his fire."
Four-faced and splendid, Brahma appeared before Bhima. "I am delighted
with your tapasya. Name the boon you want."
Bhima bowed low to the lotus-seated God, "Brahma, give me unequalled
strength."
Brahma said, "I do," and vanished.
The Rakshasa ran back to his home in the forest. He hugged his mother in
joy and told her about Brahma’s boon. Then, Bhima the fatherless rakshasa went
forth to subdue the earth. First, he went to Kamarupa to make war on king
Sudakshina, who was a Sivabhakta. With his incomparable strength, Bhima
easily vanquished Sudakshina. He bound the king and his queen in fetters,
humiliated them and shut them in a tiny subterranean cell.
In his cramped prison, Sudakshina accepted his incarceration as a Godsent
time for prayer. He moulded a parthiva Siva linga and worshipped it, invoking
the holy waters of the Ganga with mystic asanas and mudras. The kshatriya and
his wife offered themselves to Siva, incessantly chanting the six-syllabled Siva
mantra, AUM Namah Sivayah.

Meanwhile, Bhima continued his conquest of the quarters. He gathered an
army of rakshasas and he did subdue the corners of the earth. He desecrated
every holy ritual throughout his domain: as all demons do, he abhorred any kind
of worship.
When Vishnu, Indra or any deva tried to stop Bhima from defiling a holy
place, the invincible Rakshasa routed them in battle. With no worship left in it,
darkness mantled the world. Finally, on the banks of the Mahakosi, the devas
and the rishis made an earthen linga and worshipped Siva.
Siva came to them, "Vishnu, Indra, Devas, Mahamunis, what would you
have of me?"
The devas and the rishis said, "The death of Bhimarakshasa."
Siva said, "So be it," and vanished.
There was, of course, still worship in the lightless world. In Kamarupa, in
the little dungeon below ground, Sudakshina and his wife Dakshina prayed
fervently to Siva before the simple phallic icon that Sudakshina had made on the
rough floor. Finally, someone whispered in Bhima’s ear, "Sudakshina is casting
spells on you."
Bhima seized a sword and rushed down to the cell. He saw the parthiva
linga there and howled, "What is that? Evil Kshatriya, what spell do you cast on
me? Tell me the truth and I will spare your life."
Sudakshina said honestly, "I am worshipping Siva."
Bhima laughed. "Siva! Why, my uncle Ravana kept Siva as his servant. If
I see any part of this Siva of yours, I will lay hands on him and he will suffer.
Get rid of the rubbish on the floor."
Sudakshina said quietly, "I will never forsake Siva and he will always
protect me."
The Rakshasa roared with laughter. "That drunkard, that beggar, that
yogin! What does he know of protection? Is it because he protects you that you
are here in my prison?"
But Sudakshina would not raze the linga. With a growl, Bhima hurled his
sword at the earthen phallus and Siva stood forth from it. An earth-shaking battle
broke out between the Rakshasa with Brahma’s boon and Rudra and between
Siva’s ganas and Bhimasura’s fell legions. The heavens trembled; it seemed the
mountains may fall into the sea and the ocean into the sky: so ferocious was that
war that spread like fire over the earth. Narada arrived there, hands folded to
Siva.
"Lord, why use a sword to split a blade of grass? Rudra, the worlds quake
in fear."
Siva began a long humkara. In moments, that sound reduced all Bhima’s

rakshasas to ashes. The ashes of that Demon himself could not even be found.
The fire of Siva’s fury flashed from hill to forest and on; wind-borne, the
rakshasas’ ashes flew with it. Those ashes are magical: sorcerers use them to
change their forms and faces; evil spirits are kept away with those demons’
ashes.
When darkness lifted from the earth, the devas and rishis implored Siva,
"Stay on here, Lord."
Siva stays in Kamarupa, in the faithful Sudakshina’s kingdom as the
Jyotirlinga BhimaSankara, the peerless protector.

NINETEEN
 
Avimukteswara
 
Once, mysteriously, the three worlds began to quake as if caught in a
cosmic storm. The devas panicked; they flew to Vishnu in Vaikunta and asked
him why everything trembled. Hari said, "Let us go to Siva. He will know why
the worlds are shaking."
Led by Vishnu and Indra, the devas set out for Mount Mandara. When they
arrived, they were enveloped in an impenetrable darkness, a night of the spirit.
The mountain seemed deserted. They saw neither Siva nor Parvati, not even
Nandin. When Narayana saw the devas’ eyes clouded with maaya’s blindness,
he said, "Don’t you see Siva standing before you? Why don’t you worship him?"
The devas cried, "We do not see Uma’s Lord. We are blinded and we do
not know by whom or why."
Vishnu said, "Devas, you sinned against Siva. You killed his wife
Mridani’s child and he has taken your discrimination and vision from you. You
do not see him though he stands right before you. Go and purify yourselves with
the taptakrichra. Expiate your sin by bathing and fasting where Siva dwells and
you will see him again."
The devas took that vow. Chanting the Satarudriya, Siva’s hundred names,
they fasted, subsisting on just water, milk, ghee and air for three days each and
then they bathed with a hundred and fifty jars of milk, on the holy mountain in
the freezing cold. Their stain of sin was washed away.
They said to Vasudeva, "Vishnu, tell us where to find Sambhu.
Jagannatha, we want to bathe him with milk."
Vishnu opened his breast and the devas gasped when they saw, lying on
the lotus of his heart, Siva’s living linga!
They bathed that linga with milk; they smeared it with fragrant yellow
sandal and made offerings of bilva leaves and lotuses. Calling out Siva’s
thousand and eight names, the Kotirudra, they wondered how Hari and Iswara
could be one, since they were born separately from Sattva and Tamas.
As they were musing thus, Hari suddenly stood revealed before them, in
his awesome Viswarupa, lofty as the sky, brilliant as suns. He was both
Protector and Destroyer: he was Hari-Hara. Three-eyed he was, wearing

earrings of lotuses and serpents and a topknot of jata. His banner bore both the
eagle and the bull; his body was covered by both yellow silk and antelope hide.
He carried chakra and pinaka, trisula and ajagava, a skull and a bell, a plough
and a bow; and he shook the sky with a blast on his conch, the panchajanya.
The devas fell on their faces to worship that Vision.
 
*
 
Listen to the greatness of Visveswara.
That which was First, an entity of knowledge and bliss, desired another, a
second. That second, born from the tree of nirvana, was possessed of attributes:
it was called Siva. Siva split itself in two, male and female, Siva and Shakti.
Thus, the unseen and primal chita and ananda created Purusha and Prakriti.
When they saw their ineffable parents, Prakriti and Purusha were tormented by
doubt. A voice spoke from the formless Atman, saying, "You shall perform
tapasya for the sake of perfect creation."
Prakriti and Purusha said, "Siva, where shall we sit in tapasya?"
Siva created an exquisite city in the firmament near the Purusha. Here,
Vishnu sat in dhyana for a long, long time. From his tapasya, pristine waters
began to flow. These currents pervaded Sunya, the void; nothing else was to be
seen. Seeing the waters, Vishnu thought, "What is this miracle?"
At that instant, a mysterious jewel fell before him from the Lord Siva’s
ear: holy Manikarnika. Swelling, transmuting, Manikarnika became five krosas
long and wide; it floated on the waters of the beginning and Siva supported it on
his trisula. Vishnu slept there: blue Narayana with his consort Prakriti. A lotus
sprouted from his navel and Brahma was born in it. Within a golden egg,
Brahma created the fourteen dimensions, all the mandalas.
Siva thought, "How will the beings born from the golden egg attain me?
They are bound by karma."
He released Manikarnika, Kasi of panchakrosa: from his trisula into the
mortal world.
"Kasi will be the bestower of liberation in the world. It will be the
destroyer of sins, the illuminator of moksha. This shall be the place of my
uttermost mystery, greater than any knowledge."
Kasi is so named because it roots out karma from even the greatest sinner.
Siva himself installed the pristine Jyotirlinga at Kasi, the unfathomable
Avimukta: Visveswara, Lord of the universe.

Of the four mokshas: Salokya, in the same heaven with him; Samipya,
nearness to him; Sarupya, assimilation into him; and Sayujya, utter absorption
into Brahman: the last can only be attained in Kasi. Even the devas want to die
in Kasi: for anyone who dies here, whether pure or a sinner, is surely liberated. It
does not matter if they are bhaktas or not, if they are human, animal, bird or
insect, tree or plant. Those that die in Kasi are reborn in Sivaloka, bull-mounted,
with the crescent moon on their heads and infinite peace in their hearts.
A man dying in Kasi should crush his own feet to be certain he finds his
end in Varanasi. For this is the city of Siva’s grace: Siva who is the Lord of
Kailasa, tamasic without, sattvic within, who is known as Kaalagni, fire of time.
Karma once done is never wasted in a crore of kalpas and one must enjoy
or suffer the fruit of every deed. Evil karma gets one to hell, karma that is only
good, to heaven. Mixed karma results in a human birth and the birth is good or
evil according to the proportion of the mixture.
Of three kinds is karma: Sanchita, stored; Kriyamana, of this birth; and
Prarabdha, which has already begun to yield fruit. Only in Kasi, Siva’s city, can
all three kinds of karma be made ashes. But Kasi is difficult of access.
Avimukta is supreme wisdom. Avimukta is Reality. Avimukta is
matchless wellbeing. When the Ganga, which flows through swarga, bhumi and
patala, flows through Avimukta in particular, she destroys the sins of a hundred
lives for those that bathe in her. Avimukta is between the eyebrows, in the knot
of the navel, in the heart, in the head, in the sun and also in Varanasi, city
between the Varana and the Asi, where Siva’s grace and Narayana’s are found
together, regardless of bhakti or its lack. Listen.
 
Once Siva stood forth, red and blue, from the primal linga of fire between
warring Brahma and Mahavishnu. He stood forth as Nilalohita, the blue-blooded
One, three-eyed, with a trident of light and a sword of flames in his hands, a
serpent and the crescent moon his ornaments. Some say that, deluded by his own
vanity, Brahma said arrogantly to that Apparition, "Rudra, I know you: you once
sprang from my breath and you howled. Fear nothing, my naked and tamasic
child."
At which, Siva created terrible Bhairava from himself, Kaalaraja with the
body of flames. Bhairava roared like the end of time. With his fingernails, he
plucked off Brahma’s fifth head with the coarse and lying mouth. Like cold fire,
the skull fell into Bhairava’s left hand and stuck fast there. In terror, Vishnu
began to worship Siva with the Satarudriya japa and wailing in shock from time
to time, Brahma also chanted those names feverishly. Mollified, Siva granted
them his protection. He said to Bhairava, "You shall honour Vishnu. As penance

for your sin of plucking off Brahma’s head, you will roam the worlds, begging
alms. Brahma’s skull will be your begging bowl: Kapalin you shall be."
Siva created a virgin of flames, Brahmahatya with a burning body and
terrible claws and fangs, his sin embodied: to pursue Bhairava. He cried to
Brahmahatya, "You will torment the Kapalin until he reaches the holy city of
Kasi."
Relentlessly, Brahmahatya chased Bhairava. Bhairava assumed a twisted
body, still radiant and pure. Crowned with a mass of jata, surrounded by proud,
shining pramathas, he ranged the worlds. When women saw him, they were
smitten. The best born of them, the most elegant and lovely women followed
him in shameless fascination, singing and dancing in abandon. When he smiled
at them, they swooned in rapture.
Cursed and pursued tirelessly by the flaming Brahmahatya, Bhairava fled
to every sacred tirtha to seek expiation for his sin. He had no rest. The hellish
virgin never left chasing him, plunging claw and fang into him whenever she
could and the skull stuck in his palm burned him with icy fire, searing him to his
marrow, his soul. He flew in vain to all the tirthas of the devas and the asuras
and at last he arrived at Vaikunta, Vishnu’s city.
Visvaksena, the mighty dwarapalaka, barred Bhairava’s way. Bhairava
sent a gana called Kaalavega to kill him. Red-eyed Visvaksena slew Kaalavega
and cast the Sudarshana chakra at Bhairava himself. Bhairava ashed it with a
hum and impaled Visvaksena on his trident. Carrying the gatekeeper’s body in
his arms, dark Bhairava stalked into Vishnu’s court, surrounded by vrishabhas
and pramathas and pursued by the Brahmahatya.
When he saw Bhairava tormented, Hari split open his own head and let a
river of blood as alms to fill his begging bowl. But that bowl, the skull of
Brahma Paramesthin, could not be filled in a thousand cosmic years. Bhairava,
whose last refuge was Vishnu, howled long and awfully, pointing to the
Brahmahatya following him like a burning shadow. In his voice of ages, Vishnu
commanded the fierce virgin, "Release the Shulin from the skull of Brahma!"
She would not. Vishnu said to Bhairava, "You must go to Kasi to
Visveswara."
Blessing Vasudeva, Bhairava fled to Varanasi like the wind in anguish,
with Visvaksena’s corpse in his arms and the punishing virgin livid on his heels.
The instant Bhairava set foot in that city, with a final howl the Brahmahatya
plunged down into the patalas and Brahma’s molten skull fell away from
Bhairava’s hand at the feet of the Sivaganas. Dancing for joy with Visvaksena’s
corpse, Kaalabhairava, fire of time, restored Vishnu’s dwarapalaka to life.
Since then, Bhairava stands there at Kapalamochana in Kasi and he

devours the sins of his devotees, in the place that quelled his own sin of plucking
off the Pitama’s head.

TWENTY
 
Tryambakeswara
 
Siva said, "To know the meaning of Pranava is to know me. Pranava is the
seed of all lore. It is small like the banyan seed, but bears within itself a mighty,
eternal tree. It is the original mantra and the essence of the Vedas. I am Siva,
who pervades everything; yet, I dwell only in the mantra of one syllable. In the
beginning, I create the universe by saying AUM. Siva is Pranava and Pranava is
Siva. Pranava is the vital breath of all living beings, from Brahma down.
The A of Pranava is water in the south, the U is the air of the north and
the M is the fire in the middle. The maatra beyond cannot be described. It is the
vanishing point, only the enlightened know it."
 
*
 
Hear about the Jyotirlinga Tryambakeswara.
The rishi Gautama had his asrama upon the Tryambaka mountain, where
the Godavari has her source. Once, by a curse of the devas, a drought of a
hundred years fell on that place. Not a tender shoot pushed green life above the
earth. Rishis and common folk alike deserted the Tryambaka; birds and beasts
abandoned it. Holding his breath for six months, Gautama prayed to Varuna,
lord of waters, to end that drought.
Rippling supernal light, Varuna came to him, "Name your boon, O holy
one."
Gautama said, "Let there be rain in this thirsty place."
But Varuna replied, "Gautama, I cannot send rain against the devas’ will.
Ask me for any other boon and it shall be yours."
Gautama said, "Lord, you are the master of all water. You must give us
some to drink."
Varuna showed Gautama an auspicious place in which to dig a trough, of a
depth of a hand. As soon as the rishi had done this, the declivity filled with
sweet, crystalline water. Varuna said, "Great Muni, this trough will never run dry

and any sacrifice offered here, or tapasya pursued here, will be immortal. This
spring shall be known after you, O compassionate sage."
Varuna vanished. Gautama sowed seeds around that everlasting spring. In
wondrous plenitude, barley, fruit trees and flowering plants sprung up in that
place, sprouting at once, growing in an instant. The trough swelled slowly into a
pool of fertility. Rishis arrived in the blessed grove; birds and beasts flocked
back. Once destroyed by the drought, the vana grew back lush and thick around
Varuna’s pool. Happily, man and beast lived there for many years.
One day, Gautama’s disciples came to the pool to fetch water for their
guru’s worship. The other rishis’ wives prevented them, saying rudely, "Stand
back while we draw! You can fill your pitchers after we have gone."
Gautama’s disciples went and told their guru’s wife, Ahalya, what had
happened. Ahalya arrived at the sacred pool. The women dared not confront her,
though the truth was they resented Gautama’s pre-eminence.
They allowed Gautama’s sishyas to draw water, but the rishis’ wives
returned from the pool with evil stirring their hearts. They complained to their
husbands that Ahalya had been high-handed and rude. The envious rishis were
easy prey to their wives’ lies. They worshipped Ganapathy to redress the
‘wrong’ done to them. Ganesa appeared, marble white, elephant-headed and
asked what boon they wanted.
The rishis said, "Let Gautama be turned out from this place."
Ganapathy said, "Gautama’s tapasya was a blessing to all of you. Nemesis
will visit you if you harm him."
The rishis were adamant, "Lord, you must grant our boon."
Ganesa said mildly, "Then let fate take her course," and disappeared.
Ganapathy came as an emaciated cow to Gautama’s barley fields.
Staggering over the plants, the spindly animal began to feed greedily in that
field, trampling what it did not eat. When he saw the cow, Gautama tried to
chase it away with a clutch of long grass. No sooner did he touch the animal
with the grasses, than it fell dead at his feet.
The rishis and their wives rushed into the asrama and began to shout,
"Gautama is a cow slaughterer!"
Madness upon them, the brahmanas’ wives even threatened to kill Ahalya.
The brahmanas cried, "Gautama, sinner, the face of a killer should not be seen.
As long as you stay in this asrama the devas and the pitrs will never accept our
offerings. Go from here, take your criminal sishyas with you."
They stoned Gautama and Ahalya. Tears streaming down his gentle face,
Gautama cried to his tormentors, "Munis, I will leave at once, for Siva is angry
with me."

His spirit in anguish, Gautama made his new asrama a krosa away from
the old one, with the brahmanas’ permission. They said, "As long as the curse of
slaughter is upon you, you may offer no worship to the gods or the manes, nor
perform any Vedic ritual."
By now believing himself that he had sinned, humble Gautama lived
without worship of any kind for fifteen days. He could not bear it. He came to
the edge of the old settlement around Varuna’s pool and called meekly to the
brahmanas. They would not come near him: he was untouchable and they
warned him to stand at a distance. He begged them, "Holy ones, take pity on me.
I will do anything to purify myself and be able to worship again."
The brahmanas said, "There must be proper expiation for such a heinous
sin. You must walk round the earth thrice, announcing your crime, then come
back here and keep a fast for a month. Or go round this Brahmagiri Mountain a
hundred and one times. Or else, walk around the mountain eleven times in
pradakshina, then fetch water from the Ganga and purify yourself. Then make a
crore of Siva lingas and bathe again in the Ganga."
Innocent Gautama cried happily, "Rishis, thank you for showing a sinner
the way. I will go round the mountain and make parthiva Siva lingas to
worship."
So he did, joyfully, with the virtuous Ahalya and their disciples serving
them. One day, as Gautama sat worshipping him before an earthen linga, Siva
appeared before the humble rishi, with a thousand ganas. Gautama wept in
rapture, he begged Sankara, "Lord, make me sinless again."
Siva laughed. "Gautama, you are already sinless, the evil brahmanas
deceived you."
Siva revealed everything to the muni: how the jealous hermits connived to
evict him from the asrama, how Ganapathy was obliged to help them. Siva said
softly, "For those brahmanas there will be no atonement, only death."
Gautama protested! "Lord, except for what they did I would never have
seen you like this."
How pleased Siva was. "Oh, you are a blessed muni. Ask me for anything,
holy Gautama."
Bowing his head, Gautama said, "Lord, whatever five powerful men
decide comes to pass in this world; so we are always in danger. If you are
pleased, let the Ganga be given to me for my safety."
No sooner did he speak, than crystal waters stood before him in the shape
of a beautiful goddess. Gautama bowed to her, "Devi, you have sanctified the
world. Now bless me also since I am likely to fall into hell."
Siva said to Ganga, "Devi, bless this saint. In his name, stay in this place

until the kali yuga begins and Vivacity’s son is the twenty-eighth Manu."
Ganga said shyly to Siva, "Lord, you stay with me here."
Ever since, Siva dwells in the earthen linga that Gautama worshipped.
When the Ganga flowed there from the branches of an udumbara tree,
Gautama and his disciples bathed in her and that place was called Gangadvara.
The other brahmanas, who had deceived Gautama, arrived for their ablutions.
The holy river vanished.
Gautama said, "Ganga, even if these men are blind with arrogance, by the
virtue in this sacred place, you must grant them a vision of yourself."
Ganga replied, "These are the most evil men, ungrateful and treacherous.
They are unworthy of such a vision."
"Mother, the Lord has said, ‘I am sanctified in this world by the one who
helps those that harm him.’"
"Noblest Rishi, be it as you want. But first, let these sinners perform the
same penance they forced upon you in mockery."
By Gautama’s mercy, the brahmanas were purified of their sin in the
Ganga; their eyes opened, they came to his feet in genuine repentance. The
Ganga, which flows there from the trough named Kusavarta, is called the
Gautami and the linga in which Siva remains is known as Tryambakeswara, the
destroyer of great sins.
Whenever Brihaspati, Jupiter, is in the constellation of Simha, the Lion,
once in twelve years, Hari and the devas, the holy tirthas embodied, Kasi and the
others, the blessed lakes, Pushkara and the rest and the sacred rivers, come to
Gangadvara to bathe and to worship Siva as the Jyotirlinga on the banks of the
Gautami. While they stay here, their powers wane in their original abodes and
wax again only after that year is past.

TWENTY-ONE
 
Vaidyanatha
 
The nineteenth kalpa was called Svetalohita. In it, Siva first incarnated
himself as Sadyojata. When Brahma saw him, with a tuft on his head, he knew he
was Iswara and worshipped him with folded hands. As he meditated on that
Being, who was Brahman incarnate, four white and heroic sons were born to
Brahma: Sunanda, Nandana, Viswananda and Upanandana. Brahma’s sons
made a pradakshina around Sadyojata and he lovingly gave Brahma perfect
wisdom and the power to create.
In the twentieth kalpa, known as the Rakta, Brahma was red and brilliant,
when he meditated on the Brahman for grace. Suddenly, a son stood before him,
wearing crimson garments, rubies and scarlet garlands; his eyes were red as
blood. Brahma knew him as Vamadeva and he was Siva. Brahma’s sons of mind
born from Vamadeva’s power were Viraja, Vivaha, Visoka and Viswabhavana.
A delighted Parameswara gave Brahma the power of creation and perfect
wisdom.
In the twenty-first kalpa, Pithavasas, Brahma wore yellow; when he
prayed for sons, a resplendent and fulvid being was born to him. When Brahma
worshipped him with the Siva Gayatri Japa, which is the great Devi, ochre-clad
sons were born from his sides, teachers of the yogic path.
A thousand years after the kalpa of these ochre masters, all was Ekarnava
again: an ocean of dissolution. Brahma grieved again for genesis. Walking
towards him over those primal waters, he saw a black figure who yet shone like
a sun with his own splendor. He wore black; he had a radiant black crown and a
black sacred thread around his jet body. Brahma worshipped that Soul of
dreadful exploits as Aghora. The Creator thought deeply on Aghora as Brahman
and from his sides sprang four sons, dark as Aghora himself, as brilliant: called
Krishna, Krishnasikha, Krishnasya and Krishnakanthadhrika. For the sake of
Brahma’s creation, they began the miraculous yoga called Ghora, the Terrible.
In the kalpa Viswarupa, Saraswati, Vagiswari mother of the word,
manifested herself: universe-bodied. Luminous Isana came to Brahma, formed
and formless and blessed him with four radiant sons: Jatin, Mundin, Sikhandin
and Ardhamunda.

These were Siva’s five forms in the five kalpas, Sadyojata, Purusha,
Aghora, Vamadeva and Isana, each known by their color. From them, we might
conjecture, the different races of men originated.
 
*
 
Ravana, the brilliant and arrogant lord of Lanka and the rakshasas,
worshipped Siva on Mount Kailasa with fierce devotion. For long years, his
tapasya raged, but Siva did not come to him. Ravana dug a pit in a tapovana on
the southern slopes of Himavan and kindled five fires in it. He installed a Siva
linga before him and, standing in the flames, he worshipped Rudra. Still Siva did
not come to him. Ravana cut off his heads, one by one and fed them to the fire.
When he cut off nine of his ten heads, Sankara appeared before the Rakshasa.
Siva restored his severed heads to Ravana and asked him gently what boon he
wanted.
Ravana said, "Lord, I want to take this linga to Lanka. Bless me with
unequalled strength and your protection."
Siva said, "Take the linga, Rakshasa. But remember it will remain
wherever you set it down first."
Siva vanished and Ravana began the long journey back to Lanka. On the
way, the Rakshasa, that master of tapasya, felt an irresistible call of nature. He
gave the Siva linga to a cowherd he met and asked the man to hold it for him
while he relieved himself nearby. Ravana did not come back for half an hour and
the cowherd could not bear the weight of the linga any more: the strange linga of
the essence of diamonds that grew so heavy in his arms. He set it down on the
earth and at once, the phallic image took immovable root.
That Jyotirlinga Vaidyanatha is a legend through the worlds. It bestows
earthly pleasures of every kind and moksha thereafter.
Ravana still had the immense strength Siva had blessed him with and he
came home jubilant to Lanka. When they heard about Siva’s boon to him, the
devas grew anxious: they did not know what exactly the Lord had given the
Demon. Through the ages, Narada muni pretends to be a friend of all the greatest
rakshasas and asuras. By skyways of light, along which the wise travel as swiftly
as thought, the devas sent Narada to Ravana’s city.
Wide-eyed and curious, Narada demanded to hear all about his tremendous
prayatna, at which Siva himself had appeared before Ravana. With cunning
flattery, gasping at appropriate junctures, the wandering rishi elicited every

detail of his tapasya from the Rakshasa and of Siva’s boon, as well. Ravana was
so excited about the blessing he was very willing to dwell on each particular: the
feeding of his nine heads to the five fires, the splendor of Siva’s manifestation.
Ravana finally told Narada the awful truth, that Siva had given him
limitless strength. The Rakshasa added, "Now, dear friend, I will conquer the
three worlds."
Wily Narada embraced Ravana. He said, "Of course, you know you must
be careful with Siva’s boons. He is so absorbed in dhyana, you can never be sure
he will remember what he has promised you. Besides, you have lost the
Jyotirlinga, your link to him. Since I am so fond of you, I will tell you the one
sure way by which you can refresh his memory without another tapasya. You
must lift up Kailasa on which Siva sits and gently set it down again. Then he will
remember his boon to you and know you are grateful."
Stupid with power, deluded by fate, Ravana set out straightaway for the
mountain. He drew Kailasa from the earth by its roots and held it aloft.
Everything around Siva at his dhyana turned awry. Angrily the Lord cried, "Who
dares shake my mountain?"
Laughing, Sivaa told him, "Gratitude from your devotee the rakshasa.
Ravana is showing you how strong he is now."
Losing his temper for a moment, Siva cursed the Demon, "Arrogant
Rakshasa, a destroyer of your vanity will soon be born."
Narada smiled when he heard this. Ravana, who did not hear Siva’s curse,
went happily back to Lanka, certain he had reminded Rudra of his bhakti.

TWENTY-TWO
 
Naageswara
 
Obeisance to Hiranyagarbha, the eternal Purusha, Self-born Lord from
whom all kalpas and all beings emanate! Hiranyagarbha created only the
waters first. He instilled virility into them. The waters were called Naara, they
belonged to Nara; since they were his abode, he was called Naarayana.
When Hiranyagarbha blessed them, a golden egg floated on those waters.
After a year, Hiranyagarbha clove the egg in two: he made heaven and earth.
He created fourteen worlds from the halves of the egg and, from between, he
made cosmic space, akasa. He created the earth floating on the waters and the
ten quarters in the firmament. Then he created mind, speech, love, anger and
sexual delight. Hiranyagarbha made the Saptarishi, the seven sages, from his
thought and the seven great families descended from them. He made the
lightning, the thunderclouds, the red clouds and the rainbow.
He made the devas of light from his mouth, the manes from his breast and
the asuras of darkness from his loins. All kinds of creatures then flowed from
him, as Apava generated aquatic life. When they were not fruitful, he cleaved
himself and made man and woman.
 
*
 
Listen to the story of the excellent linga Nageswara.
The great vana of the Rakshasa Daruka fringed the western shores,
stretching sixteen dense yojanas in every direction. Parvati herself had given
care of this jungle to the Rakshasa’s wife Darukaa. Whenever the Demoness
wandered into it with her husband, the forest responded with green exuberance.
But the power they enjoyed by Uma’s blessing was heady and being what they
were, demons, Daruka and Darukaa terrorised the other jungle dwellers.
Rishi Aurva, the son of Urva and Bhrigu’s grandson, lived in that jungle.
The foresters came to him and said, "Maharishi, when they see you, with Siva’s
grace shining from you like a sun, the rakshasas flee. Save us, Aurva, you are

our only sanctuary."
Many of their kinsfolk had been tortured or killed by Daruka, his mate and
their demons and Aurva pronounced, "If they cause you any more grief, they
will suffer terribly. I curse them that if they torment the people of the earth their
very race will perish."
Aurva worshipped the devas to protect his jungle folk. The ones of light
heard his prayer; they flew down to that vana to battle Daruka’s rakshasas. At
first, the demons fought back strongly. When they saw their people being killed
in battle, while the devas were immortal, they grew afraid and huddled together
to confer. Darukaa told her rakshasas, "Parvati once said to me ‘There is an
island in the ocean, just off the shore. Whenever you want, you can go there.’"
In fear of the shining devas, the rakshasas took to the air, like winged
mountains of old and flew to that island. There they built a great and horrible
city for themselves. By Uma’s blessing to Darukaa, in no time another Daruka
vana, as dense as the other, grew around the city. The rakshasas never returned
to the mainland. Now they turned their depredations on seafaring folk, sailors
and fishermen.
The island rakshasas’ piracy was savage and relentless. Darukaa herself
often waded out into the ocean, just waist-deep for her when she grew to her full,
stupendous height. She would loom suddenly over merchant ships, capsize them
and sport viciously with the drowning sailors, pushing them under the waves and
laughing at their screams.
Once, the demons captured a flotilla of ships, whose captain was a vaishya
called Supriya. Supriya and his merchants were brought in chains to the
rakshasas’ grim city. They were imprisoned in grisly dungeons strewn with half-
eaten corpses. Supriya was a Sivabhakta. He wore bhasma and rudraksha and he
would never eat or sleep without first worshipping Mahadeva.
In that rat-and snake-infested dungeon, he made an earthen linga of the
Lord. He taught his fellow merchants the six-syllabled mantra, AUM Namah
Sivayah and the way of worshipping Sankara, while they awaited an awful
death at their monstrous captors’ hands. A portion of the food tossed to them
through grates set in the ceiling they offered to Siva. These scraps vanished as
soon as they were offered. They knew Rudra accepted their worship; they knew
the Lord was with them in their travail.
Sometimes, the rakshasas peered through the grates and laughed
uproariously at their captives’ ceaseless worship. But one day, walking alone in
a dark corridor of that labyrinthine city, a soldier of Daruka’s saw Siva before
him, splendid and awesome, cobras coiled round him. With a wail, the demon
fled to his master and reported what he had seen.

Daruka flew down to the dungeons in frenzy and cried to Supriya,
"Vaishya, who do you worship here in the darkness? Tell me truly and you will
not die."
Supriya said, "I do not know."
Daruka screeched, "Kill him for his secret!"
The rakshasas seized Supriya and drew their swords. The merchant cried,
"Siva, save me!"
In a flash of light, Siva erupted out of a rock crevice, nitid before the
cowering demons. He ashed them with a breath. In a miraculous instant, the
dungeons were transformed into a shining temple and the Lord’s grace was upon
his bhaktas. Siva said in anger, "Let there never be tamasic creation anymore!"
For Supriya’s suffering, he made ashes of every male rakshasa on that
island. Darukaa prayed fervently to Parvati, who had blessed her for a tapasya
performed long ago. The Goddess appeared before her. Darukaa said, "Uma,
Mother, save my race!"
Bound by the Rakshasi’s bhakti, Parvati said, "I will."
Parvati confronted her Lord.
"Siva, let your curse be fruitful at the end of the yuga; until then, let there
be tamasic creation as well. Darukaa is my own Shakti; honour my boon to her.
Let these rakshasis be fertile of themselves and bear sons."
So it came to pass. The parthiva linga, which Supriya and his followers
worshipped, is called Nageswara. At the end of the kali yuga, or when the krita
yuga dawns, Mahasena’s son Virasena, the king of Nishada and a peerless
Sivabhakta, makes a fishlike and submarine canoe, coated with tin, brass and
copper. Siva creates a yogamaya, a mantle of invisibility for that kshatriya. With
his men, Virasena sails to the Rakshasi Darukaa’s island. On a moonless night,
entering the same crevice from which Siva sprang, Virasena receives the
Paasupatastra from the Lord: with it, he obliterates Darukaa’s race. Thus, the
immaculate age begins: the halcyon krita yuga.
In the Daruka vana on that island, Parvati is called Nageswari. Blessed are
those that hear the tale of Supriya, the merchant of the sea and the Jyotirlinga
Nageswara. Their sins are washed away and they attain moksha after knowing
every worldly joy.

TWENTY-THREE
 
Rameswara, Ghusmeswara
 
Of all the continents, this one is the land of sacred rites. From here,
heaven and salvation are attained. Truly, the man who does not strive for
moksha, despite being born human in the land of Bharatavarsha, betrays his
very soul. It is the land of pleasure, too.
In the guise of passing days and nights, pieces of life fall away and death
is always at hand. The sacred twin-syllabled name, Siva, is the way to nirvana.
As the lotus is not stained by water, those that worship Siva are not stained by
sin.
 
*
 
Hear about the glory of the Jyotirlinga Rameswara.
Vishnu was born on earth as Rama. Ravana of Lanka abducted Rama’s
wife Sita. In quest of her, Rama came to Kishkinda, where he made an ally of
the vanara Sugriva, of the race of monkeys. Sugriva’s brother Vali had taken his
throne and his wife. Rama killed Vali and restored Sugriva as king of the jungle.
From Kishkinda, led by Vayu’s son Hanuman, Sugriva’s vanaras went forth to
comb the world for Sita. Hanuman discovered her in an asokavana in Lanka,
where she was Ravana’s prisoner. Sita gave him a jewelled ring to take back to
Rama, so he would know Hanuman had found her.
With a wild army of vanaras, Rama and his brother Lakshmana came to
the shore of the southern ocean of salt. They stood forlorn on a pale beach,
uncertain how they would cross the wide and plumbless water. They stood
thinking unhappily of the might of Ravana and his rakshasas, of Ravana’s son
Indrajit, who had vanquished Indra in battle. Rama’s throat was parched and he
said to Lakshmana, "My brother, I am thirsty."
No sooner were the words out of his lips than a score of vanaras sprang
away to fetch the best water they could find. The Blue One laughed gently when
ten of the bright folk brought back pure, sweet water for him in leaves and in

cupped palms. He took a little from the long hands of each one and was about to
drink. Then he thought, "I have not worshipped Siva, the saviour."
Rama made a parthiva linga on that shore and worshipped it, offering the
holy water. His heart filling with faith, Rama prayed, "Bhaavatarana, who take
men across the ocean of samsara, this ocean before me is so deep and the
rakshasa across it so powerful. More, he is your bhakta: invincible, conqueror of
the three worlds. Siva, an army of monkeys is a fickle instrument with which to
fight a war. Only your grace and partiality can save me. I have been your bhakta
since before time began. Help me now."
Rama worshipped Siva with flowers and mantras, songs and more water,
until Rudra stood forth from the earthen linga, bright as a star. Rama petitioned
him, "Lord, let my army of vanaras cross safely over this ocean to Lanka, where
Ravana believes he is unassailable. Siva, let me vanquish the arrogant rakshasa
in battle."
Siva said, "Rama, so it is written."
Rama of absolute faith said, "Mahadeva, stay in this place to help bhaktas
of the future across the sea of samsara, as you have helped me cross this sea of
water today."
Siva blessed Rameswara to be a Jyotirlinga: he remained in that parthiva
linga with which Sri Rama worshipped him. By Siva’s blessing, Rama,
Lakshmana and the vanaras crossed the sea into Lanka. They brought death to
Ravana and rescued the precious Sita.
The linga at Rameswara destroys the sins of bhaktas; it shows them the
way across the turbulent sea of samsara.
 
Listen to the story of the Jyotirlinga Ghusmesa.
A fine brahmana, a knower of Brahman, a descendant of Bharadvaja,
Sudharma lived with his wife Sudeha near the Devagiri Mountain. Though they
were wealthy, generous and devoted, Sudharma and Sudeha had no children.
This did not perturb Sudharma; he knew how to count his blessings and that fate
always keeps earthly happiness imperfect so that men remember God. Sudeha
felt pangs of inadequacy and guilt. She was certain that she was the barren one.
The wise Sudharma would gently reproach his wife when she dwelt upon their
childlessness. He said to her, "Sudeha, it is a selfish world. As time passes, there
is no father or mother, no son or lover, but only God."
But once Sudeha visited a neighbour and a quarrel broke out between them
over some pettiness. The other woman screamed at Sudeha, "At least I have a
son to inherit what we own. How will a barren wretch like you die peacefully,
when the king will take all you have? That’s why you are so vicious."

That evening, Sudeha was inconsolable. She cried hysterically that they
must do something, anything at all, but she must have a son. He could not pacify
her and Sudharma offered two flowers to Siva, at his sacrificial fire, marking one
that would give them a son. He held the flowers out to Sudeha, told her to
choose and she picked the wrong one. Sudharma said, "Even Siva isn’t willing
for us to have a son. Why not be content with everything with which he has
blessed us? There must be an excellent reason for our not having children."
She wept again and then, as a storm gagged, grew ominously quiet. A
slightly mad smile tugged at her mouth. She said, "If Siva does not will it, let me
not have a son. But you will take another woman for your wife and have a son
by her. You must have an heir."
Sudharma cried, "Don’t tempt fate, woman!" and walked out.
The next day, Sudeha brought her younger sister Ghusma to their home
and said, "Take her, you must."
Sudharma warned her, "If she has a child you will be jealous of her. Look
at you: as it is, you have no control over yourself."
Sudeha laughed, "She is my sister, I will not be jealous of her."
She fell at his feet and insisted tearfully that he marry Ghusma, or else she,
Sudeha, would kill herself. Sudharma married his wife’s younger sister. Sudeha
was so pleased she served Ghusma as if she herself was a servant in the house
and Ghusma the mistress. At every opportunity, she sent Ghusma to Sudharma
alone.
Ghusma had a different character altogether and learnt how to worship
Siva from her husband. She fashioned fine lingas from clay, sanctified them with
mantras and cast them into the nearby lake. She had time on her hands because
Sudeha would not allow her to do any housework. When she made her hundred-
thousandth linga, Ghusma conceived and gave birth to a fine son.
Now, when Sudeha saw how fondly her husband took her sister’s son in
his arms, her heart blazed up in green fire.
All the family celebrated the long awaited birth and Sudeha was in hell
with envy. For a long time, she controlled herself and pretended she too was
overjoyed with the child; and not Sudharma or his son made any difference
between the sisters. Indeed, both father and son were partial to the elder wife. It
was Sudeha the boy called Mother and his reposed and ineffusive mother he
called Aunt. But Sudeha’s mind seethed and slowly her hatred turned her into a
malevolent creature.
When his boy grew up, Sudharma got him married and the daughter-in-law
came to live with them. Sudeha could no longer contain herself. One day, when
her husband told her how happy she must be with her son and daughter-in-law in

the house, she screamed, "Not my son and daughter-in-law, only yours!"
For the first time, the poor man realised that everything in his home was
not as he had naively imagined. For years, Sudeha had secretly nurtured her
malice and it had festered within her. That night, she decided the only way she
could douse the fire in her heart was with her sister’s tears. Her daughter-in-law
had her period and was sleeping in another room. At midnight, the monster
within took control: she stole into her nephew’s room and murdered him in his
sleep. In a savage ritual, she dismembered him with a kitchen knife while, after
long, dry years, her body was wracked by fiendish excitement and she panted
and slavered like a bitch on heat. Sudeha threw the severed limbs into the lake,
where her sister Ghusma still cast her parthiva lingas every day.
In the morning, the daughter-in-law found some pieces of his flesh in her
husband’s bed and splashes of blood everywhere. She ran screaming to Sudeha:
who to her was her mother-in-law and Ghusma just her husband’s aunt. After the
release of the night’s horrible ritual, Sudeha was radiant at her puja. She beat her
breast in pretended grief; she wept inconsolably. When Ghusma was told the
horrific news, she did not stir. Only when she had finished her worship, did she
come to look at that awful room. Tears in her eyes, Ghusma said with dignity,
"Siva who gives life takes it also. Only the Lord knows the reasons why
everything happens as it does."
As she did each day, the composed Ghusma took her earthen lingas to the
lake to immerse them. Her hands trembling with the grief her heart felt, she cast
the lingas into the water, one by one. Suddenly she saw her son emerge from the
lake and stand luminous before her. The serene Ghusma welcomed her child
back among the living. Then, in a mass of glory, Siva appeared before them. In
an echoing voice, he promised, "Sudeha is a murderess and I will impale her on
my trisula."
Prostrating before him, Ghusma begged, "Spare my sister, Lord. Sadasiva,
just the sight of you will wash away her sin."
Siva blessed the faithful Ghusma, "Saintly woman, you are a mistress of
your heart as few maharishis are. Ask me for anything you want."
The wise, compassionate and far-sighted Ghusma said softly to Mahadeva,
"Stay here, Lord, to protect the world."
Siva said, "Ghusma, best among my bhaktas, I bless your family for a
hundred generations. May all your sons be wealthy and devoted. This lake shall
always be a home of my lingas and I will remain here in your name for all time."
Before the eyes of Ghusma and her son resurrected by his grace, Siva
dwindled into an unmoving Jyotirlinga. He has dwelt there since; he still stands
on the bank of the sacred Sivalaya lake. By Siva’s grace and Ghusma’s prayers,

Sudeha’s mind was freed from envy and hatred. Tearfully, in joy, as one
exorcised of a devil, she embraced her husband and her sister, her son and
daughter-in-law. Now, becoming as composed as Ghusma, for long years she
performed a relentless penance at the lake, before the Ghusmesa linga. Until,
Siva took her sin from her.
Such are Siva’s twelve Jyotirlingas of mystical light on earth. He dwells in
them for the world’s protection. The Purana says that hearing about these sacred
lingas purifies a man of his sins, confers every worldly pleasure on him and
moksha thereafter.            

The Sarabha and the Sudarshana

TWENTY-FOUR
 
Countless are the incarnations of Sadasiva in time, across the universe: as
many as there are stars in the sky, grains of sand on earth, or raindrops that fall
through all the kalpas. More.
Once, Brahma’s son Sanatkumara cursed Vishnu’s dwarapalakas, Jaya and
Vijaya. They would not allow some divine rishis, who came as bright children,
into the presence of the Blue God. Sanatkumara cursed them to three demonical
births on earth. They were first born as Diti and Kashyapa’s sons,
Hiranyakashyapu and Hiranyaksha.
When Brahma implored him, Vishnu incarnated himself as Varaha the
Boar to lift the earth out of the sea of dissolution and he liberated Hiranyaksha,
goring him to death. When Hiranyakashyapu heard that Vishnu had slain his
brother, dear as breath to him, the Asura worshipped Brahma for ten thousand
years for a boon.
"Let no one that you have created kill me: not man, beast or immortal. Let
my death not come by day or night, from above or below. Let me not die indoors
or outside, not on the ground or in the sky, or by any weapon."
Brahma granted him all this and Hiranyakashyapu was convinced he had
immortality. For ninety-six thousand years, that lord of the daityas tyrannised the
worlds. Indra and the devas could not kill him because of Brahma’s boon and at
last they prayed to Vishnu to save them from the Asura.

Prahlada, greatest among Vishnubhaktas, was born as Hiranyakashyapu’s
son. The Demon threatened the boy’s life because he worshipped the God that
he, the father, abhorred. Vishnu emerged from a pillar in Hiranyakashyapu’s
court: he was a terrible being, neither man nor beast. Roaring, he seized the
Demon, carried him to the threshold of his palace, not indoors or out. Taking
him onto his fearsome lap, not on the ground or in the sky, the Narasimha killed
him, tearing his heart out with his talons, when it was not day or night, but
twilight.
So ferocious was Vishnu’s Avatara, that not even slaughtering
Hiranyakashyapu’s awesome legions, by claw, fang and fire from its jaws, could
calm its implacable heart. That incarnation blazed in every direction, burning
even the sky. The devas were terrified; if the beast’s rage did not subside, it
would consume the universe.
They sent Prahlada to the Narasimha. At once, picking the boy up in his
arms, the Manticore embraced him and licked his face with love. Seizing their
chance, the devas scurried away to Siva. "Mahadeva, only you can save us from
the Narasimha!"
Siva sent Virabhadra to the Narasimha. When the Awful One set Prahlada
down gently and turned snarling on him, Virabhadra said, "Vishnu, as Matsya,
Kuurma and Varaha you protected the universe. Why do you want to destroy it
now? Give up this terrible form of yours, Narayana, be yourself again."
But mysterious are the Avataras. Baring his fangs, the Narasimha roared at
Virabhadra, "I am Kaala, destroyer of worlds; the universe is only part of my
own nature. Little lord of ganas, I am the death of Death and I will consume the
stars!"
Virabhadra laughed in the Narasimha’s face. "Have you no more
incarnations to incarnate, O Vishnu, that you beg to make this your last? You
roar so loudly because you have killed one puny demon. My lord Siva who
manifests himself between heaven and earth, between Indra and Agni, between
Yama and Varuna, in the light of the moon and the heart of darkness, who, if
you are Kaala, is Kaalakaala  bids me say to you that if you do not subdue
yourself, Bhairava will be upon you again."
But the Narasimha roared so the constellations trembled. He grew before
Virabhadra’s eyes: huger than creation, wilder than death, blazing cosmic fire. In
a flash, Virabhadra vanished from that place and suddenly Siva’s light shone
there, on earth and sky, enveloping everything, awesome, beyond compare. Not
of the sun or the moon was that light; it was dark and bright at once,
unprecedented. Siva himself stood forth from that light as the deformed Rudra
and as the Sarabha: a terrific golden bird whose wing-span was eternity, a

thousand adamantine claws flashing, fanged and four-legged, scimitar-beaked,
black-necked, three-eyed, hissing an unbearable humkara. Beside that
Apparition, the Narasimha seemed like a glow-worm next to the sun.
Burning with mystery, the Sarabha bound the Narasimha in the coils of his
tail. Effortlessly, he seized him in his talons and flew into the sky. There, the
Sarabha made a swift end of the Beast born to kill Hiranyakashyapu. Back to his
old form again, blue and four-armed, humbled, returned to his good sense,
Vishnu cried, "O Hara, curber of Hari! You are the ultimate saviour. Only you
could have quelled the Narasimha, it was beyond me then to master myself."
Mahavishnu bowed low to Mahadeva. Siva tore its hide from the
Narasimha and wore it on his body from that day. The head of the Manticore
became the foremost bead on his necklace of skulls.
 
*
 
Listen to how Vishnu acquired the Sudarshana chakra.
Long ago, the Asura Sridaman overran creation. By a rare boon, he had the
power of Sri Lakshmi to command. With the fortune of the worlds in his grasp,
Sridaman and his daityas marched on Vaikunta: that Demon meant to pluck the
Srivatsa from Vishnu’s chest!
Hari flew to Kailasa. Standing on a single toe of his foot, he worshipped
Siva for a millennium. He worshipped Hara with holy flowers from the Manasa
lake: a lotus for every one of the thousand names of Siva he chanted each day.
Siva stealthily stole one lotus, to test how sincere this worship was, to see if
Vishnu would notice the missing flower. Vishnu noticed at once. In a night, he
combed swarga, bhumi and patala for the flower; but he did not find it. The next
morning, when he chanted the last of the thousand names, Sarvasattvaalambana,
Vishnu calmly plucked out one of his eyes and offered it to Siva in place of the
missing lotus. Siva appeared before him in light and gave him the very wheel of
time for his weapon: the profound Sudarshana chakra.
That chakra was made from Siva’s feet; it shines with the splendor of ten
thousand suns. Like the year, it has twelve spokes, six naves and two yokes.
Alive in the spokes, are the distant devas: Agni, Soma, Mitra, Varuna, Indra,
Indragni, the viswadevas, the prajapatis, Hanuman, Dhanvantari, Tapas and
Tapasya, the months and the zodiac. In its swiftness are wind, water, fire, earth,
air and sky. At the spokes’ edges are the clouds of the dissolution, lightning, the
planets and stars, beyond which sit the seers and the Balakhilyas. The glory of

Sadasiva is in the Sudarshana!
Legend has it that, when he received the tremendous chakra, Hari’s heart
still quailed to think of Sridaman. He said to Bhava, "Lord, how can I be sure the
Sudarshana will be irresistible in every exigency?"
Siva replied, "Cast the chakra at me."
Vishnu cast the Sudarshana at Paramasiva and the whirling wheel cut
Mahadeva in three. Yet, he stood there smiling! With a cry, Vishnu fell at Siva’s
feet. Siva said serenely, "Arise, Mahabaho: only my manifested body is
truncated, my Being is beyond every weapon. These three parts of me will be
forever among men as Hiranyaksha, Suvarnaksha and Virupaksha. Do not
grieve; I told you to cast the chakra at me. Go and quell your enemies with it."
Armed with the Sudarshana chakra, Vishnu blazed forth from Kailasa and
no evil could stand against him anymore. Sridaman, who humiliated the devas,
who stole the fortune of the worlds, stood roaring before Hari. Vishnu said,
"Daitya, your life is at an end."
Quick as a thought, the Sudarshana cut the Asura’s head from his sin-
swollen body. Both tumbled down the Himalaya in a crimson avalanche.
Hymning Siva, Narayana returned to the eternal waters: which are his abode and
his rest.

UMA

TWENTY-FIVE
 
The Mountain and his wife
 
It broke my heart when Sati did what she did at her father’s sacrifice.
Giving Daksha a goat’s head, was small consolation for me. I remember those
days of aloneness, those savage days of separation; I remember them like a
nightmare. I made myself a necklace of her delicate bones, which were all there
was left of her when the yogic fire she summoned upon her petal body had done
its work and homeless, I ranged the world.
But then, deep in my heart I had always known that, for all its ecstasies,
our marriage was a cursed one from the start; and the fault was mine. I was too
enamoured of the atman, too obsessed with the life of the spirit. So that when
Brahma, Hari and the others first came asking me to marry, I thoughtlessly
enumerated the perfections I expected in my bride. I swore I would abandon her,
if she doubted me for even a moment. I had not met Sati then; I did not dream
that anyone like her could exist in the flesh. I had not yet known love. Of course,
Brahma was determined to have revenge on me for taunting him when I found
him in his daughter’s arms; but I always wondered why Vishnu did not warn me
that I would pay for my conceit. How I paid.
I cannot recall how many years or aeons the lonely torment lasted. I
remember how the icy ravines would echo my anguished howls back at me. The
pain of those days was not ordinary. It was as if I paid in full and forever, for
being who I am. I was mad then; my body was on fire with losing her. The
agony in my bones was as if they broke and mended and broke again, each
moment. Nowhere does there exist a purer hell than those first days or years or
centuries after she died. It was exceptional, my anguish: none but I could have
borne it. And accompanying it, the mind’s venomous taunting, "It would never
have happened had you gone with her!"
I remember I fell into the Yamuna and that wavy lock of the earth’s hair
was burned black by my grief. The river has flowed dark ever since. I wailed to
Sati, I sang to her, I roared my bereavement at the stars. When I slept, I saw her
in my dreams and cried, "Cruel woman, stay with me. Ah, don’t forsake me,
Sati. Don’t be angry, I will come with you to your father’s yagna. Look at me, I
worship you every moment. You said to me once ‘I cannot live without you’, but
you lied. Look how I burn: hold me or I will die!"

I would wake screaming as she faded from my sleep. Like a mad man, I
went to the asramas of the rishis of the cedar forest. The rishis’ wives became
crazed when I danced naked before them, all except Arundhati and Anasuya.
The sages cursed my phallus to fall off: my linga, which I held in my hand to tell
their wives of my despair and I crooned in grief, inflaming them. The worlds
quaked at my falling linga, which split the earth, pierced the patalas and rent the
cosmic egg. Now Vishnu, Brahma and the devas went pleading to her: to return
to me, or I would destroy the universe in my madness. Then, with the linga
ritually installed and her promise to return given, my body was whole again.
Time is a healer without equal. I realised that not all my tears, not my
chanting her name ceaselessly and dementedly would bring her back before it
was time. Soon enough, I sought my old refuge again, my timeless sanctuary: the
sweet forgetfulness hidden in the heart’s deep: the Satchitananda, the bliss of
Brahman. It was a familiar country. But at first, the return was not easy, like
coming home to an old lover who had always waited for you though you had
been unfaithful to her. However, I soon sank back into the sea of peace; I
plunged myself deep into myself.
Initially, my distraught mind would not be still and her face haunted my
every thought as a peerless fury. I saw her in life and death. I saw not merely her
face; I saw her body with its velvet folds, each a vale of Brahman to me. I saw
her breasts, night-black nipples taut; I heard her whispered and screamed
ecstasies. Ah, why was I punished so cruelly? Then, I took firm hold of myself. I
shut her out from my mind as irrevocably as she had shut herself from my life by
dying. Slowly, peace came back to me, absorption. After some months, I could
allow myself to think of her: but as a dream and almost painlessly. Yet,
sometimes her last words, which my ganas carried home to me, would float like
scarlet clouds across the horizon of my dhyana: "I will return to you when I am
born to parents who respect me."
In time, my dhyana was immaculate again and I knew nothing save
eternity then. That condition was not susceptible to sorrow, even at the memory
of Sati. Once more, I was aware of everything and nothing; and if part of me
ached for her still upon some small world of time, I was unaware of it. I lost
myself, as I never had before there was Sati. Fleetingly, I thought this was why
she came into my life, to make my tapasya purer when she left. What else could
I think?
 
Once, when we were so happy together, so much in love, we lived upon
the Himalaya. I remember there was a woman there: Mena, the wife of
Himachala, lord of mountains. Mena loved Sati like her own child. She would

set her in her lap and comb out her tresses that hung to her ankles, singing softly
to her, calling her daughter in her resonant mountain tongue. I watched them
often, from hiding and I wondered if they were not in fact mother and daughter.
So comfortable did they seem with each other, as if they belonged together in
that bond into which they had not been born.
Almost every day, Mena would send us all kinds of delicacies she had
cooked herself, often with the wistful message ‘for my child’. She always kept
her distance from me; and not from any resentment for what I was, of that I was
sure. Perhaps it was a sense of propriety; or was it awe? But I was too much in
love to bother to know Mena closely. She would always wish me if I came upon
Sati and her, talking and laughing together, the ‘mother’ often telling her
‘daughter’ ancient tales. She would rise hastily and, after wishing me, hurry
away, promising to meet Sati the next day. Sati called her Amma. Mena wanted
her to and, out of her hearing, I think I did too, once and we laughed over that
slip of my tongue. Since when did Siva have a mother or father?
Sati had told me about Mena’s birth, that she was Daksha’s granddaughter.
Daksha gave sixty of his daughters in marriage to the rishis, to Kashyapa and the
others and they were the original mothers of creation. Svadha he gave to the
pitrs, the manes. Svadha bore three daughters: Mena the eldest, Dhanya in the
middle and Kalavati the youngest. None of them was born from her womb; they
were children of thought and pure. Once, they went to Swetadipa, the white
island that is part of Hari’s realm, to visit Mahavishnu. They stayed there for a
time, at his knowing invitation.
It was while they were on Swetadipa, dazzled by Narayana’s nearness, that
Brahma’s son Sanaka and some other siddhas came to visit the Blue God.
Everyone in Vishnu’s sabha stood up when the holy ones made their entrance.
But Svadha’s daughters, whispering together in wonder at being in the
miraculous place, did not rise. They did not know they should. A silence fell on
that court and Sanaka cursed the three, "You are the pitrs’ daughters, but you are
shallow and haughty. I curse you to leave heaven and be born as women of the
earth!"
The girls were in tears; they fell at Sanaka’s feet. They begged him,
"Siddha, we meant no disrespect, we were dazzled at being near Vishnu. We beg
you, bless us as well so we may return to swarga, or we are doomed forever."
Vishnu, who knows everything, glanced at Sanaka and put a thought in the
sage’s mind, so he wondered at his own anger of a moment ago. Now Sanaka
blessed the three young women. "You will all be saved by your daughters on
earth, for they shall be the Devi’s incarnations. Mena, your child will be Siva’s
wife. You, Dhanya, shall mother Sita who will marry Rama. And Kalavati will

have Radha for her daughter and she will be Krishna’s secret love."
There was something I did not know. When Sati ashed herself at Daksha’s
yagna, with her last breath she wished to be born as Mena’s daughter: so she
would never again have to hear from me, even in jest, that she was Dakshayani,
Daksha’s child.
Mena married Himachala, most auspicious and lordly mountain, an amsa
of Vishnu himself and my bhakta. For years, they were childless, engrossed
though they were in each other and in love. One day, Vishnu came to
Himachala’s court with the other devas. Himachala welcomed them in joy.
"Today all my tapasya has borne fruit! Tell me why you have come, Lord."
Vishnu blessed Himavan and said, "Siva’s love Sati killed herself at
Daksha’s yagna. Before she died, she swore to return to Rudra, born from
parents of whom she could be proud. I believe your wife and you were fond of
Sati." He added meaningfully, "Even like your own daughter?"
Himachala could hardly believe his fortune. Overcome, he prostrated at
Narayana’s lotus feet. In transport, he mumbled over and over again, "So be it,
so be it."
While I sank deeper into myself, knowing timelessness again after my
heartbreak, the devas went back to worship the Mother of the universe who
knows all things, Durga who is before any other was. They sang her praises
without restraint, "O Sivaa, cause of everything, Mahat-and Avyakta-formed,
tranquil, holy, subtle Gayatri! O Source of the Vedas, Savitri, Saraswati and
Lakshmi. O Maaya, Nidra, Devi of sinners, Devi of peace, O unknowable
Mahakaali."
She came before them, mounted on her tiger. She was black, four-armed,
wielding awesome weapons, her hair loose and unkempt, brilliant with a
thousand priceless jewels worn carelessly, blinding as a sun. They lay on their
faces before her. She said in her soft way, "Tell me, Vishnu, Brahma, O Devas,
how can I help you?"
White-haired Brahma said humbly, for he had come to her once before,
"Mother, not the Vedas or we, the Gods, know you entirely, O Durga, whose
compassion cannot be conceived. The most sacred books speak in awe of you,
saying only what you are not. O Kaali, who were Sati, who was once Siva’s
wife, be his wife again!"
Durga said calmly, "We cannot be apart much longer. Already, Himachala
and Mena worship me to be born as their daughter. Deep in his heart, Siva also
remembers my promise to return."
She vanished from their presence and they went back to their worlds in
joy. Himavan and Mena worshipped Siva for twenty-seven years, so they might

have a child. Mena worshipped Durga, devoutly, as an idol of clay on the banks
of the holy Ganga in Aushadhiprastha, Himavan’s capital. There were days
when she fasted, taking only water; on others, air was her only sustenance. At
the end of those years of penance and charity, Sivaa stood illustrious and
unutterably lovely before Mena.
"Mena, choose your boon."
"Mother of great illusion, Mother who are the violence told of in the
Atharvaveda, O eternal Prakriti who bring even Brahman under your spell,
Mahamaaye bless me!"
Sivaa said again gently, "Ask and it shall be yours, Mena."
Taking a deep breath, Mena said, "Devi, bless me with children. Let me
have a hundred sons, long lived and brave. And then, O Durga, you be born as
my daughter to marry Rudra."
Parashakti said, "So be it," and was gone.
Mena clapped her hands and cried, "Jaya!"
She ran to her husband to give him the momentous news. When he saw
her, he knew without her telling him that at last the boon was theirs.
Mainaka was the first child born to Himavan and Mena. He, too, in time,
became a lord of mountains. When Indra sheared the wings of all mountains and
made them flightless, only Mainaka escaped the Deva king’s Vajra, because
Varuna hid him under his waves. Ninety-nine other sons were born to Himachala
and his wife, before the Goddess subtly entered Himavan’s mind and he blazed
in sudden glory. She entered his blood and, mystically, his seed.
That night he loved Mena as he had never loved her before and her cries
echoed across his embodied ridges in silver moonlight. At midnight, Mena
conceived the Devi and the mountain’s wife shone as if the moon was in her
womb.
Mena became so weak during the first two months of her pregnancy she
could not move from her bed. Her body could not bear the weight of even
clothes or ornaments. Her face was as pale as a lodhra flower: Mena was like a
moonless and overcast night when not a star can be seen. Her morning sickness
lasted into the dusk. Who else could have borne such a child? It was like
carrying the universe in her womb for nine months.
Her husband was full of desire for his wife. After the first two months of
her pregnancy and before the seventh, she allowed him softly into her swelling
body and their loving was a slow flame during those endless white nights. It was
as if she who nestled in Mena’s body kindled her parents’ souls.
When those first months were over, when Mena had grown comfortable
with her pregnancy, she was like a tender creeper thrusting out new leaves and

flowers every day. She was radiant! Himavan called her his earth with treasure
buried in her; his sami twig with fire latent in it. He nursed his pregnant wife as
if he was her mother; and at nights, unfailingly, they lay together in sweet
rapture and were closer than they had ever been in their long love.
Soon, came the day when She would be born. Vishnu, Brahma and the
devas came to Aushadhiprastha to bless Mena, whose cup brimmed dizzily over.
She, the mother, was speechless; she could only weep for joy. The Gods blessed
her and went back to their heavens. The day Mena’s divine child was born, the
sky was as clear as the wind. The stars and planets were quiet, the earth and her
oceans were perfectly auspicious; fragrant breezes blew everywhere, harbingers
of the most sacred tidings. The devas of light stood in the sky and beat tabors
and drums. The gandharvas, vidyadharas and apsaras sang and danced in the
subtle zone between heaven and earth.
Just before midnight, when the constellation Margasirsa conjoined with the
moon, on that ninth day of the month of Madhu, Mena lay in labour, Himavan at
her side. Like Ganga from the sphere of the moon, the Devi flowed out from
Mena’s body as a vision. She stood before her parents to be, in pristine majesty,
in the familiar form of Sati; she blessed them.
Only then, with a last rending push from Mena’s loins, she was born in
blood as a human child dark as a blue lotus and wailing like any mortal infant;
though mortal she was not. Like Lakshmi from the ocean of milk, came Uma
from her mother’s womb! It rained then, fragrantly. Fires in every hearth and
yagna burned deep and calm; a luminous shower of petals fell upon the earth
from above, blessing it. As I sat in dhyana, a thrill of augury coursed through my
body, when Parvati, the mountain’s daughter, was born.

TWENTY-SIX
 
The grove of dhyana
 
That dark child shone like a piece of the moon: I have spied on her past
with my mystic mind. Himavan’s city was festive at the birth of the Devi.
Knowing who she was, her father named her Kaali; like the moon in autumn,
like the Ganga during the rains, she grew in his palace. Though they had a
hundred splendid sons, Kaali’s parents would always rather be with their
incomparable daughter. She was so loved by every member of that mountain
family, that, though she was great Durga incarnate, they called her Parvati,
mountain daughter.
When she was not yet six, the brilliant little girl, her skin black as kohl, her
eyes blue as lotus petals, wanted to go off by herself to the river-bank: not to
play with sand or dolls, but to sit in tapasya.
"U Ma! Oh no!" cried her mother Mena.
"Uma!" cried Parvati in disappointment. After that, they called her Uma,
as well.
Uma had a short and unusual education. Himavan engaged a learned rishi
as her tutor. But she already knew more than her guru did; because, even as the
swans fly back to the Ganga in autumn, so, naturally, her ancient gyana returned
to her. She was the very vision of her father’s eye; he always wanted her in his
fond gaze. He went to hide behind the river reeds, the lord of mountains, to spy
on his daughter playing with her sakhis.
Once Narada arrived in Aushadipura. Himavan welcomed the wanderer
and made him comfortable. He called Parvati and made her seek the maharishi’s
blessing. He said, "Divine Narada, read my daughter’s palm. Foretell her future
and say whose wife she will be."
Narada took the child’s palm and studied it, with many a smile lighting his
face and at last a frown flitting across it.
"Day by day, she will grow in beauty and grace like the moon waxing. She
will bring her parents glory and her husband delight, whoever he may be. She
will be great, she will be chaste and fetch joy wherever she goes.
I see every possible line of fortune in your child’s hand, yet there is one
line that is unlike all the rest. I cannot tell if it is a flaw or not, but it is

exceptional. Himachala, this girl’s husband will be a naked yogin, clad in only
the wind and without any qualities. He will be free from lust and temptation,
indifferent to wealth and honour. His clothes and manner will be inauspicious,
even vulgar, to belie his heart and he will not have a mother or a father." Narada
seemed to savour that extraordinary prediction.
There was a shocked silence from Himavan and Mena, but little Parvati
glowed to hear what the rishi said: she knew it was Siva that Narada described.
When she played by the river, she already made wet lingas of sand and she drew
pictures of me from her imagination, all uncannily lifelike.
Himavan cried, "Muni, what is the way out of this misfortune? Whatever
will I do? Is it true, what you say?"
Narada said with a smile, "Mountain, the lines in the palm are the lines of
Brahma, they cannot lie. Now listen to something that will please you. There is
indeed a groom for your bewitching daughter, who exactly fits the lines in her
hand. Himavan, he is Siva who lives in the world as Rudra.
He is beyond good and evil; in him, the apparent defect is a sublime
punya. He is not just a man, O Mountain, but God: you cannot judge his
nakedness, his parentlessness, or his wildness even, as one does a man. Set aside
your dismay and worship Siva. Parvati was born for him: he will have none but
your daughter, nor she anyone but him. Surely, you have not forgotten what
went before her birth, as if your life began only on that day. Himalaya, long
before she was your daughter, Uma was part of Siva’s body."
Himavan said, "Muni, the kinnaras who know him and sometimes visit my
ranges, say Siva abhors attachment. They say he has absorbed himself in the
Brahman to forget Sati. He swore when he married her that he would never
marry any other woman. How will my Uma marry this Siva?"
Narada said to him, "Your Parvati was once Daksha’s daughter Sati."
And the rishi told of that tragic life, while young Uma’s eyes shone.
Narada said, "As for the Brahman: though he will not admit it even to himself,
Siva waits for Parvati. The Brahman is always with him; he yearns for his
woman. He wants to forget her only because he cannot bear the thought that he
will never find her again."
Himavan indulgently picked up Parvati and set her on his throne. Narada
said, "Himachala, one day she will have her rightful place again at Siva’s side, a
higher place than your throne."
Narada went his way. A few days later, in their bedchamber, Mena, who
loved Parvati more than her life, said to her husband, "Did you understand what
Narada said? I did not. I think we should find a handsome bridegroom from a
good family for our child."

Himachala saw tears in his wife’s eyes. She fell sobbing at his feet, for fear
of what Narada said. Himavan raised her up and drew her to him. "Mena, instead
of flailing against destiny, tell your daughter to worship Siva so he will marry
her. You heard the muni say that an apparent defect in a person of majesty is no
cause of misery as it is in an ordinary man. All that seems inauspicious is not so
in Siva."
Mollified, Mena went to Uma to ask her to worship Siva. When Parvati’s
mother saw her delicate daughter asleep in her bed, she could not bring herself to
say what she had come for.
Uma opened her eyes and said with a smile, "Mother, at this hour you
must have come to ask me to do tapasya. I had a dream and a holy rishi came to
me and told me to worship Siva."
Himavan came into that room. When Mena told him about their daughter’s
dream, he said, "Dozing off just now, I also had a dream. Siva himself came here
as a splendid rishi and Uma went to serve him. We must wait and see what
happens."
 
I first heard of Parvati when she was eight years old. I was still in deep
dhyana and I did not believe what I heard: that Sati, who should never have left
me, was born again as Himachala’s child. It was too soon, too easy. Who could
have wrought this miracle when I had combed the three worlds for her spirit and
not found my love anywhere? For five years, I ignored what I heard. Even if she
had returned, as more and more of the mountain folk were saying, kinnaras,
vidyadharas and gandharvas, even some of my own ganas who saw her, I was far
from certain that I wanted to see her myself. I had just begun to climb out of the
hell of her leaving me. What if she killed herself again? No! The next time there
would be no escaping the abyss.
Yet, Sati with a young girl’s face would drift into my meditation, a Sati
even darker and more beautiful than I remembered. If this was the face of
Himavan’s daughter, she was my Sati all right. I pitied myself still. I did not
have a true perception of the past, the excellent reasons at the heart of the
tragedy that had overtaken me. I only felt she had betrayed me, thoughtlessly,
out of pique. I did not take the dying promise of such a person seriously and one
to whom I had once given myself so irrevocably. I dared not believe that she
truly meant to return.
I took the easiest course open to me and possibly the most sensible one for
the time being. I convinced myself that love, profound as it was, had been no
more than a trial by fire, an obstacle devised to strengthen my tapasya when I
lost Sati. I decided I was being shown how evanescent even the greatest love is.

Only the Brahman was true: I would never again deviate from my dhyana.
Still, I could not but think of Himachala’s little girl about whom I heard so
much. And I waited. If she had indeed returned, as she had sworn to, this time it
would be for ever. I waited impatiently. One day, I could not bear it any more: I
had to know if it was truly she. I could not trust anyone else to decide; I had to
see for myself. Just one look would do. Just to know, mind you, no more, even if
it was she. I would have nothing to do with her; what does a yogin want with
women? I had made a mistake once and I was not about to repeat it.
So I told myself when I set out for Gangavartana with some of my less
rambunctious ganas. This was the quietest ridge of the Himalaya to meditate
upon and very near Himachala’s city, Aushadhiprastha.
I did not announce myself to Himavan. He would hear of my arrival soon
enough, for the mountain grapevine is lively. I set myself down, curbing my
hopes as if they did not exist and began my dhyana. Nandin, Bhringi and some
others meditated at my side. Some ganas served us and others were our sentinels.
Not half a day went by, when Himavan came to see me and I could tell he came
in some excitement.
"Mahadeva, abode of worlds, obeisance! O Lord, who have come here
because my fortune is ascending, today my life has borne fruit. Command me,
Rudra, my heart belongs to you."
And more in this vein. I had not yet looked, though I wondered keenly if
he had brought his daughter with him. Slowly, as if emerging from deep
samadhi, I fluttered my eyes open. I saw he was a great and kindly being, exactly
as I remembered. With a smile, I said, "I have come in secret to your ridges,
Mountain. I have come for tapasya. Noble Himavan, refuge of rishis and devas,
asuras and gandharvas, O Himachala sanctified by the Ganga: the one service
you can do me is to see I am not disturbed at my dhyana."
How could I say to him that I had come to see if his daughter was my Sati?
The august mountain said to me, "Lord of the universe, not the devas with their
most austere worship attain a vision of you; and you have come here unbidden.
There is no one in the three worlds as fortunate as I am. Siva, sit in tapasya
undisturbed by any of the mountain folk, for I, Himavan, am your slave."
Though his language was almost obsequious, Himachala’s tone was
genuinely affectionate and I thought here was a change from Daksha. He came
back the next day, bringing fruit and flowers for us all. Before he reached me,
my ganas came and whispered, ‘She is with him, she is with him!’ As carelessly
as I could, I said ‘Who?’ and they did not laugh only out of their habitual
reverence for me. I shut my eyes firmly at Himachala’s approach and my mind
was in tumult. I heard bare feet and the basket of fruit and flowers being set

down. Then, his voice a trifle unsteady, I fancied, Himavan said, "Lord, I have
brought my daughter Uma and two of her sakhis. They want to serve you."
I did not look up at once and, with an effort, kept my face from twitching.
But it had to be done eventually and as if coming out of ineffable dhyana, I
opened my eyes languidly. I saw her in the first flush of young womanhood,
dark as night, her eyes long as lotus petals, her face bright and mysterious as the
moon near fullness, her neck fine, her young breasts like lotus buds, her arms
slim and rounded like lily stalks, her waist so unreally slender, her feet perfect, a
cascade of curls crowning her body, for which there is no metaphor. I wanted to
cry out that she was my Sati. No one could doubt it: my Sati, yet more perfect
than she had been, if I dared think such a thought, but it was true.
I snapped my eyes shut. She pierced me through; my body trembled when
I looked at her. I set my mouth in a line, as Himavan said, "Siva, if your permit
me, I will visit you every morning at this hour and I will bring my daughter
Parvati with me. She can serve you through the day and return at night to her
mother."
Without opening my eyes again, though only I knew how much I longed
to, I said coldly, "Yes, Himachala, you may come every morning to see me. But
you will leave your daughter at home."
Her gasp did not escape me. His voice definitely tremulous, her father
asked, "Lord, why should the girl not come with me?"
Hoping my voice was not a traitor like his, I said impatiently, "Mountain, I
am a yogin. A young woman like your daughter should not be near me. Women
are seasons of illusion; worldliness comes from them. They are the very roots of
attachment. They are the destroyers of tapasya and I have no use for them."
I wondered if I was ranting and whether he noticed it: especially how I
kept my eyes shut, not daring to open them lest seeing her face I lose all control.
I spoke firmly, though I knew I hurt his feelings. I could not have her near me; I
had almost been lost with one glimpse. He dare not argue, but now she piped up
clear as a flute, "O Siva, even you perform tapasya as a yogin only because you
possess the vitality for it. My lord, that energy is Prakriti. Woman is Prakriti: the
cause of creation, nurture and destruction. Without Prakriti how will the great
Lord of the linga exist and be worshipped?"
I had to laugh. I said, "I destroy my Prakriti with tapasya, I am without
Prakriti."
She laughed then and oh, I thrilled to that warm, tinkling sound. She said,
"Yogin, if you are truly without Prakriti how is it you sit upon this mountain in
tapasya? You have been swallowed entire by Prakriti, that you no longer know
your own condition. Siva, if you are really beyond Prakriti, why should you fear

my being near you?"
In some alarm, Himavan began to make anxious noises to his daughter to
stop. I held my hand up at him, to let her speak; after all, she only spoke the
truth. I opened my eyes once more. Seeing her, my ascetic resolve vanished like
mist at sunrise. I drank thirstily of her loveliness. I sighed, tolerantly, in my best
long-suffering manner: though the truth, of course, was that I would have her
near me every day, every moment.
Pretending to give in wearily, I said, "Parvati, if you insist you may serve
me. I am the Brahman and you can do nothing to perturb my spirit. I allow you
to come and go from this place as you please; no one shall hinder you."
Blessing my good fortune, how swiftly it moved, I shut my eyes again.
They went back to their city: she promising to return the next day, her father
happier than her. I spent an uneasy night. Sati haunted my dhyana, her dead face
coalescing with young Parvati’s. Were they one person? They felt as if they must
be. Was this another cruel joke being played to enchant me and in a few years
she would leave me desolate again? Was this a trial of my resolve to remain
alone? If it was, I suspected I had already failed the test. For by dawn, I had to
admit that seeing her was as vital to me as my tapasya, as crucial as the
Parabrahman.
As the sun rose, a vision of terror rose before me, a vision of myself as I
had been after Sati died: homeless and demented. No! I would not let that
happen again. With a cry, I yoked myself and meditated fiercely on the atman. I
sank so deep into myself that, by the time she arrived, I was unaware of my body
or its surroundings. Yet, for the first time after Sati’s death, I had decided to stay
in one place for more than a day.
I would not fall prey again to that most terrible of sins, love. I locked
myself away. But she came every day to serve me, while I sat unmoving,
unbreathing: adrift on the sea of the atman.
She washed my feet and drank that water. She wiped my insensate body
with a cloth she heated over a wood fire. Each day, she worshipped me with
sixteen separate and intricate offerings, before she went back to her father’s
palace late in the evening. Some days, she brought kusa grasses, lotuses and dry
twigs for the fire. On others, she and her sakhis got onto their knees and
scrubbed the floor of my asrama. On yet other days, she just sat and gazed at my
face, as if in wonder that I existed.
She was bewitching, but I had no eyes for her. The time had not yet come
when we would be together again. But it was nearer than I knew, as I journeyed
in the domain of the spirit. The devas were faced with a crisis that only my
marrying Parvati could solve and they decided to take a hand in our fate.

TWENTY-SEVEN
 
‘Only if Siva has a son’
 
Brahma’s son Marichi sired Kashyapa, who took thirteen of Daksha’s
daughters to be his wives. Kashyapa’s eldest wife, Diti, bore the golden Asuras,
Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashyapu, who terrorised the worlds, until Vishnu, as
Varaha and Narasimha, slew them and there was peace in creation once more.
Diti was inconsolable and she prayed fervently for more children. After an age
of worship, she became pregnant again with a mighty child who could kill her
sister Aditi’s son Indra, the Deva king. When Indra heard of it, he spirited
himself into her womb and attacked the foetus with his thunderbolt. By the
power of Diti’s tapasya, the embryo did not die; it was cut in seven. Diti bore
seven sons instead of one and they were the Maruts. Indra took them into the
heavens and made them Vayu the Wind’s companions.
Again, Diti resorted to her husband with worship and she bore an
adamantine son called Vajranga. He was born full-grown and as powerful as the
greatest deva. At Diti’s instance, Vajranga abducted Indra and held him captive.
Brahma and Kashyapa interceded for the Deva king and Vajranga released Indra.
Vajranga, who was an innocent, said humbly to Brahma, "Pitama, teach
me the essential dharma by which I can achieve happiness. I kidnapped Indra
only because my mother told me to: it brought me no joy."
Brahma smiled and created Vajrangi to be Vajranga’s wife. The Creator
said to the Demon, "Only sattvik feelings can make you joyful. Be happy with
your wife."
Vajranga, lord of the asuras, was the most peaceful of Diti’s children. Not
so his wife. She always said to him, "Give me a son who will conquer the worlds
and bring misery to Vishnu."
The pure-hearted Vajranga was distraught. Much as he loathed to, it was
his dharma to give his wife what she wanted. He worshipped Brahma, his guru.
The Lotus-born One appeared before him in light. Vajranga said, "Lord, bless
me with a son who will be as his mother wants. But for my sake, let him also be
a tapasvin."
Brahma said, "So be it."
Vajrangi conceived and for years her pregnancy lasted, while her

mysterious child grew slow and strong within her. At last, one night, when
thunder crashed, bolts of lightning and comets fell together out of the sky, when
meteors flew up into heaven from an earth that shook with giant tremors and the
rough wind swept land and sea in hurricanes, uprooted the greatest trees and
blew them along like straw puppets; on a night when gales billowed blind with
dust, when the sun’s haloes were dim with Rahu’s ominous shadow, when
mountain crevasses resounded with terrifying explosions, when macabre vixens
howled and vomited fire in the villages of men, when dogs bayed and their
bitches sang dismally, when beasts of the jungle wandered lost and shivering
into human habitations, when birds of day wheeled in maddened flocks,
darkening the night sky, when cows sprayed blood through their teats in fear and
clouds rained faeces down on the world; on a night when in temples and in
homes the idols of the Gods appeared to weep and fly up into the air in despair
and foreboding, when the planets in the heavens seemed to collide in their orbits:
on such a night, in agony, Vajrangi delivered a son with enormous limbs and
strength, who dazzled the darkling quarters with his sinister brilliance: as if to
declare that they belonged to him from now!
Kashyapa Prajapati named his grandson, that demon child, Taraka. How
quickly Vajrangi’s son grew, his frame like the Himalaya, his intellect loftier.
One day, when he was no longer a child nor yet a man, he went to his mother
and said, "I will do tapasya now, if you allow me."
Vajrangi blessed her son and he went off deep into the Madhuvana, Taraka
who was already a master of astras and maaya. Even as Vishnu once did, he
stood on a single toe of his foot to propitiate Brahma, who was his father’s Deity
before him, the Pitama who was his own great-grandfather. For a hundred years,
Taraka stood unmoving, gazing at the sun, his arms raised heavenwards; for a
hundred more, he stood on his hands and worshipped the Creator. For another
hundred years, he hung by his feet from a tree above the sacrificial fire,
breathing only its smoke. The Asura Taraka’s penance lasted a thousand years,
until even those who merely heard of it trembled. Then, a mass of light poured
from his head and blazed through the sky like an untamed river of the sun.
When that splendour lit up devaloka, Indra cried, "Whose tapasya is this,
so awesome that he will usurp my throne, that he will consume the very stars?"
Panic-stricken, when they discovered who the tapasvin was and whom he
worshipped, all the maharishis and devas came flying to Brahma. "If you don’t
give Tarakasura whatever he wants, his tapasya will incinerate the heavens."
Brahma appeared, smiling radiantly, before the lord of asuras. Never
before had he been worshipped with a penance like Taraka’s. Brahma said,
"There is nothing you cannot have, Taraka."

Hands folded, Taraka replied, "If you are truly pleased, Pitama, grant me
two boons."
He waited for Brahma to agree and when the Creator nodded his heads,
Taraka named his boons. "Let no one in all this universe of yours be my equal in
strength. And let me die only at the hands of a son of Siva, who brings an army
against me."
Brahma was obliged to give him what he asked. Bowing to the Pitama,
Tarakasura went home to Sonitapura, golden capital of the daityas. Spurred on
by his ambitious mother, Taraka embarked on his conquest of the worlds. So
strong was he by Brahma’s boon that no enemy could stand before him: not the
devas, not the lokapalas. Quickly, Tarakasura was sovereign of the three worlds,
boundlessly benevolent to his own kind, but making the devas’ lives a
nightmare.
To buy some security for themselves, the devas offered up all their wealth
to him. Without his asking, Indra gave him Airavata, Kubera surrendered the
nine treasures, the rishis gave sacred Kamadhenu. Varuna gave Taraka horses of
foam, swifter than light and Surya brought him the peerless Ucchaisravas.
Everything of value in the universe quickly belonged to that great Demon. He
expected no less, for his penance had been without precedent. Tarakasura
expelled the devas from devaloka, called himself the new Indra and installed his
asuras to do the work of the gods. He ruled heaven immaculately: the sun shone
mildly for fear of him and the moon never set to please him.
The devas were in miserable exile, powerless and terrified. Though he
could not take their lives, he took everything else from them; so their
immortality was worthless, a torment and they longed for death.
In despair, they came to Brahma, their father.
"Lord of Creation, Taraka has enslaved the worlds with your boon. He has
taken all that was once ours and banished us from our homes. Wherever we are,
wherever we flee to, Taraka and his demons come hunting us. Agni, Yama,
Varuna, Nivritti, Vayu and all the guardians, every lord of light serves Taraka.
They serve him like the commonest slaves.
The Asura keeps our wives and the apsaras in his harem. No yagna is
fruitful on any world; no muni sits in tapasya anymore. Taraka has perverted the
nature of time. Every stratagem with which we tried to kill him has failed; even
Vishnu’s Sudarshana chakra fell around his neck like a garland of wildflowers.
You blessed him and now he tyrannises us. Pitama, help us, our lives are
intolerable."
Brahma sighed. "Because of my boon to him, not Hari, Rudra or I can kill
Taraka. Finally his own sins will destroy the Demon, but only when Siva has a

son. Daksha’s daughter has been reborn as Himavan’s child and Rudra will
marry only her. By the power of his dhyana, the Yogin’s seed flows up to his
head, only Parvati can make it flow down into her body. Only she can bear that
hiranyaretas in her womb: Siva’s blazing golden seed!
Even now, she attends him in Gangavartana, but he resists her. You should
persuade him to make her his wife."
Brahma went to devaloka and said to his bhakta Taraka, "Asura, I did not
bless you so you could turn the devas out of their heavens. You can rule the
worlds well enough from the earth. Return to Sonitapura."
Taraka came back to the earth and the devas went home, in relief, each to
his original place. But the Demon was still their master and they received
nothing else of value back from him save their empty palaces. Indra sat alone in
the Sudharma; his once splendid crystal hall was wan and empty. He called
Kamadeva to him. Kama came with Rati and Vasantha. His spirit undimmed by
the harsh years of Taraka’s rule, since the universe was his to madden with
desire still, Kama stood handsome and haughty before his dejected king. He
joined his hands in mock reverence and, a smile curving his lips, said, "How
may I serve you, my lord?"
"Unequalled Kama, my Vajra may fail, as it has against Taraka, but you,
my friend, are a master of the universe still. With your flower arrows and your
sugarcane bow with its string of honey-bees, with Rati and Vasantha beside you
and the Moon your friend, you can entice Brahma or Vishnu." Indra paused to
lower his voice, "But, Kama, can you enchant Siva into love?"
Kama smiled. He said to his doubting king, "Where your Vajra was
blunted, my soft shafts shall pierce. I will swerve Siva from his dhyana and
make him fall in love with Uma."
Smiling and bowing before their disconsolate master, the three seducers to
love vanished from his forlorn court.

TWENTY-EIGHT
 
Parvati’s tapasya
 
How does a yogin immersed in the atman know that spring in dangerous
color has come clandestinely to his hermitage in the mountains? I was lost to the
world, so I did not smell the flowers that burst into bloom on the mango and
asoka trees around me. While the mountain folk for leagues around, kinnaras,
gandharvas and vidyadharas, were all in rut from the potent season arrived so
suddenly, water lilies humming with giddy bees, koyals cooing madly to each
other, the moonlight conniving with these to make love irresistible, the scented
breeze blowing yearnings of separated lovers and nothing else, through the long
nights, even the stones of the earth quickened, I sat inured to that untimely and
frantic spring.
I had no warning of Kama’s arrival. The mango blossom arrow was ready
in his hand. Kama, thief of hearts, enchanting the world on his way, hid himself
in some bushes near my grove of absorption. At first, he saw no lacuna in my
dhyana through which he could pierce me with his flowery barb. He waited. At
dawn, Uma came to the tapovana, with Vasantha, Spring, bewitched by her,
trailing her like her shadow!
Kama trembled to see her beauty. At her approach, my meditation grew
shallow by instinct; my breathing grew more frequent, more human. She plucked
the unnatural spring’s wildflowers, wove them into her hair and came and stood
before me. I became aware of her scent and with it the scents of the strange
season and, puzzled, began to open my eyes. At the ambiguous moment, the
Love God, hidden in the shrubbery with Rati, shot me through the heart with his
subtle shaft. He stayed there, concealed, to see if he had found his mark.
At first, I felt nothing; nothing was new. Parvati made her offering of fruit
and flowers to me. Her eyes averted, but straying to me time and again, she
began to wipe my body with a cloth warmed over the fire. Suddenly, I felt a
surge in my loins like a bolt of lightning, a shock of desire I had not known since
Sati died. I was overwhelmed. She saw what I felt, clearly in my lap. She gave a
moan, the true import of which she hardly realised herself.
I began to babble! "Is this your face or the moon fallen to the earth? Your
lips are sweeter than the bimba; the koyal has stolen your voice. Ah, is this your

waist or an altar for me to sacrifice myself?"
If I felt like this just looking at her, what would it be to touch her? Before I
could stop myself I reached out and pulled her down into my lap, thrust my hand
into her clothes and fondled a perfect, virgin breast. But when I tried to kiss her,
she drew away from me and in horror, I saw what I was doing. I leapt up and
away from her. I roared, "Who dares disturb my tapasya?"
From the corner of my eye, I saw Kama aim another flowery arrow at me.
I glared open the eye in my forehead, the third one. A fire leapt from it, burning
up Kama’s puny missile in flight. Curling and hissing, that fire climbed into the
sky. It blazed briefly everywhere and then, like a dreadful misfortune, fell down
to the earth again. In a wink, Kama was a mound of ashes.
Uma gave a strangled cry and fled; with a scream, Rati fell senseless in the
bushes. When the fire had found its mark and beautiful Kama became ashes, the
eye in my brow blinked shut again. With a growl, I stalked out of the accursed
grove.
The devas, who had watched all this from the safety of their heights, flew
down to Rati’s side and revived her. She kicked her legs and pulled her hair; she
beat her breast and shrieked. She was ugly, demented by grief.
"Kama, Kama my life, why did you come here? I told you Siva was
dangerous. How long did your enchantment last over that terrible heart? A
moment! And you are dead. What will I do? O wretched Devas, you sent my
love to his death."
She screamed until Indra gathered Kama’s ashes in an urn and said sternly
to her, "It is Brahma’s curse being fulfilled. Keep these ashes carefully: Siva
himself will return your husband to you alive. The time of the curse’s end has
almost come."
After an age, though I could not have said why, I now went back to
Kailasa and the devas came there.
"O Sankara, Kama came to you because we sent him. He came though he
knew he was in mortal peril. Rati is inconsolable and, Siva, what will the worlds
do without Kama? Love will die."
I said heavily, "You should have come to me yourselves about Taraka. I
would have helped you. You chose to use deceit. What has been done cannot be
retrieved; but during Krishna’s life on earth, Kama will be born as the Blue God
and Rukmini’s son and he shall be called Pradyumna. Rati will also be born
then: in the house of the asura Sambara. And in that life, Rati and Kama will find
each other again."
Having promised to return his life to Kama, I grew quiet. The fire from my
brow still consumed earth and sky. It was made of the flames of the dissolution

and after it ashed Kama, it devoured everything it found. Brahma confronted that
fire, raging through his creation. He mastered it and made it burn gently, though
now it would burn forever. He gave that quenchless agni the form of a
candescent mare and led her to the ocean. Varuna came ashore, where Brahma
stood with the beast of flames and he folded his lucent hands to the Pitama.
"Lord of worlds, command me."
Brahma said, "This is the fire of Siva’s anger, made of the flames of the
end of all things. I have tamed it, but it must feed until time stops. Lord of rivers,
only you can contain this fire until the time of the end."
The Ocean led the flaming animal away below his waves. There in the
deeps, feeding on submarine currents, that dreadful agni blazes, red and gold,
until the day Brahma returns to loose it again upon creation, at the hour of the
Apocalypse.
 
When the fire sprang from my eye there was thunder, as if the sky had
been riven. On his mountain throne, Himavan heard it and trembled. Just then,
Parvati came running to him in panic: frightened and sobbing. She had seen me
walk away from Gangavartana. Himalaya took his daughter onto his lap and
called Mena to console her. Uma was inconsolable. Over and over, she cried,
"Oh, I am doomed. I curse my beauty; it is in vain. I am doomed, doomed,
doomed."
She thought of the days she served me in the sacred grove and called my
name ceaselessly. She did not know that she was being tested. I wonder if I
knew properly myself what was afoot; I remember thinking that I had escaped
disaster by the breadth of a wish. I shuddered to remember the moments when I
lost control of myself. Uma suffered terribly, she thought she might never see
me again.
Then, timely as always, Narada arrived in Himavan’s city. Going straight
to Parvati, he said, "Uma, there is only one way for you: worship Siva with a
tapasya."
Hope sparked in her desolate spirit. She cried, "Omniscient Rishi, kindly
Narada, give me a mantra with which to worship him."
And Narada first taught her the mantra of five syllables. Uma sent her
sakhis, Jaya and Vijaya, to her father. They said to the mountain, "Lord, Parvati
wants to make her body, her beauty and her family fruitful. Allow her to go to
the tapovana."
Himachala said, "If her mother agrees, I am content."
Jaya and Vijaya went to Mena, "Parvati wants to do a penance in the forest
to win Siva for her husband. Her father agrees, but bids her seek your consent."

Mena said nothing, but she did not seem pleased. The next morning,
Parvati came to her mother. "Mother, I am going to the tapovana to worship
Siva. Give me your blessing."
Stifling a sob, Mena said, "Oh Parvati, you are so unhappy! Do tapasya if
you must, my child, but do it here at home. All the Murtis are here, all the
temples. What did you gain when you left home the last time? It is unheard of: a
young girl going to sit in tapasya."
Uma would not relent. At last, though she wept, Mena had to give in to her
daughter. The moment her mother gave her consent, Parvati’s face lit up; she set
out with a few companions for the grove of penance. She no longer wore a
princess’ finery, but tree-bark, deerskin and a girdle of munja grass. She came to
Gangavartana. When she saw the deserted ridge, she bit her lip and cried softly,
"Oh, Siva."
Controlling herself quickly and more determined than ever, she began her
tapasya. She swept the ground as she used to; she built her own altar in that
place. Around the shrine, she planted sacred trees, shrubs and flowering plants
and made a proper asrama of it. Then, what a tapasya she began.
In summer, she built a fire around herself and sat at its heart. In the
monsoon, she sat exposed to lashing torrents of rain and hail. In winter, she dug
a ditch and filled it with freezing water, which often turned to ice. In this she sat,
chanting Namah Sivayah under her breath without a moment’s break, day and
night, ignoring snowfall and blizzard. She focused her mind on me, so I felt
every moment of her worship, in thrall. She ate only fruit the first year of her
tapasya, only leaves during the second and finally she ate nothing at all: she
sustained herself just on my mantra.
When she stopped eating, the devas, who watched her worship fondly and
in hope, called her Aparna, the unequalled one. Uma stood on one leg for three
thousand years, motionless, with her face turned to the sky. Her hair grew wild
and matted. The thought came to her one day, "Isn’t Siva aware of my tapasya?
Why doesn’t he come to me?"
Her time had not come. On she stood, chanting Namah Sivayah, Namah
Sivayah, until the devas and the rishis marvelled at this fiercest of all penances.
It was even greater than Tarakasura’s. The celestials came to stand near her.
They said, "No tapasya has ever been as like this one and none shall ever be."
Her consummate dhyana continued, while its grace subverted nature
around her. Deer and lion came to her asrama and lay side by side, witnesses to
her tidal peace, sharing in its swell. The trees and shrubs she once planted grew
into a tangled vana around her. Whatever the season, those trees were never
bare, or her plants without flowers. They called that place of Uma’s matchless

worship Sringitirtha and later, Gauri Shikahara.
Himachala came to the tapovana with Mena and Uma’s brothers. Shocked
when he saw her, her father cried, "Don’t torture yourself anymore, no one is
worth this. Precious child, you cannot catch the moon in the sky. How will he
who burnt the God of love to ashes, ever come in love to you?"
Mena wept when she saw the state in which her daughter was. Her
brothers were dismayed: Uma’s inhuman tapasya seemed to be in vain. With a
wan smile, which broke their hearts, she said quietly to them, "I will fetch him to
me in this very place from where he went. I will bring him back with my bhakti."
Then she said no more, but shut her eyes again and by the tiny movements
of her lips and her throat, they knew she called her love again endlessly, Namah
Sivayah, Namah Sivayah. Grief-stricken and helpless, Himachala, Mena and
the others went back to their city, so empty now that Parvati, who was its soul,
was away. Though they may not have known it clearly, their every moment was
a prayer for their daughter.
After her parents’ visit, Uma’s tapasya became even more fervid. It
brought a mystic heat to the worlds, it scorched everyone: the prajapatis, the
guhyakas, the asuras, yakshas, kinnaras, charanas, siddhas, sadhyas, the nagas
and the vidyadharas. Parvati’s tapasya paled the splendor of their divine bodies.
The devas fled to golden Mount Sumeru, to Brahma.
"Pitama, what strange fire is this that cannot be seen? It scathes all the
universe."
Brahma took them to Vishnu, who lay on the Serpent upon infinite waters,
to find a cure for Parvati’s searing penance. Blue Vishnu said, "Let us go to Siva,
I think it is time."
The devas demurred. "We dare not go near him, look what he did to
Kama."
Laughing, Hari said I would not harm them. They went first to Parvati’s
asrama. They saw her body exuding in waves the refulgence that heated creation.
They bowed to her as she sat unmoving; they prostrated themselves and then
they came to Kailasa.
The devas would not come near me. Vishnu and Brahma, who
remembered the last time they had come on a similar mission, would not either.
Narada was the only one not afraid and they sent him into the cave where I sat
among my ganas. The others stood outside at what they thought was a safe
remove.
"Obeisance to Siva, obeisance to Kamaghna! Obeisance to the skin-clad
Lord, obeisance to three-eyed Mahadeva. Obeisance to Ghora the terrible, who
else can make an end to our misery?" said Narada, smiling at Nandin at the door.

Nandin came smiling in to me. "Lord Vishnu and Brahma, all the devas
and siddhas are here to see you. But they are not sure if you will see them and
wait outside."
I motioned to him to show them in. They came into the cave, shining. I
embraced them all and I could feel their relief at finding me affable, after what
had happened to Kama.
Hari said, "Siva, only a son of yours can kill Taraka. Himachala’s daughter
Parvati was born to be your wife and her tapasya to you fires the three worlds.
Save us, Sankara: from Taraka’s tyranny and Uma’s tapasya!"
Keeping my face grave, I said, "It was from Brahma’s ancient curse that
Kama was made ashes. If I take Uma for my wife, Kama will live again. Though
he shall be formless until Krishna is born into the world, his spirit will make
creation lustful once more and ruin the tapasya of the worlds. I have cleared all
your paths to moksha by burning Kamadeva. I am a yogin; you should not ask
me to marry Parvati. Men bound with shackles of iron can free themselves, but
where is the escape from the bonds of women?"
I shut my eyes on them and gently, on a slow breeze of the spirit, I drifted
into the tracklessness of the atman. In one voice, they cried to me, "Sambhu,
only you can save us! Siva, don’t desert us in our crisis."
I thought they had begged enough and waited long enough; truth to tell, so
had I. I was desperate for Parvati: I yearned for her more than she did for me. I
longed for her nearness, her love as deep as the ocean of Brahman. As if I was
doing them a great service and making the profoundest sacrifice, I said wearily
to the Gods, "Very well, I will consider what you have said. But first, we must
test Parvati’s bhakti sternly. All of you know what happened the last time I
married at your insistence."

TWENTY-NINE
 
The Jatila and the Sunartaka
 
Even I, who am always a yogin, marvelled at her tapasya. It was so
passionate, immaculate, that I was distracted from my own dhyana. How can any
God ignore such worship? And now, though our time had come, I must, as
Vishnu observed, proceed cautiously. I thought of the Saptarishi and Marichi,
Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishta stood beaming before me
that I had summoned them. "Lord of Gods, Ocean of mercy, we are blessed that
you thought of us. Command us, we are your slaves."
I laughed, I fear, as I often do at their earnestness. More kindly, I said, "O
perfectly wise ones, my benefactors all! Parvati sits in tapasya at Gauri
Shikahara to make me her husband. Go and test her resolve, use all your
considerable wit."
They went to where Uma stood motionless, her dhyana streaming from her
like flares from a sun. When they came near, she welcomed them serenely.
Vasishta said, "Parvati, for what is your tapasya?"
Uma smiled bashfully and replied, "Rishis, you will laugh if I tell you."
They insisted. "You must tell us."
She said, "At Narada’s bidding, I am chanting Siva’s name so he will
become my husband."
The rishis laughed raucously. Kratu said, "Your tapasya is at Narada’s
bidding? Don’t you know he is a prankster? Haven’t you heard how he became
an eternal wanderer? Daksha cursed Narada when he sent his brother’s sons to
discover the ends of the universe. An enterprise not unlike your own! I can
understand a tapasya to win anyone else for a husband. But Siva! The yogin has
no feelings. He is filthy, shameless and naked, of no pedigree, ugly and
surrounded by ghouls and goblins. What a dreadful bridegroom he would make a
beautiful child like you. Ah, Parvati, Narada has cheated you."
Atri chimed in, "Even if Siva were to marry you, don’t you know what
happened to Sati? He abandoned her in a few months, sent her back to her father.
He is a solitary. He is after moksha, what will he do with you?"
For good measure, Vasishta added, "Vishnu is the husband for you. How
handsome he is and such a lover. Narayana will make you happy."

They all said, "Don’t be obstinate, Uma, we will get you married to Hari."
Parvati laughed softly and said with dignity, "By your light and wisdom,
Munis, you speak truly. But remember I am a mountain’s daughter and my
obstinacy is congenital. Undoubtedly, Vishnu is wonderful: but he is not for me.
Not if the sun rose in the west, not if Mount Meru moved from his place, not if
Agni grew cold as ice, or the lotus bloomed out of a rock, will I change my
mind. Brahmarishis, if Siva does not marry me I will remain a virgin."
The rishis came back to me and said Uma was the purest of the pure and if
I did not believe them, I should test her devotion for myself. So I must; I went to
her for the first time since she began her tapasya. But I did not go as myself. For
a last examination of her intentions, I went to her asrama in the guise of a Jatila.
I assumed an old brahmana’s form, bright, with a round shining face, jata and
leaning on a staff and carrying an umbrella as old and worn as my disguise, I
went to Uma.
She was before me at last and I swore I would not let her away again.
When she saw the splendid brahmachari, she came out to meet him with every
ceremony. She felt a special affection for this saint, she could not tell why.
When she had made the Jatila comfortable in her asrama, she said, "Who are
you, Master, who light up my tapovana?"
Knitting my brows, as if she was the strangest thing I had ever seen, I said
in the Jatila’s voice, "I am just an old brahmana who roams the world trying to
help anyone I can. But who are you, perfect young woman? Who is your father,
which is your family? Isn’t it perverse for an obviously blessed young woman
like you to be a tapasvin at your time of life? Has your husband left you?"
Then, after a brief pause to drink in her beauty, "But you are not an
ordinary young woman. Tell me, who are you? Lakshmi! No? Saraswati, then?"
She laughed and then told me all about herself: she felt she must, though
she did not know why. "I am not Lakshmi or Saraswati, Jatila. I am Himachala’s
daughter Parvati. I was once Daksha’s daughter Sati and I was someone’s wife.
But when my father mocked my husband, I killed myself to be born of a nobler
blood. In this life, too, my love came to me. Then, by my misfortune, he blazed
Kama to ashes with fire from his eye and went away. I came to the holy river to
worship him and bring him back."
She stopped and bit her lip. The smile faded from her face and there was
such sorrow in its place. Then, she smiled bravely again. "But my tapasya has
failed, Jatila. He is not pleased with me. When you arrived, I was about to make
myself ashes in the yagna fire. Now that you are here you can watch me and tell
the world my story. I will be born a million times and for a million lives woo
him with worship: if that is what it takes to win him!"

The Jatila lunged forward to stop her, but she had walked into the fire and
it raged over her head. With a hiss, the flames died around her. The Jatila
laughed, "You are an extraordinary young woman! Your tapasya is powerful
enough to extinguish a fire, but your desire remains unfulfilled. Who do you
pray for to be your husband? In whose name do you forsake unearthly beauty
like yours and deprave your young life where it does not belong? Your penance
is such that you could have any of the devas, even Vishnu I should think. Tell
me, tell me: for I am a bestower of boons. I make the strangest wishes come
true."
Despairing for her mistress, her sakhi Vijaya said, "She wants Siva for her
husband."
The Jatila jumped as if a scorpion had stung him; he howled in surprise.
He wagged his finger at Vijaya and began to laugh, "Ah, you joke with an old
man."
Parvati broke in, "There is no joke, Jatila, what she says is true."
He stared at her for a long moment; then, with a sigh, he rose, shaking his
head sadly. The Jatila said, "I must leave."
Parvati cried, "You must help me, Muni!"
He said grimly, "Having heard what your tapasya is for, I have no use for
your further friendship. I must be on my way."
He began to walk away, but in desperation and she could not have said
why, Uma fell at his feet. "Kindly Rishi, help me, you are my last hope!"
The Jatila sighed again and raised her up. "Very well. Since you stop me
with bhakti, I will stay. Since you ask me so humbly, I will speak. I know Siva
better than anyone does. He is not a normal man. He has a bull on his banner and
that bull is all he has. What is more, he does not care that he is so. You smear
your tender body with sandal paste; he coats his with ashes from the burning
ghat. You wear fine silks; he wears an elephant’s hide when he does wear
anything. You adorn yourself with gold and jewels; he drapes himself with
serpents. He has no education, no guru, why, he has no origin, or parents that
anyone knows of.
He has ten arms, Parvati and hideous bhutas and pretas are his only friends
apart from the bull. He eats anything, including meat of any kind. He has three
eyes and venom in his throat. You wear a necklace of pearls, he wears one of
skulls..."
As he went on, the Jatila’s tirade grew more spiteful. Suddenly, as if his
words had pierced her like the barbs of battle, Parvati stopped her ears with her
hands and him with an angry cry. "Wretch! Why did I honour you? You are
worthy of killing. You dare speak like this of Siva, the origin of the universe.

Siva who gave the Vedas to Vishnu as prana at the beginning of the kalpa, Siva
who is the father of Prakriti, Siva in whom everything is auspicious, Siva the
changeless, Siva from whose body the devas collect the fallen ashes to wear on
their heads, Siva whose mere name confers moksha, Siva the formless and of
endless forms! Don’t you know, you fool, that speaking ill of Siva will ruin all
the punya you have?"
The Jatila opened his mouth to speak, but Parvati screamed, "Vijaya, stop
the brahmana or he will say more! Let no one talk to the fool. Come, let us
leave: to stay here will be to court death."
She turned away, but I caught the sleeve of her garment. Vijaya and the
others gasped, because I was the Jatila no more, but myself again. Uma still had
her face turned from me. She cried, "Let me go!"
I said, "Where will you go without me?"
Hearing the change in my voice, she turned. Such an unforgettable smile
broke on her wan face. Gazing into her eyes, I said, "I will not let you go now. I
am your slave by your tapasya, by your beauty. Every moment with you is as
deep as a yuga. Tell me what you want, you can have anything from me. Parvati,
come with me to Kailasa, let us have no more pretence between us. Ask for your
vara!"
She smiled and said, "You be my Vara."
I took her hand. I wanted her, at once, as I had never wanted anything. But
she said, "Siva, you and I were husband and wife once before. But my father
Daksha did not worship the planets at our wedding and there was a tragic defect
in our marriage. Let no flaw ruin our love now. Go to my father Himalaya and
beg me for your wife. Siva, let this be for ever."
I knew she was right, this time everything must be perfect. And it was little
enough to ask after the merciless way in which I had tried her. I went back to
Kailasa to tell Nandin and the others what had happened. I went with my heart
singing: there was no one in creation as happy as I was.
 
After her years of tapasya, Uma came home and what a welcome she had
from her parents and her brothers. With a huge entourage, the whole city turned
out, Himavan and Mena went to the gates of Aushadipura to receive their
daughter. Earth and sky echoed with Mainaka and the others shouting ‘Jaya!’ as
they danced in the streets. The sacred water-pot stood in the main highway,
adorned with aguru, sandal, musk, incense and branches of fruit trees. On
elephants came the high priests, with dancing girls weaving graceful rhythms
around them; all the mountain people came, carrying a million lamps of their
joy. The brahmanas chanted Vedic mantras, conches boomed through that city

and music like an ocean swelled from vinas, nadaswarams and every other
instrument. The roll of drums was endless thunder.
When she saw her daughter, Mena ran to her with a cry and clasped her in
her arms, kissing her repeatedly. She stroked her hair and hugged her as if to
press Uma back into her body so she would never leave again. She gave her up
only when Himavan took her from her mother’s arms and embraced her himself,
sobbing like a great child. They set Parvati in a shining chariot and drove her in
triumph through Aushadipura. The heralds cried, "You are the saviour of your
family: Uma of the incredible deed!"
They showered her with petals and not all of them were from flowers of
the earth. The devas had congregated above in their vimanas, Uma was their
hope and saviour too. The ones of light rained down unworldly blooms, they
sang Parvati’s praises when she came home. Their songs echoed in heaven and
apsaras danced on fleecy cloud platforms. Uma’s sisters-in-law gave her the
ritual bath after her triumphant tapasya, washing away the dirt of years. Himavan
declared a celebration and he went to the Ganga to purify himself for the
ceremony.
Such a feast Himalaya held in his capital when his daughter Kaali came
home. I missed her so much that I decided to attend the extravaganza. Why
waste any more time, I thought, when the task on hand was auspicious? Being a
dancer myself, I went singing and dancing to the mountain’s court, while he was
still at the river. I held a blowing horn in my left hand and a dumaru in my right.
I wore a bright crimson sash round my waist and a leather wallet at my back.
Not knowing me and light-headed for joy, Mena cried, "Sunartaka, come
dance for us!"
My dumaru burst into life. I sang for them, I took their breath away with
my dancing: they had never seen such nritya! All Aushadipura gathered round
me, entranced, Mena as well. They were quiet when I danced my little tandava,
as if they had seen it before, but could not tell where. I danced the Beginning, I
danced the End and I danced the dance between; because, of course, I am
Nataraja, always a dancer. But they did not know me; none except Parvati, who
fell senseless. She saw the Dance beyond my dancing. She alone saw the dancer
as he truly was and ancient ecstasy overwhelmed Uma.
Mena brought a golden urn full of the rarest jewels to offer the Sunartaka
of genius. I danced on. She said, "Don’t you see the alms I’ve brought for you,
Sunartaka? Or don’t you know their value?"
I stopped dancing. I said, "These baubles are not the alms I came for. My
dance, lady, is not cheap."
Mena laughed tolerantly. She said before the crowd, "I am happy today,

because my daughter has come back to me. Sunartaka, tell me what you want as
alms and it shall be yours."
My dumaru chattered a starry rhythm. I sang again, I danced again. I sang
to the mountain’s wife, "Lady, it is your daughter I want as alms."
Silence fell, louder than the noises of the crowd, louder than my dumaru
and my song. Mena’s face grew dark, she cried, "Throw him out at once!"
As they hustled me towards the city gates, Himavan returned from his bath
in the Ganga. Mena was beside herself at the Sunartaka’s impertinence. She told
her husband what had happened: how Parvati had fainted and been carried to her
chambers, how the knavish dancer had asked for Uma as his alms. Himalaya
favoured me with a formidable glare. He thundered, "Throw the upstart out!"
But suddenly, the dancer was too hot for the mountain’s guards to hold: his
body burned their hands. Now, Himachala and his wife saw before them not the
gyrating Sunartaka, but the cosmic forms of Brahma, five-faced and red,
intoning the original Veda; and Mahavishnu, four-armed and blue; and Surya,
eye of the universe. They saw Rudra and, at his side already, their daughter
Uma! Then, they saw me formless, Nirguna and then again just the dancer,
begging for their daughter as alms. As great bhakti swept over the mountain
couple, the Sunartaka vanished, without their guards having to throw him out of
the gates of Aushadipura. Only the resonant chatter of the dumaru still echoed in
their minds.
Himachala and Mena cried together, "It was Siva!"
 
Bhakti grew in them like a storm. The devas said, "If Himalaya gives his
daughter to Siva with such devotion, he will have moksha and disappear from
the land of Bharata. The earth will not be ratnagarbha anymore, for the rarest,
most precious jewels in the world are formed only in Himavan."
The devas went to Brihaspati, their guru. "Master, you must see that
Himavan gives his daughter to Siva with some reservation. Or he will attain
Sivaloka and the earth will be without treasures."
Brihaspati was furious at the suggestion. He shut his ears with his palms
and cried, "Of all the created, you devas are the most selfish. If I disparage Siva
to Himavan I will find hell for myself." Then, since he was their guru, he said,
"Go to Brahma, he might help you."
Brahma said to them, "I will not risk my life. But why don’t you go to Siva
and ask him to help you? After all, to slander oneself is not sinful but
praiseworthy."
They came to Kailasa, all Indra’s folk of light. "Siva, Ocean of mercy,
Saviour of your devotees! Rudra, destroyer of misery, if Himavan gives Parvati

to you with such devotion, he will leave the world by your grace. And the earth
will be without her most precious jewels."
I had to smile at their forthright self-seeking. I said, "How shall I help
you?"
Hands folded and shrewd enough to see I was so pleased that he was in no
danger, Indra said, "Lord, no one will disparage you to the mountain. We beg
you to do it yourself."
How could I refuse? I blessed them a little doubtfully and then sought out
Himalaya, who was in his court with Mena and Uma. Helping the devas with
their curious problem would take me near Parvati again, which is where I
yearned to be since I had vanished from her father’s gates. I went again
Aushadipura, whose air was crisp and its cedars fragrant. Now I went as a
brahmana, with a staff and a parasol, wearing fine silk, a shining white tilaka on
my forehead, a string of crystal beads in my hands and a shaligrama stone hung
from my neck. I went chanting, ‘Narayana, Narayana, Narayana.’
Himavan rose to welcome me. He made the customary offering of
madhuparka: honey, butter and sugar, curd and water. Uma saw through the
brahmana at once; she smiled and was quiet. She thought I had come to ask for
her hand, or she was just glad to see me. Himalaya said, "Tell us who you are,
great Muni."
I said, "I am a Vishnubhakta and a scholar. I am itinerant and my work is
of a matchmaker."
Mena’s eyes shone with interest, as any mother’s might at the mention of
that vocation. I continued grandly, "I go where I will, I go everywhere. With my
guru’s blessing, I am omniscient. I am a simple man, O Mountain and I help the
needy: that is why I have come to your court."
Himavan’s brow wrinkled. I could almost hear his thought: ‘Perhaps I can
send this brahmana to Siva as my messenger.’
Now, staring straight at Uma, who looked shyly down at the floor, the
brahmana said, "I heard you mean to give your tender, lotus-like daughter to
Siva and I came here in amazement. How can you even think of such a match?
Siva has no friends, he is deformed, he has no qualities, he lives in a cemetery,
he looks like a snake charmer, he is naked half the time: a yogin, no householder
he! Haven’t you heard what he did with his first wife? He is homeless; no one
knows his age. Have you seen his filthy jata and the snakes around his neck and
his ghosts and goblins? How can you think of this flower of a child with that
heretic who mocks the Vedic path? How can you dream of giving this jewel of a
young woman to Siva who cannot boast of a single relative? Himalaya, people
will laugh at you. If you don’t believe what I say ask any of your own relatives,

except your daughter who I fear is touched in the head."
For a moment, the brahmana stood glaring defiantly at the court of the
mountain. Then, as if there could be no retort to the truths he had told, he turned
on his heel and walked out. Mena ran crying from the sabha. Himalaya followed
her into their apartment, where his wife wept in shuddering sobs.
"I will not give my daughter to Siva!" she howled. "I will die first, or I will
tie her to me with a rope and go into the deepest jungle. I will drown myself."
She pulled her hair, snapped her necklace and shrieked. She lay wailing on
the floor. The brahmana’s work had been well done. Poor Himavan stood
wringing his hands and the delight of the devas in heaven was boundless.
But what about me? After the Vishnubhakta’s tirade, the mountain and his
Mena would certainly not agree to let Uma marry me. I needed respectable help
to restore my prospects. I invoked my friends, the Saptarishi, again and they
stood goggling before me that I had summoned them twice in such a short time.
"Sadasiva, a vision of you is sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, a child
to the barren. Standing before you today, all our tapasya is fruitful. We are your
slaves, Sankara: command us and we will serve you gratefully."
I saw they were nervous, lest I ask them to do something dangerous for
me. I said, "Greatest among rishis! I want Parvati for my wife, but for the devas’
sake, I prejudiced her parents’ minds against myself. You seven must go to
Aushadipura and remedy this."
Prostrating, saying how honoured they were to be of service, they flew off
to the mountain’s city, where they had not been before. I hoped they outranked
the Vishnubhakta sufficiently to change Mena’s mind.
By the aerial paths, skyways of light, the Saptarishi came to Aushadipura.
They saw the streets paved with jewels and great slabs of rock from the sun and
the moon and gemstones from the navagraha. They marvelled that the lakes and
gardens of that city were finer than those in Indra’s Amravati were. They
wondered that the men of this place were nobler than devas and their women like
apsaras among the glowing trees that grew here. They said to each other, "No
wonder they say that men are eager to attain devaloka only as long as they do not
see Aushadipura on earth."
"If indeed this place is on earth."
When Himachala saw the shining seven fly down the heavenly airway, he
ran out to welcome them. The Saptarishi descended on Himachala’s capital in
style sufficient to awe the people: they stepped straight out of the sky. The
mountain fell at their feet; they raised him up and embraced him. After the
rituals of welcome, the sages were shown to exalted places in Himalaya’s court.
The august mountain said, "I am blessed that you have come here,

Maharishis. Perfect ones, tell your servant what task you have for me."
Vasishta said gravely, "Mountain, Siva is the father of the universe and
your daughter Uma is its mother. When you give Sivaa to Siva, you will become
the most venerable person in creation. Do not delay."
His voice quavering, Himachala said, "I have long cherished this desire
myself, Rishis, nothing has been dearer to my heart. But less than a week ago, a
saintly Vishnubhakta came to my court and spoke damagingly of Siva. Since
then, my wife is like a woman who has lost her mind. I fear nothing will induce
her to give our Kaali to Siva. Mena has shut herself in the krodhagraha, the
chamber of anger and remains there without bathing or eating."
He paused then and looked guiltily down at the floor. Impelled by the
Saptarishi’s piercing gazes, he confessed sadly, "Amsas of Vishnu, I too am
loath to give my Parvati to a mendicant."
Silence fell. Then, the rishis who had wisely thought of bringing
Vasishta’s peerless wife, Arundhati, with them, sent her to speak to Mena. In the
chamber of sorrow, Mena lay coiled in grief. Parvati sat consoling her, stricken
herself, but faithful and brave. Arundhati placed a hand on Mena’s brow. She
said, "Mena, arise. The Saptarishi have come to your house, as have I,
Arundhati."
Surprised, Mena rose and bowed to the muni’s wife, who was as radiant in
that dim chamber as Lakshmi. Arundhati said, "Mena, you do not know the
devas begged Siva to have a son to kill Tarakasura. Brahma and Vishnu
implored him, but he said that only if his Sati returned would he marry again.
You also worshipped the Devi asking her to be born as your daughter to become
Siva’s wife. Then Uma sat in her tapasya like the worlds have never seen and
Siva came to her and gave her his word that he would be her husband. Mena,
why do you want to forsake destiny now?"
Mena trembled. She said, "Siva is a lone man. He has no wealth, he is not
royal, only a sannyasi. How can I give my Parvati to such a one?"
Arundhati put an arm around her. Vasishta’s gracious wife said, "How can
Siva be poor, when Kubera is his servant? Yet, how can Siva, who is the
beginning, the middle and the end of all things, be merely a king, or judged as
one? Mena, this is not an ordinary man, that you can judge him by the standards
of the world. It is of Sadasiva, who dwells in all of us, of God Almighty, that we
speak."
Just hearing these words, by the other woman’s tone, or because the time
had come and the stars in heaven softened her from that moment, Mena’s doubts
melted like darkness at dawn. She came out from the chamber of anger with
Arundhati and a radiant Uma.

But in Himalaya’s hall, the mountain was not convinced that he should
have Siva for his son-in-law. Then, Vasishta told the tale of Aranya in that court,
Aranya who would not give his daughter Padma to Pippalada, who was once an
avatara of Rudra.

THIRTY
 
Preparations for a wedding
 
Vasishta said, "Once, in another dim kalpa, the Asura Vritra repeatedly
routed Indra and the devas in battle. As always, they went to Brahma for
consolation and advice.
Brahma said to them, ‘Tvashtar created this Vritra to test you devas and
the Demon has Siva’s blessing. Once, Dadichi performed a tapasya and Siva
blessed him with bones of adamant. If you ask Dadichi for his bones, he will not
refuse and if you make yourselves weapons from those bones, you will vanquish
Vritrasura.’
The devas went to Dadichi’s asrama where the rishi lived with his wife
Survacha. When he saw them coming, Dadichi sent Survacha into the dwelling,
because he already knew and did not want her to hear, what they had come for.
He made the celestials welcome and, bowing low, Indra said piteously, "We
cannot defeat Tvashtar’s Demon. Brahma says Vritra can only be killed with
weapons made from your bones. Help us, Dadichi, or we perish."
Dadichi gave up his body for the devas. He ashed himself with Siva’s
name on his lips and, absolved of all his karma, attained Brahmaloka. Indra
called Surabhi, the divine cow, to lick up the marrow from the rishi’s bones.
Then, from Dadichi’s adamantine backbone, Viswakarman fashioned a
thunderbolt called the Vajra, a bow and quiver of arrows for Indra and the
inexorable astra Brahmasiras. The bones of Dadichi shone like Siva himself and
Indra lopped off Vritra’s head with his Vajra of a thousand jagged joints.
When Survacha came out of her home, she found her husband’s smoking
remains. She cursed the devas, who by then had left the asrama, "Selfish and
manipulative Devas, I curse you to become beasts one day!"
She built a pyre for herself with dry branches from the forest; she wanted
to be with her husband. As she was about enter the flames, a disembodied voice
spoke to her. "Survacha, you are with child and Rudra himself will be born from
your womb. Brahma’s law is that a pregnant woman shall not commit sati."
Survacha cut her belly open with a sharp stone and saw a baby inside who
lit up the world with his lustre. Survacha bowed to her son, she said, "O Siva,
stay under this pipal tree and let me go to my Dadichi in heaven."

She yoked the yogic fire upon herself and escaped the mortal coil. Vishnu
and Brahma came to that tree, which was the resplendent infant’s father now.
The gandharvas and slant-eyed kinnaras, the devas and apsaras came there, with
prayer, song and dance. Brahma named the child Pippalada: the son of the pipal
tree. The holy child sat in tapasya for a lifetime at the foot of the ancient tree.
The great king Aranya, a Sivabhakta, ruled the seven continents. O
Himalaya, O Mena, he too had a hundred sons and just one daughter called
Padma, who was an amsa of Durga; and he loved her more dearly than his sons.
The girl grew into an exquisite young woman and Aranya sent word through his
vast lands to find a suitable bridegroom for his daughter.
Pippalada, the tapasvin, who lived in the vana with his foster-father, the
pipal tree, was now an old man. One day, he was walking alone in the jungle
when he had an earthy revelation. In a grove of mango trees, for the first time in
his life, he saw a gandharva and a vetali making love. The gandharva was a
master of the erotic art and Pippalada stood hidden while, in piquant posture
after posture, the lucent Elf embraced the dark forest woman who had captured
his fancy. The innocent incarnation watched them, spellbound by the
gandharva’s thrusting, the woman’s enraptured cries, as her fingers raked her
lover’s back. Pippalada stood transfixed and destiny called out to him in a new
and carnal voice.
No more could the son of the tree pursue his dhyana. His innocence was
ruined; now he wanted a woman himself. The bright gandharva and his dusky
mistress haunted his waking and sleep. Pippalada heard that woman panting in
his ear; he saw her arched back supported by the lustful gandharva’s hand; he
saw the sweat shining on her black skin: and he could not sleep. But the images
of the vetali were to be soon replaced by dreams of another.
In these same days, of his heart’s tempest, Pippalada once went to the river
Puspabhadra to bathe. There he saw Aranya’s daughter, Padma, bathing naked.
He was struck by love’s vajra. Pippalada approached the princess’ sakhis, "Who
is this girl?"
Afraid of the wild old sage, lest he curse them, Padma’s companions
replied, "She is Padma, the daughter of Aranya, Emperor of the seven
continents."
Pippalada decided Padma was the woman for him. He prayed to Siva,
bathed in the river and arrived in Aranya’s court as if to seek alms. When he saw
the strange ascetic, the king was seized by inexplicable reverence; he offered the
visitor madhuparka and worshipped him. When Aranya asked the rishi what he
could offer him as alms, Pippalada replied coolly, "Your daughter Padma."
Aranya was too shocked to respond. Eyes on fire, Pippalada said softly, "If

you don’t give her to me at once, arrogant Kshatriya, I will burn your sabha to
ashes."
Aranya’s five queens fainted. There was an uproar in his court: surely,
they cried, this old brahmana is not the groom for our princess. The king
summoned his guru and his priest. They took one look at Pippalada and, bowing
low to the visitor, pronounced, "Padma will not find a better husband in the three
worlds."
Aranya was the unhappiest man on earth, but he had to yield. He adorned
his daughter in finery and jewels and gave her, brilliant and enchanting, to
Pippalada. His heart broken, Aranya relinquished his kingdom and went away to
the wilderness to sit in tapasya. Padma’s mother died of sorrow when her child
and her husband both left her. Aranya’s son Kirtiman ruled wisely over his
father’s kingdom and his family flourished for a hundred generations. Finally,
Aranya, who sat worshipping Siva, saw in a dazzling vision who it really was his
daughter had married. And he found peace and Sivaloka."
 
Vasishta’s tale was so close to Himavan and Mena’s lives. The mountain
said to his kinsmen, "O Meru, Sahya, Gandhamadana, Mandara, Mainaka,
Vindhya, consider what I should do now. Consider well, for Uma is as much
your child as she is mine."
Arundhati said quietly, "And if you do not give her freely to Siva, she will
go to him anyway. For in his every birth, she is born to be his wife."
The mountains said, "Uma is born for Siva and to Siva she must be given."
A weight lifted from Himachala’s heart and when Mena also nodded her
assent, he smiled like the sun breaking from behind grim clouds. The mountain
bowed to the Saptarishi and Mena went in to the royal kitchen to prepare a feast
for them and to end her own fast. Himavan said, "Deep in my heart I have
always known that everything I own belongs to Siva; but time deluded me.
August Rishis, find an auspicious lagna and muhurta for the wedding."
The rishis smeared the mountain’s moustache with turmeric and saffron.
Happily, they said, "Himalaya, Siva is the mendicant, you are the almsgiver and
Parvati is the alms. You and yours shall be blessed for ever."
They blessed a radiant Parvati, whose tapasya seemed finally to be over.
"Be pleasing to Siva and like the moon waxing your beauty and your virtue will
increase."
The Saptarishi came back to me, beaming. They announced, "Lord,
prepare for the wedding."
I said honestly, "Tell me about a wedding, for I have forgotten."
They laughed. Kratu said, "Let Vishnu and his people, Brahma and his

sons, Indra and his devas, all the rishis, the gandharvas, kinnaras, yakshas,
siddhas, vidyadharas, apsaras and nagas be part of your train, immortal Siva.
They will tell you about weddings better than we can."
 
Meanwhile, in a brighter mood than he had known since the
Vishnubhakta’s visit, Himalaya called his priest Garga and asked him to write
me a formal letter of betrothal. He sent the letter to Kailasa with some of his
people, along with the customary gifts. They brought me homage and marked
my brow with the vermilion tilaka. I received them with honour and made them
welcome as any groom might his bride-to-be’s relatives. I was enjoying this and,
most important, all of it had an auspicious air.
Himalaya was pleased when his messengers returned and told him how
gracefully they had been received and how warmly his letter taken. He sent out
invitations to his relatives, informing them of the wedding date. In right earnest
now, Himavan prepared himself for the ceremony and the feast. Hills of rice,
beaten rice and jaggery, sugar sweets and salt were heaped in Aushadipura.
Vessels big as hillocks were made for milk and ghee, barley cakes, sugarcane
juice, butter and spirits, several of these. Pickles and dishes of meat were cooked
for my ganas and for some others too! The cooks were superb and they worked
night and day. There were a hundred different kinds of rice, not to speak of other
delicacies. It was the feast to end all feasts.
They collected the most breathtaking jewellery for Parvati: everything she
had ever been given and some priceless new ornaments besides. That most
auspicious morning, they bathed her in milk, the brahmana women of
Aushadipura, clad in finery, dripping gold and rubies and diamonds  this was the
day of days. Such rituals, such celebrations in the cities of the mountain; when
the time came, it seemed both Himavan and his wife had no reservation left. In
fact, their joy was deeper than it had ever been. The mood of bhakti was upon
them again, the condition the devas feared would bestow moksha on Himalaya.
Yes, Himalaya at least had no doubts anymore.
A few days before the event, the guests began to arrive with their retinues
of wives, children and attendants. Mandara, chief of mountains, came in a divine
form, towering and refulgent, golden-winged, bearing undreamed-of jewels for
the bride and her family. Asta and Udaya came, sunset and sunrise Mountains,
from west and east, with glittering gifts. Malaya came from the south, brilliant;
Dardura and Nishada came with attendant peaks, bringing treasures for the bride.
Gandhamadana came, fragrant and radiant, with his exotic family; Karavira and
Mahendra came and Pariyatra and Krauncha with a retinue of peaks.
Purushottama, Nila, Trikuta, Chitrakuta, Venkata, Srigiri, Gokamukha and

Narada came; Vindhya, with treasures; Kalanjara and sacred Kailasa came and
distant, unheard-of mountains from the seven continents, whom Himachala had
invited. Awesome and august, colourful and strange, they came to Parvati’s
wedding in Bharata Varsha.
The great rivers came, embodied and lucent, to Uma’s wedding.
Sonabhadra was there, rippling; wave-bodied Godavari; dark Yamuna; wise
Saraswati; crystal Ganga wearing ineffable ornaments, ravishing Goddess; and
Narmada, bewitching. So vast were the pandals, their canopies hid the sun above
the city. So colourful were the banners and flags over Aushadipura, they
shimmered from afar like galaxies.
The roads of that city were swept and washed with care: even like the
inside of a home. At every door, plantain stumps were tied with silken cords,
festooned with mango flowers and draped with wild jasmine garlands.
Viswakarman himself was called to create the dais, which some said was ten
thousand yojanas wide. And within that marvellous pandal was everything in
creation, high and low, mobile and unmoving: magically replicated in miniature
by the supernal artisan. There were lions; there were storks and peacocks. In
places, the experts could not tell where water was and where solid ground.
Viswakarman’s models were hardly short of Brahma’s creation.
The make-believe apsaras danced with barely unreal men, enchanting
them. No one could tell by looking at them, or even by touching them, whether
they were living or not. At the entrances were fierce dwarapalakas with bows in
their hands, fitted with arrows. There were elephants with their mahouts, horses
with bright riders, chariots and foot soldiers: all unreal, all lifelike. Mahalakshmi
at the main entrance was perfect, so she seemed to have risen just then from the
Kshirasagara. Beyond her, Nandin looked more himself than the real Nandin
who was with me on Kailasa. Above the dais of mythic size, flew a pushpaka
vimana, ship of heaven, all the devas in it.
Viswakarman had replicated everyone important with his art. He had made
the lokapalas in the sky with secret jewels of power shining in their hands, Indra
mounted on Airavata, Bhrigu and the rishis, Mahavishnu himself,
Anantasayanam and Brahma Pitama with the Vedas in his hands, surrounded by
his sons the first munis.
For the devas and the others, Viswakarman wrought miraculous environs
in Aushadipura. For Brahma there were seven shimmering palaces, for Hari
there was a Vaikunta, for me a Sivaloka, so like the original one, with
evanescent mansions that were always subtly changing their forms. There were
palaces for all the others, as well: made for them individually so each one would
be in familiar surroundings. Nothing like Himachala’s new city for his guests, it

was no less than a city, had ever been built in this world. Amidst abandoned
festivity, they waited eagerly for the bridegroom and his party to arrive.
 
When I received the letter of betrothal from the mountain, confirming a
date for the wedding, I had it read aloud in my assembly of ganas. I feted
Himavan’s messengers and cried, "Everything is auspicious: the date, the time
and the woman. I accept the proposal of marriage, you shall all come to my
wedding!"
Then I called Narada to share my joy and he materialised smiling on
Kailasa as soon as I thought of him. I embraced the muni when he prostrated at
my feet. I said happily, "Narada, I am a slave to Uma’s bhakti. In seven days, I
will marry her in her father’s city."
He cried, "Dearest Lord, I am your servant: command me!"
"Maharishi, on my behalf, invite all the devas, from Hari down; invite the
rishis, the siddhas and the rest. Tell them to come with their women, children
and their families to Kailasa for a celebration. Tell them those that do not come
are no longer my people, whether they are gods or not."
He went abroad by the wondrous airways, that lightning traveller and
made the invitations himself. Then he came back to Kailasa and stayed near me
until the day of moment. Vishnu was the first to arrive; he came as soon as he
heard the news. Soon, the others began to pour in, in grandeur. Everyone came,
save poor Kama.
The apsaras danced for us, the gandharvas sang and we drank and smoked
ganja from earthen chillums. For two days, we revelled without pause, when
Vishnu declared, "It is time to leave. We must be early for the celebrations in
Aushadipura."
I put on my best face and they said every feature of mine was an ornament.
I did not want to disappoint Uma or her parents. The seven mothers of heaven
dressed me up for the occasion, as if I was their son. Soma was my crown, silver
streak in my jata. The eye in my brow became a gemstone; my serpents turned
themselves into jewelled earrings and necklaces. The ashes on my body were
sweet unguents, my old elephant-hide from the Demon Gajasura transformed
itself into a magnificent silken garment, worthy of a bridegroom like me. When
they saw me ready for the journey, of no return, they sighed. The devas cried,
"Sadasiva, bless us!"
I was pleased. Vishnu said, "Siva, let every ritual be performed
meticulously by the laws of the grahya sutras: so this time there is no error."
I agreed happily, "So be it."
With Vishnu at my elbow, I sat before Kashyapa, Atri, Vasishta, Gautama,

Bhaguri, Brihaspati, Kanva, Shakti, Vasishta’s eldest son Jamadagni, Parasara,
Markandeya, Silapaka, Arunapaala, Akritasrama, Agastya, Chyvana, Garga,
Silada, Dadichi, Upamanyu, Bharadvaja, Akritavrana, Pippalada, Kaushika,
Kautsa, Vyasa and others. They performed the rituals that were auspicious to our
departure, carefully propitiating the pitrs and the navagraha many times. They
recited hymns from the Rik, the Yajus and Saaman; they worshipped the devas
in the Nandimukha altar I had created. Then, with those brahmanas and the
devas in our van and I mounted on Nandin, we set out.
Around me the gana armies swarmed, a great and weird sea flowing across
the world. Shankhakarna had a thousand ganas, Kekaraksha ten thousand more
and so on. A thousand such mighty gana generals marched: Vikrata, Visakha,
Parijata, Sarvantaka, Vikritanana, Dundubha, Kapala, Sandaraka, Kanduka,
Kundaka, Vistambha, Avesana, Mahakesa, Kunda, Parvataka, Chandratapana,
Kaala, Kaalaka, Mahakaala, Agnika, Agnimukha, Aditymurdha, Ghanavaha,
Sannaha, Kumuda, Amogha, Kokila, Nila, Purnabhadra and all the others.
At least a million bhutas went with the train and as many pramathas.
Virabhadra was there with countless ganas and romajas. Bhairava the
kshetrapala was there, with his strange and beautiful hordes. They were
thousand-handed; their hair dreadlocks, their bodies pale with holy ashes, fiery
with burning jewels in profusion. It was an exotic army and a glorious one; for
my ganas were, in their way, as illustrious as Vishnu and Brahma’s people were.
Some of them were of the earth, some had come up through the patalas and
others down through the seven swargas, from realms deep in the sky. They were
all there, every one from every world.
Chandi was there riding on a ghost, in festive mood, but terrifying all those
around her. She wore writhing snakes as ornaments; she carried a golden water
pot on her head; her face was twisted and clear, her eyes drunken and dazzling.
The others shrank from her when she cried out her jubilation in a ringing voice
and her macabre complement of bhutas echoed her cries.
Hari and Lakshmi were resplendent on Garuda and Brahma on his Goose
surrounded by the Vedas, the Shastras, the Puranas and the Agamas, personified.
The prajapatis and the siddhas were with us and Indra on Airavata with Sachi: all
of these among their irradiant hosts. I too, I am told, was luminous on Nandin.
Led by their master, Tumburu, the gandharvas sang and danced. The
chatter of dumarus, the jhankaaras of beris and the tumult of dundubhis
reverberated through the world. Ahead of us, also and at our sides, went the
shakinis, yatudhanas, vetalas, brahmarakshasas, Kubera’s vina vidwans, Haha
and Huhu and broad streams of elven gandharvas and kinnara centaurs. The
mothers of the universe and heaven’s virgins went before us when I rode to

Aushadipura to marry Parvati, with a procession like a river of the sun, flowing
over the earth.
When we had gone some way, Vishnu sent Narada ahead to Himachala.
When Himalaya heard of our approach, he came to his gates and looked down at
the tide that flowed up the mountain towards his city. Indra was worried when
Narada came back and told us about Viswakarman’s great hall of maaya, with
the lifelike statues of the devas. The old enemy of mountains, who had sheared
their wings of yore, was afraid to enter the city. Vishnu laughed at his fear,
"They dare not attack us, it is no more than a loving tease."
But I was not calm either. I said impatiently, "What have I to do with
statues? Does or doesn’t he mean to give Uma to me?"
But then, Himavan was among us, bowing and welcoming us into his city.

THIRTY-ONE
 
In Aushadipura
 
Mena came out on to her terrace and perhaps she was not quite convinced
about giving her daughter to me. She said to Narada, the insider everywhere,
"Let me see the bridegroom. Let me see the face and the form for which my
child spent all those years in tapasya."
I divined her thought and said to Vishnu and Brahma, "Go with the devas
to the mountain’s threshold. I will follow you."
They cast sharp glances at me, but went ahead. Mena was overwhelmed
when she saw the glittering multitude that was my marriage procession. At its
head marched the fastidious and handsome gandharvas, exotically attired,
playing rapturously on their instruments. Bright flags flapped on their chariots,
the delectable apsaras rode with them. Seeing Prabhasa, the lord of the vasus,
who came after the gandharvas, Mena gasped and some of the wedding guests
looked up to her terrace and waved. She whispered to Narada, "That is Siva."
Narada smiled, "That is not Siva, only his attendant."
Mena’s eyes grew wide, "Siva is greater than him?"
She saw Manigriva, lord of the yakshas. She grasped Narada’s arm and
cried, "Here he is."
Narada smiled, "This is only a servant of Siva’s, lady."
Agni, twice as illustrious as Manigriva, passed below. She exulted, "Siva!"
"No."
Yama went by and now Mena was certain. "Here he is surely, Maharishi."
"Only a servitor, Devi."
Nirriti, lord of the puyajanas, brighter than Yama, came along. Mena
looked at Narada, but he shook his head. Varuna came and passed; Mena’s eyes
grew rounder and rounder. As she plumbed her ignorance. Vayu went by, then
Kubera, lord of the guhyakas and then Indra himself, magnificent, mounted on
Airavata. Beside herself, digging her fingers into Narada’s arm, Mena cried,
"This is Rudra, O Muni!"
Narada replied that it was not. Soma came, lambent and relucent Surya;
and before Mena could ask her question, the rishi shook his head. Mena was a
little frightened by the time she saw Brahma. She whispered, "Siva?"

Narada said no. Then, four-armed Hari arrived, blue as a forest lotus,
wearing resonant yellow silk, mounted on Garuda. In his hands were the
Panchajanya and the Sudarshana, the Kaumodaki and the Saringa, the precious
Srivatsa curled on his breast, next to the blood red Kaustubha. He was so
awesome Mena almost swooned when she saw him and Narada answered her
silent query, no, this was not Siva yet.
Narada said, "That is Vishnu. Devi, I cannot describe Siva, except to say
that he is more glorious than Hari."
Mena’s face shone, now she was satisfied. She said, "Uma’s husband is the
Lord of these lords of light? We are blessed!"
At that moment, I arrived below her terrace with my ganas, bhutas and
pretas; and we had assumed shapes and forms that would not please the lady
Mena at all. Some ganas were hissing, flag-waving gusts of wind; some had
twisted faces, others deformed bodies. The hideous features of many were
overgrown with beards more ragged than the visages they covered. Some had no
faces at all; others had five and ten. Some were blind, some eyeless; some had
ten and twelve eyes, staring everywhere, from all parts of their heads. Some
were lame, some carried staffs and twirled nooses and others carried crude iron
clubs. They came playing on horns, dumarus and gomukhas, amidst the coarsest,
most abusive shouting, howling and yodelling. Narada said softly to Mena,
"Here are Siva’s ganas and here is the Lord himself."
She screamed just once when she saw me, then fainted: not from any
surfeit of glory, but shock. She saw me five-faced, with three eyes on every face,
glaring dementedly in different directions. I rode the snorting bull, was ash-
coated and filthy, with an unwashed peak of jata piled on my head, the crescent
moon hiding there. I was ten-handed, with a skull in one hand, the bow Pinaka in
another and the Trisula in yet another. She saw me clad in tiger-skin and
elephant-hide, bestial and hump-backed, grinning, crying out weirdly with the
worst of the ganas: hardly the groom for her daughter!
Mena came to her senses. While her anxious sakhis gathered around her,
she screamed at Narada, "Wicked Rishi, you have tricked me. Is that deformed
beast the fruit of Uma’s tapasya? The Vishnubhakta was right: I am ruined. Oh,
where are those perfidious Saptarishi and that treacherous Arundhati? Let me
avenge myself on them. Stupid Parvati, what have you got with your penance?
Our clan is doomed. Let Himavan not come near me. Oh, why didn’t I abort
Uma before she was born? Why didn’t demons devour her in the forest? I will
cut your head off myself, wretched girl."
She fainted again. What an outcry there was: the devas gathered round her
and the rishis. Brahma also came. Slowly, Mena’s eyes fluttered open. Narada

said gently, "It is only Siva’s jest, Devi. You must not be upset."
Pushing him away, she cried, "Get away from me, vile Rishi, scoundrel get
away!"
The devas said, smiling, "Rudra is only teasing you."
She wailed, "Why have all of you conspired to make my child’s beauty
futile? Didn’t you see the face of the monster who has come to marry her?"
The Saptarishi said to Mena, "Just a glance of Siva is the highest blessing.
And he has come to your city as a suitor himself."
Mena howled. She hissed at them, "Get away from me, all of you. I would
rather kill Uma than give her to Siva."
She lay on the ground, kicking her legs, beating her breast and screaming.
Himalaya arrived there and, with no great confidence, because he knew his
wife’s obduracy, said, "This is not the first time he has come here in a strange
form. Have you forgotten the Sunartaka?"
Suddenly, she grew deadly quiet. In a low voice, she said to her husband,
"Listen to me, Himalaya. Bind Parvati and cast her into the deepest chasm, I am
content. Take her to the ocean and drown her, I am content. But give her to Siva
and I will kill myself."
Now Parvati, who had been silent all this while, cried, "Mother, this is
Siva you speak of, who is the source of life. This is Mahadeva of infinite forms,
whom you curse. If he were what you now think he is, would all these rishis and
devas, Brahma and Mahavishnu, have come in his train for his wedding?"
Mena howled as if each word was an arrow in her flesh. She seized her
daughter and began to flail at her. Gnashing her teeth, rolling her eyes and
growling, Mena was a woman possessed. "Evil child, I will poison you or drown
you in a well. I will cut you into little pieces. You have brought shame on the
whole family."
Brahma separated the mother from her daughter. He said, "You do not
know Siva’s true form. Give your Uma to him and see him as he really is."
Mena spat on the ground. She told Brahma, "Why don’t you kill her
yourself?"
Then Vishnu came and raised Mena to her feet. Just seeing him, his grace
so powerful, she softened. Putting his arm around her, but his import clear, Hari
said, "Mena, you belong to Brahma’s family: do not abandon your virtue. You
do not know Siva. He is formless and primal and everything that exists came
from him. He is hideous and beautiful and beyond understanding; not Brahma or
I has fathomed him. Accept him, Mena, he is the final Truth who has come to
marry your daughter."
Mena, who was in awe of Vishnu, looked down at the ground. Her hysteria

left her and she said in a low voice, "Only if he comes in a fair form will I give
Uma to him."
Hari sent Narada to me with this message: could I assume a pleasing face
and body? Such a sigh went up in the streets of Aushadipura when I did. Narada
prostrated with tears in his eyes when he saw me. There was amazing grace and
light in that city and, I confess, it flowed from me. I raised Narada up and went
with him to my mother-in-law to be. Though she stood at splendid Vishnu’s
side, her mouth fell open when she saw me and a smile broke out on her teary
face. In a whisper, Mena said, "Siva, great indeed must have been my Uma’s
tapasya that you have blessed us by coming to our city. Oh Sankara, forgive
me!"
She fell at my feet. Content now, her last doubts allayed, Mena went into
the antapura with her women. When I came to her door, she gladly performed
the nirajana, the waving of lamps, with the other women and the rishis. I heard
them whisper among themselves on that most auspicious day.
"His face has the hue of the champaka."
"Look at his smile."
"The third eye sleeps on his brow."
"The malati flowers on him shine so brightly."
"Though she loves him, Uma couldn’t describe him adequately."
"His face is like a thousand moons."
"In all time, there has never been such a bridegroom."
"Parvati is blessed."
The gandharvas set up their wonderful songs and now Mena sang with
them: praises of the groom! The apsaras wove their lissom bodies in and out of
the music, dancing subtle, colourful truths around us. Then, the maids brought
out the bride, in finery, to worship the family Deity. She transfixed us with her
beauty. She stood before us, black as night and perfect: every exquisite limb
shimmering with ornaments such as no bride had ever worn. She gazed
unwinkingly into my face; not for a moment did she look anywhere else.
Her hair hung below her waist in a thick plait. She wore the crimson tilaka
with musk and saffron. Her ears sparkled with diamonds, her neck shone with
deep rubies, her arms with emeralds and pearls. Smeared from head to foot with
aguru, musk, sandal and saffron, her body was painted with fine lines of many
colours. Her lips were painted with lac as red as the soles of her feet. In her hand
was a lotus of a thousand petals, unworldly.
Golden anklets tinkling, Uma came out and stood among us. I dare not
look at her directly: even when I glanced at her from the corner of my eye, every
hair on my body stood on end. The blood pounded in me like a sea and I feared I

would lose control of myself from just being near her. It was she again, surely, I
knew her from another time. Then, my eyes were no longer mine to rule: they
swivelled of their own accord and locked gazes with hers; I thought I would faint
from the surge of love I felt. With a small smile, she bowed deeply to me and
now she went outside the city to pray to the Goddess who was the family Deity,
the Devi she was herself! Willessly, I turned to watch her go. With a laugh,
Vishnu took my hand and led me away.
Himalaya showed us to our apartments. We had barely settled ourselves,
when it was time for the tying of the sacred thread. Mena’s tantrum had delayed
proceedings and the muhurta was upon us. As is proper, the thread ceremony
took place in the groom’s dwelling, amidst the deep and moving chant of Vedic
hymns. That day everything was auspicious, all was perfect. I gave Parvati a new
set of clothes and the women in our party bathed her and anointed her with
golden sandal-paste. She put on the new clothes and was lovelier than ever.
Whenever I looked at her my blood seemed to catch fire. She was irresistible in
her coat of jewels.
At the thread ceremony, the bride and groom exchanged gold, ornaments
and other gifts in profusion. The two marriage parties embraced each other,
burying old animosities, forging new ties of friendship. Garga, master astrologer,
came in and said to Himavan, "The stars are in place. It is time you brought Siva
to your palace for the wedding."
I went in for my ritual bath. When that was over, they clothed me in fine
silks and hoisted me onto Nandin’s back. Shouting, singing and dancing in the
streets, though not vulgarly now, we went to the palace of the mountain with his
kinsmen who had come to escort us. I remained as calm as I could, while my
mind blazed to think of her and I could barely keep from trembling.
The earth was red with vermilion, flung up in clouds by the milling crowds
we walked through. They held the royal parasol above me as I walked; they
fanned me with pearl-handled whisks. Vishnu, Indra and Brahma walked before
me, through the sea-calls of deep conches. Nearer the palace, the apsaras and
Himavan’s dancing girls shimmered lattices of movement through the music and
one another. When we reached the palace, Himalaya himself received us. Taking
my hand graciously, he helped me off Nandin’s back and bowing to us all, he
waved a lamp before me in nirajana.
Himachala offered us padya and arghya. He ushered us affectionately into
his palace, where he seated everyone in jewelled seats in the quadrangle of the
ceremony. His great face beamed; his cup of joy brimmed over. A little round-
eyed still, Mena came with her lamp for nirajana and a host of her sakhis and the
wives and virgins of Aushadipura offered us holy water from the Ganga and

madhuparka. The Omkara echoed unceasingly in the background, swelling as the
time of the muhurta drew near. They led Parvati in and made her sit at the
southern altar.
Brahma and Vishnu, at my sides, led me to her and the women began their
lusty ululation. Brihaspati and the devas raised shouts of ‘Jaya!’ Garga sat by the
ghatika, the water clock next to the altar. At the appropriate moment, he chanted
the punyaha mantras and, scooping up a handful of rice grains, gave it to Parvati.
As he told her to, she poured the grains over my head. She stared at me and I
longed to take her in my arms right there.
Lakshmi and Saraswati came with lamps to offer nirajana and, one by one,
all the devas’ wives and the rishis’ women. Then, everyone came to bless us in
the great enclosure. Garga indicated it was time to begin. Carrying the golden
vessel between them, Himavan and Mena came to us with the priest. Prompted
by Garga, the mountain offered me water, clothes, ornaments that I would
probably never wear, chandana and everything else proper to the occasion.
Garga announced, "The hour is here. Let the ceremony begin with the tithi
being proclaimed."
In unison, all the brahmanas called out the tithi. It was time for the
gotrochchara and, carried away by the moment, Himavan cried to me, "Siva, let
us hear your ancestry, your name and your Veda."
There was stunned silence. At once, Narada began to strum fluidly on his
vina. Himavan turned on him in some annoyance, "Please desist, Muni."
Narada played on, he sang,
"Not Vishnu and Brahma know aught of Siva’s gotra,
Then what can be said of the rest?
 
Brahma did not find the head of the linga,
Mahavishnu did not find its root,
This is the Brahman you ask for his gotra,
Who has no beginning or end!
 
Think, O father, before you speak,
What it is you ask,
Not Vishnu or Brahma knows of Siva’s gotra,
What can be said of the rest?
 
AUM is Siva’s only gotra, O Himalaya. He is the Naada."
I saw Himavan’s face, which had clouded for a moment, clear. He bowed
to me, uncanny delight shining in his eyes. It is not easy to give one’s daughter

away, especially if she is Uma. His voice quivering, Himavan said, "Siva, I give
this Uma, my daughter, to you to be your wife. O Lord of all things, be pleased
to accept her. Tasmai Rudraaya Mahate."
He took her small hand and placed it in mine. The tides of her sea coursed
through me and I felt her also quiver at my touch. As bravely as I could, when
my body and soul were on fire, I intoned, "Kamasya Kodat."
I heard Vishnu and Brahma crying, "Jaya!"
With a shout, the gandharvas broke into song again. In soft frenzy, the
apsaras streamed in and began to dance ecstatic celebration. Now, grace flooded
Himavan and Mena and they began to hymn me with slokas from the Yajurveda.
I sat there, silent, holding her hand and she climbed into my soul through that
touch and made her home there. From some distant mandala, chanting my
thousand names, her parents sprinkled water from the holy rivers, brought here
in leaves of ancestral trees, over their Uma and me.

THIRTY-TWO
 
After the vows
 
It was evening, when Brahma concluded the rites. After the sprinkling of
holy water, we went to the threshold and watched Dhruva, the North Star, appear
just for us in the twilight sky. I put my arm around her in hridayalambana,
placing my fingers over her heart, then and forever. They sat us together on a
cushion and I marked her hair with vermilion. Finally, I handed the purnapaatra
full of rice grains to Brahma to signify that the ceremony was complete. I made
the gift of a cow to him, since he had been the priest when we walked in
pradakshina around the Vedic fire. Vishnu blessed us and there were more
shouts of ‘Jaya! Jaya!’ Gandharva music swelled around us in delirium.
The time drew near when, at last, we would be alone together. Just now, it
was the time of the women. The women of Aushadipura led Uma and me to the
chamber where we were to spend the night. Viswakarman had created that room
in an image of Sivaloka; jewelled lamps illumined it softly. Giggling, blushing
and jostling, the women undid the granthibandana, the knot with which they had
tied our garments together when the ceremony began. When they withdrew,
ululating suggestively, sixteen ladies of heaven came smiling into the room.
They made me sit on a crystal throne, as I am not accustomed to and, as is
customary, began to tease me with some ribaldry.
Saraswati said, "I hope you have not forgotten your skills at love, Siva. We
used to peer down from swarga in wonder at everything you did. Look at her:
she longs for us to be gone so she can wrap you in her arms!"
Laughing, Lakshmi said, "Don’t sit so far from her, Sankara. Don’t you
see she would wrap more than merely her arms around you?"
Savitri: "Here, feed her this sweet from your mouth."
Jahnavi: "Stroke her hair, Siva, touch her."
Aditi: "Give them water and betel leaves to make their mouths fresh. I
doubt they will stop with hair-stroking!"
Sachi: "Why so shy now, Sambhu? Have you forgotten how you ranged
the earth like a madman when you lost her?"
Lopamudra: "Spice his betel, Uma."
Arundhati: "If not for me, Mena would not have given her to you. Now for

my sake, love her till she is satisfied."
Ahalya: "Forget your age, O Eldest, this is a night for youth."
Tulasi: "You should not have burnt poor Kama. He would have helped you
tonight."
Svaha: "She has a dharma towards him now, much sweeter than tapasya."
Rohini: "Above him, below him and at his side! Siva, can you satisfy all
that penance?"
Vasudhara: "Knower of everything, do you know what she wants tonight?"
Satarupa: "She is hungry, Siva; feed her well."
Samjna: "Come, let us make the bed and leave them."
In rejoinder, which was expected of the groom, affecting shock I cried, "O
my mothers, how can you speak like this to your son?"
They froze for an instant; then, smiling, I fed Parvati a sweet from my
mouth as they had told me to. Those divine women went out laughing and
slammed the door shut loudly. At once, with no hesitation or shyness, Uma put
her arms around my neck: as if it was the most natural thing for her to initiate
our loving. As if she was taking up where we had left off in another life, she
drew me to her and gave me a silken kiss, warm enough to melt the glaciers
around us. Light as she was, I picked her up and set her on my lap. We drank
from each other as if we had been thirsty since the stars began. Then, she pulled
away, with a hundred fluttering kisses more. Whispering in my ear so her breath
played there, "I won’t be long," she went into the next room.
There was a low knock on the door, locked not from within but outside. I
called dreamily, "Enter."
The door opened and, her head bent, lovely, unhappy Rati stood in the
doorway. She waited in silence. I said gently, "Speak, Rati, I have time to hear
you."
She looked into my face without fear and said, "The worlds rejoice at your
marriage, Siva, but not I. You know what it is to separated from your love; you
know my pain. Lord, only when my Kama lives again will your own loving be
complete. Until then, something precious will seem missing from the joys of
your bed."
She walked into the room and laid an urn at my feet, with Kama’s ashes in
it. Tears flowing down her face, she said, "Lord, revive my Kama, only he ever
meant anything to me."
I glanced at the urn and, handsome as ever, despite having been ashes for a
time, Kama stood forth from death and prostrated at my feet. Rati gave a cry and
fell on her husband, kissing his face, his eyes and his lips. Then she too was at
my feet, bathing them in tears, crying, "Siva, Ocean of mercy, bless us for ever!"

Still dazed after having been dead, a chastened Kama stood up when I laid
my hand on his head. His voice faltering, he said, "Forgive me, Siva, for what I
did."
I replied, "This form of yours is not whole, Kama. Stay only in Vishnu’s
realm, until the end of the Dwapara yuga when Krishna is born into the world.
At that time, you will be born as his son Pradyumna and you, Rati, as Mayavati.
Then, all your powers will return to you and you shall range the worlds again.
As for Uma and I, Rati, we are beyond needing Kama’s enchantment. We were
lovers before he was made."
There was rejoicing outside when Kama emerged with Rati. Changed now
into fresh clothes and ornaments, Uma came back to me. As we reached for each
other, Himavan and Mena knocked on the door to call us to the feast in
Viswakarman’s hall.
Those creations were certainly lifelike. What a sight it was: Vishnu and
Brahma, the devas and maharishis at food, like any marriage guests, talking and
laughing together and also, everywhere around, their lifelike replicas, gazing
down silently. The cosmic artist had made even Chandi’s ganas so perfectly,
more than one blithe gandharva recoiled from that corner of the great hall.
Came the time for music and dance and we sat drinking together, feasting
our eyes and ears until the sun appeared on the horizon, touching the vistas of ice
and snow in vibrant pink and gold, in unearthly violet. Parvati never for a
moment left my side and her hand remained in mine, alive with our love. At
dawn, I said it was time to sleep and rose to leave that assembly where few were
still awake and those that were yawned.
Vishnu and Brahma followed me out and the women of Aushadipura led
us again to our bedchamber. When they shut the door, as is the custom they
shouted the foulest barrage of obscenities I have ever heard, language one would
hardly credit chaste women with knowing. But they sang out their stuff with
such verve, laughing coarsely as fishwives. At last, they went away, their filth
fading merrily down the corridor.
Uma turned to me with a moan she had contained for a life. Blindly, my
hands were upon her, our tongues entwined like mating serpents. Ignoring the
bed of flowers so carefully made for us, we fell on to the floor. Tearing away
each other’s clothes, crying out like beasts of the jungle in rut, we did not care if
all Aushadipura heard us.
For four days, she and I did not stir out of those rooms.
 
On the fifth day, they came to fetch us out to perform the chaturthikarma.
All of us stayed on in Aushadipura. Himavan would not let us leave; though, it

was his daughter he was loath to part from. Vishnu stayed with Lakshmi,
Brahma with Saraswati and I with Uma. The devas remained there, all the others
and Himalaya’s hospitality was memorable. But the long nights were just Uma’s
and mine and none so pleased about this as the devas: they still had Tarakasura
on their minds.
But at last, it was time we went home over glass glacier and snow-filled
valley to Kailasa. One morning, because Uma could not bring herself to, I went
to Himavan and Mena to tell them that we were leaving. In silence and with
dignity, the mountain heard me out. Then he fell at my feet and said only, "Bless
me, Siva."
I picked him up, embraced him and blessed him. Great Himachala was as
loving a father-in-law as anyone could wish for. At noon, with fanfare, Brahma,
Vishnu, the devas and the ganas going with us, seated together for the first time
on caparisoned Nandin, Uma and I set out on the white, majestic journey to
lonely Kailasa: holiest mountain.
At the gates of Aushadipura, Mena suddenly took my hand and cried,
"Merciful Lord, look after my Parvati, forgive a thousand faults in her. In every
birth, she is your bhaktaa; but in this one, she is also my daughter. So, pardon me
for what I say, out of love for her and my ignorance of you. Conqueror of death,
when she just hears your name she goes into an ecstasy; if anyone censures you,
her silence is like that of the dead. Care for my child, Siva, there is no one like
her."
Mena swooned before us. When she revived, she embraced both of us for
the last time and went back into the city. We took our final leave of Himavan, so
brave and dry-eyed today. Then we set out.
 
When her tears stopped, Uma reeled off for me, in a long breath, what the
brahmana woman sent by her mother had told her was the dharma of a chaste
wife. She repeated it all at astonishing speed, in an old woman’s voice and we
went on our way laughing, the devas smiling with us.
"‘The dharma of a good wife is told in the Vedas and Smritis. She shall eat
only after her husband, sit only when he sits, sleep only when he sleeps, awaken
before him, love him without deception, never show herself unembellished
before him, never adorn herself if he is away, never say his name aloud. Even if
he scolds her or beats her, she shall say ‘Lord, you can even kill me’. When he
calls her, she will leave anything she is doing and come to him. She will not go
to other people’s houses. She shall not take her husband’s money and give it to
anyone else. She will arrange everything for the daily worship. If she wants holy
water, she will drink the water with which she has washed his feet. She shall not

spend unreasonably. she will not fast without his consent. She will not leave him
for any chore, whether he is impotent, senile, or whatever. She shall not lie with
him during her periods. She shall not show herself before him after bathing. She
will look at her husband’s face and no other’s; or thinking of him, she will look
at the Sun. She will not neglect to use turmeric, vermilion, saffron, kohl, to wear
a blouse, a necklace, plait her hair. If she wants him to live long she will never
associate with a washerwoman, a harlot, a yogini, or a fallen woman, nor speak
to any woman who disparages her husband. She shall not bathe in the nude, nor
sleep on a mortar, a threshing rod, a broom, a grinding stone, or on the threshold.
Except during sexual intercourse, she shall never show her maturity and
initiative,’ the woman said, O Siva!"
She paused just to draw a breath.
"‘She shall be delighted when her husband is delighted, dejected when he
is, even-minded in affluence and adversity. The husband is superior to Brahma,
Vishnu or Siva; to a chaste woman her husband is God, guru, dharma, Kasi and
yagna. She who is unfaithful to her husband is born as a she-owl, wasting in the
hollow of a tree. Disloyal women bring the ruin of three families: those of her
husband, her mother and her father. By her punya, the chaste woman takes those
families to heaven, wherever she goes she dispels all sins. Even the Sun, the
Moon and the Wind touch the chaste woman to sanctify themselves. The chaste
wife is the root of fortune in the household. Uma, you are the mother of the
universe and Siva is its father and I say this to you merely for convention’s
sake.’"
She spoke in one breath, ironically; but I was sure that most of what she
said appealed strongly to her and she considered it all true.
Halfway along the icy, austere way, Brahma, Vishnu and the devas bowed
to us, we to them, we embraced one another and they flew back to their own
mandalas. The ganas and their women and Uma and I riding upon Nandin went
on to Kailasa.

Karttikeya and Ganesa

THIRTY-THREE
 
Hiranyaretas
 
Nectarine waters feed the Naimisa from the foothills of the crystal
mountain. The vana has abundant fruit-and flowering-trees. Here, the rishis
worship Siva with a yagna so awesome it is like the penance of Viswarijas of
old, who wanted to create another universe by his tapasya. They sit absorbed
around the sacred fire when, suddenly, there is a mighty susurrus above their
heads. The flapping of a thousand wings, a vast swirling of airs: an intimation
that a Deva comes among them!
The holy sages open their eyes to gaze at the sky, where the clouds part to
reveal a glimmering path. Down this path, comes a God so brilliant the rishis
have to turn their faces from his splendor. Smiling, that Deva dims himself to a
bearable brightness and settles among them as a tempest contained. He raises his
unearthly face to look at them and they bow to him, the rishis prostrate
themselves. It is Vayu, the Wind, who brings them the Purana of Siva in this
kalpa.
The Deva is Akasa’s son, Brahma’s sishya, a master of prana and his
ethereal body is translucent. His voice is an airy echo of the ocean, as he says,
"Munis, I bring you the Siva Purana today, where my guru Brahma’s wheel of
fire was broken, in this sacred Naimisa."
The rishis bow again; at his sign to them, they seat themselves in a
crescent around the divine storyteller.
In his reverberant whisper, Vayu begins, "Hear from me about the love of
Siva and Uma after they reached Kailasa. Hear from me secrets you might never
hear otherwise. For these are secrets of the love of they who were once one body
and then became two before Brahma and were united again in the world.
 
Narada said to his father Brahma, ‘Tell me, Pitama, about the sport of Siva
and Parvati when they went back to Kailasa.’
Brahma said, ‘Listen then to the tale of the birth of Guha. It is sinless and
will make you free. It severs the roots of karma; it is the essence of the Vedas.
After marrying Himadri’s daughter Parvati, Siva came home to Kailasa
with his ganas. Many of those loyal ones bid farewell to their Lord, variously

and went back to the corners of the universe from which they had come. At last,
Sankara and his bride entered the cavern where they had been together last when
she was Sati. They were alone. The thoughtful ganas had strewn the bed of
feathers with fragrant petals. In the lofty-ceilinged chamber of rock and ice,
stalactite and stalagmite thrust up and down, great needles in breathtaking
sculptures: abstruse music frozen. Yet, it was not cold in that cave of
enchantment. The ice did not burn the skin or freeze the blood; but it fired the
soul.
This was no imitation of Sivaloka in Aushadipura anymore. This was the
heart of Uma’s new life: the one for which she had been born. Here she felt all
her years gone by were a dream, a shadow of what this mountain and this cave
signified. By any reckoning of love, she was satisfied by their feverish tumults in
Aushadipura, when her tide would begin as soon as he touched her and last all
night, until she would see the dawn stab the sky with soft knives of light. As
soon as she came into this privacy, she knew those frenzies were no intimations
of what would happen here.
When they were alone together, he came to her and suddenly there was
nothing human about him. Now He was only God: creator, Hiranyavarna, golden
Sustainer and destroyer of time, of all the mandalas. He was terrible God, gazing
at her out of three eyes with cosmic desire and a cry of fear welled in Uma.
Then, he took her hand and she saw her own body transformed. She too was
someone else, someone she had always been; for now she was home again. Their
fingers touched, their mouths sought each other in the love that was the source of
all things.
It was no more night or day, no longer Kailasa or the world. When, bared,
he put himself into her body and they were one again in that cave, it was not a
place among the blazing galaxies; it was home before all that. One skin, one
flesh, a single darkness and light before time was, one breath, the same eternal,
heaving calm they shared. She stoked him rapturously; the stars tumbled out
again from his mouth and the Naara flowed from him: the eternal waters that are
all times and all places, upon which, in the beginning and always, Narayana lies.
They were one body; half of him was woman and Goddess, half of her was male
and God. They were night and day at once, light and dark forever: the
Androgyne at love with Itself.
Narada, their lovemaking lasted for a yuga of a thousand years of the
heavens. Never in that rhapsodic calm did his seed flow down, but always
upwards in dhyana into the infinite lotus in his great head. But the devas were
impatient, Muni: only when a son was born to Siva, could they be free of
Taraka’s dominion. They made me their leader and we went to Vishnu.

We stood in worship before him and I said, "The love of Siva and Uma
lasts an age and we have no relief from Taraka."
Vishnu said, "The time has come and the constellations around the earth
have reached their destined places. The heavens tremble with the mating of Siva
and Parvati, yet he does not spill his seed. How will Rudra have a son unless he
emits the flaming gold of his loins? Come, let us climb Kailasa."
Faithful ganas stood guard outside the cavern with the massive stone door.
They said to us, "O Vishnu, Brahma, a kalpa has passed since Siva went into the
chamber of ice with Parvati and still they have not emerged. We do not know
what they do inside, but stand guard here, turn by turn, so they are not disturbed.
We are afraid to knock on the door."
Vishnu, who alone could take the liberty, strode past the distraught ganas.
He rapped sharply on the door and cried, "Siva, what are you doing? We have
come to seek refuge from Taraka."
The Blue God’s voice was like thunder in those silent corridors and we
were all startled to hear him. Inside the cavernous chamber, Siva snatched
himself out of Uma’s body while she still lay in her interminable swoon.
Jumping up, shivering, Siva unlocked the door. As he saw Vishnu’s smiling
face, the cold draught in the passage and awful anxiety after an age of
communion, unmanned Rudra. The fierce seed he should have ejaculated into
Kaali’s womb leapt from him and fell through the crack between door and wall:
golden and smoking on the stone floor.
In a flash, Agni became a dove and swooped to swallow the burning seed.
He was enchanted and otherwise that seed would consume the three worlds, for
it had sprung from Maheswara’s body. Parvati came naked and wailing to the
door.
"Vile Devas!" she cried, when she saw what had happened. "Despoilers of
love, you have made me a barren woman. Oh, may all of you live in misery
forever. Siva’s seed was meant for my body. Base Agni, become the devourer of
all things for swallowing what was mine!"
Seizing a rueful Siva by his hand, she stormed back to their bed, slamming
the door in our faces. She had not had enough: she wanted him again. He must
love away her torment, because he had spent himself outside her body.
Agni choked and screamed as Rudra’s hiranyaretas burned down his
throat. Before our eyes, he turned pale and golden and, gasping for breath, cried
piteously, "I cannot bear the burning of Rudra’s seed!"
Someone said, "Find a woman and leave the seed in her womb."
Agni wailed, "There is no woman but Uma that can bear Siva’s blazing
seed."

Vishnu pronounced, "You must bear it, Agni, this is Parvati’s curse."
For five thousand years, Agni bore Siva’s terrific seed. It burned his flesh,
his bones, his fat, his blood, his entrails, his seed, his skin, his hair, his beard, his
eyes and his head: all golden. And he was called Hiranyagarbha, pregnant with
the golden embryo.
Once, when he absolutely could not bear Siva’s golden semen any more,
the wives of the Saptarishi were freezing in a Himalayan winter after their
ablutions in the month of Magha. To warm themselves, they came near their
sacrificial fire. In a flash, Agni spewed out Siva’s seed and it entered their pores
with his heat. Agni vanished from there as a great flame.
Only Arundhati, who by instinct did not come too near the fire, escaped
impregnation by the fulvid retas. The rest writhed on the ground, in agony and
their bodies turned golden with Rudra’s seed, shining through them like a sun.
Their bellies became bloated and they all seemed to be in the final days of
pregnancy. When they went home, their husbands, the rishis, turned them out in
fury. Finally, Arundhati invoked Siva for them, while they screamed for release.
By Siva’s grace, they vomited his seed upon the icy Himalaya and watched in
awe as it flowed together on the ground and became a tremendous golden foetus.
In fright and relief, those rishis’ wives fled.
Himalaya bore the lucific embryo for an hour, shuddering as if he would
crumble into dust. Then with a shout like a thunderclap, he hurled the foetus into
a bank of sara reeds, which grew on the banks of the Ganga. For ten thousand
human years, the glade was refulgent with the divine embryo, the grass and
reeds, the trees, birds, animals and men for a hundred leagues around, as if the
rising sun transformed them.
In the fullness of ten thousand autumns, once, on the sixth day of the
bright half of Margasirsa, a lotus-eyed boy lay in that thicket. He had his thumb
in his mouth and he cried in a voice like thunder. In the heavens, a mysterious
dundubhi resounded, a rain of flowers fell and a current of hope surged through
the earth!
Sent by me, Brahma, Viswamitra came to that glade. He folded his hands
in wonder when he saw the glorious boy. With a laugh and in perfect ancient
speech, the child said to the rishi, "Flawless Muni, perform the rites of
purification for me from the Veda. From now, you be my priest and bless me
with your love."
Viswamitra said, "Divine child, I am not a brahmana that I may purify you
with the Vedic ritual. I am Viswamitra, the kshatriya, who was once a king."
The boy said calmly, "I say you are a Brahmarishi now, Viswamitra,
revered by Vasishta and the others. Keep this a secret and purify me."

Overcome, for to be a Brahmarishi was his life’s ambition, Viswamitra
performed the rites the boy wanted. He could not have refused that child
anything: not his life, if he had asked. When Viswamitra had gone, six stellar
goddesses, the Krittikas, flew down to the earth. They arrived near the thicket by
the river to bathe in the holy Ganga. They saw the golden aura shining ten
leagues into the air; and when they saw the splendid child, they could not
contain their love.
"Let me suckle him first!" each one cried. When he saw those foster-
mothers of his quarrelling over him, Karttikeya promptly grew six heads, one for
each Krittika and he fed at all their breasts at once. From the moment they set
eyes on him, he was dearer to them than their lives and they carried him proudly,
as their son, to their home in the sky in the Pleiades. They clothed him in
brilliant garments they made themselves and adorned him in scintillating
ornaments. And no one knew about him, for they never let him out of their sight,
never told anyone he existed. Thus, miraculous Karttikeya grew, hidden by his
six mothers, deep in the sky in Vrishabha, the constellation of Taurus.’
Brahma paused, musing, until Narada urged him, ‘Father, what happened
next?’
Shaking his white heads in wonder at Karttikeya’s childhood, the Pitama
continued. ‘After another yuga of making love in the mountain cave, Uma said
in languor to Siva, "Lord, an age ago, when Vishnu called you rudely out of my
body and my love, you spilt your seed on the ground. Agni became a dove and
pecked it up in his beak, do you remember? What happened to your hiranyaretas,
Siva, which was rightfully mine?"
Tracing the contour of her black breast with a fair finger, Rudra said, "I do
not know."
Uma said, "Siva, no one but I can bear your seed and yet I know it cannot
fail. Perhaps we have a child somewhere we do not know about. I want to know
what happened to your retas."
Siva summoned the devas and asked, "Who has hidden the seed I
ejaculated? Let him speak at once and I will not punish him."
But Vishnu said, "Let he who has concealed your virtue incur the sin of a
liar, of one who outrages the modesty of his guru’s wife."
I, Brahma, cried, "Let anyone who has hidden your sacred retas be unable
to worship you ever."
The lokapalas said, "Let him always have a pang of death in his heart."
Indra’s devas, "Let him bear the sin of the stupid man who does not keep
his own word."
The wives of the devas protested, "Let she who has hidden your

hiranyaretas lose her mother and her family. Let her incur the sin of the
debauched woman who hates her husband and fornicates with other men."
Rudra turned angrily on Dharma and the other witnesses of all things. He
thundered, "Who has hidden my unfailing seed?"
We looked at one another in alarm, for he was angry. I offered hesitantly,
"Your seed fell on the ground, I saw it."
Bhumidevi, the earth, said, "I could not bear the terrible semen. It burned
me and I cast it into the fire."
Agni said, "Becoming a dove I drank it, for it enchanted me. I bore it for
five thousand years, while all of me, even my atman, turned golden. But then I
could bear it no more and I lost the seed as heat into the rishis’ wives who
shivered upon the mountain."
The mountain said, "I could not bear your burning seed for even an hour,
O Siva and I flung it into the Ganga."
Ganga said, "Mahadeva, I too could not bear your blazing virtue. I shed it
into the bank of sara grasses."
At last, Vayu, the witness, cried, "Siva, in a great thicket beside the river
of heaven, your seed turned into a splendid boy!"
Now the story came tumbling out. Surya said, "It was twilight when I saw
the child crying and I was sinking below the western mountain. But he lit the
darkness around him even as I might, he made his own day out of night."
Soma said, "The Krittikas found the boy and took him into the sky with
them."
The waters said, "They fed him at their breasts and raised him as their
own, your son bright as a star."
The dusk said softly, "He is their nurseling in the vana in the sky. They
call him Karttikeya."
The night said, "He is dearer to them than their lives, they never let him
out of their sight. Surely, she who nourishes, owns."
The day said, "They feed him only the rarest delicacies. They clothe him in
lucent finery and adorn his body with ornaments past compare."
Siva sent his ganas, Virabhadra, Visalaksha, Sankakarna, Parakrama,
Nandiswara, Mahakaala, Vajradamshtra and others, fierce, great and haughty, to
the home of the Krittikas.
The ganas encircled that world and Nandiswara cried to Karttikeya, "Siva
sent me to fetch you. You are his son born of his seed, which the earth dropped
in the fire, the fire into the rishis’ wives, the rishis’ wives on the mountain, the
mountain in the river, which set you ashore in a thicket of sara grass. These
Krittikas brought you here in love. But you, O Lord, are Siva’s son, the light of

the universe and they hide you here as a dry tree might try to hide a fire. Siva
calls you to a sabha of the devas, you must come with us."
Karttikeya said with a smile, "They are my mothers who fed me from their
bodies and raised me. Speak no ill of them. Yet what you say is true and I will
go to my father’s sabha."
Uma sent a silver vimana to her son, who was not quite her son. Swift as
thought it was and made by Viswakarman from the light of heaven. With a heart
both heavy and excited, Karttikeya climbed into the marvellous craft. Certain
they would lose him, the grief-stricken Krittikas came wailing to the door of the
ship. They cried pitifully to him, "How do you forsake us so ruthlessly now?"
Karttikeya replied, "You must come to the earth with me, little mothers."
Bringing the Krittikas with him, Siva’s son arrived at last on Siva’s
Kailasa. He waited for his father at the foot of an ancient nyagrodha tree.
Sankhas, bheris and turiyas rang out over white valley and jutting peak when
Karttikeya came to Kailasa. All the devas, with Vishnu and I at their head and
the rishis, gandharvas, siddhas, charanas and the other mountain folk with them,
wound their way in a breathless throng to see Siva’s splendorous son.
Uma had the road to her home paved with padmaraga and other precious
stones, for Karttikeya’s arrival. She stood at her city gates to welcome the boy,
with Lakshmi, Saraswati and thirty Goddesses beside her. Rambha’s apsaras
sang and danced before him as he walked up the highway. All of us worshipped
him, the boy with the golden halo. Siva wept for joy when he saw Karttikeya and
when his son bowed to him, he picked him up and kissed the top of his head.
Uma embraced him as if he had been born not just of her love, but from her
womb as well. After the devas performed the nirajana, she spirited him off to her
apartment. She suckled him at her dark breast, which had filled with milk when
he was born in the thicket: that is why she had asked Siva to find him.
In the glittering sabha, Parvati set Karttikeya on her lap. She would not let
him away from her, even for Siva to fondle his son. But the boy, Kumara, would
not sit still. He went up to his awesome father and played fearlessly with Vasuki
who hung around Rudra’s neck. When they heard his childish, delighted
laughter, Siva and Kaali’s hearts were full. And the devas’ hearts, of course,
were full: for here finally was their deliverer.
Siva set Kumara on a crystal throne. From a hundred gem-encrusted
pitchers of water, from the earth’s sacred tirthas, the boy was given his ritual
bath. Then Vishnu crowned him with a sparkling coronet he had brought and I
invested him with the holy thread and the Veda, the Brahmastra and its mantra.
All the devas had brought gifts for Karttikeya and when Agni embraced the boy
crying "My son!" Siva declared, "As your son he shall be Mahasena and

Agneya; as Uma’s son, he is Skanda; as Ganga’s son Kumara; Karttikeya as the
Krittikas’ son and Guha as mine. As the son of the sara reeds he is Sharadvata;
six-faced, he is Shanmukha."
Agni gave Karttikeya a spear of fire, which he always carried then on.
Indra gave an Airavata-born elephant, Yama his own staff, Varuna a royal
parasol of white silk and a necklace of pearls. Surya gave him a vimana like the
one in which he had flown to Kailasa and a magical coat of mail. Soma gave him
an urn full of amrita, Kama an arrow of love and his lore. Garuda gave him his
son Chitrabrahma, Lakshmi a matchless necklace, Savitri gave him the entire
siddhavidya.
And when he could speak, Siva said, "Kumara shall be Master of the army
of the devas, the gandharvas and the kinnaras. He will kill Mahisha and Taraka
for you."
Amidst ringing cries of ‘Jaya! Jaya!’ Vishnu invested Karttikeya with
sovereignty over the universe. Then we took him down to Kurukshetra upon the
river Saraswati to build him a golden shrine. There, O Muni, Siva’s son was
made Senapati of the legions of heaven!’ said Brahma to Narada, enraptured by
the tale of that birth of births."
Vayu said so to the rishis of the Naimisa in his breathy voice. While he
spoke, sometimes they saw him and at others, he was only a voice, a swirling
whisper in their souls.

THIRTY-FOUR
 
The battle by the sea
 
The rishis of the Naimisa wait in silence for Vayu to continue. Sighing like
an autumn breeze through trees nearly bare, the Wind God slowly resumes.
Wistful for those times of ancient grandeur, he says, "Narada never tires of the
Purana, finding fresh wonder in it each time, finding it a different tale with every
telling. And the rishi was comforted as he listened to the sacred narration. He
was free from the mad itch on the soles of his feet and the burning impatience in
his heart, which always cried to him, ‘Move on, Narada, there is much to be
done elsewhere.’
Brahma said to Narada, ‘At Vishnu’s command, Viswakarman created a
wonderful city near Kailasa for Siva’s son, Kumara, out of the thin mountain air.
Hari himself installed the boy there on a golden throne encrusted with jewels big
as a man’s fist; and he gave Skanda the task of rescuing the universe from
Tarakasura’s tyranny.
An old brahmana wandered into Guha’s court; he was the first supplicant
there. He prostrated at Karttikeya’s feet and cried, "Lord of the universe, I seek
refuge in you. I began a solemn yagna, but the goat for the sacrifice broke loose
and ran away. I have searched high and low, but I cannot find the animal. O
Skanda, the yagna is in your name and you must help me find my goat. Twelve-
eyed Shanmukha, make my sacrifice fruitful."

Kumara sent Virabahu to find the brahmana’s goat. As he combed the
worlds, Virabahu heard of the havoc the goat brought wherever it went. Never
actually seeing the animal, the warrior arrived in Vaikunta. There, beside the
holy Naara, eternal waters, he saw the beast tethered to a stake, cropping grass
and snorting displeasure at its captivity.
Virabahu dragged the goat to Skanda. Karttikeya was still a boy and, from
a playful impulse, he wanted to ride the animal. So, though the brahmana
protested, the protector of the universe climbed down from his throne and onto
the goat’s back. With a bleat of alarm, the creature tore out of the mountain
palace. Outside, Kumara astride, that goat traversed the universe in a wink!
When they returned from the infinite journey of an instant, Kumara said,
"Brahmana, do you really want this goat?"
And the brahmana, "Lord, how will my yagna be complete otherwise?"
And Kumara, smiling, "This goat does not deserve killing, Brahmana. Go
home, I say your yagna is complete."
Narada smiled at this part of the tale. For, he was the brahmana who
brought the goat to Karttikeya, whose mount it has been since, when he does not
ride his peacock. When Brahma paused again, ruminatively, Narada urged him
on; if the tale did not move quickly, he would have to, because of his brother
Daksha’s curse.
Brahma said, ‘The devas were euphoric at Kumara’s performance astride
the goat: here surely was he who could rid them of the yoke of Taraka. They
challenged the Asura, now master of countless worlds among the stars, his
empire of evil so far-flung it could hardly be imagined. A thunder of battle
drums sounded as Taraka came in fury to the earth with his army. Dare they
challenge Tarakasura, sovereign of galaxies? Had they forgotten how, once in
dim time, he had given them back their puny kingdom at Brahma’s plea? They
were ungrateful; he would wipe them from creation!
The two armies confronted each other at the confluence of the river Mahi
and the ocean. The devas trembled when they saw the conquering Asura’s
superbly drilled legions, a force that had never yet lost a battle. They saw lines
upon lines of demons, many of whom howled in fell voices what they would do
with the innards, the private parts and the women of the devas. The gods of light
wondered if they had made a serious mistake.
Then, a voice spoke out of the sky to the devas, "His time to die has come.
He has found no joy from all his conquests; he is weary of his life. Keep Kumara
at your head and you cannot lose the day. So it is written."
Now the devas roared, each one like Vishnu and they surrounded Taraka’s
army. The asuras laughed at the sound because they knew their king was

invincible. Still, doubt touched their hearts and they were afraid; it was yugas
since they had faced so confident an enemy. They roared back at the devas, a
noise that froze the blood of the gods. The demons shook the earth by stamping
their feet in unison, on the wet sands of that shore of fate.
Indra lifted Kumara onto Airavata at the head of the deva army and
charged the asuras. But a vimana appeared above and Kumara flew up into the
sparkling craft. Roaring like a jungle of wild beasts, the first lines of the two
armies clashed. In moments, that soft battlefield was strewn with trunkless heads
and headless bodies, twitching in death, blood spouting on to white sand.
Severed arms and legs beat brief rhythms before being still. Bodies pounded
with maces were a mass of bone and gore, with flesh flattened as on a cook’s
board. In thousands, those soldiers fell, pierced at extraordinary angles with
arrows of light and javelins of blue fire. Blood flowed in its own scarlet streams
into river and ocean and cries of death and roars of triumph rent the gull-thick
and quickly, wheeling vulture-thick sky. The ghosts of the dead flocked in
bewildered throngs among the older dead and goblins come to take them. Beasts
of carrion, vixens and dogs, were among the swooping kites and vultures, tearing
at the warm flesh of the slain.
With a ringing battlecry, Taraka flew at Indra. His generals, Samhrada and
Jambha, flashed at Agni and Yama and the tumult stilled the waves in awe. The
sea was flat as a mirror. Varuna locked with Nairritta and Bala; Suvira, king of
the guhyas, fought Vayu; Sumbha fought Sesa. Kumbha battled Soma; Kunjara,
veteran of many wars fought Mihira for his life on the crimsoned beach. It is
truly told, that battleground, with its wealth of dismembered corpses, was so
pleasing to the brave and so horrific to the coward!
At first, the asuras had the advantage. Taraka felled Indra from Airavata’s
back with a sorcerous spear and the Deva king lay unconscious on the sand.
Sorely pressed, the other devas snatched him up and fled the battle. Roaring
louder than lions, the demons had the better of them. Then, his ganas beside him,
Virabhadra, born of Siva’s rage, growling like thunder, rolling his bloody eyes,
confronted Taraka. With tridents, spears, swords, scimitars, nooses, axes and
spikes the two smashed and pierced each other. Suddenly, Virabhadra struck
Taraka squarely in his face with an occult trisula spewing white flames. The
Asura collapsed. Even from the ground he hurled a dark lance at Virabhadra and
felled him. Both rose, a little dazed, now the fight in them higher than ever. They
fell at each other again, roaring so awfully the earth quaked and the sea rose in
hilly waves.
With astras lofty and fell and all manner of commoner weapons of light
and fire, the two did titanic battle: as joyfully as if they made love! Their

battlecries were climactic shouts and quickly the rest of the war came to a
standstill around them. The soldiers of both armies sounded bheris, mridangas,
patahas, anakas and gomukhas to celebrate the noble duel between Virabhadra
and Tarakasura.
Someone called to Virabhadra, "Stop this pointless duel, O greatest Gana!
It is not written that you shall kill him."
Intoxicated with the fight, Virabhadra roared back, "I will kill the Demon!
I am no eunuch that my Master must come to battle. I will rid the worlds of
Taraka today."
Led by Virabhadra, the ganas won that encounter, because they were
masters of astras, the occult missiles. Unable to stand before the gana army and
slaughtered in hordes, the asuras turned their faces and fled. When, for the first
time ever, he saw his sinister legions flee a battle, with an angry howl Taraka
charged the devas and Virabhadra’s ganas. He had a thousand hands now; each
wielded a terrible weapon. He rode on a creature from another world, leonine but
no lion, six-legged, winged and pale.
When inexorable Taraka erupted on his forces, Virabhadra raised his
trisula with a prayer to Siva and he shone forth, lighting up the quarters. But
when he raised his weapon to finish the Asura, subtly in his heart Siva ordered
him from the field. Each moment after Virabhadra went, Taraka felled a
thousand deva and gana warriors. The ground was another sea of gore, the air a
thickness of screams. Their morale restored, the asuras streamed back into battle,
roaring "Jaya!" Victory!
Deciding the time had come to intervene, Vishnu came to fight with the
bow Saringa, the mace Kaumodaki and the Sudarshana chakra, his clarion blast
on the Panchajanya deafening and exhilarating.
Through the storm of flame-arrows raining death on the deva host, Hari
rode out to meet Tarakasura. They fought an earthshaking duel. Vishnu struck
Taraka across the chest with the Kaumodaki; the Demon pulverised the mace
with a black, flashing trident. Roaring, Narayana shot a thousand arrows at
Taraka from the Saringa, but monstrous Taraka turned Hari’s arrows into
garlands of flowers. They fell around his neck and the Demon laughed
maniacally in triumph.
In a flash, the Asura flung a spear of green light at Vishnu, took the Blue
God in the chest and struck him unconscious for a moment. Crying death, Hari
cast the Sudarshana chakra at Taraka and the fanged Demon fell senseless on the
ground. Even that final weapon did not kill him. He awoke swiftly and flung his
emerald spear at Vishnu again, toppling him from Garuda’s back. The battle
between Vishnu and Tarakasura raged and the two armies stood by, stunned by

its ferocity.
I, Brahma, said to Karttikeya high above the battleground, ‘Kumara, this
duel is senseless and wasteful. By my boon, Vishnu cannot kill the Asura. Only
you, Sivaputra, can slay Taraka.’
I sent the brilliant boy into his first and dreadful war. With a cry of joy,
that he was finally to fight as he was born to, Karttikeya leapt straight down to
the earth from his vimana. Landing light as a feather, running like the wind on
the ground, Agni’s spear blazing, a comet in his hand as he ran, Kumara came to
battle, his divine boy’s cry ringing clear above all the other bedlam. Six-headed,
he scythed through the enemy in a moment and came face to face with Taraka.
In some surprise, the Asura cried so both armies heard him, "Marvel, all of
you, at the shamelessness of Vishnu and his older brother Indra. Look to what
depths they have sunk. As if it were not enough that in every kalpa Vishnu
deceived Bali, Madhu and Kaitabha, that he tricked our people as Mohini, that as
Rama he killed Tataka, a woman and abandoned his sinless wife Sita, that as
Parasurama he beheaded his own mother, that as Krishna he seduced the wives
of anyone he cared to and married as many times as he wanted, that in his ninth
avatara he preached atheism against the Vedic way; not enough that Indra, the
older brother, cut mother Diti’s foetus into forty-nine pieces, outraged the
modesty of Gautama’s Ahalya, killed Vritra, who was a brahmana’s son,
decapitated Brihaspati’s nephew Viswarupa; as if all this were not enough,
Devas, now your great leaders send a mere boy into battle against me, Taraka,
lord of worlds!"
He threw back his head and roared with laughter. He said to Kumara,
"Leave the field, little boy, before I grow angry and kill you."
Taraka turned his back dismissively on Karttikeya and cried to Virabhadra,
"Evil Spirit, you killed countless brahmanas at Daksha’s yagna. Let me visit you
with the fruit of those murders."
Taraka ran towards Virabhadra with his spear, but Indra flashed at him
with his thunderbolt and knocked him down. The invincible Asura was
unharmed by the Vajra that could mow down an army or shear the wings of a
mountain. Taraka hurled his flaming spear at Indra and the Deva fell from
Airavata’s back. A shiver of mortal terror rippled through the host of heaven:
who could vanquish the Asura who was immune to the Sudarshana of Vishnu
and the Vajra of Devendra?
Taraka pressed home his advantage. With a growl, he wrested the Vajra
out of the fallen Indra’s grasp and flung it at the Deva king. Great Indra
screamed, he writhed in agony and again Vishnu cast the Sudarshana at the
Demon and felled him. Yet again, unharmed, Taraka rose and felled both Vishnu

and Virabhadra with a sweep of the macabre spear, which grew limitlessly even
as he swung it. Darkness fell over the deva ranks. Still they could not conceive
that, as foretold in the boon of old, only Siva’s son could kill Tarakasura.
With a roar that shook earth, sea and sky, Virabhadra sprang up. He raised
his trisula aloft; weapon and warrior blazed like a new black sun risen. But
raising a hand, Kumara stopped the gana chieftain. He said kindly, "Why waste
time, Virabhadra? Let me kill him."
Spear to spear, invoking potent sorcery with the mantras vaitalika,
khecharaka and praptika, Karttikeya and Tarakasura fought. Laughing, the
Demon began playfully; the spring of mirth dried on his lips when he clashed
spears with Rudra’s son. Their duel raged louder than the battle of the two
armies, which soon stood watching as their generals thrust and hewed at each
other, drawing geysers of blood. Deva and asura, gandharva, rakshasa and
kinnara were rooted, breathless for the outcome. The breeze no longer stirred;
the sun was pale at mid-day as if it was dusk and Himalaya came there to watch
his grandson’s awesome encounter. Suddenly, Taraka shouted above Kumara’s
boyish yells, "Who is this terrible child?"
Someone answered, "He is Siva’s son Karttikeya!"
At that moment, Kumara pierced Tarakasura through his heart with the
spear of spectral agni. The Demon’s body blew apart with the explosive power
of that thrust, in a thousand shreds. The boon of Brahma, my blessing to him,
Narada, was undone and fulfilled. Taraka’s blood and flesh was splattered across
the beach and the soldiers of the two armies. Now the devas flew at the asuras: a
vengeful tempest. Hacked from their necks, demon heads fell like monstrous hail
upon that shore. Their spirits broken, their courage gone, the asuras screamed
like cowards and the devas slaughtered them at will.
"Save me! Save me!" the demons shrieked, trying to flee.
Many even called to Karttikeya to save them! But the devas, who had
chafed so bitterly and so long under the tyranny of Taraka and his people, were a
merciless tide. After hours of unrestrained butchery, silence fell on the sandy
battleground on the shores of the western sea, save for the heavy breathing of
deva, gandharva and kinnara and the wash of the scarlet waves. Exhausted, the
ones of light leaned on their smoking weapons, catching their breath. The asura
army, vast as a jungle, had been annihilated: not a demon of the force Taraka
had brought remained alive. Only then, the host of heaven raised a shout of
"Jaya!", as they smeared themselves with blood from the pieces of dead
Tarakasura’s immense carcass.
Siva came to that field. He took Karttikeya, who was still a boy, onto his
lap and stroked his head in pride and love. Uma would not let him have their son

for long, but must have him herself to cosset and fondle. There was a great feast
that night on the beach of victory. We were all there for the nirajana and light
from the waving lamps flickered obliquely across the faces of the dead. After
aeons of terror, secrecy and torment, now music, dance and songs of liberation
filled the memorable night. We stayed there, singing the praises of Karttikeya,
until the sun rose golden over the deep blue forest behind us. Then we bathed in
the ocean and returned to our homes.’
Said Brahma."
Says mysterious Vayu to the rishis of Naimisa. They marvel as much at the
storyteller of the airy face, as the Purana, which, by his power, they not only
hear but actually see in lucid pictures before their eyes, as he tells it.

THIRTY-FIVE
 
Another son
 
Not pausing for breath, Vayu Deva tells the rishis in the Naimisa vana the
story of Ganesa.
"Brahma told Narada of infinite curiosity the tale of Ganesa’s birth. The
Pitama of the worlds said,
‘The birth of Ganesa is told differently for different kalpas. In one, he was
born from Siva’s golden seed out of Parvati’s womb, after they made love in the
vana. She was so delighted with her son she told everyone to come and look at
his perfect face. She did not except Shani Kruradrishti and Saturn’s evil eye
burnt up Ganesa’s head. Before it was too late, Siva attached the first available
head onto his son’s body and this was of a one-tusked white elephant.
In another kalpa, deep in a jungle, Siva and Parvati saw two elephants
mating. Excited by that spectacle, they too assumed elephants’ bodies, one black
and one white and went to rut. The son born out of their ecstatic mating was
Ganapathy, with a white elephant’s head.
But listen, my son, to the story of Ganesa’s birth in the Svetavaraha, kalpa
of the White Boar. Once, many years after Siva and Uma were married and some
years after the birth of Kumara, Parvati’s sakhis Jaya and Vijaya said to her,
"They who stand guard at our doors are loyal to Siva. You should have a gana of
your own, Kaali, faithful just to you."
Uma only smiled. Then one day, when she was bathing in her apartment
with her sakhis, she had Nandin on guard outside with instructions to let no one
in. Siva came unexpectedly to her door. Nandin meekly suggested to his Lord
that perhaps he should wait outside until Uma finished her bath; Siva gave him a
look that made him tremble and stormed past him into her chambers. Uma’s
sakhis shot out of the steaming bath water, shrieking, trying to cover their
nakedness. Siva muttered an apology and went out, smiling to himself. Uma was
furious. The same day, she decided, though she breathed no word of it to him,
that she would have her own gana to guard her door and he would let no one in
without her consent.
When she returned to her bath, she saw the dirt she had washed from her
body floating on the water like thin clay. She scooped up the handful of grime,

tangled with her hair and breathed life into it. In a flash, a brilliant young man
stood before her, his palms joined in reverence and beaming in love. He was
towering and flawless of limb. Pleased no end, she clothed the youth in rich
silks, she adorned his beautiful body with ornaments; blessing him, Uma cried
happily, "You are my son! I have no one else I can call just my own."
Her powerful child said, "What task have you for me, mother?"
Caressing his cheek, Uma said, "You shall be my dwarapalaka. And
remember, no one will come in here without my permission."
Uma gave him a staff of flames with which to guard her door. Looking at
him, so strong and handsome, she hugged and kissed him again and went back to
her friends and her bath. In a short while, Siva arrived at Parvati’s door and tried
to enter. Her son barred his way. "Where do you think you are going? My
mother is bathing inside, you cannot enter without her permission."
Siva stared at him for a moment. Still calmly, he said, "Who do you think I
am, that you bar my way? I am Siva."
He began to go in, but the youth fetched him a warm blast with his fire
staff and stopped him in his tracks. Siva took a deep breath and said through his
teeth, "Foolish boy, why do you stop me from entering my own house? Don’t
you know Uma is my wife?"
The youth replied with another restrained stab of his staff. Siva shouted to
his ganas and when they came running, he thundered, "Who is this? How did he
come here? Don’t just stand there gaping, ask him!"
The ganas muscled up to the boy, who stood his ground, not batting an
eye. "Who are you? Where have you come from? If you value your life, you had
better leave this place quickly!" said the Sivaganas.
They jostled him a little, tried to shove him back and were amazed when
they could not budge him. Grinning, he said, "Who are you handsome fellows,
with faces like the backsides of beasts? I think it is you that should vanish from
my mother’s door."
The ganas laughed loudly, more to reassure themselves than from real
mirth. They cried, "We are Lord Siva’s ganas. If you are a gana too, we shall not
kill you but just remove you from here. But if you are a wise fellow, leave
yourself, don’t force us to hurt you."
The young dwarapalaka replied softly, "Go."
The mighty ganas were strangely perturbed and could not tell why. Saying
how the impudent wretch would not dare challenge the ganas of Siva like this if
they themselves were not so polite, they went back to their Master who stood at
a slight remove. The ganas reported what the young man said.
Siva rasped at them, "Have you lost your manhood, O my Ganas, that you

let him mock you? Or is it just your usual taste for a fight  to flee at once! If you
attack him with no more than taunts, of course he will say anything that comes to
his mind. Go give him a taste of your blows and see if he changes his tune."
Nandin, chief of the ganas, murmured, "He says he is Parvati’s son."
Siva turned on him angrily, "And I must bow to the whim of an arrogant
obstinate woman who is my own wife? Thrash the boy. Kill him if you have to,
or they will say Siva is henpecked. Go!"
Reluctantly, Narada, the ganas went back to the youngster, who stood
staring straight ahead of him, a smile still curving his fine lips. Nandin said in
his most menacing tone, "Leave this place, child, if you don’t want to die."
Without bothering to look at him, the youth replied, "Look for your
strength to your master and I to my mother. Let us see who wins."
The Goddess at her languorous bath heard voices raised outside and said to
her sakhi Jaya, "Go and see what is happening."
Jaya opened the front door a crack and peered out. She went running back
to her mistress and cried in glee, "Siva’s ganas are threatening ours, but he faces
them calmly. He will not let Siva enter. How handsome he is, how bold! You
must not back down now: Siva must not come in unless they defeat our
dwarapalaka. He takes you too much for granted."
Uma knit her brows. She muttered, "Can’t Siva wait before breaking in?
You are right, let him not come in without a fight."
Uma sent Jaya back to the door with a message, "‘They cannot defeat you,
my son; what are these ganas before you? Don’t let them in!’ says your mother
to you."
While the women went back, giggling, to the pleasures of their bath, the
youth, slapping his thighs, cried merrily to the Sivaganas, "Not humbly or
forcibly will you enter my mother’s apartment. I have never fought a battle
before, but my mother shall see my valour. I fight for her!"
Nandin charged the boy and caught him by a leg. He smashed the gana’s
hand with his burning staff and Nandin had to let go, bellowing in pain. Then,
like a summer storm, he was at the gana force with his mother’s danda. Mighty,
war-hardened heads, hands, backs, necks, legs and chests he burned; he smashed
them like eggshells, laughing all the while in his clear, fresh voice. They fled
before his onslaught and ran to Siva. Bristling with fight, the young warrior
stood again at his mother’s door, like Yama at the end of a kalpa!
Hearing the commotion of that encounter, which sounded as if the worlds
were ending, Vishnu and I flew there to investigate. The devas, the asuras and
the other immortals had already arrived and Siva said to us, "The boy churns my
army of ganas, my experts in war, like the mountain did the ocean. He catches

their weapons in his teeth and smashes them back with his staff. Earth and sea
tremble and the sky whirls, with the stars dislodged from their places."
Never had such a battle been fought outside a bathing-room. Vishnu went
to test the strength of the boy blessed by Parvati and was knocked to the ground
with a flaming blow. Vishnu said to Siva, "I have seen many devas, daityas,
danavas, rakshasas, yakshas and gandharvas, but none to equal this guardian.
You will not kill him without deceit."
"We shall see!" cried Siva angrily. Brandishing his trisula and pinaka,
Rudra went into the fray where, with nerveless ease, Uma’s youth was
demolishing all the devas and ganas that besieged him. Siva challenged him with
a shout. In a blink, the wizardly staff struck the weapons out of Rudra’s hands.
That uncanny danda always stayed in the boy’s whirling palms, but left them
also, both at once, to smash back any attack. It was swifter than a thought,
ablaze.
Vishnu whispered to Siva, "Work your way around him and when he
attacks me, kill him from behind."
Siva crept behind the inexhaustible guardian, while Hari challenged him
from the front. The youth hurled an iron-studded club at Vishnu when he saw
him coming and Narayana struck it in shards with the Sudarshana chakra. The
boy snatched up one sliver and cast it at the Blue God, but Garuda caught the
deadly piece in his beak. The young man fell on Vishnu with his mother’s danda.
With a lightning, elongated blow of flames, he struck Hari off Garuda’s back.
Mahavishnu sprang to his feet with a roar and leapt at him. As they wrestled
fiercely, Siva crept up from behind and took off that youth’s head with his
trisula, so he died in Vishnu’s arms. Even after he was dead, for some moments,
his headless body continued to wrestle Vasudeva, in obedience to his mother’s
will.
The ganas set up a great cheer when Siva beheaded the dwarapalaka; they
beat out rhythms of victory on mridanga and pataha. With a terrible wail, Uma
came flying out of her apartment, stark naked, beating her breast and howling,
"What shall I do? Where will I go? Misery engulfs me, the devas and the ganas
have murdered my son."
Suddenly, she was Bhadrakaali before us. Her eyes rolled awfully, she
pulled her hair and screamed, "I will drown you in a deluge of blood!"
In an instant, a hundred thousand horrible Shaktis, fanged, four-armed,
mounted on lions and wielding dreadful weapons, stood where the youth had
been killed. They stood bowing to Uma.
"Mother, command us."
In awesome fury, Mahamaya commanded them, "Devour all these. Devour

the devas, ganas, rishis, yakshas and rakshasas. Devour my husband. I will make
an end of everything today, for they have murdered my son."
Her terrifying karalis, hunchbacked kubjakas, lame kanjas, long-headed
lambasirsas set about their task like fire in dry grass. They picked up deva and
asura, rakshasa and Sivagana and flung them into yawning maws like bits of
candy. Even Siva trembled at the advent of Uma’s primordial shaktis.
When a million were dead, in no time, Uma still stood unappeased among
her furies; trembling in fright, the rishis ran to the mountain’s daughter. They
fell at her feet and cried, "Mercy, Mother of the universe! Adi Shakti, the worlds
quail at your anger. Be calm, Devi, let there be peace."
Deranged, naked Uma glared at them insanely. Her pupils were dilated
wide as her irises and her eyes rolled crimson in their black sockets. She spoke
no word, only glared, her lip curled, her hands clenching and unclenching.
Again, they prostrated abjectly, "Durga, forgive us! See where Siva himself
stands, hands joined in contrition, shaken. What then of Brahma, Vishnu or the
devas? We are only your creatures, Ambika: remove our terror, give us back
peace."
Uma’s body shuddered ever so slightly, as if a current of sanity flowed
again in her soul. She sighed and her eyes rolled no more. Parvati, the mother,
said softly, "If my son has life again, I will stop the killing and recall my shaktis.
Otherwise, havoc continues!"
The maharishis came to where Siva stood with Vishnu and me and
conveyed what she had said. Siva cried, "Let it be as she wants, so there is
peace." He commanded his ganas, "Go north and bring back the head of the first
living creature you meet. Don’t dither!"
The ganas washed the youth’s headless trunk and carried it north. The first
living creature they encountered was a magical being: a white elephant with only
one tusk. With its consent and a prayer, they cut off that elephant’s head and
joined it to the dead boy’s neck. Siva sprinkled holy water on the great body and
the devas cried, "Siva, let your tejas enter him through the Veda!"
The youth awoke among the living, ruddy and brilliant again and elephant-
headed. When Uma saw her son alive, she gave a cry of joy and clasped him to
her, kissing his extraordinary head and sobbing. She blessed him with all the
siddhis and touched his lofty brow with her precious hand, which removes every
distress.
"Oh, my son, strife has been your lot since the moment you were born.
Now you shall be peaceful and contented. You will have worship before all the
devas and for the blood on your face men shall worship you with vermilion."
Siva came there, glowing with relief. He placed a tender hand on the

youth’s head and said, "This is another son of mine. He shall be the lord of all
my ganas, we will call him Ganesa."
Uma’s eyes brimmed over, though she did not look into her Lord’s face
and spoke no word to him yet. Rising from his mother’s lap, Ganesa bowed to
Brahma, Vishnu and Sankara. He said, "Arrogance is man’s nature, let my
crimes be forgiven."
With a joyful laugh, embracing Ganesa, Siva cried, "He shall be
worshipped before us all. If he is not worshipped, we are not worshipped either
and the fruit of the ritual lost. He will be worshipped with durva grass, a fast,
sandal paste, rice grains and ketaka flowers by those that want unequalled
happiness in the world, especially women and kings."
All the smiling devas cried, "So be it."
Narada, when Ganapathy was made a Deity, peace was restored to the
worlds. Parvati called off her shaktis and misery grew dim throughout the sacred
universe. Siva and Uma were united again and there was jubilation on Kailasa.
Whoever hears this tale with a pure heart shall become an abode of
everything auspicious. The barren are made fertile, the indigent become wealthy,
the sick find health and the miserable good fortune by the grace of the faultless
Ganesa, Lord of the ganas!’ Said Brahma the grandsire to the restless and
enraptured seer, his son, Narada."
Says pervasive Vayu, in compassion, sighing happily in his mystic airs, to
the rishis of the Naimisa vana, who are thirsty for the ambrosial Purana.

THIRTY-SIX
 
Mallikarjuna
 
"Divine Vayu, do not stop until you have told us the whole Purana," say
the rishis of the Naimisa, chief among whom in that kalpa was Saunaka, the
austere.
His face a bright and mobile vapour, Vayu says,
"Brahma, my guru, said to his itinerant son Narada, ‘Muni, when they had
two wonderful sons, the joy of Siva and Parvati was boundless.’
Narada sat curled like a child at Brahma’s feet, savouring the Purana.
Brahma had first told it to Narada’s brother, Sanatkumara, who then revealed it
to Vyasa, who gave it to the world in a bygone kalpa.
‘Great was the love they shared in that family: Mahadeva, Kaali and their
two sons, one six-faced and the other elephant-headed. One day, Uma said to
Siva, "They are old enough now to marry. We must find brides for them."
The boys were delighted when they heard. They challenged each other, the
elephant-headed and the six-faced, each crying, "I will marry before you!"
Even among them, there existed the rivalry that darkens love between
brothers. Siva said, "You might not believe it, but you are both equal in our eyes.
So we have decided the one who goes around the earth and comes back here
before the other, shall marry first."
Bowing quickly to his parents, Karttikeya shot away from Kailasa like an
arrow. Ganesa stood where he was, sighing to himself, snuffling through his
trunk, while thought furrowed his great brow and glinted in his canny eyes.
Finally, with a deepest sigh, he also bowed and left his parents’ presence.
Ganesa did not set off on a journey around the world. He only went to the river
and bathed, muttering under his breath, "I cannot go round the earth, at best I
may go a krosa!" His bulk was great. "Anyway, of what use is the happiness one
gets after going round the world?"
When he finished bathing, Ganapathy came home and prepared two seats
of kusa grass for Siva and Uma. When he had them seated, side by side, he
folded his hands and circled them seven times in pradakshina. Then he
prostrated and said, "Mother, Father, let me be married quickly now, I have done
what you asked."

Parvati laughed, "You were to go round the world. Kumara has already set
out; you must hurry if you hope to catch up. Come back before him and we shall
surely get you married first."
Ganesa said, "I have gone round the world more than once since you told
me to."
Uma said, "Sweet child, when did you go round the earth of seven
continents and oceans, the world of towering mountains, of holy rivers and deep
jungles?"
As a smile touched his father’s face, Ganapathy said blandly, "The Vedas
and the Shastras say, O my Mother, he who walks around his parents goes round
the earth. While he that leaves them and goes on a pilgrimage incurs the sin of
their murder. A son’s holiest shrine is the feet of his parents. I have walked
around you not once, but seven times, with perfect faith in my heart. Either you
get me married, or declare the Vedas false, since they enjoin what I have done."
He stood before them, palms still folded and Siva burst out laughing and
embraced his intelligent son. Siva cried, "You are a sublime soul! When
misfortune comes, only intelligence has the power to dispel its darkness. Ganesa,
you shall be married at once and Kumara when he returns."
At a shining ceremony organised by Viswakarman and attended by us all,
Hari and I, the devas and the others, Uma and Sarva got Ganesa married to
Prajapati Viswarupa’s daughters, the exquisite twins Siddhi and Buddhi. Soon,
Ganapathy had a son from each wife. Kshema was born to Siddhi and Laabha to
Buddhi, both splendid boys.
While Ganapathy enjoyed domestic bliss, Karttikeya was on his way
home, triumphant after an exhausting journey and certain his brother had not
overtaken him. You, Narada, met him. You told Kumara all, as you need not
have. You seemed to be in such anguish, as if the injury was first to you and
only then to him.
You whispered, "I speak the truth, though I can hardly believe it. How can
one’s parents treat one so callously, even if one’s mother is not one’s own flesh
and blood? How can one’s father stand for it?"
You paused, clicking your tongue in sympathy. Impatient after his great
journey, Guha said, "What are you babbling, Narada? Tell me what you have to
say."
You, my son, hesitated, as if unsure if you should or not. He seized you
roughly. He could not wait to be married first; surely Ganapathy was not even
halfway round the world yet and panting along. Kumara shook you by your
slender shoulders. He cried, "Tell me, Narada, quickly!"
Sighing, you said, "It is the truth, Guha. No one else would be so heartless

as Siva and Uma."
"Tell Narada!" roared Kumara.
"After they had sent you around the world, they wasted not a day and
Ganesa was married to both Viswarupa Prajapati’s beautiful daughters. He lives
happily with his parents, his wives and two handsome sons, while you are still
on your way home! What I say is there were two girls, each as lovely as her
sister; why couldn’t one have been given to you? After all, are you not the elder
one? Your parents have not done right by you, Kumara. If one’s own parents
cheat one, who else will have a care? You should not look at the faces of a
mother and father who have treated you so wretchedly."
From the corner of your eye, you watched his six faces turn crimson. You
heard the stricken cry torn from him. Then, his eyes streaming, he flew into his
parents’ home. They sat with Ganesa and his wives and their grandchildren
playing near them. With a cry of joy, Uma sprang up and ran to Karttikeya. He
pushed her aside and stood glaring at Siva for a long moment. He bowed stiffly
to his father and without a word, turned and stalked out of that palace forever.
Karttikeya went to the Krauncha peak, where the Manasarovara is, with
Uma’s cry ringing in his ears, "What have we done, where are you going?" Even
today, Narada, just as you intended, he lives there: an unfettered Guardian with
all the time in the world for his bhaktas. His vision removes every sin; his name
bestows auspiciousness upon the earth. In the month of Karttika, the devas and
the maharishis come to the place where he dwells. Whoever sees Siva’s son
Karttikeya during the day of the Krittika nakshatra of the Krittika maasa is
stripped of all his sins, even of the desire to sin anymore.
Parvati slumped unconscious to the floor when Kumara walked out of her
home. When she came to herself, she was inconsolable with guilt. If Ganesa had
been in Karttikeya’s place, might she have done differently? She shut herself in
her room, weeping and mourning her son as if he had died. When the moon grew
full and her grief with it, she came out, her hair wild and loose, tears still
streaming down her dark face and cried to Rudra, "We must go to him at once.
We have wounded his very soul."
Though he doubted the wisdom of this course, to appease his wife Siva
went out to the Krauncha with her. When Kumara heard they were coming, he
left that peak and went three yojanas away. He did not want to see them, he was
so certain that they had betrayed him.
There on the Krauncha, in sombre sorrow, Siva remained as the mystic
Jyotirlinga Mallikarjuna, gleaming amidst the ice and the snow. Ever since, the
Lord goes there secretly on each day of the new moon, amavasya, to gaze at his
son yearningly, from afar. Uma goes on the night of the full moon, paurnima, to

see him better and to cry for him in her endless guilt and grief.
Narada, the tale of Karttikeya and Ganesa frees a man from his sins and
gives him everything he desires. It frees the sick from their affliction, the
terrified from their fear, the possessed from ghosts and goblins. This story is
perfectly pure and bestows sons and grandsons, long life and heaven. It can
confer even moksha, for in truth it is Siva himself.’
Said Brahma softly to his son Narada, adrift now, his eyes shut, on the
currents of the immortal Purana."
Vayu, who has the role of Suta in that kalpa, tells the rishis in the Naimisa
vana.

Yuddha Khanda:the cantos of war

THIRTY-SEVEN
 
Tripura
 
In another kalpa, Saunaka’s rishis sit enraptured before the great
Vedavyasa’s sishya, Suta Romaharshana and hear from his lips the amrita
Purana of Siva. Suta says,
"Vyasa, my guru, said, ‘When Narada asked Brahma to tell him about the
burning of the Tripura, the Pitama said with a smile,
‘Once, when Vedavyasa wanted to hear the Siva Purana, my son
Sanatkumara told him about the Tripura and how Mahadeva destroyed them
with fire. Sanatkumara said, "When Siva’s son Karttikeya slew Tarakasura, the
asuras found they had no sanctuary anywhere. The avenging devas hunted them
on earth, in the heavens, down in the under-worlds and slaughtered them. Few
escaped the holocaust: after their long enslavement by the demons, Indra’s
people were determined to have savage satisfaction of them.
But Taraka’s three sons, Tarakaksha, Vidyunmalin and Kamalaksha,
escaped the lords of light. They vowed they would undertake a tapasya no less
than their father’s, of old: to gain a safe haven for their people scattered by the
avenging devas. The asuras were forced to go in disguise, despicably and to hide
even from their own; they were a mighty race reduced to shame. They covered
their faces and scrabbled amidst deserts and in mountain caves, where man and
deva did not come.
Taraka’s noble sons climbed to a secret cave on Mount Meru and
performed a tapasya that at least equalled the single penance of their sire.
Relinquishing every pleasure, they were like three flames of worship. In
summer, they sat in dhyana at the heart of five fires; four they built around
themselves and the fifth was the sun above. Frequently, one or the other would
faint from the heat. In the dead of winter, they sat in freezing streams laden with
ice floes, while their bodies turned blue. During the monsoon, they bared
themselves to lashing rain, soaked to the bone, while the skin stretched like
faded parchment across their skeletons.
They ate only roots and herbs, when they ate at all. They stood on their
hands and heads for years, still as stones. Their penance grew harsher as the
capacity to mortify their flesh increased. Sleepless they meditated, whilst

nightmares ravaged them. Their bodies were skin and bone. The tree-bark they
wore was caked in mud, encrusted with dry duckweed and slime and the world
itself had grown dim because the tapasya of Taraka’s sons drained its light. One
day, when only he had count of how long the penance of Tarakaksha and his
brothers had lasted, Brahma, their ancestor, stood in glory before them and said,
"I am pleased with you, enemies of the devas. Ask me for any boon."
They fell at his feet and, his voice strident from disuse, Tarakaksha said,
"Lord of creation, if you are truly pleased, grant us invincibility from every
being in your universe. Let not old age, sickness or death befall us; for of what
use, O Pitama, is wealth, vast earth, lordship over great cities, or any glory
whatever, if one is to be swallowed by death in five brief days?"
Brahma stared at the ambitious Asura. Slowly, he said, "It is not in my
power to grant immortality. All creatures that are born must die and be born
again; only Siva, conqueror of time and Mahavishnu are free from death. I
myself am mortal. Ask me for anything else, Danavas. Choose a boon befitting
your stature; you would not know what to do with immortality."
They consulted together in whispers, then Tarakaksha said, "When Taraka
was killed our people became homeless and the devas them as vetalas do
animals of the vana. Grant us each a fortress of a city, invulnerable to the gods of
light and their weapons, impregnable against all creatures of land and sea and
sorcery as well. Let our race live there in safety for ever."
Brahma objected, "I cannot give you cities that is perfectly safe."
Tarakaksha said, "Then let it be destroyed only by a single arrow of Siva’s.
We have no enmity with Rudra. He is the greatest God and we are his bhaktas."
Brahma blessed the demons of the matchless penance. "So be it. But
remember, if your people torment the rest of creation, your cities may as well be
made of straw, for so shall they burn."
Brahma directed Viswakarman to build that sanctuary for the daityas and
he vanished as wealth won in a dream. The cities Viswakarman built, under
instructions from Tarakaksha, the eldest brother, also called Mayaa, were like no
other the worlds had ever seen. Kamalaksha had his city of silver on bhumi and
it was great and intricate. Vidyunmalin had his city of bronze in patala and it was
marvellous. Tarakaksha himself had his city of gold and dreams built for him in
swarga and it was peerless.
The three cities lay in each other’s shadows. Once every thousand years, at
midday during the hour of abhijit, when the moon was in the Pushya nakshatra
and when Pushkara and Avarta showered invisible rains down on the earth, the
three cities became a single one. Only on that day were they vulnerable to Siva’s
unlikely arrow. Besides, the sons of Taraka, especially the eldest, were the most

faithful Sivabhaktas.
Ah, such cities were the Tripura of those demons! Lofty arches led into
them along royal highways. Like everything else here, the mansions, ramparts
and sky-scraping turrets, these arches were made of gold, starry metals and
stone. They were studded with incredible jewels. Above, elegant sky chariots
flitted, encrusted with padmaraga, glinting in the sun and the moon. Kalpa
vrikshas, trees of wishes, lined the wonderful streets. Palaces towered over
groves of asoka trees, koyals warbling in their branches. There were gardens
with clear pools full of lotuses and some palaces were twenty stories tall. The
Tripura, made with the rarest materials from the three worlds, basked in a veil of
fragrant incense and sacrificial smoke from the quarter of worship: Siva’s
sanctum!
Each of them awesome as Yama, the daityas came home to Tripura. Like a
pride of lions returning from captivity into a jungle, or sea-monsters into the
ocean, they swarmed majestically into the triune sanctuary and began living in
lordly mansions their kings bestowed on them. Invincible to the enemies of the
asura brothers, the Tripura teemed with a billion daityas! They rose like clouds
from sutala and patala and from mountain crannies where they had laid up like
insects under stones. As each family arrived, it asked a boon of Tarakaksha and
he granted it, whatever it was; great was his power within the precincts of his
cities.
On silvery evenings of the moon, around the lotus pools in the parks and
gardens, through orchards of mango and past tapovanas of rishis at dhyana, the
demons strolled in freedom again. After the harsh centuries of exile and
impoverishment, they wore fine silks. Their battle-scarred bodies were anointed
with sandal-paste and scented oils and their women and children were at their
sides.
Great was the prosperity of the Tripura. The asuras of the three cities were
noble and devout, their women were chaste and, after the bitter years, they
cherished what they now had. They followed the teachings of the Vedas and the
Smartas and worshipped Siva day and night with virtue and contentment. Wives
were chaste, sons were loyal and Vedic hymns blended in harmony with the
tinkling of dancers’ anklets, the plucking of vinas and the sweet breath of flutes.
Dallying in the Tripura, the danavas heard their women’s soft laughter and their
hearts were full.
A long time passed in plenitude, dharma and Sivabhakti. But time is a
wheel that turns surely. Slowly, not even perceptibly at first, the evils of life,
which had been so conspicuous by their absence in Tripura, crept in stealth into
the minds and then into the lives of the noble demons. Misfortune, envy, thirst,

hunger and discord came to Tripura. At twilight these came, unbidden,
unnoticed, the fruit of too many years of peace and fortune; they came like the
viruses of some fatal disease invading the body. Mayaa saw them clearly, in a
nightmare, even before the ruin set in.
Evil did not easily gain a foothold, for the asuras had a potent secret.
Whatever sins they committed, as time passed, they worshipped Siva as a crystal
linga enshrined in the quarter of worship; and their intransigence were forgiven
them, their sins ashed at once. For, in time, Tarakaksha Mayaa had grown to be
the greatest Sivabhakta in the worlds. In those middle days of the unrivalled
prosperity of the Tripura, Indra and his people were miserable, their envy of the
demons tore at them with green talons.
They went to Brahma, who had granted those daityas the boon. Indra said
grimly, "We are dismayed at the growing power of the danavas of Tripura. They
are asuras, Pitama and never to be trusted. You have blessed them too
generously."
Smiling to himself, Brahma said, "If they abandon dharma, Siva will burn
them. So far, they are virtuous."
He paused and gazed into his mystic heart, at the tides of the future he saw
gathering there. He murmured, "It might be wise to meet Siva after all, just in
case..."
The devas flew to Kailasa and, palms of light joined, Indra said to the bull-
bannered One, "Obeisance, golden-wombed Lord, creator, sustainer and
annihilator of everything. Obeisance, Lord of tantra, Lord of Uma, O Brahman,
O Mahakaala! Siva, Taraka’s sons have vanquished Indra’s armies. The asuras
of Tripura have Brahma’s boon and they are invincible within their cities. They
will overrun the three worlds, Rudra, only you can stop them."
Siva said gravely, "The sons of Taraka worship me and they are righteous,
O Indra. How can I kill my bhaktas?"
He waited for their reply and they stood silent and disconsolate before
him. With a sigh, Rudra said, "Of course, there is no harm in taking your fears to
Vishnu."
The devas flew back to Brahma. With him, they went to Vaikunta where
immortal Narayana lay upon Anantasesha. They cried to the Blue God, "Hari,
how will we ever have peace again, when the demons of Tripura will subdue the
universe?"
Vishnu said, "As darkness does not appear before the sun, no evil comes to
a city where dharma rules. Tarakaksha’s people are devout, they worship Siva
unfailingly."
Indra wailed, "We devas will perish!"

Hari said, for they were his favoured people, "You, too, must worship
Mahadeva."
The devas undertook a great yagna. From the pit of sacrifice, rose a
thousand awful bhutasanghas, each with a thousand bhutas, armed with fiery
trisulas, every spirit a mass of flames. Vishnu, Lord of yagnas, cried to them,
"Fly to the Tripura, O Bhutas, make them ashes!"
Howling horribly, the spirit hosts flew to the demon cities. No sooner did
they enter their portals than unseen fire made their blazing legions ashes and
they fell softly on the Tripura, like Rudra’s blessings.
Shaking his beautiful head, Vishnu said, "All the demons’ sins are washed
by their worship of Siva’s immaculate linga. Their cities cannot be taken by
force."
Then, he mused, "But what if we destroy their faith, so they do not
worship Siva any more? What if we use guile and dharma disappears from the
Tripura? How long will they stand if they do not adore the linga any longer?"
Vishnu waved away the mournful devas. "Leave it to me, I will corrupt
them myself."
 
Out of his own essential being, Vishnu created a prophet of delusion, a
false guru. He was Mayaamoha of the shaven head, clad in dishevelled clothes,
with a wicker basket in his hand and a roll of spun cotton that he shook, rattling
it with every step he walked. His thin hands trembled with weakness, but he held
in them a Maayashastra in apabhramsa: a subtle doctrine thousands of slokas
long, a veritable tome of his invention. That unholy book preached non-violence,
forbade srauta and smarta rituals and created a separate order for women so they
abandoned their homes and became ‘liberated’ yoginis. Clutching his book of
cunning lies in his hand, Mayaamoha stood, frail and glowing, before Vishnu
and cried in his shrill voice, "Dharma! Dharma!"
Hari laughed aloud at the peculiar sight. He said to Mayaamoha, "Your
mission is not with me. Go to the Tripura and preach your doctrine there.
Subvert the hearts of Mayaa’s asuras. My own maaya goes with you, so fear
nothing."
Mayaamoha, called Arihat by the Lord, mesmerically chanted the pivotal
tenet of his philosophy: "Heaven and hell are both in this world. There is no
before or after."
Shuddering a little at this, Vishnu said, "Go forth and preach your
wretchedness; you have my blessing, you will incur no sin. After you have
ruined the Tripura, my clever one, you shall go into the desert and stay there
until the dawning of the kali yuga, the age after your own heart. In the kali,

Arihat, your dharma will manifest in all its forms; for it belongs in the kali, when
true dharma scarcely survives. The dark age will call you a prophet; and finally,
at yuganta, I will give you moksha as well. Go, strange fellow, hasten to your
task."
On his way, from his thought, Arihat created four disciples for himself,
bald-headed masters of his heresy. They too covered their mouths with pieces of
gauze, each held a broom made of cloth and a wicker basket and they went with
their master, chanting in reedy voices, "Dharma! Dharma!"
They walked slowly, because they would not harm any living thing, not an
ant or an insect on the ground; they would not even breathe the microbes of the
air. Their master and maker called them Rishi, Yati, Acharya and Upadhyaya
and each one Arihat as well. Outside Tripura, where they soon arrived by
wizardry, they settled in a garden beyond the lofty gates and preached their
bizarre fundamentalism. At first, because Siva’s grace pervaded those cities,
their maaya was ineffectual and no one came to hear their sermons. If any
demon did, from curiosity, he laughed to hear such elaborate rubbish.
Arihat was distressed. Paranoia curled itself round his spirit and, for all his
professed atheism, he prayed fervently to Vishnu to come to his rescue. Vishnu
sent Narada to him. The itinerant rishi took the semanticist’s hand, led him into
Tarakaksha’s city and court and presented him to that virtuous and magnificent
Asura.
Smoothly, Narada said, "Son of Taraka, how is it such a great sage sits at
your gates and you do not invite him to preach in your city? If you comb deepest
patala, you will not find a prophet like him. On my wanderings, I have
encountered many cults and philosophies, but never one to match this master’s
wisdom. I myself have become his sishya and, if you value true dharma, you will
also."
Tarakaksha cried, "If immortal Narada is a sishya of this muni, who are we
not to accept him as our guru? Look at his shining face; truly, we could learn
wisdom from him. Initiate me, holy one."
Arihat demurred, "Only if you have complete faith in me and do exactly as
I say, will I disclose this doctrine of doctrines, this final fruit of all philosophy."
Tarakaksha swore, "I will obey your every wish, never will I transgress
your will. On my honour and my life, I swear this."
Arihat removed the square of white gauze from his mouth. His eyes shone
with the prospect of having success and power. His voice like metal scraping on
metal, he rasped, "Lord of the asuras, I will initiate you into the best of doctrines.
Be my disciple from now and be contented."
The false guru subjected the king of the asuras to a long and absurd ritual

of initiation, as prescribed in insane detail in his Maayashastra. Overcome by the
hypnotic sorcery of those mantras, the great Demon left discernment behind him.
Thus began the fall of Tripura; thus Vishnu first infiltrated those protected cities.
When Mayaa, lord of Tripura, had been initiated into Arihat’s heretic doctrine,
could his people be far behind? Soon, long lines of devout demons waited
outside Arihat’s mansion, given him by Tarakaksha. They waited outside the
mansions of his four disciples in the three cities. They waited eagerly for
initiation, never suspecting they were to be deluded by Vishnu’s maaya hidden
in each blasphemous mantra of Mayaamoha’s surreal shastra.
Arihat said grandly to Mayaa, "Listen to my shastra now, O King, it is the
quintessence of the Vedanta. The universe itself is eternal; it is not creation and
has no creator. It evolves itself and destroys itself. Brahma, Vishnu and Siva:
none is superior to the rest. For in eating, copulation, sleep and fear, we are
alike. When our time comes, we live and perish. Since we are all equals, from
Brahma down to the meanest worm, mercy is the greatest virtue and there is no
sin like violence. When pain and ignorance end, we find moksha; and if one dies
without pain or ignorance that is the greatest bliss."
The crafty Arihat stood the teachings of the Vedas on their head. He went
on to the worship of the Gods and demolished that inmost faith. He mocked
marital fidelity and preached a bizarre spiritual anarchy of non-violence,
mechanical and Godless. Most of all, he preached the equality of men and
women in all things. He seduced the minds of the wives of the Tripura with his
sophistries, promising them unlimited freedom. Besides, Vishnu’s deceptive
maaya snaked off his facile tongue.
It took a while, but not very long and all worship, except Arihat’s Godless
rites, was dead in Tripura. No more was Siva remembered, or his linga adored as
before; no more did anyone pray to Vishnu, Surya or Ganesa. The soul of
Tripura of dharma shrivelled within its beautiful walls and a vacuous madness
occupied the three demon cities. The asuras sinned as usual; but now their sins
clung to them, because they did not humble themselves before the great
Sivalinga. It stood neglected, a useless antique at the heart of the quarter of
worship. Betraying their marriage vows, hedonistic asuras lay at the very temple
doors, shamelessly fornicating with women who were not their wives. This was
the free preaching of Arihat, their guru.
 
Satisfied that Mayaamoha’s work of corruption was well done, Vishnu
went to Kailasa with the devas. Bowing to Siva, who sat with Nandin, Narayana
said, "Obeisance, Parabrahman!"
A smile touching his lips, Siva said, "I have heard something of what goes

on in Tripura. You Hari, or you Brahma, may kill the asuras. They are not my
bhaktas any more and I do not protect them."
Brahma said, "The asuras have desolated sacred Nandana, they have taken
Rambha and the apsaras to their debauched harems. They have taken Indra’s
elephants Kumuda, Anjana, Vamana and Airavata, seized the devas’ foam-born
horses and unaccountable wealth during their savage raids. But they cannot be
vanquished in battle or slain by anyone except you, Mahadeva. I myself gave
them that boon."
Rudra retorted, "What Mahadeva? Brahma, if I was truly Mahadeva, I
would have at least a vimana from which to loose my astra."
They bowed to him, smiling. "The chariot shall be ready, O Bhava."
"Then so shall I," said he.
Viswakarman created that vimana for Siva out of the stuff of kaala, the
devas’ divine time. That craft was golden and silver, like a diamond of infinite
facets; its one engine was the sun and the other the moon. The adityas presided
over the side of the sun and the digits of the moon and the nakshatras over the
other. The six seasons were the rim of the chariot; its pushkara was the sky. The
year was its velocity, the solstices were the joints of its wheels and axles, the
muhurtas were the junctions and the kaalas the pins of the yoke. The kaashtas
were the chariot’s nose, the kshanas its axle shaft, the nimeshas its base and the
minutest, most fleeting divisions of instants were its poles.
Vyasa, the firmament was the fender of that vimana, heaven and moksha
its flagstaffs. It was powered by faith and could traverse infinite space or infinite
time in a wink. All the devas were part of that chariot; it was made from their
astral bodies for the God of Gods. Brahma yoked the Vedas as steeds and
brought the resplendent craft to Siva. "We hope this is a vimana fit for you, O
Devadeva."
Blazing up in joy and glory, Rudra climbed into the diamond chariot, made
with a little of everything that exists in all the worlds. With Brahma himself as
their sarathy, they flew up at the speed of time towards the asuras’ cities. It was
an exceptional day of Pushya, which came once in a thousand years and the
Tripura moved together into the sky, joining in slow grace into a single city,
bright as a star.
Flying into battle, Siva suddenly cried in a terrible voice, "Be beasts, O
Devas and give me lordship over animals if you would vanquish the asuras!"
The devas were terrified: what if they were left bestial forever? They
remembered the curse of Dadichi’s wife Survacha. Rudra cried exultantly, "I
will free you from your animals."
Knowing his mystic meaning, the devas said, "So be it."

Then, Siva was Pasupati, Lord of animals, who liberates them. That Form
he assumed when the devas made him Pasupati cannot be described, for he was
every beast in all the worlds of creation. With his creatures around him, the
devas in their animalhood, four-footed, tailed and clawed, eyes glowing, snarling
and roaring, denizens of a mythic wilderness, Siva went into battle.
In his vimana, quivering like a giant hummingbird hanging in the air, Siva
Pasupati strung the Pinaka with an astra that contained the three final fires,
Hutasa, Soma and Narayana. He bent his body into pratyalidha, the posture of
the archer and waited while the three cities coalesced into a single one against
the constellation of Pushyami in the indigo twilight.
The Lord’s fingers were still as death on his bowstring and astra; Ganesa
sat on his thumb to make it firm. But the Tripura were elusive, the cities would
not appear in one image before Siva’s eye of aim. A voice spoke out of the air,
an asariri, "Lord of the universe, you shall not burn the Tripura until Ganesa is
worshipped."
Rudra bowed, palms folded, before Ganapathy, his wise son. When he
raised his face again, he saw there were not three separate cities in the sky, only
one. The devas, who had fallen on their faces before the elephant-headed one,
cried in triumph, ‘Jaya!’ Siva strung his bow again with the Paasupatastra and at
the auspicious moment, abhilaasa, he drew the bowstring against his ear and
hailed the asuras in the Voice of the Pasupati. Fear flashed through the demons,
black lightning in their blood. With a report that shook the firmament, Siva
loosed his astra, a flaming sun. It pierced the Tripura from below and blazed
through the city: that weapon wrought from an occult body of Vishnu’s, with
Agni at its head, bringing apocalyptic fire.
Palaces and gardens, roads paved with rubies and diamonds, turrets and
fountains of gold, silver and iron melted in the inferno. They melted down into
some handfuls of ashes. Children playing, old men watching their grandchildren
at play, men in their prime in their schools of war and learning, munis, Arihat’s
converts at lustful dhyana, women in labour, women cooking in their kitchens,
women in their beds in the throes of love, their lovers thrusting at their velvet
bodies: all these were frozen in a scream in the white flash of Siva’s astra.
Trailing smoke, battlements and palaces ablaze, the Tripura fell spinning from
the great scream in the sky, smouldering into the ocean, hissing when it struck
water. It burned pale and bright beneath the waves for many days on the bed of
the deeps: such was the fire of Siva’s Paasupatastra.
Yet, there were demons in Tripura who, by Siva’s own grace, miraculously
escaped. There were those that did not fall torched into the sea, those who called
out his name in old remembrance at the moment of terror and others who still

worshipped him secretly, even until that final day. These, I have heard, good
Vyasa, attained the realm of Ganapathy, who was revered before the astra
flamed from Siva’s Pinaka. Mayaa, architect of the asuras’ destiny, escaped and
so did Arihat and his four disciples of the tonsured heads and the weird faith of
faithlessness.
Such a silence descended on the worlds after the Tripura fell out of the
sky. Only Siva blazed forth, dazzling the ten directions, as he will at the hour
when he consumes the universe. The cowering devas whimpered. They saw
Uma as well, an emerald-green flame in half Siva’s body. He was Androgyne
and perfect mystery at that moment, God and Goddess together, bright and dark
at once, riding his vimana of Time.
When the resounding silence threatened to finish them all, Brahma said,
shaking, "Obeisance, Ardhanaariswara of the form of Omkara. Obeisance,
Pasupati! Aghora, be calm again, for the devas’ work is done."
The devas, who could barely speak, whispered, "Save us, Rudra."
Vishnu bowed to that Cosmic Form and cried in an ecstasy, "Let my
bhakti for you grow, Sadasiva!"
Tarakaksha, Mayaa who had been saved by his past devotion, said,
"Obeisance 
Mahadeva, 
great 
Kalpavriksha. 
Obeisance 
Sankara, 
O
compassionate one. They say you that love being praised, but Lord, I have no
words with which to praise you. Bless me, Siva!"
Siva said as thunder, "I am pleased with you, Mayaa, name your boon."
Mayaa prostrated at the Lord’s lotus feet. He cried, "Let my bhakti for you
be deathless, Rudra. Let no evil ever stir in my heart again."
Siva placed his palm on Mayaa’s head, "Be blessed, my bhakta."
And, Vyasa, that Daitya was saved,’ said Sanatkumara," said Brahma to
his son Narada awash on the living current of the sublime Purana in his soul."
Says Romaharshana to the rishis of Saunaka in the Naimisa vana, in that
kalpa.

THIRTY-EIGHT
 
Jalandhara, Son of the Ocean
 
Saunaka says to the Suta Romaharshana, "Tell us, O perfect Pauranika,
about Siva and the Asura Jalandhara."
Suta begins, "Brahma’s eloquent son, Sanatkumara, said to Vyasa who sat
at his feet absorbed,
‘Once, Brihaspati and Indra were on their way to Kailasa to see Lord Siva.
Suddenly, on a mountain trail, they saw a great and naked rishi whose body
shone, whose hair was matted in jata, whose mien was fierce and his skin white
as the moon.
Indra said haughtily, "Who are you, fellow, that bar our way? Don’t you
know who we are? Tell us, Muni, is Siva home on Kailasa?"
The naked rishi scratched himself and said nothing; nor did he move from
where he stood. Indra was furious, "Evil fool, dare you mock the king of the
devas?"
Indra raised his thunderbolt to strike down that muni, but the wind-clad
one made an occult mudra and Indra’s hand froze. The rishi’s eyes burned red,
his body shone a terrifying aura and his brow twitched as if with a separate rage.
Brihaspati knew that Siva stood before them and prostrated before the Lord.
"Obeisance, O Destroyer of Daksha’s yagna, O three-eyed Kamaghna, O
Tripuraari, O Kaalahara, O Vyalin with the black serpents around your body, O
Rudra who plucked off Brahma’s head, O Agni, O Vayu, O Akasa, O Naara, O
Surya, O Soma, O Akhanda, O You who are Brahma and Vishnu, O greater than
Prakriti, O Brahmandahridaya, heart of the stars!"
Devaguru Brihaspati pulled the shocked Indra down on his face at the
strange ascetic’s feet. "Mahadeva, quiet the anger rising in your eye. Indra seeks
the refuge of your lotus feet."
In a voice that made Indra tremble, Rudra said, "The fire is risen in my
eye, it will not go back."
Indra was speechless and Brihaspati cried, "Bhaktavatsala, take pity on
Indra."
Bhaktavatsala, saviour of his devotees, was delighted with his new name
and burst out laughing. He raised Brihaspati and Indra, shaking like a leaf, to

their feet. Naked Siva said, "Be known as the Enlivener, Brihaspati, you have
restored life to Indra today. And this fire in my brow I now give to the Ocean."
He grew tall as the sky, Bhaktavatsala Siva; his face was in the pale sun.
With a ringing cry, he plucked the agni from his brow and cast it into the distant
sea. Indra and Brihaspati no longer had to climb Kailasa’s summit. Siva blessed
them on that snowy slope and they went back to their homes in the sky.
The fire from Siva’s third eye fell hissing into the Sindhu Sagara sangama,
where the Indus meets the Ocean and a splendent boy was born there, at whose
cries the world shook. The devas in heaven clapped their hands over their ears.
In distant Brahmaloka, beyond the sun, Brahma heard the awful wailing. Brahma
and the devas flew down to the earth and saw the exceptional child in Varuna’s
waving lap. Bright waves embodied, the Ocean came and gave the boy to
Brahma. In wonder, the Pitama said, "Who is he, whose son?"
Varuna replied, "One moment he was not there and the next he lay crying
at the confluence of river and sea. I do not know where he came from or whose
he is. Pitama, you perform his birth rites and read the lines in his palm to tell his
fortune."
But that boy seized Brahma by the throat and began to shake his head
violently, so tears sprang to the Creator’s eyes. Brahma extricated himself from
the small and mighty grasp and declared, "He brought tears to my eyes, let him
be called Jalandhara."
With the Ocean’s help, he prised open the tiny fists and read the lines in
the child’s palms. Brahma prophesied, "He shall be a youth in a day, for he is a
boy of wonder. I have seen only one other hand to rival his in martial prowess.
He will be as powerful as Karttikeya; he will defeat Vishnu in battle. He will be
the Emperor of the asuras and even Siva will find it hard to kill him, though only
Siva can. I cannot tell who this boy’s parents are; those lines are missing. But he
will have an exquisite wife and her virtue will make him invincible."
Brahma called for Sukra, the guru of the asuras. So sure was he of what he
predicted, he set a crown on Jalandhara’s little head after performing the birth
rites for the child. He returned the boy to the Ocean. Jalandhara’s foster-father
was overjoyed and Brahma vanished back to Satyaloka with the devas.
In miraculous time, hours, Jalandhara grew into a magnificent youth.
Varuna asked the daitya king, Kaalanemi, for his daughter Vrinda, to be his
son’s wife. When the young man was married and his shakti with him, the
asuras, who had hidden themselves in patala after the devas last vanquished
them, crept out into the sun again. They swarmed to Jalandhara in teeming
hordes, eager to avenge themselves on the devas, eager to conquer the worlds
again. They crowned him their Emperor and he ruled his empire with

Sukracharya’s blessing.
Once, when Jalandhara sat in his palace with Vrinda and Bhargava, Rahu
came to his court and bowed to the Asura sovereign. Rahu was passing strange,
because he had no head! Jalandhara softly asked Sukra, "Who did this to Rahu?"
His guru replied, "Vishnu, when the Kshirasagara was churned and the
devas cheated our people of the amrita."
When he heard about the churning of the ocean, Jalandhara’s eyes turned
crimson. He called his messenger, Ghasmara and sent him to Indra with a
message.
"Base Deva, you churned my father with the mountain, tormenting him so
he gave up his jewels and his nectar, which properly belong to me. I, Jalandhara,
command you to return what is mine. Otherwise, face my consequences."
Though he was anxious, Indra replied bravely, "You brag like Shankha,
who once threatened me in his arrogance: he died. In my time, I have quelled the
pride of so many like you I have lost count of them. My brother Vishnu killed
Shankha in the waves of your father, the Sea. If you are not careful, you will
meet the same fate."
When he heard the Deva king’s message, Jalandhara’s howl shook the sky.
His lips white, he cried, "Call my asuras to arms! We march at once against the
thieves of devaloka."
With ferocious commanders like Sumbha and Nisumbha, Jalandhara
marched on devaloka. His monstrous forces camped in Nandana, the enchanted
garden outside Amravati and Jalandhara blasted out a challenge on his great sea
conch. His demons roared up at the devas behind their ramparts, mocking the
gods of light, crying that tonight the deva women would lie in asura beds.
In beautiful formation, Indra’s legions streamed out of the gates of
Amravati, a brilliant and deadly storm. Maces and fire swords, occult arrows and
spears of light flashed in the sun and quickly both forces waded in streams of
blood. That battleground was like the sky at scarlet dusk with dark clouds
scattered through it: the corpses of elephants and warriors, chariots and horses,
the writhing bodies of those struck down but not dead. But the dead did not long
remain so on either side. Sukra brought the slain asuras back to life with the
amritasanjivini; while, across the bloody field, Brihaspati revived the devas with
miraculous herbs from the mountain Drona.
In the heat of battle, Jalandhara cried to Sukra, "How do these devas rise
from death? I thought only you had the amritasanjivini vidya."
Sukra said, "It is not the sanjivini that Angiras uses, but the herbs of
Drona. If you cast that mountain into the sea, the devas will stay dead."
The son of the Ocean, son of the fire from Siva’s eye, withdrew quietly

from battle. Secretly, he flew to Mount Drona, pulled up that mountain by its
roots and cast it into the sea. Roaring in glee, Jalandhara came back to battle and
now there was no containing him. Like a whirlwind thick with blades and shafts,
fierce as the fire that sired him, the Asura Emperor fell upon the devas. They fell
around him like flies.
When the life-giving herbs from Drona were exhausted by Jalandhara’s
tide of death, Brihaspati flew to the mountain to gather more. He saw a chasm
where the roots of the mountain once plunged into the earth. He flew back to the
battle, crying, "Fly, Indra, while you live. The son of the Ocean is the son of
Siva’s fire!"
The devas fled to a cavern on golden Mount Meru on the earth. Jalandhara
entered Amravati in triumph, with asura conches blaring victory, while the deva
women cowered in their crystal mansions. Jalandhara pursued the devas to the
cave on Meru and they fled from there to Vaikunta. They prostrated before
Vishnu and cried, "Obeisance, O long-armed Hrishikesa, O Madhusudana, O
Matsya, Kuurma, Varaha, O Vamana, Parasurama, Sri Rama, Sri Krishna,
Buddha, Kalki! Obeisance, O Radha’s lover in every kalpa, O Lakshmi’s lord, O
Blue Lotus of the universe of secret lore, O Kapila, O Mahatman! Narayana,
Jalandhara has driven us out of devaloka."
Vishnu said thoughtfully, "I will come to fight the Asura."
As he went to mount Garuda, Lakshmi caught his arm. He saw tears in her
eyes! The Ocean’s daughter sobbed, "How does my brother deserve death at my
husband’s hands?"
Vishnu wiped her tears. He kissed her softly and whispered, "I cannot kill
Jalandhara. He was born from Siva’s fire and I can only show him my valour on
the field. But for the sake of the devas, I must go."
Vishnu went to battle and the wind from Garuda’s wings blew the asuras
about like straws in a gale; while, now that Hari led them, the devas flew at the
demons with new courage. Jalandhara rallied his asuras, "Stand and fight, my
heroes. Stand and fight these cowards of light. My black Mauryas, my Dhumras,
my Kaalakeyas, my Daurdhas, my Kankas, stand and they will turn tail.
Sumbha, Nisumbha, you are not afraid of these vainglorious weaklings. We will
make a sea of their blood today!"
That unequalled Demon charged roaring into the fray, while the deva
forces parted helplessly before him like a woman to her lover’s thrust. Heads
flew off bodies at dramatic trajectories; arms and legs hewn off by sword strokes
lay twitching briefly in thickening gore. Bloodcurdling screams rent the air.
Axeheads and swordblades flashed in warriors’ hands, or lay remorseful on the
ground in congealing crimson, in sorrow and expiation, that death had come to

those who brandished them.
The devas fled that battle first. From behind their lines, mounted on
Garuda, Vishnu came again to the fore. The Sudarshana chakra at his fingertip
dazzled the field, blinding the demons. In echoing blasts, the Panchajanya
flashed fear through their bodies and from above, the Saringa rained death in a
storm. Vishnu’s arrows carried asura heads into the sky in bizarre formations, so
the other demons whimpered at Narayana’s sorcery. Roaring in a voice to shake
the sun from the sky like a fruit, Jalandhara charged Vishnu.
Quick as thought, Vishnu garlanded him with a hundred nitid arrows,
shafts of blue fire. Roaring horribly, the Ocean’s son plucked them from his skin
like needles, which pricked but did not wound him. Hari cut down Jalandhara’s
banner, his royal parasol, his bow and quiver and shot a single deadly shaft
straight into the Demon’s heart. Grinning, fangs bared, Jalandhara calmly drew
that barb right out of his heart; and then Vishnu trembled. With a howl of rage,
Jalandhara struck Garuda on the head and felled him, so Hari was mountless on
the field. The Demon struck him back squarely through his breast with his green
lance, so the light of his sacred heart was suddenly dimmed.
They fought with cudgel and axe, sword and trident, each ayudha flaming
with cosmic agni: blue, green and black with wizardly power. When the
weapons were all shattered, they fell on each other with bare hands, the Blue
God and the Asura son of Siva and the Ocean. The earth cracked where they
fought. Uprooted by the shock of their blows, great trees fell split and lifeless on
the ground.
Then, Vishnu, amazed, stood in a benign form before the Asura. Hari said
with a smile, "Invincible Jalandhara, I have never fought a hero like you! I will
give you any boon you ask, because you have worshipped me with your blows
as I have never been worshipped before."
Jalandhara said, "If you are truly pleased, bring my sister Lakshmi and
come to stay in my house."
Much to the devas’ distress, Vishnu agreed, "I shall."
War against Jalandhara became impossible when Vishnu went to live in
his city and the son of the Ocean kept his great brother-in-law and his sister of
fascination in his home, with honour and in joy, for years. And Jalandhara ruled
the three worlds, patala, bhumi and swarga. He gave his asuras the devas’ places
on high and Nisumbha lordship of the under-worlds.
From the devas, gandharvas and siddhas, he took their hoarded wealth of
jewels and gold and peopled his capital with folk of all races: gandharvas, nagas,
rakshasas and men of the earth. Once the devas were conquered, the Demon
ruled his worlds wisely. He protected his people, regardless of race or kind, as if

they were his own children. In Jalandhara’s kingdom, there was no sickness,
hunger or indigence, for he was the most just and virtuous of kings.
However, when Jalandhara ruled the worlds, the devas were no more than
his slaves and they prayed fervently to Siva Bhaktavatsala to release them from
the Demon’s yoke. Siva sent Narada to those gods who lived, cowed and
humbled, as menials in Jalandhara’s fabulous city.
Their glory dim, the devas said in piteous voices, "Maharishi, you see us in
our misery: Surya, Soma, Agni and Yama expelled from our places and the
asuras ruling time. The devas of Amravati, lords of the elements, are slaves
today. Jalandhara must be killed, or we will be slaves forever."
Narada thought for a moment, then said, "Be comforted that your misery
will not last much longer."
Narada went to Jalandhara’s court, the focus of his power. Jalandhara
received the wanderer reverently. Standing when the rishi entered, he showed
him to a throne of honour. Then, smiling indulgently, he said, "Brahmana, to
what do we owe this privilege? How may I serve you?"
A beaming Narada replied, "Lord of the worlds, blessed Jalandhara of the
tremendous intellect, peerless Emperor of the daityas and danavas, there is
indeed something you can do not only for me, your admirer and well-wisher, but
for yourself. Listen carefully. On my wanderings, recently, I climbed to the
summit of Mount Kailasa. There, in a grove of kalpavrikshas, amongst a
hundred kamadhenus, a vana illumined at night by chintamanis and with gold
strewn casually about, I saw the fair and three-eyed Siva with his Parvati. O
Daitya, I thought, ‘Nowhere in the three worlds is there such grandeur!’ Then, I
remembered, ‘What of Jalandhara, lord of the asuras? Surely, he can match
Siva’s glory.’ And so, I came here to see for myself."
Narada paused and Jalandhara leaned forward and cried, "And what do
you find?"
Avuncular Narada patted the Ocean son’s hand and said, "Your wealth
more than equals Siva’s. Airavata graces your stables and Ucchaisravas; Indra’s
Parijata grows in your garden. Kubera’s treasures are in your coffers and
Brahma’s swan chariot waits at your door. Jalandhara, unrivalled indeed is your
sovereignty of the worlds. Yet, there is one possession you do not have, the most
prized one: the one that would be the crown jewel of all the rest. You do not
have a wife like Uma!"
Jalandhara’s eyes bulged. He cried, "Where is she?"
Narada smiled conspiratorially. Softly, he said, "How she, who is so
completely beautiful, lives with that naked yogin I will never understand. She
deserves better: she deserves none less than the greatest of men. She deserves the

Emperor of the universe for her husband!"
Jalandhara sat bemused, his eyes dreamy. Seeing his work well done,
Narada sighed and rose. "Well, there is no remedy for that: Siva, who has no
need of her, enjoys her fortune. And now, O King who would be truly peerless if
only Uma were at your side, I must be on my way."
When Narada had gone, Jalandhara called Rahu. His time to die drawn
near, the Asura said to his messenger, "Go, Rahu, to Mount Kailasa. There you
will find an ash-smeared rishi called Siva, with matted jata and entirely calm.
Say fearlessly to him, ‘Yogin, Sea of mercy, of what use to you is such a
beautiful wife? It is not proper that she lives with you, her beauty hidden among
your ghosts and goblins. Jalandhara, master of the worlds, already owns
Kubera’s Mahapadma, Indra’s Airavata and Parijata, Surya’s Ucchaisravas,
Brahma’s hamsa ratha, Varuna’s paasa, Mrityu’s danda and Agni’s immortal
garments burnt pure in his fire. It is only just that you give Parvati to him.’"
Rahu went to Kailasa and was shown into Siva’s presence. The Lord sat
among his ganas in a cave deep in the mountainside, which he lit up with the
radiance of his ash-coated body. Rahu stood awestruck and silent before
Mahadeva, who said kindly, "Speak, what have you come for?"
Taking a deep breath, Rahu said, "I come from Jalandhara, monarch of the
worlds. My lord says to you, Rudra, ‘How can you, who live in a cremation
ground, a naked yogin with garlands of bones around your throat, be a husband
to Himalaya’s exquisite daughter? I, Jalandhara, am the owner of everything
beautiful in the universe. You are my subject and I command you: send Parvati
to me!’"
Siva did not turn a hair and the slight smile played steadily on his face, in
the hush that fell in that cave. Then, there was a crack of thunder, a blinding
flash of light and his third eye glared open for an instant. From it, sprang a
horrible being with a lion’s face and a fanged mouth from which a snake’s
forked tongue flickered. The creature’s tawny eyes shed flames. With a wail, it
leapt at Rahu even as the Narasimha had at Hiranyakashyapu! Rahu fled. The
monster caught him near the cave mouth and yawned its jaws wide as that
entrance to devour the demon. Jalandhara’s messenger cried, "Mahadeva, save
me!"
Siva ordered the beast, "Let the brahmana go, he seeks our protection."
At the word ‘brahmana’, the creature dropped Rahu on the floor in a heap
and stood aside, slavering and growling so the cave echoed with his unappeased
hunger. Groaning as if in pain, that creature came near Siva and said in a
strangled whisper, "You snatched the prey I was born for from my jaws. Siva,
my hunger is unbearable, what shall I eat to appease it?"

Siva said in annoyance, "If you are so tormented, eat yourself!"
At which, with a grateful growl and quickly with loud crunching of bone,
champing of flesh and slurping of blood, the fiend ate himself before the
astonished eyes of the others. Only his lion’s head remained suspended in the
air, licking its lips in satisfaction! Siva roared with laughter. He cried
delightedly, "Oh, most unique monster! I name you Kirtimukha, face of fame.
From now, you shall be my dwarapalaka and you shall be worshipped first of all,
by anyone that wants to worship me."’
Said Sanatkumara to his mesmerised audience of one, his pupil Vyasa, my
master to whom Brahma’s august son taught the sacred Purana."
Suta Romaharshana, peerless Pauranika, says to the rishis of the Naimisa,
holiest of forests.

THIRTY-NINE
 
The seduction of Vrinda
 
Suta says,
"Enthralled, Vyasa cried, ‘Resplendent son of Brahma, O Sanatkumara of
infinite gyana, what happened after Siva spared Rahu’s life?’
Sanatkumara said, ‘Slowly and thoughtfully, Rahu made his way back to
Jalandhara. Reluctantly, he told the Ocean’s son what had chanced with him on
Kailasa. Springing to his feet, eyes afire, Jalandhara roared as fiercely as
Kirtimukha, "Call out my army! My generals Kaalanemi, Sumbha and
Nisumbha, the sons of Kotivara, the scions of Kambu, the Daurdhas, the
Kaalakas, the Mauryas and the Dhaurmas shall march on Kailasa. Today!"
As he climbed down from his throne, Jalandhara stumbled and his crown
fell from his head with a clatter. Sukra and Rahu rode ahead of their king that
day. They saw the sky was dark with clouds, jackals howled at them and vultures
wheeled overhead. Such was Jalandhara’s rage and his lust, he ignored those
omens of the great slumber. Making themselves invisible, the devas fled to
Kailasa; bound by Hari’s boon to Jalandhara, Vishnu and Lakshmi stayed on in
his palace.
Prostrating himself, Indra cried abjectly to Rudra, "Jalandhara is coming to
attack you, O Siva and Vishnu stays in the Asura’s palace as his guest."
Siva said quietly, "Consider Jalandhara dead, for what his messenger Rahu
said to me."
Siva sent the devas home. The daitya Emperor arrived at his gates with his
oceanic army and stood roaring like Yama. With a signal of thought, Siva
mustered his own gana forces, led by Nandin, Vighneswara and Karttikeya. The
two armies met on the holy mountain. Sword rang on sword, axe against axe;
severed heads bounced down the white slopes in macabre pageant.
Quickly, the fair ridges were crimson. The earth below trembled with the
sankhas and mridangas of war, the battle tramp of warriors and elephants and the
hooves of horses swift as sound. The air was brisk with feathered spear, arrow
and astras of many hues and flames. The mountain was strewn with fallen
weapons and hewn-off heads like rubies. Amidst battlecries and the screams of
brutal death, the ground was a marsh of melting ice and suets and blood.

Sukra resuscitated his felled asuras with the sanjivini. Their dissevered
heads barely steady on their necks, they came roaring out of death into battle
again! The ganas grew terrified at the demons rising like that and brought word
to Rudra. He screamed as if he had been pierced by a weapon. His body burned
in wrath, ruddy on the mountain and from his fiery mouth sprang an awful
kritya; her limbs were thick as palmyras, her mouth was a cave. She crushed
rough tree-trunks between her breasts to scratch herself and flew screeching into
battle.
After swallowing a few columns of asuras, she seemed dissatisfied.
Throwing her head this way and that in frenzy, seeking her prey, the one she had
come for, she stood motionless at the heart of the war. There was a shocked
pause around her. Siva’s own ganas shrank back, worried that she might turn on
them if they took her hideous fancy. Suddenly, with a delighted cry, she saw
Sukra Bhargava. Swooping on him like light, she snatched him up. Crooning in
almost conjugal joy, the kritya spread her legs wide, straddling the very
mountain. With a moan, she thrust a screaming Bhargava into her vagina and she
flew up into the sky and away.
The asuras were panic-stricken. They fled the battle, because now the
ganas were at them like a high wind among scythed grasses, scattering them
everywhere. From behind the asura lines, stemming their flight as a dam with
three awesome pillars might a river, came Kaalanemi, Sumbha and Nisumbha.
Their arrows were locust swarms in the sky and the ganas their prey. Quickly,
the gana ranks resembled the scarlet fields of the kimsuka of spring. Siva’s
legions turned tail and, whooping in delight, the asuras chased them.
Nandiswara, Ganesa and Karttikeya rose at the rear of the gana army, a
triune whirlwind. Kaalanemi and Nandin came face to face, Ganapathy and
Sumbha and, with an ululating cry, Nisumbha charged Kumara. Weapons
flashed in pale sun and snow. Nisumbha struck Karttikeya’s peacock in its chest
with six smoking arrows and it fell senseless. In a flash, with a clutch of fire
shafts, Kumara cut down Nisumbha’s chariot, horses and sarathy. Siva’s son
pierced the asura general’s chest squarely with another blue arrow. Drawing the
livid barb out with one hand, the undaunted asura cast his flaming spear at
Kumara and struck him deep in his side.
Nandin devastated Kaalanemi’s horses and chariot with seven lightning
bolts. Kaalanemi shattered Nandin’s bow with a single whistling shaft. Nandin
rushed at the daitya and struck him with his lance of slim light; blood spurted
from the demon general. With a roar, the Danava grew to a stupendous size. He
broke the peak off a nearby mountain and crashed it down on Nandin’s head.
Riding a sky chariot and a mouse, Sumbha and Ganapathy fought with

occult missiles, humming like swarms of black bees. To Sumbha’s dismay, he
suddenly saw his charioteer’s head, taken from its trunk by one of Ganesa’s
brilliant arrows, fly through the air and land in the snow, a grisly ball of blood
and brains. As his sleek vimana collapsed, Sumbha pierced Ganapathy’s mouse
with three calific astras. The creature squealed in agony. It trembled violently, as
a wounded mouse will, so Ganesa was thrown from its back. With a roar, which
echoed from the mountainsides, Ganesa felled Sumbha with an axe. He
clambered back on to the mouse, which seemed to have recovered: fighting on
foot and carrying his own weight did not appeal to the elephant-headed lord of
the ganas at all! He mocked the fallen Sumbha, prodding him with a spear as a
hunter does a leopard in his trap.
Without warning, Kaalanemi shot Ganesa treacherously from behind with
a shakti of darkness, like a serpent. Seeing Ganapathy fall, with a roar to eclipse
every effort gone before, Virabhadra charged into battle at the head of a
thousand goblins, kusmandas, bhairavas, vetalas, yoginis, pichasas and dakinis!
The mountain quaked with tigerish roars and womanly screams, as the bhutas
ran amok. They danced and sang nightmarishly; they leapt a hundred feet into
the air and turned giant cartwheels. And they swallowed the asuras they caught,
as pythons do birds. Ganesa awoke and stormed back into battle.
Now Karttikeya, Ganesa, Nandin and Virabhadra fought side by side and
back to back and they could not be taken unawares anymore. Time’s reapers,
they mowed the asuras down. Their demons falling around them in thousands
every moment, Sumbha, Nisumbha and Kaalanemi began to give ground to the
gana forces. Then, with a ringing cry from the air, Jalandhara erupted on the
encounter in a rainbow chariot, bringing death in a swathe of arrows that filled
the space between heaven and earth.
Jalandhara struck Nandin and Ganapathy with five arrows each and
Virabhadra with twenty. From a distance, Karttikeya cast Agni’s spear like light
at the son of the Ocean. It pierced his breast and he fell, his eyes rolling up. But
in a moment, pulling the lance from his flesh, grinding his teeth and gasping in
pain, the Emperor of the asuras was on his feet again, his wound closing
bloodlessly. As he rose, he flung his mace at Kumara, knocking him
unconscious. That mace flew on towards Ganesa, who splintered it with a
missile.
Virabhadra struck Jalandhara with three arrows and cut down his banner
and horses with seven whining astras. The Daitya felled Ganapathy with a
feminine shakti and he mounted another chariot, which appeared for him out of
nowhere. Shining like twin suns over the mountain, Virabhadra and Jalandhara
fought with arrows that stopped other arrows and astras that did complex,

incandescent battle by themselves in the air. Virabhadra cut down the Asura’s
horses for the second time. Losing control, the Demon sprang from his shattered
chariot and charged the gana, surprising him. He struck Virabhadra with an iron
cudgel, smashing one side of his head, so he fell vomiting blood.
When Virabhadra fell, the ganas fled shrieking to Siva. For here surely
was an adversary worthy not of them, but of their Lord himself. Then, in a truly
terrible form, mounted on his bull, Siva came to battle. The ganas returned with
him, their morale restored that now Rudra himself would lead them. When Siva
came to fight, the daityas fled: they saw he was more awesome than they had
dreamt. They could not have imagined anyone like him until they saw him on his
swaying mount.
A million sorcerous arrows they shot at Siva: Jalandhara, Sumbha,
Nisumbha, Kaalanemi, Khadgaroma, Balahaka, Ghasmara, Prachanda and the
others. Filigree net of darkness, the death shafts drifted down from the sky. With
a laugh that turned the demons’ blood to ice, Rudra split the net at its seams and
the arrows fell headless around him and his ganas, harmless as flowers. In the
awestruck silence, Siva roared once, more reverberantly than any other sound of
the day. Then, he was at them like Death’s tempest. His arrows found their
hearts, his axe glinted across the steep and icy battleground, his sword and
trident sang in blood and the horns of his hillocky bull disembowelled screaming
daityas everywhere.
Rudra lopped off Khadgaroma’s head with his axe. With a casual blow of
his club, he smashed Balahaka’s head into dripping pulp. Ghasmara suddenly
found himself ensnared in Siva’s noose and dashed to the ground, again and
again, until life left him with a sigh. The trisula truncated Prachanda in three
slivers; all the while, like ceaseless rain, Siva’s arrows slew thousands of lesser
asuras.
Jalandhara rode forth again, mocking his generals, "What use is the
pedigree of your mothers, of which you boast so much? You call yourselves
great heroes at home and run like rabbits in battle. You will not go to heaven if
die as cowards. O Asuras of little stature, you are loath to die because dreams of
fornication linger in your flesh. Don’t you know that death in battle is moksha?
Have you lost your minds, that you are afraid of death? Death gives everything;
it sets you free, fools. Come joyfully to battle, my Daityas, for death is
preferable to shame!"
But his demons were so afraid of Siva they cried, "Rudra is more terrible
than death!"
They would not come back to fight, but stood shivering like frightened
children. Jalandhara blew his conch and hailed Siva, "Come then, Yogin, fight

me! What use is it killing these cowards? Come, show me whatever meagre
strength you have."
Jalandhara aimed a brace of venomous arrows at Siva’s head. They fell
like lotus blossoms around the Auspicious One. With a smile on his sweet lips,
Siva stood unmoving at the heart of the battlefield. No one saw him raise his
bow and shoot an arrow. But abruptly, Jalandhara’s chariot was smashed, his
charioteer and horses lay in pools of blood. The Asura rushed at Rudra with his
mace aloft. Again, with such speed that no one saw anything, Siva cut the mace
in five pieces with his arrows. With a howl, Jalandhara raised a fist of spiked
mail to strike Rudra. Once more, with undiscernible swiftness, Siva’s arrows
plucked the Demon up by his armour and flung him back a krosa.
Jalandhara now resorted to the maaya his guru Bhargava had taught him,
the sorcery to which he was born. Suddenly, Siva saw wonderful hosts of
gandharvas and apsaras, singing and dancing just for him. Though he knew at
once that this was Jalandhara’s maaya, the enchantment was so powerful he
could not shake it off. He sat on his bull, bewitched, thinking that never before
had he heard such music or seen such dancing. The weapons slipped from his
hands, as the caress of flute, mridanga and vina engulfed him and the sight of
apsaras’ sinuous limbs, swaying hypnotically.
Seeing his chance, while Siva sat bemused, Jalandhara left Sumbha,
Nisumbha and Kaalanemi to mind the battle. Assuming, also with maaya,
Rudra’s very form, the Demon flew to Uma of the mountain.
She was with her sakhis; seeing Siva, she waved them away and Parvati
ran to him alone. Telling himself she had never been loved by a warrior, but only
a yogin, the Daitya born from Siva’s eye-fire had come to thrust himself upon
her. When he saw Kaali, a surge of lust overwhelmed Jalandhara. Not touching
him, only thinking for a moment that he was her husband, Uma’s love for Siva
swept into Jalandhara in a riptide: unmanned, the Asura ejaculated helplessly on
to the ground.
Uma saw him tremble and his eyes glaze over. She saw his seed spurt from
him and she vanished from there with a cry. She fled to a sanctuary on the
northern shore of the Manasarovara. There she prayed to Vishnu and he
appeared before her. Parvati cried, "Hari, did you see how the devil tried to
seduce me, while Siva is under his spell?"
Vishnu saw what had happened in his mind’s eye. He said, "Jalandhara
must be killed."
Leaning forward eagerly, Uma said, "He has shown us the way himself."
Vishnu asked, "How is that?"
Uma said, "Narayana, in all the world there is no virtue to equal chastity,

no power to equal its power. It is Vrinda’s chastity that makes Jalandhara
invincible."
She paused and there was a knowing gleam in Vishnu’s eye. He knew why
she had called him here, not Siva out of his trance. Hari asked slowly, "If
Vrinda’s chastity is violated, Jalandhara can be killed?"
Uma smiled. Vishnu bowed and vanished from her presence. He went
back to Jalandhara’s city, named after the Demon. He came as a muni and settled
himself in some woods outside the city gates. Now he had to fetch Vrinda out to
him; to the blue master of Maaya herself that posed no problem.
That night, nightmare after nightmare ravaged Vrinda, tearing through her
sleep. First, she saw her husband anointed with oil and riding naked on a black
buffalo. His head was shaven; he wore a garland of black flowers. A group of
mourning asuras surrounded him and he was enveloped in darkness. Vrinda
awoke, bathed in sweat. She rang for her maids to come and sleep in her room.
Though they left the taper burning, more evil dreams visited the queen.
Repeatedly, she saw her husband riding the black buffalo, Yama’s beast.
Near dawn, another nightmare woke her screaming. She had seen their city,
Jalandhara and herself sink beneath the ocean. Outside her window, she saw the
sun rising with a dark hole at its heart and the chaste Vrinda dissolved in tears.
She kept crying, "Where is my husband? Oh, we are doomed, we are doomed."
Her maids took her into the fresh air, out to the terraces around the palace.
She was disconsolate and restive. They took her into the city’s green parks, but
she had no peace. Her hands shook, her body perspired profusely and time and
again she burst into tears. Finally, two of her sakhis took her into the woods
beyond the city to distract her. They walked a fair way, while she spoke no word
but only wept from time to time, utterly miserable and convinced that doom was
round the corner.
Suddenly, from behind some trees two lion-faced demons, naked and
plainly aroused, sprang howling at the queen and her women. Sakhis and
mistress fled in different directions. Wailing, Vrinda ran straight into the arms of
a rishi, who turned calmly on the devils and chased them away with a deep
humkara.
The sage comforted Vrinda, "Don’t cry, my child, don’t cry. They have
gone."
When he had fetched water for her from the river and she had a sip or two,
Vrinda still sobbed. The rishi said, "Why not share your sorrow with me?"
Vrinda fell at his feet and cried, "Maharishi, my husband Jalandhara is at
war against Siva and I fear for his life."
The rishi shut his eyes in dhyana. He stood unmoving, until two monkeys

dropped down before them from the trees. The sage seemed fluent in their
gibbering tongue. He spoke to them, giving instructions. The monkeys
scampered back into the trees. Then they flew straight up into the sky and were
gone.
Vrinda asked, "What is this, holy one?"
The muni made a sign of blessing over her head. He said gravely,
"Everything will be known about your husband."
They waited only moments, when they heard the monkeys chattering
above them again. Now, they carried something in their arms. Leaping down
nimbly, the creatures set Jalandhara’s body and head, severed from each other, at
the sage’s feet. Vrinda fell on them with a cry. "Oh speak to me, Jalandhara! Son
of the Ocean, has a naked yogin conquered the master of the worlds? I told you
Siva is the Parabrahman. But you did not listen and now you are dead."
She grasped the muni’s hand. She fell on her knees before him, "Mighty
Rishi, bring my husband back to life. I know you have the power!"
She fell at his feet in a swoon. When Vrinda came to her senses, the kindly
hermit had vanished and a living Jalandhara cradled her head in his lap.
Tenderly, her husband stroked her face and whispered words of love to her.
When she tried to speak, a smile like the sun at dawn breaking on her teary face,
he stopped her mouth with his own. With new fire, his powerful hands moved
over her body, his lips moved down her throat and, moaning, she was lost to the
world. He loved her in that clearing in the woods as he had never loved her
before. Her cries brought the woodland creatures out to stare. Only when a
screaming climax wracked her body, tossing it on a tide of rapture, she saw that
his skin had turned as blue as the night lotus that blooms on secret pools in the
heart of the vana. Springing to her feet with a snarl that shook Vishnu, she
cursed him. "Vile deceiver, defiler of my virtue! May the two fiends you had
chase me, abduct your own woman in another life. And may you seek the help of
monkeys in a lonely forest."
She would have said more, but the look in his eyes stopped her: she saw he
had fallen in love with her! Vrinda shook her head in wonder, because she knew
who he was. But then, she created a fire with her yogic power. Before he could
stop her, she walked into it and was ashes before his frantic eyes. In a streak of
light, Vrinda’s spirit was absorbed into Uma. But Vishnu stood numb, heedless
of the devas and gandharvas who shouted ‘Jaya!’ and hailed him their saviour.
Smoke and ashes from her pyre covered his face in a mask and tears ran wet
courses down his cheeks.’
Sanatkumara paused in his tale. Vyasa’s eyes and his grave heart were
full."

Says the Suta to his sage audience in the Naimisa.

FORTY
 
The plants of love
 
"Unequalled Romaharshana, most poetic of your guru’s sishyas, what
happened then?"
Suta says,
"Sanatkumara said to Vyasa, thirsting for the matchless Siva Purana,
‘When Parvati vanished before his lustful eyes, Jalandhara’s spell of gandharvas
and apsaras fell away from Siva and he knew the Demon had deceived him with
maaya. Jalandhara reappeared on the field of battle, but weakened by his
shameful ejaculation. Deep in his heart, was the anxiety that even if Uma had
become his how would he satisfy her? When just the sight of her made him
spend his seed. With a terrible roar, Siva attacked Jalandhara. The Asura greeted
him with another hallucination. Rudra saw Uma a captive, tethered to the
Demon’s chariot, while the gloating generals Sumbha, Nisumbha and Kaalanemi
fondled her lecherously. The common daitya foot soldiers had their hands on her
and she sobbed and sobbed, gnashing her teeth, tossing her head in rage and
anguish. But she could not scream: they had bound her mouth with a dark cloth.
Siva stopped numb at this illusion. Jalandhara struck his chest with an
astra. Two shafts more pierced Rudra’s head and his belly, burying themselves
to their feathers, spreading fire through his body. Siva plucked them out like
thorns and, as he did, he grew before the awestruck demon army into a vast and
wild form, its head scraping the sky. Whimpering, Kaalanemi, Sumbha and
Nisumbha fled. They could not bear the terror of that Form.
He howled after them, "I will not kill you while you fly like cowards. But
one day, Uma will, for mocking her."
Jalandhara’s illusion vanished when Siva grew like that. The son of the
Ocean obscured the sky with a mantle of arrows, so day turned to night and
darkness fell upon the battle. A gasp of fright rose from the gana army. Siva’s
archery in reply was like the sun rising to dispel the night. The sorceries leaked
out from Jalandhara’s weapons and they fell harmlessly on Rudra’s people. As
night became day, the Demon Emperor also grew as tall as Meru and he fetched
Nandin a blow with his iron club. The bull’s legs turned to water and he settled
on the ground with a dismal bellow. No matter how Siva tried to rouse him, he

could not get up.
Siva cried out in fury and his body was full of terrible light, burning like
the fires at the end of time. The last straggles of the daitya army, the sturdiest
warriors, fled screaming. Only the Ocean’s son still stood his ground. In his
reluctant father’s heart, Siva knew that the child of his eye-fire must die. He
dipped his big toe in the shallow sea and, dragging it in a circle, made a wheel of
water. Smiling awfully, he said to Jalandhara, "Daitya, bear this water wheel
first, then we will see how you fight me."
Jalandhara growled. Fearlessly, he cried, "After I drink your water wheel,
Siva, I will drink your blood. Then I will deal with your puny army as Garuda
does with snakes that slither on the ground. Rudra, when I was a baby I brought
tears to Brahma’s eyes and you hope to stand against me. I am Jalandhara,
conqueror of Vishnu. I am the son of the Ocean, Emperor of the worlds!"
Siva flicked his foot forward and the chakra of water flew humming at
Jalandhara. Even as he opened his mouth to boast again, the fluid wheel struck
his head from his body. A scream of surprise froze on the lips that had
commanded the three worlds. A white fire issued from Jalandhara’s gaping
throat and with a wail, flashed back into Siva’s body from where that Demon
had once begun. Then blood sprang from him in geysers, flowed in rivers,
turning the white mountain scarlet.
Flowers from heaven, from the grateful devas, cascaded upon Siva’s head,
incandescent with the slaying of the Asura. Music and dance, now by real
gandharvas and apsaras, broke out in the sky where the celestial ones had
gathered. The devas sang:
"You are Prakriti and Purusha,
Perfect One, O Mahadeva!
We are your servants forever,
Protect us always, O Siva!"
Siva said wryly, "For you, I slew Jalandhara who was a part of me."
Amidst the delirium of release, of worship with fevered song and dance,
Brahma said quietly, "Vishnu has smeared himself with ashes from Vrinda’s
pyre and seems to have lost his mind. He wanders naked in the forest weeping
and calling her name. You must help him."
Siva said slowly, "Shakti is the illusion of such love: Mulaprakriti ties and
unties these knots. Seek her help for Hari; sing her praises until she frees him."
His work done, Siva vanished from the gory field. The devas worshipped
the Devi for Vishnu’s sake. They lay on their faces, they prayed. "We worship
you, O primordial Prakriti from whom the three gunas came, which cause
creation, sustenance and destruction! We worship you, by whose desire the

universe evolves and dissolves. O Durga of deepest mystery, O unknowable
Maaye, we beg your favour for our Lord Vishnu. He stays mourning beside dead
Vrinda’s pyre. He has smeared himself with her ashes and no one can turn him
away from that place, O Kaali."
A blinding sphere of light appeared above them; a great female voice
spoke to them out of the sky. "Uma, Lakshmi and Saraswati am I and they shall
help you."
The light vanished. The devas worshipped the three Goddesses, who came
shimmering before them. The Devis gave them three seeds and said, "Sow these
around Vishnu and he will be well again."
The devas sowed the brilliant seeds around Hari who sat lost in the
memory of Vrinda. From the seeds of Saraswati, Uma and Lakshmi, three
wonderful plants sprang up around him at midnight: the Dhatri, the Tulasi and
the Malati. They were woman plants, exquisite and naked. Full of love, they
came by moonlight, enfolding Hari in green caresses, stirring him into desire
from his stupor of grief. With tendril hands, leaf-tongued kisses and petal fellatio
they woke him back into the passion in which he was frozen when Vrinda ashed
herself. Friend Vyasa, entwined in their feminine myths of old earth,
moonbeams, emerald shoot and precious sap, Vishnu fell to frenzied love. He
roared in ecstasy for the wild lovemaking of the divine woman plants.
Suddenly, invaded by subtle envy and strange propriety, the Mallika from
Lakshmi’s seed disentangled herself from the febrile knot of Blue God and jade
plant. Trembling in her every delicate leaf and stem, she stood apart, resentful,
her breast heaving. The Dhatri and the Tulasi continued to delight Vishnu, in
threshing tumult upon tumult, beside Vrinda’s very pyre. Ever since, the Malati
has been called Varvari and is never offered at the worship of Hari.
Where Vrinda died, there grew from Vishnu’s love and her final moment
of enchantment with him, a mighty vana named after her. In a distant
incarnation, he would roam the green labyrinths of that forest with Radha and
the gopis, while, like a lover, Vrinda enfolded him in her velvet darkness again.
For at the decisive moment, when the fire ashed her, she realised that she had
never been loved as Hari had loved her so briefly. Just as he knew that if, to
begin with, his mission had only been treacherous, once he held her chaste,
angular body in his arms the passion he discovered in her would never fade,
from his immortal memory.
When he was seduced from his grief by Shakti’s love plants, Vishnu went
back to Vaikunta. He was himself again. He dreamt often of the death-sweet fire
of Vrinda’s loving, but now she was where she belonged: a memory that could
often make him cry, but not one which could delude him so he forgot who he

was.
O Son of the noble Parasara, this is no common tale but one that burns sins
and confers every wish of his heart to one who listens to it with devotion. It
enshrines knowledge in the soul and diminishes lust. He who reads or teaches
this tale long enough, finds even moksha. And he who hears it before he goes to
war will surely return victorious. This tale confers bhakti on those who lack it!’
Said Sanatkumara, to the absorbed sage."
Says Suta Romaharshana, in profound calm, to Saunaka’s rishis in that
kalpa, in the sacred Naimisa vana where Brahma’s wheel of fire once fell.

FORTY-ONE
 
Shankhachuda
 
‘O Vyasa, listen to another tale of Siva, with bhakti,’ said Sanatkumara,
Brahma’s august son, once, to the island-born Dwaipayana, aspiring pauranika,
son of the Brahmarishi and the fishergirl,’ Romaharshana says, in flow deep as
the Ganga’s.
‘Out of my love for you and seeing your absorption, I reveal this legend to
you. Marichi’s son and Brahma’s grandson, Kashyapa, was a prajapati, a creator
of profound wisdom, to whom Daksha gave thirteen of his daughters in
marriage. So multitudinous are the descendants of those women, it is futile to try
to enumerate them. Among Kashyapa’s wives was Danu, the beautiful, the
chaste. Innumerable sons of awesome power were born to her by Kashyapa’s
seed. He was both her cousin and her husband and one of those sons was
Viprachitti of untold valour.
Viprachitti’s son was the perfectly restrained Dambha, one of Vishnu’s
great bhaktas. But he had no son. Distraught, he went to his guru Sukra and
imbibed the Krishna mantra from him. Then, Dambha went to sacred Pushkara
and performed a fervid tapasya for a hundred thousand human years. As he sat in
padmasana, the mantra never off his lips, the fire of his penance illumined his
head, like a great jewel lit from within by its own flame. Quickly, the light
spilled from him and pervaded the sky and all creation. So unwavering was his
dhyana, it focused not just his own spirit but the soul of the universe.
Scorched by that light, the devas, the siddhas, the manus and other
heavenly ones came with Brahma to Vaikunta. "Hari, we fear the pralaya is upon
us. What else can this unnatural refulgence portend?"
Narayana laughed. "It is only Dambha praying for a son. I will quieten
him."
Vishnu appeared, iridescent, before Dambha in Pushkara. "I am pleased
with your tapasya, Asura, name your boon."
"Lord of Gods, Lord of Lakshmi, bless me with a son who will be your
bhakta. Give me a powerful boy who will be invincible against the devas and
conquer the three worlds."
"So be it. Now stop your tapasya," said Vishnu and vanished like a dream

at waking.
Within a week of his return, Dambha’s wife became pregnant and she
glowed with the brilliant child in her womb. When his boy was born, Dambha
named him Shankhachuda. From the beginning, Shankhachuda was an
exceptional child. He mastered all of the ancient lore with such ease his gurus
were dumbfounded. The boy seemed to know beforehand everything they had to
teach him, mathematics or astronomy, the scriptures or archery. Such was his
charm, that he quickly became the favourite child in his family. When the youth
was almost a man, his guru Jaigasavya sent him to Pushkara to perform a
tapasya to Brahma. For countless years, Shankhachuda sat in the lotus posture,
chanting the Brahma mantra. Finally, clad in a flowing white robe, the Pitama
stood before the Danava like blue fire.
"Tell me the boon you want," said the Creator.
"Let me be invincible against the devas."
Laying a divine palm on his head, Brahma blessed him. So taken was he
with that handsome youth, he gave him Krishna’s feather-light kavacha, most
magical, impenetrable armour in the universe. Brahma said, "Go to Badari and
you will find Dharmadhvaja’s daughter Tulasi at tapasya. She will be your wife."
Brahma evaporated from his presence. The delighted Shankhachuda
strapped on Krishna’s armour and journeyed to Badarikasrama. When he saw the
lovely Tulasi, he went straight up to her. "Who are you? Why do you sit here in
mowna?"
In her throaty voice of the hills, she said, "I am Dharmadhvaja’s daughter
Tulasi and I am a yogini. Be on your way, warrior, it is dangerous to come near a
woman. A woman is a false fetter of fascination, even to Brahma!"
But her eyes belied her words and she smiled at him so bewitchingly that
he was lost at once. To persuade her, as if she needed persuading, Shankhachuda
said, "What you say is partly true indeed. But Devi, you seem to be the chastest
of women and I have come here at Brahma’s behest. Tulasi, I am Shankhachuda,
the son of Dambha, of the danavas born from Danu. And I will marry you in
gandharva vivaha."
Tulasi looked down demurely, for he had passed her test to discover if he
was weak or strong. All at once, Brahma stood before them. "You are born for
each other, take her for your wife, Shankhachuda. Who but a brute will not
embrace happiness when it appears so enchanting before him? This Danava will
rule the worlds and not age or death shall have him as long as he either wears
Krishna’s kavacha, or you, Tulasi, are faithful to him."
When Shankhachuda came home with Tulasi, Sukra crowned him
Emperor of the asuras. With an endless army of daityas, danavas and rakshasas,

Shankhachuda set out for Amravati. With Brahma’s boon, he vanquished Indra’s
devas and seized dominion of the worlds. Like every great asura Emperor before
him, Shankhachuda appointed his demons to rule in place of Kubera, Surya,
Soma, Agni, Yama, Vayu and Varuna. He himself ascended Indra’s throne.
Like the reigns of so many wise asuras, his was a rule of peace and plenty.
No famine, plague or other pestilence entered his realm. No planets in the
heavens shone down a baleful light on the world. The land was fruitful without
being tilled; the ocean yielded its most precious jewels. The people were joyful
in love and lovemaking and, all her rivers flowing pure, the earth seemed blessed
with a perennial spring.
Except the devas, routed and hiding in obscure mountain caves, everyone
was happy during Shankachuda’s reign. The truth was that, though in this birth
he was born a danava, in his last life, in another kalpa, he was Krishna’s friend,
Sudama, a gopa in Vrindavana whom Radha once cursed to be born as a demon.
He was an ardent Krishna bhakta once and so he received Krishna’s armour
from Brahma. Neither Shankachuda’s nature nor his rule was demonic and his
queen had no rival for her beauty and chastity. She was his life’s muse, the
secret of his power, the delight of his bed.
The devas went to Vishnu for succour. "Vaikuntanatha, save us! Govinda
who are the very breath of your bhaktas, we seek sanctuary in you."
They wept before him. Vishnu said kindly, "Siva is the one you need. For
Krishna, whose kavacha Shankhachuda wears, is Mahadeva’s friend and lives
near him."
The devas went by an aerial path, paved with padmaraga and symantaka,
to Sivaloka. Siva sat with Parvati in an unearthly palace of lofty doorways, each
guarded by a white, five-faced, three-eyed, ten-armed, blue-throated, trisula-
wielding, ash-smeared, rudraksha-wearing gana, seated on a jewelled throne.
Every doorway led not merely into another chamber, but another mandala! Past
fifteen dwarapalakas, to each of whom they bowed, came Vishnu and the devas
and into Siva’s presence. When they saw Krishna was already there, they were
confused and apprehensive.
Adroit as ever, bowing to Brahma and Vishnu and with a smile that no one
but Siva saw, Krishna said, "My friend Sudama has been born as an asura and he
terrorises the devas. It is time he was killed and returned to me."
At which, the devas cried together, in a babble, that it was true! Finally,
Vishnu said more quietly, "Siva, only you can kill the Danava who wears
Krishna’s kavacha."
Siva said, "Go to Kailasa in the world and ask Rudra to help you."
He raised his hand in blessing and suddenly they were no longer in the

palace of many dimensions, but on a mountain slope above the world of men, on
Kailasa, near Rudra’s home. They bowed to Rudra in his cave and Indra said,
"Mahadeva, save us from Shankhachuda."
Rudra said like soft thunder, "His time has come, Devas, I will kill the
Danava."
Siva sent Pushpadanta, lord of the gandharvas, to Shankhachuda. Even that
ageless gandharva, who had seen the worlds’ wonders, stood agape when he was
ushered into Shankachuda’s court.
"Great King, I bring a message from Rudra. Siva says, ‘Give back their
kingdom and authority to the devas, for they have sought refuge in me. Or else,
meet me on the field of battle.’"
Pushpadanta waited for the august Danava’s answer. Shankhachuda said,
"I am amazed he dares challenge me. Tell him my heroic asuras will enjoy the
earth and I am anxious to meet him on the battlefield."
The Demon’s laughter rang through the opulent hall. Pushpadanta said, "O
Emperor, listen to me. Siva is not just a deva, he is much more. You can never
stand against Rudra in battle. He is the end of time, the God of Gods. Return
what is theirs to the devas. Take yourself to patala where you belong and live
there in peace. Or terror will strike you down."
Shankhachuda snarled, "Tell Siva I will fight him."
When he heard the Danava’s message, Siva said, "Let my sons set out with
my army of ganas. Let Nandin, Virabhadra and the eight Bhairavas march with
them. Let Bhadrakaali go with her legions. I go now to kill Shankhachuda!"
That army had Karttikeya and Ganapathy at its head. Virabhadra, Nandin,
Mahakaala, Subhadraka, Visalaksha, Bana, Pingalaksha, Vikampana, Virupa,
Manibhadra, Baskala, Kapila, Dirghadamshtra and a thousand other gana
generals as mighty, were in its ranks. This army set out from Kailasa to confront
the legions of the Emperor of the worlds. Vikara led a hundred thousand ganas,
as did Tamaralochana, Kalankara, Balibhadra, Kaalajiva, Kutichara, Balonmatta,
Rangaslaghya, the vicious Durjaya, the savage Duragama and many more!
At the head of unimaginable phalanxes, the careful Sankakarna marched,
Kekaraksha and Vikrita, the terrible Visaka, Pariyatrika, Sarvantaka and glorious
Vikratanana, Jalaka, Samada, Dundubha, Kalaraksha, Sandaraka, Kunduka and
Kundaka. Vistambha was part of that oceanic, horrible army, Pippala and
Sannada. Avesana went with that force, Chandrapatana, Mahakesa, the valiant
Kundin, the auspicious and gigantic Parvataka, the ancient Kaala and Kaalaka,
the fierce Agnika, the blazing Aditya and Ghanavaha and countless more come
to Siva’s banner from across the worlds: all ash-smeared, wearing holy
rudraksha into battle and matted jata for crowns.

The eight Vasus marched with Siva, the twelve Adityas, Indra, Agni,
Soma, Viswakarman, the Asvins, Kubera, Yama, Nirriti, Vayu, Varuna, Budha,
Mangala and even Kama. Another army went beside this one: one that not the
ganas dared come too near though it was an allied force. At the head of that
force, went Bhadrakaali in a jewel-studded vimana, as easy through time as
space. She wore vivid crimson clothes, a crimson garland of jungle blossoms
around her neck and she had smeared her body, as black as sunless space, with
unguents crimson as blood. She was utterly lovely and depraved. She danced,
sang, laughed lewdly and was in a great mood for the killing to come.
Her tongue was a yojana long and it was never still. In her thousand hands,
she carried sankha and gada, chakra and sword, a lotus, a leather shield, bows
and arrows, a round skull, a trisula that scraped the sky, a spear longer than her
tongue, an iron club, a thunderbolt and all the weapons of all the devas, the
mahavira, the saura, the kaalakaala, Yama’s danda, the samartha and the
mahanala weapons, among numberless others. She came to battle at the proud
head of six million yoginis and dakinis.
Tens of thousands of bhutas in their monstrous swarms marched in Siva’s
army: pretas, pisachas, kusmandas, brahmarakshasas, vetalas, yakshas, nagas,
gandharvas and kinnaras. Glorious Karttikeya rode before this sea of uncanny
warriors, at Siva’s side and Ganapathy as well. Rudra marched until he came to
the foot of a marvellous pipal tree on the banks of the Chandrabhaga, where he
waited for Shankhachuda,’ said Sanatkumara to Vyasa, by now lost among the
Purana’s mystic currents."
Says Suta to the rishis of the Naimisa.

FORTY-TWO
 
The two kavachas
 
"‘O Sanatkumara of fathomless intellect, what happened next?’ Vyasa
asked the ancient pauranika.
As absorbed in the timeless tale as his listener, Sanatkumara continued,
‘After he sent Pushpadanta back to Siva with his brash message, Shankhachuda
went in to his wife Tulasi. "The naked yogin Siva wants war with me."
Chaste Tulasi fell senseless. When she revived, she cried tearfully, "Oh,
my husband, you can vanquish anyone in battle, but how will you fight Siva? He
is the God of Gods, annihilator of universes. He is Time himself. He is the
Parabrahman. His one moment is the life and death of numberless worlds; many
Brahmas and Vishnus live and die during one day of Siva’s. Oh, Shankhachuda,
you do not know who you mean to fight."
Though he comforted her tenderly, he only laughed at her fears. "All this is
just women’s tales. In battle, your husband is the master."
He would not let her speak any more about Siva. With a hundred caresses,
he seduced her into love, which lasted all night. Though she began in anxiety
and sorrow, soon desire overwhelmed her. Dawn came before they knew it, the
time for him to leave. She wept again in his great arms and begged him not to go
to this war, or she would never see him alive again. He would not listen to her.
He said, "Speak auspicious words to me before I set out, my love: not
because I can be defeated in battle but for your own peace while I am away. I
will tell you a secret, which I have told no one before. I have Brahma’s boon that
as long as I wear Krishna’s kavacha and as long as you are true to me, neither
age nor death can come near me."
Then, though she was still distraught because her tapasvin’s mind knew a
little of Siva, he left her in her bed at the Brahma muhurta. As usual, he made his
ritual offerings to his victims, the devas. Donning his supernal armour, he went
to war at the head of eighty-six battle-honed legions. Kankas at arms, the fifty
Asura families, the hundred families of Dhaumras, the Kaalakeyas, Mauryas,
Daudhras and Kaalakas marched with him. These were lords of the worlds,
armed with ayudhas of agni, dark astras and fell sorceries. With three hundred
thousand aksauhinis of danavas, daityas and rakshasas, Shankhachuda went to

battle, riding in a chariot of the firmament.
To holy Bharatavarsha, he came with his army: to the east of the western
ocean, west of the Malaya mountain, north of Srisaila and south of
Gandhamadana, to the banks of the transparent Pushpabhadra, to Kapila’s
asrama with an ancient and sacred pipal tree, where many a rishi had found
nirvana. Shankhachuda saw Siva’s army there.
The Demon sent a messenger to Siva and that danava general found Rudra
bright as a star at the foot of the old pipal. Siva sat in padmasana with a smile on
his lips, his eyes shut in dhyana, utterly peaceful and his body like crystal
through which transcendent light shone clear. Clad in tiger-skin, the trisula and
khatvanga in his hands, alight with the immortal joy within him, sat Siva, seed of
the universe. The danava alighted from his vimana and bowed respectfully and
with some anxiety, to Rudra. "Lord, I am Shankachuda’s messenger. My master
asks what you truly want that you have come to war against us with such an
army."
"Tell Shankhachuda that, in my memory, he was not always an asura. I
remember him as a friend of Krishna’s, a gopa that Radha cursed. Yet, he hates
the devas like a true danava. Tell your master I said he should remember
himself. For I know that, with Krishna’s blessing, he has perfect recollection of
his past lives. Tell him he should put aside his malice and return their kingdom
to the gods."
As his king had instructed him, the messenger said, "Should only the
asuras put aside their malice? What about Madhu and Kaitabha, whom Vishnu
slew? What about the Tripura and the innocent Bali? And Hiranyaksha, Sumbha
and Nisumbha and countless others? What about the deceit with the amrita?
Siva, you know the enmity of the devas and the asuras is eternal. Sometimes the
devas rule and at others we. But, Rudra, it is shameful that you come to fight for
the devas. For you, O Mahadeva, are our God as well as theirs. Win or lose, you
cannot have honour from this battle: it is against your own bhaktas that you
fight."
Siva laughed gently. "Tell your master, Siva says: Shankhachuda, none of
the asuras I have vanquished in the past has been your equal. There is no shame
in my taking the field against you. Let us have no more talk, Danava, but war."
Conches rang across the field, five yojanas wide and five hundred long;
drums rolled resoundingly. Heroes’ roars shook the earth as, weapons aloft and
glinting, the two hosts rushed at each other. Mahendra locked with Vrishaparva,
Bhaskara with Viprachitti, Vishnu with Dambha, Kaala with the asura Kaala,
Agni with Gokarna, Kubera with Kaalakaya, Viswakarman with Mayaa, Mrityu
with Bhayankara, Yama with Samhara, Varuna with Kaalambika, Vayu with

Chanchala, Budha with Ghataprishta, Shanaischara with Raktaksha, Jayanta with
Ratnasara, Dharma with Dhurandara, Mangala with Ganakakasha, Vaisvana
with Sobhkara, Kamadeva with Pipita: maces flashing, long swords and short,
daggers, pattisas, bhusundis, mudgaras, spears, javelins of deadly light, parighas,
axes, tomaras and bright clouds of many-coloured arrows in the clear day.
The twelve Adityas fought Gokamukha, Churna, Khadga, Dhumra,
Samhala, Visha and Palasa. Mahanami fought Ugrachanda. The Vasus fought
the Varchas and the Asvins the demonic Diptimantas. When ordinary weapons
fell useless around the incomparable warriors, unearthly astras hummed through
the air. Luminous shaktis and shatagnis cut through columns of soldiers, horse
and elephant, in thick flashes; while head and limb of man and animal flew off
their trunks and blood in copious sprays drenched everything around.
The earth was grisly with severed heads, transforming the landscape like
some bizarre rock fall. The field was strewn with arms, legs, hands and feet, all
cut off. Headless bodies danced weirdly, with blood bubbling out of naked
necks, weapons in their hands still raised to strike down whoever had killed
them. For a moment, they danced in death, before they realised they were
beheaded and fell.
O Vyasa, the first part of the battle belonged to the danavas and the devas
fled back to Siva. Then, Bhadrakaali came into the fray: black, ravishing and
hideous! Her eyes were like red lotuses, her skin was soft and smooth; laughing
insanely, she came among the demons, came as death most horrible. She tore
their flesh from them and wolfed it, her tongue darting between her fangs to lick
the shreds stuck there. Most of all, she drank their blood greedily, often draining
them off entirely while they still lived. When she had grown immense on that
field, she thrust elephants, horses and demons down her throat without favour
and chewed on them in delight.
Karttikeya came to battle at Kaali’s side and he was a natural calamity. His
arrows covered the face of the sun and asuras fell in thousands. Faced with the
wrath of Mahamaari and Skanda, the demons fled. Shankhachuda climbed into
his flying disk of war, made of diamonds, armed at its side and glowing belly
with the strangest weapons and flew into battle.
An unnatural night fell upon the field. Siva’s army shielded its eyes and
stood staring at the sky. When the Demon discharged his missiles at them, they
fled howling back to Rudra, those not killed, stopping their ears and eyes with
their hands, falling over the dead and one another. At last, unable to bear the
terror, even Nandiswara fled and only Karttikeya remained on the field.
The lord of the danavas struck him with a hundred astras. Karttikeya knew
their secrets and turned them to ashes. Shankhachuda hurled serpents of

wizardry at Siva’s son, glittering hamadryads. As darts dipped in venom, he
flung dark trees down from forests of hallucination. He cast mountains at him.
But Siva’s son turned his body into a thousand subtle dreams on that field and no
astra or maaya harmed a hair of him.
When Karttikeya raised his own bow of power to shoot at Shankhachuda,
quick as time the Danava smashed his weapon in his hand, with a thought or an
arrow, no one could be sure which. Another missile felled Skanda’s peacock.
Then, shining like a sun and screaming like a tornado, a javelin, given the
Demon by Brahma, took Kumara in the chest and he fell spitting blood, dead.
With a wail, Kaali, who was gorging and drinking bloodily among the danavas,
picked up the limp Karttikeya. She ran with him to Siva, who gave his son life
again with a touch.
Virabhadra took the field against Shankhachuda. When the Asura shot an
astra down from on high, Virabhadra cooled it with one of his own like a cloud
full of rain. Then, with two arrows of fire, he rent the Demon’s vimana; he clove
his armour and his crown. Kaali came back to the field. She came with a vat of
raw grape liquor in her hands, from which she swilled as greedily as she did the
blood from her victims’ throats. Dancing lewdly, she came to war, her hips
grinding, blood and wine dribbling down her jowls.
She did not come alone now. She came with her own selves detached from
her body: her manifestations of Durga; Ugradamishtra the fanged, Ugradanda
with the staff of death and naked, lustful Kotavi came drunk, gyrating and
screaming into war. They picked demons off the field in great handfuls and
stuffed them into their mouths like savouries. When Bhadrakaali roared the
asuras fell dead around her, their eardrums shattered, their brains deliquesced.
The ganas rallied behind Kaali, they fought like conquerors again.
With a roar of his own, to match hers, Shankhachuda flew at her. He shot
cold and serpentine narachas at her; but she gaped open her blood-filled maw,
swallowed them and belched. She cast an Agneyastra back at him like the flames
of dissolution, but he calmed it with a Vaishnavastra. She loosed a Narayanastra
at Shankhachuda, a weapon that grew fiercer when it saw its prey.
Shankhachuda knew the answer to that knowing shaft. He fell on his face and
worshipped it with the proper mantra and the missile turned mild and blessed
him.
With another mantra, Kaali invoked the Brahmastra; but again the Danava
turned it aside with the apposite worship. Then he fetched out a keening, blazing
shakti, a hundred yojanas long and cast it at Kaali. She turned it into a garland of
mountain blossoms with a Maheswarastra. Frothing then, with an arcane mantra,
Kaali invoked the ultimate weapon: the Paasupatastra. But a voice spoke

suddenly out of heaven to her, "Chandika, even the Paasupata will not kill this
Danava."
She tossed her head in frustration; she abandoned the greatest astra. With a
bloodcurdling wail, she fell on a thousand asuras near her and ate them to
assuage her frustration, quaffing the blood spouting from their throats where she
ripped off their heads: as from a glass. With the rage of those lives in her belly,
she rushed at Shankhachuda to pluck him from his chariot and devour him as
well. He struck her through her dark nipple with a Rudrastra formed like a
burning sword, with flaming edges and the heat of a star. She stopped with a
scream. But then, with a smile, bewitching and lovely despite the raw meat that
hung from her fangs and the blood that trickled down her chin, she plucked out
the sword like a thorn from her flesh and, rolling her eyes, swallowed it.
Shankhachuda shot a quiver of missiles at her, but she splintered them in
fragments. She rushed at him again, shrieking. He vanished with maaya and she
could only smash the diamond chariot with her fist and crush the sarathy, its
asura pilot, between her thumb and forefinger like an insect. With a yell, the
Danava materialised again and spun a whirling wheel of fusion fire at her. She
caught it like a child’s playring and swallowed it, lolling her tongue out
obscenely at him. She caught the Danava, huger than a mountain and struck him
on the head with her clenched fist and he fell stunned on the ground. Because
she was a woman he was strangely embarrassed to fight her hand to hand and
tried to flee from her clinch. She picked him up, whirled him round over her
head and dashed him on the ground. He rose groggily to his feet and a fresh
chariot flew down to him in a wink. He fled beyond her reach in it, bowing to
her, she laughing joyfully: just as if she had made love to him!
"You cannot kill him, Kaali," said the voice from above again. "There are
a hundred thousand other asuras waiting for you."
Tossing her dishevelled head in resignation, baring her fangs truly as if in
love, she went crooning among Shankachuda’s army again. Abandoning the
Emperor, she swept thirstily on his men, plucking off their heads, swilling their
blood as if it were nectar to her. But soon, in sorrow, she went back to Siva and,
whimpering drunkenly, told him she could not kill Shankhachuda, he was
beyond her.
When he heard this, Siva opened his eyes. He uncoiled himself slowly,
serenely, from his yogasana. Stepping out from the great nyagrodha’s shade, he
grew into the vast form of Rudra the Annihilator and even Kaali folded her
hands in fear and reverence. When Siva came forth and Shankhachuda saw him,
the noble Danava fell on his face to worship the Lord. When Siva raised a hand
over him in blessing, the Asura gained his diamond craft in a flash and flew up

into the sky.
For a hundred years, they fought: the mighty Danava and three-eyed
Maharudra mounted on his bull. When Shankhachuda shot Nandin with an
arrow, Siva struck his bow from his hand with one of his own shafts. When the
Danava aimed a fiery javelin at Rudra, Mahadeva caught it deftly as it flew at
him and snapped it like a dry twig on his thigh. When the lord of asuras spun a
sinister chakra at him, Siva struck it into shards with a bare fist. Shankhachuda
cast an iron club, heavy as a hill, at Rudra and he made it ashes with a mudra of
his hand. The Demon rushed at Siva with an axe; a volley of luciferous arrows
stopped him in his gargantuan stride and he fell unconscious among his warriors.
Siva’s laughter echoed through the worlds as he made fine war with his
powerful adversary. He beat out secret, incomprehensible rhythms on his
dumaru; he twanged the Pinaka’s string in joy when Shankhachuda attacked him
with hazes of astras, billowing like clouds from his sky ship. He blew on his
hunting horn so both armies cowered and Nandin bellowed to shame the
Demon’s trumpeting elephants. Then, in delight, Siva clapped his hands and the
quarters shook, the earth cringed and every previous noise from the resounding
field was dwarfed.
The Asura found a magic spear and flung it at Siva, but Kshetrapala
blasted it into dust with a comet he spat from his mouth. Now Siva struck
Shankhachuda with his trisula and the Danava fell, blood on his lips. He jumped
up at once and his chest blazed open where the trident had pierced Krishna’s
armour. From his wound, sprang a monster with burning eyes. No sooner than its
torso emerged, Siva gave a resonant ‘Hum’ and struck off its head with a clean
stroke of his sword.
Though Siva struck Shankhachuda down a score of times, the Demon
would always get up, grinning, though he was felled with weapons violent
enough to raze armies. Shankhachuda saw his own legions decimated by
Kumara, who had come to battle again and devoured by Kaali and he was grim.
Crying out in grief and rage, near madness, he ran at Siva and locked with him
hand to hand.
As he came, Siva loosed ten Maheswarastras at the Demon, which they say
not only burn the body but dispel the deepest illusions of the soul. When they
struck Shankhachuda, clad in Krishna’s kavacha, they lost their lustre and fell
impotently around him. Despairing, Siva seized up his trisula in earnest. A
celestial voice said from the sky, "You cannot make Brahma’s boon false. As
long as he wears Krishna’s kavacha and his wife is faithful to him, you cannot
kill him even with your trisula."
Siva sighed, "So be it."

At his will now, Hari came to him on that field. Siva said to the Blue One,
"It must be done."
Vyasa, shortly after this, an old and shining mendicant visited
Shankhachuda, who was exultant at having repelled the Maheswarastras and
convinced of his immortality now. The brahmana said, "Conqueror of Siva,
invincible Danava, around whom the Maheswarastra falls like a garland of
parijatas, grant me a boon today and it will bring you fortune and everlasting
fame."
"Ask for anything you want, Brahmana."
"The world says to me Shankhachuda is not mighty, but Krishna’s kavacha
protects him. Show me they are liars, give me your armour!"
Shankhachuda was startled. But his word was given and he thought,
Brahma had blessed him that as long as Tulasi was true to him he could not die.
The Demon was surer of his wife’s chastity than he was of Krishna’s armour.
Shankhachuda took off the kavacha and gave it to the wizened brahmana and the
grand Asura thought no more of it.
The same night, Tulasi, asleep in her palace, awoke in surprise. She heard
the dundubhi of victory being beaten at her gates. She jumped up, ran to her
window and saw her husband step out of his vimana. In joy, she rushed to bathe
before he finished the rituals of homecoming at the city gates and arrived in her
bedroom. She dabbed herself with the musks and scents that were his favourites,
she put on a silk robe she had worn when they were first married. Tulasi waited
eagerly for her husband, the fragrant betel leaf with camphor ready and she
herself entirely desirable.
After what seemed a lifetime, she heard his knock at her door. She ran into
his arms and he embraced her, so his precious kavacha cut into her delicate skin.
Something inside her gave a lurch at his embrace, but she thought it a pang of
happiness. Crying for joy, she washed his feet and peeled his armour and clothes
from him, her hands light as butterflies on his body, while he sat exhausted on a
throne, his feet in a golden vessel of water. She kneaded him expertly where he
was knotted with battle. She drew a steaming bath with medicinal salts and,
having anointed his magnificent body with fragrant oils, led him in to it, as shyly
and excitedly as if this was their first night together. She dropped her own robe
on the way.
In the bath, her exquisite hands were upon him again and he touched her in
the scented water so her breath grew shallow. Desire rose in her body like a sun
after the long night of his absence. As she traced a hundred kisses down his
smooth chest and his belly, she whispered, "Tell me how you have come back
alive from a war with Siva. I did not hope to see you again."

Stroking her, stroking her, he lost himself in the legends of her fine body,
her flanks, her arched back, the triangle of soft night and peace between her legs
of water and fire. He said sadly, "Such killing there was, such killing. He and I
fought for a year. Our asuras were all slain by Karttikeya and by Kaali and still
we two fought on. Then, Brahma came to the field to make peace between us;
and with all my people dead and you waiting for me, I agreed. The devas have
their kingdom back and I have you."
Joining his great hands around her waist, he lifted her up. Then, slowly, as
she bit her lip and shut her eyes, he lowered her on to his body so she cried out
as he was in her like a dark flame. Tulasi’s eyes flew open and a scream was on
her lips: she knew by the feel of him inside her that he was not her husband.
Holding her helpless, he moved her effortlessly above him and thrust at her from
below. And who could tell if her cries were of rapture, of horror, or of both, as,
so quickly in that frenzy, he spent himself deep in her womb?
He heard her sob, beating her fist on his chest, "Who are you, cheat?"
He was himself again before her wondering eyes: blue and four-armed,
stroking her wet hair. With a cry, she tore herself from him and, standing naked
and dripping, she cursed him.
"Ruthless, hard-hearted Vishnu, you shall be a stone!"
Suddenly, Siva stood there, glorious. He said to Tulasi, "Dry your tears.
Only karma brings joy and sorrow and this is the fruit of your karma of the past:
your own tapasya that you have forgotten. Cast off your life. You are Hari’s
now, let your body be a river of love for him. Be the sacred Gandaki and in
bhumi, swarga and patala, be the holiest plant of worship. Tulasi, you will be
Vishnu’s secret love forever."
After Tulasi’s curse, Vishnu became a mountain in Bharatavarsha, on the
banks of the Gandaki. With tiny teeth, the insects of the ground carved slow
rings of torture into his body of stone; they carved strange and sacred sculptures
there. The pieces of him that fell into the river are the holiest of all stones and
shaligramas. Thus, Vishnu took unto himself Tulasi’s pain at her separation from
Shankhachuda, whose wife she had been for a manvantara.
When Vishnu had violated Tulasi’s chastity, Shankhachuda, who did not
know this, attacked Siva again on the distant battlefield. Now he did not have
Krishna’s kavacha either. Siva cried to the Danava, "Where is your pretty
armour today? Won’t you be killed without it?"
Shankhachuda roared back, "I have other armour that protects me, Rudra,
a kavacha of love!"
"Are you certain you have not lost that kavacha, as well, in the night?"
"That armour can never be taken from me: it is not mine to give."

"I think it has been given, Shankhachuda."
The trisula blazed in Rudra’s hand; it was a thousand dhanus long, a
hundred hands wide and terrible. It was Light. It was the universal Atman. It was
eternal, pristine and Un-created. Siva whirled it above him, thrice and with a
touch of it on Shankachuda’s head, made him whispering ashes. In his last
moment, the heroic Asura screamed in anguish: before his dying eyes, he saw a
vision of his Tulasi in Vishnu’s arms.
By Siva’s blessing, Shankachuda’s skeleton fell into the ocean and every
holy shell in the world is made from that great Asura’s bones.
Muni, this is a peerless legend; it destroys torment, it confers deep gyana
and bhakti. The brahmana who hears it is a brahmana indeed, the kshatriya a
conqueror, the vaishya wealthy and the sudra the most excellent of men!’
explained Sanatkumara to the avid Vyasa."
Romaharshana tells the rishis of the vana.

FORTY-THREE
 
Andhaka
 
"In ancient times, Sanatkumara told this Purana of pristine antiquity to
Vyasa, eager to drink its nectar, so it may free him from illusion," says Suta
Romaharshana, whose ability makes the listening rishis’ hair stand on end.
"Matsyagandhi’s son by Parasara said, ‘Brahma putra, I am thirsty for the
Puranamrita. Tell me more!’
Sanatkumara began again, ‘Hear a tale I had from Karttikeya himself.
Listen to the story of Andhaka.
Once, for worldly sport, Siva came to Kasi with Uma and his ganas. He
made a city for himself there and made Bhairava its master. From Kasi, Siva
went on to golden Mandara of the sacred caves. Out on the eastern ridges of that
mountain, one day, while he lay under her at long, languorous love, in sudden
bashfulness Parvati shut his three eyes with her hands the hues of coral and the
golden lotus. A darkness that had never been before fell on the universe. From
Uma’s tender hands a juice of rut flowed, for Siva’s third eye tried to blink open
and its heat fired her palms.
With a cry at the plumbless darkness, she snatched her hands away from
his face. The drops of that juice, which was both the essence of her and the fire
of him, fell onto the crag upon which they lay and a dreadful and inhuman Being
stood before them! It was that very darkness, with nowhere to hide, embodied
and born blind so he may not see his parents’ coition. He was awful to behold,
slavering; his swarthy face twitched in reasonless rage: anger because that was
his nature. His huge body, born of Siva’s night, was deformed, matted locks
hung in ugly straggles to his shoulders and his jet-black skin was covered with
fine, curly down, like a monstrous baby’s.
He stood there in the bent-necked, attentive posture of the blind. Then, he
began to sing hideously to himself and to dance disjointedly to his own song.
The horrible creature wept aloud and, like a serpent, darted his forked tongue in
and out of his lipless mouth. Uma covered her nakedness and cowered against
Siva in fear. Siva said gently, "You made him with your hands, now don’t shrink
from what you have done. Let us call him Andhaka and let us look after him.
Though he is ugly, he is great, too."

A wave of compassion for Andhaka swept Uma. She now saw him by the
light that had returned to the world. He was more dreadful than before, snarling
and gnashing his teeth. She ordered her sakhis to care for him as her own son.
Though he growled like thunder Andhaka offered no resistance.
At this same time, the Asura Hiranyaksha burned with an envy that his
wife stoked: his brother, Hiranyakashyapu, had five stalwart sons, while he had
none. Hiranyaksha sat in a fierce tapasya in the dead of winter and the blaze of
summer, for years, his senses restrained, impervious to the world around him. At
last, Siva stood before him and said, "Don’t smother your nature so cruelly,
Hiranyaksha. Tell me, what will gladden your heart?"
Prostrating himself, Hiranyaksha said, "Siva, I have no son, as all daityas
should, a son to inherit my kingdom after me. My brother has five mighty
princes. As for me, when I die, how will I find heaven if my family is extinct?"
Siva said kindly, "You may not have a son born of your seed, but a great
son you shall surely have. I will give you my own boy Andhaka, as strong as
you, Hiranyaksha and invincible in war."
Overjoyed, Hiranyaksha accepted the ferocious Andhaka. What son could
be more asuric than this one born out of absolute night? Exultant, he went home
with the black boy. So delighted was Hiranyaksha with his son that, to celebrate,
he conquered the devas and dragged the earth down into patala. Vishnu came as
the Boar Varaha, which contained all yagnas and all living beings in feral amsa.
Stamping and burrowing, he broke open the earth. He dived down into patala
and with hooves of lightning trampled the demon armies that confronted him. He
severed Hiranyaksha’s head from his body with the Sudarshana chakra. Then,
upon his curved tusks, Vishnu lifted bhumi back to the surface.
After he killed Hiranyaksha, Vishnu crowned Andhaka king of the asuras.
When Hiranyakashyapu was also slain by the Narasimha from the pillar, people
said, "What will a blind man do with a kingdom?"
Andhaka’s cousins, Prahlada and his brothers, decided he was neither born
nor fit to be a king and they usurped most of his kingdom. Andhaka was broken
and went into the forest for tapasya. He stood on one leg for a thousand years,
arms raised over his head, chanting secret mantras as if they were his very
breaths. During the last year of his penance, when every other mortification was
exhausted, each day, good Vyasa, Andhaka sliced off a piece of his flesh and
offered it, dripping blood, into the sacrificial fire. At the end of the year, only the
ceaseless mantra supported his life: all his blood had leaked away and his flesh
been consigned, piece by piece, to the flames.
At last Andhaka decided he would offer his skeleton to the agni. Then,
Brahma stood before him and said, "Daitya, choose your boon. What all the

universe cannot have, shall be yours."
"May Prahlada and his brothers be my slaves. Let me, who am blind now,
have divine vision. Let Indra and the devas pay me tribute. Let not deva or
gandharva, daitya or yaksha, naaga or mortal man, not Hari or Siva kill me."
Brahma said, "What you ask shall be yours, Asura. Yet, none that is born
can escape death. So you must accept some condition of mortality, however
remote."
No more than a moment did Andhaka think. "When I desire my mother,
whom I do not know, for my bed, let me die."
Brahma was startled. He frowned, then said, "So be it, Daitya, but use your
might only against great enemies. Arise, King Andhaka!"
Andhaka remained kneeling. He said softly, "Touch me with your holy
hand, Pitama, give me another body for the one I fed the fire."
When the Creator touched Andhaka, he was handsome and noble and had
lustrous eyes that saw the world clearly. With Brahma’s boon Andhaka easily
vanquished his cousins. Then, in the tradition of all the great daitya sovereigns
before him, he marched on devaloka. He routed Indra’s army there and forced
the devas to pay him tribute. Gandharvas, nagas, suparnas, rakshasas, yakshas
and men all served him and Andhaka, born of Siva’s brief blindness, was
sovereign of the universe.
Wherever he went, a thousand lovely women, from all the races, graced
his harem. Andhaka was happy on fresh riverbank and in dense jungle, on
austere mountain slope and in his magnificent palaces on earth and in the sky
and in the patalas as well  his tastes were eclectic and his virility was boundless.
Not just women, every treasure in the universe the Demon acquired and enjoyed.
Mansions, palaces and chariots of land, sea and firmament, he owned. Rare
exotic food and drink, from far and near worlds, he tasted; varied, subtle music
and dance he enjoyed. Thus, the years passed in peace and pleasure, because no
one dared oppose his power. Surrounded by soft, false friends Andhaka grew
bored. He yearned for war and perhaps, in his soul, for death’s release: the final
pleasure.
He took to philosophy then, though he was no philosopher. He roamed the
earth with his daityas and founded a new and bizarre ‘faith’ of his own, a mad
religion of Godlessness. Wherever he found a Vedic ritual or yagna, he
desecrated it and forced his atheism on the people. He called himself Mahatma,
while he wandered the world in ennui.
One day, when his karma was ripe and the planets in ominous
concatenations in the heavens Andhaka came to golden Mandara, where long
ago he had been born when Uma briefly shut Siva’s eyes. Uncanny recognition

stirred in his blood, though he had no conscious memory of the violet ridges of
that mountain or the sunsets and sunrises with the beauty of dreams. Andhaka
roared in mysterious exhilaration. His lifelong restlessness, his incessant sense of
travail and seeking, left him like sleep at dawn. He cried to his bewildered
people, "Build a city for me here, I will rule the worlds from this mountain. I do
not know why or how, but Mandara is my home."
So they did. One day, out for a walk among graceful cedars Andhaka’s
three ministers, Duryodhana, Vaidhasa and Hatsi, saw something that made
them run back to their king. They cried to him, "Andhaka, we have seen the
strangest sight on this mountain. In a secret cave above the clouds, we saw a
divine rishi who wears the crescent moon in his jata. He is noble and handsome;
his eyes are shut in dhyana and serpents entwine his body. He wears an
elephant’s hide and a string of skulls around his neck like pearls. His skin is
smeared with ashes, his face shines with unearthly brilliance and he wields a
trisula, a sword, a bow and a quiver of arrows, a bhusundi and astras.
Nearby, is another being with a fearsome simian face. Armed to the teeth,
he stands guard at the mouth of an adjoining cavern. Still more wonderful,
Andhaka, is the white and aged bull at the hermit’s side and more than the bull,
the young woman who sits alone in the second cave. Never, in all our wandering
through heaven and earth, have we seen a woman so beautiful. We have become
men of vision since we looked upon her face! My Lord, she is not fit to be the
wife of a rishi, however brilliant, but the mistress of the master of worlds. Come
and see for yourself, it is your destiny that brought you to this mountain."
Mythic excitement surged in him and Andhaka sent those asuras back to
the rishi in the cave. "I am Hiranyaksha’s son Andhaka, lord of the worlds, that
send this message. Who are you, strange seer, with serpents round your throat
and a bull at your side? Who are you, armed like a warrior, yet lost in dhyana?
Whose son are you? Don’t you know it is a sin to do tapasya near a beautiful
woman? Send your wife to me with my ministers."
The rishi replied softly to the Asura, "I am such a lowly one, Rakshasa,
that I remember no father or mother. I have come here for the
Mahapaasupatavrata. Oh, I am an old and rootless wretch and the world knows
my young wife bears patiently with me. She surely deserves only the one that
has been everywhere and seen all things. I have become weak from my
indulgence in her and I am going away into a vana to sit alone in tapasya.
Whatever is mine that you desire you can have, Rakshasa, if you can pass Viraka
who stands guard at the cave’s mouth."
Baring his fangs when he heard the muni’s contemptuous message,
specially the mocking ‘Rakshasa’, to him a great Asura Andhaka roared, "I will

have his head and his wife in my bed tonight!"
He climbed to the cave. He attacked Viraka with his great sword of
sorcery. But the monkey-faced gana smashed that weapon and sent Andhaka
scuttling from battle with a taste of fight as he had never had. Prahlada attacked
Viraka, as did Bhaji, Sahasrabhanu, Kujamba, Sambara, Vrita and some more
demons. Viraka cut them up and left them to rot among the jackals that gathered
dancing among the ghosts of the dead and the slough of blood and severed heads
and limbs, which quickly covered the ground where that gana fought.
Within the cave Viraka guarded, Parvati was terrified. Siva had left for the
mystic tapovana and the battle outside raged like a war. A thousand asura
weapons pierced Viraka and blocked the cave mouth; he fought on. In the dark,
Uma cried out to Brahma and Vishnu to help her. They came as women
themselves, as Shaktis. And the devas, gandharvas, rishis, siddhas, nagas and
guhyakas came with them, as an army of fierce warrior women, bristling with
weapons, blasting on sankhas.
Viraka plucked out arrows, swords and spears from his flesh and he stood
up to fight the daityas once more. Suddenly, howling and awesome, Brahma’s
Shakti, Brahmi, appeared four-faced at his side. With a staff of death she felled
thousands of demons as they swarmed in tides at the cave mouth, she struck
them down with eerie beams of light. Vishnu’s Shakti, Narayani, appeared at
Viraka’s other side, with her mace and bow, her sword and her splendid chakra.
She, too, killed the demons at her great will, razing millions in an eyeflash.
Bidaujasi, Indra’s Shakti, stood forth from that cave. Her skin was golden;
the sky was her brow. She was a thousand-eyed and she mowed the asuras down
with an incomprehensible ploughshare weapon, a gleaming halayudha. Yamya
held Death’s staff, Agni’s Shakti blazed. Varunyi came with a fluid noose with
which she strung up a thousand asuras each moment. Kubera’s Shakti, armed
with a mace and fierce as the fires of the dissolution, was at the enemy like a
conflagration. The Lord of the yakshas was a vampire woman, fanged, fearful, a
blood drinker. The Shakti of the naaga king had talons with which to rend her
victims and she spat venom that made them ashes. A hundred other ferocious
Shaktis held the demons at bay, slaughtering them on the mountainside; that
army of guardian women calmed Uma in her claustrophobic cave.
Then, dim memories of the horrible pleasures of war awakened in her own
blood, Parvati came out herself. She was black as pitch and red-eyed at the cave
mouth, howling, shaking her wild tresses in frenzy: eager for blood to quench
her fear and her long, long thirst!
For an awful year and a day, Viraka’s extraordinary army fought to protect
Parvati on the golden mountain. Numberless asuras they slaughtered. Then, even

as the war raged, Siva returned. He came rejuvenated after his tapasya in the
emerald forest made from his own thought: a tapovana where a moment was a
thousand years. He came back glowing, his virtue restored by the
Paasupatavrata, the fast of the Pasupati.
When Siva returned, Uma’s army of warrior women vanished from
Mandara. Only the blood and the corpses on the slopes of the mountain bore
witness they had been there. Andhaka sent a messenger to Siva. He sent
Vighasa, whose limbs had been shattered by the Shaktis’ weapons. Vighasa
limped into Rudra’s presence and said haughtily, "‘Let our armies not fight
anymore, false and warlike Yogin,’ says my master Andhaka to you. ‘Thinking
you were a sage, I did not call you to battle. Now I say to you, either give up
your wife or come out from hiding and let me send you to Yama!’"
Siva replied, "Of what avail are a wife or riches to a feeble man? Your
words are fierce, Rakshasa, but I would see your fight as well."
With the reptilian Gila at the head of his army Andhaka attacked. They
rained terrible missiles on the cave mouth and on Viraka. Boulders crashed
across that entrance and its guardian was sorely pressed. Siva summoned an
army of devas and they came at once through the aerial ways, from diverse
places. They came by land, air and water, with chariots and elephants, horses
and bulls, lions and bhutas. Flying on wonderful deer and magical boars, sarasa
birds and great serpents out of cremation grounds and the embodied spirits of
oceans, lakes and rivers, they came to fight at Siva’s side against Andhaka with
the boon. They came with the Narasimha burning at their head!
Such a mountain-shaking battle there was on the sacred slopes of Mandara
and in his glassy ravines and white valleys, quickly drenched scarlet with the
gore of heroes demonic and divine. It was a brief encounter. Abruptly, Vighasa
the asura grew tall as the sky and, stooping down from the sun, yawning wide a
chasm of a mouth, he swallowed Siva’s whole army. Brahma, Indra, Vishnu,
Surya, Soma and all the rest he swallowed; only Viraka was left at the cave
mouth. He ran in to Rudra in the fallen gloom, crying, "Lord, Vighasa has
devoured your army. Just I am left to fight in the dark."
Siva laughed in the darkness. He began to sing the Saamaveda resonantly
and there was light in the world again: for Rudra at his song shone on the
mountain like the swallowed sun! Viraka, who saw again by that light, rushed
out roaring to fight, with Nandin beside him. As soon as they came, Vighasa
swallowed both.
Siva went to war. He went alone and majestic, intoning a bizarre mantra.
When the dissonant chant pierced Vighasa’s ears, he was sick in his heart, soul
and belly. He began to retch helplessly on the mountain of war. He disgorged

Vishnu, the devas, Viraka and Nandin and the rest. He had swallowed them by
the Saptarishi’s ancient curse, when, once, after killing Hiranyakashyapu,
Vishnu the Narasimha threatened to blow the universe into ashes with his breath
of fire.
Another wild encounter raged. Andhaka’s daityas tasted bitter defeat and
death at the hands of Siva’s army. But Sukra, the guru of the demons, revived his
dead with the mritasanjivini and they came roaring out of Yama’s clutches to
take the field again. At first, the devas were unnerved. Then, Sivaganas swooped
down from the sky on Sukra, bound him like a wild beast and brought him
before Siva. Without a word, Rudra swallowed Bhargava.
When Sukra was gone, the rout of the danavas began in earnest. Those that
fell now, with arrows through their hearts, or their heads hewn off by the devas’
scything blades, no longer rose again. Hordes of bhutas streamed onto the field,
tearing the flesh off dead demons, feasting. Drunken, celebrant vetalas danced
victory, with spears raised high and wolf packs ranged the mountain, their
mouths full of the flesh of the smouldering dead and vultures eager and greedy.
Roaring so the earth shuddered, Vishnu attacked Andhaka with his mace,
the Kaumodaki and felled him a hundred times with terrific blows to his head
and body. Always protected by his boon Andhaka rose to fight again. The Asura
cast trees, serpents and mountain peaks that he broke off and occult astras at
Siva, Uma and Narayana. He assailed them with ancient sorceries, dark
thunderbolts. The battle raged down from the mountain onto the plains of
Avanti, near the Mahakaala forest Siva had created for his Paasupatavrata.
Siva shot the Demon with the Paasupatastra and made a gaping hole in
Andhaka’s body, from which blood gushed like a mountain spring. Wherever the
Asura’s blood fell on the ground, a thousand Andhakas sprang alive! When
weapons pierced these, wherever their crimson fell on the earth, another
thousand Andhakas sprang up. In alarm, Sarva stopped killing the danavas.
Siva turned to Hari to help him. Narayana turned himself into the Revati,
river of quenchless thirst. Siva slew the Andhakas again. Now the Revati drank
their blood and no more fiends sprang from the dead and dying ones. With
ineffable archery, Rudra killed them all, until only Andhaka himself, the Asura
born of the Lord’s own darkness, remained alive. With a fulminant roar, Siva
rushed at Andhaka, impaled him on the Vijaya, his trisula of mystery and lifted
him a thousand dhanus above the earth.
His heart pierced Andhaka hung in agony in the sky, while, commanded
by the devas, the vengeful elements tore at him, limb, eye and brain. The rain
drenched him through to his marrow, then washed away his flesh in strips. The
sun dried another half of him so fiercely even his skeleton was burnt to ashes

and fell to the earth in flakes from the trident. Still Andhaka did not die, but
hung grimly on to life.
 
When Siva swallowed Bhargava like a fruit Andhaka’s asuras did not rise
from the dead any more. Inside Siva’s belly, Bhargava wandered, desperately
seeking escape. As he roamed there, he saw the seven under-worlds: tala, atala,
vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala and patala. Lost and bewildered, he saw all the
mandalas of Brahma and Vishnu, Indra and the devas, Aditya and the apsaras.
All these miraculous worlds Bhargava ranged with swift magic, seeking a way to
return to Andhaka’s side. All those realms shook with the roaring from the
mountain battle between the asuras and Siva’s pramathas.
In terror, Bhargava fell to hymning Siva. His eyes shut, he chanted in a
fever, "O You with the infinite feet, forms and heads, O Destroyer, O Auspicious
One, O infinite-armed, how do I praise you? O Eight-formed, infinity-formed,
bestower of the desires of deva and asura, O fell and awful Siva: give me words
with which to hymn you. AUM! Obeisance, O Mahadeva, to whom the devas
and asuras bow, Lord of all beings, past and future, O tawny-eyed, O strength of
us all; O intellect-formed, who wear the hide of the tiger, who spring from the
flint sticks of sacred Agni, Lord of the three worlds, Iswara, Hara; O bay-eyed,
dissolver of the yugas, who are fire, Lord of the ganas, protector of the worlds,
great-armed, trident-bearer, thousand-handed, with time’s curved fangs; O
Kaala, Maheswara, imperishable, time-formed, blue-throated One, the universe
your belly, Soul of everything, purifier, pervasive One, destroyer of death;
Brahmacharin, Pasupati, bodiless, bull on your banner, Lord of bhutas, Jatin, of
great fame, cave-dweller, deathless, beautiful One; O Siva like the morning sun,
dweller in the burning ghat, Umapati, hour of the dissolution, Yogin, Father,
Turiya, Bhikshu of the left wing; O complex Siva, the sacrificer and the
sacrifice, O Purusha, O golden-eared Deity at the door, O dreadful and
compassionate Siva, a thousand times AUM!"
As he chanted, Bhargava was caught up in a warm rush of something that
had the scent of the beginning of the stars. He was washed along in a soft flood
and ejaculated into the light of the world from Siva’s most sacred linga!
Bhargava stood, hands folded, blinking; three thousand human years had passed
while he was inside Siva’s body.
Like golden thunder above him, he heard Siva laugh softly and proclaim,
"Bhargava, seeing the way you have chosen to come back to us, we shall call
you Sukra. And let anyone who worships you have great virility."
Sukra saw Andhaka impaled on the flaming trisula, his flesh all eaten
away. He heard that once great king also hymn Siva in a ghostly whisper, calling

his hundred names:
"AUM Mahadeva, Hara, Siva, Rudra, Pushkara, Sarva, Bhava, Isana,
Pasupati; AUM Nataraja, Kapalin, Nilalohita, Ashtamurti, Viswamurti,
Trilochana, Pinakin, Jatin; AUM Purusha, Paratpara, Nilakanta, Mrigavyadha,
Suresha, Dayakara, Sukshma, Saumya, Mahaushadhi; AUM Puratana, Soma,
Alokasambhavya, Sanatana, Jagadisa, Sadasiva, Jagadguru, Parabrahman; AUM
Aja, Muni, Lokanatha, Shantha, Nishachara, Yugadikrita, Bindusamsraya,
Trishulin, Sara; AUM Sankara, Anadi, Pranava, Ekatman, Ajneya, Nabhogati,
Hiranyavarna, Aghora, Sambhu..."
Sukra saw the Asura drenched in showers of amrita by Siva’s blessing. His
suffering over, his sin paid for, trembling in love and awe Andhaka knelt at
Siva’s feet, "I was deluded, Lord, I did not know who you Are. Forgive me that I
dared look upon my mother Uma with lust. Oh, Siva, where is the Devi’s fury
and where am I, a miserable daitya? Lord, grant me your mercy that I be serene
in my soul and devoted to you both."
And because his heart was true and because he was their son, Siva and
Uma blessed Andhaka, laying their palms on him. They sniffed his head in
affection and raised him up as a Lord of ganas. Those that hear this legend and
the mrityunjaya mantra, which Andhaka chanted at last, shall have everything
they desire in this world and in heaven and moksha thereafter!’
Said Sanatkumara of the many voices to Vyasa, my master,"
Says Romaharshana, Suta of genius, to the spellbound rishis of the
Naimisa vana.

ANTAH: in the end
 
On a golden evening of that kalpa, his Siva Purana ended. Vyasa’s pupil,
the Suta Romaharshana, blessed the rishis of the Naimisa vana and vanished into
a sunset the color of blood. The next morning, the rishis were to perform the
ritual ablution to mark the end of their yagna. At Brahma’s behest, Saraswati
herself became a river in the holy vana and flowed there for them to bathe.
Shouting her name, they plunged into her waters and offered tarpana to the
Gods.
Purified by the Saraswati, they set out for Kasi, on the banks of the Ganga,
to worship at the Avimukteswara Jyotirlinga. The cadences of the Siva Purana
still echoed in their minds. For days, they travelled and one evening, shading
their eyes against the setting sun, they saw the pristine Ganga flowing down the
mountain. With cries of joy, they raced one another to her golden currents. They
plunged into her: convinced she would wash their sins.
A short way downstream, they saw another group of rishis bathing. As
those munis emerged from their immersions, the sky filled with a mass of light,
as if ten suns had risen there as one. While the Naimisa hermits stood agape,
those other rishis rose bodily out of the river, into the air and were subsumed
into the tremendous refulgence. The next moment, the light and they both
vanished.
From on high, a voice spoke to Saunaka’s sages, "Rishis, that was the jyoti
of the Maheswara linga you saw. Hearing the Purana has purified you and a
great siddhi awaits you in the next world."
The rishis stood in the river, awestruck. Hearing the Siva Purana from
Romaharshana had made ashes of the sins of all their bygone lives and bhakti
welled in their hearts like the Ganga herself. In that sacred dusk, they knew even
moksha was not far. The voice spoke again to them, "Munis, climb Mount Meru
to where Sanatkumara sits in dhyana."
The rishis climbed golden Meru, their hearts alight with a huge intimation
of adventure, of mystery. High on that mountain and wide as a small sea, was a
lake called the Skandasaras. Their bodies airy, they climbed to the Skandasaras
on feet light with faith. They saw the deep lake through which light passed
unbent, it was so clear. Slabs of unearthly crystal paved its shores. Incandescent
flowers, out of dreams, bloomed on its banks and upon its water lotuses of
another world floated.
So blue was that water, the sky seemed to have fallen into it. Steps made
of the darkest turquoise led to the edge of the lake. The rishis climbed down in

soft exhilaration and gathered lotus, lily and holy water in leaf cups for their
worship. Unperturbed herds of golden deer drank where the hermits bathed and
offered worship. The chill water enlivened their spirits. They heard karandava,
sarasa and koyal calling on the lake of wonder, while, in rustling whispers, the
water spoke back to bird and deer.
When they climbed up again to a place of vantage above the Skandasaras,
with a cry, Saunaka pointed to its northern bank. There an unearthly
luminescence seemed to grow out of the rushes, casting its aura high into the air.
Sanatkumara sat under a kalpa vriksha, the last of its kind growing on earth in
that age. Other rishis and yogins were adoring Brahma’s son, just awakened
from samadhi.
Saunaka’s munis ran around the lake and prostrated themselves at his feet.
The radiant one asked, "What brings you here, my children?"
Saunaka told him about the Purana they heard in the Naimisa vana, of the
tower of light they saw over Kasi and the voice that had sent them here.
Sanatkumara raised a hand over them in blessing. The sky erupted with the
tumult of a dundubhi. When they looked up, the living azure was lit by another
sun risen there. A vimana like a jewel, an immense ship of the firmament, ringed
by a hundred lesser ones, flew down at thought’s blinding speed until it filled the
sky. It was relucent and so alive it seemed to breathe.
The air was full of heavenly music. The sages saw mighty Sivaganas in the
splendid vimanas, apsaras of impossible beauty, Rudra women, siddhas,
Brahmarishis, gandharvas tall and long-haired, yakshas with luminous skins,
charanas, kinnara fauns and grave centaurian kimpurushas: divine beings all.
Between crystal panels that covered the great vimana, Saunaka’s munis saw a
golden banner with a fighting bull emblazoned. At the helm of that ship sat
Nandin, Lord of the Earth, in his human form, his wife Suyasa beside him.
He was three-eyed and held a trisula. They knew that, in his Master’s
name, he wielded absolute power over the rulers of the stars! Behind the Gana
lord, they fancied an immense and glowing Shadow stood, a crescent moon in its
matted locks, a serpent king round its blue throat; but they could not be certain it
was there at all.
Crying out in an ecstasy, Sanatkumara threw himself on the ground before
the vision in the sky. Nandin raised his hand in a blessing. Sanatkumara said,
"These rishis of the six clans performed a yagna in the Naimisa vana. They have
come here at Brahma’s instance."
Nandin beckoned serenely and, by a beam of light from his hand, the rishis
rose into the chariot of the sky. As they flashed away starwards, like time, with a
look from his eye Nandiswara cut away their paasas, the silvery umbilici that

bound them to the earth with vestigial memories of a thousand lives. Oceanic
freedom overwhelmed the sages: the bliss of moksha and the knowledge of Siva,
the Auspicious One.
AUM Namah Sivayah AUM Namah Sivayah
AUM Namah Sivayah
AUM Shanti Shanti Shanti
AUM Shantihi AUM
 

