 
 
EXTERNAL POSSESSION AND THE UNDISENTANGLABILITY 
OF SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS 
by 
LUKE MADISON SMITH 
(Under the Direction of Vera Lee-Schoenfeld) 
ABSTRACT 
 
Over the past decades, generative attempts to understand the formal syntactic properties 
of the human language faculty have become unexpectedly entangled with semantics. While 
classical theories assumed a wide degree of autonomy for the engine of syntax in the language 
faculty, empirical research into argument structure, syntactic cartography and cross-linguistic 
alternations has nudged the field toward an understanding of syntax fundamentally linked to a 
core of semantic processing. Here, I investigate External Possession as a syntactic alternation, in 
order to fan these flames. I argue that External Possession is a formally uniform, well-motivated 
and non-arbitrary alternation whose unique semantics and pragmatics come hand-in-hand with 
its syntactic properties. This reinforces the idea that human syntax is based on a universal 
structure reducible in part to semantics and pragmatics. I speculate as to the nature of this 
structure. 
 
 
INDEX WORDS: 
syntax, semantics, theories of grammar, biolinguistics, possession 
 

 
 
EXTERNAL POSSESSION AND THE UNDISENTANGLABILITY 
OF SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS 
 
by 
 
LUKE MADISON SMITH 
B.A., Georgia State University, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Thesis Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of The University of Georgia in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree 
 
MASTER OF ARTS 
 
ATHENS, GEORGIA 
2015 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015 
Luke Madison Smith 
No Rights Reserved 
 
 

 
 
EXTERNAL POSSESSION AND THE UNDISENTANGLABILITY 
OF SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS 
 
by 
 
LUKE MADISON SMITH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Major Professor: 
Vera Lee-Schoenfeld 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee: 
 
Pilar Chamorro 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Timothy Gupton 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic Version Approved: 
 
Julie Coffield 
Interim Dean of the Graduate School 
The University of Georgia 
May 2015 
 

iv 
 
 
 
DEDICATION 
 
I suppose it would constitute a supreme lack of filial piety to dedicate this thesis to 
anyone save my now late mother. There's no sense in sentimentalizing it publicly, so it will be 
left at that. It remains to be seen if my mother's moral support in my career path was a good 
investment, although she was indeed enthusiastic about my work despite not really knowing 
what I do. Then again, the same is true of myself. 
My mother always wanted to sulk timidly away from the idea of death, balking even at 
the idea of a funeral and the pathetic ways people try to crack a smile in 'celebrating death.' Yet I 
think that she missed the point, as there is reason to celebrate death, and had I one more chance 
to speak with her, perhaps I would tell her this. 
 
Death is what gives life meaning. An eternal and unthreatened life is an idle eternity 
without vigor. I've been through enough procrastinative summers to know the apathy engendered 
by plenty. We celebrate death because it gives us the limits that make us make our lives 
meaningful. Without it we would never know the value of life, whose incalculable value comes 
from its very scarcity. We must know the night to appreciate the day. We must know poverty to 
appreciate riches. We must know despondency to appreciate companionship. And we must know 
death to truly appreciate life. Death is not a mistake. It is the very reason that life is worth living. 
 
Death leaves in the living the most profound and deep coldness, a coldness I've never felt 
before. But that coldness exists to be rekindled in a new hearthfire, which will inevitably come. I 
suppose that this volume should more properly be dedicated to that rekindling and that new 
family which will anew sit around it.  
 

v 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
First, as a practical matter, I should thank my numerous consultants for their 
grammaticality judgments on their native languages: Laura Alarcón for Spanish and Dot-eum 
'Rachel,' Kihoon and Wonbin Kim (no relation) for Korean. Kihoon was incidentally the one 
who first directed me to begin looking at case theory in Korean, which would eventually inspire 
a large portion of this project. Laura should be thanked as well for helping me make up my mind 
to move the hell out of the Atlanta area two years ago and out here. Rachel should also be 
thanked for somehow putting up with my constant endeared mockery. 
 
I should also publicly thank the whole of the graduate student body of the program (and 
perhaps even the ROMLettes) for their supportiveness, which oft-times borders on the 
suspicious; I almost get the perhaps erroneous feeling that I’ll be missed here. I’ve enjoyed 
looking over a lot of shoulders and assisting with a lot of projects, especially because some 
people have this idea that I did it for non-selfish reasons. In reality, every little article or side-
note I picked up in helping someone else has come into play in my work or understanding 
linguistics generally, so it was always a ploy. Needless to say, the past two years have been a 
highly successful experiment in academic antifragility. Coming into this program, I really had 
only studied Latin and Greek and such, sort of knew what a phoneme was and had a vague 
knowledge of this Noam Chomsky guy, but that was about it as it came to my knowledge of 
linguistics. Hopefully this thesis is evidence of at least some marginal advancement. 
 
Personal acknowledgements are in order for many varieties of people. Some have been 
great resources and partners in understanding language and interchanging ideas (Doug Merchant, 

vi 
 
Joey Stanley, Jenni Palomäki, Martin Macak). Some have been irreplaceable friends (Mike and 
Rachel Olsen, Sara Carðer and again Dot-eum). Some have been serious... sometimes too serious 
(Josh Hanna and Lindsey Antonini) and some have gone sorely underappreciated (Trevor 
Ramsey and Katie Dicken). At least one has managed to fall into all of these categories—she 
knows who she is, wherever she is, likely brooding in that ephemeral regret and self-loathing 
which I will always cherish, despite her mostly pretended lack of sentimentality. I should 
probably also add an honorable mention of my insufferable roommate, Longlong Wang (and I 
suppose I should say, for posterity’s sake, that that is his real name). But the sands of time pass 
and memories fade. At least that’ll be my excuse when I totally forget about all of you in ten 
years, or at least pretend to. 
 
I should also acknowledge my father’s constant support of me in my career. When I say 
‘my career’ I mean his no-so-subtle support of me leaving academia and getting a real career. At 
this point, however, I might be a little too deep in this wicked system to find gainful employment 
elsewhere, so it looks like I’m in for life (the joke’s on him for supplying me with that Latin 
book that would eventually land me here a decade later). I am indeed worried, in a way most 
here unfortunately aren’t, as to whether or not this path will contribute to actual society in a way 
that makes the billions the state wastes on education worth it (yeah, keep believing you guys!). 
That remains to be seen, but this is precisely the line of ‘work’ suitable for a wide, fulfilling and 
impactful life. 
 

vii 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .............................................................................................................v 
LIST OF FIGURES ....................................................................................................................... ix 
CHAPTER 
 
1 BACKGROUND ...........................................................................................................1 
 
 
 
1.1 An Ode to Skinner .............................................................................................1 
 
 
 
1.2 The Standard Theory..........................................................................................3 
 
 
 
1.3 Semanticizing Syntax.........................................................................................7 
 
 
 
1.4 The Undisentanglability Thesis .......................................................................12 
 
2 EXTERNAL POSSESSION CONSTRUCTIONS ......................................................14 
 
 
 
2.1 Basics ...............................................................................................................14 
 
 
 
2.2 Pragmatics: 'Why' Does External Possession Exist? .......................................16 
 
 
 
2.3 Thematic External Possession..........................................................................21 
 
 
 
2.4 External Possession and Aspect .......................................................................24 
 
 
 
2.5Formal Representations of TEPC .....................................................................26 
 
 
 
2.6 The Absolutive Limitation ...............................................................................27 
 
 
 
2.7 Modification of Possessa .................................................................................30 
 
 
 
2.8 Distributed Plurality .........................................................................................32 
 
 
 
2.9 Athematic External Possession ........................................................................34 
 
 
 
2.10Modeling External Possession ........................................................................39 

viii 
 
 
 
 
2.11 The Syntactic Specifics ..................................................................................45 
 
3 THOUGHTS ON THEORY ........................................................................................55 
 
 
 
3.1 Towards a Fuller Model of Syntax ..................................................................57 
 
 
 
3.2 Biolinguistics and Theory Economy ................................................................59 
 
 
 
3.3 Experimental Possibilities ................................................................................65 
 
 
 
3.4 Theoretical Momentum ....................................................................................67 
REFERENCES ..............................................................................................................................72 
APPENDICES 
 
A Glossing Abbreviations ................................................................................................79 
 
B Terminological Abbreviations .....................................................................................80 
 
C A Typology of External Possession .............................................................................81 

ix 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Page 
Figure 1: The Reverse-Y Model ......................................................................................................4 
Figure 2: Cinque’s Cartographies of Verbal Morphemes and Adverbs ........................................11 
Figure 3: Rizzi’s Left Periphery ....................................................................................................19 
Figure 4: The Topic/Comment Structure of Language ..................................................................20 
Figure 5: External and Internal Possession Constructions Contrasted ..........................................39 
Figure 6: The Structure Sufficient for Modeling External Possession ..........................................48 
Figure 7: Thematic External Possession from Themes..................................................................49 
Figure 8: (Unacceptable) Thematic External Possession from Agents .........................................50 
Figure 9: Recursive Topicalization of Athematic Possessors ........................................................52 

1 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
BACKGROUND 
 
"The linguists have this peculiar capacity to make whatever they do seem terribly important." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–Skinner 
1.1 An Ode to Skinner 
It's at least worth beginning with the quote reproduced at the beginning of this document. 
B.F. Skinner as a psychologist and researcher would be largely the rhetorical tool of the demise 
of his own school of thought. Noam Chomsky's virulent 1959 review of Skinner's Verbal 
Behavior would prove a fateful shift not only in linguistics, but also in wider psychology and 
would trigger the rise of cognitive science generally. 
 
Behaviorism was based on the assumption that the only truly scientific method of 
analyzing human action was one which ignored most of the unpredictable and unreliable 
vagaries of the human mind, focusing narrowly on subjects' responses to stimulus in 
experimental circumstances. To Skinner and other Behaviorists, the brain was an associative tool 
that blindly linked possible behaviors with outcomes. When it was rewarded with positive 
reinforcement for an action, it would incentivize the same action again in the same 
circumstances. When it was punished for an action, the punishment disincentized further action. 
This simple algorithm for learning was the whole of Behaviorist science. Thus learning, 
including learning language, was an issue of a person gradually being trained to use a certain 

2 
 
word or phrase and being punished from using ungrammatical or undesirable expressions. 
Lacking in this also was any implicit acknowledgement of the cognitive differences in learning 
between say, a human and a pigeon as a target of research. 
 
What Chomsky noted of human language was that any person's knowledge of their native 
language was far too expansive to be the narrow result of psychological conditioning. At an 
obvious level, a speaker of a language has an immediate and exhaustive ability to diagnose 
whether any random string of words in their language is grammatical or not. This is not trivial. 
Considering there is an infinite number of ways to add and shuffle words together, any amount 
of reflection on this will make it seem miraculous that humans can judge and produce sentences 
so effortlessly without any conscious thought on their language's 'grammar.' 
 
This point, quite obvious once noted, was fatal for Behaviorism. If people actually 
learned what sentences were acceptable or unacceptable in a language by conditioning, we would 
have to have an infinite amount of stimulus to condition them. That's to say, if there are an 
infinite number of potentially ungrammatical sentences in English (which there are), a child 
would have to be spanked by its parents an infinite number of times after using that infinite set of 
sentences to fully condition it into 'learning' the language. This is clearly not practical, yet we 
can still reject that infinite set of sentences as ungrammatical despite never having been spanked 
away from using them. 
 
The take-away from this was that ‘language’ was not just a set of learned expressions or 
words, but a dynamic system which could ‘generate’ (hence generative) an infinite set of 
grammatical utterances (and reject all others). Language, as Chomsky often quotes from von 
Humboldt, is the "infinite use of finite means." That is to say, although there may be a finite 
number of words in a language, combining those words with a finite number of syntactic rules 

3 
 
can quite easily give us truly infinite possibilities in linguistic expression without infinite 
cognitive machinery. 
 
The unique aspect of the human mind, as opposed to the minds of other animals, was that 
it had the peculiar ability to piece together syntactic rules intuitively with any amount of 
exposure to linguistic data. This ability, the language faculty (LF) was the core of study of the 
new Generative Program (GP). 
1.2 The Standard Theory 
The primary goal of Generative Linguistics has been disentangling the language faculty 
in the strictest sense from other cognitive faculties and modeling it as a separate unit. This is 
principally the study of 'Universal Grammar' (UG), the set of constraints and traits unique to the 
LF and underivable from other cognitive systems. The general idea has been that, to understand 
UG, it was most important to hold constant all linguistic phenomena not narrowly syntactic. This 
is what underlies Chomsky's 1953 description of generative syntax as a set of “techniques which 
enable [linguists] [...] to determine the state and structure of natural languages without semantic 
reference” [emphasis added] (242). 
 
This lack of 'semantic reference' was particularly important for the budding program. 
Semantics provides much of the intuition behind introspective analyses of language, and these 
lay analyses could contaminate a scientific approach to the purely formal aspects of language. 
Chomsky thus dismisses the idea that "the properties and content of the mind are accessible to 
introspection," calling it "the greatest defect of classical philosophy of mind" (1972; 25). 
 
Additionally, if we assume that the human capacity to reason and conceptualize events is 
independent of language, the search for UG principles in language can only be obscured by 
paying too much attention to the semantics of language, which are presumably not directly 
related to the linguistic system per se. Indeed, part of the main arguments for a formal account of 

4 
 
syntax come from the realization of 'Colorless green ideas' sentences, where semantic 
anomalousness clearly does not correlate with syntactic unacceptability (Chomsky 1957). 
 
Out of these concerns and assumptions is the "Standard Theory" born. The Standard 
Theory was that built out of the framework of Syntactic Structures and culminated in the 
publishing of Chomsky's 1965 Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Its core was a Phrase Structure 
component which could generate an infinite set of sentences based on rewrite rules with the 
capacity for recursion, the first major model of the syntax of the language faculty. After the 
generation of a 'deep structure' according to the Phrase Structure rules, the linguistic system was 
modeled as splitting into two separate channels (yielding the Reverse-Y model of grammar). 
 
Figure 1: The Reverse-Y Model (from Searle 1972) 
On one side, the deep structure would undergo syntactic transformations: perhaps 
passivization or equideletion or various kinds of insertions or deletions that would change the 
phonological output of the system which would eventually be uttered. On the other side, 
Base Component 
Deep Structures 
Transformational 
component 
Semantic 
component 
Surface structures 
Phonological 
component 
Semantic 
representation of 
sentences 
Syntax 

5 
 
however, the deep structure would be sent off to the semantic engine for interpretation. This 
meant that syntactic/phonological transformations and meaning were utterly distinct parts of the 
linguistic system, and both only tangentially dependent of the deep structure. 
 
This was spelled out more explicitly by Katz and Postal (1964) in what would become 
known as the eponymous 'Katz-Postal Hypothesis.' The hypothesis brought out explicitly one of 
the implications of the Reverse-Y model of the LF: that the syntactic transformations that occur 
down the road to the Phonological Form have no effect on the semantics of an utterance. Thus, 
although passivization dramatically changes phonological form, sentences like the two below 
must share the same meaning because they are modeled as having the same deep structure. 
(1) 
a. 
Billy loves Sally. 
b. 
Sally is loved by Billy. 
The Katz-Postal Hypothesis ran into empirical and theoretical problems quickly. One 
significant one had been that some aspects of language obviously linked to semantics, 
particularly negation, had been modeled, and could only be modeled for various reasons as being 
transformations. This meant that a negated sentence must share a deep structure with its truth-
functional opposite and at first glance, Katz-Postal would have to treat them both as 
synonymous. Katz and Postal dealt with this saying that negated deep structures are indeed 
different, but only because there is a phonologically null negative operator manifest in the base 
generation. Still, other derived sentences seem to have obviously different meanings than their 
deep structure counterpart, take, for example, the effects of passivization on quantifier scope. 
(2) 
a. 
Every man loves three women. 
 
b. 
Three women are loved by every man. 
c. 
An arrow hit every target. 

6 
 
d. 
Every target was hit by an arrow. 
 
The standard interpretation of (2a) is for each man, he loves three (possibly different) 
women, while (2b) has the reading of there being three particular women in the world which all 
men happen to love. Katz and Postal argue that in cases like these, both readings remain possible 
and thus no semantics have actually changed in passivization. What changes is the standard 
implicature associated with each sentence. Of course, had this not been the case, plugging that 
theoretical hole (or any other) would be as easy as positing another invisible operator. 
 
Chomsky (1965) highlights some other diseconomies of the Standard Model. One 
problem was that the Phrase Structure rules were liable to over-generate expressions that were 
not actually acceptable on semantic grounds; he provides several examples (76). 
(3) 
a. 
the boy elapsed 
 
b. 
the harvest was clever to agree 
 
c. 
John is owning a house 
 
d. 
John solved the pipe 
 
Although noting that these could conceivably be ruled out as unacceptable on mere 
semantic grounds, Chomsky employs ‘syntactic features’ and selectional constraints to weed 
them out. That is to say, he expands each lexical entry to include extra syntactic features which 
encode quasi-semantic information about a lexical item. Thus 'John' is marked for being 
[+Human] while 'harvest' is [-Animate] and thus [-Human]. Thus if we state that the predicate 
'was clever' requires a [+Human] subject, we can rule out (3b) while accepting a "John was 
clever to agree." 
 
This is a peculiar choice. At this point, all lexical entries now must encode data for a set 
hierarchy of syntactic features which, at best, only reproduce what the semantic engine would be 

7 
 
doing regardless. Then again, it is not even clear in Aspects if Chomsky intended to create 
merely a model which could produce a set of grammatical utterances regardless of machinery or 
a model that completely recapitulated the actual psycholinguistic processing in language. If he 
strove to do the latter, programming these features into the lexicon would be an enormous 
diseconomy, and not necessarily an example of a psychologically real model. Yet if the latter 
were not his intension, the entire Chomskyan program is scarcely more than an attempt to 
reproduce output which assumedly “[interprets] success as [merely] approximating unanalyzed 
data,” to evoke Chomsky’s criticisms of computational approaches to cognitive science. 
1.3 Semanticizing Syntax 
As time went yet further on, the Standard Theory, with its rigid division between syntax 
and semantics and between syntactic transformations and semantic change, had empirical 
shadows cast over it. In fact, much of the development within the Generative Program within the 
past decades has consisted in further degrading or redefining classical Chomskyan syntax in 
ways not often explicitly appreciated. 
 
The main brunt of the problem with the Standard Theory, or at least the circumstantial 
argument against it, was that many of the allegedly autonomous traits of syntax can be directly 
correlated with semantics. That is to say, semantics has such a tangible effect on word placement 
and transformational possibilities that it seems untenable to assume the syntactic derivation was 
semantically blind, and only recapitulating semantics in its employment of syntactic features. 
 
One of the first major chinks in the armor of autonomy was the discovery of robust 
syntactic differences between unergative and unaccusative verbs by Perlmutter (1978) and others 
originally working in Relational Grammar. Although both are classically categorized as 
'intransitive,' the subjects of unergative verbs (talk, walk, chirp) are semantically agents, while 
the subjects of unaccusative verbs (fall, die, come, break) are semantically patients or 

8 
 
undergoers. Importantly, this semantic difference is not isolated in meaning, but will be manifest 
in different syntactic traits in nearly every language. In English, for example, unaccusative 
subjects can, like transitive objects be modified by resultative adjectives, while unergative 
subjects cannot. 
(4) 
a. 
Billy shot him dead. 
b. 
He fell dead. 
c. 
*He screamed dead. (i.e. screamed himself to death) 
Similar patterns are observed in other languages. Burzio (1986) notably sees a similar 
unaccusative/unergative mismatch in Italian, where unaccusative subjects, like objects can take 
the partitive clitic ne, while unergative subjects cannot. 
(5) 
a. 
Ne 
ho 
mangiati 
due. 
 
 
PARTi have 
eaten  
twoi 
 
 
'I've eaten two of them.' 
 
b. 
Ne 
sono 
venuti molti. 
 
 
PARTi are 
come manyi 
 
 
'Many of them came.' 
 
c. 
*Ne 
hanno gridato  
alcuni. 
 
 
PARTi have 
screamed 
somei 
 
 
putatively: 'Some of them screamed.' 
Moreover, at the foundation of the Minimalist Programme, Chomsky (1995) and Krazter 
(1996) argue for an independent dedicated supraverbal projection in the syntax which deals with 
the semantics of a verbal agent. That is to say, all languages express agenthood and seem to do 
so with the same syntax: agentive nominals are always generated or externally merged above all 

9 
 
other verbal arguments, directly below functional categories. Thus it seems to be the case that a 
particular node in a derivation corresponds to a particular semantic interpretation, both within 
and without any individual language. This becomes the 'vP Hypothesis' which is a significant 
way in which semantics begins to be unabashedly smuggled into formal syntax. Additionally, it 
lessens the demands of the lexicon to specify the nature of a verb’s selectional requirement, in 
that agenthood is computed external to the proposition itself, in a way Kratzer construes as 
mirroring Neo-Davidsonian event semantics. 
 
This development additionally helps to account for the formal differences between 
unaccusative and unergative subjects. If agency is assigned to nominals at a certain node, we can 
account for the differences between unergatives and unaccusatives by saying that their arguments 
are generated at different points in the derivation: an unergative subject is merged into the vP 
projection, while an unaccusative subject originates lower, perhaps as a complement to the V 
head and often rises to subject position in different languages because of the External Projection 
Principle or another motivator. 
 
This is only a hop, skip and a jump from Baker's Uniformity of Theta-Assignment 
Hypothesis (1988). Baker suggests that, not only is the agent theta-role assigned at a specific 
projection in a derivation, but all theta-roles. This is important because it creates a direct analogy 
between the semantic structure of language and the syntactic structure. Simply enough, a 
different origin point in the syntax means different meaning and vice versa. The assumption here 
is that human language is partially composed of a set of universal theta-assigning projections that 
construe the argument semantics of an expression. Due to its universality, this hierarchy is 
presumably a component of UG, if not an emergent property of other cognitive constraints. 
Baker (1995) can be consulted as a review of some of the work on different proposals for the 

10 
 
precise ordering of this hierarchy of projections. 
 
These developments were mirrored by an exceptionally robust inquiry into the 
comparative syntax of adverbials and functional heads within the Cartographic Approach. While 
the syntax of argument structure appears to be stable throughout languages, Cinque (1999) finds 
a similar stable structure in much of the circumverbal environment. Having investigated the 
morphology and adverb orders of around 75 languages, he shows that adverbs are arrayed in a 
certain constant hierarchy entirely dependent on the semantics of the adverbs in use. At the same 
time, verbal morphemes show the same homogeneity of structure and importantly, the structure 
of the two precisely mirror each other. That is to say, the syntax and morphology of verb phrases 
mirror a semantic structure in a very suspicious way if one actually assumes total syntactic 
autonomy. 
 

11 
 
Moodspeech act 
 Moodevaluative 
  Moodevidential 
   Moodepistemic 
 Tensepast/future 
  Modnecessity 
   Modpossibility 
    Aspecthabitual 
     Aspectrepetitive 
      Aspectfrequentative 
       Modvolition 
        Aspectcelerative 
         Tenseanterior 
          Aspectterminative 
           Aspectcontinuative 
            Aspectcontinuous 
             Aspectretrospective 
              Aspectdurative 
               Aspectprospective 
                Modobligation 
                 Aspectfrustrative 
                  Aspectcompletive 
                   Voicepassive 
                    Verb 
 
AdvPspeech act (frankly) 
 AdvPevaluative (fortunately) 
  AdvPevidential (allegedly) 
   AdvPepistemic (probably) 
 AdvPpast/future (then) 
  AdvPnecessity (necessarily) 
   AdvPpossibility (possibly) 
    AdvPhabitual (usually) 
     AdvPrepetitive (again) 
      AdvPfrequentative (frequently) 
       AdvPvolition (willingly) 
        AdvPcelerative (quickly) 
         AdvPanterior (already) 
          AdvPterminative (no longer) 
           AdvPcontinuative (still) 
            AdvPcontinuous (always) 
             AdvPretrospective (just) 
              AdvPdurative (briefly) 
               AdvPprospective (imminently) 
                AdvPobligation (obligatorily) 
                 AdvPfrustrative (in vain) 
                  AdvPcompletive (partially) 
                   AdvPmanner (well) 
                    Verb 
 
Figure 2: Cinque’s Cartographies of Verbal Morphemes and Adverbs 
Realizations such as this triggered an expansion of syntactic cartography to understand 
traditionally opaque elements of syntax and to attempt ground them in semantic hierarchies 
which emerged in different projections. Scott (2002) takes Cinque's methodology to craft a 
similar hierarchy of adjectival modifiers within nominal projections and others look into topic 
and focus phenomena (Benincà and Poletto 2004). 
This movement towards a semantic basis of syntax makes strong, testable predictions 
about the nature of UG. Although languages might differ on diverse parameters that modify the 
surface forms of language, investigations of movement and coindexing phenomena should 
correspond with the idea that base generation is linked with the semantics of a verbal argument 
structure and functional categories. For example, since it is generally considered uncontroversial 

12 
 
that the agentive projection vP is higher in the syntactic derivation than the VP, where themes 
are generated, we should expect not to find a language, even one with canonical object-subject 
order, where a coindexed subject and object trigger an anaphor appearing in the agentive node 
and an R-expression as the complement to the verb. Additionally, we expect not to find a 
language where the subjects of unaccusatives model like transitive subjects while the subjects of 
unergatives model like transitive objects. 
Moreover, with the general intuition that the semantic structure of human grammar 
should be mirrored in the syntax, we should find much of the following: semantically similar 
constructions in various languages which, although might be realized distinctly from language to 
language, show the same syntactic limitations despite what logical possibilities we can imagine 
for language. 
1.4 The Undisentanglability Thesis 
Again, the Standard Theory assumed a largely autonomous system of syntax which 
generated and judged strings with reference to 'semantics' only insofar as syntactic features 
happened to recapitulate the logic of the semantic structure. Semantically anomalous sentences 
were ruled out, strangely enough, by the selectional requirements of the syntax, rather than by 
the semantic engine itself. 
This absolute autonomy gradually became more and more circumstantial given the robust 
amount of syntactic phenomena inextricably linked to semantics. My thesis here is simply that 
much of what we know of as syntax and semantics is absolutely undisentanglable: most if not all 
'syntactic' alternations are rooted in the semantics and pragmatics of expressions. Cartographic 
Approaches to the syntax of human language along with UTAH-like interpretations of theta-roles 
have demonstrated a kind of immutable semantic hierarchy inherent in language and ‘movement’ 
and transformations about this hierarchy often must be conditioned by the semantics of this 

13 
 
structure. Therefore, in many cases, a syntactic transformation is a reflection of a semantic 
change. 
My idea is that Generative Syntax has come to the point where one can say that the Katz-
Postal Hypothesis is nearly conclusively the absolute opposite of truth. If the alternations and 
constructions of human language are cast on to a quasi-cartographic semantic hierarchy, we 
should expect not only for languages to yield formally similar semantic alternations, but we 
should expect that semantic or pragmatic transformations or alternations in a language should 
exhibit formal traits and restrictions which are largely constant, if not totally so. 
To illustrate this, it's worth it to examine External Possession (EP) as a linguistic 
phenomenon. We will see that External Possession Constructions (EPCs) across the world's 
languages are not only pragmatically and semantically comparable, but they show the same 
syntactic 'glitches' and traits that indicate a formal similarity. This illustrates the fact that 
syntactic alternations are not utterly arbitrary transformations that occur to a deep structure, but 
are grounded in the constraints of an underlying grammatical system present in all human 
languages which in part motivates syntactic change. 
 
 

14 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
EXTERNAL POSSESSION CONSTRUCTIONS 
2.1 Basics 
 
All human languages can be said to have ways of encoding possession as a semantic 
relationship. Generally, within a given noun phrase, the possessor of that noun phrase can be 
realized as a syntactically subordinated element as shown below. I will refer to this type of 
construction, variously realized in all of the world’s languages as Internal Possession (IP). 
(6) 
a. 
Rompí  
[el 
brazo [de 
Billy]].  
 
 
(Spanish) 
broke.1S 
[the 
arm 
[of 
Billy]] 
‘I broke the arm of Billy.’ 
b. 
A-johei-ta 
 
[[pe-mitã] 
rova].  
 
 
(Guaraní) 
1AC-wash-FUT 
[[that-child] 
face] 
‘I’ll wash that child’s face.’ 
c. 
Mary-ga 
[[John-uy] 
dari-reul] 
chatda.  
 
(Korean) 
Mary-N 
[[John-G] 
leg-A]  
kicked 
‘Mary kicked John’s leg.’ 
Thus a noun, such as the Spanish brazo ‘arm’ heads a projection which is additionally 
modified by a semantically possessive prepositional phrase de Billy ‘of Billy/Billy’s’. The same 
is true of the Korean dari ‘leg’ and its genitive-marked possessor John-uy and of the Guaraní 
rova ‘face’ and its possessor (albeit morphologically unmarked) pe-mitã ‘child’. 

15 
 
External possession constructions, however, allow possessors to appear as verbal 
arguments independent of the possessum projection. This is manifest in a variety of strategies 
cross-linguistically. In European languages, possessors often become 'indirect objects' or 
'Possessor Datives' maintaining the autonomy of the possessum (7a). Other languages employ 
noun incorporation of the possessum, thus reducing it as an independent entity and promoting the 
possessor to full and exclusive argumenthood (7b). Still others (7c) will promote the possessor to 
non-dative argumenthood, in ways specific to the language. 
(7) 
a. 
Le 
rompí  
[el 
brazo] [a 
Billy].  
 
(Spanish) 
D 
broke.1S 
the 
arm 
to 
Billy 
‘I broke Billy’s arm.’ 
b. 
A-hova-hei-ta  
[pe-mitã]. 
 
 
 
 
(Guaraní) 
1AC-face-wash-FUT that-child 
‘I’ll wash that child’s mouth.’ 
c. 
Mary-ga 
[John-eul] 
[dari-reul] 
chatda.  
 
(Korean) 
Mary-N 
John-G  
leg-A  
kicked 
‘Mary kicked John in the leg.’ 
 
Although the surface forms of these languages are quite different, it should be 
emphasized that in each case, the possessor climbs to verbal argumenthood and in each case, we 
will see the same semantic and pragmatic corollaries. 
 
To examine external possession, I will mostly be referring to these three particular 
languages for their accessibility and representativeness. External possession in Spanish 
resembles in its appearance and its formal traits the other possessor dative languages of Europe 
(French, Italian, German, Bulgarian, Romanian, etc.), Guaraní is representative of languages 

16 
 
which show EP through noun incorporation (many Amerindian and Australian languages) and 
Korean is comparable to other languages with various case alternation-based EPCs (Japanese, 
Nez Perce, Pomo etc.). Appendix C catalogues the main EP traits of all of these languages with 
various sources. I will be illustrating examples from many of these languages as useful or 
convenient, and noting exceptions to the generalizations I made as they arise. Generally, 
however, as I will show, the formal traits borne in common by all of these languages are roughly 
analogous on the most salient points. 
2.2 Pragmatics: ‘Why’ Does External Possession Exist? 
‘Why’ is generally an unscientific question to ask. Nevertheless, failure to ascend to 
arbitrary suit-and-tie scientific standards should not constitute any kind of impediment to actual 
scientific inquiry. As said, as many of the world’s languages encode EPCs through various 
means, what is an important question to ponder is why the possessors of nouns are so common to 
be ‘externalized’ in natural language, while the locations, adjectives of size, determiners and 
other modifiers of those nouns are not externalized in any systematic way cross-linguistically. 
 
Various authors have already remarked on the ‘why’ of EPCs in various frameworks, in 
all cases, the motivation being one pragmatic in nature. Velasquez-Castillo (1996; 166), for 
example,characterizes EP in Guaraní as “maintaining focal attention on a given discourse 
participant [the possessor]” while at the same time, “maximally backgrounding an affected body-
part [possessum].”As an example, take a sentence like ‘I broke Billy’s teeth.’ Despite the fact 
that teeth heads the object noun phrase, in nearly any imaginable discursive setting, Billy is the 
most pragmatically important and cognitively salient participant for nearly any imaginable 
interlocutor (with the possible exception of Billy’s doubtlessly money-grubbing dentist). EP 
allows a language to promote Billy such that he gains sentential prominence over teeth. 

17 
 
Thus External Possession as a pragmatic alternation bridges the gaps between two 
otherwise countervailing tendencies of grammar: firstly, that possessors of arguments tend to be 
syntactically subordinated to their possessions, yet secondly, that at a discourse level, many 
possessors are generally more pragmatically important or salient than their possessa. This is a 
problem because, while in many cases in natural language, syntactic structure mirrors the 
pragmatic hierarchy of language: agents are syntactically higher and, at least at an intuitive level, 
more likely to be topics of discourse. But this tendency is generally not the case in the context of 
possessor constructions; possessions are usually modeled as heading projections while their 
possessors are modeled either as projection-internal specifiers or other elements depending on 
the framework. 
 
Gundel (1988), building off of the pre-generative work of the Prague School, 
conceptualizes the pragmatics of language such that the most leftward, generally syntactically 
highest element is the sentential topic, the discursively known and established information of the 
sentence, which is elaborated on by the rest of the sentence, the comment. A part of that 
comment is what is often referred to as the focus, which is new or contrastive information. 
Gundel importantly notes that sentential foci generally appear in ‘direct object’ position, 
generally the second most prominent nominal in the clause. Additionally, she notes that where 
the marking of the topic-comment structure is intonational, foci will universally receive 
sentential stress, rather than topics (232). It should be noted that in most cases, EPC will consist 
in relocating possessors to precisely this position. Note also that languages which 
morphologically encode the evidential information of a clause will often do so by marking the 
‘direct object’ or focus position (cfr. with Sánchez’s (2010) work on Quechua), seeing that it is 

18 
 
precisely this information which constitutes the addition to the dialog which might require 
evidential information.1 
This topic-focus framework would be integrated in the Generative Program primarily by 
Rizzi (1997) through a Cartographic Approach to syntax. Rizzi proposed segmenting the ‘Left 
Periphery’ (traditionally the complementizer phrase (CP)) into a series of projections with 
distinct pragmatic values as illustrated below. 
                                                 
1As to the issue of evidentials, there seems to be some debate as to where the boundary of 
focalhood and evidentiality lies (again, cfr. Sánchez 2010). Evidentials seem to show some tell-
tale signs of foci: generally only one is permitted per clause and they are barred from 
subordinated clauses (data from Quechua). 
(54) 
*[Hwan-pa 
papa-ta-m 
miku-sqa-n-ta]  
yacha-ni. 
(Sánchez 2010; 48) 
 
[Juan-G 
potato-A-EV eat-NOM-S-A] 
know-1S 
 
putatively: ‘I know [that Juan eats potatosFOCUS].’ 
Not to mention the semantic and pragmatic similarities alluded to above (both add and qualify 
information). It might be the case that what we call here focus should actually be subdivided into 
various grades of evidentiality. 

19 
 
 
Figure 3: Rizzi’s Left Periphery 
Here, the ForceP designates the clausal type of the subordinatzed structure, the two 
iterations of TopP host sentential topics, which are, as designated by the *, recursive, FocP hosts 
a single possible focus and FinP determines the finiteness of the clause. This system is later 
simplified by Benincà and Potello (2004) who reason against Rizzi’s argument for the necessity 
of two topic levels, arguing instead that there is a Topic field above and a Focus field below, 
both of whose respective component parts are pragmatically distinct, albeit non-recursive. I will 
evoke this structure later to model EPCs. Rizzi (2004) recapitulates the most basic form of 
clausal structure below, where the Topic Projection hosts a topic constituent as its specifier, and 
takes the rest of the sentence, the comment, as its complement. The focus projection, 
concordantly hosts a focus constituent as its specifier and the rest of the sentence as the 
complement, which Rizzi designates the "presupposition." 

20 
 
 
Figure 4: The Topic/Comment Structure of Language 
 
Importantly, these ideas mirror the conception of Gundel, in that in all cases, sentential 
topics are the syntactically highest (or linearly most leftward) constituents in an utterance while 
sentential foci follow directly after or below in the syntax. The remainder of an utterance, the 
presuposition, is of peripheral discursive importance, but carries the semantic machinery which 
makes the addition to discourse meaningful. 
This said, my general assumption is that External Possession "exists" in language because 
it brings cognitively salient possessors into greater sentential prominence and into focushood, 
whereas otherwise they would be syntactically subordinated to their semantic possessions. An 
external possessor is syntactically closer to functioning as a topic and focus, and seeing that it 
functions as an independent constituent, it can be more easily manipulated for topic and focus 
strategies. Thus in some sense, the discursive and pragmatic importance of possessors as 
reference points or ‘landmarks’ in Hole’s (2006) terminology ‘motivates’ the cross linguistic 
employment of External Possession, while at the same time, no language (to my knowledge) has 
constructions such as ‘External Location’ or ‘External Color’ where location or color modifiers 
(usually less salient) are promoted into verbal argumenthood. This is the case because the 
locations or colors of nominals generally have no particular discursive importance. 
 
My point here, again, is circumstantial, but is important to understanding External 
Possession in that the usage of an EPC corresponds to a pragmatic promotion of the possessor 
generally. In some languages, particularly those with semantically neutral EPCs, externalizing a 

21 
 
possessor seems to have an exclusively pragmatic role, and external possessors show the 
characteristic limitations of topics and foci as will be discussed further below. 
2.3 Thematic External Possession 
There is an exceptionally large subset of the languages with EPCs where they exhibit a 
semantic change in a sentence as well: that is, possessor affectedness. I will call constructions 
like these thematic external possession constructions (TEPC) as opposed to those without 
semantic changes which I will call athematic EPCs (AEPC), which seem to be more rare 
typologically speaking. TEPCs in all given languages share a common semantic and pragmatic 
character. Although there is much semantic and truth-functional overlap with their IP 
equivalents, an EPC designates that the raised possessor is specially affected by the verbal 
action. We'll treat this as the possessor being marked as [+affected] in being externalized, while 
internal possessors are undetermined as to affectedness. The semantics of this alternation are 
illustrated in the Northern Pomo examples in (8) from O’Connor (1996; 137). 
(8) 
a. 
[[hayu yačuʔ] ʔuy-nam] 
mo:w xabe-wih 
baneh  
(IP) 
[dog 
OBL eye-DET] 
he 
rock-INST 
hit 
‘He hit the dog’s eye with a rock.’ 
b. 
[hayu yačul] mo:w xabe-wih 
[ʔuy] baneh  
 
(EP) 
[dog 
ACC] he 
rock-INST 
[eye] hit 
‘He smashed the dog’s eye with a rock.’ (potentially causing damage) 
In (8a), the possessor, hayu 'dog,' serves as the possessor of the object, but being 
unexternalized, is not entailed to be specially affected by the hitting. In (8b), seeing that hayu has 
raised, we are to conclude that the action has affected or damaged a dog in such a way as to be 
permanent or at least important. This affectedness often is interfaced with or is conditioned by 
the animacy or consciousness of a possessor nominal, as illustrated in Spanish in (9). 

22 
 
(9) 
a. 
Abrieron 
su 
estómago. 
 
 
 
 
(IP) 
opened.3p 
3 
stomach 
'They opened his stomach.' (While perhaps he was unconscious or dead.) 
b. 
Le 
abrieron 
el 
estómago. 
 
 
 
(EP) 
D 
opened  
the 
stomach 
'They opened his stomach.' (He was alive and conscious.) 
 
For this reason, TEP is limited or nearly limited to human or empathizable animals in 
various languages (or perhaps cultures), but even non-animate and non-personified possessors 
can be raised in various contexts. Guaraní, which usually limits TEPC to humans and body parts 
like in (10), also allows non-living possessors to be raised if there is a semantic sense in which 
their nature is significantly changed as in (11) (data from Velasquez-Castillo 1996; 154) 
(10) 
a. 
Pe-mita 
resay o-syry  
rei-pa.  
 
 
(IP) 
that-child 
tear 
3AC-flow 
easily-TOT 
‘The child’s eyes are watering.’ 
b. 
Hesay-syry 
pe-mitã. 
 
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
3IN=tear-flow that-child 
‘The child is crying profusely.’ 
(11) 
a. 
Pe-yvyra 
rogue o-kui.  
 
 
 
 
(IP) 
that-tree 
leaf 
3AC-fall 
‘The leaf fell off the tree.’ (No big deal) 
b. 
Pe-yvyra 
hogue-kui. 
 
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
that-tree 
3IN=leaf-fall 
‘The leaves of that tree are falling.’ (Because it’s fall.) 

23 
 
The only difference in Guaraní between (11a) and (11b) is simply whether the possessor 
is externalized (by incorporating the possessum). Where it is, we must assume that the leaf-
falling is fundamentally changing the tree, most plausibly because continuing falling will 
eventually fully denude it. Thus although trees are generally unconscious, they can still be 
marked as being [+affected] if they are significantly changed. Kin terms can also condition PR to 
emphasize psychological or emotional affectedness in Spanish (12) and Guaraní (13). These can 
also be compared to (10) above. 
(12) 
a. 
Se 
murió mi 
madre.  
 
 
 
 
(IP) 
REFL died 
my 
mother 
'My mother died.' 
b. 
Se 
me 
murió la 
madre.  
 
 
 
(EP) 
REFL me 
died 
the 
mother 
'My mother died (on me).' 
(13) 
c. 
Che-memby-rasy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
1IN-son-ill 
'My son is sick.' 
d. 
Pe-kuña-karai i-memby-kuña-porã.  
 
 
 
(EP) 
that=lady     
3IN-offspring-woman-pretty 
‘That lady has a beautiful daughter.’ 
This said, TEPCs are not permitted in contexts where the predicate has no conceivable 
direct physical or psychological effect on the possessor. Thus, in the below Korean data from 
Cho and Lee (2003; 5), TEPC is possible with the verb ttaeyeotda ‘hit’ where John can be said to 

24 
 
be affected by the action, while impossible with the psych predicate saranghaetda ‘loved’ where 
John is utterly unaffected by Mary’s love. 
(14) 
a. 
Mary-ga 
John-eul 
eolgur-eul 
ttaeryeotda. 
 
 
(EP) 
Mary-N 
John-A  
face-A  
hit 
‘Mary hit John’s face.’ or ‘Mary hit John in the face.’ 
b. 
*Mary-ga 
John-eul 
eolgur-eul 
saranghaetda.  
 
(EP) 
Mary-N 
John-A  
face-A  
loved 
putatively: ‘Mary loved John’s face.’  
2.4 External Possession and Aspect 
 
Various authors have noticed examples like the above to correspond to a distinction of 
lexical aspect. Telic predicates like hit seem to be much more likely to show TEPC than atelic 
predicates such as love. Indeed, Haspelmath (1999) characterizes EP in Europe as falling about a 
situation hierarchy where ‘patient-affecting’ predicates are most likely to trigger EP, followed by 
‘dynamic non-affecting’ predicates, but lastly, and perhaps impossible in the languages of 
Europe, ‘statives,’ which seem to implicitly cover atelic verbs. Haspelmath illustrates this with 
the following judgments from Roldán (1972) (Spanish) and Wierzbicka (1986) (Polish) 
respectively. 
(15) 
a. 
*A estos autores 
les  
es errada 
la constucción. 
 
(EP) 
 
 
to these authors 
3p.D is wrong 
the construction 
 
 
putatively: ‘The construction of these authors is incorrect.’ 
 
b. 
*Widziałem 
mu 
zęby.  
 
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
saw.1s  
him.D teeth 
 
 
putatively: ‘I saw his teeth.’ 

25 
 
Although a generally sound typological generalization, in many senses, this cline is 
epiphenomenal. While many ‘dynamic ‘non-affecting’’ predicates are apparently barred from 
hosting EPCs, proper context can allow for an acceptable affectedness interpretation. As 
Haspelmath notes in a footnote, other languages such as Portuguese and Italian accept examples 
like the above with greater liberty. Additionally, in most cases a situational interpretation can 
allow EP from otherwise non-affecting predicates as below. 
(16) 
 
%Me vieron los 
libros.  
 
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
me 
saw.3p the 
books 
 
 
‘They saw my books.’ 
Tuggy (1980) notes that sentences like that above become acceptable in certain 
situations; i.e. (16) is something which “a bookkeeper, especially if dishonest, could say of the 
company auditors,” and in that context EPC would be licensed. Martin (1999) shows a similar 
example from Creek, uttered by a radio announcer “encouraging quilt makers not to be shy about 
having their work seen at an upcoming competition” (241). 
(17) 
 
…nâkitilómha nâk 
an-hiciphoyáɬis 
kónccin 
owât…  
(EP) 
quilt 
 
thing 1S-see.IMPERS.FUT think.2s 
when 
‘…if you’re thinking, they’ll see my quilts and things…’ 
 
External possession is acceptable here because, due to possible embarrassment, the 
possessor can be understood to be affected by the verb despite it not being something that 
physically transforms him. What is important here is simply to note that it is the semantics of an 
event which condition TEPCs, and it is not the case that certain verbs uniquely lexically 
condition the use of the construction in any language. 

26 
 
 
Still, TEPCs from pure statives are nearly totally absent in natural languages.2 Tomioka 
and Sim (2007) implicitly treat this as a result of event semantics. In the case of Korean, they 
model external possession as an extra event projection affect above the main verb phrase which 
is read into the eventuality of the lexical predicate. This affect, which has an eventive reading, 
would clash with any purely stative predicates, resulting in the aforementioned ungrammaticality 
of (14b) as well as assumedly stative examples in other languages. 
 
Thus we should expect that a verb should be able to license TEPCs so long as it can 
conceivably be said to have an eventive interpretation. Thus in a language like Spanish with a 
grammaticized perfective/imperfective aspectual distinction, even quasi-statives can be finagled 
into an eventive interpretation with perfective aspect and proper context. 
(18) 
 
Nos 
*eran/%fueron  
coreanos 
los 
padres. (EP) 
 
 
2P.D wereIPFV/werePFV 
Korean  
the 
parents 
 
 
with eran: (putatively) ‘Our parents were Korean (to our benefit/chagrin).’ 
 
 
with fueron: (highly situational) ‘Our parents went Korean on us (this one time).’ 
2.5 Formal Representations of TEPC 
 
We can be specific about the semantic difference between TEPCs and IPCs in the 
framework of Neo-Davidsonian event semantics. As stated, thematic external possession adds to 
the possessor an affectedness reading, entailing that it has been specially affected by the verbal 
action. We can reproduce the contrast here in the Korean examples from (6c) and (7c). 
(6) 
(c) 
Mary-ga 
John-uy 
dari-reul 
chatda.  
 
 
(IP) 
 
 
Mary-N 
John-G  
leg-A  
kicked 
 
 
‘Mary kicked John’s leg.’ 
                                                 
2 There might be exceptions to this in the examples illustrated in (13), but confer with 
Velasquez-Castillo (1996) for a wider discussion of the case of Guaraní. 

27 
 
(7) 
(c) 
Mary-ga 
John-eul 
dari-reul 
chatda.  
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
Mary-N 
John-A  
leg-A  
kicked 
 
 
‘Mary kicked John in the leg.’ 
 
We can represent the semantics of (6c) below in (6’). The event is one of kicking, 
performed by an agent Mary on a patient leg where leg is a possession of John. The only 
differential semantics between (6c) and (7c) is that of the addition of an affectedness conjunct in 
(7’) designating the affectedness of John. 
(6’) 
∃e | kick(e) & agent(e, Mary) & patient(e, leg) & poss(leg, John) | 
(7’) 
∃e | kick(e) & agent(e, Mary) & patient(e, leg) & poss(leg, John) & affectee(e, John) | 
 
First, it’s important to note that the possible worlds in which (7’) is true are a subset of the 
worlds where (6’) is; the addition of the affectee() conjunct only restricts further (7c)’s truth 
conditions. Construing the verb of an EPC as a Neo-Davidsonian event also accounts for the 
unacceptability of atelic and stative predicates with the construction, such as (14b) and (15a). 
Thus, in (14b), we may not have a TEPC seeing that the predicate saranghaetda ‘loved’ is atelic, 
not eventive. 
2.6 The Absolutive Limitation 
External possession constructions can be shown to occur in a variety of syntactic 
conditions, but show, particularly in the case of thematic EP, principled boundaries. As König 
and Haspelmath (1997) note, and as illustrated below, a language which allows for EPCs will 
permit them from objects of transitive verbs, examples of these can be found back in (7). 
Additionally, EPCs are possible in the subjects of unaccusative (non-agentive intransitive) verbs 
as below (Spanish, Korean, Hebrew and German respectively). 

28 
 
(19) 
a. 
Se 
le 
rompió el brazo 
a Billy. 
 
 
REFL 3S.D broke the arm 
to Billy 
‘Billy broke his arm./Billy’s arm got broken.’ 
b. 
Mary-ga 
dari-ga bureojida. 
Mary-N 
leg-N broke 
‘Mary broke her leg./Mary’s leg broke.’ 
c. 
ha-kelev 
ne’elam 
le-Rina. 
 
(Borer and Grodzinsky 1986) 
the-dog 
disappeared 
to-Rina 
‘Rina’s dog disappeared.’ 
d. 
Der Arm 
ist 
mir 
eingeschlafen.  
(Lee-Schoenfeld 2006) 
 
the arm 
is 
me.D in.slept 
‘My arm fell asleep (on me).’ 
 
This allowance, however, does not necessarily extend to unergative verbs, which cannot 
yield TEPCs despite surface similarities, as illustrated in the same languages as well as Creek 
below. 
(20) 
a. 
*Le 
habló la boca  
a Billy. 
 
 
3S.D spoke the mouth 
to Billy 
 
 
putatively: ‘Billy’s mouth spoke.’ (fine as ‘The mouth spoke to Billy.’) 
 
b. 
*Mary-ga 
ip-i 
 
malhaetda. 
 
 
Mary-N 
mouth-N 
spoke 
 
 
putatively: ‘Mary’s mouth spoke.’ 

29 
 
 
c. 
*ha-kelev 
hitrocec 
le-Rina. 
 
(Borer and Grodzinsky 1986) 
 
 
the-dog 
ran-around 
to-Rina 
 
 
putatively: ‘Rina’s dog ran around.’ 
 
d. 
*Der Hund 
ist 
Lena  
hermgelaufen. (Lee-Schoenfeld 2006) 
 
 
the dog  
is 
Lena.D  
run.around 
 
 
putatively: ‘Lena’s dog ran around.’ 
e. 
*ifá 
án-wokhacóks. 
 
 
 
(Martin 1999; 237) 
dog 
1S-barks 
putatively: ‘My dog is barking.’ (acceptable as ‘The dog is barking for me.’) 
 
The same is true of transitive agents, which as noted by Haspelmath (1999), constitute the 
most typologically rare form of external possession. I will argue, and model that thematic 
external possession from agents is impossible for principled reasons(while athematic external 
possession is possible although rare for pragmatic reasons). This is illustrated below in Spanish, 
Korean and Creek. 
(21) 
a. 
*La pierna 
me 
rompió el vaso. 
 
 
the leg  
me.D broke the vase 
 
 
putatively: ‘My leg broke the vase.’ (fine as ‘The leg broke the vase on me.’) 
 
b. 
*Mary-ga 
dari-ga John-eul 
chatda. 
 
 
Mary-N 
leg-N John-A  
kicked 
 
 
putatively: ‘Mary’s leg kicked John (to Mary’s chagrin).’ 
c. 
*John ifá-t 
 
itóci-n  
in-káhcis. 
 
(Martin 1999; 237) 
 
 
John 
dog-N  
stick-O  
broke 
 
 
‘John’s dog broke the stick.’ 

30 
 
 
Creek additionally highlights the fact that it is the agentivity of the possessum which bars 
TEPCs—not necessarily dual-argumenthood of a verb. That is to say, while possessors of agents 
are non-externalizable, possessors of experiencers are in appropriate contexts. 
(22) 
 
ɬákko-t  
ací-n am-iyâcis. 
 
 
horse-NOM 
corn-OBL 
1S-wants 
 
 
‘My horse wants corn (on me).’ (Or ‘The horse wants my corn.’) 
2.7 Modification of Possessa 
 
Additionally, as a part of the reduced autonomy of possessa in TEPCs, many languages 
disbar possessa from being modified by non-restrictive adjectives. In the cases of European 
possessor datives, this noticed of French by Guéron (1985; 50), of Spanish by Kempchinsky 
(1992; 700) and of Italian by Cinque and Krapova (2009; 128). 
(23) 
a. 
Je 
lui 
ai 
lavé 
les 
cheveux 
(*blonds). 
I 
him.D have 
washedthe 
hairs 
 
(blond) 
‘I washed his (*blond) hair.’ 
b. 
Le 
lavé 
la 
(*bella) 
cara 
al 
niño. 
him.D washed the 
(beautiful) 
face 
to.the boy 
‘I washed the boy’s (*beautiful) face.’ 
c. 
Gli 
hai 
fotografato 
 la 
(<*bella>) 
bocca (<*bella>). 
 
him.D have 
photographed the 
(beautiful) 
mouth (beautiful) 
‘You photographed his (*beautiful) mouth.’ 
 
This restriction is not merely a feature of European languages, but it is comparable to 
similar limitations in EPCs in other languages. Siloni (2002; 171) and O’Grady (1991; 82) notice 
the same of Hebrew and Korean EPCs respectively. 

31 
 
(24) 
a. 
*ha-rofe 
badak  
l-o 
‘et 
ha-roš  
ha-pacu’a 
the-doctor 
examined 
to-him A 
the-head 
the-wounded 
putatively: ‘The doctor examined his wounded head.’ 
b. 
*ha-rofe 
badak  
l-a 
‘et 
ha-yad  
ha-švura 
the-doctor 
examined 
t-her 
A 
the-hand 
the-broken 
putatively: ‘The doctor examined her broken hand.’ 
c. 
*Sue-ga 
gi-n 
 
meri-ga 
joda3 
Sue-N  
long-ADJ 
hair-N  
be.good 
putatively: ‘Sue’s long hair is good.’ 
 
These can be compared to the similar status of noun incorporated possessa in Guaraní, 
which still cannot take any form of modification. 
 (25) 
a. 
*Ai-po-akatua-pete 
la-mitã. 
3AC-hand-right-slap the-child 
putatively: ‘I slapped the child’s right hand.’ 
b. 
*Che-resa-tuicha-se. 
1IN-eye-big-VOL 
putatively: ‘I want to have big eyes.’ 
 
At an intuitive level, it should be clear that the possessa in the noun incorporation 
examples have visibly lost their syntactic autonomy, but it might be worth considering the 
possibility that even possessa in the other examples of EPC are similarly ‘incorporated.’O’Grady 
                                                 
3Tomioka and Sim (2007) use judgements that seem to contradict O’Grady’s here in that the 
possessum can be modified by an adjective or relative clause. My own consultants, however, 
agreed with O’Grady’s judgments and rejected the examples that Tomioka and Sim presented as 
being grammatical. O'Grady marks this particular example with a ‘?’ for reduced or questionable 
acceptability. 

32 
 
(1991) similarly treats possessa in EPCs as syntactically deficient nominals, referring to them 
generally as more like ‘adverbials’ than anything else. A Korean consultant of mine chimed in a 
similar intuition: possessa in EPCs are closer to being parts of the verb than independent 
arguments. That said, it might be an interesting line of study to look into the prosody of EPCs to 
see what kind of phonological phrase boundaries could be surmised. 
2.8 Distributed Plurality 
 
In a similar vein, the agreement relationships of possessa in EPCs vary from their IP 
equivalents. EPCs generally show distributed plurality, in that if the possessum is plural, there 
must be at least two possessa per possessor. This is illustrated in Spanish below with data from 
Kempchinsky (1992; 700). 
(26) 
a. 
El 
médico  
les 
examinó 
la 
garganta. 
 
(EP) 
 
 
the 
doctor  
3P.D examined 
the 
throat 
 
 
‘The doctor examined their throats.’ 
 
b. 
*El 
médico  
les 
examinó 
las 
gargantas. 
 
(EP) 
 
 
the 
doctor  
3P.D examined 
the 
throats 
 
 
putatively:‘The doctor examined their throats.’ 
 
Garganta ‘throat’ must be singular in this case seeing that each possessor has only one. 
Of course, it is possible to have a pluralized possessum, but only in the case that each possessor 
has two or more of the affected body-parts/possessions. We see this restriction found in Spanish 
in other possessor dative languages (French from Vergnaud and Zubizaretta 1990). 
(27) 
a. 
Le médicin 
leur 
a 
examiné 
la 
gorge. 
 
 
the doctor 
3P.D has 
examined 
the 
throat 
‘The doctor examined their throats.’ 

33 
 
b. 
*Le médicin leur 
a 
examiné 
les 
gorges. 
 
the doctor 
3P.D has 
examined 
the 
throats 
putatively: ‘The doctor examined their throats.’ 
c. 
DerArzt 
guckt den 
Kindern 
in 
den 
Hals. 
thedoctor 
looked the.D children.D 
in 
the 
throat 
‘The doctor looked at the children’s throat.’ 
Evans (1999) incidentally shows that possessumplurality is totally barred from Mayali’s 
noun incorporation constructions, thus despite it being possible for a person to have two hands, 
(28a) is not acceptable, despite a Spanish equivalent (28b) being possible. 
(28) 
a. 
Abanmani-bid-garrme-ng      
daluk. 
1/3ua-hand-grasp-PP               
woman 
‘I grabbed the two women by their hands.’ 
NOT: ‘I grabbed the woman by her two hands.’ 
 
b. 
El 
médico le 
examinó 
las 
manos. 
 
 
the 
doctor 3S.D examined 
the 
hands 
 
 
‘The doctor examined her hands.’ 
 
Thus within thematic external possession constructions, we can see a number of 
seemingly arbitrary formal constraints. The possessa of externalized possessors must be 
interpreted as being distributed, and are generally not available for adjectival modification. 
Additionally, TEPC is illicit from agentive nominals, despite being possible from theta positions 
without a proto-agent role. There is also a general correspondence of TEPC only with eventive 
and telic predicates. All of these can be counted as the general glitches that accompany the 
semantic change of thematic external possession. 

34 
 
2.9Athematic External Possession 
 
As stated beforehand, however, there are various languages which display a formally 
similar brand of EP without the corresponding semantic changes. I have termed these 
constructions athematic external possession constructions (AEPCs). AEPCs do not show these 
same syntactic glitches that TEPCs do, however they both share the similar pragmatics which I 
introduced in sections 2.1-2. In TEPC, where affectedness is mandatory in EPCs, like in French 
or Italian, non-affected possessors are barred from the construction as noted in (29) from Kayne 
(1977; 159) and Picallo and Rigau 1999; 1015). 
(29) 
a. 
*Tu 
lui 
aimes bien 
les 
jambes. 
 
 
 
(EP) 
you 
3S.D love 
well 
the 
legs 
putatively: ‘You love his/her legs.’ 
b. 
*Gli 
ho 
dimenticato 
il 
nome.  
 
 
 
(EP) 
3S.D have 
forgotten 
the 
name 
putatively: ‘I forgot his name.’ 
However in languages with AEPCs where possessor affectedness is irrelevant, the 
equivalents of the above are acceptable. Thus, these sentences and many like them are indeed 
possible as shown in the Bulgarian examples from Stateva (2002; 649) and Cinque and Krapova 
(2009; 129). 
(30) 
a. 
Az 
mnogo  
mu 
 
xaresvam 
novata šapka.  
(EP) 
I 
very much 
3S.D  
like 
 
new 
hat 
‘I love his new hat.’ 
b. 
Ne 
mu 
 
pomnja 
fizionomijata.  
 
 
(EP) 
not 
3S.D  
remember 
face 
‘I don’t remember his face.’ 

35 
 
 
Because of the lack of semantic conditioning, the related surface level restrictions on 
EPC, such as its non-acceptability with statives and non-affected possessors evaporate. Deal 
(2013; 408) provides examples of this in Nez Perce, (reproduced below) where in both cases, the 
externalized possessor is not at all conceivably affected by the action. Additionally, we see a 
stative predicate in (31a), defying the generalizations of TEPCs made in section 2.4. 
(31) 
a. 
Weet ‘e-cukwe-ney’-se 
Luk-ne  
tiim’es? 
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
Q 
3O-know-EP-IMP 
Luke-OBJ 
book 
 
 
‘Do you know the Book of Luke?’ 
 
b. 
pee-x-te-ne’ny-u’ 
Coosef-ne 
temikees 
naaqc hiisemtuks-pe. (EP) 
 
 
3-see-go-EP-FUT 
Joseph-OBJ 
tomb  
one 
moon-LOC 
 
 
‘They will go to see Joseph’s tomb next month.’ 
 
In addition to different semantics, AEPCs also lack the formal properties of TEPCs 
shown in (2.6-2.8).Haspelmath’s aforementioned generalization that EPC cannot occur from 
agentive nominals may be true of TEPCs, but languages with AEPC clearly show counter 
examples. Maasai, which marks possessor externalization with indirect object inflection on the 
verb, shows that a salient possessor of a subject can indeed trigger EP (Payne 1997; 414-415). 
(32) 
a. 
áa-ból  
ɔl-páyyàn 
ɔ-sandúkù. 
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
3>1-open 
S-man.NOM S-box.ACC 
 
 
Possessor of subject interpretation: “My husband will open the box.” 
 
 
Possessor of object interpretation: “The man will open my box.” 

36 
 
 
b. 
áa-yyér 
ɔl-páyyàn 
in-kírí.  
 
 
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
3>1-cook 
S-man.NOM P-meat.ACC 
 
 
‘My husband will cook the meat.’ 
 
 
(anomalously as ‘The man will cook my meat.’) 
Aissen (1999) models Tz’utujil as being canonically VOS, but topic and focus strategies 
can bring constituents, specifically externalized possessors into focalization which is consistently 
regionalized to the left of the verb head linearly. She, as Payne does of Maasai, notes the 
existence of AEPC from unergative subjects in Tz’utujil, mentioning however that there seems to 
be at least somewhat of an idiolectal or contextual variation in the acceptability of these 
sentences. 
(33) 
a. 
%Jar Aa Lu’ tzijooni 
[ja r-k’ajooleci] 
chi pa ja moloojrii’iil. 
 
 
the Mr. P. 
speak  
the 3A-son 
 
at in 
the meeting 
 
 
‘Pedro’s son spoke at the meeting.’ 
 
b. 
%Januu-chaaq’i 
nsamaj [r-mee’aal 
eci] 
pa 
klinika. 
 
 
the 1S-brother  
work` 3S-daughter 
 
at 
clinic 
 
 
‘My brother’s daughter works at the clinic.’ 
 
The variable acceptability might, however be more in the irregular pragmatics of these 
expressions. In a similar example,(34) showing EPfrom an agentive subject, Aissen quotes a 
speaker commenting that ‘it’s odd because you expect the sentence to be about the father’ (187). 
(34) 
 
?Janata’ 
ninsamaj 
r-maal. 
 
 
the father 
1S.work 
3S-cause 
 
 
‘I’m working on account of my father.’ 

37 
 
 
The speaker’s intuitions of the awkwardness of the sentence seem to corroborate the idea 
that janata’ ‘father’ functions as a discourse topic or focus.4 It would be strange to set a topic for 
which the comment had little bearing and added questionably relevant information. (33b) for 
example can be compared to an English sentence like, “As for my brother, his daughter works at 
the clinic.” A sentence like this forces a frame where ‘my brother’ is commented on by an action 
which would be relevant to him only in a highly contextual discourse environment. 
 
AEPCs also do not show either a mandatory distributed reading of the possessum (35a), 
or the disability of being modified by non-restrictive adjectives (35b) (Bulgarian data from 
Cinque and Krapova (2009; 130)). 
(35) 
a. 
Ako 
jadete mnogo, šte 
si 
napǎlnite 
stomaxa/stomasite… 
 
 
if 
eat.2P a lot 
will 
REFL fill.2P  
stomach/stomachs 
 
 
‘I you (P) eat a lot, you (P) will fill your stomachs…’ 
                                                 
4 It should be said that although Aissen models Tz’utujil EP as being primarily motivated by 
pragmatic (and not semantic) factors, she does on several occasions refer to externalized 
possessors as being ‘affected’ mirroring work done on what I have called TEPC. I do not, 
however, think that Tz’utujil EP is an example of TEPC in my definition, nor that it can be said 
that possessors are ‘affected’ on a semantic/truth-conditional level in the language. Some of 
Aissen’s examples show that possessors are not so much ‘affected’ as they are discursively 
relevant (numbers from the original). 
(13) 
a. 
Jun ak’aal 
k’axaxiruuqul chaaq’a’. 
 
 
a child  
be.heard 
3S.voice 
in night 
 
 
‘A child’s voice was heard in the dark.’ 
 
b. 
Jun aachi 
k’utmaj 
to 
rpalaj pa wentana. 
 
 
a man  
appear  
DIR 
3S.face at window 
 
 
‘A man’s face was seen at the window.’ 
It may be in many cases that discursive relevance might imply some degree of affectedness, but 
this seems to be an implicature, as opposed to the ironclad restriction of semantic affectedness 
applied in examples of TEPC here such as (29). 

38 
 
 
b. 
Mnogo ti 
mrazja toja 
loš 
xarakter. 
 
 
a lot 
2S.D hate.1S this 
bad 
character 
 
 
‘I really hate this bad character of yours.’ 
 
c. 
Ne 
moga da 
ì 
opiša  
krasivata 
kosa. 
 
 
not 
can.1S MOD 3S.D describe.1S 
beautiful 
hair 
 
 
‘I cannot describe her beautiful hair.’ 
 
These distinctions between TEPC and AEPC are not unimportant. We can see that a 
semantic difference between two superficially similar constructions yields a set of formal, 
syntactic differences with no obvious relation to the semantics of the construction itself. This 
will be shortly addressed. 
 
Summing up, however, both thematic and athematic external possession constructions 
differ from internal possession constructions in pragmatics and the actual constituency status of 
the possessor nominal form, while thematic external constructions differ from internal and 
athematic external possession constructions in terms of truth functionality. Figure 5 illustrates 
these distinctions. 

39 
 
 
Figure 5: External and Internal Possession Constructions Contrasted 
 
The semantics which separate TEPCs is that possessor must take an affected reading (as 
argued in section 2.3).Thus as I have modeled above, TEPCs have more stringent truth-
conditions than AEPCs and IPC; ergo, the possible worlds where an TEPC is true is a subset of 
the world where its IP equivalent is. The pragmatic distinction between IP and EP is indicated in 
Figure 5 as the possessors being marked for focus in the latter cases. It might be the case that 
focushood is not the proper way to construe this difference in pragmatics, but as I argued in 
sections 2.1-2, EP does bring possessors to higher discourse prominence 
2.10 Modeling External Possession 
 
As to the issue of formal modeling, it should behoove us to ask first whether or not 
External Possession actually exists independently in human language. When EP (under the name 
of Possessor Ascension) began to be studied under Relational Grammar in the 1970s (starting 
with Perlmutter and Postal (1972)), there was at least some question as to whether EP was an 
possessor is unspecified to focus 
and affectedness 
• possessor is [+focus] 
• possessor is [+affected] 
Thematic External 
Possession 
Internal Possession 
Athematic External 
Possession 
different semantics 
different pragmatics 
• possessor is [+focus] 
• unspecified as to affectedness 

40 
 
alternation in itself or an epiphenomenon of other traits of language. Tuggy (1980) makes the 
latter argument, saying specifically of Spanish that what seemed to be Possessor Ascension was 
really the interaction of two separate phenomena: ethical datives and possessor deletion, the 
latter of which can occur without an affected possessor as Tuggy illustrates below. 
(36) 
 
Levantó la mano. 
 
 
raised the hand 
 
 
'He raised his hand.' 
 
Tuggy makes a case in favor of what superficially looks like EP being an epiphenomenon 
in Spanish, but the argument simply cannot apply to languages which show EP in noun 
incorporation or with non-dative case alternations. That is, in languages withoutethical datives, 
an externalized affectee must be interpreted as the semantic possessor of the theme even though 
its marking does not designate in essence any theta-role associated with affectedness outside of 
that construction. To recall the Korean examples, an affected possessor of an object becomes 
accusative marked, yet accusative case is not the marker of any general construction in the 
language similar to ethical datives. 
 
We can also see that externalized elements must be interpreted as the possessors of the 
theme nominal. Thus in (37) in Korean, John cannot be ‘externalized’ when the theme DP has 
another possessor realized as shown by Vermeulen (2005; 210). 
(37) 
 
*Mary-ga 
John-eul 
Bill-eul 
dari-reul 
chatda.  
(EP) 
 
 
Mary-N 
John-A  
Bill-A  
leg-A  
kicked 
 
 
putatively: ‘Mary kicked Bill’s leg to the chagrin of John.’ 
This shows that in isolated contexts, the externalized element must indeed correspond to 
an argument of the theme noun phrase. Similar evidence against this proposal can be found in 

41 
 
Landau (1991), where even acknowledging context-sensitive double possessors like (38a) (where 
Sigal could’ve lent his glasses to Rina), in situations where only one possessor of a possessum is 
logically possible, EPC is not allowed as it forces a possessive, not a merely benefactive reading. 
(38) 
a. 
Gil 
šavar le-Rina et 
ha-miškafayim 
šel 
Sigal. 
Gil 
broke to-RinaA 
the-glasses 
 
of 
Sigal 
‘Gil broke Sigal’s glasses on Rina.’ 
b. 
ha-amargan 
šina 
le-Rina et 
ha-šem  
šel ha-mofa/*šel Galit. 
the-manager 
changed to-RinaA 
the-name 
of the-show/of Galit 
 
 
‘The manager changed Rina’s name of the show.’ 
 
 
putatively: ‘The manager changed Galit’s name on Rina.’ 
The possibility of a grammatical interpretation of (38a) does give strong evidence to the 
idea that the possessor dative does have a different derivation site than a prepositional possessor, 
seeing that both are possible in one sentence. But importantly, the non-grammaticality of the 
‘Galit’ interpretation of (38b) should also show that there is a semantic operator or empty 
category linking Rina to the theme DP and thus disabling a base-generated reading of ‘The 
manager changed Galit’s name for Rina.’ To be clear, Rina in (38b) must be obligatorily 
interpreted as the possessor of ha-mofa ‘the show,’ and thus another nominal Galit, may not be. 
Once we establish that we can look at External Possession as one linguistic unit, the next 
question that should arise is whether EP can be treated as an instance of raising or control. Kayne 
(1977) and Guéron (1985), both writing of French as well as Borer and Grodzinsky (1986) 
writing of Hebrew vie for the control alternation. French and Hebrew, being both languages with 
TEPC and ethical datives offer the possibility of characterizing ethical datives and EP as a 
singular phenomenon, in a way similar to Tuggy’s model (1980). In these control-based 

42 
 
frameworks, the externalized possessors generally are modeled as being base generated as ethical 
datives, and EPCs are licensed by the fact that these datives c-command a coindexed pro-form in 
the possessor slot of the theme nominal. 
An exclusively control-based analysis of EP becomes less effective when dealing with EP 
in languages with noun incorporation like Mayali or Guaraní or languages like Korean with a 
non-dative case alternation. That is to say, in these languages, there is no good reason for 
thinking an externalized possessor is base generated in the same way an ethical dative could be. 
As noted before, Korean has no benefactive accusatives, despite the fact that accusative-marked 
nominals function as beneficiaries/affectees in EPCs. This makes a derivational/raising theory of 
EP more desirable seeing that these beneficiary accusatives do not exist independently. 
Raising accounts of EPCs are generally more common among researchers working on 
AEPCs. Deal (2013; 401) makes a strong argument for a derivational account of EPC from Nez 
Perce (with AEP), where she first notices that EP is generally obligatory. 
(39) 
a. 
Weet ‘e-cukwe-ney’-se 
Luk-ne  
tiim’es? 
 
(EP) 
 
 
Q 
3O-know-EP-IMP 
Luke-OBJ 
book 
 
 
‘Do you know the Book of Luke?’ 
 
b. 
*Weet ‘e-cukwe-ce 
Luk-nim 
tiim’es-ne? 
 
 
(IP) 
 
 
Q 
3O-know-IMP Luke-G 
book-OBJ 
 
 
putatively: ‘Do you know the Book of Luke?’ 
 
Wherever an EPC is available in Nez Perce, the IPC equivalent of the sentence with a 
standard genitive is grammatically impossible. (39b) shows this ungrammatical internal 
possession in which Luk-nim ‘Luke’s’ is a genitive possessor interior to a noun phrase headed by 
tiim’es ‘book.’ To be well formed, a possessor must be externalized into becoming an oblique-

43 
 
marked argument of the verb, as in (39a). Verbal arguments can only occur with IP where there 
is an additional nominal blocking extraction into the upper clause.Thus Deal (403) notes that in 
the case of ditransitives, the externalized possessor may only be construed to be the possessor of 
the syntactically highest nominal (the goal/beneficiary), and not of the theme. 
(40) 
a. 
‘ew-‘nii-yey’-se 
Angel-ne 
pike 
 
taaqmaaɬ. 
 
 
3O-give-EP-IMP 
Angel-OBJ 
mother.N 
hat.N 
 
 
‘I’m giving Angel’s mother a hat.’ 
 
 
*‘I’m giving a/the mother Angel’s hat.’ 
 
b. 
‘aayat-om 
hi-kiwyek-ey’-se 
‘iin-e picpic cuu’yem. 
 
 
woman-ERG 3-feed-EP-IMP 
1S-O cat.N fish.N 
 
 
‘The woman fed my cat the fish.’ 
 
 
*‘The woman fed a/the cat my fish.’ 
 
Deal interprets these data to mean that possessor externalization is absolutely obligatory 
in Nez Perce, save situations where it is impossible due to Relative Locality (a DP (the 
possessor) cannot move to a position yet higher than another DP (the beneficiary)). Deal 
motivates this movement on the theoretical grounds of Case assignment, saying that Luk ‘Luke’ 
in (39b) must raise in normal conditions to receive objective case. Only where raising is 
impossible due to locality constraints can the possessor be assigned genitive casein situ as a last 
resort measure. This approach mirrors Landau’s (1999) account of external possession in 
Hebrew, granted that Landau belabored under the not necessarily correct assumption that EP in 
Hebrew is athematic. 
 
Generally, most models of AEPCs tend to raising analyses and models of TEPCs tend to 
control, albeit with some exceptions. Lee-Schoenfeld (2006) models German EP as raising to a 

44 
 
theta-assigning projection below the agentive vP and above the primary verbal shell. Like 
Landau and Deal, she treats it as motivated by need for abstract Case. Models similar to this can 
be found in Rodriguez (2010) of Portuguese and in Henderson (2014) of Chimwiini.Tomioka 
and Sim (2007) however, dismiss derivational accounts on a priori grounds, saying in a way 
reminiscent of Katz-Postal, that “the semantic difference between the two patterns indicates that 
it is unlikely that they are derivationally related” (4). Still, this as a theory-internal dispute might 
not utterly negate the aforementioned benefits of using raising to account for AEPCs. 
Regardless, there are some interesting ramifications of taking a raising/derivational 
approach to EP. While possessors in European languages appear as clausal datives, externalized 
possessors in Korean can be nominative ‘subjects’ if externalizing from an unaccusative or 
adjectival predicate. These nominatives are specially available to embedded control structures 
(O’Grady 1991; 80). 
(41) 
a. 
Mary-gai 
[eci 
eolgur-i 
yeppeu-e-ci-lyego] 
noryekaetda. 
 
 
Mary-N 
[ec 
face-N  
pretty-INF-become-C] 
tried 
 
 
‘Mary tried to become pretty in the face.’ 
 
b. 
[eci 
iir-eul  
ha-si-daga], 
eomeoni-gai 
son-i geochir-eo-cheotda. 
 
 
ec 
this work-A 
do-HON-while mother-N 
hand-Arough-INF-became 
 
 
‘While [she was] doing this work, mother’s hands became rough.’ 
 
This is important data for a raising approach to EP. In (41a), we would assume that Mary 
is externally merged as the DP-internal possessor of eolgur ‘face,’ which is raised into a subject-
like position inside of the subordinated clause. However, interestingly enough, this raised Mary 
is suppressed by the Mary of the matrix clause. It would be somewhat difficult to account for the 
subordinated Mary’s disappearance assuming a non-movement theory of control. 

45 
 
 
Assuming a movement theory of control constructions, Mary is generated in the DP, is 
raised into the subordinated clause’s VP,then is raised once more into the matrix clause. 
However without a movement account of control, it is not clear why the raised Mary disappears 
when raised. The same problem exists in (41b), where if no movement is assumed for the control 
structure, an extra eomeoni ‘mother’ should be expected where the empty category is glossed as 
appearing. 
 
For similar reasons, it might be best to remain agnostic as to whether external possession 
is an example of a raising on control phenomenon, especially in the wake of numerous 
movement theories of control  which have called into question the very idea of a distinction 
between the two (Hornstein and Polinsky 2010). Probably the most comfortable stance is one 
holding that the differences and contrasts between raising and control, as two theoretically 
distinct but eerily similar linguistic systems, mostly amount to little more than a competition of 
metaphors. For those reasons, it might be worth it to leave the question open to more specific 
analysis elsewhere and keep ourselves to doing what we have done in describing linguistic 
phenomena: using whatever metaphor is most convenient at the time. 
2.11 The Syntactic Specifics 
Regardless, there are some uniformities that can be surmised from the work on EP which 
can shed light on its formal restrictions. A good theory of EP should not only contain a system 
which accounts for extant acceptability judgements in different languages, but one that interfaces 
the semantics of the construction such that we can understand why TEPCs and AEPCs yield such 
formally different characters. 
Starting with TEPC, most model EP as a construction where there is correspondence with 
or movement to a supra-VP node on the part of the externalized possessor. It is an issue of 
control for Tomioka and Sim (2007) and an issue of raising for Landau (1999) and Lee-

46 
 
Schoenfeld (2006), but the models are analogous. In each case, the possessor is eventually hosted 
in a projection beneath the agentive vP and above the VP. Importantly, for Lee-Schoenfeld and 
Tomioka and Sim, this projection is overtly semantic, assigning a beneficiary/maleficiary theta-
role in Lee-Schoenfeld’s case and functioning as a phonologically null affect verb in Tomioka 
and Sim’s. If we assume a structure like this, we not only account for the differential semantics 
of the construction, but we solve for why TEPC is categorically impossible from agentive DPs. 
That is, while possessors may extract from or c-command theme nominals which are generated 
in the VP, they may not do so with respect to agentive nominals which are generated further up 
in the derivation than the affectee projection. 
While I said that all EPCs are pragmatic in that they bring possessors to discourse 
prominence, TEPCs add the extra semantics of affectedness. This can be modeled as simple 
movement5 to a theta-assigning node. The movement thus tends to locate the possessor in the 
‘object position,’ i.e. canonical focus position (Gundel 1988). To complete the circle, and bring 
EP into line with Cartographic Approaches to topic and focus, we can say that the hierarchically 
highest nominals (in our case, usually the agent and externalized possessor) gain a covert 
relationship with the specifiers of Topic and Focus projections, making the agent of the clause 
the sentential topic, and the possessor, not the possessum the focus. 
AEPCs, as I said earlier, are merely pragmatic, and change no truth-functionally 
important semantics of a sentence. Instead of movement to a theta-assigning node that would 
assumedly change the semantics of an utterance, it’s easy enough to model AEPC as being 
movement of a possessor nominal to a Topic and Focus projection à la Rizzi (1997). This is 
                                                 
5Again, I don’t preclude possibilities of control in EPCs, but I’ll be referring to EPCs as 
‘movement’ or ‘raising’ for sake of simplicity. There’s no need for me to remention each 
metaphor where here, the distinction is not utterly important for my analysis. 

47 
 
precisely what Aissen (1999) does for AEPC in Tz’utujil; externalized possessors, in a way 
mirroring the pragmatics of TEPCs, are modeled as becoming foci6, while other elements, 
including the subject can be promoted to topichood if the discourse environment is such to 
warrant it. This puts the pragmatics of AEPCs and TEPCs in perfect symmetry, while still 
maintaining the semantic differences. Therefore, we can model AEPC as singularly a process of 
interfacing with a left periphery, and for this I will use the structure below reminiscent of 
Benincà and Poletto’s (2004) derivation of Rizzi’sorginal (1997) model. TopP and FocP are 
modeled as being recursive, yet as per Benincà and Poletto, this is only a simplification for 
modeling purposes, when in reality the Topic and Focus fields are divisible into a variety of 
pragmatically distinct projections whose distinctions are subtle, but not fundamental for our 
analysis here. 
                                                 
6Aissen reasons externalized possessors must be foci, seeing that unlike topics, they can easily be 
rendered indefinite in Tz’utujil and other languages. 

48 
 
 
Figure 6: The Structure Sufficient for Modeling External Possession 
 
Most importantly, assuming a structure like this, we can still make sense of the formal 
differences between the two constructions. Again, TEP is impossible from agentive nominals 
because that would require movement downward in the derivation. To show the contrast here in 
Korean, refer to examples (7c) and (21b) reproduced again below. 
(7) 
c. 
Mary-ga 
John-eul 
dari-reul 
chatda.  
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
Mary-N 
John-A  
leg-A  
kicked 
 
 
'Mary kicked John in the leg.' 

49 
 
(21) 
b. 
*Mary-ga 
dari-ga  
John-eul 
chatda.  
 
 
(EP) 
 
 
Mary-N 
leg-N  
John-A  
kicked 
 
 
putatively: ‘Mary’s leg kicked John (to Mary’s chagrin).’ 
 
We can spell these sentences out visually using the lower portion of the structure in 
Figure 6. Below we see a derivation (7c). 
 
Figure 7: Thematic External Possession from Themes 
 
Here, John is generated as a possessor of dari 'leg' and raises to a vP marking 
affectedness. This movement is licit seeing that John is externally merged below this 
affectedness projection. This contrasts with ungrammatical examples like (21b) illustrated below. 

50 
 
 
Figure 8: (Unacceptable) Thematic External Possession from Agents 
Here, movement is illicit seeing that Mary would be moving down the clausal spine to a 
node which does not c-command the moving DP Mary. This kind of downward movement is not 
obviously present elsewhere in human language and is wholly incompatible with Minimalist 
syntax. 
But agent EP in athematic constructions is still a possibility, given that the topic and 
focus projections are syntactically higher than the agentive vP. This can account for the data 
given of Tz’utujil and Maasai showing EPC from agentive clauses. It is indeed worth asking why 
more languages with AEPCs don’t use agent EP more frequently, given the fact that it is not 
syntactically barred. I would attribute this to a lack of pragmatic motivation: note that possessors 
which are already generated within the syntactically highest nominal projection already have a 
decent modicum of discourse prominence. Externalization should be less effective than it would 
be from a theme nominal. It also might be worthy of note that both Tz’utujil and Maasai are 
canonically verb-initial languages, while subject-initial languages may need less in the way of 
nominal promotion for pragmatic reasons. 

51 
 
 
Aside from the lack of pragmatic justification to justify highly productive AEPC from 
transitive subjects, there is also reason to consider computational limitations of sentences. 
Transitive sentences like (32) result in inherent ambiguities in that the externalized possessors 
can be interpreted as either the possessors of subjects or objects. This leads Payne (1997; 415) to 
surmise that speakers would often avoid transitive EPCs in elicitation contexts due merely to the 
lack of clarity in that context. 
 
There is one other important difference between the modeling of TEPCs and AEPCs. 
Assuming a recursivity of the topic domain assumed in Rizzi (1997), we might expect there to be 
discourse oriented languages with AEPCs which can yield a number of externalized possessors 
in a single clause. This actually is the case of Japanese, where possessor may be recursively 
topicalized/focalized (Uehara 1999; 48). 
(42) 
a. 
John-ga 
oneesan-ga 
kami-ga 
totemo kirei-da. 
 
 
John-N  
sister-N 
hair-N  
very 
pretty-be 
 
 
‘John’s older sister’s hair is very pretty.’ 
 
b. 
John-ga 
oneesan-ga 
syuzin-ga 
totemo hansamu-da. 
 
 
John-N  
sister-N 
husband-N 
very 
handsome-be 
 
 
‘John’s sister’s husband is very handsome.’ 
Without taking into account a difference between TEP and AEP, Japanese would be a 
bizarre challenge for Haspelmath’s (1999) typological generalizations of EP in that, as illustrated 
below, Japanese EP is actually impossible from theme nominals (Uehara 1999; 47), while 
Haspelmath assumes that EP from theme nominals is a precondition for EP elsewhere. 

52 
 
(43) 
 
*Mary-ga 
John-o oneesan-o 
hometa. 
 
 
Mary-N 
John-A sister-A 
praised 
 
 
putatively: ‘Mary praised John’s sister.’ 
 
This shows us that possessor externalization to a node lower than the agentive vP is not 
licensed in Japanese, while movement to a topic/focus projection still is. This is consistent with 
the structure I have hypothesized, in which we can illustrate (42a) below. 
 
Figure 9: Recursive Topicalization of Athematic Possessors 
Here, there is apparently a kind of recursive pied-piping of possessor nominals, in that the 
theme noun raises to spec TP only to have its possessor [[John] oneesan] topicalized to the 
lower TopP, after which John is topicalized into the higher TopP. A derivational analysis like 

53 
 
this, however, implies, although not necessarily correctly, that the theme nominal remains 
penetrable to syntactic manipulation significantly after external merge, potentially jeopardizing 
its consistency with a phase-based approach to syntax. This might stimulate a temptation to rely 
on a base-generation or control-based account of recursive AEPC as in (42), even though as 
Uehara notes, there remains an obligatory possessor interpretation in these sentences, equivalent 
to Landau’s aforementioned examples of Hebrew in (38). 
Interestingly enough, some of my Korean consultants rejected TEPC as we have modeled 
it here and as it is found in the literature. Those who did, however, would still accept double 
nominative constructions in a way consistent with the grammar of Japanese. This should be a 
good indication of the fact that there are formal differences between TEPCs and AEPCs in that 
acceptance of one needn’t imply acceptance of the other. It’s not the case that TEPC and AEPC 
condition slightly different semantics or implicatures read into the same construction, but they 
are independently formally and semantically distinct constructions which are relatively stable 
across languages. 
Summing up, we can, with a relatively small structure, account for some of the numerous 
differential traits between thematic and athematic external possession. Because we have modeled 
TEP as being movement to an affectedness projection above VP and below the agentive vP, we 
can account for the lack of TEP from agentive clauses. Seeing that we have modeled AEP as 
simple movement to much higher topic and focus projections, there is no such restriction in those 
cases, indeed, the recursivity of the left-periphery is recapitulated by the potential recursivity of 
AEP in some languages. Thus assuming this structure, the formal traits of EP are not so much 
learned idiosyncrasies as much as emergent properties of the underlying structure of language. 
We should expect then, that any construction in language which semantically encodes 

54 
 
affectedness, should show a similar discontinuities with agentive nominals, derivable from the 
fact that agentivity is encoded higher in the derivation than affectedness (implying a cartography 
of argument structure equivalent to UTAH). 
What is important of EP is that the semantic and pragmatic data which it encodes 
corresponds to a set of unexpected formal properties which are common to all languages, 
whether they encode EP through noun incorporation, possessor datives or other means. These 
formal properties attest to a consistent underlying structure/cartography of human language 
partially visible in the comparison of alternations and cross-linguistic data. Semantic or 
pragmatic changes in a language, in thematic or athematic external possession, correspond to a 
set of formal constraints which are specific not to the surface appearance of the EPC, but its 
semantic and pragmatic value. In this way, language structure and syntax, as I have argued, is 
largely undisentanglable from the semantics and pragmatics of its utterances. 
 

55 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
THOUGHTS ON THEORY 
 
Now that we’ve discussed external possession, it’s worth thinking about some of the 
implications of its traits and formal properties. The larger point I am trying to make is that the 
seemingly idiosyncratic syntactic traits of a construction or the language faculty (LF) in general 
are not necessarily isolated rules, but principled results of a layer of semantic representation in 
human information processing. Cartographic Approaches to syntax have yielded a highly 
successful predictive mechanism for analyzing the semantic/syntactic nature of language, and I 
think that it’s worth expanding this line of inquiry into the domain or verbal argument structure 
in earnest. That is what I have attempted to do here. 
 
This has important implications for the study of UG. Syntacticians are accustomed to 
approaching UG as if it is indeed a set of neurotic rules that the human language faculty sets on 
expression. UG is often, mistakenly I think, thought of independent and unmotivated rules: the 
External Projection Principle, binding conditions, Relativized Minimality, etc. which have been 
posited and kept or fallen out of favor over the years. Part of the reason that these principles must 
be formulated, I think, is the legacy of the Standard Theory to deemphasize the highly active, if 
not ubiquitous interface between syntax and semantics/pragmatics. 
 
However External Possession, what with its systematic limitations and properties, shows 
us that these seemingly random formal traits of language are systematically related to and 
sometimes derivable from the semantic hierarchy implicit in human language. As soon as we 

56 
 
acknowledge a thematic/semantic hierarchy in argument structure (one of 
agent>affectee>theme), we immediately make claims about the formal traits of syntax and the 
possibilities of nominal movement and coreference. We also immediately make claims about the 
possibilities of human language and how expressions can vary according to their semantics. In 
the case of EP, these predictions fit tightly with the data: possessor extraction is impossible from 
agentive nominals down to the lower affectee node, AEPC is potentially recursive, syntactic 
prominent equals pragmatic prominence, etc. 
 
This is not only true of External Possession, but of other alternations, which in general, 
put languages in the contortions closest to experimental circumstances. Dative alternation can be 
referred to as another common example. The formal differences between the two alternating 
forms of English dative alternation (‘Mary taught John French’ versus ‘Mary taught French to 
John’) can be seen replicated equivalently in a variety of the world’s languages with semantically 
analogous alternations: Spanish (Demonte 1995), Dutch (Colleman 2010), Korean (O’Grady 
1991), etc. External Possession is not unique, but a representation of the general case. 
 
Now in my conception, UG, and syntax as a whole is entirely epiphenomenal or 
emergent. That is to say that all of the happenstance ‘principles’ and ‘constraints’ we can 
propose of language, each one should be derivable from an understanding of the semantic 
structure underlying language or its externalization scheme, which I assume to be highly simple. 
Of course this is not to liken my conception to so-called ‘Emergent Grammar,’ where grammar is 
a magical outcome of language use, but I mean that language is emergent in that its formal 
properties are based singularly on the semantic cartography and computational structure. Given 
the semantic processing of the human mind, the LF could not have evolved in our species very 
differently from what it is now. 

57 
 
We should also be clear that this is actually a statement of language significantly more 
‘nativist’ than traditional Chomskyan linguistics. For Chomsky, the traits of language are 
idiosyncrasies of a recently developed LF at the cutting edge of human evolution. They are only 
peripherally and incidentally related to other cognitive capacities. My idea, however is that 
effectively every aspect of language is tied into cognitive faculties far deeper and far more 
immutable in the human cognitive system than traditional Generative Linguistics has assumed. 
3.1 Towards a Fuller Model of Syntax 
I should probably make clear my general intuitions on syntactic modeling. Again, I view 
Cartographic Approaches as fundamental to understanding the linguistic system, but not 
necessarily in the way Cinque (1999) or others working within the Minimalist Program seem to. 
To me, the painstakingly specific nature of the cartography of adverbials, verbal morphology or 
argument structure is not syntactic or narrowly linguistic in nature, but is a part of the human 
mind generally. Independent of language, we must conceive of a mechanism that humans and 
other animals employ to conceptualize events and make semantic and pragmatic judgments. I am 
stating that a semantic cartography is precisely what must exist in the mind generally, and its 
appearance in language is epiphenomenal on the fact that we must linearize language in a way 
that recapitulates the cognitive structure of our minds. 
Minimalist syntax models the linguistic system as upward structure building. ‘Merge’ 
selects two linguistic units and combines them, creating a derivation with syntactic demands as 
determined by the lexical items it has merged. To be clear, Merge as an instrument of syntax, 
much like Phrase Structure rules before it, creates the structure.Yet I am saying that the structure 
is independent of the linguistic system. The capacity to think and conceptualize events is prior to 
language, and it would seem uneconomical and unlikely to assume that we have utterly distinct 
mechanisms for semantic and syntactic processing. All ‘syntax’ is, in my conception, is a 

58 
 
linearization mechanism which, in a way analogous to Merge, builds upwards, yet not creating 
structure, but following an innate semantic structure and matching that structure with lexical 
entries and appending the lexemes leftward or rightward depending on the parameters of the 
language in question. 
Of course even the apparently arbitrary parameters of syntax could theoretically be 
worked out to be semantic or pragmatic in nature. The differences between languages can be 
formulated as simply being whether a given language shows overt or covert movement (as has 
been suggested from time to time between wh-fronting and wh-in situ languages). This is 
circumstantial, but languages may only differ in whether they realize a phonological element 
higher or lower in a chain in a derivation. 
Regardless, it is important as a methodological note to keep constant attention to the 
possibility of pragmatic or semantic ties of putative UG principles. Formalizing an observation in 
language as a merely syntactic ‘principle’ too often stifles the elucidation of what factors might 
play into it. That’s to say, if we state that the sun rises because of the labors of sun hobgoblins 
who hoist it into the air on an invisible pulley, and that is a convenient enough theory, it might 
stifle further inquiry into the true mechanisms of the sunrise. In the same way, if we write off the 
fact that a nominal must, in many languages, raise to spec TP because of an invisible EPP force, 
that very uneconomical explanation, if sufficiently convenient or convincing, might stifle inquiry 
into other factors which might independently and coherently motivate the same phenomenon. 
None of this is to overlook the actual problem of motivating subject-movement, but my heuristic 
as to syntactic principles is to shoot on sight; it seems to be the case that many ‘merely’ syntactic 
phenomena interface cleanly with other factors of language in a way that might eventually 
explain them on independent grounds. 

59 
 
3.2 Biolinguistics and Theory Economy 
Now important for any theory of the LF is theoretical plausibility in the face of the 
biological evolution of the LF itself. Although many cognitive faculties are involved in the 
production and comprehension of language, there is a narrow band of those faculties that appear 
to be unique to the human species. This narrow band is what Hauser et al. (2002) dub "the 
faculty of language in the narrow sense" (FLN), as opposed to "the faculty of language in the 
broad sense" (FLB), the latter of which would be all of the cognitive machinery which 
participates in conceptualization, theory of mind, sound discrimination, etc. This FLN is implied 
to be nearly synonymous with "recursion" as a property of human language or "Merge" in the 
Minimalist Program. 
Chomskyan syntax however has been in a kind of conceptual conundrum. On one side, 
Chomskyan linguistics evolved with the intuition that the LF was a largely unique and privileged 
aspect of human cognition. The realization had been that the formal properties of language, 
particularly syntax, patterned in such a way that could not be directly related to semantics or 
other cognitive properties. This meant that syntax had to be conceived as a largely autonomous 
entity in the brain, which could be shown to have a complex array of independent properties and 
tendencies. This is reflected in the "independence of grammar" beginning in the model of 
Syntactic Structures, yet with it come the aforementioned epistemological problems. 
On the other hand- on the evolutionary perspective, a small and economical LF is more 
desirable. There seem not to be any ‘intermediate forms’ between creatures with FLN and 
without it, and language itself seems to have arriven on the evolutionary stage immediately, if 
not over the course of a brief million years. This strongly suggests that the biology of language is 
such that there are only several, if not only one genetic parameter that separates a linguistically-
capable hominid from a linguistically-non-capable one. 

60 
 
Thus although representing the complexities of the syntax of human language might 
encourage us to theorize a complex and unique LF, the evolutionary fact of language demands 
that the LF be biologically simple and amenable to a relatively quick evolution. Even aside from 
the evolutionary problem, this is a theoretical diseconomy. If we assume that syntax is fully 
detached from other cognitive faculties, including semantic processing, the mere diversity of 
natural languages forces us to model human syntax as an ever increasing and semantically blind 
system of arbitrary phrases. This feeds into the nasty stereotype7 of syntacticians muttered by 
other linguists: that generative syntax is mostly a craft of unfalsifiable theoretical hand-waving 
and positing an invisible world of projections to skirt around mainly theory-internal problems. 
Tacking syntax down to a semantic hierarchy, however, alleviates this problem by allowing us to 
make refutable predictions about the possibilities of human language. Even with our cursory 
glance at external possession, we’ve made several surface-level claims about language: that 
TEPC from an agentive clause is impossible, that EP corresponds to an increased pragmatic 
salience of the possessor (not vice versa) and that externalization of non-possessor elements of 
arguments is not similarly motivated on pragmatic grounds and thus is substantially less likely to 
occur in natural language. 
At that, building syntactic and semantic processing in together also substantially limits 
the palette with which syntacticians can solve problems which, in Popperian terms, makes 
syntactic modeling far more ‘scientific’ (meaning refutable). As Cinque (1999; 20) notes, “a 
restrictive theory should force a one-to-one relation between position and [semantic] 
interpretation (i.e., one specific and distinct interpretation for each position of ‘base 
generation’),” while later adding that “[t]he crucial point, then, is whether all languages have the 
                                                 
7 Generally speaking, all stereotypes are true, but that’s not to say they’re not mean. :’( 

61 
 
same full array of interpretations. Although we cannot be certain, as usual, the available evidence 
indicates that they do” (132). That is to say, the economy and chance of falsifiability are large 
pluses in themselves, but even greater is the fact that language does indeed seem to show the 
otherwise highly unlikely semantic hierarchies as demonstrated by Cartographic Approaches. 
Cinque (1999) made this argument of adverbs and verbal morphemes, Scott (2002) made it of 
adjectives and I would argue that a similar hierarchy is clear in verbal argument structure, in a 
way that strongly substantiates a universal thematic hierarchy as proposed by Baker (1988). 
Still the theoretical mess is one issue a highly autonomous syntax, but the problem posed 
for actual first language acquisition is a powerful one as well. If we imagine a language-learning 
child who searches for exclusively formal rules in language without reference to semantics, we 
have to acknowledge that there is effectively an infinite set of possible hypotheses, rules, and 
exceptions the child can generate for any given alternation or derivation in language, especially 
given the notorious Poverty of Stimulus involved in actual language acquisition which would be 
unable to fully prune back erroneous formal generalizations of language. It is much more 
understandable that a child’s ‘language acquisition device’ understands and interprets linguistic 
data with the assumption that the variations seen in the surface form are based on the predictable 
semantics and pragmatics of an expression underlying it. This assumption would drastically 
curtail the range of hypotheses a child would implicitly make of language and thus significantly 
facilitate language acquisition. Given, for example, Cinque’s hierarchy of adverbial projections 
and its position in Universal Grammar, if a child ascertains that the meaning of the word 
‘usually’ there is no need to generate hypotheses as to whether it should be generated 
syntactically superior or inferior to adverbs like ‘always’ or ‘well.’ The order of usually >always 
>well (Thus ‘He usually always sings well,’ and *‘He well usually sings always’) is implicit in 

62 
 
the child’s natural grammar. Understanding a hierarchy as we have reviewed here, the 
parameters that need setting in a language become functionally limited to the number of 
computations that can occur between elements in a chain (i.e., a child must simply decide 
whether wh-movement is covert or overt, whether head-movement is, whether external 
possession is etc.). In essence, this implies that all languages demonstrate the same 
transformations, varying only as to whether they are overt or covert on the ‘surface 
representation.’ 
Still at first blush, it might seem that we have exacerbated the problem of the evolution of 
the LF. That is, if we assume that there are inherent syntactic positions in the architecture of 
language that are related to semantic notions: an affectedness projection, an agency projection, 
universal projections for verbal tense, mood and aspect, etc., we seem to be saying that the 
language faculty is an incredibly complex one, and thus more unlikely to arise in the few 
millions of years separating man from other apes. I think this interpretation is not only wrong, 
but patently backwards. 
In the terminology of Hauser et al., I would say that the complexities revealed by 
Cartographic Approaches to syntax as well as the exploration of the semantics of argument 
structure here are actually parts of the Faculty of Language in the Broad Sense. When we posit 
"overlaps" like this between the systems of syntax and semantics, we are in effect exporting the 
complexities of the module of syntax (effectively the FLN) to the module of semantics 
(effectively the FLB). Our minds' capacity for reasoning and semantic processing are assuredly 
not specific to language, and indeed to one degree or another are shared with all other animals- 
thus we have no reason to assume this faculty is simple, consistent or economical seeing that it 
has evolved over the course of billennia. 

63 
 
The evolutionarily recent and economical FLN I would argue is simply a small linking 
mechanism which matches the 'projections' on the semantic hierarchy with lexical items and 
linearizes them in such a way consistent with whatever 'parameters' an I-language might have. 
This is the bare minimum of added cognitive processing sufficient to distinguish animal and 
human verbal capacity and it thus efficiently deals with the evolutionary problem of language: it 
cuts down the FLN into a small but fundamental role of linking the semantic hierarchy 
underlying human thought to linear order. This linking role is a much more plausible 
evolutionary product than a highly pristine and autonomous syntactic engine implicitly 
conceptualized at the beginning of the Generative Program. 
There are several important notes to make on this. If this is a reasonable statement on the 
nature of the syntax of language, then it can first be said that syntactic analysis is not so much of 
a venture into an insular language faculty, but into the general cognitive traits of humans. This 
includes the facts we have addressed here with alternations such as thematic external possession. 
TEP is not mere syntax, but a syntactic alternation that expresses a discursively and truth-
functionally different construal of events than its alternative. The universals of EP might be 
superficially syntactic, but if the structure of human language is based on the semantics behind it, 
that same superficial syntax is generally a window into the semantic and conceptual processing 
of humans. In the same way, despite athematic EP not varying from IP on semantic grounds, we 
still see that the formal syntactic changes occur in tandem with pragmatic shifts, and these differ 
in a systematic and principled way from both TEP and IP. 
Additionally, if this hierarchy of conceptual processing is indeed not part of the FLN, but 
the FLB, we can reasonably assume that animals which are cognitively similar to humans should 
bear a conceptually similar cognitive repertoire. Presumably, the complexity of the 'functional 

64 
 
heads' we see in the architecture of language is a gradually-evolved cognitive structure present in 
many if not all our close relatives to some degree or another. The only difference between 
humans and nonhuman animals is the small FLN which matches the elements on this semantic 
hierarchy with linguistic signs and linearizes and externalizes them in a language-specific way. 
Let’s also be clear of what I mean by ‘externalize.’ Language is, obviously, phonetically 
encoded and enunciated (externalized) for purposes of communication, but importantly, it is also 
‘externalized’ from the lower levels of cognition into the conscious mind. While the event 
semantic hierarchy shown by syntactic cartography may exist in the depths of the unconscious 
mind, beyond the access of intuition and for the apparent strict purposes of event and entity 
evaluation, language, however, serves to externalize this hierarchy in a piece-meal fashion into 
the realm of the conscious portion of the brain. Language brings to our awareness very complex 
semantic dependency relationships, interestingly enough, without giving us a conscious 
understanding of the actual processing that goes into them. This is why students in a class on 
formal semantics can have immediate and intuitive judgments of the conditional acceptability of 
complex tensual and aspectual interrelations, but not necessarily understand the formal 
constraints that go into them, even if these formal constraints are mirrored, at one level or 
another in the abyss of the human information processing system. Language, thus, raises a 
portion of this system into the realm of our conscious understanding; without it, very complex 
event comprehension would still occur, but not at a level amenable to meta-cognition. This 
might, as it happens, serve as a purpose of language equally if not more important than language 
as a mode of interpersonal communication. 

65 
 
3.3 Experimental Possibilities 
 
We can make arguments from economy of theory and biological plausibility, but perhaps 
a more direct vantage point to the reality of a theory is psycholinguistic research into how 
precisely the human mind goes about processing syntax and semantics. 
 
It’s important to be clear on terminology. It’s common for psycholinguists to talk about 
the substantial psycholinguistic differences known between ‘semantic’ and ‘syntactic’ 
processing, but the ‘semantics’ spoken of here are not the same which I intend. Most 
psycholinguistic research into semantics focuses on specifically lexical semantics, and most 
active research done covers the retrieval of lexical items and their interactions with each other, 
this retrieval being manifestly different in psychological nature from syntactic processing. The 
semantics which is of interest to me here, and the semantics at work in external possession, is 
that read into words by the syntax of a language. 
 
That is to say, I have implied in line with UTAH that syntactic position is a mirror of 
argumental semantics, that is, whether a nominal is read as an agent, patient, affectee, 
experiencer etc. Similar research into the semantics of verbal cartography could be conceivably 
called conceptual semantics. To my knowledge, there has not been psycholinguistic research 
done into semantics of this nature in as many words. Testing the implications of what I have 
formulated here would, however, be relatively easy given methodologies already at work in 
psycho and neurolinguistic research. 
 
Musso et al. (2013) (and other research in Moro 2013) have demonstrated that patterns in 
pseudo-languages violating and not violating UG principles are processed fundamentally 
differently in the brain, as demonstrated by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). If participants 
are taught fabricated languages, fabricated languages obeying the syntax of UG are processed in 
precisely the same way that one would process an actually existing language, even if one speaks 

66 
 
a typologically incomparable native language. However fabricated languages violating UG 
principles are indeed solvable, but are processed differently in the brain itself as shown by MRI, 
with additionally an increased error rate and response time. 
 
To test the validity of verbal or argumental cartography, or the general 
undisentanglability of syntax and semantics I have suggested here, one need only throw 
argumental semantics into a similar experiment. For example, if the semantics and pragmatics of 
TEP are inherent in its variant syntax, one could design an experiment to test this. Fabricate a 
language where unmarked possession is expressed by a construction resembling EP, while a 
construction semantically similar to real-world TEP (with possessor affectedness) is expressed 
with what looks like IP. One should expect if what I have formulated here is true, that this kind 
of fabricated language with a backwards system of possession should be incapable of being 
processed as a real natural language, and its semantic disjoints are equally contradictory to ‘UG’ 
as any of Musso et al.’s fabricated languages with non-UG syntax. This is all granted the fact 
that the particular syntactic collocations of words in this hypothetical language still follow 
constructions in real natural languages, but their concordant semantics clash with the structure I 
suggest to be read universally into language. 
 
One could similarly test the innateness of Cinque’s cartographies by fabricating 
languages with morphemes or adverbs which contradict the order stated in his formulation. 
Again, we should expect if this order is more than a mere coincidence, that participants should 
have as much trouble processing these orders as contra-UG syntax. Now the interpretation of 
such results would be up for debate. They would be consistent with my view expressed here, but 
also with the quite importantly different view of Cinque (cfr. 2012), that cartographies are not so 
much an issue of semantic processing, so much as a somewhat arbitrary set of semantic 

67 
 
projections that have happened to be integrated into UG in the evolution of the LF. Either way, 
such experimentation would drive forward research and highlight the fact historically neglected 
fact that syntactic structure is built part and parcel with semantics and pragmatics. 
3.4 Theoretical Momentum 
 
I’ve presented a fuzzy mosaic of a somewhat novel theory of grammar here. I say 
‘somewhat’ because in many ways, movements in the field have been escalating into a tighter 
interface between syntax and semantics since the inception of Generative Syntax. This, of 
course, was partially an inevitability since the two were originally characterized as maximally 
distinct in the great autonomy of syntax in the ‘Standard Theory’ of Chomsky (1965). 
Additionally, it is not necessarily clear to me whether there is a psychological reality to the 
institutional divide between semantics and pragmatics.8 
 
But what about the leftovers? For all the aspects of syntax which can be conclusively tied 
down to a semantic or pragmatic motivation, what of those which continue in their classical 
autonomy? Indeed, aspects of syntax such as the External Projection Principle, that-trace effects, 
                                                 
8 In formal terms, semantics and pragmatics are clearly different entities in that semantics is 
truth-functional, while pragmatics, governing language use, is not, being situational. However 
peering into the psychological reality of language processing and cartographies, it is not 
absolutely clear where semantics can be said to end and pragmatics begins. One of the erroneous, 
I think, assumptions of linguists working in semantic and pragmatic processing has been to look 
at the human linguistic system as if it should or does recapitulate formal logic or the formalisms 
of pragmatics. 
In reality, information processing in the mind is probably such that there is no stark division 
between the two, nor do humans compute the world in terms of truth conditions, therefore the 
academic division between semantics and pragmatics may be mentally unfounded (although not 
the say unimportant for formal reasons). I can’t state this with certainty that this is the case, but 
the idea that the human mind is a computer working at its base in terms of formal logic (the main 
fallacy of Generative Semantics) is simply queer. From this it should follow that we have no 
reason to even posit a distinction between truth-functional semantics and non-truth-functional 
pragamtics. 

68 
 
structural case assignment and others seem to be utterly unlinked to semantic factors. There are a 
number of possibilities. 
 
As I’ve mentioned, one, perhaps the most economical and theoretically alluring answer is 
that all these apparently arbitrary aspects of syntactic independence are epiphenomenal: they all 
fall out from simple formal rules based on a semantic core. That’s to say, just as the impossibility 
of TEP in agentive clauses falls out from the wider semantic core of the agency projection over 
the affectedness projection, other seemingly neurotic restrictions (perhaps say that-trace effects) 
fall out of other yet unearthed facts of semantic or computational structure. It’s often the case 
that these “purely syntactic” aspects of language bear whispers of correlating with semantic or 
pragmatic factors. Languages with split ergativity are a good example of this; if assignment of 
nominative, accusative, ergative and absolutive cases is arbitrary, why should so many split 
ergative languages vary in morphological alignment (whether accusative or ergative case is 
assigned) in different verbal aspects? As Coon (2013) notes, a huge portion of split-ergative 
languages (Hindi, Basque, Chol, Tongan, Georgian, and many others) show an ergative 
alignment in perfective aspects and accusative alignment in imperfective aspects, without any 
cases varying in the other direction.9 Notice also that the apparently formal difference in case 
assignment in these languages often does bear semantic or pragmatic corollaries in a way 
comparable to external possession. Anand and Nevins (2006), for example, show that the 
possibilities for scope ambiguities in Hindi vary on whether or not the agent is assigned ergative 
case (in perfective predicates) or nominative (in imperfective predicates). 
                                                 
9 With a mind for cartographies, this fact might have to do with the locus of perfective aspect 
within the structure of language. A verb or a verbal argument may be structurally positioned 
differently dependent on the Aktionsart of a predicate, and this might be realized in a 
systematically different alignment of case assignment, as shown in split-ergative languages. 
There are many thoughts to be had here. 

69 
 
(44) 
a. 
koi shaayer 
har ghazal 
likhtaa hai. 
 
 
some poet.N every song.A write.IMP be 
 
 
‘Some poet writes every song.’ 
 
 
∃x ∀y | poet(x) & write(x,y) | 
 
 
∀y ∃x | poet(x) & write(x,y) | 
 
b. 
kisii shaayer-ne 
har ghazal 
likhii. 
 
 
some poet-E  
every song.N wrote 
 
 
‘Some poet wrote every song.’ 
∃x ∀y| poet(x) & write(x,y) | 
 
 
*∀y ∃x| poet(x) & write(x,y) | 
(44a) shows an imperfective predicate which yields an accusative alignment, while (44b) 
is a perfective predicate assigning ergative alignment. In the first case, the utterance is 
ambiguous as to scope, and the universal quantifier from the object positions may scope over the 
whole clause. Yet this is not the case in (44b), where only the scope equivalent to linear order is 
possible. Data such as this seems to indicate that the two agents, differing only by case 
assignment yield utterly distinct syntactic properties, calling into question the notion that case 
assignment is a function of ‘mere’ syntax. 
Take also structural case ‘optionality’ like that below in Korean (O’Grady 1991; 139) and 
Icelandic (Thráinsson et al. 2004; 314). 

70 
 
(45) 
a. 
John-i Yeongmi-ga aphuda-ko 
miteotda. 
 
 
John-N Yeongmi-N 
sick-COMP 
believe 
 
b. 
John-i Yeongmi-reul aphuda-ko 
miteotda. 
 
 
John-N Yeongmi-A 
sick-COMP 
believe 
 
 
‘John believed Yeongmi to be sick.’ 
(46) 
a. 
Honum 
tókti 
 
gentan vera 
stuttlig. 
 
 
him.D  
seemed 
girl.N be.INF entertaining 
b. 
Honum 
tókti 
 
gentuna 
vera 
stuttlig 
him.D  
seemed 
girl.A  
be.INF entertaining 
‘The girl seemed entertaining to him.’ 
 
Despite the fact that both nominative and accusative case are available to these 
‘accusativus cum infinitivo’ constructions, my consultants showed a strong general preference 
for (45a) over (45b), indicating at some level, even purely ‘abstract’ case has some kind of 
pragmatic effect, albeit not sufficiently understood as of yet. Relatively common facts like this 
might at least be the proper wedge to assault the possible interface of structural case and 
semantics and reveal yet another aspect of syntactic autonomy to be theoretically premature. 
 
There may be truth to this idea, but potential holes, fatal or otherwise, can be poked in it. 
Firstly, if language is naught but semantics and pragmatics, why should languages vary at all? I 
have motivated EP on semantic and pragmatic grounds, but why shouldn’t every language 
employ EP, and at the same times? If we discover some kind of pragmatic factor that seems to 
motivate, say, the EPP, does it follow that languages with or without it are eternally 
pragmatically distinct? 

71 
 
 
These are worthwhile questions to contemplate, but I think that the working assumption 
of formal linguistics should be to minimalize the truly formal aspects of syntax. A fruitfully 
scientific approach to a cognitive science should entail constantly trying to reduce known formal 
tendencies to yet deeper underlying principles; and my point here is that the next frontier of these 
underlying principles is in the semantic cartography of human language. If my intuitions are 
remotely valid, linguistics is not simply the study of how words are pieced together, but it is a 
quite direct view into the processing cartography that underlies human cognition. Linguistics, 
specifically the study of syntax, can yield a strong testament to how humans process and 
understand events and the world around them and can finally aid in the modeling, reverse-
engineering and perhaps even the understanding of the human mind and experience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"The linguists have this peculiar capacity to make whatever they do seem terribly important." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–Skinner 
 

72 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
AISSEN, JUDITH. 1987. Tzotzil Clause Structure. Riedel Publishing Company. 
AISSEN, JUDITH. 1992. External possessor and logical subject in Tz’utujil. In Payne and Barshi. 
BAKER, MARK. 1988. Incorporation: A Theory of Grammatical Function Changing. Chicago 
University Press. 
BAKER, MARK. 1995. On the structural positions of themes and goals. In Rooryck and Zauring. 
BENINCÀ, PAOLA and CECILIA POLETTO. 2004. Topic, focus and V2. In Rizzi 2004. 
BORER, HAGIT (ed.) 1986. Syntax and Semantics. Academic Press, New York. 
BORER, HAGIT and YOSEF GRODZINSKY. 1986. Syntactic cliticization and lexical cliticization: 
The case of Hebrew dative clitics. In Borer. 
BOSQUE, IGNACIO and VIOLETA DEMONTE (eds.) 1999. Gramática descriptiva de la lengua 
española. Madrid: Espasa-Calpe. 
BRECHT, RICHARD D. and JAMES S. LEVINE (eds.) 1986. Case in Slavic.Slavica. 
BURZIO, LUIGI. 1986. Italian Syntax: A Government-Binding Approach. Boston: Reidel 
Publishing Company. 
BYBEE, JOAN, JOHN HAIMAN and SANDRA A. THOMPSON. 1997. Essays on Language Function 
and Language Type. John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
CHAPPELL, HILARY and WILLIAM MCGREGOR (eds.) 1996.The Grammar of Inalienability: A 
Typological Perspective on Body Part Terms and the Part-Whole Relationship. New 
York: Mouton de Gruyter. 

73 
 
CHOMSKY, NOAM. 1953. Systems of Syntactic Analysis. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 
18.3.242–256. 
CHOMSKY, NOAM. 1957. Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton & Co. 
CHOMSKY, NOAM. 1959. A review of B.F. Skinner’s Verbal Behavior. Language 35.1.26–58. 
CHOMSKY, NOAM. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press. 
CHOMSKY, NOAM. 1972. Language and Mind. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
CINQUE, GUGLIELMO. 1999. Adverbs and Functional Heads: A Cross-Linguistic Perspective. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
CINQUE, GUGLIELMO (ed.). 2002. Functional Structure in DP and IP: The Cartography of 
Syntactic Structures, Volume 1. Oxford University Press. 
CINQUE, GUGLIELMO and ILIYANA KRAPOVA. 2009. The Two ‘Possessor Raising’ Constructions 
of Bulgarian. In Franks et al., 123–148. 
COLLEMAN, TIMOTHY. 2010. Beyond the Dative Alternation: The Semantics of the Dutch Aan-
Dative. In Glynn. 
COON, JESSICA. 2013. TAM split ergativity, Part I. Language and Linguistics Compass 7.3.171–
190. 
DALY, JOHN P. and MARGARET H. DALY. 1980. Work Papers of the Summer Institute of 
Linguistics, University of North Dakota Session, 24. 
DAVIES, WILLIAM D. 1986. Choctaw Verb Agreement and Universal Grammar. Riedel 
Publishing Company. 
DEAL, AMY ROSE. 2013. Possessor Raising. Linguistic Inquiry 44.3.391–432. 
DEAL, AMY ROSE. (to appear). External Possession and Possessor Raising. 
DEMONTE, VIOLETA. 1995. Dative alternation in Spanish. Probus 7.5–30. 

74 
 
DONOHUE, MARK. 1997. External Possession in Kanum. Concordia University, Montréal. 
DONOHUE, MARK. 1999. Syntactic roles vs. semantic roles. In Payne and Barshi. 
EVANS, NICHOLAS. 1996. The syntax and semantics of body part incorporation in Mayali. In 
Chappell and McGregor, 65–109. 
FEUILLET, JACK (ed.) 1998. Actanceet Valence dans les Langues de l’Europe. Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
FRANKS, STEVEN, VRINDA CHIDAMBARAM and BRIAN JOSEPH (eds.) 2009. A Linguist’s Linguist: 
Studies in South Slavic Linguistics in Honor of E. Wayles Browne. Bloomington, IN: 
Slavica. 
FRIED, MIRJAM. 1999. From interest to ownership: A constructional view of external possessors. 
In Payne and Barshi, 473–504. 
GLYNN, DYLAN (ed.) 2010. Quantitative Methods in Cognitive Science: Corpus Driven 
Approaches. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
GUÉRON, JACQUELINE. 1985. Inalienable Possession, PRO-Inclusion and Lexical Chains. In J. 
Guéron et al. 
GUÉRON, JACQUELINE, H.G. OBENAUER and J.Y. POLLOCK (eds.). 1985. Grammatical 
Representations. Dordrecht: Foris. 
GUNDEL, JEANETTE K. 1988. Universals of topic-comment structure. In Hammond et al., 209–
239. 
HAEGEMAN, LILIANE (ed.) 1997. Elements of Grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
HAMMOND, MICHAEL, EDITH A. MORAVCSIK and JESSICA R. WIRTH (eds.) 1988.Studies in 
Syntactic Typology. John Benjamins Publishing Company. 

75 
 
HAUSER, MARC, NOAM CHOMSKY, and TECUMSEH FITCH. 2002. The Language Faculty: What is 
it, who has it, and how did it evolve? Science, 298.1569–1579. 
HASPELMATH, MARTIN. 1999. External possession in a European areal perspective. In Payne and 
Barshi, 109–135. 
HENDERSON, BRENT. 2014. External possession in Chimwiini. Journal of Linguistics 50.2.297–
321. 
HOLE, DANIEL. 2006. Extra argumentality – affectees, landmarks and voice. Linguistics 
44.2.383–424. 
HORNSTEIN, NORBERT and MARIA POLINSKY (eds.) 2010.Movement Theory of Control. John 
Benjamins Publishing Company. 
KAYNE, RICHARD. 1975. French Syntax: the Transformational Cycle. MIT Press. 
KATZ, JERROLD J. and PAUL POSTAL. 1964. An Integrated Theory of Linguistic Description. MIT 
Press. 
KEMPCHINSKY, PAULA. 1991. Syntactic Constraints on the Expression of Possession in Spanish. 
Hispania, 75.3.697–704. 
KRATZER, ANGELIKA. 1996. Severing the external argument from its verb. In Rooryck and 
Zauring. 
KÖNIG, EKKEHARD and MARTIN HASPELMATH. 1998. Les constructions à possesseurexternedans 
les languesd’Europe. In Feuillet. 
LANDAU, IDAN. 1991. Possessor raising and the structure of VP. Lingua 107.1–37. 
LEE, IN QUE. 1997. Dative Constructions and Case Theory in Korean. Dissertation. Simon Fraser 
University. 

76 
 
LEE-SCHOENFELD, VERA. 2006. German possessor datives: raised and affected. Journal of 
Comparative Germanic Linguistics 9.101–142. 
MARTIN, JACK B. 1999. External possession in Creek. In Payne and Barshi, 229–250. 
MORO, ANDREA. 2013. The Equilibrium of Human Syntax: Symmetries in the Brain. New York: 
Routledge. 
MUSSO, MARIACRISTIANA, ANDREA MORO, VOLKMARGLAUCHE, MICHEL RIJNTJES, JÜRGEN 
REICHENBACH, CHRISTIAN BÜCHEL, and CORNELIUS WEILLER. 2013. “Broca’s Area and 
the Language Instinct”. In Moro. 
O’CONNOR, MARY CATHERINE. 1996. The Situated Interpretation of Possessor-Raising. In 
Shibatani and Thompson, 125–156. 
O’CONNOR, MARY-CATHERINE. 2007. External possession and utterance interpretation: a 
crosslinguistic exploration. Linguistics 43.5: 577–613. 
O’GRADY, WILLIAM. 1991. Categories and Case. John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
OUHALLA, JAMAL AND UR SHLONSKY (eds.) 2002.Themes in Arabic and Hebrew Syntax. Boston: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
PAYNE, DORIS L. 1997. The Maasai external possession construction. In Bybee et al. 
PAYNE, DORIS L. AND IMMANUEL BARSHI. 1999. External Possession. Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins Publishing Company. 
PERLMUTTER, DAVID.  1978. Impersonal passives and the unaccusative hypothesis. Proceedings 
of the 4th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 157–190. 
PICALLO, CARME and GEMMA RIGAU. 1999. El posesivo y las relaciones posesivas. In Bosque 
and Demonte, 973–1024. 
RIZZI, LUIGI. 1997. The fine structure of the left periphery. In Haegeman. 

77 
 
RIZZI, LUIGI (ed.) 2004. The Structure of CP and IP. Oxford University Press. 
ROLDÁN, MERCEDES. 1972. Concerning Spanish datives and possessives. Language Sciences 
21.27–32. 
ROORYCK, JOHN and LAURIE ZAURING (eds.) 1995.Phrase Structure and the Lexicon. Springer 
Verlag. 
SÁNCHEZ, LILIANA. 2010. The Morphology and Syntax of Topic and Focus: Minimalist inquiries 
in the Quechua Periphery. John Benjamins Publishing Company. Philadelphia. 
SCOTT, GARY-JOHN. 2002. Stacked Adjectival Modification and the Structure of Nominal 
Phrases. In Cinque 2002, 91–120. 
SEARLE, JOHN. 1972. Chomsky’s Revolution in Linguistics. The New York Review of Books, June 
29, 1972. 
SILONI, TAL. 2002. Adjectival constructions and inalienable constructions. In Ouhalla and 
Shlonsky, 161–187. 
SHIBATANI, MASAYOSHI AND SANDRA A. THOMPSON (eds.) 1996.Grammatical Construction: 
Their Form and Meaning. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
STATEVA, PENKA. 2002. Possessive clitics and the structure of nominal expressions. Lingua 
112.647–690. 
TOMIOKA, SATOSHI and CHANG-YONG SIM. 2007. The event semantic root of inalienable 
possession. University of Delaware. 
TUGGY, DAVID. 1980. ¡Ethical Dative and Possessor Omission Sí, Possessor Ascension No!.In 
Daly and Daly. 
UEHARA, KEIKO. 1999. External possession constructions in Japanese: A psycholinguistic 
perspective. In Payne and Barshi. 

78 
 
VELASQUEZ-CASTILLO, MAURA. 1996. The Grammar of Possession: Inalienability, 
Incorporation and Possessor Ascension in Guaraní. Philadelphia: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company. 
VERMEULEN, REIKO. 2005. External possession in Korean. University of College London 
Working Papers in Linguistics 17.175–213. 
WIERZBICKA, ANNA. 1986. The meaning of a case: A study of the Polish dative. In Brecht and 
Levine. 
 
 
 

79 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
A. Glossing Abbreviations 
Gloss  
Translation 
1 
 
first person 
2 
 
second person 
3 
 
third person 
A 
 
accusative 
AC 
 
active 
ADJ 
 
adjective 
D 
 
dative 
C 
 
complementizer 
DET 
 
determiner 
E 
 
ergative 
ec 
 
empty category (trace, pro) 
EV 
 
evidential 
FUT 
 
future 
G 
 
genitive 
HON  
honorific 
IMP 
 
imperfective 
IMPERS 
impersonal 
IN 
 
inactive 
INF 
 
infinitive 
INST  
instrumental 
LOC  
locative 
N 
 
nominative 
NOM  
nominalization 
O 
 
oblique 
OBJ 
 
object 
P 
 
plural 
PFV 
 
perfective 
Q 
 
question 
REFL  
reflexive 
S 
 
singular 
TOT 
 
totalitive 
 
 
 

80 
 
B. Terminological Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Translation 
# 
 
infelicitous 
% 
 
dialectical or situationally acceptable 
* 
 
ungrammatical 
? 
 
questionable grammaticality or felicity 
AEP 
 
athematic external possession 
AEPC  
athematic external possession construction 
EP 
 
external possession 
EPC 
 
external possession construction 
FLB 
 
the faculty of language in the broad sense 
FLN 
 
the faculty of language in the narrow sense 
IP 
 
internal possession 
IPC 
 
internal possession construction 
LF 
 
language faculty 
TEP 
 
thematic external possession 
TEPC  
thematic external possession construction 
UG 
 
universal grammar 
 
 
 

81 
 
C. A Typology of External Possession 
 
Below is a brief chart cataloguing some of the different external possession constructions 
in various languages. The columns list language names, their genetic family, whether they bear 
thematic (T) or athematic (A) external possession and what form of EP they have (sources being 
in the final column). The abbreviations for the form of EP are as follows: 
 
 
 
CA 
case alternation of possessor (and sometimes possessum) 
 
 
 
MV 
movement of possessor 
NI 
noun incorporation of possessum 
PD 
possessor datives 
VI 
verb inflection agreeing with possessor 
Language 
Family 
T/AEPC 
Form of EP 
Sources 
Spanish 
Romance 
T 
PD 
Tuggy 1980, Kemchinsky 1991, 
Roldán 1972 
French 
Romance 
T 
PD 
Kayne 1975 
Italian 
Romance 
T 
PD 
Cinque and Krapova 2009 
Bulgarian 
Slavic 
both 
PD 
Cinque and Krapova 2009 
Korean 
N/A 
both 
CA 
O'Grady 1991, Tomioka and Sim 
2007 
German 
Germanic 
T 
PD 
Lee-Schoenfeld 2006, Hole 2006 
Northern 
Pomo 
Pomoan 
T 
CA 
O'Conner 1996, 2007 
Guaraní 
Tupian 
T 
NI 
Velasquez-Castillo 1996 
Nez Perce 
Sahaptian 
A 
CA 
Deal 2013, to appear 
Hebrew 
Semitic 
T 
PD 
Borer and Grodzinsky 1986, Landau 
1991, Siloni 2002 
Tz’utujil 
Mayan 
A 
MV 
Aissen 1992 
Mayali 
Arnhem 
T 
NI 
Evans 1996 
Japanese 
N/A 
A 
CA 
Uehara 1999 
Creek 
Muskogean 
T 
VI 
Martin 1999 
Maasai 
Nilotic 
A 
VI 
Payne 1997 

82 
 
Tzotzil 
Mayan 
A 
VI 
Aissen 1987 
Tukang Besi 
Austronesian 
T 
VI 
Donohue 1999 
Choctaw 
Muskogean 
A 
VI 
Davies 1986 
Kanun 
N/A 
T 
VI 
Donohue 1997 
 

