
Snakes, Sunrises, and Shakespeare


How Evolution Shapes Our Loves and Fears
Gordon H. Orians
The University of Chicago Press | Chicago and London

Gordon H. Orians is professor emeritus of biology at 
the University of Washington.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2014 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published 2014.
Printed in the United States of America
23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 
 
1 2 3 4 5
isbn- 13: 978- 0- 226- 00323- 8 (cloth)
isbn- 13: 978- 0- 226- 00337- 5 (e- book)
doi: 10.7208 /  chicago /  9780226003375.001.0001
Library of Congress  Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Orians, Gordon H., author.
 Snakes, sunrises, and Shakespeare : how evolution 
shapes our loves and fears / Gordon H. Orians.
 
 
pages cm
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 isbn 978- 0- 226- 00323- 8 (cloth : alkaline paper) — 
isbn 978- 0- 226- 00337- 5 (e- book) 
1. Emotions. 2. Evolution (Biology)—Psychological 
aspects. I. Title.
 bf531.o73 2014
 152.4—dc23
2013019829
o This paper meets the requirements of ansi /  niso 
z39.48- 1992 (Permanence of Paper).

1 
Whistling for Honey • 1
2 Ghosts of the African Savanna • 9
3 The High Cost of Learning • 23
4 Reading the Landscape • 33
5 The Snake in the Grass 
( . . . and Other Hazards) • 42
6 Settling Down and Settling In • 60
7 A Ransom in Pepper • 97
8 The Musical Ape • 118
9 The First Sniff • 139
10 Ordering Nature • 150
11 The Honeyguide and the Snake: 
Embracing Our Ecological Minds • 162
Acknowledgments . 183
Notes . 185
Illustration Credits . 207
Index . 209
Contents


1
How old is the human sweet tooth, and 
why do we crave sweet things?
As it happens, these two questions 
will take us far from our distant ancestors and their hunger for wild 
honey. They will lead us to still other questions, questions that have to 
do with the emotions the natural world arouses in us—yearning and 
revulsion, joy and fear—and how those emotions have shaped every as-
pect of our lives.
But our story starts here, following a prehistoric hunter somewhere 
in Africa, whistling for honey.
Until humans ﬁ gured out how to reﬁ ne sugar from plants such as 
sugarcane and sugar beets, we had to steal from creatures skilled at con-
centrating the nectar of ﬂ owers into a rich source of food: honeybees. 
Our ancestors learned how to rob the nests of wild bees at least twenty 
thousand years ago—rock art of that age survives in Zimbabwe (ﬁ g-
ure 1.1) The image left behind on the rock face clearly shows a person 
smoking a hive to get honey.
Our African ancestors must have found honey a sweet temptation: 
it was nutritious, delicious, and easy to digest. But bee colonies are 
uncommon on the African savanna. In order to ﬁ nd and exploit them, 
prehistoric humans relied on an unusual partner that also beneﬁ ted by 
leading them to the hives. That partnership has persisted into modern 
times; we can still witness it today in several African tribes, among them 
the Boran of northeast Kenya.
Just before setting off in search of honey, Boran honey hunters give a 
speciﬁ c, loud whistle, known as the fuulido (ﬁ gure 1.2). If they’re in luck, 
there will be a return call from a bird with a fuulido of its own. The caller 
is a greater honeyguide, a small bird; its Latin name, Indicator indica-
tor, reﬂ ects its value to humans. The honeyguide repeats its distinctive 
Whistling 
for Honey

2
chapter one
“follow me” call, and begins to escort the Boran hunters to a bee’s nest, 
pausing frequently to allow the hunters to catch up. Most astonishing, 
upon arriving at the tree where the bees have nested, the honeyguide 
perches and sings a special “indication” song. The bird escort remains 
nearby as the hunters disperse the bees and claim the prize of the honey-
comb. In gratitude, they always reward their navigator by leaving be-
hind some honeycomb. Unlike most birds, honeyguides can digest wax; 
they feast on it along with the honey and bee larvae lodged in the comb,1 
but honeyguides are too small and weak to open bees nests. They depend 
on humans to do it for them, just as people depend on honeyguides to 
help them ﬁ nd the nests.
This unusual mutually beneﬁ cial partnership features in the myths of 
many African  savanna- dwelling tribes. Our ancestors probably gorged 
on honey whenever they could ﬁ nd it. Honey was a nutritional and en-
ergy bonanza, a precious fuel for our large hominid brains. But the rarity 
of hives in the savannas made it impossible to gather enough to grow fat 
on this rich resource.
By contrast, walk the aisles of a modern supermarket and count the 
staggering variety of sweet and sugary foods. We modern humans are 
blessed and cursed by uninterrupted access to sweets, and we have be-
come slaves to our sweet tooth. Hardwired with our ancestors’ crav-
ings for  sugar- rich foods, we’re unable to resist. We are also adapted to 
Figure 1.1. Rock painting showing a honey hunter using 
smoke on a wild hive, Toghwana Dam, Zimbabwe.

3
Figure 1.2a. A Hadza hunter named Darabe whistling for a honeyguide.
Figure 1.2b. Hadza boy eating a nutritionally rich honeycomb.

4
chapter one
an  environment where food was sometimes abundant and sometimes 
scarce. When it is abundant, we lay on fat for the future hard times. To-
day, hard times rarely come. As a result, obesity is now a serious health 
problem throughout the developed world and an increasing problem in 
developing nations.
It turns out that a fondness for sugar is just one trait our ancestors be-
queathed to us. Our ancestors’ responses to environmental challenges—
unpredictable sources of food, ever- present predators, extremes of 
weather—have molded our modern emotional lives. They are a central 
theme of this book. Evolutionary psychologists tell us that whenever 
we’re incited to act by strong emotions, positive or negative, chances are 
good those actions were of great evolutionary importance. Responding 
appropriately to stimuli meant the difference between surviving or not, 
leaving offspring or not.
Our ancestors came to prefer or “like” beneﬁ cial objects and events 
in nature that increased their chance of surviving and passing on their 
genes to their children—in short, evolution by natural selection. Con-
versely, they came to avoid or “dislike” objects and events that were 
threatening and decreased their chances of surviving and reproducing. 
Over time, these likes and dislikes became wired in the human brain. As 
a result, we have a taste for honey and a nearly universal fear of carni-
vores with big teeth. Science allows us to trace these ancient emotions 
and ﬁ nd the adaptation in what we ﬁ nd beautiful and what ﬁ lls us with 
revulsion and fear. We can better understand how we interact emotion-
ally with our environment by viewing our behavior through an evolu-
tionary lens that focuses on our ancestors.
This book records the results of my efforts to ﬁ nd out how our emo-
tional lives bear the imprint of decisions our ancestors made long ago on 
the African savanna as they selected places to live, sought food and safety, 
and socialized in small  hunter- gatherer groups. I hope to convince you 
that the impressions are many and deep and the rewards for this new 
understanding as useful as the honeyguides are to the Boran people.
How I Came to These Questions
My search for an environmental basis to emotions and aesthetics began 
the year I was seven, when I discovered the world of birds. My family 

5
whistling for honey 
rented a cabin on a lake in northern Wisconsin, and I was captivated 
by the call of the common loon. I soon began to record observations of 
birds I saw; those notebooks still sit on the shelves of my university of-
ﬁ ce. When I was about thirteen, I joined birders in the Milwaukee, Wis-
consin chapter of the Audubon Society. A few of them were professional 
ornithologists. At some moment, I put two and two together—people 
were actually paid to study birds! I decided then that I would go to col-
lege, major in biology, and become a professional biologist. I did exactly 
that. I became a behavioral ecologist because I was interested in the de-
cisions birds like honeyguides must make to be successful—how they 
select habitats, search for food and decide what to eat, chose their mates, 
and invest in their offspring.2
In my young adulthood I never questioned my strong attraction to 
birds. I simply enjoyed them. But as I matured as an evolutionary bi-
ologist, I began to think deeply about human emotional responses to 
nature. My thoughts, as well as those of many other people, were stimu-
lated by Edward O. Wilson’s Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, published 
in 1975.3 Wilson helped me recognize that the decisions I was studying 
with birds govern our lives as well. My curiosity has led me in surprising 
directions and caused me to learn about topics that I knew little or noth-
ing about, but all examined through an evolutionary lens.
Like most other people, I have been deeply moved by the roar of ocean 
waves,  lightning- ﬁ lled skies, and claps of thunder. Views of sunsets and 
beautiful spreading trees have given me pleasure. The smell and sight 
of rotting ﬂ esh repulse me. Yet, why we respond emotionally the way 
we do to the cheerful songs of birds or the glow of sunshine—this was 
a foreign topic, one that my scientiﬁ c colleagues and I seldom pursued 
in depth.
Emotions through an Evolutionary Lens
Evolutionary biologists like me came to the party late. For centuries, art-
ists and philosophers had explained the human emotional response to 
beauty by pointing to human culture and works of art. We must look 
primarily at our responses to human creations, they argued, to under-
stand our feelings and the basic structure of our emotional lives. Dar-
ing to explain our emotional responses to nature in evolutionary terms 

6
chapter one
can provoke outrage among artists and nature lovers. In the nineteenth 
century, John Keats despaired that Isaac Newton had forever sullied the 
beauty and mystique of rainbows by explaining how they were formed. 
In his poem Lamina (1820) he complained that Newton had destroyed a 
rainbow by unweaving it. Keats was not alone, then or now (ﬁ gure 1.3). 
Even today, most people resist having their emotions explained because 
they believe that explaining them will destroy their inherent wonder. 
Such deﬁ ance is so pervasive that Richard Dawkins wrote Unweaving the 
Rainbow: Science, Delusion, and the Appetite for Wonder (its title taken from 
the line in Keats’s poem), which addressed this false perception.4
Scientists marvel at rainbows even though they know that physi-
cal processes generate them, just as most of us intensely enjoy physi-
cal intimacy even though we understand its biological function. Yet, 
many people are hostile to the idea that our emotions evolved because 
they positively inﬂ uenced the survival and reproductive success of our 
Figure 1.3. The origin of double rainbows from René Descartes, Les Météores, 1637.

7
whistling for honey 
 ancestors. They resist the idea that science might better explain our 
emotions than philosophy, art, or common sense.
But what are emotions? We all know, or think we know, much about 
emotions. We know that they powerfully affect our behavior and 
thoughts; that some of our emotions are pleasant, others are not. Yet, 
as Fehr and Russell describe, “everyone knows what an emotion is, until 
asked to give a deﬁ nition.”5 We struggle to deﬁ ne them. Fortunately, we 
can set aside the deﬁ nitional problem and study emotions directly. In 
this book I will draw upon self- reports (rating scales, questionnaires) 
and upon physiological measures of emotions. By examining this evi-
dence we will develop a deeper understanding of what emotions are than 
we could gain by trying to come up with a deﬁ nition.
To understand our emotional responses to the environment we shall 
explore in greater depth why we even have emotions at all. That explora-
tion, covered in the next two chapters, will set the stage for later discus-
sions of how humans perceive the environment with our senses and why 
our emotional responses to nature are so diverse. I hope to demonstrate 
that an evolutionary approach to human behavior gives us a creative way 
to think about our emotional lives and a way to answer many questions 
we have about them. The evolutionary approach to why we have the 
emotions and aesthetic responses we do differs strikingly from the pre-
vailing view held by Western academics. We will be concerned primarily 
with the so- called basic emotions—pleasure, anger, fear, pain, surprise, 
and disgust. We will pay little attention to the social emotions—love, 
guilt, shame, embarrassment, pride, envy, and jealousy.
In this book I share with you the results of my personal odyssey to un-
derstand our emotional responses to nature and how scientists explain 
them. Our emotional roots lie in the African savannas, back where we 
ﬁ rst followed honeyguides to a sweet feast of honey, while keeping an 
eye out for lions that might dine on us. We will examine how an under-
standing of our evolutionary history helps explain why we respond emo-
tionally, why the reasons for our responses are often hidden from us, 
and how our brains evolved to make decisions that improve our survival 
and reproductive success. Understanding these emotions is particularly 
important today when we live and respond emotionally to a complex 
environment that differs dramatically from the one our ancestors lived 

8
chapter one
in until very recently. I will also explore how the experience of our emo-
tional responses inﬂ uences both what we do to the environment as well 
as what the environment does to us.
The current traits of organisms are the result of their history because 
evolutionary processes cannot anticipate what the next week, century, 
or geological era will look like. For modern humans, this means that 
some of the emotional responses to environments that served our ances-
tors well may no longer be adaptive in today’s industrial societies. For 
example, we still dream about primeval spiders and snakes rather than 
about more pervasive modern threats like guns, nuclear weapons, and 
climate change. Evolutionary insights may help us identify and explain 
why some elements of our responses are no longer adaptive.
My explorations of  human- environment interactions have been both 
challenging and enjoyable. I hope to convey at least some of that plea-
sure and excitement to you and to demonstrate that we may be able to 
use our improved understanding of the roots of our emotional lives to 
make better decisions today. And understanding ourselves better is, it-
self, a rich source of pleasure.6

9
We respond with strong feelings to the 
world around us. We react to some ob-
jects, places, and events with pleasure, 
and call them beautiful; others arouse 
feelings of fear, disgust, or horror, and 
we call them ugly. But why do we have this aesthetic sense?
Intellectual thinkers have speculated about the origins and meanings 
of an aesthetic sense at least since the early sixth century BC in Greece, 
but Baumgarten’s Aesthetica, published in 1750, established the science 
of the sense experience.1 It was Baumgarten who gave us the word “taste” 
in the sense of the human ability to judge what is good. This view of an 
aesthetic sense opened the way to the scientiﬁ c study of emotions in the 
nineteenth century by such men as Charles Darwin, William James, and 
Wilhelm Wundt.2
As early as 1785 the Scottish philosopher Thomas Reid recognized 
that our emotions might have evolved because they were useful:3
By a careful examination of the objects which Nature hath given this ami-
able quality (of beauty), we may perhaps discover some real excellence in 
the object, or at least some valuable purpose that is served by the effects it 
produces upon us. This instinctive sense of beauty, in different species of 
animals, may differ as much as the external sense of taste, and in each spe-
cies be adapted to its manner of life.
In this remarkable passage, written seventy years before Charles Dar-
win published On the Origin of Species, Reid proposes that the aesthetic 
senses of animals are likely to be related to their relationships with their 
environment. He suggests that animal and human emotional responses 
evolved because of beneﬁ ts that accompanied them.
Ghosts of 
the African 
Savanna

10
chapter two
A generation later, Darwin would show how natural selection, acting 
over millions of years, could produce structures beautifully ﬁ tted for 
a speciﬁ c task: eyes for seeing, ears for hearing, wings for ﬂ ying. But 
could the human mind, with its powerful emotions, evolve in the same 
way? Darwin thought it had. Thirteen years after the publication of his 
1859 masterwork, he published The Expression of the Emotions in Man and 
Animals. It was lavishly illustrated, with engravings showing the human 
facial muscles, a dog with its hackles raised, a grimacing baboon, a sulky 
chimpanzee—as well as many images of people. Some of the images were 
photographs by a French physiologist,  Guillaume- Benjamin- Amand 
Duchenne, published with his 1862 book Mécanisme de la Physionomie 
Humaine, ou Analyse  Electro- physiologique de l’Expression des Passions.
Duchenne used a device he had originally developed to investigate the 
muscles that control the hand to ﬁ nd the muscles responsible for creat-
ing particular expressions. He applied an electrical current to the facial 
muscles of a number of different test subjects. He also took photographs 
of the same people with blank expressions, and others where they were at-
tempting to simulate expressions without the aid of the probes (ﬁ gure 2.1).
At this time, Darwin was forming his own ideas about the expres-
sion of emotions in humans. He was fascinated by Duchenne’s photos 
and wondered whether the expressions Duchenne had elicited from his 
patients were universal, whether certain muscle movements of the face 
always accompanied the same emotional state, in other words, whether 
there were universal expressions of human emotions. Did a certain gri-
mace always mean disgust? To ﬁ nd out, he conducted experiments on 
his own—on the guests at his own dinner parties.
It fortunately occurred to me to show several of the best plates, without a 
word of explanation, to above twenty educated persons of various ages and 
both sexes, asking them, in each case, by what emotion or feeling the old 
man was supposed to be agitated; and I recorded their answers in the words 
which they used. (Expression, 14)
The ﬁ rst visitors Darwin tested were his cousins, who came to dinner 
on March 22, 1868. A week later in London he hosted another party, and 
got the opinions of a number of his naturalist friends. He found that his 
guests accurately inferred the emotions of the people in the photos. Part 
of what we know about the parties has come down to us from witnesses. 

11
Figure 2.1. Some of  Guillaume- Benjamin- Amand Duchenne’s images of facial 
 expressions from Darwin’s Expression of the Emotions in Man and Other Animals, 1872.

12
chapter two
Darwin conducted one of his experiments during the visit of the Har-
vard botanist Asa Gray. His wife, Jane Gray, wrote a letter to her sister de-
scribing how funny the dinnertime experiment was and how the guests 
went off afterward and practiced making faces in front of mirrors.
Darwin was among a group of  nineteenth- century thinkers focusing 
on the age- old problem of emotions. Philosophers across the ancient 
world had struggled with the question of what emotions are. But with 
the dawn of modern psychology and the advent of the machine age, sci-
entists had an increasing array of techniques and technologies at their 
disposal. They asked study subjects to complete adjective checklists, rat-
ing scales, and questionnaires, or simply asked them to describe what 
they felt. They could record and quantify emotions using instruments 
to measure heart rate, respiration, skin conductance, muscle tension, 
and blood pressure.4
But alone among these investigators, Darwin was looking at human 
emotion through an evolutionary lens. Viewed from that perspective, 
emotions were not the gift of a divine creator but a legacy of our animal 
origins. Even as natural selection had shaped our ancestors’ brains and 
bodies, so had evolution shaped their emotions. If we wanted to see how 
emotions might have evolved, Darwin argued, we could form hypoth-
eses by looking at ourselves and at other animals: our pet cats and dogs, 
or the chimpanzee in the local zoo.
No doubt as long as man and all other animals are viewed as independent 
creations, an effectual stop is put to our natural desire to investigate as far 
as possible the causes of Expression. . . . With mankind some expressions, 
such as the bristling of the hair under the inﬂ uence of extreme terror, 
or the uncovering of the teeth under that of furious rage, can hardly be 
understood, except on the belief that man once existed in a much lower 
and  animal- like condition. . . . He who admits on general grounds that the 
structure and habits of all animals have been gradually evolved, will look at 
the whole subject of Expression in a new and interesting light. (12)
As he states in this quote, Darwin concluded that our emotions and 
how we express them have deep evolutionary roots. Indeed, he judged 
this to be so obvious that in the ﬁ nal paragraph of his book he states, 
“but as far as my judgment serves, such confirmation was hardly 
needed.” Today, no serious scientist contests that conclusion.

13
ghosts of the african savanna
Emotions’ Evolutionary Roots
Darwin’s perspective suggests that we should look for ways that par-
ticular emotions and the actions based on them could have helped our 
ancestors survive and reproduce.5 For example, it is obvious that those 
ancestors who enjoyed sexual intimacy would have passed more copies 
of the genes inﬂ uencing those preferences to subsequent generations 
than those who did not enjoy, and, hence were less stimulated to seek 
out, sexual partners. By the same logic, individuals who were attracted 
to and hence settled in safe environments rich in resources (caves, wa-
ter, game) should have left more offspring than individuals who were 
attracted to and settled in inferior habitats. Those offspring would have 
inherited copies of the genes inﬂ uencing those preferences.
For these reasons, an evolutionary perspective on aesthetics suggests 
that beauty and ugliness are not intrinsic properties of objects. Rather 
beauty and ugliness arose from interactions between traits of objects 
and the human nervous system. In this view, beautiful objects were ones 
that, if we responded to them positively, improved our lives— increasing 
our likelihood of surviving, winning a mate, and leaving offspring.6 
Ugly objects were ones that interfered with or impeded some aspect of 
living. In other words, we should view our responses to beauty and ugli-
ness by asking, what do they accomplish? We will make more progress 
in understanding our emotions and our aesthetic responses if we ask, 
“how might these responses have helped our ancestors solve problems?
From the Prairie to the Playground
A May morning in 2010 found me standing alone on windswept prai-
rie in eastern Montana, observing a herd of pronghorn antelope. I ap-
proached as quietly as I could, but not quietly enough. Suddenly one 
animal sensed my presence, and in an instant they had all bounded away. 
In a few seconds the herd had covered a vast distance and were almost 
lost to sight. The pronghorn, Antilocapra americana, is North America’s 
fastest land mammal, able to sustain speeds of  ﬁ fty- nine to  sixty- ﬁ ve 
miles per hour for many minutes. They are so fast, in fact, that no preda-
tor around—not bears, coyotes, or wolves—can catch them (ﬁ gure 2.2). 
Watching them, a curious evolutionary biologist might ask, if they can 

14
chapter two
outpace every predator, why do pronghorn continue to race across the 
prairie, expending huge amounts of energy? Or, as an inquisitive child 
might put it, if nothing can catch them, why do pronghorn run so fast?
The answer is the key to understanding an important theme of this 
book: we can understand the behavior of contemporary animals only 
by recreating in our minds their past environments and the forces that 
shaped their responses. The remarkable speed of the American prong-
horn is probably a legacy of selection by American cheetahs (Miraci-
nonyx spp.) (ﬁ gure 2.3) that became extinct during the last ice age.7 The 
swift cheetahs the pronghorn coevolved with are long gone, but the 
pronghorns are still speedy. If I were to try to explain their incredible 
speed and endurance without understanding the past environment, my 
explanation would doubtless be wrong.
We can apply this same logic to human responses to the environment. 
Until as recently as one hundred thousand years ago, humans lived in 
small groups on the African savanna. They continued to live in small 
groups and sought similar environments as they dispersed out of Af-
rica. Human nature has been molded by the responses of our ancestors 
Figure 2.2. Pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) running 
in a grassland, Yellowstone National Park, Montana.

15
ghosts of the african savanna
to events in that long- ago environment. It follows that we will better 
understand who we are, our emotional response to our current environ-
ment, indeed our most basic emotions, if we ﬁ rst grasp what our ances-
tors did, why they did it, and the consequences of their actions.
For example, consider children playing on a playground at recess. 
Watch and notice where the children head—which kids start a game 
of dodge ball or tag, which head to the swings, and which immediately 
start to climb. Which kids are the ﬁ rst onto the climbing structure? 
Would you be surprised to know it is the girls?
We now call them play structures or climbing frames, but in an earlier 
generation playground climbing equipment was known as the  jungle 
gym or the monkey bars, usually made of metal piping from which chil-
dren could dangle by their knees or swing, hand over hand, ape or mon-
key fashion. That name, the monkey bars, gives us a clue to the puzzle 
of why girls climb more than boys. It turns out to be an  environmental 
Figure 2.3. The extinct North American cheetah (Miracinonyx) is 
shown hunting a pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) in 
the Great Basin region during the late Pleistocene.

16
chapter two
ghost from our past, a legacy of our primate ancestors. We are apes, not 
monkeys, so the bars should have been called “ape bars,” but you get 
the point.
We came down from the trees, adopted a bipedal lifestyle, and took 
advantage of all it offered. But hominid females never lost the ability 
to climb trees. They were lighter and more agile than the males, but 
also smaller and more vulnerable, more at risk from savanna predators. 
Trees offered the only refuge from large carnivores. Females would have 
climbed not just to escape predators, but also to collect fruit and nuts 
and take advantage of the shade from the hot equatorial sun. Thus tree 
climbing was adaptive for females, less so for males. Males eventually 
became less adept at climbing, this argument goes, but climbing by 
smaller and more vulnerable females was favored much longer.
What evidence do we have that this story is true? First, girls do climb 
more than boys. Girls climbed more frequently than boys, regularly 
much more often, on elementary school playgrounds, and they fell less 
often. It appears that they are better adapted for climbing, compared 
to boys. Women have a wider range of foot motion than men, allowing 
them to grip tree branches with all four limbs. Male foot morphology 
indicates that hominid males climbed less often.8
There is another line of evidence. Most savanna primates sleep in 
trees; so did our ancestors. If females were more likely to sleep in trees 
than males, they should be particularly alert to attacks by predators 
from below. Males, on the other hand, sleeping on the ground, should 
be more attentive to side attacks. Three-  to four- year- old boys and girls 
are equally fearful at night, but boys are more afraid of danger to one 
side—the monster in the closet—while girls are more fearful of some-
thing dangerous below—the monster under the bed.9
When we observe girls at recess swinging from the monkey bars 
with ease, are we witnessing a ghost from our environmental past? I 
believe so, but I have come to this view of human emotion gradually. I 
was raised the American Midwest, in a Protestant family. I was taught 
to seek meaning by appeals to spiritual rather than evolutionary forces. 
Only when I matured as a biologist did my thinking shift to an evolu-
tionary perspective. I discovered why ghosts of environments past, like 
the speed of pronghorns on the prairie, might reside in my own psyche 

17
ghosts of the african savanna
and shape my construct of reality. Novel as it may seem, delving into 
past human life on African savannas is fundamental to an inquiry into 
our current emotions and the way we live our  twenty- ﬁ rst- century lives. 
So let’s journey back and take a closer look at the lives of our hominid 
ancestors about ﬁ fty thousand years ago.
Surviving on the Savanna
The social environment we live in today has existed for a remarkably 
brief period of time. Until  thirty- ﬁ ve thousand years ago, we lived in 
small,  hunter- gatherer groups. The next milestone in our evolution, 
the domestication of cereal crops and livestock, occurred only about ten 
thousand years ago. The Industrial Revolution started within the last 
two centuries. We have been truly modern for fewer than ten genera-
tions. So the behavioral responses that enabled our  hunter- gatherer an-
cestor to survive on the plains of Africa served us well until very recently.
To survive on the African savannas, let alone breed and stay healthy, 
our ancestors needed many skills. During their daily forays in search of 
food, they needed to navigate through the landscape, recognize objects, 
understand and make tools like nets and spears, judge distance, avoid 
mammalian predators and venomous snakes, identify edible plants, and 
capture animals. When eating, they needed to avoid  disease- causing or-
ganisms and consume a balanced diet. With experience, they needed 
to decide which foraging efforts repaid their energy expenditure and 
which did not. They needed to select mates of high reproductive value 
and successfully court them, while avoiding incest. Successful males 
had to prevent their mates from conceiving by a rival male. Parents 
needed to attend to alarm cries, detect when their children needed help, 
and be motivated to offer that help. Living in groups meant they had to 
interpret social situations correctly, recognize faces and emotions, help 
relatives, deter aggression, maintain friendships, cooperate, and make 
effective  trade- offs among many of these activities.10
Some of these behaviors, such as detecting when our children need 
help and interpreting social situations correctly, are still vital. Others, 
such as identifying wild food plants and avoiding venomous snakes and 
dangerous mammals, no longer hold much value in contemporary ur-

18
chapter two
ban society. Still other behaviors, such as the ability to maintain a good 
nutritional balance, are declining in our modern society even though 
we still need them.
We can divide these many skills of  hunter- gatherer life into ﬁ ve cat-
egories: (1) shelter, ﬁ nding a place to live; (2) safety, avoiding injury or 
death by protecting themselves from bad weather, dangerous animals, 
or people; (3) nourishment, acquiring sufﬁ cient quantity and quality of 
food; (4) friends, choosing good associates; and (5) achieving content-
ment, a goal that clearly helped support the other four categories.11
Hunter- Gatherer Society
By 1.6 million years ago, our ancestors could walk upright rapidly and 
efﬁ ciently. This posture reduced heat stress and water loss, so our ances-
tors could travel long distances during the day when dangerous carni-
vores were resting. They could seek and ﬁ nd food in places too danger-
ous to visit at dawn, at dusk, or at night. So the  hunter- gatherer lifestyle 
was born. These small bands of close relatives were seminomadic, mov-
ing seasonally to follow their food sources. Few places on Earth provided 
enough resources to enable people to settle in one place year- round. 
Members of the band helped one another survive danger, sharing food, 
 child- rearing duties, knowledge, and skills. Men hunted and fought 
males of other groups, while women gathered edible plants, trapped, 
ﬁ shed, and harvested eggs (ﬁ gure 2.4).
Walking upright also freed our ancestors’ hands for throwing things 
(such as nets and spears) and processing food (butchering animals, 
cleaning ﬁ sh, cracking nuts). With their improved hunting skills, these 
early ancestors added animal protein and fat to a  plant- dominated diet.12
As I stated in chapter 1, the currency of evolution is reproductive 
 success—the genetic contributions of individuals to later generations. 
To contribute genes to its descendants, an organism must survive to re-
produce; some of its offspring must do the same. Our helpless infants 
and slowly maturing children require intimate care and prolonged at-
tention from parents, especially the mother. Until very recently human 
infants depended on their mothers’ milk about three years on average.13 
Infants remained in almost constant physical contact with adults during 

19
ghosts of the african savanna
the ﬁ rst several years of their lives. Their mothers or other adults carried 
them while they searched for food.
Hunter- gatherer groups were small and women bore a child only 
once every four years or more. Therefore, a group would have had only 
a few children. They would have socialized primarily with children of 
other ages: they would have learned much through contact with older 
children. As they grew they would have helped ﬁ nd food and care for 
infants. The same- aged peer groups in which the youths of today social-
ize have existed only a short time.14
The  hunter- gather diet was probably reasonably well balanced but 
food was often scarce, delaying the onset of puberty. Once women be-
gan to ovulate, they were likely either pregnant or lactating most of the 
time. Males may have associated with particular females long enough to 
attempt to monopolize their reproductive careers, sometimes for many 
years. Males interacted with infants and children much less than women 
did, but men provided food and protection. Some of our ancestors ap-
pear to have practiced infanticide, perhaps to allocate scarce resources 
or eliminate deformed or sickly infants.15 Intertribal conﬂ ict appears to 
have been common, ﬂ aring up into warfare.
Figure 2.4. BaAka women eating foraged fruit on a hunting trip, Central African Republic.

20
chapter two
Soon after our ancestors began to walk upright their brains enlarged 
rapidly. A larger brain can assimilate, interpret, and respond to more 
information. Primates that live in large social groups have larger brains 
relative to their body size than ones that live in smaller social groups. 
Living in a complex social group appears to favor larger brains.
But a larger brain comes at a cost. For example, selection for giving 
birth to a  large- brained infant conﬂ icted with selection for a narrow 
pelvis to support bipedal locomotion. The shape of the female pelvis 
changed to yield a larger opening; the shape of heads of babies evolved to 
make it easier for them to pass through the birth canal; but the changes 
were insufﬁ cient for human babies to be born as developmentally ma-
ture as infant gorillas and chimpanzees. As a result of this  trade- off in 
the design of the female pelvis, we are born with very immature brains. 
The type of brain growth that is completed during pregnancy in goril-
las and chimpanzees continues for a year after birth in human infants. 
Human children have an unusually long period of dependency during 
which they learn about their social and natural environments while still 
sheltered and cared for by adults. To determine what legacies from our 
ancestors reside in our psyches, it would help to know what they paid 
special attention and responded to.
Ghosts of Environments Past
The biological world is replete with “ghosts.” There are ghosts of habi-
tats past, ghosts of predators past, ghosts of parasites past, ghosts of 
competitors past, ghosts of fellow humans past, and ghosts of meteors, 
volcanic eruptions, hurricanes, and droughts past. How can we identify 
ghosts and determine why they survive in our minds? We can narrow 
our search for environmental ghosts by recognizing that environments 
bombard us with much more information than an individual can as-
similate and use. Information overload is not new. It has plagued our 
ancestors for millions of years. Fortunately, we can ignore much incom-
ing information because it has little value. The evolutionary responses 
to information overload are neural programs that emphasize or de- 
emphasize some of the arriving information. These neural programs 
function much like ﬁ lters, screening out irrelevant information and let-
ting through only the important data. By having such ﬁ lters we exhibit 

21
ghosts of the african savanna
what is called biologically prepared learning.16 That is, our minds ﬁ lter out 
extraneous information, paying attention to and storing information 
that inﬂ uences decisions affecting survival and reproduction.
Behaviors may persist because not enough time has elapsed for ge-
netic mutations and genetic drift to erode them or because the genes 
may also code for a trait that is adaptive and actively selected for. Re-
cent investigations show that behavioral patterns can persist long after 
natural selection no longer favors them. Arctic species of moths that 
have long lived in bat- free environments still have anti- bat defensive be-
haviors.17 Anti- snake behavior has persisted in North American ground 
squirrels for at least several hundred thousand years in areas lacking 
snakes. Only Arctic ground squirrels that have lived for three to ﬁ ve mil-
lion years in  snake- free environments fail to respond to them. A ground 
squirrel generation is one year; three hundred thousand years scaled up 
from ground squirrel generations to human generations would be ﬁ ve 
million years.
No terrestrial snake in Madagascar can inﬂ ict a life- threatening bite. 
Snakes have not seriously injured anyone on the island during the two 
thousand years that humans have lived there. Yet most Malagasy display 
the nearly universal fear of snakes. A highly feared snake that represents 
the serpent in the Garden of Eden features in early Malagasy translations 
of the Bible.18 (We’ll learn more about the long human relationship with 
snakes in chapter 5.)
The typical objects of fears and phobias pose little danger in mod-
ern societies, yet our fear and avoidance of the feared object persists.19 
On the other hand, we have developed only weak fears to dangerous 
objects that only recently have become environmental threats. Behav-
iors clearly have persisted in animals for thousands of generations af-
ter they had little or no effect on ﬁ tness. Nonetheless, some scientists 
doubt that Pleistocene ghosts reside in the human mind. Jared Diamond 
has argued, “Humans spread out of Africa’s savannas at least 1 mil-
lion years ago. We have had plenty of time since then—thousands of 
 generations—to replace any original innate responses to savanna with 
innate responses to the new habitats encountered.”20 However, we can-
not use general plausibility arguments to tell if environmental ghosts 
exist. To demonstrate or reject Pleistocene ghosts we must test speciﬁ c 
hypotheses experimentally.

22
chapter two
Since leaving Africa and adapting to hot and cold climates and new 
diets, we have evolved different body sizes and shapes, skin pigmenta-
tion, and immune responses. We evolved the ability to digest some of 
the plants found in new geographical regions, allowing us to adapt to 
and exploit new sources of food.21 Nevertheless, ghosts can persist for 
many generations if they aren’t selected against or have no inﬂ uence on 
ﬁ tness. In subsequent chapters we will explore the possible existence 
of ghosts by assessing whether the environmental clues to which our 
ancestors responded are similar enough today that formerly adaptive 
responses still serve us today. We will ﬁ nd out that some of them are 
but that some are not. Speciﬁ c hypotheses will help explain why they 
persist.

23
Why should we have ghosts of the sa-
vanna in our heads? In part it’s because 
learning is expensive, and not just in 
the sense of college tuition. From birth, 
humans spend massive amounts of time 
gaining, interpreting, and using new information. As a species, we are 
vain about our vaunted capacity to learn, but learning is very costly. Our 
central nervous system is only 2 percent of our adult body weight, but it 
accounts for some 20 percent of our metabolic requirements. It is bio-
logically “expensive” to build and maintain a system that can acquire 
knowledge through the senses and store them in memory, retrieving 
knowledge as needed to make informed decisions. For many years we 
spend most of our waking hours learning things. Many of us spend de-
cades of our lives in school. If we could dispense with learning, we could 
use that time to do something else. This is why evolutionary biologist 
George C. Williams asserted that all elements of behavior that can be 
instinctive—stored genetically—are likely to evolve to be instinctive.1
Learning isn’t just costly and time- consuming; it can be risky. The 
price of not learning life’s lessons is often high. We may fail to learn 
something important or learn the wrong thing. We have all heard dark 
jokes about people “taking themselves out of the gene pool.” But what 
if knowledge were available to us from birth, like preinstalled software? 
It turns out that some knowledge is. We introduced that knowledge in 
chapter 2 where we called it ghosts of past environments. Ghosts of past 
environments are important from the moment we are born. Before we 
can stand, walk, or talk, our infant brains possess a kind of genetic mem-
ory, innate knowledge. Innate knowledge is that body of things we know 
about our world without having direct experience of them.
The High 
Cost of 
Learning

24
chapter three
For example, we seem intuitively to understand concepts of space, 
time, and causality that we could not deduce from personal experiences. 
Prussian philosopher Immanuel Kant, in his monumental Foundation of 
the Metaphysics of Morals, concluded that we could not comprehend the 
environment unless we entered the world already understanding these 
relationships.
Recent research shows that Kant was correct. For example, the brains 
of rat pups moving through a maze for the ﬁ rst time light up in areas 
where the brains of experienced older rats keep information about direc-
tion.2 That is, the brains of naive rat pups are primed to attend to and 
understand spatial relationships the ﬁ rst time they view them. Human 
infants also have an innate sense of spatial relations.3 We also display 
innate knowledge by the disgust we experience when we look at pus and 
rotted, odorous ﬂ esh. We did not know that the microorganisms that 
cause these symptoms existed until very recently, but we innately re-
spond as if we do know what causes pus and rot.
Our minds and those of other animals possess innate knowledge be-
cause having that kind of knowledge enabled our ancestors to respond 
appropriately to new situations. Evolutionary biology allows us to see 
innate knowledge as a legacy from our deep evolutionary past, but 
where does that knowledge come from?
The Origins of Innate Knowledge
An animal having a nervous system with internal models that embody 
“expectations” about the world can judge the signiﬁ cance of new infor-
mation and use it to respond appropriately. That is, it can behave as if 
it anticipates the results of its responses the ﬁ rst time it makes them. 
Natural selection has been the “judge” of how good those responses have 
been. None of this requires (nor does it preclude) that an individual be 
cognitively aware of the consequences of its decisions. William T. Pow-
ers explored this perspective on knowledge in his classic book Behavior: 
The Control of Perception.4 Identifying and explaining what kinds of in-
nate knowledge we have will be a major focus of this book.
Recognizing that biological evolution is the source of innate knowl-
edge gives us three important insights. First, we can understand why our 

25
the high cost of learning
knowledge ﬁ ts our environment, why we seem to be able to understand 
the world. Second, an evolutionary perspective provides an answer to the 
puzzle of how we know so much despite having such limited personal 
experiences. Third, evolution explains why our knowledge reﬂ ects the 
environments in which our ancestors evolved. Our minds are adapted to 
the external world before we emerge from the womb, even as the hoof of 
a horse is adapted to the prairie ground before the horse is born and the 
ﬁ n of a ﬁ sh is adapted for swimming before the ﬁ sh hatches.
Behaviors as Adaptations
Like hooves and ﬁ ns, behaviors may be adaptations that are based on 
innate information. When members of a species confront an environ-
mental problem or opportunity for sufﬁ cient generations, the response 
that evolves can result in genetic changes. In this book I sometimes use a 
verbal shortcut by saying that natural selection has favored a “behavior,” 
but natural selection cannot do that. It can select only for mechanisms 
that produce behavior. Behavior does not differ in this regard from other 
features of organisms, such as hearts, wings, hooves, ﬁ ns, and digestive 
systems. For all these traits, natural selection can favor only molecular 
mechanisms that produce some outcome, whether that is a behavior or 
a wing, but the accurate statement is awkward and long. The shortcut is 
handy, as long as we remember what it really means.
Behavioral adaptations often are speciﬁ c; selecting a habitat, ﬁ nding 
food, and courting, to mention only a few, present unique challenges. 
A single  general- purpose behavior is unlikely to be an efﬁ cient means 
to solve every challenge.5 So a suite of behaviors evolves, rather than a 
single behavior to suit all circumstances.
We do not need to know how an adaptive behavior arose to study it. 
We simply need to identify why natural selection favored the mecha-
nisms that produce it. We need not demonstrate that it has a genetic 
basis. In fact, we know little about the genetic basis of most adaptations. 
Today we know which genes govern the development of the fetal heart, 
but from its structure and operation we knew that the human heart was 
adapted for pumping blood long before the rediscovery of Gregor Men-
del’s work on peas in 1900 ushered in the beginning of the Age of the 

26
chapter three
Gene. We do not doubt that a bird’s wings are adapted for ﬂ ying, even 
though we have much to learn about the genetic programs that build 
them (ﬁ gure 3.1).
Ethical considerations limit the experiments we can perform on 
people, but we can study human adaptations in many other ways. Fossils 
leave traces of behavior (ﬁ gure 3.2). We are the only living hominid spe-
cies, but we can gain insights by studying our nearest relatives, the great 
apes and other primates. Human cultures are real- world “experiments” 
in how to deal with the many different environments in which we live. 
Comparing the behaviors that differ among cultures (for ex ample, 
courtship rituals) with those that are relatively universal (disposal of the 
dead) can help us discover adaptations. Studies of  hunter- gatherer cul-
tures help us understand how and why our ancestors made the decisions 
that governed their lives. We can also use the changes in our behavior as 
we age, become increasingly mobile, and encounter the environment in 
new and different ways, to test hypotheses about adaptations.6
In the chapters that follow I focus on the adaptations that motivate 
and guide our responses to the physical, biological, and social environ-
ments in which we live and through which we move. As we will see, that 
set of adaptations is very large.
Figure 3.1. A murmuration of starlings signal winter is on its 
way as they arrive at Gretna in Scottish borders.

27
the high cost of learning
Seeing through Hominid Eyes
Every time we look at an object or scene, we see at it through the eyes of 
our hominid ancestors, unconsciously assessing what we could do with 
it or in it. We may also evaluate the consequences of those actions. We 
ask of an object not only, what is it? but also, what’s in it for me? How easy 
would it be to enter that environment, explore it, and ﬁ nd my way back? 
What would I gain? Is that tree a source of fruit, a refuge from predators, 
or a lookout post? A river might be a source of water, a channel to move 
along, or an obstacle to be crossed.7 Flocks of birds or herds of mammals 
might signal an environment rich in game. Without our being aware 
of it, our nervous system is busy ﬁ ltering incoming data, suppressing 
or enhancing information, checking the accuracy of perceptions, and 
evaluating information. Because our modern lifestyle has arisen in a 
mere blink of evolutionary time, we all do this with brains adapted for 
life on the African plains.
Figure 3.2. Pleistocene human prints, western New South Wales, Australia. 
Mary Pappin ( foreground) found the human prints while working with Bond 
University professor Steve Webb. They are cleaning up the site with children 
from the three traditional tribal groups of Willandra Lakes. The site promises 
to be the world’s largest collection of Pleistocene human footprints.

28
chapter three
The beneﬁ ts things offer are captured by the concept of affordance, 
introduced in 1979 by the psychologist J. J. Gibson.8 Affordance is what 
an object or environment offers to an individual at a particular time. 
We cannot simply tally the attributes of an environment and quantify 
its affordance because affordance varies with season, weather, and an 
individual’s current needs.9
The evolutionary outcome of making and acting upon those evalua-
tions is that we intuitively recognize and seek out high- quality environ-
ments. That is, we have evolved to seek out environments and objects 
that beneﬁ t us and ignore or avoid ones that don’t. The evolutionary 
good news is that many of the things we enjoy doing are likely to be 
good to do.
Much of the environmental data upon which our hominid ancestors 
depended concerned the location of objects in space. Survival depended 
on knowing those locations: Where were prey animals yesterday? Where 
did I cache the food I could not carry back to camp? Where are the trees 
with ripe fruit? Where are safe hiding places that I may need to use in 
an emergency? Locating resources is important, but for a highly social 
species, so is understanding and assessing the social environment. We 
assess both kinds of environments using both innate and new informa-
tion. Let’s explore how that works.
Adaptive Responses to Nature
Genes store knowledge about ancestral worlds; they prepare individu-
als for circumstances they have never faced before. Genes also inﬂ uence 
what things we most easily learn about and remember.10 Many parts of 
our natural environment remain much as they were throughout human 
evolution. If we were magically transported to an African savanna at the 
time when the brains of our ancestors underwent rapid enlargement, 
we would recognize topographic features: cliffs, waterfalls, rivers, and 
lakes. The landscape we would need to traverse to seek food and ﬁ nd 
shelter would be familiar. We would recognize most species of plants 
and animals. The sounds of nature and their sources would be familiar. 
Scientists now think that many universal human traits, such as classiﬁ -
cation of basic colors, probably evolved in response to those stable parts 
of the environment.11

29
the high cost of learning
Other environmental features, however, have appeared so recently 
that we lack evolved responses to them. Some of them, such as domes-
ticated plants and animals, exotic species, dams, and buildings are rela-
tively minor modiﬁ cations of long- standing environmental features. 
Others, such as highways, toxic chemicals, and machinery, are novel. 
They have been present for such a short time that we have not evolved 
adaptive responses to them. As we will discuss, our innate knowledge 
does not help us deal with them.
The same unconscious assessment happens with the people we en-
counter. Our social brains are wired to calculate the positive and nega-
tive affordances of people we meet. Later we will discuss why we are es-
pecially good at sizing up strangers and reading body and face language 
(ﬁ gure 3.3).
Figure 3.3. By observing infants’ brain activity in response to their mother’s face 
versus that of a stranger, scientists have learned that, by at least the age of six 
months, infants are able to distinguish between familiar and unfamiliar faces.

30
chapter three
Whatever their nature—the environment, the plants and animals it 
in, or the people with whom we share the space—conditions persist for 
only a particular length of time. Just how long inﬂ uences when and how 
we need to respond to them.
Timing Matters
Most objects moving across the ancient landscape were potential prey, 
predators, or other people. Tracking them was important and deci-
sions often had to be made quickly. In addition to responding quickly 
to events, our ancestors had to pay attention to environmental cues 
that change slowly over time. Seasonal changes were among the most 
important ones. The types of resources and where they could be found 
changed as the year progressed. Our ancestors had to gather and act on 
this information, for instance, deciding to follow migrating herds, or 
journeying to a higher elevation to harvest a particular wild food.
Some features of the environment or events changed minute to min-
ute, or hour to hour. Others changed annually; still others on a scale too 
slow for us to register. Changes that occurred on the scale of minutes or 
hours included shifts in the weather, the sudden appearance of wild ani-
mals or potential enemies, and the approach of dusk. Responses to these 
near- term events included seeking shelter, taking defensive action, and 
ﬁ nding a secure sleeping place before nightfall. Seasonal changes in-
cluded shortened days; the appearance of buds, leaves, and ﬂ owers; rain-
fall. In response to these changes, our ancestors shifted their hunting 
sites. Changes on the scale of decades included alteration to the habitat 
as meadows were replaced by woodland or a river changed course. In 
response to these  longer- term changes, small bands may have set out 
in search of new territory to settle. Features that changed on the scale 
of centuries would have registered as constants. An ability to anticipate 
the future and plan for it is vital for dealing with changing conditions.
Filtering Environmental Information
Much of the environmental information our brains receive is of little or 
no consequence. We can’t pay attention to all of it, and we shouldn’t. So 

31
the high cost of learning
how do our brains sort through the ﬂ ood of data and winnow out only 
the information upon which survival depends?
Our nervous system does so in several ways. Sense organisms have 
evolved to respond only to parts of the incoming information. For ex-
ample, some animals (birds, insects) can see ultraviolet light; we cannot. 
Also sense organs are especially sensitive to sudden changes. Constant 
environmental conditions are generally of little immediate signiﬁ cance. 
Sudden changes, on the other hand, are usually worth paying atten-
tion to (think of a rabbit’s sudden swiveling of its ears in response to a 
sound). We respond weakly to background smells, but react strongly to 
sudden odors, like smoke from the toaster. In a more dramatic example 
of ﬁ ltering, the ears of a bat are completely turned off while the bat is 
echolocating; the ear is then ready to respond to soft echoes when they 
arrive a fraction of a second later. If the ear were operating during call-
ing, the call’s loud clicks would still be reverberating in it; the bat could 
not detect the soft echoes that tell it where prey or obstacles are. The 
bat’s survival depends on this ability to ﬁ lter out an extraneous signal—
its own echolocation call.
Estonian biologist Jakob von Uexküll was the ﬁ rst to recognize the 
importance of information ﬁ ltering.12 He thought that the subjective 
worlds of animals were made up of a small number of things important 
to it. He called these subjective worlds umwelt (German for “environ-
ment”). The umwelt of a tick, von Uexküll argued, consists of only three 
things: The odor of butyric acid, produced by the sweat glands of all 
mammals; the temperature of  thirty- seven degrees Celsius (the tempera-
ture of mammalian blood); and the hair of mammals. By responding to 
those few cues, a tick can ﬁ nd and attach to a mammal, the primary task 
it needs to accomplish.
Our umwelt is more complex than a tick’s, but we too often rely on 
simple cues. Those cues are largely visual. Primates, including humans, 
rely on vision to locate things, to identify objects from fragmentary 
information, and to detect when things move. As beﬁ ts a diurnal pri-
mate we have  forward- facing eyes and color vision, features that help us 
comprehend environments. To tell where objects are in space we need to 
perceive depth. Most of us use differences in the images falling on our 
two retinas to do so, but individuals with only one good eye still perceive 

32
chapter three
depth. They manage this by using other cues: the relative sizes of ob-
jects, which objects hide others, shadows, elevation, texture gradients, 
color, and linear perspective.
Our brains also extract patterns from complex backgrounds and rec-
ognize them as objects. We construct complete ﬁ gures from fragmen-
tary cues (a snake in the grass) by having strong line and edge detectors 
combined with a neural program that interprets even poorly deﬁ ned 
lines and incomplete objects as parts of real physical forms. Our color 
vision also helps us ﬁ nd objects. Studies of infants show how innate in-
formation helps our children cope with the complex world into which 
they are born. The visual systems of children mature slowly, but even as 
infants our brains actively ﬁ lter visual information. Later in the book, 
we will look in detail at how the relevance of environmental information 
changes with age and why infants’ innate knowledge is adaptive.13
As we have just discussed, animal minds possess innate knowledge 
about the environment because individuals that possess internal mod-
els of how the world works make better decisions than individuals that 
lack them. An evolutionary view explains the ﬁ t between innate human 
knowledge and our environment. It also explains why we have a central 
nervous system that stores past knowledge that served our ancestors.
So our ghosts of the savanna are evolved responses to an environmen-
tal problem or opportunity that persisted long enough for signiﬁ cant 
genetic changes to occur in our species. I call them ghosts because many 
of the processes we use to assess the affordance of an environment are 
unconscious; we generally remain unaware that our nervous system is 
processing and evaluating the information we use to make quick deci-
sions. Environmental information ﬂ ows over and around us; we ignore 
much of it. But the relevant information is allowed through, allowing 
our unconscious assessment of our surroundings.
With the background provided by these three chapters, we are now 
ready explore in detail how we interact with the environment, to explain 
why our ancestors’ emotional responses helped them respond appro-
priately to environmental challenges, and to determine why the conse-
quences of their responses reside as ghosts of environments past in our 
minds today.

33
Ghosts of the African savannas inhab-
ited our ancestor’s minds as they dis-
persed from Africa to Europe and Asia. 
Archaeologists have learned this because 
several kinds of information tell them 
what kinds of environments our ancestors traversed and the resources 
they used. For example, traces of plants and animals in their caves and 
campsites reveal what they ate. The remains of more than 250 species 
of birds have been found in campsites scattered over much of Europe. 
Those birds exist and use the same habitats today as they did thousands 
of years ago, so archaeologists use them to infer the landscapes around 
the caves. Those birds, and, hence, our ancestors, lived in habitats, like 
the East African ones, that were a mixture of savanna, wetlands, and 
rocky outcrops.1
Our ancestors’ artworks also tell us what they paid attention to. An 
engraved stone tablet was found in a cave in Abauntz in the Navarra re-
gion of northern Spain (ﬁ gure 4.1). It was carved about 13,600 years ago 
and contains the earliest known representation of a landscape. The stone 
measures less than ﬁ ve inches by seven inches and is less than an inch 
thick, but it depicts mountains, meandering rivers, ponds, and good 
foraging and hunting places (ﬁ gure 4.2). Access routes to different parts 
of the landscape are carved on it. A mountain with herds of ibex on its 
slopes is clearly one that can be seen from the cave today. The landscape 
is strikingly similar to the East African home of our ancestors—a mo-
saic of open grassland, widely spaced trees, scattered copses, and denser 
woods near rivers and lakes. Grasslands with scattered trees, hills, and 
rock outcroppings are an ideal habitat in which to hunt. The inhabitants 
of Abauntz Cave could have used the wide vista to plan long- distance 
moves; the trees and prominences were places from which they could 
Reading 
the 
Landscape

34
chapter four
track moving animals and detect approaching human groups. Nearby 
lakes and rivers were permanent sources of water.
In combination, these results also suggest that our ancestors prob-
ably dispersed along coastlines rather than via the large treeless areas of 
interior Europe. Coastlines offered the mixture of savanna, woodland, 
outcrops, and water that our ancestors needed. They were not yet able to 
kill large animals at a distance. That skill would have been essential on 
the open plains that lacked concealment.
Ghosts of the African savanna accompany travelers today. For ex-
Figure 4.1. A primitive map engraved fourteen thousand years 
ago on a rock by Magdalenian  hunter- gatherers in what is 
now Spain. Pilar Utrilla of University of Zaragoza discovered 
the rock in the cave of Abauntz Lamizulo in 1994.

35
reading the landscape
ample, in September 1849, Captain R. B. Marcy was leading an ex-
pedition to explore little known areas of the southern plains for the 
American government. He recorded the following emotions as they ap-
proached the headwaters of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River “over as 
beautiful a country for eight miles as I ever beheld. It was a perfectly level 
grassy glade, and covered with a growth of large mesquite trees at uni-
form distances, standing with great regularity, and presenting more the 
Figure 4.2. A representation of a map on the rock from the Late Magdalenian level from 
Abauntz Cave. Top, detail of the actual mountain and its representation on the rock, with 
the river and the ford at its feet. Bottom, landscape features identiﬁ ed by numbers.

36
chapter four
 appearance of an immense peach orchard than a wilderness.” Captain 
Marcy intuitively inferred that the savanna landscape was fertile, well 
watered, and would be a good place to settle. His responses, like those of 
the rest of us, reﬂ ect our long time on African savannas.2
We seem to have retained these emotional responses to landscapes 
for thousands of years. They are ghosts of past environments that reside 
in our minds. To gain insight into how such behaviors can become part 
of a species’ DNA, let’s imagine an animal ﬁ rst entering an unfamiliar 
environment. Of the data ﬂ ooding its senses, which bits of information 
should it pay attention to? Which ones would tell it the most about what 
this environment has to offer? Current conditions matter, but if the in-
dividual is to claim the area and raise offspring there, future conditions 
may matter even more. For this reason, many animals attend to those 
features of the landscape that predict future conditions. These features 
may not have anything to offer the individual over the short term. For 
example, birds may settle not where there is an immediate abundance of 
food, but where there is promise of future food. Birds use features such 
as the density of stands of trees and the conﬁ guration of their branches 
and leaves when choosing a nesting site.3 Birds evolved to do this be-
cause vegetation structure is a better predictor of food supplies weeks 
later, during the crucial period when hungry nestlings will need to be 
fed. Birds assess not only what the habitat can do for them now. They also 
assess what the habitat has to offer their offspring weeks in the  future.
So we see that an animal selecting a place to live makes a sequence of 
decisions. First, it selects the general area, one with a variety of habitats. 
Different habitats are suited to different activities. In one, an individual 
may display to other males and court females. In another, it may forage. 
It may select a nest site and defend it against rivals in a third. Finally, it 
must decide how to respond to individual features of the environment 
as it encounters them. Depending on the species, these can be potential 
predators, prey, mates, rivals, nest sites, and so forth.
Individuals typically make decisions about individual features of the 
environment (eat those berries) more frequently than ones that affect 
behavior for a longer time (build a nest here), but the latter strongly af-
fect the others. For example, a bad decision about a single food item—
rejecting it when you should have eaten it—will affect survival much 

37
reading the landscape
less than a bad decision about where to place a nest, which will inﬂ uence 
hundreds of foraging decisions. However, some decisions about indi-
vidual features, such as a slow response to a hungry predator, may have 
lethal consequences. In general, the more time and energy an individual 
invests in a decision, the more important that decision should be to its 
survival and reproductive success. This holds true for humans as well. 
We invest more time choosing a house than deciding on a restaurant for 
dinner; courtship often extends for many years.
An individual’s status—age, sex, and physical condition—also inﬂ u-
ence where it goes, how it gets there, and what it does when it arrives. 
Time of day and weather also inﬂ uence its decisions. If the decisions 
help the animal survive and reproduce, that is, if a safe nest site in an 
area rich in food is chosen, the psychological mechanisms that inﬂ uence 
such decisions evolve to become encoded in the animal’s genes.4
Stages of Habitat Selection
My colleagues and I have found it useful to think of habitat selection as 
a  three- stage process.5 We’ll call these stages encounter, explore, and 
exit or establish. In the encounter stage, an animal comes upon an un-
familiar landscape and decides either to explore it or to move on. As we 
will see, people make this decision unconsciously and almost instantly. 
Decisions at this stage do not require conscious inference, but the in-
dividual may unconsciously consider information he or she has stored 
about places he or she has already been.
These rapid, unconscious responses are evoked by parts of the envi-
ronment that signal its suitability. Typically, these features are general 
ones; psychologist Robert Zajonc called them “preferenda.”6 They in-
clude the distribution of objects in space, depth clues, water, and trees.7 
We use clues about depth to assess distance, perhaps to estimate the 
time required to cross open spaces to reach prey or a place of safety. 
Trees and ﬂ owing water signal the presence of food, possible shelter, 
and the ability to move unimpeded by following the course of a river.
If the individual decides to remain, it begins to explore the area and 
gathers more information about it. This explore stage involves a great 
deal of cognition; exploration may extend over many days. Complex, 

38
chapter four
patterned features of the environment, such as views of the horizon and 
ways of moving through it, prompt exploration. Only by exploring a 
complex environment can an individual determine whether resources 
are abundant or scarce, now and in the future, and whether it offers 
safety or peril.8 Exploration is risky, exposing the individual to as yet 
unknown danger, so risk assessment is a prominent component at this 
stage.
British geographer Jay Appleton developed a theory to explain how we 
evaluate unfamiliar landscapes by considering features—prospect, ref-
uge, and hazard—that inﬂ uence our ability to safely explore and gather 
information about a new environment.9 Prospect offers a good view or 
vista (ﬁ gure 4.3). Refuge provides cover from which to observe without 
being seen. Hazard refers to the risks a person faces while exploring an 
environment. These features could be primary—available immediately 
from the viewer’s current position—or secondary, accessed only after 
entering the environment. Elements of  prospect- refuge theory are rele-
vant to both our unconscious initial responses to unfamiliar landscapes 
and the conscious assessments we make while exploring an area.
Appleton conceived this theory, which has stimulated much research 
Figure 4.3. From a perch in a tree high on a ridge, a Hadza man named 
Mahiya peers across the rough terrain, looking for game.

39
reading the landscape
on landscapes, while reading a paragraph in Konrad Lorenz’s classic 
work of popular science, King Solomon’s Ring:
Easter is already in the air, and we are taking a walk in the forest whose 
wooded slopes of tall beeches can be equaled in beauty by few and sur-
passed by none. We approach a forest glade. . . . Before we break through 
the last bushes and out of cover on to the free expanse of the meadow, we do 
what all wild animals and all good naturalists, wild boars, leopards, hunt-
ers, and zoologists would do under similar circumstances: we reconnoiter, 
seeking before we leave our cover, to gain from it the advantage which it 
can offer alike to hunter and hunted—namely to see without being seen.10
Appleton’s ideas have influenced many workers across diverse 
 disciplines—my own included. We will revisit  prospect- refuge theory 
over the next three chapters of this book.
During the third and ﬁ nal stage, the individual moves on (exit) or 
decides to remain, for a short time, a season, or a lifetime (establish). 
If it elects to stay, an individual may try to improve the environment 
(excavate a burrow, build a nest, clear brush, dig a well). The stages of 
habitat selection often overlap; so will our discussions.
Our responses to environmental cues vary with our needs. Food, wa-
ter, and shelter matter more when we are hungry, thirsty, or cold. A fam-
ily enjoying a picnic is likely to dislike an approaching storm; a farmer 
whose crops are wilting in a drought will welcome it. But they will all 
seek a dry place before rain falls. Despite these differences, common pat-
terns emerge because humans respond positively to evidence of food, 
water, shelter, and refuges, and negatively to potential hazards, such as 
storms, ﬁ re, predators, and obstacles.
The Legible Landscape
In the developed world, we spend most of our lives in familiar 
 environments—our homes, workplaces, areas where we shop. We func-
tion well in those environments and generally feel comfortable there. 
Yet even the most settled among us regularly ﬁ nd ourselves in unfamil-
iar places. Our ancestors made many  ﬁ rst- stage decisions during their 
lives. We can infer how they responded by studying how we comprehend 
unfamiliar environments today.

40
chapter four
Much of what we know about our unconscious responses to environ-
ments comes from experiments with images. A rich experimental lit-
erature shows that people quickly and unconsciously draw inferences 
when shown photographs of unfamiliar landscapes.11 We base these 
inferences on how much information we need to process to draw in-
ferences about the scene before us. We draw some of these inferences 
quickly and unconsciously (encounter stage), but we may then employ 
substantial conscious processing (explore stage).
Psychologists use terms such as “coherence,” “complexity,” “legibil-
ity,” and “mystery” when talking about how we unconsciously and con-
sciously process a landscape when we ﬁ rst encounter it.
Coherence refers to the ease with which we can grasp a scene’s organi-
zation. Legibility is an assessment of how well one could ﬁ nd one’s way 
in it without getting lost. American urban planner Kevin Lynch ﬁ rst in-
troduced the concept of legibility in his 1960 book The Image of the City.12 
He described the apparent clarity or legibility of a cityscape in terms of 
the ease with which we can recognize its components and organize them 
into a coherent pattern. A legible space is one that is easy to understand 
and remember. It has a structure that enables us to navigate within it 
and ﬁ nd our way back to the starting point.
To assess complexity we pay attention to objects that may tell us about 
the scene’s resource richness. Mystery refers to a promise of more infor-
mation if we enter the scene. Mystery arouses our curiosity and evokes 
hypotheses about where to ﬁ nd resources and where risks and dangers 
are most likely to confront us. But to gain that knowledge, we must 
expose ourselves to danger. As Konrad Lorenz suggested, it is advanta-
geous to see without being seen.
As we will see, our responses to paintings and photographs of land-
scapes are a rich source of information about how we evaluate unfamil-
iar landscapes. Experiments conducted by many investigators reveal 
regular and meaningful patterns to our rapid evaluations, but that sub-
jects are generally unable to explain their choices. Even though we like 
to think that we understand why we respond the way we do, experiment-
ers have found that when they ask us why we like or dislike scenes, we 
are often embarrassed that we cannot explain why;13 we invent explana-
tions. Psychologist Jonathan Haidt wrote in his 2006 book,

41
reading the landscape
When you see a painting, you usually know instantly and automatically 
whether you like it. If someone asks you to explain your judgment, you 
confabulate. You don’t really know why you think something is beautiful, 
but your interpreter module is skilled at making up reasons. . . . You search 
for a plausible reason for liking the painting, and you latch on to the ﬁ rst 
reason that makes sense (maybe something vague about color, or light, or 
the reﬂ ection of the painter in the clown’s shiny nose).14
Fortunately, as we will explore in later chapters, researchers have de-
vised clever experiments to help reveal our hidden motivations.
The features that inﬂ uence our initial, noncognitive responses to 
unfamiliar environments in the encounter phase are also important 
during the explore phase. Ghosts of environments past also inﬂ uence 
how we assess an environment as we explore it, respond to its risks and 
resources, and alter it to improve our lives.
These assessments are the focus of the next several chapters.

42
While I scaled the trunk of an acacia tree, 
my companion stood nearby, scanning 
the horizon through binoculars, keeping 
a lookout for predators. I was climbing 
the tree to measure the height at which 
the trunk split into main branches and 
to collect leaves to study later in camp. It 
was October 12, 1978. My wife, Betty, and 
I were camped at the base of the Ngu-
ruman Escarpment in southern Kenya 
where we were gathering data to test a prediction.
Earlier that year I had proposed the savanna hypothesis, and we had 
come to Africa to put the hypothesis to a test. When I advanced the sa-
vanna hypothesis, anthropologists already knew that our ancestors lived 
in East African savannas during the time their brains tripled in size. I 
predicted that the shapes of trees that dominated  resource- rich savan-
nas in which they would have survived and reproduced best should be 
especially attractive to us. So Betty and I measured trees growing on 
 resource- rich and  resource- poor Kenyan savannas to ﬁ nd out which 
shapes dominated the best sites. But we had more on our minds than 
the shapes of the trees—the shapes among the trees and in the tall grass 
concerned us even more. At night in our tent, we could hear lions roar-
ing; by day, as we walked across the savanna, we wondered how close to 
our path a snake might be resting.
We were worried about lions, but Betty and I were especially concerned 
about snakes. What if we failed to spot an adder or a large python until we 
got within striking distance of it? Startling at the sight of a snake or even 
a shed snakeskin is a nearly universal human response. Snakes evoke 
disgust in many people who mistakenly view them as “slimy” because 
The Snake 
in the Grass 
($.$.$.$and 
Other 
Hazards)

43
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
they glisten.1 Snakes evoke strong negative emotions in people who have 
never seen or been bitten by one. New Englanders, few of whom said that 
they had previous encounters with snakes, reported that snakes were the 
most prevalent objects of their intense fears.2 But is our fear of snakes 
innate, a legacy of our primate ancestors? Or is it learned?
The neural systems that prompt us to ﬂ ee from or avoid danger were 
probably among the ﬁ rst behavioral systems to evolve in animals.3 To 
stay out of trouble, an animal must be able to recognize patterns, know 
which ones signal danger, and act appropriately. The objects and situ-
ations that evoke fear in humans today—snakes, large mammals, hos-
tile strangers—were genuinely dangerous to our ancestors. A fear- and- 
learning neural circuit shared by many mammals, including ourselves, 
is located in the amygdala, an  almond- shaped region of nerve cells in the 
temporal lobes of the vertebrate brain.4 This “fear circuit” yields rapid 
responses that can be triggered by very few clues.5 It is especially sensi-
tive to stimuli, something half- seen, undulating through the grass, that 
are related to recurrent survival threats.
Venomous snakes and large constrictors like boas and pythons have 
caused human deaths for millennia.6 They preyed on our primate ances-
tors, on the earliest hominids, and for hundreds of thousands of years, 
they have preyed on us. Snakes have a highly distinctive shape and way 
of moving. Most snakes are ambush predators; they are dangerous only 
if we approach them closely without detecting them. Most other large 
terrestrial predators also need to approach their prey closely before they 
launch an attack. They take advantage of cover and have color patterns 
that camouﬂ age them against the backgrounds in which they hunt.
Our ancestors would have beneﬁ ted from an ability to detect hidden, 
stationary predators from glimpses of only small parts of them. Spe-
cial systems for distinguishing the patterns that provide camouﬂ age—
stripes, spots, complex patterns with crossing lines and many edges 
(tessellated patterns)—and for detecting their eyes would help. Research 
suggests that we do have these special detection systems.
Tessellated patterns are rare in nature but common among snakes.7 
Yet, cells of the mammalian visual system are highly stimulated by such 
patterns. The system readily detects scale patterns in peripheral vision, 
where we are most likely to spot a snake. A checkerboard arrangement 
of textures presented close to where a person is looking generates more 

44
chapter five
activity in our visual centers than a uniform texture.8 A diamond pat-
tern produces larger neural activity in the visual centers of the human 
brain than a  random- dot pattern, a circle, or a triangle on a randomly 
textured background.9 The neural system responds selectively to angles 
and edges, features that enhance our ability to detect snakes against a 
background during daylight. Our neural fear module increases our abil-
ity to detect motionless snakes, even when we are unaware that we have 
seen them.10 Lynne Isbell makes a compelling argument that enhanced 
ability to detect motionless snakes was the factor that favored the evolu-
tion of the unusual features of the primate visual system.11
Yet, reptilian scales also evoke positive emotional responses. During 
the last decade of the twentieth century, snake prints were fashionable 
in women’s apparel and accessories. They were worn to gain attention. 
Skins of crocodiles and snakes were often used in consumer products, 
although today, in response to conservation concerns, printed fabrics 
that resemble real skins replace them. In south Asia, Hindus, hoping to 
enhance their fertility, worship cobras. They associate cobras with the 
sacred symbol of Lord Shiva. During a serpent ceremony, dense crowds 
croon and pray to each cobra displayed before the deity (ﬁ gure 5.1).12
Figure 5.1. People offer prayers to a snake during the annual 
Hindu Nag Panchami festival in Jammu, India.

45
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
Our desire to approach and investigate snakes probably accounts for 
the frequent appearance of scale patterns on engravings and their dis-
play in paintings and mosaics. Deliberately ground, scraped, and gouged 
shale on which ocher pigment was engraved with a crosshatch pattern 
similar to that of reptiles are among the oldest artifacts of Middle Stone 
Age sites. The dominant  diamond- patterned crosshatching, zigzags, 
and step forms of the decorative motifs in Mayan art are thought to imi-
tate rattlesnake scale patterns.13 Some of the mosaic designs in Islamic 
art also are similar to  snake- scale patterns (ﬁ gure 5.2).
During the early evolutionary history of primates, venomous and 
constricting snakes were their most important vertebrate predators.14 
Figure 5.2. Left, scales of a gaboon viper (Bitis 
gabonica); right, detail of the façade of Shir 
Dar funerary madrasa, Samarqand, 1636.

46
chapter five
Dangerous snakes continue to be a source of human disability and 
death. More than 150,000 people die from snakebites each year, most of 
them in the tropics.15 Other than lemurs, which evolved on Madagascar, 
an island lacking venomous snakes, all primates have an innately based 
fear of snakes that is easily triggered.  Laboratory- reared monkeys that 
have never seen a snake become fearful merely by observing other fear-
ful monkeys.16
We also have a  built- in bias toward detection of and responses to 
snakes. Nine-  to ten- month- old human infants do not react differently 
to snakes than to other animals, but by the age of one year, before they 
begin to walk, infants quickly associate snakes with fear. By the age of 
three, children detect snakes more rapidly than nonthreatening stimuli 
(ﬂ owers, frogs, caterpillars). In contrast, neither children nor adults 
detect a single frog among ﬂ owers better than a single ﬂ ower among 
frogs.17 In other words, we learn more quickly to spot and respond to 
snakes than to most other things because neural circuits that respond 
especially strongly to them form during the ﬁ rst year, a time of rapid 
maturation of the infant brain.
A by- product of our predisposition to fear snakes is that we mistak-
enly infer correlations between snakes and aversive stimuli. In an experi-
ment, Andrew Tomarken and colleagues showed study subjects slides 
of snakes, ﬂ owers, or mushrooms. Some slides were paired with a slight 
electric shock; others were not. The study subjects were more likely to 
mistakenly judge that slides of snakes had been paired with shock than 
were slides of ﬂ owers or mushrooms.18 They did not experience an illu-
sory shock when shown dangerous man- made objects such as damaged 
electrical equipment or guns. The image of a snake is sufﬁ cient to make 
us imagine we feel pain.
Given that a snake poses relatively little danger once we are aware of 
it, a certain level of attraction to snakelike forms would remind us of its 
presence and induce us to monitor where it is. Evidence from ﬁ eldwork 
with primates suggests how this might have evolved. African and Asian 
monkeys and apes call to draw attention to a snake. The alerted group 
members may follow the snake until it leaves the area to hunt in a place 
where it has not been seen.
The mixture of fear and attraction we have to snakes probably ex-
plains why snakes have become symbols of power and sex, totems, pro-

47
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
tagonists of myths, and gods. Snakes are mystically transﬁ gured in most 
cultures. The Hopi recognize the water serpent Palulukon, a benevolent 
but frightening godlike being. The Kwakiutl, who live in coastal British 
Columbia and Alaska, a region that lacks venomous snakes, fear sisiutl, a 
 three- headed serpent with both human and reptilian faces. When it ap-
pears in dreams, it presages insanity or death. The Sharanahua of Peru 
summon reptile spirits by taking hallucinogenic drugs, and they stroke 
their faces with snake tongues.
Awe of snakes has generated much art, especially religious. Serpentine 
forms adorn European Paleolithic stone carvings. Snakes were carved 
into mammoth teeth in Siberia, well outside the range of any snake. Styl-
ized snakes often serve as talismans of the gods and spirits that bestow 
fertility: Ashtoreth of the Canaanites, the demons Fu- Hsi and Nu- kua of 
the Han Chinese, and the powerful goddesses Mudammã and Manasã of 
Hindu India. Ancient Egyptians venerated at least thirteen snake deities 
that ministered to health, fecundity, and vegetation. Amulets in gold in-
scribed with the sign of a cobra god were placed in the wrappings of Tu-
tankhamen’s mummy. The Aztec rain god Tlaloc consisted in part of two 
coiled rattlesnakes whose heads met to form his upper lip. Coatl, the ser-
pent, is part of the names of many Aztec divinities. Coatlicue was a threat-
ening chimera of snake and human parts; Cihuacoatl was goddess of child-
birth and mother of the human race. Fire was rekindled every  ﬁ fty- two 
years over the body of Xiuhcoatl, the ﬁ re serpent, to mark a major division 
in the Aztec religious calendar. Quetzalcoatl, a plumed serpent with a hu-
man head, was god of morning and evening, of death and resurrection 
(ﬁ gure 5.3). Aztecs believed that he invented the calendar and writing.
Snakes evoke strong fearful responses in most people, but we are also 
afraid of many other plants and animals. Injury and death caused by other 
organisms have been important throughout human history, but respond-
ing to other organisms is complex because we get many positive things 
from them as well. Let’s look more closely at the threats many other ani-
mals and plants pose to us to understand why we might fear them.
Dangers Large and Small
Plants and animals provide us with food, ﬁ ber, fuel, transport, and pro-
tection, but some of them may be dangerous. Plants remain rooted to 

48
chapter five
one spot and, unless we ingest them, pose little threat. The threats posed 
by other animals are many. They are mobile, often stealthy, and use cam-
ouﬂ age to avoid being seen. Animals can be predators or parasites, and 
even when we ourselves are the predator, contaminated meat can sicken 
us. The threat posed by an animal may depend on its current state. We 
need to worry about a hungry lion but not one that has just fed on a 
zebra.
Dangerous organisms can range in size from elephants and large 
constricting snakes to scorpions and spiders, to the unseen, invisible to 
the unaided eye,  disease- causing bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Animals 
that otherwise do not harm us—ﬂ ies, ﬂ eas, ticks, and mosquitoes—can 
transmit disease. We did not know of the existence of microorganisms 
until the seventeenth century, and we did not know that they cause dis-
eases until only a century ago, so we have not evolved to fear them. We 
do, however, experience revulsion when we see things that are associ-
Figure 5.3. The gods Tezcatlipoca and Quetzalcoatl devouring a man. “Tonalamatl” 
(Codex Borbonicus, religious calendar), Aztec manuscript on paper, 39 × 40 cm, 
early sixteenth century, Bibliotheque de l’Assemblee Nationale, Paris.

49
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
ated with pathogens—festering wounds, rotting meat, dead bodies, and 
feces.
Thorns, Horns, and Things with Sharp Teeth
Predators large enough to pose a danger to a full- grown human have 
large, pointed teeth and claws. Many large grazing mammals have sharp 
horns, antlers, or hooves. They use their horns in sexual combat; they 
would have used them against attacking human hunters. Many species 
have facial patterns that exaggerate the size of their weapons. Some 
plants have sharp, penetrating thorns and spines. We should be moti-
vated to avoid contact with them but should know and remember where 
they are. As with other potentially dangerous things, we may be both 
fearful of and attracted to them. We have a deep fear of long, sharp teeth. 
Males of many primates have prominent canines they use to threaten 
and ﬁ ght enemies and competitors. The Dracula legend continues to 
inspire fear even though males of our ancestors long ago lost their pro-
truding canines.
Responses to Pointed Forms
We have strong responses, both positive and negative, to pointed forms. 
African savannas are full of plants with sharp thorns. Most species of 
Commiphora and Acacia, which dominate vast areas of African savannas, 
have spines that can puncture our skin, feet, and eyes. Paying attention 
to those plants, especially during times of rapid movement, would have 
reduced the chance of injury.
Richard Coss videotaped walkers and joggers as they passed two 
plants positioned on each side of a path in the arboretum of the Uni-
versity of California, Davis. The “provocative” plant, a Spanish dagger 
(Yucca gloriosa), has long,  dagger- shaped leaves that radiate from a cen-
tral stem. The “safe” plant was a  similar- sized crape myrtle (Lagerstro-
emia indica) with rounded leaves. Coss switched locations of the plants 
halfway through the experiment. We might have expected them to avoid 
the dagger, but both walkers and joggers favored the side of the path 
where the dagger was located; they passed close to it.19 Coss explained 
this surprising result by suggesting that paying attention to the dagger 

50
chapter five
might help joggers remember its location and be less likely to run into 
it in the future.
Early humans learned to fracture rocks to create ﬂ akes and cores 
they used for cutting, scraping, and tips of weapons. These pointed ob-
jects were valuable, so our ancestors should have evolved to ﬁ nd them 
attractive. Coss tested this prediction by recording people’s responses 
to black silhouettes of pointed and rounded shapes. People judged 
pointed shapes to be both more dangerous and more attractive than 
blunt shapes.
Because pointed shapes are aesthetically attractive but also evoke cau-
tion and fear, we expect sharp forms to be prominent in art and design. 
They are! Pointed forms are common in sculptures, graphical designs, 
and shrines. They are used to increase the aggressive appearances of 
characters in plays and dances. The gaping mouths and prominent teeth 
of ﬁ gures that adorn temples and medieval cathedrals were thought to 
have warded off evil.
Another reason for our strong responses to pointed forms could be 
that the angles in the eyebrows, cheeks, chin, and jaw in an angry hu-
man face resemble a downward pointing V- shape. The curves in the 
cheeks, eyes, and mouth of a happy face are round.20 A simple down-
ward pointing V triggers greater activation of several brain regions than 
does an identical V- shape pointing upward. We detect downward point-
ing V- shapes embedded in a ﬁ eld of other shapes more readily than we 
detect the same shapes pointing upward.21 Only a person adopting an 
evolutionary approach would have thought to test this prediction or 
have imagined the surprising result.
The Leopard’s Spots
Large spotted cats have preyed on primates for millennia. Even today 
leopards cause many human deaths in Africa and the Indian subcon-
tinent.22 Leopard rosettes fascinate infants only seven months old. In 
a series of experiments in day- care facilities, infants and toddlers were 
allowed to handle four lightweight plastic jars. Each jar had  yellowish-
 orange paper with full- sized patterns of leopard rosettes, rock python 
patches, or scales pressed against its interior side and bottom surfaces. 
Children poked jars with python and leopard patterns significantly 
more often than they poked plain and plaid jars. Richard Coss inter-

51
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
preted poking as an investigative action because children immediately 
stopped touching jars if they rolled over.23
Beneﬁ ts from paying attention to large cats may account for our fas-
cination with and attraction to their fur. The ﬁ rst recorded use of spot-
ted leopard pelts as clothing comes from early Neolithic hunters and in-
dividuals of high stature in the village of Çatal Hüyük.24 Some societies 
still associate wearing spotted pelts with high social status.25 The value 
of  spotted- cat pelts today is so great—as much as $60,000 for a single 
snow leopard pelt—that illegal poaching threatens some species.
Eyes—Has It Seen You?
Most prey animals have eyes on the sides of their heads that enable them 
to detect predators sneaking up from behind. The eyes of most preda-
tors, on the other hand, are on the front of their heads.  Forward- facing 
eyes enable them to more easily ﬁ nd and track their prey.
In study after study, in species after species, scientists have found 
that many animals pay special attention to eyes and eyelike forms. Ma-
caques have a special neural system that facilitates recognition of two 
facing eyes.26 Wild bonnet macaques recognize leopards better if they 
can see their facing eyes.27 Newborn human infants respond to a pair of 
large facing eyes by turning their heads. Even infants lacking head con-
trol react by withdrawing; preterm infants as young as  thirty- six weeks 
old react to eye contact with strangers by stiffening their bodies and 
averting their eyes.28
We most easily detect a vertebrate, particularly a mammal, and assess 
its intentions by looking at its face.29 We also respond to eyelike sym-
bols, such as bull’s- eyes. Automobile taillights designed as two concen-
tric disks elicit much stronger physiological arousal (skin conductance, 
pupil dilation) than other taillight patterns.30
Friend or Foe? Assessing the Intentions of Other Humans
Throughout human history, we have distrusted people outside our clan, 
our tribe. Even though research shows that most violence today comes 
at the hands of people we know, and even though we are all descended 
from a common ancestor who lived some two hundred thousand years 

52
chapter five
ago, we still fear people we perceive as “other.” We believe strangers will 
do us harm.31 Why? In deep time, hominids outside the family group 
were likely to be a raiding party.
Fear of strangers appears among children as soon as they can move on 
their own.32 To assess the intentions of other people, we look at all body 
parts, but our faces are especially revealing. The human face has un-
usually complex musculature and neural innervations. Facial  muscles 
differ from most other muscles by moving skin rather than bones. 
About twenty muscles produce psychologically meaningful facial ex-
pressions.33 Darwin clearly recognized that the design of the human face 
suggested that it had evolved to communicate social signals.34 Facial 
expressions of most primates are similar to ours.35
As we have already seen, signals can evolve only if the behavior they 
elicit beneﬁ ts both signalers and recipients. Facial expressions meet 
these requirements. We all gain from an ability to detect subtle facial 
clues. We may also gain by giving false information about our future 
behavior. Angry males pose greater danger than angry females. We do 
not know how often males attacked infants during our evolutionary 
past, but males of many mammals attack infants.36 Most attacks hap-
pen when strange males evict the dominant resident males of a social 
group. By killing infants they induce lactating females to come back into 
estrous quickly. Fear of strangers doubtless has deep roots in human 
evolution.37
Therefore, men should react more strongly to angry men than to an-
gry women. Experiments conﬁ rm this expectation. Men show stronger 
physiological (skin conductance) responses to angry men than to an-
gry women.38 Infants also fear men more than women.39 These results 
are not caused by height differences because tall women do not elicit as 
much fear as men do. Nor can they be explained by differences in facial 
hair; infants whose fathers had beards were just as afraid of strange men 
with beards as infants with beardless fathers.40
Fear of strangers develops around seven months, peaks at about one 
year, and continues until two years of age. Fear of strangers does not de-
velop until several months after infants discriminate between familiar 
and unfamiliar people.41 Until they start crawling infants are unlikely to 
contact strangers without being with their mothers. This developmental 
“gap”42 makes sense from an ecological and evolutionary perspective.

53
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
A Dangerous World
Many physical hazards are permanent features of landscapes. To avoid 
injury or worse, we need to remember the location of cliffs, waterfalls, 
rapids, and other dangerous features. An evolutionary perspective sug-
gests that people should be motivated to learn and remember their lo-
cations. Our ancestors doubtless kept such knowledge in a mental map 
and used it to plan future hunting and foraging expeditions or war par-
ties. We should be motivated to approach closely enough to see how dan-
gerous they are, whether they offer any reward despite the danger, and 
how best we should respond to them. This may explain our fascination 
with waterfalls and cliffs and why we enjoy approaching them, but not 
too closely. Most national parks in the United States were established 
around spectacular but potentially dangerous geological features (ﬁ g-
ure 5.4).
It seems our brains may even be wired to exaggerate the danger, just in 
case we don’t get the message.43 We respond strongly and rapidly to some 
hazards because we have an inﬂ ated perception of the danger.44 Consider 
the danger posed by uneven ground. We may fall when we move over an 
Figure 5.4. Denali National Park, Alaska, is dominated 
by North America’s highest mountain.

54
chapter five
uneven area with vertical changes less than a meter. A simple trip can 
result in an injury that makes it harder to walk; falls of only a meter or 
two can produce serious injuries. These risks would have been especially 
important when our ancestors were pursuing prey or escaping from en-
emies, or even when they had to cover a lot of ground while foraging to 
meet their energy needs. Even if a fall were not fatal, it could have seri-
ous consequences, leaving the injured vulnerable to predators or simply 
unable to ﬁ nd enough food. As we would expect, our perceptual system 
makes vertical surface irregularities seem larger than they are.45
We should also pay attention to signals that something dramatic is 
about to happen: a loud noise, a strong vibration, or a ﬂ ash of light. 
Loud noises accompany or immediately precede many natural disasters 
and other hazardous events. We pay attention to the sound of thunder 
and falling trees or rock slides. Fear of loud noises and bright lights (as-
sociated with thunder and lightning) appears during infancy.46 By the 
time they are six years old, children fear more events—earthquakes, 
ﬁ re, thunder, lightning, and deep water.47 Such events should command 
our immediate attention because the time to initiate a timely response 
may be very brief. However, cognition is usually necessary to determine 
the cause of a noise, its location, and to decide on an appropriate re-
sponse to it.
Water Hazards
Of all the world’s physical features, water is the most changeable. Tsu-
namis and ﬂ oods can strike without notice. People can quickly drown 
in ocean waves and riptides. Tides can cut off access to land and strand 
us. Even permanent features, such as waterfalls, rapids, and deep lakes 
can be hazardous.
We have many reasons to fear water, but we need to drink daily, and 
lakes and rivers are rich sources of food, so we should also be attracted 
to water. As we will see in chapter 6, we are! We descend on rivers, lakes, 
and oceans for our vacations. Landscape architects go to great lengths 
to enhance water in public parks and gardens. We pay more for homes 
that front on or have views of water.
The result of our ambivalent responses to water is that we are at-
tracted to water but we keep a safe distance from dangerous features. 

55
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
We get close enough to waterfalls to view them without incurring a sig-
niﬁ cant risk.
Light and Shadows
Night was a dangerous time for our ancestors and other diurnal pri-
mates. Fear of darkness must have evolved soon after nocturnal primates 
became active during the day. Infant baboons are born with fears of fall-
ing and the dark. Our visual system, evolved to see color during the day, 
functions poorly under low light. Many dangerous predators (hyenas, 
large cats, wild dogs, and snakes) hunt primarily at night. Our ancestors, 
who daily covered long distances hunting and gathering, may often have 
found themselves without shelter at dusk. The setting sun would have 
been a strong signal to return to a safe place before nightfall. Evening 
shadows also provide a brief period during which it is easier to perceive 
depth than at other times during the day.
Therefore, cues that signal the approaching darkness—setting sun 
and lengthening shadows—should be highly motivating. They are, but 
how we respond to a sunset depends on whether we are close to or in 
a safe resting place or in an exposed situation far from safety. Sunrise 
rarely requires urgent responses. Normally we view the rising sun, if we 
are awake, from a refuge where we spent the night. Light increases at 
sunrise, signaling many hours of good visibility.
Artists have apparently intuitively understood this, because they po-
sition people differently in sunsets and sunrises. In paintings designed 
to evoke pleasant feelings, people are closer to a refuge in paintings of 
sunsets than in paintings of sunrises. To elicit feelings of tranquility 
at sunset, landscape painters typically include an obvious and easily 
reached refuge. Pathways to the refuge are usually highlighted. Artists 
may even violate physical laws to highlight refuges: the sun’s rays may 
be reﬂ ected from windows after the sun has set.
Fire: A Mysterious Hazard
Fire must have seemed mysterious to our ancestors. They probably knew 
that lightning caused ﬁ res (lightning- caused ﬁ res were common in the 
environments our ancestors inhabited), but they could not have under-
stood why things burned or what happened to them as they burned. 

56
chapter five
Myths inevitably developed around something as mysterious as ﬁ re. For 
the ancient Greeks, for example, ﬁ re was stolen from the gods by the 
Titan Prometheus and delivered to Earth in a stalk of fennel.
Mastery of ﬁ re was a key event in human history, but to do so our 
ancestors had to overcome their fear of ﬁ re. They probably noticed that 
grazing mammals were attracted to recently burned areas to feast on 
the nutritious young blades of grass. They may have eaten and found 
tasty the scorched bodies of animals they found when exploring recently 
burned areas. Archaeologists have found evidence of our ancestors’ wide 
range of uses of ﬁ re to inﬂ uence where fresh young nutritious grass 
would be, to protect themselves from predators, to stay warm at night, 
to prepare skins, make pottery, and cook food. Hominids domesticated 
ﬁ re at least three hundred thousand years ago, perhaps as much as a mil-
lion years ago. Fire became the most important tool our ancestors used 
to manipulate the environment. As people colonized tropical highlands 
and temperate lands, they carried ﬁ re with them.
Fears Change with Age
As we discussed in chapter 2, we are born with very immature brains. 
Brain growth that is completed during pregnancy in gorillas and chim-
panzees continues for a year after birth in human infants. And geneti-
cally guided development of neural circuits continues for more than a 
decade. Methyl groups are added to DNA bases throughout our lives. 
They inﬂ uence which genes are turned on and off as we mature.48
So genetically inﬂ uenced behaviors appear at different ages. Genes 
govern our ability to speak a language, but we do not expect children 
to speak when they are born. Young women and men do not become 
sexually motivated and develop adult physical traits (breasts, buttocks, 
beards, low voices) until they are more than ten year old.
Although they are less obvious, children’s responses to the environ-
ment also show evidence of adaptations that emerge over time as they 
become more mobile and encounter new spaces, organisms, objects, 
and situations that present both opportunities and dangers. As they age, 
children are increasingly likely to be farther from adults when they en-
counter hazardous situations. Children old enough to explore the world 

57
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
around them must increasingly rely on their own behavior; they can 
count less on protection and help from adults. For our hominid ances-
tors, cries or distress calls worked well only when a caretaker was within 
arm’s reach, otherwise a cry might have attracted a predator. Natural 
selection should have resulted in neural programs that cause fearful re-
sponses to develop to speciﬁ c things at ages when those things begin to 
pose a danger. We expect genetically inﬂ uenced behaviors to ﬁ rst appear 
at the time during maturation that they would have been useful to our 
ancestors’ children. The unfolding of our fear responses accords with 
this expectation.
Newborn infants cry or show other signs of distress from loud 
sounds, bright light, rapid or irregular movements, looming objects, 
and loss of equilibrium. Infants have good visual acuity by six to eight 
months. They point to many distant objects (cars, birds, planes). Be-
tween the ages of one and three years, children spend most waking time 
interacting with nearby objects,49 a behavior that may reduce their ten-
dency to wander.
Looming objects and sudden movements are likely to have accom-
panied the approach of dangerous animals.50 Fear responses to these 
stimuli begin at about seven months. Fear of spiders begins around the 
age of three and a half years and continues throughout childhood.51 Fear 
of “bugs” is greater among children six to eight years of age than among 
those aged nine to twelve.52 Fear of small animals develops in children 
soon after they are capable of independent movement, the ﬁ rst time they 
are likely to encounter such animals when away from their mothers.53 
Fear of larger animals generally does not develop until children are more 
than four years old.54 But fear of dogs has been observed in children as 
young as two.55 After about ten years of age, social fears become more 
prominent; fear of large animals wanes.56
Being fearful of some objects and situations is rational. Indeed, as we 
have seen, most organisms that evoke fear were genuinely dangerous 
to our ancestors. But many people hold deep fears of situations, even 
imaginary ones that pose no danger. We call these apparently irrational 
fears “phobias.” Psychologists recognize many different kinds of pho-
bias: nature phobias, animal phobias, and social phobias.57 An evolutionary 
perspective helps explain why we have these apparently irrational fears.

58
chapter five
When Fear Becomes Phobia
We can make two kinds of mistakes when we sense danger. We can fail to 
respond when the danger is real, or we can assume that the danger is real 
when it is not. The costs of making these two kinds of errors differ dra-
matically. A false negative (failing to respond to a dangerous situation—
a lion in the grass) is more costly than a false positive (overreacting to a 
situation that turns out to be harmless—wind whistling in the grass). 
The ﬁ rst error could be deadly; the second generally costs only wasting 
a bit of time and energy. This is why we have what’s known as a nega-
tivity bias;58 that is, we are more averse to losses than we are attracted 
to gains.59 Negative stimuli raise our blood pressure and heart rate. 
We have more negative than positive emotions and have more words 
in English for painful sensations than for pleasant ones.60 We respond 
faster to threats and unpleasant events than to positive opportunities 
and pleasurable situations. It is better to avoid perceived danger quickly 
and sometimes be wrong than delay and just once be seriously wrong! 
These and many other physiological and behavioral human traits are 
traces from deep evolutionary time, echoes of the lives of our ancestors 
as they pursued food and sought to avoid being food for other animals. 
Their struggles have left a negative imprint in our brains.
Psychologists, particularly in Sweden and Norway, have conducted 
imaginative experiments that show how fears and phobias are acquired 
and maintained. Most of these experiments have used an approach pio-
neered by Swedish psychologist Arne Öhman. Investigators ﬁ rst evoke a 
defensive response by showing either fearful stimuli (snakes or spiders) 
or neutral stimuli (geometric ﬁ gures), paired with an electric shock in-
tended to mimic a bite. Then they repeatedly present the same stimuli, 
but without an electric shock and measure the rate of decline of aver-
sive responses to fear- relevant and neutral stimuli. Aversive responses 
are usually acquired more quickly to fear- relevant than to fear- neutral 
stimuli; responses to snakes and spiders always persist longer when they 
are no longer reinforced than responses to neutral stimuli.
To test whether these results could be due to cultural reinforcement, 
investigators compared responses to snakes and spiders with far more 
dangerous, strongly culturally conditioned, modern stimuli, such as 
handguns and frayed electrical wires. Aversive responses to these mod-

59
the snake in the grass ($.$.$.$and other hazards)
ern dangerous stimuli extinguish more quickly than responses to snakes 
and spiders.61 A person may acquire an aversive response to fearful 
natural stimuli merely by being told that shock will be given. Aversive 
responses to neutral natural stimuli cannot be elicited this way. We may 
become fearful merely by watching an actor who pretends to react fear-
fully to slides of fearful stimuli (snakes, spiders, rats) or neutral natural 
stimuli (berries). But people acquire more persistent aversive reactions 
when they watch the person’s reactions to fearful than to neutral stim-
uli.62 Rhesus monkeys respond much as we do to fearful stimuli (toy 
snakes and crocodiles) and to neutral stimuli (toy rabbits).63
Even more striking are the results of “backward masking” experi-
ments in which the investigator shows a slide for only ﬁ fteen to thirty 
milliseconds before it is “masked” by a different slide. Subjects are not 
consciously aware of having seen the stimulus slide, but slides that con-
tain snakes or spiders elicit strong aversive reactions in most people.64
These results show that aversive responses occur even when we are 
unaware that we have seen the threatening stimulus. We do not respond 
that way to neutral or fear- irrelevant stimuli. Cultural /  learned hypoth-
eses cannot explain these striking results, but they make adaptive sense. 
Studies of twins show that phobias have a genetic basis. Twins are more 
like one another than other siblings in their responses to traumatic 
events, such as dog bites, and their fear of open spaces.65
Our ancestors would have benefited from being especially aware 
and cautious around dangerous situations and objects. Some of those 
events and objects are still sources of danger in today’s world, but many 
of them are not. The modern world is full of dangers our ancestors could 
not have imagined. In the last chapter of this book we will revisit the 
challenges we face when trying to adjust our  savanna- adapted minds to 
life in modern technological societies.

60
Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid, 
two dissident Russian artists who de-
fected to the United States, asked a 
marketing research firm to conduct 
a survey to assess the attitudes and 
preferences of adult Americans about the visual arts. Pollsters asked 
about one thousand people questions such as,
If you had to name one color as your favorite color—the color you would 
like to stand out in a painting you would consider buying for your home, 
for example—which color would it be?
When you select pictures, photographs, or other pieces of art for your 
home, do you ﬁ nd you lean more toward modern or more toward tradi-
tional styles?
and
Many people ﬁ nd that a lot of the paintings they like have similar features 
or subjects. Take animals for example. On the whole, would you say that 
you prefer seeing paintings of wild animals, like lions, giraffes, or deer, or 
that you prefer paintings of domestic animals?
The pollsters asked respondents whether they preferred natural or 
portrait settings, indoor or outdoor scenes, geometric or random pat-
terns, ﬂ at or richly textured surfaces, and sharp angles or soft curves.
Komar and Melamid took the ﬁ ndings and incorporated the most pre-
ferred features into a single landscape painting, America’s Most Wanted 
(ﬁ gure 6.1). The  savanna- like landscape features water (a placid lake), 
gently sloping hills in the background, and a wooded cliff on the left. 
The most prominent tree would be easy to climb in the event of sudden 
Settling Down 
and 
Settling In

61
settling down and settling in
danger. Two deer in the shallows of the lake suggest a good source of 
animal food. The scene features three young people in their reproduc-
tive prime plus an older man—George Washington.1
Komar and Melamid got similar results from comparable surveys in 
nine other countries: Russia, Ukraine, France, Finland, Denmark, Ice-
land, Turkey, Kenya, and China. They also painted the “most wanted” 
scenes inspired by surveys conducted in those countries. The nine ad-
ditional paintings had striking similarities to America’s Most Wanted. All 
the Most Wanted paintings showed savannas with water, easily climbed 
trees, happy people, and large mammals. Overwhelmingly, people pre-
ferred smoothly painted outdoor scenes that looked “real,” with blended 
colors. They liked both wild and domestic animals and human ﬁ gures, 
especially children and women, in casual poses. Familiar historical ﬁ g-
ures had positive valences. Interestingly, as pointed out by art theorist 
Ellen Dissanayake, neither the artists nor anyone connected with the sur-
vey appear to have known about research on environmental  aesthetics.2
Respondents were asked about paintings they would like to hang in 
their homes, ones that they would enjoy looking at over and over again. 
Figure 6.1. Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid, America’s Most 
Wanted, 1994, oil and acrylic on canvas. Photo by D. James Dee.

62
chapter six
They may have unconsciously imagined themselves settling in the pic-
tured environments. They were making the evaluations appropriate to 
the explore stage of our framework.
Jane Austen was not an evolutionary biologist but, as shown by 
this passage from her 1811 novel Sense and Sensibility, she clearly under-
stood how people respond to environments in which they are about 
to live.
The ﬁ rst part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a disposi-
tion to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant. But as they drew towards 
the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a country which they 
were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a view of Barton Valley as 
they entered it gave them cheerfulness. It was a pleasant, fertile spot, well 
wooded, and rich in pasture. After winding along it for more than a mile, 
they reached their own house. . . .
The situation of the house was good. High hills rose immediately 
behind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were open 
downs, the others cultivated and woody. The village of Barton was chieﬂ y 
on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from the cottage windows. 
The prospect in front was more extensive; it commanded the whole of the 
valley, and reached into the country beyond. The hills which surrounded 
the cottage terminated the valley in that direction; under another name, 
and in another course, it branched out again between the two of the steep-
est of them. 
The Dashwood women had lost their estate through inheritance and 
were forced to move. They had to accept the charity of a relative who of-
fered them a cottage and adjust to a lower social and economic status. 
The women were not like tourists in a European city, who enjoy explor-
ing its cobbled streets, nooks and corners, compact housing, and quaint 
shops, but rarely think about what it would be like to actually live there. 
The women thought about the landscape as a place to live.
As we discussed in chapter 4, during the second stage an individual 
explores an area and gathers more information about its resources. 
Exploration may last many days. The environmental features likely to 
command our attention during the explore stage are primarily those 
that signal the resource potential of the area and how safe it would be 
to explore it.3

63
settling down and settling in
Komar and Melamid used surveys to determine, and paintings to ex-
press, the landscape preferences of people in various modern societies. 
I will also use paintings in this chapter because they (as well as pho-
tographs) can be analyzed in several ways. Each can tell us something 
different about how we evaluate environments as places to live in and 
how and why we modify them. One of the chief ways paintings reveal 
our landscape preferences is in the manner that vegetation is depicted. 
Humans manipulate vegetation for many purposes, often for utilitar-
ian ones, such as clearing forests to make way for settlements or roads, 
converting wild land to agriculture, or maintaining a surface suited for 
various sporting pursuits. These utilitarian environments may have aes-
thetic appeal, but their design is not driven by aesthetics. Songwriters 
may wax eloquent about waving ﬁ elds of grain, but we derive aesthetic 
pleasures in agricultural landscapes from mixtures of ﬁ elds, pastures, 
orchards, and woodlots, not from viewing particular crops.
Other modiﬁ cations to vegetation are designed to please the eye, 
rouse feelings of patriotism, or provide an intimate space in which to 
meditate or grieve. Parks, gardens, and cemeteries should reﬂ ect our 
evolutionarily based preferences better than utilitarian environments 
because we design them to be pleasant places to spend time in. Their 
design features should entice exploration and settling. Differences in 
how those places were conceived can tell us much about our preferences 
for living places. We cannot enter a landscape in a photo or painting, but 
we do spend time in parks and gardens.
In the paragraphs that follow, I assume that landscape designers mod-
iﬁ ed landscapes to win and keep clients and artists wanted to sell their 
paintings. Municipal leaders probably also want parks, green spaces, and 
public gardens to enhance the aesthetic appeal of their communities.
Imagine that we are in Central Park in New York on a sunny afternoon. 
The park is full of people walking, jogging, bird- watching, skating, sail-
ing model boats, and relaxing on benches and blankets. The park, de-
signed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, appears natural, but 
it is almost entirely landscaped. Among its many important features are 
several  natural- looking but artiﬁ cially created lakes and ponds, exten-
sive walking tracks, bridle paths, two ice- skating rinks, the Central Park 
Zoo, the Central Park Conservatory Garden, a wildlife sanctuary, a large 

64
chapter six
area of natural woods, an outdoor amphitheater, seven major lawns, and 
many small grassy areas. It has something for everybody. No wonder it 
attracts large crowds of people.
Now imagine that some of our remote ancestors are transported to 
Central Park. How might they respond to the landscape? To help us 
think about their reactions, we will use two evolutionary theories—the 
savanna hypothesis and  prospect- refuge theory—that were developed 
speciﬁ cally to generate predictions about our responses to landscapes. 
The savanna hypothesis, which I developed in 1978, asserts that we 
should be especially attracted to plants that grew in high- quality Af-
rican savannas because, if they had responded positively to them, our 
ancestors would have settled in places in which they had good survival 
and reproductive success.
Jay Appleton’s  prospect- refuge theory proposes that we decide how to 
evaluate an unfamiliar landscape by looking for ways to explore it safely. 
The theory suggests that we should choose routes that would allow us 
to gain the most information about the environment while exposing 
ourselves to the least risk. It also predicts that if artists wish their land-
scapes to be attractive, they should depict a safe route to a refuge that 
would offer good views (ﬁ gure 6.2).
So, our ancestors probably would intuitively assess Central Park by 
paying attention to tree shapes, landscape patterns, and signs of water. 
If they initially decided that the park merited exploration, they would 
then decide how to move safely through it to learn enough to decide 
whether to settle there. In other words, our ancestors would probably re-
spond as we do if they were to suddenly ﬁ nd themselves in Central Park.
We will not use Central Park to test these predictions, but other parks 
and gardens will serve as models. The savanna hypothesis assumes that 
our preferences for landscape patterns and tree shapes have been rela-
tively unaltered during the relatively brief time that we have lived in 
temperate, boreal, and Arctic environments. The trees that dominate 
 resource- rich savannas are typically broader than they are tall, have 
canopies wider than they are deep, have small, compound leaves, and 
have trunks that are short relative to their total height (ﬁ gure 6.3a). Trees 
that grow along rivers ﬂ owing through savannas are taller, narrower, 
and have trunks that seldom split close to the ground (ﬁ gure 6.3b). In 
drier, less productive habitats, trees of many species are shorter; many 

65
settling down and settling in
have multiple trunks (ﬁ gure 6.3c). Our aesthetic responses should reﬂ ect 
both the resources a tree offers (food, shade, safety) and the information 
it provides about the quality of the environment.
We will test predictions from the savanna hypothesis to find out 
which tree shapes are most attractive to us. If our aesthetic preferences 
reﬂ ect our savanna origins, we should ﬁ nd trees similar to those that 
dominate  resource- rich savannas especially attractive. Horticulturalists 
Figure 6.2. Ferdinand Bellerman (1814–89), Road to La 
Guiara, Venezuela, oil on cardboard, 1844.

66
Figure 6.3. Trees and shrubs of East African savannas. Kenya. (a) Acacia tortilis, a 
dominant tree in high quality savannas; (b) taller acacias near a stream; (c) multi-
stemmed shrubs of dry savannas, browsed by gerenuks (Litocranius walleri).

67
settling down and settling in
should favor and cultivate those trees, and they should make other trees 
and shrubs more  savanna- like by pruning them and selecting mutants 
with  savanna- like shapes.
Similarly, parks and gardens should be designed to resemble African 
savanna vegetation. All over the world, in parks large and small, we ﬁ nd 
this to be so. Parks feature scattered trees and shrubs with a grassy un-
derstory. Great pains are taken to create water features or the illusion of 
water, through fountains, ponds, and reﬂ ecting pools, and to enhance 
the quality and quantity of existing water resources for drinking and 
recreation.
We will test predictions about our responses to unfamiliar environ-
ments by looking at gardens that we view from a particular place and by 
analyzing the structure of landscape paintings. We will also test predic-
tions about our responses during the explore stage of habitat selection 
by studying the structure of gardens we enjoy by walking through them. 
But before we test these predictions, let’s explore a bit of history.
Tree shapes are clearly drawn in the very early landscape paintings. 
The Miniature Fresco on Santorini, dating from about 1700 BC, shows a 
mountain landscape with scattered trees. We cannot identify the species, 
but they have the spreading form of savanna trees. A fresco showing the 
king lancing a lion in a mountainous savanna adorns the tomb of Philip II 
of Macedon, who died in 336 BC. Here we can identify the trees—beeches. 
They are huge, with spreading crowns, quite unlike the towering beeches 
of the Macedonian forests that would have been familiar to the artists.4
Medieval gardens, the ﬁ rst ones about which we have speciﬁ c infor-
mation, were of two main kinds—herb gardens designed for growing 
food plants and places set aside for recreation, known as “orchards” or 
“pleasaunces.”5 Most pleasure gardens were surrounded by a wall and 
had sheltered alcoves where sunshine could enter during winter. They 
also had arbors shaded by fruit trees, vines, and climbing ornamental 
shrubs. Many also had artiﬁ cial hills topped with seats, pavilions, or 
other structures. Towers, offering even more extensive views, were often 
erected on mounds or natural hills.
Although aesthetic considerations drove why and how people de-
signed “pleasaunces,” other factors also mattered. Modifying large ex-
panses of land is expensive. Large parks can be built only by wealthy 
landowners or by governments. The structure of landscape gardens also 

68
chapter six
reﬂ ects the level of security.6 Large parks and gardens were created pri-
marily during times when enemies were unlikely to attack. The species 
of plants that were available, the societal ideals and symbols that plants 
or structures represented, and the attitudes that society had toward na-
ture also inﬂ uenced the forms of gardens and parks.7
Japanese Gardens Are  Savanna- Like
Japanese gardens are especially useful for testing the savanna hypoth-
esis because Japanese gardeners prune many woody plants to alter their 
shapes. They have also selected and used genetically modiﬁ ed forms of 
many woody plants. From the eighth through the thirteenth centuries, 
gardens adorned palaces and villas of royal families and wealthy nobles. 
They were open and ﬁ lled with ﬂ owers and blossoming trees and con-
tained streams that emptied into ponds and lakes, some of which were 
large enough to accommodate small boats. Those gardens were designed 
for the pleasures of the few who could afford them.
No early Japanese gardens survive, but Lady Murasaki Shikibu pro-
vided a vivid picture of gardens of the Heian period (794–1185) in her 
great novel The Tale of Genji.
Genji effected great improvement in the appearance of the grounds by a 
judicious handling of knoll and lake, for, though such features were already 
there in abundance, he found it necessary here to cut away a slope, there to 
dam a stream, that each occupant of the various quarters might look out 
of her windows upon such a prospect as pleased her best. To the southeast 
he raised the level of the ground and on this bank planted a profusion of 
early ﬂ owering trees. At the foot of this slope the lake curved with espe-
cial beauty, and in the foreground, just beneath the windows, he planted 
borders of cinquefoil, of red- plum, cherry, wisteria, kerria, rock- azalea, and 
other such plants as are at their best in springtime. . . .
Akikonomu’s garden was full of such trees as in  autumn- time turn to 
the deepest hue. The stream above the waterfall was cleared out and deep-
ened to a considerable distance; and that the noise of the cascade might 
carry further, he set great boulders in mid- stream, against which the cur-
rent crashed and broke.8
Zen Buddhism’s philosophy of simplicity and meditation sub-
sequently influenced all Japanese art forms, but gardens remained 

69
settling down and settling in
 savanna- like. They became more sober and changed less seasonally. 
Ever green plants dominated them. Rocks and gravel became major con-
struction elements; shrubs were often pruned to resemble rocks (ﬁ g-
ure 6.4). Small gardens became popular as population density increased 
and land became more expensive.
According to the savanna hypothesis, trees that are commonly planted 
in gardens should be broader relative to their height, have relatively shorter 
trunks, and have small, more deeply divided leaves than rarely planted ones 
do. Japanese maples (Acer) and oaks (Quercus), two genera of trees com-
monly planted in Japanese gardens, are good for testing these predictions.
Three of the  twenty- two maple species native to Japan—Acer siebold-
ianum, A. japonicum, and A. palmatum—dominate those planted in gar-
dens. They naturally grow sideways to seek patches of brighter light 
in the forest understory. Japanese gardeners do not prune them; they 
already have  savanna- like shapes. The wild A. palmatum individuals 
my wife Betty and I measured do not differ from those in gardens in 
number of main branches or total height relative to canopy width. Some 
rarely planted species also have  light- seeking growth forms, but most 
rarely planted species are taller relative to their breadth than the com-
monly planted ones. They do not resemble tropical savanna trees.
Figure 6.4. Azaleas pruned to resemble rocks, Sento Gosho, Kyoto, Japan.

70
chapter six
Although not compound, the leaves of commonly planted maples 
have ﬁ ve to seven lobes that extend to the middle of the blade, giving 
them a compound appearance. The leaves of nonplanted species are less 
deeply divided; eleven have only shallowly lobed leaves, three have lobes 
that penetrate to the middle of the blade, and two have compound leaves 
with un- lobed leaﬂ ets.
All fourteen species of Japanese oaks (Quercus) have simple leaves. 
Eight species are evergreen; six are deciduous. Oak species commonly 
planted in gardens do not differ from nonplanted oaks in the number of 
main branches from the trunk, in height relative to breadth or in relative 
height of their trunks. All commonly planted species are evergreen with 
small leaves. In contrast, most deciduous oak species have large, shallowly 
lobed leaves. Unlike maples, oaks are heavily pruned so that they stay small 
and have more branches from the trunk than wild- grown individuals.
The natural growth forms of commonly planted conifers in Japanese 
gardens are not  savanna- like, but Japanese red pines (Pinus densiﬂ ora) 
that grow in windswept locations, such as seashores and mountain 
ridges, resemble tropical savanna trees. One of these places, the rocky 
coast of Omishima Island, is one of the most celebrated scenes in Japan. 
The red pines’ ﬂ exible growth form may have attracted Japanese gar-
deners. Red pines in gardens are pruned so that they are broader than 
they are tall and have trunks that divide close to the ground. They are 
trimmed to produce distinct canopy layering much like that of African 
savanna trees (ﬁ gure 6.5).
Most conifers are large trees suitable only for parks and large gardens 
rather than private houses, but many dwarf varieties have been culti-
vated and planted in small gardens and pots, and made into bonsai. Of 
 ﬁ fty- eight conifer species with named cultivars,  forty- seven have dwarf 
and semidwarf varieties, totaling more than two hundred named culti-
vars.9 Mutants of  twenty- four species with columnar shapes or weeping 
branches and twigs are commonly planted in parks and gardens world-
wide. Gardeners might have sought mutants with  acacia- like growth 
forms, but they are extremely rare.
We can use cultivars of Acer palmatum, the maple most extensively 
planted in Japanese gardens, to test the prediction that they should have 
smaller and more deeply lobed leaves than their wild ancestors. Wild 
type A. palmatum has green leaves with seven moderately deep lobes. 

71
settling down and settling in
Vertrees divides cultivars into groups called “palmate,” “dissectum,” 
“deeply divided,” “linearlobium,” and “dwarf.”10 For cultivars in each 
group, I recorded the number of lobes and their depth. I scored depth of 
lobes on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 = very shallowly lobed, 3 = lobed approxi-
mately halfway to the base of the leaf, and 5 = lobed to the base so that the 
leaf is effectively compound. Depth of lobes of “wild type” A. palmatum 
varies, but most leaves score between 2 and 3.
The leaves of mutants and wild type trees have the same number of 
lobes, except in the “dissectum” group whose lobes are so deeply dis-
sected that the leaves are doubly compound. However, depth of lobes 
has been increased. The leaves of very few cultivars are as shallowly 
lobed as wild type A. palmatum. More than half are lobed to the base, so 
that they are compound. (ﬁ gure 6.6)
Weeping or so- called prostrate forms of A. palmatum are widely 
planted. All dwarf cultivars grow no taller than a meter. Many taller 
forms have multiple stems, are broader than tall when mature, and have 
drooping branches. Vertrees gives insufﬁ cient information for me to as-
sess the sizes of leaves of most cultivars, but the leaves of dwarf plants 
are much smaller than those of wild A. palmatum.
Figure 6.5. Japanese red pines (Pinus densiﬂ ora) pruned to resemble savanna 
trees with short trunks and spreading branches, Kyoto, Japan.

72
Figure 6.6. Leaves of cultivars of Japanese maples. Many of the cultivars 
are so deeply lobed that they are actually compound.

73
settling down and settling in
In general, these changes accord with predictions from the savanna 
hypothesis. Compared with wild plants, widely planted mutants have 
relatively shorter trunks and smaller, more deeply divided leaves. The 
mutant forms of species that are regularly planted in gardens are small 
trees with spreading crowns and small  compound- like leaves, like the 
dominant trees of rich African savannas.
Savanna Trees Off er Multiple Beneﬁ ts
In addition to indicating resource richness, savanna trees also offer 
safety.
The closer to the ground a tree’s trunk divides the easier it is to climb. 
A dense tree provides good shade, but visibility from its canopy is poor. 
To test if those traits inﬂ uence attractiveness, Judi Heerwagen and I re-
corded people’s responses to photographs of Acacia tortilis, a common 
species in  resource- rich East African savannas; it often dominates sa-
fari advertisements. We selected photographs of individual trees that 
varied in  height- to- width ratio, height at which the trunk divided, and 
extent of canopy layering. We grouped them so that one category (trunk 
height, canopy density, canopy layering) varied but the others did not 
(ﬁ gure 6.7).
We asked participants to rate each tree on a continuous scale: 1 to 2 = 
“unattractive,” 3 to 4 = “moderately attractive,” and 5 to 6 = “very attrac-
tive.” Participants could score a tree as, say, 3.6 rather than 3 or 4. We re-
corded ratings of  seventy- two people entering or leaving the University 
of Washington Bookstore and thirty in a restaurant on the University of 
Washington campus. They ranged in age from eighteen to sixty. We ap-
proached people and asked them if they would mind ﬁ lling out a ques-
tionnaire on the role of trees in environmental aesthetics. Instructions 
on the survey read, “In the attached  photo- questionnaire, we ask you to 
rate the relative attractiveness of a number of trees. There are six trees on 
each page, with the rating scale under each. Circle the point on the scale 
which best corresponds to your opinion of the tree’s attractiveness.” 
They were asked to rate the trees on each page before they continued to 
the next and not to turn back once they had completed a page.
We tested four hypotheses: (1) Trees whose trunks divide closer to the 
ground should be more attractive than trees whose trunks divide higher 

74
Figure 6.7. One of the pages of photos of Acacia tortilis trees that Judi 
Heerwagen and I used to test people’s aesthetic responses to tree shapes.

75
settling down and settling in
up. (2) Trees with moderate canopy density should be more attractive 
than trees with low or high canopy density. (3) Trees with a high canopy 
layering should be more attractive than trees with low or moderate lay-
ering. (4) The broader a tree’s canopy relative to its height, the more at-
tractive it should be.
As we predicted, low trunk height, canopy layering, and wide cano-
pies positively inﬂ uenced people’s scores.11 Contrary to our predictions, 
however, the  canopy- width- to- canopy- height ratio did not inﬂ uence a 
tree’s attractiveness. We were not able to assess the impact of canopy 
density because canopies appeared more similar to one another in the 
 black- and- white  photo- questionnaire than in the original color photos.
Ghosts in Western Gardens
Western gardens are also rich sources of information for evaluating the 
savanna hypothesis. Western gardening began in the Middle East, a dry 
region with brutally hot summers. Agriculture was restricted to valley 
bottoms and depended on spring meltwater from mountain snow. Water 
was scarce and valuable. In striking contrast to the dry natural landscapes 
that surrounded them, Persian gardens were walled oases of fruit trees 
and water. They were designed as places to sit and escape from the sun’s 
heat. Persian gardens were models for Islamic gardens, which spread 
eastward to India and westward to Turkey, North Africa, and Spain.
We have only indirect evidence of the forms of those ancient Persian 
gardens. One source is an immense carpet of silk, gold, silver, and jew-
els, known as the Spring of Khosrow Carpet, which apparently repre-
sented the spring garden of King Khusrau I (531–579). Arabs discovered 
it when they conquered the Mesopotamian city of Ctesiphon in 637. They 
reported it to be about 450 feet long and 90 feet wide. Unfortunately, 
the carpet was cut up and the fragments handed out to the troops as 
the spoils of war. Gardens portrayed on surviving Persian carpets have a 
small border of ﬂ owers, followed by a wider one of trees. The main part 
of the garden is divided into four sections, separated by canals with ﬁ sh. 
Each of the four sections is divided into six squares where ﬂ owerbeds 
alternate with beds containing plane and cypress trees.
Marco Polo traversed the Near East during the 1260s. He described a 
garden “planted with all the ﬁ nest fruits in the world” and with “four 

76
chapter six
conduits, one ﬂ owing with wine, one with milk, one with honey, and one 
with water.” We must take his description, especially of the conduits, 
with many grains of salt, but it does suggest that real gardens were simi-
lar to what is portrayed on Persian garden carpets that survive today. Our 
remote ancestors would have felt comfortable in them.
No ancient Persian gardens remain, but a few Moorish gardens sur-
vive in southern Spain. Moors invaded Spain in 710 and ruled much of 
the country for centuries. Spaniards did not reconquer the Kingdom of 
Granada, the last bit of the Moorish empire, until 1492. Despite strenu-
ous efforts to eradicate Islamic belief and Arabic learning, some aspects 
of Arab culture survived; as we will see, gardening is one of them.
Walking in Large Gardens—Prospects and Refuges
Jay Appleton’s  prospect- refuge theory predicts that designers should 
provide garden visitors with a succession of refuges, each one offering 
a view of a different part of the garden. Views should feature areas that 
offer water, the promise of resources, and safety. Designers may ensure 
that visitors see these views by directing walkers along a speciﬁ c route 
of travel indicated by clearly marked rock or gravel paths.
Japanese gardens ﬁ t these predictions. Paths curve; rocks, trees, or 
shrubs frequently hide their courses.12 A walker emerges from one ref-
uge with a new prospect view. After a short walk through an open area, 
another refuge (a group of trees and shrubs that obscures other parts of 
the garden) appears. Multiple prospect views also foster an impression 
that a garden is much larger than it actually is.
Western gardens, although they superﬁ cially look very different, 
share some structural features. For example, the Great Avenue at Castle 
Howard, Yorkshire, England, is about ﬁ ve miles long, most of which is 
straight, but it has a series of little hills each of which reveals a new vista. 
Architectural features—an early  eighteenth- century obelisk, a Victo-
rian column, and a number of gateways also generate variety.
The most elaborate formal garden designed around a speciﬁ ed route 
of travel also is the largest—the gardens of the Palace of Versailles. The 
garden is so large, at eight hundred hectares, that King Louis XIV ac-
tually wrote an itinerary for viewing his garden. Entitled La Maniere de 
Montrer les Jardines de Versailles, it not only indicates the route, but also 

77
settling down and settling in
commands the visitor to look at views in a speciﬁ c way. “Leaving the 
Chateau . . . go on to the terrace. You must stop at the top of the steps . . .” 
The gardens at Versailles are so extensive that it would have taken most 
of a day to complete the route, even by carriage. Following Louis’s itin-
erary, a visitor would move through the garden from one fountain to 
another, never losing sight of water. Sited on ﬂ at terrain, Versailles was 
regularly short of water. Indeed, the speciﬁ ed itinerary allowed foun-
tains to be turned on in a particular order. A “secret” route ran parallel 
to the king’s. Boys ran along it, signaling with ﬂ ags when it was time to 
turn fountains on and off.
Italian Renaissance gardens had ample supplies of naturally ﬂ owing 
water. Designers manipulated views to generate surprises. Leon Battista 
Alberti (1404–72), who wrote extensively about principles of garden de-
sign, suggested “I would have it stand pretty high, but upon so easy an 
Ascent, that it should hardly be perceptible to those that go to it, till 
they ﬁ nd themselves at the Top, and a large Prospect opens itself to their 
view.”13
Many  little- modiﬁ ed Italian Renaissance gardens remain. The most 
perfectly maintained one is Villa Lante, Bagnaia, begun in 1564 and ex-
tensively restored in 1954. The long, slim rectangular garden descends in 
terraces down a wooded slope. Water ﬂ ows down its central axis from a 
grotto at the top to a square pool at the bottom (ﬁ gure 6.8). Villa D’Este, 
begun around 1550, has a similar design but with the addition of elabo-
rate fountains. A visitor is encouraged to enter at the bottom and follow 
gently rising paths. At the top a visitor is rewarded with a magniﬁ cent 
view of the city of Tivoli. A similar design with a stairway thickly shaded 
with trees and shrubs, from which a walker emerges to a spectacular 
view of Rome, is found in Villa Medici.
England’s expansive landscape gardens can be traversed via multiple 
routes, but Lancelot “Capability” Brown (1716–83) designed his gardens 
so that travelers were repeatedly surprised. He planted strips of wood-
land to conceal undesirable landscape features. He used clumps and iso-
lated groups of trees to frame distant views. Brown also created many 
lakes by damming streams. He concealed dams so they were hidden un-
til a person got very close to them (ﬁ gure 6.9).
Moorish gardens also were designed for walking. The best surviv-
ing ones, the Generalife and the Alhambra, are in Granada, Spain. The 

78
Figure 6.8. Lower Garden, Ville Lante, Bagnaia, Viterbo, Italy.
Figure 6.9. Burghley House, built 1565–87 by William Cecil, Lord Treasurer to Queen 
Elizabeth I; lake designed by Capability Brown, 1775–80; Stamford, Lincolnshire.

79
settling down and settling in
 Alhambra, built around 1238, is an alcazaba (military fortress), an alcázar 
(palace), and a medina (small city) all in one. The Generalife is a complex 
of gardens built over many centuries. In 1958 a ﬁ re destroyed part of it. 
Restoration workers found that the original garden beds were well below 
the paths; the tops of ﬂ owers would have been roughly level with the 
paths. The Court of the Lions is the purest surviving Moorish garden in 
Spain. Water rises in adjacent rooms and fountains, runs along narrow 
channels past slender pillars that line the garden, and forms four rivers 
that divide the beds. Today’s beds are level with the paths; the original 
ones were probably lower.
Although the general layouts of Granada’s gardens are probably very 
similar to the original Moorish design, the fountains are recent Spanish 
additions. Cypress trees, which had religious signiﬁ cance in Persia, were 
part of the original Moorish plantings, but many plants, which include 
salvias and yuccas from the Americas, are recent introductions. We do 
not know if or how the Moors manipulated tree forms. Currently, most 
trees in the Generalife and the Alhambra are heavily pruned, a necessity 
in such small spaces, but few of them are modiﬁ ed to have  savanna- like 
forms. Other than oranges, none of the trees or shrubs bears edible fruits.
Distant Views Are Important
As we saw in chapter 4, people sitting at the entrance to Abauntz Cave in 
Spain had expansive views of plains and mountains. With that view they 
could see distant prey and spot approaching people. Long ago gardeners 
learned how to use expansive views of areas beyond a garden’s borders to 
give an impression that it is much larger than it really is. Such borrowed 
scenery, as it is called, also enhances the perceived power and author-
ity of the garden’s owner (ﬁ gure 6.10). Borrowed scenery is especially 
important for gardens designed to be viewed from a nearby spot. We 
consider this in the next section.
Assessing Prospects from Afar
When we encounter an unfamiliar landscape we make a rapid un-
conscious assessment to determine whether to stay and explore it or 
move on.

80
chapter six
A designer of a garden that is to be viewed from a nearby spot con-
fronts the same limitations as painters and photographers. Yet, a gar-
dener has a major advantage. A painting or photo, once completed, is 
forever the same, although today’s digital photos are easily modiﬁ ed. 
A garden changes with weather, time of day, and season. Trees burst 
into leaf, turn colors in autumn, and drop their leaves. Flowers bloom 
and fade. A succession of ﬂ owers, enhanced by ripening fruits, gener-
ates seasonal color changes. Just as one cannot wade into the same river 
twice, one cannot view the same garden twice. A person can experience 
something new with each visit.
Many small Japanese gardens are viewed from a particular spot. The 
main attraction is often water, real or simulated. Japanese garden de-
signers are experts in creating an impression that these small gardens 
are larger than they really are. They sometimes build boats half the nor-
mal size so that the ponds in which they ﬂ oat seem to be large. They 
employ horizontal lines, such as a stretch of sand or gravel raked into 
ﬂ owing lines, to create a sense of spaciousness. They magnify apparent 
depth by placing large rocks and plants near the viewpoint, smaller ones 
farther away.
Figure 6.10. Borrowed scenery, Bodnant Garden, North Wales. 
The garden ends at the low wall just behind the pond.

81
settling down and settling in
Japanese designers also create a sense of distance by placing plants 
and materials of brighter colors near the viewing spot and darker shades 
in the distance, and by planting trees and shrubs with larger leaves 
nearby, woody plants with smaller leaves farther away. A curving path 
that winds among trees and shrubs appears to be far away. A sense of 
greater size is sometimes created in small gardens by making a plot of 
lawn or sand slightly narrower farther from the viewing point, a device 
that makes the garden appear to recede more rapidly.
Garden designers in the West also took advantage of borrowed views. 
Cattle and sheep roamed large gardens. They kept the lawn closely clipped 
and provided owners with dairy products and meat. Walls, hedges, or 
fences controlled livestock movements and provided privacy. These En-
glish gardens were inward looking and visually tied to the house. In 1738, 
a simple but important innovation—the ha- ha—dramatically changed 
appearances. A ha- ha is a ditch dug around those parts of a garden to be 
visually joined to the landscape. It was wide and deep and had one steep 
side, so that cattle could not cross it in either direction. Ha- has were de-
signed to be invisible from the house to create an illusion that the garden 
and surrounding countryside were united. The name “ha- ha” came to be 
used because people were surprised when they suddenly encountered the 
unexpected barrier.
Landscape gardeners were much inﬂ uenced by landscape painters, 
particularly Claude Lorrain (1600–1682) and Gaspard Dughet (1615–75). 
They both painted many landscapes near Tivoli, about ﬁ fteen miles east 
of Rome. That area is hilly; the River Anio plunges down its valley in 
a series of cascades. The ruin of the temple of the Vesta is perched on 
a jutting corner of a hill near Tivoli. Dating from the ﬁ rst century BC, 
the temple of the Vesta appears in more than forty of Claude’s surviv-
ing paintings and in a high proportion of Gaspard’s. Garden designer 
William Kent (1685–1748), ﬁ rst trained as a painter, studied in Italy from 
1712 to 1719. He introduced imitations of the temple to English gardens; 
it became the most frequently imitated ancient building in British land-
scapes. More than twenty were built; even more were built on the conti-
nent. Kent viewed gardens as landscapes through which a visitor could 
proceed from one “landscape picture” to another. Each “picture” would 
have an association with nature and some images of the past in the form 
of urns, statues, temples, and ruins.

82
chapter six
Changes recommended by landscape architects to their prospec-
tive clients can help us understand what motivated them. Humphrey 
Repton (1752–1818), a leading British landscape architect, provides the 
most complete record. He prepared “before” and “after” drawings for 
his clients, bound his drawings in red covers, and explained in an ac-
companying text why he proposed those changes. Judi Heerwagen and 
I analyzed eighteen “before” and “after” drawings in Repton’s Redbooks 
to test whether the changes he recommended ﬁ t predictions from the 
savanna hypothesis and  prospect- refuge theory.14
As we predicted, Repton often added trees and copses to open ﬁ elds. 
He added groups of trees at the water’s edge, a feature that protects people 
when they are drinking, resting, or bathing (ﬁ gure 6.11). Our savanna 
ancestors were less alert when engaged in those activities and, therefore, 
beneﬁ ted from the protection afforded by trees. Repton also frequently 
altered straight borders demarking pasture and woods by planting trees 
in open spaces to create uneven edges. He also added scattered copses of 
trees, removed trees to open up distant views, and opened woods to allow 
both physical and visual access. He modiﬁ ed trees so that their trunks 
split close to the ground, making them easy to climb, and added ﬂ owers 
and shrubs. He removed trees in about half of the landscapes to open 
views to the horizon. In his book The Art of Landscape Gardening, Repton 
provided the rationale for the changes he proposed. He noted that too 
many trees “make a place appear gloomy and damp.”15
Water features are the most striking part of Repton’s designs. He fre-
quently added bodies of water and enlarged existing ones to make them 
more conspicuous. In about half his designs, he enhanced the view of 
water features. He added rocks to a brook to give it “a rippling, lively 
effect which is highly preferable to a narrow stagnant creek.” Repton 
believed that “it is only by such deceptions that art can imitate the most 
pleasing works of nature.”16
Repton also added cattle, sheep, and deer, and where appropriate, 
boats. He defended doing so by saying that “both are real objects of im-
provement, and give animation to the scene.” His addition of animals is 
especially interesting because doing so went well beyond the common 
scope of a landscape architect’s commission.
Two technical inventions—the lawn mower and the greenhouse—
exerted an important inﬂ uence on Western garden design. Prior to the 

83
settling down and settling in
invention of the lawn mower by Edwin Budding in 1830, closely cut 
lawns were maintained either by sheep and cattle or laboriously with 
a scythe. A small landowner who lacked sheep or a team of gardeners 
could afford a lawn mower. By the 1870s the lawn mower had triumphed; 
scythes were rusting in tool sheds.
The greenhouse was invented in 1829 by Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward, a 
doctor, an amateur entomologist, and an ardent grower of ferns. He got 
Figure 6.11. Above, Sketch showing the “before” view of the water 
at Wentworth, Yorkshire. Below, Lifting the ﬂ ap reveals the “after” 
view with Humphrey Repton’s proposed improvements.

84
chapter six
his idea when a fern appeared in a glass bottle in which he had buried 
the chrysalis of a sphinx moth. He concluded that plants would prosper 
in a bottle where the air was free from soot. He placed the bottle out-
side the window of his study and was delighted that the fern and other 
plants continued to grow. Stimulated by this simple experiment he built 
a  glass- enclosed case about ﬁ ve feet high with a perforated pipe around 
the top through which water rained on the plants.
It did not take long for greenhouses to be widely used. With a green-
house a gardener could grow large numbers of tender annual plants to 
transplant at speciﬁ c times. When they had ﬁ nished blooming, plants 
could be dug up and replaced with another batch of annuals from 
the greenhouse. Greenhouses for the ﬁ rst time made it easy to main-
tain a garden with dramatic seasonal changes in ﬂ owering herbaceous 
plants
Woody plants are also sources of seasonal color variations. Autumn 
leaves of deciduous trees are an obvious example, but many cultivars 
have brightly colored or variegated leaves during the summer growing 
season. Maple mutants with bright red petioles and red samaras (fruits) 
are also extensively planted, as we will see in chapter 8.
“A Beauteous City for the Dead”
The term “cemetery” is derived from a Greek word that means “sleeping 
place.” Greeks moved cemeteries outside the city for sanitary reasons, 
but their main motivation was to provide a place for visitors—the dead 
being unable to appreciate their surroundings—to establish contacts 
with nature and to achieve a sense of the continuity of life. Few objects 
were placed in Greek graves, but elaborate and brightly painted stelae 
and statues often marked the graves to ensure that the dead would not 
be forgotten.
The Greek concept of cemetery settings was adopted in America’s 
most important cemetery, Mount Auburn, which was established in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1835 and modeled on the Père Lachaise 
Cemetery in Paris. Foreign dignitaries were regularly taken to the cem-
etery. It was quipped that Bostonians had only two ways of entertaining 
important guests—a formal public dinner and a drive to Mount Au-

85
settling down and settling in
burn. Mount Auburn was much admired and was imitated in cemeteries 
throughout the eastern and midwestern United States.
Lady Emmeline Charlotte Elizabeth  Stuart- Wortley, who was taken to 
both the Harvard campus and Mount Auburn in 1849, wrote an enthu-
siastic description:
The ﬁ nely diversiﬁ ed grounds occupy about one hundred acres, in general 
profusely adorned with a rich variety of trees, and in some places planted 
with ornamental shrubbery: there are some tombs graced with charming 
ﬂ ower beds. There are also some pretty sheets of water there: it is divided 
into different avenues and paths, which have various names. Generally they 
are called after the trees of ﬂ owers that abound there, such as lily, poplar, 
cypress, violet, woodbine, and others. It is, indeed, a beauteous city for the 
dead. The birds were singing most melliﬂ uously and merrily—it was quite 
a din of music that they kept up in these solemn but lovely shades. The 
views from Mount Auburn are ﬁ ne and extensive. There are some graceful 
and well- executed monuments within its precincts.17
Color Vision and the Preference for Blue and Green
This survey of Western and Japanese gardens shows that they share a 
number of features. But are these common features the result of univer-
sal human aesthetic preferences? They may be. As we saw at the begin-
ning of the chapter, surveys carried out for Komar and Melamid yielded 
similar results in ten countries. People in all countries preferred similar 
structures, and they all preferred blue, followed by green.
Why did people prefer blue and green? One possibility is that these 
two colors have been dominant features of the natural environment for 
billions of years. They are inevitable by- products of the physical proper-
ties of water and of the compounds in plant leaves that absorb light and 
support photosynthesis. They already existed when color vision evolved 
several hundred million years ago. At that time very few colors would 
have been found on Earth. In addition to blue, green, and brown, there 
would have been the colors of the rainbow, reﬂ ected colors of crystals, 
and the red of spilled blood, but not much more. The most striking col-
ors of nature—the brilliant plumage of birds and the rich colors of ﬂ ow-
ers and fruits—evolved because their bearers were more easily seen and 

86
chapter six
color could send a signal of vigor, ﬁ tness, or ripeness. But those colors 
were more conspicuous only to an animal with color vision.
My explanation of Komar and Melamid’s ﬁ ndings is not universally 
shared. Arthur Danto, a philosopher and art critic for the Nation, asserts 
that our preferences for pictures are culturally produced. He believes 
that we prefer the colors our culture makes familiar.18 He suggests that 
our landscape preferences have been determined by what is pictured in 
calendars. He is correct that, in response to the questions about what 
types of art people have in their homes, 91 percent of Kenyans men-
tioned prints from calendars, but his explanation fails to explain why 
those scenes are selected for calendars. Calendar producers surely want 
images people will enjoy looking at. Their selections must be guided by 
an intuitive sense of what we ﬁ nd attractive. In my view, Danto has the 
causation backward.
Responses to Individual Trees
Investigators have used people’s responses to  computer- generated trees 
or photos of trees to test whether we ﬁ nd  savanna- shaped trees particu-
larly attractive. Robert Sommer and Joshua Summit showed drawings 
of columnar, globular, fan, broad oval, and narrow conical shaped trees, 
as well as eucalyptus, oak, conifer, palm, and acacia, to college students 
in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Israel, Japan, and the United States. They 
all rated spreading and globular trees higher than conical and columnar 
ones.19 College students from Zimbabwe, South Africa, Estonia, Italy, 
Switzerland, and the US- Mexico border also preferred trees with an 
 acacia- like shape.20 The rank order of tree shapes was spreading, globe, 
fan, oval, conical, and columnar. These results strongly support the sa-
vanna hypothesis. Participants also scored trees more highly if they were 
common where they had grown up, indicating that early exposure to a 
tree increases its attractiveness. In laboratory experiments, people have 
lower blood pressure when they view trees with spreading rather than 
rounded canopies.21
Children and Trees. All experiments I have described so far were con-
ducted with adults. We expect children to respond differently to trees and 
their responses should change with age as their ability to climb improves. 

87
settling down and settling in
Few experiments have been conducted on children’s tree- climbing ac-
tivities, in part because of ethical concerns. However, Coss and Moore 
tested whether young children with little or no tree- climbing experi-
ence understood that trees could be antipredator refuges and sources of 
shade.22 Because our female ancestors were better climbers than males 
during most of human evolution, Coss and Moore predicted that pre-
school girls would value trees as antipredator refuges more highly than 
preschool boys did. They tested this prediction by asking children where 
they would seek refuge from a predator.
In one experiment Coss and Moore used a  computer- generated scene 
with a spreading tree next to a rock outcrop that contained a crevice a 
child could squeeze into but that was too narrow to admit a lion. Both 
children and the lion could climb the outcrop. Coss and Moore took 
snapshots from different vantage points in this virtual world and or-
ganized them into a picture book. They used eighteen pictures in a nar-
rated tour of the three potential refuge sites. The narrator pointed to rel-
evant features in each picture before turning the page. Then the lion was 
presented, and the assistant continued with the next set of pictures that 
reviewed the tour and reminded the children that they had seen three 
places where they might hide. Finally, the assistant asked each child, 
“where would you go to feel safe from the lion?”
As they had predicted, girls selected the acacia tree more often than 
either the crevice or top of the boulder. The boys, on the other hand, did 
not favor any one of the three. Combined, boys and girls selected the tree 
for a refuge more often than they selected the top of the rock. Evidently 
they understood that a lion could climb the rock but not the tree.
In another experiment, Coss and Moore presented children from 
three cultures with silhouettes of trees that differed in crown height and 
width to determine if crown shape inﬂ uenced choice of tree for aesthetic 
appreciation, accessibility, visibility, sleeping, and refuge from a lion. 
They used four trees—an Austrian pine (Pinus nigra), an African fever 
tree (Acacia xanthophloea), an unbrowsed Acacia tortilis, and a heavily 
browsed A. tortilis. Children could “climb” the trees with their ﬁ ngers, 
but they could not tell how large they were. They predicted that children 
would select a tree with a wide crown rather than a tall crown as the 
prettiest tree.
Children were ﬁ rst asked if they climbed trees, how often, and where 

88
chapter six
they climbed them. They were then asked four questions, in random or-
der: “Which tree is the prettiest?” “Which tree would you climb to see 
better?” “Which tree would you choose to sleep in?” “Which tree would 
you climb to hide?” The ﬁ nal, and most provocative question was, “A 
wild lion has escaped from the zoo and was seen nearby. Which tree 
would you climb to feel safe?”
To see better, children preferred the pine, fever tree, and browsed 
A. tortilis over the unbrowsed A. tortilis, the tree with the densest canopy. 
However, most of them preferred the unbrowsed A. tortilis as the tree in 
which to hide, to sleep in, and to feel safe from the lion. This result is not 
surprising;  three- to ﬁ ve- year- old children show a good understanding 
of how obstructions restrict another person’s ﬁ eld of view when they 
play hiding games.23
More than half of the children selected the Austrian pine, a tree with 
a tall narrow crown, as the prettiest, a result that differs markedly from 
the aesthetic preferences of adults in most experiments. It also conﬂ icts 
with predictions from the savanna hypothesis. Apparently, for reasons 
we do not understand, aesthetic appreciation of tree shapes changes 
during transition from childhood to adulthood because college students 
strongly preferred the unbrowsed A. tortilis; only 5.4 percent preferred 
the Austrian pine.
In another experiment, Coss and Moore used the same tree silhou-
ettes to test possible sex differences in tree preferences. Half of  three-  to 
four- year- old preschool children at day- care centers in Davis, Califor-
nia, were presented with the four trees in the same positions on the page 
as in the second experiment. The others were presented with a rotated 
layout in which the Austrian pine appeared in the lower  right- hand cor-
ner. They asked three new questions: “Which tree would be the most 
difﬁ cult to climb?” “Which tree would you stay under to keep cool on a 
hot day?” “Where in that tree would you climb to feel safe?”
Children judged the fever tree to be the most difﬁ cult to climb, but 
not by very much. They strongly preferred the unbrowsed A. tortilis as 
the tree to stay under to keep cool and the tree in which they would feel 
safest from the lion. Both four- year- old boys and girls selected a sig-
niﬁ cantly higher refuge site in the Austrian pine than did  three- year- old 
boys. Four- year- old girls selected slightly higher refuge sites in the fe-

89
settling down and settling in
ver tree than did  three- year- old children. Four- year- old girls selected 
safe sites closer to the edge of the canopy of both the unbrowsed and 
browsed A. tortilis tree than did four- year- old boys. Small branches far 
from the trunk are safer because some predators, especially leopards, 
can climb trees but cannot crawl out on small branches without break-
ing then.
These results are unlikely to be due to experience because all children 
had climbed only commercially built structures in backyards, parks, 
and school grounds; none of them resembled trees. The children ap-
peared to possess knowledge about the refuge value of trees that they 
could not have derived from prior experience. Their judgments appear 
to be adaptive in the circumstances under which our ancestors would 
have climbed trees. Baboons, langurs, and macaques also choose outer 
branches for refuge from  heavier- bodied predators and preferentially 
sleep on small, outer branches.24
Symbolic Signiﬁ cance of Tree Shapes
Inevitably we attach symbolic signiﬁ cance to trees. We associate them 
with positive values, such as permanence, stability, trustworthiness, 
fertility, and generosity.25 Trees are prominent in children’s stories and 
myths of many cultures. The three parts of a tree—root, trunk, and 
crown—have been thought to reﬂ ect the infernal, earthly, and heavenly 
domains.26
Although most of us are attracted to trees similar in form to those 
that dominate  resource- rich African savannas, we also ﬁ nd trees with 
other shapes to be beautiful. Trees that are tall and narrow are widely 
planted near houses and along roads. Tall, slender cypresses are promi-
nent in Middle Eastern and Mediterranean gardens. The Lombardy mu-
tant of a European poplar is common in Western gardens. The savanna 
hypothesis cannot explain why those trees have strong aesthetic appeal.
A plausible alternative hypothesis is that their appeal derives from 
our positive responses to sunlight. We require sun exposure to synthe-
size vitamin D, which we need for development of the musculoskeletal 
system, preventing rickets and osteoporosis, and preventing chronic 
diseases such as type 1 diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis. Daylight also 

90
chapter six
regulates the body’s  twenty- four- hour circadian rhythms. When we are 
exposed to insufﬁ cient daylight or artiﬁ cial light, melatonin levels in-
crease, causing us to become drowsy and depressed.
The sun arcs across the sky during the day, but sunlight comes pri-
marily from above. Darkness reigns below. Most religions postulate that 
heaven or its equivalent lies above in the sky. Hell or its equivalent lies 
in the dark interior of Earth. Spiritual help comes from above. Positive 
emotions are associated with events above us. We speak of having a 
“high” or feeling “low.” We have “uppers” and “downers.” We speak of 
being “lifted up” or “dragged down.” We have higher and lower thoughts. 
When people are asked to evaluate whether words shown on a screen are 
positive or negative, they respond more quickly when a positive word is 
ﬂ ashed at the top of the screen or a negative word is ﬂ ashed at the bot-
tom of the screen than the reverse.27
Our deep intuitive sense that “happy is up” may explain why we asso-
ciate striving to achieve “higher states of awareness” and greater status 
with symbols that point upward. Tall narrow trees may evoke “uplifting” 
emotional responses, especially on ﬂ at terrain. The spires and  steeples of 
religious buildings may also reﬂ ect this fundamental emotion. Nations 
compete to have the highest buildings, not those that occupy the great-
est amount of ground space.
The Signiﬁ cance of Water
We can survive several weeks without food, but we must drink daily. 
Omega- 3 amino acids, which we need for building large brains, are dif-
ﬁ cult to get. Aquatic animals, such as mollusks, are good sources. We 
are surprisingly agile in water. Infants prior to six months of age ex-
hibit appropriate movements and breath control when placed in water. 
Water always increases the attractiveness of environments. We highly 
value water in our initial responses to landscapes (encounter stage). We 
also value water when we evaluate environments for  longer- term use 
(explore stage). We ﬂ ock to shores of rivers, lakes, and oceans for vaca-
tions. We add water, sometimes at great expense, to our private yards. 
Landscape architects enhance water in public parks and gardens. We pay 
more for homes that front on water or have views of water.
Water has probably always been a major feature of gardens, but evi-

91
settling down and settling in
dence of water disappears quickly when a garden is abandoned, so we 
have only indirect evidence about water in most ancient gardens. We 
know about water in Egyptian gardens because it is pictured in tombs, 
sculptural relief, and paintings with decorative geometric ponds and 
canals with ﬁ sh, lotuses, and papyri.
Mesopotamian engineers created networks of lakes, reservoirs, and 
canals. They were destroyed, restored by Nebuchadnezzar between 604 
and 561 BC, and destroyed again by the Persians. As described by Greek 
historians Strabo and Diodorus, the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, cre-
ated by Nebuchadnezzar to please his Persian wife (605 BC), contained 
conduits and fountains. Engines drew water out of the river Euphrates 
and supplied it to the garden via concealed conduits.
The word “fountain” initially meant a spring of water. Many Greek 
springs were dedicated to gods, goddesses, nymphs, and heroes. Water 
delivered to carved basins was often used for drinking. One Corinthian 
fountain had a statue of the horse Pegasus with water ﬂ owing from its 
hooves. Another included a bronze statue of Neptune standing on a dol-
phin, from which water ﬂ owed. Gardens and then cities grew up around 
springs.
Rome is a city of fountains, but the number today is miniscule com-
pared with the 1,212 public fountains and 926 public baths that existed 
when the Goths sacked the city. Only ﬁ ve of the original fountains sur-
vive. These impressive structures were built where they could be fed by 
water from mountain springs and rivers.
As we have described, traditional Persian gardens contained four es-
sentials: water for irrigation, display, and sound; shade trees for shelter; 
ﬂ owers for scent and color; and music. In much of the Islamic world 
(India, Pakistan, the Middle East, northern Africa, Spain, and Portugal), 
where water was scarce, architects made the most of small amounts.
Designers of European Renaissance gardens generally worked with 
the natural terrain, but Baroque gardeners often built ramps, terraces, 
and steps, many of which gushed with water. Renaissance and Baroque 
gardens often had  water- driven devices that produced a variety of noises.
Chinese and Japanese garden designers also extensively used water, 
often in the form of a sinuous pond, interrupted by hills, mounds, rocks, 
and trees, positioned such that only part of the water can be seen from one 
place. Japanese designers perfected the art of creating a dry streambed, 

92
chapter six
ﬁ rst developed by the Chinese. Carefully placed rocks, sand, and gravel 
and raked patterns create an image of moving water (ﬁ gure 6.12).
An  eleventh- century manual, the Sakuteiki (Memorandum on Gar-
den Making), recommends the following procedure for constructing a 
stream. “In making a stream in a garden, place the rocks where the wa-
ter turns: then it will run smoothly. Where the water curves, it strikes 
against the outer banks, and so a ‘turning stone’ should be laid here and 
there as if forgotten. But if too many stones are placed along the stream, 
while it may appear natural when you are close by, from a distance it will 
seem as if they had no purpose. Moreover, an excess of rocks will make 
the course seem one of stone rather than of water. Thus, the water effect 
will be spoiled.”
Water and Real Estate Prices. Realtors have long known that market 
prices increase if houses have views of water. Data from 6,949 home 
sales from 1984 through 1993 in Bellingham, Washington, show that wa-
ter frontage increased the value of a home by 126 percent compared to a 
comparable nonview, nonfrontage home. An unobstructed view of Bell-
ingham Bay added even more to the market price; a mountain view added 
Figure 6.12. Rock garden with gravel raked to simulate waves. 
Upper garden,  Rengejo- in, Koyasan, Kyoto.

93
settling down and settling in
much less to its value. The market value of a house decreased slowly with 
its distance from the bay.28
Houses in eastern Massachusetts with a water view sold for more than 
similar houses without one.29 So did three thousand houses in the Neth-
erlands built after 1970. The largest increases in prices (28 percent) were 
for houses with a garden facing water connected to a sizeable lake. Sale 
price increased 8–10 percent if a house overlooked water.30 The size of 
the water body had little inﬂ uence on sale price.31 This response suggests 
that the beneﬁ t of the water is for drinking rather than transportation.
Aesthetics of Imaginary Environments—Heaven and Hell
We know that we will die, but throughout recorded history, and pre-
sumably long before that, people did not want to accept that death is 
ﬁ nal. They resolved the psychological pain of this grim prospect by 
constructing visions of life somewhere else after death on Earth. Pre-
historic people easily observed evidence of life after death. Dead plants 
appeared to spring to life after rains or in spring, amphibians emerged 
from mud, and migratory birds reappeared from unknown places after 
long absences.
Perceptions of heaven and hell tell us something about the features we 
would like to ﬁ nd in the environment of our next life. Limits to human 
imagination guarantee that concepts of the “otherworld” are strongly 
inﬂ uenced by the world we do know. We imagine life in those worlds in a 
body similar to the one we live in. Heaven is similar to Earth but without 
most unpleasant parts of the earthly environment. Australian aborigi-
nes thought the land beyond the great water in the sky was like Australia 
but more fertile, well watered, and full of game. For the Comanche, the 
land where the sun sets is a valley wider and longer than their own val-
ley, where there is no darkness, wind, or rain, and game is abundant.32
Because people have thought that life after death continues in famil-
iar ways, the dead were typically buried with possessions they would 
need in their next life. Rich people were assumed to need their servants 
in their next life. Tombs of city kings and their consorts, found at Ur in 
Mesopotamia, dating from before 2000 BC, contain many servants, sol-
diers, courtiers, and  ladies- in- waiting who were killed and buried with 
them. In China, under the Shang Dynasty (from the eighteenth to the 

94
chapter six
eleventh centuries BC), kings and noblemen were buried with a substan-
tial escort of servants.
Depictions of the two options were clearly designed to reinforce the 
desirability of getting to heaven but avoiding hell. What are they like?
Heaven
Christian heaven was ﬁ lled with beautiful trees that provided bountiful 
fruit and perpetual shade. Jesus compared the Kingdom of God to a great 
tree in which many birds make their nests. In the ﬁ fth century BC, Pin-
dar described the Isles of the Blessed: “The corn grows by itself, the ﬁ g 
needs no grafting, vines are always in ﬂ ower and olives in shoot, honey 
drips from the oaks and water splashes down the  mountain- sides. The 
cows and goats do not need tending. The climate is perfect, and the 
place is totally untouched by the ungentlemanly ﬁ ngers of trade and 
commerce.” Heaven is populated with the same organisms that support 
a  hunter- gatherer’s existence on Earth; pure water is always available.
According to the Koran, believers go to enclosed gardens full of maid-
ens and fountains. “They shall feel neither the scorching heat nor the 
biting cold. Trees will spread their shade around them, and fruits will 
hang in clusters over them.” A Muslim tradition describes a tree in para-
dise so large that a person on a horse could ride beneath its shade for a 
year. In Hindu legend a colossal rose- apple tree that gives shade to the 
whole Earth grows on Mount Meru. The juice of its fruits, which are as 
big as elephants, forms the river of immortality.
Hell
Christianity inherited the concept of hell from Judaism and mytholo-
gies of the Ancient World. Judgment and punishment of some sort were 
necessary consequences of Christian doctrine. If God had sent his son 
into the world to save all who believed in him, those who did not accept 
him and his teaching would not be saved. It did not necessarily follow 
that they must be physically tortured after death, but they needed to 
suffer in some signiﬁ cant way. The God of the Old Testament was a god 
of thunder and lightning; ﬁ re was one of his principal weapons.
Descriptions of hell were vague until Virgil described it in his epic 
poem, the Aeneid. The most detailed description of the Christian hell is 

95
settling down and settling in
found in Dante’s Inferno, part of his  fourteenth- century Divine Comedy. In 
the Divine Comedy, Virgil himself is the guide through hell and purgatory. 
Dante’s hell has nine circles or layers that correspond to the nine spheres 
that characterize the heavens. The deeper down into the pit, the greater 
is the degree of wickedness and the more terrible the  punishment.
In most accounts of hell the principal physical tortures are from ﬁ re 
and heat. A lake of ﬂ ame descends from the lake of ﬁ re and brimstone 
in the book of Revelation. Torrents of ﬁ re and heat also are prominent 
in the hells of other religions. Hell is described less vividly in the Koran 
than paradise is, but it is not a pleasant place. In Buddhist and Hindu 
hells, ﬁ re is a major agent of punishment, but punishment for most vic-
tims is temporary. Sooner or later, most sinners are released and sent 
back to lead fresh lives on Earth. Only the exceptionally wicked are con-
demned to eternal punishment.
Pictorial representations and verbal descriptions of Christian hell 
portray the landscape as bleak and barren, with gloomy valleys, jagged 
cliffs, stony plains, whirlwinds of ﬁ re, rivers of ﬂ ame and pitch, fuming 
pits, putrid swamps, and yawning chasms. Instead of sweet music and 
songs of praise and thanks to God, hell resounds with screams of agony, 
wailing and gnashing of teeth, and desperate but useless requests to God 
for mercy.
Oriental hells also have grim rulers and monsters. The Tibetan Book 
of the Dead, a guide to the experience of dying, describes the judgment 
in Yama’s court. A painting of the scene shows him wearing a human 
skin as cloak, a girdle of human heads, and a headdress of skulls. He 
holds a sword and a mirror in which every human action is reﬂ ected. The 
good and evil actions of the dead are weighed in his presence; the wicked 
are led off to punishment in the eight hot hells and the eight cold hells.
The hell of the Jo¯do- shu¯ or Pore Land sect in Japan also has eight hot 
divisions and eight cold, presided over by Emma- o¯, the Japanese equiva-
lent of Yama. He is shown dressed as a judge with a book in which all 
human actions are recorded and with two severed heads beside him.
The vivid and detailed accounts tell us more about the ranking of 
the seriousness of various sins during the fourteenth century than it 
does about environmental aesthetics. Nonetheless, the themes of wa-
ter contaminated by pathogens and excrement and lack of resources to 

96
chapter six
support a meaningful existence are common to all descriptions of hell. 
Heavens are invariably safe places with abundant resources. There are 
no  resource- rich savannas in hell!
As this chapter demonstrates, by employing a variety of perspectives 
generated by evolutionarily based theories, we can now offer plausible 
explanations for the design of gardens, our aesthetic responses to tree 
shapes, and how we imagine the otherworld to be. More hypotheses and 
more tests of them lie in the future.

97
The first recorded  plant- hunting mis-
sion, dispatched to “the land of Punt” on 
behalf of Queen Hatshepsut of Egypt in 
1495 BC, sought spices. The expedition, led by Prince Nehasis, sailed up 
the Nile, crossed over to the Red Sea, and then headed south to Somalia 
to seek the source of frankincense (Boswellia sacra) and myrrh (Commiph-
ora myrrha). Trees the plant hunters discovered were dug up, brought 
back to Thebes, and planted.1 When he laid siege to Rome 2,500 years 
ago, the Gothic leader Alaric demanded a ransom, not just of gold and 
silver, but 1,364 kilograms of pepper (ﬁ gure 7.1). Kings and queens un-
derwrote the voyages of Marco Polo, Ferdinand Magellan, and Christo-
pher Columbus to ﬁ nd faster routes to  spice- growing countries. Spices 
have played a major role in human history.
We are the only species that manipulates its food for taste. We ﬁ nd 
foods more appealing if they contain pungent plant products, but our 
attempts to manipulate and control the food we eat go well beyond ﬂ a-
vor. Food is a rich source of metaphor. We may describe a person as be-
ing “sweet” or a “sourpuss.” We speak of “getting to the meat of the mat-
ter” or “where’s the beef?” Many cultures have elaborate rules governing 
how food must be prepared if it is to be acceptable for human consump-
tion. Orthodox Jews and Muslims have extensive dietary restrictions, 
but dietary restrictions also govern the diets of observant Buddhists, 
 Seventh- day Adventists, Hindus, Roman Catholics, and Mormons. We 
must eat to live, but why is eating surrounded by such a complex set of 
rules and responses? Why do we socialize over food, celebrate eating, 
and spend so much time eating? Why does food become both a mark of 
status and a general expression of a civilization?2
Perspectives from evolutionary biology can help us understand many 
of these seemingly peculiar aspects of our relationships with food. Food 
A Ransom 
in Pepper

98
chapter seven
selection, after all, is one of the two most important forces in animal 
evolution. When an ecologist encounters a new species, the only ques-
tion more important than “what does it eat?” is “what eats it?” In chap-
ter 5, we discussed our responses to who eats or attacks us. Here we focus 
on what we eat, why we eat it, and the complex emotions that surround 
seeking and eating food. To understand what we eat and why we like it, 
we need to probe into our coevolution with the species we eat, use as 
medicines, and appreciate aesthetically.
We’ve seen that assessing an environment’s current and long- term 
Figure 7.1. Harvesting fruits of a pepper tree, Java, Indonesia, from 
La Cosmographie Universelle, 1575, by André Thevet.

99
a ransom in pepper
potential to provide food is an important task during the explore phase 
of habitat selection. Sometimes that potential is obvious, as when a 
glimpse of an unfamiliar landscape reveals herds of large mammals, 
ﬂ ocks of birds, and  fruit- laden trees. More frequently, however, evidence 
for food availability is less obvious. Evidence of abundant food today may 
not predict abundance in the future when we will need it. Once humans 
settle in a particular environment, we consistently manipulate it to im-
prove its food- producing abilities (establish). These habits began long 
before the invention of agriculture, which is the most important way we 
alter landscapes today. Our preagricultural ancestors burned vast areas 
to stimulate new grass growth and affect distribution of large mammals. 
They dammed and diverted small rivers to facilitate catching ﬁ sh.
Our Ancestors’ Diet
Today when humans adopt a  vegetable- based diet we do so by choice, but 
this was not always the case. Our common ancestor with chimpanzees, 
our closest living relatives, was probably an herbivore, as gorillas are to-
day. Although it is unclear whether our ancestors ate other animals before 
they began to walk upright, by 1.6 million years ago improved bipedal 
locomotion made them better at capturing mobile animals. At ﬁ rst, our 
ancestors probably captured animals by grabbing them with their hands, 
a method still practiced in some parts of the world. The Maoris of New 
Zealand, for instance, construct dams to create artiﬁ cial dead- end creeks 
into which they chase ﬁ sh. When the stream ﬂ ow is re- diverted they cap-
ture the stranded ﬁ sh by hand (ﬁ gure 7.2). On California beaches where 
pole ﬁ shing is illegal, people capture spawning grunion by hand. During 
a Nigerian ﬁ shing festival in the Sokoto River near Argungu, the ﬁ rst 
prize is awarded to the angler who captures the ﬁ rst ﬁ sh with his hands.3
Killing at a distance probably began with throwing rocks at small 
birds, mammals, and fish. Humans are remarkably good at throw-
ing objects with great accuracy. Chimps also throw objects using the 
same  eighty- eight muscles that we use, but they have terrible aim; their 
brains evidently lack the capacity to execute the motion. The so- called 
Acheulian hand ax may not have been an ax but a throwing stone. Neu-
rophysiologist William Calvin pointed out that the stones have sharp 
edges where they would have been held. If they had used them as tools, 

100
chapter seven
people would have cut themselves. They are found in very large numbers 
around water holes, places where game would have concentrated. In ad-
dition, when thrown the “ax” turns over in ﬂ ight, landing point down in 
the soil or a body of an animal. In short, the “ax” was well designed as a 
throwing stone (ﬁ gure 7.3).4
Killing distance further increased with the invention of spears, bows 
and arrows, boomerangs, and guns. Gradually humans became the most 
effective predator in Earth’s history, expanding our diet and causing the 
extinction of large mammals on several continents. A by- product of do-
mesticating and storing the seeds of grasses and incorporating large, 
 difﬁ cult- to- capture animals is that we acquired an  energy- rich diet that 
could be consumed in a short period of time, at meals.
Between 2.3 and 1.8 million years ago, hominids were restricted pri-
marily to areas in Africa with water, shade, and rocky outcrops. Their 
weapons probably had an effective range no greater than thirty feet. 
Hunting success would have depended on stalking skills and vast knowl-
Figure 7.2. Two Maori men at work with two hı¯naki (ﬁ sh traps) 
capturing upokororo, a New Zealand ﬁ sh resembling a grayling or 
trout. This photo was taken in 1922 by James McDonald.

101
a ransom in pepper
edge about habitats and behavior of animals, how fast and far they could 
run or ﬂ y, and their escape strategies. And their mostly hairless bodies 
enabled them to pursue and capture large mammals during the heat of 
the day as San hunters do today.
Similarly early hominids would have beneﬁ ted from an ability to assess 
whether a dangerous animal was more likely to attack rather than ﬂ ee.5 The 
complex skills required to hunt successfully explain why men in modern 
 hunter- gatherer societies do not reach their maximum hunting ability 
until they are thirty, even though their strength peaks at age eighteen.6
Figure 7.3. Acheulean hand axes from Kent, from the Victoria 
County History of Kent, London, 1912. The axes are named 
after the type- site in Saint- Acheul, near Amiens, France.

102
chapter seven
Seeking and Finding Food
Foraging—looking for food—has evolved to be emotionally satisfy-
ing for the simple but powerful reason that those of our ancestors who 
enjoyed foraging would have been more motivated to hunt and to take 
risks when attacking dangerous prey than men with lower motivation. 
Strong positive motivation should lead to better hunting success. Also, a 
successful hunter, by virtue of his success and willingness to share food 
with others, receives social and sexual beneﬁ ts, thereby reinforcing the 
intrinsic pleasures of hunting.7 Hunting and ﬁ shing are popular today 
even though comparable food is available at much lower prices in stores. 
Many people who do not like to eat ﬁ sh nonetheless enjoy ﬁ shing! Catch- 
and- release ﬁ shing is a rapidly growing sport.
Decisions about when to forage, what to seek, and where to seek it 
are intricately connected because what foragers are looking for inﬂ u-
ences where they go: wild plums and crayﬁ sh along the riverbank; clams 
and seaweed along the strand. The foragers’ goals also determine which 
search images they employ. We are all familiar with search images from 
our own behavior. For example, when I walk in the woods with an ento-
mologist I see and hear many birds that my companion fails to observe, 
but I miss most of the interesting insects hiding on leaves and in bark 
crevices. Food reveals itself to the prepared mind.
Animals Provide Direct and Indirect Clues
Because animals move around, hunters must locate them before they 
can begin to stalk them. Animals leave clues in the form of tracks, feces, 
broken and browsed vegetation and bark, and remains of kills. These 
clues may tell a hunter the direction an animal was moving and how 
long ago it was there. The tracking abilities of hunters in traditional so-
cieties, such as the San, !Kung, and Hadza, are well documented. They 
can distinguish tracks of many different species and tell how long ago 
the animals made them.8 I have been amazed at the tracking abilities of 
guides during my safaris in Africa
Matthew Sharps and colleagues wondered whether the skills and 
predispositions for processing animal tracks might reside in the basic 
architecture of our brains. If so, even modern people who do not hunt 
should recognize and remember animal tracks more readily than they re-

103
a ransom in pepper
member other types of visual stimuli. To test this hypothesis, they asked 
subjects to learn and recall one hundred items, twenty from each of ﬁ ve 
categories: military armored vehicles, seashells, kitchen utensils, trees, 
and animal tracks.9 Participants were informed that they would see a 
number of pictures and that they were to remember them because they 
would be asked about them later. It was a so- called  double- blind study; 
neither the subjects nor the person administering the experiment were 
aware of its purpose. During the ﬁ rst trial, they were shown images for 
ﬁ ve seconds each, separated by a two- second interval. After a ten- minute 
period, during which respondents solved an arithmetic problem, they 
were again shown the same items. During this second trial, they saw 
each item again for eight seconds and were asked to write down its name. 
Participants remembered kitchen utensils best, but they remembered 
animal tracks better than seashells, trees, or military vehicles.
Sharps removed some items that confused people and randomly 
removed others to get seventeen items in each category. Then he con-
ducted a second experiment with a new group of subjects. Participants 
best recalled cooking utensils, but again they recalled animal tracks bet-
ter than seashells, trees, and military vehicles. A third experiment, us-
ing the same images but presenting them in a different order, yielded 
similar results. Men and women performed the same.
These ﬁ ndings do not suggest the existence of some sort of  track-
 speciﬁ c visual neural module. Nevertheless, Sharps’s experiments sug-
gest that we may be predisposed to pay attention to animal tracks and 
to recall them better than other types of unfamiliar objects. Women and 
men may score alike on the test because evidence suggests that Paleo-
lithic women trapped and hunted small game. Further research will be 
required to clarify the mechanisms by which those responses operate, 
but these experiments demonstrate that such mechanisms may exist 
and that they can be investigated experimentally.
Plants Provide Clues to Food Availability
Few of the many plants we eat have edible tissues throughout the year. 
We can save valuable time by remembering when different plants ﬂ ower 
and have ripe fruits and tender leaves. Let’s see if we do and what clues 
we use.
We eat leaves of some plants, so being able to tell edible leaves from 

104
chapter seven
inedible ones is useful. Young leaves of many species, which are gener-
ally more palatable than old leaves, differ in color from mature leaves. 
Expanding leaves of most  temperate- zone plants are a yellowish green; 
they turn darker green when full- sized. In contrast, expanding leaves 
of many tropical woody plants are reddish. Leaves of temperate zone 
deciduous trees assume bright colors when chlorophyll is withdrawn 
prior to their being discarded in autumn. Paying attention to leaf color 
may have made it easier for our ancestors to locate plants of particular 
species that may now, or in the future, have nutritious tissues.
If our ancestors paid particular attention to leaf colors and used them 
to ﬁ nd edible plant tissues, we would predict that plant breeders, wish-
ing to sell more plants, should select for markets mutants with leaves 
with contrasting colors at times of years when leaves of most plants are 
green. Cultivated trees, such as maples, that produce neither striking 
ﬂ owers nor edible fruits are good for testing the prediction that atypical 
leaf colors have been commercial successes.
We can test this prediction by looking at the 133 cultivars of twenty 
species of maples illustrated in Antoine Le Hardÿ de Beaulieu’s An Il-
lustrated Guide to Maples.10 Fourteen species have cultivars with unusual 
leaf colors. Ten of those species have brightly colored (mostly red) pet-
ioles and shoots. Mature leaves of wild individuals of the widely culti-
vated Japanese maple Acer palmatum remain green throughout the sum-
mer. But only  ﬁ fty- seven of 140 listed cultivars of this species have green 
leaves. Sixty- six have either red or purple summer leaves; seventeen have 
variegated leaves.
Horticulturalists clearly have preferred mutants with leaves that are 
not green when they “should be.” The hypothesis may also explain why 
we are attracted to the autumn colors of deciduous forests of northeast-
ern North America, even though these colors signal a time of decreasing, 
not increasing, resources. English gardeners were particularly attracted 
to American plants with red and orange branches and colorful blossoms 
and berries.11
Flowers Provide Clues
Flowers are a minor part of human diets, but ﬂ owers are an important 
source of information about current and future locations of foods. 

105
a ransom in pepper
Watching and following bees visiting ﬂ owers may help us ﬁ nd honey. 
Flowers precede fruits and seeds; we can predict where and when we 
can collect those foods if we remember when and where plants bearing 
them bloomed. Flowering plants may also signal the presence of water. 
In  species- rich vegetation, ﬂ owers greatly aid in identifying plants that 
otherwise may be difﬁ cult to distinguish in the mass of similar green 
leaves.
If it were advantageous for our ancestors to pay attention to ﬂ owers, 
we should enjoy looking at them. We do! Women smile when presented 
with a bouquet of ﬂ owers; their pleasurable feelings last for several 
days.12 Men and women in elevators respond more positively to ﬂ owers 
than to other gifts. Giving ﬂ owers to elderly people evokes immediate 
and long- term positive moods and improved memory. Florists report 
that they receive hugs and kisses when they deliver ﬂ owers.
Once we have located food, we need to decide whether or not to eat 
it. Maybe it is not worth ingesting. A normally palatable item might 
be dangerous to eat if it is infested with pathogens or parasites. Thus 
whether or not to eat something becomes a crucially important ques-
tion. As Gary Paul Nabhan notes, “We are what our ancestors ate, and 
also what they had to regurgitate.”13
Danger at the Dinner Table
The act of eating breaches the body’s immune defenses. This is true 
whether or not we’re allergic to or intolerant of lactose or gluten, shell-
ﬁ sh or peanuts. Every animal that eats takes in potential toxins, patho-
gens, and parasites. The liver—an evolutionary innovation also present 
in invertebrates like mollusks and crustaceans—is able to neutralize 
many toxins, but vomiting and diarrhea are humans’ most effective and 
immediate defenses against a swallowed pathogen. Neither is pleasant, 
and they may be unhealthy. Thus an animal beneﬁ ts by being able to 
distinguish edible from inedible items and ingesting only edible ones.
Getting enough food without becoming sick is especially difﬁ cult for 
omnivores.14 As the name suggests, omnivores typically eat many food 
types; what is available varies geographically.15 Tissues of most plant 
species contain a range of alkaloids, terpenes, and phenolics that are 

106
chapter seven
toxic to herbivores and pathogens. The search to determine which tox-
ins plants contain and how to neutralize them has preoccupied human 
societies for many millennia.16
Ingesting an unfamiliar food is risky, yet an omnivore needs to  sample 
many unfamiliar foods to ﬁ nd out which are safe to eat. Otherwise we 
will reject foods we should have eaten. A varied diet is likely to be more 
nutritionally balanced and to have lower levels of any particular toxin 
than a diet composed of only a few species. Thus omnivores are curious 
about new foods, but approach them with healthy suspicion.
When a novel food source is encountered, an animal must ﬁ rst deter-
mine whether or not it is edible. Then the animal must decide whether 
an item known to be edible should be captured and eaten at that particu-
lar moment. Finally, if the animal is provisioning offspring, it needs to 
decide whether or not to eat the item immediately, carry it back to its 
young, or cache it. The best decision varies during the course of a year or 
an animal’s reproductive life. Depending on age and whether the animal 
has a mate or young, it may store food for future consumption or deliver 
it to be shared by a mate or kin.17 Different considerations and emotions 
accompany these decisions.
Is It Edible?
We eat hundreds of different species, but we reject millions of others. 
Potential foods are not simply either edible or inedible. Some are highly 
nutritious and always desirable. Others provide speciﬁ c nutrients that 
are only occasionally needed. Some are low quality, starvation foods. 
During times of scarcity, foods that are otherwise rejected may be eaten. 
As humans deplete their food base, they turn to increasingly less proﬁ t-
able and palatable foods.18 Charlie Chaplin making a  seven- course meal 
of a shoe hints at the real starvation foods humans have turned to in 
lean times: during the Irish potato famine, starving Irish ate kelp and 
seaweed. During World War II, the Dutch in occupied Holland ate tulip 
bulbs; in Russia, peasants learned to survive on nettle soup. Even can-
nibalism may be resorted to under extreme duress.
Omnivores are rarely born knowing what to eat. As Paul Rozin put 
it, “it’s part of the biology of being an omnivore to have to learn almost 
everything about what is edible.”19 We learn what is edible by carefully 

107
a ransom in pepper
ingesting things and monitoring the physiological consequences, by 
observing what others eat, and by being told what is good to eat. Obser-
vation and instruction have obvious value; individuals we observe have 
probably ingested those substances for many years and have survived. 
Mother may indeed know best!
Breast milk has both immunological and antibiotic properties, so 
nursing infants can sample unfamiliar objects with less risk than after 
they are weaned. A relatively safe way for children to learn what is edible 
is to sample things within view of caretakers. Very young children are 
more likely to be in the presence of caretakers, but when children are 
able to walk they are more likely to sample foods where adults cannot 
see and advise them.
It follows that infants should begin to put strange objects in their 
mouths as soon as they are able to but reduce doing so when they wean. 
As expected, infants begin to put objects into their mouths at about two 
months of age, before they begin to crawl. At this age, we use objects in-
serted into the mouth to pacify crying infants or to provide visual inter-
est.20 Mouthing increases up until about six months of age and then be-
gins to decrease. It is rarely observed in children older than two years.21 
By mouthing small objects young children also ingest helpful microbes 
that will replace those in breast milk when they are weaned.22 Flavor 
preferences develop rapidly in newborn infants. Several feeding experi-
ences are generally required to develop ﬂ avor preferences, but aversions 
are learned more rapidly.23
Without instructors, how can an omnivore tell whether ingesting a 
food item would be dangerous? For most types of objects, we immedi-
ately can tell if it is dangerously hot or cold, sharp or irritating, soft or 
hard, bitter or sweet. But if we ingest something toxic, we do not get 
sick until hours later. Like other omnivores, we automatically and un-
consciously associate sickness with food we ingested hours earlier. We 
develop aversions to that food, and typically avoid it in the future. Even 
odor of a food that made us sick may evoke nausea. I know this from 
experience. As a youth I became ill from eating too many clams on my 
ﬁ rst visit to the Atlantic coast. I was unable to eat clams again for about 
twenty years. Many of you have doubtless had similar experiences.
Many different responses to potential foods, ranging from extreme 
pleasure to disgust, have evolved in response to the danger of ingesting 

108
chapter seven
external objects, even nutritious ones. People who ingest contaminated 
or spoiled food are likely to become ill or die. It is a good idea to pay at-
tention to signs that a potential food might be toxic, even when one is 
very hungry.
A Matter of Taste
We may accept a food because it tastes good or reject it because it tastes 
bad, but that is only one of many reasons we do so. We also decide on the 
basis of anticipated consequences, both physiological and social, of eat-
ing a type of food. What you know about a food—where it comes from, 
its characteristics—may inﬂ uence whether you think it is appropriate 
to eat. Foods may be acceptable only in particular situations, or they 
may be categorically rejected. Because of the variety of reasons that in-
ﬂ uence which foods are actually acceptable, human cuisines differ more 
than expected from differences in what is available.24 Nonetheless, a few 
generalizations apply.
Pleasure is positively associated with nutritional value. As we saw in 
chapter 4, we like the taste of nutritious foods. Under ancestral condi-
tions,  sugar- rich foods, such as fruit and honey, were scarce. We can-
not ask a biochemist to tell us where in the structure of a sugar mol-
ecule sweetness lies. Sweetness comes from an interaction between the 
structure of a molecule and our nervous system. Our nervous system 
has evolved to render simple sugars, which are easily digested and en-
ergy rich, as sweet. We have used knowledge of how our neural recep-
tors function to develop nonnutritious sugar substitutes that trigger 
sweetness sensations so that we can enjoy artiﬁ cially sweetened food 
and drink while avoiding unwanted calories. Until our ancestors added 
animals to their diet, they also found it difﬁ cult to acquire fat.
Disgust
Charles Darwin was the ﬁ rst person to identify the strong relationship 
between disgust and food. In The Expression of the Emotions in Man and An-
imals (1872), he remarked, “Disgust is a sensation rather more distinct in 
its nature, and refers to something revolting, primarily in relation to the 
sense of taste, as actually perceived or vividly imagined; and secondarily 

109
a ransom in pepper
to anything which causes a similar feeling, through the sense of smell, 
touch, or even eyesight. Nevertheless, extreme contempt, or, as it is of-
ten called, loathing contempt, hardly differs from disgust”(250). A few 
pages later, Darwin further noted, “It is curious how readily this feeling 
is excited by anything unusual in the appearance, odour, or nature of 
our food” (255). He also commented, “Extreme disgust is expressed by 
movements round the mouth identical with those preparatory to the act 
of vomiting. The mouth is opened widely, with the upper lip strongly 
retracted, which wrinkles the sides of the nose, and with the lower lip 
protruded and everted as much as possible” (256). “Spitting seems an 
almost universal sign of contempt or disgust; and spitting obviously 
represents the rejection of anything offensive from the mouth” (259).25
Darwin’s pioneering observations have been confirmed. Disgust, 
which is expressed in all human cultures, is the most powerful reason 
people reject certain types of food. We feel disgust toward objects our 
culture tells us are not food. Most items that evoke disgust are of animal 
origin. Most of us are sure that disgusting things, such as worms, rats, 
and beetles, taste bad even though we have never tried them. Moreover, 
we have no interest in trying them. Pus, maggots, rotting food, and scav-
enging animals universally evoke the distinctive facial expressions of 
disgust (ﬁ gure 7.4). We respond with disgust both to things that should 
be kept out of our bodies and to things, such as blood, that should be 
kept in. Disgust carries with it a notion of contamination. Most people 
will not drink juice that has been stirred with a sterilized cockroach or 
drink from a meticulously cleaned bedpan. In most cultures, people eat 
relatively few of the available animals. Americans generally do not eat 
insects, amphibians, reptiles, or rodents, but people in some other cul-
tures do. Yet, most kinds of animals that evoke disgust are actually ed-
ible and nutritious!
Darwin did not speculate about the origin of feelings of disgust, but 
his observations ﬁ t with the notion that disgust is an adaptation that 
deterred our ancestors from eating rotting meat, feces, and viscera that 
commonly harbor harmful microorganisms. Microorganisms can mul-
tiply rapidly; there is no dose below which it is safe to ingest them. Our 
responses to potential contamination are, appropriately, dose insensi-
tive. Even brief contact with a potential contaminant sufﬁ ces to evoke 
full- ﬂ edged feelings of disgust.26 Disgust is evolutionarily programmed 

110
Figure 7.4. In 1968, psychologist Paul Ekman took his camera to the island 
of New Guinea to photograph the faces of the South Fore people. These four 
photos show a man smiling, looking down, concerned, and frowning.

111
a ransom in pepper
intuitive microbiology that developed long before people knew that mi-
croorganisms existed, much less that they caused diseases.
Inappropriate items are ones our culture tells us are inedible. We do 
not eat things like pencils, grass, paper, and cloth even though we prob-
ably would not get sick if we did. Plant parts, which are generally less 
nutritious and more difﬁ cult to digest than animal tissues, rarely evoke 
disgust. They are also much less likely than animal tissues to harbor 
toxic bacteria. Many vegetarians, particularly those who avoid eating 
meat for moral reasons (saving animal lives, reducing animal pain, sav-
ing the environment), come to dislike meat and may even be disgusted 
by the thought of eating it. Vegetarians who avoid meat primarily for 
health reasons generally remain tempted by meat and avoid exposure to 
their favorite meat dishes.27
Our sense of purity may also have intuitive microbiological roots. 
Our minds appear to have a “purity module” that directs our attention 
to things that were associated with dangers caused by microbes. Con-
cerns about purity have simulated development of elaborate, complex 
moral rules that in many cultures govern diet and hygienic practices.28 
Humans have universally strong moral feelings about menstruation, 
eating, bathing, sex, and handling corpses. Much of the moral law of 
Judaism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, and many traditional societies 
functions to maintain “purity.” People who observed those morally en-
forced practices may have experienced better health than those who did 
not. Compliance was probably maintained because violations of those 
rules evoked disgust.
All cultures and languages studied by Jonathan Haidt have at least 
one word that applies to both core disgust (cockroaches and feces) 
and to some kinds of social offence, such as sleazy politicians or hypo-
crites.29 We reject or disapprove of abstract concepts such as ideologies 
and political views with disgust. Propagandists throughout history 
have exploited this connection to evoke disgust toward other groups of 
people. Nazi propaganda depicted Jews as cockroaches and rats; Hutu 
instigators labeled Tutsis as cockroaches during the Rwandan genocide.
The levator labii muscle region of the face, a part of the basic oral /  
nasal disgust response to foods, is activated by moral disgust as well.30 
This suggests that our sense of moral disgust may be built upon an an-
cient food rejection system.31 When we say that moral transgressions 

112
chapter seven
“leave a bad taste in my mouth,” we may be unconsciously expressing a 
deep evolutionary relationship.
Our intuitive microbiology may also account for the remarkable 
fact that animal tissues are both the most tabooed and the most pre-
ferred types of food in most human cultures. These responses make 
sense because animal tissues are highly nutritious but are fertile breed-
ing grounds for pathogens once the animal dies. We have strong bio-
logical urges to eat animals, but we also have a rich array of cultural 
reservations and rules about eating them. Part of our reluctance to eat 
animals may come from a belief that “you are what you eat,” that you 
take on some properties of things you ingest. Many people hold, either 
consciously or subconsciously, a belief that if you eat animals, you will 
become more animallike. Such beliefs fueled opposition to vaccination. 
Injecting ﬂ uids from cows into our bodies, it was feared, would animal-
ize us.32 Yet, people are not concerned about becoming more plantlike 
as a result of eating plants.
Accepting New Foods
We may eat hundreds of species of plants and animals, but human di-
ets are remarkably conservative. We are reluctant to try new foods or 
to abandon familiar ones. Europeans were reluctant to add potatoes 
and tomatoes to their cuisines even though they knew that those plants 
were staple foods of Amerindians. Given such resistance, how do new 
foods become incorporated into cuisines? Spices play a critical role in 
determining what is acceptable; once established, they are remarkably 
persistent.
Some Like It Hot
Spices inﬂ uence tastes of foods, but they contain little energy. They 
must provide some other beneﬁ t for us to value them so highly. One 
hypothesis is that we enjoy spices because they disguise the tastes and 
smells of spoiled food. However, food- borne bacteria kill thousands of 
people every year and debilitate millions more. Eating spoiled food by 
covering up its bad ﬂ avor is a dangerous thing to do, even if you are 
starving. Natural selection is not likely to have favored people who ate 
rancid food whose bad ﬂ avors were covered by spices.

113
a ransom in pepper
An antimicrobial hypothesis is more plausible. Spices protect plants 
against bacteria and fungi. They also protect our food from attack by 
them. Many of the most widely used spices have strong antimicrobial 
properties.33 Mixes of them, which are common in many traditional 
recipes, are even more powerful.  Disease- causing organisms are more 
abundant in tropical than in temperate regions. As we would expect, 
the proportion of traditional recipes containing antimicrobial spices is 
highest in the tropics.
Cells of dead plants harbor fewer pathogens than cells of dead ani-
mals. An animal’s immune system ceases to function when it dies; bac-
teria then increase rapidly. The antimicrobial hypothesis therefore also 
predicts that spices should be used less in vegetable dishes than in meat 
dishes. The prediction has been conﬁ rmed. As shown by more than two 
thousand recipes from more than one hundred traditional cookbooks 
from several dozen countries, vegetable dishes everywhere call for fewer 
spices per recipe than meat dishes.34 Once people learned that they were 
less likely to get sick after eating spicy foods than nonspicy foods, spices 
became signals that a food was safe to eat. 
Pathogens and foods available to people vary geographically, so 
people rapidly evolved genetic adaptations to deal with the peculiarities 
of their local foods.35 People who now live in areas remote from those 
occupied by their ancestors may actually beneﬁ t from devoting ﬁ nan-
cial resources to import the spices that characterize their traditional 
 cuisines.
Why are we the only animals that add spices to their food? When did 
we ﬁ rst begin to use spices? Nobody knows the answer to either ques-
tion, but spices would have become especially valuable when our an-
cestors began to hunt and kill large mammals whose ﬂ esh could not be 
eaten quickly. Humans may have been using spices and salt to preserve 
food for millennia.36 The value of spices might have further increased 
when people learned how to cook food. Cooking neutralizes many tox-
ins, allowing us to eat plants that would otherwise be inedible. Apes use 
plants and minerals as antacids and purgatives and worming medicine. 
When they are sick, chimpanzees seek out and eat  bitter- tasting plants 
that they otherwise do not ingest.37
Many factors have been proposed as key to the rapid recent evolution-
ary changes in the human lineage. Among them are bipedal locomotion, 

114
chapter seven
opposable thumbs, language, trade, and a more complex social organi-
zation. Control of ﬁ re has also been suggested as a critical factor—the 
so- called cooking hypothesis. Control of ﬁ re provided protection from 
predators and the ability to shape metal and ﬁ re ceramics as well as cook 
food. Cooking shifted much of the work of chewing and digesting out-
side our bodies. Nonhuman primates also prefer cooked over uncooked 
food.38 According to the theory, by “outsourcing” part of the digestive 
process we freed up energy that became available to support a larger and 
energetically expensive brain.39
What Foods Are Eaten Only at Particular Times?
Many nutritious foods are eaten only during special occasions. Foods 
that are suitable at certain times may not be suitable at other times or 
under other conditions. Some of these restrictions are purely cultural, 
but one has a clear biological basis.
About 70 percent of women experience nausea and vomiting (preg-
nancy sickness or “morning sickness”) during the ﬁ rst trimester of preg-
nancy. Morning sickness has traditionally been viewed as pathological; 
efforts were made to suppress it. However, Margie Proﬁ t suggested that 
morning sickness is an adaptation that discourages mothers from in-
gesting toxins that may be harmful to a developing embryo.40 Strong 
aversions to certain foods are conﬁ ned to the ﬁ rst trimester of preg-
nancy, the time of major organ formation, when a developing embryo is 
most vulnerable to toxins. Foods that most frequently evoke aversions 
or sickness contain high levels of toxins (coffee, alcoholic beverages, 
 strong- tasting vegetables, and sometimes meats and eggs). Women who 
suffer pregnancy sickness have lower probability of miscarriage and fe-
tal death rates than women who do not. Morning sickness is absent in all 
seven of  twenty- seven traditional societies with meat- free  cereal- based 
diets.41 If morning sickness is an evolved adaptation, it probably evolved 
recently, after our ancestors left Africa, developed agriculture, and 
added many more foods to their diets.
Food and Social Status
Food sharing has ancient roots; the practice is widespread among 
 hunter- gatherers. Males of many species of birds and mammals court 

115
a ransom in pepper
females using food. Male chimpanzees show off by sharing valuable and 
 difﬁ cult- to- capture food—for example, part of a red colobus monkey.42 
Food sharing had the added beneﬁ t of making sure meat was eaten be-
fore it could rot, necessary in tropical climates where meat quickly rots 
and preserving it by smoking and drying is difﬁ cult. And once we be-
gan sharing food with one another, we began to use food to show off. 
A  difﬁ cult- to- capture food item is good for showing off with because 
it is genuinely valuable and clearly signals the skills of its possessor. 
 (ﬁ gure 7.5).
In traditional  hunter- gatherer societies, successful hunters advance 
in social status and have enhanced reproductive opportunities.43 Com-
plex networks of obligations govern food sharing. A prize kill like a kudu 
antelope means a bonanza of meat—everyone gets a generous portion. 
The items most likely to be shared are hunted rather than gathered.44 
Figure 7.5. Italian trufﬂ e hunter and trader Cristiano Savini, left, holds a 1.5- kilogram 
(3.3- pound) white trufﬂ e; Angela Leong, right, wife of Macau tycoon Stanley Ho, 
won the auction for the trufﬂ e with a bid of US$330,000 in Macau, December 1, 2007. 
The unusually heavy trufﬂ e was dug up in 2007 by Savini, his father, Luciano, and 
dog, Rocco, in Palaia, a town about forty kilometers (twenty- ﬁ ve miles) from Pisa. The 
Savinis said Rocco started snifﬁ ng “like crazy” when he zeroed in on the fungus.

116
chapter seven
Foods that are of high value and difﬁ cult to obtain, especially meat, are 
shared more widely than easily acquired foods. Aché  hunter- gatherers 
share meat and honey within their band, but they share vegetable foods, 
which depend mostly on effort expended rather than skill, only within 
nuclear families.45
Good hunters in  hunter- gatherer societies on average share more 
food with others than do poor hunters. A good hunter might do bet-
ter for his family by hunting smaller, more reliable, and less shareable 
resources, but good hunters and their families receive preferential treat-
ment within the group. Their legitimate offspring survive better than 
offspring of poor hunters. Good hunters also father more illegitimate 
children; women report that they prefer them as lovers.46 Not surpris-
ingly, hunters preferentially seek resources they can share and use to 
gain reproductive beneﬁ ts. Show- offs tend to spend more time away 
from their spouses, thereby increasing opportunities for gaining sexual 
favors.47
Men typically show off with  difﬁ cult- to- capture food, but today they 
also compete with superlarge vegetables, even though unusually large 
ones are less edible than smaller ones. People may try to convince oth-
ers that their gardening success comes from having personal magical 
abilities.48
Domestication: Making Foods Better
As we have seen, features of prey that signal their suitability as food 
evoke positive emotional responses. Our ancestors domesticated plants 
and animals by enhancing traits that made them even more proﬁ table to 
eat. Animals were bred for larger size, more meat, and docility. Domes-
ticators favored tenderness and lower concentrations of  bitter- tasting 
toxins in plant leaves. In fruits they increased size, sweetness, pulp- to- 
seed ratios, ease of separating seeds from pulp, and storability. Domesti-
cated ﬂ owers are larger and more conspicuousness than their wild rela-
tives. Some plants that were toxic in their wild form, like cassava, were 
crossbred to create nontoxic varieties.
Fleshy fruits evolved to attract animals that consume pulp and then 
defecate unharmed seeds away from the parent plant. Most ﬂ eshy fruits 
are nutritious, but many contain toxins until their seeds are mature. 

117
a ransom in pepper
A few fruits are toxic even when mature. Among them are chili pep-
pers, which contain chemicals (capsaicins) that irritate the linings of 
our mouths. These irritants have been bred out of sweet peppers, but 
hot peppers have been incorporated into cuisines throughout the world, 
probably because of their antimicrobial properties.
Energy allocated to pulp is not available to be used to produce seeds. 
Plants evolve to allocate only enough resources to pulp to attract frugi-
vores. Frugivores may prefer larger and more nutritionally concentrated 
fruits, but they exerted little inﬂ uence on the evolution of fruit size and 
richness. Fruits were too scarce during many times of year for frugivo-
res to be choosy! Domestication dramatically changed all that. Fruits of 
domesticated varieties of apples, pears, peaches, plums, quinces, apri-
cots, oranges, grapefruits, and others are much larger and have greater 
concentrations of sugar than those of their wild ancestors. We have even 
produced many varieties of seedless  fruit- bearing plants that we must 
propagate by grafting. We gain because the plant allocates none of its 
energy to seeds we don’t want.
Calling for Food
People generally stalk animals quietly, but sometimes people sing when 
they hunt; they may imitate the calls of animals to lure them into kill-
ing range. As we saw in chapter 1, hunters may sing for honey. We are 
remarkably vocal animals. In the next chapter we will explore how we 
came to be so talkative and musical.

118
The first song of a male red- winged 
blackbird in late winter evokes in me 
feelings of great pleasure. That distinc-
tive conk- a- ree reminds me of the many 
happy hours I have spent among these 
birds, studying their social lives and trying to tease apart the meaning 
of their alarm and contact calls and songs (ﬁ gure 8.1). I have watched 
them call and sing to attract mates, repel competitors, and warn others 
about imminent danger as a hawk ﬂ ies by. I tried to ﬁ nd out what mes-
sages the singing males were communicating and how other individuals 
responded to the messages.
I learned that songs tell other males that the territory is occupied and 
that its owner will attack them if they trespass. Females, on the other 
hand, are informed that the singer will welcome them, will fertilize their 
eggs and help them defend and rear their offspring. Female redwings 
also sing, but they do not attract mates or defend a territory. Redwings 
were clearly responding emotionally to their calls and songs, but I knew 
that what they felt was hidden from us.
In part because I carried out most of my research in the ﬁ eld, I am 
sensitive to nature’s sounds. In this way I resemble members of  hunter- 
gatherer and traditional agricultural societies, but they live close to 
nature day and night, so they know more about nature’s sounds than I 
do. For example, the Hutu and Tutsi tribes of central East Africa knew 
the ultralow frequency communications of elephants and incorpo-
rated them into their songs and stories for centuries before modern 
scientists became aware of them. For millennia, Tlingit hunters in the 
Paciﬁ c Northwest and Inuit hunters in the Arctic heard the sounds of 
whales through the hulls of their boats. Scientists ﬁ rst recorded them 
in the 1940s.
The 
Musical 
Ape

119
the musical ape
Sounds have been a source of valuable information throughout hu-
man history. Young BaAka children in the  Dzanga- Sangha forest of the 
Central African Republic know what many of the sounds in the forest 
mean for food and danger.1 This chapter explores the origin and sub-
sequent development of our remarkably powerful emotional responses 
to sounds. I ask, and hope to answer, two questions. First, how did pay-
ing attention to natural sounds and sounds produced by fellow humans 
improve our ancestors’ survival? Second, how did the beneﬁ ts of paying 
attention to the sounds of nature lead to the elaboration of music both 
by our voices and by musical instruments? We differ strikingly from our 
closest primate relatives in being remarkably musical.
To understand how our emotional reaction to sound helped us sur-
vive and may have led to the development of music, we need to under-
stand the acoustic environment of the natural world. A soundscape con-
sists of a complex web of inorganic sounds produced by the physical 
environment and organic sounds produced by living things. Much like 
the instruments of an orchestra, the sound of each component has its 
own frequency, amplitude, timbre, and duration. Taken together, these 
Figure 8.1. A male red- winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus) utters a 
song while he spreads his wings and exposes his red shoulder patches. 
This song- spread repels other males but attracts females.

120
chapter eight
 components make up the acoustic ambiance of a given habitat. Impor-
tant messages may be conveyed by the “orchestral” ambient sound of a 
forest or meadow.2 A meadow where many individuals are calling may 
signal an environment free of predators. Conversely, the sudden ces-
sation of calls probably indicates a signiﬁ cant change. In the natural 
world, sudden silence is a real attention grabber.
Many of nature’s sounds come from the physical environment. Waves 
crash, thunder rolls, volcanoes erupt, avalanches roar, and brooks 
 babble. Many physical events of signiﬁ cance to animals, such as electri-
cal storms, high winds, volcanic eruptions, and falling water, produce 
loud noises. Other sounds, such as the movement of air through tree 
canopies, grasses, or dry leaves, are softer.
In the beginning, living things produced sounds only as a by- product 
of metabolic processes, the business of living, or by moving. The neu-
ral circuitry at the base of the midbrain and upper spinal cord that un-
derlies sound production was present more than four hundred million 
years ago in the common ancestor of all vocal animals, but animals 
probably did not produce other than incidental sounds until more than 
 three- quarters of life’s evolutionary time had passed. Some insects, ﬁ sh, 
and reptiles and most amphibians, mammals, and birds call and sing, 
but even today, most animals are mute. Many silent animals can detect 
and respond to sounds and other vibrations in their environment. Flying 
moths initiate evasive actions when they hear the calls of hunting bats.
Using the channel of sound for communication was an important in-
novation. It allowed animals to send messages without revealing them-
selves to potential predators. A visual signaler makes itself conspicuous, 
but the source of a sound can be difﬁ cult to pinpoint because sounds 
bend around corners and penetrate obstacles. Sound is also a fast and 
efﬁ cient way of sending signals. An animal can pass in an instant from 
uttering a high to a low pitch, from harsh notes to pure tones, and from 
loud to soft notes, from calling to silence. An animal can stop display-
ing, but it does not instantly disappear. Many animals, especially small 
ones like insects, amphibians, and birds, can broadcast a message from 
a sheltered location or at night when they would be difﬁ cult for preda-
tors to see.
Attending and responding to the sounds of nature has survival 
value for both vocal and nonvocal animals. Paying attention to nature’s 

121
the musical ape
sounds certainly had survival value for our remote ancestors. The sound 
of rushing water may indicate the presence of dangerous rapids ahead. 
Sounds may reveal the presence of desirable prey, dangerous predators, 
or hostile human enemies. The buzzing of bees may indicate the loca-
tion of honey. Hunters who attended to animal sounds would have been 
more successful than individuals who ignored them.
Some birds and whales elaborate their calls into songs that we call 
musical. They imitate one another and compete for space and mates by 
means of singing duels. Many birds learn their songs by listening to oth-
ers; they may form dialects. Yet, the calls of most primates are relatively 
simple and innate. Humans differ strikingly from our closest relatives in 
our elaborate music making. What led to that remarkable development?
All Human Cultures Make Music
Everyone can sing and has songs inside. If you don’t think you 
can sing, go into the forest and start singing. Pretty soon the trees 
will start to respond—swaying and moving their leaves. 
—A Menominee Elder
Making music is ancient and ubiquitous. No human culture known to-
day or at any time in recorded history lacked music. Music generates 
powerful emotions of pleasure, ecstasy, joy, sadness, terror, and dis-
gust. Music exerts a powerful inﬂ uence on our minds and bodies. Music 
therapy has been widely used in many societies since antiquity.3 Many 
hospitals and clinics employ music to calm patients and reduce the need 
for general anesthesia. Premature infants gain weight faster and leave 
the hospital sooner if they can listen to lullabies.4
It is remarkable that something as unnecessary as music should exert 
such an inﬂ uence over our lives. The powerful emotions music evokes in 
us suggest that individuals with those emotions had better survival and 
reproductive success than individuals with weaker emotional responses. 
But why?
The origin and function of music have attracted the attention of schol-
ars for more than one hundred years. During the ﬁ rst half of the twenti-
eth century, the ﬁ eld of ethnomusicology, the study of social and cultural 
aspects of music and dance in local to global contexts, ﬂ ourished. Its 

122
chapter eight
practitioners wanted to understand the origins and evolution of music 
and the place of music in the human mind. They applied theories from 
many social science ﬁ elds to interpret the forms and meanings of music 
worldwide. The International Council for Traditional Music was founded 
in 1947; the Society for Ethnomusicology was founded in 1958.
An interesting example of ethnomusicology research is the Canto-
metrics Project. Launched in 1959, its goal was to test Alan Lomax’s the-
ory that the musical style of a culture, that is, the pattern of its common 
musical practices, reﬂ ects its social organization and lifestyles. With 
his collaborates, Lomax analyzed more than four thousand songs from 
more than four hundred cultures. His major conclusion, published in 
a book,5 was that “a culture’s favored song style reﬂ ects and reinforces 
the kind of behavior essential to its main subsistence efforts and to its 
central and controlling social institutions.”
The lives of people in most of the societies that Lomax studied were 
dominated by hunting, gathering, ﬁ shing, tending animals, gardening, 
and, of course, politics. Those activities were the most important things 
that their song styles could reﬂ ect. We cannot recover the music of our 
remote ancestors, but Lomax’s ﬁ ndings probably offer valuable clues to 
its forms.
The Origins of Music
The ﬁ rst person to speculate seriously about the evolution of music was 
none other than Charles Darwin. Darwin’s wife, Emma, was a talented 
pianist; her daily piano playing captivated him. Darwin’s home life and 
his love of music clearly inﬂ uenced his thinking. In The Descent of Man, 
and Selection in Relation to Sex, he devoted ten pages to birdsong and six 
to human music. He viewed both phenomena as outcomes of sexual se-
lection, features that originated and became elaborated as displays to 
attract sexual partners. Darwin suggested that the capacity to perceive 
musical notes could easily have begun as a side effect of the capacity 
to distinguish noises “an ear capable of discriminating noises—and 
the high importance of this power to all animals is admitted by every 
one—must be sensitive to musical notes” Darwin concluded by propos-
ing that if male birds sing to females, it must be because female birds 
are impressed by singing: “unless females were able to appreciate such 

123
the musical ape
sounds and were excited or charmed by them, the persevering efforts of 
the males, and the complex structures often possessed by them alone, 
would be useless; and this is impossible to believe” And ﬁ nally, “it ap-
pears probable that the progenitors of man, either the males or females 
or both sexes, before acquiring the power of expressing their mutual 
love in articulate language, endeavored to charm each other with musi-
cal notes and rhythm.”6
Darwin’s insightful conjecture about birdsong was quickly accepted, 
but his suggestion that human music evolved to serve the same function 
was neglected until very recently.7 Claude Levi- Strauss expressed the po-
sition typical of cultural anthropologists, as follows: “Since music is the 
only language with the contradictory attributes of being at once intel-
ligible and untranslatable, the musical creator is a being comparable to 
the gods, and music itself the supreme mystery of the science of man.” 
In other words, we were unweaving the rainbow again.8
But opinions have changed. In his 2005 book, The Singing Neander-
thals, Stephen Mithen argues that it is highly unlikely “that our deepest 
emotions would be so easily and profoundly stirred by music if it were 
no more than a recent human invention. And neither would our bodies, 
as they are when we automatically begin tapping our ﬁ ngers and toes 
when listening to music. In fact, even when we sit still, the motor areas 
of our brains are activated by music.”9
In recent decades, thinkers from a range of disciplines have come for-
ward to propose new hypotheses about how human music might have 
arisen. Some suggest music is a by- product of having a big brain, or 
of being conscious, of having developed an elaborate, learned culture, 
or of having surplus energy. None of these explanations made the case 
for music conferring any adaptive advantage. Those arguments make 
little evolutionary sense because surplus energy can be converted into 
fat or used to synthesize products the body needs and that enhance an 
individual’s ﬁ tness. A surplus brain mass that consumed great amounts 
of energy but conferred no beneﬁ ts would quickly have been eliminated 
by natural selection.10
Most theorists who seriously sought an adaptive value to music pos-
tulated group selection as the mechanism. In other words, they thought 
that music beneﬁ ted social groups rather than the individuals making 
and responding to it. Although a group may beneﬁ t from music making 

124
chapter eight
by its members, theories that explain the evolution of music by postu-
lating beneﬁ ts to groups face the freeloader problem. If the production 
of music beneﬁ ts the group but is costly to its performers, individuals 
that save time and energy by not incurring those costs still gain the ben-
eﬁ ts. They get something for nothing. Thus, freeloaders should increase 
at the expense of performers. Because the freeloader problem is serious, 
I limit my discussion to those hypotheses that identify beneﬁ ts to indi-
viduals who pay attention to and make music.
We have seen throughout this book that behaviors that made us suc-
cessful tend to be ones we ﬁ nd rewarding. Therefore, if paying attention 
to and responding to the sounds of nature contributed to the success 
of our ancestors, doing so should be intrinsically rewarding and the 
sounds of greatest potential signiﬁ cance, that is, those that signaled the 
most important changes in the environment, should generate the stron-
gest emotional responses.
Nevertheless, there is no obvious reason that attending to and re-
sponding to the sounds of nature should lead to the development of 
music. Individuals of most species beneﬁ t from attending to the sounds 
of nature, but most of them did not develop music. Music accompanies 
almost everything humans do—hunting, herding, storytelling, playing, 
washing, eating, praying, meditating, courting, marrying, healing, and 
burying. Powerful selective forces must have been acting on us for us to 
become the most highly musical among the millions of species. To ﬁ nd 
out what they were, a brief excursion into history may be helpful.
Music’s History
The physical traces of music’s origin are lost in the mists of antiquity. 
Early vocal music has left no traces, but we have reasons to believe that 
singing is very ancient. In the late 1980s, French archaeologists used 
singing in their exploration of prehistoric caves in southwestern France. 
They discovered that the chambers with most paintings were particu-
larly resonant and concluded that the caves were sites of ceremonies ac-
companied by music.
Instrumental music probably began with percussion—slapping the 
buttocks, belly, and thighs, clapping the hands, and stamping the ground. 
The manufacture of instruments goes back at least to ﬁ fty thousand 

125
the musical ape
years ago. Beaded rattles, scrapers, bullroarers, and bone ﬂ utes have been 
excavated from late Older Stone Age strata. The earliest known musical 
instruments, fragments of bone ﬂ utes from Slovenia, are about  forty-
 four thousand years old.11 Instruments in the Hohle Fels Cave in south-
western Germany are at least forty thousand years old; those from Geis-
senklösterle in southern Germany were made about  thirty- six thousand 
years ago.12
Although humans have been making music for at least ﬁ fty thousand 
years, until the invention of musical notation in the Middle East, about 
four thousand years ago, there was no way to capture and preserve its 
forms. With the invention of musical notation we gradually came to ex-
press ourselves musically in the form of repeat performances.
We can clarify our thinking about the origins and evolution of music 
by focusing on several questions.13 First, what adaptive functions are 
served by singing, chanting, humming, whistling, dancing, drumming, 
and playing instruments? Second, who generates these signals, what be-
havioral changes do they generate, and who beneﬁ ts? Third, what are 
the costs of producing and listening to music? These questions require 
us to postulate an origin of musical utterances and to show how engag-
ing in musical behavior enhanced the survival and reproductive success 
of performers and recipients, whether or not other group member also 
received beneﬁ ts.
Costs and Beneﬁ ts of Making Music
Many theorists have argued that because performing and listening to 
music is cost free, music, and other arts as well, might be by- products 
of other adaptations, such as “the hunger for status, the aesthetic plea-
sure of experiencing adaptive objects and environments, and the ability 
to design artifacts to achieve desired ends.”14 Clearly, these adaptations 
contribute to our enjoyment of music today, and, yes, a decision to par-
ticipate in some kind of musical activity imposes little cost in modern 
societies. However, for three reasons making music was costly for our 
ancestors.
First, making or listening to music imposes opportunity costs. When 
performing or listening to music, one cannot perform many other activ-
ities. Singing has traditionally accompanied some kinds of work, such 

126
chapter eight
as rowing, plowing and harvesting, and hauling nets, in which coor-
dination of the movements of individuals is important. We can and do 
sing while cooking, drawing water, and seeking food, but we can do very 
few other things while playing an instrument.
Second, singing, playing an instrument, and dancing consume en-
ergy. Our metabolic rate during vigorous dancing is six times greater 
than when we are resting. Dancing is as energetically expensive as 
swimming and twice as costly as rapid walking. Vigorous drumming is 
equally costly. Dancers in traditional societies often collapse in exhaus-
tion. The ability to perform complex dance movements for extended 
time periods demands physical vigor and muscular coordination.
Third, individuals involved in making music usually do not pay care-
ful attention to their surroundings. This would have left early human per-
formers and listeners vulnerable to surprise attack. Music masks other 
sounds and advertises the location of the group. Predators and hostile hu-
mans can easily locate and approach undetected a group of music makers.
What beneﬁ ts could have overridden those costs? That is, from an 
evolutionary point of view, what good is making music?
What Beneﬁ ts Accrue from Making Music?
Making music is typically a group activity; in many cultures music is 
inseparable from dancing. Dance plays an important role in courtship in 
many cultures. Maasai warriors sing and dance to display their personal 
prowess before assembled maidens, using songs to extol their manly 
virtues.
Group dancing, rhythmic clapping, and chanting all release brain 
chemicals that promote afﬁ liative emotions among both athletes and 
warriors. Scottish regiments marched into battle preceded by their pip-
ers as recently as the 1944 D- day landings in Normandy. The traditional 
Maori haka, used to intimidate enemies in battle, has been adapted to 
the rugby pitch by the New Zealand national team, the All Blacks. Sing-
ing and dancing reinforce the bonds among us and arouse in us feelings 
of love and a willingness to act for the beneﬁ t of the group.
Song is widely used as a signal in the animal world, often in combina-
tion with striking visual displays. Many insects and amphibians com-
municate through song. Male birds use song to claim and hold territo-

127
the musical ape
ries and to win mates and keep them. Among the species of birds that 
establish long- term pair bonds, many cement those bonds by engaging 
in elaborate vocal duets.
Some primates use calls to defend their territory, advertise for a mate, 
or both.15 They also use calls to signal the presence of predators. But 
these calls are at best only simple songs. We humans are the only truly 
singing primate. How and why did our ability to sing arise?
Theories for the Origins of Music
In addition to explaining how it would have beneﬁ ted both performers 
and listeners, any theory of the origin of human music must explain how 
music became so remarkably elaborated. Some theories put forward to 
explain the origin of music fail to pass the test that both sender and re-
ceiver must beneﬁ t. Others falter when confronted with the high costs of 
making music. And most fail to explain the evolution of music’s ability 
to evoke remarkably powerful emotions. Nonetheless, components of 
those theories can help us understand music’s origins.
Origin from Language. Language has often been suggested as the source 
from which music developed.16 Chanting, an early musical form, exag-
gerates the patterns, tones, and rhythms of speech. Buddhist chants are 
rooted in spoken language; they are governed by qualitative rules such 
as “keep the tones without fault.”
Nevertheless, language alone cannot account for the development of 
music. A major objection to this theory is that we process music and 
language mostly in different areas of our brains. Language is mediated 
on the left side; music is mediated on both sides. The rhythmic compo-
nent of very simple spoken songs, like nursery rhymes, is handled in the 
right hemisphere, whereas their words are dealt with in the left. This 
is why people who have lost their speech following a left- sided stroke 
are encouraged to use nursery rhymes to recover speech. These simplest 
forms of  spoken- word song are stored mostly in the undamaged right 
hemisphere.
Before scientists knew that different neural networks mediated music 
and language, they knew that some people afﬂ icted with serious speech 
deﬁ ciencies had normal musical abilities. Russian composer Vissarion 

128
chapter eight
Yakovlevich Shebalin composed his ﬁ rst symphony while still a school-
boy. He was elected a professor in the Moscow Conservatory where he 
tutored many well- known Russian composers. In 1953, at the age of  ﬁ fty-
 one, he suffered a mild stroke that impaired his right hand, the right 
side of his face, and disturbed his speech. He recovered, but on Octo-
ber 9, 1959, he suffered a more severe stroke that partially paralyzed his 
right side and nearly destroyed his ability to speak. He partly recovered 
but continued to ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to talk and understand what was said to 
him. He died from a third stroke on May 29, 1963. Remarkably, he com-
pleted his ﬁ fth symphony only a few months before his death. Dmitry 
Shostakovich described it as “a brilliant creative work, ﬁ lled with high-
est emotions, optimistic and full of life.”
Even if we were to accept that music originated from language, the 
theory does not explain the remarkable elaboration of making music or 
tell us why making music beneﬁ ted our ancestors. It also fails to provide 
an explanation for our strong emotional responses to music.
Origin from the Imitation of Animal Sounds. A theory for the origin of 
music favored by Valerius Geist, William Benzon, and Bernie Krause, 
among others, is that music developed from imitations of the vocaliza-
tions of other animals.17 Certain brain regions contain mirror neurons 
that are active both when we execute an activity and when we observe 
another individual engaged in that activity.18 Thus, imitation has a deep 
neural basis.
Vocal mimicry is attractive as a hypothesis because it doesn’t require 
natural selection to invent something from nothing. A person that imi-
tated an animal’s vocalizations might also attempt to imitate its move-
ment and behavior, leading to ritual and dance. Bushmen render typical 
gaits of animals by softly and rhythmically beating their bows.19 Ani-
mal calls are part of music in many cultures.20 The Kayabi of the Mato 
Grosso, Brazil, imitate voices of birds, otters, monkeys, and jaguars. Es-
kimos imitate cries of geese, swans, and walruses to bring these animals 
within shooting range.21 Australian aborigines mimic a hawk alarm call 
to get a running lizard to freeze so that it becomes an easier target.
Imitating the vocalizations of other members of the same species 
could serve several purposes. Songs advertise possession of a territory 
and establish relationships among neighboring individuals. Many birds 

129
the musical ape
learn the local dialect, which reduces negative interactions because es-
tablished individuals recognize one another and avoid pointless con-
tests. Yet, vocal mimicry plays only a minor role among any species of 
primate other than humans.22
Imitation requires voluntary control over the vocal apparatus, a nec-
essary precursor to music. This control in turn may have favored a modi-
ﬁ ed vocal apparatus to facilitate creation of a wide variety of sounds. As 
Susan Blackmore suggests, “Imitation requires three skills: making de-
cisions about what to imitate, complex transformations from one point 
of view to another, and the production of matching body actions.”23 It 
also requires knowing in what context to use different imitations. Our 
closest primate relatives appear to lack this skill set. Nevertheless, some 
birds are skilled vocal imitators even though they have much smaller 
brains and simpler  sound- producing structures than primates. Surely 
primates would have used imitation if it had been advantageous.
Although the ability to mimic other animals was certainly of direct 
value to our ancestors when hunting and in social interactions, this the-
ory too falls short. We need additional factors to account for the elabo-
ration of music and the remarkable strength of emotional responses to 
music. Mimicry provides a start, but by itself it cannot yield ecstasy.
Origin from  Mother- Infant Communication. Art theorist Ellen Dissanay-
ake has championed the theory that music developed from communica-
tion between mothers and their infants.24 Indeed, the structure of music 
and lullabies is similar in cultures around the world. Infants and moth-
ers bond strongly using music and body rhythms.25
Infant- directed speech—what we call “baby talk”—has a higher 
overall pitch, a wider range of pitch, longer vowels and pauses, shorter 
phrases, and more repetition than normal adult speech. Human infants 
are interested in, and sensitive to, rhythms, tempos, and melodies of 
speech long before they are able to understand meanings of words. 
These exaggerated signals are processed as “good” and “afﬁ liative” in 
the infant’s brain, where they are translated into emotions of delight 
and pleasure. The  infant- directed speech and the facial expressions and 
actions that accompany it reinforce emotional bonds between mother 
and infant. Eventually cooing evolved into sung  infant- directed speech, 
what we call a lullaby.

130
chapter eight
Nonetheless,  mother- infant bonding falls short of explaining the 
powerful emotions generated by performing and listening to music. 
Baby talk probably developed after the human nervous system was al-
ready sensitized to melody and rhythm.
Origin from Territorial and Alarm Calls. Gibbons, chimpanzees, gorillas, 
orangutans, langurs (Presbytis), colobus monkeys (Colobus), and howler 
monkeys (Alouatta) produce long calls that they use to advertise their 
claim on territory and broadcast the location of individuals, food, and 
predators (ﬁ gure 8.2). These long calls consist of loud, pure tones that 
accelerate and then slow down toward the end. Long calls are given pri-
marily by dominant males or during duets by mated gibbons. Callers 
defend their territory and alert close relatives to resources or danger. 
These situations are important for group members; so they should evoke 
strong emotional responses in all recipients. To convert them into a 
 simple type of song only a steady rhythm would need to be added.26 Our 
early human ancestors probably used similar vocalizations.
This theory meets the criterion of providing direct beneﬁ ts to both 
callers and recipients. It also explains why long calls would have evoked 
Figure 8.2. Siamang (Hylobates syndactylus) adult calling. 
The inﬂ ated throat sac is a resonating chamber.

131
the musical ape
strong emotions. In groups with many males, vocal competition for at-
tention and leadership could readily have led to ever more elaboration of 
calls and, perhaps, the incorporation of rhythm. However, the theory in 
its current form cannot explain why the long calls of no other primates 
evolved greater complexity that became music. Nevertheless, this theory 
provides an important component of a more comprehensive theory of 
the evolution of music via sexual selection that I will now describe.
Elaboration by Sexual Selection. As we have already seen, Charles Darwin 
ﬁ rst proposed that vocal communication in general and music in par-
ticular developed as a result of sexual selection. Darwin appears to have 
been right! Females of some species of birds are more strongly attracted 
to males with larger song repertoires.27 Song elaboration in humpback 
whales also is probably also favored by sexual selection.28
Why should females pay attention to song repertoires of potential 
mates? The “developmental stress hypothesis” explains why ability to 
produce a complex song repertoire is a reliable indicator of a male’s 
quality.29 Learning and producing songs is a complex cognitive task. It 
requires a specialized neural system that develops when the individual is 
growing rapidly and may experience poor nutrition, diseases, and other 
stresses. At that time, many other physiological and anatomical systems 
are competing for the limited energy supply.30 Therefore a male bird 
that sings vigorously and well is advertising his health and ﬁ tness.
The courtship displays of many animals are accompanied by vocal-
izations. Most of these displays have parts that carry a high cost in time 
and opportunity to develop and perform, and, therefore, indicate a per-
former’s quality. As much as antlers or bright plumage, vocalizations 
carry a promise of good genes. What advantages did singing and danc-
ing offer our distant ancestors? Women in early human societies would 
have beneﬁ ted by assessing the physical capabilities of the vigorously 
dancing and calling men and basing their choices of a mate on that as-
sessment. Males would have beneﬁ ted by watching females dance and 
from sizing up the dances of rivals and using that information to assess 
the reliability of other men as partners during hunting and warring. 
They would also have assessed the likelihood of success if they chal-
lenged other individuals for social dominance.
We can see evidence for the sexual selection theory of human music 

132
chapter eight
today in the  music- making activities of societies all around the mod-
ern world. In both the modern world and throughout human history, 
making music has been a shared activity, carried out mostly by males in 
small groups. Observing females may respond with music of their own, 
but only very recently have women in small groups performed on stage.
Men that play the best music and dance the best are more attractive to 
women.31 In Kenya, Kikuyu women listen with keen interest; they pre-
sent a successful ﬂ utist with food and drink as a sign of appreciation. In 
the Trobriand islands, a man with a good singing voice is sure of success 
with women. As a native put it, “The throat is a long passage like the wila 
(cunnus) and the two attract each other. A man who has a beautiful voice 
will like women very much and they will like him.” Many societies have 
male competitive singing or playing feasts in which winners receive en-
thusiastic applause and, sometimes, material gifts.
The reproductive beneﬁ ts that accompany vocal abilities are evident 
today. Rock stars can have hundreds of times the number of sexual part-
ners as other males. Guitarist Jimi Hendrix died at  twenty- seven from 
an overdose of the drugs he used to stimulate his musical imagination. 
During his short life he had sexual relations with hundreds of women, 
maintained parallel long- term relationships with two women, and fa-
thered children in the United States, Germany, and Sweden. Under an-
cestral conditions, without modern methods of birth control, he likely 
would have fathered many more.32
Of the various factors suggested as explanations for the origin and 
development of music, sexual selection best accounts for the incred-
ible emotional elaboration of making music. But, if so, why did similar 
elaboration of vocalizations not occur in other primates? What factors 
favored the evolution of singing and dancing in our ancestors?
An important factor is that early humans came to live in complex 
societies with strong competition among individuals for access to re-
sources and mates. Also, the length of time that infants remained de-
pendent greatly increased in the lineage leading up to modern humans, 
requiring males to commit to provide for the long- term care of their 
offspring. Women then became sexually receptive throughout the year; 
the time of ovulation was no longer obvious. These two features of the 
human female reproductive cycle increased women’s options of mate 
choice and enabled women to choose one male to father her children and 

133
the musical ape
a different male to care for them. In combination, these developments 
would have intensiﬁ ed sexual selection. They are powerful today.
Musical Universals
Music has deep evolutionary roots, so music in all cultures should share 
basic structural features. Yet, the search for universals in music has a 
long but relatively unproductive history. Failure prompted some re-
searchers to conclude that music does not share any deep structures, 
but investigators may have been searching for the wrong things. The 
striking differences among musical traditions drew researchers’ atten-
tion to the possible explanations for those differences, distracting them 
from the search for underlying similarities. Researchers’ concentration 
on differences is why the common deep structure of all languages re-
mained undiscovered until the 1960s.33
Technology available in the last quarter century has given us new 
views of, and new insights into, the musical brain. Positron emission 
tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
studies show that both language and music depend on widely distrib-
uted neural networks, some of which overlap. Our complex auditory 
communications probably evolved concurrently with enlargement of 
our brain and accompanying cortical lateralization.34 People who have 
had fewer than three years of music lessons during their lives recognize 
tunes more quickly if they are played to the left ear through a set of ear-
phones, and, hence, are monitored by the right hemisphere of the brain, 
than if played to the right ear.35 One reason for believing that all mu-
sic shares basic structural features is that two elements—melody and 
rhythm—are universal components of music. A third component—
harmony—appears to be restricted to certain musical traditions. We’ll 
now look at each of these elements in turn.
Melody. The oldest known pieces of music are pure vocal melodies.36 
Surviving Paleolithic cultures throughout the world use two  clear- cut 
melodic styles. One is a “tumbling strain,” a form used by some birds, 
a wild melody that begins with a leap up to a loud high note. The voice 
then descends by jumps or glides to low, almost inaudible notes. It then 
leaps again to the highest note and repeats the descending cascade 

134
chapter eight
 (ﬁ gure 8.3). These strains, which are similar to shouts of joy or wails of 
rage, may derive from such outbursts.37 Tumbling strains are difﬁ cult 
to execute. Oliver Sachs believes that originally tumbling melodies were 
ﬁ erce and unruly, with no pattern to the steps. Gradually, however, the 
strains changed to have recurrent patterns.
A second, less emotional type of melody may consist of only two 
pitches sung in alteration. The voice moves up and down and more or 
less describes a horizontal zigzag line.38 These melodies are similar to 
both the one- note and the two- note patterns of the ﬁ rst  babble- songs 
of small children.
Rhythm. All music has rhythm. We now know much about how the brain 
generates rhythm. Different sides of the brain process rhythmic percep-
tion and harmonic perception. The basic perception of harmonic inter-
vals is seated in the auditory cortex of the right brain. Rhythmic skills 
favor the left brain.39 Batteries of tests used to measure musical abilities 
show that we can be divided into two groups—one has tonality skills, 
the other has rhythmic skills. Some of us are brilliant harmonically but 
inept rhythmically, and vice versa. Alas, some of us possess neither skill.
Harmony. Polyphony, the performance of more than one note at a time, 
also has ancient roots. A rudimentary polyphony with at least some sort 
Figure 8.3. A spectrogram of the tumbling song of a canyon wren (Catherpes 
mexicanus). A spectrogram plots the frequency (pitch) of the sound over time.

135
the musical ape
of mingling of notes and parts, characterizes some melodies in most 
cultures.40 However, all traditional Chinese music is melodic, but not 
harmonic. Han musicians all play versions of a single melodic line. A 
few genres of Arabic music are polyphonic, but the vast majority of Ara-
bic music emphasizes melody and rhythm, not harmony.
The highly developed harmony of Western music began with the 
chants of medieval Christian monks.41 They had a single melodic line 
that wavered up and down no more than a step or two. Most notes were 
held long, and there was no beat (ﬁ gure 8.4). Chants were prayers; words 
were much more important than tones.
Harmony depends on the fact that some sounds go well together; that 
is, they are consonant. Sounds that do not go together are dissonant. 
Neurology, acoustics, and music theory all contribute to an understand-
ing of dissonance.42 The neurological explanation resides in the struc-
ture of the middle ear. A pure frequency sound stimulates the highest 
level of activation of receptors at a particular point along the membrane, 
but receptors on either side of that point also ﬁ re. Two frequencies 
form a dissonant interval when their critical bands overlap and upset 
Figure 8.4. The Laborde chansonnier, a medieval songbook owned by the Marquis 
de Laborde (1807–69). Manuscript on vellum, made in France around 1470.

136
chapter eight
each other’s activations, which is why tones very close in frequency are 
 dissonant.
Ultimately, dissonance is a lack of order; consonance is the presence 
of order. However, we all know that our ears and brains adjust to disso-
nance that earlier or untrained listeners found intolerable. Composers 
may use dissonance to engage listeners by moving away from the tonal 
center of a composition far enough to cause some anxiety but not so far 
as to destroy a composition’s tonal center.
Anticipation and Musical Pleasure
We listen to music because it evokes strong emotions, most of them 
pleasurable. Yet, during most of the past several centuries, Western aes-
thetic philosophers resisted the idea that the arts in general and music 
in particular have anything to do with “mere pleasure.” Music critic Ed-
uard Hanslick (1825–1904) regarded physiological and psychological re-
sponses to music as “pathological.” Most Western aesthetic philosophers 
use the word “pleasure” to imply some kind of crude bodily sensation, 
the study of which was not worth the attention of sophisticated people.43 
But all pleasure is biological. The hypothesis that making and listening 
to music are not motivated primarily by pleasure is  implausible.
Pleasurable Sounds in Nature
If responding positively and negatively to the sounds of nature is one of 
the roots of human music, the sounds and patterns we ﬁ nd pleasurable 
in music and nature should be similar. This may be true.
Birds whose songs we ﬁ nd pleasant and musical use rhythms simi-
lar to those of our own music. When birds compose songs they often 
use the same rhythmic variations, pitch relationships, permutations, 
and combinations of notes as human composers.44 Singing humpback 
whales use phrases of a few seconds in duration; they create themes out 
of several phrases before singing the next theme. Although they are ca-
pable of singing over a range of at least seven octaves, humpbacks use 
musical intervals between their notes that are similar to intervals of hu-
man musical scales. Their songs contain repeating refrains that form 
rhymes.45 Whales mix percussive or noise elements in their songs; they 

137
the musical ape
do so in a ratio similar to that used in Western symphonic music. Some 
humpback songs include a statement of a theme, a section in which it is 
elaborated, and then a return to a slightly modiﬁ ed version of the origi-
nal theme (that is, the A- B- A stanza form).
Many birds elaborate their vocalizations in ways that correspond to 
a “theme with variation.”46 Young individuals practice singing and de-
velop their musical repertories by listening to themselves and the sounds 
of others. Some birdsongs use the same rhythmic variations, pitch rela-
tionships, permutations, and combinations of notes as human compos-
ers. Indeed, birdsongs contain every elementary rhythmic effect found 
in human music.47 Humans regard animal calls that use pure tones and 
rhythms similar to those of our music as pleasant. Pitch intervals in 
birdsongs that are the same as or similar to the intervals of human music 
are likely to be ranked high musically. One of the main features of bird-
song is its pleasant tonal quality, achieved by production of pure sounds 
with a restricted frequency range, with few harmonics or overtones. The 
songs of the musician wren and common potoo, generally regarded as 
among the most beautiful of birdsongs, use the pentatonic scale, which 
is also a common feature of traditional music.
Culture and Training Inﬂ uence Tastes in Music.
Despite its remarkable variety, human music conforms to fundamental 
patterns in much the same way that a deep grammar underlies all hu-
man languages. Nevertheless, although some form of universal musi-
cal grammar may exist, the music of other cultures may be so different 
from the one in which we are raised that we may judge such sounds to 
be unmusical. In our increasingly global society, this is beginning to 
change, with an increased audience and market in the West for “world” 
music with its challenging structures, tonalities, and dissonances.
Within a culture, musical innovation may be unpleasant or even out-
rageous, when ﬁ rst heard. Often, however, new rhythms, melodies, or 
harmonies come to be accepted as pleasant after people have listened 
to them many times. Most people acquire their musical tastes during 
adolescence among friends of the same age; they often retain those pref-
erences for the rest of their lives.
Even though the forging of social bonds was probably not the factor 

138
chapter eight
that ﬁ rst led to the development of music, once we had evolved strong 
emotional responses to it, music clearly assumed a variety of social func-
tions. Today music synchronizes activities, relieves boredom, reduces 
tension, stimulates group identity, and communicates political and re-
ligious messages. Ritual music and dance trigger brain mechanisms that 
foster social bonding, suggesting that ritual dancing may have been es-
sential for creating the trust upon which all social interaction depends. 
Indeed, most people develop their personal musical choices by conform-
ing to the preferences of their peers. Our musical lives are inﬂ uenced by 
both the music of the spheres and music of our peers.

139
Women believe that they have a better 
sense of smell than men. They are right! 
On average, women detect odors at lower 
concentrations and are better at identifying them than men. Even week- 
old baby girls turn toward novel odors and spend more time smelling 
them than baby boys do.
Why are women more sensitive to odors than men? One plausible 
reason is that during much of our evolutionary history women were 
the primary gatherers of fruits, vegetables, and small animals. A good 
sense of smell would have improved their ability to locate fruits, judge 
their ripeness, assess risks associated with eating them, and evaluate the 
quality of the many different kinds of potentially edible plants present 
in the savanna environment.1 An acute sense of smell would have been 
less useful to men who were hunting elusive mammals and birds. An-
other reason is that women, being on average choosier than men, would 
have made good use of odors in choosing the fathers of their children.
We also use body odors as tribal markers. The Desana people of Co-
lombia believe that each tribe has its own characteristic odor, owing to 
heredity and what its members eat. The Desana, who are hunters, ex-
ude the odor of the game they consume; their neighbors, the Tapuya, 
who eat primarily ﬁ sh, are thought to smell of ﬁ sh. The neighboring 
farmers, the Tukano, are said to smell of roots and vegetables. Avery Gil-
bert, an expert in human odor perception, writes that every culture has 
a foul- smelling food that all members must ingest to be recognized as 
true natives.2 You are not really Icelandic unless you eat hákarl (rotten 
shark meat). Real Japanese eat a  creosote- smelling mass of fermented 
soybeans called natto. People in northern Sweden make surströmming 
by fermenting herring in barrels for a couple of months. They then put 
them into tin cans for up to a year. The strong odors released when the 
The First 
Sniff 

140
chapter nine
can is opened are often compared to rotten eggs, vinegar, and rancid 
butter. Kiviak, a traditional Inuit food from Greenland, is made of hun-
dreds of auks, including their beaks, feet, and feathers, preserved in the 
 hollowed- out body of a seal. Air is removed from the sealskin, which is 
sewn up and sealed with grease. The foul- smelling fermented birds are 
eaten during the winter, particularly on birthdays and weddings.
Gilbert may exaggerate, but cuisines do function as strong cultural 
identity markers. Odoriferous foods are particularly strong markers; 
they are especially prevalent at high latitudes. True believers claim that 
they really ﬁ nd them tasty. Although we are poorer than most mammals 
in detecting chemical signals, odors are clearly important in our lives. 
To ﬁ nd out why, let’s ﬁ rst look at the odors that nature produces.
Nature’s Odors
Some of nature’s odors are by- products of geologic processes. Volcanoes, 
fumaroles, and geysers have distinctive sulfurous odors. Lightning pro-
duces odorous airborne chemicals. We easily recognize the odor of sea 
air, but biological processes generate most of nature’s odors. Trees emit 
pungent resin; decaying plant matter gives loam its distinctive earthy 
scent. Animals mark territories with urine and musk. Ruminants like 
sheep and goats belch to get rid of the gas created by fermenting leaves 
in their rumens.
Ripening fruits emit chemicals that attract frugivores from great dis-
tances. Plants synthesize many defensive chemicals that protect them 
from animals that want to eat them. Some of them are emitted only 
when tissues are damaged,3 but others are naturally released into the air.
Chemists have identiﬁ ed more than seven hundred  ﬂ avor- producing 
volatile chemicals in food and beverages.4 A single fruit or vegetable 
may synthesize several hundred, but only a few determine the “ﬂ avor 
ﬁ ngerprint” that helps animals and humans identify them. As fruits 
ripen, larger molecules are converted to smaller ones that better nour-
ish seeds. Those same chemicals may attract birds and mammals that 
eat the pulp and disseminate the seeds. Plants defend themselves against 
predators—especially insects and mammals—in part by synthesizing 
toxic chemicals. Herbivores can detoxify many of them, but they must 
expend energy to do so.

141
the first sniff
Animals also produce many volatile chemicals. Some, such as body 
odors, are by- products of normal metabolism. They did not evolve to 
facilitate communication. A class of chemicals called pheromones, how-
ever, evolved in the service of attracting mates and deterring enemies. 
Animals also use pheromones to mark borders of their territories and 
foraging trails that other individuals use to ﬁ nd distant food sources. 
The distance over which these chemicals can be detected and how long 
they persist in the environment ﬁ t their communicative functions.5 For 
example, to mark their trails, ants deposit large molecules that diffuse 
slowly. They spread slowly and persist so that other ants can follow the 
trail. The sex attractants produced by insects, mammals, and some other 
animals, on the other hand, are small molecules that disperse widely. 
They can be detected at great distances by potential mates.
Microorganisms also produce many volatile chemicals as they break 
down food. The metabolism of bacteria produces foul odors that make 
rotting food repulsive to animals that would otherwise eat it.6 In warm 
climates, vertebrate scavengers must ﬁ nd dead bodies quickly before 
bacterial products reach toxic levels. In winter, when cold temperatures 
inhibit bacterial growth, vertebrates can dine on a carcass for many 
months.
With this background, we are now ready to consider how chemicals 
inform us about important things in the environment and how we use 
them to respond to life’s challenges.
Odors and Aff ordance
What odors do we humans pay attention to? We respond negatively to, 
and avoid contact with, odors we associate with harm or that are harm-
ful in and of themselves. Most volatile chemicals that come from water, 
caves, volcanoes, and fumaroles make us sick if we inhale them. Fires 
produce distinctive odors that our ancestors would at ﬁ rst have avoided. 
Later they learned how to use ﬁ re to protect themselves against predators, 
to cook food, and to create fresh green growth that attracted herbivores. 
We seek other odors, consciously or unconsciously, because they can help 
us ﬁ nd a meal or a mate or even communicate with the spirit world.
As most people know when they’ve tried to enjoy a meal with a bad 
head cold, the senses of taste and smell are closely linked. If the sense of 

142
chapter nine
taste were located in our mouth, simply swallowing a mouthful of wine, 
would give us the full sensation of its taste. But, the nerves that receive 
other than the four basic sensations are in the upper nasal cavity where 
air does not circulate during normal breathing. This is why it is difﬁ cult 
to “taste” food when our nasal passages are clogged. It is also why a food 
can smell bad but taste good (blue cheese, durian) or smell good but 
taste bad (coffee).
Odors coming from other living organisms are sources of many 
kinds of positive and negative information about current or future food 
sources or enemies. Many organisms produce chemicals that make them 
less desirable as food. Odors produced by ﬂ owers and fruits are designed 
to be attractive to at least some animals. Many animals emit odors that 
signal possession of a territory or attract sexual partners. Products of 
genes in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) have odors that 
choosy mates can detect. Female mice prefer as mates males whose MHC 
alleles differ from their own. Females that mate with MHC- dissimilar 
males are less likely to abort their fetuses. Humans are not as discrimi-
nating as mice, but we also use odors to make mating choices. In 1995 
Claus Wedekind and his colleagues found that in a group of female col-
lege students who smelled T- shirts worn by male students for two nights 
(without deodorant, cologne, or scented soaps), by far most women 
chose shirts worn by men of dissimilar MHCs. Their preference was re-
versed if they were on oral contraceptives.7 Several studies since then 
have shown that we use body odors when choosing mates.
We are attracted to the odors of ﬂ owers; many perfumes are derived 
from them. We locate most ﬂ owers visually; we must stick our nose into 
most of them to detect their odors. Night- blooming ﬂ owers emit power-
ful odors that attract bats and moths from great distances. We can detect 
those odors, but we seldom approach their source. We have modiﬁ ed 
ﬂ owers to enhance their beauty and increase their life spans. Uninten-
tionally, in the process they have become less fragrant just as the larger 
fruits we have favored are often less tasty than their smaller progenitors.
A plant will have more surviving offspring if its fruits are not eaten 
until the enclosed seeds are mature. Immature seeds may pass unharmed 
through a frugivore’s digestive tract, but they are unlikely to germinate. 
Unfortunately from the point of view of plants, the world is full of ani-
mals that attack fruits to consume seeds rather than the surrounding 

143
the first sniff
ﬂ eshy pulp. They don’t wait for the pulp to sweeten. These seed raid-
ers range from large parrots and pigeons to small insects whose larvae 
live within fruits. Plants defend their unripe fruits with toxic chemi-
cals, but once fruits are ripe, pulp- eating visitors are welcomed. At that 
time, plants start to produce chemicals that attract animals. Among the 
chemicals emitted by ripe fruits is alcohol.
Alcohol’s Attraction. Alcohol relieves pain, stops infections, lubricates 
social exchanges, and contributes to a general sense of joy. Every human 
society has discovered and taken advantage of these medicinal and psy-
chological beneﬁ ts of alcohol. People use alcohol to help them communi-
cate with their gods and their ancestors, from the fermented maize beer 
of the Tarahumara shamans of Mexico to the ceremonial wine of the Jew-
ish and Christian traditions. Cereal grains may have been domesticated 
primarily to produce beer rather than bread. In an article in the Scientiﬁ c 
American, Robert Braidwood argued that a single processed food— barley 
bread—was the driving force for domestication of cereals. Jonathan 
Sauer responded by arguing that beer rather than bread was the primary 
motivator. Braidwood then organized a conference titled “Did Man Once 
Live by Beer Alone.” Many opinions were expressed, but no resolution 
was reached.8 In any event, probably neither beer nor bread came ﬁ rst be-
cause other more easily fermented substances were probably discovered 
and exploited before barley was domesticated.9 Barley beer is, in fact, 
more nutritious than bread. It contains more B vitamins and the essential 
amino acid lysine. It is also a potent mind- altering and medicinal liquid.
William James vividly expressed the power of alcohol in The Varieties 
of Religious Experience:
The sway of alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to its power to 
stimulate the mythical facilities of human nature, usually crushed to earth 
by the cold facts and dry conditions of the sober hour. Sobriety diminishes, 
discriminates, and says no; drunkenness expands, unites, and says yes. It 
is in fact the great exciter of the Yes function in man. It brings its votary 
from the chill periphery of things to the radiant core. It makes him for the 
moment one with truth.10
Many other animals are also attracted to alcohol. Fruit- eating verte-
brates inevitably ingest alcohol when they eat the sweet mixture of sugar 

144
chapter nine
and alcohol that oozes from ripe fruits on branches or on the ground. 
Some of them have even been observed binging on rotting fruit.11 In 
northern Australia, the period just before the rains begin is called the 
“drunken parrot season.” At that time people pick up scores of intoxi-
cated red- collared lorikeets from the streets of Darwin and take them to 
an animal hospital to recuperate. Orangutans and elephants travel for 
miles to ﬁ nd fermented fruits. They appear to like getting drunk, but 
getting drunk in a world full of predators does not seem like a good idea 
(ﬁ gure 9.1). What is going on?
The “drunken monkey” hypothesis of Robert Dudley proposes that 
a strong attraction to the smell and taste of alcohol helps  fruit- eating 
vertebrates ﬁ nd ripe fruit.12 As a fruit ripens, yeasts on the skin and 
within the ﬂ esh convert sugars into alcohols, primarily ethanol. Ethanol 
content rises rapidly and may reach concentrations as high as 1 percent. 
Overripe fruit on the ground may have ethanol concentrations as high 
as 4 percent, as high as the level in some hard ciders. Ethanol is a small 
molecule that disperses readily in air. An animal able to detect it could 
ﬁ nd ripe fruit easily by moving upwind. Finding fruits quickly is beneﬁ -
cial because competition for fruits in nature is often intense. Ripe fruits 
Figure 9.1. Black spider monkey (Ateles paniscus paniscus) eating the 
fermenting fruit of a Sapotaceae plant, Amazonia, Brazil.

145
the first sniff
are often consumed quickly by a variety of birds and mammals and are 
soon rendered unpalatable by bacteria and fungi in tropical heat.
Although the drunken monkey hypothesis predicts that frugivores 
should be attracted to the odor of alcohol, when given a choice in the 
laboratory they typically prefer fruits with less ethanol.13 This result is 
still compatible with the drunken monkey hypothesis; frugivores might 
be attracted to the odor of ethanol and use it to ﬁ nd ripe fruit while still 
preferring to ingest less of it. As we mentioned, getting drunk in a world 
full of predators is not a good idea.
In support of Dudley’s drunken monkey hypothesis, the beneﬁ ts of 
consuming alcohol appear to outweigh the detriments for human health. 
The good news from an increasing body of research is that moderate 
consumption of alcohol, particularly red wine, confers health  beneﬁ ts.
Our ancestors would have found it difﬁ cult to consume enough natu-
rally fermented fruit to make them sick. However, about ten thousand 
years ago, humans learned how to control fermentation. Distillation 
made drinks with much higher alcohol concentrations widely available. 
Alcohol abuse soon followed. Alcoholism, along with obesity, is a dis-
ease caused by great differences between our prehistoric and contempo-
rary environments. We ﬁ nd it hard not to binge on addictive substances 
that during most of our evolutionary history we could have consumed 
only in  health- promoting moderation.
Body Odors and Perfumes
don giovanni: Zitto! mi pare sentir odor di femmina!
(Hush! I think I scent a woman!)
leporello: Cospetto! Che odorato perfetto!
(Wow! what a nose!)
don giovanni: All’aria mi par bella.
(And a pretty one at that.) 
—Mozart, Don Giovanni, text by Lorenzo da Ponte
People in all cultures use chemicals to alter the odors their bodies emit. 
Fragrances have been in use for at least ﬁ ve thousand years; traditional 
scents are still used in modern perfumes.14 Manufacturers of perfumes 
today use the same techniques as their Egyptian predecessors.15 Many 
of today’s ingredients—cassia, cinnamon, sandalwood, styrax, benzoin, 

146
chapter nine
jasmine, and rose—were used as incense by Chinese, Indian, or Egyp-
tian cultures ﬁ ve thousand years ago. Some detailed recipes for myrrh, 
labdanum, galbanum, and olibanum recorded in the Bible (Exodus 
30:34–36) are used today.
Why do we use perfumes? Perfumes can mask unpleasant body odors, 
but a small number would do that job. Advertising campaigns tell us 
that the primary purpose of perfumes is to enhance one’s sexual attrac-
tiveness (ﬁ gure 9.2). True, but that does not explain why they work. That 
hypothesis does not tell us why we ﬁ nd those odors attractive rather 
than repulsive, what messages they send, who receives the messages, or 
who is manipulating whom.
Figure 9.2.  Eighteenth- century perfume shop advertisement with civet 
cat and snuffbox. The musk of the African civet (Civettictis civetta) 
has been prized as a component of perfume for centuries.

147
the first sniff
An interesting hypothesis proposes that perfumes enhance rather 
than block a person’s natural odor.16 Why might that work? A plausible 
answer is that parasites evolve so rapidly that every human generation 
needs new combinations of genes to resist them. The genes that play 
that role, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), are the most 
polymorphic of vertebrate genes. Determining which MHC alleles po-
tential mates would have been especially important in  disease- rich en-
vironments.17 This may be why people typically take a long time to ﬁ nd 
“their perfume” and then stay with it for many years. The painter of Les 
Fleurs Animées obviously knew that humans prefer other perfumes for 
themselves than on their sexual partner (ﬁ gure 9.3). Wise men also avoid 
choosing perfumes for their partners.
Our Changing Responses to Nature’s Odors
We have strong positive and negative responses to nature’s odors. We 
respond positively to odors emanating from objects that afford posi-
tive opportunities and negatively to odors coming from objects (rotten 
food) or situations (a forest ﬁ re) that are best avoided. Both positive and 
negative aesthetic responses to aromas evolved in the service of ﬁ nding 
food, avoiding toxins, and selecting mates. We have particularly strong 
responses to odors that tell us about dangers and about the quality of 
potential food items. Odors also play a major role in how we interact 
with one another, advertise our abilities, and integrate ourselves into 
social groups. Our emotional responses to odors change as we mature. 
As adults we avoid objects that emit odors of decay, but children do not. 
Anyone who has raised children knows that two- year- olds insert almost 
anything in their mouths, including feces, sampling the world while 
still protected by breast milk. Failure to ingest microbes during infancy, 
common in today’s sterile environments, may be one reason for the cur-
rent rapid increase in allergies in industrial societies.
A by- product of our use of odors in social interactions is the ease with 
which our responses to odors can be manipulated by suggestion. A good 
example is an experiment performed at the University of Wyoming in 1899 
by a chemistry professor, Edwin Slosson. He told the class that the experi-
ment’s purpose was to demonstrate the diffusion of odor through air. He 
then poured some liquid from a bottle onto a wad of cotton, keeping it far 

148
chapter nine
from his nose. He started a stopwatch and told the students to raise a hand 
as soon as they smelled something. He reported the results as follows:
While awaiting results I explained that I was quite sure that no one in the 
audience had ever smelled the chemical compound which I poured out, 
and expressed the hope that, while they might ﬁ nd the odor strong and 
peculiar, it would not be too disagreeable to anyone. In ﬁ fteen seconds 
most of those in the front row had raised their hands, and in forty seconds 
the “odor” had spread to the back of the hall, keeping a pretty regular 
“wave front” as it passed on. About  three- fourths of the audience claimed 
to perceive the smell, the obstinate minority including more men than the 
Figure 9.3. Tubereuse and jonquille from Les Fleurs Animées. The man’s 
ﬂ owers are orange, the woman’s are white, in the colored original.

149
the first sniff
average of the whole. More would probably have succumbed to the sugges-
tion, but at the end of a minute I was obliged to stop the experiment, for 
some in the front seats were being unpleasantly affected and were about to 
leave the room.18
Yet, Slosson was holding a cotton ball soaked only in water! Other 
experimenters have obtained similar results.19 The members of the “ob-
stinate minority” must have overcome strong urges to raise their hands, 
just as we are motivated to laugh at a joke even if we failed to “get” the 
punch line. The desire to be an integrated member of a group often 
trumps reality.
The underlying reason for the power of “spin” in relation to odor per-
ception is that smells don’t happen just in the nose. The brain is active 
at all times during odor perception, controlling the intensity of snifﬁ ng, 
inﬂ uencing habituation to current inputs, and preparing us for action. 
The structures of molecules are not reliable guides to how it smells to 
us. Molecules exist in the air, but we can register only some of them as 
smells. “Odors are perceptions, not things in the world. The fact that 
a molecule of phenylethyl alcohol smells like rose is a function of our 
brain, not a property of the molecule.”20
Our response to odors is a dramatic illustration that our nervous sys-
tem is organized functionally to help us make good decisions, not to 
provide us with accurate pictures of nature. We still don’t understand 
why we differ so much in our ability to detect odors. Women may, on av-
erage, be better than men in detecting odors, but sensory abilities of the 
sexes overlap. Moreover, great variability exists within each sex, from 
people born without a sense of smell to “supernoses” who excel in the 
industries of perfumery, viniculture, and the creation of artiﬁ cial ﬂ a-
vorings. Is this variability the result of differences in individual experi-
ences, such as positive or traumatic events accompanied by strong odors 
that left indelible impressions? Has there been selection that favored 
specialization, or is the variability simply a result of sexual recombina-
tion? Keep inhaling!

150
Ornithologist Frank M. Chapman was 
one of many people concerned about 
declining bird populations more than 
one hundred years ago. His worries led him to propose a new holiday 
 tradition—a Christmas bird census. Rather than hunt birds, he sug-
gested that people go out and count them. He inspired  twenty- seven 
birders in  twenty- five cities in North America to conduct the first 
Christmas Bird Counts on Christmas Day 1900. The idea caught on. In 
2011, birders held Christmas Bird Counts in 2,215 different places around 
the world; they tallied 61,359,451 individuals (ﬁ gure 10.1). Communities 
compete to tally the most species or to get the highest number of individ-
uals of particular species. For some people, participating in the counts 
has become an obsession; they rise before dawn to join in several counts 
within a few days; counts can now be held over a two- week period.
Why are so many people motivated to spend long hours, often in 
cold, miserable weather, counting birds? Why do they care how many 
different kinds they see? Why do they not just count the number of 
individuals? Why do they care who sees the most species? A plausible 
evolutionary reason is that an environment rich in species offers greater 
affordance than one with few species. The resources our ancestors re-
quired (food, ﬁ ber, and shelter, among other things) came from many 
species. Knowledge of those species would have helped them ﬁ nd them. 
When our ancestors evaluated habitats, they surely thought about the 
species living there and how they could use them. Paying attention to 
other species evolved to become pleasurable. Later we’ll see how this 
ability to distinguish among and remember many different kinds and 
forms of things expresses itself in ways that don’t always seem directly 
connected to life on the African plains.
Ordering 
Nature

151
ordering nature
Counting Species on the Savanna
Throughout human history, knowledge of other species, especially their 
suitability as food, has been crucial to our survival. Paying attention to 
timing and location of ﬂ owering plants would have told our ancestors 
where they could ﬁ nd fruit in season. Signs of recent animal activity—
tracks, broken branches, scat, and odors—provided hunters with valu-
able information. Movements of herds of mammals and ﬂ ocks of birds 
offered direct information about food availability. Humans have long 
observed other species of animals to determine what is safe to eat.1 The 
Incas learned which plants were dangerous to eat by observing plants 
eaten by animals that later became sick.2 The behavior of female mam-
mals might indicate where their vulnerable offspring were hidden.
Animals could be valuable in other ways. By observing them, early 
humans could beneﬁ t from animals’ knowledge of the environment. 
Seafarers have long used the behavior of seabirds to aid navigation. 
Figure 10.1. Jeannie Elias, left, Mary Spencer, and Alison Wagner look for birds in 
Fayston, Vermont, December 19, 2008, as they take part in the National Audubon 
Society’s annual Christmas Bird Count. Between December 14 and January 5, 
birders around the Western hemisphere headed out on one day to keep track 
of the birds they could see and hear in a  ﬁ fteen- mile diameter circle.

152
chapter ten
People of the Poluwat Atoll in the Caroline Islands navigate across great 
distances between islands by dead reckoning, but when they become 
lost or stray from their intended course, they rely on behavior of sea-
birds to ﬁ nd land.3 The islanders have intimate knowledge of the birds’ 
foraging behavior and how their ﬂ ight destinations change between 
dawn and dusk.
Before the invention of agriculture people typically occupied a series 
of seasonal campsites, following seasonal availability of animals and 
plants. People had to decide when to shift from a dry- season camp to a 
wet- season camp, or from a winter camp to a spring camp. These deci-
sions to shift camp needed to be timed carefully, and this depended on 
a deep understanding of life cycles of local species. This deep under-
standing of other species lies at the basis of our attraction to the great 
diversity of living things. I argue that it’s also the basis of a wide range 
of human collecting behavior.
Aesthetic Responses to Biodiversity
Although environments that are  species- rich offer greater affordance 
than ones with fewer species, the relationship is not simple. Adding a 
few species to a  species- poor environment may greatly increase its value, 
but a few more species in an already  species- rich environment may have 
little effect. Also, the more different species there are, the more difﬁ -
cult it becomes to track them. Research shows that we prefer environ-
ments with intermediate levels of biological richness to both simpler 
and more complex ones.4  Species- poor environments have too few re-
sources;  species- rich ones have so many that choosing among them or 
remembering where they are becomes difﬁ cult.
People in traditional societies typically profess a holistic view of 
nature in which each species is perceived to have a speciﬁ c function. 
This often extends to a belief that nonhuman species are important for 
spiritual reasons beyond their utility as food, ﬁ ber, other materials, or 
medicines.5 Many people in modern industrialized societies believe that 
a world with many fewer species would be a less desirable place to live 
in. This belief spurs them to donate to organizations that work to pre-
serve species that live on other continents, places they may never visit. 

153
ordering nature
Knowing that those species continue to exist is sufﬁ cient motivation 
for donating.
Although people are attracted to a variety of organisms, we ﬁ nd some 
environments with few species very attractive, if we can judge by the 
kinds of environments we recreate in our gardens and other highly hu-
manized landscapes. The most highly developed garden traditions— 
European formal gardens and Japanese gardens—are dominated by a 
few species of woody plants. Most of us respond positively to gardens 
that display a profusion of ﬂ owers of different species and colors, but 
environments that contain a jumble of plants of many species receive 
low scores in psychological tests (chapter 6). Subjects report that they 
are too difﬁ cult to interpret, that it is hard to determine how to enter and 
use those environments. We respond positively to large ﬂ ocks of birds 
and herds of mammals that have only one species, but I am not aware 
of experiments that test our responses to scenes of ﬂ ocks and herds that 
differ only in the number of species in them. Opportunities for imagina-
tive research abound.
Classifying Species
To know how to respond to different species it helps to categorize them. 
By doing so we create stereotypes that greatly simplify deciding what 
to do with their members. By the logic we have employed throughout 
this book, classifying things should be pleasurable. It is! As psycholo-
gist Nicholas Humphrey pointed out, pleasure happens when we view 
and attempt to order shapes and patterns because “an activity as vital as 
classiﬁ cation was bound to evolve to be a source of pleasure.”6
Naming things, particularly plants and animals, was probably a ma-
jor function of early human language. We know that classifying organ-
isms was an important activity in ancient Mesopotamia and the Medi-
terranean basin.7 We can classify things that lack names, but it is much 
easier to remember things if they have names. Ancient Hebrews recog-
nized the importance of names by having Adam, as his ﬁ rst task, name 
the animals. “So out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of 
the ﬁ eld and every bird of the air, and brought them to the man to see 
what he would call them; and whatever the man called every living crea-

154
chapter ten
ture, that was its name. The man gave names to all cattle, and to the 
birds of the air, and to every beast of the ﬁ eld” (Genesis 2:18). The writers 
of Genesis had poor knowledge of the extent of Earth’s biodiversity; they 
imagined Adam’s job to be a fairly simple one that he could accomplish 
in less than a day, and they did not care if plants had names.
We now classify anything that can be ordered, but the value of pay-
ing attention to other species may be the origin of our desire to clas-
sify things. The pleasure we gain from ﬁ nding order in nature may also 
help explain our propensity to seek and ﬁ nd “order” where there is none. 
People ﬁ nd forms of living organisms in clouds. We imagine outlines 
of people, animals, and human artifacts in rock formations that are 
the result of normal erosion. We ﬁ nd monsters in driftwood and wave 
 patterns.
Rarity and Aff ordance
Common species probably provided most of the resources used by our 
ancestors; they do so in hunting and gathering societies today, but rare 
and unusual species and events may have provided valuable informa-
tion about environmental changes. Not all novel events signal some-
thing important, but some of them do. Rare events may indicate that 
current ways of using the environment should be altered. Indeed, un-
usual events (more powerful hurricanes and tornadoes, early ﬂ owering 
of plants, early breeding of birds) are currently telling us about the con-
sequences of climate change. Rare species have provided special ﬂ avors 
(spices), scarce nutrients, and medicinal beneﬁ ts (recall chapter 7).
The survival value of attending to rare and unusual events may help 
explain the aesthetic attraction of unusual variants of plants and ani-
mals, an attraction that has led to a proliferation of cultivars of domes-
ticated plants and breeds of domesticated animals. In 1800, only ﬁ fteen 
breeds of dogs were recognized; a century later, there were sixty (ﬁ g-
ure 10.2). A similar proliferation occurred with virtually all forms of live-
stock, domestic fowl, pigeons, canaries, and plants. By the 1850s, 150 
breeds of pigeons already were recognized.
Animals with atypical coloration have always fascinated people. Mu-
seums are stuffed with them, deluding people into thinking that they 

155
ordering nature
are much more common than they really are. Albinos or partial albinos 
are the most common color aberrations. These variants typically arise 
as random mutations; most of them quickly die out in nature. However, 
they are nurtured in captivity and incorporated into popular varieties.
Ordering Becomes Collecting
Our remote ancestors could not afford to collect many things because they 
had to carry their possessions with them when they changed seasonal 
camps. They probably collected some small things like  arrowheads—
different kinds are used for killing different types of prey (ﬁ gure 10.3)—
but most things that accumulated at a campsite were probably left be-
hind when people departed. Nevertheless, the pleasure of classifying 
things has been expanded into a desire to collect them. Our ancestors 
probably began to collect things as soon as they established permanent 
villages.
Figure 10.2. Prize dogs at the Birmingham dog show, 1869. The National Dog Show 
Birmingham remains the world’s oldest ongoing dog show. The American Kennel Club 
now recognizes 161 distinct breeds, from the saluki, with its origins in ancient Egypt, 
to newly recognized breeds like the Norwegian lundehund, trained to hunt pufﬁ ns.

156
chapter ten
Most of us now collect something at some time during our lives. My 
collecting passion was stamps; I organized mine by country and date of 
issue. People around the world collect art objects, books, coins, stamps, 
antiques, and a mind- boggling array of items from autographs to Ti-
betan mountain ghost traps. Collectors of speciﬁ c things form organi-
zations and have annual meetings at which they talk about their col-
lections as well as buy and sell. They spend a lot of time ordering them.
We are not the only animals that collect things. Many species of 
animals cache food for later use. Hoarding, storing, or caching food is 
known in at least twelve families of birds,  twenty- one families of mam-
mals (but not in primates), and many insects.8 The honey we value so 
highly is food bees have stored for the savanna dry season or the north-
ern winter. We use the name of animals that collect things to describe 
people who cannot throw things away—pack rats.
Collecting things sometimes becomes a passion with undesirable 
consequences. Physiologist Ivan Pavlov, who thought deeply our pas-
sion for collecting, expressed it this way:
Figure 10.3. A boy displays his prize arrowhead collection 
at a hobby show at Hanford, Washington.

157
ordering nature
If we consider collecting in all its variations, it is impossible not to be 
struck with the fact that on account of this passion there are accumulated 
often completely trivial and worthless things, which represent absolutely 
no value from any point of view other than the gratiﬁ cation of the propen-
sity to collect. Notwithstanding the worthlessness of the goal, every one 
is aware of the energy, the occasional unlimited self- sacriﬁ ce, with which 
the collector serves his purpose. He may become a  laughing- stock, a butt 
of ridicule, a criminal; he may suppress his fundamental needs, all for the 
sake of his collection.9
What induces a person to become obsessed with collecting things? 
The answer, of course, lies in the brain. A detailed study of  eighty- six pa-
tients with brain lesions showed that the thirteen patients with lesions 
in a particular prefrontal region of the cortex developed compulsive, 
obsessive collecting behavior.10 They all massively accumulated useless 
objects and persisted in doing so despite vigorous efforts by their close 
associates to stop it. The data suggest that a mechanism in that part of 
the forebrain normally adjusts our predisposition to acquire things so 
that it does not become disruptive. Not every person who becomes ob-
sessed with collecting things has brain lesions, but something may have 
disrupted the normal control system.
Evidently our desire to collect things is so strong that a special mech-
anism evolved to keep us from going overboard. A control mechanism 
may have been necessary because, as we will see, collections are excellent 
for showing off.
Sexual Selection and Elaboration
In addition to the enjoyment they get from classifying objects, people 
take pride in the sizes of their collections. They also take pride in the 
number of places they have visited or things they have seen. During the 
eighteenth century, gardeners in Europe eagerly sought exotic plants 
from around the world and boasted in the number of species they raised. 
A vigorous trade existed between England and North America. An ama-
teur gardener in Pennsylvania, John Bartram, became the principal sup-
plier of seeds and plants to growers in England.11
Many people take great pleasure in ﬁ nding as many species of birds as 
they can on a given day or year. They assemble “life lists” of species they 

158
chapter ten
have seen. Some people travel hundreds or even thousands of miles to 
add a rare species to their life list. Why do we engage in such costly and 
seemingly useless behavior?
Competition for status, often unconscious, may underlie such behav-
ior. We use other species to compete for status, indirectly by ﬂ aunting 
the length of our lists, and more directly by competing in dog shows, 
horse shows, ﬂ ower shows, and bonsai shows. People work mightily to 
win prizes in those shows and proudly display their winning ribbons 
and plaques.
Catching and keeping birds has long contributed to status. Men gave 
birds to women as courtship gifts. In medieval times catching small 
birds was, along with hunting, falconry, and ﬁ shing, one of four noble 
and  status- enhancing pursuits. Hunters had higher status than bird 
catchers, but the latter ranked higher than ﬁ shermen. The more success-
ful a bird catcher, the greater was his status in the local community. In 
his little book Hungers Prevention, Gervase Markham claimed that small 
birds have two uses: “either pleasure or food, pleasure because every one 
of them naturally, have excellent Field- Notes, and may therefore be kept 
in cages and nourisht in their own tunes, or also trayned to any other 
notes, or else for food, being of pleasant taste, and exceeding much 
nourishing, by reason of their Naturelle heat, and light digestion.”12
Canaries reached central Europe via Spain and Italy in the 1400s. 
Their melodious songs immediately captured the attention of people 
on a continent already full of bird keepers. Germans enlarged the vocal 
repertories of  captive- reared birds by exposing them to large numbers of 
songs. Several villages became involved with breeding canaries, but the 
center of the business was St. Andreasberg. During the 1820s, the town 
was producing about four thousand male canaries each year (only male 
canaries sing). By 1882,  three- quarters of the eight hundred families in 
St. Andreasberg were rearing canaries. In some years the town exported 
as many as twelve thousand male canaries. The trade in caged songbirds 
was not conﬁ ned to Europe. More than ten million birds were sent to 
America during the ﬁ rst four decades of the twentieth century.13
It was perhaps inevitable that, once we began breeding birds for their 
songs, people would stage singing contests (ﬁ gure 10.4). The earliest 
known formal song contest was a chafﬁ nch competition in the Harz 
Mountains of Germany in 1456. The species used in early song contests 

159
ordering nature
included skylarks, goldﬁ nches, linnets, greenﬁ nches, and chafﬁ nches. 
The winner of a “strong singing” contest was the bird that sang the high-
est number of complete songs in a set period of time, usually about ﬁ ve 
minutes. Success in another type, “distance singing,” was judged on the 
number of songs a chafﬁ nch performed in thirty minutes or an hour. 
Figure 10.4. The “Kota Tua Cup,” a songbird competition in front of 
Fatahillah Museum in the Kota Tua area of Jakarta, Indonesia, January 24, 
2009. Hundreds of birds competed in this singing competition.

160
chapter ten
When canaries became available, they were also extensively used in sing-
ing contests. A winning canary conferred great prestige on its owner. 
Chafﬁ nch singing contests have fallen out of fashion with the rise of the 
modern  animal- rights movement.
Competition for status, and the sexual opportunities it affords, is not 
a uniquely human attribute. Other species use attractive objects for the 
same purpose. Male bowerbirds decorate their elaborate bowers with 
colored objects that they place near the entrances to their bowers (ﬁ g-
ure 10.5). They compete for objects and steal them from their neighbors. 
The number of objects with rare and unusual colors shows a male’s sta-
tus. Only dominant males can steal rare objects from other males and 
prevent them from recovering them. Objects having colors that are com-
mon on the forest ﬂ oor tell nothing about the quality of their owner 
because subordinate males also can assemble them.
Collecting organisms and other things has made great contributions 
to scientiﬁ c knowledge. Without collections we would not know about 
the great diversity of life. We know that exposure to DDT caused the 
shells of birds’ eggs to thin because we could measure eggs collected 
Figure 10.5. Male great bowerbird (Chlamydera nuchalis) at his bower 
decorated with green glass, plastic toy elephant, toy soldier, and 
other decorations, Townsville, Queensland, Australia.

161
ordering nature
before DDT was made. We know how natural environments sounded 
because Bernie Krause recorded them.14 But our desire to possess exotic 
species or parts of them (skins, horns, tusks) is threatening the existence 
of orchids, parrots, tigers, leopards, elephants, rhinoceroses, and many 
other species. Most nations of the world have joined CITES (the Conven-
tion on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora), established in 1975, to control the massive worldwide trafﬁ c in 
rare species, but animals and animal parts command such high prices in 
the world market that smuggling continues. We need to learn how to use 
our drive to collect and categorize things in a way that serves our own 
desires without endangering other species that share our small planet 
with us.

162
In the opening episode, a small bird, 
appropriately called a honeyguide, 
led Boran hunters in Kenya to a bee-
hive. Honeyguides are good at ﬁ nd-
ing hives, but they are unable to open 
them. The Boran and other tribes have 
trouble locating widely dispersed 
hives but are adept at extracting the 
nutritional bonanza of honey and 
bee larvae, some of which they leave 
as payback for the helpful birds. This 
remarkable partnership evolved because honey was uncommon on the 
African savanna and both partners craved it. Except during the brief 
season when fruits were ripe, it was the only source of sugar. Centuries 
later, as our ancestors spread abound the globe, they clung to their taste 
for honey and produced a fermented version, mead, the intoxicant that 
became the libation of Viking sagas and medieval poetry.
A sweet tooth was adaptive for our  hunter- gatherer ancestors who 
needed to store energy to be active during times of food scarcity (the 
human body converts excess sugar to fat) and to pay for their large, ex-
pensive brains. Most of the foods they collected were not sweet. Much 
later, agriculture gave us abundant starch. Only recently has technol-
ogy inundated us with sugar. Our  savanna- adapted bodies still crave 
sugar, but lean times rarely or never come for most people in modern 
technological societies. So now we deposit the excess as fat and become 
obese. An evolutionary perspective helps explain why about two- thirds 
of American adults and 10 to 15 percent of children less than nineteen 
years of age are overweight or obese and why there is a global epidemic 
The 
Honeyguide 
and the 
Snake
Embracing Our 
Ecological Minds

163
the honeyguide and the snake
of obesity and type 2 diabetes in both adults and, for the ﬁ rst time, 
children.
Coren Apicella, a biological anthropologist from Harvard Medi-
cal School, and her colleagues used our fondness for honey to ﬁ nd out 
whether social networks in modern societies are ancient patterns or 
recent developments. They gave members of the Hadza tribe,  hunter-
 gathers in Tanzania, honey sticks (hollow wax straws ﬁ lled with honey, 
such as are sometimes sold at drugstores and farm stands). They asked 
the participants with whom they would share the honey. The Hadza 
sharing pattern closely resembles the sharing behavior of people in the 
developed world.1
As the Boran hunters followed honeyguides ﬂ ying through the trees, 
they would have been advised to look down as well to avoid coming close 
to a python or adder without seeing it. Their sensitive peripheral vision 
would have helped them detect motionless snakes in the grass. If one 
of the hunters had detected a snake, he would have alerted the others, 
allowing them to give the hidden snake a wide berth. In that way they 
would have continued to be predators rather than becoming prey.
Our fondness for sweets, honed on savanna honey, important though 
it is today, is only one of many ghosts of past environments that persist 
in the modern psyche. Our honey ﬁ xation illustrates the central message 
of this book: the experiences of our distant ancestors in their savanna 
homeland color our responses to everything around us—our reactions 
to landscapes, other organisms, and the sounds and odors of nature. Us-
ing evolutionary insights we have uncovered legacies born on the Afri-
can savanna that would have gone unnoticed without an evolutionary 
perspective.
Savanna Legacies
Some of the responses I have discussed were already well known, but 
evolutionary psychology has shed new light on why we have them. 
Consider, for example, our attraction to water. Evolutionary psycholo-
gists have shown that infants and toddlers on their hands and knees 
mouth ﬂ at, glossy objects as if drinking, suggesting that our positive 
response to water is innate. Some of the other responses that we better 

164
chapter eleven
understand as a result of research by evolutionary psychologists are that 
we have
• Hardwired autonomic nervous system circuits that respond more strongly 
to stimuli that were relevant in the past (snakes, dangerous herbivores, and 
large carnivorous mammals) than to stimuli that pose greater threats today 
(ﬁ rearms, electrical wires, speeding cars).
• Strong responses to pointed forms that resemble of the fangs, claws, and 
horns of dangerous animals.
• Automatic and unconscious association of sickness with food eaten hours 
earlier and negative responses to likely sources of contagion, such as rot-
ting ﬂ esh, and signs of infection, such as pus. This implies an intuitive 
microbiology that evolved long before we were aware of the existence of 
microorganisms or had a germ theory of disease.
Although evolutionary psychology has enriched our understanding 
of those things we already knew about, its greatest value has been to help 
us think of responses and patterns we would have missed completely, or 
failed to have imagined, without an evolutionary perspective. Among 
the surprises that have been discovered are that
• Women remember better than men the location of high- quality food in a 
supermarket.
• We have a previously unknown and unsuspected vertical illusion; we dra-
matically overestimate vertical irregularities on the ground.
•  Prospect- refuge theory can explain our unconscious emotional responses 
to unfamiliar environments.
• The savanna hypothesis predicts new explanations for our preferences 
among tree shapes, and the way we manipulate trees in parks and gardens.
• We remember animal tracks better than most other types of objects.
• We are especially attracted to changing colors of leaves and to ﬂ owers.
• Our neural systems more accurately detects changes in the positions of 
animals than of objects, even cars and other motor vehicles, by far the most 
deadly moving things in today’s environment.
• Children have an intuitive understanding that animals are self- propelled 
whereas other things are not.
• We have special neural mechanisms attuned to tessellated patterns that 
facilitate detection of snakes.
Some of the most striking insights evolutionary psychology has pro-
vided into human nature involve our responses to other people, an arena 

165
the honeyguide and the snake
I have only lightly touched on in this book. Among the most important 
ﬁ ndings are that
• Our brains possess a special neural module for detecting cheaters.
• Our surprising propensity to share what we have with others in “one- shot” 
economic games may a by- product of social decision making under condi-
tions of uncertainty.
Regarding our propensity to share, our ancestors could not have 
known whether an encounter with a stranger would be the only one or 
the ﬁ rst of many interactions. It wouldn’t pay to share resources with 
someone you might never see again, but it could be worse to refuse to 
share with someone who might end up being a neighbor. No stranger 
ever came from far away. Under those conditions, evolutionary psychol-
ogy predicts we should hedge our bets. We should evolve responses that 
balance the costs of mistaking a one- shot encounter with a stranger for 
the ﬁ rst of many encounters with someone who will become familiar. 
Wrongly assuming we will have no future encounters may result in for-
feiting the beneﬁ ts from future social encounters when kindness and 
generosity are repaid. Even though subjects are told that the experiment 
is a one- shot encounter, our savanna minds respond otherwise.2
The Road Ahead
The body of information on our emotional responses to the environment 
is impressive and growing rapidly, but it represents only the beginning 
of what the sciences of behavioral ecology and evolutionary psychol-
ogy can and will discover. We cannot imagine today the rich array of 
hypotheses future investigators will develop or what their experiments 
will reveal.
As Joseph Heinrich at the University of British Columbia has pointed 
out, most laboratory studies that test evolutionary psychology hypoth-
eses have been carried out with WEIRD (Western, educated, industrial-
ized, rich, and democratic) college students who are unrepresentative of 
humanity as a whole. Much more  cross- cultural research and studies of 
people of all ages will be needed to determine which responses are uni-
versal and which are culture speciﬁ c, at which ages responses ﬁ rst de-

166
chapter eleven
velop, and which are more easily altered by experience. Some responses 
that embody strongly held cultural values will probably vary widely, but 
many other responses may be similar across cultures. The many known 
“human universals” suggest that, despite the overlay of nationality and 
culture, we are fundamentally alike.3 People’s preferences for landscape 
features, especially  savanna- like vegetation, tree shapes, and colors, for 
example, are similar across many cultures. Yet, as scientists generate 
new hypotheses that predict response patterns we have not yet imag-
ined, we are likely to be in for some interesting surprises. The unex-
pected outcomes will also be sources of much of the pleasure that will 
accompany future discoveries. Finding something unexpected is much 
more exciting than afﬁ rming something we judge likely to be true.
Our Complex Ecological Minds
Many of our rich and varied emotional responses to the physical and 
biological environment were molded when our ancestors lived on Afri-
can savannas. Their conscious and unconscious assessments inﬂ uenced 
decisions about where to go and what to do there. To better understand 
our complex modern minds, we need to brieﬂ y dip back into the past 
for some ecological context. Rarely did our  savanna- dwelling ancestors 
need to choose among several options at once. Most choices were “do or 
don’t,” a choice between responding to a particular thing or situation or 
moving on to the next decision.
Consider an individual (we’ll say a male early ancestor) entering an 
environment for the ﬁ rst time. On encountering this new place, he de-
cides either to stop and explore or move on and continue searching. To 
make an appropriate decision he needs to have a guess about the general 
state of the environment. He must have an expectation of what he might 
encounter and how soon if he continued to explore. The decision to give 
chase is based on how long he thinks it might be before another poten-
tial meal comes along. Like other foragers, he would have encountered 
most of his potential prey one at a time. As do starlings, which like most 
birds encounter prey individually, he would have made better choices by 
having more information about the general state of the environment.4
Even though our ancestors sometimes did need to evaluate and 

167
the honeyguide and the snake
choose among simultaneous options, they always had incomplete 
knowledge; the consequences of their decisions were always uncertain. 
Rarely were there “right” answers they could have determined by taking 
time to gather more information although they clearly beneﬁ ted by be-
ing able to rapidly process much information.
This fundamental feature of the “decision environment” of our an-
cestors may help explain our behavior today. To see how, let’s look at 
the surprising results of some of the imaginative experiments that were 
summarized and synthesized by psychologist Daniel Kahneman.5
We start with how we size up an offer of easy money. In some experi-
ments subjects are asked to choose between two simultaneous options 
for which there is a mathematically correct answer. For example, people 
were asked to choose between receiving $46 (guaranteed) or tossing a 
coin and getting $100 (heads) or nothing (tails). Most people preferred 
the sure thing, even though its expected value over repeated trials ($46) 
is less than the expected value of the coin toss ($50). The reason is that 
we give greater psychological weight to losses and potential losses than 
to gains. As we have seen, our ancestors beneﬁ ted by developing a pow-
erful aversion to loss.
Our negativity bias also shows up in the following type of experi-
ment. People in one group are given a coffee mug; people in another 
group are given a chocolate bar. Soon thereafter individual members of 
both groups are told that they can keep the gift they have but if they 
wish they can exchange it for the alternative. Most people in both groups 
elect to keep what they have rather than trade. For our ancestors, posses-
sion of an object normally meant that they had expended some effort to 
acquire it, even if, as in many psychological experiments, it was a gift. 
Moreover, a gift normally implies indebtedness to someone. Therefore, 
the loss of a possession psychologically implies a signiﬁ cant sunk cost. 
Our ancestors rarely received something for nothing.
Our ecological minds can also explain the striking binary structure 
of human thought. Most decisions of our ancestors had to make were 
 “either- or.” An object or landscape was either to be approached or avoided. 
An item was either edible or inedible. An individual was a suitable mate 
or he or she wasn’t. And they often had to make decisions quickly. An 
individual that pondered the desirability of ﬂ eeing from a hungry preda-

168
chapter eleven
tor was more likely to be captured than one that ﬂ ed instantly. A sexu-
ally active male that debated at length the desirability of mating with a 
receptive female would ﬁ nd another’s genes in his place.
Although taking action requires quick decisions with polar opposite 
outcomes, inputs from the environment tend to be complex and often 
contradictory. To help us decide quickly, our brains resolve complex in-
puts into polar categories. Polar thinking is not simply a feature of West-
ern thought, a legacy of Greek and Roman logic and languages that gave 
us polar preﬁ xes: con- dis, post- ante, pro- con. Polar opposites are found 
across cultures, among people speaking different languages and with 
different intellectual histories. Cosmological schemata of cultures as di-
verse as Chinese (for example, yin and yang), Indonesian, Keresan Pueblo 
Indians, and Oglala Sioux all divide nature into a few categories.6 Claude 
Lévi- Strauss, the leading anthropologist of his generation, claimed that 
all tribal myths are built upon polar opposites—hot and cold, night and 
day, raw and cooked, good and bad.7 Spatial distinctions in most lan-
guages are relatively simple. Although space is a continuous variable, in 
our languages something is either close or far.8 These universal patterns 
suggest that polar typology has deep evolutionary roots. Our ecologi-
cal mind explains why we evolved to resolve complex inputs into binary 
outputs. Action is polar!
Our Ecological Mind and the Social Sciences
The view of the human mind that emerges from investigations of our 
interactions with the environment contrasts strikingly with the human 
mind in the standard social science model that prevailed for most of the 
twentieth century.9 According to that model, the evolution of human 
consciousness, combined with our remarkable learning ability, emanci-
pated us from the control of our genome. There is no such thing as hu-
man nature. As expressed by José Ortega y Gasset, “Man has no nature: 
what he has is his history.” In other words, the human mind begins as 
a blank slate. The formless mind of an infant is transformed into a cul-
tural human adult mind by the surrounding culture. Psychologists who 
adopted this perspective believed that all thought, feelings, and behav-
iors could be explained by a few mechanisms of learning.
The amazing recent advances in cognitive neurology have made that 

169
the honeyguide and the snake
model untenable. Yet, many people who recognize that our behavior is 
a product of complex interactions between heredity and environment 
during maturation still believe that we differ fundamentally from other 
animals in that environmental inﬂ uences so completely trump genetic 
inﬂ uences on our behavioral development that a potential role for genes 
on much of our behavior can be ignored. However, some traits, such 
as the ability to learn a language early in life, appear entirely geneti-
cally determined; barring signiﬁ cant developmental delay or a certain 
rare mutation, any child will speak by the age of two. Other traits, such 
as which language a person speaks, are entirely environmentally deter-
mined. The insights into our ecologically molded minds that I have il-
lustrated in this book greatly enrich our understanding of which compo-
nents of our behavior bear the imprint of our long evolutionary history 
and why they do.
Our Ecological Minds and Sexual Selection
We are constantly sizing up the competition, comparing ourselves to ri-
vals, especially sexual rivals. We make many decisions by estimating our 
ability relative to that of competitors or opponents. If a male judges the 
other guy to be larger or stronger, he usually backs down. We rarely pick 
ﬁ ghts we are certain to lose. Tall men are more successful in business 
than short men; they typically win political contests. A review of the 
extensive literature on selection acting on traits that inﬂ uence mating 
success, such as elaborate displays in males, shows that sexual selection 
is stronger than natural selection acting on traits that directly inﬂ uence 
survival or fecundity.10
A few examples will explain what I mean. Competition for status, 
which drives many components of human behavior, begins in childhood 
and continues during adulthood. We cultivate ﬂ owers, fruits, and veg-
etables that are much larger than natural ones. We build homes much 
larger than necessary to satisfy the basic amenities a house provides. 
Such conspicuous consumption is a sexual display like a lion’s mane or 
a peacock’s tail. An evolutionary perspective explains why we elaborate 
only a small set of objects and behaviors that are typically things that are 
intrinsically pleasurable. The psychological effect of elaboration is to 
make them even more pleasurable. So we build elaborate houses, main-

170
chapter eleven
tain large, fancy gardens, compete for status with our collections of 
things, and display the physical skills that would have served our ances-
tors well. Many dress styles enlarge or exaggerate breasts and buttocks 
(women) or shoulders and  upper- arm strength (men). Competition for 
status is successful only if it uses objects that generate strong positive 
emotions. Otherwise, nobody cares.
Sexual selection can also explain why our gardens and parks and 
other green spaces don’t always display the features of a savanna. We of-
ten alter them to display our power, wealth, and status. As we discussed 
in chapter 5, formal European Renaissance gardens differ strikingly 
from tropical savannas. Many of them are best viewed from the owner’s 
home, not by walking through them (ﬁ gure 11.1). The elaborately mani-
cured landscapes function as a dominance display. Only wealthy, power-
ful people can afford to maintain them.
Not all our fascination with elaboration is due to sexual selection. We 
are fascinated by supernormal scenery—big storms and rugged moun-
tains. Painters and photographers exaggerated the topography of the 
American West as part of a campaign to convince Congress to establish 
national parks in the most spectacular areas. We are not alone in think-
ing that bigger is better. For example, adult songbirds respond to the 
Figure 11.1. Garden Castello Balduino from the balcony, Montalto di Pavia, Italy.

171
the honeyguide and the snake
gaping mouths of their offspring by bringing food. The gaping mouths 
in a nest are virtually certain to be those of its offspring. Thus, when a 
cuckoo, cowbird, or other  brood- parasitic bird lays her egg in the nest of 
a smaller bird, the large egg is incubated. More surprising, the parents 
eagerly feed the exotic nestling, even when it grows to be much larger 
than their own offspring (ﬁ gure 11.2).
Applied Environmental Aesthetics
The environmental movement has been concerned primarily with the 
effects we have on environments rather than effects environments have on 
Figure 11.2. These gullible reed warblers (Acrocephalus scirpaceus) had their work cut out for 
them when they were tricked into thinking this enormous cuckoo chick was their own.

172
chapter eleven
us. We do, of course, have profound inﬂ uences on Earth’s climate and the 
cycles of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus. We are massively modify-
ing Earth’s landscapes, moving disease organisms around the world, and 
causing the extinction of many species of plants and animals. We live on 
an increasingly cultivated planet with shrinking wildlands like our an-
cestors knew in East Africa. Our strong positive and negative emotional 
responses to living organisms and natural environments inﬂ uence how 
we respond to nature, how we attempt to manipulate it, and why we 
care about it. Understanding the roots of our emotional responses to 
environments, in addition to its intrinsic interest, helps us understand 
why we manipulate nature as we do and suggests how to improve our 
role as stewards.
Insights from evolutionary psychology suggest ways to interact with 
our environment that are both emotionally satisfying and less destruc-
tive than much of our current behavior is. We can use our emotional 
responses to events and situations to design educational programs and 
environmental policies, and to use plants and animals creatively in a 
variety of therapeutic situations. There are already some promising ap-
plications of environmental psychological research to current problems 
and challenges.
The Environment and Cognition
To respond appropriately to environmental challenges, our ancestors 
had to take in a ﬂ ood of diverse information, compare it to previously 
learned information, and decide how to act in a new situation. Function-
ing in a complicated and uncertain environment favored complex cog-
nitive capabilities. One legacy of this interaction between our brains and 
complex natural environments is that being in natural surroundings 
actually helps us think more clearly. People suffering from attention fa-
tigue recover when exposed to natural settings, in part because natural 
places like woodlands and meadows and riverbanks engage the mind ef-
fortlessly and provide a respite from sustained attention.11 Exposure to 
the great outdoors has been shown to help children with attention deﬁ -
cit /  hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), particularly those for which medica-
tion has proven ineffective. Children with ADHD concentrated better 
after a  twenty- minute walk in a park than in two other urban  settings.12

173
the honeyguide and the snake
The good feelings we experience when we’re out in nature help us re-
call information from memory and ﬁ nd creative solutions to problems. 
Exposure to nature promotes recovery from mental fatigue stemming 
from demanding work tasks that require a high degree of sustained 
attention.13 Stress reduces our performance on various  higher- order 
cognitive tasks, but even a brief exposure to nature leads to improved 
mood, reduces stress, and results in better performance on experimen-
tal tasks.14 This is true whether subjects are exposed to actual natural 
settings or simply shown photographs.15 That exposure to the natural 
world reduces stress has important implications for the design of work 
spaces, living quarters, and healthcare facilities. Architects and plan-
ners are just beginning to incorporate these insights into their blue-
prints.16 Evolutionary psychology results would predict that exposure 
to  savanna- like natural environments will yield better results than expo-
sures to other landscape types, but this prediction has not been tested.
Aesthetics and Environmental Education
As we have seen, emotions are central to human decision making; we 
communicate emotion in part through the arts. This suggests that educa-
tors should make greater use of the performing arts to inform audiences 
about conservation issues and to stimulate dialogue and inspire action. 
Conservation education and outreach at all levels can be designed to pro-
mote interdisciplinary understanding of natural and built environments 
by combining science, arts, and humanities. Use of music and dance 
should enhance both learning and subsequent involvement in conser-
vation activities. Listening to music elevates endorphin levels, creating 
pleasurable feelings and stimulating learning. More research is needed 
to determine the types of active and passive art experiences that most 
effectively evoke changes in people’s behavior in relation to the environ-
ment, but we already know enough to sense the great potential of such 
activities for enhancing the effectiveness of environmental education.17
Environment, Design, and Restorative Emotions
During the last twenty years, an evolutionary perspective on human 
emotions has proven increasingly useful in psychiatry, medicine, and 

174
chapter eleven
nutrition.18 Deviating from the landscapes and diets of our ancestors 
often leads to undesirable outcomes. Patients recovering from surgery 
in hospitals with either views of natural vegetation or simulated views 
that depict natural scenes with water, recover more rapidly and are less 
anxious while recovering than patients with no access to natural views 
or who see only abstract designs.19 If people spend even a few hours in 
forests, parks, and other places with trees, they experience increased im-
mune function. The cause appears to be phytoncides, airborne chemi-
cals that plants emit to protect themselves from insects and other her-
bivores and prevent rotting.20
If aesthetic responses evolved because they helped people solve life’s 
problems, exposure to high quality environments should be restorative; 
it should reduce feelings of tension and stress. It does! More than one 
hundred studies show that stress reduction consistently emerges as 
a beneﬁ t of recreation in wild places.21 Spending time in urban parks 
and other landscaped seminatural settings also reduces stress.22 The sa-
vanna hypothesis predicts that feelings of relaxation and peacefulness 
should be especially strongly evoked by settings resembling savannas. 
University students often seek natural environments or urban settings 
dominated by natural elements (wooded urban parks, places offering 
views of natural landscapes, locations at edges of water) when they feel 
stressed or depressed. Today, however, stressed students are increasingly 
turning to social media to relax and connect with friends. The long- term 
consequences of this substitution are uncertain, but, as I have demon-
strated, we have neural circuits honed to respond positively to speciﬁ c 
landscape features; virtual environments should not be as effective as 
natural ones. We should experimentally test the strength and nature of 
our responses to real and virtual worlds before we assume that access to 
real worlds does not matter.
Designing Environmental Policies
Since the 1970s, the US government has developed ways to measure 
how people feel about their environment. Policy makers want to know 
how citizens feel about the effects that projects, like building dams or 
widening highways, will have on the surrounding environment. Using 
surveys and interviews, agencies try to assess the value people place on 

175
the honeyguide and the snake
wilderness and unspoiled places, and their willingness to pay to create, 
preserve, and maintain them.
A good example is the way that concepts from evolutionary psychol-
ogy are being used to help manage aesthetic resources on public land. 
In 1993 the US Forest Service published Agricultural Handbook Number 
701, “Landscape Aesthetics: A Handbook for Scenery Management.”23 Its 
purpose is to assist land managers in implementing a “Scenery Manage-
ment System” to improve visitors’ physiological well- being as “an im-
portant byproduct of viewing interesting and pleasant natural landscapes 
of high depth views and  natural- appearing open spaces” (emphasis in the 
original). The recommendations draw on psychological and physiologi-
cal studies of people under stress, recovering in hospitals, and in recre-
ational and other settings, that demonstrate the restorative properties of 
natural settings. The results of studies by Dimberg, Ulrich, and Simons, 
showing that heart rate (beats per minute) decreases when people view 
spatially open landscapes but not when they view spatially restricted en-
vironments are particularly important. Based on these results, the hand-
book recommends assessing the scenic attractiveness of landscapes and 
offers suggestions for enhancing the visibility of a landscape by altering 
plants and trees or buildings that obscure the view.
The Human- Animal Bond
Humans depend on animals, especially mammals, for food, ﬁ ber, and 
countless other commodities. We are attracted to scenes with large 
mammals. The big ﬁ ve (elephant, rhinoceros, cape buffalo, lion, and 
leopard) are the main attractions on African safaris. As we have seen, 
we have neural programs that are sensitive to animals and their move-
ments. Stress is reduced when people observe arrays of moving animals. 
As expected, keeping pets is very pleasurable. The use of animals as com-
panions may have begun before animals were domesticated.24 Psychia-
trists have long believed that animals can help minds and bodies heal, 
but until recently we had only anecdotal evidence. Today, many species, 
from dogs and rabbits to horses and llamas, are used as therapy animals 
both with children with autism and adults with chronic problems such 
headaches, impaired vision, and dementia. Often expressionless and si-
lent patients smile, laugh, and talk to the animals as well as the therapy 

176
chapter eleven
animal’s handlers. Speech, attention, and nonverbal expression of emo-
tions are strikingly improved if people have a pet or regular access to a 
companion animal.25 Why should this be so?
Our ancestors’ success in hunting and gathering depended on gain-
ing information about where animals were in the environment and 
communicating that information to other people. They would have 
beneﬁ ted from trying to think like the animals they were hunting. That 
would have helped them understand and, hence, predict their behavior. 
Asking questions like “If I were a rabbit, where would I hide from preda-
tors?” would have been helpful. The success of such anthropomorphism 
may have favored our tendency to assume that animals really have con-
scious strategies.26 Over the millennia, that mental habit would, in turn, 
have favored the development of totemism, which is a formal recogni-
tion of our kinship with animals. Bonding emotionally with animals was 
certain to evolve.
The Healing Garden
Three thousand years ago, in what is now Iraq, people tried using hor-
ticulture as emotional therapy. Persians created gardens designed to 
please multiple senses by combining beauty, fragrance, the sights and 
sounds of water, birdsong, and shade. In 1812, Benjamin Rush, a physi-
cian and professor of the Institute of Medicine and Clinical Practice at 
the University of Pennsylvania, noted that digging in a garden was one 
of the activities that distinguished male patients who recovered from 
mania from those that did not.27 Rush inspired many public and pri-
vate psychiatric hospitals to include gardening and farming activities 
in their programs. In the 1940s, the US Veterans Administration estab-
lished hospitals to care for wounded servicemen and - women. Members 
of garden clubs and the horticultural industry brought ﬂ owers to the 
hospitals and introduced  plant- based activities.28 In the 1950s, Alice 
Burlingame, a trained psychiatrist, established horticulture therapy 
programs with volunteers from the National Farm and Garden Bureau; 
she also coauthored the ﬁ rst book on horticultural therapy.
In 1973, a group of horticultural therapy professionals established 
the Council for Therapy and Rehabilitation through Horticulture. Now 
called the American Horticultural Therapy Association, it has nearly one 

177
the honeyguide and the snake
thousand members; most of them are registered professionals. A rich 
literature that describes the cognitive, psychological, social, and physi-
cal beneﬁ ts of horticultural therapy supports their belief that working 
with plants promotes emotional, mental, and physical health and well-
 being. The organization publishes the Journal of Therapeutic Horticulture 
and supports a variety of activities.
We Are Regressing Backward
Although people have an inherent love of nature—what Edward O. Wil-
son calls biophilia—these feelings, like many other evolved traits, fail 
to ﬂ ourish unless nurtured in early childhood. We can be introduced 
to nature via three avenues—direct, indirect, and vicarious. Direct ex-
perience is by far the most important for children’s cognitive develop-
ment and in their feelings about nature because it engages a wider range 
of  problem- solving responses than the other two modes.29 Yet, in the 
United States today the majority of most children’s interactions with na-
ture are via Twitter, YouTube, and other electronic media—videophilia. 
Such sedentary and solitary forms of interacting with nature negatively 
affect cognitive development, contribute to childhood obesity, and in-
crease feelings of loneliness and depression.30 We need to get young 
people out into nature. The campaign by Richard Louv, a Berkeley, Cali-
fornia journalist, “No Child Left Inside,” is pointing the way.31 Louv has 
identiﬁ ed a serious mental problem, “nature deﬁ cit disorder,” that af-
ﬂ icts a large proportion of children today.
Mayan children only four or ﬁ ve years old are familiar with more than 
one hundred species of plants; suburban children in the United States 
can name only a few.32 Most undergraduate students at Northwestern 
University, in Evanston, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago, had heard of some 
of the local trees (birch, cedar, chestnut, ﬁ g, hickory, maple, oak, pine, 
and spruce), but fewer than half had any familiarity with alder, buckeye, 
linden, mountain ash, sweet gum, and tulip tree, all of which are com-
mon in the Evanston area. Lack of detailed, ﬁ rsthand knowledge about 
particular species leads to loss of the meanings attached to them. We call 
that process backward regression.
The serious loss of knowledge about and, hence, appreciation of, na-
ture that accompanies growing up in a modern technological society 

178
chapter eleven
bodes ill for our efforts to preserve Earth’s biodiversity. Indirect experi-
ences of nature do not generate the emotional involvement with living 
organisms that appears to be necessary to motivate people to care about 
biodiversity and devote time and money to help preserve it. People can-
not mourn the loss of something they did not know existed. We cannot 
expect people who have never experienced nature to appreciate it and be 
willing to work to save it.
Our Pleistocene Minds in Today’s World
Our  savanna- adapted ecological minds generally function quite well in 
modern industrial, urbanized societies. Our attraction to savanna veg-
etation and trees that are similar to those that dominate high- quality 
African savannas poses no problems for us today. The parks and gar-
dens we design and the art we create that mimic our ancestral homeland 
enrich our lives. Our love of music has stimulated some of the ﬁ nest 
expressions of human creativity. Making and listening to music brings 
great joy to the lives of people on all human cultures. We may sometimes 
become obsessed with our collections of things, but, by and large, col-
lecting and categorizing things is a source of pleasure, not of problems.
Unfortunately, some of our  savanna- derived biases do pose problems 
for us today. Our love of food has generated the rich and varied cuisines 
that so delight and sustain us, but our craving for sweets has allowed the 
food industry to make fortunes while we become increasingly obese and 
face an epidemic of type 2 diabetes. We can’t control what is a normal, 
deeply rooted urge for a nutritious resource that was scarce during most 
of human history.
Our autonomic nervous system circuits evolved to respond strongly 
to stimuli that were relevant in the past (snakes, dangerous herbivores, 
and large carnivorous mammals) not to stimuli that pose greater threats 
today (ﬁ rearms, electrical wires, speeding cars). We should be afraid 
of guns, driving fast, driving without a seat belt, and hair dryers near 
bathtubs, not of snakes and spiders. Efforts by public ofﬁ cials to strike 
fear in citizens using statistics and shocking photographs usually fail. 
Parents scold to deter their children from playing with matches or chas-
ing a ball into the street, but when Chicago children were asked what 
they were most afraid of, they cited lions, tigers, and snakes. We ﬁ nd it 

179
the honeyguide and the snake
very difﬁ cult to control those fears. We cannot eliminate them by con-
sciously reminding ourselves that, for example, most snakes are actually 
 harmless.
Our failure to fear truly dangerous objects and situations in today’s 
environment causes serious social problems. We drive dangerously and 
kill one another at high rates on highways because we fail to recognize 
how dangerous driving a motor vehicle at high speeds on crowded roads 
really is. Weapons of all kinds, from handguns to nuclear bombs, rarely 
evoke a level of fear that matches their real hazard. The thrill of the hunt, 
combined with the power of modern ﬁ rearms, easily leads to decimation 
of wildlife and high rates of homicide.
The consequences of failing to address the stark mismatch between 
the things we fear the most and the things that are most likely to kill 
us are serious. To deal with such problems as high accident rates and 
an epidemic of obesity and its associated type 2 diabetes, we must ﬁ rst 
recognize that they are biological problems. This tells us that solutions 
will not come easily because the urges that drive them are strong. We 
cannot rely on research to come up with silver bullets that will cause 
the problems to shrink or vanish. Enhanced public education to help 
us make better decisions will certainly help but is likely to yield only 
modest results. Alas, our increasing obesity is accompanied by more 
and more books on how to diet.
Clearly, the incentives we have chosen to employ are insufﬁ cient for 
the task. Speed limits lower accident rates but psychologically we do not 
fear driving fast. We slow down because we fear being arrested, not be-
cause we fear having an accident. We happily drive faster than the speed 
limit when we think we can get away with it. In addition to regulations, 
which are an essential part of reigning in our savanna minds, we need 
to devise and employ incentives that either directly affect our emotions 
or prevent us from yielding to them.
To combat obesity, for example, we could enact laws to protect chil-
dren. We already require parents to enroll their children in school, have 
them immunized, and make them wear seat belts. We don’t let them buy 
alcohol or cigarettes. Type 2 diabetes used to be called “adult onset,” but 
it is increasing rapidly today in children along with their increasing obe-
sity. Why not prevent them from having access to unhealthy doses of 
sugary drinks at school? We could ban unhealthy food in schools and re-

180
chapter eleven
quire schools to provide daily physical education, which unfortunately, 
has been dropped in many school districts. We could require that mass- 
marketed junk food bear prominent health warning labels. Reducing the 
negative effects of such deeply rooted biological problems will be dif-
ﬁ cult, but we know that the consequences of failing to tackle them will 
become increasingly serious. Ghosts of the Pleistocene in our psyches 
are both good and bad.
Environmental Aesthetics and Progress
We understand more about how the world works than ever before, and 
our knowledge base grows exponentially. Unfortunately, this accumula-
tion may not make us more sensible. As Edward O. Wilson suggested, we 
are drowning in information but starved for wisdom. Applying results 
of environmental aesthetics may improve human well- being, but ethical 
and political progress may lag behind. History tells us that knowledge 
mostly increases power; it has little inﬂ uence on rationality or morality; 
our needs and emotions remain basically the same. The major decisions 
made by our ancestors during the Pleistocene are the same ones we fret 
over today. Yet, the improved understanding of ourselves that evolution-
ary psychology is giving us can be a source of inspiration.
An evolutionary perspective offers a rich and rewarding view of what 
it means to be a human being on Earth. Following Charles Darwin’s lead 
we have developed a new perspective of life on Earth, its origins, and 
how the millions of species we share our small planet with came into 
being. Evolutionary biology has also given us answers to the deep ques-
tions people everywhere have asked. Who are we? Where did we come 
from? Where are we going? We now employ evolutionary perspectives 
to think creatively about the challenges our savanna ancestors faced, 
how they evolved to deal with them, and why their responses have left 
important legacies in our modern minds. We understand why we have a 
sense of beauty and awe, and why emotions drive our decisions.
We have much more to learn, but we can be certain that an evolution-
ary perspective will continue to yield new and interesting insights into 
our interactions with the complex environment we live in. Most reassur-
ing is the good news that most of the things we like to do are good for 
us to engage in. The evolutionary mirror has told us why that is so. Only 

181
the honeyguide and the snake
a few animals—elephants and apes—recognize themselves in a mirror. 
Humans have self- reﬂ ected for a long time, but we have an increasingly 
deeper understanding of the nature of the savanna ape whose reﬂ ection 
we view if we take time to look.
If we look carefully in a mirror, we can see a Boran hunter whistling 
to a honeyguide, a spreading acacia tree casting welcome midday shade, 
and, out of the corner of our eyes, a python hiding in the grass. We can 
recognize both our current selves and the savanna environment that, 
with its challenges and opportunities, molded us. It is a comforting vi-
sion. We can and should take pleasure in contemplating this inspiring 
glimpse of ourselves as part of the unfolding of life on Earth over nearly 
four billion years.


183
During the many years I have thought about and studied the evolutionary 
roots of human emotional responses to components of the environment, I 
have been fortunate to beneﬁ t from insights and advice from Judi Heerwagen. 
We worked together on environmental aesthetics for more than twenty years, 
and we have coauthored several papers on the subject. Her inﬂ uence perme-
ates this book. The ﬁ rst article I published on environmental aesthetics in 1980 
was the result of being invited by Joan Lockard to contribute a chapter in her 
book on human evolution. Writing that article stimulated my desire to con-
tinue to explore the evolutionary roots of our responses to the environment. 
Lionel Tiger, then a program ofﬁ cer with the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foun-
dation, urged me to continue my explorations of this theme; the foundation 
provided a small grant that supported our initial research in Kenya. My wife, 
Betty, was my constant companion during that research. She held the ends of 
tape measures, recorded data, took pictures of the trees, and kept a watchful 
eye out for lions and snakes, which were difﬁ cult to see even in short grass. 
She performed similar functions during our investigations of Japanese and 
European formal gardens, where predators were absent.
I have been fortunate to beneﬁ t from insights and advice of many col-
leagues. Useful comments on individual chapters have been provided by John 
Alcock, David Barash, George Brengelman, Gardner Brown, Eliot Brenowitz, 
Joseph Carroll, Sue Christian, Richard Coss, Emily Doolittle, John Edwards, 
Arne Öhman, Eric Pianka, Paul Rozin, William Searcy, Tore Slagsvold, Eric 
Alden Smith, and Robert Sommer. Ann Downer- Hazell, my talented editor, 
skillfully helped me liven my prose without putting too many words into my 
mouth. I owe special thanks to Leda Cosmides, Eric Dinerstein, and Marianne 
Kogon—they read the entire manuscript and offered a wealth of insightful 
comments. As is always the case, they bear no responsibility for residual errors 
or my inappropriate conclusions and  interpretations.
Acknowledgments


185
Chapter One
1. Most scientists doubted that honeyguides really guided people to bees’ nests until 
experiments by Isack and Reyer clearly demonstrated that they do (H. A. Isack and 
H. U. Reyer, “Honeyguides and Honey Gatherers: Interspeciﬁ c Communication in a 
Symbiotic Relationship,” Science 243 [1989]: 1343–46).
2. I describe my youthful experiences and my subsequent scientiﬁ c career in G. H. Ori-
ans, “My Life with Birds,” in Leaders in Animal Behavior: The Second Generation, ed. Lee 
Drickamer and Donald Dewsbury (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 
405–27.
3. E. O. Wilson, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1975). 
Wilson’s book summarized the literature and stimulated decades of research in be-
havioral ecology.
4. R. Dawkins, Unweaving the Rainbow (London: Penguin, 1998).
5. E. Fehr and J. Russell, “Concepts of Emotions Viewed from a Prototype Perspective,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 113 (1984): 464–86. The quote appears on 
page 464.
6. G. H. Orians, “Habitat Selection: General Theory and Applications to Human Behav-
ior,” in Evolution of Human Social Behavior, ed. J. S. Lockard (New York: Elsevier, 1980), 
49–77. Being asked to write this article and the responses it generated stimulated me 
to pursue the research that eventually led to this book.
Chapter Two
1. A. G. Baumgarten, Aesthetica (Frankfurt: I. C. Kleyb, 1750); F. J. Kovach, Philosophy of 
Beauty (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1974).
2. Charles Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (London: John 
Murray, 1872); W. James, “What Is an Emotion?,” Mind 9 (1884): 188–205; W. Wundt, 
Outlines of Psychology, trans. C. H. Judd (Leipzig: Englemann, 1897).
3. T. Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (Edinburgh: Maclachian and Stewart, 
1785).
4. For a good summary, see J. T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary, and A. J. Fridlund, “The 
Skeletomotor System,” in Principles of Psychology: Physical, Social, and Inferential El-
ements, ed. J. T. Cacioppo and L. G. Tassinary (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990).
5. For an excellent summary, see L. Cosmides and J. Tooby, “Evolutionary Psychology 
Notes

186
notes to chapter two
and the Emotions,” in Handbook of Emotions, ed. M. Lewis and J. M.  Haviland- Jones, 
2nd ed. (New York: Guilford Press, 2000), 91–115.
6. J. Appleton, The Experience of Landscape (New York: Wiley, 1975).
7. J. A. Byers, American Pronghorn: Social Adaptations and the Ghosts of Predators Past (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).
8. R. G. Coss and E. P. Charles, “The Role of Evolutionary Hypotheses in Psychological 
Research: Instincts, Affordances, and Relic Sex Differences,” Ecological Psychology 16 
(2004): 199–236; R. G. Coss and R. O. Goldthwaite, “The Persistence of Old Designs 
for Perception,” in Perspectives in Ethology, ed. N. S. Thompson, vol. 11, Behavioral De-
sign (New York: Plenum Press, 1995), 83–148; R. L. Sussman, J. T. Stern Jr., and W. L. 
Jungers, “Arboreality and Bipedality in the Hadar Hominids,” Folia Primatologica 43 
(1984): 113–56.
9. R. G. Coss and R. O. Goldthwaite, “The Persistence of Old Designs for Perception,” 
in Perspectives in Ethology, ed. N. S. Thompson, vol. 11, Behavioral Design (New York: 
Plenum Press, 1995), 83–148
10. A good summary is provided by J. Tooby and L. Cosmides, “The Psychological Foun-
dations of Culture,” in The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of 
Culture, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1992), 19–136.
11. J. H. Heerwagen and G. H. Orians, “The Ecological World of Children,” in Children and 
Nature: Psychological, Sociocultural, and Evolutionary Investigations, ed. P. H. Kahn Jr. 
and S. R. Kellert (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 29–63; G. H. Orians and J. H. 
Heerwagen, “Evolved Responses to Landscapes,” in The Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Bar-
kow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 555–79.
12. D. E. Brown, Human Universals (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1991); R. B. Lee and I. De-
vore, eds., Kalahari  Hunter- Gatherers: Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1976); K. R. Hill et al., “Coresidence Pat-
terns in  Hunter- Gatherer Societies Show Unique Human Social Structure,” Science 
331 (2011): 1286–89; P. Shipman and A. Walker, “The Costs of Becoming a Predator,” 
Journal of Human Evolution 18 (1989): 373–92.
13. M. Konner, “Hunter- Gatherer Infancy and Childhood: The !Kung and Others,” in 
Hunter- Gatherer Childhoods: Evolutionary, Developmental and Cultural Perspectives, ed. 
B. S. Hewlett and M. E. Lamb (New Brunswick, NJ: Aldine Transaction, 2005), 19–64.
14. Ibid.
15. K. Hill and A. M. Hurtado, Ache Life History: The Ecology and Demography of a Foraging 
People (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1996).
16. M. E. P. Seligman, “On the Generality of the Laws of Learning,” Psychological Review 
77 (1970): 406–18.
17. J. Rydell, H. Roninen, and K. W. Philip, “Persistence of Bat Defense Reactions in High 
Arctic Moths (Lepidoptera),” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B 267 
(2000): 553–57; R. G. Coss and R. O. Goldthwaite, “The Persistence of Old Designs for 
Perception,” in Perspectives in Ethology, ed. N. S. Thompson, vol. 11, Behavioral Design 
(New York: Plenum Press, 1995), 83–148.
18. C. J. Raxworthy, “Reptiles,” in The Natural History of Madagascar, ed. S. M. Goodman 
and J. P. Benstead (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 934–51.

187
notes to chapter three
19. R. S. Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia, and Natural Landscapes,” in The Biophilia Hy-
pothesis, ed. S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 
73–137; E. O. Wilson, Biophilia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).
20. J. Diamond, “New Guineans and Their Natural World,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, 
ed. S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 25–171.
21. G. P. Nabhan, Why Some Like It Hot: Food, Genes, and Cultural Diversity (Washington, 
DC: Island Press, 2004).
Chapter Three
1. G. C. Williams, Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolution-
ary Thought (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1966).
2. T. J. Wills et al., “Development of the Hippocampal Cognitive Map in Preweanling 
Rats,” Science 328 (2010): 1573–76.
3. S. A. Lee, V. A. Sovrano, and E. S. Spelke, “Navigation as a Source of Geometric 
Knowledge: Young Children’s Use of Length, Angle, Distance, and Direction in a 
Reorientation Task,” Cognition 123 (2012): 144–61.
4. W. T. Powers, Behavior: The Control of Perception (Chicago: Aldine de Gruyter, 1973).
5. J. Tooby and L. Cosmides, “The Psychological Foundations of Culture,” in The 
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, ed. J. Barkow, 
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 19–136.
6. A thorough synthesis of the literature on childhood and its evolution is M. Konner’s 
The Evolution of Childhood: Relationships, Emotion, Mind (Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press, 2010); J. H. Heerwagen and G. H. Orians, “The Ecological World of Children,” 
in Children and Nature: Psychological, Sociocultural, and Evolutionary Investigations, ed. 
P. H. Kahn Jr. and S. R. Kellert (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 29–63.
7. J. Appleton, The Symbolism of Habitat (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1990).
8. J. J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception (Boston:  Houghton- Mifﬂ in, 
1979).
9. M. Kyttä, M. Kaaja, and L. Horelli, “An  Internet- Based Design Game as a Mediator of 
Children’s Environmental Visions,” Environment and Behavior 36 (2004): 127–51.
10. H. R. Pulliam and C. Dunford, Programmed to Learn: An Essay on the Evolution of Cul-
ture (New York: Columbia University Press, 1980); M. E. P. Seligman, “On the Gener-
ality of the Laws of Learning,” Psychological Review 77 (1970): 406–18.
11. D. E. Brown, Human Universals (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1991).
12. J. Von Uexkull, Theoretical Biology (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1926).
13. J. Bowlby, Attachment and Loss (New York: Basic Books, 1980); M. Konner, The Evolution 
of Childhood: Relationships, Emotion, Mind (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2010).
Chapter Four
1. C. Finlayson et al., “The Homo Habitat Niche: Using the Avian Fossil Record to Depict 
Ecological Characteristics of Palaeolithic Eurasian Hominins,” Quaternary Science 
Review 30 (2011): 1–8.
2. Captain R. B. Marcy, Report on Exploration and Survey of Route from Fort Smith, 

188
notes to chapter four
Arkansas, to Santa Fe, New Mexico, Made in 1849, House ex. Doc. 45: 31st Cong., 1st 
sess., Public Document 577 (1849), quoted on page 89, in J. C. Malin, The Grassland of 
North America: Prolegomena to Its History, with Addenda (Lawrence, KS: James Malin, 
1956).
3. M. L. Cody, ed., Habitat Selection in Birds (New York: Academic Press, 1985).
4. J. E. R. Staddon, “Learning as Inference,” in Evolution and Learning, ed. R. C. Bolles 
and M. D. Beecher (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1988), 59–77 ; J. Tooby and L. Cosmides, 
“The Past Explains the Present: Emotional Adaptations and the Structure of Ancient 
Environments,” Ethology and Sociobiology 11 (1990): 375–424.
5. G. H. Orians and J. H. Heerwagen, “Evolved Responses to Landscapes,” in The 
Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1992), 555–79.
6. R. B. Zajonc, “Feeling and Thinking: Preferences Need No Inferences,” American Psy-
chologist 35 (1980): 151–75; R. M. Baron, “Social Knowing from an  Ecological- Event 
Perspective: A Consideration of the Relative Domains of Power for Cognitive and 
Perceptual Modes of Knowing,” in Cognition, Social Behavior, and the Environment, ed. 
J. H. Harvey (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1981), 61–89.
7. R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan, The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1989); R. S. Ulrich, “Visual Landscapes and Psy-
chological Well- Being,” Landscape Research 4 (1979): 17–23; R. S. Ulrich, “Aesthetic 
and Affective Response to Natural Environments,” in Human Behavior and Environ-
ment, ed. I. Altman and J. F. Wohlwill, vol. 6, Behavior and the Natural Environment 
(New York: Plenum Press, 1983).
8. N. K. Humphrey, “Natural Aesthetics,” in Architecture for People, ed. B. Mikellides 
(London: Studis Vista, 1980), 59–73; S. Kaplan, “Aesthetics, Affect, and Cognition: 
Environmental Preferences from an Evolutionary Perspective,” Environment and Be-
havior 19 (1987): 3–32; S. Kaplan, “Environmental Preference in a  Knowledge- Seeking, 
 Knowledge- Using Organism,” in The Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, 
and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 591–98; D. E. Berlyne, Aes-
thetics and Psychobiology (New York:  Appleton- Century- Crofts, 1971); S. Kaplan and 
R. Kaplan, Cognition and Environment: Functioning in an Uncertain World (New York: 
Praeger, 1982).
9. J. Appleton, The Experience of Landscape (New York: Wiley, 1975).
10. K. Z. Lorenz, King Solomon’s Ring (New York: Crowell, 1952). The quote is on page 181 
of the 1964 edition.
11. S. Kaplan, “Environmental Preference in a  Knowledge- Seeking,  Knowledge- Using 
Organism,” in The Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 591–98.
12. K. Lynch, The Image of the City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1960).
13. S. Kaplan, “Environmental Preference in a  Knowledge- Seeking,  Knowledge- Using 
Organism,” in The Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 591–98.
14. J. Haidt, The Happiness Hypothesis (New York: Basic Books, 2006). The quote is on 
page 21.

189
notes to chapter five
Chapter Five
1. J.  Bennett- Levy and T. Marteau, “Fear of Animals: What Is Prepared?,” British Journal 
of Psychology 75 (1984): 37–42.
2. W. S. Agras, D. Sylvester, and D. Oliveau, “The Epidemiology of Common Fears and 
Phobias,” Comprehensive Psychiatry 10 (1969): 151–56.
3. A. Öhman, “Face the Beast and Fear the Face: Animal and Social Fears as Prototypes 
for Evolutionary Analyses of Emotion,” Psychophysiology 23 (1986): 123–45.
4. M. Davis and Y. Lee, “Fear and Anxiety: Possible Roles of the Amygdala and Bed Nu-
cleus of the Striata Terminalis,” Cognition and Emotion 12 (1998): 277–305; P. J. Lang, 
M. Davis, and A. Öhman, “Fear and Anxiety: Animal Models and Human Cognitive 
Psychophysiology,” Journal of Affective Disorders 61 (2001): 137–59; S. Mineka, “The 
Role of Fear in Theories of Avoidance Learning, Flooding and Extinction,” Psycho-
logical Bulletin 86 (1979): 985–1001; A. Öhman and S. Mineka, “The Malicious Serpent: 
Snakes as a Prototypical Stimulus for an Evolved Module of Fear,” Current Directions 
in Psychological Science 12 (2003): 5–9; D. Viviani et al., “Oxytocin Selectivity Gates 
Fear Responses through Distinct Outputs from the Central Amygdala.” Science 333 
(2011): 104–7.
5. J. E. LeDoux, “Emotion Circuits in the Brain,” Annual Review of Neuroscience 23 
(2000): 155–84; A. Öhman and S. Mineka, “Fears, Phobias, and Preparedness: To-
ward an Evolved Module of Fear and Fear Learning,” Psychological Science 108 (2001): 
438–522; P. Rozin and E. B. Royzman, “Negativity Bias, Negativity Dominance, and 
Contagion,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 5 (2001): 296–320.
6. L. A. Isbell, The Fruit, the Tree, and the Serpent: Why We See so Well (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2009).
7. R. G. Coss, “The Role of Evolved Perceptual Biases in Art and Design,” in Evolutionary 
Aesthetics, ed. E. Voland and K. Gammer (Berlin:  Springer- Verlag, 2003), 69–130.
8. S. A. Kastner, P. De Weerd, and L. G. Ungerleider, “Texture Segregation in the Hu-
man Visual Cortex: A Functional MRI Study,” Journal of Neurophysiology 83 (2000): 
2453–57.
9. T. Okusa, R. Kakgi, and N. Osaka, “Cortical Activity Related to Cue- Invariant Shape 
Perception in Humans,” Neuroscience 98 (2000): 615–24.
10. A. Öhman, A. Flykt, and F. Esteves, “Emotion Drives Attention: Detecting the Snake 
in the Grass,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 130 (2001): 466–78.
11. L. A. Isbell, The Fruit, The Tree, and The Serpent: Why We See so Well (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2009).
12. H. Miller, “The Cobra, India’s ‘Good Snake,’” National Geographic 138 (1970): 393–408.
13. J. Diaz- Bolio, The Geometry of the Maya and Their Rattlesnake Art (Mérida: Area Maya- 
Mayan Area, 1987).
14. L. A. Isbell, The Fruit, The Tree, and The Serpent: Why We See So Well (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2009).
15. J. White, “Bites and Stings from Venomous Animals: A Global Overview,” Therapeutic 
Drug Monitor 22 (2000): 65–68.
16. M. Cook and S. Mineka, “Selective Associations in the Observational Conditioning of 

190
notes to chapter five
Fear in Rhesus Monkeys,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes 
16 (1990): 372–89.
17. V. LoBue and J. S. DeLoache, “Detecting the Snake in the Grass: Attention to Fear- 
Relevant Stimuli by Adults and Young Children,” Psychological Science 19 (2008): 284–
89; J. S. DeLoache and V. LoBue, “The Narrow Fellow in the Grass: Human Infants 
Associate Snakes and Fear,” Developmental Science 12 (2009): 201–7.
18.  A. J. Tomarken, S. K. Sutton, and S. Mineka, “Fear- Relevant Illusory Correlations: 
What Types of Associations Promote Judgmental Bias?,” Journal of Abnormal Psychol-
ogy 104 (1995): 312–26.
19. R. G. Coss, “The Role of Evolved Perceptual Biases in Art And Design,” in Evolution-
ary Aesthetics, ed. E. Voland and K. Gammer (Berlin:  Springer- Verlag, 2003), 69–130.
20. C. E. Osgood, G. J. Suci, and P. H. Tannenbaum, The Measurement of Meaning (Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1957).
21. C. L. Larson, J. Aronoff, and J. J. Stearns, “The Shape of Threat: Simple Geometric 
Forms Evoke Rapid and Sustained Capture of Attention,” Emotion 7 (2007): 526–53; 
C. L. Larson et al., “Recognizing Threat: A Simple Geometric Shape Activates Neural 
Circuitry for Threat Detection.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 21 (2009): 1523–35.
22. A. Treves and L.  Naughton- Treves, “Risk and Opportunity for Humans Coexisting 
with Large Carnivores,” Journal of Human Evolution 36 (1999): 275–82.
23. R. G. Coss, “The Role of Evolved Perceptual Biases in Art And Design,” in Evolution-
ary Aesthetics, ed. E. Voland and K. Gammer (Berlin:  Springer- Verlag, 2003), 69–130.
24. J. Mellaart, Çatal Hüyük: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia (London: Thames and Hudson, 
1968).
25. A. Wolfe and B. Sleeper, Wild Cats of the World (New York: Crown, 1995).
26. R. Desimone, “Face- Selective Cells in the Temporal Cortex of Monkeys,” Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience 3 (1991): 1–8; C. Bruce, R. Desimone, and C. G. Gross, “Vi-
sual Properties of Neurons in a Polysensory Area in Superior Temporal Sulcus of 
the  Macaque,” Journal of Neurophysiology 46 (1981): 369–84; K. Tanaka, “Representa-
tion of Visual Features of Objects in the Inferotemporal Cortex,” Neural Networks 9 
(1996): 1459–75; D. I. Perrett, E. T. Rolls, and W. Caan, “Visual Neurons Responsive-
ness to Faces in the Monkey Temporal Cortex,” Experimental Brain Research 47 (1982): 
329–42.
27. R. G. Coss, U. Ramakrishnan, and J. Schank, “Recognition of Partially Concealed 
Leopards by Wild Bonnet Macaques (Macaca radiata): The Role of the Spotted Coat,” 
Behavioural Processes 68 (2005): 145–63.
28. R. G. Coss, “The Perceptual Aspects of Eye- Spot Patterns and Their Relevance to 
Gaze Behaviour,” in Behaviour Studies in Psychiatry, ed. C. Hutt and S. J. Hutt (London: 
Pergammon Press, 1970), 121–24.
29. R. G. Coss, Mood Provoking Visual Stimuli: Their Origins and Applications (Los Angeles: 
University of California Press, 1965); R. G. Coss, “The Perceptual Aspects of Eye- Spot 
Patterns and Their Relevance to Gaze Behaviour,” in Behaviour Studies in Psychiatry, 
ed. C. Hutt and S. J. Hutt (London: Pergammon Press, 1970), 121–24; J. Topal and 
V. Csányi, “The Effect of Eye- Like Schema on Shuttling Activities of Wild House 
Mice (Mus musculus domesticus):  Context- Dependent Threatening Aspects of the Eye-
spot Patterns,” Animal Learning and Behavior 22 (1994): 96–102.

191
notes to chapter five
30. R. G. Coss, “The Role of Evolved Perceptual Biases in Art and Design,” in Evolutionary 
Aesthetics, ed. E. Voland and K. Gammer (Berlin:  Springer- Verlag, 2003), 69–130.
31. A. T. Jersild and F. B. Holmes, Children’s Fears (New York: Bureau of Publications, 
Teachers College, Columbia University, 1935); T. G. R. Bower, Development in Infancy 
(San Francisco: Freeman, 1974); P. K. Smith, “The Ontogeny of Fear in Children,” in 
Fear in Animals and Man, ed. W. Sluckin (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979).
32. L. Berk, Child Development, 4th ed. (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1997).
33. A. J. Fridlund, Human Facial Expressions: An Evolutionary View (San Diego: Academic 
Press, 1994).
34. C. Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Animals and Man (London: John Murray, 
1872).
35. R. A. Hinde, Biological Bases of Human Social Behavior (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1974); 
W. K. Redican, “An Evolutionary Perspective on Human Facial Displays,” in Emo-
tion in the Human Face, ed. P. Eckman (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 
212–80; R. J. Andrews, “Evolution and Facial Expression,” Science 142 (1963): 1034–41.
36. S. Hrdy, The Woman Who Never Evolved (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1981); E. K. Roberts et al., “A Bruce Effect in Wild Geladas,” Science 335 (2012): 1222–25.
37. I. M. Marks, Fears, Phobias and Rituals: Panic, Anxiety and Their Disorders (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1987).
38. E. J. Mazurski et al., “Conditioning with Facial Expressions of Emotions: Effects of 
CS Sex and Age,” Psychophysiology 33 (1996): 416–25.
39. G. A. Morgan and H. N. Ricciutti, “Infants’ Responses to Strangers during the First 
Year,” in Determinants of Infant Behavior, ed. B. M. Foss (London: Methun, 1967); 
P. K. Smith, “The Ontogeny of Fear in Children,” in Fear in Animals and Man, ed. 
W. Sluckin (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979); M. Daly and M. Wilson, “Evo-
lutionary Social Psychology and Family Homicide,” Science 242 (1988): 519–24.
40. T. M. Horner, “Two Methods of Studying Danger Reactivity in Infants: A Review,” in 
Annual Progress in Child Psychiatry and Child Development, ed. S. Chess and A. Thomas 
(New York: Bruner /  Mazel, 1981), 78–98.
41. G. W. Bronson, “Infants’ Reactions to Unfamiliar Persona and Novel Objects,” Mono-
graphs of the Society for Research in Child Development 37, no. 3 (1972).
42. S. Zegans and L. S. Zegans, “Fear of Strangers in Children and the Orienting Reac-
tion,” Behavioral Science 17 (1972): 407–19.
43. A. Maurer, “What Children Fear,” Journal of Genetic Psychology 106 (1965): 265–77.
44. M. G. Haselton and D. M. Buss, “Error Management Theory: A New Perspective on 
Biases in Cross- Sex Mind Reading,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 78 
(2000): 81–91.
45. R. E. Jackson, “Falling Towards a Theory of the  Vertical- Horizontal Illusion,” in Stud-
ies in Perception and Action, ed. H. Left and K. L. Marsh (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 2005), 
8:241–44; R. E. Jackson and L. K. Cormack, “Evolved Navigation Theory and the En-
vironmental Vertical Illusion,” Evolution and Human Behavior 29 (2008): 299–304.
46. S. Scarr and P. Salapetek, “Patterns of Fear Development during Infancy,” Merrill- 
Palmer Quarterly 16 (1970): 53–90.
47. N. J. King, D. I. Hamilton, and T. H. Ollendick, Children’s Phobias: A Behavioral Per-
spective (New York: Wiley, 1988); I. M. Marks, Fears, Phobias and Rituals: Panic, Anxiety 

192
notes to chapter five
and Their Disorders (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); I. M. Marks and M. G. 
Gelder. “Different Ages of Onset in Varieties of Phobia,” American Journal of Psychia-
try 123 (1966): 218–21.
48. D. Lieberman, The Evolution of the Human Head (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2011). 
This book provides a thorough review of the development of the human head and 
the unfolding of its neural circuits.
49. J. W. Anderson, “Attachment Behaviors Out of Doors,” in Ethological Studies of Child 
Behavior, ed. N.  Blurton- Jones (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972).
50. J. Bowlby, Attachment and Loss (New York: Basic Books, 1980); C. Garvey, Children’s Play 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990); B. L. White et al. “Competence 
and Experience,” in The Structure of Experience, ed. I. C. Uzgiris and F. Weizmann 
(New York: Plenum Press, 1977), 15–152; R. A. Chase, “Toys and Infant Development: 
Biological, Psychological, and Social Factors,” Children’s Environments 9 (1992): 3–12.
51. S. Scarr and P. Salapetek, “Patterns of Fear Development during Infancy,” Merrill- 
Palmer Quarterly 16 (1970): 53–90: P. K. Smith, “The Ontogeny of Fear in Children,” 
in Fear in Animals and Man, ed. W. Sluckin (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979), 
164–68.
52. P. Muris, H. Merckelbach, and R. Collaris, “Common Childhood Fears and Their Ori-
gins,” Behavioral Research and Therapy 35 (1997): 929–37.
53. R. Lapouse and M. A. Monk, “Fears and Worries in a Representative Sample of Chil-
dren,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 29 (1959): 803–18.
54. W. S. Agras, D. Sylvester, and D. Oliveau. “The Epidemiology of Common Fears and 
Phobias,” Comprehensive Psychiatry 10 (1969): 151–56.
55. P. Muris, H. Merckelbach, and R. Collaris, “Common Childhood Fears and Their Ori-
gins,” Behavioral Research and Therapy 35 (1997): 929–93; T. H. Ollendick, J. L. Matson, 
and W. J. Heisel, “Fears in Children and Adolescents: Normative Data,” Behavior Re-
search and Therapy 23 (1985): 465–67; H. Angelino, J. Dollins, and E. V. Mech, “Trends 
in the ‘Fears and Worries’ of School Children as Related to Socio- Economic Status 
and Age,” Journal of Genetic Psychology 89 (1956): 263–76.
56. E. R. Hagman, “A Study of Fears of Children of Pre- School Age,” Journal of Experi-
mental Education 1 (1932): 110–30; F. B. Holmes, “An Experimental Study of Fears of 
Young Children,” Child Development Monographs 20 (1935): 167–296.
57. N. J. King, D. I. Hamilton, and T. H. Ollendick, Children’s Phobias: A Behavioral Per-
spective (New York: Wiley, 1988); H. Angelino, J. Dollins, and E. V. Mech, “Trends in 
the ‘Fears and Worries’ of School Children as Related to Socio- Economic Status and 
Age,” Journal of Genetic Psychology 89 (1956): 263–76; J. W. Croake, “Fears of Children,” 
Human Development 12 (1969): 239–74; T. H. Ollendick, J. L. Matson, and W. J. Heisel, 
“Fears in Children and Adolescents: Normative Data,” Behavior Research and Therapy 
23 (1985): 465–67; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM- IV, 4th ed. 
(Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 1994).
58. A. Öhman, U. Dimberg, and L.- G. Öst, “Animal and Social Phobias: Biological Con-
straints on Learned Fear Responses,” in Theoretical Issues in Behavior Therapy, ed. 
S. Reiss and R. R. Bootzin (New York: Academic Press, 1985), 123–78.
59. M. G. Haselton and D. Nettle, “The Paranoid Optimist: An Integrative Evolutionary 

193
notes to chapter six
Model of Cognitive Biases,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 10, no. 1 (2006): 
47–66.
60. D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. Schwarz, eds., Well- Being: The Foundations of Hedonic 
Psychology (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1999); D. Kahneman, and A. Tver-
sky, eds., Choices, Values and Frames (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000); 
D. Kahneman, “A Perspective on Judgment and Choice: Mapping Bounded Ratio-
nality,” American Psychologist 58, no. 9 (2003): 697–720; J. L. Knetsch, “Asymmetric 
Valuation of Gains and Losses and Preference Order Assumptions,” Economic Inquiry 
33 (1995): 134–41; P. Rozin and E. B. Royama, Negativity Bias, Negativity Dominance, 
and Contagion,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 5 (2001): 296–320.
61. R. J. McNally, “Preparedness and Phobias: A Review,” Psychological Bulletin 101 (1987): 
283–303; K. Hugdahl and A. C. Kärker, “Biological vs. Experiential Factors in Fear- 
Conditioning,” Behavioral Research and Therapy 19 (1981): 109–15.
62. K. Hugdahl, “Electrodermal Conditioning to Potentially Phobic Stimuli: Effects of 
Instructed Extinction,” Behavioral Research and Therapy 16 (1978): 315–21; S. Hygge and 
A. Öhman, “Modeling Processes in the Acquisition of Fears: Vicarious Electroder-
mal Conditioning to Fear- Relevant Stimuli,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy 36 (1978): 271–79.
63. M. Cook and S. Mineka, “Selective Associations in the Observational Conditioning 
of Fear in Rhesus Monkeys,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Pro-
cesses 16 (1990): 372–89.
64. A. Öhman and J. J. F. Soares, “On the Automatic Nature of Phobic Fear: Conditioned 
Electrodermal Responses to Masked Fear- Relevant Stimuli,” Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology 103 (1993): 231–40; A. Öhman, “Face the Beast and Fear the Face: Animal and 
Social Fears as Prototypes for Evolutionary Analyses of Emotion,” Psychophysiology 
23 (1986): 123–45.
65. P. K. Smith, “The Ontogeny of Fear in Children,” in Fear in Animals and Man, ed. 
W. Sluckin (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979), 164–68.
Chapter Six
1. V. Komar and A. Melamid, Painting by the Numbers: Komar and Melamid’s Scientiﬁ c 
Guide to Art, ed. J. Wypijewski (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997).
2. E. Dissanayake, “Komar and Melamid Discover Pleistocene Taste,” Philosophy and 
Literature 22 (1998): 486–96.
3. N. K. Humphrey, “Natural Aesthetics,” in Architecture for People, ed. B. Mikellides 
(London: Studis Vista, 1980), 59–73; S. Kaplan, “Aesthetics, Affect, and Cognition: 
Environmental Preferences from an Evolutionary Perspective,” Environment and Be-
havior 19 (1987): 3–32; S. Kaplan, “Environmental Preference in a  Knowledge- Seeking, 
 Knowledge- Using Organism,” in The Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, 
and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 591–98; S. Kaplan and R. Ka-
plan, Cognition and Environment: Functioning in an Uncertain World (New York: Praeger, 
1982); D. E. Berlyne, Aesthetics and Psychobiology (New York:  Appleton- Century- Crofts, 
1971).

194
notes to chapter six
4. A. T. Grove and O. Rackham, The Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001), 193.
5. Sir F. Crisp, Medieval Gardens, ed. C. C. Patterson (London: Bodley Head, 1924).
6. P. L. Carpenter, T. D. Walker, and F. O. Lamphear, Plants in the Landscape (San Fran-
cisco: W. H. Freeman, 1975).
7. Yi- Fu Tuan, Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and Values (En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice- Hall, 1974).
8. Lady M. Shikibu, The Tale of Genji, trans. Arthur Waley (London: Allen and Unwin, 
1935).
9. D. M. Van Gelderen and J. R. P. van Hoey Smith, Conifers (Portland, OR: Timber Press, 
1986).
10. J. D. Vertrees, Japanese Maples (Forest Grove, OR: Timber Press, 1978).
11.  J. H. Heerwagen and G. H. Orians, “Humans, Habitats, and Aesthetics,” in The Bio-
philia Hypothesis, ed. S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson (Washington, DC, Island Press, 
1993), 138–72.
12. P. Thiel, “Why Dig Japan Today?” (Vancouver: Program Exhibition Notes, Roots of 
Japanese Architecture, Fine Arts Gallery, University of British Columbia, November 
16–December 3, 1966).
13. L. B. Alberti, De Re Aediﬁ catoria (Florence, 1485); L. B. Alberti, Ten Books on Architec-
ture, trans. J. Leoni (1724).
14. H. Repton, The Art of Landscape Gardening (Boston:  Houghton-  Mifﬂ in, 1907), 96; 
G. H. Orians and J. H. Heerwagen, “Evolved Responses to Landscapes,” in The 
Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1992), 555–79.
15. H. Repton, The Art of Landscape Gardening (Boston:  Houghton- Mifﬂ in, 1907), 97.
16. H. Repton, Observations on the Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening (London: 
Taylor, 1803); H. Repton, The Art of Landscape Gardening (Boston:  Houghton- Mifﬂ in, 
1907).
17. Lady E. C. S.- Wortley, Travels in the United States, etc., during 1849 and 1850 (London: 
Richard Bentley, 1851).
18. A. Danto, “Can It Be the ‘Most Wanted’ Even if Nobody Wants It?,” in Painting by the 
Numbers: Komar and Melamid’s Scientiﬁ c Guide to Art, ed. J. Wypijewski (New York: 
Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1997).
19. R. Sommer and J. Summit, “Cross- Rankings of Tree Shape,” Ecological Psychology 8 
(1996): 327–41.
20. R. Sommer, “Further Cross- National Studies of Tree Form Preference,” Ecological 
Psychology 9 (1997): 153–60.
21. V. I. Lohr and C. H.  Pearson- Mims, “Responses to Scenes with Spreading, Rounded, 
and Conical Tree Forms,” Environment and Behaviour 38 (2006): 667–68.
22. R. G. Coss and M. Moore, “Precocious Knowledge of Trees as Antipredator Refuge 
in Preschool Children: An Examination of Aesthetics, Attributive Judgments, and 
Relic Sexual Dinichism,” Ecological Psychology 14: (2002), 181–222.
23. A. E. Bigelow, “Hiding in Blind and Sighted Children,” Development and Psychopathol-
ogy 3 (1991): 301–10; A. Bridges and J. Rowles, “Young Children’s Projective Abilities: 
What Can a Monster See?” Educational Psychology 5 (1985): 251–66.

195
notes to chapter seven
24. U. Ramakrishnan and R. G. Coss, “A Comparison of the Sleeping Behavior of Three 
Sympatric Primates: A Preliminary Report,” Folia Primatologica 72 (2001a): 51–53; 
U. Ramakrishnan and R. G. Coss, “Strategies Used by Bonnet Macaques (Macaca ra-
diata) to Reduce Predation While Sleeping,” Primates 432 (2001b): 193–206.
25. N. Altman, Sacred Trees (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1993).
26. P. Fuller, “The Geography of Mother Nature,” in The Iconography of Landscape, ed. 
D. Cosgrove and S. Daniels (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 11–31.
27. B. P. Meier and M. D. Robinson, “Why the Sunny Side Is Up: Associations between 
Affect and Vertical Position,” Psychological Science 15 (2004): 243–47.
28. E. D. Benson, J. L. Hansen, and A. L. Schwartz, “Water View and Residential Property 
Values,” Appraisal Journal 68 (2000): 260–71; E. D. Benson et al., “Pricing Residential 
Amenities: The Value of a View,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 16 (1998): 
55–73.
29.  R. H. Plattner and T. J. Campbell, “A Study of the Effect of Water View on Site Value,” 
Appraisal Journal 46 (1978): 20–28.
30. J. Luttik, “The Value of Trees, Water, and Open Space as Reﬂ ected by House Prices in 
The Netherlands,” Landscape and Urban Planning 48 (2000): 161–67.
31. E. L. David and W. B. Lord, “Determinants of Property Value on Artiﬁ cial Lakes,” 
 unpublished report (University of Wisconsin, College of Agriculture, Madison, 
1969).
32. Yi- Fu Tuan, Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and Values (En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice- Hall, 1974).
Chapter Seven
1. Athenaeus (ca. 200 AD), The Deipnosophists, trans. C. B. Glick, 7 vols. (Cambridge, 
MA: Loeb Classical Library, 1961); D. P. Patterson, “Plant Exploration,” Proceedings of 
the International Plant Propagators Society 20 (1970): 251–57.
2. L. Kass, The Hungry Soul (New York: Free Press, 1994).
3. P. Quinnett, Darwin’s Bass (Kansas City, MO: Andrews McMeel, 1998).
4. R. W. Young, “Evolution of the Human Hand: The Role of Throwing and Clubbing,” 
Journal of Anatomy 202 (2003): 165–74; William Calvin explores this in detail in The 
Throwing Madonna: Essays on the Brain (Boston: McGraw- Hill, 1983).
5. W. S. Laughlin, “Hunting: An Integrating Biobehavior System and Its Evolutionary 
Importance,” in Man the Hunter, ed. R. B. Lee and I. Devore (Chicago: Aldine, 1968).
6. M. Gurven, H. Kaplan, and M. Guttierrez, “How Long Does It Take to Become a Pro-
ﬁ cient Hunter? Implication on the Evolution of Delayed Growth,” Journal of Human 
Evolution 51 (2006): 454–70.
7. K. Hawkes, “Why Do Men Hunt? Beneﬁ ts for Risky Choices,” in Risk and Uncertainty 
in Tribal and Peasant Economies, ed. E. Cashdan (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990), 
145–66.
8. M. G. Bicchieri, ed., Hunters and Gatherers Today (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Win-
ston, 1972).
9. M. J. Sharps et al., “Memory for Animal Tracks: A Possible Cognitive Artifact of Hu-
man Evolution,” Journal of Psychology 136 (2002): 469–92.

196
notes to chapter seven
10. A. Le Hardÿ de Beaulieu, An Illustrated Guide to Maples (Portland, OR: Timber Press, 
2001).
11. A. Wulf , The Brother Gardeners: Botany, Empire and the Birth of an Obsession (New York: 
Knopf, 2008).
12. J.  Haviland- Jones et al., “An Environmental Approach to Positive Emotion: Flowers,” 
Evolutionary Psychology 3 (2005): 104–32.
13. G. P. Nabhan, Why Some Like It Hot: Food, Genes, and Cultural Diversity (Washington, 
DC: Island Press, 2004).
14. P. Rozin, “Why We Eat What We Eat, and Why We Worry about It,” Bulletin of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences L (1997): 26–48.
15. C. R. Peters, E. M. O’Brien, and E. O. Box, “Plant Types and Seasonality of Wild- Plant 
Foods, Tanzania to Southwestern Africa: Resources for Models of the Natural Envi-
ronment,” Journal of Human Evolution 13 (1984): 397–414.
16. T. Johns, With Bitter Herbs They Shall Eat It: Chemical Ecology and the Origins of Human 
Diet and Medicine (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990).
17. G. H. Orians and N. P. Pearson, “On the Theory of Central Place Foraging,” in Analy-
sis of Ecological Systems, ed. D. V. Horn, R. D. Mitchell, and G. R. Stairs (Columbus: 
Ohio State University Press, 1979) 155–77.
18. J. M. Broughton, “Prehistoric Human Impacts on California Birds: Evidence from 
the Emeryville Shellmound Avifauna,” Ornithological Monographs no. 26 (2004); 
American Ornithologists’ Union.
19. P. Rozin, “Why We Eat What We Eat, and Why We Worry about It,” Bulletin of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences L (1997): 26–48.
20. I. C. Uzgiris, “Ordinality in the Development of Schemas for Relating to Objects,” 
in Exceptional  Infant- Normal Infant, ed. J. Helmuth (New York: Bruner /  Mazel, 1967), 
317–34.
21. R. G. Coss, S. Ruff, and T. Simms, “All That Glistens: II. The Effects of Reﬂ ective 
Surface Finishes on the Mouthing Activity of Infants and Toddlers,” Ecological Psy-
chology 15 (2003): 197–21; I. C. Uzgiris, “Ordinality in the Development of Schemas for 
Relating to Objects,” in Exceptional  Infant- Normal Infant, ed. J. Helmuth (New York: 
Bruner /  Mazel, 1967), 317–34.
22. J. V. Neel, “Lessons from a ‘Primitive’ People,” Science 170 (1970): 815–22.
23. P. Rozin, “Getting to Like the Burn of Chili Pepper: Biological, Psychological and 
Cultural Perspectives,” in Chemical Senses: Irritation, ed. B. G. Green, J. R. Mason, and 
M. R. Kare, vol. 2 (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1990), 231–69; A. A. Blake, “Flavor Per-
ception and the Learning of Food Preferences,” in Flavour Perception, ed. A. J. Taylor 
and D. D. Roberts (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004), 172–98.
24. P. Rozin, “Why We Eat What We Eat, and Why We Worry about It,” Bulletin of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences L (1997): 26–48.
25. C. Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (London: John Murray, 
1872). Page citations are from the 1998 edition annotated by Paul Ekman.
26. C. Nemeroff and P. Rozin, “You Are What You Eat: Applying the  Demand- Free ‘Im-
pressions’ Unique to an Unacknowledged Belief Ethos,” Journal of Psychological An-
thropology 17 (1989): 50–69.

197
notes to chapter seven
27. P. Rozin, “Why We Eat What We Eat, and Why We Worry about It,” Bulletin of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences L (1997): 26–48.
28. P. Rozin, J. Haidt, and C. R. McCauley, “Disgust,” in Handbook of Emotions, ed. 
M. Lewis and J. M.  Haviland- Jones, 2nd ed. (New York: Gilford Press, 2000), 637–53; 
J. Haidt, The Happiness Hypothesis (New York: Basic Books, 2006); J. Haidt and C. Jo-
seph, “Intuitive Ethics: How Innately Prepared Intuitions Generate Culturally Vari-
able Virtues,” Daedalus 133 (2004): 55–66.
29. J. Haidt, The Happiness Hypothesis (New York: Basic Books, 2006).
30. H. A. Chapman et al., “In Bad Taste: Evidence for the Oral Origins of Moral Disgust,” 
Science 323 (2009): 1222–26.
31. P. Rozin, J. Haidt, and K. Fincher, “From Oral to Moral,” Science 323 (2009): 1179–80.
32. K. Thomas, Man and the Natural World: A History of the Modern Sensibility (New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1983).
33. P. W. Sherman and J. Billings, “Darwinian Gastronomy: Why We Use Spices,” BioSci-
ence 49 (1998): 453–63.
34. G. P. Nabhan, Why Some Like It Hot: Food, Genes, and Cultural Diversity (Washington, 
DC: Island Press, 2004); P. W. Sherman and G. A. Hash, “Why Vegetable Recipes Are 
Not Very Spicy,” Evolution and Human Behavior 22 (2001): 147–63.
35. M. Eisenstein, “Of Beans and Genes,” Nature 468 (2010): 513–15.
36. S. H. Katz, “Fava Bean Consumption: A Case for the Co- Evolution of Genes and Cul-
ture,” in Food and Evolution, ed. M. Harris and E. B. Ross (Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press, 1987), 133–59; M. Kurlansky, Salt: A World History (New York: Penguin 
Books, 2003).
37. R. Wrangham and T. Nishida, “Aspilia spp. Leaves: A Puzzle in the Feeding Behavior 
of Wild Chimpanzees,” Primates 24 (1983): 276–82.
38. V. Wobber, B. Hare, and R. Wrangham, “Great Apes Prefer Cooked Food,” Journal of 
Human Evolution 55 (2008): 340–48.
39. R. Wrangham, Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human (New York: Basic Books, 2009).
40. M. Profet, “The Evolution of Pregnancy Sickness as Protection to the Embryo against 
Pleistocene Teratogens,” Evolutionary Theory 8 (1988): 177–90; M. Profet, “Pregnancy 
Sickness as Adaptation: A Deterrent to Maternal Ingestion of Teratogens,” in The 
Adapted Mind, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1992), 327–66.
41. S. M. Flaxman and P. W. Sherman, “Morning Sickness: A Mechanism for Protecting 
Mother and Embryo,” Quarterly Review of Biology 75 (2000): 113–48.
42. C. Stanford, Chimpanzee and Red Colobus: The Ecology of Predator and Prey (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1998).
43. J. H. Barkow, Darwin, Sex, and Status: Biological Approaches to Mind and Culture (To-
ronto: University of Toronto Press, 1989).
44. R. Hames, “Sharing among the Yanomamö: Part 1: The Ethics of Risk,” in Risk and 
Uncertainty in Tribal and Peasant Economies, ed. E. Cashdan (Boulder: University of 
Colorado Press, 1990), 89–106.
45. H. Kaplan and H. Hill, “Food Sharing among Ache Foragers: Tests of Explanatory 
Hypotheses,” Current Anthropology 26 (1985): 223–39.

198
notes to chapter eight
46. Ibid.
47. P. D. Dwyer and M. Minnegal, “Hunting in Lowland Tropical Rainforest: Towards 
a Model of Non- Agricultural Subsistence,” Human Ecology 19 (1991): 187–212; P. M. 
Kaberry, “Political Organization in the Northern Abelam,” Politics in New Guinea, 
ed. R. M. Berndt and P. Lawrence (Nedlands: University of Western Australia Press, 
1971); A. Weiner, The Trobrianders of Papua New Guinea (New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1988).
48. M. Young, Fighting with Food (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
Chapter Eight
1. B. Krause, The Great Animal Orchestra: Finding the Origins of Music in the World’s Wild 
Places (New York: Little, Brown, 2012).
2. Ibid.
3. P. Gouk, Music Healing in Cultural Contexts (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000).
4. J. M. Standley, “The Effect of Contingent Music to Increase Non- Nutritive Sucking of 
Premature Infants,” Pediatric Nursing 26 (2000): 493–95, 498–99; J. M. Standley, “The 
Effect of Music- Reinforced Non- Nutritive Sucking on Feeding Rate of Premature 
Infants,” Journal of Pediatric Nursing 18 (2003): 169–73.
5. A. Lomax, Folk Song Style and Culture (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1978).
6. C. Darwin, The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex (New York: D. Appleton, 
1872), quotes on 877, 878, and 880.
7. G. Miller, “Evolution of Human Music through Sexual Selection,” in The Origins of 
Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 
329–60.
8. C. Levi- Strauss, L’Homme nu (Paris: Plon, 1971).
9. S. Mithen, The Singing Neanderthals: The Origins of Music, Language, Mind and Body 
(London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2005).
10. G. Miller, “Evolution of Human Music through Sexual Selection,” in The Origins of 
Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 
329–60.
11. D. Kunej and I. Turk, “New Perspectives on the Beginnings of Music: Archaeological 
and Musicological Analysis of a Middle Paleolithic Bone ‘Flute,’” in The Origins of 
Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 
235–68.
12. N. J. Conard, M. Malina, and S. C. Münzel, “New Flutes Document the Earliest Mu-
sical Tradition in Southwestern Germany,” Nature 460 (2009): 737–40; F. D’Errico 
et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Symbolism, and 
Music—An Alternative Inter- Disciplinary Perspective,” Journal of World Prehistory 
17 (2003): 1–70.
13. J. Tooby and L. Cosmides, “Evolutionary Psychology and the Emotions,” in Hand-
book of Emotions, ed. M. Lewis and J. M.  Haviland- Jones, 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford 
Press, 1990), 91–115.
14. J. Tooby and L. Cosmides, “The Psychological Foundations of Culture,” in The Adapted 
Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, 

199
notes to chapter eight
and J. Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 19–136; S. Pinker, The Blank 
Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature (New York: Penguin, 2002).
15. R. Dunbar, Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1996).
16. Ibid.; J. Molino, “Toward an Evolutionary Theory of Music and Language,” in The Ori-
gins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2000), 165–76.
17. W. L. Benzon, Beethoven’s Anvil: Music in Mind and Culture (New York: Basic Books, 
2001); B. Krause, The Great Animal Orchestra: Finding the Origins of Music in the World’s 
Wild Places (New York: Little, Brown, 2012); V. Geist, Life Strategies, Human Evolution, 
Environmental Design: Toward a Biological Theory of Health (New York:  Springer- Verlag, 
1978).
18. V. Gazzola and C. Keysers, “The Observation and Execution of Actions Share Motor 
and Somatosensory Voxels in All Tested Subjects:  Single- Subject Analyses of Un-
smoothed fMRI Data,” Cereb Cortex 19, no. 6 (2008): 1239–55, www .pubmedcentral 
.nih .gov /  articlerender.fcgi?tool=pmcentrez&artid=2677653.
19. E. M. Thomas, The Old Way: A Story of the First People (New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux, 2006).
20. E. Doolittle, “Crickets in the Concert Hall: A History of Animals in Western Music,” 
Transcultural Music Review 12 (2008).
21. C. Sachs, The Wellsprings of Music, ed. Jaap Kunst (The Hague: Martin Nijhoff, 1962).
22. R. M. Seyfarth and D. L. Cheney, “Behavioral Mechanisms Underlying Vocal Com-
munication in Nonhuman Primates,” Animal Learning and Behavior 25 (1997): 249–67; 
D. L. Cheney and R. M. Seyfarth, Baboon Metaphysics: The Evolution of a Social Mind 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).
23. S. Blackmore, The Meme Machine (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
24. E. Dissanayke, Art and Intimacy: How the Arts Began (Seattle: University of Wash-
ington Press, 2000); E. Dissanayake, “Antecedents of the Temporal Arts in Early 
 Mother- Infant Interaction,” in The Origins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and 
S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 389–410.
25. E. Terhardt, “Gestalt Principles and Music Perception,” in Auditory Processing of Com-
plex Sounds, ed. W. A. Yost and C. S. Watson (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1987), 157–66; 
S. Trehub, “Human Processing Predispositions and Musical Universals,” in The Ori-
gins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2000), 427–48; C. Trevarthen, “Musicality and the Intrinsic Motive Pulse: Evidence 
from Human Psychology and Infant Communication,” special issue, Musicae Scien-
tiae (1999–2000): 155–215.
26. T. Geissmann, “Gibbon Songs and Human Music from an Evolutionary Perspective,” 
in The Origins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA.: 
MIT Press, 2000), 103–23.
27. R. V. Alatalo, C. Glynn, and A. Lundberg, “Singing Rate and Female Attraction in the 
Pied Flycatcher: An Experiment,” Animal Behavior 39 (1990): 601–3; B. Kempenaers, 
G. R. Verheyen, and A. A. Dhondt, “Extrapair Paternity in the Blue Tit (Parus caeru-
leus): Female Choice, Male Characteristics, and Offspring Quality,” Behavioral Ecology 
8 (1997): 481–92; C. K. Catchpole, “Sexual Selection and the Evolution of Complex 

200
notes to chapter eight
Songs among European Warblers of the Genus Acrocephalus,” Behaviour 74 (1980): 
149–66; C. K. Catchpole, J. Dittami, and B. Leisler, “Differential Responses to Male 
Song Repertoires in Female Songbirds Implanted with Oestradiol,” Nature 312 (1984): 
563–64; B. Catchpole, B. Leisler, and J. Dittami, “Sexual Differences in the Responses 
of Captive Great Reed Warblers (Acrocephalus arundinaceus) to Variations in Song 
Structure and Repertoire Size,” Ethology 73 (1986): 69–77; C. K. Catchpole and P. J. B. 
Slater, Bird Song: Biological Themes and Variations (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995); C. K. Catchpole. and P. K. McGregor, “Sexual Selection, Song Complex-
ity and Plumage Dimorphism in European Buntings of the Genus Emberiza,” Ani-
mal Behavior 33 (1985): 1149–66; H. Lampe and G.- P. Saetre, “Female Pied Flycatchers 
Prefer Males with Larger Song Repertoires,” Proceedings of the Royal Society, London, 
B 262 (1995): 163–67; W. A. Searcy, “Song Repertoire Size and Female Preferences in 
Song Sparrows,” Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 14 (1984): 281–86; W. A. Searcy 
and K. Yasukawa, “Song and Female Choice,” in Ecology and Evolution of Acoustic Com-
munication in Birds, ed. D. I. Rubenstein and R. W. Wrangham (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1996), 175–200; F. E. Wasserman and J. A. Cigliano, “Song Output 
and Stimulation of the Female in White- Throated Sparrows,” Behavioral Ecology and 
Sociobiology 29 (1991): 55–59.
28. K. Payne, P. Tyack, and R. Payne, “Progressive Changes in the Songs of Humpback 
Whales (Megaptera novaeangliae): A Detailed Analysis of Two Seasons in Hawaii,” in 
Communication and Behavior of Whales, ed. R. Payne (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1983), 9–57; K. Payne and R. Payne, “Large Scale Changes over 19 Years in Song of 
Humpback Whales in Bermuda,” Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 68 (1985): 89–114; 
K. Payne, “The Progressively Changing Songs of Humpback Whales: A Window 
on the Creative Process in a Wild Animal,” in The Origins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, 
B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 135–50.
29. S. Nowicki, S. Peters, and J. Podos, “Song Learning, Early Nutrition and Sexual Se-
lection in Songbirds,” American Zoologist 38 (1998): 179–90; S. Nowicki, W. A. Searcy, 
and S. Peters, “Brain Development, Song Learning and Mate Choice in Birds: A Re-
view and Experimental Test of the ‘Nutritional Stress Hypothesis,’” Journal of Com-
putational Physics A 188 (2002): 1003–14.
30. W. A. Searcy and S. Nowicki, The Evolution of Animal Communication: Reliability and 
Deception in Signaling Systems (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005).
31. N. Neave et al., “Male Dance Moves That Catch a Woman’s Eye,” Biology Letters 7 
(2011): 221–24.
32. G. Miller, “Evolution of Human Music through Sexual Selection,” in The Origins of 
Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 
329–60.
33. N. Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965); 
N. Chomsky, Rules and Representations (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980).
34. D. Falk, “Hominid Brain Evolution and the Origin of Music,” in The Origins of Music, 
ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 197–216.
35. T. Bever and R. Chiarello, “Cerebral Dominance in Musicians and Nonmusicians,” 
Science 185 (1974): 537–39.
36. C. Sachs, The Wellsprings of Music, ed. Jaap Kunst (The Hague: Martin Nijhoff, 1962).

201
notes to chapter nine
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.
39. J. Sergent, E. Zuck, S. Terriah, and B. MacDonald, “Distributed Neural Network 
Underlying Musical Sight- Reading and Keyboard Performance,” Science 257 (1992): 
106–10; W. Chen et al., “Functional Mapping of Human Brain during Music Imagery 
Processing,” NeuroImage 3 (1996): S205.
40. C. Sachs, The Wellsprings of Music, ed. Jaap Kunst (The Hague: Martin Nijhoff, 1962).
41. R. Jourdain, Music, the Brain, and Ecstasy (New York: Avon Books, 1998).
42. Ibid.
43. D. Huron, Sweet Anticipation: Music and the Psychology of Expectation (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2006).
44. L. F. Baptista and R. A. Keister, “Why Bird Song Is Sometimes Like Music,” Perspec-
tives in Biology and Medicine 48 (2005): 426–43.
45.  K. Payne, “The Progressively Changing Songs of Humpback Whales: A window 
into the Creative Process in a Wild Animal,” in The Origins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, 
B. Merker, and S. Brown (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 135–50.
46. C. Hartshorne, Born to Sing: An Interpretation and World Survey of Bird Song (Blooming-
ton: Indiana University Press, 1973).
47. C. K. Catchpole and P. J. B. Slater, Bird Song: Biological Themes and Variations (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
Chapter Nine
1. L. Tiger, The Pursuit of Pleasure (New York: Little, Brown, 1992).
2. A. Gilbert, What the Nose Knows: The Science of Scent in Everyday Life (New York: Crown, 
2008).
3. S. A. Goff and H. J. Klee, “Plant Volatile Compounds: Sensory Cues for Health and 
Nutritional Value?,” Science 311 (2006): 815–91.
4. L. M. Nijssen et al., Volatile Compounds in Food, vol. 7, supp. 1 (Zeist: TNO Nutrition 
and Food Research Institute, 1997).
5. G. F. Oster and E. O. Wilson, Caste and Ecology in the Social Insects (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1978).
6. D. H. Janzen, “Why Fruits Rot, Seeds Mold, and Meat Spoils,” American Naturalist 111 
(1977): 691–713.
7. C. Wedekind et al., “MHC- Dependent Mate Preferences in Humans,” Proceedings of 
the Royal Society: Biological Sciences 266 (1995): 245–49.
8. R. J. Braidwood et al., “Symposium: Did Man Once Live by Beer Alone?” American 
Anthropologist 55 (1953): 515–26.
9. P. E. McGovern, Ancient Wine: The Search for the Origin of Viniculture (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2006).
10. W. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (London: Longmans, Green, 1902), 377.
11. R. Dudley, “Evolutionary Origins of Human Alcoholism in Primate Frugivory,” Quar-
terly Review of Biology 75 (2000): 3–15.
12. Ibid.; R. Dudley, “Ethanol, Fruit Ripening, and the Historical Origins of Human Al-
coholism and Primate Frugivory,” Integrative and Comparative Biology 44 (200): 315–

202
notes to chapter ten
32; D. Stephens and R. Dudley, “The Drunken Monkey Hypothesis,” Natural History 
(December 2004 /  January 2005).
13. D. J. Levey, “The Evolutionary Ecology of Ethanol Production and Alcoholism,” Inte-
grative and Comparative Biology 44 (2004): 284–89.
14. D. M. Stoddard, “The Role of Olfaction in the Evolution of Human Sexuality: An 
Hypothesis,” Man 21 (1986): 514–20; D. M. Stoddard, The Scented Ape: The Biology and 
Culture of Human Odour (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
15. G. H. Dodd, “The Molecular Dimension in Perfumery,” in Perfumery: The Psychology 
and Biology of Fragrance, ed. S. Van Toller and G. H. Dodd (London: Chapmen and 
Hall, 1991), 19–46.
16. R. R. Calkin and J. S. Jellinek, Perfumery: Practice and Principles (New York: Wiley, 
1994).
17. C. D. Daly and R. S. White, “Psychic Reactions to Olfactory Stimuli,” British Journal 
of Medical Psychology 10 (1930): 70–87.
18. E. E. Slosson, “A Lecture Experiment in Hallucinogens,” Psychological Review 6 
(1899): 407–8.
19. A. Gilbert, What the Nose Knows: The Science of Scent in Everyday Life (New York: Crown, 
2008).
20. Ibid., 25.
Chapter Ten
1. T. Johns, With Bitter Herbs They Shall Eat: Chemical Ecology and the Origins of Human 
Diet and Medicine (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990).
2. S. H. Riesenberg, “Magic and Medicine in Ponape,” Southwest Journal of Anthropology 
4 (1948): 406–29.
3. T. Gladwin, East Is a Big Bird: Navigation and Logic on Puluwat Atoll (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1970).
4. S. Kaplan, “Environmental Preference in a  Knowledge- Seeking,  Knowledge- Using 
Organism,” in The Adapted Mind, ed. J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 591–98.
5. D. L. Medin, N. O. Ross, and D. G. Cox, Culture and Resource Conﬂ ict: Why Meanings 
Matter (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006).
6. N. K. Humphrey, “Natural Aesthetics,” in Architecture for People, ed. B. Mikellides 
(London: Studio Vista, 1980), 59–73. The quote is on page 64.
7. A. K. Thomason, Luxury and Legitimation Royal Collecting in Ancient Mesopotamia (Al-
dershot: Ashgate, 2005); A. Bounia, The Nature of Classical Collecting. Collectors and 
Collections, 100 BCE—100 CE (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004).
8. D. F. Sherry, “Food Storage by Birds and Mammals,” Advances in the Study of Behavior 
15 (1985): 153–88; C. C. Smith and O. J. Reichman, “The Evolution of Food Caching by 
Birds and Mammals,” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 15 (1984): 329–51.
9. I. P. Pavlov, “The Reﬂ ex of Purpose,” in Lectures on Conditioned Reﬂ exes, vol. 1. (Lon-
don: Lawrence and Wishart, 1963).
10. S. W. Anderson, H. Damaio, and A. R. Damasio, “A Neural Basis for Collecting Be-
havior in Humans,” Brain 128 (2005): 201–12.

203
notes to chapter eleven
11. A. Wulf, Brother Gardeners: Botany, Empire and the Birth of an Obsession (New York: 
Knopf, 2008).
12. C. Markham, Colloquies on the Simples and Drugs of India by Garcia da Orta (London: 
Henry Sotheran, 1913).
13. T. Birkhead, A Brand- New Bird (New York: Basic Books, 2003).
14. B. Krause, The Great Animal Orchestra: Finding the Origins of Music in the World’s Wild 
Places (New York: Little, Brown, 2012).
Chapter Eleven
1. C. L. Apicella et al. “Social Networks and Cooperation in  Hunter- Gatherers,” Nature 
481 (2012): 497–501.
2. A. W. Delton et al., “Evolution of Direct Reciprocity under Uncertainty Can Explain 
Human Generosity in One- Short Encounters,” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 108 (2011): 1335–40.
3. D. E. Brown, Human Universals (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1991).
4. Starlings beneﬁ t from additional information about the state of the environment 
when required to make sequential decisions about prey but not when they must 
choose between two simultaneously available prey items. E. Freiden and A. Kacelnik, 
“Rational Choice, Context Dependence, and the Value of Information in European 
Starlings (Sturnus vulgaris),” Science 334 (2011): 1000–1002.
5. D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011).
6. Yi- Fu Tuan, Topophili: A Study of Environmental Perceptions, Attitudes, and Values (En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice- Hall, 1974).
7. C. Levi- Strauss, La Pensée Sauvage (Paris: Plon, 1962).
8. W. Burkert, Creation of the Sacred: Tracks of Biology in Early Religion (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1998); S. Pinker, The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window 
into Human Nature (New York: Penguin, 2007).
9. L. Cosmides and J. Tooby, Evolutionary Psychology: Theoretical Foundations, in Ency-
clopedia of Cognitive Science (London: Macmillan, 2003); S. Pinker, The Blank Slate: The 
Modern Denial of Human Nature (New York: Penguin, 2002).
10. J. G. Kingsolver and D. W. Pfennig, “Patterns and Power of Phenotypic Selection in 
Nature,” BioScience 57 (2007): 561–72.
11. F. E. Kuo and A. F. Taylor, “A Potential Natural Treatment for  Attention- Deﬁ cit /  
Hyperactivity Disorder: Evidence from a National Study,” American Journal of Public 
Health 94 (2004): 1580–86.
12. Ibid.; A. F. Taylor and F. E. Kuo, “Children with Attention Deﬁ cits Concentrate Better 
after Walk in the Park,” Journal of Attention Disorders 12 (2006): 402–9.
13. S. Kaplan and J. F. Talbot, “Psychological Beneﬁ ts of a Wilderness Experience,” in 
Human Behavior and Environment, ed. I. Altman and J. F. Wohlwill, vol. 6, Behavior and 
the Natural Environment (New York: Plenum Press, 1983).
14. T. Hartig, M. Mang, and G. W. Evans, “Restorative Effects of Natural Environmental 
Experiences,” Environment and Behavior 23 (1991): 3–26; R. Hockey, ed., Stress and Fa-
tigue in Human Performance (New York: Wiley, 1983); D. C. Glass and J. E. Singer, Urban 
Stress: Experiments on Noise and Social Stressors (New York: Academic Press, 1972).

204
notes to chapter eleven
15. R. S. Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia, and Natural Landscapes,” in The Biophilia Hy-
pothesis, ed. S. R. Keller and E. O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1995), 
 73–137.
16. S. R. Kellert, J. H. Heerwagen, and M. L. Mader, eds., Biophilic Design: The Theory, Sci-
ence, and Practice of Bringing Buildings to Life (New York: Wiley, 2008).
17. S. K. Jakobson, M. D. McDuff, and M. C. Monroe, Conservation Education and Outreach 
Techniques (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).
18. G. C. Williams and R. M. Nesse, “The Dawn of Darwinian Medicine,” Quarterly Re-
view of Biology 66 (1991): 1–21; R. Nesse, “Evolutionary Explanations of Emotions,” 
Human Nature 1 (1991): 261–89; R. Nesse and G. C. Williams, Why We Get Sick: The New 
Science of Darwinian Medicine (New York: Times Books, 1996).
19. R. S. Ulrich, “View through a Window May Inﬂ uence Recovery from Surgery,” Sci-
ence 224 (1984): 420–21; R. S. Ulrich, O. Lundén, and J. L. Eltinge, “Effects of Exposure 
to Nature and Abstract Pictures on Patients Recovering from Heart Surgery,” Psycho-
physiology 30, supp. 1 (1993): 7–26.
20. Q. Li et al., “A Forest Bathing Trip Increases Human Natural Killer Activity and Ex-
pression of Anti- Cancer Proteins in Female Subjects,” Journal of the Biological Regula-
tion of Homeostatic Agents 22 (2008): 45–55; Q. Li et al., “Visiting a Forest, but Not a 
City, Increases Human Natural Killer Activity and Expression of Anti- Cancer Pro-
teins,” International Journal of Immunopathological Pharmacology 21 (2008): 117–27.
21. R. C. Knopf, “Human Behavior, Cognition, and Affect in the Natural Environment,” 
in Handbook of Environmental Psychology, ed. D. Stokols and I. Altman (New York: Wi-
ley, 1987), 783–825; R. S. Ulrich, U. Dimberg, and B. L. Driver, “Psychophysiological 
Indicators of Leisure Beneﬁ ts,” in Beneﬁ ts of Leisure, ed. B. L. Driver, P. J. Brown, and 
G. L. Peterson (State College, PA: Venture, 1991).
22. R. S. Ulrich and D. Addoms, “Psychological and Recreational Beneﬁ ts of a Neighbor-
hood Park,” Journal of Leisure Research 13 (1981): 43–65; S. Kaplan, “The Restorative 
Beneﬁ ts of Nature: Toward an Integrative Framework,” Journal of Environmental 
Psychology 15 (1995): 169–82; S. Kaplan and J. F. Talbot, “Psychological Beneﬁ ts of a 
Wilderness Experience,” in Human Behavior and Environment, ed. I. Altman and J. F. 
Wohlwill, vol. 6, Behavior and the Natural Environment (New York: Plenum Press, 
1983); H. W. Schroeder, “Environment, Behavior, and Design Research on Urban 
Forests,” in Advances in Environment, Behavior, and Design, ed. E. H. Zube and G. T. 
Moore, vol. 2 (New York: Plenum Press, 1989).
23. C. Frances and C.  Cooper- Marcus, “Places People Take Their Problems,” in Proceed-
ings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Environmental Design Research Association, ed. 
J.  Urbina- Soria, P.  Ortega- Andeane, and R. Bechtel (Oklahoma City, OK: EDRA, 1991); 
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Landscape Aesthetics: A Handbook for 
Scenery Management (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Ofﬁ ce, 1993).
24. A. Katcher, “Man and the Living Environment: An Excursion into Cyclical Time,” 
in New Perspectives in Our Lives with Companion Animals, ed. A. Katcher and A. Beck 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983).
25. A. Katcher and G. Wilkins, “Dialogue with Animals: Its Nature and Culture,” in The 
Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 
1993), 173–97; A. Katche et al., “Looking, Talking, and Blood Pressure: The Physi-

205
notes to chapter eleven
ological Consequences of Interaction with the Living Environment,” in New Perspec-
tives on Our Lives with Companion Animals, ed. A. Katcher and A. Beck (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983); A. M. Beck, “Use of Animals in the Rehabili-
tation of Psychiatric Inpatients,” Psychological Reports 58 (1986): 63–66; A. Katcher 
and G. Wilkins, “Dialogue with Animals: Its Nature and Culture,” in The Biophilia 
Hypothesis, ed. S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson (Washington, DC Island Press, 1993), 
173–97.
26. D. C. Dennett, Kinds of Minds (New York: Basic Books, 1996).
27. B. Rush, Medical Inquiries and Observations upon Diseases of the Mind (Philadelphia: 
Kimber and Richardson, 1812).
28. P. D. Reif, “Agriculture and Health Care: The Care of Plants and Animals for Therapy 
and Rehabilitation in the United States,” in Farming for Health, ed. J. Hassink and 
M. van Dijk (Wageningen: Springer, 2006), 309–43.
29. S. R. Kellert, “Children’s Afﬁ liations with Nature: Structure, Development, and the 
Problem and Environmental Generational Amnesia,” in Children and Nature: Psycho-
logical, Sociocultural, and Evolutionary Investigations, ed. P. H. Kahn Jr. and S. R. Kellert 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 93–116.
30. P. A. Zaradic and O. R. W. Pergams, “Videophilia: Implications for Childhood De-
velopment and Conservation,” Journal of Developmental Processes 2 (2007): 130–44; 
O. R. W. Pergams and P. A. Zaradic, “Evidence for a Fundamental and Pervasive Shift 
Away from  Nature- Based Recreation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
USA 105 (2008): 2295–300.
31. R. Louv, Last Child in the Woods: Saving Our Children from  Nature- Deﬁ cit Disorder (Cha-
pel Hill, NC: Algonquin Books, 2005).
32. J. W. Dougherty, “Salience and Relativity in Classiﬁ cation,” American Ethnologist 
5 (1978): 665–80; B. Stross, “Acquisition of Botanical Terminology by Tzeltal Chil-
dren,” in Meaning in Mayan Languages, 107–41, ed. M. Edmonson (The Hague: Mour-
ton, 1973), 1075–42.


207
1.1. International Bee Research Association, ibra .org. 1.2a. Brian M. Wood, Yale Uni-
versity. 1.2b. Joanna Eede. 1.3. Special Collections Research Center, University of 
Chicago Library. 2.1. Special Collections Research Center, University of Chicago Li-
brary. 2.2. Tom and Pat Leeson, Ardea .com. 2.3. © Michael Rothman 1997. 2.4. Kalpesh 
Lathigra /  World Wildlife Fund- UK 3.1. Owen Humphries /  PA /  AP. 3.2. Michael Amendo-
lia. 3.3. Image courtesy of Charles Nelson, PhD, Boston Children’s Hospital; photo by 
Margaret Lampert. 4.1. Reprinted from Journal of Human Evolution, 57 /  2, P. Utrilla et al., 
A paleolithic map from 13,660 calBP: engraved stone blocks from the Late Magdalenian 
in Abauntz Cave (Navarra, Spain), Fig. 7, Copyright 2009, with permission from Else-
vier. 4.2. Reprinted from Journal of Human Evolution, 57 /  2, P. Utrilla et al., A paleolithic 
map from 13,660 calBP: engraved stone blocks from the Late Magdalenian in Abauntz 
Cave (Navarra, Spain), Fig. 7, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 4.3. Mar-
tin Schoeller /  AUGUST. 5.1. AP Photo /  Channi Anand. 5.2. Composite image courtesy of 
Richard Coss. 5.3.  Bridgeman- Giraudon /  Art Resource, NY. 5.4. Photo courtesy of John 
Schoen. 6.1. Courtesy of Ronald Feldman Fine Arts, New York /  www .feldmangallery 
.com. 6.2. bpk, Berlin /  Staatliche Museen /  Joerg P. Anders /  Art Resource, NY. 6.3. Gor-
don Orians. 6.4. Gordon Orians. 6.5. Gordon Orians. 6.6. Courtesy of Arnold Arbore-
tum Horticultural Library. © President and Fellows of Harvard College. Arnold Arbore-
tum Archives. 6.7. Gordon Orians. 6.8. Gordon Orians. 6.9. Jarrold Publishing /  The Art 
Archive at Art Resource, NY. 6.10. Gordon Orians. 6.11a. Courtesy of the Smithsonian 
Institution Libraries, Washington, D.C. 6.11b. Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution 
Libraries, Washington, D.C. 6.12. Gordon Orians 7.1. Gianni Dagli Orti /  The Art Archive 
at Art Resource, NY. 7.2. James McDonald, 1922. Reproduction from a  black- and- white 
glass lantern slide. Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa. 7.3. Reprinted from 
the Victoria County History of Kent, London, 1912. 7.4. Paul Eckman, Ph.D. /  Paul Ekman 
Group, LLC. 7.5. AP /  Ho Chon In. 8.1. Gordon Orians. 8.2. Mark Newman /  FLPA /  Min-
den Pictures. 8.3. Cornell Library of Ornithology. 8.4. Library of Congress. 9.1. Nick 
Gordon, naturepl .com. 9.2. Bodleian Library, University of Oxford. 9.3. Special Collec-
tions Research Center, University of Chicago Library 10.1. AP /  Toby Talbot. 10.2. © Il-
lustrated London News Ltd /  Everett Collection. 10.3. Hanford Declassiﬁ cation Project /  
Department of Energy. 10.4. Tommy Fabianus /  Demotix. 10.5. Tim Laman. 11.1. Gordon 
Orians. 11.2. AP /  David Tipling /  Solent News /  Rex Features.
Illustration Credits


209
Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations.
Abauntz cave stone tablet, 33–34, 34, 35, 79
Acacia, 49; A. tortilis, 66, 73–75, 74, 87–89; 
A. xanthophloea, 87–89
Acer, 69–73; A. japonicum, 69; A. palmatum, 
69, 70–72, 104; A. sieboldianum, 69
Acheulian hand axes, 99–100, 101
Acrocephalus scirpaceus, 171
adaptive behavior, 25–26
Addoms, D., 204n22
ADHD, 172
Aeneid (Virgil), 94
Aesthetica (Baumgarten), 9
aesthetic sense: and biodiversity, 152; and 
landscape, 35–36; and life after death, 
93–96; origins of, 9, 13; and rarity, 154–
55; and tree shape, 65–75, 88, 89–90; 
and water, 90–93. See also beauty
affordance, 28, 150, 152
African civet, 146
African fever tree, 87–89
African savannas. See savannas
Agelaius phoeniceus, 118, 119
Agras, W. S., 189n2, 192n54
agriculture, 99
Alaric, 97
Alatalo, R. V., 199n27
Alberti, Leon Battista, 77
alcohol, 143–45, 162
alcoholism, 145
Alhambra, 77–79
All Blacks rugby team, 126
Altman, N., 195n25
American cheetahs, 14, 15
American Horticultural Therapy Associa-
tion, 176–77
America’s Most Wanted, 60–61, 61
Anderson, J. W., 192n49
Anderson, S. W., 202n10
Andrews, R. J., 191n35
Angelino, H., 192n55, 192n57
animals: change in position of, 164; and 
children, 164; as companions, 175–76; 
domestication of, 116, 154; hunting of, 
18, 99–103; odor of, 141; rare, 154–55. See 
also names of individual species
animal tracks, 102–3, 151, 164
anthropomorphism, 176
Antilocapra americana, 13–14, 14, 15
ants, 141
Apicella, C. L., 163
Appleton, J., 38–39, 64, 76, 186n6, 187n7
archaeology, 33
Aronoff, J., 190n21
arrowheads, 155, 156
art: Abauntz stone tablet, 33–34, 34, 35; and 
depictions of vegetation, 63; and garden 
design, 81; landscape art, 33, 60–62, 63, 
67, 81, 86; pointed forms in, 50; prefer-
ences for, 60–62, 63, 86; rock painting 
of honey hunter, 1, 2; snakes in, 45, 47; 
sunsets and sunrises in, 55; trees in, 67
Art of Landscape Gardening, The (Repton), 82
Ateles paniscus paniscus, 144
Athenaeus, 195n1
attention deﬁ cit /  hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), 172
Index

210
index
Austen, Jane, Sense and Sensibility, 62
Australia, 93, 128, 144, 160, 160
Australian aborigines, 93, 128
Austrian pine, 87–88
azaleas, 69
Aztec, 47, 48
BaAka, 19, 119
baboons, 89
backward regression, 177–78
Baptista, L. F., 201n44
Barkow, J. H., 197n43
Bartram, John, 157
bats, 21, 31, 120
Baumgarten, A. G., Aesthetica, 9
beauty, 4, 13. See also aesthetic sense
Beck, A. M., 205n25
bees, 156. See also honey
behavioral adaptations, 25–26
Behavior (Powers), 24
Bellerman, Ferdinand, Road to La Guiara, 
Venezuela, 65
Bennett- Levy, J., 189n1
Benson, E. D., 195n28
Benzon, W. L., 128
Berk, L., 191n32
Berlyne, D. E., 188n8, 193n3
Bever, R., 200n35
Bible, 153–54
Bicchieri, M. G., 195n8
Bigelow, A. E., 194n23
Billings, J., 197n33
biodiversity, 150, 152–53, 178
biophilia, 177
birds: archaeological remains of, 33; bird-
ers, 150, 151, 157–58; birdsong, 118, 121, 
122–23, 126–27, 131, 134, 136–37, 137; 
 brood- parasitic, 171, 171; catching of, 
158; Christmas Bird Counts, 150, 151; 
habitat selection of, 36; keeping of, 
158–60; singing contests, 158–60, 159; 
use of, for navigation, 151–52; vocal 
mimicry of, 128–29; wing adaptation 
of, 26. See also names of individual species
Birkhead, T., 203n13 (chap. 10)
Birmingham Dog Show, 155
Blackmore, S., 129
black spider monkey, 144
Blake, A. A., 196n23
blue, 85–86
Bodnant Garden, 80
Boran, 1–2, 162, 163
borrowed scenery, 79–81, 80
Boswellia sacra, 97
Bower, T. G. R., 191n31
bowerbirds, 160, 160
Bowlby, J., 187n13, 192n50
Box, E. O., 196n15
boys: climbing ability of, 15–16; fears of, 16; 
sense of smell of, 139; tree preference 
of, 87, 88–89. See also children; men
Braidwood, R. J., 143
brain: and collecting behavior, 157; fear 
circuit in, 43, 44; growth of, 20, 46, 56; 
size of, 20, 42
Brazil, 128
breast milk, 107, 147
bright lights, 54
Bronson, G. W., 191n41
Broughton, J. M., 196n18
Brown, D. E., 186n12, 187n11, 203n3
Brown, Lancelot (Capability), 77, 78
Bruce, C., 190n26
Buddhism: chanting, 127; dietary restric-
tions in, 97; and garden design, 68; life 
after death in, 95
Budding, Edwin, 83
Burghley House, 78
Burkert, W., 203n8
Burlingame, Alice, 176
Buss, D. M., 191n44
Byers, J. A., 186n7
Caan, W., 190n26
Calkin, R. R., 202n16
Calvin, William, 99
Campbell, T. J., 195n29
Canaanites, 47
canaries, 158, 160
cannibalism, 106

211
index
Cantometrics Project, 122
canyon wren, 134
cape buffalo, 175
Carpenter, P. L., 194n6
Castello Balduino, 170
Castle Howard, 76
Catchpole, C. K., 199n27, 201n47
Catherpes mexicanus, 134
cemeteries, 84–85. See also tombs
Central African Republic, 19, 119
Central Park, 63–64
chafﬁ nches, 158–60
changes: in animal positions, 164; in the 
environment, 29, 30; in food, 22; and 
the senses, 31–32
chanting, 127, 135
Chaplin, Charlie, 106
Chapman, Frank M., 150
Chapman, H. A., 197n30
Charles, E. P., 186n8
Chase, A., 192n50
cheating, 165
Chen, W., 201n39
Cheney, D. L., 199n22
Chiarello, R., 200n35
childbirth, 20
child rearing, 18–19, 129–30
children: and animals, 164; attraction to 
leopard spots, 50–51; attraction to 
water, 163; brain growth of, 20, 46, 
56; and climbing, 15–16, 86–89; fears 
of, 16, 46, 54, 56–57; and food, 107; 
 infant- directed speech, 129–30; infan-
ticide, 19, 52; interactions with nature, 
177; and obesity, 179–80; and odors, 147; 
reaction to strangers, 29, 51, 52; and 
trees, 86–89; visual systems of, 32. See 
also boys; girls
chili peppers, 117
chimpanzees, 99, 115, 130
China, 168
Chinese gardens, 91–92
Chinese tombs, 93–94
Chlamydera nuchalis, 160, 160
Chomsky, N., 200n33
Christianity: and life after death, 94–95; 
and purity, 111
Christmas Bird Counts, 150, 151
Cigliano, J. A., 200n27
CITES, 161
Civettictis civetta, 146
classiﬁ cation of species, 153–54, 155
cliffs, 53
climate change, 154
climbing, 15–16, 73, 86–89
coastlines, 34
cockroaches, 109, 111
Cody, M. L., 188
cognition, 172–73
cognitive neurology, 168–69
coherence, 40
Collaris, R., 192n52, 192n55
collecting behavior, 152, 155–61, 178
colobus monkeys, 130
Colombia, 139
color preferences, 85
color vision, 85–86
Columbus, Christopher, 97
Comanche, 93
Commiphora, 49; C. myrrha, 97
common potoo, 137
communication:  mother- infant, 129–30; by 
pheromones, 141; in sounds of nature, 120
Conard, N. J., 198n12
conifers, 70
consonance, 135–36
Cook, M., 189n16, 193n63
Cooper- Marcus, C., 204n23
Cormack, L. K., 191n45
Cosmides, L., 187n5, 188n4, 198nn13–14, 
203n9
Cosmographie Universelle, La (Thevet), 98
Coss, R. G., 49–51, 87–89, 186nn8–9, 
186n17, 189n7, 190nn27–28, 191n30, 
195n24, 196n21
courtship, 126, 131, 158
cowbirds, 171
Cox, D. G., 202n5
crape myrtle, 49–50
Crisp, F., 194n5

212
index
Croake, J. W., 192n57
Csányi, V., 190n28
cuckoos, 171, 171
culture, 168–69
Daly, C. D., 202n17
Daly, M., 191n39
Damaio, H., 202n10
Damasio, A. R., 202n10
dancing, 126
dangers: of animals, 48–49, 50–51; of food, 
105–8, 112–13, 164; in the landscape, 
53–56; modern, 164, 178–79; of plants, 
47–48. See also fear; snakes
Dante, Divine Comedy, 95
Danto, Arthur, 86
darkness, fear of, 55
Darwin, Charles, 9, 131, 180; The Descent 
of Man, 122–23; The Expression of the 
Emotions in Man and Animals, 10–12, 11, 
52, 108–9
David, E. L., 195n31
Davis, M., 189n4
Dawkins, R., Unweaving the Rainbow, 6
DDT, 160–61
death, 93–96
decision environment, 166–68
DeLoache, J. S., 190n17
Delton, A. W., 203n2
Denali National Park, 53
Dennett, D. C., 205n26
depth perception, 31–32
Desana, 139
Descartes, René, Les Météores, 6
Descent of Man, The (Darwin), 122–23
Desimone, R., 190n26
Devore, I., 186n12
De Weerd, P., 189n8
Dhondt, A. A., 199n27
diabetes, type 2, 163, 178, 179
Diamond, Jared, 21
Diaz- Bolio, J., 189n13
Diener, E., 193n60
Dimberg, U., 175, 192n58, 204n21
Diodorus, 91
disgust: and food, 108–12; moral, 111–12; and 
natural selection, 4; at pus, 24, 48–49, 
164; at rotten ﬂ esh, 24, 48–49, 164
Dissanayake, E., 61, 129
dissonance, 135–36
Dittami, J., 200n27
Divine Comedy (Dante), 95
Dodd, G. H., 202n15
dogs, 57, 155
Dollins, J., 192n55, 192n57
Don Giovanni (Mozart), 145
Doolittle, E., 199n20
Dougherty, J. W., 205n32
Driver, B. L., 204n21
drunken monkey hypothesis, 144–45
Duchenne,  Guillaume- Benjamin- Amand, 
10, 11
Dudley, R., 144–45
Dughet, Gaspard, 81
Dunbar, R., 199nn15–16
Dunford, C., 187n10
Dwyer, P. D., 198n47
Egyptian gardens, 91
Egyptians, 47
Eisenstein, M., 197n35
Ekman, Paul, 110
elephants, 118, 144, 161, 175, 181
emotional restoration, 173–74
emotions: deﬁ ning, 7; and the environ-
ment, 4–8, 15, 171–72, 173–74, 175, 
178; and evolution, 6–7, 10, 12–13; and 
expressions, 10–12, 52; and landscape, 
36; measurement of, 12; and music, 121, 
123, 129–30, 132, 136, 138; and sounds of 
nature, 118–19; usefulness of, 9
enjoyment. See pleasure
environment: changes in, 29, 30; and cogni-
tion, 172–73; and emotions, 4–8, 15, 171–
72, 173–74, 175, 178; innate knowledge of, 
28–29, 32; manipulation of, for food, 99; 
unfamiliar, 39–41. See also landscape
environmental education, 173
environmental ghosts, 16, 20–22, 23–24, 
32, 34–36, 41, 163

213
index
environmental policies, 174–75
Eskimos, 128
Esteves, F., 189n10
ethanol, 144–45
ethnomusicology, 121–22
Evans, G. W., 203n14 (chap. 11)
evolution: and emotions, 6–7, 10, 12–13; 
and innate knowledge, 24–25; of mu-
sic, 122–25, 131–32; and reproductive 
success, 4, 18–19
evolutionary psychology, 4, 163–65, 172
Expression of the Emotions in Man and Ani-
mals, The (Darwin), 10–12, 11, 52, 108–9
expressions, 10–12, 52
eyes, 51
facial expressions, 10–12, 52
Falk, D., 200n34
fear: of animals, 57, 164; of bright lights, 
54; children’s fears, 16, 46, 54, 56–57; of 
darkness, 55; of ﬁ re, 54, 55–56; of loud 
noises, 54; of men, 52; and natural se-
lection, 4; past versus modern dangers, 
178–79; persistence of, 21; phobias, 
57–59; of pointed forms, 49–50, 164; of 
snakes, 21, 42–47, 58–59, 164, 178–79; 
of spiders, 57, 58–59; of spots, 50–51; 
of strangers, 51–52; of water, 54–55; of 
women, 52. See also dangers
Fehr, E., 7
fermentation, 143–45
Fincher, K., 197n31
Finlayson, C., 187n1 (chap. 4)
ﬁ re: fear of, 54, 55–56; in hell, 95; mastery 
of, 56, 114
ﬁ shing, 99, 100
Flaxman, S. M., 197n41
Fleurs Animées, Les (Granville), 147, 148
ﬂ owers, 104–5, 142, 151, 153, 164
Flykt, A., 189n10
fMRI. See functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI)
food: archaeological remains of, 33; 
availability of, 99, 151; change in, 22; 
and children, 107; cooking of, 113, 114; 
dangers of, 105–8, 112–13, 164; decisions 
about, 106; and disgust, 108–12; and 
domestication, 116–17; edibility of, 
106–8; and ﬂ owers, 104–5; foraging for, 
18, 19, 102; hunting of animals for, 18, 
99–103; leaf color, 103–4; manipulation 
of, 97; new, 112–14; odoriferous, 139–40, 
143–45; religious dietary restrictions, 
97; rules for, 97; sharing of, 114–16, 163; 
and social status, 114–16; for special 
occasions, 114; storage of, 156
footprints, 27
Foundation of the Metaphysics of Morals 
(Kant), 24
France, 124
Frances, C., 204n23
frankincense, 97
freeloader problem, 124
Freiden, E., 203n4
Fridlund, A. J., 191n33
frugivores, 142–45
Fuller, P., 195n26
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI), 133
fur coats, 51
gardens: collecting of plants, 157; Egyp-
tian, 91; greenhouses, 82–84; ha- has, 81; 
horticultural therapy, 176–77; imitation 
classical ruins, 81; Italian Renaissance, 
77, 170, 170; Japanese, 68–73, 69, 76, 
80–81, 91–92, 92, 153; lawn mowers, 
82–83; medieval, 67–68; Mesopota-
mian, 91; Moorish, 76, 77–79; Persian, 
75–76, 91, 176; prospect views in, 76–77; 
and social status, 170; use of borrowed 
scenery, 79–81, 80; water features in, 
75–76, 77, 79, 80, 82, 90–93; Western, 
75–76, 76–79, 81–84, 91, 153. See also 
plants; trees
Gazzola, V., 199n18
Geissmann, T., 199n26
Geist, V., 128
Gelder, M. G., 192n47
Generalife, 77–79

214
index
gerenuks, 66
Germany, 125, 158
ghosts, environmental. See environmental 
ghosts
gibbons, 130
Gibson, J. J., 28
Gilbert, A., 139–40, 202nn19–20
girls: and climbing, 15–16, 87; fears of, 16; 
and sense of smell, 139; and tree prefer-
ence, 87, 88–89. See also children; women
Gladwin, T., 202n3
Glynn, C., 199n27
Goff, S. A., 201n3
goldﬁ nches, 159
Goldthwaite, R. O., 186nn8–9, 186n17
gorillas, 99, 130
Gouk, P., 198n3
Granville, J. J., Les Fleurs Animées, 147, 148
Gray, Asa, 12
Gray, Jane, 12
green, 85–86
greenﬁ nches, 159
greenhouses, 82–84
Greenland, 140
Gross, C. G., 190n26
ground squirrels, 21
group living, 17–20
group selection, 123–24
Grove, A. T., 194n4
Gurven, M., 195n6
Guttierrez, M., 195n6
habitat selection, 34–39, 62, 67, 99
Hadza, 3, 102, 163
Hagman, E. R., 192n56
ha- has, 81
Haidt, J., 40–41, 111, 196–97nn28–29, 197n31
Hames, R., 197n44
Hamilton, D. I., 191n47, 192n57
Han Chinese, 47
Hanging Gardens of Babylon, 91
Hansen, J. L., 195n28
Hare, B., 197n38
Hartig, T., 203n14 (chap. 11)
Hartshorne, C., 201n46
Haselton, M. G., 191n44, 192n59
Hash, G. A., 197n34
Hatshepsut, Queen, 97
Haviland- Jones, J., 196n12
Hawkes, K., 195n7
heaven, 90, 93, 94, 96
Heerwagen, J. H., 73–75, 82, 186n11, 188n5, 
204n16
Heinrich, J., 165
Heisel, W. J., 192n55, 192n57
hell, 90, 93, 94–96
Hendrix, Jimi, 132
Hill, H., 197n45
Hill, K. R., 186n12, 186n15
Hinde, R. A., 191n35
Hinduism: dietary restrictions in, 97; and 
life after death, 94, 95; and purity, 111; 
and snakes, 44, 44
Hohle Fels Cave, 125
Holmes, F. B., 191n31, 192n56
honey, 1–2, 156, 162–63
honeyguides, 1–2, 162, 163
honey hunters, 1–2, 2, 3, 162, 163
Hopi, 47
Horelli, L., 187n9
Horner, T. M., 191n40
horticultural therapy, 176–77
howler monkeys, 130
Hrdy, S., 191n36
Hugdahl, K., 193nn61–62
Humphrey, N. K., 153, 188n8, 193n3
Hungers Prevention (Markham), 158
hunter- gatherers, 17–20, 26, 114–16
hunting, 18, 99–103
Huron, D., 201n43
Hurtado, A. M., 186n15
Hutus, 111, 118
Hygge, S., 193n62
Hylobates syndactylus, 130
Iceland, 139
Illustrated Guide to Maples, An (Le Hardÿ de 
Beaulieu), 104
Image of the City, The (Lynch), 40
imitation of sounds, 128–29

215
index
Indicator indicator, 1–2, 162, 163
Indonesia, 168
infant- directed speech, 129–30
infanticide, 19, 52
information ﬁ ltering, 20–21, 27–28, 30–32
information overload, 20–21
innate knowledge, 23–25, 28–29, 32, 89
International Council for Traditional 
Music, 122
Inuit, 118, 140
Irish potato famine, 106
Isbell, L. A., 44, 189n6, 189n14
Islam: dietary restrictions in, 97; and life 
after death, 94, 95; and purity, 111
Islamic art, 45
Italian Renaissance gardens, 77, 170, 170
Jackson, R. E., 191n45
Jakobson, S. K., 204n17
James, William, 9; The Varieties of Religious 
Experience, 143
Janzen, D. H., 201n6
Japan, 139
Japanese gardens, 68–73, 69, 76, 80–81, 
91–92, 92, 153
Japanese maples, 69–73, 71, 104
Japanese oaks, 69, 70
Jellinek, J. S., 202n16
Jersild, A. T., 191n31
Jo¯do- shu¯, 95
Johns, T., 196n16, 202n1
Jourdain, R., 201nn41–42
Journal of Therapeutic Horticulture, 177
Judaism: dietary restrictions in, 97; and life 
after death, 94; and purity, 111
Jungers, W. L., 186n8
Kaaja, M., 187n9
Kaberry, P. M., 198n49
Kacelnik, A., 203n4
Kahneman, D., 167, 193n60
Kakgi, R., 189n9
Kant, Immanuel, Foundation of the Meta-
physics of Morals, 24
Kaplan, H., 195n6, 197n45
Kaplan, R., 188nn7–8, 193n3
Kaplan, S., 188nn7–8, 188n11, 188n13, 193n3, 
202n4, 203n13 (chap. 11)
Kärker, A. C., 193n61
Kass, L., 195n2
Kastner, S. A., 189n8
Katcher, A., 204–5nn24–25
Katz, S. H., 197n36
Kayabi, 128
Keats, John, Lamina, 6
Keister, R. A., 201n44
Kellert, S. R., 204n16, 205n29
Kempenaers, B., 199n27
Kent, William, 81
Kenya, 1–2, 132, 162
Keresan Pueblo Indians, 167
Keysers, C., 199n18
Khusrau I, 75
Kikuyu, 132
King, N. J., 191n47, 192n57
King Solomon’s Ring (Lorenz), 39, 40
Kingsolver, J. G., 203n10 (chap. 11)
Klee, H. J., 201n3
Knetsch, J. L., 193n60
Knopf, R. C., 204n21
knowledge of other species, 150–52
Komar, V., 60, 85, 86
Konner, M., 186nn13–14
Krause, B., 128, 161, 198nn1–2
Kunej, D., 198n11
!Kung, 102
Kuo, F. E., 203nn11–12 (chap. 11)
Kurlansky, M., 197n36
Kwakiutl, 47
Kyttä, M., 187n9
Laborde chansonnier, 135
Lagerstroemia indica, 49–50
Lamina (Keats), 6
Lampe, H., 200n27
Lamphear, F. O., 194n6
landscape: art, 33, 60–62, 63, 67, 81, 86; and 
coherence, 40; dangers in the, 53–56; 
and emotions, 36; and ghosts of the 
environment, 41; habitat selection, 

216
index
34–39; and legibility, 40; and mystery, 
40; responses to images of, 40. See also 
environment
“Landscape Aesthetics” (US Forest Ser-
vice), 175
landscape design: and art, 81; cemeteries, 
85–85; parks, 63–64, 67–68; vegetation 
in, 63; water features in, 63, 67, 75–76, 
77, 79, 80, 82, 90–93. See also gardens
Lang, P. J., 189n4
language, 127–28, 169
langurs, 89, 130
Lapouse, R., 192n53
Larson, C. L., 190n21
Laughlin, W. S., 195n5
lawn mowers, 82–83
leaf color, 103–4, 164
leaf shape, 70–73, 71
learning, 23
LeDoux, J. E., 189n5
Lee, R. B., 186n12
Lee, S. A., 187n3
Lee, Y., 189n4
legibility, 40
Le Hardÿ de Beaulieu, Antoine, An Illus-
trated Guide to Maples, 104
Leisler, B., 200n27
leopards, 50–51, 89, 161, 175
Levey, D. J., 202n13
Lévi- Strauss, C., 123, 168
Li, Q., 204n20
Lieberman, D., 192n48
lightning, 54, 55
linnets, 159
lions, 175, 178
LoBue, V., 190n17
location of resources, 28, 164
Lohr, V. I., 194n21
Lomax, Alan, 122
Lord, W. B., 195n31
Lorenz, Konrad, King Solomon’s Ring, 39, 40
Lorrain, Claude, 81
loud noises, 54
Louis XIV, 76–77
Louv, R., 177
Lundberg, A., 199n27
Luttik, J., 195n30
Lynch, Kevin, The Image of the City, 40
Maasi, 126
macaques, 51, 89
Madagascar, 21
Mader, M. L, 204n16
Magellan, Ferdinand, 97
major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 
142, 147
Malina, M., 198n12
Mang, M., 203n14 (chap. 11)
Maoris, 99, 100, 126
maples, 69–73, 71, 84, 104
maps, Abauntz stone tablet, 33–34, 34, 35
Marcy, R. B., 35–36
Markham, Gervase, Hungers Prevention, 158
Marks, I. M., 191n37, 191n47
Marteau, T., 189n1
Matson, J. L., 192n55, 192n57
Maurer, A., 191n43
Mayan art, 45
Mazurski, E. J., 191n38
McCauley, C. R., 197n28
McDuff, M. D., 204n17
McGovern, P. E., 201n9
McGregor, P. K., 200n27
McNally, R. J., 193n61
mead, 162
Mech, E. V., 192n55, 192n57
medieval gardens, 67–68
Medin, D. L., 202n5
Meier, B. P., 195n27
Melamid, A., 60, 85, 86
Mellaart, J., 190n24
melody, 133–34, 134
men: and child rearing, 19; fear of, 52; 
hunting for food, 18; and infanticide, 
19, 52; and music, 132; and sense of 
smell, 139, 149. See also boys
Mendel, Gregor, 25
Merckelbach, H., 192n52, 192n55
Mesopotamia, 153
landscape (continued)

217
index
Mesopotamian gardens, 91
Météores, Les (Descartes), 6
Mexico, 143
MHC. See major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC)
mice, 142
Miller, G., 198n7, 198n10, 200n32
Miller, H., 189n12
Mineka, S., 189nn4–5, 189n16, 193n63
Miniature Fresco, Santorini, 67
Minnegal, M., 198n47
Miracinonyx, 14, 15
Mithen, S., The Singing Neanderthals, 123
Molino, J., 199n16
money experiment, 167
Monk, M. A., 192n53
monkeys, 46
Monroe, M. C., 204n17
Moore, M., 87–89
Moorish gardens, 76, 77–79
Morgan, G. A., 191n39
Mormonism, 97
morning sickness, 114
moths, 21, 120
Mount Auburn, 84–85
Mozart, Wolfang Amadeus, Don Giovanni, 
145
Münzel, S. C., 198n12
Muris, P., 192n52, 192n55
music: beneﬁ ts of, 125–27; costs of, 125–26; 
and emotions, 121, 123, 129–30, 132, 136, 
138; and environmental education, 173; 
ethnomusicology, 121–22; evolution 
of, 122–25, 131–32; and group selec-
tion, 123–24; instrumental, 124–25; 
and language, 127–28; melody, 133–34, 
134;  mother- infant communication, 
129–30; musical notation, 125; origins 
of, 121–25, 127–33; and pleasure, 
136–38, 178; rhythm, 134–36; and sexual 
selection, 122–23, 131–33; singing, 124, 
125–26, 131; and social bonding, 138; 
and sounds of nature, 119, 124, 128–29; 
 ubiquity of, 121–22; universals in, 
133–36
myrrh, 97
mystery, 40
Nabhan, G. P., 105, 187n21, 197n34
natural selection, 4, 10, 21–22, 169
nature deﬁ cit disorder, 177
Naughton- Treves, L., 190n22
Nazism, 111
Neave, N., 200n31
Nebuchadnezzar, 91
Neel, J. V., 196n22
negativity bias, 58, 167
Nehasis, Prince, 97
Nemeroff, C., 196n26
Nesse, R. M., 204n18
Netherlands, 106
Nettle, D., 192n59
New Guinea, 110
Newton, Isaac, 6
New Zealand, 99, 100, 126
Nigeria, 99
Nijssen, L. M., 201n4
Nishida, T., 197n37
Nowicki, S., 200nn29–30
nursery rhymes, 127
oaks, 69, 70
obesity, 4, 145, 162–63, 178, 179–80
O’Brien, E. M., 196n15
odor: animal, 140, 141; of ﬂ owers, 142; hu-
man, 139, 142, 145–47; odoriferous food, 
139–40, 143–45; responses to, 147–49; and 
sexual selection, 142, 147; in social inter-
actions, 147–48. See also smell, sense of
Oglala Sioux, 168
Öhman, A., 58, 189nn3–5, 189n10, 192n58, 
193n64
Okusa, T., 189n9
Oliveau, D., 189n2, 192n54
Ollendick, T. H., 191n47, 192n55, 192n57
Olmsted, Frederick Law, 63
Omishima Island, 70
orangutans, 130, 144
orchids, 161
Orians, Betty, 42, 69

218
index
Ortega y Gasset, J., 168
Osaka, N., 189n9
Osgood, C. E., 190n20
Öst, L. - G., 192n58
Oster, G. F., 201n5
Pappin, Mary, 27
parks, 63–64, 67–68
parrots, 161
patterns, tessellated. See tessellated patterns
Patterson, D. P., 195n1
Pavlov, I. P., 156–57
Payne, K., 200n28, 201n45
Payne, R., 200n28
Pearson, N. P., 196n17
Pearson- Mims, C. H., 194n21
pepper, 97, 98
Père Lachaise Cemetery, 84
perfumes, 142, 145–47, 146
Pergams, O. R. W., 205n30
Perrett, D. I., 190n26
Persian gardens, 75–76, 91, 176
Peters, C. R., 196n15
Peters, S., 200n29
pets, 175–76
pheromones, 141
Philip, K. W., 186n17
Philip II of Macedon, 67
phobias, 57–59. See also fear
phytoncides, 174
Pindar, 94
Pinker, S., 203n8
Pinus densiﬂ ora, 70, 71
Pinus nigra, 87–88
plants: dangers of, 47–48; domestication 
of, 116–17, 154; horticultural therapy, 
176–77; in landscape design, 63; leaf 
color, 103–4, 164; toxins in, 105–6. See 
also gardens; trees
Plattner, R. H., 195n29
pleasure: and classiﬁ cation of species, 
153–54, 178; and elaboration, 169–70; 
and music, 136–38, 178
Podos, J., 200n29
pointed forms, 49–50, 164
polar typology, 167–68
Polo, Marco, 75–76, 97
Poluwat Atoll, 152
Pore Land sect, 95
positron emission tomography (PET), 133
possession experiment, 167
Powers, William T., Behavior, 24
Proﬁ t, M., 114
pronghorn antelope, 13–14, 14, 15
prospect- refuge theory, 38–39, 64, 76, 82, 164
Pulliam, H. R., 187n10
purity, 111
pus, 24, 48–49, 164
Quercus, 69, 70
Quinnett, P., 195n3
Rackham, O., 194n4
rainbows, 6, 6
Ramakrishnan, U., 190n27, 195n24
rarity, 154–55
rats, 24
Raxworthy, C. J., 186n18
red- collared lorikeets, 144
red colobus monkeys, 115
Redican, W. K., 191n35
red pines, 70, 71
red- winged blackbirds, 118, 119
reed warblers, 171
Reid, Thomas, 9
Reif, P. D., 205n28
religion: and life after death, 90, 94–96; 
role of snakes in, 44, 44, 47. See also 
individual religions
reproductive success, 4, 13, 18–19, 116. See 
also sexual selection
Repton, Humphrey, 83, 84; The Art of Land-
scape Gardening, 82
revulsion. See disgust
rhinoceroses, 161, 175
rhythm, 134–36
Ricciutti, H. N., 191n39
Riesenberg, S. H., 202n2
Roberts, E. K., 191n36
Robinson, M. D., 195n27

219
index
Rolls, E. T., 190n26
Roman Catholicism, 97
Roninen, H., 186n17
Ross, N. O., 202n5
rotten ﬂ esh, 24, 48–49, 164
rotten food, 141
Royama, E. B., 193n60
Royzman, E. B., 189n5
Rozin, P., 106, 189n5, 193n60, 196n14, 
196nn23–24, 196–97nn26–28, 197n31
Ruff, S., 196n21
Rush, Benjamin, 176
Russell, J., 7
Russia, 106
Rwanda, 111
Rydell, J., 186n17
Sachs, C., 199n21, 200–201nn36–38, 201n40
Sachs, O., 134
Saetre, G. - P., 200n27
Sakuteiki, 92
Salapetek, P., 191n46, 192n51
San, 102
Sauer, J., 143
savanna hypothesis: and garden design, 
68–73, 75–76, 82, 164; and stress reduc-
tion, 174; and tree shape, 42, 64–75, 66, 
79, 86–89
savannas: challenges of, 17–18; environ-
mental ghosts from the, 34–36; honey 
hunters of, 1–2, 2, 3
Savini, Cristiano, 115
Scarr, S., 191n46, 192n51
Schank, J., 190n27
Schwarz, A. L., 195n28
Schwarz, N., 193n60
Searcy, W. A., 200n27, 200nn29–30
seasonal changes, 30
Seligman, M. E. P., 186n16
Sense and Sensibility (Austen), 62
senses, and changes, 31–32
Sento Gosho, 69
Sergent, J., 201n39
Seventh- day Adventists, 97
sexual intimacy, 13
sexual selection: and birdsong, 122–23; and 
collecting behavior, 160; and music, 
122–23, 131–33; and odor, 142, 147; and 
social status, 169–70. See also reproduc-
tive success
Seyfarth, R. M., 199n22
Sharanahua, 47
sharing, 114–16, 163, 165
Sharps, M. J., 102–3
Shebalin, Vissarion Yakovlevich, 127–28
Sherman, P. W., 197n33, 197n34, 197n41
Sherry, D. F., 202n8
Shikibu, Murasaki, The Tale of Genji, 68
Shipman, P., 186n12
Shostakovich, Dmitry, 128
siamangs, 130
Siberia, 47
silence, 120
Simms, T., 196n21
Simons, R. F., 175
singing, 124, 125–26, 131
Singing Neanderthals, The (Mithen), 123
skylarks, 159
Slater, P. J. B., 200n27, 201n47
Sleeper, B., 190n25
Slosson, E. E., 147–49
Slovenia, 125
smell, sense of, 31, 139, 141–42, 149. See also 
odor
Smith, P. K., 191n31, 191n39, 192n51, 193n65
snakes: in art, 45, 47; fear of, 21, 42–47, 
58–59, 163, 164, 178–79; role in religion, 
44, 44, 47; snake prints in fashion 
items, 44; tessellated patterns of, 
43–45, 45, 50, 164
Soares, J. J. F., 193n64
social bonding, 138
social environment, 28
social media, 174, 177
social networks, 163
social status: and collecting behavior, 158–
61; competition for, 169–70; and food, 
114–16; and sexual selection, 169–70
Society for Ethnomusicology, 122
Sociobiology (Wilson), 5

220
index
Sommer, R., 86
soundscape, 119–20
sounds of nature: birdsong, 118, 121, 
122–23, 126–27, 131, 134, 136–37, 137; for 
communication, 120; and emotions, 
118–19; and music, 119, 124, 128–29; 
and pleasure, 136–37; and survival, 
119, 120–21; territorial and alarm calls, 
130–31; vocal mimicry, 128–29
South Fore, 110
Sovrano, V. A., 187n3
Spanish dagger, 49–50
spatial ability, 24
Spelke, E. S., 187n3
spices, 97, 112–13, 117
spiders, fear of, 57, 58–59
spots, 50–51
Spring of Khosrow Carpet, 75
Staddon, J. E. R., 188n4
Standley, J. M., 198n4
Stanford, C., 197n42
starlings, 26, 166, 203n4
status. See social status
Stearns, J. J., 190n21
Stern, J. T., Jr., 186n8
Stoddard, D. M., 202n14
Strabo, 91
strangers: reaction to, 29, 29, 51–52; shar-
ing with, 165
stress reduction, 173, 174
Stross, B., 205n32
Stuart- Wortley, Emmeline Charlotte 
Elizabeth, 85
Suci, G. J., 190n20
sugar, 2–4, 108, 162–63
Summit, J., 86
sunlight, 89–90
sunrises, 55
sunsets, 55
Sussman, R. L., 186n8
Sweden, 139–40
Sylvester, D., 189n2, 192n54
Talbot, J. F., 203n13 (chap. 11)
Tale of Genji, The (Shikibu), 68
Tanaka, K., 190n26
Tannenbaum, P. H., 190n20
Tanzania, 163
Tapuya, 139
taste, sense of, 141–42
Taylor, A. F., 203nn11–12 (chap. 11)
teeth, 49–50
temple of the Vesta, 81
Terhardt, E., 199n25
tessellated patterns, 43–45, 45, 50, 164
therapy animals, 175–76
Thevet, André, La Cosmographie Univer-
selle, 98
Thiel, P., 194n12
Thomas, E. M., 199n19
Thomas, K., 197n32
Thomason, A. K., 202n7
thorns, 49–50
throwing stones, 99–100
ticks, 31
Tiger, L., 201n1
tigers, 161, 178
Tlingit, 118
Tomarken, Andrew, 46
tombs, 93–94
Tooby, J., 187n5, 188n4, 198nn13–14, 203n9
Topal, J., 190n28
totemism, 176
trees: in art, 67; and children, 86–89; 
climbing of, 16, 73, 86–89; knowledge 
of, 177; leaf shape, 70–73, 71; shape 
of, 42, 64–75, 66, 69, 79, 86–90; sym-
bolic signiﬁ cance of, 89–90. See also 
gardens; plants; and names of individual 
species
Trehub, S., 199n25
Trevarthen, C., 199n25
Treves, A., 190n22
Trobriand islands, 132
tropical savannas. See savannas
trufﬂ es, 115
Tuan, Yi- Fu, 194n7, 203n6
Tukano, 139
Turk, I., 198n11
Tutsis, 111, 118

221
index
Tversky, A., 193n60
Tyack, P., 200n28
type 2 diabetes, 163, 178, 179
Ulrich, R. S., 175, 187n19, 188n7, 204n15, 
204n19, 204nn21–22
umwelt, 31
uneven ground, 53–54, 164
Ungerleider, L. G., 189n8
universal human traits, 28, 166
Unweaving the Rainbow (Dawkins), 6
US Forest Service, “Landscape Aesthet-
ics,” 175
Utrilla, Pilar, 34
Uzgiris, I. C., 196nn20–21
vaccination, 112
Van Gelderen, D. M., 194n9
van Hoey Smith, J. R. P., 194n9
Varieties of Religious Experience, The (James), 
143
Vaux, Calvert, 63
vegetarianism, 111
Verheyen, G. R., 199n27
Versailles, 76–77
vertical illusion, 53–54, 164
Vertrees, J. D., 71
Victoria County History of Kent, 101
Villa D’Este, 77
Villa Lante, 77, 78
Villa Medici, 77
Virgil, Aeneid, 94
vision, 31
Viviani, D., 189n4
vocal mimicry, 128–29
von Uexküll, J., 31
Walker, A., 186n12
Walker, T. D., 194n6
walking upright, 18
Ward, Nathaniel Bagshaw, 83–84
warfare, 19
Washington, George, 61
Wasserman, F. E., 200n27
water: and children, 163; fear of, 54–55; in 
landscape design, 63, 67, 75–76, 77, 79, 
80, 82, 90–93; and real estate prices, 
92–93
waterfalls, 53, 54–55
weapons, 99–100
Webb, Steve, 27
Wedekind, C., 142
Weiner, A., 198n47
Western gardens, 75–76, 76–79, 81–84, 
91, 153
whales, 118, 121, 131, 136–37
White, B. L., 192n50
White, J., 189n15
White, R. S., 202n17
Wilkins, G., 204n25
Williams, G. C., 23, 204n18
Wills, T. J., 187n2 (chap. 3)
Wilson, E. O., 177, 180, 187n19, 201n5; 
Sociobiology, 5
Wilson, M., 191n39
Wobber, V., 197n38
Wolfe, A., 190n25
women: and childbirth, 20; and child 
rearing, 18–19; and climbing, 15–16, 87; 
fear of, 52; foraging for food by, 18, 19; 
hunting by, 103; and location of food, 
164; and music, 132; sense of smell of, 
139, 149. See also girls
World War II, 106
Wrangham, R., 197nn37–39
Wulf, A., 196n11, 203n11 (chap. 10)
Wundt, Wilhelm, 9
Yasukawa, K., 200n27
Young, M., 198n48
Young, R. W., 195n4
Yucca gloriosa, 49–50
Zajonc, Robert, 37
Zaradic, P. A., 205n30
Zegans, L. S., 191n42
Zegans, S., 191n42
Zimbabwe, 1, 2

