SPATIAL COGNITION AND COMPUTATION, 4: 1 (March 2004), 69–103
Copyright © 2004, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to: Pierre Grenon, 
IFOMIS, University of Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16, 04107 Leipzig, Germany; 
pgrenon@ifomis.uni-leipzig.de. 
SNAP and SPAN: 
Towards Dynamic Spatial Ontology 
 
Pierre Grenon and Barry Smith   
Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science, 
University of Leipzig   
Department of Philosophy, University at Buffalo 
 
 
We propose a modular ontology of the dynamic features of reality. This 
amounts, on the one hand, to a purely spatial ontology supporting snapshot 
views of the world at successive instants of time and, on the other hand, to 
a purely spatiotemporal ontology of change and process. We argue that 
dynamic spatial ontology must combine these two distinct types of inven-
tory of the entities and relationships in reality, and we provide characteri-
zations of spatiotemporal reasoning in the light of the interconnections 
between them. 
 
Keywords: Ontology, Processes, Objects vs. Fields, Spatial Reasoning, 
Dynamic GIS. 
 
Reality is essentially dynamic. Faced with this fact, two alternative views may 
be distinguished, which have traditionally been perceived as incompatible. On 
the one hand are views which take the dichotomy between space and time 
ontologically seriously. On the other hand are views which see reality in terms 
of a single unified ontological theory of the spatiotemporal. These two views 
correspond to two different sorts of spatiotemporal reasoning. The former deals 
with successions of instantaneous snapshots of the world, the latter with changes 
and processes as such.  
 
We here outline a theory that is designed to do justice to what is of value in 
both of these approaches. Our position is that a good ontology must be capable 

138 Grenon, Smith  
of accounting for spatial reality both synchronically (as it exists at a time) and 
diachronically (as it unfolds through time), but that these are two different tasks. 
Our approach thus rests on what might be described as a joint venture between 
the so-called three-dimensionalist and four-dimensionalist perspectives current 
in contemporary philosophical ontology. 
 
The paper is structured as follow. We lay out the methodological and phi-
losophical foundations of our approach and we present the main elements of its 
formalization. Our two main ontological theories, namely SNAP and SPAN, are 
presented in sections 3 and 4, and section 5 discusses the structures which link 
them together. Finally we apply our framework to the domain of geography, 
culminating in the outline of an ontologically well-founded and comprehensive 
dynamic geospatial ontology.  
1  Philosophical Background 
Ontology concerns itself with the question of what there is. Briefly, it purports 
to produce an account of the token entities existing in the world, of the types or 
categories under which these token entities fall, and of the different sorts of 
relations which hold between them.  
 
This philosophical task of working out the types and relationships among 
entities must of course at some point join up with the work of scientists. The full 
task of ontology is then a matter of going back and forth between the formula-
tion of philosophical theories and the testing of such theories against what we 
know about reality from the work of scientists.  
 
Ontology produces theories about the world formalized in some logical 
language. The virtue of formalization is first of all that of enforcing a certain 
degree of clarity. Another virtue is that it makes theories readily accessible, 
evaluable, and re-usable by other communities of researchers. Additionally, 
formalization makes it possible for us to exploit some of the power of logic 
when using ontologies in reasoning systems. In this paper, we provide the basic 
framework for a complete axiomatized theory of our modular ontology.  
 
Our methodology, defended in (Smith, 2003) and (Grenon, 2003a), is realist, 
perspectivalist, fallibilist, and adequatist. Realism asserts that reality and its 
constituents exist independently of our (linguistic, conceptual, theoretical, 
cultural) representations thereof. Perspectivalism maintains that there may be 
alternative, equally legitimate perspectives on reality. But perspectivalism is 
constrained by realism: thus it does not amount to the thesis that just any view of 
reality is legitimate. To establish which views are legitimate we must weigh 
them against their ability to survive critical tests when confronted with reality, 
for example via scientific experiments. Those perspectives which survive are 
deemed to be transparent to reality. This is however in a way that is always 
subject to further correction. It is a fact that sciences change with time, and that 
thus all assertions must be understood against the background of fallibilism, 
which accepts that both theories and classifications can be subject to revision. 

 
SNAP and SPAN 139 
Adequatism, finally, is opposed to reductionism in philosophy. The reductionist 
affirms that, among the plurality of alternative views of reality there is some 
one, basic view to which all the others ought to be reduced. We, in contrast, 
affirm that there are many views of reality which are equally veridical. These are 
views of entities in different domains or of entities as seen from different per-
spectives, or they are views of what exists on different levels of granularity 
(microscopic, mesoscopic, geographic). Adequatism is the doctrine that a 
plurality of such views is needed if we are to do justice to reality as a whole. 
Basic Formal Ontology  
It was Husserl in his Logical Investigations (1913/21) who first drew a clear 
distinction between two kinds of ontological inquiry. On the one hand is what he 
called formal ontology, which is a theory at the highest and most domain-neutral 
level. Formal ontology deals with the categories and relations which appear in 
all domains and which are in principle applicable to reality under any perspec-
tive (with some possible additions or subtractions in specific domains or levels). 
Examples of such categories and relations include: object, relation, group, 
number, part-of, identical-to. On the other hand are what Husserl called material 
or regional ontologies, which are the ontologies of specific domains. There are 
as many ontologies in this sense as there are subject matters or domains of 
inquiry. Examples of such domains were for Husserl the domain of space, time 
and physical things; the domain of organisms; the domain of mind; and the 
domain of societies.  
 
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) is a theory of the basic structures of reality 
currently being developed at the Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical 
Information Science (IFOMIS) in the University of Leipzig. BFO is a formal 
ontology in the sense of Husserl and its construction follows the methodological 
maxims presented above. The enterprise of building BFO is thus motivated on 
the one hand by the desire to be faithful to reality, and on the other hand by the 
need to accept a multiplicity of perspectives upon reality which may be skew to 
each other. IFOMIS and its associates are developing a series of material or 
regional ontologies, including: MedO (for Medical Ontology), GeO (for Geo-
graphical Ontology), and DisReO (for Disaster Relief Ontology). BFO is de-
signed to serve as a reusable template, which can (with some modifications) be 
used in constructing material ontologies for any and all domains of entities.  
 
Temporal Modes of Being  
The central dichotomy among the perspectives represented in BFO concerns the 
modes of existence in time of the entities populating the world. BFO endorses 
first of all a view according to which there are entities that have continuous 
existence and a capacity to endure (persist self-identically) through time even 
while undergoing different sorts of changes. We will henceforth use the terms 
‘continuant’ and ‘endurant’ interchangeably for such entities. These entities 
come in several kinds. Examples are: you, the planet Earth, a piece of rock; but 

140 Grenon, Smith  
also: your suntan, a rabbit-hole, Leeds. All of these entities exist in full in any 
instant of time at which they exist at all and they preserve their identity over 
time through a variety of different sorts of changes. You are the same person 
today as you were yesterday.  
 
In addition, however, BFO endorses a view according to which the world 
contains occurrents, more familiarly referred to as processes, events, activities, 
changes. Occurrents include: your smiling, her walking, the landing of an 
aircraft, the passage of a rainstorm over a forest, the rotting of fallen leaves. 
These entities are four-dimensional. They occur in time and they unfold them-
selves through a period of time.  
 
Occurrents are all bound in time in the way described by Zemach (1970). This 
means that each portion of the time during which an occurrent occurs can be 
associated with a corresponding temporal portion of the occurrent. This is 
because occurrents exist only in their successive temporal parts or phases. Some 
occurrents – for example beginnings and endings (the initial and terminal 
boundaries of processes) – are instantaneous.  
 
The term perdurant is more precisely used for those occurrents which persist 
(perdure) in time, in other words for those which are extended and not instanta-
neous. For more concerning these notions see (Lowe, 1998; Sider, 2001).  
 
Following (Ingarden, 1964), we shall reserve the term ‘process’ for tempo-
rally extended occurrents. The beginnings and endings of processes and the 
crossings of transition thresholds within processes – all entities which exhaust 
themselves in single instants of time – we shall call ‘events’.  
 
Spatiotemporal Ontologies in BFO  
Continuants and occurrents exist in time in different ways. The challenge is to 
build a unified framework within which we can do justice to both of these 
modes of being equally. This framework needs to keep the two corresponding 
groups of entities clearly separate, since no single inventory can embrace them 
both. At the same time however we have to find a way of bringing them to-
gether: continuants are themselves subject to constant change; occurrents de-
pend on continuant objects as their bearers. In particular, there is an important 
correspondence between continuants and those special types of occurrents which 
are their lives.  
 
Here again we draw on an intuition of Zemach (1970) to the effect that 
distinct modes of being generate distinct ontologies. The difference in mode of 
being of continuants and occurrents corresponds to an opposition between two 
different ways of existing in time. Accordingly, we distinguish two main kinds 
of ontologies, called SNAP and SPAN, one for continuants, the other for occur-
rents. Relations between continuants and occurrents are thus trans-ontological – 
they transcend the SNAP-SPAN divide. The resulting framework is a combina-
tion, in the spirit of adequatism, of a three-dimensionalist and a four-
dimensionalist perspective, positions which are normally seen as representing 
mutually incompatible views of reality.  

 
SNAP and SPAN 141 
 
A reductionist four-dimensionalist asserts that it is possible to translate all 
talk about three-dimensional entities into talk which refers exclusively to proc-
esses. She holds that we can eliminate continuants in favour of four-dimensional 
spatiotemporal worms. Thus she will accept just the SPAN part of our present 
framework. A reductionist three-dimensionalist, in contrast, asserts that it is 
possible to describe the whole of reality by referring exclusively to endurant 
entities. She can take advantage, accordingly, only of the SNAP part of our 
framework. Here, however, we shall insist that, if we want to do justice to the 
whole of reality in non-reductionistic fashion, then we need both types of 
component. We need SNAP to do justice to the world of three-dimensional 
bodies, as also to the spatial regions at which they are located as well as to the 
qualities, powers, functions, roles and other entities which exist self-identically 
from one moment to the next. We need SPAN to do justice to the processes in 
which such enduring entities are involved and to the spatiotemporal volumes 
within which such processes occur.  
 
Granularity and Ontological Zooming  
Reality can be carved up ontologically in many different ways. A rock can be 
apprehended as an object in its own right, or as a structured group of molecules. 
Each material application of BFO is restricted to some given level of granular-
ity, and each such granular ontology will respect BFO’s two-component SNAP-
SPAN structure. Here we understand levels of granularity as roughly equivalent 
to levels of details (Hornsby, 2001; Hornsby and Egenhofer, 2002). In practice, 
granularity often reflects the specific ways of carving up domains of reality we 
associate with different scientific theories. Where issues of granularity arise in 
what follows we shall assume as underlying framework the theory of granular 
partitions presented in (Bittner and Smith, 2002).  
 
Taxonomies of SNAP and SPAN  
It might be useful to give a schematic representation of the taxonomies of 
SNAP. These will serve here the purpose of representing the subsumption 
relations among top-level categories (for lack of place, we will not give axioms).  
 
 
SNAP 
Entities 
Substantial 
entities 
SNAP 
dependent 
entities 
Spatial regions 
Substances 
Fiat Parts 
Aggregates 
of substances
Boundaries 
Sites 
Niches, 
Places, 
etc. 
Qualities 
Roles,  
Functions, 
etc.
Points 
Lines,  
Surfaces,
Volumes
 
Figure 1. The main formal categories of SNAP entities.  
 

142 Grenon, Smith  
 
SPAN 
entities 
Processual 
entities 
Temporal
regions
Spatiotemporal 
regions 
Processes 
Fiat parts 
Aggregates 
Instantaneous 
temporal 
boundaries 
Connected 
Scattered
Settings 
Events 
Intervals
Instants 
Scattered 
Connected 
Figure 2. Taxonomy of SPAN entities.  
 
In figures 1 and 2, the italicized items stand for categories which are both 
dissective and cumulative. Items picked out in bold are categories of basic 
entities. These notions will be defined in 2.2. Meanwhile, figure 3 provides a list 
of primitive relations used in the sequel and indicates their signatures.  
 
Constituent: Entity x Ontology 
TemporalIndex: Ontology x TimeRegion 
Part: Entity x Entity 
InheresIn: SnapDependent x Substantial 
SpatialLocation:  
SnapEntity x SpaceRegion 
TemporalLocation:  
SpanEntity x TimeRegion 
TemporalLocation:  
SpanEntity x SpacetimeRegion  
Exists-At: SnapEntity x TimeInstant 
ParticipatesIn: Substantial x Processual 
Figure 3. Primitive relations and their signatures.  
2  Formal Framework for BFO  
Given the two-ontology structure of BFO, we need some framework within 
which to express the SNAP and SPAN perspectives and to represent their 
interconnections. Our framework draws on ideas introduced in (Grenon, 2003b; 
2003c). The basic idea is that the variables of the theory range over both entities 
and the ontologies they recognize. Entities and ontologies are not however on a 
par. Entities are in the world of what happens and is the case. Ontologies are 
analogous to mathematical structures such as groups and vector spaces. They 
can be understood as ways in which reality and the entities in reality are organ-
ized or structured. 
 
We use a first-order language for our formalization, employing the following 
symbols: ~ for negation, ∧ for conjunction, ∨ for disjunction, → for material 
implication, ↔ for material equivalence, ∃ and ∀ for the existential and univer-
sal quantifiers. x, y, z, … are variables ranging over spatio-temporally existing 
entities (continuants, occurrents, spatial, temporal and spatiotemporal regions of 
various kinds, and material universals), and a, b, c are constants denoting such 
entities. ω, ω′, ω′′, … are variables ranging over ontologies, and α, β, γ, … are 

 
SNAP and SPAN 143 
constants denoting ontologies. Despite appearances, we are not using a sorted 
logic; entities and ontologies form one single domain, and it is only for the 
purposes of making the formulae more readable that we use different kinds of 
variables. We introduce special constants denoting certain designated entities, 
including, space, time, earth, mountain, lake. Functor symbols include: spatial-
location, surface, life, etc.  
 
All symbols for predicates in what follows have initial capital letters, and all 
predicates correspond to formal categories and relations. We use monadic 
predicates (Substance, SpatialRegion, Entity) to express membership in formal 
categories. We use polyadic predicates such as Identity, Part and Instantiation 
exclusively in order to capture formal relations. 
 
We assume all the tautologies and the standard rules of inference of classical 
first-order logic. ‘A’ next to a number indicates that the formula is an axiom, ‘D’ 
that it is a definition, ‘T’ that it is a theorem. Throughout this paper unbound 
variables are assumed to be within the scope of universal quantifiers.  
2.1  Entities and Ontologies  
Everything which exists in the spatio-temporal world is an entity. ‘Entity(x)’ 
stands for: ‘x exists in the spatio-temporal world’.  
 
An ontology is captured by depiction of the entities which exist within a given 
portion of the world at a given level of generality. It includes a taxonomy of the 
types of entities and relations which exist in the world under a given perspective. 
‘Ω(α)’ stands for: ‘α is an ontology’.  
 
A constituent of an ontology α is an entity whose existence is recognized by 
α. ‘Constituent(x, α)’ stands for: ‘x is a constituent of α ’.  
 
Here are a few of the basic axioms constraining these notions:  
(A1) 
~ (Ω(ω) ∧ Entity(x) ∧ ω = x) 
(A2) 
Ω(ω) → ∃x (Entity(x) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) 
(A3) 
Entity(x) → ∃ω (Ω(ω) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) 
A1 enforces the separation between entities and ontologies. By A2, any ontol-
ogy has at least one constituent. By A3, any entity is a constituent of some 
ontology. 
 
Ontologies and Ontology Forms  
Each depiction of the world is such that the entities depicted fall under certain 
formal categories such as Quality or SpatialRegion. The latter are related to-
gether in a specific way, which we call an ontology form. Each ontology instan-
tiates a certain ontology form. So far we have distinguished two ontology forms, 
of SNAP and SPAN, respectively. Different SNAP and SPAN ontologies can be 
indexed in various ways, reflecting the different sorts of perspectives to which 
they correspond. Each SNAP ontology is indexed by a single time instant; each 
SPAN ontology by a single time interval. The default time-index for SPAN 

144 Grenon, Smith  
ontologies is the whole of time.  We write ‘TemporalIndex(α, t)’ for: ‘t is the 
temporal index of the ontology α’, TimeRegion is the predicate applying to 
regions of time of arbitrary length, including temporal instants. We then have:  
(A4) 
TemporalIndex(α, t) ∧ TemporalIndex(α, t')  → t = t' 
 
Both SNAP and SPAN ontologies are indexed also by domain and by level of 
granularity. The default SNAP domain is: everything, the universe in its entirety 
and its parts, i.e., all continuants existing at some given instant of time. The 
default SPAN domain is the history of the universe in its entirety. All SNAP 
ontologies instantiate the same ontology form, though they differ in the material 
they recognize and in the perspectives they are associated with. A SNAP ontol-
ogy of the zoological domain with index now would contain no entity instantiat-
ing the material universal dinosaur.  
 
Material Universals  
Material universals correspond to the real invariants or patterns in the world 
apprehended by the material sciences. They are the ontological foundation for 
typing, classifying or sorting entities. They are not concepts but rather entities in 
the world to which our material concepts (when they are transparent) corre-
spond. Material universals are multiply instantiated: they exist in toto at differ-
ent places and different times in the different particulars which instantiate them 
(Smith, 1997; Grenon and Johansson, 2003). For instance, the material universal 
mountain is instantiated by Mont Blanc in France and by Grossglockner in 
Austria. The two mountains are numerically distinct entities, but it is the very 
same universal which exists in these two different places. The relation between 
universals and particulars is one of instantiation. ‘Instantiation(a, u)’ stands for: 
‘particular a is an instance of the material universal u’.  
 
Given any material universal u we can form a constructed pseudo-predicate U 
such that an entity falls under U if and only if it is an instance of u. Formally, we 
write:  
 
 
 
 
 
U(x) ≡def Instantiation(x, u).  
 
We refer to material universals by means of terms such as ‘mountain’, ‘lake’, 
and so on. While it is common in formalized theories to allow the unrestricted 
definition of ever more complex predicates via Boolean composition, we claim 
that the realm of universals is not structured in this Boolean fashion. There may 
be mountains and there may be oceans, but there is no universal mountain-or-
ocean. We thus accept a sparse theory of universals, a theory of the type em-
braced by realist ontologists from Aristotle to Armstrong (1978) and Lewis 
(1983), who hold that the question as to which universals exist in reality is a 
matter for scientists − not for ontologists, logicians or linguists − to determine.  
 
Taxonomies of Universals in BFO  
Each SNAP or SPAN ontology may be understood as opening a window on a 
certain portion of the world. We can look through this window in a way which 

SNAP and SPAN
145 
selects particulars or in a way which selects universals. Thus each SNAP and 
SPAN ontology is an ontology of particulars, but it is also, when we change our 
direction of focus, an ontology of the universals which such particulars instanti-
ate. The Foundational Model of Anatomy talks in this connection of an opposi-
tion between canonical and instantiated anatomy (Rosse and Mejino, 2003). 
 
A taxonomy is a tree, organized into nodes of greater and lesser generality, 
these nodes correspond to material universals. We use the terms ‘genus’ and 
‘species’ to refer informally to universals at higher and lower positions within 
such trees. A geological taxonomy recognizes the genus rock and the species 
igneous rock, metamorphic rock, sedimentary rock. Each of the latter is an 
immediate sub-species of the single genus rock. The species on any given level 
are pairwise disjoint (no rock falls under more than one of these species). In 
addition, species jointly exhaust their genus (each rock falls under one of these 
species). When all species meet these requirements the taxonomy is a partition-
ing tree. To see how the phenomenon of vagueness can be dealt with in this 
context see (Bittner and Smith, 2002).  
2.2  Mereology  
Mereology, the theory of the part-whole relationship, will be our basic tool for 
understanding the domains of SNAP and SPAN ontologies (Simons, 1987). 
‘Part(a, b)’ stands for ‘a is a (proper or improper) part of b’. The parthood 
relation is reflexive (A5), transitive (A6), and antisymmetric (A7). ProperPart is 
the irreflexive form of parthood (D8). Overlap obtains when two entities have a 
part in common (D9). The ternary relation Sum defined in (D10) obtains when 
the first relata is the sum of the two other relata. The sum of two entities, when it 
exists, is the smallest entity which overlaps anything which overlaps either 
entity.  
(A5) 
Part(x, x)  
(A6) 
(Part(x, y) ∧ Part(y, z)) → Part(x, z)  
(A7) 
(Part(x, y) ∧ Part(y, x)) → x = y 
(D8) 
ProperPart(x, y) ≡def Part(x, y) ∧ x ≠ y  
(D9) 
Overlap(x, y) ≡def ∃z (Part(z, x) ∧ Part(z, y))  
(D10)    Sum(z, x, y) ≡def ∀w ((Overlap(w, x) ∨ Overlap(w, y)) ↔ Overlap(w, z)) 
∧ ∀z' ∀w (((Overlap(w, x) ∨ Overlap(w, y)) ↔ Overlap(w, z')) → z = z') 
We do not assert a general  existential axiom for sums because we want to 
postulate sums of entities within particular categories only, namely, within those 
of substances, SNAP dependent entities, processes, and spatial, temporal, and 
spatiotemporal regions. Our full formal theory will contain axioms for each of 
these categories similar to this one for substances:  
(A11) 
(Substance(x) ∧ Substance(y) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)  
∧ Constituent(y, ω)) → ∃z (Constituent(z, ω) ∧ Sum(z, x, y)  

146 Grenon, Smith  
Thus for any two substances in an ontology, there is a constituent of this ontol-
ogy which is their sum. 
 
Using the schematic letter ‘P’ as a stand-in for a given (possibly constructed) 
predicate, we give the following definitions (adapted from Simons, 1987): 
(D12) 
P is dissective when all parts of any instances of P also fall under P:  
(P(x) ∧ Part(y, x)) → P(y) .  
(D13) 
P is cumulative when the sum of any two instances of P also falls 
under P:  
(Sum(z, x, y) ∧ P(x) ∧ P(y)) → P(z) . 
The predicate corresponding to the universal cup is neither dissective (a part of a 
cup is generally not a cup) nor cumulative (the sum of two cups is not a cup). 
However, the predicate corresponding to water is both, though its dissectivity 
holds only down to parts of a certain level of granularity. Entity is dissective. 
(For lack of place, we will not write these claims formally, but they ought to be 
seen as axioms instantiating the axiom schemas D12-13.) 
 
Mereology and Universals  
For each material domain, each level of granularity, and each perspective, we 
can distinguish a number of basic universals whose instances are the basic 
building blocks of reality as captured by the corresponding SNAP and SPAN 
ontologies. Generally, these universals – for example molecule, cell, organism, 
city, nation – will be neither cumulative nor dissective. Instances of basic 
universals we call basic entities. In addition to the basic entities, there are also 
aggregates, fiat parts (Smith, 2001b), and boundaries of basic entities. You are a 
basic entity in the SNAP ontology of common sense; your digestive system is, 
within this ontology, a fiat part (of you). You and your hat are basic entities, the 
sum of you and your hat is an aggregate. The categories of aggregate, fiat part, 
and boundary are formal categories which appear in an ontology as soon as the 
basic entities themselves are recognized. However, aggregates, fiat parts, and 
boundaries are not themselves extra entities; rather they reflect merely different 
possibilities of slicing up a given domain on a given level of granularity.  
2.3  Formal Relations  
Our framework comprehends a number of different types of formal relations. 
Here we shall focus on binary relations, but the treatment can be extended to 
relations of higher arity. The most important types of relations are:  
 
(i) Intra-ontological. A relation between constituents of a single ontology is 
called intra-ontological. An example is the relation of part to whole between 
entities of a single granularity. An object is never part of a process, a process is 
never part of an object. Since in BFO there are two main types of ontology, 
SNAP and SPAN, there are also two main types of intra-ontological relations.  
 
(ii) Trans-ontological. A relation between entities that are constituents of 
distinct ontologies is called trans-ontological. Consider the relation of participa-

 
SNAP and SPAN 147 
tion between an object and a process (as when an army participates in manoeu-
vres). We distinguish four main types of binary trans-ontological relations, 
having signatures: (SNAP, SPAN), (SNAP, SNAP), (SPAN, SNAP), and 
(SPAN, SPAN), respectively.  
 
(iii) Meta-ontological. A relation that obtains between ontologies or between 
an ontology and an entity is called meta-ontological. Examples are the relation 
of constituency introduced above or the relations of temporal order between 
ontologies of different temporal indices.  
 
Ontological Indices of Relations.  
Entities recognized by distinct ontologies may be differently related in each. In 
one ontology, for example, the relation of being on between the cup and the desk 
is recognized, in another it is not.  
 
When a relation R obtains between entities a and b in a single ontology α, we 
write ‘R(a, b, α)’. In the case of trans-ontological relations, there might be as 
many ontologies mentioned as there are relata. We then write for example ‘R(a, 
α, b, β )’ for: ‘R obtains between a in α and b in β ’. We then assume the follo-
wing constraints:  
 
 
 
 
 
R(x, y,ω) → (Constituent(x,ω) ∧ Constituent(y,ω))  
 
 
 
 
 
R(x,ω, y,ω ′) → (Constituent(x,ω) ∧ Constituent(y,ω ′))  
In practice, when the context is clear we shall omit ontological indices.  
3  SNAP  
A SNAP ontology is formed through the depiction of enduring entities existing 
at a given time (in a given domain at a given level of granularity). Such an 
ontology is analogous to a snapshot, or to the results of a process of sampling. 
Constituents of SNAP ontologies (SnapΩ) are SNAP entities. The predicate 
SnapEntity is both dissective and cumulative (parts and sums of SNAP entities 
are SNAP entities themselves). Each SNAP ontology is indexed to some specific 
instant of time (for which we shall use the predicate TimeInstant):  
(A14) 
(TemporalIndex(ω, x) ∧ SnapΩ(ω)) → TimeInstant(x) 
 
A SNAP ontology recognizes only enduring entities existing at the time of its 
index, entities which typically have existed already for some time in the past and 
will go on existing in the future. SNAP entities are in other words not instanta-
neous entities, and nor are they sums of instantaneous slices. Rather, we assume 
a variant of the philosophical doctrine of presentism propounded by (Brentano, 
1976) and (Chisholm, 1989), which holds that all entities which exist exist at the 
present time. Each SNAP ontology is a presentist ontology relative to some 
specific instant. BFO’s ability to handle a multiplicity of SNAP ontologies with 
different indices means however that it is not presentist in the narrow sense.  

148 Grenon, Smith  
 
Being a constituent of a SNAP ontology amounts to existing (as a continuant) 
at the time of the ontology’s index. ‘ExistsAt(a, t)’ stands for: ‘the SNAP entity 
a exists at instant t’.  
(D15) 
ExistsAt(x, t) ≡def ∃ω (SnapΩ(ω) ∧ TemporalIndex(ω, t)  
∧ Constituent(x, ω))  
 
Enduring entities exist continuously during extended periods of time even 
while undergoing certain sorts of changes (for instance, changes of temperature 
or mass or height). We may thus speak about existence during a period of time 
by integrating across the instants of time in which endurants are captured by 
corresponding SNAP ontologies. We define ExistsDuring as follows:  
(D16) 
ExistsDuring(x, y) ≡def TimeRegion(y)  
∧ ∀z ((TimeInstant(z) ∧ ProperPart(z, y)) → ExistsAt(x, z))  
3.1  Spatial Regions  
Reasoning within a single SNAP ontology is prototypically (but not exclusively) 
a form of spatial reasoning. We embrace a so-called absolutist view of space, 
sometimes called a container view, which holds that spatial regions are entities 
in their own rights. Moreover, they are endurants of such a sort that other SNAP 
entities can be located at or in them. (The phenomenon of vacuum shows that 
some regions need not have any entity located at or in them.) There is one 
distinguished spatial region, namely space or the entire spatial universe (the 
maximal spatial region). All spatial regions are parts of space. Thus we may 
define the predicate SpatialRegion as follows: 
(D17) 
SpatialRegion(x) ≡def Part(x, space)  
SpatialRegion is trivially dissective and cumulative.  
 
We may study space both topologically and geometrically. In addition, space 
supports a rich variety of qualitative reasoning. Thus, we may extend the taxon-
omy of spatial regions in a variety of ways, for example by reference to qualita-
tive topological categories such as self-connected, convex, holed, and so on. The 
mereotopology of spatial regions also gives us the resources to speak about the 
relations of connectedness and separation between spatial regions, fiat bounda-
ries, dimensionality, and other related notions (Cohn, Bennett, Gooday, and 
Gotts, 1997; Smith, 1997; Smith and Varzi, 2000; Cohn and Hazarika, 2001a; 
Galton, 2001; Cohn and Varzi, 2003). 
 
Spatial regions can serve as locations for SNAP entities. To this end, we 
introduce a new primitive relation of spatial location, symbolized: ‘SpatialLoca-
tion’ (it corresponds to the notion of exact location in (Casati and Varzi, 1996)).  
(A18) 
(SnapEntity(x) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) → ∃y SpatialLocation (x, y, ω) 
(A19) 
(SpatialLocation(x, y, ω) ∧ SpatialLocation(x, y′, ω)) → y = y′ 
SpatialLocation is a functional predicate. We can denote the spatial location of 
an entity a in an ontology ω via the expression ‘spatial-location(a, ω)’.  

 
SNAP and SPAN 149 
(D20) 
(spatial-location(x, ω) = y) ≡def SpatialLocation(x, y, ω) 
3.2  Substantial Entities  
The category of substantial entities is a non-basic formal category comprehend-
ing the categories of: substances, their fiat parts, boundaries, aggregates, and 
sites. It is the generalization of the category of substances which results from the 
relaxation of the mereotopological constraints of boundedness and connected-
ness. The predicate Substantial is both dissective and cumulative.  
 
Substances are maximal connected substantial entities. They are those sub-
stantial entities which enjoy a certain rounded-offness or natural completeness. 
In addition to material objects such as cups, rocks, and planets, organisms are 
the prototypical examples of substances. We treat substances in BFO along the 
lines presented in (Smith, 1997). Substances have the following principal 
features (these are all necessary conditions for being a substance; their conjunc-
tion comes close to forming a sufficient condition): 
(i)  Substances do not depend for their continued existence upon other entities. 
(ii)  Substances are the bearers of qualities and are subject to qualitative 
change. 
(iii)  Substances are enduring entities: they preserve their identity over time and 
through changes of various sorts. 
(iv)  Substances have a location in space. 
(v)  Substances are self-connected wholes with bona fide boundaries (Smith 
and Varzi, 2000; Smith and Brogaard, 2003).  
 
The predicate Substance is neither dissective nor cumulative. On any given 
level of granularity, the parts and aggregates of substances are not themselves 
substances. Note well that the term ‘substance’ is thus used here as a count 
noun, in keeping with the philosophical tradition stretching back to Aristotle. In 
ordinary English the term ‘substance’ has of course a mass sense, the full 
treatment of which is here however left to one side as it involves issues of 
granularity.  
 
Fiat parts are discussed in (Smith 1995; Smith and Varzi, 2000; Smith 
2001b). It is possible to carve out zero-, one-, two- and three-dimensional fiat 
parts of the Earth, as when the North Pole or the Equator are demarcated, when 
a parcel of land is demarcated on a cadastral map, or when a certain volume 
beneath the Earth’s surface is demarcated for purposes of mining exploration.  
 
Boundaries are lower-dimensional parts of spatial entities (Smith, 1997; 
Smith and Varzi, 2000). The boundary of the Earth is a closed two-dimensional 
surface.  
 
Aggregates of substances are mereological sums comprehending separate 
substances as parts. In contradistinction to substances, aggregates may be 
scattered and thus have non-connected boundaries. Aggregates on one level of 
granularity (for example a collection of soldiers) may correspond to substances 
(for example an infantry battalion) on another level of granularity.  

150 Grenon, Smith  
 
Sites are for example a room in a house, or a landing strip, or the interior of 
an airline cockpit. The corner of a room is a site, as also is your alimentary tract. 
Many sites are holes, cavities or similar entities dependent on physical hosts 
(Casati and Varzi, 1994). Some sites, for example the Reichstag in Berlin, are 
formed by sums of holes and cavities together with the substantial entities which 
surround or bound them. The addresses where people live and work are labels 
not of spatial regions but rather of the sites which they characteristically occupy. 
Sites sometimes act as surrounding spaces for other entities (Smith and Varzi, 
2002). They are generally filled by a medium such as air or water. The medium 
is then itself one of the parts of the site.  
 
As substances are located in space (at spatial regions), so also are the sites 
associated with them. But substantial entities also occupy sites or parts of sites., 
so that we have a three-term relation between substantial entities, sites and 
spatial regions. Occupies itself is a two-term relation between a substantial 
entity and a site. It is definable in terms of the notions of location and internal 
part (Smith and Varzi, 1999). For present purposes it is sufficient to point that in 
any ontology in which a case of the occupies relation obtains, i) the substantial 
entity and site which are joined by this relation do not overlap and neither do 
their respective locations; ii) the substantial entity’s location is an internal part 
of the location of the sum of this entity with the site which it occupies. 
 
SNAP can thus do justice to a certain feature of the relational approach to 
space − in which spatiality is essentially conceived in term of system of relations 
between objects (Galton, 2001). Sites will call for a mereotopology in which 
both fiat and bona fide boundaries play an important role, and also the ability to 
deal with the surfaces of substances (Stroll, 1988; Casati and Varzi, 1994).  
 
We can consider more specific kinds of sites:  
 
(a) Boundary-Free and Physically Bounded Sites: Sites are typically com-
pounds of rigid surroundings and fluid medium. Some sites, for instance air 
traffic corridors, are defined exclusively in terms of fiat boundaries. Sites whose 
boundaries are partly or wholly solid we call ‘physically bounded’; others we 
call ‘boundary-free’. Your office, when the door and windows are closed, is a 
wholly physically bounded site. Your nostril is a partly physically bounded site. 
The determination of boundaries of sites often involves a factor of vagueness 
(Smith and Varzi, 2002), which is however here left out of account.  
 
(b) Niches or Environments: Niches (Smith and Varzi, 1999) are those special 
sorts of sites, marked out by their capacity to be occupied by substances of 
special sorts, especially organisms.  
3.3  SNAP Dependent Entities  
Examples of SNAP dependent entities include: particularized qualities (the 
colour of this tomato, the ambient temperature in this room), functions (the 
function of the canal to enable transportation), roles (as student, as captain of a 
soccer team), dispositions (of vegetables, that they are prone to rotting), powers 
(of a refrigerator, to slow the decay of vegetables), liabilities (of the vegetables, 

 
SNAP and SPAN 151 
to be affected by the functioning of the refrigerator). Other types of SNAP 
dependent entity include: states or conditions, shapes, plans, norms, tasks, laws. 
 
All of these entities have in common the feature of enduring through time and 
of requiring a basis in SNAP independent entities in order to exist. (The particu-
lar colour of this tomato would not exist without the tomato it is the colour of.) 
However, if endurance and dependence are necessary conditions for SNAP 
dependent entities, they are not sufficient conditions. The distinguishing feature 
of these entities is that they inhere in substances. InheresIn is an intra-
ontological relation between a SNAP dependent entity and its substantial bearer.  
 
The redness of the ball inheres in the ball; the elevation of a summit inheres 
in the summit; the shape of a landform inheres in the landform. Inherence is a 
form of existential dependence (Husserl, 1913/21; Simons, 1987; Smith, 1997). 
The latter is such that the first of its relata (in the case of inherence, the SNAP 
dependent entity) exists only in virtue of the existence of the second (the bearer). 
There are other forms of dependence relations (e.g., between processes and their 
participants). Thus dependence alone does not suffice for the relation of inher-
ence to obtain, though we will not pursue this matter here. Inherence is also a 
form of spatial subsumption, i.e., the spatial location of the inhering entity is a 
part of its bearer’s:  
(A21) 
(InheresIn(x, y, ω) ∧ SpatialLocation(x, x′, ω)  
∧ SpatialLocation(y, y′, ω)) → Part(x′, y′, ω) 
 
There are both monadic and polyadic or relational SNAP dependent entities. 
Examples of monadic SNAP dependent entities include qualities dependent on 
one substance only, such as the mass of this apple. Examples of relational SNAP 
dependent entities include entities which depend upon a multiplicity of sub-
stances, which they serve to relate together, such as a treaty between two coun-
tries. The treaty itself depends for its existence upon the countries involved. The 
treaty document itself is a SNAP independent entity.  
 
Given the multiplicity of kinds of dependence relations, the terminology is 
here very hard to fix and the types we have distinguished by way of example are 
not themselves clearly separated from each other. We avoid the terms ‘property’ 
and ‘attribute’ and cognate terms, because the latter are too closely associated 
with a traditional reading of the term ‘predicate’ in predicate logic – a reading 
which rides roughshod over the distinctions of importance to us here. We reject 
also Aristotle’s ‘accident’ and Husserl’s ‘moment’ and the term ‘trope’ as used 
for instance in (Campbell, 1990; Simons, 1994; Lowe, 2002). This is because 
each of these terms refers to a mixed group of entities which traverse what is for 
us the crucially important divide between SNAP and SPAN. In what follows we 
shall sometimes use ‘quality’ as a convenient shorthand term for ‘SNAP de-
pendent entity’.  

152 Grenon, Smith  
3.4  Universals 
Going downward in the hierarchy of kinds of being, we can introduce further 
predicates which are specializations of those surveyed here. Eventually, we 
move from the domain of formal categories to the domains of material univer-
sals belonging to different material regions apprehended at different levels of 
granularity. Finding out which are the genuine formal categories is the job of 
ontologists. Finding out which are the genuine material universals is the job of 
specialist scientists.  
 
SNAP material universals fall into two main families:  
 
(i) Substantial universals. These are the universals instantiated by substantial 
entities. For instance, substance universals such as ball, body, planet; site 
universals such as valley, bay, cave; universals under which fiat parts of sub-
stances fall such as leg, hilltop, mound; universals instantiated by aggregates of 
substantials such as: family, mountain-range, fleet.  
 
(ii) Quality universals. These are the universals instantiated by SNAP de-
pendent entities. Recall that on our view SNAP dependent entities – qualities, 
conditions, functions, etc. – are particulars, which instantiate corresponding 
kinds of universals. The universals colour or shape are instantiated by the colour 
and the shape of this ball. The universal red is a determinate of the determinable 
universal colour (Johansson, 2000).  
 
By combining substantial and quality universals (or their associated defined 
predicates), we may build constructed predicates a volo (Grenon and Johansson, 
2003). For instance RedBall, which corresponds to no material universal, applies 
by definition to all those instances of the substance universal ball in whose 
surface there inheres an instance of the quality universal red.  
4  SPAN 
SPAN is the ontological theory of those entities which unfold themselves 
through time in their successive temporal parts. (SNAP entities do not have 
temporal parts: your youth is not a part of you, but rather a part of your life.) A 
SPAN ontology (SpanΩ) is obtained by depicting the reality constituted by the 
entities that unfold themselves within some determinate interval of time, in some 
given domain of reality, and at some level of granularity. As ontologies of 
endurants are analogous to snapshots of reality, so ontologies of perdurants are 
analogous to videos spanning time (though the latter analogy has to be taken 
with a large grain of salt).  
 
In regard to SPAN, a form of methodological eternalism is appropriate, i.e., 
of the philosophical doctrine according to which all times (past, present, and 
future) exist on a par. An all-encompassing SPAN ontology has time itself as 
constituent. Any SPAN ontology has some temporal regions as constituents.  
(A22) 
SpanΩ(ω) → ∃x (TimeRegion(x) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) 

 
SNAP and SPAN 153 
 
Occurrents are structured also along the spatial dimension; however, the real 
substrate for location here is no longer space but rather spacetime, which is itself 
a SPAN entity. SPAN entities are not located in space − the assumption that 
they are so located derived from the fact that each region of space may be put in 
correspondence with a particular portion of an instantaneous slice of spacetime. 
SPAN ontologies comprehend spatiotemporally extended regions and the 
occurrents (including changes, as entities in their own right) located at such 
regions.  
4.1  Processual Entities  
These are entities which stand to processes as substantial entities stand to 
substances. Processuals are occurrents or happenings; they involve participants 
of a SNAP kind, and they are dependent on their participants. They are located 
at spatiotemporal regions and temporal regions. (We here leave open the ques-
tion whether this location relation is determinate, or whether there are also cases 
of vague location of processual entities in time.) Processual entities include: 
processes, fiat parts, aggregates and boundaries thereof. The predicate Proces-
sual is both dissective and cumulative. Processual entities may have more or less 
complex structures. However, in contradistinction to what obtains in the realm 
of substances, there are few clean joints (bona fide boundaries) in the realm of 
processual entities. This is because processes merge with each other in a variety 
of ways to make larger process-wholes, to the degree that the SPAN realm is in 
large part a realm of flux. Thus when you breathe and your friend talks these 
two processes become merged together in a way that has no counterpart in the 
SNAP realm of substances. When talking about processes as unitary entities we 
are often in fact engaging in the sort of gerrymandering alluded to in (Quine, 
1960; §36, p. 171). Notice, however, that we here depart from Quine, who 
propounded an exclusively four-dimensionalistic ontology. Processes are pre-
cisely occurrent entities in which substances and other SNAP entities partici-
pate. Processes are the entities revealed when we adopt a certain special (SPAN) 
perspective on reality. But the orthogonal (SNAP) perspective is no less faithful 
to what exists.  
 
Processes are those extended processual entities which are self-connected 
wholes. On the one hand, they have beginnings and endings corresponding to 
real discontinuities, which are their bona fide boundaries. On the other hand, 
they involve no temporal or spatiotemporal gaps in their interiors. In particular, 
a given process may not be occurring at two distinct times without occurring 
also at every time in the interval between them. Similarly a process may not 
occupy two spatiotemporal regions separated topologically along the spatial 
dimension without occupying also a continuous spatiotemporal bridging region 
which lies between them (Cohn and Varzi, 2003). 
 
If a given processual entity is affected by gaps of either of these sorts, then 
we are dealing not with one single process but rather with an aggregate of 
processes. As we see when examining for example movements of air fronts, 

154 Grenon, Smith  
tornadoes, combustion processes within a forest fire, troop movements, epi-
demic transmissions of diseases, what is a process and what is an aggregate of 
processes (thus what is connected and what is non-connected, what is a fiat and 
what is a bona fide boundary) may depend on the level of granularity chosen.  
 
All the proper parts of a process on the same level of granularity as the 
process itself are by definition fiat parts; for if processes are connected entities, 
then any division into parts must of necessity be a fiat division. Examples are: 
the first day of the Six Day war, the displacement of an anticyclone during some 
given 20 minute period. However, when we move to a lower level of granular-
ity, then we often find it possible to recognize bona fide process parts (for 
example, the movements of individual droplets of water in a rainstorm).  
 
Events are instantaneous boundaries of processes and instantaneous transi-
tions within processes. They are more generally bona fide and fiat instantaneous 
temporal parts of processes. Examples are: the beginning of a conflict; the 
ceasing to exist of a country as a result of annexation; the detaching of a portion 
of rock as a result of erosion. Bona fide events are the temporal analogues in 
SPAN of the spatial boundaries of substances in SNAP. Instantaneous transi-
tions within the interiors of processes – for example the transition in your life 
which marked your becoming 4 years old – are fiat temporal boundaries. 
 
Aggregates of processes. Examples of aggregates of processes are: the aggre-
gate of all wars and ethnic conflicts in Central Africa in a given year; the aggre-
gate of all movements of troops in the jungle in a given night. Again: aggregates 
of processes at one level of granularity may appear as processes in their own 
right at coarser grains.  
 
Settings (spatiotemporal environments). Just as we distinguished sites within 
SNAP, so we can distinguish settings (Barker, 1978) and their four-dimensional 
counterparts within SPAN. The Hundred Years War forms a setting for the 
burning of Joan of Arc.  
4.3  Temporal Regions  
Time, the maximal temporal region, is a perdurant, and thus a SPAN entity. A 
temporal region is a part of time. TimeRegion may now be defined as follows:  
(D23) 
TimeRegion(x) ≡def Part(x, time) 
 
Instants of time are zero-dimensional boundaries of extended temporal 
regions. TimeInstant is a specialization of the predicate TimeRegion.  
 
Our apparatus will require a theory of temporal order reflecting the structure 
of time as a linear continuum. We follow traditional usage and take as our 
primitive the relation Before, a strict total order which holds between two time 
instants when the first is earlier than the second.  
 
Every SPAN entity can be assigned a temporal location. TemporalLocation is 
a primitive relation between an entity and an (instantaneous or extended, con-
nected or disconnected) region of time (‘TemporalLocation(a, t)’ stands for: ‘a 
is located at region of time t’).  

 
SNAP and SPAN 155 
(A24) 
SpanEntity(x) → ∃y (TimeRegion(y) ∧ TemporalLocation(x, y))  
The temporal location of each SPAN entity is unique and TemporalLocation is 
therefore functional:  
(A25) 
(TemporalLocation(x, y) ∧ TemporalLocation(x, z)) → z = y  
We may thus introduce a temporal-location function analogous to spatial-
location introduced earlier, though without an ontology as an argument. Proces-
sual entities do not change their locations in time in the way in which substantial 
entities may change their locations in space.  
 
Instantaneous SPAN entities are located at instants of time. We define the 
intra-ontological relation AtTime:  
(D26) 
AtTime(x, y) ≡def (TemporalLocation(x, y) ∧ TimeInstant(y))  
 
We can define a number of temporal relations holding between processuals in 
virtue of the ordering and mereotopological relations which exist between their 
respective temporal locations. In particular, we could define the relation Cotem-
poral holding between SPAN entities which have as temporal locations exactly 
the same region of time.  
(D27) 
Cotemporal(x, y) ≡def (temporal-location(x) = temporal-location(z) 
The relation TemporalPart (between SPAN entities) can then be defined as 
follows:  
(D28) 
TemporalPart(x, y) ≡def Part(x, y) ∧ ∀z ((Part(z, y) ∧ Cotemporal(x,z))  
→ Part(z, x))  
Each temporal part is thus the sum of all cotemporal parts of a SPAN entity 
located within a given region of time. Instantaneous temporal parts we call 
‘temporal slices’:  
(D29) 
TemporalSlice(x, y) ≡def TemporalPart(x, y) ∧ ∃t AtTime(x,t)  
We may now define the predicate Event holding of instantaneous processuals: 
(D30) 
Event(x) ≡def ∃y (Processual(y) ∧ TemporalSlice(x, y))  
By definition of TemporalSlice, events are located at an instant of time. Notice 
that this definition allows us to capture events of both the fiat and bona fide 
sorts. We may now define the relation OccursAt between a processual and a 
time. It is the relation which holds between a processual entity and an instant of 
time at which a temporal slice of this processual is located:  
(D31) 
OccursAt(x, t) ≡def ∃y (TemporalSlice(y, x) ∧ AtTime(y, t))  
Obviously, in the case of an event e, OccursAt(e, t) is equivalent to AtTime(e, t). 
A proper mereotopological apparatus will allow us to define self-connected and 
scattered SPAN entities, and maximally connected parts of SPAN entities.  

156 Grenon, Smith  
4.4  Spatiotemporal Regions  
The totality of spatiotemporal regions reflects the totality of possible fiat demar-
cations of that maximal region we call spacetime. In accordance with the eter-
nalism of SPAN, all spatiotemporal regions exist on a par with each other within 
the spatiotemporal universe. Our framework calls for a fiat mereotopology for 
spacetime regions, with:  
(D32) 
SpacetimeRegion(x) ≡def Part(x, spacetime) 
 
Some of the instances of SpacetimeRegion are the spatiotemporal extensions 
of processual entities. Processuals then stand to spatiotemporal regions in SPAN 
ontologies in a way analogous to the way in which substantials stand to spatial 
regions in SNAP ontologies. In other words, spacetime constitutes the universal 
substratum for all SPAN entities, and location in SPAN has to be understood in 
relation to this spatiotemporal framework. SpatiotemporalLocation, defined by 
analogy to TemporalLocation, is the relation between a SPAN entity and the 
region of spacetime at which it is located. SpatiotemporalLocation, too, is 
functional and so allows the definition of the functor spatiotemporal-location. 
 
Spatiotemporal regions are entities which exist in their own right, independ-
ently of any processuals which may be located at or within them. Moreover, 
partitions of the spatiotemporal regions at which processuals are located gener-
ate corresponding delineations of the processuals themselves. Spatiotemporal 
regions have specific sorts of four-dimensional shapes – for example the charac-
teristic shapes of army manoeuvres or of hurricane movements – and these may 
be used in the formulation of taxonomies of their processual occupants.  
 
As in the spatial and temporal cases, a number of spatiotemporal relations 
hold between processuals, including those which hold in virtue of the relations 
between the regions of spacetime at which they are located. Thus there are 
mereological and mereotopological relations as well as relations of co-incidence 
or locational overlap which obtain when two entities occupy the same spatio-
temporal region or when their respective spatiotemporal regions share a part. 
5  Trans-Ontology in BFO 
Trans-ontology is the element in our framework which serves to integrate 
distinct ontologies. We have distinguished different kinds of trans-ontological 
relations and we can now characterize different varieties of trans-ontological 
reasoning of the forms: SNAP-SNAP, SPAN-SPAN, and SNAP-SPAN (or 
SPAN-SNAP). Trans-ontology is involved also in reasoning with multiple levels 
of granularity, but we shall not focus on this issue here.  
SNAP-SNAP Trans-Ontology 
This is reasoning paradigmatically involving discrepancies between temporally 
separated snapshots. A depiction of the world over time from the SNAP per-
spective involves taking a succession of temporally indexed SNAP ontologies 

 
SNAP and SPAN 157 
into account. As single SNAP ontologies are akin to snapshots of reality, so a 
succession of such ontologies is akin to a slide show.  
 
It is important to emphasize that changes themselves are not entities accord-
ing to the SNAP point of view. Rather, they appear, here, as trans-ontological 
structures or patterns. (Only in the SPAN ontology are changes entities in their 
own right.) Here we review from the SNAP perspective three main types of 
change: qualitative, locational, and substantial. We shall focus on changes of the 
qualitative sort, as these exhibit some of the peculiar features of SNAP-SNAP 
trans-ontological reasoning.  
 
Qualitative Change  
At any given time certain qualities inhere in each given substance. At any 
subsequent time a number of different qualities may inhere in the same sub-
stance. Pace (Loux, 1979) there need be no inconsistency in ascribing contradic-
tory properties to the same object providing such ascriptions pertain to distinct 
ontologies and such a way that there is no single perspective within which they 
conjunctively obtain. There are various modes of qualitative change: 
 
(i) Change in determinables: In many cases a SNAP dependent entity will 
instantiate different determinates of the same determinable quality universal at 
different times. The colour of this table becomes tarnished over time. The colour 
changes; yet there is still something which remains the same and which is the 
subject of such change: the token determinable remains the same while transi-
tioning through successive token determinates or values. Some quantitative 
changes, for example changes in temperature, belong under this heading also.  
 
(ii) Qualitative creation: A SNAP dependent entity that is not present in one 
ontology appears in later ontologies. This is what happens when Jacques Chirac 
takes on the role of President of France, or when a desert area is irrigated and 
thereby acquires a new dispositional quality of supporting vegetation coverage.  
 
(iii) Qualitative destruction: A substance has a certain SNAP dependent 
entity for a certain interval of time but not at later times. This is what happens 
when a substance loses powers or functions, as when Jacques Chirac ceases to 
be President or when a ground area is classified as not suitable for development. 
 
Spatial and Locational Change  
In one SNAP ontology the cup is on the table, in a later SNAP ontology it is on 
the floor. The cup underwent locational change. In one SNAP ontology Danzig 
is a part of Germany; in a later SNAP ontology it is part of Poland. Here, Ger-
many and Poland undergo spatial change. 
 
Substantial Change  
Substantial change occurs when substances are created or destroyed, as when a 
substance is divided up so as to produce a plurality of substances or when a 
plurality of substances is fused or merged. The Kingdom of Saxony was once 
one nation; currently its territory is divided among several administrative re-

158 Grenon, Smith  
gions of a new and more comprehensive state. We can distinguish further simple 
types of substance formation following the list provided by (Smith and Bro-
gaard, 2003), including budding, absorption, separation, unification, and so on.  
 
Genidentity  
As these kinds of change illustrate, there are trans-ontological filiations and 
correspondences between entities recognized in successive SNAP ontologies. In 
order to account for such kinds of changes it is useful to introduce the trans-
ontological relation of genidentity, which is a relation in which one entity stands 
to another when the latter is such-as-to-have-come-forth-from the former (cut a 
chunk of rubber into two pieces and the sum of the separated pieces is exactly 
physically genidentical to the chunk as it existed before the cutting). On the 
varieties of genidentity see (Lewin, 1922) and (Smith and Mulligan, 1982). 
Reasoning with SPAN Ontologies 
Reasoning about change can be conducted within a single SPAN ontology. 
However, it is useful to introduce the notion of a temporal restriction of a SPAN 
ontology motivated by temporal partitioning of the time line. This amounts to 
forming partial SPAN ontologies by restriction to specific intervals of time. If a 
SPAN ontology β is such that its constituents are the constituents of a SPAN 
ontology α, where the maximal temporal region of α is a part of that of β, then 
we say that α is a temporal restriction of β, and write: TemporalRestriction(α, 
β). When the index of the restriction is an instant of time, we call β: ‘the cross-
section of α’ and write: Section(α, β). 
(D33) 
TemporalRestriction(ω,ω′) ≡def ∃t ∃t' (TemporalIndex(ω, t)  
∧ TemporalIndex(ω′, t′) ∧ Part(t, t′) ∧ (∀x (Constituent(x,ω)  
↔ (Constituent(x,ω′) ∧ Part(temporal-location(x), t))))  
(D34) 
Section(ω, ω′) ≡def ∃t (TemporalRestriction(ω, ω′)  
∧ TemporalIndex(ω, t) ∧ TimeInstant(t))  
 
Notice that the uniqueness of temporal location and the putative granularity of 
ontologies, requires that any ontology which has a given SPAN entity as a 
constituent has its corresponding temporal location as a constituent (hence, the 
granularity of processuals is transmitted to the granularity of temporal regions).  
(A35) 
(Constituent(x, ω) ∧ TemporalLocation(x, y)) → Constituent(y, ω) 
SNAP-SPAN Trans-ontology 
Each SNAP entity is related to the unique SPAN entity which is its history or 
life. This is true of both substantial and dependent SNAP entities: each has a life, 
with a beginning and an end. The relation between you and your life is of course 
difficult to define. We shall assume that it is a functional relation (since your life 
is unique), and use a functional notation, life, in order to denote the life of a 
SNAP entity. The term “history” is also used in the context of SNAP trans-

 
SNAP and SPAN 159 
ontology (e.g., in (Bennett, 2001; 2002)) to denote a mapping from time points 
to states of the physical world. Our approach seems closer to that of (Cohn and 
Hazarika, 2001b), with the qualification that they focus on regions and intend to 
work exclusively within a four-dimensional framework for handling material 
objects as occurrents. Histories might best be understood as four-dimensional 
settings along the line introduced already above.  
 
There is a family of other trans-ontological relations between SNAP and 
SPAN entities, of which not only participation but also initiation, termination, 
creation, destruction, sustenance, deterioration, facilitation, hindrance are 
examples (for details, see Grenon, 2003; Smith and Grenon, 2003). Here, we 
describe the basic intuitions of the framework, taking as prototypical the exam-
ple of participation.  
 
A participant in a process exists during a time which overlaps the temporal 
location of the process. We then have: 
(A36) 
ParticipatesIn(a, ω, b, ω′)  → (Substantial(x) ∧ Processual(y))  
(A37) 
(ParticipatesIn(a, ω, b, ω′) ∧ ExistsDuring(x, t)  
∧ TemporalLocation(y, s, ω′)) → Overlap(t, s, ω′)  
 
Notice, first, that both the instant at which a exists and the processual entity 
in which a participates are on the side of SPAN. Those SNAP entities which 
exist at an instant may be related to non-instantaneous SPAN entities, e.g., to 
processes or time intervals, in virtue of the fact that, at the instant at which they 
exist, there is located a temporal slice of the corresponding extended SPAN 
entity. Thus, we see that SNAP-SPAN trans-ontological relations are rooted in a 
form of cotemporality. This cotemporality between entities is reflected by yet 
another kind of cotemporality, namely between a SNAP ontology and a section 
of that SPAN ontology which recognizes the processual entity involved in the 
pertinent relation of participation. The temporal slice of the process acts as a 
mediator, while instants of time play a cardinal role as medium of connection 
between SNAP and SPAN entities and ontologies.  
 
If we know that a participates in b at two separate time instants t1 and t2, then 
we are entitled to infer that a exists during [t1, t2]. (Recall that SNAP entities 
have a continuous existence in time.) As concerns b, strictly speaking our 
framework guarantees only that it has two temporal slices t1 and t2 (by definition 
of OccursAt). For instance, b might be a scattered processual entity in which a 
participates only in each of the beginning slices of its successive phases.  
 
That a participates in b over a region of time t means that there is a series of 
SNAP ontologies αi (1≤i) covering t, and a SPAN ontology β whose temporal 
index contains t, such that ‘ParticipatesIn(a, αi, b, β)’ is true for each i. How-
ever, the temporal location of b and the lifespan of a may enter in a variety of 
relations, corresponding to the range of possible situations (e.g., intitiation of b 
by a process or destruction of a through b). In the case of the relation between a 
SNAP entity and its life, we will always have exact temporal coincidence. In 

160 Grenon, Smith  
other words, SNAP entities exist for the entirety of the period of time at which 
their life is located, and conversely.  
 
There is finally a crucial form of trans-ontological relation between spatial 
and spatiotemporal regions. Instants of time delineate a cross-section of space-
time which is super-imposable on space as apprehended by the corresponding 
SNAP ontology. The relation between the two is then not one of identity – no 
continuant is identical with any occurrent – but rather a sui generis relation of 
superposition. Space in other words is not a mere temporal slice of spacetime. 
We will come back to this in the following section.  
6  Case Study: The Ontology of Geodynamic  
We have laid down a comprehensive framework for spatial ontology, discussing 
the many kinds of changes which take place in this domain. We also considered 
changes as entity in their own right, and argued that they require an ontological 
treatment in their own right as processual entities. We propose now to apply this 
general approach to the domain of geography. In order to avoid redundancy, we 
will take for granted all that has been said above and discuss in detail here only 
some of the specific features of geographical ontology.  
Geographical Ontology 
A geographical ontology is a theory of those coarse-grained entities and kinds of 
entities and relations we find in the geographical realm. Geographical entities 
are those entities appearing at a certain level of granularity and which have a 
certain relation to the Earth. These entities – both continuants and occurrents – 
are as numerous as the objects of the different branches of geography, including 
not only physical and human and political geography, but also geology, geo-
morphology, climatology, meteorology and so forth.  
 
A complete geographical ontology should include in addition not only those 
entities which fall under the purview of such geographical sciences but also 
those entities at geographical scales which are encountered by human beings in 
the everyday business of life (Egenhofer and Mark, 1995). Geographical scale is 
here understood as encompassing Frank’s cityscapes as well as geographic 
landscapes (2003). In geographical reality we find first of all continuants such as 
mountains and lakes, valleys and deltas, land parcels and cities; armies and their 
areas of operation; commuters and their patterns of commuting; hospital systems 
and their patterns of provision of medical services. These are all SNAP geo-
graphical entities.  
 
Mountains, cities and armies are entities with which human beings are in-
volved in their everyday interactions with the world, which are themselves 
SPAN geographical entities. A platoon climbs a hill and fights to defend its 
summit. Winds blow along the coast creating dunes. Ambulances fan out to deal 
with the victims of disasters. Our basic assumption in light of these examples is 

 
SNAP and SPAN 161 
that reality is made up of objects: platoons, hills, dunes, ambulances, which are 
involved in a continuous series of processes: climbing, blowing, fighting.  
 
At the levels of granularity with which geographical ontologies are con-
cerned, reality is essentially dynamic. It involves a continuous succession of 
processes; but these are in every case processes in or involving objects. A 
geographical ontology can thus be limited neither to objects nor to processes, 
but must make room for both. Indeed, geographical sciences are interested 
precisely in those SPAN entities which are patterns of development of geo-
graphical objects over time.  
 
It is however a limitation of most mainstream approaches to geographical 
ontology, in particular (as noted in Worboys, 2001) in the GIS context, that they 
rest on an essentially static view of the geographical realm. They focus essen-
tially on snapshots of the world and concentrate on handling discrepancies 
between different states of the world at different times, reflecting the fact that 
geographic information systems have their roots in printed maps. There is 
certainly a growing body of literature working towards developing the tools for 
handling dynamic geographic information (Hornsby and Egenhofer, 2000; 
Worboys, 2001; Frank, 2003; Galton, 2003). But still, the main paradigm 
remains what we earlier characterized as SNAP trans-ontological reasoning 
coupled with what we might also call the ‘spatialization’ of occurrents.  
 
The notion of lifeline (Hornsby and Egenhofer, 2002), for instance, is a way 
of tracking objects through a series of changes conceived in terms of transitions 
of discrepancies between successive states; the notion of lifestyle (Medak, 2001) 
is a way of building types of objects according to the common features of their 
lifelines. Lifelines, however, are abstract constructs. Geographical changes are 
entities in their own right. The approach to change and non-change in terms of 
lifelines can thus do some justice to the logical properties of reasoning about 
such changes, but it cannot do justice to the ontology of changes themselves. 
Treatments of change still predominate which centre on the category of objects 
and construct changes as abstract entities out of these, e.g., (Frank, 2003).  
 
The assumption that it is possible to construct spatiotemporal entities, or 
abstract counterparts thereof, on the basis of enduring entities arises from the 
fact that it is possible to use the same coordinate system in a space and time 
approach as in a spacetime approach. This artificial indistinguishablity has its 
bright side as it provides the foundation for managing the trans-ontological co-
incidence of space at a time with a corresponding temporal slice of spacetime. 
 
GeO, our ontology of the geographical realm, reproduces in its structure the 
formal-ontological divide between SNAP and SPAN. Geographical regions are 
at the heart of our theory of geographical entities. We will start by characterizing 
the former before turning toward other SNAP and SPAN geographical entities.  
6.1  Georegions and Geo-Ontologies 
We have used ‘region’ as a generic term embracing regions of space, of time, 
and of spacetime. The term ‘georegion’ will have the same generic character 

162 Grenon, Smith  
here. Common to all georegions is the fact that they are of geographical scale 
and are locations of entities which are or occur at or near the surface of the 
Earth. A theory of granularity is thus needed for a fully fledged ontology of 
geographic entities, since the latter will provide analyses of the two concepts of 
existing or occurring in proximity to the surface of the Earth and of being of 
geographical scale. Here, however, we shall take these notions as primitive. 
Note that since we will here be dealing with ontologies focused on coarse-
grained entities at or near the surface of the Earth, we can here set aside issues 
of the relativistic frame-dependence of simultaneity. 
 
Geospatial Regions. 
The Earth itself is not a geospatial region and neither is its surface. Rather, it is a 
substance, and its parts (mountains, cliffs, plateaux) are substantial entities (they 
are fiat parts of the substance Earth). We use henceforth ‘earth’ in our formulas 
to designate this substance. The Earth is located at a certain geospatial region at 
any time at which it exists. Geospatial regions are regions of space at or in 
which are located parts of the Earth or of the Earth’s atmosphere at or near its 
surface.  
 
The framework for three-dimensional spatial reasoning presented above will 
need to be extended in the geographical context in such a way as to include the 
means to define for any substance, its surface, interior, and exterior, together 
also with the concepts of near-surface-interior and near-surface-exterior.  
 
Since the relation between a substance and its (maximal, and therefore 
unique) surface is functional, we use the functional expression surface in order 
to denote a substance’s surface. The entity surface(earth) is a SNAP substantial 
entity existentially dependent upon earth, and it has a specific spatial location at 
any given time. We may now define surface geospatial regions as spatial loca-
tions of parts of the surface of the Earth: 
(D38) 
SurfaceGeoSpatialRegion(x, ω) ≡def SpatialRegion(x)  
∧ ∃y (Part(y, surface(earth, ω)) ∧ SpatialLocation(y, x, ω)) 
Geospatial regions are transient in nature; in other words, the regions of space 
which are geospatial are such in a given SNAP ontology only and their role is 
carried on from one time index to the next by numerically different regions. 
(This is the reason behind the addition of an ontological index in the definien-
dum of D41.) More generally, geospatial and surface geospatial regions are, 
within any given SNAP ontology, those regions of space which have a geo-
graphical significance.  
 
This implies that there is a further sort of spatial reasoning in the geographical 
context, relating to the way geographical entities are located with respect to 
surface(earth). This is the type of reasoning we employ when working with two-
dimensional maps. The functional relation SurfaceLocation relates a spatial 
entity to its corresponding surface location. (This is in fact a ternary relation 
between a SNAP entity, a spatial region and a substance acting as a reference 

 
SNAP and SPAN 163 
body. Here, however, we can leave the third term out of account, since we 
assume in all geographical contexts that the relevant reference body is the 
Earth.) The surface location of a geographical entity is that portion of the loca-
tion of the Earth’s surface onto which the spatial location of the entity projects 
along the vertical axis at a given time.  
 
Geographical entities are in every case spatially located at, under or above 
their surface locations. We thus can assume that synchronic spatial relations 
obtain between entities located at given spatial regions at given times in reflec-
tion of the relations which obtain between the regions themselves. Some of these 
relations have a mereotopological character, some are distance and orientation 
relations. For example an airplane is above the city of Carlin, NV, Carlin is 
situated along Interstate 80, Carlin is west of New York. An airplane flying over 
Carlin, while spatially disconnected from the city, is such that its surface loca-
tion is part of (or overlaps) that of the city it is flying over.  
 
Geotemporal and Geospatiotemporal Regions 
Geotemporal Regions are the regions of time during which the Earth exists:  
(D39) 
GeoTimeRegion(x) ≡def (TimeRegion(x) ∧ ∀y (TimeSlice(y, x)  
→ ExistsAt(earth, y)))  
 
Since the Earth is a SNAP entity, it has a life, which is a SPAN entity. The 
Earth exists at any time at which the process we call its life is occurring, and 
conversely:  
(T40) 
ExistsAt(earth, t) ↔ OccursAt(life(earth), t)  
The geotemporal regions are then precisely the parts of the region of time 
occupied by the life of the Earth:  
(T41) 
GeoTimeRegion(x) ↔ (TemporalLocation(life(earth), y)  
∧ Part(x, y))  
 
Geospatiotemporal Regions are the regions of spacetime which are parts of 
the spatiotemporal location of the life of the Earth:  
(D42) 
GeoSpacetimeRegion(x) ≡def  
(SpatiotemporalLocation(life(earth), y) ∧ (Part(x, y))  
 
Geo-Ontologies 
In a full account of the framework, we would need to introduce predicate sym-
bols for each type of geographical ontology, including those specializations of 
SnapΩ to which, for instance, maps correspond. SNAP geographical entities are 
characterized, inter alia, by the fact that they have a geospatial location (A43) 
and also a surface geospatial location (which ought to follow as a corollary of 
A43 in a complete axiomatization of the theory). Further, they exist at geotem-
poral regions (A44). SPAN geographical entities are characterized by the fact 

164 Grenon, Smith  
that they have a geospatiotemporal location (A45) and also a geotemporal 
location (which ought to follow as a corollary of A45):  
(A43) 
(SnapGeoEntity(x) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) → ∃y (GeoSpatialRegion(y)  
∧ SpatialLocation(x, y, ω)) 
(A44) 
(SnapGeoEntity(x) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) → ∃ω′ ∃y (SpanΩ(ω′)  
∧ Constituent(x, ω′) ∧ (GeoTimeRegion(y) ∧ ExistsAt(x, y, ω)) 
(A45) 
(SpanGeoEntity(x) ∧ Constituent(x, ω)) → ∃y (Constituent(x, ω)  
∧ GeoSpacetimeRegion(y) ∧ SpatiotemporalLocation(x, y)) 
6.3  The SNAP Geographical Object Ontology 
We discuss five major subcategories of geographical SNAP entities: features, 
artifacts, agents, places, and qualities.  
 
(i) Geographical Features. The entities one first encounters in interacting 
with the world at geographic scale are geophysical features such as hills, moun-
tains, lakes, and rivers. Such substantial entities are the most salient geographi-
cal entities for human subjects (Smith and Mark, 1999). In addition, there is a 
number of fiat geographical features defined by human geography and various 
branches of geographically oriented social sciences such as geopolitics, demog-
raphy, etc. These include states, counties, postal districts, and a wide variety of 
other fiat objects whose demarcation is due to the activities of human beings.  
 
(ii) Geographical Artifacts include buildings, roads, bridges, reservoirs, cities, 
towns, etc. These too are substantial entities.  
 
(iii) Geographical Agents. A geographical artifact such as a city has a gov-
ernment, which is a geographical agent. Both the city and its government are 
SNAP geographical entities. Geopolitical agents are tied to certain geopolitical 
objects, which are tied in turn to certain geographical sites or places. There are 
also mobile geographical agents, such as an army on the march or the racing 
pool of the Tour de France. Mobile agents, like other mobile geographical 
objects, have the capacity to produce derived geographical objects: armies 
produce front lines; aggregates of viral agents produce quarantine zones. These 
too are substantial geographical entities. 
 
(iv) Geographical Places. Objects take up space, they occupy some position, 
and they thereby help to carve out sites of various sorts, including those special 
kinds of sites we call places. Places – inter alia, the places whose names are 
listed in gazetteers – are organized into hierarchies of increasing size, from the 
small portions of territory (a street corner, a field), to countries and continents. 
There are also three-dimensional sites such as mine shafts and fiat volumes of 
the Earth’s crust demarcated when mining rights are assigned to underground 
resources. The family of places includes also cities and towns conceived as 
geopolitically demarcated sites or locations which one can inhabit (rather than as 
aggregates of material substances). The term ‘London’ is accordingly ambigu-
ous as between London-as-site (‘John lives in London’) and London-as-
geoartifact (‘John admired London from the air’).  

 
SNAP and SPAN 165 
 
(v) Boundaries and Geographical Regions. The boundaries of geographical 
substantial entities are of two sorts: fiat and bona fide. The former reflect human 
(for example administrative) decisions; the latter are real physical discontinui-
ties. Often some extended substantial entity will be taken as an indicator of a 
boundary (a fence, for example, will indicate the delimitation of a property, a 
river will participate in the physical delineation of the border between two 
countries).  
 
(vi) Geographical Qualities. In the geographical realm we are interested in 
qualities (and other SNAP dependent entities) of geographical substantial 
entities of geographical scale. These include qualities of features (for example 
the altitude of a mountain peak) and of agents (an army’s morale, a govern-
ment’s level of respect for human rights).  
6.4  The SPAN Geographical Process Ontology  
 
A primary division among SPAN geographical entities is that according to the 
kinds of participants they involve. On the one hand we have physical processes 
such as erosion, water run-off, forest fires, whose participants are exclusively 
physical objects. On the other hand we have social processes such as demo-
graphic changes, epidemics, wars, which are processes involving aggregates of 
human beings. We can distinguish also various families of geographical actions 
such as army manoeuvres or the passing of a re-zoning ordinance.  
 
Geographical changes reflect in the main spatial changes. Thus, there is the 
category of substantial changes, comprising different subcategories of events in 
which geographic objects are created and destroyed, together with related forms 
of changes for example of the sort discussed in (Hornsby and Egenhofer, 2000). 
Substantial changes are always instantaneous, though they are associated in 
every case with extended processes which precede or follow them.  
 
Some geographical objects are tied essentially to their sites; this holds espe-
cially of geographical features such as canyons and mountains. However, a 
number of geographical objects endure through changes of site, either through 
movement (e.g., thunderstorms) or through shifts over time (e.g., front lines in a 
war, city limits). Other sorts of geographical changes include qualitative, struc-
tural and morphological changes: for example a change in vegetation coverage 
or in temperature across a given or site.  
 
Note that a geographical change of temperature is at another level of granular-
ity a non-geographical matter of the movements of molecules. This shows again 
the need for a formal apparatus for treating granularity in a way which can allow 
macroscopic geographical phenomena to be related to the microscopic processes 
by which they are constituted (Bittner and Smith, 2002).  
 
Patterns and Features of Processes 
In all regions of the Earth there are processes which occur more or less regu-
larly, defining for example seasonal weather patterns. Patterns may be correlated 
with one another via complex relations of causality and dependence – for 

166 Grenon, Smith  
example in the way in which ocean currents (patterns of water displacement) are 
correlated with patterns formed by winds blowing over the surface of the water 
(patterns of displacement of masses of air). In order to describe such SPAN 
patterns we have to build a framework for describing the characteristic features 
of processes, including in particular: 
 
(i) Changes of intensity or rate of a process which give rise to characteristics 
such as: accelerating, alternating (e.g. tidal variations), gradual, instantaneous, 
continuous, discrete, regular, zigzagging, cyclical, seasonal, transient, and so on.  
 
(ii) Changes in the geographical extent of a process, such as the increase in 
prevalence of a disease, expansion of commercial penetration, routing of an 
army.  
 
In each case, these features are characterizable in our framework in terms of 
projections of processes onto the corresponding characteristic shapes of the 
spatiotemporal regions they occupy.  
6.5  The SNAP Geographical Fields Ontology  
Work on the ontology of geography has recognized two distinct perspectives, 
called the object and field perspectives, respectively (Couclelis, 1992; Peuquet et 
al., 1999; Galton, 2001; Smith and Mark, 2003). The object-perspective is 
precisely the SNAP geographical framework presented here. The field-
perspective involves apprehending reality in terms of distributions of attributes 
such as temperature, population density or tree-coverage over a given spatial 
location. SNAP Fields are enduring entities which are located at or defined in 
terms of geospatial regions with which they coincide spatially. Field attributes 
are dependent SNAP entities which are associated with given locations at given 
times.  
 
Here, too, we must distinguish between attributes as determinables and 
attributes as determinates. The former are universals such as temperature or 
elevation. The latter are specific values of universals such as −30°C or 4810 
meters. Values of attributes form scales, sometimes demarcated in terms of real 
numbers, sometimes in terms of other cardinal or ordinal measures. Some 
attributes, for example soil types, have qualitative determinables and determi-
nates.  
 
The SNAP field- and object-perspectives in the geographical domain can be 
directed towards identical portions of reality. It follows that there are a number 
of trans-ontological relations between the entities recognized by each, echoing 
Broogaard’s discussion in (Peuquet et al., 1999).  
 
A SNAP field ontology recognizes only one basic geospatial region (as base 
field) together with the associated distributions of attributes (SNAP dependent 
entities); thus it masks all of those entities in the geographic domain which are 
recognized by SNAP as substances and their substantial parts. There is no planet 
Earth visible from the field perspective, neither are there mountains and lakes. 
There are however fields (or parts of fields) which comprehend any relevant 

 
SNAP and SPAN 167 
aggregation of the features associated with the corresponding objects. These 
correspondences fall within the purview of yet another sort of trans-ontology.  
 
Relations in SNAP Field Ontologies.  
Fields are related to their attributes in a way that is analogous to the inherence 
relation between SNAP dependent entities and the substantial entities which are 
their bearers. Attributes in a field are necessarily bound to a given part of the 
field, and thus to a given spatial location. We use the relation of attribution 
between an attribute in a field and the corresponding field location, abbreviated 
in the symbol ‘AttributedTo’. The SNAP field and object perspectives are then 
linked as follows. Whenever a is attributed to b in a SNAP field ontology and b 
is located at the position c, there is, in some SNAP object ontology (SnapObjΩ), 
a substance located at c in which a′, a proxy of a, inheres. For instance, there is 
a portion of the elevation field of the Earth corresponding to Mont Blanc.  
(A46) 
AttributedTo(x, y, ω) ∧ TemporalIndex(ω, t) → ∃ω ′ ∃x′ ∃y′ (Sna-
pObjΩ(ω ′) ∧ TemporalIndex(ω′, t) ∧ InheresIn(x, z, ω ′)) 
There has to be additional constraints on attribution, e.g., we may only allocate 
an attribute which depends on a field at a region which is part of that of the field.  
(A47) 
(AttributedTo(x, y, ω) ∧ SpatialLocation(x, x′, ω)  
∧ SpatialLocation(y, y′, ω)) → Part(x′, y′, ω) 
It is primarily SNAP geographical fields which are of importance in the litera-
ture. Reflection shows however that the field perspective can be combined also 
with the SPAN framework when the substratum of location in relation to which 
attributes are allocated is spatiotemporal. (Galton, 2003) 
Conclusion  
We have presented a framework which allows the formulation of relations 
between different ontologies, and we have applied this framework to the treat-
ment of dynamic features of what exists in space and in spacetime. We outlined 
a system of spatial and spatiotemporal ontologies and a meta-ontological frame-
work within which we can understand the relations obtaining between them.  
 
Our theory cannot, of course, solve all the problems pertaining to dynamic 
spatial and geographical ontology. Nevertheless, we believe that we have 
advanced the foundations for a framework which can be extended and applied to 
the treatment of families of ontologies of other types, including ontologies at 
different levels of granularity as well as ontologies generated by the object- and 
field-perspectives. It can provide a tool also for dealing with the relations 
between distinct culturally-generated perspectives on the geographical domain, 
of the sort which are studied by linguists and anthropologists. Standardly, of 
course, such culturally-generated perspectives have been dealt with in relativis-
tic fashion − so that, as it is sometimes said, the members of different cultural 

168 Grenon, Smith  
groups ‘live in different worlds’. Perhaps the most characteristic feature of our 
framework is that it offers a way out of this relativistic trap. It shows how we 
can deal with pluralities of ontologies which are distinct yet nonetheless directed 
towards (because they are ontologies of) one and the same reality.  
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation under the 
auspices of its Wolfgang Paul Programme and the National Science Foundation 
under Grant BCS-9975557: Geographic Categories; An Ontological Investigation. 
Thanks go to the anonymous referees of this journal for insightful comments and 
to Mike Worboys for his encouragement and support.  
 
References 
Armstrong, D. M. (1978). Universals and Scientific Realism. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Barker, R. G. and Associates (1978). Habitats, Environments, and Human 
Behavior. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 
Bennett, B. (2001). Space, Time, Matter and Things. In Welty, C. and Smith, B. 
(eds.), (2001). Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Formal 
Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS’ 01), Ogunquit, New York: ACM, 
105-116. 
Bennett, B. (2002). Physical Objects, Identity and Vagueness. In Fensel, D., 
McGuinness, D. and Williams, M-A. (eds.) Principles of Knowledge Repre-
sentation and Reasoning: Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference 
(KR 2002), Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA. 
Bittner, T., and Smith, B. (2002). A Theory of Granular Partitions. In Duckham, 
M., Goodchild, M. and Worboys, M. (eds.) Foundations of Geographic In-
formation Science. London: Taylor & Francis Books. 
Brentano, F. (1976). Philosophical Investigations on Space, Time and the 
Continuum, trans. by Smith, B., London: Croom Helm, 1987.  
Campbell, K. (1990). Abstract Particulars. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell. 
Casati, R., Smith. B., and Varzi, A. C. (1998). Ontological Tools for Geography. 
In (Guarino, 1998), 77–85. 
Casati, R. and Varzi, A. C. (1994). Holes and Other Superficialities. Cambridge, 
MA and London: The MIT Press.  
Casati, R. and Varzi, A. C. (1996). The Structure of Spatial Localization, Phi-
losophical Studies, 82: 2, 205-239.  
Casati, R. and Varzi, A. C. (1999). Parts and Places: The Structures of Spatial 
Representation. Cambridge, MA: The M.I.T. Press. 
Chisholm, R. M. (1989). On Metaphysics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press. 
Cohn, A. G., Bennett, B., Gooday, J. M. and Gotts, N.M. (1997). Representing 
and Reasoning with Qualitative Spatial Relations about Regions. Stock, O. 
(ed.), Temporal and Spatial Reasoning. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 

 
SNAP and SPAN 169 
Cohn, A. G. and Hazarika, S. (2001a). Qualitative Spatial Representation and 
Reasoning: An Overview. Fundamenta Informaticae, 46, 1-29. 
Cohn, A. G. and Hazarika, S. (2001b). Spatio-Temporal Continuity in Geo-
graphic Space. Meeting on Fundamental Questions in Geographical Informa-
tion Science, Manchester, England, July, 2001. 
Cohn, A. G. and Varzi, A. C. (2003). Mereotopological Connection. Journal of 
Philosophical Logic (forthcoming).  
Couclelis, H. (1992). People Manipulate Objects (but Cultivate Fields): Beyond 
the Raster-Vector Debate in GIS. In Frank, A., U., Campari, I. and For-
mentini, U. (eds.), Theories and Methods of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in 
Geographic Space, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 65–77. 
Egenhofer, M. and Mark, D. (1995) Naive Geography. A. Frank and W. Kuhn 
(Eds.). Spatial Information Theory – A Theoretical Basis for GIS (COSIT’ 
95), Semmering, Austria (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 988). Berlin: 
Springer, 1-15. 
Frank, A. U. (2003). Ontology for Spatio-Temporal Databases. In Koubarakis, 
M. et al. (eds.), Spatiotemporal Databases: The Chorochronos Approach 
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2520), Berlin, Springer-Verlag  
Frank, A. U., Raper, J., and Cheylan, J-P. (eds.) (2001). Life and Motion of 
Socio-Economic Units (GISDATA Series 8), London: Taylor & Francis.  
Galton, A. C. (2000). Qualitative Spatial Change. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Galton, A. C. (2001). Space, Time, and the Representation of Geographical 
Reality. Topoi 20, 173-187. 
Galton, A.C. (2003). Desiderata for a Spatio-Temporal Geo-Ontology. In Kuhn, 
W., Worboys, M. F., and Timpf, S. (eds.) Spatial Information Theory: Foun-
dations of Geographic Information Science (COSIT 2003) (Springer Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science ), Berlin: Spinger, 1-12. 
Grenon, P. (2003a) Knowledge Management from the Ontological Standpoint. 
In Proceedings of the WM 2003 Workshop on Knowledge Management and 
Philosophy, April 2003, Luzern Switzerland, (forthcoming). 
Grenon, P. (2003b) The Ontology of Spatio-Temporal Reality and its Formaliza-
tion. In Guesgen, H. W., Mitra, D., and Renz, J. (eds.) Foundations and Ap-
plications of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning (FATSR), AAAI Spring Symposium 
Technical Reports Series, AAAI Press, 27-34.  
Grenon, P. (2003c). Spatiotemporality in Basic Formal Ontology: SNAP and 
SPAN, Upper-Level Ontology and Framework for Formalization, IFOMIS 
Technical Report Series (http://ifomis.de). 
Grenon, P. and Johansson, I. (2003). A Formalization of the Peculiarities of 
Aristotelian Universals. IFOMIS Technical Report Series (http://ifomis.de). 
Guarino, N. (Ed.). Formal Ontology in Information Systems. (Proceedings of 
FOIS’ 98, Trento, Italy, 6-8 June 1998), Amsterdam: IOS Press. 
Hornsby, K. (2001). Temporal Zooming. Transactions in GIS, 5: 3, 255-272.  

170 Grenon, Smith  
Hornsby, K. and Egenhofer, M. (2000). Identity-Based Change: A Foundation 
for Spatio-Temporal Knowledge Representation. International Journal of 
Geographical Information Science, 14: 3, 207-224. 
Hornsby, K. and Egenhofer, M. (2002). Modeling Moving Objects over Multi-
ple Granularities, Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 36, 177-194. 
Husserl, E. (1913/21). Logische Untersuchungen (2nd ed.). Halle: Niemeyer. 
English translation by J. N. Findlay as Logical Investigations. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970. 
Ingarden, R. (1964). Time and Modes of Being. Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Thomas. 
Johansson, I. (2000). Determinables as Universals. The Monist, 83: 1, 101-121. 
Lewin, K. (1922). Der Begriff der Genese in Physik, Biologie und Entwick-
lungsgeschichte. Eine Untersuchung zur vergleichenden Wissenschaftslehre. 
Berlin: Borntraeger. 
Lewis, D. (1983). New Work for a Theory of Universals. Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy, 61: 4, 343-77. 
Loux, M. J. (1979) The Possible and the Actual. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press. 
Lowe, E. J. (1998). The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and 
Time. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lowe, E. (2002). A Survey of Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Peuquet, D. J., Smith, B., and Brogaard, B. (1999). The Ontology of Fields, 
Report of a Specialist Meeting, National Center for Geographic Information 
and 
Analysis 
(http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/Publications/Varenius_Reports/ 
Ontology_of_Fields.pdf). 
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Rosse, C. and Mejino, J. L. V. (2003) A Reference Ontology for Bioinformatics: 
The Foundational Model of Anatomy. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. In 
press. 
Sider, T. (2001). Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Simons, P. (1987). Parts: A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Simons, P. (1994). Particulars in Particular Clothing: Three Trope Theories of 
Substance. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 65, 553-575. 
Smith, B. (1995). On Drawing Lines on a Map. In Frank, A. U. and Kuhn, W. 
(eds.). (1995) Spatial Information Theory. A Theoretical Basis for GIS (Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, 988). Berlin: Springer, 475–484. 
Smith, B. (1997). On Substances, Accidents and Universals: In Defence of a 
Constituent Ontology. Philosophical Papers 26, 105–127. 
Smith, B. (2001a). Objects and Their Environments: From Aristotle to Ecologi-
cal Ontology. In (Frank, Raper and Cheylan, 2001), 79-97. 
Smith, B. (2001b). Fiat Objects. Topoi 20: 2, 131–148. 

 
SNAP and SPAN 171 
Smith, B. (2003). Ontology and Information Science. Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, forthcoming. 
Smith, B. and Brogaard, B. (2003). Sixteen Days, The Journal of Medicine and 
Philosophy, 28: 1, 45-78.  
Smith, B. and Grenon, P. (2003). The Cornucopia of Formal Relations, Dialec-
tica (forthcoming). 
Smith, B. and Mark, D. M. (1999). Ontology with Human Subjects Testing: An 
Empirical Investigation of Geographic Categories, American Journal of Eco-
nomics and Sociology 58: 2, 245-272. 
Smith, B. and Mark, D. M. (2003) Do Mountains Exist? Towards an Ontology 
of Landforms, Environment & Planning B (Planning and Design) 30:3, 411-
427. 
Smith, B. and Mulligan, K. (1982). Pieces of a Theory. In B. Smith (Ed.). Parts 
and Moments: Studies in Logic and Formal Ontology. Munich: Philosophia, 
15-109. 
Smith, B. and Varzi, A. C. (1999). The Niche. Nous, 33: 2, 198-222. 
Smith, B. and Varzi, A. C. (2000). Fiat and Bona Fide Boundaries. Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, 60: 2, 401–420. 
Smith, B. and Varzi, A. C. (2002). Surrounding Space: The Ontology of Organ-
ism-Environment Relations. Theory in Biosciences, 121: 2, 139-162. 
Stroll, A. (1988). Surfaces. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  
Worboys, M. F. (2001). Modelling Changes and Events in Dynamic Spatial 
Systems with Reference to Socio-Economic Units. In (Frank, Raper and 
Cheylan, 2001), 129-137. 
Zemach, E. (1970). Four Ontologies. The Journal of Philosophy, 47, 231-247. 

