   
     
     
 
       
      
            
 
 
 
Social Contract for the AI Age 
AWIS: AI World Society 09/09/2020 
 
World Leadership Alliance Signatories 
Governor Michael Dukakis, Boston Global Forum and 
President Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga, Latvia and World Leadership Alliance-Club de Madrid 
 
Additional Signatories 
Vint Cerf, Google; Nazli Choucri, MIT;  
Prime Minister Zlatko Lagumdzija, Bosnia and Herzegovina; 
Tuan Anh Nguyen, Boston Global Forum; Thomas Patterson, Harvard University;  
Alex Pentland, MIT; Marc Rotenberg, CAIDP; David Silbersweig, Harvard University 
 
I. 
A New Social Contract in the Age of Artificial Intelligence 
 
The term “artificial intelligence” refers to the development of computer systems able to perform 
tasks that normally require human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, 
decision-making, language translation, and self-driving cars.  Advances in AI have already 
altered conventional ways of seeing the world around us. This is creating new realities for 
everyone – as well as new possibilities. 
These advances in AI are powerful in many ways. They have created a new global ecology and 
yet remain opaque and need to be better understood. Advances in AI raise policy issues that must 
be assessed. We must now focus through dialogue, tolerance, learning and understanding on key 
principles and practices for an agreement among members of society for shared social benefit 
that we call the Social Contract for the AI Age. 
The expansion of Artificial Intelligence is widely recognized and could change our lives in ways 
yet unimagined. At the same time, without guidelines or directives, the undisciplined use of AI 
poses risks to the wellbeing of individuals and creates possibilities for economic, political, social, 
and criminal exploitation.  

   
The international community recognizes the challenges and opportunities, as well as the 
problems and perils, of AI. Many countries have announced national strategies to promote the 
proper use and development of AI. These strategies set out common goals such as: 
• 
Scientific research, funding and culture, 
• 
Sustainable development, and inclusive growth 
• 
Skills, education, and talent development 
• 
Public and private sector adoption, 
• 
Fairness, transparency, and accountability 
• 
Ethics, values and inclusion, 
• 
Reliability, security and privacy, 
• 
Science-policy links, 
• 
Standards, human control and regulations 
• 
Data and digital infrastructure. 
AI is also the focus of foreign policy and international cooperation. There is a shared view that 
no country will be able to compete or meet the needs of its citizens without increasing its AI 
capacity. As well, many countries are now engaged in technology leapfrogging. It is no longer 
expected, nor necessary, to replicate the stages of economic development of the West—one 
phase at a time.  
In a world as diverse as the one today, there are few mechanisms for responding to such 
possibilities on a global scale. Social Contract for the AI Age is designed to establish a common 
understanding for policy and practices, anchored in general principles to help maximise the "good" 
and minimise the "bad" associated with AI. Derived from the 18th century concept of a social 
contract—an agreement among the members of society to cooperate for social benefits—Social 
Contract for the AI Age is focuses on the conditions of the 21st century. It is a response to artificial 
intelligence, big data, the Internet of Things, and high-speed computation.  
 
Foundations 
Just as earlier social contracts helped shape societies for a common purpose, the Social Contract 
for the AI Age has a transformative vision, one that transcends the technological features of 
artificial intelligence and seeks to provide foundations for a new society.  Consider, for example, 
how the Covid-19 pandemic urgently requires a new society with new structure and order, 
approach -- new ways to share data and coordinate action, accelerated social reliance on digital 
service across businesses, education, and government services. The Social Contract for the AI Age 
would create standards for a new international system. It focuses on the conduct of each nation, 
relations with international business and not for profit entities, and the cooperation of nations.  Just 
as TCP / IP is the platform for communication among internet users, the Social Contract for AI 
Age is a platform for connection among governments, stakeholders, and private and public 
institutions. 
 
 
 

   
Objectives 
The Social Contract for the AI Age seeks to build a multi-stakeholder, inclusive society in all 
aspects of life across politics, government, economics, business, and industry. The Social Contract 
for the AI Age values creation, innovation, philanthropy, and mutual respect.  It seeks the right of 
freedom on, and access to, the Internet worldwide.  The Social Contract for the AI Age  seeks to 
make the world a locus of responsible interaction—a place where every person’s contribution is 
recognized and everyone has a right to knowledge and access to information, where no one is 
above the law, where money cannot be used to subvert political process, and where integrity, 
knowledge, creativity, honesty, and tolerance shape decisions and guide policy. 
 In short, the Social Contract for the AI Age seeks to build a world where all are 
recognized and valued, and all forms of governance adhere to a set of values and are accountable 
and transparent. It is a world where global challenges are met by collective action and 
responsibility.  
 
II. 
Principles 
Extensive and appropriate AI application to politics, governments, society, and businesses can 
create a Smart Democracy. The Social Contract for the AI Age creates a platform for a Smart 
Democracy society, and a new global supply chain, named Supply Chain 2020. As a framework 
for society in the AI age, the Social Contract 2020 is based on balancing power among 
governments, businesses, civil society, individuals, and AI assistants. The Social Contract for the 
AI Age is a commitment to protect property, common values, and collective norms. 
 
(1) AI must respect fundamental human rights such as human dignity, rule of law, 
and privacy protection.  
(2) AI systems must be considered from a multi-stakeholder perspective --- for the 
individual and for society as a whole  
(3) The Social Contract for the AI Age is a basis to achieve sustainable and inclusive 
development for a global community that is fair, equitable, and prosperous. It is 
designed to apply the concept of a people-centered economy and to create a 
trustworthy AI, data, and Internet ecosystem for work and life. 
(4) The Social Contract for the AI Age should be transparent and accountable, and 
follow standards based on policies driven by trustworthy data. The UN 
Sustainable Development Goals data metrics and the World Economic Forum 
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) metrics, should provide citizens 
and organizations with reliable data that enables well-informed policy choices. 
(5)  Communities must have control over their data. Data is the basis of self-
determination and provides the ability to measure the impact of actions and 
policy in the AI realm. 
(6) Data literacy at all levels of society, together with open, trustworthy information, 
is the basis for an intelligent, thoughtful society.  
 
 
III. 
Commitments of Stakeholders/ Power Centers 
(1) Individuals, Citizens, Groups: 

   
• Everyone is entitled to basic rights and dignity that are enhanced/promoted by AI.  
 
Data Rights and Responsibilities:  
• Each individual has the right to privacy and is entitled to access and control over 
their own data. Individuals have a right to manage their data, individually or 
collectively, and the right to withhold their data from businesses. 
• Each individual and each community must have access to a trustworthy AI, data, 
and Internet ecosystem to create an inclusive, fair, people-centered economy, and 
society. 
Internet Rights: 
• Each individual has the right to access the Internet and any website or news system 
without restriction.  
• Freedom of expression on the Internet is guaranteed. 
• Secure digital identity allows the individual to know about, and control access to 
their data. 
 
Education and Political Participation: 
            Each individual has the right to education through best available venues.  
• Each individual must have access to education/knowledge/training about the use 
and impact of AI. 
• Each individual has the right to unimpeded political participation.  
• Everyone must have access to due process and fair trial, as well as remediation 
for injustice. 
 
 
 
Responsibility: 
• Individuals is prohibited from exercising socially disruptive behaviors, such as 
hacking, disseminating disinformation or online hate. 
• Individuals must contribute to the common good through appropriate taxes and 
provision of critical personal information (with appropriate data protection) as, 
for example, in the collection of census data and voting for public officials 
 
 
(2) Governments. Governments have a leading role in the Social Contract for the AI  
Age. 
• All government should behave responsibly in the management of AI for 
governance and for interactions with individuals and such behavior must be easily 
auditable. 
• All governments implement AI governance policies that respect honesty, 
transparency, fairness, and accountability. These standards and norms apply in 

   
every area of governance and are the basis for collaboration with international 
communities.  
• All governments create incentives for citizens to use AI in ways that benefit 
society (for example each person does good work for society that will be 
recognized as value, and this value can be exchanged with other values such as 
financial value, products, services, etc.). 
• All governments construct a secure, stable, and trustworthy AI, data, and Internet 
ecosystem for work and life to support the people-centered economy. 
• All governments ensure that communities are able take control of their data and 
use AI with their data so that they can manage their community to suit their needs 
and to create prosperity for themselves and their family. 
• All governments establish norms, rules and pass laws to ensure AI benefits 
society. 
• All governments create secure safety net for citizens in a trustworthy AI, data, and 
Internet ecosystem for work and life. 
• All governments protect intellectual property rights without undermining free 
access to the information commons. 
 
Collaborations between governments:   
• Norms, values and standards of the Social Contract for the AI Age are designed 
as connections among governments. To maintain the Social Contract for the AI 
Age, it is essential for countries to establish a Democratic Alliance for Digital 
Governance.  All governments should work to promote the Democratic Alliance 
for Digital Governance. 
 
United Nations and International Organizations:  
• The United Nations should extend international human rights standards for AI, 
and create a UN Convention on AI and establish a specialized UN Agency on AI. 
 
(3) Business Entities. Business operations and related rights come with accountability and 
responsibility – nationally and internationally. Business must: 
• Enable independent audits for transparency, fairness, accountability, and 
cybersecurity. 
• Adopt common AI values, standards, norms, and data ownership rules with 
penalties for noncompliance.  
• Companies will be incentivized to do business only with companies and countries 
that uphold the Social Contract for the AI Age and endorse Supply Chain 2020. 
• Collaborate with governments and civil society to help create a people-centered 
AI, data, and Internet ecosystem, to create trustworthy and relevant data, and to 
use AI to share wealth with individuals and communities. 
 
(4) Civil Society Organizations & Community. Rights and responsibilities of civil society 
organizations include: 
• 
 Monitor governments and firms with respect to common values. 

   
• Promote common values, norms, standards, and laws. 
• Support AI users and assist them to serve the broad interests of society. 
• Collaborate with governments, business entities, and others to create a people-
centered AI, data, and Internet ecosystem for work and life, enabling all people 
can create meaningful data, value, and create value-based wealth for their 
community. 
• Enable data cooperatives—the voluntary collaborative pooling by individuals of 
their personal data for the benefit of the group or community. 
• Participate in the making of AI rules and norms.  
• Enhance civil society become an intelligent, thoughtful civil society based on 
knowledge, smart data, critical thinking and social responsibility; and through the 
achievement of data literacy, to become a trusted open-data system, with 
validated, predictive AI tools that communities to plan their future. 
(5) AI Assistants. AI assistants provide an interface to facilitate compliance with 
established standards. 
• Support AI users and assist them to serve the broad interests of society. 
• Engage with other power centers for mutual support and supervision. 
• Community control: AI assistants should be governed by communities of users. 
 
 
IV. 
Implementation.  The Social Contract for the AI Age will be implemented as follows: 
• The promulgation of a Code of Ethics for AI Developers and AI Users. 
• The creation of a system to monitor and evaluate governments, companies, and 
individuals (based on their contribution to maintaining norms, standards, common 
values, and international laws for honesty, transparency, accountability, and 
responsibility).   
• The recognition of the Social Contract for the AI Age by the United Nations, 
governments, companies, civil society and the international AI community. 
• The establishment of a United Nations Convention on Artificial Intelligence to 
obligate governments and others to comply with international rules and norms to 
protect rights in AI age. 
• The development of the Democratic Alliance for Digital Governance as the global 
authority to enforce the Social Contract for the AI Age. 
• The creation of the “AIWS City”—an all-digital virtual city based on the standards 
and norms of “the Social Contract for the AI Age”, “People Centered Economy”, 
“Trustworthy Economy”, “AI-Government”, and “Intellectual Society-Thoughtful 
Civil Society”. 
 
 
 

