Societies 2015, 5, 220–244; doi:10.3390/soc5010220 
 
societies 
ISSN 2075-4698 
www.mdpi.com/journal/societies 
Article 
Against the Use of Knowledge Gained from  
Animal Experimentation 
Rebecca Tuvel 
Department of Philosophy, Rhodes College, 2000 N. Parkway, Memphis, TN 38112, USA;  
E-Mail: tuvelr@rhodes.edu; Tel.: +1-901-843-3586 
Academic Editor: Chloe Taylor 
Received: 7 November 2014 / Accepted: 11 March 2015 / Published: 23 March 2015 
 
Abstract: While there exists considerable protest against the use of animals in 
experimentation, less protest is voiced against the use of knowledge gained from animal 
experimentation. Pulling from arguments against the use of Nazi data, I suggest that using 
knowledge gained from animal experimentation both disrespects animal victims and 
sustains the practice. It is thus pro tanto morally wrong. 
Keywords: animal experimentation; knowledge gained from evil; Nazi data 
 
1. Introduction 
While there exists considerable protest against the use of animals in experimentation, less protest is 
voiced over the use of knowledge gained from animal experimentation. 1 Instead, there is a widespread 
consequentialist belief that if experimentation has already taken place, use of its epistemic benefits is 
morally permissible. 2 After all, would it not be a further insult to the dead animal to refuse the 
                                                 
1. The infliction of pain to and the death of animals in experimentation receives attempted justification on several grounds, 
including to “advance knowledge, test and devise medical and non-medical products…[and] determine…toxicity  
levels” [1] (p. 17). Since all of these purposes serve to enhance knowledge in one way or another (e.g., how toxic is this 
product?), I speak broadly about animal experimentation’s results as epistemic. When I refer to animal experimentation, 
I intend the “use of live animals in research in the biological, psychological and medical technological sciences” [2] (p. 6). 
2  According to Hugh LaFollette, most people embrace a “common view”, which holds that “although (a) there are moral 
limits on what we can do to (some) nonhuman animals; (b) humans can use them when doing so advances significant 
human interest” [3] (p. 796). This broadly consequentialist thought employs a cost-benefit type of reasoning, such  
that even those who are against animal experimentation itself may still justify use of the practice’s results (since the  
OPEN ACCESS

Societies 2015, 5 
221 
 
 
knowledge for which the animal was killed, not to mention harmful to the humans whose lives may be 
helped or even saved by the experiment’s results? On this view, morality not only permits, but 
demands the use of knowledge gained from an admittedly immoral practice. 
In this paper, I argue against the idea that the use of knowledge gained from animal experimentation 
is permissible. Rather, I suggest that sanctioning the epistemic benefits of animal experimentation both 
disrespects animal victims and sustains the practice. It is thus pro tanto morally wrong. 3 This 
argument has implications not only for use of the experiments’ results, but for the experiments 
themselves. Indeed, to the degree that animal experimentation’s continued existence is predicated on 
the usability of its results, then an inability to justify the use of these results effectively blocks the main 
justification for the experiments themselves. Without this justification in place, animal experimentation 
as an ongoing practice cannot be defended. In addition to challenging the epistemic benefits of animal 
experimentation, this argument thus provides an alternative route to challenging the practice itself. 
First, I describe why animal experimentation is morally wrong. Next, I canvass some arguments 
against the use of Nazi data. I then consider the relevance of these arguments for the case at hand.  
I conclude that two of these arguments (the victim disrespect and practice encouragement concerns)  
are sufficiently compelling to generate a pro tanto reason against the use of knowledge gained from 
animal experimentation. 
2. The Case against Experimentation 
In order to make the pro tanto case against the use of knowledge gained from animal 
experimentation, I first need to show that animal experimentation is morally wrong. To do so, I will 
show that it qualifies as wrong on both deontological and consequentialist grounds. First, since 
deontological animal rights theory holds that sentient animals deserve rights that protect them from 
being used as a means to an end, animal experimentation is wrong on this view. Second, I show that 
the amount of animal interests frustrated in experimentation, coupled with the fact that the results of 
animal experimentation do not translate well to humans, renders the practice morally wrong on 
consequentialist grounds. 
2.1. Animal Rights Theory: The Case against Experimentation 
Human rights theory holds that human beings possess basic interests that ought never to be violated. 
These interests are so strong that they merit rights, a kind of protective shield that safeguards them 
from violation. No matter how great a benefit is at stake, then, your right to life trumps any reason  
I may have to violate it (save for cases in which my basic rights are also at stake, e.g., self-defense). 
Accordingly, the inviolable rights view holds that “a person cannot be killed in order to harvest her 
body parts, even if dozens of other humans might benefit from her organs, bone marrow, or stem cells. 
Nor can she be made a subject of non-consensual medical experimentation, no matter how much the 
                                                                                                                                                                       
deed is already done). Moe and Martin hold this type of position in relation to the use of data gained from  
Nazi experimentation [4,5]. 
3  As Shelly Kagan describes it, “a pro tanto reason has genuine weight, but nonetheless may be outweighed by other 
considerations...a prima facie reason appears to be a reason, but may actually not be a reason at all” [6] (p. 17). 

Societies 2015, 5 
222 
 
 
knowledge gained from experimenting on her would help others” [7] (p. 19). In short, her basic interest 
in living, and the right to life afforded by this, trumps any justification that would violate that right. 
Most people think that humans alone deserve inviolable rights, because they uniquely possess 
certain capacities (e.g., the ability to reason, to use language, to plan or to be moral, to name a few 
popular contenders). Yet the problem with this argument is that not all humans thought to deserve 
rights share whatever capacity is deemed necessary for rights. For instance, people with severe 
cognitive disabilities deserve inviolable rights, yet may not share the capacity to be rational or use 
language. The same goes for infants and some persons with mental illness. This argument (famously 
known as the argument from marginal cases) poses one of the strongest challenges to efforts to accord 
rights uniquely on the basis of species. 
What, then, does ground a claim to inviolable rights? According to some animal rights theorists, it is 
the capacity for sentience, the ability to be aware of one’s surroundings and to experience pain, that 
grounds this claim. “Conscious/sentient beings are selves—that is, they have a distinctive subjective 
experience of their own lives and of the world” [7] (p. 25). They are vulnerable “to pleasure and pain, 
to frustration and satisfaction, to joy and suffering, or to fear and death” [7] (p. 25). On this view, if a 
being is sentient, then that being has certain basic interests in need of protection. Sentient beings thus 
deserve inviolable rights, including the right not to be experimented on against their will. 
Several have objected to the argument that animal sentience supports a claim to inviolable animal 
rights. According to Carl Cohen, even if animal sentience may generate certain obligations on the part 
of humans to animals, it cannot generate anything close to animal rights. The reason is that animals are 
of a fundamentally different kind from humans, such that “rights pertain to [humans] as humans”, and 
never to animals [8] (p. 37, my emphasis). However, given that he recognizes the strength of the 
argument from marginal cases (which, to repeat, establishes that not all humans share any one capacity 
that uniquely grants them rights), Cohen is at pains to explain why humans and animals are of a 
morally different kind. If they do not all share one capacity that grants them moral status, then why is 
being a member of the kind “biologically human” morally relevant [9] (p. 52)? As Nathan Nobis 
explains, “we share, little, morally, with human cells in flasks or organs in an icepack; bare biology 
doesn’t count for much” [9] (p. 57). Absent the ability to rely on some supposedly shared human 
capacity, Cohen’s kind principle amounts to pure speciesism, or the arbitrary privileging of one’s 
species over another. 4 
Perhaps one might try to draw the line elsewhere, though. One could simply argue that it is not 
humans per se who deserve rights, but those capable of higher cognition. This principle is not 
                                                 
4  Moreover, it is irrelevant that some or most humans possess the requisite property for moral inclusion (e.g., rationality 
or language), for other humans cannot gain the property “being a member of the moral community” by mere  
association [9] (p. 53). Nathan Nobis explains: “Consider a case where you’d wish this principle were true: you are a 
student (A) in a class who has failed the exams and done none of the homework, so on your own merits, you are failing. 
However, fortunately for you, the rest of the students have the properties of ‘passing the exams and done well on the 
homework’ (C) and, on that basis, have the property (R), passing the course.’ If Cohen’s principle were true, you too 
would have the property of passing the class, as well, because you are a member of the kind (K) ‘students taking this 
class’, and the properties from the majority transfer to you. Unfortunately for you, this property you would possess only 
on your own merits (which you lack, since you have failed the exams and have done none of the work), so Cohen’s 
principle is false” [9] (p. 53). 

Societies 2015, 5 
223 
 
 
speciesist, the objector maintains, because it excludes not only animals incapable of higher cognition, 
but humans incapable of higher cognition, too. On this view, it turns out that most humans, the great 
apes and dolphins, for instance, deserve rights, but many animals, infants and cognitively disabled 
people do not. The problem with this view is that it leaves the latter category of beings completely 
vulnerable to violation. And since we should be “horrified at the suggestion that it is acceptable to use 
such people as forced organ donors or as non-consenting subjects in biomedical experiments, even if 
we did so ‘humanely,’” this position is unacceptable [10] (p. 17). 
To consider one final reason why rights ought not to hinge on higher cognition, animal rights 
theorists Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka enjoin us to imagine Telepaths. Telepaths are an alien 
species with cognitive capacities far beyond our own, including their impressive capacity to 
communicate telepathically [7] (p. 27). Imagine that Telepaths come to Earth, enslave the human race 
and defend their actions on the grounds that humans have inferior mental capacities [7] (p. 27). 
Naturally, we, the enslaved, would think the Telepaths morally abhorrent [7] (p. 28). Regardless of our 
relatively feeble capacities, humans would protest, “we have our own lives to lead, our own experience 
of the world, our own sense of how our lives go better or worse” [7] (p. 28). Insofar as the same is true 
for animals, we cannot condemn the Telepaths’ violation of human rights without also condemning 
humans’ violation of animal rights [7] (p. 28). 
In sum, animal rights theory shows why animal experimentation is morally wrong. As a matter of 
consistency, if we think that all sentient humans deserve the right not to be subject to experimentation 
against their will, we must likewise hold that all sentient animals deserve this right. 
2.2. Consequentialism: The Case against Experimentation 
According to consequentialism, one ought to perform whatever act will produce the most good. As 
a species of consequentialism, utilitarianism defines good consequences as those that increase the 
welfare of all affected beings. Although what constitutes welfare (or well-being) differs depending on 
the account, for our purposes, welfare can be understood in terms of the satisfaction of interests. In 
making moral decisions, then, the utilitarian will try to weigh the interests of all affected beings and 
choose the act that produces the highest level of interest-satisfaction. On this view, if killing me can 
save five others, all else being equal, it would be right to frustrate my interest in life to satisfy the 
interests of the five. 
Like several animal rights theorists (see [7,10]), utilitarian animal ethicists agree that sentience—the 
capacity for “suffering and/or enjoyment or happiness”—grants a being equal moral consideration [11] 
(p. 7). As early utilitarian Jeremy Bentham famously put it, the question is not “Can they reason, nor 
can they talk, but, can they suffer?” [11] (p. 7). The capacity for suffering is important, as Peter Singer 
explains, because it is “a prerequisite for having interests at all” [11] (p. 7). We do not speak of a 
table’s interests, because, as a non-sentient object, it has none. However, “a mouse […] does have an 
interest in not being kicked along the road, because it will suffer if it is” [11] (p. 8). Finally, equal 
moral consideration means that if a being has an interest in not suffering, that interest gets to be 
“counted equally” with the similar interests of any other being [11] (p. 8). In sum, since most animals 
have an interest in not suffering, this interest ought to be included and counted equally in the utilitarian 
calculation of interests. 

Societies 2015, 5 
224 
 
 
Once animals’ interests are included in the utilitarian calculation, many human practices involving 
animals are no longer justified. For instance, the immense amount of animal pain and suffering that 
over eight billion animals endure in U.S. factory farms alone each year has been well documented [12] 
(p. 756). For a utilitarian, this amount of suffering is so extreme that the human interests satisfied by 
consuming meat cannot possibly outweigh it. As Singer puts it, since “none of these practices cater for 
anything more than our pleasures of taste, our practice of rearing and killing other animals in order to 
eat them is a clear instance of the sacrifice of the most important interests of other beings in order to 
satisfy trivial interests of our own” [13] (p. 223). 
However, unlike factory farming, much animal experimentation appears to serve non-trivial human 
interests, so could it be justified on utilitarian grounds? It is true that animal experimentation could  
in theory be justified on utilitarian grounds. This is especially true for Singer, who maintains that “it is 
not arbitrary to hold that the life of a self-aware being, capable of abstract thought, of planning for 
their future, of complex acts of communication, and so on, is more valuable than the life of a being 
without these capacities” [11] (p. 20). According to this view, since a being with self-awareness who is 
capable of abstract thought is likely to have greater interests than a being without these capacities, it 
could be permissible to sacrifice a being with lesser interests for the sake of the being with greater 
interests. And although not all humans are capable of these so-called higher capacities (e.g., infants 
and the severely cognitively disabled) and neither are all animals incapable of them (e.g., chimpanzees, 
dogs, pigs), since most humans are capable and most animals incapable of these capacities, human 
interests will on average outweigh animal interests. Leaving aside the many concerns that have been 
voiced over this position (see Francione [10], Kittay [14] et al.), since the interests of beings with 
“higher” capacities can be sacrificed for the interests of beings with “lower” capacities on this view, 
utilitarianism entails that animal experimentation could theoretically be justified. 5 
However, justification in theory is different from justification in practice. And in practice, animal 
experimentation cannot be justified on utilitarian grounds. The reason is two-fold. First, animal 
experimentation causes immense animal pain and distress for often frivolous human purposes. Second, 
of the experiments that do serve important human interests (e.g., medical experiments), the results are 
often of dubious relevance to humans. For these reasons, the utilitarian calculation of interests will not 
favor animal experimentation. 
2.3. Animal Pain and Distress in Experimentation 
Since governments do not require researchers to keep track of how many rats, mice, fish, birds, 
frogs or invertebrates they use in experimentation, it is impossible to know precisely how many 
animals are used in experimentation [15] (p. 25). However, according to estimates by Taylor and 
                                                 
5  Although Singer has been accused otherwise, he maintains that his account is not speciesist. This is because, 
controversially, not only do non-self-aware animals have fewer interests than self-aware humans on his view, but  
non-self-aware humans have fewer interests as well. As Singer writes, “whenever experimenters claim that their 
experiments are important enough to justify the use of animals, we should ask them whether they would be prepared to 
use a brain-damaged human being at a similar mental level to the animal they are planning to use. […] What difference 
is there between the two? Only that one is a member of our species and the other is not? But to appeal to that difference 
is to reveal a bias no more defensible than racism or any other form of arbitrary discrimination” [11] (p. 82–83). 

Societies 2015, 5 
225 
 
 
colleagues, in 2005, 37 countries used a total of 50.4 million animals for experimentation ([16], quoted 
in [17]). In the U.S. context, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) reports that 
1,134,693 animals were used in American laboratories in 2010 and 953,077 animals in 2012 [18]. 
These numbers include cats, dogs, guinea pigs, hamsters, marine mammals, primates, pigs, rabbits, 
sheep and other unnamed animals, but exclude mice, rats and fish. Although we cannot be certain  
of the numbers, it is estimated that approximately 80,000,000 mice and rats are used annually in  
the U.S. [15] (p. 26). 
Nearly all animals used in experimentation are capable of experiencing pain and distress. Indeed, 
this is often what makes them useful models. As Andrew Knight explains, “almost all animals used in 
laboratories are higher vertebrates, such as mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians, which possess 
the neuroanatomical and psychological capacities necessary to experience significant pain, fear, and 
psychological distress” [17] (p. 35). Yet similar to the difficulty involved in estimating the exact 
numbers, it is difficult to estimate how much pain and distress animals undergo in experimentation [15] 
(p. 27). 6 Not only is it a challenge to quantify animal pain and distress [15] (p. 27), but the 
classification of “minor” to “moderate” to “severe” pain or distress necessarily involves subjective 
interpretation.7 However, some criteria are in place to help judge levels of pain and distress in animals. 
These include watching for “altered heart rate, abnormal breathing or muscle twitching”, “impaired 
activity”, “personality changes such as increased aggression”, “restlessness”, “changes in dietary 
intake and behavior”, “abnormal vocalization”, “abnormal posture” or “self-mutilation” [2] (p. 95). 
Of the three main purposes for which experimental animals are used—to develop pharmaceutical/ 
medical products, to advance scientific research and to test toxicity levels [19] (p. 21)—the vast 
majority involves some level of animal pain and/or distress. Indeed, insofar as the goal of much animal 
experimentation is to “model severe human injuries and illnesses”, it is difficult to deny that many 
animals experience pain and distress in experimentation [20] (p. 1). Moreover, although experimenters are 
expected to use anesthetics to alleviate animal pain, they are not required to if doing so would interfere 
with the experiment’s results [20] (p. 1). 8 For instance, in recent studies to test new drugs for arthritis 
pain, no painkillers were given to a control group of animals (while the other group received relief 
only if the drugs work) [20] (p. 1). This is characteristic of pain therapy studies generally [21] (p. 222).  
It is safe to say that when animals are used as models for human disease, they experience pain and 
distress. Animals have been used as models for nearly all human diseases, including cancer, AIDS, 
diabetes, Lou Gehrig’s disease and Alzheimer’s [22] (p. 32). Consider cancer. As Carbone notes, 
“virtually every human cancer is modeled in animals, and as in people, some cancers (such as oral and 
bone cancers) appear to be quite painful, even in their early stages” [20] (p. 2). It has been estimated 
that one carcinogenetic study alone used over 1200 animals [17]. In such studies, animals are made to 
                                                 
6  Pain can be defined as “the detection and signaling of a noxious stimulus”, while suffering can be defined as “the 
affective, behavioral or emotional response to the pain” [2] (p. 93). 
7  As Vaughan Monamy notes, “it may be argued that it is not possible to describe to another the pain one is feeling, or to 
comprehend another person’s misery” [2] (p. 93). 
8  Carbone notes that “The AWA (Animal Welfare Act), the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and 
current Public Health Service policy all allow for the conduct of what are often called ‘‘Category E’’ studies—experiments 
in which animals are expected to undergo significant pain or distress that will be left untreated because treatments for 
pain would be expected to interfere with the experiment” [20] (p. 1). 

Societies 2015, 5 
226 
 
 
absorb or, in the case of tobacco, inhale carcinogenic substances. These procedures are said to account 
for some of the highest levels of pain and distress animals experience in experimentation [17] (p. 63). 
One paper describes the process as follows: “…in order to simulate human smoking patterns, a 2-s puff 
from a burning cigarette is diluted with air and forced into a chamber for a short period, followed by an 
air purge. However, animals that are being forced involuntarily to inhale the smoke suffer avoidance 
reactions and change their breathing patterns to shallow, hesitant inspirations…” [23] (p. 973). 9 The 
pain animals undergo in carcinogenicity studies is also long term; rodents are initially dosed when they 
are 6–8 weeks old and continue to be dosed for 90–110 weeks, at the end of which (if they survive), 
they are killed [17] (p. 63). Moreover, since it is notoriously difficult to control for pain in cancer 
patients, most animal pain is not alleviated in these cases [20] (p. 2). 10 Furthermore, even if it could 
provide some relief, since pain medication can delay the progression of cancer, it may complicate the 
research and thus not be used [20] (p. 2). 
There are many other areas of experimentation in which animals experience pain and distress. 
Animals are used in toxicology studies that test household cleaners, pesticides, cosmetics and 
chemicals for toxic effects on animals [24] (p. 46). In acute oral versions of these tests, animals are 
force-fed substances by mouth or by way of a tube inserted down their throats, after which they “often 
display classic symptoms of poisoning, including vomiting, diarrhea, paralysis, convulsions, and 
internal bleeding” [11] (p. 53). In one such test, the lethal dose 50 (LD50), it is expected that half (or 
50 percent) of subjects will die [2] (p. 63). Before they die, the animals are very sick and in clear pain 
and distress [11] (p. 54). Animals are also used in skin irritation tests, like the well-known Draize eye 
irritancy test. In these tests, animals (often rabbits) are restrained and a potentially toxic substance, 
such as a household cleaner, is dropped into the animal’s eye [25] (p. 70). One researcher describes a 
rabbit’s reaction thus: “Total loss of vision due to serious internal injury to cornea or internal structure. 
Animal holds eye shut urgently. May squeal, claw at eye, jump and try to escape” [11] (p. 54). 
Animals are also used in mutagenicity studies that test products to see if they will produce genetic 
mutations, as well as in reproductive toxicity studies that test chemicals to see whether they will cause 
miscarriages, infertility or birth defects [2] (p. 63). Animals are used in neurological research that may 
involve the infliction of brain damage on animals and in bone and joint research in which animals’ 
bones are fractured or injured [24] (p. 46). They may also be used for research on “depression, drug 
addiction, aggressive behavior, communication, learning and problem solving, normal and abnormal 
social behavior, reproduction and parental care” [2] (p. 61). Some of this research may involve no pain 
or suffering, such as when monkeys’ responses to the playback of alarm calls is observed, while others 
involve clear pain and suffering, such as in electric shock or maternal deprivation experiments 
respectively [2] (p. 61). 
                                                 
9  The study itself admits that comparisons between humans and animals are dubious: “Cigarette smoke has been tested 
for carcinogenicity by inhalation studies in rodents, rabbits and dogs. The model systems for animal exposure to 
tobacco smoke do not fully simulate human exposure to tobacco smoke, and the tumours that develop in animals are not 
completely representative of human cancer. Nevertheless, the animal data provide valuable insights regarding the 
carcinogenic potential of tobacco smoke” [23] (p. 1185). 
10  As Carbone writes, “successful pain treatment [in humans] can require an intravenous catheter for round-the-clock 
medication. This would be an extremely unlikely and challenging management strategy for rodents on cancer  
studies” [20] (p. 2). 

Societies 2015, 5 
227 
 
 
Animals not only experience pain and distress directly in experimentation, but also in relation to 
laboratory confinement. In their assessments of the ethics of animal research, institutional animal care 
and use committees (IACUCs) do not factor in animals’ experiences in laboratories when they are not 
undergoing research [26] (p. 175). Yet, as Robert Streiffer argues, since animals are confined for the 
purpose of later research and since confinement is a “ubiquitous aspect of the lives of almost all 
research animals”, it is relevant to an ethical assessment of the research itself [26] (p. 175). 
Streiffer argues that although confinement properly understood is not ipso facto harmful to animals 
(or humans), it is clear that many laboratory confinement conditions are harmful to animals.  
So, although laboratories may provide some benefits to animals in the form of veterinary care, a 
regular diet and protection from external threats, like predators and bad weather, laboratory 
confinement is also associated with boredom, frustration, lack of access to conspecifics and  
species-typical behaviors [26] (pp. 183–184). Fear and chronic stress are also common in animals who 
live in less-than-ideal laboratory environments, particularly for those who have been captured from the 
wild [17] (p. 36). In general, the confinement conditions in laboratories lead to notably distressed 
behavior in animals. Consider the case of rabbits: 
Because most are not surgically sterilized, [rabbits] are kept alone in small, steel cages to 
prevent fighting and unwanted reproduction, and typically have nothing to play with and 
nothing to do. Rabbits, like other laboratory animals, are often observed engaging in 
stereotypic behaviors associated with emotional and psychological deprivation, such as bar 
licking, excessive grooming, or paw chewing, and sitting in a hunched position for hours at 
a time. The cages are too small to permit normal behaviors such as sitting up on hind legs, 
hopping, digging, and hiding. In addition, they often either undereat or overeat to counter 
their boredom; and many develop deformities in the spine and legs because they can’t 
move freely in the tiny spaces [27] (p. 79). 
In addition to these straightforward physical and psychological harms, some have argued that 
laboratory confinement frustrates animals’ interests in other ways. As Michael Allen Fox notes, “when 
we inflict pain or suffering on animals, we harm them. However, harm may also result when we 
confine or socially isolate them, deprive them of the ability to behave in ways natural to their species, 
or kill them” [28] (p. 58). For instance, according to natural function theorists, an animal’s ability to 
engage in species-typical behavior or to exercise natural capacities contributes to that animal’s  
well-being [26] (p. 183). On this view, “a mouse who can burrow into a substrate or a monkey mother 
who can nurse her baby has a life that goes better in a way” [26] (p. 183). Among other things, natural 
function theorists sometimes argue that conditions of confinement prevent animals from exercising the 
species-typical behavior of autonomy [26] (p. 187). Lori Gruen defines autonomy as involving the 
ability to “make choices about what to do, when to do it, and who to do it with” and that many animals 
exhibit such abilities when they plan, save tools, hide food for later use or engage in manipulation or 
deception [29] (p. 148). Insofar as many laboratories not only confine animals, but also control nearly 
every aspect of animals’ lives and choices, including whether they can reproduce, when and what they 
can eat and who to live and interact with [30] (p. 163), laboratories also frustrate animals’ interests  
in autonomy. 

Societies 2015, 5 
228 
 
 
Whether due to pain, distress or a lack of autonomy, animals’ most basic interests are frustrated in 
experimentation. In light of this, we should not be surprised to learn that animals have often tried to 
escape laboratory environments. In 2009, for instance, nine snow monkeys managed to escape from an 
Oregon animal testing lab after a cleaner forgot to lock a cage door (all were found and returned to the 
lab three days later) [31]. Mice are also “known escape artists”, and will readily flee if a cage door is 
left unfastened [32]. For anyone who doubts that animals are harmed by experimentation in the above 
ways, minimally their efforts to resist and flee whenever possible suggests they are harmed by it in 
some way. 
2.4. Benefits to Humans 
As mentioned earlier, if sufficiently important human interests are at stake, animal experimentation 
could be justified on utilitarian grounds. However, important human interests are often not at stake in 
animal experimentation, leading Singer to argue that “among the tens of millions of experiments 
performed, only a few can possibly be regarded as contributing to important medical research” [11]  
(p. 40). Indeed, as discussed above, animals are used for all sorts of purposes aside from medical ones, 
including for commercial products, like makeup and cleaning items, and for non-medical research and 
basic pedagogy in many university departments [11] (p. 40). Perhaps it will be conceded that, if they 
involve animal suffering, these experiments do not serve human interests sufficiently important to 
outweigh this suffering and, so, are wrong on utilitarian grounds. But what about important biomedical 
experiments? Are the benefits to humans sufficiently great to outweigh the frustration of animals’ 
interests in these cases? 
Perhaps most damaging to the case for animal experimentation is the fact that medical experiments 
often do not yield usable results for humans. According to one estimate, “95% of drugs found safe and 
effective on nonhuman animal tests are rejected as harmful or useless during human clinical trials” [33] 
(p. 90; quoted in [34]). For instance, although it revealed no negative effect on pregnant “dogs, cats, rats, 
monkeys, hamsters and chickens”, the drug thalidomide caused severe defects in over 10,000 human 
babies [11] (p. 57). 11 There are countless examples of drug trials like this. David Sztybel elaborates: 
Tuberkulin cures tuberculosis in guinea pigs but causes it in humans. The arthritis 
medicine, oraflex, was safe and effective on animals but kills humans, and indeed guinea 
pigs can safely eat strychnine, while sheep can consume large quantities of arsenic. 
Digitalis, a cardiac drug that has saved millions of human lives, was delayed in its release 
because it dangerously elevates blood pressure in dogs. The discoverers of penicillin are 
grateful that no guinea pigs were available for testing, for it kills these small animals. 
Morphine causes mania in cats and mice, and dogs have twenty times the tolerance for it 
that humans do. Cases such as these abound. Nonhuman animals make very poor models 
for predicting results for human beings, and it is doubtful whether they help us to predict at 
all even when the humans and nonhumans are similarly affected by treatments: we just do 
not know in advance, in any given case. And allowing us to know in advance is supposed 
to be the whole point of animal experimentation [34] (p. 178). 
                                                 
11  Deformities were produced only in a specific strain of rabbit [11] (p. 57). 

Societies 2015, 5 
229 
 
 
Such troubling cases have led several physicians and scientists to question the usefulness of animal 
experimentation [11] (p. 56). As an American Medical Association (AMA) representative once put it, 
“frequently animal studies prove little or nothing and are very difficult to correlate to humans” [11] (p. 
58). Similarly, as scientist and executive director of the American Council on Science and Health, 
Elizabeth Whelan, notes, “it doesn’t take a Ph.D. in the sciences to grasp the fact that rodent exposure 
to the saccharin equivalent of 1800 bottles of soda pop a day doesn’t relate well to our daily ingestion 
of a few glasses of the stuff” [11] (p. 57). 
Of course, this is not to suggest that animal experimentation never yields useful knowledge for 
humans. Animal experimentation has certainly played a role in the creation of many vaccines, drugs 
and other products that have greatly benefited humans [29] (p. 118). As the American Medical 
Association writes, “virtually every advance in medical science in the 20th century, from antibiotics to 
vaccines to antidepressant drugs and organ transplants, has been achieved either directly or indirectly 
through the use of animals in laboratory experiments” [3] (p. 800). Moreover, it has been argued that 
alternatives to animal experimentation, like human cells and tissue cultures, cannot yield knowledge 
anywhere as useful as studies on living organisms [3] (p. 801). On this view, complex human behavior 
can only be modeled on similarly complex beings, not on computers [3] (p. 801). 
However, several responses are due. To the first point, since medical researchers are often legally 
required to experiment on animals, it is true that animal experimentation has played a role in nearly 
every medical advance [3] (p. 802). Yet, as Hugh LaFolette argues, that animal experimentation played a 
role in every medical advance does not mean it played an important or causally relevant role [3] (p. 802). 
As LaFolette points out, “Virtually all biomedical scientists drank milk as infants. However, that does 
not establish that milk drinking leads to biomedical knowledge” [3] (p. 802). Moreover, since they 
may not be useful or relevant, failed experiments on animals that played a less causally relevant role 
are likely to be under-reported in medicine [3] (p. 803). Indeed, surveys have revealed chronic 
problems with reporting in scientific research on animals generally, giving added cause for concern [35]. 
Second, the reason that there is often discontinuity between a product’s effects on animals versus its 
effects on humans is that although they are similar, animals and humans are also importantly different. 
So although both humans and animals are “highly organized, intact systems”, it is important not to 
overstate the similarities between them [3] (p. 807). LaFolette elaborates:  
Species differences are evident even in closely related species: humans and New World 
monkeys use different metabolic pathways. Why do these differences matter? Because 
researchers often speak as if the condition or disease being studied in laboratory animals 
strongly resembles the condition in humans. Evolutionary theory suggests that is not a 
plausible expectation. We thus have reason to think that nonhuman animals are not, in 
general, strong models of human biomedical phenomena [3] (pp. 809–810). 
In presuming that animals make good models for humans, we not only run into the danger of falsely 
assuming that certain drugs or products are safe for humans, but we may also lose out on drugs or 
products that are dangerous to animals yet safe for humans [11] (p. 57). For instance, insulin, morphine 
and penicillin all produced negative effects in infant rabbits and mice, mice and guinea pigs,  
respectively [11] (p. 57). Had we taken experiments of these drugs on animals seriously, humans may 

Societies 2015, 5 
230 
 
 
have never benefited from them. In short, as far as benefits to humans are concerned, animal 
experimentation may preclude us from important discoveries more often than it contributes to them. 
Moreover, it is important that any assessment of the benefits of animal experimentation consider the 
practice as a practice. LaFolette aptly notes that the moral issue is never about one single experiment 
and its potential benefits to humans, for a single experiment never leads to a discovery [3] (p. 814). 
Rather, “all scientific experiments are part of a pattern of activity—an institutional practice—and 
discoveries are made through an organized pattern of experimentation” [3] (p. 814). The question is 
therefore whether the practice of animal experimentation as a whole can be justified, not simply this or 
that experiment. Framed in this way, it becomes clear that, as a practice, animal experimentation 
always produces a concrete harm to animals for a merely possible benefit to humans [3] (p. 817). This 
is because scientists can never know for sure whether an experiment will prove beneficial (and, as we 
have seen, many experiments produce no benefit at all) [3] (p. 817). As a practice, then, we can never 
say that animal experimentation will benefit humans [3] (p. 817). 
Finally, LaFollette also argues that we should not speak of the benefits animal experimentation  
could produce, but the benefits that “only it could produce” [3] (p. 818, my emphasis). If animal 
experimentation’s benefits could be attained through alternatives, then we must not weigh the “purported 
benefits of experimentation, but only the increase in benefits relative to alternatives” [3] (p. 818). 
Indeed, if the practice of animal experimentation were abolished, then presumably we could spend 
more energy on developing alternatives to it. 12 This would increase the likelihood that alternatives 
could produce benefits just as good as, if not better than animal experimentation, thus closing the gap 
between the benefits due to animal experimentation and those due to alternatives.  
This section was intended to show that animal experimentation is morally wrong on both 
deontological and consequentialist grounds. Whether it is because sentient animals deserve inviolable 
rights, protection from pain, distress and harmful laboratory confinement or because animal 
experimentation’s purported benefits to humans do not outweigh animals’ interests in not suffering, 
there are plenty of reasons why animal experimentation is morally wrong. 
I will now turn to consider arguments against the use of knowledge gained from evil, specifically 
the use of Nazi data. 13 However, before doing so, it will be important to say something about the term 
                                                 
12  Indeed, many viable alternatives to animal experimentation exist, including, but not limited to, human-tissue in vitro 
testing, human stem-cell research, and micro-dosing technology. Since they do not require animal suffering, the existence 
and promise of such alternatives (several of which are cheaper and more reliable than the use of animal models) renders 
the utilitarian case for animal experimentation especially precarious. Thanks to Mylan Engel Jr. for this point.  
13  Many would object to the effort to analogize the case of animal experimentation to that of Nazi experimentation on the 
grounds that it is offensive to the memory of Holocaust victims. Consider, for instance, the uproar that ensued following 
PETA’s 2003 campaign entitled “Holocaust on your plate”, which placed images of concentration camp inmates 
alongside images of caged animals. One PETA tagline read: “To animals, all humans are Nazis” (invoking a similar line 
by Jewish writer Isaac Bashevis Singer) [36] (p. 98). In response, several Jewish groups and individuals called the 
exhibit “outrageous, offensive... abhorrent” and a “reprehensible misuse of Holocaust materials” [37]. Of course, such 
comparisons must always be made with the utmost care (for instance, they should not be made as claims to identical 
oppressions (see Sztybel [36], Painter [38])). However, we should also remain critical of objections to such comparisons 
on speciesist grounds. That is, one should object to claims that the comparison is offensive, because Holocaust victims 
mattered morally, whereas animals qua animals matter less or not at all. Once speciesist objections are pushed aside and 
the analogy is understood not as a claim to identical oppressions, I think the comparison becomes instructive, not only 

Societies 2015, 5 
231 
 
 
“evil”. Since the literature on Nazi data describes such cases in terms of products of evil, I retain the 
use of this term. However, the precise meaning of “evil” is vague. I follow Claudia Card’s definition of 
evil as a “harm that is (1) reasonably foreseeable (or appreciable); and (2) culpably inflicted  
(or tolerated, aggravated, or maintained); and that (3) deprives, or seriously risks depriving, others of 
the basics that are necessary to make a life possible and tolerable or decent (or to make a death 
decent)” [40] (p. 16). Card further defines a tolerable life as a life “at least minimally worth living for 
its own sake and from the standpoint of the being whose life it is, not just as a means to the ends of 
others” [40] (p.16). On this definition, to commit evil, one need not have evil motives, but simply be 
culpable, i.e., be doing something wrong [41] (p. 163). Note further that on Card’s view, “wrongdoing 
is necessary but not sufficient to make something evil. A wrongdoing is evil when it causes intolerable 
harm to others” [41] (p. 163). 
As the preceding section served to show that intolerable harm, culpable wrongdoing and the lack of 
a decent life for animals are all characteristic of animal experimentation, then animal experimentation 
can properly be deemed evil on Card’s definition. In fact, Card herself denies that only humans can be 
victims of evil and that her own view “includes evils done to animals” [40] (p. 9). 
3. Knowledge Gained from Evil 
Much ink has been spilled over whether it is permissible to use knowledge gained from evil. As a 
foremost example, consider the debates in bioethics over the use of Nazi data. 14 As the Nuremberg 
trials revealed, the Nazis performed and documented horrific human experiments at several 
concentration camps [42] (p. 103). As in animal experimentation, victims were subject to pain and 
suffering for tests that were in most cases expressly intended to end in death. These include 
hypothermia experiments that submerged victims into ice water until they froze to death, high altitude 
experiments that dissected victims’ brains while they were still alive, experiments to test intravenous 
poison injections and forced artificial insemination and sterilization. Hitler’s biographer, Allan 
Bullock, describes the experiments as follows: 
Among the other uses to which concentration-camp prisoners were put was to serve as the 
raw material for medical experiments by S.S. doctors. None of the post-war trials produced 
more macabre evidence than at the so-called “Doctors” Trial. All the experiments were 
conducted without anaesthetics or the slightest attention to the victims’ sufferings. 
Amongst the ordeals to which they were subjected were intense air pressure and intense 
cold until the “patient’s” lungs burst or he froze to death; the infliction of gas gangrene 
wounds; injection with typhus and jaundice; experiments with bone grafting; and a large 
number of investigations of sterilization (for “racial hygiene”), including castration and 
abortion. According to a Czech doctor who was a prisoner at Dachau and who personally 
                                                                                                                                                                       
for its ability to shed light on the gravity of the human use of animals, but since “the commodification and exploitation 
of women, racialized peoples, and animals are indelibly linked and mutually sustaining”, also to understand better 
human oppression [39] (pp. 38–39). 
14  In relation to the debate over morally-tainted Nazi data discussed below, see Moe [4], Martin [5], Schafer [43],  
Post [44]. Ridley [45], Godlovitch [46], Zion [47], Cohen [42] and Plaisted [48] et al.  

Societies 2015, 5 
232 
 
 
performed some seven thousand autopsies, the usual results of such experiments were 
death, permanent crippling, and mental derangement (quoted in [36] (p. 108)). 
It goes without saying that Nazi experimentation constitutes an instance of evil. Yet, given that 
these experiments also gave rise to data 15 that could be useful today, a moral dilemma arises. On the 
one hand, some think it would be immoral to refrain from using Nazi data. Consider Kristen Moe’s 
point that even though Nazi experimentation was egregiously unethical, we should not “let the 
inhumanity of such experiments blind us to the possibility that some ‘good’ may be salvaged from the 
ashes” ([4] (p. 41) quoted in [42]). 16 
On the other hand, given the severity of the evil involved, many have objected to the use of these 
data. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), for one, considered using Nazi data in the 
development of air pollution regulations on phosgene, an industrial chemical used in pesticides and 
plastics in the U.S. [42] (p. 109). Whereas the EPA had no viable means of testing the effects of 
phosgene on human populations, the Nazis ran such experiments on over fifty prisoners in preparation 
for a possible phosgene attack on Germany by the Allies [42] (p. 110). These experiments resulted in 
relevant data on the effects of phosgene, data that could be instrumental in saving lives today. Despite 
the potential utility of these data, however, the EPA decided against using them. Similarly, the New 
England Journal of Medicine declined to publish Nazi data that could have been useful for 
hypothermia research [42] (p. 108). 
What best accounts for the decision to forgo the use of Nazi data? There are three main categories 
of argument typically invoked to justify the idea that the use of Nazi research is immoral: (1) the 
character pollution concern; (2) the victim disrespect concern; and (3) the practice encouragement 
concern. I will canvass these concerns, arguing that the second and third provide the most convincing 
arguments in favor of the idea that the use of knowledge gained from evil is at least pro tanto morally 
wrong. I will echo Dennis Plaisted’s summary and assessment of the character pollution concern and 
agree with him that this concern both appears to “condemn too many things” and to misplace the moral 
                                                 
15  As Stan Godlovitch notes, this data includes, for example, information derived from hypothermia experiments  
regarding tolerance to cold and ways to revive people gone unconscious from hypothermia [46] (p. 2). Interestingly, 
himself a major animal activist, Godlovitch also invokes, but does not develop, a comparison to animal 
experimentation: “I must add—though this will play no role in the discussion—that I can find no interesting moral 
difference between these research cases, so graphic to us now, and the current daily routine use of other animals by 
researchers worldwide” [46] (p. 2). 
16  This parallels thoughts that a refusal to use knowledge from animal experimentation means the animal died in vain and 
resonates with the popular idea that it is more respectful to an animal that we use all its parts than to “waste” it. On this 
view, morality is commensurate with use. As an example of this view, Chloë Taylor describes a hunter colleague of hers 
who claimed he was a fellow animal activist, because he makes sure to use every part of the animal he kills, making 
“household items of their fat, fur, skin and bones” [49] (p. 88). However, Taylor notes that using “parts” and eating 
meat are never considered moral in relation to humans [49] (p. 86). Rather, they are considered signs of utmost 
depravity. If we learned, for instance, that human bodies were being dug up for a newfound energy resource, moral 
outrage (rather than moral approbation) would ensue. Indeed, far from profiting without consent from human death or 
suffering, respectful attitudes toward dead humans typically involve mourning rituals and efforts to grant humans 
dignity by fulfilling their wishes [49] (p. 97). Taylor concludes that the speciesist Western worldview “is deontological 
with respect to dead humans and utilitarian with respect to dead animals of other species” [49] (p. 97). 

Societies 2015, 5 
233 
 
 
focus on users rather than victims. However, I depart somewhat from Plaisted and others in my 
assessment of the latter two categories. 
The first category is the character pollution concern. The worry here is less about effects on victims 
and more about the character of the person using the data. Plaisted identifies three types of character 
pollution concerns: the “complicity rationale”, the “contamination rationale” and the “seepage and  
self-deception rationales” [48] (p. 1). I take each in turn. 
According to the complicity rationale, those who benefit from evil are complicit, because they enter 
an association that suggests their implicit approval of the original evil ([50] (p. 9) in [48] (p. 6)). 
According to James Burtchaell, “this situation is detectable when the associate’s ability to condemn the 
activity atrophies” ([50] (p. 9) in [48] (p. 6)). This kind of complicity takes place regardless of one’s 
actual sentiment about the product of evil—simply using the product renders one complicit, for use 
alone diminishes one’s ability to condemn the original act [48] (p. 7). As Ronald Green puts the 
general sentiment, “Just to pick up a tome containing intimate depictions of the bodies of people 
murdered by the Nazis, I feel, is to make myself an accessory to the cruel deeds” [51] (p. 548). 17 
However, the complicity rationale is problematic, for it is unclear just how one can be complicit in 
evil after evil has already been committed. Plaisted is correct to say that this rationale “strains the 
notion of complicity beyond recognition” [48] (p. 7). Indeed, as Plaisted notes, Burtchaell actually 
intends a different understanding of complicity, one that suggests that one’s stamp of approval on the 
original evil causes moral deterioration in one’s character [48] (p. 7). If this is the sense of complicity 
Burtchaell has in mind, then he is not invoking the common understanding of complicity according to 
which one causally contributes to evil, but rather the idea that employing the benefits of evil taints 
one’s character by “harden[ing] one morally” [48] (p. 7). If this is Burtchaell’s meaning, then he may 
come closer to the contamination rationale discussed below. 
According to this second type of character pollution concern, the use of products resulting from evil 
contaminates one’s character [48] (p. 9). The idea here is that “those who are willing to appropriate the 
products of evil fail to display the appropriate amount of moral horror towards the past evil; they have 
become desensitized morally and… that is the sense in which they are contaminated” [48] (p. 11). 
However, if this is Burtchaell’s intended meaning, he seems mistaken to suggest that the use of a 
product of evil implies one’s approval of or desensitization to the original evil, since it is at least 
possible to condemn evil while using its products, perhaps even toward good aims. To this point, 
Plaisted convincingly argues that both the complicity and contamination rationales would appear to 
rule out many acts that we find perfectly acceptable [48] (p. 8). In the first instance: 
If supporters of the complicity rationale seriously wish to maintain that one can become a 
blameworthy accomplice to the evil of abortion 18 after the fact by using the tissue of an 
aborted fetus for benevolent medical purposes, even if one disapproves of abortion, it is 
difficult to see how their rationale would not also condemn the use of organs from murder 
victims and other products of evil [48] (p. 8). 
Similarly, Plaisted argues that the contamination rationale also condemns too much. By way of the 
same example, Plaisted asks: “Shouldn’t we view the organs as defiled themselves and anyone who 
                                                 
17  Green himself thinks such sentiments are “highly opaque to analysis” [51] (p. 548). 
18  This, of course, assuming that abortion is morally wrong. 

Societies 2015, 5 
234 
 
 
appropriates them for another purpose as consequently defiled as well? If not, then how should we 
distinguish the donation case from the Nazi data or fetal tissue case?” [48] (p. 11). In sum, without 
guidance on how to distinguish between complicity or contamination in the case of using Nazi data 
versus using a murder victim’s organs, it is difficult to render compelling either rationale [48] (p. 8). 
Finally, Plaisted lists the “seepage and self-deception” character concerns coined by Catherine 
Kaveny. Seepage takes place when the benefits of evil cause one to view that evil positively [48] (p. 12). 
To return to the EPA case, seepage would take place if in using the Nazi phosgene gas experiments, 
the EPA members began to view the data approvingly. Self-deception takes place when one “deludes 
oneself about one’s motives for using the product of evil” [48] (pp. 12–13). To take the same example, 
if the EPA members convinced themselves that they did not view the data more positively (even 
though they had), but rather were simply trying to do good, they would be deceiving themselves. 
Plaisted notes that these concerns fare better than the previous two because they are case-sensitive. 
Whether seepage or self-deception actually take place depends on the context, and this means they do 
not “condemn too many things”. However, despite the latter two concerns having some moral force, I 
concur with Plaisted that character-based concerns in general are ill focused. As he writes, “I find the 
prospect of someone other than the appropriator being harmed as a result of the appropriator’s act 
more troubling than the prospect of character damage to the appropriator” [48] (p. 13). I agree that, to 
be morally compelling, the wrong of using data gained from evil should be indexed to victims, not  
users themselves. 
According to the second category of concern, the use of data gained from evil is inherently 
disrespectful to the victims [45] (p. 255). On this view, since the victims suffered unjustly, the 
continued use of products arising from those experiments is disrespectful. 19 Consider here the anger 
that ensued over eBay’s trade in Holocaust memorabilia, including victims’ clothing, shoes, Yellow 
Star of David armbands, a suitcase and a toothbrush. The trade caused international outrage, leading 
one survivor to remark that such profiting from evil was “so disrespectful to the victims” [52]. 
However, like the character pollution concern, some argue that this concern is also unconvincing. 
According to the skeptic, the connection between the knowledge gained from evil and disrespect to 
victims is far from obvious (e.g., [45] (p. 256); [47] (p. 233)). As Ridley puts it, “There does not 
appear to be any reason why someone might not be filled with genuine reverence and respect for the 
victims of an unethical experiment while at the same time benefitting from its results, or attempting to 
benefit others by using those results” [45] (p. 256). Ridley provides the example of a murder victim. 
He argues that if a murder caused police to tighten security in the area where the victim was murdered, 
thus creating a safer neighborhood, it does not follow from this benefit to the neighborhood that  
the murder victim is disrespected [45] (p. 256). Similarly, it would not follow from the use of Nazi  
data to improve air pollution regulations that Holocaust victims are disrespected. Ridley explains, 
                                                 
19  Some might object to the victim disrespect concern on the grounds that we cannot disrespect the dead. I do not have the 
space to enter this debate here. However, for those who doubt the possibility of disrespecting the dead, I think the 
victim disrespect concern can be also be understood in terms of disrespect to victims’ memory, and disrespecting 
victims’ memory can do direct harm to: (1) those individuals who cared for the victims (e.g., their family members, or 
perhaps activists who fight on behalf of those victims); and (2) in the case of ongoing oppression, to the class of victims 
who are oppressed by the same practice, but who remain alive (e.g., animals currently being used in experimentation). 

Societies 2015, 5 
235 
 
 
“Only if the beneficiaries …relish the fact that their good fortune was made possible by the unjust 
suffering of someone else is anything evidently repulsive going on but then it is these people’s attitude 
towards unjust suffering that is repulsive and not the (mere) fact that they happen to be the 
beneficiaries of it” [45] (p. 256). In fact, one might instead suggest that benefiting others is a way of 
respecting those victims, by ensuring they “did not suffer for nothing” [45] (p. 256). I will return to 
this concern below. 
Finally, there is the practice encouragement concern. The practice encouragement concern is forward 
rather than backward looking and places the focus on potential victims, not users themselves [48] (p. 14). 
According to this view, the use of products arising from evil implicitly or explicitly encourages others 
to perpetrate evil in the future [48] (p. 2); [47] (p. 233). This would take place if, for instance, using 
Nazi data caused researchers to commission and perform horrific experiments on non-consenting 
individuals. The practice encouragement concern captures a clear and intuitive thought: the use of 
products of evil is morally unacceptable if it leads to future evil. As Plaisted writes, “…under the 
encouragement rationale it is not that things associated with evil have any magical property that 
contaminates the user of them, or that by using such objects we somehow become accomplices after 
the fact to the original evil; it is rather that using such objects will be wrong if such use will lead to 
concrete instances of evil in the future” [48] (p. 14). As I find both the victim disrespect and practice 
encouragement concerns the most convincing, I will say more about each below. 
4. Knowledge Gained from Animal Experimentation 
Although I agree with Plaisted that the character pollution concern is not a convincing basis on 
which to oppose the use of knowledge gained from evil, I think the case of animal experimentation 
brings to light the strength of both the victim disrespect and practice encouragement concerns. 
Take first the victim disrespect concern. Although Ridley may be correct that there is nothing 
inherently disrespectful to victims when one uses a product of evil, I do not think we can do away with 
the victim disrespect concern so readily in the case at hand. This is because while it is reasonable to 
suppose that a murder victim is not disrespected by the introduction of stricter security into the 
neighborhood where she was murdered, the same cannot be said about the use of knowledge for which 
an animal died. To see this, consider that Ridley’s murder case presumes nothing about a class of 
relevant oppressors and oppressed victims. Ridley is not describing a case in which, say: (1) a black 
man was murdered in a white neighborhood; (2) the murder was racially motivated; and (3) his murder 
was then used to ensure better security for the white segment of the neighborhood. If this were 
Ridley’s case, then we ought to reconsider the claim that employing the black man’s murder to further 
a white neighborhood’s safety does not amount to a form of disrespect. On the contrary, respect for the 
black victim in this case would involve ensuring greater safety for black people at risk of racially-
motivated crimes. For instance, if Trayvon Martin’s killing, a killing many (reasonably) believe to be a 
direct result of racism, was used to further the protection of the white segment of the gated community 
in which he was killed, many would rightly suggest that Martin was disrespected by such a decision. 
And the reason he would be disrespected is that white domination—and society’s systematic 
expression that white bodies matter more and deserve more protection than black bodies—is part and 
parcel of the racist worldview that contributed to Martin’s death. 

Societies 2015, 5 
236 
 
 
For similar reasons, epistemically benefiting from animal experimentation disrespects animal 
victims. Just like using Trayvon Martin’s killing to ensure safety for a white community would 
disrespect him, using the results of animal death to benefit humans would likewise disrespect animal 
victims. The reason is that human domination, and society’s systematic expression that human bodies 
are more morally considerable and worthy than animal bodies, is part and parcel of the speciesist 
worldview that contributes to animal death. Here, too, there is a relevant class of oppressors and 
oppressed victims that we cannot deny—in this case, a class of beings that routinely tortures, hunts, 
captures, kills or eats another class of beings deemed inferior. Since humans as a group directly or 
indirectly participate in harm to animals for human purposes, the suggestion that animals could be 
respected by the human use of knowledge acquired through their deaths and suffering is insulting. 
Next, unlike the use of Nazi data, using knowledge from animal experimentation provides a  
clear-cut case of practice encouragement. In the Nazi case, whether the use of Nazi data encourages 
scientists to perform evil experiments is debatable. It is debatable because there is not a tight 
connection between the use of Nazi data and the encouragement of future evil. Rather, we can imagine 
the use of Nazi data accompanied by a condemnation of its origins and future genocidal acts. We can 
do this largely because the Nazis have ceased murdering Jews and other victims. However, it is more 
difficult to imagine the accompanying condemnation in the case of knowledge gained from animal 
experimentation. The reason is that, like a supply and demand model, use of the knowledge presently 
encourages experimenters to solicit further experimentation the same way consumption of meat 
encourages meat companies to produce more meat. In other words, once we account for the main 
purpose behind animal experimentation, namely to yield useful knowledge, affirmations of the 
practice’s usefulness serve to vindicate it. In signaling to experimenters that the practice is useful, the 
experimenters are thereby directly encouraged to continue the ongoing practice of experimentation. To 
modify the Nazi example, it is as if the Nazis dropped all other ideological commitments to the 
extermination of Jews, but still thought the Jews made especially good specimens for research. Then, 
imagine a user of that research claiming she condemned what the Nazis were doing, but she detached 
the research’s results from the Nazis’ acts. One might rightfully query: “Knowing full well that the 
practice continues for the sake of the knowledge you seek, how can you consistently use the 
knowledge gained from experimentation, but claim you do not wish to encourage the practice? 
Without your use, the practice could not survive.” This would be akin to condemning the practice of 
factory farming, but continuing to consume factory-farmed animals, knowing full well that factory 
farming’s purpose is to produce animals to be consumed. 
According to Plaisted, for practice encouragement to take place, the following three conditions must 
be met: (1) “the person commits an evil act”; (2) “use of the evil product influenced that person to look 
more favorably on the commission of that act than she would have otherwise”; (3) “without that 
favorable influence the person would not have committed the act” [48] (p. 15). These three conditions 
are met in the case of an animal experimenter who kills an animal for knowledge, regards animal 
experimentation more positively in light of the knowledge gained and who would not have killed the 
animal if it were not for the prior approbatory feeling that use of the resultant knowledge engendered 
toward experimentation. 
I find Plaisted’s conditions overly restrictive. Plaisted suggests that one must commit the evil act in 
order for encouragement of evil to take place. Plaisted reasons that “merely causing people to look 

Societies 2015, 5 
237 
 
 
more favorably on an evil […] does not seem to be much of a basis for opposing the use of evil 
products” [48] (p. 16). To take his example, if one is led to regard elective abortions approvingly as a 
result of fetal tissue’s benefits (assuming elective abortions are wrong), but is not led to get an abortion 
herself, then evil is not encouraged [48] (p. 16). However, I think Plaisted underestimates what it 
means for individuals in a society to look positively upon evil acts. A society’s favorable viewing of an 
evil act can still encourage evil in that it can render it more likely that evil be committed or help simply 
to maintain the status quo. In other words, encouragement need not attach to success. For peer pressure 
to take place, for instance, one need not successfully pressure someone into a given act, but only to 
impose the pressure itself and make the pressured act more probable. Similarly, if a society is led to 
regard animal experimentation approvingly, this need not directly lead to more animal experimentation 
for the practice to be encouraged. All that is required for encouragement is that the practice be:  
(1) either rendered more likely than it otherwise would have been; or (2) urged to continue at its 
current rate. 
In fact, Plaisted himself acknowledges a more mitigated type of encouragement when he argues 
that, sometimes, the “use of a product of evil promotes an environment or context in which the original 
evil is regarded favorably” [48] (p. 17). In this case: 
The benefits of using the evil product have led to a situation in which society views the 
original evil in a more positive light. If fetal tissue transplantation proved to have 
substantial therapeutic benefits, it may lead society overall to regard abortion in a more 
favorable light. This generally more positive attitude towards abortion could make it easier 
for some to opt for abortion than they could have without the more positive context 
brought forth by fetal tissue appropriation. I believe this type of situation should be 
recognized as encouragement of evil just like its more direct counterpart [48] (p. 17). 
Here, Plaisted seems to acknowledge that the encouragement of evil can take place regardless of 
whether a person actually commits evil (Condition 1). It takes place simply if an attitude “could make 
it easier” for some to commit evil. 
On this score, Ronald Green provides a wider and thus more helpful account of practice 
encouragement. Green’s account captures what he calls “indirect encouragement”. For indirect 
encouragement to take place, the benefits of evil need not encourage an actor to commit more evil [51]  
(p. 550). Indirect encouragement is concerned less with the impact on the evildoer himself and more 
with the societal impact “of the public rule of conduct that is created by one’s acceptance of the 
benefits of wrongdoing” [51] (p. 550). It is this type of encouragement that Green thinks takes place in 
the Nazi data case. According to Green, using Nazi data creates an undesirable public rule according to 
which the scientific community effectively announces that unethically acquired data may be used so 
long as: “(1) the information can benefit humanity; and (2) there is no chance that those who created 
the information will be encouraged to repeat their deeds” [51] (p. 550). Given that such a public rule 
could (but does not necessarily) encourage some researchers to disregard proper moral conduct 
knowing that their research will be used anyway or to endure temporary criticism in the interest of 
future gain, it is “prima facie morally questionable” [51] (p. 551). 
Of course, the public rule created in the case of animal experimentation even more clearly 
encourages experimentation itself. The public rule in this case states not only that animal research can 

Societies 2015, 5 
238 
 
 
be used when it benefits humanity (Green’s first condition), but that it can be used even though its use 
will likely encourage more animal experimentation in the future. With such a rule in place, society is 
surely led to approve of the use of knowledge gained from animal experimentation. Moreover, even if 
this public rule does not directly cause more animal experimentation to come about, minimally, it helps 
to maintain the status quo. Indeed, if a negative public rule were in place that led to strong societal 
disapproval of the use of knowledge gained from animal experimentation, animal experimentation itself 
would be unable to persist. 
5. Conclusions: Implications for Knowledge Use 
The victim disrespect and practice encouragement concerns provide the most plausible routes to 
understanding the pro tanto wrong of using knowledge gained from evil. Indeed, in their explanation 
for why they refuse to publish data arising from Nazi research, the New England Journal of Medicine 
echoes these two concerns and adds an expressive argument against the data’s use. The journal said it 
would not publish data acquired from injustice because: (1) publishing unjust work violates the 
principle of respecting the research subject (the victim disrespect concern); (2) could encourage others 
to do the same in the future (the practice encouragement concern); and (3) refusing to publish the work 
sends the important message that knowledge, “though important, may be less important to a decent 
society than the way it is obtained” (in [46], p. 8). I submit that these same three concerns explain with 
equal force why it is wrong to use knowledge gained from animal experimentation. 
At this point, it is worth asking just what these arguments imply for the actual use of knowledge 
gained from animal experimentation. 20 I think there are at least three questions we can ask to help 
assess whether the pro tanto wrong of using knowledge gained from animal experimentation can be 
offset: (1) Is the evil recognized and admitted by the knowledge user? (2) Is the reason for the 
knowledge use morally good? (3) Is it somehow beneficial to the research subjects themselves or at 
least to the species that was experimented on? 
With these questions in mind, it becomes clear that most current uses of knowledge gained from 
animal experimentation do not overcome the pro tanto wrong established by the victim disrespect and 
practice encouragement concerns. Consider the animal experimenter him or herself as a relevant 
knowledge user. First, in the case of animal testing, the experimenter is directly complicit in the pain 
and death animals undergo; it is accordingly unlikely that the experimenter acknowledges animals as 
victims of evil. Typically, when one is directly involved in putting animals to death or subjecting them 
                                                 
20  When I refer to knowledge use, I do not intend the use of knowledge by someone who already possesses the  
relevant knowledge (we cannot simply “unknow”). Rather, I intend use in terms of transfer, i.e., should this 
knowledge/data/information be transferred to a wider pool of knowledge or to others? Following Robert Nozick’s 
formulation, “a person who acquires a holding in accordance with the principle of justice in acquisition is entitled to that 
holding” and “a person who acquires a holding in accordance with the principle of justice in transfer, from someone else 
entitled to the holding, is entitled to the holding” [53] (p. 151). For Nozick, there can only be “justice in holding” if 
Conditions 1 and 2 are met [53] (p. 151). On my view, since there was no justice in acquisition (i.e., knowledge gained 
from animal experimentation was not legitimately acquired), then there can be no justice in transfer (i.e., since it was 
not legitimately acquired in the first place, knowledge gained from animal experimentation cannot legitimately be 
transferred to others).  

Societies 2015, 5 
239 
 
 
to pain, it is easier to deny that animals are victims at all. 21 Consider, for instance, the apparent lack of 
sympathy in the following experimental reports: “First, we’ll consider a mutant mouse created in the 
laboratory…it turns out that, ultimately, this mouse is a disaster: it dies at birth because it cannot 
control the muscles used for breathing”; “Most interestingly, subjecting a mother rat during pregnancy 
to moderate stress 22 (confinement in a clear plastic tube under bright lights) can reduce the levels of 
testosterone in the developing fetus”; “…there was a determined effort to reproduce…a complete 
anterograde amnesia for facts and events, in an animal model (preferably an inexpensive animal like a 
rat)” ([54] pp. 70, 181, 132 in [55] p. 7). These passages reveal that at least some scientists use rather 
dispassionate language in describing animal subjects (“most interestingly”, “an inexpensive animal”, 
“this mouse is a disaster”), thus suggesting a lack of sympathy for their plight, let alone an 
acknowledgment of their victim status. 23 
Next, although animal testing sometimes serves morally good aims (consider its role in medicine 
versus consumer products), as noted earlier, much animal experimentation serves seemingly trivial 
purposes [25], (p. 65); [22], (p. 117); [56], (p. 311); [49], (p. 99). Lori Gruen describes several 
experiments like this, including an experiment that tested the effects of LSD on 71 kittens [25] (p. 65). 
She writes, “While the experimenters noted that ‘the behavioral effects of LSD in animals have 
received monumental attention and literally thousands of studies have dealt with the issue’, they 
decided to go ahead and subject the kittens to the experiments in order to compare the effects on young 
animals with those on adults” [25] (p. 65). It is difficult to fathom a crucial scientific need for such  
an experiment. 
Finally, the vast majority of experimentation still benefits humans, not animals, as in the case of 
scientific research aimed at human health or the development of products for human consumption [17] 
(p. 9). Only rarely are the results of animal experimentation used to benefit animals themselves. 24 
In sum, since (1) the wrongness of animal experimentation is likely to go unacknowledged by the 
experimenter, (2) the practice often serves frivolous aims and (3) it overwhelmingly benefits humans, 
not animals, most current-day uses of knowledge from animal experimentation fall prey to the pro 
tanto wrong and do not offset it. They are accordingly unjust. 
I would like to end by canvassing a few objections to my account. First, an objector will protest, 
given that so many gains have been ill gotten, will not it turn out that a huge sum of knowledge cannot 
be used on this view? For instance, in 1849, so-called father of gynecology J. Marion Sims performed 
the first successful fistula operation [58] (p. 29). Since he played such a central role in the development 
of gynecology, it is not implausible to think that much of the field’s knowledge can be traced to his 
studies. Yet, Sims performed his first vesicovaginal fistula surgeries on enslaved African-American 
                                                 
21  I think this is especially likely in the case of experiments intended to satisfy scientific curiosity. 
22  I would also question the description of this as “moderate” stress for the rat. Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for  
this point. 
23  Consider here Joel Marks’ call for scientists to formally acknowledge the debt owed to animals in their experimental 
research [54] (p. 6). However, although formal acknowledgment may constitute a step forward in the fight against 
animal oppression, if it serves to allay human guilt over the use of animals, it could also constitute a step back. 
24  Even in experiments intended to benefit animals, the research may not benefit individual animals, but rather future 
animals of that species. Moreover, even in studies on animal health, for instance, the benefit is still usually for humans  
(for instance, to ensure a safe meat supply). Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for this point. 

Societies 2015, 5 
240 
 
 
women [58] (p. 29). As slaves, these women were not asked for consent, and several underwent great 
pain and suffering (anesthetic was not used) [58] (p. 29). If a line can be traced from Sims’ 
experiments on slaves to current-day gynecological knowledge, then must we cease using 
gynecological knowledge, as well? Moreover, insofar as all modern medicine has relied on at least some 
animal (not to mention non-consensual human) experimentation in the past, does this mean we must 
cease using all modern medical knowledge, as well? 
Here, I must emphasize the nature of pro tanto wrongs. Unlike proper wrongs, or acts that are 
wrong all things considered, pro tanto wrongs are acts that would be wrong were there no other 
considerations in play. As Shelly Kagan describes it, “a pro tanto reason has genuine weight, but 
nonetheless may be outweighed by other considerations” [6] (p. 17). In the case of gynecological 
knowledge, then, it may turn out both that its use is pro tanto wrong, but that a ban on the use of this 
knowledge would produce more wrongs than it would prevent. These additional wrongs could be 
strong enough to outweigh the pro tanto wrong of using the knowledge. Indeed, in many cases, it will 
be too late to block knowledge use, for unlike Nazi data, some knowledge is already entrenched in 
existing epistemic fields such that preventing its further transfer would be unrealistic (or perhaps 
impossible), all things considered. This is likely the case with Sims’ gynecological knowledge, which 
is already embedded in a wider, pre-existing field of knowledge. Given these considerations, it would 
thus be wrong to try to block the knowledge use. 
However, although using knowledge gained from Sims’ experiments is not likely to encourage 
today’s gynecologists to perform surgery on non-consenting African-American women (the practice 
encouragement concern), epistemically benefiting from experiments on African-American slaves still 
meets the victim-disrespect and expressiveness 25 concerns mentioned above. In light of this, it will 
still be important to take carefully considered, context-specific measures to diminish the wrong 
associated with using knowledge reliant on this history. Perhaps widespread awareness and 
denunciation of experiments and procedures that abused and exploited African-American slaves is an 
appropriate step. Indeed, since many African-Americans remain distrustful of the healthcare system 
due to its history of experimentation on and abuse of black bodies [59] (p. 191), perhaps the mandatory 
acknowledgment and teaching of this history to medical professionals can help contribute to racial 
justice. Moreover, perhaps medical professionals must commit to combating institutional racism in the 
healthcare system by taking measures to ensure their practices do not racially discriminate (ideally, 
these things would be done in their own right as well). 
However, the gynecological knowledge case is still importantly different from the animal 
experimentation case. First, and most importantly, unlike the use of gynecological knowledge, the use 
of knowledge gained from the ongoing practice of animal experimentation meets the practice 
encouragement concern. Second, although some knowledge gained from experiments on animals will 
be entrenched in epistemic fields from which it cannot be readily extracted, data from new and future 
experiments on animals will not hold such pre-existing ties. In these cases, it will be easier to 
individuate knowledge and prevent its further transfer. In the case of new and future experiments on 
animals, then, rejection of the knowledge gained from animal experimentation is morally appropriate. 
                                                 
25  Recall that the New England Journal of Medicine’s third reason for refusing to publish Nazi data is that it expresses the 
message that “though important, [the data] may be less important to a decent society than the way it is obtained.” 

Societies 2015, 5 
241 
 
 
Additionally, since animal experimentation’s existence is predicated on the usability of its results, the 
rejection of these results will serve to impugn further animal experimentation. 
However, this is not to suggest that the refusal of knowledge is always morally good, for it would 
be naive to assume that the moral work is done once knowledge is simply refused. Indeed, in some 
cases, the simple refusal of knowledge may seem ethically pure, yet actively contribute to evil by 
ignoring or destroying an atrocity’s epistemic products. 26 In other cases, knowledge gained from evil 
might be used subversively. For instance, consider an animal activist who seeks to use animal 
experimentation data for the explicit purpose of publicly condemning it or employing it to help heal 
sick animals who survived experimentation. Here is a case of someone taking up unethically acquired 
knowledge and using it to combat animal suffering. However, to repeat, insofar as the current 
employment of knowledge gained from animal experimentation does not offset the pro tanto wrong in 
these subversive ways, it remains unjust. 
One final objection will hold that this proposal is unrealistic, for how can we ever purport to know 
what knowledge is or is not the product of evil? It is true that we are mired in uncertainty and the limits 
of our situation. However, this is the nature of ethical life. The same way we can never fully know the 
effects of our actions, we can never fully know the histories and contexts tied to our present-day 
situation. Yet ethics still demands that we try. We do our best to predict the effects our actions will have 
on others. Similarly, we must do our best to combat ignorance and seek to learn about structures and 
systems of oppression that give rise to present-day institutions, practices and knowledge [60] (p. 140). 
Such epistemic responsibility will prove key in our efforts to address wrongdoing to both humans  
and animals. 
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank Andrew Forcehimes, Mylan Engel Jr. and four anonymous reviewers for their 
helpful feedback. 
Conflicts of Interest 
The author declares no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. 
Zamir, T. Killing for Knowledge. J. Appl. Philos. 1990, 23, 17–40. 
2. 
Monamy, V. Animal Experimentation: A Guide to the Issues; Cambridge University Press: 
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2009. 
3. 
Lafolette, H. Animal Experimentation in Biomedical Research. In The Oxford Handbook of 
Animal Ethics; Frey, R.G., Beauchamp, T.L., Eds.; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, 
USA, 2011. 
4. 
Moe, K. Should the Nazi research data be cited? Hastings Cent. Rep. 1984, 14, 5–7. 
5. 
Martin, R. Using Nazi Scientific Data. Dialogue 1986, 25, 403–411. 
6. 
Kagan, S. The Limits of Morality; Clarendon Press: Oxford, UK, 1989. 
                                                 
26  Thanks to José Medina for this point.  

Societies 2015, 5 
242 
 
 
7. 
Donaldson, S.; Kymlicka, W. Zoopolis; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2011. 
8. 
Cohen, C.; Regan, T. The Animal Rights Debate; Rowman & Littlefield: Lanham, MD, USA, 2001. 
9. 
Nobis, N. Carl Cohen’s “Kind” Arguments for Animals Rights and Against Human Rights.  
J. Appl. Philos. 2004, 21, 43–59. 
10. Francione, G.; Garner, R. The Animal Rights Debate: Abolition or Regulation? Columbia 
University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2010. 
11. Singer, P. Animal Liberation and Animal Rights. In Earthcare: An Anthology in Environmental 
Ethics; Clowney, D., Mosto, P., Eds.; Rowman & Littlefield: Lanham, MD, USA. 2009. 
12. DeGrazia, D. The Ethics of Confining Animals: From Farms to Zoos to Human Homes. In The 
Oxford Handbook of Animal Ethics; Frey, R.G., Beauchamp, T.L., Eds.; Oxford University Press: 
New York, NY, USA, 2011. 
13. Singer, P. All Animals Are Equal. In Applied Ethics; Singer, P., Ed.; Oxford University Press:  
New York, NY, USA, 1986. 
14. Kittay, E.F. The Personal is Philosophical is Political: A Philosopher and Mother of a Cognitively 
Disabled Person Sends Notes From the Battlefield. Metaphilosophy 2009, 40, 606–627. 
15. Carbone, L. What Animals Want: Expertise and Advocacy in Laboratory Animal Welfare Policy; 
Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2004. 
16. Taylor, K.; Gordon, N.; Langley, G.; Higgins, W. Estimates for Worldwide Laboratory Animal 
Use in 2005. Altern. Lab. Anim. 2008, 36, 327–342. 
17. Knight, A. The Costs and Benefits of Animal Experiments; Palgrave MacMillan: Oxford, UK, 2011. 
18. USDA 
Statistics 
for 
Animals 
Used 
in 
Research 
in 
2012. 
Available 
online: 
http://speakingofresearch.com/2014/02/17/usda-statistics-for-animal-used-in-research-in-2012/ 
(accessed on18 February 2015). 
19. Olsson, I.; Anna, S.; Robinson, P.; Sandøe, P. Ethics of Animal Research. In Handbook of 
Laboratory Animal Science, Volume I: Essential Principles and Practices; Hau, J., Schapiro, S., Eds.; 
CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2011. 
20. Carbone, L. Pain in Laboratory Animals: The Ethical and Regulatory Imperatives. PLoS One 
2011 6, 1–6. 
21. Zimmerman, M. Ethical Considerations in Relation to Pain in Animal Experimentation.  
Acta Physiol. Scand. 1986, 554, 221–233. 
22. Francione, G. Introduction to Animal Rights: Your Child or the Dog? Temple University Press: 
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2000. 
23. World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC Monographs on 
the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Tobacco Smoke and Involuntary Smoking. 
Available online: http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol83/mono83.pdf (accessed on 18 
February 2015). 
24. Aaltola, E. Animal Ethics. In Encyclopedia of Environmental Ethics and Philosophy; Callicott, J.B., 
Frodeman, R., Eds.; MacMillan Reference: Farmington Hills, MI, USA, 2009. 
25. Gruen, L. Dismantling Oppression: An Analysis of the Connection between Women and Animals. 
In Ecofeminism: Women, Animals, Nature; Gaard, G., Ed.; Temple University Press: Philadelphia, 
PA, USA, 1993. 

Societies 2015, 5 
243 
 
 
26. Streiffer, R. The Confinement of Laboratory Animals: Ethical and Conceptual Issues. In The 
Ethics of Captivity; Gruen, L., Ed.; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2014. 
27. Demello, M. Rabbits in Captivity. In The Ethics of Captivity; Gruen, L., Ed.; Oxford University 
Press: New York, NY, USA, 2014. 
28. Allen Fox, M. Animal Experimentation: A Philosopher’s Changing Views. Between Species 1987, 
3, 55–75. 
29. Gruen, L. Ethics and Animals; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011. 
30. Gruen, L. The Faces of Animal Oppression. In Dancing with Iris: The Philosophy of Iris Marion 
Young; Nagel, M., Ferguson, A., Eds.; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2009. 
31. Felsinger, A. Nine Snow Monkeys Escape from Oregon Animal Testing Lab. Available online: 
http://planetsave.com/2009/04/04/nine-snow-monkeys-escape-from-oregon-animal-testing-lab/ 
(accessed on 11 November 2014). 
32. Leary, W. Why No Mouse Should Ever Escape AIDS Experiment. Available online: 
http://www.nytimes.com/1988/02/02/science/why-no-mouse-should-ever-escape-aids-
experiment.html (accessed 11 November 2014). 
33. Sharpe, R. The Cruel Deception: The Use of Animals in Medical Research; Thorsons Publishing 
Limited: London, UK, 1988. 
34. Sztybel, D. A Living Will Clause for Supporters of Animal Experimentation. J. Appl. Philos. 
2006, 23, 173–189. 
35. Kilkenny, C.; Parsons, N.; Kadyszewski, E.; Festing, M.F.W.; Cuthill, I.C.; Fry, D.; Hutton, J.;  
Altman, D.G. Survey of the Quality of Experimental Design, Statistical Analysis and Reporting of 
Research Using Animals. PLoS One 2009, 4, e7824. 
36. Sztybel, D. Can the Treatment of Animals be Compared to the Holocaust? Ethics Environ. 2006, 
11, 97–132. 
37. Besser, J. Museum Demands End to PETA’s Use of Holocaust Photos. Available online: 
http://www.jweekly.com/article/full/19449/museum-demands-end-to-peta-s-use-of-holocaust-photos/ 
(accessed 11 November 2014). 
38. Painter, C. The Analogy between the Holocaust and Animal Factory Farming: A Defense. J. Crit. 
Anim. Stud. 2014, 12, 33–62. 
39. Deckha, M. Salience of Species Difference for Feminist Theory. Hastings Women’s L.J. 2006,  
17, 1–38. 
40. Card, C. The Atrocity Paradigm: A Theory of Evil; Oxford University Press: New York, NY,  
USA, 2002. 
41. Davion, V. Feminist Perspectives on Global Warming, Genocide, and Card’s Theory of Evil. 
Hypatia 2009, 24, 160–177. 
42. Cohen, B. The Ethics of Using Medical Data from Nazi Experiments. J. Halacha Contemp. Soc. 
1990, 19, 103–126. 
43. Schafer, A. On Using Nazi Data: The Case Against. Dialogue 1986, 25, 413–419. 
44. Post, S. The Echo of Nuremberg: Nazi Data and Ethics. J. Med. Ethics 1991, 17, 42–44. 
45. Ridley, A. Ill-gotten Gains: On the Use of Results from Unethical Experiments in Medicine.  
Public Aff. Q. 1995, 9, 253–266. 

Societies 2015, 5 
244 
 
 
46. Godlovitch, S. Forbidding Nasty Knowledge: On the Use of Ill-gotten Information. J. Appl. 
Philos. 1997, 14, 1–17. 
47. Zion, D. “Moral Taint” or Ethical Responsibility? Unethical Information and the Problem of HIV 
Clinical Trials in Developing Countries. J. Appl. Philos. 1998, 15, 231–239. 
48. Plaisted, D. The Ethics of Appropriating Evil. Teach. Ethics 2007, 7, 1–23. 
49. Taylor, C. Respect for the (animal) dead. In Animal Death; Johnston, J., Probyn-Rapsey, F., Eds.; 
Sydney University Press: Sydney, Australia, 2013. 
50. Burtchaell, J.T. University Policy on Experimental Use of Aborted Fetal Tissue. IRB: Rev. Hum. 
Subj. Res. 1988, 10, 7–11. 
51. Green, R. Benefiting from “Evil”: An Incipient Moral Problem in Human Stem Cell Research. 
Bioethics 2002, 16, 544–556. 
52. Nicol, M.; Murphy, S. Ebay’s sick trade in holocaust souvenirs: Outrage over auctions of Death 
Camp relics. Available at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2485251/Ebays-sick trade-
Holocaust-souvenirs-Outrage-auctions-Death-Camp-relics.html (accessed on 11 November 2014). 
53. Nozick, R. Anarchy, State, Utopia; Blackwell Publishers: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1974. 
54. Linden, D. The Accidental Mind; Harvard University Press: Boston, MA, USA, 2007. 
55. Marks, J. On Due Recognition of Animals Used in Research. J. Anim. Ethics 2011, 1, 6–8. 
56. Slicer, D. Your Daughter or Your Dog? A Feminist Assessment of the Animal Research Issue. 
Hypatia 1991, 6, 108–124. 
57. Donovan, J. Feminism and the Treatment of Animals: From Care to Dialogue. Signs 2006, 31,  
305–329. 
58. Ojanuga, D. The Medical Ethics of the “Father of Gynaecology”, Dr J Marion Sims. J. Med. 
Ethics 1993, 19, 28–31. 
59. Slavery, R.V. Segregation and Racism: Trusting the Health Care System Ain’t Always Easy!  
An African American Perspective on Bioethics. Louis U. Pub. L. Rev. 1995, 15, 191–235. 
60. Medina, J. The Epistemology of Resistance: Gender and Racial Oppression, Epistemic Injustice, 
and the Social Imagination; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2013. 
© 2015 by the author; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

