XVI
SOME HANDBOOKS
THE description of the handbook on the elements of
astronomy entitled the Introduction to the Phaenomena and
attributed to Geminus might properly have been reserved
for this chapter. It was, however, convenient to deal with
Geminus in close connexion with Posidonius; for Geminus
wrote an exposition of Posidonius's Meteor ologica related to the
original work in such a way that Simplicius, in quoting a long
passage from an epitome of this work, could attribute the
passage to either Geminus or ' Posidonius in Geminus'; and it
is evident that, in other subjects too, Geminus drew from, and
was influenced by, Posidonius.
The small work Be motu circulari corporum caelestiwni by
CLEOMEDES (KXeo/jLrjSovs KVKXLKTJ Oecopia) in two Books is the
production of a much less competent person, but is much more
largely based on Posidonius. This is proved by several refer-
ences to Posidonius by name, but it is specially true of the
very long first chapter of Book II (nearly half of the Book)
which seems for the most part to be copied bodily from
Posidonius, in accordance with the author's remark at the
end of Book I that, in giving the refutation of the Epicurean
assertion that the sun is just as large as it looks, namely one
foot in diameter, he will give so much as suffices for such an
introduction of the particular arguments used by 'certain
authors who have written whole treatises on this one topic
(i.e. the size of the sun), among whom is Posidonius'. The
interest of the book then lies mainly in what is quoted from
Posidonius; its mathematical interest is almost nil.
The date of Cleomedes is not certainly ascertained, but, as
he mentions no author later than Posidonius, it is permissible
to suppose, with Hultsch, that he wrote about the middle of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

236 
SOME HANDBOOKS
the first century B. c. As he seems to know nothing of the
works of Ptolemy, he can, hardly, in any case, have lived
later than the beginning of the second century A. D.
Book I begins with a chapter the object of which is to
prove that the universe, which has the shape of a sphere,
is limited and surrounded by void extending without limit in
all directions, and to refute objections to this view. Then
follow chapters on the five parallel circles in the heaven and
the zones, habitable and uninhabitable (chap. 2); on the
motion of the fixed stars and the independent (npoaipeTiKai)
movements of the planets including the sun and • moon
(chap. 3); on the zodiac and the effect of the sun's motion in
it (chap. 4); on the inclination of the axis of the universe and
its effects on the lengths of days and nights at different places
(chap. 5); on the inequality in the rate of increase in the
lengths of the days and nights according to the time of year,
the different lengths of the seasons due to the motion of the
sun in an eccentric circle, the difference between a day-and-
night and an exact revolution of the universe owing to the
separate motion of the sun (chap. 6); on the habitable regions
of the globe including Britain and the ' island of Thule', said
to have been visited by Pytheas, where, when the sun is in
Cancer and visible, the day is a month long; and so on (chap. 7).
Chap. 8 purports to prove that the universe is a sphere by
proving first that the earth is a sphere, and then that the air
about it, and the ether about that, must necessarily make up
larger spheres. The earth is proved to be a sphere by the
method of exclusion; it is assumed that the only possibilities
are that it is (a) flat and plane, or (b) hollow and deep, or
(c) square, or (d) pyramidal, or (e) spherical, and, the first four
hypotheses being successively disposed of, only the fifth
remains. Chap. 9 maintains that the earth is in the centre of
the universe; chap. 10, on the size of the earth, contains the
interesting reproduction of the details of the measurements of
the earth by Posidonius and Eratosthenes respectively which
have been given above in their proper places (p. 220, pp. 106-7);
chap. 11 argues that the earth is in the relation of a point to,
i. e. is negligible in size in comparison with, the universe or
even the sun's circle, but not the moon's circle (cf. p. 3 above).
Book II, chap. 1, is evidently the piece de resistance^ con-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CLEOMEDES 
237
sisting of an elaborate refutation of Epicurus and his followers,
who held that the sun is just as large as it looks, and further
asserted (according to Cleomedes) that the stars are lit up as
they rise and extinguished as they set. The chapter seems to
be almost wholly taken from Posidonius; it ends with some
pages of merely vulgar abuse, comparing Epicurus with Ther-
sites, with more of the same sort. 
The value of the chapter
lies in certain historical traditions mentioned in it, and in the
account of Posidonius's speculation as to the size and distance
of the .sun, which does, as a matter of fact, give results much
nearer the truth than those obtained by Aristarchus, Hippar-
chus, and Ptolemy. Cleomedes observes (1) that by means of
water-clocks it is found that the apparent diameter of the sun
is 1/750th of the sun's circle, and that this method of
measuring it is said to have been first invented by the
Egyptians; (2) that Hipparchus is said to have found that
the sun is 1,050 times the size of the earth, though, as regards
this, we have the better authority of Adrastus (in Theon of
Smyrna) and of Chalcidius, according to whom Hipparchus
made the sun nearly 1,880 times the size of the earth (both
figures refer of course to the solid content). We have already
described Posidonius's method of arriving at the size and
distance of the sun (pp. 220-1). After he has given this, Cleo-
medes, apparently deserting his guide, adds a calculation of
his own relating to the sizes and distances of the moon and
the sun which shows how little he was capable of any scien-
tific inquiry.1 Chap. 2 purports to prove that the sun is
1 He says (pp. 146. 17-148. 27) that in an eclipse the breadth of the
earth's shadow is stated to be two moon-breadths; hence, he says, it
seems credible (mQavov) that the earth is twice the size of the moon (this
practically assumes that the breadth of the earth's shadow is equal to
the diameter of the earth, or that the cone of the earth's shadow is
a cylinder!). Since then the circumference of the earth, according to
Eratosthenes, is 250,000 stades, and its diameter therefore 'more than
80,000' (he evidently takes n = 3), the diameter of the moon will be
40,000 stades. Now, the moon's circle being 750 times the moon's
diameter, the radius of the moon's circle, i.e. the distance of the moon
from the earth, will be -gth of this (i.e. n = 3) or 125 moon-diameters;
therefore the moon's distance is 5,000,000 stades (which is much too
great). Again, since the moon traverses its orbit 13 times to the sun's
once, he assumes that the sun s orbit is 13 times as large as the moon's,
and consequently that the diameter of the sun is 13 times that of the
moon, or 520,000 stades and its distance 13 times 5,000,000 or 65,000,000
stades!
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

238 
SOME HANDBOOKS
larger than the earth; and the remaining chapters deal with
the size of the moon and the stars (chap. 3), the illumination
of the moon by the sun (chap. 4), the phases of the moon and
its conjunctions with the sun (chap. 5), the eclipses of the
moon (chap. 6), the maximum deviation in latitude of the five
planets (given as 5° for Venus, 4° for Mercury, 2|° for Mars
and Jupiter, 1° for Saturn), the maximum elongations of
Mercury and Venus from the sun (20° and 50° respectively),
and the synodic periods of the planets (Mercury 116 days,
Venus 584 days, Mars 780 days, Jupiter 398 days, .Saturn
378 days) (chap. 7).
There is only one other item of sufficient interest to be
mentioned here. 
In Book II, chap. 6, Cleomedes mentions
that there were stories of extraordinary eclipses which ' the
more ancient of the mathematicians had vainly tried to ex-
plain*; the supposed cparadoxical' case was that in which,
while the sun seems to be still above the horizon, the eclipsed
moon rises in the east. The passage has been cited above
(vol. i, pp. 6-7), where I have also shown that Cleomedes him-
self gives the true explanation of the phenomenon, namely
that it is due to atmospheric refraction.
The first and second centuries of the Christian era saw
a continuation of the work of writing manuals or introduc-
tions to the different mathematical subjects. About A. D. 100
came NICOMACHUS, who wrote an Introduction to Arithmetic
and an Introduction to Harmony; 
if we may judge by a
remark of his own,1 he would appear to have written an intro-
duction to geometry also. The Arithmetical Introduction has
been sufficiently described above (vol. i, pp. 97-112).
There is yet another handbook which needs to be mentioned
separately, although we have had occasion to quote from it
several times already. This is the book by THEON OF SMYRNA
which goes by the title Expositio rerum mathematicarum ad
legendum Platonem utilium. 
There are two main divisions
of this work, contained in two Venice manuscripts respec-
tively. The first was edited by Bullialdus (Paris, 1644), the
second by T. H. Martin (Paris, 1849); the whole has been
1 Nicom. Arith. ii. 6. 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEON OF SMYRNA 
239
edited by E. Hiller (Teubner, 1878) and finally, with a French
translation, by J. Dupuis (Paris, 1892).
Theon's date is approximately fixed by two considerations.
He is clearly the person whom Theon of Alexandria called
'the old Theon', rov -iraXaibv Oecoua,1 and there is no reason
to doubt that he is the ' Theon the mathematician' (6 /jLaOrj-
IIOLTIKOS) who is credited by Ptolemy with four observations
of the planets Mercury and Venus made in A.D. 127, 129, 130
and 132.2 The latest writers whom Theon himself mentions
are Thrasyllus, who lived in the reign of Tiberius, and
Adrastus the Peripatetic, who belongs to the middle of the
second century A.D. Theon's work itself is a curious medley,
valuable, not intrinsically, but for the numerous historical
notices which it contains. The title, which claims that the
book contains things useful for the study of Plato, must not
be taken too seriously. 
It was no doubt an elementary
introduction or vade-mecum for students of philosophy, but
there is little in it which has special reference to the mathe-
matical questions raised in Plato. The connexion consists
mostly in the long proem quoting the views of Plato on the
paramount importance of mathematics in the training of
the philosopher, and the mutual relation of the five different
branches, arithmetic, geometry, stereometry, astronomy and
music. The want of care shown by Theon in the quotations
from particular dialogues of Plato prepares us for the patch-
work character of the whole book.
In the first chapter he promises to give the mathematical
theorems most necessary for the student of Plato to know,
in arithmetic, music, and geometry, with its application to
stereometry and astronomy.3 But the promise is by no means
kept as regards geometry and stereometry: indeed, in a
later passage Theon seems to excuse himself from including
theoretical geometry in his plan, on the ground that all those
who are likely to read his work or the writings of Plato may
be assumed to have gone through an elementary course of
theoretical geometry.4 
But he writes at length on figured
1 Theon of Alexandria, Comm. on Ptolemy's Syntaxes, Basel edition,
pp. 390, 395, 396.
2 Ptolemy, Syntaxes, ix. 9, x. 1, 2.
3 Theon of Smyrna, ed. Hiller, p. 1. 10-17.
4 Z6., p. 16. 17-20.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

240 
SOME HANDBOOKS
numbers, plane and solid, which are of course analogous to
the corresponding geometrical figures, and he may have con-
sidered that he was in this way sufficiently fulfilling his
promise with regard to geometry and stereometry. 
Certain
geometrical definitions, of point, line, straight line, the three
dimensions, rectilinear plane and solid figures, especially
parallelograms and parallelepipedal figures including cubes,
plinthides (square bricks) and So/ciSes (beams), and scalene
figures with sides unequal every way (= ficofjiio-Koi in the
classification of solid numbers), are dragged in later (chaps.
53-5 of the section on music)1 in the middle of the discussion
of proportions and means; if this passage is not an inter-
polation, it confirms the supposition that Theon included in
his work only this limited amount of geometry and stereo-
metry.
Section I is on Arithmetic in the same sense as Nicomachus's
Introduction. 
At the beginning Theon observes that arith-
metic will be followed by music. Of music in its three
aspects, music in instruments {kv opydvois), music in numbers,
i.e. musical intervals expressed in numbers or pure theoretical
music, and the music or harmony in the universe, the first
kind (instrumental music) is not exactly essential, but the other
two must be discussed immediately after arithmetic.2 The con-
tents of the arithmetical section have been sufficiently indicated
in the chapter on Pythagorean arithmetic (vol. i, pp. 112-13);
it deals with the classification of numbers, odd, even, and
their subdivisions, prime numbers, composite numbers with
equal or unequal factors, plane numbers subdivided into
square, oblong, triangular and polygonal numbers, with their
respective 'gnomons' and their properties as the sum of
successive terms of arithmetical progressions beginning with
1 as the first term, circular and spherical numbers, solid num-
bers with three factors, pyramidal numbers and truncated
pyramidal numbers, perfect numbers with their correlatives,
the over-perfect and the deficient; this is practically what
we find in Nicoinachus. But the special value of Theon's
exposition lies in the fact that it contains an account of the
famous ' side-' and ' diameter-' numbers of the Pythagoreans.3
1 Theon of Smyrna, ed. Hiller, pp. 111-13. 
2 16., pp. 16. 24-17. 11.
3 26., pp. 42. 10-45. 9. Cf. vol. i, pp. 91-3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEON OF SMYRNA 
241
In the Section on Music Theon says he will first speak of
the two kinds of music, the audible or instrumental, and the
intelligible or theoretical subsisting in numbers, after which
he promises to deal lastly with ratio as predicable of mathe-
matical entities in general and the ratio constituting the
harmony in the universe, c not scrupling to set out once again
the things discovered by our predecessors, just as we have
given the things handed down in former times by the Pytha-
goreans, with a view to making them better known, without
ourselves claiming to have discovered*any of them'.1 Then
follows a discussion of audible music, the intervals which
give harmonies, &c., including substantial quotations from
Thrasyllus and Adrastus, and references to views of Aris-
toxenus, Hippasus, Archytas, Eudoxus and Plato. 
With
chap. 17 (p. 72) begins the account of the 'harmony in
numbers', which turns into a general discussion of ratios,
proportions and means, with more quotations from Plato,
Eratosthenes and Thrasyllus, followed by Thrasyllus's divisio
canonis, chaps. 35, 36 (pp. 87-93). After a promise to apply
the latter division to the sphere of the universe, Theon
purports to return to the subject of proportion and means.
This, however, does not occur till chap. 50 (p. 106), the
intervening chapters being taken up with a discussion of
the Sejcas and Terpcucrvs (with eleven applications of the
latter) and the mystic or curious properties of the numbers
from 2 to 10; here we have a part of the theologumena of
arithmetic. The discussion of proportions and the different
kinds of means after Eratosthenes and Adrastus is again
interrupted by the insertion of the geometrical definitions
already referred to (chaps. 53-5, pp. 111-13), after which
Theon resumes the question of means for ' more precise'
treatment.
The Section on Astronomy begins on p. 120 of Hiller's
edition. 
Here again Theon is mainly dependent upon
Adrastus, from whom he makes long quotations. Thus, on
the sphericity of the earth, he says that for the neces-
sary conspectus of the arguments it will be sufficient to
refer to the grounds stated summarily by Adrastus. 
In
explaining (p. 124) that the unevennesses in the surface of
1 Theon of Smyrna, ed. Hiller, pp. 46. 20-47. 14.
1523.2 
R
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

242 
SOME HANDBOOKS
the earth, represented e.g. by mountains, are negligible in
comparison with the size of the whole, he quotes Eratosthenes
and Dicaearchus as claiming to have discovered that the
perpendicular height of the highest mountain above the normal
level of the land is no more than 10 stades; and to obtain the
diameter of the earth he uses Eratosthenes's figure of approxi-
mately 252,000 stades for the circumference of the earth,
which, with the Archimedean value of -2
Y
2- for 7T, gives a
diameter of about 80,182 stades. The principal astronomical
circles in the heaven are next described (phaps. 5-12, pp.
129-35); then (chap. 12) the assumed maximum deviations in
latitude are given, that of the sun being put at 1°, that of the
moon and Venus at 12°, and those of the planets Mercury,
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn at 8°, 5°, 5° and 3° respectively; the
obliquity of the ecliptic is given as the side of a regular polygon
of 15 sides described in a circle, i.e. as 24° (chap. 23, p. 151).
Next the order of the orbits of the sun, moon and planets is ex-
plained (the system is of course geocentric); we are told (p. 138)
that 'some of the Pythagoreans' made the order (reckoning
outwards from the earth) to be moon, Mercury, Venus, sun,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, whereas (p. 142) Eratosthenes put the
sun next to the moon, and the mathematicians, agreeing with
Eratosthenes in this, differed only in the order in which they
placed Venus and Mercury after the sun, some putting Mercury
next and some Venus (p. 143). The order adopted by 'some
of the Pythagoreans' is the Chaldaean order, which was not
followed by any Greek before Diogenes of Babylon (second
century B.C.); 'some of the Pythagoreans' are therefore the
later Pythagoreans (of whom Nicomachus was one); the other
order, moon, sun, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, was
that of Plato and the early Pythagoreans. 
In chap. 15
(p. 138 sq.) Theon quotes verses of Alexander ' the Aetolian'
(not really the ' Aetolian', but Alexander of Ephesus, a con-
temporary of Cicero, or possibly Alexander of Miletus, as
Chalcidius calls him) assigning to each of the planets (includ-
ing the earth, though stationary) with the sun and moon and
the sphere of the fixed stars one note, the intervals between
the notes being so arranged as to bring the nine into an
octave, whereas with Eratosthenes and Plato the earth was
excluded, and the eight notes of the octachord were assigned
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEON OF SMYRNA 
243
to the seven heavenly bodies and the sphere of the fixed stars.
The whole of this passage (chaps. 15 to 16, pp. 138-47) is no
doubt intended as the promised account of the 'harmony in
the universe', although at the very end of the work Theon
implies that this has still to be explained on the basis of
Thrasyllus's exposition combined with what he has already
given himself.
The next chapters deal with the forward movements, the
stationary points, and the retrogradations, as they respectively
appear to us, of the five planets, and the ' saving of the pheno-
mena ' by the alternative hypotheses of eccentric circles and
epicycles (chaps. 17-30, pp. 147-78). These hypotheses are
explained, and the identity of the motion produced by the
two is shown by Adrastus in the case of the sun (chaps. 26, 27,
pp. 166-72). 
The proof is introduced with the interesting
remark that ' Hipparchus says it is worthy of investigation
by mathematicians why, on two hypotheses so different from
one another, that of eccentric circles and that of concentric
circles with epicycles, the same results appear to follow \ 
It
is not to be supposed that the proof of the identity could be
other than easy to a mathematician like Hipparchus; the
remark perhaps merely suggests that the two hypotheses were
discovered quite independently, and it was not till later that
the effect was discovered to be the same, when of course the
fact would seem to be curious and a mathematical proof would
immediately be sought. Another passage (p. 188) says that
Hipparchus preferred the hypothesis of the epicycle, as being
his own. If this means that Hipparchus claimed to have
discovered the epicycle-hypothesis, it must be a misapprehen-
sion; for Apollonius already understood the theory of epi-
cycles in all its generality. According to Theon, the epicycle-
hypothesis is more ' according to nature '; but it was presum-
ably preferred because it was applicable to all the planets,
whereas the eccentric-hypothesis, when originally suggested,
applied only to the three superior planets; in order to make
it apply to the inferior planets it is necessary to suppose the
circle described by the centre of the eccentric to be greater
than the eccentric circle itself, which extension of the hypo-
thesis, though known to Hipparchus, does not seem to have
occurred to Apollonius.
R 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

244 
SOME HANDBOOKS
We next have (chap. 31, p. 178) an allusion to the systems
of Eudoxus, Callippus and Aristotle, and a description
(p. 180 sq) of a system in which the 'carrying' spheres
(called ' hollow') have between them ' solid spheres which by
their own motion will roll (ave\igov<ri) the carrying spheres in
the opposite direction, being in contact with them'. These
* solid' spheres (which carry the planet fixed at a point on
their surface) act in practically the same way as epicycles.
In connexion with this description Theon (i.e. Adrastus)
speaks (chap. 33, pp. 186-7) of two alternative hypotheses in
which, by comparison with Chalcidius,1 we recognize (after
eliminating epicycles erroneously imported into both systems)
the hypotheses of Plato and Heraclides respectively. It is
this passage which enables us to conclude for certain that
Heraclides made Venus and Mercury revolve in circles about
the sun, like satellites, while the sun in its turn revolves in
a circle about the earth as centre. Theon (p. 187) gives the
maximum arcs separating Mercury and Venus respectively
from the sun as 20° and 50°, these figures being the same as
those given by Cleomedes.
The last chapters (chaps. 37-40), quoted from Adrastus, deal
with conjunctions, transits, occultations and eclipses. 
The
book concludes with a considerable extract from DercyHides,
a Platonist with Pythagorean leanings, who wrote (before the
time of Tiberius and perhaps even before Varro) a book on
Plato's philosophy. It is here (p. 198. 14) that we have the
passage so often quoted from Eudemus:
' Eudemus relates in his Astronomy that it was Oenopides
who first discovered the girdling of the zodiac and the revolu-
tion (or cycle) of the Great Year, that Thales was the first to
discover the eclipse of the sun and the fact that the sun's
period with respect to the solstices is not always the same,
that Anaximander discovered that the earth is (suspended) on
high and lies (substituting KeTrai for the reading of the manu-
scripts, Kivelrai, moves) about the centre of the universe, and
that Anaximenes said that the moon has its light from the
sun and (explained) how its eclipses come about' (Anaxi-
menes is here apparently a mistake for Anaxagoras).
1 Chalcidius, Comm. on Timaeus, c. 110. Cf. Aristarchus of Samos,
pp. 256-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

