Naval War College Review 
Naval War College Review 
Volume 74 
Number 4 Autumn 2021 
Article 22 
2021 
Something of Themselves: Kipling, Kingsley, Conan Doyle and the 
Something of Themselves: Kipling, Kingsley, Conan Doyle and the 
Anglo-Boer War 
Anglo-Boer War 
Richard Norton 
Sarah LeFanu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Norton, Richard and LeFanu, Sarah (2021) "Something of Themselves: Kipling, Kingsley, Conan Doyle and 
the Anglo-Boer War," Naval War College Review: Vol. 74 : No. 4 , Article 22. 
Available at: https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol74/iss4/22 
This Book Review is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals at U.S. Naval War College Digital 
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Naval War College Review by an authorized editor of U.S. Naval 
War College Digital Commons. For more information, please contact repository.inquiries@usnwc.edu. 

	
B OOK REVIEWS	
163
operations. Dr. Aleksandra Nesic, a visit­
ing faculty member at both the Army’s 
John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center 
and School and the Joint Special Opera­
tions University, closes out the section 
with a fascinating exercise in historical-
narrative analysis of the 1389 Battle of 
Kosovo, including how political elites in 
Bosnia recontextualize and weaponize it 
in different ways for strategic purposes.
The final section turns toward the 
narrative’s effect on statecraft and stability. 
Colonel Christopher Holshek, USA (Ret.), 
critically assesses U.S. forces’ need to 
institutionalize the effective training and 
deployment of informational power via 
a whole-of-nation strategy, citing the 
success of the Marshall Plan in cultivating 
a durable narrative in Europe against 
the Soviet Union. Dr. Frank G. Straub, 
director of the National Police Founda­
tion’s Center for Mass Violence Response 
Studies, follows with an assessment of 
how narrative can influence police-citizen 
relations. Through neighborhood-level 
efforts at cooperative and community-
involved policing, departments can use 
narrative to build up trust and legitimacy 
to better protect citizens. The book closes 
with a cerebral, future-forward piece on 
the predicted standardization of soft-
power theory through the “noosphere,” 
written by retired RAND political scientist 
Dr. David Ronfeldt and Naval Postgradu­
ate School professor Dr. John Arquilla. 
They argue that true soft power has been 
misconceived and therefore does not have 
the same breadth of theory for application 
as is found for hard power, resulting in 
the former’s underuse. They hypothesize 
that the eventual development of educa­
tion and training in “noopolitik” will be 
critical for the strategists of the future.
Dangerous Narratives is an eclectic work 
that covers a surprising range of topics 
that one might not consider at first glance 
to be connected. The book is a testament 
to the far-reaching interest that the 
psychological and cognitive realms attract 
across the field of national-security policy. 
As I read each chapter, I consistently was 
captivated by the diversity of thought that 
such a specific conceptual framework 
was able to generate. This no doubt was 
because of the skill with which all the 
authors took a deceptively complex 
concept and, in their own terms and 
in the context of their own experi­
ences, described it clearly. The result 
is an excellent introductory handbook 
for the student-practitioner who seeks 
to understand the impacts of narra­
tive on national-security strategy.
NICK OMICHINSKI
Something of Themselves: Kipling, Kingsley, Conan 
Doyle and the Anglo-Boer War, by Sarah LeFanu. 
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2020. 381 pages. 
$29.95.
Today, the Boer War—or, more accurately, 
the Second Anglo-Boer War (1899–
1902)—is likely to be viewed as something 
quaint and obsolete, a sepia-toned 
daguerreotype from the waning Victorian 
era. Lacking the gravitas that comes with 
the antiquity of the Peloponnesians, its is­
sues and lessons seem to have been swept 
away by the industrialized, mass-produced 
warfare of the twentieth century and a 
general distaste for the conflicts of empire.
However, in its time the Boer War 
riveted the attention of the British Empire 
and, indeed, the world. Magnet-like, 
the cockpit of conflict drew three very 
different, particular Britons: Arthur 
Conan Doyle, Rudyard Kipling, and 
Mary Kingsley. All enjoyed some level 
1
Norton and LeFanu: Something of Themselves: Kipling, Kingsley, Conan Doyle and the A
Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2021

	
164	
NAVAL WAR COLLEGE REVIEW
of fame; all were published authors; and 
two were considered scientists. But 
they experienced the conflict from very 
different backgrounds and points of 
view, and they saw the war through very 
different lenses. Kipling and Doyle were 
affected profoundly by their experiences 
in South Africa; Kingsley died there.
Sarah LeFanu deals with each of her 
subjects separately and chronologically, 
devoting the first six chapters of the book 
to examining Doyle, Kingsley, and Kipling 
up to the point when the war broke out. 
This section is essential to placing these 
individuals within the context of their 
times. While each has a compelling 
story, it is hard not to be most engaged 
by the biography of Mary Kingsley. Of 
the three, Kingsley is more likely to be 
unknown, although she should not be.
An autodidact, Kingsley was inspired by 
her father’s tales of wanderlust, and she 
both conformed to and pushed against the 
expectations demanded of the women of 
empire. Although she was desperate for 
adventure, she often had to stay at home 
to care for her brother. When she did get 
an opportunity to explore the rivers of 
West Africa, she did so with a vengeance, 
paddling miles upriver, discovering new 
species of fish, and compiling copious 
notes that formed the basis of her first 
book, Travels in West Africa. Later, 
as a respected authority in her field, 
she engaged in what today would be 
called “flame wars” with other experts 
when it came to Britannia’s African 
trade policies. Yet the fact that Kingsley 
championed the British Empire did not 
make her blind to imperial faults.
In contrast, Kipling and Doyle, although 
well traveled, were more literary men, 
and Doyle was also a licensed physician. 
LeFanu does not shy from covering some 
of the more-difficult aspects of their lives, 
such as Doyle’s illicit affection for and 
rapid marriage to his second wife (after a 
minimal mourning period for his first). In 
the case of Kipling, LeFanu describes fully, 
but with dignity and compassion, the 
death of his six-year-old daughter and the 
permanent impact it left on the author.
The Boer War did not start well for the 
British, then went from bad to worse. 
Boer forces seized the initiative and 
inflicted powerful opening defeats on 
their enemies. But the British would not 
tolerate a victory by the Boers, especially 
one that left the latter with significant 
diamond mines and the world’s largest 
gold reef. So reinforcements flowed from 
England; Doyle, Kingsley, and Kipling 
followed. Kipling was on a charitable mis­
sion: delivering care packages for British 
troops, especially the sick and wounded. 
He was a celebrity and was treated as such.
Doyle, as a professional medical man, 
took a more direct part in the conflict. 
Having volunteered, he was assigned 
as a doctor to the Royal Army Medical 
Corps at a field hospital. As much a 
well-known celebrity as Kipling, he was 
something of an occasional war tourist 
but diligently tended to the growing 
number of British troops in his care who 
had been struck down by diseases—which 
would kill far more of their companions 
than did Boer bullets. And death did 
come close to Doyle—typhus claimed 
at least one of his attendants.
Kingsley, freed from the responsibility 
of caring for her brother, went to South 
Africa expecting to be able to mount 
yet another journey of exploration 
after the war was over. But, as she had 
volunteered for nursing assignments, 
there were more-immediate duties; she 
was assigned to assist in nursing Boer 
prisoners. As was the case in most prisons 
and hospitals, disease was rampant—the 
2
Naval War College Review, Vol. 74 [2021], No. 4, Art. 22
https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol74/iss4/22

	
B OOK REVIEWS	
165
odds of catching a fatal illness were high. 
But Kingsley did her duty, even when she 
probably could have called in favors from 
friends and worked elsewhere. Eventu­
ally, she contracted typhus and died.
In addition to keen-eyed observation of 
her main subjects, LeFanu introduces and 
briefly examines other key players, such as 
General H. Herbert Kitchener and Roger 
D. Casement. Casement, an acquaintance 
of Kingsley, was instrumental in exposing 
the horrors of King Leopold’s Congo 
Free State. Eventually, he was tried for 
treason for his role in the 1916 Easter 
Rising in Dublin and executed.
Something of Themselves is neither a 
standard biography nor a standard history. 
It depicts the Boer War—correctly—as 
a historical and political crossroads, 
one where passed three exceptional 
individuals of their day. Told with 
compassion and accuracy, it provides 
a deeper understanding of Kingsley, 
Kipling, and Doyle and of the time in 
which they lived. It is a worthy read as a 
stand-alone work, and a welcome addition 
to any collection devoted to the study of 
war or any of LeFanu’s three subjects.
RICHARD NORTON
2030: How Today’s Biggest Trends Will Collide and
Reshape the Future of Everything, by Mauro F. Gui-
llén. New York: St. Martin’s, 2020. 278 pages. $28.99.
Mauro F. Guillén’s latest book, 2030: 
How Today’s Biggest Trends Will Collide 
and Reshape the Future of Everything, is 
a powerful reminder of how the world is 
changing demographically and economi­
cally as the result of technological in­
novations that will rewrite the Western-
centric framework to which many 
Americans are accustomed. The trends 
will reach critical mass within the next 
decade, making Guillén’s well-written 
analysis a timely wake-up call to direct 
our attention to a new world order.
Guillén suggests that in the past, 
Western cultures compartmentalized 
the world in a linear way, thinking about 
trends—regarding new generations of 
people, having fewer children, urban 
lifestyles, and technology—separately. 
This approach blinds us to the new 
nature of reality. To put it colloquially, 
so much of the world is changing that 
when we focus on the trees we miss 
the forest. Guillén is not the first to 
point out how global change will 
challenge Western perceptions of the 
world. Many of the transformations he 
references began over the past decade. 
What is novel is his holistic review of 
the data and a shift away from linear 
thinking toward a “peripheral vision.”
For twenty-five years, Guillén was on 
the faculty at the Wharton School, 
where he earned multiple teaching 
awards; recently, he became director of 
the Cambridge Judge Business School 
and a fellow of Queen’s College at the 
University of Cambridge. He divides 
2030 into eight chapters, each of which 
focuses on a segment of demographics, 
from population growth to the real­
ity of a population living longer—and 
therefore more concentrated in the 
over-fifty bracket—along with the shift 
toward a world in which women will 
hold 55 percent of global wealth.
The introduction to 2030 places the 
reader ten years in the future. It depicts 
a warmer average temperature, using 
vignettes of Rehema, a woman from 
Nairobi who lives in Britain, and Angel, 
a woman originally from the Philippines  
living in Los Angeles. Angel reads 
newspaper headlines indicating that 
3
Norton and LeFanu: Something of Themselves: Kipling, Kingsley, Conan Doyle and the A
Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2021

