See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380185464
Some Questions On the Proof of the Gödel Incompleteness Theorem
Preprint · April 2024
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.36275.85280
CITATIONS
0
READS
379
1 author:
Hong Zhang
Bank of China
9 PUBLICATIONS   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Hong Zhang on 30 April 2024.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Some Questions On the Proof of the
G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem
Abstract
The G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem was a major discovery in modern
logic that has consistently attracted the attention of scientific and philo-
sophical circles. However, since the G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem was
put forward, the scientific and philosophical significance of its proof has
been questioned; in particular, Wittgenstein regarded it as a certain logi-
cal paradox. In the article, the author raises several questions about the
proof of the G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem,finds out the specific paradox
form in the proof, points out the high consistency of its proof method
and Russell’s Paradox, and asserts that there is no “true but unprovable”
proposition,which strongly supports Wittgenstein’s view. The so-called
G¨odel formula is a logically invalid circular formula, which is outside the
effective definition domain of predicate W. Therefore, the conclusion of
this paper is that the proof of the G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem is based
on an invalid formula, and the contradiction of the proof originates from
the G¨odel formula itself. Thus it cannot be attributed to the incomplete-
ness of the system, so the proof is wrong.
Keywords: Russell’s Paradox, G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem, G¨odel for-
mula, actual infinity.
In 1901, Russell discovered Russell’s Paradox, which brought a third crisis
to the development of mathematics. The solution to this paradox has not been
found. Soon after, in 1931, the logician G¨odel proved the famous incompleteness
theorem, which induced an epoch-making change in the study of the basis of
mathematics. However, this theory has been strongly criticized by the expert
philosopher Wittgenstein. Although the circles of mathematics and logic tend
to fully accept this theory, the debate between the two ideas has not been
resolved. However, G¨odel based his proof on an invalid formula, which makes
G¨odel’s proof meaningless. Let us analyze it in detail below.
1

1
Master of Philosophy, Wittgenstein questioned
the proof of the G¨odel Incompleteness Theo-
rem.
Once the G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem was put forward, it attracted great
philosophical debate, especially from the philosopher Wittgenstein. As Juliet
Floyd, a professor of philosophy at Boston University, said, the philosophical
collision between Wittgenstein and G¨odel was the most fascinating and extreme
in the twentieth century. In his Logic Journey, Wang Hao detailed the debate
between the two.
He said, “G¨odel emphasizes abstract and general things,
while Wittgenstein focuses more on concrete and special things.
G¨odel was
very interested in the relationship between philosophy and science. In Wittgen-
stein’s view, ‘the difficulty of philosophy is to say only what we know’. . . . . . . .
Although they both believe that philosophy is conceptual research, they have
completely different views on concepts. Although both put considerable effort
on the philosophy of mathematics, their perspectives and conclusions are often
opposite”(Wang Hao, 2009, pp224-225). In G¨odel’s view, Wittgenstein does not
understand the incompleteness theorem, and G¨odel said, “He interpreted it as
a logical paradox that, but in fact, on the contrary, is a mathematical theorem
of an undisputed part of mathematics (limited number theory or combinato-
rial mathematics).” (Wang Hao, 2009, p227) We believe that Wittgenstein’s
challenge of the incompleteness theorem is well founded and that the “true but
unprovable” proposition is meaningless. Here, we question it from three aspects.
2
Prepare knowledge
To facilitate the discussion, we first explain the relevant formulas as follows:
The predicate W(x1, x2) in the formal system N holds if and only if x1 is
the term corresponding to the G¨odel number of a well-formed formula B(y) ,
and x2 is the term corresponding to the G¨odel number of the proof of B(x1)
in N. Its corresponding relationship on the model DN is W(p, q), which is a
primitive recursive relationship. Therefore, formula B(y) is the basis
of the predicate W(x1, x2) , and it is a definite valid formula, not an
invalid formula. [This is something we have not fully noticed before,
and it is the key to G¨odel’s proof.]
We know that the relation W(p, q) on the model DN is primitive recursive
if and only if the relationship is expressible in the formal systemN, which is the
basis for the proof of the GIT (G¨odel’s Incompleteness Theorem). Therefore,
we can also say that the predicate W(x1, x2) is also primitive recur-
sive, which is very important and places effective restrictions on its
domain.
In the proof of the G¨odel Incompleteness Theorem, the undecidable formula
u = A(0(p)) = (∀x2)¬W(0(p), x2)
(1)
2

is called the G¨odel formula. (A. G. Hamilton,1989, pp192-194), where p is the
G¨odel number of the formula
A(x1) = (∀x2)¬W(x1, x2)
(2)
, expressed with the function g, we have p = g(A(x1)) . 0(p) represents the term
corresponding to the number p. We use wf. to represent ‘well-formed formula’.
Regarding Russell’s Paradox, its general expression form is
T = {x|x /∈x}
(3)
The meaning is as follows: T is a set made up of all sets that do not belong to
themselves.
Γ is a set of well-formed formulas for the first-order language L. The model
of Γ refers to the following: An interpretation of L is called the model of Γ if
in this interpretation every element of Γ is true.
The model of a first-order system S refers to an interpretation of S called
the model of S, and if in this interpretation, every theorem of S is true.
3
Question-1: The basis of the proof of the GIT
is the idea of actual infinity. In the proof of
the GIT, the relation W(p, q) and predicate
W(x1, x2) do not agree; the object of the for-
mer is a potential infinity, while the object
of the latter is an actual infinity. This clearly
contradicts the “expressible relationship” be-
tween them.
Therefore, the G¨odel formula
does not belong to the effective definition do-
main of the predicate W(x1, x2) and cannot be
used to prove the GIT.
We believe that the undecidable formula u (i.e., the G¨odel formula) is not a
logically valid formula and should be outside the valid domain of the predicate
W(x1, x2) of the formal system N; there are always some well-formed formulas
that are outside the valid domain of the predicate W(x1, x2). Such formulas
exist in form but not in interpretation, creating a kind of idling. It
can also be said that the predicate W(x1, x2) that decides all the well-
formed formulas does not exist (otherwise it must be restricted). This
is exactly the same as the T in Russell’s Paradox (the so-called set composed of
all sets that do not belong to themselves). That is, we cannot exhaust all
the Turing machines, all the sets, and all the well-formed formulas.
3

The relation W(p, q) holds if and only if p is the G¨odel number of formula
wf.B(x1) , where x1 appears freely in wf.B(x1) , and q is the G¨odel number of
the proof of wf.B(0(p)) in the formal system N. Relation W(p, q) is primitive
recursive in the model DN(such as the set of natural numbers), which is a kind of
potential infinity, while in the formal system N, “all the well-formed formulas”
is a kind of
actual infinity. The object that the predicate W(x1, x2) is
going to process is a “completed all” and an actual infinity.
This
leads to W(x1, x2) determining a certain kind of well-formed formula
defined by itself, which leads to contradictions, hence leading to the
emergence of the undecidable well-formed formula
u = A(0(p)) = (∀x2)¬W(0(p), x2)
(4)
.
Here, there is a situation completely similar to Russell’s Paradox, and the
G¨odel formula u is similar to
T = {x|x /∈x}
(5)
in Russell’s Paradox. The predicate determines a well-formed formula com-
posed of itself; the essence lies in that we insist on the idea of actual infinity.
In the opinion of Wang Hao, a famous mathematical logician, the main reason
Wittgenstein opposes G¨odel’s proof is this actual infinity. He pointed out, “The
‘true but unprovable’ proposition assumes that positive integers or the infinite
set of P(1), P(2), etc., act as a complete whole, not the potential whole” (Fan
Yuehong,2017,p172). Therefore, we believe that the basis of the proof of the
GIT is a complete idea of actual infinity.
Since the actual infinity is different from the potential infinity, the
relation W(p, q) and the predicate W(x1, x2) must be equivalent, and
this requires that the object that the predicate W(x1, x2) processes
should not be an actual infinity.
The former is primitive recursive, an
impossible self-loop, while the object processed by the latter is an actual infin-
ity, which must contain its own judgment of itself, and must appear self-loop,
thus destroying its own primitive recursiveness. Therefore, the G¨odel formula
is bound to be excluded from the effective definition domain of the predicate
W(x1, x2) ; that is, the G¨odel formula does not belong to the effective
definition domain of the predicate W(x1, x2) , and the G¨odel formula
cannot be used to prove the GIT.
As we know, not all the well-formed formulas of the formal system N can be
used to represent a number-theoretic function, such as formula x1 = x1 ∧y ̸= y
is impossible to represent a number-theoretic function; and the G¨odel formula
is such a kind of well-formed formula, so it does not belong to the effective
definition domain of predicate W(x1, x2) .
4

4
Question-2: The G¨odel formula u is a circular
description, not a definite, valid formula. The
basis of the predicate W(x1, x2) , the formula
B(y) corresponding to the variable x1 , must
be a definite effective formula.
The contra-
diction of the proof originates from the G¨odel
formula itself, which cannot be attributed to
the incompleteness of the system; thus, the
proof is wrong.
The formula described by a cycle is not an effective formula; its G¨odel
number does not belong to the valid domain of relation W(p, q), and
it cannot be used to prove the GIT. We know that the G¨odel formula
u is the premise of the GIT proof, and if it is an invalid formula, then
the GIT proof is also invalid.
In formula
A(x1) = (∀x2)¬W(x1, x2)
(6)
, x1 is the term corresponding to the G¨odel number of a definite formula
B(y) , and we substitute x1 into formula B(y) to obtain B(x1) .
The sig-
nificance of the above wf.A(x1) is that formula B(x1) cannot be proven in
system N. Since we do not limit what this formula B(x1) is, it can be for-
mula wf.A(x1) itself.
In this way, formula wf.A(x1) buries the seed of the
cyclic definition in its definition, that is, formula A(x1) can be interpreted as
follows: formula A(x1) cannot be proved in system N, thus becoming an
unknown cycle object. We define arbitrary formulas by using this “un-
limited” predicate W(x1, x2) , which is exactly like the definition of
set T in Russell’s Paradox. This shows that the predicate W(x1, x2)
crosses a certain boundary and goes to its opposite.
Indeed, formally, formula A(x1) or formula u is understandable, and they
are all well-formed formulas. Similar to the definition of T in Russell’s Paradox,
there is no problem in form, but the explanation is ineffective. The G¨odel
formula u is undecidable in system N, which shows only that formal
system N, such as the concept of “set”, also needs to be limited.
For formula
A(x1) = (∀x2)¬W(x1, x2)
(7)
, we replace x1 at the right end of the above formula with 0(p), and we obtain
A(x1) = A(0(p)) = (∀x2)¬W(0(p), x2)
(8)
. Then, we put p = g(A(x1)) into the above formula, and we obtain
A(x1) = A(0(p)) = (∀x2)¬W(0(g(A(x1))), x2)
(9)
5

, that is,
A(x1) = (∀x2)¬W(0(g(A(x1))), x2)
(10)
Obviously, formula A(x1) is a circular definition, forming an infinite
backward chain, which is its own basis, although we disguise it by
the G¨odel number (or G¨odel mapping).
No one knows exactly what
formula A(x1) truly is.
This expression is similar to the infinite cycle of ‘a
set belongs to oneself’ in Russell’s Paradox. This obviously violates the
basic requirement of W(p, q) or predicate W(x1, x2) , namely, that the
well-formed formula B(y) corresponding to x1 must be a definite valid
formula rather than a circular expression.
Under the circular definition, the validity of the G¨odel formula u does not
hold; that is, u is not a valid formula. A logical invalid formula has no right or
wrong points, and it becomes meaningless to take it as an “undecidable formula”.
Thus, the emergence of u is not due to the incompleteness of the
formal system N but due to the definition of u itself.
This is the
fundamental reason why the great Wittgenstein considered G¨odel’s
proof as a logical paradox.
Since u is an invalid formula, we believe that any language L of the formal
system N should not include this formula; that is, there is no interpretation of u
in the model DN, so there is no so-called ‘true but unprovable’ proposition.
Otherwise, no suitable model can exist for any language containing u, where
we must exclude u from the normal language or some restriction on our formal
language.
As Wittgenstein said, tautology and contradictory logical propositions are
meaningless, and they have no rich connotations, which means that nothing is
said about the world. Therefore, as Juliet Floyd points out, “Wittgenstein’s
fundamental view on G¨odel’s proof is that he showed the impossibility of some
kind of construction—— just as it is impossible with a ruler and a compass
to divide an angle in three parts. . . . . . . . Wittgenstein warns people against
trying to find the derivability of these sentences. Indeed, we will insist that
the derivability of such a sentence is not a derivability in the relevant sense. ”
(Floyd J.,1995)
5
Question-3: The logical approach of the proof
of the GIT is completely different from the
proof of the Turing Machine Halting Problem
and the solution of Russell’s Paradox.
The scientific responses to Russell’s Paradox and Turing Machine Halt-
ing Problem are that humans deny the existence of this contradiction rather
than affirming its existence. In contrast, the proof of the GIT recognizes the
rationality of this contradiction, namely, the rationality of the G¨odel formula,
rather than denies it.
6

As above, we know that the existence of the undecidable formula u in the
proof of the GIT is no different from the existence of T in Russell’s Paradox.
This is also completely similar to the Turing Machine Halting Problem, but we
have come to the opposite conclusion. From the solution of the Turing Ma-
chine Halting Problem, we conclude that there is no Turing machine to judge
all Turing machines. From the GIT, we conclude that the form system N is in-
complete, rather than questioning the rationality of the domain of the predicate
W(x1, x2) that decides all the well-formed formulas, that is, questioning the ra-
tionality of the G¨odel formula itself. This unrestricted predicate W(x1, x2)
is similar to the relationship of belonging in Russell’s Paradox.
We argue that the domain of the predicate W(x1, x2) is limited,
just as is our solution to Russell’s Paradox: The definition of a set must
be limited. That is, p does not belong to a valid domain of the relation W(m, n).
This formula u is the same as the definition of set T in Russell’s Paradox, which
is a circular definition. The essence of the circular definition is that the
idea of actual infinity works; that is, we judge the “things” that have
not been generated as “things that already exist”, thus leading to
contradictions.
Below, we compare the formula u to the set T in Russell’s Paradox.
We set M as the set of all theorems of the formal system N. In the proof of
the GIT:
If u ∈M, the relationship W(p, q) holds. We derive that both W(0(p), 0(q))
and ¬W(0(p), 0(q)) are theorems for formal systems N, which contradicts the
consistency of N, and thus u /∈M.
However, if u /∈M, then the relationship W(p, q) does not hold; based on
the ω-consistency, we conclude that ¬u /∈M . In this case, although for each
q, there is ¬W(0(p), 0(q)) holds, but we cannot confirm whether u ∈M is true,
that is, we cannot confirm whether
(∀x2)¬W(0(p), x2) ∈M
(11)
is true ; it may or may not be true. Under the different models, we will have the
different results. Under the Standard Model (namely, the Normal Model)DN,
only the interpretations of 0, 0(1), 0(2), 0(3), 0(4), . . . are included, and there is
no interpretation for the other elements.
In this case, for each q, there is
¬W(0(p), 0(q)) holds, then we have
(∀x2)¬W(0(p), x2) ∈M
(12)
, that is, u ∈M is true. Therefore, under the Standard Model DN, we
can derive u /∈M from u ∈M ; from u /∈M we can also derive u ∈M .
While in Russell’s Paradox, T = {x|x /∈x}, we have
If T ∈T , according to the definition rules, T is its own element, and we
obtain T /∈T ;
If T /∈T, then T meets the definition of the element of T and thus has
T ∈T. This leads to a conflict.
7

A comparative analysis of these two proofs obviously shows that they are
very similar, and the former is not completely equivalent to the latter, but the
former contains the possibility of the latter. That is, under the Standard
Model DN, the G¨odel formula is a typical Russell’s Paradox.
We can clearly analyze this cycle. In Russell’s Paradox, the treatment is
that, as a set, such a T does not exist. In the proof of the Turing Machine
Halting Problem, people also did not recognize the existence of the Turing
machine H that judges “all Turing machines”. We therefore hold that this un-
decidable formula u constructed in the proof of GIT, as a contradiction, should
not exist and should not be admitted. We should reflect on the other possibili-
ties of the problem as we deal with Russell’s Paradox, rather than considering
the existence of u as reasonable and thus concluding the formal system N as
incomplete. In G¨odel’s view, the rationality of the existence of u is based on
the rationality of its construction; however, similarly, the construction of T in
Russell’s Paradox is also reasonable, but we do not admit the rationality of the
existence of T; instead, we reflect on whether the definition rule of the set itself
is reasonable.
Therefore, the GIT proof shows that its logical approach is obviously dif-
ferent from the former two. We believe that u is a formula with invalid
semantics and invalid logic, with its correct form and invalid content,
similar to T in Russell’s Paradox, which cannot be used to prove the
GIT. As Wittgenstein questions the meaning of u, he claims that it is not a
meaningful mathematical proposition, that u is not available in mathematical
proofs and calculations and that we should abandon the natural language inter-
pretation of u. Wittgenstein points out, “Mathematical propositions, like other
propositions, do need to explain their grammar”(Wittgenstein, 2003, p291).
That is, we must regulate and restrict mathematical propositions such as Rus-
sell’s Paradox and the G¨odel formula.
6
Summary
Above, we have questioned the reasonableness of the proof of the GIT from three
aspects, and we believe that the definition and use of the G¨odel formula should
be abandoned. Not as G¨odel thinks—the system is incomplete, the so-called
‘true but unprovable’ proposition does not exist. Just as in Russell’s Paradox,
what we want to limit is the definition of sets, so the set that contains all sets
that do not belong to themselves does not exist. G¨odel’s proof was based on an
invalid formula and was therefore erroneous.
References
Wittgenstein, L. 2003: On the Foundation of Mathematics (Wittgenstein
Complete Works,vol.7), translated by Xu Youyu and Tu Jiliang, published by
Hebei Education Press (China).
8

Wang Hao, 2009: Logic Journey: From G¨odel to Philosophy, translated by
Xing Taotao, Hao Zhaokuan and Wang Wei, published by Zhejiang University
Press (China).
A. G. Hamilton,1989: The Mathematician’s Logic, translated by Luo Rufeng,
Chen Muchang, Ru Jiza and Huang Wanhui, published by The Commercial
Press (China).
Floyd J.,1995: On saying what you really want to say: Wittgenstein, G¨odel,and
the trisection of the angle. Hintikka,1995,(251):373-425
Fan Yuehong,2017: A Study on Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematic,
Science Press (China).
9
View publication stats

