 

Sony str-se391 protect mode
Sony str-de925 protector mode.  Sony str-de445 protect mode.  Sony str de935 protector problems.  Sony str-de545 protect mode reset.  
Contact Support Parts & Repair The STR-K740P protect error usually occurs in the form of "PROTECT" flashing on the display, and this article looks into how to fix this error and bring the amplifier out of this mode. The purpose of the protect error is to protect the amplifier components from damage should a short circuit occur. 
The most common form of short is usually user error when they short the speaker terminals, or overload it by attaching too many speakers. The protection mechanism usually places the amplifier into protect mode when it detects a short, and during this time it prevents power to the amplifier circuitry, thereby preventing harm to the speakers and
expensive amplifier components. When you see this message, the first thing to do is to switch OFF the amplifier immediately, and disconnect the speakers from the terminals, at the amplifier end. Let the amplifier cool for 15 minutes and then switch ON to see if the message still appears. If the message goes away, then you need to make sure the
speakers are not short and correct impedance. However if the protect message keeps appearing all the time and without the speakers attached, then it is likely that there has been permanent damage to the internal components, and the unit will require repair. This is a complex piece of Japanese electronic engineering and it requires a fully qualified
and experienced electronic engineer to repair it, therefore do not attempt to repair it. In the following sections, we look at what sometimes goes wrong when such an error appears permanently. If we look at one side of the push-pull stage, we see that if Q703 goes short between its collector and emitter junctions, the voltage rail would flow through
the speaker and ground, however, there is R716 in the path, which will go open. When R716 is open and Q703 is short, Q705 will detect current through its base junction which starts the process of flagging the protect error. Usually, a Class AB push-pull configuration has a ceramic resistor within the power path, which the Sony service manual calls
non-flammable resistor that requires checking. 
When the transistors go short between their collector-emitter junctions, it creates a path from the positive voltage rail to ground -- or negative rail to ground, in a split voltage system -- and the only resistor in this path is this non-flammable resistor, which goes open. In this channel example, the non-flammable power resistor is R716 which is a twin
resistor package consisting of a pair of 0.22-ohm resistors in series. 
The audio power output design is class AB push-pull configuration, consisting of MP1620 and MN2488 pair of Japanese transistors manufactured by the Sanken Electric Company. 
The MP1620 is a PNP type, whilst the MN2488 is its complementary NPN transistor. These are hardy transistors with collector current (Ic) rated at 10 A. It would require a hard short across the speaker terminals in order to damage them. This together with a state-of-the-art Japanese electronic protection mechanism ensures that they will survive for
many years. This Article Continues... Sony STR-K740P Sony STR-K740P Review How to Fix Sony Amplifier Protect Mode Error Sony STR-K740P Repair Sony STR-K740P Power Supply Unit Sony STR-K740P Chipset Sony Amplifier Mitsumi Radio Tuner Sony STR-K740P Back Sockets Contact Support Parts & Repair Contact Support Parts & Repair
You’ve switched on your Sony AV receiver only to be greeted by the word ‘Protect’ on the display screen and doesn’t do anything else. 
“Something is amidst”, as you think to yourself, and unfortunately you are right. Don’t be alarmed and before you send your Sony AVR off for repair, there are some troubleshooting steps you should try first. As this may not be your amplifier’s fault and you should isolate the actual problem first. When your Sony AV receiver enters this mode, you will
see either the word ‘Protect’ or ‘Protector’ appear. Protect/protector mode is activated to prevent damages to your receiver’s internal components such as the power amps, circuits, transistors, etc. The possible culprits that would activate this mode, will be a power surge, a short in the circuitry, excessive heat, speakers issue, and more. Also, when
the Sony protect mode is activated, your speakers will not function as you’ll need to find the culprit and remove the threat. 
You can do some troubleshooting on your own and hopefully solve the issue before the need to send it for repair. You should always turn off the Sony AVR first, once you have turned it off, you can start by following the below steps. Once you have switched off the Sony receiver, you should allow some time for it to cool down. After some time has
passed, you can try to have a feel of the heat by hovering your hand near the chassis. If you are confident enough that is not too hot, you can try physically touching it. You will also need to check if the vents/exhaust are been blocked. If it is, you should remove the objects that are blocking the Sony receiver vents. If it is not possible due to the
placement inside the cabinet, then you will have no choice but to take the receiver out of the cabinet and place it somewhere else with proper ventilation. You should always place your receivers in an area with proper airflow and ventilation, this is to prevent them from overheating as it will trigger Sony protect/protector mode. The area will also need
to be a clean environment, remove dust from the area and AV receiver, as they may block the vents or deteriorate the airflow. Do not place your Sony receiver near appliances that generate heat or under direct sunlight. If recently, you find that your receiver generates a lot of heat, just by turning it on and nothing is been played. It is advisable to
switch it off immediately and bring it in for repair. If the protector mode is been activated due to a power outage or electrical surge then this could be easily solved by turning off the receiver and plugging out the power cord from the power outlet. You should wait at least half an hour before plugging back the power cord and turning the Sony receiver
back on. This step should have reset the internal surge protection circuit and your receiver should be working fine now. If your Sony AV receiver is overloaded to the point of clipping, it will trigger the Sony protect mode. This usually happens when you turn up the volume too high during a music/movie playback as it draws more power from the amps.
Another reason will be, there are too many speakers such as your surround speakers, center speakers, ceiling speakers, etc., and your Sony receiver is unable to provide enough power to all of them, causing the amp to clip. You should lower down the volume to a moderate level or to a point your receiver wouldn’t clip (with enough headroom for
peaks). You can disconnect the speakers (by pairs) starting with your surround speakers first until you reach the number of speakers that wouldn’t overload your receiver. Another solution is to get additional power amplifiers to drive the front mains such as your left, right, and center speaker. And allow your Sony AV receiver to power the rest of the
speakers. 
If you do not have an active subwoofer, then it is recommended to get one for this situation since it could help to relieve your receiver, as producing bass uses a lot of power. You should check for loose speaker wires or wire strands that are touching each other, touching other wires, touching the back of your Sony receiver, and the speakers
themselves. These situations may short the receiver, and activate the protector mode. Either due to wear and tear or by accident, strands of speaker wires may be exposed. You will need to check your speaker cables/wires occasionally and change to new ones if required. Remember to switch off your Sony receiver when you are doing this step. This is
another way to check if a specific speaker and/or speaker wire/cable is causing the issue. Turn off your Sony receiver, then proceed to remove all speaker wires/cables from your receiver. Turn it back on, and if the problem stops, that means one or more of your speakers or wires is triggering the Sony protect/protector mode. You can either check
your speakers and wires individually or reconnect each one at a time to see which speakers are the culprits. Replace the faulty speaker wires or the speakers, this should solve the issue. If the problem persists when you turn the receiver back on without attaching any speaker wires, this will mean the fault lies with your Sony receiver. You should send
the receiver back to the service center for repair as you won’t be able to fix it yourself and also you do not have the components to replace the damaged ones. You must match your speakers’ impedance with the impedance of your Sony receiver that is designed to drive. If not, your receiver will activate protect mode. Your speakers may get damaged
as well due to incorrect impedance. To solve this issue, you can either change your speakers to the ones with matching impedance or change your Sony receiver to match your speakers’ impedance. Turn off the receiver and turn it back on while holding the power button for roughly 10 seconds. 
A screen will appear prompting something like press enter to clear all and you’ll just need to press ‘enter’ on the remote control. Your Sony receiver will default back to factory settings and all your previous configurations will be gone. 
Different models may require a different method to do the reset, you can always refer to your manual. There is a slight possibility that it could be an issue with your receiver model only or your batch. You can check online to confirm this and if it is true, there’s maybe a firmware update that can solve this issue. Please remember to power off your Sony
receiver first before proceeding with the steps above, unless it is necessary for the receiver to be switched on. If all the steps above fail to fix the issue, it will at least isolate the problem for you and you will know which audio component is to be sent for repair e.g. speakers or Sony receiver. If your warranty has expired, you may want to check and ask
for potential repair costs. Based on the provided costs, you might want to consider either proceed with the repair or purchase a new AVR. 
Especially you have used your Sony receiver for many years, and likely more problems may appear in the future. Might as well use the money to get a new AVR, since it will have the latest features, a longer lifespan, and a warranty. I also wouldn’t recommend buying 2nd hand AV receivers since you wouldn’t know if there are any problems internally
and you may encounter issues just after a few months of use. Still, the decision is yours to make, just audition the used receiver as thoroughly as possible. Article ID : 00025096 / Last Modified : 02/03/2022 NOTE: If model-specific information is needed to complete any of these steps, refer to the instruction manual with the product. Manuals are
posted on your model support page. If the words PROTECTOR and PUSH POWER appear in alternating sequence on the display of your home audio device, or if the word PROTECT or PROTECTOR appears, there may be an external speaker issue or connection issue that is triggering the protection circuit. Try following these steps to resolve this
issue: NOTE: Because each of these steps represents a possible solution to this issue, check the A/V receiver status after completing each step. If there has been an electrical surge or power outage, then the internal surge protection inside the home audio device may have been triggered to protect the device from the surge. This is normal. To reset
the internal surge protection circuit unplug the AC power cord from the wall for at least 30 minutes.Ensure the top of the home audio device has proper ventilation to keep it from overheating. Running the home audio device in a poorly ventilated cabinet can trigger the protection circuit.Reduce the volume level. If the impedance of any of the
speakers is below the rated impedance range indicated on the rear of the home audio device next to the speaker connections, the home audio device may enter the PROTECT mode. Raising the volume with a low impedance speaker will trigger the protection circuit. 
NOTES: Replace low impedance (outside of specifications) speakers with the correct impedance to prevent this from occurring.If you continue to use the low impedance (outside of specifications) speakers and you ran the Auto Calibration, check your SPEAKER SETUP and individual speaker LEVEL to reduce any speaker LEVEL with a positive gain to
0.0dB or less. 
To isolate the problem, do the following: Turn off the home audio device, and remove all speaker wires from the back. Then turn the device back on and check if the issue is resolved. If it is still having the same issue, turn off the device again leave it off for at least 30 minutes before turning it on again.Inspect the speaker cords. If a cord is frayed or in
contact with another terminal, an error will occur. Fix the connection to prevent a short circuit.Make sure the speaker impedance is within the recommended range. 
If the impedance is not correct, the speakers will not work properly and may be damaged. If the speakers are within the recommended impedance range, check the connections. If the speakers being used are within the suitable impedance range and they are still not working, there may be a malfunction or some other flaw within the speakers. Test by
using a different set of speakers if available. 
If the issue is still unresolved, service may be required.  Go to Product Repair.  Contact Support Parts & Repair

