
SPACETIME A D GEOMETRY 


Pearson New International Edition 
Spacetime and Geometry 
An Introduction to General Relativity 
Sean Carroll 
PEARSON 

Pearson Education Limited 
Edinburgh Gate 
Harlow 
Essex CM20 2JE 
England and Associated Companies throughout the world 
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk 
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored In a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, vithout either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6- 10 Kirby Street, London EC1N STS. 
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not ves in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights In such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
PEARSON 
ISBN 10: 1-292-02663-4 
ISBN 13: 978- 1-292-02663-3 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Brit sh Library 
Printed in the Uni ed States of America 

"For if each Star is little more a mathematical Point, located upon 
the Hemisphere of Heaven by Right Ascension and Declination, then 
all the Stars, taken together, tho' innumerable, must like any other 
set of points, in tum represent some single gigantick Equation, to the 
mind of God as straightforward as, say, the Equation of a Sphere,-to 
us unreadable, incalculable. A lonely, uncompensated, perhaps even 
impossible Task,-yet some of us must ever be seeking, I suppose." 
-Thomas Pynchon, Mason & Dixon 


Preface 
General relativity is the most beautiful physical theory ever invented. It describes 
one of the most pervasive features of the world we experience-gravitation-in 
terms of an elegant mathematical structure-the differential geometry of curved 
spacetime-leading to unambiguous predictions that have received spectacular 
experimental confirmation. Consequences of general relativity, from the big bang 
to black holes, often get young people first interested in physics, and it is an unal-
loyed joy to finally reach the point in one's studies where these phenomena may 
be understood at a rigorous quantitative level. If you are contemplating reading 
this book, that point is here. 
In recent decades, general relativity (GR) has become an integral and indis-
pensable part of modem physics. For a long time after it was proposed by Einstein 
in 1916, GR was counted as a shining achievement that lay somewhat outside the 
mainstream of interesting research. Increasingly, however, contemporary students 
in a variety of specialties are finding it necessary to study Einstein's theory. In ad-
dition to being an active research area in its own right, GR is part of the standard 
syllabus for anyone interested in astrophysics, cosmology, string theory, and even 
particle physics. This is not to slight the more pragmatic uses of GR, including 
the workings of the Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite network. 
There is no shortage of books on GR, and many of them are excellent. Indeed, 
approximately thirty years ago witnessed the appearance of no fewer than three 
books in the subject, each of which has become a classic in its own right: those by 
Weinberg (1972), Misner, Thome, and Wheeler (1973), and Hawking and Ellis 
(1975). Each of these books is suffused with a strongly-held point of view advo-
cated by the authors. This has led to a love-hate relationship between these works 
and their readers; in each case, it takes little effort to find students who will de-
clare them to be the best textbook ever written, or other students who find them 
completely unpalatable. For the individuals in question, these judgments may very 
well be correct; there are many different ways to approach this subject. 
The present book has a single purpose: to provide a clear introduction to gen-
eral relativity, suitable for graduate students or advanced undergraduates. I have 
attempted to include enough material so that almost any one-semester introduc-
tory course on GR can find the appropriate subjects covered in the text, but not 
too much more than that. In particular, I have tried to resist the temptation to write 
a comprehensive reference book. The only goal of this book is to teach you GR. 
An intentional effort has been made to prefer the conventional over the id-
iosyncratic. If I can be accused of any particular ideological bias, it would be a 
vii 

1iii 
Preface 
tendency to think of general relativity as a field theory, a point of view that helps 
one to appreciate the connections among GR, particle physics. and string theory. 
At the same time, there are a number of exciting astrophysical applications of GR 
(black holes, gravitational lensing, the production and detection of gravitational 
waves, the early universe, the late universe, the cosmological constant), and I 
have endeavored to include at least enough background discussion of these issues 
to prepare students to tackle the current literature. 
The primary question facing any introductory treatment of general relativity is 
the level of mathematical rigor at which to operate. There is no uniquely proper 
solution, as different students will respond with different levels of understanding 
and enthusiasm to different approaches. Recognizing this, I have tried to pro-
vide something for everyone. I have not shied away from detailed formalism, but 
have also attempted to include concrete examples and informal discussion of the 
concepts under consideration. Much of the most mathematical material has been 
relegated to the Appendices. Some of the material in the Appendices is actually an 
integral part of the course (for example, the discussion of conformal diagrams), 
but an individual reader or instructor can decide just when it is appropriate to 
delve into them; signposts are included in the body of the text. 
Surprisingly, there are very few formal prerequisites for learning general rel-
ativity; most of the material is developed as we go along. Certainly no prior ex-
posure to R.iemannian geometry is assumed, nor would it necessarily be helpful. 
It would be nice to have already studied some special relativity; although a dis-
cussion is included in Chapter I, its purpose is more to review the basics and and 
introduce some notation, rather than to provide a self-contained introduction. Be-
yond that, some exposure to electromagnetism, Lagrangian mechanics, and linear 
algebra might be useful, but the essentials are included here. 
The structure of the book should be clear. The first chapter is a review of spe-
cial relativity and basic tensor algebra, including a brief discussion of classical 
field theory. The next two chapters introduce manifolds and curvature in some 
detail; some motivational physics is included, but building a mathematical frame-
work is the primary goal. General relativity proper is introduced in Chapter 4, 
along with some discussion of alternative theories. The next four chapters dis-
cuss the three major applications of GR: black holes (two chapters), perturbation 
theory and gravitational waves, and cosmology. Each of these subjects has wit-
nessed an explosion of research in recent years, so the discussions here will be 
necessarily introductory, but I have tried to emphasize issues of relevance to cur-
rent work. These three applications can be covered in any order, although there 
are interdependencies highlighted in the text. Discussions of experimental tests 
are sprinkled through these chapters. Chapter 9 is a brief introduction to quan-
tum field theory in curved spacetime; this is not a necessary part of a first look 
at GR, but has become increasingly important to work in quantum gravity and 
cosmology, and therefore deserves some mention. On the other hand, a few topics 
are scandalously neglected; the initial-value problem and cosmological perturba-
tion theory come to mind, but there are others. Fortunately there is no shortage of 
other resources. The Appendices serve various purposes: There are discussions of 

Preface 
ix 
technical points that were avoided in the body of the book, crucial concepts that 
could have been put in various places, and extra topics that are useful but outside 
the main development. 
Since the goal of the book is pedagogy rather than originality, I have often 
leaned heavily on other books (listed in the bibliography) when their expositions 
seemed perfectly sensible to me. When this leaning was especially heavy, I have 
indicated it in the text itself. It will be clear that a primary resource was the book 
by Wald (1984), which has become a standard reference in the field; readers of 
this book will hopefully be well-prepared to jump into the more advanced sections 
of Wald's book. 
This book grew out of a set of lecture notes that were prepared when I taught 
a course on GR at MIT. These notes are available on the web for free, and will 
continue to be so; they will be linked to the website listed below. Perhaps a little 
over half of the material here is contained in the notes, although the advantages 
of owning the book (several copies, even) should go without saying. 
Countless people have contributed greatly both to my own understanding of 
general relativity and to this book in particular-too many to acknowledge with 
any hope of completeness. Some people, however, deserve special mention. Ted 
Pyne learned the subject along with me, taught me a great deal, and collaborated 
with me the first time we taught a GR course, as a seminar in the astronomy 
department at Harvard; parts of this book are based on our mutual notes. Nick 
Warner taught the course at MIT from which I first learned GR, and his lectures 
were certainly a very heavy influence on what appears here. Neil Comish was 
kind enough to provide a wealth of exercises, many of which have been included 
at the end of each chapter. And among the many people who have read parts of 
the manuscript and offered suggestions, Sanaz Arkani-Hamed was kind enough 
to go through the entire thing in great detail. 
I would also like to thank everyone who either commented in person or by 
email on different parts of the book; these include Tigran Aivazian, Teodora Be-
loreshka, Ed Bertschinger, Patrick Brady, Peter Brown, Jennifer Chen, Michele 
Ferraz Figueir6, Eanna Flanagan, Jacques Frie, Y gor Geurts, Marco Godina, 
Monica Guica, Jim Hartle, Tamas Hauer, Daniel Holz, Ted Jacobson, Akash 
Kansagra, Chuck Keeton, Arthur Kosowsky, Eugene Lim, Jorma Louko, Robert 
A. McNees, Hayri Mutluay, Simon Ross, ltai Seggev, Robert Wald, and Barton 
Zwiebach. Apologies are due to anyone I may have neglected to mention. And 
along the way I was fortunate to be the recipient of wisdom and perspective from 
numerous people, including Shadi Bartsch, George Field, Deryn Fogg, Ilana Har-
ms, Gretchen Helfrich, Mari Ruti, Maria Spiropulu, Mark Trodden, and of course 
my family. (This wisdom often came in the form, "What were you thinking?") 
Finally, I would like to thank the students in my GR classes, on whom the strate-
gies deployed here were first tested, and express my gratitude to my students and 
collaborators, for excusing my book-related absences when I should have been 
doing research. 
My friends who have written textbooks themselves tell me that the first printing 
of a book will sometimes contain mistakes. In the unlikely event,that this happens 

Preface 
here, there will be a list of errata kept at the website for the book: 
http://spacetimeandgeometry.net/ 
The website will also contain other relevant links of interest to readers. 
During the time I was working on this book, I was supported by the National 
Science Foundation, the Department of Energy, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, 
and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation. 
Sean Carroll 
Chicago, Illinois 
June 2003 

Contents 
1 • Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
1 
1.1 
Prelude 
1 
1.2 
Space and Time, Separately and Together 3 
1.3 
Lorentz Transformations 
12 
1.4 
Vectors 
15 
1.5 
Dual Vectors (One-Forms) 
18 
1.6 
Tensors 
21 
1.7 
Manipulating Tensors 
25 
1.8 
Maxwell's Equations 
29 
1.9 
Energy and Momennun 30 
1.10 
Classical Field Theory 
37 
1.11 
Exercises 45 
2 • Manifolds 
48 
2.1 
Gravity as Geometry 48 
2.2 
What ls a Manifold? 54 
2.3 
Vectors Again 63 
2.4 
Tensors Again 68 
2.5 
The Metric 
71 
2.6 
An Expanding Universe 
76 
2.7 
Causality 
78 
2.8 
Tensor Densities 
82 
2.9 
Differential Forms 
84 
2.10 Integration 88 
2.11 
Exercises 
90 
3 • Curvature 
93 
3.1 
Overview 
93 
3.2 
Covariant Derivatives 
94 
3.3 
Parallel Transport and Geodesics 
102 
xi 

xii 
Contents 
3 .4 
Properties of Geodesics 
108 
3.5 
The Expanding Universe Revisited 
113 
3.6 
The Riemann Curvature Tensor 
121 
3.7 
Properties of the Riemann Tensor 
126 
3.8 
Synunetries and Killing Vectors 
133 
3.9 
Maximally Synunetric Spaces 
139 
3.10 Geodesic Deviation 
144 
3.11 
Exercises 
146 
4 • Gravitation 
151 
4.1 
Physics in Curved Spacetime 
151 
4.2 
Einstein's Equation 
155 
4.3 
Lagrangian Formulation 
159 
4.4 
Properties of Einstein's Equation 
165 
4.5 
The Cosmological Constant 
171 
4.6 
Energy Conditions 
174 
4.7 
The Equivalence Principle Revisited 
177 
4.8 
Alternative Theories 
181 
4.9 
Exercises 
190 
5 • The Schwarzschild Solution 
193 
5.1 
The Schwarzschild Metric 
193 
5.2 
Birkhoff's Theorem 
197 
5.3 
Singularities 204 
5.4 
Geodesics of Schwarzschild 205 
5.5 
Experimental Tests 
212 
5.6 
Schwarzschild Black Holes 
218 
5.7 
The Maximally Extended Schwarzschild Solution 222 
5.8 
Stars and Black Holes 
229 
5.9 
Exercises 236 
6 • More General Black Holes 
238 
6.1 
The Black Hole Zoo 238 
6.2 
Event Horizons 239 
6.3 
Killing Horizons 244 
6.4 
Mass, Charge, and Spin 248 
6.5 
Charged (Reissner-Nordstrom) Black Holes 254 
6.6 
Rotating (Kerr) Black Holes 
261 
6.7 
The Penrose Process and Black-Hole Thermodynamics 267 
6.8 
Exercises 272 

Contents 
xiii 
7 • Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
274 
7.1 
Linearized Gravity and Gauge Transformations 274 
7 .2 
Degrees of Freedom 279 
7.3 
Newtonian Fields and Photon Trajectories 286 
7.4 
Gravitational Wave Solutions 293 
7 .5 
Production of Gravitational Waves 
300 
7 .6 
Energy Loss Due to Gravitational Radiation 
307 
7. 7 
Detection of Gravitational Waves 
315 
7 .8 
Exercises 320 
8 • Cosmology 
323 
8.1 
Maximally Symmetric Universes 
323 
8.2 
Robertson-Walker Metrics 
329 
8.3 
The Friedmann Equation 
333 
8.4 
Evolution of the Scale Factor 338 
8.5 
Redshifts and Distances 344 
8.6 
Gravitational Lensing 349 
8.7 
Our Universe 
355 
8.8 
Inflation 
365 
8.9 
Exercises 374 
9 • Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
376 
9.1 
Introduction 376 
9.2 
Quantum Mechanics 
378 
9.3 
Quantum Field Theory in Flat Spacetime 
385 
9.4 
Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
394 
9.5 
The Unruh Effect 402 
9.6 
The Hawking Effect and Black Hole Evaporation 412 
APPENDIXES 
423 
A • Maps between Manifolds 
423 
B • Diffeomorphisms and Lie Derivatives 
429 
C • Submanifolds 
439 
D • Hypersurfaces 
443 

xiv 
Contents 
E • Stokes's Theorem 
453 
F • Geodesic Congruences 
459 
G • Conformal Transformations 
467 
H • Conformal Diagrams 
471 
I • The Parallel Propagator 
479 
J • Noncoordinate Bases 
483 
Bibliography 
495 
Index 
501 

CHAPTER 
1 
Special Relativity and 
Flat Spacetime 
1.1 • PRELUDE 
General relativity (GR) is Einstein's theory of space, time, and gravitation. At 
heart it is a very simple subject (compared, for example, to anything involving 
quantum mechanics). The essential idea is perfectly straightforward: while most 
forces of nature are represented by fields defined on spacetime (such as the elec-
tromagnetic field, or the short-range fields characteristic of subnuclear forces), 
gravity is inherent in spacetime itself. In particular, what we experience as "grav-
ity" is a manifestation of the curvature of spacetime. 
Our task, then, is clear. We need to understand spacetime, we need to un-
derstand curvature, and we need to understand how curvature becomes gravity. 
Roughly, the first two chapters of this book are devoted to an exploration of space-
time, the third is about curvature, and the fourth explains the relationship between 
curvature and gravity, before we get into applications of the theory. However, let's 
indulge ourselves with a short preview of what is to come, which will perhaps mo-
tivate the initial steps of our journey. 
GR is a theory of gravity, so we can begin by remembering our previous theory 
of gravity, that of Newton. There are two basic elements: an equation for the 
gravitational field as influenced by matter, and an equation for the response of 
matter to this field. The conventional Newtonian statement of these rules is in 
terms of forces between particles; the force between two objects of masses M and 
m separated by a vector r = re(r) is the famous inverse-square law, 
GMm 
F = --
2 -e(r)t 
,. 
(1.1) 
and this force acts on a particle of mass m to give it an acceleration according to 
Newton's second law, 
F=ma. 
(1.2) 
Equivalently, we could use the language of the gravitational potential <I>; the po-
tential is related to the mass density p by Poisson's equation, 
and the acceleration is given by the gradient of the potential, 
a= V<I>. 
(1.3) 
(1.4) 
1 

Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
Either ( 1.1) and (1.2), or (1.3) and (1.4 ), serve to define Newtonian gravity. To 
define GR, we need to replace each of them by statements about the curvature of 
spacetime. 
The hard part is the equation governing the response of spacetime curvature to 
the presence of matter and energy. We will eventually find what we want in the 
form of Einstein's equation, 
(1.5) 
This looks more forbidding than it should, largely because of those Greek sub-
scripts. In fact this is simply an equation between 4 x 4 matrices, and the subscripts 
label elements of each matrix. The expression on the left-hand side is a measure 
of the curvature of spacetime, while the right-hand side measures the energy and 
momentum of matter, so this equation relates energy to curvature, as promised. 
But we will defer until later a detailed understanding of the inner workings of 
Einstein's equation. 
The response of matter to spacetime curvature is somewhat easier to grasp: 
Free particles move along paths of "shortest possible distance," or geodesics. In 
other words. particles try their best to move on straight lines, but in a curved 
spacetime there might not be any straight lines (in the sense we are familiar with 
from Euclidean geometry). so they do the next best thing. Their parameterized 
paths xµ.(A.) obey the geodesic equation: 
d2 xµ. 
dxP dxa 
dA.2 + r~a di.. di.. = 0. 
(1.6) 
At this point you aren't expected to understand ( 1.6) any more than ( 1.5); but soon 
enough it will all make sense. 
As we will discuss later, the universal nature of geodesic motion is an ex-
tremely profound feature of GR. This universality is the origin of our claim that 
gravity is not actually a "force," but a feature of spacetime. A charged particle in 
an electric field feels an acceleration, which deflects it from straight-line motion; 
in contrast, a particle in a gravitational field moves along a path that is the closest 
thing there is to a straight line. Such particles do not feel acceleration; they are 
freely falling. Once we become more familiar with the spirit of GR, it will make 
perfect sense to think of a ball flying through the air as being more truly "unaccel-
erated" than one sitting on a table; the one sitting a table is being deflected away 
from the geodesic it would like to be on (which is why we feel a force on our feet 
as we stand on Earth). 
The basic concept underlying our description of spacetime curvature will be 
that of the metric tensor, typically denoted by gµ.v· The metric encodes the ge-
ometry of a space by expressing deviations from Pythagoras's theorem, (t::.l)2 = 
(t::.x)2 + (t::.y)2 (where t::.l is the distance between two points defined on a Carte-
sian grid with coordinate separations t::.x and t::.y). This familiar formula is valid 
only in conventional Euclidean geometry, where it is implicitly assumed that 
space is flat. In the presence of curvature our deeply ingrained notions of ge-

1.2 Space and Time, Separately and Together 
3 
ometry will begin to fail, and we can characterize the amount of curvature by 
keeping track of how Pythagoras's relation is altered. This information is con-
tained in the metric tensor. From the metric we will derive the Riemann curvature 
tensor, used to define Einstein's equation, and also the geodesic equation. Setting 
up this mathematical apparatus is the subject of the next several chapters. 
Despite the need to introduce a certain amount of formalism to discuss curva-
ture in a quantitative way, the essential notion of GR ("gravity is the curvature 
of spacetime") is quite simple. So why does GR have, at least in some benighted 
circles, a reputation for difficulty or even abstruseness? Because the elegant truths 
of Einstein's theory are obscured by the accumulation of certain pre-relativity no-
tions which, although very useful, must first be discarded in order to appreciate 
the world according to GR. Specifically, we live in a world in which spacetime 
curvature is very small, and particles are for the most part moving quite slowly 
compared to the speed of light. Consequently, the mechanics of Galileo and New-
ton comes very naturally to us, even though it is only an approximation to the 
deeper story. 
So we will set about learning the deeper story by gradually stripping away the 
layers of useful but misleading Newtonian intuition. The first step, which is the 
subject of this chapter, will be to explore special relativity (SR), the theory of 
spacetime in the absence of gravity (curvature). Hopefully this is mostly review, 
as it will proceed somewhat rapidly. The point will be both to recall what SR is all 
about, and to introduce tensors and related concepts that will be crucial later on, 
without the extra complications of curvature on top of everything else. Therefore, 
for this chapter we will always be working in flat spacetime, and furthermore we 
will only use inertial (Cartesian-like) coordinates. Needless to say it is possible 
to do SR in any coordinate system you like, but it turns out that introducing the 
necessary tools for doing so would take us halfway to curved spaces anyway, so 
we will put that off for a while. 
1.2 • SPACE AND TIME, SEPARATELY AND TOGETHER 
A purely cold-blooded approach to GR would reverse the order of Chapter 2 
(Manifolds) and Chapter I (Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime). A manifold 
is the kind of mathematical structure used to describe spacetime, while special 
relativity is a model that invokes a particular kind of spacetime (one with no cur-
vature, and hence no gravity). However, if you are reading this book you presum-
ably have at least some familiarity with special relativity (SR), while you may 
not know anything about manifolds. So our first step will be to explore the rela-
tively familiar territory of SR, taking advantage of this opportunity to introduce 
concepts and notation that will be crucial to later developments. 
Special relativity is a theory of the structure of spacetime, the background on 
which particles and fields evolve. SR serves as a replacement for Newtonian me-
chanics, which also is a theory of the structure of spacetime. In either case, we can 
distinguish between this basic structure and the various dynamical laws govern-

4 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
particle worldline-
FIGURE 1.1 In Newtonian spacetime there is an absolute slicing into distinct copies of 
space at different moments in time. Particle worldlines are constrained to move forward 
in time, but can travel through space at any velocity; there is universal agreement on the 
question of whether two events at different points in space occur at the same moment of 
time. 
ing specific systems: Newtonian gravity is an example of a dynamical system set 
within the context of Newtonian mechanics, while Maxwell's electromagnetism 
is a dynamical system operating within the context of special relativity. 
Spacetime is a four-dimensional set, with elements labeled by three dimen-
sions of space and one of time. (We'll do a more rigorous job with the definitions 
in the next chapter.) An individual point in spacetime is called an event. The path 
of a particle is a curve through spacetime, a parameterized one-dimensional set of 
events, called the worldline. Such a description applies equally to SR and New-
tonian mechanics. In either case, it seems clear that "time" is treated somewhat 
differently than "space"; in particular, particles always travel forward in time, 
whereas they are free to move back and forth in space. 
There is an important difference, however, between the set of allowed paths 
that particles can take in SR and those in Newton's theory. In Newtonian mechan-
ics, there is a basic division of spacetime into well-defined slices of "all of space 
at a fixed moment in time." The notion of simultaneity, when two events occur at 
the same time, is unambiguously defined. Trajectories of particles will move ever 
forward in time, but are otherwise unconstrained; in particular, there is no limit 
on the relative velocity of two such particles. 
In SR the situation is dramatically altered: in particular, there is no well-defined 
notion of two separated events occurring "at the same time." That is not to say that 
spacetime is completely structureless. Rather, at any event we can define a light 
cone, which is the locus of paths through spacetime that could conceivably be 
taken by light rays passing through this event. The absolute division, in Newtonian 

1 .2 
Space and Time, Separately and Together 
5 
particle worldline--
~)/ 
~ 
"-, 
·-.,~ 
/ 
light cones 
FIGURE 1.2 In special relativity there is no absolute notion of "all of space at one mo-
ment in time." Instead, there is a rule that particles always travel at less than or equal to the 
speed of light. We can therefore define light cones at every event, which locally describe 
the set of allowed trajectories. For two events that are outside each others' light cones, 
there is no universal notion of which event occurred earlier in time. 
mechanics, of spacetime into unique slices of space parameterized by time, is 
replaced by a rule that says that physical particles cannot travel faster than light, 
and consequently move along paths that always remain inside these light cones. 
The absence of a preferred time-slicing in SR is at the heart of why the notion 
of spacetime is more fundamental in this context than in Newtonian mechanics. 
Of course we can choose specific coordinate systems in spacetime, and once we 
do, it makes sense to speak of separated events occurring at the same value of 
the time coordinate in this particular system; but there will also be other possible 
coordinates, related to the first by "rotating" space and time into each other. This 
phenomenon is a natural generalization of rotations in Euclidean geometry, to 
which we now turn. 
Consider a garden-variety two-dimensional plane. It is typically convenient 
to label the points on such a plane by introducing coordinates, for example by 
defining orthogonal x and y axes and projecting each point onto these axes in the 
usual way. However, it is clear that most of the interesting geometrical facts about 
the plane are independent of our choice of coordinates; there aren't any preferred 
directions. As a simple example, we can consider the distance between two points, 
given by 
(1.7) 
In a different Cartesian coordinate system, defined by x' and y' axes that are 
rotated with respect to the originals, the formula for the distance is unaltered: 
(1.8) 
We therefore say that the distance is invariant under such changes of coordinates. 

6 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
~y· 
y 
\ 
'\·\ 
.. ~.{ ~~~.~.--
~y· 
I - ;,. 
. r. 
' 
I 
I 
\. 
I 
· 
I · 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, I 
···x· 
I 
". .. f~·;.:5 
.•• 1 .•.. -···1~· 
_.., ...... 
x 
FIGURE 1.3 Two-dimensional Euclidean space, with two different coordinate systems. 
Notions such as "the distance between two points" are independent of the coordinate sys-
tem chosen. 
This is why it is useful to think of the plane as an intrinsically two-dimensional 
space, rather than as two fundamentally distinct one-dimensional spaces brought 
arbitrarily together: Although we use two distinct numbers to label each point, 
the numbers are not the essence of the geometry, since we can rotate axes into 
each other while leaving distances unchanged. In Newtonian physics this is not 
the case with space and time~ there is no useful notion of rotating space and time 
into each other. Rather, the notion of "all of space at a single moment in time" has 
a meaning independent of coordinates. 
SR is a different story. Let us consider coordinates (t, x, y, z) on spacetime, 
set up in the following way. The spatial coordinates (x, y, z) comprise a standard 
Cartesian system, constructed for example by welding together rigid rods that 
meet at right angles. The rods must be moving freely, unaccelerated. The time 
coordinate is defined by a set of clocks, which are not moving with respect to 
the spatial coordinates. (Since this is a thought experiment, we can imagine that 
the rods are infinitely long and there is one clock at every point in space.) The 
clocks are synchronized in the following sense. Imagine that we send a beam of 
light from point 1 in space to point 2, in a straight line at a constant velocity c, 
and then immediately back to 1 (at velocity -c). Then the time on the coordinate 
clock when the light beam reaches point 2, which we label t2, should be halfway 
between the time on the coordinate clock when the beam left point 1 (t1) and the 
time on that same clock when it returned (ti): 
(1.9) 
The coordinate system thus constructed is an inertial frame, or simply "iner-
tial coordinates." These coordinates are the natural generalization to spacetime 
of Cartesian (orthonormal) coordinates in space. (The reason behind the careful 

1 .2 
Space and Ti me, Separately and Together 
7 
2 
x 
FIGURE 1.4 Synchronizing clocks in an inertial coordinate system. The clocks are syn-
chronized if the time 12 is halfway between t1 and ti when we bounce a beam of light from 
point 1 to point 2 and back. 
construction is so that we only make comparisons locally; never, for example, 
comparing two far-away clocks to each other at the same time. This kind of care 
will be even more necessary once we go to general relativity, where there will not 
be any way to construct inertial coordinates throughout spacetime.) 
We can construct any number of inertial frames via this procedure, differing 
from the first one by an offset in initial position and time, angle, and (constant) 
velocity. In a Newtonian world, the new coordinates (t', x', y', z') would have the 
feature that t' = t +constant, independent of spatial coordinates. That is, there 
is an absolute notion of "two events occurring simultaneously, that is, at the same 
time." But in SR this isn't true; in general the three-dimensional "spaces" defined 
by t = constant will differ from those defined by t' = constant. 
However, we have not descended completely into chaos. Consider, without any 
motivation for the moment, what we will call the spacetime interval between two 
events: 
(1.10) 
(Notice that it can be positive, negative, or zero even for two nonidentical points.) 
Here, c is some fixed conversion factor between space and time, that is, a fixed 
velocity. As an empirical matter, it turns out that electromagnetic waves propa-
gate in vacuum at this velocity c, which we therefore refer to as "the speed of 
light." The important thing, however, is not that photons happen to travel at that 
speed, but that there exists a c such that the spacetime interval is invariant under 
changes of inertial coordinates. In other words, if we set up a new inertial frame 
(t', x', y', z'), the interval will be of the same form: 
(1.11) 

8 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
This is why it makes sense to think of SR as a theory of four-dimensional space-
time, known as Minkowski space. (This is a special case of a four-dimensional 
manifold, which we will deal with in detail later.) As we shall see, the coordi-
nate transformations that we have implicitly defined do, in a sense, rotate space 
and time into each other. There is no absolute notion of "simultaneous events"; 
whether two things occur at the same time depends on the coordinates used. 
Therefore, the division of Minkowski space into space and time is a choice we 
make for our own purposes, not something intrinsic to the situation. 
Almost all of the "paradoxes" associated with SR result from a stubborn per-
sistence of the Newtonian notions of a unique time coordinate and the existence 
of "space at a single moment in time." By thinking in terms of spacetime rather 
than space and time together, these paradoxes tend to disappear. 
Let's introduce some convenient notation. Coordinates on spacetime will be 
denoted by letters with Greek superscript indices running from 0 to 3, with 0 
generally denoting the time coordinate. Thus, 
XO= ct 
x 1 =x 
x2 = y 
x 3 = z. 
(1.12) 
(Don't start thinking of the superscripts as exponents.) Furthermore, for the sake 
of simplicity we will choose units in which 
C= t 
(1.13) 
we will therefore leave out factors of c in all subsequent formulae. Empirically 
we know that c is 3 x 108 meters per second; thus, we are working in units where 
1 second equals 3 x 108 meters. Sometimes it will be useful to refer to the space 
and time components of xµ separately, so we will use Latin superscripts to stand 
for the space components alone: 
x 1 = x 
x;: 
x2 = y 
(1.14) 
x 3 = z. 
It is also convenient to write the spacetime interval in a more compact form. 
We therefore introduce a 4 x 4 matrix, the metric, which we write using two lower 
indices: 
r/µ.v = (~! ! H) · 
0 
0 0 1 
(1.15) 
(Some references, especially field theory books, define the metric with the oppo-
site sign, so be careful.) We then have the nice formula 
(as)2 = r/µvaxµ. axv. 
(1.16) 

FIGURE 
1.5 A 
light 
cone, portrayed on a space-
time diagram. Points that 
are spacelike-, null-, and 
timelike-separated from the 
origin are indicated. 
1.2 Space and Time, Separately and Together 
9 
This formula introduces the summation convention, in which indices appearing 
both as superscripts and subscripts are summed over. We call such labels dummy 
indices; it is important to remember that they are summed over all possible values, 
rather than taking any specific one. (It will always tum out to be the case that 
dummy indices occur strictly in pairs, with one "upstairs" and one "downstairs." 
More on this later.) The content of (1.16) is therefore exactly the same as (1.10). 
An extremely useful tool is the spacetime diagram, so let's consider Minkow-
ski space from this point of view. We can begin by portraying the initial t and x 
axes at right angles, and suppressing the y and z axes. ("Right angles" as drawn on 
a spacetime diagram don't necessarily imply "orthogonal in spacetime," although 
that turns out to be true for the t and x axes in this case.) It is enlightening to 
consider the paths corresponding to travel at the speed c = l, given by x = ±t. 
A set of points that are all connected to a single event by straight lines moving 
at the speed of light is the light cone, since if we imagine including one more 
spatial coordinate, the two diagonal lines get completed into a cone. Light cones 
are naturally divided into future and past; the set of all points inside the future and 
past light cones of a point p are called timelike separated from p, while those 
outside the light cones are spacelike separated and those on the cones are light-
like or null separated from p. Referring back to (1.10), we see that the interval 
between timelike separated points is negative, between spacelike separated points 
is positive, and between null separated points is zero. (The interval is defined to 
be ( 6.s )2, not the square root of this quantity.) 
The fact that the interval is negative for a timelike line (on which a slower-
than-light particle will actually move) is annoying, so we define the proper time 
r to satisfy 
(1.17) 
A crucial feature of the spacetime interval is that the proper time between two 
events measures the time elapsed as seen by an observer moving on a straight path 
between the events. This is easily seen in the very special case that the two events 
have the same spatial coordinates, and are only separated in time; this corresponds 
to the observer traveling between the events being at rest in the coordinate system 
used. Then (6.r)2 = -rJµvtl.xµ fl.xv = (6.1)2, so 6.r = 6.t, and of course we 
defined t as the time measured by a clock located at a fixed spatial position. But 
the spacetime interval is invariant under changes of inertial frame; the proper time 
( 1.17) between two fixed events will be the same when evaluated in an inertial 
frame where the observer is moving as it is in the frame where the observer is at 
rest. 
A crucial fact is that, for more general trajectories, the proper time and coor-
dinate time are different (although the proper time is always that measured by the 
clock carried by an observer along the trajectory). Consider two trajectories be-
tween events A and C, one a straight line passing through a halfway point marked 
B, and another traveled by an observer moving away from A at a constant velocity 
v = dx/dt to a point B' and then back at a constant velocity -v to intersect at 

10 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
B' 
x 
FIGURE 1.6 The twin paradox. A traveler on the straight path through spacetime ABC 
will age more than someone on the nonstraight path AB' C. Since proper time is a measure 
of distance traveled through spacetime, this should come as no surprise. (The only surprise 
might be that the straight path is the one of maximum proper time; this can be traced to the 
minus sign for the timeli.k.e component of the metric.) 
the event C. Choose inertial coordinates such that the straight trajectory describes 
a motionless particle, with event A located at coordinates (t, x) = (0, 0) and C 
located at ( 6.t, 0). The two paths then describe an isosceles triangle in spacetime; 
B has coordinates ( ! 6.t, 0) and B' has coordinates ( ! 6.t, 6.x), with 6.x = ! v 6.t. 
Clearly, 6.tAB = !at, but 
6.rAB' = J(!fl.1)2 - (6.x)2 
=!~6.t. 
(1.18) 
It should be obvious that 6.rBc = 6.tAB and 6.rB'C = 6.rAB'· Thus, the ob-
server on the straight-line trip from event A to C experiences an elapsed time of 
6.tABC = 6.t, whereas the one who traveled out and returned experiences 
(1.19) 
Even though the two observers begin and end at the same points in spacetime, 
they have aged different amounts. This is the famous "twin paradox," the unfortu-
nate scene of all sorts of misunderstandings and tortured explanations. The truth 
is straightforward: a nonstraight path in spacetime has a different interval than 
a straight path, just as a nonstraight path in space has a different length than a 
straight one. This isn't as trivial as it sounds, of course; the profound insight is the 
way in which "elapsed time along a worldline" is related to the interval traversed 
through spacetime. In a Newtonian world, the coordinate t represents a universal 
flow of time throughout all of spacetime; in relativity, t is just a convenient co-
ordinate, and the elapsed time depends on the path along which you travel. An 

1.2 
Space and Time, Separately and Together 
11 
important distinction is that the nonstraight path has a sh01ter proper time. In 
space, the shortest distance between two points is a straight line; in spacetime, the 
longest proper time between two events is a straight trajectory. 
Not all trajectories are nice enough to be constructed from pieces of straight 
lines. In more general circumstances it is useful to introduce the infinitesimal 
interval, or line element: 
(1.20) 
for infinitesimal coordinate displacements dxµ. (We are being quite informal 
here, but we'll make amends later on.) From this definition it is tempting to take 
the square root and integrate along a path to obtain a finite interval, but it is some-
what unclear what J Jr/µvdxµdxv is supposed to mean. Instead we consider a 
path through spacetime as a parameterized curve, xµ (A.). Note that, unlike con-
ventional practice in Newtonian mechanics, the parameter A. is not necessarily 
identified with the time coordinate. We can then calculate the derivatives dxµ /di.., 
and write the path length along a space like curve (one whose infinitesimal inter-
vals are spacelike) as 
(1.21) 
where the integral is taken over the path. For timelike paths we use the proper 
time 
(1.22) 
which will be positive. (For null paths the interval is simply zero.) Of course 
we may consider paths that are timelike in some places and spacelike in others, 
but fortunately it is seldom necessary since the paths of physical particles never 
change their character (massive particles move on timelike paths, massless par-
ticles move on null paths). Once again, 6. r really is the time measured by an 
observer moving along the trajectory. 
The notion of acceleration in special relativity has a bad reputation, for no 
good reason. Of course we were careful, in setting up inertial coordinates, to make 
sure that particles at rest in such coordinates are unaccelerated. However, once 
we've set up such coordinates, we are free to consider any sort of trajectories for 
physical particles, whether accelerated or not. In particular, there is no truth to the 
rumor that SR is unable to deal with accelerated trajectories, and general relativity 
must be invoked. General relativity becomes relevant in the presence of gravity, 
when spacetime becomes curved. Any processes in flat spacetime are described 
within the context of special relativity; in particular, expressions such as (1.22) 
are perfectly general. 

12 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
1.3 • LORENTZ TRANSFORMATIONS 
We can now consider coordinate transformations in spacetime at a somewhat 
more abstract level than before. We are interested in a formal description of 
how to relate the various inertial frames constructed via the procedure outlined 
above; that is, coordinate systems that leave the interval (1.16) invariant. One 
simple variety are the translations, which merely shift the coordinates (in space 
or time): 
(1.23) 
where aµ is a set of four fixed numbers and 0~
1 
is the four-dimensional version 
of the traditional Kronecker delta symbol: 
oµ' = { 1 when µ,' = µ,, 
µ 
0 
when µ,' ~ µ,. 
(1.24) 
Notice that we put the prime on the index, not on the x. The reason for this 
should become more clear once we start dealing with vectors and tensors; the 
notation serves to remind us that the geometrical object is the same, but its 
components are resolved with respect to a different coordinate system. Trans-
lations leave the differences 6.xµ unchanged, so it is not remarkable that the 
interval is unchanged. The other relevant transformations include spatial ro-
tations and offsets by a constant velocity vector, or boosts~ these are linear 
transformations, described by multiplying xµ by a (spacetime-independent) ma-
trix: 
(1.25) 
or, in more conventional matrix notation, 
x' =Ax. 
(1.26) 
(We will generally use indices, rather than matrix notation, but right now we 
have an interest in relating our discussion to certain other familiar notions usually 
described by matrices.) These transformations do not leave the differences 6.xµ 
unchanged, but multiply them also by the matrix A. What kind of matrices will 
leave the interval invariant? Sticking with the matrix notation, what we would 
like is 
(6.s)2 = (6.x)T 17(6.x) = (6.x')T 17(6.x') 
= (6.x)T AT17A(6.x), 
(1.27) 
and therefore 
(1.28) 

1 .3 
Lorentz Transformations 
13 
or 
µ 1 
v' 
µ 1 
v' 
r/pa =A pr/µ'v'A a =A pA a r/µ'v'· 
(1.29) 
(In matrix notation the order matters, while in index notation it is irrelevant.) We 
want to find the matrices Aµ' v such that the components of the matrix r/µ'v' are 
the same as those of r/pa; that is what it means for the interval to be invariant 
under these transformations. 
The matrices that satisfy ( 1.28) are known as the Lorentz transformations; 
the set of them forms a group under matrix multiplication, known as the Lorentz 
group. There is a close analogy between this group and S0(3), the rotation group 
in three-dimensional space. The rotation group can be thought of as 3 x 3 matrices 
R that satisfy RT R = 1, where 1 is the 3 x 3 identity matrix. Such matrices are 
called orthogonal, and the 3 x 3 ones form the group 0(3). This includes not only 
rotations but also reversals of orientation of the spatial axes (parity transforma-
tions). Sometimes we choose to exclude parity transformations by also demanding 
that the matrices have unit determinant, IR I = 1; such matrices are called special, 
and the resulting group is S0(3). The orthogonality condition can be made to look 
more like ( 1.28) if we write it as 
(1.30) 
So the difference between the rotation group 0(3) and the Lorentz group is the 
replacement of 1, a 3 x 3 diagonal matrix with all entries equal to + 1, by ry, 
a 4 x 4 diagonal matrix with one entry equal to -1 and the rest equal to + 1. 
The Lorentz group is therefore often referred to as 0(3, 1 ). It includes not only 
boosts and rotations, but discrete reversals of the time direction as well as parity 
transformations. As before we can demand that IAI = 1, leaving the "proper 
Lorentz group" S0(3, 1 ). However, this does not leave us with what we really 
want, which is the set of continuous Lorentz transformations (those connected 
smoothly to the identity), since a combination of a time reversal and a parity 
reversal would have unit determinant. From the (p, <J) = (0, 0) component of 
( 1.29) we can easily show that I A 0' o I :::: l, with negative values corresponding to 
time reversals. We can therefore demand at last that A 0' o :::: 1 (in addition to I A I = 
1 ), leaving the "proper orthochronous" or "restricted" Lorentz group. Sometimes 
this is denoted by something like S0(3, 1) t, but usually we will not bother to 
make this distinction explicitly. Note that the 3 x 3 identity matrix is simply the 
metric for ordinary flat space. Such a metric, in which all of the eigenvalues are 
positive, is called Euclidean, while those such as (1.15), which feature a single 
minus sign, are called Lorentzian. 
It is straightforward to write down explicit expressions for simple Lorentz 
transformations. A familiar rotation in the x-y plane is: 
(1.31) 

14 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
The rotation angle e is a periodic variable with period 2H. The boosts may be 
thought of as "rotations between space and time directions." An example is given 
by a boost in the x-direction: 
( 
coshQ> 
- sinhQ> 0 0) 
A
µ' 
_ 
- sinh 4> 
cosh 4> 
0 
0 
v-
0 
0 
1 0 
. 
0 
0 
0 1 
(1.32) 
The boost parameter Q>, unlike the rotation angle, is defined from -oo to oo. A 
general transformation can be obtained by multiplying the individual transfor-
mations; the explicit expression for this six-parameter matrix (three boosts, three 
rotations) is not pretty, or sufficiently useful to bother writing down. In general 
Lorentz transformations will not commute, so the Lorentz group is nonabelian. 
The set of both translations and Lorentz transformations is a ten-parameter non-
abelian group, the Poincare group. 
You should not be surprised to learn that the boosts correspond to changing 
coordinates by moving to a frame that travels at a constant velocity, but let's see 
it more explicitly. (Don't confuse "boosting" with "accelerating." The difference 
between boosting to a different reference frame and accelerating an object is the 
same as the difference between rotating to a different coordinate system and set-
ting an object spinning.) For the transformation given by (1.32), the transformed 
coordinates t' and x' will be given by 
t' = t coshQ> - x sinhQ> 
x' = -t sinhQ> +xcoshQ>. 
(1.33) 
From this we see that the point defined by x' = 0 is moving; it has a velocity 
x 
sinhQ> 
v= - = -- =tanhQ>. 
t 
coshQ> 
(1.34) 
To translate into more pedestrian notation, we can replace 4> = tanh-1 v to obtain 
t' = y(t - vx) 
x' = y(x - vt), 
(1.35) 
where y = 1 / .Jl=VZ. So indeed, our abstract approach has recovered the con-
ventional expressions for Lorentz transformations. Applying these formulae leads 
to time dilation, length contraction, and so forth. 
It's illuminating to consider Lorentz transformations in the context of space-
time diagrams. According to (1.33), under a boost in the x-t plane the x' axis 
(t' = 0) is given by t = x tanh Q>, while the t' axis (x' = 0) is given by t = 
x / tanh Q>. We therefore see that the space and time axes are rotated into each 
other, although they scissor together instead of remaining orthogonal in the tradi-
tional Euclidean sense. (As we shall see, the axes do in fact remain orthogonal in 

1.4 Vectors 
x = -1 
x' = -1' 
;' 1' 
x=1 
x' = 1' 
15 
x' 
x 
FIGURE 1.7 A Lorentz transfonnation relates the {1 1, x'} coordinates to the {1, x} coor-
dinates. Note that light cones are unchanged. 
the Lorentzian sense~ that's the implication of the metric remaining invariant un-
der boosts.) This should come as no surprise, since if spacetime behaved just like 
a four-dimensional version of space the world would be a very different place. We 
see quite vividly the distinction between this situation and the Newtonian world; 
in SR, it is impossible to say (in a coordinate-independent way) whether a point 
that is spacelike separated from p is in the future of p, the past of p, or "at the 
same time." 
Note also that the paths defined by x' = ±t' are precisely the same as those 
defined by x = ±t; these trajectories are left invariant under boosts along the x-
axis. Of course we know that light travels at this speed; we have therefore found 
that the speed of light is the same in any inertial frame. 
1.4 • VECTORS 
To probe the structure of Minkowski space in more detail, it is necessary to intro-
duce the concepts of vectors and tensors. We will start with vectors, which should 
be familiar. Of course, in spacetime vectors are four-dimensional, and are often 
referred to as four-vectors. This turns out to make quite a bit of difference-for 
example, there is no such thing as a cross product between two four-vectors. 
Beyond the simple fact of dimensionality, the most important thing to empha-
size is that each vector is located at a given point in spacetime. You may be used 
to thinking of vectors as stretching from one point to another in space, and even 
of "free" vectors that you can slide carelessly from point to point. These are not 
useful concepts outside the context of flat spaces; once we introduce curvature, 
we lose the ability to draw preferred curves from one point to another, or to move 
vectors uniquely around a manifold. Rather, to each point p in spacetime we as-
sociate the set of all possible vectors located at that point; this set is known as 
the tangent space at p, or Tp. The name is inspired by thinking of the set of 

16 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
vectors attached to a point on a simple curved two-dimensional space as com-
prising a plane tangent to the point. (This picture relies on an embedding of the 
manifold and the tangent space in a higher-dimensional external space, which we 
won't generally have or need.) Inspiration aside, it is important to think of these 
vectors as being located at a single point, rather than stretching from one point to 
another (although this won't stop us from drawing them as arrows on spacetime 
diagrams). 
In Chapter 2 we will relate the tangent space at each point to things we can 
construct from the spacetime itself. For right now, just think of Tp as an abstract 
vector space for each point in spacetime. A (real) vector space is a collection of 
objects (vectors) that can be added together and multiplied by real numbers in a 
linear way. Thus, for any two vectors V and Wand real numbers a and b, we have 
(a +b)(V + W) = aV +bV +aW +bW. 
(1.36) 
Every vector space has an origin, that is, a zero vector that functions as an identity 
element under vector addition. In many vector spaces there are additional oper-
ations such as taking an inner (dot) product, but this is extra structure over and 
above the elementary concept of a vector space. 
A vector is a perfectly well-defined geometric object, as is a vector field, de-
fined as a set of vectors with exactly one at each point in spacetime. [The set of all 
the tangent spaces of an n-dimensional manifold M can be assembled into a 2n-
dimensional manifold called the tangent bundle, T(M). It is a specific example 
of a "fiber bundle," which is endowed with some extra mathematical structure; we 
won't need the details for our present purposes.] Nevertheless it is often useful to 
decompose vectors into components with respect to some set of basis vectors. A 
basis is any set of vectors which both spans the vector space (any vector is a linear 
combination of basis vectors) and is linearly independent (no vector in the basis 
FIGURE 1.8 A suggestive drawing of the tangent space Tp. the space of all vectors at 
the point p. 

1.4 Vectors 
17 
is a linear combination of other basis vectors). For any given vector space, there 
will be an infinite number of possible bases we could choose, but each basis will 
consist of the same number of vectors, known as the dimension of the space. (For 
a tangent space associated with a point in Minkowski space, the dimension is, of 
course, four.) 
Let us imagine that at each tangent space we set up a basis of four vectors e(µ >, 
withµ, E {O, 1, 2, 3} as usual. In fact let us say that each basis is "adapted to the 
coordinates xµ"-that is, the basis vector eo> is what we would normally think 
of pointing along the x-axis. It is by no means necessary that we choose a basis 
adapted to any coordinate system at all, although it is often convenient. (As before, 
we really could be more precise here, but later on we will repeat the discussion 
at an excruciating level of precision, so some sloppiness now is forgivable.) Then 
any abstract vector A can be written as a linear combination of basis vectors: 
(1.37) 
The coefficients Aµ are the components of the vector A. More often than not 
we will forget the basis entirely and refer somewhat loosely to "the vector Aµ," 
but keep in mind that this is shorthand. The real vector is an abstract geometrical 
entity, while the components are just the coefficients of the basis vectors in some 
convenient basis. (Since we will usually suppress the explicit basis vectors, the 
indices usually will label components of vectors and tensors. This is why there 
are parentheses around the indices on the basis vectors, to remind us that this is a 
collection of vectors, not components of a single vector.) 
A standard example of a vector in spacetime is the tangent vector to a curve. 
A parameterized curve or path through spacetime is specified by the coordinates 
as a function of the parameter, for example, xµ (A.). The tangent vector V (A.) has 
components 
(1.38) 
The entire vector is V = Vµe(µ)- Under a Lorentz transformation the coordinates 
xµ change according to (1.25), while the parameterization A. is unaltered; we can 
therefore deduce that the components of the tangent vector must change as 
(1.39) 
However, the vector V itself (as opposed to its components in some coordinate 
system) is invariant under Lorentz transformations. We can use this fact to derive 
the transformation properties of the basis vectors. Let us refer to the set of basis 
vectors in the transformed coordinate system as e<v'>- Since the vector is invariant, 
we have 
µ A 
v' A 
Av' vµ A 
V = V e(µ) = V e(v') = 
µ 
e(v')· 
(1.40) 

18 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
But this relation must hold no matter what the numerical values of the components 
V µ are. We can therefore say 
(l.41) 
To get the new basis e<v'> in terms of the old one e<µ» we should multiply by the 
inverse of the Lorentz transformation Av'µ. But the inverse of a Lorentz transfor-
mation from the unprimed to the primed coordinates is also a Lorentz transforma-
tion, this time from the primed to the unprimed systems. We will therefore intro-
duce a somewhat subtle notation, by using the same symbol for both matrices, just 
with primed and unprimed indices switched. That is, the Lorentz transformation 
specified by Aµ' v has an inverse transformation written as AP a'. Operationally 
this implies 
A µ Av' 
~µ 
Aa' A>.. 
~a' 
v' 
P = o P ' 
>.. 
r' = or' . 
(1.42) 
From ( 1.41) we then obtain the transformation rule for basis vectors: 
(1.43) 
Therefore the set of basis vectors transforms via the inverse Lorentz transforma-
tion of the coordinates or vector components. 
Let's pause a moment to take all this in. We introduced coordinates labeled 
by upper indices, which transformed in a certain way under Lorentz transforma-
tions. We then considered vector components that also were written with upper 
indices, which made sense since they transformed in the same way as the coordi-
nate functions. (In a fixed coordinate system, each of the four coordinates xµ can 
be thought of as a function on spacetime, as can each of the four components of a 
vector field.) The basis vectors associated with the coordinate system transformed 
via the inverse matrix, and were labeled by a lower index. This notation ensured 
that the invariant object constructed by summing over the components and ba-
sis vectors was left unchanged by the transformation, just as we would wish. It's 
probably not giving too much away to say that this will continue to be the case 
for tensors, which may have multiple indices. 
1.5 • DUAL VECTORS (ONE-FORMS) 
Once we have set up a vector space, we can define another associated vector space 
(of equal dimension) known as the dual vector space. The dual space is usually 
denoted by an asterisk, so that the dual space to the tangent space Tp. called the 
cotangent space, is denoted r;. The dual space is the space of all linear maps 
from the original vector space to the real numbers; in math lingo, if w E r; is a 
dual vector, then it acts as a map such that 
w(aV + bW) = aw(V) + bw(W) ER, 
(l.44) 

1.5 
Dual Vectors (One-Forms) 
19 
where V, W are vectors and a, b are real numbers. The nice thing about these 
maps is that they form a vector space themselves; thus, if wand 11 are dual vectors, 
we have 
(aw+ b17)(V) = aw(V) + b17(V). 
(1.45) 
To make this construction somewhat more concrete, we can introduce a set of 
basis dual vectors e<v) by demanding 
(1.46) 
Then every dual vector can be written in terms of its components, which we label 
with lower indices: 
(l.47) 
Usually, we will simply write wµ, in perfect analogy with vectors, to stand for the 
entire dual vector. In fact, you will sometimes see elements of Tp (what we have 
called vectors) referred to as contravariant vectors, and elements of r; (what we 
have called dual vectors) referred to as covariant vectors, although in this day and 
age these terms sound a little dated. If you just refer to ordinary vectors as vectors 
with upper indices and dual vectors as vectors with lower indices, nobody should 
be offended. Another name for dual vectors is one-forms, a somewhat mysterious 
designation that will become clearer in Chapter 2. 
The component notation leads to a simple way of writing the action of a dual 
vector on a vector: 
w(V) = WµB(µ)(Vv e<v» 
= Wµ yve(µ)(e(v>) 
= Wµ Vvo~ 
= Wµ yµ ER. 
(1.48) 
This is why it is rarely necessary to write the basis vectors and dual vectors ex-
plicitly; the components do all of the work. The form of (l.48) also suggests that 
we can think of vectors as linear maps on dual vectors, by defining 
(1.49) 
Therefore, the dual space to the dual vector space is the original vector space 
itself. 
Of course in spacetime we will be interested not in a single vector space, but 
in fields of vectors and dual vectors. [The set of all cotangent spaces over M can 
be combined into the cotangent bundle, T*(M).] In that case the action of a 
dual vector field on a vector field is not a single number, but a scalar (function) 
on spacetime. A scalar is a quantity without indices, which is unchanged under 

20 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
Lorentz transformations; it is a coordinate-independent map from spacetime to 
the real numbers. 
We can use the same arguments that we earlier used for vectors (that geomet-
rical objects are independent of coordinates, even if their components are not) 
to derive the transformation properties of dual vectors. The answers are, for the 
components, 
(l.50) 
and for basis dual vectors, 
(1.51) 
This is just what we would expect from index placement; the components of a 
dual vector transform under the inverse transformation of those of a vector. Note 
that this ensures that the scalar ( 1.48) is invariant under Lorentz transformations, 
just as it should be. 
In spacetime the simplest example of a dual vector is the gradient of a scalar 
function, the set of partial derivatives with respect to the spacetime coordinates, 
which we denote by a lowercase d: 
(1.52) 
The conventional chain rule used to transform partial derivatives amounts in this 
case to the transformation rule of components of dual vectors: 
(l.53) 
where we have used ( 1.25) to relate the Lorentz transformation to the coordinates. 
The fact that the gradient is a dual vector leads to the following shorthand nota-
tions for partial derivatives: 
(l.54) 
So, xµ has an upper index, but when it is in the denominator of a derivative it 
implies a lower index on the resulting object. In this book we will generally use 
8µ rather than the comma notation. Note that the gradient does in fact act in a 
natural way on the example we gave above of a vector, the tangent vector to a 
curve. The result is an ordinary derivative of the function along the curve: 
(l.55) 

1.6 Tensors 
21 
1.6 • TENSORS 
A straightforward generalization of vectors and dual vectors is the notion of a 
tensor. Just as a dual vector is a linear map from vectors to R, a tensor T of type 
(or rank) (k, l) is a multilinear map from a collection of dual vectors and vectors 
to R: 
T : T* x · · · x T* x Tp x · · · x Tp ~ R. 
P (k times) 
P 
(I times) 
(l.56) 
Here, "x" denotes the Cartesian product, so that for example Tp x Tp is the space 
of ordered pairs of vectors. Multilinearity means that the tensor acts linearly in 
each of its arguments; for instance, for a tensor of type ( 1, 1), we have 
T(aw + b17, cV + dW) = acT(w, V) 
+ adT(w, W) + bcT(17, V) + bdT(17, W). (C57) 
From this point of view, a scalar is a type (0, 0) tensor, a vector is a type ( 1, 0) 
tensor, and a dual vector is a type (0, 1) tensor. 
The space of all tensors of a fixed type (k, l) forms a vector space; they can 
be added together and multiplied by real numbers. To construct a basis for this 
space, we need to define a new operation known as the tensor product, denoted 
by®· If Tis a (k, l) tensor and Sis an (m, n) tensor, we define a (k + m, l + n) 
tensor T ® S by 
T ® S(w(l), ... , w<k>, ... , w<k+m), y<l), ... , yU>, ... , yU+n» 
= T(w< 1>, ... , w<k>, y<l), ... , y<I)) 
x S(w<k+l), ... , w<k+m), yU+l), ... , yU+n». 
(1.58) 
Note that the w<n and v<n are distinct dual vectors and vectors, not components 
thereof. In other words, first act T on the appropriate set of dual vectors and 
vectors, and then act Son the remainder, and then multiply the answers. Note 
that, in general, tensor products do not commute: T ® S ~ S ® T. 
It is now straightforward to construct a basis for the space of all (k, /)tensors, 
by taking tensor products of basis vectors and dual vectors; this basis will consist 
of all tensors of the form 
(l.59) 
In a four-dimensional spacetime there will be 4k+I basis tensors in all. In compo-
nent notation we then write our arbitrary tensor as 
(l.60) 

22 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
Alternatively, we could define the components by acting the tensor on basis vec-
tors and dual vectors: 
( 1.61) 
You can check for yourself, using ( 1.46) and so forth, that these equations all hang 
together properly. 
As with vectors, we will usually take the shortcut of denoting the tensor T by 
its components Tµ 1 ···µk v1 ... v1• The action of the tensors on a set of vectors and 
dual vectors follows the pattern established in ( 1.48): 
T(w(l) 
w<k) y(l) 
y(/)) = rµi···µk 
w<l) ... w<k) y(l)v1 ... y(/)v1 
' ••• ' 
' 
' ••• ' 
VI ... V/ 
µI 
µk 
. 
(l.62) 
A (k, /) tensor thus has k upper indices and I lower indices. The order of the 
indices is obviously important, since the tensor need not act in the same way on 
its various arguments. 
Finally, the transformation of tensor components under Lorentz transforma-
tions can be derived by applying what we already know about the transformation 
of basis vectors and dual vectors. The answer is just what you would expect from 
index placement, 
(1.63) 
Thus, each upper index gets transformed like a vector, and each lower index gets 
transformed like a dual vector. 
Although we have defined tensors as linear maps from sets of vectors and tan-
gent vectors to R, there is nothing that forces us to act on a full collection of 
arguments. Thus, a ( 1, 1) tensor also acts as a map from vectors to vectors: 
(1.64) 
You can check for yourself that Tµ v vv is a vector (that is, obeys the vector trans-
formation law). Similarly, we can act one tensor on (all or part of) another tensor 
to obtain a third tensor. For example, 
(l.65) 
is a pe1f ectly good (1, 1) tensor. 
You may be concerned that this introduction to tensors has been somewhat too 
brief, given the esoteric nature of the material. In fact, the notion of tensors does 
not require a great deal of effort to master; it's just a matter of keeping the indices 
straight, and the rules for manipulating them are very natural. Indeed, a number of 
books like to define tensors as collections of numbers transforming according to 
(1.63). While this is operationally useful, it tends to obscure the deeper meaning 
of tensors as geometrical entities with a life independent of any chosen coordinate 

1.6 Tensors 
23 
system. There is, however, one subtlety that we have glossed over. The notions of 
dual vectors and tensors and bases and linear maps belong to the realm of linear 
algebra, and are appropriate whenever we have an abstract vector space at hand. In 
the case of interest to us we have not just a vector space, but a vector space at each 
point in spacetime. More often than not we are interested in tensor fields, which 
can be thought of as tensor-valued functions on spacetime. Fortunately, none of 
the manipulations we defined above really care whether we are dealing with a 
single vector space or a collection of vector spaces, one for each event. We will 
be able to get away with simply calling things functions of xµ when appropriate. 
However, you should keep straight the logical independence of the notions we 
have introduced and their specific application to spacetime and relativity. 
In spacetime, we have already seen some examples of tensors without calling 
them that. The most familiar example of a (0, 2) tensor is the metric, r/µv· The 
action of the metric on two vectors is so useful that it gets its own name, the inner 
product (or scalar product, or dot product): 
(1.66) 
Just as with the conventional Euclidean dot product, we will refer to two vectors 
whose inner product vanishes as orthogonal. Since the inner product is a scalar, 
it is left invariant under Lorentz transformations; therefore, the basis vectors of 
any Cartesian inertial frame, which are chosen to be orthogonal by definition, are 
still orthogonal after a Lorentz transformation (despite the "scissoring together" 
we noticed earlier). The norm of a vector is defined to be inner product of the 
vector with itself; unlike in Euclidean space, this number is not positive definite: 
{ 
< 0, 
if r/µv vµ yv is 
= 0, 
> 0, 
yµ is timelike 
V µ is lightlike or null 
V µ is spacelike. 
(A vector can have zero norm without being the zero vector.) You will notice 
that the terminology is the same as that which we used earlier to classify the 
relationship between two points in spacetime; it's no accident, of course, and we 
will go into more detail later. 
Another tensor is the Kronecker delta o~, of type ( 1, 1). Thought of as a map 
from vectors to vectors (or one-forms to one-forms), the Kronecker delta is simply 
the identity map. We follow the example of many other references in placing the 
upper and lower indices in the same column for this unique tensor; purists might 
write oµ P or opµ, but these would be numerically identical, and we shouldn't get 
in trouble being careless in this one instance. 
Related to the Kronecker delta and the metric is the inverse metric r/µv, a type 
(2, 0) tensor defined (unsurprisingly) as the "inverse" of the metric: 
µv 
_ 
vµ _ 
f:µ 
1J 
r/vp -
r/pvr/ 
-
op· 
(1.67) 
(It's the inverse metric since, when multiplied by the metric, it yields the identity 
map.) In fact, as you can check, the inverse metric has exactly the same compo-

24 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
nents as the metric itself. This is only true in flat space in Cartesian coordinates, 
and will fail to hold in more general situations. There is also the Levi-Civita 
symbol, a (0, 4) tensor: 
ifµ, vp<J is an even permutation of 0123 
ifµ, vp<J is an odd permutation of 0123 
otherwise. 
(1.68) 
Here, a "permutation of 0123" is an ordering of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, which 
can be obtained by starting with 0123 and exchanging two of the digits; an even 
permutation is obtained by an even number of such exchanges, and an odd per-
mutation is obtained by an odd number. Thus, for example, €0321 = -1. (The 
tilde on Eµvpa, and referring to it as a symbol rather than simply a tensor, derive 
from the fact that this object is actually not a tensor in more general geometries or 
coordinates; instead, it is something called a "tensor density." It is straightforward 
enough to define a related object that is a tensor, which we will denote by Eµvpa 
and call the "Levi-Civita tensor." See Chapter 2 for a discussion.) 
A remarkable property of the above tensors-the metric, the inverse metric, 
the Kronecker delta, and the Levi-Civita symbol-is that, even though they all 
transform according to the tensor transformation law (1.63), their components re-
main unchanged in any inertial coordinate system in flat spacetime. In some sense 
this makes them nongeneric examples of tensors, since most tensors do not have 
this property. In fact, these are the only tensors with this property, although we 
won't prove it. The Kronecker delta is even more unusual, in that it has exactly 
the same components in any coordinate system in any spacetime. This makes 
sense from the definition of a tensor as a linear map; the Kronecker tensor can 
be thought of as the identity map from vectors to vectors (or from dual vectors 
to dual vectors), which clearly must have the same components regardless of co-
ordinate system. Meanwhile, the metric and its inverse characterize the structure 
of spacetime, while the Levi-Civita symbol is secretly not a true tensor at all. 
We shall therefore have to treat these objects more carefully when we drop our 
assumption of flat spacetime. 
A more typical example of a tensor is the electromagnetic field strength ten-
sor. We all know that the electromagnetic fields are made up of the electric field 
vector E; and the magnetic field vector B;. (Remember that we use Latin indices 
for spacelike components 1, 2, 3.) Actually these are only "vectors" under rota-
tions in space, not under the full Lorentz group. In fact they are components of a 
(0, 2) tensor Fµv• defined by 
(1.69) 
From this point of view it is easy to transform the electromagnetic fields in one 
reference frame to those in another, by application of ( 1.63). The unifying power 
of the tensor formalism is evident: rather than a collection of two vectors whose 

1 .7 
Manipulating Tensors 
25 
relationship and transformation properties are rather mysterious, we have a single 
tensor field to describe all of electromagnetism. (On the other hand, don't get car-
ried away; sometimes it's more convenient to work in a single coordinate system 
using the electric and magnetic field vectors.) 
1.7 • MANIPULATING TENSORS 
With these examples in hand we can now be a little more systematic about some 
properties of tensors. First consider the operation of contraction, which turns a 
(k, l) tensor into a (k - 1, l - 1) tensor. Contraction proceeds by summing over 
one upper and one lower index: 
(l.70) 
You can check that the result is a well-defined tensor. It is only permissible to 
contract an upper index with a lower index (as opposed to two indices of the same 
type); otherwise the result would not be a well-defined tensor. (By well-defined 
tensor we mean either "transforming according to the tensor transformation law," 
or "defining a unique multilinear map from a set of vectors and dual vectors to the 
real numbers"; take your pick.) Note also that the order of the indices matters, so 
that you can get different tensors by contracting in different ways; thus, 
(l.71) 
in general. 
The metric and inverse metric can be used to raise and lower indices on ten-
sors. That is, given a tensor ra/3 y~. we can use the metric to define new tensors, 
which we choose to denote by the same letter T: 
TCt.{3µ ~ = .,,µy TCt./3 Y~· 
T f3 
Ta/3 
µ 
y~ = r/µCt. 
y~. 
T 
pa 
PY 
a~ Ta/3 
µv 
= r/µCt. r/vf3r/ 
r/ 
y~. 
(l.72) 
and so forth. Notice that raising and lowering does not change the position of an 
index relative to other indices, and also that free indices (which are not summed 
over) must be the ;;ame on both sides of an equation, while dummy indices (which 
are summed over) only appear on one side. As an example, we can tum vectors 
and dual vectors into each other by raising and lowering indices: 
Vµ = r/µv yv 
(l.73) 
Because the metric and inverse metric are truly inverses of each other, we are free 
to raise and lower simultaneously a pair of indices being contracted over: 
(l.74) 

26 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
The ability to raise and lower indices with a metric explains why the gradient 
in three-dimensional flat Euclidean space is usually thought of as an ordinary 
vector, even though we have seen that it arises as a dual vector; in Euclidean 
space (where the metric is diagonal with all entries + 1) a dual vector is turned 
into a vector with precisely the same components when we raise its index. You 
may then wonder why we have belabored the distinction at all. One simple reason, 
of course, is that in a Lorentzian spacetime the components are not equal: 
(l.75) 
In a curved spacetime, where the form of the metric is generally more compli-
cated, the difference is rather more dramatic. But there is a deeper reason, namely 
that tensors generally have a "natural" definition independent of the metric. Even 
though we will always have a metric available, it is helpful to be aware of the 
logical status of each mathematical object we introduce. The gradient, with its 
action on vectors, is perfectly well-defined regardless of any metric, whereas the 
"gradient with upper indices" is not. (As an example, we will eventually want to 
take variations of functionals with respect to the metric, and will therefore have to 
know exactly how the functional depends on the metric, something that is easily 
obscured by the index notation.) 
Continuing our compilation of tensor jargon, we refer to a tensor as symmetric 
in any of its indices if it is unchanged under exchange of those indices. Thus, if 
Sµvp = Svµp. 
(1.76) 
we say that Sµvp is symmetric in its first two indices, while if 
Sµvp = Sµpv = Spµv = Svµp = Svpµ = Spvµ• 
(l.77) 
we say that Sµvp is symmetric in all three of its indices. Similarly, a tensor is 
antisymmetric (or skew-symmetric) in any of its indices if it changes sign when 
those indices are exchanged; thus, 
Aµvp = -Apvµ 
(l.78) 
means that Aµvp is antisymmetric in its first and third indices (or just "antisym-
metric in µ, and p"). If a tensor is (anti-) symmetric in all of its indices, we refer 
to it as simply (anti-) symmetric (sometimes with the redundant modifier "com-
pletely"). As examples, the metric r/µv and the inverse metric r/µv are symmetric, 
while the Levi-Ci vita symbol € µ vpa and the electromagnetic field strength ten-
sor Fµv are antisymmetric. (Check for yourself that if you raise or lower a set of 
indices that are symmetric or antisymmetric, they remain that way.) Notice that 
it makes no sense to exchange upper and lower indices with each other, so don't 
succumb to the temptation to think of the Kronecker delta o~ as symmetric. On 
the other hand, the fact that lowering an index on o~ gives a symmetric tensor (in 
fact, the metric) means that the order of indices doesn't really matter, which is 
why we don't keep track of index placement for this one tensor. 

1.7 Manipulating Tensors 
27 
Given any tensor, we can symmetrize (or antisymmetrize) any number of its 
upper or lower indices. To symmetrize, we take the sum of all permutations of the 
relevant indices and divide by the number of terms: 
(l.79) 
while antisymmetrization comes from the alternating sum: 
'T' 
a 
1( 
a 
1 
. 
"[µ 1µ 2···µ,,Jp = -
Tµ 1µ 2···µ,,p +a ternatmg sum over 
n! 
· 
f · d" 
) 
permutations o m ices µ, 1 • • · µ,n . 
(l.80) 
By "alternating sum" we mean that permutations that are the result of an odd 
number of exchanges are given a minus sign, thus: 
T[µvp)a = ~ (Tµvpa -
Tµpva + Tpµva -
Tvµpa + Tvpµa -
Tpvµa) · 
(1.81) 
Notice that round/square brackets denote symmetrization/antisymmetrization. 
Furthermore, we may sometimes want to (anti-) symmetrize indices that are 
not next to each other, in which case we use vertical bars to denote indices not 
included in the sum: 
. T(µlvlp) = ! (Tµvp + Tpvµ) · 
(1.82) 
If we are contracting over a pair of upper indices that are symmetric on one tensor, 
only the symmetric part of the lower indices will contribute; thus, 
(1.83) 
regardless of the symmetry properties of Y µ v. (Analogous statements hold for an-
tisymmetric indices, or if it's the lower indices that are symmetric to start with.) 
For any two indices, we can decompose a tensor into symmetric and antisymmet-
ric parts, 
Tµvpa = T(µv)pa + T[µv)pa• 
(l.84) 
but this will not in general hold for three or more indices, 
Tµvpa =/= T(µvp)a + T[µvp)a, 
(l.85) 
because there are parts with mixed symmetry that are not specified by either 
the symmetric or antisymmetric pieces. Finally, some people use a convention 
in which the factor of 1 / n ! is omitted. The one used here is a good one, since, for 
example, a symmetric tensor satisfies 

28 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
(1.86) 
and likewise for antisymmetric tensors. 
For a (1, 1) tensor Xµ v• the trace is a scalar, often denoted by leaving off the 
indices, which is simply the contraction: 
X=X\. 
(1.87) 
If we think of Xµ v as a matrix, this is just the sum of the diagonal components, 
so it makes sense. However, we will also use trace in the context of a (0, 2) tensor 
Y µ v• in which case it means that we should first raise an index ( Y µ v = gµ>.. Y >.. v) 
and then contract: 
Y -
y>.. 
-
nµvy 
-
>.. -
., 
µv· 
(1.88) 
(It must be this way, since we cannot sum over two lower indices.) Although 
this is the sum of the diagonal components of Y µ v• it is certainly not the sum of 
the diagonal components of Y µ v; we had to raise an index, which in general will 
change the numerical value of the components. For example, you might guess that 
the trace of the metric is -1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 2, but it's not: 
nµvn 
-
f:µ -
4 
'I 
•1µV -
Oµ -
• 
(1.89) 
(Inn dimensions, o~ = n.) There is no reason to denote this trace by g (or o), 
since it will always be the same number, even after we make the transition to 
curved spaces where the metric components are more complicated. Note that an-
tisymmetric (0, 2) tensors are always traceless. 
We have been careful so far to distinguish clearly between things that are al-
ways true (on a manifold with arbitrary metric) and things that are only true in 
Minkowski space in inertial coordinates. One of the most important distinctions 
arises with partial derivatives. If we are working in flat spacetime with inertial 
coordinates, then the partial derivative of a (k, l) tensor is a (k, l + 1) tensor; 
that is, 
(1.90) 
transforms properly under Lorentz transformations. However, this will no longer 
be true in more general spacetimes, and we will have to define a covariant deriva-
tive to take the place of the partial derivative. Nevertheless, we can still use the 
fact that partial derivatives give us tensor in this special case, as long as we keep 
our wits about us. [The one exception to this warning is the partial derivative 
of a scalar, aa<1>. which is a perfectly good tensor (the gradient) in any space-
time.] Of course, if we fix a particular coordinate system, the partial derivative is 
a perfectly good operator, which we will use all the time; its failure is only that 
it doesn't transform in the same way as the tensors we will be using (or equiv-
alently, that the map it defines is not coordinate-independent). One of the most 

1 .8 Maxwell's Equations 
29 
useful properties of partial derivatives is that they commute, 
(1.91) 
no matter what kind of object is being differentiated. 
1.8 • MAXWELL'S EQUATIONS 
We have now accumulated enough tensor know-how to illustrate some of these 
concepts using actual physics. Specifically, we will examine Maxwell's equa-
tions of electrodynamics. In 19th-century notation, these are 
V x B- a1E = J 
'V·E=p 
v x E+a1B =0 
'V·B=O. 
(1.92) 
Here, E and B are the electric and magnetic field 3-vectors, J is the current, p 
is the charge density, and V x and V · are the conventional curl and divergence. 
These equations are invariant under Lorentz transformations, of course; that's how 
the whole business got started. But they don't look obviously invariant; our ten-
sor notation can fix that. Let's begin by writing these equations in component 
notation, 
€iJkaJBk - ()oE; = f 
a;E; =Jo 
€ijkai Ek+ ()oB; = 0 
a;B; =0. 
(1.93) 
In these expressions, spatial indices have been raised and lowered with aban-
don, without any attempt to keep straight where the metric appears, because o;1 
is the metric on flat 3-space, with oil its inverse (they are equal as matrices). 
We can therefore raise and lower indices at will, since the components don't 
change. Meanwhile, the three-dimensional Levi-Civita symbol €if k is defined 
just as the four-dimensional one, although with one fewer index (normalized 
so that € 123 = €123 = 1). We have replaced the charge density by J 0; this is 
legitimate because the density and current together form the current 4-vector, 
Jµ = (p, jX' JY, JZ). 
From (1.93), and the definition (l.69) of the field strength tensor Fµv• it is easy 
to get a completely tensorial 20th-century version of Maxwell's equations. Begin 
by noting that we can express the field strength with upper indices as 

30 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
Fo; = Ei 
Fij = €ijk Bk. 
(1.94) 
To check this, note for example that F 01 = 1'1°01'1 11 Fo1 and F 12 = €123 B3. Then 
the first two equations in ( 1.93) become 
ajFij -
()oFOi = f 
(l.95) 
Using the antisymmetry of Fµv, we see that these may be combined into the 
single tensor equation 
(l.96) 
A similar line of reasoning, which is left as an exercise, reveals that the third and 
fomth equations in (1.93) can be written 
(1.97) 
It's simple to verify that the antisymmetry of Fµv implies that (1.97) can be equiv-
alently expressed as 
(l.98) 
The four traditional Maxwell equations are thus replaced by two, vividly 
demonstrating the economy of tensor notation. More importantly, however, both 
sides of equations (1.96) and ( 1.97) manifestly transform as tensors; therefore, if 
they are true in one inertial frame, they must be true in any Lorentz-transformed 
frame. This is why tensors are so useful in relativity-we often want to express 
relationships without recourse to any reference frame, and the quantities on each 
side of an equation must transform in the same way under changes of coordinates. 
As a matter of jargon, we will sometimes refer to quantities written in terms of 
tensors as covariant (which has nothing to do with "covariant" as opposed to 
"contravariant"). Thus, we say that ( 1.96) and ( 1.97) together serve as the covari-
ant form of Maxwell's equations, while (1.92) or (1.93) are noncovariant. 
1.9 • ENERGY AND MOMENTUM 
We've now gone over essentially everything there is to know about the care and 
feeding of tensors. In the next chapter we will look more carefully at the rigorous 
definitions of manifolds and tensors, but the basic mechanics have been pretty 
well covered. Before jumping to more abstract mathematics, let's review how 
physics works in Minkowski spacetime. 
Start with the worldline of a single particle. This is specified by a map R ~ M, 
where M is the manifold representing spacetime; we usually think of the path as 

1.9 
Energy and Momentum 
31 
a parameterized curve xµ(A.). As mentioned earlier, the tangent vector to this path 
is dxµ /di.. (note that it depends on the parameterization). An object of primary 
interest is the norm of the tangent vector, which serves to characterize the path; 
if the tangent vector is timelike/null/spacelike at some parameter value A., we say 
that the path is timelike/null/spacelike at that point. This explains why the same 
words are used to classify vectors in the tangent space and intervals between two 
points-because a straight line connecting, say, two timelike separated points will 
itself be timelike at every point along the path. 
Nevertheless, be aware of the sleight of hand being pulled here. The metric, 
as a (0, 2) tensor, is a machine that acts on two vectors (or two copies of the 
same vector) to produce a number. It is therefore very natural to classify tan-
gent vectors according to the sign of their norm. But the interval between two 
points isn't something quite so natural; it depends on a specific choice of path (a 
"straight line") that connects the points, and this choice in tum depends on the 
fact that spacetime is flat (which allows a unique choice of straight line between 
the points). 
Let's move from the consideration of paths in general to the paths of massive 
particles (which will always be timelike). Since the proper time is measured by a 
clock traveling on a timelike worldline, it is convenient to use r as the parameter 
along the path. That is, we use (1.22) to compute r(A.), which (if A. is a good 
parameter in the first place) we can invert to obtain A.(r), after which we can think 
of the path as xµ(r). The tangent vector in this parameterization is known as the 
four-velocity, U µ: 
~ 
~ 
(1.99) 
Since dr 2 = -rJµvdxµdxv, the four-velocity is automatically normalized: 
(1.100) 
This absolute normalization is a reflection of the fact that the four-velocity is not 
a velocity through space, which can of course take on different magnitudes, but a 
"velocity through spacetime," through which one always travels at the same rate. 
The norm of the four-velocity will always be negative, since we are only defining 
it for timelike trajectories. You could define an analogous vector for spacelike 
paths as well; for null paths the proper time vanishes, so r can't be used as a 
parameter, and you have to be more careful. In the rest frame of a particle, its 
four-velocity has components uµ = (1, 0, 0, 0). 
A related vector is the momentum four-vector, defined by 
(1.101) 

32 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
where m is the mass of the particle. The mass is a fixed quantity independent of 
inertial frame, what you may be used to thinking of as the "rest mass." It turns 
out to be much more convenient to take this as the mass once and for all, rather 
than thinking of mass as depending on velocity. The energy of a particle is sim-
ply E = p0, the timelike component of its momentum vector. Since it's only 
one component of a four-vector, it is not invariant under Lorentz transformations; 
that's to be expected, however, since the energy of a particle at rest is not the 
same as that of the same particle in motion. In the particle's rest frame we have 
p0 = m; recalling that we have set c = 1, we see that we have found the equation 
that made Einstein a celebrity, E = mc2. (The field equation of general relativity 
is actually more fundamental than this one, but Rµv - ! Rgµv = 81(GTµv doesn't 
elicit the visceral reaction that you get from E = mc2.) In a moving frame we can 
find the components of pµ by performing a Lorentz transformation; for a particle 
moving with three-velocity v = dx/dt along the x axis we have 
pµ = (ym, vym, 0, 0), 
(l.102) 
where y = I/.J'f=V2. For small v, this gives p0 = m + !mv2 (what we usually 
think of as rest energy plus kinetic energy) and p 1 = mv (what we usually think 
of as Newtonian momentum). Outside this approximation, we can simply write 
(l.103) 
or 
(1.104) 
where p2 = o;j pi pj. 
The centerpiece of pre-relativity physics is Newton's Second Law, or f = 
ma = dp/dt. An analogous equation should hold in SR, and the requirement 
that it be tensorial leads us directly to introduce a force four-vector f µ satisfying 
(l.105) 
The simplest example of a force in Newtonian physics is the force due to gravity. 
In relativity, however, gravity is not described by a force, but rather by the cur-
vature of spacetime itself. Instead, let us consider electromagnetism. The three-
dimensional Lorentz force is given by f = q(E + v x 8), where q is the charge on 
the particle. We would like a tensorial generalization of this equation. There turns 
out to be a unique answer: 
(l.106) 
You can check for yourself that this reduces to the Newtonian version in the limit 
of small velocities. Notice how the requirement that the equation be tensorial, 

1.9 
Energy and Momentum 
33 
which is one way of guaranteeing Lorentz invariance, severely restricts the pos-
sible expressions we can get. This is an example of a very general phenomenon, in 
which a small number of an apparently endless variety of possible physical laws 
are picked out by the demands of symmetry. 
Although pµ provides a complete description of the energy and momentum of 
an individual particle, we often need to deal with extended systems comprised of 
huge numbers of particles. Rather than specify the individual momentum vectors 
of each particle, we instead describe the system as a fluid-a continuum char-
acterized by macroscopic quantities such as density, pressure, entropy, viscosity, 
and so on. Although such a fluid may be composed of many individual particles 
with different four-velocities, the fluid itself has an overall four-velocity field. Just 
think of everyday fluids like air or water, where it makes sense to define a velocity 
for each individual fluid element even though nearby molecules may have appre-
ciable relative velocities. 
A single momentum four-vector field is insufficient to describe the energy and 
momentum of a fluid; we must go further and define the energy-momentum ten-
sor (sometimes called the stress-energy tensor), Tµv. This symmetric (2, 0) tensor 
tells us all we need to know about the energy-like aspects of a system: energy den-
sity, pressure, stress, and so forth. A general definition of Tµv is "the flux of four-
momentum pµ across a surface of constant xv." In fact, this definition is not going 
to be incredibly useful; in Chapter 4 we will define the energy-momentum tensor 
in terms of a functional derivative of the action with respect to the metric, which 
will be a more algorithmic procedure for finding an explicit expression for Tµv. 
But the definition here does afford some physical insight. Consider an infinitesi-
mal element of the fluid in its rest frame, where there are no bulk motions. Then 
r00, the "flux of p0 (energy) in the x0 (time) direction," is simply the rest-frame 
energy density p. Similarly, in this frame, To; = T;o is the momentum density. 
The spatial components Tij are the momentum flux, or the stress; they represent 
the forces between neighboring infinitesimal elements of the fluid. Off-diagonal 
terms in Tij represent shearing terms, such as those due to viscosity. A diagonal 
term such as T 11 gives the x-component of the force being exerted (per unit area) 
by a fluid element in the x-direction; this is what we think of as the x-component 
of the pressure, Px (don't confuse it with the momentum). The pressure has three 
components, given in the fluid rest frame (in inertial coordinates) by 
There is no sum over i. 
T ;; 
p; = 
. 
(1.107) 
To make this more concrete, let's start with the simple example of dust. (Cos-
mologists tend to use "matter" as a synonym for dust.) Dust may be defined in 
flat spacetime as a collection of particles at rest with respect to each other. The 
four-velocity field Uµ(x) is clearly going to be the constant four-velocity of the 
individual particles. Indeed, its components will be the same at each point. Define 
the number-flux four-vector to be 
(l.108) 

34 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
where n is the number density of the particles as measured in their rest frame. 
(This doesn't sound coordinate-invariant, but it is; in any frame, the number den-
sity that would be measured if you were in the rest frame is a fixed quantity.) 
Then No is the number density of particles as measured in any other frame, while 
N; is the flux of particles in the xi direction. Let's now imagine that each of the 
particles has the same mass m. Then in the rest frame the energy density of the 
dust is given by 
p=mn. 
(l.109) 
By definition, the energy density completely specifies the dust. But p only mea-
sures the energy density in the rest frame; what about other frames? We notice 
that both n and m are 0-components of four-vectors in their rest frame; specifi-
cally, Nµ = (n, 0, 0, 0) and pµ = (m, 0, 0, 0). Therefore pis theµ,= 0, v = 0 
component of the tensor p ® N as measured in its rest frame. We are therefore 
led to define the energy-momentum tensor for dust: 
(1.110) 
where p is defined as the energy density in the rest frame. (Typically you don't 
just guess energy-momentum tensors by such a procedure, you derive them from 
equations of motion or an action principle.) Note that the pressure of the dust in 
any direction is zero; this should not be surprising, since pressure arises from the 
random motions of particles within the fluid, and we have defined dust to be free 
of such motions. 
Dust is not sufficiently general to describe most of the interesting fluids that 
appear in general relativity; we only need a slight generalization, however, to ar-
rive at the concept of a perfect fluid. A perfect fluid is one that can be completely 
specified by two quantities, the rest-frame energy density p, and an isotropic rest-
frame pressure p. The single parameter p serves to specify the pressure in every 
direction. A consequence of isotropy is that Tµv is diagonal in its rest frame-
there is no net flux of any component of momentum in an orthogonal direction. 
Furthermore, the nonzero spacelike components must all be equal, T 11 = T22 = 
T 33 . The only two independent numbers are therefore the energy density p = r 00 
and the pressure p = Tu; we don't need a subscript on p, since the pressure is 
equal in every direction. The energy-momentum tensor of a perfect fluid therefore 
takes the following form in its rest frame: 
(
p 0 0 0) 
T µv = 
0 
P 0 0 
0 0 
p 
0 
. 
0 0 0 
p 
(1.111) 
(Remember that we are in flat spacetime; this will change when curvature is in-
troduced.) We would like, of course, a formula that is good in any frame. For dust 
we had Tµv = pUµuv, so we might begin by guessing (p + p)Uµuv, which 

1 . 9 
Energy and Momentum 
35 
gives 
(
p + p 0 0 0) 
0 
0 0 0 
0 
0 0 0 
. 
0 
0 0 0 
(1.112) 
This is not a very clever guess, to be honest. But by subtracting this guess from 
our desired answer, we see that what we need to add is 
(
-p 0 
0 0) 
0 
p 
0 
0 
0 
0 
p 
0 
. 
0 
0 
0 
p 
(1.113) 
Fortunately, this has an obvious covariant generalization, namely p1Jµv . .Thus, the 
general form of the energy-momentum tensor for a perfect fluid is 
(1.114) 
It may seem that the procedure used to arrive at this formula was somewhat arbi-
trary, but we can have complete confidence in the result. Given that ( 1.111) should 
be the form of T µ v in the rest frame, and that ( 1.114) is a perfectly tensorial ex-
pression that reduces to ( 1.111) in the rest frame, we know that ( 1.114) must be 
the right expression in any frame. 
The concept of a perfect fluid is general enough to describe a wide variety of 
physical forms of matter. To determine the evolution of such a fluid, we specify 
an equation of state relating the pressure to the energy density, p = p(p ). Dust is 
a special case for which p = 0, while an isotropic gas of photons hasp= !P· A 
more exotic example is vacuum energy, for which the energy-momentum tensor 
is proportional to the metric, Tµv = -Pvacr/µv. By comparing to (1.114) we find 
that vacuum energy is a kind of perfect fluid for which Pvac = -Pvac· The notion 
of an energy density in vacuum is completely pointless in special relativity, since 
in nongravitational physics the absolute value of the energy doesn't matter, only 
the difference in energy between two states. In general relativity, however, all en-
ergy couples to gravity, so the possibility of a nonzero vacuum energy will become 
an important consideration, which we will discuss more fully in Chapter 4. 
Besides being symmetric, Tµv has the even more important property of be-
ing conserved. In this context, conservation is expressed as the vanishing of the 
"divergence": 
(1.115) 
This expression is a set of four equations, one for each value of v. The equation 
with v = 0 corresponds to conservation of energy, while aµTµk = 0 expresses 

36 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
conservation of the kth component of the momentum. Let's apply this equation to 
a perfect fluid, for which we have 
aµTµv = aµ(P + p)UµUv + (p + p)(UvaµUµ + UµaµUv) +av p. (l.116) 
To analyze what this equation means, it is helpful to consider separately what 
happens when we project it into pieces along and orthogonal to the four-velocity 
field Uµ. We first note that the normalization UvUv = -1 implies the useful 
identity 
UvaµUv = !aµ(UvUv) = 0. 
(l.117) 
To project (l.116) along the four-velocity, simply contract it into Uv: 
UvaµTµv = -aµ(PUµ) - paµUµ. 
(l.118) 
Setting this to zero gives the relativistic equation of energy conservation for a 
perfect fluid. It will look more familiar in the nonrelativistic limit, in which 
p « p. 
(l.119) 
The last condition makes sense, because pressure comes from the random motions 
of the individual particles, and in this limit these motions (as well as the bulk 
motion described by U µ) are taken to be small. So in ordinary nonrelativistic 
language, ( 1.118) becomes 
at p + v . (pv) = 0, 
(1.120) 
the continuity equation for the energy density. We next consider the part of ( 1.116) 
that is orthogonal to the four-velocity. To project a vector orthogonal to Uµ, we 
multiply it by the projection tensor 
(l.121) 
To convince yourself this does the trick, check that if we have a vector V
1~, parallel 
to uµ' and another vector w.r' perpendicular to uµ' the projection tensor will 
annihilate the parallel vector and preserve the orthogonal one: 
Applied to aµ Tµv, we obtain 
pa v vllv = 0 
pa vWf = Wf. 
pa vaµTµv = (p + p)UµaµUa + aa p + ua UµaµP· 
(1.122) 
(1.123) 
In the nonrelativistic limit given by ( 1.119), setting the spatial components of this 
expression equal to zero yields 
p [a1v + (v · V)v] + V p + v(a1 p + v · V p) = 0. 
(l.124) 

1 .10 Classical Field Theory 
37 
But notice that the last set of terms involve derivatives of p times the three-
velocity v, assumed to be small; these will therefore be negligible compared to 
the V p term, and can be neglected. We are left with 
p [a1v + (v · V)v] = -V p, 
(1.125) 
which is the Euler equation familiar from fluid mechanics. 
1.10 • CLASSICAL FIELD THEORY 
When we make the transition from special relativity to general relativity, the met-
ric r/µv will be promoted to a dynamical tensor field, gµv(x). GR is thus a par-
ticular example of a classical field theory; we can build up some feeling for how 
such theories work by considering classical fields defined on flat spacetime. (We 
say classical field theory in contrast with quantum field theory, which is quite a 
different story; we will discuss it briefly in Chapter 9, but it is outside our main 
area of interest here.) 
Let's begin with the familiar example of the classical mechanics of a single 
particle in one dimension with coordinate q(t). We can derive the equations of 
motion for such a particle by using the "principle of least action": we search for 
critical points (as a function of the trajectory) of an action S, written as 
S = f dt L(q,q), 
(1.126) 
where the function L(q, q) is the Lagrangian. The Lagrangian in point-particle 
mechanics is typically of the form 
L = K- V, 
(1.127) 
where K is the kinetic energy and V the potential energy. Following the calculus-
of-variations procedure, which is described in any advanced textbook on classical 
mechanics, we show that critical points of the action [trajectories q(t) for which 
S remains stationary under small variations] are those that satisfy the Euler-
Lagrange equations, 
aL 
d ( aL )- 0 
aq - dt 
a(q) 
-
· 
For example, L = !42 - V (q) leads to 
.. 
dV 
q = - dq. 
(1.128) 
(1.129) 
Field theory is a similar story, except that we replace the single coordinate q (t) 
by a set of spacetime-dependent fields, <I>; (xµ), and the action S becomes afunc-
tional of these fields. A functional is simply a function of an infinite number of 

38 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
variables, such as the values of a field in some region of spacetime. Functionals are 
often expressed as integrals. Each <I>; is a function on spacetime (at least in some 
coordinate system), and i is an index labeling our individual fields. For example, 
in electromagnetism (as we will see below) the fields are the four components of 
a one-form called the "vector potential," Aµ: 
(l.130) 
We're being very lowbrow here, in thinking of a one-form field as four different 
functions rather than a single tensor object. This point of view makes sense so 
long as we stick to a fixed coordinate system, and it will make our calculations 
more straightforward. 
In field theory, the Lagrangian can be expressed as an integral over space of 
a Lagrange density £,, which is a function of the fields <I>; and their spacetime 
derivatives aµ <I>;: 
(1.131) 
So the action is 
f 
f 
4 
. 
. 
S = 
dt L = 
d x C(<I>', aµ<I>'). 
(1.132) 
The Lagrange density is a Lorentz scalar. We typically just say "Lagrangian" 
when we mean "Lagrange density." It will most often be convenient to define 
a field theory by specifying the Lagrange density, from which all of the equations 
of motion can be readily derived. 
We will use "natural units," in which not only c = 1 but also h = k = 1, where 
h = h/2H, his Planck's constant, and k is Boltzmann's constant. The objection 
might be raised that we shouldn't involve h in a purely classical discussion; but 
all we are doing here is choosing units, not determining physics. (The relevance 
of h would appear if we were to quantize our field theory and obtain particles, but 
we won't get that far right now.) In natural units we have 
[energy]= [mass]= [(length)- 1] = [(time)- 1]. 
(l.133) 
We will most often use energy or mass as our fundamental unit. Since the action 
is an integral of L (with units of energy) over time, it is dimensionless: 
[S] = [E][T] = Mo. 
(1.134) 
The volume element has units 
(l.135) 
so to get a dimensionless action we require that the Lagrange density have units 
[£,] = M4. 
(1.136) 

1 .10 Classical Field Theory 
39 
The Euler-Lagrange equations come from requiring that the action be un-
changed under small variations of the fields, 
<I>; ~ <l>i + 0 <l>i ' 
aµ<1>; ~ aµ<1>; + o(aµ<1>;) = aµ<1>; + aµ(o<I>;). 
(1.137) 
(l.138) 
The expression for the variation in aµ <I>; is simply the derivative of the variation 
of <I>;. Since o 
<I>; is assumed to be small, we may Taylor-expand the Lagrangian 
under this variation: 
.C(<1>;,aµ<1>;) ~ .C(<I>; +0<1>;,aµ<1>; +aµo<I>;) 
. 
. 
a.c 
. 
a.c 
. 
=.C(<1>',aµ<1>')+ a<1>;0<1>' + a(a,.L<1>;)aµ(o<1>'). 
(l.139) 
Correspondingly, the action goes to S ~ S + o S, with 
(1.140) 
We would like to factor out o<I>; from the integrand, by integrating the second 
term by parts: 
(1.141) 
The final term is a total derivative-the integral of something of the form aµ yµ_ 
that can be converted to a surface term by Stokes's theorem (the four-dimensional 
version, that is; see Appendix E for a discussion). Since we are considering vari-
ational problems, we can choose to consider variations that vanish at the bound-
ary (along with their derivatives). It is therefore traditional in such contexts to 
integrate by parts with complete impunity, always ignoring the boundary contri-
butions. (Sometimes this is not okay, as in instanton calculations in Yang-Mills 
theory.) 
We are therefore left with 
(l.142) 
The functional derivative o S / o 
<I>; of a functional S with respect to a function <I>; 
is defined to satisfy 
(1.143) 

40 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
when such an expression is valid. We can therefore express the notion that S is at a 
critical point by saying that the functional derivative vanishes. The final equations 
of motion for our field theory are thus: 
(l.144) 
These are known as the Euler-Lagrange equations for a field theory in flat space-
time. 
The simplest example of a field is a real scalar field: 
<f>(xµ) : (spacetime) ~ R. 
(l.145) 
Slightly more complicated examples would include complex scalar fields, or maps 
from spacetime to any vector space or even any manifold (sometimes called "non-
linear sigma models"). Upon quantization, excitations of the field are observable 
as particles. Scalar fields give rise to spinless particles, while vector fields and 
other tensors give rise to higher-spin particles. If the field were complex instead 
of real, it would have two degrees of freedom rather than just one, which would 
be interpreted as a particle and a distinct antiparticle. Real fields are their own 
antiparticles. An example of a real scalar field would be the neutral ;rr-meson. 
So let's consider the classical mechanics of a single real scalar field. It will 
have an energy density that is a local function of spacetime, and includes various 
contributions: 
kinetic energy : 
gradient energy : 
potential energy : 
(1.146) 
Actually, although the potential is a Lorentz-invariant function, the kinetic and 
gradient energies are not by themselves Lorentz-invariant; but we can combine 
them into a manifestly Lorentz-invariant form: 
(l.147) 
[The combination r/µv (()µ</> )(()v<f>) is often abbreviated as (()</> )2 .] So a reasonable 
choice of Lagrangian for our single real scalar field, analogous to L = K - V in 
the point-particle case, would be 
(1.148) 
This generalizes "kinetic minus potential energy" to "kinetic minus gradient mi-
nus potential energy density." Note that since [.C] = M4, we must have [ V] = 
M4• Also, since [aµ]= [a/axµ]= M 1, we have 
[</>]=Ml. 
(l.149) 

1 .1 0 
Classical Field Theory 
41 
For the Lagrangian ( 1.148) we have 
ac. 
dV 
()<J> = - d<f>' 
(1.150) 
The second of these equations is a little tricky, so let's go through it slowly. When 
differentiating the Lagrangian, the trick is to make sure that the index placement 
is "compatible" (so that if you have a lower index on the thing being differen-
tiated with respect to, you should have only lower indices when the same kind 
of object appears in the thing being differentiated), and also that the indices are 
strictly different. The first of these is already satisfied in our example, since we 
are differentiating a function of aµ</> with respect to aµ</>· Later on, we will need 
to be more careful. To fulfill the second, we simply relabel dummy indices: 
(1.151) 
Then we can use the general rule, for any object with one index such as Vµ, that 
(1.152) 
because each component of Va is treated as a distinct variable. So we have 
a(~ef>) [~pa (3p¢)(3.¢)] =~pa (8~(3aef>l + (3p¢)8,;') 
= r/µa (()a<f>) + 17Pµ(ap</>) = 217µvav<1>· 
(1.153) 
This leads to the second expression in ( 1.150). 
Putting ( 1.150) into ( 1.144) leads to the equation of motion 
dV 
0.+.--=0 
'I' 
d<f> 
' 
(1.154) 
where 0 = r/µvaµav is known as the d'Alembertian. Note that our metric sign 
convention(-+++) comes into this equation; with the alternative (+---)con-
vention the sign would have been switched. In flat spacetime ( 1.154) is equivalent 
to 
•• 
2 
dV 
</> - 'V </> + d<f> = 0. 
(1.155) 
A popular choice for the potential V is that of a simple harmonic oscillator, 
V(</>) = !m2<J>2. The parameter mis called the mass of the field, and you should 
notice that the units work out correctly. You may be wondering how a field can 
have mass. When we quantize the field we find that momentum eigenstates are 
collections of particles, each with mass m. At the classical level, we think of 
"mass" as simply a convenient characterization of the field dynamics. Then our 

42 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
equation of motion is 
( 1.156) 
the famous Klein-Gordon equation. This is a linear differential equation, so the 
sum of two solutions is a solution; a complete set of solutions (in the form of 
plane waves) is easy to find, as you can check for yourself. 
A slightly more elaborate example of a field theory is provided by electro-
magnetism. We mentioned that the relevant field is the vector potential Aµ; the 
timelike component Ao can be identified with the electrostatic potential <I>, and the 
spacelike components with the traditional vector potential A (in terms of which 
the magnetic field is given by B = V x A). The field strength tensor, with com-
ponents given by ( 1.69), is related to the vector potential by 
(l.157) 
From this definition we see that the field strength tensor has the important property 
of gauge invariance: when we perform a gauge transformation on the vector 
potential, 
(1.158) 
the field strength tensor is left unchanged: 
( 1.159) 
The last equality follows from the fact that partial derivatives commute, aµ av = 
avaµ. Gauge invariance is a symmetry that is fundamental to our understanding 
of electromagnetism, and all observable quantities must be gauge-invariant. Thus, 
while the dynamical field of the theory (with respect to which we vary the action to 
derive equations of motion) is Aµ, physical quantities will generally be expressed 
in terms of Fµv· 
We already know that the dynamical equations of electromagnetism are 
Maxwell's equations, (1. 96) and ( 1. 97). Given the definition of the field stregth 
tensor in terms of the vector potential, ( 1. 97) is actually automatic: 
(l.160) 
again because partial derivatives commute. On the other hand, ( 1.96) is equivalent 
to Euler-Lagrange equations of the form 
( 1.161) 
if we presciently choose the Lagrangian to be 
£ = -!FµvFµv + AµJµ. 
(1.162) 

1 .10 Classical Field Theory 
43 
For this choice, the first term in the Euler-Lagrange equation is straightforward: 
a.c = ov Jµ = r. 
()Av 
µ 
(1.163) 
The second term is tricker. First we write F µ v F µ v as 
F 
F µv 
F. 
FCt./3 
Ct.p f3a F. 
F 
µ v 
= 0t.{3 
= 11 
11 
0t.{3 pa · 
(1.164) 
We want to work with lower indices on F µ v, since we are differentiating with re-
spect to aµAv, which has lower indices. Likewise we change the dummy indices 
on F µ v Fµ v, since we want to have different indices on the thing being differen-
tiated and the thing we are differentiating with respect to. Once you get familiar 
with this stuff it will become second nature and you won't need nearly so many 
steps. This lets us write 
Then, since Faf3 = aaAf3 - a13Aa, we have 
aFaf3 
-oµov -oµov 
()(()µAv) -
Ct. 
f3 
f3 a· 
Combining ( 1.166) with (1.165) yields 
so 
()(Fa13F0t.f3) = n0t.Pnf3a [(oµov - oµov)F + (oµov - oµov)F. /3] 
()(()µAv) 
•1 
•1 
Ct. 
f3 
f3 a 
pa 
p a 
a p 
Ct. 
= (17µp17va -
11vp11µa)Fpa + (170t.µ17f3v -
110t.vry!3µ)Faf3 
= Fµv -
Fvµ + Fµv -
Fvµ 
a.c 
---=-Fµv. 
()(()µAv) 
Then sticking ( 1.163) and ( 1.168) into ( 1.161) yields precisely ( 1.96): 
(1.165) 
(1.166) 
(1.167) 
(1.168) 
(1.169) 
Note that we switched the order of the indices on Fµv in order to save ourselves 
from an unpleasant minus sign. 
You may wonder what the purpose of introducing a Lagrangian formulation 
is. if we were able to invent the equations of motion before we ever knew the 
Lagrangian (as Maxwell did for his equations). There are a number of reasons, 

44 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
starting with the basic simplicity of positing a single scalar function of spacetime, 
the Lagrange density, rather than a number of (perhaps tensor-valued) equations 
of motion. Another reason is the ease with which symmetries are implemented; 
demanding that the action be invariant under a symmetry ensures that the dynam-
ics respects the symmetry as well. Finally, as we will see in Chapter 4, the action 
leads via a direct procedure (involving varying with respect to the metric itself) 
to a unique energy-momentum tensor. Applying this procedure to (1.148) leads 
straight to the energy-momentum tensor for a scalar field theory, 
(1.170) 
Similarly, from (1.162) we can derive the energy-momentum tensor for electro-
magnetism, 
T.µv -
FµJ...Fv 
-
lnµvFJ...aF 
EM -
J... 
4•1 
J...a· 
(1.171) 
Using the appropriate equations of motion, you can show that these energy-
momentum tensors are conserved, aµTµv = 0 (and will be asked to do so in the 
Exercises). 
The two examples we have considered-scalar field theory and electro-
magnetism-are paradigms for much of our current understanding of nature. The 
Standard Model of particle physics consists of three types of fields: gauge fields, 
Higgs fields, and fermions. The gauge fields describe the "forces" of nature, in-
cluding the strong and weak nuclear forces in addition to electromagnetism. The 
gauge fields giving rise to the nuclear forces are described by one-form poten-
tials, just as in electromagnetism; the difference is that they are matrix-valued 
rather than ordinary one-forms, and the symmetry groups corresponding to gauge 
transformations are therefore noncommutative (nonabelian) symmetries. The 
Higgs fields are scalar fields much as we have described, although they are also 
matrix-valued. The fermions include leptons (such as electrons and neutrinos) 
and quarks, and are not described by any of the tensor fields we have discussed 
here, but rather by a different kind of field called a spinor. We won't get around 
to discussing spinors in this book, but they play a crucial role in particle physics 
and their coupling to gravity is interesting and subtle. Upon quantization, these 
fields give rise to particles of different spins; gauge fields are spin- I, scalar fields 
are spin-0, and the Standard Model fermions are spin-!. 
Before concluding this chapter, let's ask an embarassingly simple question: 
Why should we consider one classical field theory rather than some other one? 
More concretely, let's say that we have discovered some particle in nature, and 
we know what kind of field we want to use to describe it; how should we pick 
the Lagrangian for this field? For example, when we wrote down our scalar-field 
Lagrangian ( 1.148), why didn't we include a term of the form 
(1.172) 

1 .11 
Exercises 
45 
where A. is a coupling constant? Ultimately, of course, we work by trial and error 
and try to fit the data given to us by experiment. In classical field theory, there's 
not much more we could do; generally we would start with a simple Lagrangian, 
and perhaps make it more complicated if the first try failed to agree with the data. 
But quantum field theory actually provides some simple guidelines, and since we 
use classical field theory as an approximation to some underlying quantum the-
ory, it makes sense to take advantage of these principles. To make a long story 
short, quantum field theory allows "virtual" processes at arbitrarily high energies 
to contribute to what we observe at low energies. Fortunately, the effect of these 
processes can be summarized in a low-energy effective field theory. In the effec-
tive theory, which is what we actually observe, the result of high-energy processes 
is simply to "renormalize" the coupling constants of our theory. Consider an arbi-
trary coupling constant, which we can express as a parameterµ, (with dimensions 
of mass) raised to some power, A. = µ,q (unless A. is dimensionless. in which case 
the discussion becomes more subtle). Very roughly speaking, the effect of high-
energy processes will be to makeµ, ve1y large. Slightly more specifically,µ, will 
be pushed up to a scale at which new physics kicks in, whatever that may be. 
Therefore, potential higher-order terms we might think of adding to a Lagrangian 
are suppressed, because they are multiplied by coupling constants that are very 
small. For ( 1.172), for example, we must have A. = µ,- 2, so A. will be tiny (be-
cause µ, will be big). Only the lowest-order terms we can put in our Lagrangian 
will come with dimensionless couplings (or ones with units of mass to a positive 
power), so we only need bother with those at low energies. This feature of field 
theory allows for a dramatic simplification in considering all of the models we 
might want to examine. 
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, general relativity itself is a clas-
sical field theory, in which the dynamical field is the metric tensor. It is neverthe-
less fair to think of GR as somehow different; for the most part other classical 
field theories rely on the existence of a pre-existing spacetime geometry, whereas 
in GR the geometry is determined by the equations of motion. (There are excep-
tions to this idea, called topological field theories, in which the metric makes no 
appearance.) Our task in the next few chapters is to explore the nature of curved 
geometries as characterized by the spacetime metric, before moving in Chapter 4 
to putting these notions to work in constructing a theory of gravitation. 
1.11 • EXERCISES 
1. Consider an inertial frame S with coordinates xµ = (t, x, y, z), and a frame S' with 
coordinates xµ' related to S by a boost with velocity parameter v along the y-axis. 
Imagine we have a wall at rest in S', lying along the line x' = -y'. From the point of 
view of S, what is the relationship between the incident angle of a ball hitting the mirror 
(traveling in the x-y plane) and the reflected angle? What about the velocity before and 
after? 

46 
Chapter 1 Special Relativity and Flat Spacetime 
2. Imagine that space (not spacetime) is actually a finite box, or in more sophisticated 
terms, a three-torus, of size L. By this we mean that there is a coordinate system xµ = 
(t, x, y, z) such that every point with coordinates (t, x, y, z) is identified with every 
point with coordinates (t, x + L, y, z), (t, x, y + L, z), and (t, x, y, z + L). Note that 
the time coordinate is the same. Now consider two observers; observer A is at rest 
in this coordinate system (constant spatial coordinates), while observer B moves in 
the x-direction with constant velocity v. A and B begin at the same event, and while 
A remains still, B moves once around the universe and comes back to intersect the 
worldline of A without ever having to accelerate (since the universe is periodic). What 
are the relative proper times experienced in this interval by A and B? Is this consistent 
with your understanding of Lorentz invaiiance? 
3. Three events, A, B, C, are seen by observer 0 to occur in the order ABC. Another ob-
server, 6, sees the events to occur in the order CB A. Is it possible that a third observer 
sees the events in the order AC B? Support your conclusion by drawing a spacetime 
diagram. 
4. Projection effects can trick you into thinking that an astrophysical object is moving 
"superluminally." Consider a quasar that ejects gas with speed v at an angle () with 
respect to the line-of-sight of the observer. Projected onto the sky, the gas appears to 
travel perpendicular to the line of sight with angular speed Vapp/ D, where D is the 
distance to the quasar and Vapp is the apparent speed. Derive an expression for Vapp 
in terms of v and (). Show that, for appropriate values of v and (), Vapp can be greater 
than 1. 
5. Particle physicists are so used to setting c = 1 that they measure mass in units of energy. 
In particular, they tend to use electron volts ( 1 e V = 1.6 x 1 o-12 erg = 1.8 x 1 o-33 g), 
or, more commonly, keV, MeV, and GeV (103 eV, 106 eV, and 109 eV, respectively). 
The muon has been measured to have a mass of 0.106 GeV and a rest frame lifetime 
of 2.19 x 10-6 seconds. Imagine that such a muon is moving in the circular storage 
ring of a particle accelerator, 1 kilometer in diameter, such that the muon's total energy 
is 1000 GeV. How long would it appear to live from the experimenter's point of view? 
How many radians would it travel around the ring? 
6. In Euclidean three-space, let p be the point with coordinates (x, y, z) = (1, 0, -1). 
Consider the following curves that pass through p: 
xi (A.) = (A., (A. _ 0 2, -A.) 
xi(µ)= (cosµ, sinµ,µ - 1) 
xi (a)= (a2' a3 + a2' a). 
(a) Calculate the components of the tangent vectors to these curves at p in the coordi-
nate basis {ax. ay. az}. 
(b) Let f = x2 + .v2 - yz. Calculate df /dA., df /dµ and df /da. 
7. Imagine we have a tensor X µ v and a vector V µ, with components 
xµv = (!1 
-1 
-2 
0 1 
0 3 
0 
~l) 
0 
' 
-2 
vµ = (-1, 2, o, -2). 

1 .11 
Exercises 
Find the components of: 
(a) Xµv 
(b) Xµ v 
(c) x<µv) 
(d) X[µv] 
(e) x\ 
(f) VµVµ 
(g) VµXµv 
47 
8. If av Tµv = Qµ, what physically does the spatial vector Q; represent? Use the dust 
energy momentum tensor to make your case. 
9. For a system of discrete point particles the energy-momentum tensor takes the fonn 
(a) (a) 
T 
= ~ 
Pµ Pv s<3>(x _ x<a)) 
µv 
~ O(a) 
' 
a 
p 
(1.173) 
where the index a labels the different particles. Show that, for a dense collection of 
particles with isotropically distributed velocities, we can smooth over the individual 
particle worldlines to obtain the perfect-fluid energy-momentum tensor (1.114). 
10. Using the tensor transfonnation law applied to F µ v. show how the electric and magnetic 
field 3-vectors E and B transfonn under 
(a) a rotation about the y-axis, 
(b) a boost along the z-axis. 
11. Verify that (1.98) is indeed equivalent to (1.97), and that they are both equivalent to the 
last two equations in ( 1.93). 
12. Consider the two field theories we explicitly discussed, Maxwell's electromagnetism 
(let Jµ = 0) and the scalar field theory defined by (1.148). 
(a) Express the components of the energy-momentum tensors of each theory in three-
vector notation, using the divergence, gradient, curl, electric, and magnetic fields, 
and an overdot to denote time derivatives. 
(b) Using the equations of motion, verify (in any notation you like) that the energy-
momentum tensors are conserved. 
13. Consider adding to the Lagrangian for electromagnetism an additional term of the fonn 
C' = iµvpa Fµv Fpa. 
(a) Express C' in tenns of E and B. 
(b) Show that including C' does not affect Maxwell's equations. Can you think of a 
deep reason for this? 

CHAPTER 
2 
Manifolds 
2.1 • GRAVITY AS GEOMETRY 
48 
Gravity is special. In the context of general relativity, we ascribe this specialness 
to the fact that the dynamical field giving rise to gravitation is the metric ten-
sor describing the curvature of spacetime itself, rather than some additional field 
propagating through spacetime; this was Einstein's profound insight. The phys-
ical principle that led him to this idea was the universality of the gravitational 
interaction, as formalized by the Principle of Equivalence. Let's see how this 
physical principle leads us to the mathematical strategy of describing gravity as 
the geometry of a curved manifold. 
The Principle of Equivalence comes in a variety of forms, the first of which is 
the Weak Equivalence Principle, or WEP. The WEP states that the inertial mass 
and gravitational mass of any object are equal. To see what this means, think about 
Newtonian mechanics. The Second Law relates the force exerted on an object to 
the acceleration it undergoes, setting them proportional to each other with the 
constant of proportionality being the inertial mass m;: 
F = m;a. 
(2.1) 
The inertial mass clearly has a universal character, related to the resistance you 
feel when you try to push on the object; it takes the same value no matter what 
kind of force is being exerted. We also have Newton's law of gravitation, which 
can be thought of as stating that the gravitational force exerted on an object is pro-
portional to the gradient of a scalar field <I>, known as the gravitational potential. 
The constant of proportionality in this case is called the gravitational mass mg: 
Fg = -mg V<I>. 
(2.2) 
On the face of it, mg has a very different character than m;; it is a quantity specific 
to the gravitational force. If you like, mg/ m; can be thought of as the "gravita-
tional charge" of the body. Nevertheless, Galileo long ago showed (apocryphally 
by dropping weights off of the Leaning Tower of Pisa, actually by rolling balls 
down inclined planes) that the response of matter to gravitation is universal-
every object falls at the same rate in a gravitational field, independent of the com-
position of the object. In Newtonian mechanics this translates into the WEP, which 
is simply 
m; =mg 
(2.3) 

2 .1 
Gravity as Geometry 
49 
for any object. An immediate consequence is that the behavior of freely-falling 
test particles is universal, independent of their mass (or any other qualities they 
may have); in fact, we have 
a= -V<I>. 
(2.4) 
Experimentally, the independence of the acceleration due to gravity on the com-
position of the falling object has been verified to extremely high precision by the 
Eotvos experiment and its modern successors. 
This suggests an equivalent formulation of the WEP: there exists a preferred 
class of trajectories through spacetime, known as bie1tial (or "freely-falling") tra-
jectories, on which unaccelerated particles travel-where unaccelerated means 
"subject only to gravity." Clearly this is not true for other forces, such as elec-
tromagnetism. In the presence of an electric field, particles with opposite charges 
will move on quite different trajectories. Every particle, on the other hand, has an 
identical gravitational charge. 
The universality of gravitation, as implied by the WEP, can be stated in an-
other, more popular, form. Imagine that we consider a physicist in a tightly sealed 
box, unable to observe the outside world, who is doing experiments involving the 
motion of test particles, for example to measure the local gravitational field. Of 
course she would obtain different answers if the box were sitting on the moon or 
on Jupiter than she would on Earth. But the answers would also be different if the 
box were accelerating at a constant velocity; this would change the acceleration 
of the freely-falling particles with respect to the box. The WEP implies that there 
is no way to disentangle the effects of a gravitational field from those of being in a 
uniformly accelerating frame, simply by observing the behavior of freely-falling 
particles. This follows from the universality of gravitation; in electrodynamics, 
in contrast, it would be possible to distinguish between uniform acceleration and 
an electromagnetic field, by observing the behavior of particles with different 
charges. But with gravity it is impossible, since the "charge" is necessarily pro-
portional to the (inertial) mass. 
To be careful, we should limit our claims about the impossibility of distin-
guishing gravity from uniform acceleration by restricting our attention to "small 
enough regions of spacetime." If the sealed box were sufficiently big, the gravi-
tational field would change from place to place in an observable way, while the 
effect of acceleration would always be in the same direction. In a rocket ship or 
elevator, the particles would always fall straight down. In a very big box in a grav-
itational field, however, the particles would move toward the center of the Earth, 
for example, which would be a different direction for widely separated experi-
ments. The WEP can therefore be stated as follows: The motion of freely-falling 
pa1ticles are the same in a gravitational.field and a uniformly accelerated frame, 
in small enough regions of spacetime. In larger regions of spacetime there will be 
inhomogeneities in the gravitational field, which will lead to tidal forces, which 
can be detected. 
After the advent of special relativity, the concept of mass lost some of its 
uniqueness, as it became clear that mass was simply a manifestation of energy 

50 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
and momentum (as we have seen in Chapter 1). It was therefore natural for Ein-
stein to think about generalizing the WEP to something more inclusive. His idea 
was simply that there should be no way whatsoever for the physicist in the box to 
distinguish between uniform acceleration and an external gravitational field, no 
matter what experiments she did (not only by dropping test particles). This rea-
sonable extrapolation became what is now known as the Einstein Equivalence 
Principle, or EEP: In small enough regions of spacetime, the laws of physics re-
duce to those of special relativity,· it is impossible to detect the existence of a 
gravitational field by means of local experiments. 
In fact, it is hard to imagine theories that respect the WEP but violate the EEP. 
Consider a hydrogen atom, a bound state of a proton and an electron. Its mass 
is actually less than the sum of the masses of the proton and electron considered 
individually, because there is a negative binding energy-you have to put energy 
into the atom to separate the proton and electron. According to the WEP, the grav-
itational mass of the hydrogen atom is therefore less than the sum of the masses of 
its constituents; the gravitational field couples to electromagnetism (which holds 
the atom together) in exactly the right way to make the gravitational mass come 
out right. This means that not only must gravity couple to rest mass universally, 
but also to all forms of energy and momentum-which is practically the claim of 
the EEP. It is possible to come up with counterexamples, however; for example, 
we could imagine a theory of gravity in which freely falling particles began to 
rotate as they moved through a gravitational field. Then they could fall along the 
same paths as they would in an accelerated frame (thereby satisfying the WEP), 
but you could nevertheless detect the existence of the gravitational field (in viola-
tion of the EEP). Such theories seem contrived, but there is no law of nature that 
forbids them. 
Sometimes a distinction is drawn between "gravitational laws of physics" and 
"nongravitational laws of physics," and the EEP is defined to apply only to the 
latter. Then the Strong Equivalence Principle (SEP) is defined to include all of the 
laws of physics, gravitational and otherwise. A theory that violated the SEP but 
not the EEP would be one in which the gravitational binding energy did not con-
tribute equally to the inertial and gravitational mass of a body; thus, for example, 
test particles with appreciable self-gravity (to the extent that such a concept makes 
sense) could fall along different trajectories than lighter particles. 
It is the EEP that implies (or at least suggests) that we should attribute the 
action of gravity to the curvature of spacetime. Remember that in special relativity 
a prominent role is played by inertial frames-while it is not possible to single 
out some frame of reference as uniquely "at rest," it is possible to single out a 
family of frames that are "unaccelerated" (inertial). The acceleration of a charged 
particle in an electromagnetic field is therefore uniquely defined with respect to 
these frames. The EEP, on the other hand, implies that gravity is inescapable-
there is no such thing as a "gravitationally neutral object" with respect to which 
we can measure the acceleration due to gravity. It follows that the acceleration 
due to gravity is not something that can be reliably defined, and therefore is of 
little use. 

2 .1 
Gravity as Geometry 
51 
Instead, it makes more sense to define "unaccelerated" as "freely falling," and 
that is what we shall do. From here we are led to the idea that gravity is not 
a "force"-a force is something that leads to acceleration, and our definition of 
zero acceleration is "moving freely in the presence of whatever gravitational field 
happens to be around." 
This seemingly innocuous step has profound implications for the nature of 
space time. In SR, we have a procedure for starting at some point and constructing 
an inertial frame that stretches throughout spacetime, by joining together rigid 
rods and attaching clocks to them. But, again due to inhomogeneities in the grav-
itational field, this is no longer possible. If we start in some freely-falling state 
and build a large structure out of rigid rods, at some distance away freely-falling 
objects will look like they are accelerating with respect to this reference frame, as 
shown in Figure 2.1. The solution is to retain the notion of inertial frames, but to 
discard the hope that they can be uniquely extended throughout space and time. 
Instead we can define locally inertial frames, those that follow the motion of in-
dividual freely falling particles in small enough regions of spacetime. (Every time 
we say "small enough regions," purists should imagine a limiting procedure in 
which we take the appropriate spacetime volume to zero.) This is the best we can 
do, but it forces us to give up a good deal. For example, we can no longer speak 
with confidence about the relative velocity of far-away objects, since the inertial 
reference frames appropriate to those objects are completely different from those 
appropriate to us. 
Our job as physicists is to construct mathematical models of the world, and 
then test the predictions of such models against observations and experiments. 
Following the implications of the universality of gravitation has led us to give 
up on the idea of expressing gravity as a force propagating through spacetime, 
FIGURE 2.1 Failure of global frames. Since every particle feels the influence of gravity, 
we define "unaccelerating" as "freely falling." As a consequence, it becomes impossible to 
define globally inertial coordinate systems by the procedure outlined in Chapter 1, since 
particles initially at rest will begin to move with respect to such a frame. 

52 
FIGURE 2.3 Gravitational 
redshift on the surf ace of the 
Earth, as measured by ob-
servers at different elevations. 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
FIGURE 2.2 The Doppler shift as measured by two rockets separated by a distance z, 
each feeling an acceleration a. 
and indeed to give up on the idea of global reference frames stretching through-
out spacetime. We therefore need to invoke a mathematical framework in which 
physical theories can be consistent with these conclusions. The solution will be to 
imagine that spacetime has a curved geometry, and that gravitation is a manifes-
tation of this curvature. The appropriate mathematical structure used to describe 
curvature is that of a differentiable manifold: essentially, a kind of set that looks 
locally like flat space, but might have a very different global geometry. (Remem-
ber that the EEP can be stated as "the laws of physics reduce to those of special 
relativity in small regions of spacetime," which matches well with the mathemat-
ical notion of a set that locally resembles flat space.) 
We cannot prove that gravity should be thought of as the curvature of space-
time; instead we can propose the idea, derive its consequences, and see if the 
result is a reasonable fit to our experience of the world. Let's set about doing just 
that. 
Consider one of the celebrated predictions of the EEP, the gravitational red-
shift. Imagine two boxes, a distance z apart, each moving with some constant 
acceleration a in a region far away from any gravitational fields, as shown in Fig-
ure 2.2. At time to the trailing box emits a photon of wavelength A.o. The boxes 
remain a constant distance apart, so the photon reaches the leading box after a 
time !:l.t = z/c in our background reference frame. (We assume !:l.v/c is small, 
so we only work to first order.) In this time the boxes will have picked up an ad-
ditional velocity !:l.v = a!:l.t = az/c. Therefore, the photon reaching the leading 
box will be redshifted by the conventional Doppler effect, by an amount 
fl.A. 
6.v 
az 
~=---;-= c2· 
(2.5) 
According to the EEP, the same thing should happen in a uniform gravitational 
field. So we imagine a tower of height z sitting on the surface of a planet, with ag 
the strength of the gravitational field (what Newton would have called the "accel-
eration due to gravity"), as portrayed in Figure 2.3. We imagine that observers in 
the box at the top of the tower are able to detect photons emitted from the ground, 
but are otherwise unable to look outside and see that they are sitting on a tower. 

2. 1 Gravity as Geometry 
53 
In other words, they have no way of distinguishing this situation from that of the 
accelerating rockets. Therefore, the EEP allows us to conclude immediately that 
a photon emitted from the ground with wavelength A.o will be redshifted by an 
amount 
fl.A. 
agz 
~ = -;2• 
(2.6) 
This is the famous gravitational redshift. Notice that it is a direct consequence of 
the EEP; the details of general relativity were not required. 
The formula for the redshift is more often stated in terms of the Newtonian 
potential <I>, where ag = V <I>. (The sign is changed with respect to the usual 
convention, since we are thinking of ag as the acceleration of the reference frame, 
not of a particle with respect to this reference frame.) A nonconstant gradient of 
<I> is like a time-varying acceleration, and the equivalent net velocity is given by 
integrating over the time between emission and absorption of the photon. We then 
have 
(2.7) 
where 6. <I> is the total change in the gravitational potential, and we have once 
again set c = 1. This simple formula for the gravitational redshift continues to be 
true in more general circumstances. Of course, by using the Newtonian potential 
at all, we are restricting our domain of validity to weak gravitational fields. 
From the EEP we have argued in favor of a gravitational redshift; we may now 
use this phenomenon to provide further support for the idea that we should think 
of spacetime as curved. Consider the same experimental setup that we had before, 
now portrayed on the spacetime diagram in Figure 2.4. A physicist on the ground 
emits a beam of light with wavelength A.o from a height zo. which travels to the 
top of the tower at height z l · The time between when the beginning of any single 
wavelength of the light is emitted and the end of that same wavelength is emitted 
is fl.to = A.o / c, and the same time interval for the absorption is 6.t 1 = A.1 / c, where 
time is measured by clocks located at the respective elevations. Since we imagine 
that the gravitational field is static, the paths through spacetime followed by the 
leading and trailing edge of the single wave must be precisely congruent. (They 
are represented by generic curved paths, since we do not pretend that we know 
just what the paths will be.) Simple geometry seems to imply that the times fl.to 
and 6.t1 must be the same. But of course they are not; the gravitational redshift 
implies that the elevated experimenters observe fewer wavelengths per second, so 
that 6.t 1 > fl.to. We can interpret this roughly as "the clock on the tower appears to 
run more quickly." What went wrong? Simple geometry-the spacetime through 
which the photons traveled was curved. 

54 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
I 
~to L 
zo 
z 
FIGURE 2.4 Spacetime diagram of the gravitational-redshift experiment portrayed in 
Figure 2.3. Spacetime paths beginning at different moments are congruent, but the time 
intervals as measured on the ground and on the tower are different, signaling a breakdown 
of Euclidean geometry. 
We therefore would like to describe spacetime as a kind of mathematical struc-
ture that looks locally like Minkowski space, but may possess nontrivial curvature 
over extended regions. The kind of object that encompasses this notion is that of 
a manifold. In this chapter we will confine ourselves to understanding the con-
cept of manifolds and the structures we may define on them, leaving the precise 
characterization of curvature for the next chapter. 
2.2 • WHAT IS A MANIFOLD? 
Manifolds (or differentiable manifolds) are one of the most fundamental concepts 
in mathematics and physics. We are all used to the properties of n-dimensional 
Euclidean space, Rn, the set of n-tuples (x 1, ... , xn), often equipped with a flat 
positive-definite metric with components o;j. Mathematicians have worked for 
many years to develop the theory of analysis in Rn-differentiation, integration, 
properties of functions, and so on. But clearly there are other spaces (spheres, 
for example) which we intuitively think of as "curved" or perhaps topologically 
complicated, on which we would like to perform analogous operations. 
To address this problem we invent the notion of a manifold, which corresponds 
to a space that may be curved and have a complicated topology, but in local re-
gions looks just like Rn. Here by "looks like" we do not mean that the metric is 
the same, but only that more primitive notions like functions and coordinates work 
in a similar way. The entire manifold is constructed by smoothly sewing together 
these local regions. A crucial point is that the dimensionality n of the Euclidean 
spaces being used must be the same in every patch of the manifold; we then say 

2.2 
What Is a Manifold? 
55 
that the manifold is of dimension n. With this approach we can analyze functions 
on such a space by converting them (locally) to functions in a Euclidean space. 
Examples of manifolds include: 
• Rn itself, including the line (R), the plane (R2), and so on. This should be 
obvious, since Rn looks like Rn not only locally but globally. 
• Then-sphere, sn. This can be defined as the locus of all points some fixed 
distance from the origin in Rn+ 1. The circle is of course S 1, and the two-
sphere S2 is one of the most useful examples of a manifold. (The zero-
sphere s0, if you think about it, consists of two points. We say that s0 is a 
disconnected zero-dimensional manifold.) It's worth emphasizing that the 
definition of sn in terms of an embedding in Rn+l is simply a convenient 
shortcut; all of the manifolds we will discuss may be defined in their own 
right, without recourse to higher-dimensional flat spaces. 
• The ii-torus rn results from taking an n-dimensional cube and identifying 
opposite sides. The two-torus T2 is a square with opposite sides identified, 
as shown in Figure 2.5. The surface of a doughnut is a familiar example. 
• A Riemann surface of genus g is essentially a two-torus with g holes instead 
of just one, as shown in Figure 2.6. S2 may be thought of as a Riemallll sur-
face of genus zero. In technical terms (not really relevant to our present dis-
.--.-------..... ....... 
,_..._ _____ "' 
) 
identifying opposite 
sides 
FIGURE 2.5 The torus, T2, constructed by identifying opposite sides of a square. 
genus 0 
genus l 
genus 2 
FIGURE 2.6 Riemann surfaces of different genera (plural of "genus"). 

56 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
cussion), every "compact orientable boundaryless" two-dimensional mani-
fold is a Riemann surface of some genus. 
• More abstractly, a set of continuous transformations such as rotations in Rn 
forms a manifold. Lie groups are manifolds that also have a group struc-
ture. So for example S0(2), the set of rotations in two dimensions, is the 
same manifold as S1 (although in general group manifolds will be more 
complicated than spheres). 
• The direct product of two manifolds is a manifold. That is, given manifolds 
M and M' of dimension n and n', we can construct a manifold M x M', 
of dimension n + n', consisting of ordered pairs (p, p') with p E Mand 
p' EM'. 
With all of these examples, the notion of a manifold may seem vacuous: what 
isn't a manifold? Plenty of things are not manifolds, because somewhere they do 
not look locally like Rn. Examples include a one-dimensional line running into 
a two-dimensional plane, and two cones stuck together at their ve~s, as por-
trayed in Figure 2.7. More subtle examples are shown in Figure 2.8. Consider for 
example a single (two-dimensional) cone. There is clearly a sense in which the 
cone looks locally like R2; at the same time, there is just as clearly something 
singular about the vertex of the cone. This is where the word "differentiable" in 
"differentiable manifold" begins to play a role; as we will see when we develop 
the formal definition, the cone can be thought of as a type of manifold, but one that 
is not smooth at its vertex. (Other types of singularities are more severe, and will 
prevent us from thinking of certain spaces as manifolds, smooth or otherwise.) 
Another example is a line segment (with endpoints included). This certainly will 
FIGURE 2.7 
Examples of spaces that are not manifolds: a line ending on a plane, and 
two cones intersecting at their vertices. In each case there is a point that does not look 
locally like a Euclidean space of fixed dimension. 

2.2 What Is a Manifold? 
57 
FIGURE 2.8 Subtle examples. The single cone can be thought of as a manifold, but not 
a smooth one, due to the singulaiity at its origin. A line segment is not a manifold, but may 
be described by the more general notion of "manifold with boundary." 
not fit under the definition of manifolds we will develop, due to the endpoints. 
Nevertheless, we can extend the definition to include "manifolds with boundary," 
of which the line segment is a paradigmatic example. A brief discussion of mani-
folds with boundary is in Appendix D. 
These subtle cases should convince you of the need for a rigorous definition, 
which we now begin to construct; our discussion follows that of Wald ( 1984 ). 
The informal idea of a manifold is that of a space consisting of patches that look 
locally like Rn, and are smoothly sewn together. We therefore need to formalize 
the notions of "looking locally like Rn" and "smoothly sewn together." We require 
a number of preliminary definitions, most of which are fairly clear, but it's nice to 
be complete. The most elementary notion is that of a map between two sets. (We 
assume you know what a set is, or think you do; we won't need to be too precise.) 
Given two sets M and N, a map </> : M ~ N is a relationship that assigns, to 
each element of M, exactly one element of N. A map is therefore just a simple 
generalization of a function. Given two maps </> : A ~ B and 1/1 : B ~ C, we 
define the composition l/f o </> : A ~ C by the operation (l/I o <f>)(a) = 1/1(</>(a)), 
as in Figure 2.9. So a E A, <f>(a) E B, and thus (l/I o <f>)(a) E C. The order in 
which the maps are written makes sense, since the one on the right acts first. 
A map </> is called one-to-one (or injective) if each element of N has at most 
one element of M mapped into it, and onto (or surjective) if each element of N has 
at least one element of M mapped into it. (If you think about it, better names for 
"one-to-one" would be "one-from-one" or for that matter "two-to-two.") Consider 
functions</>: R ~ R. Then <f>(x) =ex is one-to-one, but not onto; <f>(x) = x 3-x 
is onto, but not one-to-one; <f>(x) = x 3 is both; and <f>(x) = x2 is neither, as in 
Figure 2.10. 
FIGURE 2.9 The map 1/J o </> : A ~ C is formed by composing</> : A ~ Band 
1/f :B~C. 

58 
</>(x) 
x 
one-to-one, not onto 
<J>-1 
FIGURE 2.11 
A map and 
its inverse. 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
x 
x 
x 
onto, not one-to-one 
both 
neither 
FIGURE 2.10 Types of maps. 
The set Mis known as the domain of the map</>, and the set of points in N 
that M gets mapped into is called the image of <f>. For any subset U c N, the 
set of elements of M that get mapped to U is called the preimage of U under 
<f>, or <J>- 1(U). A map that is both one-to-one and onto is known as invertible 
(or bijective). In this case we can define the inverse map <J>- 1 : N ~ M by 
(</>- 1 o <f>)(a) =a, as in Figure 2.11. Note that the same symbol <f>- 1 is used for 
both the preimage and the inverse map, even though the former is always defined 
and the latter is only defined in some special cases. 
The notion of continuity of a map is actually a very subtle one, the precise 
formulation of which we won't need. Instead we will assume you understand the 
concepts of continuity and differentiability as applied to ordinary functions, maps 
</> : R ~ R. It will then be useful to extend these notions to maps between more 
general Euclidean spaces, </> : Rm ~ Rn. A map from Rm to Rn takes an m-tuple 
(x 1, x 2, ... , xm) to an n-tuple (y1, y2, ... , yn), and can therefore be thought of 
as a collection of n functions </>; of m variables: 
1 _ ,+.l ( 1 
2 
m) 
y -'I' X ,X , ••• ,X 
2 
2 
1 
2 
m 
y = </> (x , x , ... , x ) 
(2.8) 
n _ A.n( 1 
2 
m) 
y -'I' x ,x , ... ,x 
. 
We will refer to any one of these functions as CP if its pth derivative exists and 
is continuous, and refer to the entire map </> : Rm ~ Rn as C P if each of its com-
ponent functions are at least CP. Thus a c0 map is continuous but not necessarily 
differentiable, while a C00 map is continuous and can be differentiated as many 
times as you like. Consider for example the function of one variable <f>(x) = lx31. 
This function is infinitely differentiable everywhere except at x = 0, where it is 
differentiable twice but not three times; we therefore say that it is C2. C00 maps 
are sometimes called smooth. 

x2 
(----./\ 
I 
,V 
) 
\ 
I 
', 
,,/ 
' .... __ _... open ball 
xi 
FIGURE 2.12 An open ball 
defined in Rn. 
2.2 What Is a Manifold? 
59 
We will call two sets M and N diffeomorphic if there exists a C00 map 
</> : M ~ N with a C00 inverse <J>-1 : N ~ M; the map</> is then called a 
diff eomorphism. This is the best notion we have that two spaces are "the same" 
as manifolds. For example, when we said that S0(2) was the same manifold as 
S1, we meant they were diffeomorphic. See Appendix B for more discussion. 
These basic definitions may have been familiar to you, even if only vaguely 
remembered. We will now put them to use in the rigorous definition of a mani-
fold. Unfortunately, a somewhat baroque procedure is required to formalize this 
relatively intuitive notion. We will first have to define the notion of an open set, 
on which we can put coordinate systems, and then sew the open sets together in 
an appropriate way. 
We start with the notion of an open ball, which is the set of all points x in 
Rn such that Ix - y I < r for some fixed y E Rn and r E R, where Ix - y I = 
[L; (xi - yi )2] 112. Note that this is a strict inequality-the open ball is the interior 
of an n-sphere of radius r centered at y, as shown in Figure 2.12. An open set in 
Rn is a set constructed from an arbitrary (maybe infinite) union of open balls. In 
other words, V c Rn is open if, for any y e V, there is an open ball centered at y 
that is completely inside V. Roughly speaking, an open set is the interior of some 
(n - 1)-dimensional closed surface (or the union of several such interiors). 
A chart or coordinate system consists of a subset U of a set M, along with 
a one-to-one map</> : U ~ Rn, such that the image </>(U) is open in Rn, as in 
Figure 2.13. (Any map is onto its image, so the map</>: U ~ <f>(U) is invertible 
if it is one-to-one.) We then can say that U is an open set in M. A C00 atlas is an 
indexed collection of charts { ( U a, <Pa)} that satisfies two conditions: 
1. The union of the U a is equal to M; that is, the U a cover M. 
2. The charts are smoothly sewn together. More precisely, if two charts over-
lap, UanU13 ~ 0, then the map (<f>ao<f>"j1) takes points in </>13(UanU13) C Rn 
onto an open set <Pa ( U a n U 13) c Rn, and all of these maps must be C00 
where they are defined. This should be clearer from Figure 2.14, adapted 
from Wald ( 1984 ). 
So a chart is what we normally think of as a coordinate system on some open set, 
and an atlas is a system of charts that are smoothly related on their overlaps. 
At long last, then: a C00 n-dimensional manifold (or n-manifold for short) 
is simply a set M along with a maximal atlas, one that contains every possible 
M 
FIGURE 2.13 A coordinate chart covering an open subset U of M. 

60 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
M 
1 
\<1>13 
~~ 
These maps are only 
defined on the shaded 
regions, and must be 
smooth here. 
FIGURE 2.14 Overlapping coordinate charts. 
compatible chart. We can also replace C00 by CP in all the above definitions. 
For our purposes the degree of differentiability of a manifold is not crucial; we 
will always assume that any manifold is as differentiable as necessary for the 
application under consideration. The requirement that the atlas be maximal is so 
that two equivalent spaces equipped with different atlases don't count as different 
manifolds. This definition captures in formal terms our notion of a set that looks 
locally like Rn. Of course we will rarely have to make use of the full power of the 
definition, but precision is its own reward. 
One nice thing about our definition is that it does not rely on an embed-
ding of the manifold in some higher-dimensional Euclidean space. In fact, any 
n-dimensional manifold can be embedded in R2n (Whitney's embedding theo-
rem), and sometimes we will make use of this fact, such as in our definition of the 
sphere above. (A Klein bottle is an example of a 2-manifold that cannot be em-
bedded in R3, although it can be embedded in R4 .) But it is important to recognize 
that the manifold has an individual existence independent of any embedding. It is 
not necessary to believe, for example, that four-dimensional spacetime is stuck in 
some larger space. On the other hand, it might be; we really don't know. Recent 
advances in string theory have led to the suggestion that our visible universe is 
actually a "brane" (generalization of "membrane") inside a higher-dimensional 
space. But as far as classical GR is concerned, the four-dimensional view is per-
fectly adequate. 
Why was it necessary to be so finicky about charts and their overlaps, rather 
than just covering every manifold with a single chart? Because most manifolds 
cannot be covered with just one chart. Consider the simplest example, S1. There 
is a conventional coordinate system, e : S 1 ~ R, where e = O at the top of 
the circle and wraps around to 27l'. However, in the definition of a chart we have 
required that the image 8(S1) be open in R. If we include either e = O ore = 27l', 
we have a closed interval rather than an open one; if we exclude both points, we 

s' 
FIGURE 2.15 1\vo coordi-
nate charts, which together 
cover s1. 
2.2 What Is a Manifold? 
61 
haven't covered the whole circle. So we need at least two charts, as shown in 
Figure 2. 15. 
A somewhat more complicated example is provided by S2, where once again 
no single chart will cover the manifold. A Mercator projection, traditionally used 
for world maps, misses both the North and South poles (as well as the Interna-
tional Date Line, which involves the same problem with 8 that we found for S1 .) 
Let's take S2 to be the set of points in R3 defined by (x 1 )2 + (x2)2 + (x3)2 = 1. 
We can construct a chart from an open set U 1, defined to be the sphere minus the 
north pole, via stereographic projection, illustrated in Figure 2.16. Thus, we draw 
a straight line from the north pole to the plane defined by x 3 = -1, and assign to 
the point on S2 intercepted by the line the Cartesian coordinates (y1, y 2) of the 
appropriate point on the plane. Explicitly, the map is given by 
1 
2 
3 _ 
1 
2 
( 
2x 1 
2x
2 
) 
</>1 (x ' x ' x ) = (y ' y ) = 1 - x3 ' 1 - x3 
. 
(2.9) 
Check this for yourself. Another chart (U2, </>2) is obtained by projecting from the 
south pole to the plane defined by x 3 = + 1. The resulting coordinates cover the 
sphere minus the south pole, and are given by 
1 
2 
3 -
1 2 
( 
2xl 
2x2 ) 
</>2(x 'x 'x ) = (z 'z ) = 1 + x3' 1 + x3 
. 
(2.10) 
Together, these two charts cover the entire manifold, and they overlap in the region 
-1 < x 3 < + 1. Another thing you can check is that the composition </>2 o <P} 1 is 
given by 
x3 
+ 
. 
4yi 
z' = [(yl)2+(y2)2]' 
(2.11) 
FIGURE 2.16 Defining a stereographic coordinate chart on s2 by projecting from the 
north pole down to a plane tangent to the south pole. Such a chart covers all of the sphere 
except for the north pole itself. 

62 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
R' 
FIGURE 2.17 The chain rule relates the partial derivatives of go f to those of g and/. 
and is C00 in the region of overlap. As long as we restrict our attention to this 
region, (2.11) is just what we normally think of as a change of coordinates. 
We therefore see the necessity of charts and atlases: Many manifolds cannot 
be covered with a single coordinate system. Nevertheless, it is often convenient 
to work with a single chart, and just keep track of the set of points that aren't 
included. 
One piece of conventional calculus that we will need later is the chain rule. 
Let us imagine that we have maps f : Rm ~ Rn and g : Rn ~ R1, and therefore 
the composition (go f) : Rm ~ R1, as shown in Figure 2.17. We can label points 
in each space in terms of components: xa on Rm, yb on Rn, and zc on R1, where 
the indices range over the appropriate values. The chain rule relates the partial 
derivatives of the composition to the partial derivatives of the individual maps: 
(2.12) 
This is usually abbreviated to 
(2.13) 
There is nothing illegal or immoral about using this shorthand form of the chain 
rule, but you should be able to visualize the maps that underlie the construction. 
Recall that when m = n, the determinant of the matrix ayb ;axa is called the 
Jacobian of the map, and the map is invertible whenever the Jacobian is nonzero. 

2 .3 Vectors Again 
63 
2.3 • VECTORS AGAIN 
Having constructed this groundwork, we can now proceed to introduce various 
kinds of structure on manifolds. We begin with vectors and tangent spaces. In our 
discussion of special relativity we were intentionally vague about the definition 
of vectors and their relationship to the spacetime. One point we stressed was the 
notion of a tangent space-the set of all vectors at a single point in spacetime. The 
reason for this emphasis was to remove from your minds the idea that a vector 
stretches from one point on the manifold to another, but instead is just an object 
associated with a single point. What is temporarily lost by adopting this view is 
a way to make sense of statements like "the vector points in the x direction"-if 
the tangent space is merely an abstract vector space associated with each point, 
it's hard to know what this should mean. Now it's time to fix the problem. 
Let's imagine that we wanted to construct the tangent space at a point p in a 
manifold M, using only things that are intrinsic to M (no embeddings in higher-
dimensional spaces). A first guess might be to use our intuitive knowledge that 
there are objects called "tangent vectors to curves," which belong in the tangent 
space. We might therefore consider the set of all parameterized curves through 
p-that is, the space of all (nondegenerate) maps y : R ~ M, such that pis in 
the image of y. The temptation is to define the tangent space as simply the space 
of all tangent vectors to these curves at the point p. But this is obviously cheating; 
the tangent space Tp is supposed to be the space of vectors at p, and before we 
have defined this we don't have an independent notion of what "the tangent vector 
to a curve" is supposed to mean. In some coordinate system xµ any curve through 
p defines an element of Rn specified by then real numbers dxµ /dJ.. (where >.. 
is the parameter along the curve), but this map is clearly coordinate-dependent, 
which is not what we want. 
Nevertheless we are on the right track, we just have to make things indepen-
dent of coordinates. To this end we define :F to be the space of all smooth func-
tions on M (that is, C00 maps f : M ~ R). Then we notice that each curve 
through p defines an operator on this space, the directional derivative, which 
maps f ~ df /dJ.. (at p). We will make the following claim: the tangent space Tp 
can be identified with the space of directional derivative operators along curves 
through p. To establish this idea we must demonstrate two things: first, that the 
space of directional derivatives is a vector space, and second that it is the vector 
space we want (it has the same dimensionality as M, yields a natural idea of a 
vector pointing along a certain direction, and so on). 
The first claim, that directional derivatives form a vector space, seems straight-
forward enough. Imagine two operators d / dJ.. and d / d 11 representing derivatives 
along two curves xµ(J..) and xµ(17) through p. There is no problem adding these 
and scaling by real numbers, to obtain a new operator a(d/dJ..) + b(d/d17). It is 
not immediately obvious, however, that the space closes; in other words, that the 
resulting operator is itself a derivative operator. A good derivative operator is one 
that acts linearly on functions, and obeys the conventional Leibniz (product) rule 
on products of functions. Our new operator is manifestly linear, so we need to 

64 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
FIGURE 2.18 Partial derivatives define directional derivatives along curves that keep all 
of the other coordinates constant. 
verify that it obeys the Leibniz rule. We have 
(2.14) 
As we had hoped, the product rule is satisfied, and the set of directional derivatives 
is therefore a vector space. 
Is it the vector space that we would like to identify with the tangent space? The 
easiest way to become convinced is to find a basis for the space. Consider again a 
coordinate chart with coordinates xµ. Then there is an obvious set of n directional 
derivatives at p, namely the partial derivatives aµ at p, as shown in Figure 2.18. 
Note that this is really the definition of the partial derivative with respect to xµ: 
the directional derivative along a curve defined by xv = constant for all v # µ, 
parameterized by xµ itself. We are now going to claim that the partial derivative 
operators {aµ} at p form a basis for the tangent space T p. (It follows immediately 
that Tp is n-dimensional, since that is the number of basis vectors.) To see this 
we will show that any directional derivative can be decomposed into a sum of 
real numbers times partial derivatives. This will just be the familiar expression for 
the components of a tangent vector, but it's nice to see it from the big-machinery 
approach. Consider an n-manifold M, a coordinate chart</> : M ~ Rn, a curve y : 
R ~ M, and a function f : M ~ R. This leads to the tangle of maps shown in 
Figure 2.19. If A. is the parameter along y, we want to express the vector/operator 
d /di.. in terms of the partials aµ. Using the chain rule (2.12), we have 
d 
d 
d)J = dA. (f 0 y) 
= !!_[(f 0 </>-1) 0 (</> 0 y)] 
di.. 

2.3 
Vectors Again 
65 
Joy 
- .. ,, .. :::.~..:.:3.t·JOe~"!\'1fl7.f."Af·."~~:;.t"T:~.t:Nn•G.·.-.4iC;'~~--~t?.·1f~~ 
FIGURE 2.19 Decomposing the tangent vector to a curve y : R ~ M in tenns of partial 
derivatives with respect to coordinates on M. 
d(</> o y)µ au o <t>-1) 
=----
di.. 
axµ 
dxµ 
= d>.. aµf· 
(2.15) 
The first line simply takes the informal expression on the left-hand side and 
rewrites it as an honest derivative of the function (f o y) : R ---+ R. The sec-
ond line just comes from the definition of the inverse map </>-1 (and associativity 
of the operation of composition). The third line is the formal chain rule (2.12), 
and the last line is a return to the informal notation of the start. Since the function 
f was arbitrary, we have 
d 
dxµ 
---a 
di.. -
di.. 
µ-
(2.16) 
Thus, the partials {aµ} do indeed represent a good basis for the vector space of 
directional derivatives, which we can therefore safely identify with the tangent 
space. 
Of course, the vector represented by d /di.. is one we already know; it's the 
tangent vector to the curve with parameter/... Thus (2.16) can be thought of as 
a restatement of equation ( 1.38), where we claimed that the components of the 
tangent vector were simply dxµ /di... The only difference is that we are working 
on an arbitrary manifold, and we have specified our basis vectors to bee(µ) = aµ. 
This particular basis (e(µ) = aµ) is known as a coordinate basis for Tp; it 
is the formalization of the notion of setting up the basis vectors to point along 
the coordinate axes. There is no reason why we are limited to coordinate bases 
when we consider tangent vectors. For example, the coordinate basis vectors are 
typically not normalized to unity, nor orthogonal to each other, as we shall see 

66 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
shortly. This is not a situation we can define away; on a curved manifold, a co-
ordinate basis will never be orthonormal throughout a neighborhood of any point 
where the curvature does not vanish. Of course we can define noncoordinate or-
thonormal bases, for example by giving their components in a coordinate basis, 
and sometimes this technique is useful. However, coordinate bases are very sim-
ple and natural, and we will use them almost exclusively throughout the book; for 
a look at orthonormal bases, see Appendix J. (It is standard in the study of vector 
analysis in three-dimensional Euclidean space to choose orthonormal bases rather 
than coordinate bases; you should therefore be careful when applying formulae 
from GR texts to the study of non-Cartesian coordinates in flat space.) 
One of the advantages of the rather abstract point of view we have taken toward 
vectors is that the transformation law under changes of coordinates is immediate. 
Since the basis vectors are e(µ) = aµ, the basis vectors in some new coordinate 
system xµ' are given by the chain rule (2.13) as 
axµ 
aµ'= --,aw 
axµ 
(2.17) 
We can get the transformation law for vector components by the same technique 
used in flat space, demanding that the vector V = V µaµ be unchanged by a 
change of basis. We have 
vµaµ = vµ' aµ' 
I axµ 
- vµ --a 
-
axµ' µ. 
(2.18) 
and hence, since the matrix axµ' ;axµ is the inverse of the matrix axµ ;axµ', 
axµ' 
vµ' = --vµ. 
axµ 
(2.19) 
Since the basis vectors are usually not written explicitly, the rule (2.19) for trans-
fonning components is what we call the "vector transformation law." We notice 
that it is compatible with the transformation of vector components in special rel-
ativity under Lorentz transformations, yµ' = Aµ'µ Vµ, since a Lorentz transfor-
mation is a special kind of coordinate transformation, with xµ' = Aµ' µXµ. But 
(2.19) is much more general, as it encompasses the behavior of vectors under arbi-
trary changes of coordinates (and therefore bases), not just linear transformations. 
As usual, we are trying to emphasize a somewhat subtle ontological distinction-
in principle, tensor components need not change when we change coordinates, 
they change when we change the basis in the tangent space, but we have decided 
to use the coordinates to define our basis. Therefore a change of coordinates in-
duces a change of basis, as indicated in Figure 2.20. 
Since a vector at a point can be thought of as a directional derivative operator 
along a path through that point, it should be clear that a vector field defines a map 
from smooth functions to smooth functions all over the manifold, by taking a 

2.3 Vectors Again 
67 
FIGURE 2.20 A change of coordinates xµ ~ xµ' induces a change of basis in the 
tangent space. 
derivative at each point. Given two vector fields X and Y, we can therefore define 
their commutator [X, Y] by its action on a function f(xµ): 
[X, Y](f) = X(Y(f)) - Y(X(f)). 
(2.20) 
The virtue of the abstract point of view is that, clearly, this operator is independent 
of coordinates. In fact, the commutator of two vector fields is itself a vector field: 
if f and g are functions and a and b are real numbers, the commutator is linear, 
[X, Y](af + bg) = a[X, Y](f) + b[X, Y](g), 
(2.21) 
and obeys the Leibniz rule, 
[X, Y](fg) = f[X, Y](g) + g[X, Y](f). 
(2.22) 
Both properties are straightforward to check, which is a useful exercise to do. An 
equally interesting exercise is to derive an explicit expression for the components 
of the vector field [X, Y]µ, which turns out to be 
j ix. YIµ= x•a,yµ - r•a,xµ. 
(2.23) 
By construction this is a well-defined tensor; but you should be slightly worried 
by the appearance of the partial derivatives, since partial derivatives of vectors are 
not well-defined tensors (as we discuss in the next section). Yet another fascinat-
ing exercise is to pe1fonn explicitly a coordinate transfonnation on the expression 
(2.23), to verify that all potentially nontensorial pieces cancel and the result trans-
forms like a vector field. The commutator is a special case of the Lie derivative, 
discussed in Appendix B; it is sometimes referred to as the Lie bracket. Note that 
since partials commute, the commutator of the vector fields given by the partial 
derivatives of coordinate functions, {aµ}, always vanishes. 

68 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
2.4 • TENSORS AGAIN 
Having explored the world of vectors, we continue to retrace the steps we took in 
flat space, and now consider dual vectors (one-fonns). Once again the cotangent 
space r; can be thought of as the set of linear maps w : Tp ~ R. The canonical 
example of a one-fonn is the gradient of a function f, denoted df, as in (1.52). 
Its action on a vector d /di.. is exactly the directional derivative of the function: 
( d) 
df 
df di.. 
=di... 
(2.24) 
It's tempting to ask, "why shouldn't the function f itself be considered the one-
fonn, and df /di.. its action?" The point is that a one-form, like a vector, exists 
only at the point it is defined, and does not depend on infonnation at other points 
on M. If you know a function in some neighborhood of a point, you can take its 
derivative, but not just from knowing its value at the point; the gradient, on the 
other hand, encodes precisely the infonnation necessary to take the directional 
derivative along any curve through p, fulfilling its role as a dual vector. 
You may have noticed that we defined vectors using structures intrinsic to the 
manifold (directional derivatives along curves), and used that definition to define 
one-fonns in tenns of the dual vector space. This might lead to the impression 
that vectors are somehow more fundamental; in fact, however, we could just as 
well have begun with an intrinsic definition of one-forms and used that to define 
vectors as the dual space. Roughly speaking, the space of one-forms at pis equiv-
alent to the space of all functions that vanish at p and have the same second partial 
derivatives. In fact, doing it that way is more fundamental, if anything, since we 
can provide intrinsic definitions of all q-fonns (totally antisymmetric tensors with 
q lower indices), which we will discuss in Section 2.9 (although we will not delve 
into the specifics of the intrinsic definitions). 
Just as the partial derivatives along coordinate axes provide a natural basis for 
the tangent space, the gradients of the coordinate functions xµ provide a natural 
basis for the cotangent space. Recall that in flat space we constructed a basis for 
r; by demanding that e<µ>(ecv>) = o~. Continuing the same philosophy on an 
arbitrary manifold, we find that (2.24) leads to 
axµ 
dxµ(a ) = -
= oµ 
v 
axv 
v. 
(2.25) 
Therefore the gradients {dxµ} are an appropriate set of basis one-fonns; an arbi-
trary one-fonn is expanded into components as w = wµ dxµ. 
The transfonnation properties of basis dual vectors and components follow 
from what is by now the usual procedure. We obtain, for basis one-fonns, 
(2.26) 
and for components, 

2.4 Tensors Again 
69 
(2.27) 
We will usually write the components wµ when we speak about a one-fonn w. 
Just as in flat space, a (k, /) tensor is a multilinear map from a collection of 
k dual vectors and I vectors to R. Its components in a coordinate basis can be 
obtained by acting the tensor on basis one-fonns and vectors, 
(2.28) 
This is equivalent to the expansion 
(2.29) 
The transformation law for general tensors follows the same pattern of replacing 
the Lorentz transformation matrix used in flat space with a matrix representing 
more general coordinate transfonnations: 
(2.30) 
This tensor transfonnation law is straightforward to remember, since there really 
isn't anything else it could be, given the placement of indices. 
Actually, however, it is often easier to transfonn a tensor by taking the identity 
of basis vectors and one-fonns as partial derivatives and gradients at face value, 
and simply substituting in the coordinate transformation. As an example, consider 
a symmetric (0, 2) tensor Son a two-dimensional manifold, whose components 
in a coordinate system (x 1 = x,x2 = y) are given by 
This can be written equivalently as 
S = Sµv(dxµ ® dxv) 
= (dx)2 + x2(dy)2, 
(2.31) 
(2.32) 
where in the last line the tensor product symbols are suppressed for brevity (as 
will become our custom). Now consider new coordinates 
I 
2X 
x =-
y 
y 
y' = 2 
(2.33) 

70 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
(valid, for example, when x > 0, y > 0). These can be immediately inverted to 
obtain 
x = x'y' 
y = 2y'. 
(2.34) 
Instead of using the tensor transfonnation law, we can simply use the fact that we 
know how to take derivatives to express dxµ in tenns of dxµ'. We have 
dx = y' dx' + x' dy' 
dy = 2dy'. 
(2.35) 
We need only plug these expressions directly into (2.32) to obtain (remembering 
that tensor products don't commute, so dx' dy' # dy' dx'): 
S = (y')2(dx')2 +x'y'(dx' dy' + dy' dx') + [(x')2 +4(x'y')2](dy')2, 
(2.36) 
or 
( 
(y')2 
x' y' 
) 
s I 1-
µ v -
x' y' 
(x')2 + 4(x' y')2 
· 
(2.37) 
Notice that it is still symmetric. We did not use the transfonnation law (2.30) 
directly, but doing so would have yielded the same result, as you can check. 
For the most part the various tensor operations we defined in flat space are 
unaltered in a more general setting: contraction, symmetrization, and so on. There 
are three important exceptions: partial derivatives, the metric, and the Levi-Civita 
tensor. Let's look at the partial derivative first. 
Unfortunately, the partial derivative of a tensor is not, in general, a new tensor. 
The gradient, which is the partial derivative of a scalar, is an honest (0, 1) tensor, 
as we have seen. But the partial derivative of higher-rank tensors is not tensorial, 
as we can see by considering the partial derivative of a one-fonn, aµ Wv, and 
changing to a new coordinate system: 
(2.38) 
The second tenn in the last line should not be there if aµ Wv were to transfonn as a 
(0, 2) tensor. As you can see, it arises because the derivative of the transfonnation 
matrix does not vanish, as it did for Lorentz transfonnations in flat space. 
Differentiation is obviously an important tool in physics, so we will have to 
invent new tensorial operations to take the place of the partial derivative. In fact 
we will invent several: the exterior derivative, the covariant derivative, and the Lie 
derivative. 

2.5 
The metric 
71 
2.5 • THE METRIC 
The metric tensor is such an important object in curved space that it is given a new 
symbol, gµv (while r/µv is reserved specifically for the Minkowski metric). There 
are few restrictions on the components of gµv• other than that it be a symmetric 
(0, 2) tensor. It is usually, though not always, taken to be nondegenerate, meaning 
that the determinant g = lgµ v I doesn't vanish. This allows us to define the inverse 
metric gµ v via 
gµvg 
- g 
gJ...µ -
f:µ 
va -
J...a 
- oa. 
(2.39) 
The symmetry of gµv implies that gµv is also symmetric. Just as in special rela-
tivity, the metric and its inverse may be used to raise and lower indices on tensors. 
You may be familiar with the notion of a "metric" used in the study of topology, 
where we also demand that the metric be positive-definite (no negative eigenval-
ues). The metric we use in general relativity cannot be used to define a topology, 
but it will have other uses. 
It will take some time to fully appreciate the role of the metric in all of its 
glory, but for purposes of inspiration [following Sachs and Wu (1977)] we can 
list the various uses to which gµ v will be put: ( 1) the metric supplies a notion 
of "past" and "future"; (2) the metric allows the computation of path length and 
proper time; (3) the metric determines the "shortest distance" between two points, 
and therefore the motion of test particles; (4) the metric replaces the Newtonian 
gravitational field <f>; (5) the metric provides a notion of locally inertial frames and 
therefore a sense of "no rotation"; (6) the metric determines causality, by defining 
the speed of light faster than which no signal can travel; (7) the metric replaces 
the traditional"£uclidean three-dimensional dot product of Newtonian mechanics. 
Obviously these ideas are not all completely independent, but we get some sense 
of the importance of this tensor. 
In our discussion of path lengths in special relativity we (somewhat handwav-
ingly) introduced the line element as ds 2 = r/µvdxµdxv, which was used to get 
the length of a path. Of course now that we know that dxµ is really a basis dual 
vector, it becomes natural to use the terms "metric" and "line element" inter-
changeably, and write 
(2.40) 
To be perfectly consistent we should write this as "g," and sometimes will, but 
more often than not g is used for the determinant lgµvl· For example, we know 
that the Euclidean line element in a three-dimensional space with Cartesian coor-
dinates is 
(2.41) 
We can now change to any coordinate system we choose. For example, in spheri-
cal coordinates we have 

72 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
which leads directly to 
x = r sine cos 4> 
y = r sine sin 4> 
z = rcose, 
ds 2 = dr2 + r 2 de2 + ,.2 sin2 e dq,2. 
(2.42) 
(2.43) 
Obviously the components of the metric look different than those in Cartesian 
coordinates, but all of the properties of the space remain unaltered. 
Most references are not sufficiently picky to distinguish between "dx," the 
infonnal notion of an infinitesimal displacement, and "dx ," the rigorous notion of 
a basis one-fonn given by the gradient of a coordinate function. (They also tend 
to neglect the fact that tensor products don't commute, and write expressions like 
dxdy + dydx as 2dxdy; it should be clear what is meant from the context.) In 
fact our notation "ds 2" does not refer to the differential of anything, or the square 
of anything; it's just conventional shorthand for the metric tensor, a multilinear 
map from two vectors to the real numbers. Thus, we have a set of equivalent 
expressions for the inner product of two vectors V µ and wv: 
gµv Vµ wv = g(V, W) = ds 2(V, W). 
(2.44) 
Meanwhile, "(dx)2" refers specifically to the honest (0, 2) tensor dx ® dx. 
A good example of a non-Euclidean manifold is the two-sphere, which can be 
thought of as the locus of points in R3 at distance 1 from the origin. The metric 
in the (e, 4>) coordinate system can be derived by setting r = 1 and dr = 0 in 
(2.43): 
(2.45) 
This is completely consistent with the interpretation of ds as an infinitesimal 
length, as illustrated in Figure 2.21. Anyone paying attention should at this point 
be asking, "What in the world does it mean to set dr = O? We know that dr 
is a well-defined nonvanishing one-fonn field." As occasionally happens, we are 
using sloppy language to motivate a step that is actually quite legitimate; see Ap-
pendix A for a discussion of how submanifolds inherit metrics from the spaces in 
which they are embedded. 
As we shall see, the metric tensor contains all the information we need to 
describe the curvature of the manifold (at least in what is called Riemannian ge-
ometry; we will get into some of the subtleties in the next chapter). In Minkowski 
space we can choose coordinates in which the components of the metric are con-
stant; but it should be clear that the existence of curvature is more subtle than hav-
ing the metric depend on the coordinates, since in the example above we showed 
how the metric in flat Euclidean space in spherical coordinates is a function of r 
and e. Later, we shall see that constancy of the metric components is sufficient 
for a space to be flat, and in fact there always exists a coordinate system on any 

2 .5 
The metric 
73 
FIGURE 2.21 The line element on a two-dimensional sphere. 
flat space in which the metric is constant. But we might not know how to find 
such a coordinate system, and there are many ways for a space to deviate from 
flatness; we will therefore want a more precise characterization of the curvature, 
which will be introduced later. 
A useful characterization of the metric is obtained by putting gµv into its 
canonical form. In this form the metric components become 
gµv = diag (-1, -1, ... , -1, +l, +l, ... , +l, 0, 0, ... , 0), 
(2.46) 
where "diag" means a diagonal matrix with the given elements. The signature of 
the metric is the number of both positive and negative eigenvalues; we speak of"a 
metric with signature minus-plus-plus-plus" for Minkowski space, for example. If 
any of the eigenvalues are zero, the metric is "degenerate," and the inverse metric 
will not exist; if the metric is continuous and nondegenerate, its signature will be 
the same at every point. We will always deal with continuous, nondegenerate met-
rics. If all of the signs are positive, the metric is called Euclidean or Riemannian 
(or just positive definite), while if there is a single minus it is called Lorentzian 
or pseudo-Riemannian, and any metric with some +l's and some -1 'sis called 
indefinite. (So the word Euclidean sometimes means that the space is flat, and 
sometimes doesn't, but it always means that the canonical form is strictly posi-
tive; the terminology is unfortunate but standard.) The spacetimes of interest in 
general relativity have Lorentzian metrics. 
We haven't yet demonstrated that it is always possible to put the metric into 
canonical form. In fact it is always possible to do so at some point p E M, but 
in general it will only be possible at that single point, not in any neighborhood 
of p. Actually we can do slightly better than this; it turns out that at any point p 
there exists a coordinate system xµ in which gµv takes its canonical form and the 
first derivatives aagµv all vanish (while the second derivatives a;,aagµv cannot be 

74 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
made to all vanish): 
(2.47) 
Such coordinates are known as locally inertial coordinates, and the associated 
basis vectors constitute a local Lorentz frame; we often put hats on the indices 
when we are in these special coordinates. Notice that in locally inertial coordi-
nates the metric at p looks like that of flat space to first order. This is the rigorous 
notion of the idea that "small enough regions of spacetime look like flat (Min-
kowski) space." Also, there is no difficulty in simultaneously constructing sets of 
basis vectors at every point in M such that the metric takes its canonical form~ the 
problem is that in general there will not be a coordinate system from which this 
basis can be derived. Bases of this sort are discussed in Appendix J. 
We will delay a discussion of how to construct locally inertial coordinates until 
Chapter 3. It is useful, however, to see a sketch a proof of their existence for the 
specific case of a Lorentzian metric in four dimensions. The idea is to consider 
the transformation law for the metric 
(2.48) 
and expand both sides in Taylor series in the sought-after coordinates xi.t. The 
expansion of the old coordinates xµ looks like 
( axµ ) . 
I ( 
a2 xµ ) 
. . 
xµ = -. xµ + -
. 
. 
xµ' xµ2 
axµ p 
2 axµ' axµ2 
p 
1 ( 
a3xµ 
) . . . 
+ -
. 
. 
. 
xµ'xµ 2xµ3 + · · ·, 
6 axµi axµ2axµ3 
p 
(2.49) 
with the other expansions proceeding along the same lines. [For simplicity we 
have set xµ(p) = xi.t(p) = 0.] Then, using some extremely schematic notation, 
the expansion of (2.48) to second order is 
(2.50) 
( ax ax ) 
(ax a2 x 
ax ax A 
) 
A 
= a.x a.x g P + a.x a.xa.x g + a.x a.x ag 
P x 
(
ax a3x 
a2x a2x 
ax a2x A 
axaxAA) 
AA 
+ a.x a.xa.xa.x g + a.xa.x a.xa.x g + a.x a.xa.x ag + a.x a.x aag P xx· 
We can set terms of equal order in x on each side equal to each other. There-
fore, the components gµv(p), 10 numbers in all (to d~scribe a symmetric 
two-index tensor), are determined by the matrix (axµ ;axµ)p. This is a 4 x 4 

2.5 
The metric 
75 
matrix with no constraints; thus, we are free to choose 16 numbers. Clearly this 
is enough freedom to put the IO numbers of gµv(P) into canonical form, at least 
as far as having enough degrees of freedom is concerned. (In fact there are some 
limitations-if you go through the procedure carefully, you find for example that 
you cannot change the signature.) The six remaining degrees of freedom can 
be interpreted as exactly the six parameters of the Lorentz group; we know that 
these leave the canonical form unchanged. At first order we have the derivatives 
aagµv(p), four derivatives of ten components for a total of 40 numbers. But 
looking at the right-hand side of (2.50) we see that we now have the additional 
freedom to choose (a 2xµ /axiii axii2)p. In this set of numbers there are IO inde-
pendent choices of the indices fl,1 and fl,2 (it's symmetric, since partial derivatives 
commute) and four choices ofµ,, for a total of 40 degrees of freedom. This is 
precisely the number of choices we need to determine all of the first derivatives 
of the metric, which we can therefore set to zero. At second order, however, we 
are concerned with a;,a&gµv(p); this is symmetric in i> and fJ as well asµ and 
v, for a total of 10 x 10 = 100 numbers. Our ability to make additional choices 
is contained in (a 3xµ ;axit-1 axitiaxii3)p. This is symmetric in the three lower 
indices, which gives 20 possibilities, times four for the upper index gives us 80 
degrees of freedom-20 fewer than we require to set the second derivatives of 
the metric to zero. So in fact we cannot make the second derivatives vanish; the 
deviation from flatness must therefore be measured by the 20 degrees of freedom 
representing the second derivatives of the metric tensor field. We will see later 
how this comes about, when we characterize curvature using the Riemann tensor, 
which will tum out to have 20 independent components in four dimensions. 
Locally inertial coordinates are unbelievably useful. Best of all, their useful-
ness does not generally require that we actually do the work of constructing such 
coordinates (although we will give a recipe for doing so in the next chapter), but 
simply that we know that they do exist. The usual trick is to take a question of 
physical interest, answer it in the context of locally inertial coordinates, and then 
express that answer in a coordinate-independent form. Take a very simple ex-
ample, featuring an observer with four-velocity ui.t and a rocket flying past with 
four-velocity V µ. What does the observer measure as the ordinary three-velocity 
of the rocket? In special relativity the answer is straightforward. Work in inertial 
coordinates (globally, not just locally) such that the observer is in the rest frame 
and the rocket is moving along the x-axis. Then the four-velocity of the observer 
is ui.t = (1, 0, 0, 0) and the four-velocity of the rocket is vi.t = (y, vy, 0, 0), 
where vis the three-velocity and y = I/~. 
so that v =JI - y-2. Since 
we are in flat spacetime (for the moment), we have 
(2.51) 
since 1100 = -1. The flat-spacetime answer would therefore be 
(2.52) 

76 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
Now we can go back to curved spacetime, where the metric is no longer flat. 
But at the point where the measurement is being done, we are free to use locally 
inertial coordinates, in which case the components of gµ11 are precisely those of 
r/itv· So (2.52) is still true in curved spacetime in this particular coordinate system. 
But (2.52) is a completely tensorial equation, which doesn't care what coordinate 
system we are in; therefore it is true in complete generality. This kind of procedure 
will prove its value over and over. 
2.6 • AN EXPANDING UNIVERSE 
A simple example of a nontrivial Lorentzian geometry is provided by a four-
dimensional cosmological spacetime with metric 
(2.53) 
This describes a universe for which "space at a fixed moment of time" is a flat 
three-dimensional Euclidean space, which is expanding as a function of time. 
Worldlines that remain at constant spatial coordinates xi are said to be comoving; 
similarly, we denote a region of space that expands along with boundaries defined 
by fixed spatial coordinates as a "comoving volume." Since the metric describes 
(distance)2, the relative distance between comoving points is growing as a(t) in 
this spacetime; the function a is called the scale factor. This is a special case 
of a Robertson-Walker metric, one in which spatial slices are geometrically flat; 
there are other cases for which spatial slices are curved (as we will discuss in 
Chapter 8). But our interest right now is not in where this metric came from, but 
in using it as a playground to illustrate some of the ideas we have developed. 
1}'pical solutions for the scale factor are power laws, 
O<q<l. 
(2.54) 
Actually there are all sorts of solutions, but these are some particularly simple and 
relevant ones. A matter-dominated flat universe satisfies q = ~, while a radiation-
dominated flat universe satisfies q = ~. An obvious feature is that the scale factor 
goes to zero as t ~ 0, and along with it the spatial components of the metric. 
This is a coordinate-dependent statement, and in principle there might be another 
coordinate system in which everything looks finite; in this case, however, t = 0 
represents a true singularity of the geometry (the "Big Bang"), and should be 
excluded from the manifold. The range of the t coordinate is therefore 
0 < t < 00. 
(2.55) 
Our spacetime comes to an end at t = 0. 
Light cones in this curved geometry are defined by null paths, those for which 
d s2 = O. We can draw a spacetime diagram by considering null paths for which 

2.6 
An Expanding Universe 
77 
y and z are held constant; then 
0 = -dt2 + t2q d.x 2, 
(2.56) 
which implies 
dx 
- = ±t-q. 
dt 
(2.57) 
You might worry that, after all that fuss about dxµ being a basis one-fonn and not 
a differential, we have sloppily "divided by dt 2" to go from (2.56) to (2.57). The 
truth is much more respectable. What we actually did was to take the (0, 2) tensor 
defined by (2.56), which takes two vectors and returns a real number, and act it on 
two copies of the vector V = (dxµ /dJ..)aµ, the tangent vector to a curve xµ (J..). 
Consider just the dt2 piece acting on V: 
dt2(V, V) = (dt ® dt)(V, V) = dt(V) · dt(V), 
where the notation dt(V) refers to a real number that we compute as 
dt(V) = dt ( d:: a,,) 
= dxµ dt (a ) 
dJ.. 
µ 
dxµ at 
= dJ.. axµ 
dt 
= d>..' 
(2.58) 
(2.59) 
where in the third line we have invoked (2.25). Following the same procedure 
with d.x 2, we find that (2.56) implies 
0= -
-
+t2q 
-
( dt )
2 
(dx)2 
dJ.. 
dJ.. 
' 
from which (2.57) follows via the one-dimensional chain rule, 
dx 
dx dJ.. 
dt = dJ.. dt 
(2.60) 
(2.61) 
The lesson should be clear: expressions such as (2.56) describe well-defined ten-
sors, but manipulation of the basis one-fonns as if they were simply "differentials" 
does get you the right answer. (At least, most of the time; it's a good idea to keep 
the more fonnal definitions in mind.) 
We can solve (2.57) to obtain 
t = (1 - q) 1/0-q>(±x - xo) 1/(1-q), 
(2.62) 

78 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
-· 
FIGURE 2.22 Spacetime diagram for a flat Robertson-Walker universe with a(t) ex: tq, 
for 0 < q < I. The dashed line at the bottom of the figure represents the singularity at 
t = 0. Since light cones are tangent to the singularity, the pasts of two points may be 
nonoverlapping. 
where xo is a constant of integration. These curves define the light cones of our 
expanding universe, as plotted in Figure 2.22. Since we have assumed 0 < q < 1, 
the light cones are tangent to the singularity at t = 0. A crucial feature of this 
geometry is that the light cones of two points need not intersect in the past; this is 
in contrast to Minkowski space, for which the light cones of any two points always 
intersect in both the past and future. We say that every event defines an "horizon," 
outside of which there exist worldlines that can have had no influence on what 
happens at that event. This is because, since nothing can travel faster than light, 
each point can only be influenced by events that are either on, or in the interior 
of, its past light cone (indeed, we refer to the past light cone plus its interior as 
simply "the past" of an event). Two events outside each others' horizons are said 
to be "out of causal contact." These notions will be explored more carefully in the 
next section, as well as in Chapters 4 and 8. 
2.7 • CAUSALITY 
Many physical questions can be cast as an initial-value problem: given the state 
of a system at some moment in time, what will be the state at some later time? 
The fact that such questions have definite answers is due to causality, the idea that 
future events can be understood as consequences of initial conditions plus the laws 
of physics. Initial-value problems are as common in GR as in Newtonian physics 
or special relativity; however, the dynamical nature of the spacetime background 
introduces new ways in which an initial-value formulation could break down. 
Here we very briefly introduce some of the concepts used in understanding how 
causality works in GR. 

2.7 Causality 
79 
We will look at the problem of evolving matter fields on a fixed background 
spacetime, rather than the evolution of the metric itself. Our guiding principle will 
be that no signals can travel faster than the speed of light; therefore information 
will only flow along timelike or null trajectories (not necessarily geodesics). Since 
it is sometimes useful to distinguish between purely timelike paths and ones that 
are merely non-spacelike, we define a causal curve to be one which is timelike or 
null everywhere. Then, given any subset Sofa manifold M, we define the causal 
future of S, denoted J + ( S), to be the set of points that can be reached from 
S by following a future-directed causal curve; the chronological future J+(S) 
is the set of points that can be reached by following a future-directed timelike 
curve. Note that a curve of zero length is chronal but not causal; therefore, a 
point p will always be in its own causal future J+(p), but not necessarily its own 
chronological future J+(p) (although it could be, as we mention below). The 
causal past 1- and chronological past 1- are defined analogously. 
A subset S c M is called achronal if no two points in S are connected by a 
timelike curve; for example, any edgeless spacelike hypersurface in Minkowski 
spacetime is achronal. Given a closed achronal set S, we define the future domain 
of dependence of S, denoted v+ (S), as the set of all points p such that every past-
moving inextendible causal curve through p must intersect S. (lnextendible just 
means that the curve goes on forever, not ending at some finite point; closed means 
that the complement of the set is an open set.) Elements of S itself are elements 
of D+(S). The past domain of dependence v-(S) is defined by replacing future 
with past. Generally speaking, some points in M will be in one of the domains 
of dependence, and some will be outside; we define the boundary of v+(S) to 
be the future Cauchy horizon H+(S), and likewise the boundary of v-(S) to 
be the past Cauchy horizon H- (S). You can convince yourself that they are both 
null surfaces. The domains of dependence and Cauchy horizons are illustrated in 
Figure 2.23, in which Sis taken to be a connected subset of an achronal surface l;. 
FIGURE 2.23 A connected subset Sofa spacelike surface I:, along with its causal struc-
ture. D±(S) denotes the future/past domain of dependence of S, and H±(S) the future/past 
Cauchy horizon. 

80 
FIGURE 2.24 The surface 
~ is everywhere spacelike but 
lies in the past of the past light 
cone of the point p; its do-
main of dependence is not all 
of the spacetime. 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
The usefulness of these definitions should be apparent; if nothing moves faster 
than light, signals cannot propagate outside the light cone of any point p. There-
fore, if every curve that remains inside this light cone must intersect S, then in-
formation specified on S should be sufficient to predict what the situation is at p; 
that is, initial data for matter fields given on S can be used to solve for the value 
of the fields at p. The set of all points for which we can predict what happens by 
knowing what happens on Sis the union D(S) = v+ (S) u v-(S), called simply 
the domain of dependence. A closed achronal surface l; is said to be a Cauchy 
surface if the domain of dependence D(l;) is the entire manifold; from informa-
tion given on a Cauchy surface, we can predict what happens throughout all of 
spacetime. If a spacetime has a Cauchy surface (which it may not), it is said to be 
globally hyperbolic. 
Any set l; that is closed, achronal, and has no edge, is called a partial Cauchy 
surface. A partial Cauchy surface can fail to be an actual Cauchy surface either 
through its own fault, or through a fault of the spacetime. One possibility is that 
we have just chosen a "bad" hypersurface (although it is hard to give a general 
prescription for when a hypersurface is bad in this sense). Consider Minkowski 
space, and an edgeless spacelike hypersurface l;, which remains to the past of the 
light cone of some point, as in Figure 2.24. In this case l; is an achronal surface, 
but it is clear that v+(l;) ends at the light cone, and we cannot use information 
on l; to predict what happens throughout Minkowski space. Of course, there are 
other surfaces we could have picked for which the domain of dependence would 
have been the entire manifold, so this doesn't worry us too much. 
A somewhat more nontrivial way for a Cauchy horizon to arise is through 
the appearance of closed timelike curves. In Newtonian physics, causality is en-
forced by the relentless forward march of an absolute notion of time. In spe-
cial relativity things are even more restrictive; not only must you move forward 
in time, but the speed of light provides a limit on how swiftly you may move 
through space (you must stay within your forward light cone). In general relativ-
ity it remains true that you must stay within your forward light cone; however, 
this becomes strictly a local notion, as globally the curvature of spacetime might 
"tilt" light cones from one place to another. It becomes possible in principle for 
light cones to be sufficiently distorted that an observer can move on a forward-
directed path that is everywhere timelike and yet intersects itself at a point in its 
"past"-this is a closed timelike curve. 
As a simple example, consider a two-dimensional geometry with coordinates 
{ t, x}, such that points with coordinates (t, x) and (t, x + 1) are identified. The 
topology is thus Rx S1. We take the metric to be 
ds 2 = - cos(A.)dt 2 - sin(A.)[dt dx + dx dt] + cos(A.)dx2, 
(2.63) 
where 
A.= coC1 t, 
(2.64) 

FIGURE 2.26 A singular-
ity at p removes any points in 
its future from the domain of 
dependence of a surface ~ in 
its past. 
2.7 Causality 
identify 
---4',-------- '~~---
closed 
timelike curve 
81 
FIGURE 2.25 A cylindrical spacetime with closed timelike curves. The light cones pro-
gressively tilt, such that the domain of dependence of the surface ~ fills the lower part of 
the spacetime, but comes to an end when the closed timelike curves come into existence. 
which goes from A(t = -oo) = 0 to /..(t = oo) = 1r. This metric doesn't 
represent any special famous solution to general relativity, it was just cooked up 
to provide an interesting example of closed timelike curves; but there is a well-
known example known as Misner space, with similar properties. In the spacetime 
defined by (2.63), the light cones progressively tilt as you go forward in time, as 
shown in Figure 2.25. Fort < 0, the light cones point forward, and causality is 
maintained. Once t > 0, however, x becomes the timelike coordinate, and it is 
possible to travel on a timelike trajectory that wraps around the S 1 and comes 
back to itself; this is a closed timelike curve. If we had specified a surface l; 
to this past of this point, then none of the points in the region containing closed 
timelike curves are in the domain of dependence of l;, since the closed timelike 
curves themselves do not intersect l;. There is thus necessarily a Cauchy horizon 
at the surface t = 0. This is obviously a worse problem than the previous one, 
since a well-defined initial value problem does not seem to exist in this space-
time. 
A final example is provided by the existence of singularities, points that are not 
in the manifold even though they can be reached by traveling along a geodesic 
for a finite distance. Typically these occur when the curvature becomes infinite 
at some point; if this happens, the point can no longer be said to be part of the 
spacetime. Such an occurrence can lead to the emergence of a Cauchy horizon, as 
depicted in Figure 2.26-a point p, which is in the future of a singularity, cannot 
be in the domain of dependence of a hypersurface to the past of the singularity, 
because there will be curves from p that simply end at the singularity. 

82 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
These obstacles can also arise in the initial value problem for GR, when we try 
to evolve the metric itself from initial data. However, they are of different degrees 
of troublesomeness. The possibility of picking a "bad" initial hypersmface does 
not arise very often, especially since most solutions are found globally (by solv-
ing Einstein's equation throughout spacetime). The one situation in which you 
have to be careful is in numerical solution of Einstein's equation, where a bad 
choice of hypersmface can lead to numerical difficulties, even if in principle a 
complete solution exists. Closed timelike curves seem to be something that GR 
works hard to avoid-there are certainly solutions that contain them, but evolution 
from generic initial data does not usually produce them. Singularities, on the other 
hand, are practically unavoidable. The simple fact that the gravitational force is 
always attractive tends to pull matter together, increasing the curvature, and gen-
erally leading to some sort of singularity. Apparently we must learn to live with 
this, although there is some hope that a well-defined theory of quantum gravity 
will eliminate (or at least teach us how to deal with) the singularities of classical 
GR. 
2.8 • TENSOR DENSITIES 
Tensors possess a compelling beauty and simplicity, but there are times when it 
is useful to consider nontensorial objects. Recall that in Chapter 1 we introduced 
the completely antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol, defined as 
{ 
+1 if µ,1µ,2 · · · /J,n is an even permutation ofOl · · · (n - 1), 
Eµ 1µi···µ,, = 
-1 if µ,1µ,2 · · · /J,n is an odd permutation of 01 · · · (n - 1), 
0 
otherwise. 
(2.65) 
By definition, the Levi-Civita symbol has the components specified above in any 
coordinate system (at least, in any right-handed coordinate system; switching the 
handedness multiplies the components of €µ 1µ2···µ,, by an overall minus sign). 
This is called a "symbol," of course, because it is not a tensor; it is defined not to 
change under coordinate transformations. We were only able to treat it as a tensor 
in inertial coordinates in flat spacetime, since Lorentz transformations would have 
left the components invariant anyway. Its behavior can be related to that of an 
ordinary tensor by first noting that, given any n x n matrix Mµ µ', the determinant 
IMI obeys 
(2.66) 
This is just a streamlined expression for the determinant of any matrix, completely 
equivalent to the usual formula in terms of matrices of cofactors. (You can check it 
for yourself for 2 x 2 or 3 x 3 matrices.) It follows that, setting Mµ µ' = axµ ;axµ', 
we have 

2 .8 
Tensor Densities 
83 
(2.67) 
where we have also used the facts that the matrix axµ' ;axµ is the inverse of 
axµ ;axµ', and that the determinant of an inverse matrix is the inverse of the 
determinant, I M-11 = IM 1-1 . So the Levi-Ci vita symbol transforms in a way 
close to the tensor transformation law, except for the determinant out front. Ob-
jects transforming in this way are known as tensor densities. Another example is 
given by the determinant of the metric, g = lgµvl· It's easy to check, by taking 
the determinant of both sides of (2.48), that under a coordinate transformation we 
get 
(2.68) 
Therefore g is also not a tensor; it transforms in a way similar to the Levi-Civita 
symbol, except that the Jacobian is raised to the -2 power. The power to which 
the Jacobian is raised is known as the weight of the tensor density; the Levi-Ci vita 
symbol is a density of weight 1, while g is a (scalar) density of weight - 2. 
However, we don't like tensor densities as much as we like tensors. There 
is a simple way to convert a density into an honest tensor-multiply by lglw/2, 
where w is the weight of the density (the absolute value signs are there because 
g < 0 for Lorentzian metrics). The result will transform according to the tensor 
transformation law. Therefore, for example, we can define the Levi-Civita tensor 
as 
(2.69) 
Since this is a real tensor, we can raise indices and so on. Sometimes people 
define a version of the Levi-Civita symbol with upper indices, €µ 1µ 2···µ,,, whose 
components are numerically equal to sgn(g)€µ 1µ2···µ,,• where sgn(g) is the sign 
of the metric determinant. This turns out to be a density of weight -1, and is 
related to the tensor with upper indices (obtained by using gµ v to raise indices on 
€µ1µ2···µ,,) by 
(2.70) 
Something you often end up doing is contracting p indices on €µ 1µ 2···µ,, with 
€µ 1µ 2···µ,,; the result can be expressed in terms of an antisymmetrized product of 
Kronecker deltas as 
(2.71) 
wheres is the number of negative eigenvalues of the metric (for Lorentzian sig-
nature with our conventions, s = 1). The most common example is p = n - 1, 

84 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
for which we have 
(2.72) 
2.9 • DIFFERENTIAL FORMS 
Let us now introduce a special class of tensors, known as differential forms (or 
just forms). A differential p-form is simply a (0, p) tensor that is completely an-
tisymmetric. Thus, scalars are automatically 0-forms, and dual vectors are auto-
matically one-forms (thus explaining this terminology from before). We also have 
the the 4-form € µ vpa . The space of all p-forms is denoted AP, and the space of all 
p-form fields over a manifold Mis denoted AP(M). A semi-straightforward ex-
ercise in combinatorics reveals that the number of linearly independent p-forms 
on an n-dimensional vector space is n!/(p!(n - p)!). So at a point on a four-
dimensional spacetime there is one linearly independent 0-form, four 1-forms, 
six 2-forms, four 3-forms, and one 4-form. There are no p-forms for p > n, since 
all of the components will automatically be zero by antisymmetry. 
Why should we care about differential forms? This question is hard to answer 
without some more work, but the basic idea is that forms can be both differentiated 
and integrated, without the help of any additional geometric structure. We will 
glance briefly at both of these operations. 
Given a p-form A and a q-form B, we can fonn a (p + q)-form known as the 
wedge product A A B by talcing the antisymmetrized tensor product: 
(p + q)! 
(AAB)µi···µp+q = 
I 
I 
A[µ1···µpBµp+1···µp+q]• 
p. q. 
Thus, for example, the wedge product of two 1-forms is 
(A A B)µv = 2A[µBvJ = AµBv -
AvBw 
Note that 
A AB= (- l)pq BA A, 
(2.73) 
(2.74) 
(2.75) 
so you can alter the order of a wedge product if you are careful with signs. We are 
free to suppress indices when using forms, since we know that all of the indices 
are downstairs and the tensors are completely antisymmetric. 
· 
The exterior derivative d allows us to differentiate p-form fields to obtain 
(p + 1)-form fields. It is defined as an appropriately normalized, antisymmetrized 
partial derivative: 
(2.76) 
The simplest example is the gradient, which is the exterior derivative of a 0-form: 
(2.77) 

2.9 
Differential forms 
85 
Exterior derivatives obey a modified version of the Leibniz rule when applied to 
the product of a p-form wand a q-form 17: 
d(w A 17) = (dw) A 11 + (- l)P w A (d17). 
(2.78) 
You are encouraged to prove this yourself. 
The reason why the exterior derivative deserves special attention is that it is 
a tensor, even in curved spacetimes, unlike its cousin the partial derivative. For 
p = 1 we can see this from the transformation law for the partial derivative of a 
one form, (2.38); the offending nontensorial term can be written 
(2.79) 
This expression is symmetric inµ,' and v', since partial derivatives commute. But 
the exterior derivative is defined to be the antisymmetrized partial derivative, so 
this term vanishes (the antisymmetric part of a symmetric expression is zero). We 
are then left with the correct tensor transformation law; extension to arbitrary p is 
straightforward. So the exterior derivative is a legitimate tensor operator; it is not, 
however, an adequate substitute for the partial derivative, since it is only defined 
on forms. In the next chapter we will define a covariant derivative, which is closer 
to what we might think of as the extension of the partial derivative to arbitrary 
manifolds. 
Another interesting fact about exterior differentiation is that, for any form A, 
d(dA) = 0, 
(2.80) 
which is often written d2 = 0. This identity is a consequence of the definition 
of d and the fact that partial derivatives commute, aaa/3 = a13aa (acting on any-
thing). This leads us to the following mathematical aside, just for fun. We define a 
p-form A to be closed if dA = 0, and exact if A =dB for some (p - 1)-form B. 
Obviously, all exact forms are closed, but the converse is not necessarily true. 
On a manifold M, closed p-forms comprise a vector space ZP(M), and exact 
forms comprise a vector space BP(M). Define a new vector space, consisting of 
elements called cohomology classes, as the closed forms modulo the exact forms: 
ZP(M) 
HP(M)=--. 
BP(M) 
(2.81) 
That is, two closed forms [elements of Z P ( M)] define the same cohomology class 
[elements of HP(M)] if they differ by an exact form [an element of BP(M)]. 
Miraculously, the dimensionality of the cohomology spaces HP ( M) depends only 
on the topology of the manifold M. Minkowski space is topologically equivalent 
to R4, which is uninteresting, so that all of the HP(M) vanish for p > 0; for 
p = 0 we have H0 ( M) = R. Therefore in Minkowski space all closed forms 
are exact except for zero-forms; zero-forms can't be exact since there are no -1-

86 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
forms for them to be the exterior derivative of. It is striking that information about 
the topology can be extracted in this way, which essentially involves the solutions 
to differential equations. 
The final operation on differential forms we will introduce is Hodge duality. 
We define the Hodge star operator on an n-dimensional manifold as a map from 
p-forms to (n - p)-forms, 
(2.82) 
mapping A to "A dual." Unlike our other operations on forms, the Hodge dual 
does depend on the metric of the manifold [which should be obvious, since we 
had to raise some indices on the Levi-Civita tensor in order to define (2.82)). 
Applying the Hodge star twice returns either plus or minus the original form: 
**A= (-l)s+p(n-p) A, 
(2.83) 
wheres is the number of minus signs in the eigenvalues of the metric. 
Two facts on the Hodge dual: First, "duality" in the sense of Hodge is distinct 
from the relationship between vectors and dual vectors. The idea of "duality" is 
that of a transformation from one space to another with the property that doing 
the transformation twice gets you back to the original space. It should be clear 
that this holds true for both the duality between vectors and one-forms, and the 
Hodge duality between p-fonns and (n - p)-forms. A requirement of dualities 
between vector spaces is that the original and transformed spaces have the same 
dimensionality; this is true of the spaces of p- and (n - p)-forms. 
The second fact concerns differential forms in three-dimensional Euclidean 
space. The Hodge dual of the wedge product of two I-forms gives another I-
form: 
(2.84) 
(All of the prefactors cancel.) Since I-forms in Euclidean space are just like vec-
tors, we have a map from two vectors to a single vector. You should convince 
yourself that this is just the conventional cross product, and that the appearance of 
the Levi-Civita tensor explains why the cross product changes sign under parity 
(interchange of two coordinates, or equivalently basis vectors). This is why the 
cross product only exists in three dimensions-because only in three dimensions 
do we have an interesting map from two dual vectors to a third dual vector. 
Electrodynamics provides an especially compelling example of the use of dif-
ferential forms. From the definition of the exterior derivative, it is clear that equa-
tion (l.89) can be concisely expressed as closure of the two-form Fµv: 
dF=O. 
(2.85) 
Does this mean that F is also exact? Yes; as we've noted, Minkowski space is 
topologically trivial, so all closed forms are exact. There must therefore be a one-

2.9 
Differential forms 
87 
form Aµ such that 
F=dA. 
(2.86) 
This one-form is the familiar vector potential of electromagnetism, with the 0 
component given by the scalar potential, Ao = <f>, as we discussed in Chapter 1. 
Gauge invariance is expressed by the observation that the theory is invariant under 
A ~ A + dA. for some scalar (zero-form) A., and this is also immediate from the 
relation (2.86). The other one of Maxwell's equations, (1.88), 
(2.87) 
where the current one-form J is just the current four-vector with index lowered. 
Filling in the details is left for you, as good practice converting from differential-
form notation to ordinary index notation. 
Hodge duality is intimately related to a fascinating feature of certain field the-
ories: duality between strong and weak coupling. It's hard not to notice that the 
equations (2.85) and (2.87) look very similar. Indeed, if we set J µ = 0, the equa-
tions are invariant under the "duality transformations" 
(2.88) 
We therefore say that the vacuum Maxwell's equations are duality invariant, while 
the invariance is spoiled in the presence of charges. We might imagine that mag-
netic as well as electric monopoles existed in nature; then we could add a magnetic 
current term *JM to the right-hand side of (2.85), and the equations would be in-
variant under duality transformations plus the additional replacement J # 
JM. 
(Of course a nonzero right-hand side to (2.85) is inconsistent with F = dA, so this 
idea only works if Aµ is not a fundamental variable.) Dirac considered the idea 
of magnetic monopoles and showed that a necessary condition for their existence 
is that the fundamental monopole charge be inversely proportional to the funda-
mental electric charge. Now, the fundamental electric charge is a small number; 
electrodynamics is weakly coupled, which is why perturbation theory is so re-
markably successful in quantum electrodynamics (QED). But Dirac's condition 
on magnetic charges implies that a duality transformation takes a theory of weakly 
coupled electric charges to a theory of strongly coupled magnetic monopoles (and 
vice-versa). Unfortunately monopoles don't fit easily into ordinary electromag-
netism, so these ideas aren't directly applicable; but some sort of duality sym-
metry may exist in certain theories (such as supersymmetric nonabelian gauge 
theories). If it did, we would have the opportunity to analyze a theory that looked 
strongly coupled (and therefore hard to solve) by looking at the weakly coupled 
dual version; this is exactly what happens in certain theories. The hope is that 
these techniques will allow us to explore various phenomena that we know ex-
ist in strongly coupled quantum field theories, such as confinement of quarks in 
hadrons. 

88 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
2.10 • INTEGRATION 
~,.~rrr.HW; 
u 
FIGURE 
2.27 
An 
in-
finitesimal 
n-dimensional 
region, 
represented 
as 
a 
parallelepiped, is defined by 
an ordered set of 11 vectors, 
shown here as U, V, and W. 
An important appearance of both tensor densities and differential forms is in inte-
gration on manifolds. You have probably been exposed to the fact that in ordinary 
calculus on Rn the volume element dn x picks up a factor of the Jacobian under 
change of coordinates: 
(2.89) 
There is actually a beautiful explanation of this formula from the point of view 
of differential forms, which arises from the following fact: on an n-dimensional 
manifold M, the integrand is properly understood as an n-fonn. In other words, 
an integral over an n-dimensional region l; c Mis a map from an n-form field w 
to the real numbers: 
h: w~R. 
(2.90) 
Such a statement may seem strange, but it certainly looks familiar in the context of 
line integrals. In one dimension any one-form can be written w = w(x)dx, where 
the first w is a one-form and w(x) denotes the (single) component function. And 
indeed, we write integrals in one dimension as f w(x)dx; you may be used to 
thinking of the symbol dx as an infinitesimal distance, but it is more properly a 
differential form. 
To make this more clear, consider more than one dimension. If we are claiming 
that the integrand is an n-form, we need to explain in what sense it is antisym-
metric, and for that matter why it is a (0, n) tensor (a linear map from a set of n 
vectors to R) at all. We all agree that integrals can be written as f f (x) d µ,, where 
f (x) is a scalar function on the manifold and d µ, is the volume element, or mea-
sure. The role of the volume element is to assign to every (infinitesimal) region 
an (infinitesimal) real number, namely the volume of that region. A nice feature 
of infinitesimal regions (as opposed to ones of finite size) is that they can be taken 
to be rectangular parallelepipeds-in the presence of curvature we have no clear 
sense of what a "rectangular parallelepiped" is supposed to mean, but the effects 
of curvature can be neglected when we work in infinitesimal regions. Clearly we 
are not being rigorous here, but our present purpose is exclusively motivational. 
As shown in Figure 2.27 (in which we take our manifold to be three-dimen-
sional for purposes of illustration), a parallelepiped is specified by n vectors that 
define its edges. Our volume element, then, should be a map from n vectors to the 
real numbers: dµ,(U, V, W) E R. (Actually it should be a map from infinitesimal 
vectors to infinitesimal numbers, but such a map also will take finite vectors to fi-
nite numbers.) It's also clear that it should be linearly scalable by real numbers; if 
we change the length of any of the defining vectors, the volume changes accord-
ingly: dµ,(aU, bV, cW) = abcdµ,(U, V, W). Linearity with respect to adding 
vectors is not so obvious, but you can convince yourself by drawing pictures. 

2. 1 0 Integration 
89 
Therefore our volume element is an honest (0, n) tensor. Why antisymmetric? Be-
cause we are defining an oriented element; if two of the vectors are interchanged 
we should get a volume of the same magnitude but opposite sign. (If this is not ob-
vious, you should at least convince yourself that the volume should vanish when 
two vectors are collinear.) Thus, volume elements inn dimensions are in a very 
real sense n-forms. 
To actually do calculations, we need to make these ideas more concrete, which 
turns out to be straightforward. The essential insight is to identify the naive vol-
ume element dn x as an antisymmetric tensor density constructed with wedge 
products: 
(2.91) 
The expression on the right-hand side can be misleading, because it looks like 
a tensor (an n-form, actually) but is really a density. Certainly if we have two 
functions f and g on M, then df and dg are one-forms, and df A dg is a two-
form. But the functions appearing in (2.91) are the coordinate functions them-
selves, so when we change coordinates we replace the one-forms dxµ with a 
new set dxµ'. You see the funny business-ordinarily a coordinate transforma-
tion changes components, but not one-forms themselves. The right-hand side of 
(2.91) is a coordinate-dependent object (a tensor density, to be precise) which, in 
the xµ coordinate system, acts like ctx0 A · · · A dxn- l. Let's see this in action. 
First notice that the definition of the wedge product allows us to write 
ctx0 A ... A dxn-l = ...!._€ 
dxµ 1 A ... A dxµ,, 
n! µ1 .. ·µ,, 
, 
(2.92) 
since both the wedge product and the Levi-Civita symbol are completely antisym-
metric. (The factor of I/ n ! takes care of the overcounting introduced by summing 
over permutations of the indices.) Under a coordinate transformation€µ 1 ... µ,, stays 
the same, while the one-forms change according to (2.26), leading to 
Multiplying by the Jacobian on both sides and using (2.91) and (2.92) recovers 
(2.89). 
It is clear that the naive volume element dn x transforms as a density, not a 
tensor, but it is straightforward to construct an invariant volume element by mul-
tiplying by .Jiij: 
(2.94) 
which is of course just (n !)- 1Eµ 1 ... µ,, dxµ 1 A· · ·A dxµ,,. In the interest of simplicity 
we will usually write the volume element as .Jiij dn x, rather than as the explicit 

90 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
wedge product: 
(2.95) 
it will be enough to keep in mind that it's supposed to be an n-form. In fact, the 
volume element is no more or less than the Levi-Civita tensor E µ i ···µ,,; restoring 
the explicit basis one-forms, we see 
I 
= _L: 
dxµI 
A ••• Adxµll 
I <=µI ... µ,, 
" 
" 
n. 
= ~.jjgj Eµ1···µ,,dxµ 1 A ... A dxµ,, 
n. 
= Ji8T dxo A ... A c1xn-1 
= .jjgjdnx. 
(2.96) 
Notice that the combinatorial factors introduced by the epsilon tensor precisely 
cancel those from switching from tensor products to wedge products, which is 
only allowed because the epsilon tensor automatically antisymmetrizes. 
The punch line, then, is simple: the integral I of a scalar function </> over an 
n-manifold is written as 
(2.97) 
Given explicit forms for</> (x) and .Jjgj, such an integral can be directly evaluated 
by the usual methods of multivariable calculus. The metric determinant serves to 
automatically take care of the correct transformation properties. You will some-
times see the more abstract notation 
I= J 
<f>(x)E; 
(2.98) 
given (2.96), these two versions convey the same content. 
2.11 • EXERCISES 
1. Just because a manifold is topologically nontlivial doesn't necessaiily mean it can't be 
covered with a single chart. In contrast to the circle S1, show that the infinite cylinder 
R x S 1 can be covered with just one chart, by explicitly constructing the map. 
2. By clever choice of coordinate charts, can we make R2 look like a one-dimensional 
manifold? Can we make R ~ look like a two-dimensional manifold? If so, explicitly 
construct an appropriate atlas, and if not, explain why not. The point of this problem 

2. 11 
Exercises 
91 
is to provoke you to think deeply about what a manifold is; it can't be answered rig-
orously without going into more details about topological spaces. In particular, you 
might have to forget that you already know a definition of "open set" in the original 
R2 or R 1, and define them as being appropriately inherited from the R 1 or R2 to which 
they are being mapped. 
3. Show that the two-dimensional torus T2 is a manifold, by explicitly constructing an 
appropriate atlas. (Not a maximal one, obviously.) 
4. Verify the claims made about the conunutator of two vector fields at the end of Section 
2.3 (lineaiity, Leibniz, component fonnula, transfonnation as a vector field). 
5. Give an example of two linearly independent, nowhere-vanishing vector fields in R2 
whose conunutator does not vanish. Notice that these fields provide a basis for the 
tangent space at each point, but it cannot be a coordinate basis since the conunutator 
doesn't vanish. 
6. Consider R3 as a manifold with the flat Euclidean metric, and coordinates {x, y, z}. 
Introduce spherical polar coordinates {r, 8, <Pl related to {x, y, z} by 
so that the metlic takes the fonn 
x = r sin8 cos<P 
y = r sin8 sin<P 
z = rcos8, 
ds2 = dr2 + r 2d82 + r 2 sin2 8dq,2. 
(a) A particle moves along a parameterized curve given by 
x(A) =cos A, 
y(A) =sin A, 
z(A) =A. 
Express the path of the curve in the {r, 8, <P} system. 
(2.99) 
(2.100) 
(2.101) 
(b) Calculate the components of the tangent vector to the curve in both the Cartesian 
and spherical polar coordinate systems. 
7. Prolate spheroidal coordinates can be used to simplify the Kepler problem in celestial 
mechanics. They are related to the usual cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) of Euclidean 
three-space by 
x = sinh x sin8 coscp, 
y = sinhx sin8 sincp, 
z = cosh x cos8. 
Restrict your attention to the plane y = 0 and answer the following questions. 
(a) What is the coordinate transfonnation matrix axµ ;axv' relating (x, z) to (X, 8)? 
(b) What does the line element ds2 look like in prolate spheroidal coordinates? 
8. Verify (2.78): for the exterior derivative of a product of a p-fonn wand a q-fonn YJ, 
we have 
d(w A YJ) = (dw) A YJ + (-l)Pw A (dYJ). 
(2.102) 

92 
Chapter 2 Manifolds 
9. In Euclidean three-space, suppose *F = q sin 8 dB A d</J. 
(a) Evaluate d * F = *'. 
(b) What is the two-fonn F equal to? 
(c) What are the electric and magnetic fields equal to for this solution? 
(d) Evaluate f v d*F, where Vis a ball of radius R in Euclidean three space. 
10. Consider Maxwell's equations, dF = 0, d*F = *'·in 2-dimensional spacetime. 
Explain why one of the two sets of equations can be discarded. Show that the electro-
magnetic field can be expressed in tenns of a scalar field. Write out the field equations 
for this scalar field in component fonn. 
11. There are a lot of motivational words attached here to what is a very simple problem; 
don't get too distracted. In ordinary electromagnetism with point particles, the part 
of the action which represents the coupling of the gauge-potential one-fonn A< 1) to a 
charged particle can be written S = J 
Y A< 1), where y is the particle world line. (The 
superscript on A 0) is just to remind you that it is a one-fonn.) For this problem you 
will consider a theory related to ordinary electromagnetism, but this time in I I space-
time dimensions, with a three-fonn gauge potential A <3) and four-fonn field strength 
F<4) = dA <3). Note that the field strength is invariant under a gauge transfonnation 
A (3) ~ A <3) + d.A <2) for any two-fonn A <2). 
(a) What would be the number of spatial dimensions of an object to which this 
gauge field would naturally couple (for example, ordinary E+M couples to zero-
dimensional objects-point particles)? 
(b) The electlic charge of an ordinary electron is given by the integral of the dual of 
the two-fonn gauge field strength over a two-sphere surrounding the particle. How 
would you define the "charge" of the object to which A <3) couples? Argue that it 
is conserved if d * F<4) = 0. 
(c) Imagine there is a "dual gauge potential" A that satisfies d(A) = *F<4). To what 
dimensionality object does it naturally couple? 
(d) The action for the gauge field itself (as opposed to its coupling to other things) 
will be an integral over the entire I I-dimensional spacetime. What are the tenns 
that would be allowed in such an action that are invariant under "local" gauge 
transfonnations, for instance, gauge transfonnations specified by a two-fonn A <2) 
that vanishes at infinity? Restrict yourself to tenns of first, second, or third order 
in A <3) and its first derivatives (no second derivatives, no higher-order tenns ). 
You may use the exterior derivative, wedge product, and Hodge dual, but not any 
explicit appearance of the metric. 
More background: "Supersymmetry" is a hypothetical synuneu? relating bosons 
(particles with integral spin) and fennions (particles with spin ~· 2, etc.). An inter-
esting feature is that supersynunetric theories are only well-defined in I I dimensions 
or less-in larger numbers of dimensions, supersynunetry would require the existence 
of particles with spins greater than 2, which cannot be consistently quantized. Eleven-
dimensional supersynunetry is a unique theory, which naturally includes a three-fonn 
gauge potential (not to mention gravity). Recent work has shown that it also includes 
the various higher-dimensional objects alluded to in this problem (although we've cut 
some corners here). This theory turns out to be a well-defined limit of something called 
M-theory, which has as other limits various I 0-dimensional superstring theories. 

CHAPTER 
3 
Curvature 
3.1 • OVERVIEW 
We all know what curvature means, at least informally, and in the first two chap-
ters of this book we have felt free to refer on occasion to the concept of curvature 
without giving it a careful definition. Clearly curvature depends somehow on the 
metric, which defines the geometry of our manifold; but it is not immediately 
clear how we should attribute curvature to any given metric (since, as we have 
seen, even the metric of a flat space can look arbitrarily complicated in a suffi-
ciently extravagant coordinate system). As is often the case in mathematics, we 
require quite a bit of care to formalize our intuition about a concept into a usable 
mathematical structure; formalizing what we think of as "curvature" is the subject 
of this chapter. 
The techniques we are about to develop are absolutely crucial to the subject; 
it is safe to say that there is a higher density of useful formulas per page in this 
chapter than in any of the others. Let's quickly summarize the ~ost important 
ones, to provide a roadmap for the formalism to come. 
All the ways in which curvature manifests itself rely on something called a 
"connection," which gives us a way of relating vectors in the tangent spaces of 
nearby points. There is a unique connection that we can construct from the metric, 
and it is encapsulated in an object called the Christoffel symbol, given by 
(3.1) 
The notation makes r~v look like a tensor, but in fact it is not; this is why we 
call it an "object" or "symbol." The fundamental use of a connection is to take a 
covariant derivative V µ (a generalization of the pru1ial derivative); the covariant 
derivative of a vector field V v is given by 
(3.2) 
and covariant derivatives of other sorts of tensors are given by similar expressions. 
The connection also appears in the definition of geodesics (a generalization of the 
notion of a straight line). A parameterized curve xµ(A.) is a geodesic if it obeys 
d 2xµ 
dxP dxa 
dA.2 + r~a di.. dA. = 0, 
(3.3) 
known as the geodesic equation. 
93 

94 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
Finally, the technical expression of curvature is contained in the Riemann ten-
sor, a (1, 3) tensor obtained from the connection by 
(3.4) 
Everything we want to know about the curvature of a manifold is given to us 
by the Riemann tensor; it will vanish if and only if the metric is pe1f ectly flat. 
Einstein's equation of general relativity relates certain components of this tensor 
to the energy-momentum tensor. 
These four equations are all of primary importance in the study of curved mani-
folds. We will now see how they arise from a careful consideration of how familiar 
notions of geometry in flat space adapt to this more general context. 
3.2 • COVARIANT DERIVATIVES 
In our discussion of manifolds, it became clear that there were various notions we 
could talk about as soon as the manifold was defined: we could define functions, 
take their derivatives, consider parameterized paths, set up tensors, and so on. 
Other concepts, such as the volume of a region or the length of a path, required 
some additional piece of structure, namely the introduction of a metric. It would 
be natural to think of the notion of curvature as something that depends exclu-
sively on the metric. In a more careful treatment, however, we find that curvature 
depends on a connection, and connections may or may not depend on the metric. 
Nevertheless, we will also show how the existence of a metric implies a certain 
unique connection, whose curvature may be thought of as that of the metric. This 
is the connection used in general relativity, so in this particular context it is legit-
imate to think of curvature as characterizing the metric, without introducing any 
additional structures. 
The connection becomes necessary when we attempt to address the problem 
of the partial derivative not being a good tensor operator. What we would like 
is a covariant derivative, that is, an operator that reduces to the partial derivative 
in flat space with inertial coordinates, but transforms as a tensor on an arbitrary 
manifold. It is conventional to spend a certain amount of time motivating the 
introduction of a covariant derivative, but in fact the need is obvious; equations 
such as aµTµv = 0 must be generalized to curved space somehow. So let's agree 
that a covariant derivative would be a good thing to have, and go about setting it 
up. 
In flat space in inertial coordinates, the partial derivative operator aµ is a map 
from (k, l) tensor fields to (k, l + 1) tensor fields, which acts linearly on its argu-
ments and obeys the Leibniz rule on tensor products. All of this continues to be 
true in the more general situation we would now like to consider, but the map pro-
vided by the partial derivative depends on the coordinate system used. We would 
therefore like to define a covariant derivative operator V to perform the func-
tions of the partial derivative, but in a way independent of coordinates. Rather 
than simply postulating the answer (which would be perfectly acceptable), let's 

3.2 
Covariant Derivatives 
95 
motivate it by thinking carefully about what properties a covariant generalization 
of the partial derivative should have-mathematical structures are, after all, in-
vented by human beings, not found lying on sidewalks. We begin by requiring 
that V be a map from (k, l) tensor fields, to (k, l + 1) tensor fields which has these 
two properties: 
1. linearity: 
V (T + S) = VT + VS; 
2. Leibniz (product) rule: 
V(T ® S) = (VT)® S + T ®(VS). 
If V is going to obey the Leibniz rule, it can always be written as the partial 
derivative plus some linear transformation. That is, to take the covariant deriva-
tive we first take the partial derivative, and then apply a correction to make the 
result covariant. [We aren't going to prove this reasonable-sounding statement; 
see Wald (1984) if you are interested.] Let's consider what this means for the co-
variant derivative of a vector V v. It means that, for each direction µ,, the covariant 
derivative V µ will be given by the paitial derivative aµ plus a correction specified 
by a set of n matrices (f µ)Pa (one n x n matrix, where n is the dimensionality 
of the manifold, for eachµ,). In fact the parentheses are usually dropped and we 
write these matrices, known as the connection coefficients, with haphazard index 
placement as ria. We therefore have 
I v,, v• =a,, v• + r~i. v'-. 
(3.5) 
Notice that in the second term the index originally on V has moved to the r, and 
a new index is summed over. If this is the expression for the covariant derivative 
of a vector in terms of the partial derivative, we should be able to determine the 
transformation properties off~>. by demanding that the left-hand side be a (1, 1) 
tensor. That is, we want the transformation law to be 
(3.6) 
Let's look at the left side first; we can expand it using (3.5) and then transform the 
parts that we understand (which is everything except r ~: >.' ): 
On the right-hand side we can also expand Vµ vv: 

96 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
These last two expressions are to be equated; the first terms in each are identical 
and therefore cancel, so we have 
v' 
ax>..' 
J... 
axµ 
J... 
a axv' 
axµ axv' v 
r µ'>..' ax>.. v + axµ' v axµ ax>.. = axµ' axv r µJ... v>.., 
<3.9) 
where we have changed a dummy index from v to A.. This equation must be true 
for any vector V >.., so we can eliminate that on both sides. Then the connection co-
efficients in the primed coordinates may be isolated by multiplying by ax>..;axa' 
and relabeling <J
1 ~ A.'. The result is 
v' 
axµ ax>.. axv' v 
axµ ax>.. 
a2xv' 
r µ'>..' = axµ' ax>..' axv r µJ... -
axµ' ax>..' axµ ax>... 
(3.10) 
This is not, of course, the tensor transformation law; the second term on the right 
spoils it. That's okay, because the connection coefficients are not the components 
of a tensor. They are purposefully constructed to be nontensorial, but in such 
a way that the combination (3.5) transforms as a tensor-the extra terms in the 
transformation of the partials and the f's exactly cancel. This is why we are not 
so careful about index placement on the connection coefficients; they are not a 
tensor, and therefore you should try not to raise and lower their indices. 
What about the covariant derivatives of other sorts of tensors? By similar rea-
soning to that used for vectors, the covariant derivative of a one-form can also be 
expressed as a partial derivative plus some linear transformation. But there is no 
reason as yet that the matrices representing this transformation should be related 
to the coefficients r~>..· In general we could write something like 
(3.11) 
where f ~ v is a new set of matrices for each µ,. Pay attention to where all of the 
various indices go. It is straightforward to derive that the transformation properties 
off must be the same as those Off, since Otherwise'\/ µWv wouldn't transform as 
a tensor, but otherwise no relationship has been established. To do so, we need to 
introduce two new properties that we would like our covariant derivative to have, 
in addition to the two above: 
3. commutes with contractions: 
V µ (T\p) = (VT)µ \p, 
4. reduces to the partial derivative on scalars: v µ </> = aµ</> . 
There is no way to "derive" these properties; we are simply demanding that they 
be true as part of the definition of a covariant derivative. Note that property 3 
is equivalent to saying that the Kronecker delta (the identity map) is covariantly 
constant, V µ o~ = 0; this is certainly a reasonable thing to ask. 
Let's see what these new properties imply. Given some one-form field wµ and 
vector field V µ, we can take the covariant derivative of the scalar defined by W>.. V >.. 
to get 

3 .2 
Covariant Derivatives 
97 
Vµ(w>- v>-) = (Vµw>.)v>- + w>.(Vµ v>-) 
= (C)µW>.)V>. + f~>.Wa y>- + W>.(C)µ V>.) + W>.f~P VP. 
(3.12) 
But since W>. V >- is a scalar, this must also be given by the partial derivative: 
v µ (w>- v>-) = aµ (w>- v>-) 
= (aµw>.)v>- + w>.(aµ v>-). 
(3.13) 
This can only be true if the terms in (3.12) with connection coefficients cancel 
each other; that is, rearranging dummy indices, we must have 
But both Wa and v>- are completely arbitrary, so 
f~>. = -f~>.· 
(3.14) 
(3.15) 
The two extra conditions we have imposed therefore allow us to express the co-
variant derivative of a one-form using the same connection coefficients as were 
used for the vector, but now with a minus sign (and indices matched up somewhat 
differently): 
(3.16) 
It should come as no surprise that the connection coefficients encode all the 
information necessary to take the covariant derivative of a tensor of arbitrary rank. 
The formula is quite straightforward; for each upper index you introduce a term 
with a single + r' and for each lower index a term with a single - r: 
VaTµ1µ2 .. ·µ"v1vi· .. v1 = aarµ1µ2···µk,v1vi···V1 
+ rµ, r>-µ2···µ,.. 
+ rµ2 rµ1>-···µ,.. 
+ ... 
a>. 
v I vi · · · v1 
a>. 
v 1 vi··· Vt 
(3.17) 
This is the general expression for the covariant derivative. You can check it your-
self; it comes from the set of axioms w~ have established, and the usual require-
ments that tensors of various sorts be coordinate-independent entities. Sometimes 
an alternative notation is used; just as commas are used for partial derivatives, 
semicolons are used for covariant ones: 
(3.18) 
Once again, in this book we will stick to "Va." 

98 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
To define a covariant derivative, then, we need to put a connection on our 
manifold, which is specified in some coordinate system by a set of coefficients 
r~v (n3 = 64 independent components in n = 4 dimensions) that transform 
according to (3.10). (The name connection comes from the fact that it is used 
to transport vectors from one tangent space to another, as we will soon see; it 
is sometimes used to ref er to the operator V, and sometimes to the coefficients 
r~v·) Evidently, we could define a large number of connections on any manifold, 
and each of them implies a distinct notion of covariant differentiation. In general 
relativity this freedom is not a big concern, because it turns out that every metric 
defines a unique connection, which is the one used in GR. Let's see how that 
works. 
The first thing to notice is that the difference of two connections is a tensor. 
Imagine we have defined two different kinds of covariant derivative, V µ and V 
µ, 
with associated connection coefficients r~v and f~v· Then the difference 
>.. 
>.. 
...... >.. 
s µv = r µv - r µv 
(3.19) 
is a ( 1, 2) tensor. (Notice that we had to choose a convention for index placement.) 
We could show this by brute force, plugging in the transformation laws for the 
connection coefficients, but let's be a little more slick. Given an arbitrary vector 
field V >.., we know that both V µ V >.. and V µ V >.. are tensors, so their difference must 
also be. This difference is simply 
v v>.. - v v>.. = a v>.. + r>.. v>.. - a v>.. - f>.. v>.. 
µ 
µ 
µ 
µv 
µ 
µv 
= s>..µv vv. 
(3.20) 
Since y>.. was arbitrary, and the left-hand side is a tensor, s>..µv must be a tensor. 
As a trivial consequence, we learn that any set of connection coefficients can be 
expressed as some fiducial connection plus a tensorial correction, 
(3.21) 
Next notice that, given a connection specified by r~v' we can immediately 
form another connection simply by permuting the lower indices. That is, the set of 
coefficients r~µ will also transform according to (3.10) (since the partial deriva-
tives appearing in the last term can be commuted), so they determine a distinct 
connection. There is thus a tensor we can associate with any given connection, 
known as the torsion tensor, defined by 
(3.22) 
It is clear that the torsion is antisymmetric in its lower indices, and a connection 
that is symmetric in its lower indices is known as "torsion-free." 
We can now define a unique connection on a manifold with a metric gµv by 
introducing two additional properties: 

3 .2 
Covariant Derivatives 
99 
• torsion-free: r~v = r~v)' 
• metric compatibility: 'Vpgµv = 0. 
A connection is metric compatible if the covariant derivative of the metric with 
respect to that connection is everywhere zero. This implies a couple of nice prop-
erties. First, it's easy to show that both the Levi-Civita tensor and the inverse 
metric also have zero covariant derivative, 
'V)...(Eµvpa = 0 
'Vpgµv = 0. 
(3.23) 
Second, a metric-compatible covariant derivative commutes with raising and low-
ering of indices. Thus, for some vector field V >., 
(3.24) 
With non-metric-compatible connections we would have to be very careful about 
index placement when taking a covariant derivative. 
Our claim is therefore that there is exactly one torsion-free connection on a 
given manifold that is compatible with some given metric on that manifold. We 
do not want to make these two requirements part of the definition of a covariant 
derivative; they simply single out one of the many possible ones. 
We can demonstrate both existence and uniqueness by deriving a manifestly 
unique expression for the connection coefficients in terms of the metric. To ac-
complish this, we expand out the equation of metric compatibility for three dif-
ferent permutations of the indices: 
'\/pgµv = ()pgµv -
f~µgAV -
f~vgµ).. = 0 
'\/ µgvp = ()µgvp -
f~vg>.p -
f~pgv).. = 0 
'Vvgpµ = ()vgpµ -
f~pgJ..µ -
f~µgpJ.. = 0. 
(3.25) 
We subtract the second and third of these from the first, and use the symmetry of 
the connection to obtain 
(3.26) 
It is straightforward to solve this for the connection by multiplying by gap. The 
result is 
(3.27) 
This formula is one of the most important in this subject; commit it to memory. 
Of course, we have only proved that if a metric-compatible and torsion-free con-
nection exists, it must be of the form (3.27); you can check for yourself that the 
right-hand side of (3.27) transforms like a connection. 

100 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
This connection we have derived from the metric is the one on which conven-
tional general relativity is based. It is known by different names: sometimes the 
Christoffel connection, sometimes the Levi-Civita connection, sometimes the 
Riemannian connection. The associated connection coefficients are sometimes 
called Christoffel symbols and written as Uv}; we will sometimes call them 
Christoffel symbols, but we won't use the funny notation. The study of manifolds 
with metrics and their associated connections is called Riemannian geometry, or 
sometimes pseudo-Riemannian when the metric has a Lorentzian signature. 
Before putting our covariant derivatives to work, we should mention some mis-
cellaneous properties. First, note that in ordinary flat space there is an implicit 
connection we use all the time-the Christoffel connection constructed from the 
flat metric. The coefficients of the Christoffel connection in flat space vanish in 
Cartesian coordinates, but not in curvilinear coordinate systems. Consider for ex-
ample the plane in polar coordinates, with metric 
d s2 = dr2 + r 2de2. 
(3.28) 
The nonzero components of the inverse metric are readily found to be grr = 1 
and g88 = ,.-2. Notice that we use r and e as indices in an obvious notation. We 
can compute a typical connection coefficient: 
f~r = !grP(()rgrp + ()rgpr -
()pgrr) 
= !grr (()rgrr + argrr -
argrr) 
+ !gr(/ (()rgrfl + argflr -
aflgrr) 
= !<1)(0 + 0 - 0) + !<O)(O + 0 - 0) 
=0. 
Sadly, it vanishes. But not all of them do: 
fBB = !grP(()Bgf/p + ()8gp8 -
()pg88) 
= !grr (()Bgflr + ()8gr8 -
()rgBB) 
= !OH0+0-2r) 
= -r. 
Continuing to tum the crank, we eventually find 
fBr = f~B = 0 
r~r = 0 
8 
8 
1 
r,.. = r8 = -
rr1 
r 
,. 
(3.29) 
(3.30) 
(3.31) 

3 .2 
Covariant Derivatives 
101 
From these and similar expressions, we can derive formulas for the divergence, 
gradient, and curl in curvilinear coordinate systems. 
Contrariwise, even in a curved space it is still possible to make the Christoffel 
symbols vanish at any one point. This is because, as we argued in the last chapter, 
we can always make the first derivative of the metric vanish at a point; so by 
(3.27) the connection coefficients derived from this metric will also vanish. Of 
course this can only be established at a point, not in some neighborhood of the 
point. We will discuss this more fully in Section 3.4. 
Another useful property is that the formula for the divergence of a vector (with 
respect to the Christoffel connection) has a simplified form. The covariant diver-
gence of V µ is given by 
vµ vµ =aµ vµ + r~>- v>-. 
(3.32) 
It is straightforward to show that the Christoffel connection satisfies 
(3.33) 
and we therefore obtain 
(3.34) 
There are also formulas for the divergences of higher-rank tensors, but they are 
generally not such a great simplification. 
We use the Christoff el covariant derivative in the curved-space version of 
Stokes's theorem (see Appendix E). If yµ is a vector field over a region I: with 
boundary aI:, Stokes's theorem is 
(3.35) 
where nµ is normal to ()I:, and Yij is the induced metric on al:. If the connection 
weren't metric-compatible or torsion-free, there would be additional terms in this 
equation. 
The last thing we need to mention is that converting partial derivatives into 
covariant derivatives is not always necessary in order to construct well-defined 
tensors; in particular, the exterior derivative and the vector-field commutator are 
both well-defined in terms of partials, essentially because both involve an anti-
symmetrization that cancels the nontensorial piece of the partial derivative trans-
formation law. The same feature implies that they could, on the other hand, be 
equally well-defined in terms of (torsion-free) covariant derivatives; the antisym-
metrization causes the connection coefficient terms to vanish. Thus, if V is the 
Christoffel connection, wµ is a one-form, and Xµ and yµ are vector fields, we 

102 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
can write 
(3.36) 
and 
(3.37) 
If the connection is not torsion-free, the last equalities in these expressions are 
no longer true; the more fundamental definitions of the exterior derivative and the 
commutator are those in terms of the partial derivative. 
Before moving on, let's review the process by which we have been adding 
structures to our mathematical constructs. We started with the basic notion of a set, 
which you were presumed to be familiar with (informally, if not rigorously). We 
introduced the concept of open subsets of our set; this is equivalent to introducing 
a topology, and promoted the set to a topological space. Then by demanding that 
each open set look like a region of Rn (with n the same for each set) and that 
the coordinate charts be smoothly sewn together, the topological space became 
a manifold. A manifold is simultaneously a very flexible and powerful structure, 
and comes equipped naturally with a tangent bundle, tensor bundles of various 
ranks, the ability to take exterior derivatives, and so forth. We then proceeded 
to put a metric on the manifold, resulting in a manifold with metric (sometimes 
Riemannian manifold). Independently of the metric we found we could introduce 
a connection, allowing us to take covariant derivatives. Once we have a metric, 
however, there is automatically a unique torsion-free metric-compatible connec-
tion. Likewise we could introduce an independent volume form, although one is 
automatically determined by the metric. In principle there is nothing to stop us 
from introducing more than one connection, or volume form, or metric, on any 
given manifold. In general relativity we do have a physical metric, which deter-
mines volumes and the covariant derivative, and the independence of these notions 
is not a crucial feature. 
3.3 • PARALLEL TRANSPORT AND GEODESICS 
Now that we know how to take covariant derivatives, let's step back and put this 
in the context of differentiation more generally. We think of a derivative as a way 
of quantifying how fast something is changing. In the case of tensors, the crucial 
issue is "changing with respect to what?" An ordinary function defines a number 
at each point in spacetime, and it is straightforward to compare two different num-
bers, so we shouldn't be surprised that the partial derivative of functions remained 
valid on arbitrary manifolds. But a tensor is a map from vectors and dual vectors to 
the real numbers, and it's not clear how to compare such maps at different points 
in spacetime. Since we have successfully constructed a covariant derivative, can 
we think of it as somehow measuring the rate of change of tensors? The answer 
turns out to be yes: the covariant derivative quantifies the instantaneous rate of 

3.3 
Parallel Transport and Geodesics 
103 
q 
p 
FIGURE 3.1 In flat space, we can parallel transport a vector by simply keeping its Carte-
sian components constant. 
change of a tensor field in comparison to what the tensor would be if it were "par-
allel transported." In other words, a connection defines a specific way of keeping 
a tensor constant (along some path), on the basis of which we can compare nearby 
tensors. 
It turns out that the concept of parallel transport is interesting in its own right, 
and worth spending some time thinking about. Recall that in flat space it is unnec-
essary to be very careful about the fact that vectors are elements of tangent spaces 
defined at individual points; it is actually very natural to compare vectors at dif-
ferent points (where by "compare" we mean add, subtract, take the dot product, 
and so on). The reason why it is natural is because it makes sense, in flat space, to 
move a vector from one point to another while keeping it constant, as illustrated 
in Figure 3.1. Then, once we get the vector from one point to another, we can do 
the usual operations allowed in a vector space. 
This concept of moving a vector along a path, keeping constant all the while, 
is known as parallel transport. Parallel transport requires a connection to be well-
defined; the intuitive manipulation of vectors in flat space makes implicit use of 
the Christoffel connection on this space. The crucial difference between flat and 
curved spaces is that, in a curved space, the result of parallel transporting a vec-
tor from one point to another will depend on the path taken between the points. 
Without yet assembling the complete mechanism of parallel transport, we can use 
our intuition about the two-sphere to see that this is the case. Start with a vector 
on the equator, pointing along a line of constant longitude. Parallel transport it up 
to the north pole along a line of longitude in the obvious way. Then take the orig-
inal vector, parallel transport it along the equator by an angle e, and then move it 
up to the north pole as before. As shown in Figure 3.2, it should be clear that the 
vector, parallel transported along two paths, arrived at the same destination with 
two different values (rotated by 8). 
It therefore appears as if there is no natural way to uniquely move a vector 
from one tangent space to another; we can always parallel-transport it, but the 
result depends on the path, and there is no natural choice of which path to take. 

104 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
FIGURE 3.2 Parallel transport on a two-sphere. On a curved manifold, the result of 
parallel transport can depend on the path taken. 
Unlike some of the problems we have encountered, there is no solution to this 
one-we simply must learn to live with the fact that two vectors can only be com-
pared in a natural way if they are elements of the same tangent space. For example, 
two particles passing by each other have a well-defined relative velocity, which 
cannot be greater than the speed of light. But two particles at different points on 
a curved manifold do not have any well-defined notion of relative velocity-the 
concept simply makes no sense. Of course, in certain special situations it is still 
useful to talk as if it did make sense, but occasional usefulness is not a substitute 
for rigorous definition. In cosmology, for example, the light from distant galax-
ies is redshifted with respect to the frequencies we would observe from a nearby 
stationary source. Since this phenomenon bears such a close resemblance to the 
conventional Doppler effect due to relative motion, we are very tempted to say 
that the galaxies are "receding away from us" at a speed defined by their redshift. 
At a rigorous level this is nonsense, what Wittgenstein would call a "grammatical 
mistake"-the galaxies are not receding, since the notion of their velocity with 
respect to us is not well-defined. What is actually happening is that the metric of 
spacetime between us and the galaxies has changed (the universe has expanded) 
along the path of the photon from here to there, leading to an increase in the wave-
length of the light. As an example of how you can go wrong, naive application 
of the Doppler formula to the redshift of galaxies implies that some of them are 
receding faster than light, in apparent contradiction with relativity. The resolution 
of this apparent paradox is simply that the very notion of their recession should 
not be taken literally. 
Enough about what we cannot do; let's see what we can. Parallel transport is 
supposed to be the curved-space generalization of the concept of "keeping the vec-
tor constant" as we move it along a path; similarly for a tensor of arbitrary rank. 

3.3 
Parallel Transport and Geodesics 
105 
Given a curve xµ(I..), the requirement of constancy of a tensor Tµ 1µ2 .. ·µk v,v2 ... v1 
along this curve in flat space is simply that the components be constant: 
.!!.._ µ1µ2···µk 
_ dxµ _a_ µ1µ2···µk 
_ 
di.. T 
v, v2···V1 -
di.. axµ T 
v, v2 .. ·v1 - 0. 
To make this properly tensorial we simply replace this partial derivative by a co-
variant one, and define the directional covariant derivative to be 
D 
dxµ 
di..= di.. Vw 
(3.38) 
This is a map, defined only along the path, from (k, l) tensors to (k, l) tensors. 
We then define parallel transport of the tensor T along the path xµ(/..) to be the 
requirement that the covariant derivative of T along the path vanishes: 
T 
_ 
" Tµ1w1···µk 
0 
( 
D 
)µ1µ2···µk 
dxa 
di.. 
vi v2···v1 = di.. v a 
-
vi vi ... v1 = · 
(3.39) 
This is a well-defined tensor equation (since both the tangent vector dxµ /di.. and 
the covariant derivative VT are tensors), known as the equation of parallel trans-
port. For a vector it takes the form 
d 
dxa 
-vµ+rµ -VP=O. 
di.. 
<1p di.. 
(3.40) 
We can look at the parallel transport equation as a first-order differential equation 
defining an initial-value problem: given a tensor at some point along the path, 
there will be a unique continuation of the tensor to other points along the path 
such that the continuation solves (3.39). We say that such a tensor is parallel-
transported. 
The notion of parallel transport is obviously dependent on the connection, 
and different connections lead to different answers. If the connection is metric-
compatible, the metric is always parallel transported with respect to it: 
D 
dxa 
di.. gµv = di.. Vagµv = 0. 
(3.41) 
It follows that the inner product of two parallel-transported vectors is preserved. 
That is, if yµ and wv are parallel-transported along a curve xa (/..),we have 
D 
µ 
v 
( D 
) 
µ 
v 
( D 
µ) 
v 
µ ( D 
v) 
d /.. (g µ v V W ) = d /.. g µ v V W + g µ v d /.. V 
W + g µ v V 
di.. W 
= o. 
(3.42) 
This means that parallel transport with respect to a metric-compatible connection 
preserves the norm of vectors, the sense of orthogonality, and so on. 
With parallel transport defined, the next logical step is to discuss geodesics. A 
geodesic is the curved-space generalization of the notion of a straight line in Eu-
clidean space. We all know what a straight line is: it's the path of shortest distance 

· 106 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
between two points. But there is an equally good definition-a straight line is a 
path that parallel-transports its own tangent vector. It will tum out that these two 
concepts coincide if and only if the connection is the Christoffel connection. 
We'll start with the second definition (a geodesic is a curve along which the 
tangent vector is parallel-transported), since it is computationally much more 
straightforward. The tangent vector to a path xµ(A.) is dxµ /di... The condition 
that it be parallel transported is thus 
D dxµ 
di.. di.. = O, 
(3.43) 
or alternatively 
(3.44) 
This is the geodesic equation, another one you should memorize. We can eas-
ily see that it reproduces the usual notion of straight lines if the connection co-
efficients are the Christoffel symbols in Euclidean space; in that case we can 
choose Cartesian coordinates in which f~a = 0, and the geodesic equation is 
just d 2xµ /dA.2 = 0, which is the equation for a straight line. 
That was embarrassingly simple; let's tum to the more nontrivial case of the 
shortest-distance definition. As we know, various subtleties are involved in the 
definition of distance in a Lorentzian spacetime; for null paths the distance is 
zero, for timelike paths it's more convenient to use the proper time. So in the 
name of simplicity let's do the calculation just for a timelike path-the resulting 
equation will tum out to be good for any path, so we are not losing any generality. 
We therefore consider the proper time functional, 
-! (-
dxµ dxv )
1
1
2 
r -
gµv di.. di.. 
dA., 
(3.45) 
where the integral is over the path. To search for shortest-distance paths, we could 
do the usual calculus-of-variations treatment to seek critical points of this func-
tional. They will tum out to be curves of maximum proper time, consistent with 
our discussion of the twin paradox in Chapter 1. However, we can simplify the 
algebra by means of a trick. The integral (3.45) is of the form r = f ~ 
dA., 
where f = gµv(dxµ /dA.)(dxv /di..). The variation looks like 
or= J 
oFldt.. 
=-J 
~<-n-112ofd>... 
(3.46) 
It makes things easier if we now specify that our parameter is the proper time 
r itself, rather than the arbitrary parameter A., so that the tangent vector is the 

3.3 
Parallel Transport and Geodesics 
four-velocity Uµ. This fixes the value off, 
dxµ dxv 
f = gµv-- = gµvUµUv = -1. 
dr dr 
From (3.46) we then have 
or=-~ J 
of dr. 
107 
(3.47) 
(3.48) 
Stationary points of (3.45)-paths for which or = 0-are therefore equivalent to 
stationary points (with fixed parameterization) of the simpler integral 
1 f 
1 f 
dxµ dxv 
I = 2 f dr = 2 
gµv dr dr dr. 
(3.49) 
(The ! is by no means necessary, but will make things nicer later on.) Taking 
variations of this expression is thus a shortcut to finding shortest-distance paths, 
one that we will wisely follow. 
Stationary points of I will of course obey the Euler-Lagrange equations 
( 1.128), but evaluating them involves repeated application of the chain rule, and it 
is just as simple to directly consider the change in the integral under infinitesimal 
variations of the path, 
xµ ~ xµ +oxµ 
gµv ~ gµv + (()agµv)oxa. 
(3.50) 
The second line comes from Taylor expansion in curved spacetime, which as you 
can see, uses the partial derivative, not the covariant derivative. This is because 
we are simply thinking of the components gµv as functions on spacetime in some 
specific coordinate system. Plugging this into (3.49) and keeping only terms first-
order in oxµ' we get 
_ 1 J [ 
dxµ dxv 
a 
d(oxµ) dxv 
dxµ d(oxv)] 
OJ - 2 
aagµv dr dr OX +gµv~ dr +gµv dr ~ 
dr. 
(3.51) 
1 J [ d 2xµ 
dxa dxµ] 
= -2 
gµv dr2 + aagµv dr dr 
OXV dr, 
(3.52) 
where we have neglected boundary terms, which vanish because we take our vari-
ation oxµ to vanish at the endpoints of the path. In the second line we have used 

108 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
the chain rule on the derivative of gµv· The variation (3.51) then becomes, after 
rearranging some dummy indices, 
f [ 
d2xµ 
1 
dxµ dxv] 
OJ= -
gµa dr2 + 2 (aµgva + avgaµ - aagµv) dr dr 
ox<1 dr. 
(3.53) 
Since we are searching for stationary points, we want o I to vanish for any varia-
tion ox<1; this implies 
d2xµ 
1 
dxµ dxv 
gµ<1 dr2 + 2 (aµgva + avgaµ - aagµv) dr dr = 0, 
(3.54) 
and multiplying by the inverse metric gPa finally leads to 
d2xP 
1 
dxµ dxv 
dr2 + lgpa (aµgva + ()vgaµ - ()agµv} dr dr = 0. 
(3.55) 
We see that this is precisely the geodesic equation (3.40), but with the specific 
choice of Christoffel connection (3.27). Thus, on a manifold with metric, ex-
tremals of the length functional are curves that parallel transport their tangent 
vector with respect to the Christoffel connection associated with that metric. It 
doesn't matter if any other connection is defined on the same manifold. Of course, 
in GR the Christoffel connection is the only one used, so the two notions are the 
same. 
The variational principle provides a convenient way to actually calculate the 
Christoffel symbols for a given metric. Rather than simply plugging into (3.27), it 
is often less work to explicitly vary the integral (3.49), with the metric of interest 
substituted in for gµv· An example of this procedure is shown in Section 3.5. 
3.4 • PROPERTIES OF GEODESICS 
The primary usefulness of geodesics in general relativity is that they are the paths 
followed by unaccelerated test particles. A test particle is a body that does· not 
itself influence the geometry through which it moves-never perfectly true, but 
often an excellent approximation. This concept allows us to explore, for example, 
the properties of the gravitational field around the Sun, without worrying about 
the field of the planet whose motion we are considering. The geodesic equation 
can be thought of as the generalization of Newton's law f = ma, for the case 
f = 0, to curved spacetime. It is also possible to introduce forces by adding terms 
to the right-hand side; in fact, looking back to the expression ( 1.105) 
d2xµ 
dxP dxa 
q 
dxv 
-- + fµ -- = -Fµv dr . 
dr2 
pa dr dr 
m 
(3.56) 
We will talk about this more later, but in fact your guess would be correct. 

3.4 
Properties of Geodesics 
109 
We should say some more careful words about the parameterization of a 
geodesic path. When we presented the geodesic equation as the requirement that 
the tangent vector be parallel-transported, (3.44), we parameterized our path with 
some parameter A., whereas when we found the formula (3.55) for the extremal 
of the spacetime interval, we wound up with a very specific parameterization, the 
proper time. Of course from the form of (3.55) it is clear that a transformation, 
r ~A.= ar +b, 
(3.57) 
for some constants a and b, leaves the equation invariant. Any parameter related 
to the proper time in this way is called an affine parameter, and is just as good as 
the proper time for parameterizing a geodesic. What was hidden in our derivation 
of (3.44) was that the demand that the tangent vector be parallel-transported 
actually constrains the parameterization of the curve, specifically to one related 
to the proper time by (3.57). In other words, if you start at some point and with 
some initial direction, and then construct a curve by beginning to walk in that 
direction and keeping your tangent vector parallel transported, you will not only 
define a path in the manifold but also (up to linear transformations) define the 
parameter along the path. 
Of course, there is nothing to stop you from using any other parameterization 
you like, but then (3.44) will not be satisfied. More generally you will satisfy an 
equation of the form 
d2xµ 
dxP dxa 
dxµ 
da2 + r~<1 da da = f(a) da ' 
(3.58) 
for some parameter a(A.), where f (a) is related to the affine parameter by 
(d2a) (da)-2 
f(a)=-
-
-
dA.2 
di.. 
(3.59) 
Conversely, if (3.58) is satisfied along a curve you can always find an affine pa-
rameter A.(a) for which the geodesic equation (3.44) will be satisfied. 
For timelike paths, we can write the geodesic equation in terms of the four-
velocity uµ = dxµ /dr as 
(3.60) 
Similarly, in terms of the four-momentum pµ = mUµ, the geodesic equation is 
simply 
(3.61) 
This relation expresses the idea that freely-falling particles keep moving in the 
direction in which their momenta are pointing. 
For null paths, the proper time vanishes and r is not an appropriate affine pa-
rameter. Nevertheless, it is still perfectly well-defined to ask whether a parameter-

110 
FIGURE 3.3 We can al-
ways approximate a time-
like path by a sequence of 
null paths with a total path 
length of zero. Hence, time-
like geodesics must be max-
ima of the proper time rather 
than minima. 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
ized path xµ (A.) satisfies the geodesic equation (3.44). If a null path is a geodesic 
for some parameter A., it will also be a geodesic for any other affine parameter 
of the form al..+ b. However, there is no preferred choice among these param-
eters like the proper time is for timelike paths. Once we choose a parameter at 
some point along the path, of course, there is a unique continuation to the rest 
of the path if we want to solve the geodesic equation. It is often convenient to 
choose the normalization of the affine parameter A. along a null geodesic such that 
dxµ /dA. is equal to the momentum four-vector: 
dxµ 
pµ = di.. . 
(3.62) 
This is in contrast to timelike paths, where dxµ /dr is the momentum per unit 
mass. Then an observer with four-velocity Uµ measures the energy of the particle 
(or equivalently the frequency, since we are setting h = 1) to be 
(3.63) 
This expression always tells us the energy of a particle with momentum pµ as 
measured by an observer with four-velocity Uµ, whether pµ is null or timelike; 
you can check it by going to locally inertial coordinates. (A caveat: this expression 
for E does not include potential energy, only the intrinsic energy from motion and 
inertia. In a general spacetime there will not be a well-defined notion of gravita-
tional potential energy, although in special cases it does exist.) 
An important property of geodesics in a spacetime with Lorentzian metric is 
that the character (timelike/null/spacelike) of the geodesic, relative to a metric-
compatible connection, never changes. This is simply because parallel transport 
preserves inner products, and the character is determined by the inner product of 
the tangent vector with itself. This is why we were consistent to consider purely 
timelike paths when we derived (3.55); for spacelike paths we would have derived 
the same equation, since the only difference is an overall minus sign in the final 
answer. 
Let's now explain the earlier remark that timelike geodesics are maxima of the 
proper time. The reason we know this is true is that, given any timelike curve 
(geodesic or not), we can approximate it to arbitrary accuracy by a null curve. 
To do this all we have to do is to consider "jagged" null curves that follow the 
timelike one, as portrayed in Figure 3.3. As we increase the number of sharp cor-
ners, the null curve comes closer and closer to the timelike curve while still hav-
ing zero path length. Timelike geodesics cannot therefore be curves of minimum 
proper time, since they are always infinitesimally close to curves of less proper 
time (zero, in fact); actually they maximize the proper time. This is how you can 
remember which twin in the twin paradox ages more-the one who stays home 
is basically on a geodesic, and therefore experiences more proper time. Of course 
even this is being a little cavalier; actually every time we say "maximize" or "min-
imize" we should add the modifier "locally." Often the case is that between two 
points on a manifold there is more than one geodesic. For instance, on S2 we can 

3.4 Properties of Geodesics 
111 
draw a great circle through any two points, and imagine traveling between them 
either the short way or the long way around. One of these is obviously longer than 
the other, although both are stationary points of the length functional. 
Geodesics provide a convenient a way of mapping the tangent space Tp of a 
point p to a region of the manifold that contains p, called the exponential map. 
This map in tum defines a set of coordinates for this region that are automatically 
the locally inertial coordinates discussed in Section 2.5 [coordinates xiL around a 
point p such that gµ_v(P) = 11µ.v and aagµv(P) = O]. We begin by noticing that 
any vector k E Tp defines a unique geodesic passing through it, for which k is the 
tangent vector at p, and /..(p) = 0: 
dxµ 
di.. (/.. = 0) = kµ. 
(3.64) 
Uniqueness follows from the fact that the geodesic equation is a second-order 
differential equation, and specifying initial data in the form xµ(p) and kµ = 
(dxµ /d/..)(p) completely determines a solution. On this geodesic there will be a 
unique point in M for which/..= 1. The exponential map at p, expP : Tp ~ M, 
is then defined as 
(3.65) 
\ 
where xv(/..) solves the geodesic equation subject to (3.64), as shown in Fig-
ure 3.4. 
For some set of tangent vectors kµ near the zero vector, this map will be well-
defined, and in fact invertible. Depending on the geometry, however, different 
geodesics emanating from a single point may eventually cross, at which point 
expP : Tp 4 
M is no longer one-to-one. Furthermore, the range of the expo-
nential map is not necessarily the whole manifold, and the domain is not neces-
sarily the whole tangent space. The range can fail to be all of M simply because 
there can be two points that are not connected by any geodesic. An example is 
given by anti-de Sitter space, discussed in Chapter 8. The domain can fail to be 
all of Tp because a geodesic may run into a singularity, which we think of as 
"the edge of the manifold." Manifolds that have such singularities are known as 
geodesically incomplete. In a more careful discussion it would actually be the 
FIGURE 3.4 The exponential map takes a vector in Tp to a point in M that lies at unit 
affine parameter along the geodesic to which the vector is tangent. 

112 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
other way around: the best way we have of defining a singularity is as a place 
where geodesics appear to "end," after we remove trivial cases in which a part of 
the manifold is artificially excluded by hand. See Wald ( 1984) or Hawking and 
Ellis ( 1973). This problem is not merely technical; the singularity theorems of 
Hawking and Penrose state that, for certain matter content, spacetimes in gen-
eral relativity are almost guaranteed to be geodesically incomplete. As examples, 
two of the most useful spacetimes in GR-the Schwarzschild solution describing 
black holes and the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker solutions describing homoge-
neous, isotropic cosmologies-both feature important singularities; these will be 
discussed in later chapters. 
We now use the exponential map to construct locally inertial coordinates. The 
easy part is to find basis vectors {e(µ)} for Tp such that the components of the 
metric are those of the canonical form: 
(3.66) 
Here g( , ) denotes the metric, thought of as a multilinear map from Tp x Tp 
to R. And the hats have different meanings: over e they remind us that it's a 
basis vector, and over the indices they remind us that we are in locally inertial 
coordinates (as we shall see). This is easy because it's just linear algebra, not 
yet referring to coordinates; starting with any set of components for gµv• we can 
always diagonalize this matrix and then rescale our basis vectors to satisfy (3.66). 
The hard part, we would expect, is finding a coordinate system xiL for which 
the basis vectors {e(µ)} comprise the coordinate basis, e<µ> = aµ. and such that 
the first partial derivatives of gµv vanish. In fact, however, the exponential map 
achieves this automatically. For any point q sufficiently close to p, there is a 
unique geodesic path connecting p to q, and a unique parameterization A. such 
that A.(p) = 0 and A.(q) = 1. At p the tangent vector k to this geodesic can 
be written as a linear combination of our basis vectors, k = kµe<J1>· We define 
the sought-after coordinates xµ simply to be these components: xiL(q) = kµ. In 
other words, we have defined the coordinates xiL(q) to be the components (with 
respect to our normalized basis {e(µ)}) of the tangent vector k that gets mapped to 
q by expP. Coordinates constructed in this way are known as Riemann normal 
coordinates at p. 
We still need to verify that these Riemann normal coordinates satisfy aagµv(P) 
= 0. Note that a ray in the tangent space (a parameterized set of vectors of the 
form A.kµ, for some fixed vector kµ) gets mapped to a geodesic by the exponential 
map. Therefore, in Riemann normal coordinates, a curve xiL(A.) of the form 
(3.67) 
will solve the geodesic equation. Indeed, any geodesic through p may be ex-
pressed this way, for some appropriate vector kµ. We therefore have 
d2xµ 
dA.2 = 0 
(3.68) 

3.5 
The Expanding Universe Revisited 
113 
along any geodesic through p in this coordinate system. But, by the geodesic 
equation, we also have 
d2xii 
• 
• • 
--2 (p) = - r':. (p)kP ka' 
dA. 
pa 
(3.69) 
where kP = (dxP /dA.)(p). Since this holds for arbitrary kP, we conclude that 
r~. (p) = o. 
pa 
(3.70) 
Now apply metric compatibility: 
O = Vagµv 
= a-g-- - rLg-. - rLg.· 
a µv 
aµ AV 
av µA 
= aagitv• 
(3.71) 
where all quantities are evaluated at p. We see that Riemann normal coordinates 
provide a realization of the locally inertial coordinates discussed in Section 2.5. 
They are not unique; there are an infinite number of non-Riemann-normal coor-
dinate systems in which gµv(P) = 1Jµv and aagµv(P) = 0, but in an expansion 
around p they will differ from the Riemann normal coordinates only at third order 
inxiL. 
3.5 • THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE REVISITED 
Let's put some of the technology we have developed to work in understanding a 
simple metric. Recall the expanding-universe metric we studied in Chapter 2, 
ds 2 = -dt2 + a 2(t)[dx2 + dy2 + dz2] 
2 
2 
. 
. 
= -dt +a (t)o;jdx'dx 1. 
(3.72) 
This metric describes a universe consisting of flat spatial sections expanding as 
a function of time, with the relative distance between particles at fixed spatial 
coordinates growing proportionally to the scale factor a(t). 
Faced ~ith a metric, the first thing we do is to calculate the Christoffel symbols. 
As mentioned at the end of Section 3.3, the easiest technique for doing so is 
actually to vary explicitly an integral of the form (3.49). Plugging in the metric 
under consideration, we have 
1 J [ ( 
dt )
2 
2 
dxi dxj] 
I= -
-
-
+a (t)o;j--
dr. 
2 
dr 
dr dr 
(3.73) 
The technique is to consider variations xµ ~ xµ + oxµ and demand that o I 
vanish. We get n equations on an n-dimensional manifold (in this case n = 4 ), one 
for each µ,; each equation corresponds to a component of the geodesic equation 

114 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
(3.44). In the equation derived by varying with respect to xµ, the coefficient of 
(dxP /dr)(dxa /dr) Will be f~a· 
For the metric (3.72), we need to consider separately variations with respect to 
x0 = t and one of the xi's (it doesn't matter which one, since the results for each 
spacelike direction will be equivalent). Let's start with t ~ t + ot .. The nontrivial 
time dependence comes from the scale factor, for which, to first order, 
a(t + ot) = a(t) + aot' 
(3.74) 
where a= da/dt. We therefore have 
1 J [ dt d(ot) 
. 
dxi dxj ] 
OJ= -
-2--- +2aaoi·--ot dr 
2 
dr dr 
1 dr dr 
f [
d2t 
dxi dxj] 
= 
-
+aaoij--
otdr, 
dr2 
dr dr 
(3.75) 
where we have dropped a boundary term after integrating by parts (as always). 
Setting the coefficient of ot equal to zero implies 
d2t 
dxi dxj 
dr2 + aaOij dr dr = 0, 
which is supposed to be equivalent to the geodesic equation (withµ,= 0) 
d2x0 
0 dxP dxa 
-+r ---o 
d r 2 
pa d r d r -
· 
Comparison of these two equations implies 
r8o = o, 
ro - ro - o 
iO -
Oi -
• 
r?j = aa oil· 
(3.76) 
(3.77) 
(3.78) 
We can repeat this procedure for a spatial coordinate, xi ~ xi + oxi. The 
variation is then 
OJ = ~ J 
a2 (20;. dxi d(axj)) dr 
2 
1 dr 
dr 
=-
a --+2a--
Oi·ox'dr. 
f ( 
2d2xi 
da dxi) 
. 
dr2 
dr dr 
1 
(3.79) 
We can express da/dr in terms of a by using the chain rule, 
da 
. dt 
-=a-. 
dr 
dr 
(3.80) 

3.5 
The Expanding Universe Revisited 
115 
Then setting the coefficient of oxj equal to zero in (3.79) implies 
d2xi 
a dt dxi 
-+2---=0. 
dr2 
a dr dr 
(3.81) 
Comparing to the geodesic equation, we find that the Christoffel symbols must 
satisfy 
. dxP dxa 
a dt dxi 
r' --=2---
pa dr d r 
a d r dr · 
(3.82) 
The Christoffel symbols are therefore given by 
rbo = o 
r; - r; - a o; 
JO -
Oj -
-;; j 
r~k = o. 
(3.83) 
Together, (3.78) and (3.83) are all of the connection coefficients for the metric 
(3.72). These are, of course, necessary both for studying geodesics of the space-
time and for taking covariant derivatives; in fact, (3.76) and (3.81) together are 
the geodesic equation. Let's put this to work by solving for null geodesics, those 
followed by massless particles such as photons, for which we have to use A. rather 
than r as a parameter. Without loss of generality we can consider paths along the 
x-direction, for which xµ (A.) = {t (A.), x(A.), 0, O}. It is trivial to solve for null 
paths of this sort, using ds 2 = 0. We have 
(3.84) 
which implies 
dx 
1 dt 
dA. = -;;dA.. 
(3.85) 
In Section 2.6 we solved this for a = tq, but here we will remain more gen-
eral. Also, we have chosen to consider paths moving in the positive x-direction, 
which determines the sign of dx/dA.. We must distinguish, however, between 
"null paths" and "null geodesics": the latter are a much more restrictive class, 
and to show that these paths are geodesics, we need to solve for the coordinates t 
and x in terms of the parameter A.. 
Let's solve for dt/dA., which will turn out to be the quantity in which we are 
most interested. Plugging the null condition (3.85) into theµ, = 0 component of 
the geodesic equation (3.76), and remembering to replacer ~ A., we get 
d
2t 
~ ( dt ) 
2 
- 0 
dA.2 +a 
dA. 
-
· 
(3.86) 

116 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
It is straightforward to verify that this is solved by 
dt 
wo 
di..=~ 
(3.87) 
where wo is a constant. For a given a(t), this could be instantly integrated to yield 
t (/..). But more interesting is to consider the energy E of the photon as it would be 
measured by a comoving observer (one at fixed spatial coordinates), who would 
have four-velocity 
uµ = o. o, o, O). 
(3.88) 
Don't get tricked into thinking that the timelike component of the four-velocity 
of a particle at rest will always equal unity; we need to satisfy the normalization 
condition gµvUµuv = -1, which in the rest frame (U; = 0) implies u 0 = 
J-goo. According to (3.63), and using pµ = dxµ /di.., we have 
E = -pµUµ 
dx0 
= -goo-u0 
di.. 
wo 
=-
a 
(3.89) 
We see why the notation wo was chosen for the constant of proportionality in 
(3.87): wo is simply the frequency of the photon when a = 1. Recall that E = hw, 
and we are using units in which h = 1. 
We have uncovered a profound phenomenon: the cosmological redshift. A 
photon emitted with energy E 1 at scale factor a1 and observed with energy E2 at 
scale factor a2 will have 
= 
(3.90) 
E1 
a2 
This is called a "redshift" because the wavelength of the photon is inversely pro-
portional to the frequency, and in an expanding universe the wavelength therefore 
grows with time. As a practical matter this provides an easy way to measure the 
change in the scale factor between us and distant galaxies, and also serves as. a 
proxy for the distance: since the universe has been monotonically expanding, a 
greater redshift implies a greater distance. In conventional notation, the amount 
of redshift is denoted by 
w1 -
w2 
a2 
z= 
=--1, 
(3.91) 
W2 
a1 
so that z vanishes if there has been no expansion, for instance, if the emitter and 
observer are so close that there hasn't been enough time for the universe to appre-
ciably expand. 

3.5 
The Expanding Universe Revisited 
117 
As mentioned in Section 3.3, the cosmological redshift is not a Doppler shift 
(despite the understandable temptation to refer to the "velocity" of receding galax-
ies). Now we can understand this statement quantitatively. You might imagine 
that, as far as the behavior of emitted photons is concerned, there is little differ-
ence between two galaxies physically moving apart in a flat spacetime and two 
galaxies at fixed comoving coordinates in an expanding spacetime. But let's con-
sider a specific (unrealistic, but educational) example. Start with flat spacetime, 
and imagine that our two galaxies are initially not moving apart, but are at rest in 
some globally inertial coordinate system. One emits a photon toward the other; 
while the photon is traveling, we quickly move the two galaxies apart until they 
are twice their original separation, then leave them stationary at that distance; and 
then the photon is absorbed by the second galaxy. Clearly there will be no Doppler 
shift, since the galaxies were at rest both at emission and absorption. Now con-
sider the analogous phenomenon in an expanding spacetime, with the galaxies 
stuck at fixed comoving coordinates. We begin with the scale factor constant (the 
universe is not expanding). One galaxy emits a photon, and we imagine that dur-
ing the photon's journey the universe starts expanding until the scale factor is 
twice its original size, and then stops expanding before the photon is absorbed. In 
this case there certainly will be a redshift, despite the fact that there was no "rela-
tive motion" (an ill-defined concept in any case) at either absorption or emission; 
the photon's wavelength will have doubled as the scale factor doubled, so we ob-
serve a redshift z = 1. This demonstrates the conceptual distinction between the 
cosmological redshift and the conventional Doppler effect. 
Beyond the geodesic equation, covariant derivatives will play a role in gener-
alizing laws of physics from the flat spacetime of special relativity to the curved 
geometry of general relativity. As we will discuss in more detail in the next chap-
ter, a simple rule of thumb is simply to replace all partial derivatives by covariant 
derivatives, an.j all appearances of the flat spacetime metric r/µv by the curved 
metric gµv· For example, the energy-momentum conservation equation of special 
relativity, aµTµv = 0, where Tµv is the energy-momentum tensor, becomes 
(3.92) 
In cosmology, we typically model the matter filling the universe as a perfect fluid; 
the corresponding energy-momentum tensor comes from generalizing (1.114) to 
curved spacetime, 
(3.93) 
Recall that p is the energy density, pis the pressure, and Uµ is the four-velocity 
of the fluid. For the metric (3. 72) the components of the inverse metric are 
(3.94) 

118 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
We can take the fluid to be in its rest frame in these coordinates, so that the com-
ponents of the four-velocity are Uµ = (1, 0, 0, 0). In fact the fluid would have to 
be in its rest frame for this particular metric to solve Einstein's equation, as we 
will later see. The energy-momentum tensor therefore takes the form 
Tµv = (p a-2p a-2p 
-
) . 
a 2p 
(3.95) 
Note that these components are specific to the metric (3.72), and will generally 
look different for other metrics. 
Let's see what the energy-momentum conservation equation VµTµv = 0 im-
plies for a perfect fluid in an expanding universe. The rule for covariant derivatives 
(3.17) implies 
(3.96) 
This equation has four components, one for each µ,, although the three µ, = i E 
{I, 2, 3} are equivalent. Let's first look at the v = 0 component, piece by piece. 
The first term is straightforward, 
(3.97) 
The second term is 
(3.98) 
and the third term is 
ro Tµ>.. _ ro Too+ ro r11 + ro r22 + ro T33 _ 3 ~P 
µ>.. 
-
oo 
11 
22 
33 
-
a · 
(3.99) 
In each of these sets of equations, we have first invoked the fact that T µ v is di-
agonal, and then used the explicit formulae for the energy-momentum tensor and 
the connection coefficients in this metric. All together, then, we find 
. 
a 
p = -3-(p + p). 
a 
(3.100) 
Now let's look at one of the spatial components, choosing v = 1 for definiteness. 
Once again working piece by piece, we have for the first term in (3.96), 
a T µ1 
a r11 
-2a 
µ 
= 
1 
=a 
xP· 
(3.101) 
The second and third terms are 
(3.102) 

3.5 
The Expanding Universe Revisited 
119 
and 
r 1 T µ>.. _ r 1 Too + r 1 T 11 + r 1 r22 + r 1 T33 _ 0 
µ>.. 
-
00 
11 
22 
33 
-
. 
(3.103) 
Equivalent results will hold for v = 2 and v = 3. So the spatial components of 
the energy-momentum conservation equation simply amount to 
a;p =O. 
(3.104) 
It is illuminating to compare these results to those we would obtain in Min-
kowski spacetime, which can be found by simply setting a = l, a = 0. The 
pressure-gradient equation (3.104) is unaffected, so there is no effect of curvature 
on the spatial components: for a fluid that is motionless as measured by a comov-
ing observer, the pressure must be constant throughout space. For the timelike 
component, on the other hand, the expansion of the universe introduces a nonzero 
right-hand side to (3.100). To understand the consequences of this new feature, 
let us consider equations of state of the form 
p=wp, 
(3.105) 
where w is some constant. Then (3.100) becomes 
i> 
a 
-
= -3(1 + w)-, 
(3.106) 
p 
a 
which can be solved to yield 
p ex a-30+w). 
(3.107) 
In Chapter 1 we mentioned three kinds of perfect fluid with equations of state of 
the form (3.105): dust, with w = 0; radiation, with w = i; and vacuum, with 
w = -1. A set of nonrelativistic, noninteracting particles behaves like dust; a 
set of photons or other massless particles behaves like radiation; and a nonzero 
constant energy density throughout spacetime acts like vacuum. From (3.107) we 
see that the equation of state determines how the energy density evolves as the 
universe expands: 
matter 
p = 0 
radiat~on p = i p 
p ex a - 4 
vacuum 
p = -p p =constant. 
(3.108) 
We will explore these behaviors more thoroughly in Chapter 8; for right now let's 
simply note that they make sense. For dust, the energy density comes from the 
rest mass of each particle; if all the particles have mass m, the energy density 
is simply p = nm, where n is· the number density. Since the number density 
goes down as a-3 (the physical volume of a comoving region goes up, while the 

120 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
total number of particles stays constant), while the masses remain unchanged, 
we expect that the energy density obeys p ex a-3• For radiation, meanwhile, the 
energy of each particle (such as a photon) redshifts away as a- 1 as the universe 
expands; since the number density still obeys n ex a-3, we expect that p ex 
a-4 • Finally, the vacuum energy density is an intrinsic and unchanging amount of 
energy in any physical volume; it doesn't redshift at all as the universe expands, 
so we get p = constant. 
This example brings to life the differences between flat and curved spacetimes. 
For example, consider what we might be tempted to call the "energy," the integral 
over space of the energy density: E = f pa3 d3 x, where the boundaries are at 
fixed comoving coordinates, so the region expands along with the universe, and 
the factor of a3 comes from the square root of the determinant of the spatial metric 
a2oij. This number is clearly not conserved in general. For dust, since p ex a-3, 
E remains constant as the universe expands; but for radiation it decreases, and 
for vacuum energy it increases. This is upsetting, since conservation of energy is 
one of the more cherished principles of physics. What has happened? One way 
of thinking about this is from the viewpoint of Noether's theorem, which states 
that every symmetry implies a conserved quantity. Energy is the conserved quan-
tity that derives from invariance under time translations. Clearly, in an expanding 
universe, the energy-momentum tensor is defined on a background that is chang-
ing with time; therefore there is no reason to believe that the energy should be 
conserved. ("There is no timelike l{jlling vector," in the language to be intro-
duced in Section 3.8.) Nevertheless, we continue to refer to V µTµv = 0 as the 
energy-momentum conservation equation. It conveys the idea that there is a def-
inite law obeyed by the energy-momentum tensor, even if there is no integral 
corresponding to a conserved energy. The transition from flat to curved space-
time induces the additional Christoffel-symbol terms in (3.96); these tenns serve, 
roughly speaking, to allow transfer of energy between the matter fields (com-
prising Tµv) and the gravitational field. This notion is not very formal, however, 
and you shouldn't push it too far-it turns out to be difficult to associate a local 
energy density to the gravitational field, although it is possible in certain circum-
stances. 
Of course there is also a notion of time-translation invariance that refers not to 
the background spacetime, but to the theory itself (that is, to the equations that de-
fine the theory rather than a specific solution to them). We haven't yet developed 
the dynamical equations of general relativity, but they will tum out to be invariant 
under time translations, as well as under any other sort of coordinate transfonna-
tions, as indeed they must be. This general coordinate invariance leads to a set of 
constraints on allowed configurations of the theory, and generally requires a more 
subtle analysis. 
In the end, you should come to accept that there is a profound difference be-
tween flat and curved spacetimes, and some of our favorite notions from flat-
spacetime physics will be seriously modified in this more general context. This is 
not a sign of any flaw in general relativity, but a natural consequence of discarding 
the rigid spacetime geometry we learn to take for granted. 

3.6 The Riemann Curvature Tensor 
121 
3.6 • THE RIEMANN CURVATURE TENSOR 
FIGURE 3.5 An infinitesi-
mal loop defined by two vec-
tors Aµ and Bv. 
Having set up the machinery of covariant derivatives and parallel transport, we are 
at last prepared to discuss curvature proper. The curvature is quantified by the Rie-
mann tensor, which is derived from the connection. The idea behind this measure 
of curvature is that we know what we mean by "flatness" of a connection-the 
conventional (and usually implicit) Christoffel connection associated with a Eu-
clidean or Minkowskian metric has a number of properties that can be thought of 
as different manifestations of flatness. These include the fact that parallel trans-
port around a closed loop leaves a vector unchanged, that covariant derivatives 
of tensors commute, and that initially parallel geodesics remain parallel. As we 
shall see, the Riemann tensor arises when we study how any of these properties 
are altered in more general contexts. 
We have already argued, using the two-sphere as an example, that parallel 
transport of a vector around a closed loop in a curved space will lead to a transfor-
mation of the vector. The resulting transformation depends on the total curvature 
enclosed by the loop; it would be more useful to have a local description of the 
curvature at each point, which is what the Riemann tensor is supposed to provide. 
One conventional way to introduce the Riemann tensor, therefore, is to consider 
parallel transport around an infinitesimal loop. We are not going to do that here, 
but take a more direct route. Nevertheless, even without working through the de-
tails, it is possible to see what form the answer should take. Since spacetime looks 
flat in sufficiently small regions, our loop will be specified by two (infinitesimal) 
vectors Aµ and Bv. We imagine parallel transporting a vector yµ by first mov-
ing it in the direction of Aµ, then along Bv, then backward along Aµ and Bv 
to return to the starting point, as shown in Figure 3.5. We know the action of 
parallel transport is independent of coordinates, so there should be some tensor 
that tells us how the vector changes when it comes back to its starting point; it 
will be a linear transformation on a vector, and therefore involve one upper and 
one lower index. But it will also depend on the two vectors A and B that de-
fine the loop; therefore there should be two additional lower indices to contract 
with Aµ and Bv. Furthermore, the tensor should be antisymmetric in these two 
indices, since interchanging the vectors corresponds to traversing the loop in the 
opposite direction, and should give the inverse of the original answer. This is 
consistent with the fact that the transformation should vanish if A and B are the 
same vector. We therefore expect that the expression for the change o VP experi-
enced by this vector when parallel transported around the loop should be of the 
form 
(3.109) 
where RPaµv is a (1, 3) tensor known as the Riemann tensor (or simply curva-
ture tensor). It is antisymmetric in the last two indices: 
(3.110) 

122 
FIGURE 3.6 The commu-
tator of two covariant deriva-
tives. 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
Of course, if (3.109) is taken as a definition of the Riemann tensor, a convention 
needs to be chosen for the ordering of the indices. There is no agreement at all on 
what this convention should be, so be careful. 
Knowing what we do about parallel transport, we could very carefully pe1fonn 
the necessary manipulations to see what happens to the vector under this opera-
tion, and the result would be a fonnula for the curvature tensor in tenns of the 
connection coefficients. It is much quicker, however, to consider a related opera-
tion, the commutator of two covariant derivatives. The relationship betw~en this 
and parallel transport around a loop should be evident; the covariant derivative 
of a tensor in a certain direction measures how much the tensor changes relative 
to what it would have been if it had been parallel transported, since the covariant 
derivative of a tensor in a direction along which it is parallel transported is zero. 
The commutator of two covariant derivatives, then, measures the difference be-
tween parallel transporting the tensor first one way and then the other, versus the 
opposite ordering, as shown in Figure 3.6. 
The actual computation is very straightforward. Considering a vector field VP, 
we take 
[Vµ, Vv]VP = VµVvVP-VvVµVP 
= aµ(Vv VP) -
r~v VA yP + r~a Vv ya -
(µ, ~ v) 
= ()µ()v yP + (()µfea)Va + reaaµ ya -
f~v()A yP -
f~vf~a ya 
+ f~a()V ya + f~af~A VA -
(µ, ~ V) 
= (()µfea -
()vf~a + f~Af~a -
f~Af~a)Va -2f{'µv)VAVP. 
(3.111) 
In the last step we have relabeled some dummy indices and eliminated some tenns 
that cancel when antisymmetrized. We recognize that the last tenn is simply the 
torsion tensor, and that the left hand side is manifestly a tensor; therefore the 
expression in parentheses must be a tensor itself. We write 
[V µ' Vv]VP =RP aµv ya -
TAµv VA VP, 
where the Riemann tensor is identified as 
' 
R P ·l' ' -
a f P 
a f P + rP rA 
rP fA 
aµv -
µ va -
v µa 
µA va -
VA µa· 
Notice a number of things about the derivation of this expression: 
(3.112) 
(3.113) 
• Of course we have not demonstrated that (3.113) is actually the same tensor 
that appeared in (3.109), but in fact it's true. You are asked to show this in 
the Exercises. 
• It is perhaps surprising that the commutator [V µ, V v ], which appears to be 
a differential operator, has an action on vector fields that (in the absence of 

3.6 The Riemann Curvature Tensor 
123 
torsion, at any rate) is a simple multiplicative transformation. The Riemann 
tensor measures that part of the commutator of covariant derivatives that is 
proportional to the vector field, while the torsion tensor measures the part 
that is proportional to the covariant derivative of the vector field; the second 
derivative doesn't enter at all. 
• Notice that the expression (3.113) is constructed from nontensorial ele-
ments; you can check that the transformation laws all work out to make 
this particular combination a legitimate tensor . 
• The antisymmetry of RP aµv in its last two indices is immediate from this 
formula and its derivation. 
• We constructed the curvature tensor completely from the connection (no 
mention of the metric was made). We were sufficiently careful that the 
above expression is true for any connection, whether or not it is metric 
compatible or torsion free. 
• Using what are by now our usual methods, the action of [Vp, Va] can be 
computed on a tensor of arbitrary rank. The answer is 
[Vp, Va ]XµJ ···µk VJ ···vi 
T >-
"xµJ···µk 
= -
pa VA 
VJ ···V/ 
+ RµJ >..paX>..µi···µk VJ ···vi + Rµ2 >..paXµJ>..···µk VJ· .. vi + · · · 
R>-
xµJ· .. µk 
R>-
xµJ···µk 
-
VJpa 
>..v2···v1 -
v2pa 
VJA···vt -
· · · · (3.114) 
Both the torsion tensor and the Riemann tensor, thought of as multilinear maps, 
have elegant expressions in terms of the vector-field commutator. Thinking of the 
torsion as a map from two vector fields to a third vector field, we have 
T(X, Y) = VxY - VyX - [X, Y], 
(3.115) 
and thinking of the Riemann tensor as a map from three vector fields to a fourth 
one, we have (in funny-looking but standard notation) 
R(X, Y)Z = VxVyZ - VyVxZ - V[x,Y]Z. 
(3.116) 
In these expressions, the notation V x refers to the covatiant derivative along the 
vector field X; in components, Vx = XµV w So, for example, (3.116) is equiva-
lent to 
RP aµvXµ yv za = x>-v>..(Y 17V17ZP) -
y>-v>..(X 17V17ZP) 
-
(X>..a>..Y 11 -
y>-a>..X 11 )V17ZP' 
(3.117) 
which you can check is equivalent to (3.113). Note that the two vectors X and Y in 
(3.116) correspond to the last two indices in the component form of the Riemann 

124 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
tensor. The last tenn in (3.116), involving the commutator [X, Y], vanishes when 
X and Y are taken to be the coordinate basis vector fields (since [aµ, av] = 0), 
which is why this tenn did not arise when we originally took the commutator of 
two covariant derivatives. We will not use this notation extensively, but you might 
see it in the literature, so you should be able to decode it. 
Having defined the curvature tensor as something that characterizes the con-
nection, let us now admit that in GR we are most concerned with the Christoffel 
connection. In this case the connection is derived from the metric, and the asso-
ciated curvature may be thought of as that of the metric itself. This identification 
allows us to finally make sense of our infonnal notion that spaces for which the 
metric looks Euclidean or Minkowskian are flat. In fact it works both ways: 
• If a coordinate system exists in which the components of the metric are 
constant, the Riemann tensor will vanish. 
• If the Riemann tensor vanishes, we can always construct a coordinate sys-
tem in which the metric components are constant. 
Technically, these statements should be restricted to a region of the manifold that 
is simply-connected (all loops in the region can be smoothly defonned to a point 
without leaving the region); we will implicitly assume this condition below. 
The first of these is easy to show. If we are in some coordinate system such 
that aagµv = 0 everywhere, not just at a point, then r~v = 0 and aaf~v = 
O; thus RP aµv = 0 by (3.113). But this is a tensor equation, and if it is true 
in one coordinate system it must be true in any coordinate system. Therefore, 
the statement that the Riemann tensor vanishes is a necessary condition for it 
to be possible to find coordinates in which the components of gµv are constant 
everywhere. 
The second claim, that RP aµv = 0 everywhere implies we can find a coordi-
nate system in which the metric components are constant everywhere, is harder to 
prove (but not very hard). Consider as a wann-up a one-fonn w = wµ dxµ, defined 
at some point p. For any path xµ(I,.) that includes p, we can construct a unique 
one-fonn field along the path by demanding that wµ be parallel-transported: 
dxµ 
d/.. 'VµWv = 0. 
(3.118) 
In general, if we perfonned this procedure for distinct paths that started at p and 
passed through some other point q, the value of wµ at q would depend on the 
path. However, if the Riemann tensor vanishes everywhere, the parallel-transport 
will be path-independent, and we can define a unique one-fonn field throughout 
the manifold. Therefore (3.118) must be true for arbitrary dxµ /di..; this can only 
be true if wµ is covariantly constant: 
(3.119) 
On an arbitrary manifold there will be no solutions to this equation; it is only 
possible here because we are assuming that the curvature vanishes. We can take 

3.6 The Riemann Curvature Tensor 
125 
the antisymmetric part of (3.119), and from (3.36) we know that this is just the 
exterior derivative: 
(3.120) 
or, in index-free notation, 
dw=O. 
(3.121) 
In other words, w is closed. It is also exact (there exists a scalar function a such 
that w = da), since we have restricted the topology of the region in which we are 
working. In components we have 
(3.122) 
There is nothing special about the one-fonn w, so we can repeat this procedure 
with a set of one-fonns e<a), where a E { l ... n} on an n-dimensional manifold. 
We may choose our one-fonns to comprise a nonnalized basis for the dual space 
r;, such that the components of the metric with respect to this basis are those of 
the canonical fonn; in other words, 
(3.123) 
Here we use r/ab in a generalized sense, as a matrix with either + 1 or -1 for 
each diagonal element and zeroes elsewhere. The actual arrangement of the +l's 
and -1 's depends on the canonical form of the metric, but is irrelevant for the 
present argument. Now let us parallel transport the entire set of basis fonns all 
over the manifold; the vanishing of the Riemann tensor ensures that the result 
will be independent of the path taken. Since the metric is always automatically 
parallel-transported with respect to a metric-compatible connection, the metric 
components will remain unchanged, 
ds 2(anywhere) = r/ab e<a) ® e<b). 
(3.124) 
We therefore have specified a set of one-fonn fields, which everywhere define a 
basis in which the metric components are constant. This is completely unimpres-
sive; it can be done on any manifold, regardless of what the curvature is. What we 
would like to show is that this is a coordinate basis (which will only be possible if 
the curvature vanishes). However, by the same arguments that led to (3.122), we 
know that all of the e<a)•s are exact fonns, so that there exists a set of functions 
ya such that the one-fonn fields are their gradients, 
(3.125) 
These n functions are precisely the sought-after coordinates; all over the manifold 
the metric takes the fonn 
(3.126) 

126 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
At this point you are welcome to switch from using a, bas indices toµ,, v if you 
prefer. 
We have thus verified that the Riemann tensor provides us with an answer to the 
question of whether some horrible-looking metric is secretly that of flat space in 
a perverse coordinate system. If we calculate the Riemann tensor of such a metric 
and find that it vanishes, we know that the metric is flat; if it doesn't vanish, there 
is curvature. 
3.7 • PROPERTIES OF THE RIEMANN TENSOR 
The Riemann tensor, with four indices, naively has n4 independent components 
in an n-dimensional space. In fact the antisymmetry property (3.110) means that 
there are only n(n - 1)/2 independent values these last two indices can take on, 
leaving us with n3(n - 1)/2 independent components. When we consider the 
Cluistoffel connection, however, a number of other symmetries reduce the inde-
pendent components further. Let's consider these now. 
The simplest way to derive these additional symmetries is to examine the Rie-
mann tensor with all lower indices, 
(3.127) 
Let us further consider the components of this tensor in locally inertial coordinates 
xµ established at a point p. Then the Christoffel symbols themselves will vanish, 
although their derivatives will not. We therefore have 
Rpaµv(P) = g,o>Jaµrta - avrka) 
1 
~-
= 2gp5..g r (aµavgai + aµaagiv - aµaigva - avaµgai 
- avaagiµ + avaigµa) 
- lca-a-g-- -a-a-g-- -a-a-g-· +a-a-g-·) 
-
2 
µ a 
pv 
µ p va 
v a pµ 
v p µa • 
(3.128) 
In the first line we have used r! . (p) = 0, in the second line we have used 
• • 
µv 
aµg).r = 0 in Riemann normal coordinates, and the fact that partials commute 
in the third line. From this expression we can notice immediately three properties 
of Rpaµv: it is antisymmetric in its first two indices, 
(3.129) 
it is antisymmetric in its last two indices [which we already knew from (3.110)], 
Rpaµv = -Rpavµ. 
(3.130) 

3.7 
Properties of the Riemann Tensor 
127 
and it is invariant under interchange of the first pair of indices with the second: 
I Rpuµ" = R,,,,,,,. I 
(3.131) 
With a little more work, which is left to your imagination, we can see that the sum 
of cyclic pennutations of the last three indices vanishes: 
I Rpuµ" + Rpµ"u + Rp,uµ = 0. I 
(3.132) 
Given (3.130), it's easy to see that this last property is equivalent to the vanishing 
of the antisymmetric part of the last three indices: 
I Rp[uµ"] = 0. I 
(3.133) 
All of these properties have been derived in a special coordinate system, but 
they are all tensor equations; therefore they will be true in any coordinates (so 
we haven't bothered with hats on the indices). Not all of them are independent; 
with some effort, you can show that (3.129), (3.130), and (3.133) together imply 
(3.131). The logical interdependence of the equations is usually less important 
than the fact that they are true. 
Given these relationships between the different components of the Riemann 
tensor, how many independent quantities remain? Let's begin with the facts that 
Rpaµv is antisymmetric in the first two indices, antisymmetric in the last two 
indices, and symmetric under interchange of these two pairs. This means that we 
can think of it as a symmetric matrix R[pa](µvJ• where the pairs p<J and µ,v are 
thought of as individual indices. An m x m symmetric matrix has m(m + 1)/2 
independent components, while an n x n antisymmetric matrix has n(n - 1)/2 
independent components. We therefore have 
~ [~n(n - n] [!n(n - 1) + 1] = i(n4 - 2n3 + 3n2 - 2n) 
(3.134) 
independent components. We still have to deal with the additional symmetry 
(3.133). An immediate consequence of (3.133) is that the totally antisymmetric 
part of the Riemann tensor vanishes, 
R[paµv] = 0. 
(3.135) 
In fact, this equation plus the other symmetries (3.129), (3.130), and (3.131), are 
enough to imply (3.133), as can be easily shown by expanding (3.135) and ma-
nipulating the resulting terms. Therefore imposing the additional constraint of 
(3.135) is equivalent to imposing (3.133), once the other symmetries have been 
accounted for. How many independent restrictions does this represent? Let us 
imagine decomposing 
Rpaµv = Xpaµv + R[paµv]· 
(3.136) 

128 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
It is easy to see that any totally antisymmetric 4-index tensor is automatically 
antisymmetric in its first and last indices, and symmetric under interchange of 
the two pairs. Therefore these properties are independent restrictions on Xpaµv• 
unrelated to the requirement (3.135). Now a totally antisymmetric 4-index tensor 
has n(n - l)(n - 2)(n - 3)/4! terms, and therefore (3.135) reduces the number 
of independent components by this amount. We are left with 
k<n4 - 2n3 + 3n2 - 2n) - -bn(n - l)(n - 2)(n - 3) = fln 2(n2 -
1) 
(3.137) 
independent components of the Riemann tensor. 
In four dimensions, therefore, the Riemann tensor has 20 independent compo-
nents. (In one dimension it has none.) These twenty functions are precisely the 20 
degrees of freedom in the second derivatives of the metric that we could not set 
to zero by a clever choice of coordinates when we first discussed locally inertial 
coordinates in Chapter 2. This should reinforce your confidence that the Riemann 
tensor is an appropriate measure of curvature. 
In addition to the algebraic symmetries of the Riemann tensor (which constrain 
the number of independent components at any point), it obeys a differential iden-
tity, which constrains its relative values at different points. Consider the covariant 
derivative of the Riemann tensor, evaluated in locally inertial coordinates: 
v>.. Rfla/.tv =a>.. Rflaitv 
- la-ca-a-g-- -a-a-g-- -a-a·g·· +a-a·g··) 
-
2 A 
µ a 
pv 
µ p va 
v a pµ 
v p µa • 
(3.138) 
It may seem illegitimate to take the derivative of an expression that is only true at a 
point, but the terms we are neglecting are all proportional to aagitv• and therefore 
vanish. We would like to consider the sum of cyclic permutations of the first three 
indices: 
Vj_ Rpaitv + VPRa'i/.tv + Vc,R'ipµv 
- lca-a-a-g-- - a-a-a-g-- - a-a-a g·· + a-a-a-g·· 
-
2 
A µ a 
pv 
A µ p va 
A v a 
pµ 
A v p µa 
+ a-a-a-g-- - a-a-a-g · - a+a·g· · + a+a·g · 
P µ A av 
P µ a 
VA 
p v A aµ 
p v a µA 
+a-a-a-g·. -a-a-a-g-- -a-a-a-g· +a-a-a·g··) 
a µ P AV 
a µ A vp 
a v p Aµ 
a v A µp 
= 0. 
(3.139) 
Once again, since this is an equation between tensors it is true in any coordinate 
system, even though we derived it in a particular one. We recognize by now that 
the antisymmetry Rpaµv = -Rapµv allows us to write this result as 
Vp .. Rpa]µv = 0. 
(3.140) 
This is known as the Bianchi identity. For a general connection there would be 
additional terms involving the torsion tensor. It is closely related to the Jacobi 

3.7 
Properties of the Riemann Tensor 
129 
identity, since (recalling the definition of the Riemann tensor in tenns of the com-
mutator of covariant derivatives) it expresses 
(3.141) 
The Riemann tensor has four indices. At times it is useful to express a tensor 
as a sum of various pieces that are individually easier to handle and may have di-
rect physical interpretations. The trick is to do this in a coordinate-invariant way. 
For example, we could decompose the Riemann tensor into RP aij and RP a;o, 
from which we could reconstruct the entire tensor (since RP aoo vanishes). But 
clearly this decomposition is not invariant under change of basis; we want to 
find a decomposition that is preserved when we change coordinates. What we 
are really doing is considering representations of the Lorentz group. We have 
two fundamental tricks at our disposal: taking contractions, and taking symmet-
ric/antisymmetric parts. For example, given an arbitrary (0, 2) tensor Xµv. we can 
decompose it into its symmetric and antisymmetric pieces, 
(3.142) 
and the symmetric part can be further decomposed into its trace X = gµv Xcµv) 
-
1 
and a trace-free part Xµv = Xcµv) - ;;Xgµv• so that 
1 
..-. 
Xµv = -Xgµv + Xµv + X[µv)· 
n 
(3.143) 
(Note that X[µvJ is automatically traceless.) When we change coordinates, the 
different pieces Xgµv. Xµv• and X[µvJ are rotated into themselves, not into each 
other; we say that they define "invariant subspaces" of the space of (0, 2) ten-
sors. For more complicated tensors the equivalent decomposition might not be so 
simple. 
· For the Riemann tensor, our first step is to take a contraction to fonn the Ricci 
tensor: 
(3.144) 
For the curvature tensor formed from an arbitrary (not necessarily Christoffel) 
connection: there are a number of independent contractions to take. Our primary 
concern is with the Christoffel connection, for which (3.144) is the only inde-
pendent contraction; all others either vanish, or are related to this one. The Ricci 
tensor associated with the Christoffel connection is automatically symmetric, 
(3.145) 
as a consequence of the symmetries of the Riemann tensor. The trace of the Ricci 
tensor is the Ricci scalar (or curvature scalar): 

130 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
(3.146) 
We could also fonn the trace-free part Rµv = Rµv -
~ Rgµv. but this turns out 
not to be especially useful; it is more common to express things in tenns of Rµv 
and R. 
The Ricci tensor and scalar contain all of the infonnation about traces of the 
Riemann tensor, leaving us the trace-free parts. These are captured by the Weyl 
tensor, which is basically the Riemann tensor with all of its contractions removed. 
It is given in n dimensions by 
2 
Cpaµv = Rpaµv -
(n _ 2) (gp[µRv)a -
ga[µRvJp) 
2 
+ (n - l)(n - 2) gp(µgv)a R 
(3.147) 
This messy fonnula is designed so that all possible contractions of Cpaµv vanish, 
while it retains the symmetries of the Riemann tensor: 
Cpaµv = C(pa)[µv)• 
Cp[aµv) = 0. 
(3.148) 
The Weyl tensor is only defined in three or more dimensions, and in three dimen-
sions it vanishes identically. One of the most important properties of the Weyl 
tensor is that it is invariant under confonnal transfonnations (discussed in the 
Appendices). This means that if you compute CP aµv (note that the first index 
is upstairs) for some metric gµv• and then compute it again for a metric given 
by w 2(x)gµv• where w(x) is an arbitrary nonvanishing function of spacetime, 
you get the same answer. For this reason it is often known as the conformal 
tensor. 
An especially useful form of the Bianchi identity comes from contracting twice 
on (3.139): 
or 
0 = gva gµJ...('V>..Rpaµv + 'VpRa>..µv + 'VaRJ...pµv) 
= 'Vµ Rpµ -
'VpR + 'Vv Rpv. 
(3.149) 
(3.150) 
Notice that, unlike the partial derivative, it makes sense to raise an index on the 
covariant derivative, due to metric compatibility. We define the Einstein tensor 

3.7 
Properties of the Riemann Tensor 
131 
as 
Gµv = Rµv - !Rgµv· 
(3.151) 
In four dimensions the Einstein tensor can be thought of as a trace-reversed ver-
sion of the Ricci tensor. We then see that the twice-contracted Bianchi identity 
(3.150) is equivalent to 
(3.152) 
The Einstein tensor, which is symmetric due to the symmetry of the Ricci tensor 
and the metric, will be of great importance in general relativity. 
We should pause at this point to contrast the fonnalism we have developed with 
our intuitive notion of curvature. Our intuition is unfortunately contaminated by 
the fact that we are used to thinking about one- and two-dimensional spaces em-
bedded in the (almost) Euclidean space in which we live. We think, for example, 
of a straight line as having no curvature, while a circle (S1) is curved. However, 
according to (3. 137), in one, two, three, and four dimensions there are 0, I, 6 and 
20 independent components of the Riemann tensor, respectively. (Everything we 
say about the curvature in these examples refers to the curvature associated with 
the Christoffel connection, and therefore the metric.) Therefore it is impossible 
for a one-dimensional space such as S1 to have any curvature as we have defined 
it. The apparent contradiction stems from the fact that our intuitive notion of cur-
vature depends on the extrinsic geometry of the manifold, which characterizes 
how a space is embedded in some larger space, while the Riemann curvature is 
a property of the intrinsic geometry of a space, which could be measured by ob-
servers confined to the manifold. Beings that lived on a circle and had no access 
to the larger world would necessarily think that they lived in a flat geometry-
for example, there is no possibility of a nondegenerate infinitesimal loop around 
which we could parallel-transport a vector and have it come back rotated from its 
original position. Extrinsic curvature, discussed in Appendix D, is occasionally 
useful in GR when we wish to describe submanifolds of spacetime; but most of-
ten we are interested in the intrinsic geometry of spacetime itself, which does not 
rely on any embeddings. 
We can illustrate the intrinsic/extrinsic difference further with an example from 
two dimensions, where the curvature has one independent component. In fact, all 
of the information about the curvature is contained in the single component of the 
Ricci scalar. Consider a torus, portrayed in Figure 3. 7, which can be thought of as 
a square region of the plane with opposite sides identified (topologically, S1 x S1 ). 
Although a torus embedded in three dimensions looks curved from our point of 
view, it should be clear that we can put a metric on the torus whose components 
are constant in an appropriate coordinate system-simply unroll it and use the 
~uclidean metric of the plane, ds 2 = d.x 2 + dy2. In this metric, the torus is flat. 

132 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
identify 
-------
FIGURE 3.7 A torus thought of as a square in flat space with opposite sides identified. 
There is also nothing to stop us from introducing a different metric in which the 
torus is not flat, but the point we are trying to emphasize is that it can be made flat 
in some metric. Every time we embed a manifold in a larger space, the manifold 
inherits an "induced metric" from the background in which it is embedded, as 
discussed in the Appendix A. Our point here is that a torus embedded in a flat 
three-dimensional Euclidean space will have an induced metric that is curved, but 
we can nevertheless choose to put a different metric on it so that the intrinsic 
geometry is flat. 
Let's tum to a simple example where the curvature does not vanish. We have 
already talked about the two-sphere S2, with metric 
(3.153) 
where a is the radius of the sphere. It will actually be the radius if our sphere is 
embedded in R3, but we can call it the radius even in the absence of any embed-
ding. Two-dimensional people living on the sphere could calculate a by measuring 
the area of the sphere, dividing by 4H, and taking the square root; using the word 
"radius" to refer to this quantity is merely a convenience. We should also point 
out that the notion of a sphere is sometimes used in the weaker topological sense, 
without any particular metric being assumed; the metric we are using is called the 
round metric. Without going through the details, the nonzero connection coeffi-
cients for (3.153) are 
r:q, = - sine cose 
r:q, = r!e =cote. 
Let's compute a promising component of the Riemann tensor: 
R8 q,eq, = ae r:q, - aq, rgq, + rg>- r~q, - r:>- r~q, 
= (sin2 e - cos2 e) - (0) + (0) - (-sine cose)(cote) 
= sin2 e. 
(3.154) 
(3.155) 

3.8 
Symmetries and Killing Vectors 
133 
The notation is obviously imperfect, since the Greek letter A. is a dummy index that 
is summed over, while the Greek letters e and</> represent specific coordinates. 
Lowering an index, we have 
Req,eq, = ge>.. R>..q,eq, 
= gee Re q,eq, 
= a2 sin2 e. 
(3.156) 
It is easy to check that all of the components of the Riemann tensor either vanish 
or are related to this one by symmetry. We can go on to compute the Ricci tensor 
via Rµv = gaf3 Raµf3v· We obtain 
Ree = g<P<P Rq,eq,e = 1 
Req, = Rq,e = O 
Rq,q, = g°e Req,eq, = sin2 8. 
The Ricci scalar is similarly straightforward: 
fJO 
A.A. 
2 
R = g 
Ree + g"'"' Rq,q, = 2 · 
a 
(3.157) 
(3.158) 
Therefore the Ricci scalar, which for a two-dimensional manifold completely 
characterizes the curvature, is a constant over the two-sphere. If we had per-
turbed the metric (corresponding physically to bumps on the sphere), this would 
no longer have been the case. Note that the scalar curvature decreases as the radius 
of the sphere increases. Even in more general contexts, we will sometimes refer 
to the "radius of curvature" of a manifold as providing a length scale over which 
the curvature varies; the larger the radius of curvature, the smaller the curvature 
itself. 
3.8 • SYMMETRIES AND KILLING VECTORS 
The real world is a messy place, and we have no hope of finding a metric that de-
scribes our actual universe, or even any small part thereof, with perfect precision. 
Instead, we model spacetime via various approximations appropriate to the phys-
ical situation being studied. For example, the geometry outside a star or planet 
may be approximated, to some order of precision, as being spherically symmet-
ric, even if the real situation includes small deviations from this symmetry-these 
may be added in later as perturbations. 
General relativity is no different from other fields of physics, then, in being 
especially interested in solutions with symmetry. In fact, such properties may be 
even more crucial in GR than in, say, electromagnetism, since the nonlinear nature 
of Einstein's equation (discussed in the next chapter) makes it hard to find any 
exact solutions at all. In the context of curved spacetime, however, we need to be 

134 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
more careful than usual about what exactly is meant by "symmetry." In this section 
we develop some useful tools for studying symmetry; a deeper investigation can 
be found in Appendix B. 
We think of a manifold M as possessing a symmetry if the geometry is invari-
ant under a certain transformation that maps M to itself; that is, if the metric is 
the same, in some sense, from one point to another. In fact different tensor fields 
may possess different symmetries; symmetries of the metric are called isome-
tries. Sometimes the existence of isometries is obvious; consider, for example, 
four-dimensional Minkowski space, 
(3.159) 
We know of several isometries of this space; these include translations (xµ ~ 
xµ +aµ, with aµ fixed) and Lorentz transformations (xµ ~ Aµ vXv, with Aµ v a 
Lorentz-transformation matrix). The fact that the metric is invariant under transla-
tions is made immediately apparent by the simple fact that the metric coefficients 
r/µ v are independent of the individual coordinate functions xµ. Indeed, whenever 
aa.gµv = 0 for some fixed <J* (but for all µ, and v), there will be a symmetry 
under translations along xa* : 
(3.160) 
The careful reader will have noticed that we still haven't precisely defined what 
we mean by symmetry; roughly we imagine that the metric is invariant under 
some transformation, but the precise meaning is only developed in Appendix B. 
Also, the implication arrow in (3.160) only goes one way, and it would be nice 
to have a clean criterion for deciding when a given transformation counts as a 
symmetry; this will come soon. 
Isome tries of the form (3 .160) have immediate consequences for the motion of 
test particles as described by the geodesic equation. Recall from (3.61) that the 
geodesic equation can be written in terms of the four-momentum pµ = mUµ 
(valid for timelike paths, at least) as 
(3.161) 
By metric compatibility we are free to lower the indexµ,, and then we may expand 
the covariant derivative to obtain 
(3.162) 
The first term tells us how the momentum components change along the path, 
(3.163) 

3.8 
Symmetries and Killing Vectors 
while the second term is 
rfµP>..Pa = !gav(a>..gµv + aµgv>.. - avg>..µ)P>..Pa 
= !(a>..gµv + aµgv>.. - avg>..µ)P>..Pv 
= ! (()µgv>..) p>.. pv, 
135 
(3.164) 
(3.165) 
(3.166) 
where we have used the symmetry of p>..pv to go from the second line to the 
third. So, without yet making any assumptions about symmetry, we see that the 
geodesic equation can be written as 
dpµ 
1 
>.. v 
m dr = 2.(aµgv>..)P p . 
(3.167) 
Therefore, if all of the metric coefficients are independent of the coordinate xa*, 
we find that this isometry implies that the momentum component Pa ... is a con-
served quantity of the motion: 
dpa.., = O. 
dr 
(3.168) 
This will hold along any geodesic, even though we only derived it for timelike 
ones. The conserved quantities implied by isometries are extremely useful in 
studying the motion of test particles in curved backgrounds. 
Of course, even though independence of the metric components on one or more 
coordinates implies the existence of isometries, the converse does not necessarily 
hold. Symmetry under Lorentz transformations, for example, is not manifest as 
independence of r/µv on any coordinates; indeed, in four dimensions, there are 
four types of translations and six types of Lorentz transformations, for a total 
of ten, which is obviously larger than the number of dimensions the metric could 
possibly be independent of. What is more, it would be simple enough to transform 
to a complicated coordinate system where not even the translational symmetries 
were obvious. Such a coordinate transformation would change the metric com-
ponents, but not the underlying geometry, which is what the symmetry is really 
characterizing. Clearly a more systematic procedure is called for. 
We can develop such a procedure by casting the right-hand equation of (3.168), 
expressing constancy of one of the components of the momentum, in a more man-
ifestly covariant form. If xa* is the coordinate which gµv is independent of, let us 
consider the vector aa .... which we label as K: 
(3.169) 
which is equivalent in component notation to 
(3.170) 
We say that the vector K µ generates the isometry; this means that the transforma-
tion under which the geometry is invariant is expressed infinitesimally as a motion 

136 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
in the direction of K µ. Again, the notion is developed more fully in Appendix B. 
In terms of this vector, the noncovariant-looking quantity Pa,. is simply 
(3.171) 
Meanwhile, the constancy of this (scalar) quantity along the path is equivalent to 
the statement that its directional derivative along the geodesic vanishes: 
dpa,. = 0 
dr 
Expanding the expression on the right, we obtain 
pW\lµ(Kvpv) = pµKvVµpv + pµpv'\lµKv 
= pµ pv'\1µ K v 
= Pµ pv'\1(µ K v). 
(3.172) 
(3.173) 
where in the second line we have invoked the geodesic equation (pµ '\1 µPv = 
0). In the third line we have used the fact that pµ pv is automatically symmetric 
in µ, and v, so only the symmetric part of '\1 µ K v could possibly contribute. We 
therefore conclude that any vector K µ that satisfies V(µ K v) = 0 implies that 
K vPv is conserved along a geodesic trajectory: 
I 'ilcµK,i = o 
=? 
pµ'ilµ(K,p") = o. 
(3.174) 
The equation on the left is known as Killing's equation, and vector fields that 
satisfy it are known as Killing vector fields (or simply Killing vectors). You can 
verify for yourself that, if the metric is independent of some coordinate xa*, the 
vector aa,. will satisfy Killing's equation. In fact, if a vector Kµ satisfies Killing's 
equation, it will always be possible to find a coordinate system in which K = aa,.; 
but in general we cannot find coordinates in which all the Killing vectors are 
simultaneously of this form, nor is this form necessary for the vector to satisfy 
Killing's equation. 
As we investigate in Appendix B, Killing vector fields on a manifold are in tne-
to-one correspondence with continuous symmetries of the metric on that maru-
fold. Every Killing vector implies the existence of conserved quantities associated 
with geodesic motion. This can be understood physically: by definition the metric 
is unchanging along the direction of the Killing vector. Loosely speaking, there-
fore, a free particle will not feel any forces in this direction, and the component of 
its momentum in that direction will consequently be conserved. In fact, using the 
same kind of logic by which we sho~ed that K v p v is conserved along a geodesic 
if V(µ K v) = 0 generalizes to additional indices, a Killing tensor is a symmetric/-
index tensor K v1 ···vi that satisfies the obvious generalization of Killing's equation, 
and correspondingly leads to conserved quantities by contracting with I copies of 

3.8 
Symmetries and Killing Vectors 
137 
the momentum: 
(3.175) 
Simple examples of Killing tensors are the metric itself, and symmetrized tensor 
products of Killing vectors. Killing tensors are not related in a simple way to 
symmetries of the spacetime, but they will simplify our analysis of rotating black 
holes and expanding universes. 
Derivatives of Killing vectors can be related to the Riemann tensor by 
(3.176) 
as you are asked to prove in the exercises. Contracting this expression yields 
(3.177) 
These relations, along with the Bianchi identity and Killing's equation, suffice to 
show that the directional derivative of the Ricci scalar along a Killing vector field 
will vanish, 
(3.178) 
This last fact is another reflection of the idea that the geometry is not changing 
along a Killing vector field. 
Besides leading to conserved quantities for the motion of individual particles, 
the existence of a timelike Killing vector allows us to define a conserved en-
ergy for the entire spacetime. Given a Killing vector K v and a conserved energy-
momentum tensor Tµv• we can construct a current 
that is automatically conserved, 
'VµJj = ('VµKv)Tµv + Kv('VµTµv) 
=0. 
(3.179) 
(3.180) 
The first term vanishes by virtue of Killing's equation (since the symmetry of 
the upper indices serves to automatically symmetrize the lower indices), and the 
second term vanishes by conservation of Tµ v. If K v is time like, we can integrate 
over a spacelike hypersurface I: to define the total energy, 
Er= h 
Jjnµ.JYd 3x, 
(3.181) 
where Yij is the induced metric on I: and nµ is the normal vector to I:. In Ap-
pendix Ewe discuss integration over hypersurfaces, and in particular Stokes's the-
orem; as explained there, Er will be the same when integrated over any spacelike 

138 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
hypersmface, and is therefore conserved. This result fits nicely with our discus-
sion in Section 3.5, where we found that the total energy is not typically conserved 
in an expanding universe; expansion means that the metric is changing with time, 
so there is no isometry in this direction. When there is a timelike Killing vector, we 
can write the metric in a form where it is independent of the timelike coordinate, 
and Noether's theorem implies a conserved energy. Similarly, spacelike Killing 
vectors may be used to construct conserved momenta (or angular momenta). 
Although it may or may not be simple to actually solve Killing's equation in 
any given spacetime, it is frequently possible to write down some Killing vectors 
by inspection. (Of course a generic metric has no Killing vectors at all, but to 
keep things simple we often deal with metrics with high degrees of symmetry.) 
For example, in R3 with metric ds 2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2, independence of the 
metric components with respect to x, y, and z immediately yields three Killing 
vectors: 
xµ = (1, o, O) 
yµ = (0, 1, 0) 
zµ = (O, o, 1). 
(3.182) 
These clearly represent the three translations. There are also three rotational sym-
metries in R3, which are not quite as simple. To find them, imagine first going to 
polar coordinates, 
where the metric takes the form 
x = r sine cos 4> 
y = r sine sin 4> 
z = rcose, 
(3.183) 
(3.184) 
Now the metric (the same metric, just in a different coordinate system) is man-
ifestly independent of Q>. We therefore know that R = aq, is a Killing vector. 
Transforming back to Cartesian coordinates, this becomes 
(3.185) 
The Cartesian components Rµ are therefore ( -y, x, 0). Since this represents a 
rotation about the z-axis, it is straightforward to guess the components of all three 
rotational Killing vectors: 
Rµ = (-y, x, 0) 
Sµ = ( Z, 0, -x) 
Tµ = ( 0, -z, y), 
(3.186) 

3.9 
Maximally Symmetric Spaces 
139 
representing rotations about the z, y, and x-axes, respectively. You can check for 
yourself that these actually do solve Killing's equation. The overall signs don't 
matter, since minus a Killing vector is still a Killing vector. 
This exercise leads directly to the Killing vectors for the two-sphere S2 with 
metric 
(3.187) 
Since this sphere can be thought of as the locus of points at unit distance from the 
origin in R3, and the rotational Killing vectors all rotate such a sphere into itself, 
they also represent symmetries of S2. To get explicit coordinate-basis representa-
tions for these vectors, we first transform the three-dimensional vectors (3.186) to 
polar coordinates xµ' = (r, e, <f>). A straightforward calculation reveals 
R = aq, 
s = cos<f> a0 - cote sin</> aq, 
T = - sin</> a0 - cote cos</> aq,. 
(3.188) 
Notice that there are no components along ar. which makes sense for a rotational 
isometry. Therefore the expressions (3.188) for the three rotational Killing vectors 
in R3 are exactly the same as those of S2 in spherical polar coordinates. 
Inn 2: 2 dimensions, there can be more Killing vectors than dimensions. This 
is because a set of Killing vector fields can be linearly independent, even though 
at any one point on the manifold the vectors at that point are linearly dependent. 
It is trivial to show (so you should do it yourself) that a linear combination of 
Killing vectors with constant coefficients is still a Killing vector (in which case 
the linear combination does not count as an independent Killing vector), but this is 
not generally true with coefficients that vary over the manifold. You can also show 
that the commutator of two Killing vector fields is a Killing vector field; this is 
very useful to know, but it may be the case that the commutator gives you a vector 
field that is not linearly independent (or it may simply vanish). The problem of 
finding all of the Killing vectors of a metric is therefore somewhat tricky, as it is 
not always clear when to stop looking. 
3.9 • MAXIMALLY SYMMETRIC SPACES 
How symmetric can a space possibly be? An example of a space with the highest 
possible degree of symmetry is Rn with the flat Euclidean metric. Consider the 
isometries of this space, which we know to be translations and rotations inn di-
mensions, from the perspective of what they do in the neighborhood of some fixed 
point p. The translations are those transformations that move the point; there are 
n independent axes along which it can be moved, and hence n total translations. 
The rotations, centered at p, are those transformations that leave p invariant; they 

140 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
can be thought of as moving one of the axes through p into one of the others. 
There are n axes, and for each axis there are n - 1 other axes into which it can be 
rotated, but we shouldn't count a rotation of y into x as separate from a rotation of 
x into y, so the total number of independent rotations is !n(n - 1). We therefore 
have 
n + !n(n -
1) = !n(n + 1) 
(3.189) 
independent symmetries of Rn. But our counting argument only referred to the 
behavior of the symmetry in a neighborhood of p, not globally all over the mani-
fold; so even in the presence of curvature the counting should be the same. If the 
metric signature is not Euclidean, some of the rotations will actually be boosts, 
but again the counting will be the same. The number of isometries is, of course, 
the number of linearly independent Killing vector fields. We therefore refer to 
an n-dimensional manifold with !n(n + 1) Killing vectors as a maximally sym-
metric space. The most familiar examples of maximally symmetric spaces are 
n-dimensional Euclidean spaces Rn and the n-dimensional spheres sn. For an n-
dimensional sphere we usually think of the isometries as consisting of !n(n + 1) 
independent rotations, rather than as some collection of both rotations and trans-
lations. However, if we consider the action of these rotations on some fixed point 
p, a moment's thought convinces us that the entire set can be decomposed into 
!n(n - 1) rotations around the point (keeping p fixed), and another n that move 
p along each direction, just as in Rn. 
If a manifold is maximally symmetric, the curvature is the same everywhere 
(as expressed by translation-like isometries) and the same in every direction (as 
expressed by rotation-like isometries). Hence, if we know the curvature of a max-
imally symmetric space at one point, we know it everywhere. Indeed, there are 
only a small number of possible maximally symmetric spaces; they are classified 
by the curvature scalar R (which will be constant everywhere), the dimensionality 
n, the metric signature, and perhaps some discrete pieces of information relating 
to the global topology (distinguishing, for example, an n-torus from Rn, and tori 
of different sizes from each other). It follows that we should be able to reconstruct 
the entire Riemann tensor of such a space from the Ricci scalar R; let's see how 
this works. 
The basic idea is simply that, since the geometry looks the same in all direc-
tions, the curvature tensor should look the same in all directions. What might this 
mean? First choose locally inertial coordinates at some point p, so that gµv = 
11[1.v· Of course, locally inertial coordinates are not unique; for example, we can 
perform a Lorentz transformation at p and the metric components will remain 
those of 11[1.v· (By "doing a Lorentz transformation" we really are referring to a 
change of basis vectors in Tp; in a curved spacetime, this only makes sense at a 
single point, not over a region.) Since the geometry is maximally symmetric, we 
want the same to be true of the Riemann tensor; that is, the components of R paµ v 
should not change under a Lorentz transformation either, since there is no pre-
ferred direction in space time. But there are unique tensors that do not change their 
components under Lorentz transformations-the metric, the Kronecker delta, and 

3.9 
Maximally Symmetric Spaces 
141 
the Levi-Civita tensor. This means that, in these coordinates and at this point, 
the components of Rpafl-v will be proportional to a tensor constructed from these 
invariant tensors. Attempting to match the symmetries of the Riemann tensor re-
veals that there is a unique possibility: 
(3.190) 
But this is a completely tensorial relation, so it must be true in any coordinate 
system. We have argued in favor of this relation at a single point p, but in a 
maximally symmetric space all points are created equal, so it must also be true at 
any other point as well. The proportionality constant is easily fixed by contracting 
both sides twice [the left-hand side becomes R, and the right-hand side is n(n -
1)]. We end up with an equation true in any maximally symmetric space, at any 
point, in any coordinate system: 
(3.191) 
Likewise, if the Riemann tensor satisfies this condition (with R a constant over 
the manifold), the metric will be maximally symmetric. In two dimensions, find-
ing that R is a constant is sufficient to prove that a space is maximally symmetric, 
since there is only one independent component of the curvature. In higher dimen-
sions you have to work harder. 
Locally, then (ignoring questions of global topology), a maximally symmetric 
space of given dimension and signature is fully specified by R. The basic clas-
sification of such spaces is simply whether R is positive, zero, or negative, since 
the magnitude of R represents an overall scaling of the size of the space. For Eu-
clidean signatures, the flat maximally symmetric spaces are planes or appropriate 
higher-dimensional generalizations, while the positively curved ones are spheres. 
Maximally symmetric· Euclidean spaces of negative curvature are hyperboloids, 
denoted Hn. These are less familiar because even a two-dimensional hyperboloid 
cannot be isometrically embedded in R3. Let's examine this two-dimensional hy-
perboloid briefly. 
There are a number of ways of representing H2, which has the same topology 
as R2. One simple way is as the Poincare half-plane, which is the region y > 0 
of a two-dimensional region with coordinates {x, y} and metric 
(3.192) 
The geometry of the Poincare half-plane is of course different from that of the 
upper half of R2, despite the use of similar coordinates. For example, we can 
compute the length of a line segment stretching vertically (x = constant) from Yt 
to y2: 

142 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
f,
Y2 
6.s = 
YI 
=a r2 dy 
)YI 
y 
=alnG~). 
(3.193) 
This is not at all the result 6.s = Y2 - Yt we would expect in Euclidean space. In 
particular, notice that the path length becomes infinite for paths that approach the 
boundary y = 0. In other words, it's not really a boundary at all; it's infinitely far 
away, as far as anyone living on the hyperboloid is concerned. 
The nonvanishing Christoffel symbols for (3.192) are 
x 
x 
_, 
rxy=ryx=-y 
y 
-I 
rxx = y 
y 
-I 
ryy =-y . 
(3.194) 
From these it is straightforward to show that geodesics satisfy 
(x - xo)2 + y2 = 12' 
(3.195) 
for some constants xo and I. Curves of this form are semicircles with centers 
located on the x-axis, as shown in Figure 3.8. In the limit as xo ~ oo and I ~ oo 
with I - xo fixed, we get a straight vertical line. Following our discussion of S2 at 
the end of Section 3.7, we calculate a representative component of the Riemann 
tensor to be 
Rx 
-2 
yxy = -y . 
(3.196) 
As with the two-sphere, all other components are either vanishing or related to 
this by symmetries. This is simply a reflection of the fact that we are in two di-
y 
--+ 
x 
FIGURE 3.8 The upper half plane with a negatively curved metric. Geodesics are semi-
circles and straight lines that intersect the x-axis vertically. 

3.9 
Maximally Symmetric Spaces 
143 
mensions, with only one independent component of curvature. Turning the crank 
yields the Ricci tensor, 
R 
-2 
xx= -y 
Rxy =0 
R 
-2 
yy=-y 
' 
(3.197) 
and the curvature scalar, 
(3.198) 
We see that it matches that of S2 with the opposite sign, and in particular that it 
is a constant. Since we are in two dimensions, this is enough to ensure that our 
metric really is maximally symmetric. Of course there are coordinates in which 
H2 looks very different; one is introduced in the Exercises. 
Locally, then, a maximally symmetric space of Euclidean signature is either 
a plane, a sphere, or a hyperboloid, depending on the sign of R. Globally, any 
maximally symmetric space (of Euclidean signature) can be constructed by tak-
ing a carefully chosen region of one of these three spaces and identifying differ-
ent sides, as the flat torus can be constructed from R2. As an aside, let's briefly 
mention a connection between local geometry and global topology, encompassed 
by the Gauss-Bonnet theorem. For a two-dimensional compact boundaryless ori-
entable manifold, this reads 
x(M) = -1 { RJ!gj dnx, 
47r JM 
(3.199) 
where x (M) is a topological invariant of the space, known as the Euler charac-
teristic. In general it can be calculated from the cohomology spaces mentioned in 
Chapter 2; in two dimensions, however, it is simply given by 
x(M) = 2(1 - g), 
(3.200) 
where g is the genus of the surface (zero for a sphere, and equal to the number of 
handles of a torus or Riemann surface). The Gauss-Bonnet theorem holds whether 
or not the curvature R is a constant; when it is, however, we see that all Riemann 
surfaces of genus g ~ 2 must have negative curvature, just as a sphere must be 
positively curved and a torus must be ftat. 
Continuing our aside, think for the moment about string theory, which claims 
that the fundamental objects comprising the universe are small one-dimensional 
loops of string. Such strings have two-dimensional "world-sheets" rather than 
one-dimensional worldlines. Doing perturbation theory in string theory (the 
equivalent of calculating Feynman diagrams in quantum field theory) involves 
summing over all world-sheet geometries (generally, for technical reasons, Eu-

144 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
clidean geometries). This sounds like a lot of geometries, but in two dimensions 
any metric can be written as some fiducial metric times a conformal factor. This 
should be plausible, since there is only one curvature component; you are asked 
to prove it in the Exercises. The fiducial metric can be chosen differently for 
each world-sheet topology, and we can make our lives easier by choosing it to 
be (locally) a metric of maximal symmetry-the round sphere for genus zero, 
the plane for genus one, and the hyperboloid for higher genera. Even more for-
tunately, the string theories of greatest physical interest are the so-called critical 
string theories, for which the conformal factor itself doesn't matter. This is one 
of the things that makes doing calculations in perturbative string theory possible; 
we only have to sum over a discrete set of topologies, with a finite number of 
modular parameters for each topology (such as the parameters telling us the sizes 
of the different directions in a torus). 
We close this section with one last point. We have explored the maximally 
symmetric spaces of Euclidean signatures; there are, of course, corresponding 
spacetimes with Lorentzian signatures. We know that the maximally symmetric 
spacetime with R = 0 is simply Minkowsk.i space. The positively curved max-
imally symmetric spacetime is called de Sitter space, while that with negative 
curvature is imaginatively labeled anti-de Sitter space. These spacetimes will be 
more thoroughly discussed in Chapter 8. 
It should be clear by now that the Appendices flesh out these ideas in important 
ways. Impatient readers may skip over them, but it would be a shame to do so. 
3.10 • GEODESIC DEVIATION 
The Riemann tensor shows up as a consequence of curvature in one more way: 
geodesic deviation. You have undoubtedly heard that the defining property of Eu-
clidean (flat) geometry is the parallel postulate: initially parallel lines remain par-
allel forever. Of course in a curved space this is not true; on a sphere, certainly, 
initially parallel geodesics will eventually cross. We would like to quantify this 
behavior for an arbitrary curved space. 
The problem is that the notion of "parallel" does not extend naturally from flat 
to curved spaces. The best we can do is to consider geodesic curves that might 
be initially parallel, and see how they behave as we travel down the geodesics. To 
this end we consider a one-parameter family of geodesics, Ys (t). That is, for each 
s e R, Ys is a geodesic parameterized by the affine parameter t. The collection of 
these curves defines a smooth two-dimensional surface (embedded in a manifold 
M of arbitrary dimensionality). The coordinates on this surface may be chosen to 
be s and t, provided we have chosen a family of geodesics that do not cross. The 
entire surface is the set of points xµ (s, t) E M. We have two natural vector fields: 
the tangent vectors to the geodesics, 
(3.201) 

3.10 
Geodesic Deviation 
145 
FIGURE 3.9 A set of geodesics Ys(I), with tangent vectors Tµ. The vector field Sµ 
measures the deviation between nearby geodesics. 
and the deviation vectors 
sµ =axµ. 
as 
(3.202) 
This name derives from the informal notion that Sµ points from one geodesic 
toward the neighboring ones. 
The idea that Sµ points from one geodesic to the next inspires us to define the 
"relative velocity of geodesics," 
(3.203) 
and the "relative acceleration of geodesics," 
(3.204) 
You should take the names with a grain of salt, but these vectors are certainly 
well-defined. This notion of relative acceleration between geodesics should be 
distinguished from the acceleration of a path away from being a geodesic, which 
would be given by aµ= TaVaTµ. 
Since S and T are basis vectors adapted to a coordinate system, their commu-
tator vanishes: 
[S, T] = 0. 
(3.205) 
From (3.37) we then have 
(3.206) 

146 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
With this in mind, let's compute the acceleration: 
Aµ= TPVp(TaVaSµ) 
= TPVp(SaVaTµ) 
= (TPVpSa)(VaTµ) + TPSaVpVaTµ 
= (SPVpTa)(VaTµ) + TPSa (Va VpTµ + Rµvpar) 
= (SPVpTa)(VaTµ) + SaVa(TPVpTµ) - (SaVaTP)VpTµ 
+ RµvpaTvTpSa 
(3.207) 
Let's think about this line by line. The first line is the definition of Aµ, and the 
second line comes directly from (3.206). The third line is simply the Leibniz rule. 
The fourth line replaces a double covariant derivative by the derivatives in the 
opposite order plus the Riemann tensor. In the fifth line we use Leibniz again (in 
the opposite order from usual), and then we cancel two identical terms and notice 
that the term involving TPVpTµ vanishes because Tµ is the tangent vector to a 
geodesic. The result, 
(3.208) 
is the geodesic deviation equation. It expresses something that we might have 
expected: the relative acceleration between two neighboring geodesics is propor-
tional to the curvature. 
The geodesic deviation equation characterizes the behavior of a one-parameter 
family of neighboring geodesics. We will sometimes be interested in keeping 
track of the behavior of a multi-dimensional set of neighboring geodesics, per-
haps representing a bundle of photons or a distribution of massive test particles. 
Such a set of geodesics forms a congruence; in Appendix F we derive equations 
that describe the evolution of such congruences. 
Physically, of course, the acceleration of neighboring geodesics is interpreted 
as a manifestation of gravitational tidal forces. In the next chapter we explore 
in more detail how properties of curved spacetime are reflected by physics in a 
gravitational field. 
3.11 • EXERCISES 
1. Verify these consequences of metric compatibility (Va g µ v = 0): 
'Yagµv = 0 
'Y>..€µvpa = O. 
(3.209) 

3.11 
Exercises 
147 
2. You are familiar with the operations of gradient (V <P ), divergence (V · V) and curl 
(V x V) in ordinary vector analysis in three-dimensional Euclidean space. Using co-
variant derivatives, derive fonnulae for these operations in spherical polar coordinates 
{r, 8, </J} defined by 
x = r sin 8 cos <P 
y = rsin8 sin</J 
z = rcos8. 
(3.210) 
(3.211) 
(3.212) 
Compare your results to those in Jackson ( 1999) or an equivalent text. Are they iden-
tical? Should they be? 
3. Imagine we have a diagonal metric gµ v· Show that the Chtistoffel symbols are given 
by 
r~v =0 
r >.. 
1 ( 
)-1 "l 
µµ = -2 gu 
a>.,gµµ 
r~>.. = aµ (1n Jlgul) 
r~>.. =a>.. (1nJlgul~ 
In these expressions, µ ¥: v ¥: A, and repeated indic.~s are not summed over. 
4. In Euclidean three-space, we can define paraboloidal coordinates (u, v, </J) via 
x = uvcos<P 
y = uvsin<P z = !<u2 -v2). 
(3.213) 
(3.214) 
(3.215) 
(3.216) 
(a) Find the coordinate transfonnation matrix between paraboloidal and Cartesian co-
ordinates axa ;axf3' and the inverse transfonnation. Are there any singular points 
in the map? 
(b) Find the basis vectors and basis one-fonns in tenns of Cartesian basis vectors and 
fonns. 
(c) Find the metric and inverse metric in paraboloidal coordinates. 
(d) Calculate the Chtistoffel symbols. 
(e) Calculate the divergence V µ yµ and Laplacian V µ Vµ J. 
5. Consider a 2-sphere with coordinates (8, <P) and metric 
ds2 = d82 + sin2 8 d<P2. 
(3.217) 
(a) Show that lines of constant longitude (</J = constant) are geodesics, and that the 
only line of constant latitude (8 =constant) that is a geodesic is the equator (8 = 
1f /2). 
(b) Take a vector with components Vµ = (1, 0) and parallel-transport it once around 
a circle of constant latitude. What are the components of the resulting vector, as a 
function of 8? 
6. A good approximation to the metric outside the surface of the Earth is provided by 
ds2 = -(1 + 2<1>)dt 2 + (1 - 2<1>)dr2 + r 2(d82 + sin2 8 d</J2), 
(3.218) 

148 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
where 
<I>=_ GM 
r 
(3.219) 
may be thought of as the familiar Newtonian gravitational potential. Here G is New-
ton's constant and M is the mass of the earth. For this problem <I> may be assumed to 
be small. 
(a) Imagine a clock on the surface of the Earth at distance R1 from the Earth's center, 
and another clock on a tall building at distance R2 from the Earth's center. Calcu-
late the time elapsed on each clock as a function of the coordinate time t. Which 
clock moves faster? 
(b) Solve for a geodesic corresponding to a circular orbit around the equator of the 
Earth (8 = ;r/2). What is d<f>/dt? 
(c) How much proper time elapses while a satellite at radius R1 (skimming along the 
surface of the earth, neglecting air resistance) completes one orbit? You can work 
to first order in <I> if you like. Plug in the actual numbers for the radius of the Earth 
and so on (don't forget to restore the speed of light) to get an answer in seconds. 
How does this number compare to the proper time elapsed on the clock stationary 
on the surface? 
7. For this problem you will use the parallel propagator introduced in Appendix I to see 
how the Riemann tensor arises from parallel transport around an infinitesimal loop. 
Consider the following loop: 
x 1 =O 
Using the infinite series expression for the parallel propagator, compute to lowest 
nontrivial order in oa and ob the transfonnation induced on a vector that is parallel 
transported around this loop from A to B to C to D and back to A, and show it is 
proportional to the appropriate components of the Riemann tensor. To make things 
easy, you can use x 1 and x2 as parameters on the appropriate legs of the journey. 
8. The metric for the three-sphere in coordinates xµ = (l/t, 8, </>)can be written 
(3.220) 

3.11 
Exercises 
149 
(a) Calculate the Ch1istoffel connection coefficients. Use whatever method you like, 
but it is good practice to get the connection coefficients by varying the integral 
(3.49). 
(b) Calculate the Riemann tensor, Ricci tensor, and Ricci scalar. 
(c) Show that (3.191) is obeyed by this metric, confirming that the three-sphere is a 
maximally symmetric space (as you would expect). 
9. Show that the Weyl tensor Cµ vpa is left invariant by a confonnal transfonnation. 
10. Show that, for n :::::, 4, the Weyl tensor satisfies a version of the Bianchi identity, 
V pCP aµv = 2 ~: = 
~~ ( 
V[µRv]a + 2(n ~ l) ga[µ Vv]R) · 
(3.221) 
11. Since the Poincare half-plane with metric (3.192) is maximally symmetric, we might 
expect that it is rotationally symmetric around any point, although this certainly isn't 
evident in the {x, y} coordinates. If that is so, it should be possible to put the metric in 
a fonn where the rotational symmetry is manifest, such as 
(3.222) 
To show that this works, calculate the curvature scalar for this metric and solve for the 
function f (r) subject to the condition R = -2/a2 everywhere. What is the range of 
the coordinate r? 
12. Show that any Killing vector K µ satisfies the relations mentioned in the text: 
Vµ Va KP= RP aµvKv 
K>..V>..R =0. 
(3.223) 
13. Find explicit expressions for a complete set of Killing vector fields for the following 
spaces: 
(a) Minkowski space, with metric ds2 = -dt2 + ctx2 + dy2 + dz2. 
(b) A spacetime with coordinates {u, v, x, y} and metric 
ds 2 = -(dudv + dvdu) + a2(u)dx2 + b2(u)dy2, 
(3.224) 
where a and bare unspecified functions of u. This represents a gravitational wave 
spacetime. (Hints, which you need not show: there are five Killing vectors in all, 
and all of them have a vanishing u component K" .) 
Be careful, in all of these cases, about the distinction between upper and lower indices. 
14. Consider the three Killing vectors of the the two-sphere, (3.188). Show that their com-
mutators satisfy the following algebra: 
[R,S)=T 
[S, T) = R 
[T,R)=S. 
(3.225) 
15. Use Raychaudhuri's equation, discussed in Appendix F, to show that, if a fluid is flow-
ing on geodesics through spacetime with zero shear and expansion, then spacetime 
must have a timelike Killing vector. 

150 
Chapter 3 Curvature 
16. Consider again the metric on a three-sphere, 
ds2 = dl/12 + sin2 l/t(d82 + sin2 8 dcp2). 
(3.226) 
In this problem we make use of noncoordinate bases, discussed in Appendix J. In an 
orthononnal frame of one-fonns e<a) the metric would become 
ds2 = (]0) ® (]0) + (](2) ® e<2) + (](3) ® (](3). 
(3.227) 
(a) Find such an orthononnal frame of one-fonns, such that the matrix e~ is diagonal. 
Don't worry about covering the entire manifold. 
(b) Compute the components of the spin connection by solving d~ + wa b A eb = 0. 
(c) Compute the components of the Riemann tensor RP aµ v in the coordinate basis 
adapted to xµ by computing the components of the curvature two-fonn Rabµ v 
and then converting. 

CHAPTER 
4 
Gravitation 
4.1 • PHYSICS IN CURVED SPACETIME 
Having paid our mathematical dues, we are now prepared to examine the physics 
of gravitation as described by general relativity. This subject falls naturally into 
two pieces: how the gravitational field influences the behavior of matter, and how 
matter determines the gravitational field. In Newtonian gravity, these two ele-
ments consist of the expression for the acceleration of a body in a gravitational 
potential <I>, 
a= -V<I>, 
(4.1) 
and Poisson's differential equation for the potential in terms of the matter density 
p and Newton's gravitational constant G: 
(4.2) 
In general relativity, the analogous statements will describe how the curvature 
of spacetime acts on matter to manifest itself as gravity, and how energy and 
momentum influence spacetime to create curvature. In either case it would be 
legitimate to start at the top, by stating outright the laws governing physics in 
curved spacetime and working out their consequences. Instead, we will try to be 
a little more motivational, starting with basic physical principles and attempting 
to argue that these lead naturally to an almost unique physical theory. 
In Chapter 2 we motivated our discussion of manifolds by introducing the Ein-
stein Equivalence Principle, or EEP: "In small enough regions of spacetime, the 
laws of physics reduce to those of special relativity; it is impossible to detect the 
existence of a gravitational field by means of local experiments." The EEP arises 
from the idea that gravity is univerJal; it affects all particles (and indeed all forms 
of energy-momentum) in the same way. This feature of universality led Einstein 
to propose that what we experience as gravity is a manifestation of the curvature 
of spacetime. The idea is simply that something so universal as gravitation could 
be most easily described as a fundamental feature of the background on which 
matter fields propagate, as opposed to as a conventional force. At the same time, 
the identification of spacetime as a curved manifold is supported by the similar-
ity between the undetectability of gravity in local regions and our ability to find 
locally inertial coordinates (gµr, = 17µr,, a;,gµr, = 0 at a point p) on a manifold. 
151 

152 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
Best of all, this abstract philosophizing translates directly into a simple recipe 
for generalizing laws of physics to the curved-spacetime context, known as the 
minimal-coupling principle. In its baldest form, this recipe may be stated as 
follows: 
I. Take a law of physics, valid in inertial coordinates in flat spacetime. 
2. Write it in a coordinate-invariant (tensorial) form. 
3. Assert that the resulting law remains true in curved spacetime. 
It may seem somewhat melodramatic to take such a simple idea and spread it 
out into a three-part procedure. We hope only to make clear that there is nothing 
very complicated going on. Operationally, this recipe usually amounts to taking 
an agreed-upon law in flat space and replacing the Minkowski metric r/µ v by 
the more general metric gµ v, and replacing partial derivatives aµ by covariant 
derivatives V µ. For this reason, this recipe is sometimes known as the "Comma-
Goes-to-Semicolon Rule," by those who use commas and semicolons to denote 
partial and covariant derivatives. 
As a straightforward example, we can consider the motion of freely-falling 
(unaccelerated) particles. In flat space such particles move in straight lines; in 
equations, this is expressed as the vanishing of the second derivative of the pa-
rameterized path xµ (A.): 
d 2xµ 
dA.2 = 0. 
(4.3) 
This is not, in general coordinates, a tensorial equation; although d xµ / dA. are 
the components of a well-defined vector, the second derivative components 
d2 xµ /di.. 2 are not. You might really think that this is a tensorial-looking equation; 
however, you can readily check that it's not even true in polar coordinates, unless 
you expect free particles to move in circles. We can use the chain rule to write 
(4.4) 
Now it is clear how to generalize this to curved space-simply replace the partial 
derivative by a covariant one, 
(4.5) 
We recognize, then, that the appropriate general-relativistic version of the Newto-
nian relation (4.3) is simply the geodesic equation, 
d2xµ 
dxP dxa 
dA.2 + r~a di.. di.. = 0. 
(4.6) 
In general relativity, therefore, free particles move along geodesics; we have men-
tioned this before, but now you have a slightly better idea why it is true. 

4.1 
Physics in Curved Spacetime 
153 
As an even more straightforward example, and one that we have referred to 
already, we have the law of energy-momentum conservation in flat spacetime: 
(4.7) 
Plugging into our recipe reveals the appropriate generalization to curved space-
time: 
(4.8) 
It really is just that simple-sufficiently so that we felt quite comfortable using 
this equation in Chapter 3, without any detailed justification. Of course, this sim-
plicity should not detract from the profound consequences of the generalization 
to curved spacetime, as illustrated in the example of the expanding universe. 
It is one thing to generalize an equation from flat to curved spacetime; it is 
something altogether different to argue that the result describes gravity. To do so, 
we can show how the usual results of Newtonian gravity fit into the picture. We 
define the Newtonian limit by three requirements: the particles are moving slowly 
(with respect to the speed of light), the gravitational field is weak (so that it can be 
considered as a perturbation of flat space), and the field is also static (unchanging 
with time). Let us see what these assumptions do to the geodesic equation, taking 
the proper time r as an affine parameter. "Moving slowly" means that 
dxi 
dt 
Tr« dr' 
(4.9) 
so the geodesic equation becomes 
(4.10) 
Since the field is static ('1()gµv = 0), the relevant Christoffel symbols r({0 simplify: 
r({0 = !gµ>-('1og>.o + aogo>. - a>.goo) 
(4.11) 
Finally, the weakness of the gravitational field allows us to decompose the metric 
into the Minkowski form plus a small perturbation: 
gµv = r/µv + hµv. 
lhµvl « 1. 
(4.12) 
We are working in inertial coordinates, so r/µ v is the canonical form of the metric. 
The "smallness condition" on the metric perturbation hµv doesn't really make 
sense in a_rbitrary coordinates. From the definition of the inverse metric, gµ v g va = 
of;' we find that to first order in h, 
(4.13) 

154 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
where hµ v = r/µp rJ va h pa. In fact, we can use the Minkowsk.i metric to raise and 
lower indices on an object of any definite order in h, since the corrections would 
only contribute at higher orders. If you like, think of hµv as a symmetric (0, 2) 
tensor field propagating in Minkowski space and interacting with other fields. 
Putting it all together, to first order in h µ v we find 
r({0 = -!rJµ>-a>.hoo. 
(4.14) 
The geodesic equation (4.10) is therefore 
-- = _.,,µ>-a>.hoo 
-
d
2xµ 
1 
(dt)
2 
dr2 
2 
dr 
(4.15) 
Using ()ohoo = 0, theµ,= 0 component of this is just 
d 2t 
dr2 =0. 
(4.16) 
That is, dt /dr is constant. To examine the space like components of (4.15), recall 
that the spacelike components of r/µv are just those of a 3 x 3 identity matrix. We 
therefore have 
d2xi 
1 (dt )
2 
dr2 = 2 dr 
a;hoo. 
(4.17) 
Dividing both sides by (dt /dr)2 has the effect of converting the derivative on the 
left-hand side from r to t, leaving us with 
d 2xi 
1 
d12 = 2a;hoo. 
(4.18) 
This begins to look a great deal like Newton's theory of gravitation. In fact, if we 
compare this equation to ( 4.1 ), we find that they are the same once we identify 
hoo = -2<1>, 
(4.19) 
or in other words 
goo= -(1 + 2<1>). 
(4.20) 
Therefore, we have shown that the curvature of spacetime is indeed sufficient 
to describe gravity in the Newtonian limit, as long as the metric takes the form 
(4.20). It remains, of course, to find field equations for the metric that imply this 
is the form taken, and that for a single gravitating body we recover the Newtonian 
formula 
but that will come soon enough. 
GM 
<I>=---, 
,. 
(4.21) 

4.2 
Einstein's Equation 
155 
The straightforward procedure we have outlined for generalizing laws of 
physics to curved spacetime does have some subtleties, which we address in 
Section 4.7. But it's more than good enough for our present purposes, so let's not 
delay our pursuit of the second half of our task, obtaining the field equation for 
the metric in general relativity. 
4.2 • EINSTEIN'S EQUATION 
Just as Maxwell's equations govern how the electric and magnetic fields respond 
to charges and currents, Einstein's field equation governs how the metric responds 
to energy and momentum. Ultimately the field equation must be postulated and 
tested against experiment, not derived from any bedrock principles~ however, we 
can motivate it on the basis of plausibility arguments. We will actually do this in 
two ways: first by some informal reasoning by analogy, close to what Einstein 
himself was thinking, and then by starting with an action and deriving the corre-
sponding equations of motion. 
The informal argument begins with the realization that we would like to find 
an equation that supersedes the Poisson equation for the Newtonian potential: 
V2<1> = 47rGp, 
(4.22) 
where V2 = oii a; a 
j is the Laplacian in space and p is the mass density. [The ex-
plicit form of <I> given in ( 4.21) is one solution of ( 4.22), for the case of a pointlike 
mass distribution.] What characteristics should our sought-after equation possess? 
On the left-hand side of ( 4.22) we have a second-order differential operator acting 
on the gravitational potential, and on the right-hand side a measure of the mass 
distribution. A relativistic generalization should take the form of an equation be-
tween tensors. We know what the tensor generalization of the mass density is~ it's 
the energy-momentum tensor Tµv· The gravitational potential, meanwhile, should 
get replaced by the metric tensor, because in ( 4.20) we had to relate a perturba-
tion of the metric to the Newtonian potential to successfully reproduce gravity. 
We might therefore guess that our new equation will have Tµ v set proportional to 
some tensor, which is second-order in derivative~ of the metric; something along 
the lines of 
(4.23) 
but of course we want it to be completely tensorial. 
The left-hand side of (4.23) is not a sensible tensor; it's just a suggestive nota-
tion to indicate that we would like a symmetric (0, 2) tensor that is second-order 
in derivatives of the metric. The first choice might be to act the d' Alembertian 
D = Vµ V µ on the metric gµ v, but this is automatically zero by metric compatibil-
ity. Fortunately, there is an obvious quantity which is not zero and is constructed 
from second derivatives (and first derivatives) of the metric: the Riemann tensor 
RP aµv· Recall that the Riemann tensor is constructed from the Christoffel sym-

156 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
bots and their first derivatives, and the Christoffel symbols are constructed from 
the metric and its first derivatives, so RP aµ v contains second derivatives of gµ v· 
It doesn't have the right number of indices, but we can contract it to form the 
Ricci tensor Rµv. which does (and is symmetric to boot). It is therefore tempting 
to guess that the gravitational field equations are 
(4.24) 
for some constant K. In fact, Einstein did suggest this equation at one point. There 
is a problem, unfortunately, with conservation of energy. If we want to preserve 
(4.25) 
by (4.24) we would have 
(4.26) 
This is certainly not true in an arbitrary geometry; we have seen from the Bianchi 
identity (3.150) that 
(4.27) 
But our proposed field equation implies that R = KgµvTµv =KT, so taking these 
together we have 
(4.28) 
The covariant derivative of a scalar is just the partial derivative, so ( 4.28) is telling 
us that T is constant throughout spacetime. This is highly implausible, since T = 
0 in vacuum while T ~ 0 in matter. We have to try harder. 
Of course we don't have to try much harder, since we already know of a sym-
metric (0, 2) tensor, constructed from the Ricci tensor, which is automatically 
conserved: the Einstein tensor 
(4.29) 
which always obeys Vµ G µ v = 0. We are therefore led to propose 
Gµv = KTµv 
(4.30) 
as a field equation for the metric. (Actually it is probably more common to write 
out Rµv -
!Rgµv• rather than use the abbreviation Gµv·) This equation satis-
fies all of the obvious requirements: the right-hand side is a covariant expression 
of the energy and momentum density in the form of a symmetric and conserved 
(0, 2) tensor, while the left-hand side is a symmetric and conserved (0, 2) tensor 
constructed from the metric and its first and second derivatives. It only remains 
to fix the proportionality constant K, and to see whether the result actually repro-

4.2 
Einstein's Equation 
157 
duces gravity as we know it. In other words, does this equation predict the Poisson 
equation for the gravitational potential in the Newtonian limit? 
To answer this, note that contracting both sides of (4.30) yields (in four dimen-
sions) 
R =-KT, 
(4.31) 
and using this we can rewrite (4.30) as 
Rµv = K(Tµv - ! Tgµv). 
(4.32) 
This is the same equation, just written slightly differently. We would like to 
see if it predicts Newtonian gravity in the weak-field, time-independent, slowly-
moving-particles limit. We consider a perfect-fluid source of energy-momentum, 
for which 
(4.33) 
where Uµ is the fluid four-velocity and p and p are the rest-frame energy and 
momentum densities. In fact for the Newtonian limit we may neglect the pressure; 
roughly speaking, the pressure of a body becomes important when its constituent 
particles are traveling at speeds close to that of light, which we exclude from 
the Newtonian limit by hypothesis. So we are actually considering the energy-
momentum tensor of dust: 
(4.34) 
The "fluid" we are considering is some massive body, such as the Earth or the 
Sun. We will work in the fluid rest frame, in which 
uµ = (U0 , o, o, 0). 
(4.35) 
The timelike component can be fixed by appealing to the normalization condition 
gµvUµuv = -1. In the weak-field limit we write, in accordance with (4.12) and 
(4.13), 
. 
goo = -1 + hoo, 
g00 = -1 - hoo. 
Then to first order in h µ v we get 
(4.36) 
(4.37) 
In fact, however, this is needlessly careful, as we are going to plug the four-
velocity into (4.34), and the energy density pis already considered small (space-
time will be flat asp is taken to zero). So to our level of approximation, we can 
simply take u0 = 1, and correspondingly Uo = -1. Then 
Too= p, 
(4.38) 

158 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
and all other components vanish. In this limit the rest energy p = Too will be 
much larger than the other terms in Tµ v, so we want to focus on theµ, = 0, v = 0 
component of (4.32). The trace, to lowest nontrivial order, is 
T = g00Too =-Too= -p. 
(4.39) 
We plug this into the 00 component of our proposed gravitational field equation 
( 4.32), to get 
(4.40) 
This is an equation relating derivatives of the metric to the energy density. To find 
the explicit expression in terms of the metric, we need to evaluate Roo = R>..o>..O· 
In fact we only need R; o;o, since R0ooo = 0. We have 
(4.41) 
The second term here is a time derivative, which vanishes for static fields. The 
third and fourth terms are of the form (r)2, and since r is first-order in the metric 
perturbation these contribute only at second order, and can be neglected. We are 
left with RiojO = aj r&o. From this we get 
Roo = R;o;o 
[ 1 "}.. 
] 
= a; 2g' (()og>..o + aogo>.. - a>..goo) 
1 .. 
= - 2011 a;ajhoo 
= -~V
2 hoo. 
(4.42) 
Comparing to (4.40), we see that the 00 component of (4.30) in the Newtonian 
limit predicts 
(4.43) 
Since ( 4.19) sets hoo = - 2<1>, this is precisely the Poisson equation ( 4.22), if we 
set K = 8:rrG. 
So our guess, ( 4.30), seems to have worked out. With the normalization chosen 
so as to correctly recover the Newtonian limit, we can present Einstein's equation 
for general relativity: 
I Rµv - ! Rgµv = 8irGTµv· I 
(4.44) 
This tells us how the curvature of spacetime reacts to the presence of energy-
momentum. G is of course Newton's constant of gravitation; it has nothing to 
do with the trace of G µ v· Einstein, you may have heard, thought that the left-
hand side was nice and geometrical, while the right-hand side was somewhat less 
compelling. 

4.3 
Lagrangian Formulation 
159 
It is sometimes useful to rewrite Einstein's equation in a slightly different form. 
Following (4.31) and (4.32), we can take the trace of (4.44) to find that R = 
-8JTGT. Plugging this in and moving the trace term to the right-hand side, we 
obtain 
(4.45) 
The difference between this and ( 4.44) is purely cosmetic; in substance they are 
precisely the same. We will often be interested in the Einstein's equation in vac-
uum, where Tµ v = 0 (for example, outside a star or planet). Then of course 
the right-hand side of (4.45) vanishes. Therefore the vacuum Einstein equation is 
simply 
Rµv = 0. 
(4.46) 
This is both slightly less formidable, and of considerable physical usefulness. 
4.3 • LAGRANGIAN FORMULATION 
An alternative route to Einstein's equation is through the principle of least action, 
as we discussed for classical field theories in flat spacetime at the end of Chapter 1. 
Let's spend a moment to generalize those results to curved spacetime, and then 
see what kind of Lagrangian is appropriate for general relativity. We'll work in 
n dimensions, since our results will not depend on the dimensionality; we will, 
however, assume that our metric has Lorentzian signature. 
Consider a field theory in which the dynamical variables are a set of fields 
<J>i (x). The classical solutions to such a theory will be those that are critical points 
of an action S, generally expressed as an integral over space of a Lagrange den-
sity £, 
S = f C(<l>i, Vµ<l>i)dnx. 
(4.47) 
Note that we are now imagining that the Lagra11gian is a function of the fields and 
their covariant (rather than partial) derivatives, as is appropriate in curved space. 
Note also that, since dn xis a density rather than a tensor,£, is also a density (since 
their product must be a well-defined tensor); we typically write 
(4.48) 
where Z is indeed a scalar. You might think it would be sensible to forget about 
what we are calling £,and just focus on l, but in fact both quantities are useful 
in different circumstances; it is £, that will matter whenever we are varying with 

160 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
respect to the metric itself. The associated Euler-Lagrange equations make use of 
the scalar l, and are otherwise like those in flat space, but with covariant instead 
of partial derivatives: 
(4.49) 
In deriving these equations, we make use of Stokes's theorem (3.35), 
{ 'Vµ vµJigjdnx = { 
llµ vµJIYldn- 1x, 
)E 
laE 
(4.50) 
and set the variation equal to zero at infinity (the boundary). Integration by parts 
therefore takes the form 
J 
A"(V,,B)./=id"x = - J 
(V,,A")B./=id"x +boundary terms. (4.51) 
For example, the curved-spacetime generalization of the action for a single scalar 
field </> considered in Chapter 1 wou Id be 
which would lead to an equation of motion 
dV 
O<f>- d<f> = 0, 
where the covariant d' Alembertian is 
(4.52) 
(4.53) 
(4.54) 
Just as in flat spacetime, the combination gµv('Vµ</>)('Vv<f>) is often abbreviated 
as (V</>)2. Of course, the covariant derivatives are equivalent to partial derivatives 
when acting on scalars, but it is wise to use the V µ notation still; you never know 
when you might integrate by parts and suddenly be acting on a vector. 
With that as a wann-up, we turn to the construction of an action for general 
relativity. Our dynamical variable is now the metric gµv; what scalars can we 
make out of the metric to serve as a Lagrangian? Since we know that the metric 
can be set equal to its canonical form and its first derivatives set to zero at any one 
point, any nontrivial scalar must involve at least second derivatives of the metric. 
The Riemann tensor is of course made from second derivatives of the metric, and 
we argued earlier that the only independent scalar we could construct from the 
Riemann tensor was the Ricci scalar R. What we did not show, but is nevertheless 
true, is that any nontrivial tensor made from products of the metric and its first 
and second derivatives can be expressed in terms of the metric and the Riemann 
tensor. Therefore, the only independent scalar constructed from the metric, which 

4.3 
Lagrangian Formulation 
161 
is no higher than second order in its derivatives, is the Ricci scalar. Hilbert figured 
that this was therefore the simplest possible choice for a Lagrangian, and proposed 
(4.55) 
known as the Hilbert action (or sometimes the Einstein-Hilbert action). As we 
shall see, he was right. 
The equation of motion should come from varying the action with respect to 
the metric. Unfortunately the action isn't quite in the form (4.47), since it can't 
be written in terms of covariant derivatives of gµ v (which would simply vanish). 
Therefore, instead of simply plugging into the Euler-Lagrange equations, we will 
consider directly the behavior of SH under small variations of the metric. In fact it 
is more convenient to vary with respect to the inverse metric gµ v. Since gµ>.. g>.. v = 
o~, and the Kronecker delta is unchanged under any variation, it is straightforward 
to express variations of the metric and inverse metric in terms of each other: 
(4.56) 
so stationary points with respect to variations in gµ v are equivalent to those with 
respect to variations in gµv· Using R = gµv Rµv. we have 
where 
OSH = (oS)i + (oS)2 + (oS)3, ,. 
(oS)i = J 
dnx J='igµvoRµv 
(oS)2 = f dnx J='iRµvogµv 
(oS)3 = J 
dnx RoJ='i. 
(4.57) 
(4.58) 
The second term (oS)2 is already in the form of some expression multiplied by 
ogµv; let's examine the others more closely. 
Recall that the Ricci tensor is the contraction of the Riemann tensor, which is 
given by 
(4.59) 
The variation of the Riemann tensor with respect to the metric can be found by 
first varying the connection with respect to the metric, and then substituting into 
this expression. However, let us consider arbitrary variations of the connection by 
replacing 
(4.60) 

162 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
The variation oreµ is the difference of two connections, and therefore is itself a 
tensor. We can thus take its covariant derivative, 
(4.61) 
Here and elsewhere, the covariant derivatives are taken with respect to gµv. not 
gµv + ogµv· Given this expression and a small amount of labor, it is easy to show 
that, to first order in the variation, 
(4.62) 
You are encouraged check this yourself. Therefore, the contribution of the first 
term in (4.58) to oS can be written 
(oS)i = J 
dnxJ°=i gµv [ V>.(or~µ) -
Vv(or~µ)J 
(4.63) 
where we have used metric compatibility and relabeled some dummy indices. We 
can now plug in the expression for or~v in terms of ogµv, which works out to be 
or~v = -! [g>.µ Vv(og>-a) + gAV Vµ (og>-a) - gµagv,8 va (oga,8)]' 
leading to 
(oS)i = f dnxJ"=i Va[gµvVa(ogµv) - V>.(oga>.)], 
(4.64) 
(4.65) 
as you are also welcome to check. But (4.63) [or (4.65)] is an integral with re-
spect to the natural volume element of the covariant divergence of a vector; by 
Stokes's theorem, this is equal to a boundary contribution at infinity, which we 
can set to zero by making the variation vanish at infinity. Therefore this term con-
tributes nothing to the total variation. Although to be honest, we have cheated. The 
boundary term will include not only the metric variation, but also its first deriva-
tive, which is not traditionally set to zero. For our present purposes it doesn't 
matter, but in principle we might care about what happens at the boundary, and 
would have to include an additional term in the action to take care of this subtlety. 
To make sense of the (oS)3 term we need to use the following fact, true for any 
square matrix M with nonvanishing determinant: 
ln(det M) = Tr(ln M). 
(4.66) 
Here, In M is defined by exp(ln M) = M. For numbers this is obvious, for matri-
ces it's a little less straightforward. The variation of this identity yields 
1 
--o(detM) = Tr(M-1oM). 
detM 
(4.67) 

4.3 
Lagrangian Formulation 
163 
We have used the cyclic property of the trace to allow us to ignore the fact that 
M-1 and oM may not commute. Taking the matrix M to be the metric gµv. so 
that det M = det g µ v = g, we get 
og = g(gµvogµv) 
= -g(gµvogµv). 
(4.68) 
In the last step we converted from ogµv to ogµv using (4.56). Now we can just 
plug in to get 
1 
oJ"=i = - 2J"=iog 
-
1 
g 
µv 
- 2 J"=igµ vog 
= -~J"=igµvogµv. 
2 
(4.69) 
Hearkening back to (4.58), and remembering that (oS)i does not contribute, 
we find 
(4.70) 
Recall that the functional derivative of the action satisfies 
(4.71) 
where { <J>i} is a complete set of fields being varied (in our case, it's just gµ v). 
Stationary points are those for which each oS/o<l>i = 0, so we recover Einstein's 
equation in vacuum: 
1 
oSH 
1 
r=;:-- = Rµv - -Rgµv = 0. 
-v-gogµv 
2 
(4.72) 
The advantage of the Lagrangian approach is manifested by the fact that our very 
first guess (which was practically unique) gave the right answer, in contrast with 
our previous trial-and-error method. This is a reflection of two elegant features of 
this technique: First, the Lagrangian is a scalar, rather than a tensor, and therefore 
more restricted; second, the symmetries of the theory are straightforwardly im-
posed (in this case, we automatically derived a tensor with vanishing divergence, 
which is related to diffeomorphism invariance, as discussed in Appendix B). 
We derived Einstein's equation "in vacuum" because we only included the 
gravitational part of the action, not additional terms for matter fields. What we 
would really like, however, is to get the nonvacuum field equation as well. That 

164 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
means we consider an action of the form 
1 
S = 161TGSH +SM, 
(4.73) 
where SM is the action for matter, and we have presciently normalized the grav-
itational action so that we get the right answer. Following through the same pro-
cedure as above leads to 
1 
oS -
1 
(R 
1 
) 
1 
oSM - 0 
,J=g ogµv -
16JTG 
µv - 2Rgµv + .j=g ogµv -
. 
We now boldly define the energy-momentum tensor to be 
1 
oSM 
Tµv = -2----. 
,J=g ogµv 
This allows us to recover the complete Einstein's equation, 
Rµv - !Rgµv = 8JTGTµv• 
or equivalently, Gµv = 8JTGTµv· 
(4.74) 
(4.75) 
(4.76) 
Why should we think that (4.75) is really the energy-momentum tensor? In 
some sense it is only because it is a symmetric, conserved, (0, 2) tensor with 
dimensions of energy density; if you prefer to call it by some other name, go 
ahead. But it also accords with our preconceived expectations. Consider again the 
action for a scalar field, (4.52). Now vary this action with respect, not to <f>, but to 
the inverse metric: 
8S4> = f d"x[J=i (-~8g""V,,ef>Vvef>) + 8J=i (-k"V,,ef>Vvef>- V(ef>))] 
(4.77) 
= f d"xj=g8g""HV,,ef>Vvef> +(-~c,,.)(-~cpaVpef>Vuef>- V(ef>))l 
(4.78) 
We therefore have 
r«t>) = _2_1 _ os<t> 
µv 
.j=g ogµv 
= 'Vµ</>'Vv</> -
~gµvgpa'Vp</>'Va</> - gµv V(<J>). 
(4.79) 
In flat spacetime this reduces to what we had asserted, in Chapter 1, was the 
correct energy-momentum tensor for a scalar field. 
On the other hand, in Minkowski space there is an alternative definition for 
the energy-momentum tensor, which is sometimes given in books on electro-
magnetism or field theory. In this context energy-momentum conservation arises 

4.4 Properties of Einstein's Equation 
165 
as a consequence of symmetry of the Lagrangian under spacetime translations. 
Noether's theorem states that every symmetry of a Lagrangian implies the exis-
tence of a conservation law; invariance under the four spacetime translations leads 
to a tensor sµ v' which obeys aµ sµ v = 0 (four relations, one for each value of v ). 
The details can be found in Wald (1984) or Peskin and Schroeder (1995). Apply-
ing Noether's procedure to a Lagrangian that depends on some fields <I>; and their 
first derivatives aµ <J>i (in flat spacetime), we obtain 
(4.80) 
where a sum over i is implied. You can check that this tensor is conserved by 
virtue of the equations of motion of the matter fields. Sµ v often goes by the name 
"canonical energy-momentum tensor"; however, there are a number of reasons 
why it is more convenient for us to use (4.75). First, (4.75) is in fact what appears 
on the right hand side of Einstein's equation when it is derived from an action, and 
it is not always possible to generalize (4.80) to curved spacetime. But even in flat 
space (4.75) has its advantages; it is manifestly symmetric, and also guaranteed 
to be gauge invariant, neither of which is true for (4.80). We will therefore stick 
with (4.75) as the definition of the energy-momentum tensor. 
Now that Einstein's equation has been derived, the rest of this chapter is de-
voted to exploring some of its properties. These discussions are fascinating but not 
strictly necessary; if you like, you can jump right to the applications discussed in 
subsequent chapters. 
4.4 • PROPERTIES OF EINSTEIN'S EQUATION 
Einstein's equation may be thought of as a set of second-order differential equa-
tions for the metric tensor field gµv· There are really ten independent equations 
(since both sides are symmetric two-index tensors), which seems to be exactly 
right for the ten unknown functions of the metric components. However, the 
Bianchi identity Vµ G µ v = 0 represents four constraints on the functions R µ v (x), 
so there are only six truly independent equations in (4.44). In fact this is appropri-
ate, since if a metric is a solution to Einstein's equation in one coordinate system 
xµ it should also be a solution in any other coordinate system xµ'. This means 
that there are four unphysical degrees of freedom in gµ v• represented by the four 
functions xµ' (xµ), and we should expect that Einstein's equation only constrains 
the six coordinate-independent degrees of freedom. 
As differential equations, these are extremely complicated; the Ricci scalar 
and tensor are contractions of the Riemann tensor, which involves derivatives 
and products of the Christoffel symbols, which in tum involve the inverse met-
ric and derivatives of the metric. Furthermore, the energy-momentum tensor Tµ v 
will generally involve the metric as well. The equations are also nonlinear, so 
that two known solutions cannot be superposed to find a third. It is therefore very 

166 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
difficult to solve Einstein's equation in any sort of generality, and it is usually nec-
essary to make some simplifying assumptions. Even in vacuum, where we set the 
energy-momentum tensor to zero, the resulting equation (4.46) can be very diffi-
cult to solve. The most popular sort of simplifying assumption is that the metric 
has a significant degree of symmetry, and we will see later how isometries make 
life easier. 
The nonlinearity of general relativity is worth a remark. In Newtonian gravity 
the potential due to two point masses is simply the sum of the potentials for each 
mass, but clearly this does not carry over to general relativity outside the weak-
field limit. There is a physical reason for this, namely that in GR the gravitational 
field couples to itself. This can be thought of as a consequence of the equiva-
lence principle-if gravitation did not couple to itself, a gravitational atom (two 
particles bound by their mutual gravitational attraction) would have a different 
inertial mass than gravitational mass (due to the negative binding energy). The 
nonlinearity of Einstein's equation is a reflection of the back-reaction of gravity 
on itself. 
A nice way to think about this is provided by Feynman diagrams. These are 
used in quantum field theory to calculate the amplitudes for scattering processes, 
which can be obtained by summing the various contributions from different in-
teractions, each represented by its own diagram. Even if we don't go so far as to 
quantize gravity and calculate scattering cross-sections (see the end of this sec-
tion), we can still draw Feynman diagrams as a simple way of keeping track of 
which interactions exist and which do not. A simple example is provided by the 
electromagnetic interaction between two electrons; this can be thought of as due 
to exchange of a virtual photon, as shown in Figure 4.1. 
In contrast, there is no diagram in which two photons exchange another pho-
ton between themselves, because electromagnetism is linear (there is no back-
reaction). The gravitational interaction, meanwhile, can be thought of as deriving 
from the exchange of a virtual graviton (a quantized perturbation of the met-
ric). The nonlinearity manifests itself as the fact that both electrons and gravi-
FIGURE 4.1 A Feynman diagram for electromagnetism. In quantum field theory, such 
diagrams are used to calculate amplitudes for scattering processes; here, just think of it as 
a cartoon representing a certain interaction. The point of this particular diagram is that the 
coupling of photons to electrons is what causes the electromagnetic interaction between 
them. In contrast, there is no coupling of photons to other photons, and no analogous 
diagram in which photons interact. 

4.4 
Properties of Einstein's Equation 
167 
FIGURE 4.2 Feynman diagrams for gravity. Upon quantization, Einstein's equation pre-
dicts spin-two particles called gravitons. We don't know how to carry out such a quanti-
zation consistently, but the existence of gravitons is sufficiently robust that it is expected 
to be a feature of any well-defined scheme. Since gravity couples to energy-momentum, 
gravitons interact with every kind of particle, including other gravitons. This provides a 
way of thinking about the nonlineaiity of Einstein's theory. 
tons can exchange virtual gravitons, and therefore exert a gravitational force, as 
shown in Figure 4.2. There is nothing unique about this feature of gravity; it is 
shared by most gauge theories, such as quantum chromodynamics, the theory of 
the strong interactions. Electromagnetism is actually the exception; the linearity 
can be traced to the fact that the relevant gauge group, U(l), is abelian. But non-
linearity does represent a departure from the Newtonian theory. This difference is 
experimentally detectable; the reason why (as we shall see) the orbit of Mercury is 
different in GR versus Newtonian gravity is that the gravitational field influences 
itself, and the closer we get to the Sun, the more noticeable that influence is. 
Beyond the fact that it is complicated and nonlinear, it is worth thinking a bit 
about what Einstein's equation is actually telling us. Clearly it relates the energy-
momentum distribution to components of the curvature tensor; but from a physi-
cal point of view, precisely what kind of gravitational field is generated by a given 
kind of source? One way to answer this question is to consider the evolution of the 
expansion () of a family of neighboring timelike geodesics. We imagine a small 
ball of free test particles moving along geodesics with four-velocities Uµ, and fol-
low their evolution; the expansion() = v µ uµ tells us how the volume of the ball 
is growing (or shrinking, if() < 0) at any one moment of time. Clearly the value 
of the expansion will depend on the initial conditions for our test particles. The 
effects of gravity, on the other hand, are encoded in the evolution of the expan-
sion, which is governed by Raychaudhuri's equation. This equation, discussed in 
Appendix F, tells us that the derivative of the expansion with respect to the proper 
time r along the geodesics is given by the following expression: 
d() 
2 
2 
1 2 
v 
dr = 2w - 2a - 3B - RµvUµU . 
(4.81) 
The terms on the right-hand side are explained carefully in Appendix F; w en-
codes the rotation of the geodesics, a encodes the shear, and Rµ v is of course the 
Ricci tensor. Raychaudhuri's equation is a purely geometric relation, making no 

168 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
reference to Einstein's equation. The combination of the two equations, however, 
can be used to describe how energy-momentum influences the motion of test par-
ticles, since Einstein's equation relates Tµv to Rµv and Raychaudhuri's equation 
relates Rµv to d() /dr. 
Let us consider the simplest possible situation, where we start with all of the 
nearby particles at rest with respect to each other in a small region of spacetime. 
Then the expansion, rotation, and shear will all vanish at this initial moment. Let 
us further construct locally inertial coordinates xi.t, in which ui.t is in its rest 
frame, so that ui.t = (1, 0, 0, 0) and Rµ;pi.tuv = R00. We therefore have (in 
these coordinates, at this point) 
d() 
-
= -Roo· 
dr 
Now we can tum to Einstein's equation, in the form 
Rµv = 8JTG ( Tµv - !Tgµv). 
Since we are in locally inertial coordinates, we have 
gµ" = r/µv 
T = gi.t"Tµv = -p + Px +Py+ Pz• 
(4.82) 
(4.83) 
(4.84) 
(4.85) 
where p = T00 is the rest-frame energy density and Pk = Ti:k is the pressure in 
the xi: direction. Thus, (4.82) becomes 
d() 
dr = -4JTG(p + Px +Py+ Pz). 
(4.86) 
This equation is telling us that energy and pressure create a gravitational field that 
works to decrease the volume of our initially stationary ball of test particles (if p 
and the p; 's are all positive). In other words, gravity is attractive. 
Of course, from (4.86) we see that gravity is not necessarily attractive; we 
could imagine sources for which p + Px +Py+ Pz were a negative number. Clearly, 
the role of pressure bears noting. For one thing, it represents an unambiguous de-
parture from Newtonian theory, in which the pressure does not influence gravity 
(it doesn't appear in Poisson's equation, V2<1> = 4JTGp). The difference is hard to 
notice in our Solar System, since the pressure in the Sun and planets is much less 
than the energy density, which is dominated by the rest masses of the constituent 
particles. For another thing, notice that the gravitational effect of the pressure 
is opposite to that of the direct effect with which we are more familiar, namely 
that positive pressure works to push things apart. In most circumstances the di-
rect effect of pressure is much more noticeable. However, the pressure can only 
act directly when there is a pressure gradient (for example, a change in pressure 
between the interior and exterior of a piston), whereas the gravitational effect de-
pends only on the value of the pressure locally. If there were a perfectly smooth 

4.4 
Properties of Einstein's Equation 
169 
pressure, it would only be detectable through its gravitational effect; an example 
is provided by vacuum energy, discussed in Section 4.5. 
As a final comment on (4.86), let's point out that it is completely equivalent 
to Einstein's equation-they convey identical information. This very specific re-
lation will hold for any set of initially motionless test particles; the only way this 
can happen is if all of the components of Einstein's equation are true. If we like, 
then, we can state Einstein's equation in words1 as follows: "The expansion of the 
volume of any set of particles initially at rest is proportional to (minus) the sum 
of the energy density and the three components of pressure." 
So Einstein's equation tells us that energy density and pressure affect the Ricci 
tensor in such a way as to attract particles together when p and p are positive. 
What about the components of the Riemann tensor that are not included in the 
Ricci tensor? In Chapter 3 we found that these components were described by the 
Weyl tensor (expressed here in four dimensions), 
(4.87) 
The Ricci tensor is the trace of the Riemann tensor, while the Weyl tensor de-
scribes the trace-free part; together they provide a complete characterization of 
the curvature. Clearly, given some specified energy-momentum distribution, there 
is still some freedom in the choice of Weyl curvature, since there is no analogue 
of Einstein's equation to relate CP aµv algebraically to Tµv· This is exactly as it 
should be. Imagine for example a spacetime that is vacuum everywhere, Rµ v = 0. 
Flat Minkowski space is a possible solution in such a case, but so is a gravitational 
wave propagating through empty spacetime (as we will discuss in Chapter 7). 
Since only Rµ v enters Einstein's equation, it might appear that the components 
of C paµ v are completely unconstrained. But recall that we are not permitted to 
arbitrarily specify the components of the curvature tensor throughout a manifold; 
they are related by the Bianchi identity, 
Vp .. Rpa)µv = 0. 
(4.88) 
As you showed in Exercise 10 of Chapter 3, this identity implies a differential 
relation for the Weyl tensor of the form 
(4.89) 
On the right-hand side, the Riemann tensor only appears via its contractions the 
Ricci scalar and tensor, which can be related to Tµ v by Einstein's equation; we 
therefore have 
VPCpaµv = 8JTG (vrµTvJa + !ga[µ Vv1T) · 
(4.90) 
So, while Rµv and Tµv are related algebraically through Einstein's equation, 
C paµ v and Tµ v are related by this first-order differential equation. There will be 
1 J.C Baez, "The Meaning of Einstein's Equation," http://arXiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0103044. 

170 
Chapter 4 
Gravitation 
a number of possible solutions for a given energy-momentum distribution, each 
specified by certain boundary conditions. This equation can be thought of as a 
propagation equation for gravitational waves, in close analogy with Maxwell's 
equations V µ Fvµ = J v. 
Having listed all of these lovely properties of Einstein's equation, it seems only 
fair that we should mention one distressing feature: the well-known difficulty of 
reconciling general relativity with quantum mechanics. GR is a classical field 
theory: the dynamical variable is a field (the metric) defined on spacetime, and 
coordinate-invariant quantities constructed from this field (such as the curvature 
scalar) can in principle be specified and measured to arbitrary accuracy. In the 
case of other field theories, such as electromagnetism, there are well-understood 
procedures for beginning with the classical theory and quantizing it, to obtain 
the dynamics of operators acting on wave functions living in a Hilbert space. For 
GR, the usual procedures run into both technical and conceptual difficulties, a de-
scription of which is beyond the scope of this book. One aspect of the technical 
difficulties is that GR is not "renormalizable" in the way that the Standard Model 
of particle physics is; when considering higher-order quantum effects, infinities 
appear that cannot be absorbed in any finite number of parameters. Nonrenor-
malizability does not mean that theory is fundamentally incorrect, but is a strong 
suggestion that it should only be taken seriously up to a certain energy scale. 
Fortunately, the regime in which observable effects of quantum gravity are 
expected to become important is far from our everyday experience (or, for that 
matter, any conditions we can produce in the lab). Way back in 1899 Planck 
noticed that his constant h, for which nowadays we more often substitute h = 
h/27r = 1.05 x 10-27 cm2 g/sec, could be combined with Newton's constant 
G = 6.67 x 10-8cm3 g-1 sec-2 and the speed of light c = 3.00 x 1010cm sec-1 
to form a basic set of dimensionful quantities: the Planck mass, 
(
hc)l/2 
mp = 
G 
= 2.18 x 10-5 g, 
the Planck length, 
(
hG)1;2 
Ip = 
-;J 
= 1.62 x 10-33 cm, 
the Planck time, 
(
hG)1;2 
tp = -;s 
= 5.39 x 10-44 sec, 
and the Planck energy, 
Ep = ( h~s y
12 
= 1.95 x 1016 erg 
= 1.22 x 1019 GeV. 
(4.91) 
(4.92) 
(4.93) 
(4.94) 
(4.95) 

4.5 The Cosmological Constant 
171 
A Ge V is 109 electron volts, a common unit in particle physics, as it is ap-
proximately the mass of a proton. We usually set h = c = 1, so that these 
quantities are all indistinguishable in the sense that mp = lp1 = tp1 = Ep. 
You will hear people say things like "the Planck mass is 1019 GeV"; or sim-
ply refer to "the Planck scale." Another commonly used quantity is the reduced 
Planck scale, mp = mp/./Si = 2.43 x 1018 GeV, which is often more conve-
nient in equations-note that the coefficient of the curvature scalar in (4.73) is 
m~/2. Most likely, quantum gravity does not become important until we consider 
particle masses greater than mp, or times shorter than tp, or lengths smaller than 
Ip, or energies higher than Ep; at lower scales, classical GR should suffice. Since 
these are all far removed from observable phenomena, constructing a consistent 
theory of quantum gravity is more an issue of principle than of practice. On the 
other hand, quantum effects in curved spacetime might be important in the real 
world; as we will discuss in Chapter 8, they might lead to density fluctuations 
in the early universe, which grow into the galaxies and large-scale structure we 
observe today. 
There is a leading contender for a fully quantum theory that would encompass 
GR in the appropriate limit: string theory. In string theory we imagine that the 
fundamental objects are not point particles like electrons or photons, but rather 
small one-dimensional objects called strings, which can be either closed loops or 
open segments. String theory was originally proposed as a model of the strong 
nuclear force, but it was soon realized that the theory inevitably predicted a mass-
less spin-two particle: exactly what a quantum theory of gravity would require. 
String theory seems to be a consistent quantum theory, and it predicts gravity, but 
there is still a great deal about it that we don't understand. In particular, the way 
in which a classical spacetime arises out of fundamental strings is somewhat mys-
terious, and the connection to direct experiments is tenuous at best. Nevertheless, 
string theory is remarkably rich and robust, and promises to be an important part 
of theoretical physics for the foreseeable future. 
4.5 • THE COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT 
A characteristic feature of general relativity is that the source for the gravita-
tional field is the entire energy-momentum tensor. In nongravitational physics, 
only changes in energy from one state to another are measurable; the normaliza-
tion of the energy is arbitrary. For example, the motion of a particle with potential 
energy V (x) is precisely the same as that with a potential energy V (x) + Vo, for 
any constant Vo. In gravitation, however, the actual value of the energy matters. 
not just the differences between states. 
This behavior opens up the possibility of vacuum energy: an energy density 
characteristic of empty space. One feature that we might want the vacuum to ex-
hibit is that it not pick out a preferred direction; it will still be possible to have 
a nonzero energy density if the associated energy-momentum tensor is Lorentz 
invariant in locally inertial coordinates. Lorentz invariance implies that the corre-

172 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
sponding energy-momentum tensor should be proportional to the metric, 
T (vac) 
· · = - Pvac r/µ· v' 
µv 
(4.96) 
since r/ itv is the only Lorentz invariant (0, 2) tensor. This generalizes straightfor-
wardly from inertial coordinates to arbitrary coordinates as 
(4.97) 
Comparing to the perfect-fluid energy-momentum tensor Tµv = (p + p)UµUv + 
pgµv. we find that the vacuum looks like a perfect fluid with an isotropic pressure 
opposite in sign to the energy density, 
Pvac = -Pvac· 
(4.98) 
The energy density should be constant throughout spacetime, since a gradient 
would not be Lorentz invariant. 
If we decompose the energy-momentum tensor into a matter piece ri~) and a 
. 
r<vac) 
E. 
. , 
. 
. 
vacuum piece µv 
= -Pvacgµv• mstem s equation 1s 
(4.99) 
Soon after inventing GR, Einstein tried to find a static cosmological model, since 
that was what astronomical observations of the time seemed to imply. The result 
was the Einstein static universe, which will be discussed in Chapter 8. In order for 
this static cosmology to solve the field equation with an ordinary matter source, 
it was necessary to add a new term called the cosmological constant, A, which 
enters as 
(4.100) 
From comparison with ( 4.99), we see that the cosmological constant is precisely 
equivalent to introducing a vacuum energy density 
A 
Pvac = 87rG · 
(4.101) 
The terms "cosmological constant" and "vacuum energy" are essentially inter-
changeable. 
Is a nonzero vacuum energy something we should expect? We arrived at the 
Hilbert Lagrangian ZH = R by looking for the simplest possible scalar we could 
construct from the metric. Of course there is an even simpler one, namely a con-
stant. Using (4.69), it is straightforward to check that 
S = f d4x .;-:::g [-
1-(R - 2A) +CM] 
16rrG 
(4.102) 

4.5 The Cosmological Constant 
173 
leads to the modified equation ( 4.100); alternatively, the vacuum Lagrangian is 
simply 
Cvac = - Pvac · 
(4.103) 
So it is certainly easy to introduce vacuum energy; however, we have no insight 
into its expected value, since it enters as an arbitrary constant. 
The vacuum energy ultimately is a constant of nature in its own right. (An 
exception occurs in certain theories where a spacetime symmetry such as super-
symmetry or conformal invariance governs the value of the vacuum energy; here 
we are considering a more generic field theory.) Nevertheless, there are various 
distinct contributions to the vacuum energy, and it would be strange if the total 
value were much smaller than the individual contributions. One such contribu-
tion comes from zero-point fluctuations-the energies of quantum fields in their 
vacuum state. 
Consider a simple harmonic oscillator, a particle moving in a one-dimensional 
potential V (x) = ! w2 x 2• Classically, the vacuum for this system is the state 
in which the particle is motionless and at the minimum of the potential (x = 
0), for which the energy in this case vanishes. Quantum-mechanically, however, 
the uncertainty principle forbids us from isolating the particle both in position 
and momentum, and we find that the lowest energy state has an energy Eo = 
~liw (where we have temporarily reintroduced explicit factors of Ii for clarity). 
Of course, in the absence of gravity, either system actually has a vacuum energy 
that is completely arbitrary; we could add any constant to the potential without 
changing the theory. But quantum fluctuations have changed the zero-point energy 
from our classical expectation. 
A precisely analogous situation holds in field theory. If we take the Fourier 
transform of a free quantum field (one where we ignore interactions for simplic-
ity), we find that it becomes an infinite number of harmonic oscillators in mo-
mentum space, as we discuss in Chapter 9. The frequency w of each oscillator is 
w = Jm2 + k2, where m is the mass of the field and k is the magnitude of the 
wave vector of the mode. If we set the classical vacuum energy to zero, each of 
these modes contributes a quantum zero-point energy of liw /2. Formally, adding 
all of these contributions together yields an infinite result. If, however, we discard 
the very high-momentum modes on the grounds that we trust our theory only up 
to a certain ultraviolet momentum cutoff kmax. we find that the resulting energy 
density is of the form 
Pvac '"'"' lik!ax. 
(4.104) 
This answer could have been guessed by dimensional analysis; the numerical con-
stants that have been neglected will depend on the precise theory under consid-
eration. If we are confident that we can use ordinary quantum field theory all the 
way up to the reduced Planck scale mp = (8rrG)- 112 -
1018 GeV, we expect a 
contribution of order 
Pvac'"'"' (1018 GeV)4 '"'"' 10112 erg/cm3• 
(4.105) 

174 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
Field theory may fail earlier, although quantum gravity is the best reason we have 
to believe it will fail at any specific scale. 
As we will discuss in Chapter 8, cosmological observations imply 
(4.106) 
much smaller than the naive expectation just derived. The ratio of ( 4.105) to 
(4.106) is the origin of the famous discrepancy of 120 orders of magnitude be-
tween the theoretical and observational values of the cosmological constant. We 
are free to imagine that the bare vacuum energy is adjusted so that the net cos-
mological constant is consistent with the limit (4.106), except for one problem: 
we know of no special symmetry that could enforce a vanishing vacuum energy 
while remaining consistent with the known laws of physics; this conundrum is 
the "cosmological constant problem." We will discuss the cosmological effects of 
vacuum energy more in Chapter 8. 2 
4.6 • ENERGY CONDITIONS 
Sometimes it is useful to think about Einstein's equation without specifying the 
theory of matter from which Tµv is derived. This leaves us with a great deal of 
arbitrariness; consider for example the question, What metrics obey Einstein's 
equation? In the absence of some constraints on Tµv• the answer is any metric 
at all; simply take the metric of your choice, compute the Einstein tensor G µv 
for this metric, and then demand that T µ v be equal to G µ v. It will automatically 
be conserved, by the Bianchi identity. Our real concern is with the existence of 
solutions to Einstein's equation in the presence of "realistic" sources of energy 
and momentum, whatever that means. One strategy is to consider specific kinds 
of sources, such as scalar fields, dust, or electromagnetic fields. However, we 
occasionally wish to understand properties of Einstein's equations that hold for a 
variety of different sources. In this circumstance it is convenient to impose energy 
conditions that limit the arbitrariness of Tµv· 
Energy conditions are coordinate-invariant restrictions on the energy-momen-
tum tensor. We must therefore construct scalars from Tµv• which is typically ac-
complished by contracting with arbitrary timelike vectors tµ or null vectors lµ. 
For example, the weak energy condition (WEC) states that T µviµ t v :::: 0 for all 
timelike vectors tµ. For purposes of physical intuition, it is useful to consider the 
special case where the source is a perfect fluid, so that the energy-momentum 
tensor takes the form 
(4.107) 
where Uµ is the fluid four-velocity. Let's use this form to translate the WEC into 
physical terms. Because the pressure is isotropic, Tµvtµt v will be nonnegative 
2For more on the physics and cosmology of vacuum energy, see S.M. Carroll, Liv. Rev. Rel. 4, I 
(2001),http://arxiv.org/astro-ph/0004075. 

4.6 
Energy Conditions 
175 
for all timelike vectors tµ if both TµvUµuv ~ 0 and Tµvlµlv ~ 0 for some 
null vector lµ (convince yourself of this; it's just adding vectors). We therefore 
evaluate 
(4.108) 
The WEC therefore implies p ~ 0 and p + p ~ 0. These are simply the 
reasonable-sounding requirements that the energy density be nonnegative and the 
pressure not be too large compared to the energy density. Of course we need not 
restrict ourselves to perfect fluids, we merely use them to gain insight into the 
requirements the energy conditions impose. 
There are a number of different energy conditions, appropriate to different cir-
cumstances. Some of the most popular are the following: 
• The Weak Energy Condition or WEC, as just discussed, states that 
Tµvtµt v ~ 0 for all timelike vectors tµ, or equivalently that p ~ 0 and 
p + p ~ 0. 
• The Null Energy Condition or NEC states that Tµvlµlv ~ 0 for all null 
vectors lµ, or equivalently that p + p ~ 0. It is a special case of the WEC, 
with the timelike vector replaced by a null vector. The energy density may 
now be negative, so long as there is a compensating positive pressure. 
• The Dominant Energy Condition or DEC includes the WEC (Tµvtµtv ~ 
0 for all timelike vectors tµ), as well as the additional requirement that 
Tµvtµ is a nonspacelike vector (namely, that TµvTv >..tµt>.. ~ 0). For a per-
fect fluid, these conditions together are equivalent to the simple requirement 
that p ~ lpl; the energy density must be nonnegative, and greater than or 
equal the magnitude of the pressure. 
• The Null Dominant Energy Condition or NDEC is the DEC condition 
for null vectors only: for any null vector f,µ, Tµvlµ ev ~ 0 and Tµv lµ is a 
nonspacelike vector. The allowed density and pressure are the same as for 
the DEC, except that negative densities are allowed so long as p = -p. In 
other words, the NDEC excludes all sources excluded by the DEC, except 
for a negative vacuum energy. 
• The Strong Energy Condition or SEC states that Tµvtµt v ~ ! T\ta ta 
for all timelike vectors tµ, or equivalently that p + p ~ 0 and p + 3 p ~ 0. 
Note that the SEC does not imply the WEC. It implies the NEC, along with 
excluding excessively large negative pressures. From (4.86) we see that it 
is the SEC that implies gravitation is attractive. 
These conditions are illustrated in Figure 4.3. In addition we have plotted the 
constraint w ~ -1, where w = p/p is called the equation-of-state parameter. 
This is a useful concept in cosmology, where sources often have equations of state 
p = wp with w being a constant (of course, w is defined whether it is constant 

176 
' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
' ' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
' 
/ 
/ 
' 
/ 
' ' ' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
(a)WEC 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
(d)NDEC 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
p 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
(b) NEC 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
' ' ' ' 
(e) SEC 
' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
p 
' ' 
/ 
/ 
' ' ' ' ', 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
' ' ' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
' 
/ 
' 
/ 
', 
' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
(c) DEC 
p 
(f) w ~ -1 
p 
p 
FIGURE 4.3 Energy conditions as applied to perfect fluids, expressed as allowed regions of energy density p and pressure 
p. Illustrated are the Weak Energy Condition (WEC), Null Energy Condition (NEC), Dominant Energy Condition (DEC), 
Null Dominant Energy Condition (NDEC), and the Strong Energy Condition (SEC). For comparison, we also have illustrated 
the condition w ~ -1, where w = p / p is the equation-of-state parameter. 
or not). If we restrict ourselves to sources with p ~ 0, then any of the energy 
conditions mentioned above will imply w :::: -1. 
Most ordinary classical forms of matter, including scalar fields and electro-
magnetic fields, obey the DEC (see Exercises), and hence the less restrictive con-
ditions (WEC, NEC, NDEC). The SEC is useful in the proof of some singularity 
theorems, but can be violated by certain forms of matter, such as a massive scalar 
field. It turns out that quantum fields can generically violate any of the energy 
conditions we have listed; there may, however, be inequalities involving integrals 
over regions of spacetime that are satisfied even by quantum fields. This is an area 
of current investigation. 
The energy conditions are not, strictly speaking, related to energy conserva-
tion; the Bianchi identity guarantees that V µ Tµv = 0 regardless of whether we 

4.7 The Equivalence Principle Revisited 
177 
impose any additional constraints on Tµv. Rather, they serve to prevent other 
properties that we think of as "unphysical," such as energy propagating faster than 
the speed of light, or empty space spontaneously decaying into compensating re-
gions of positive and negative energy. In particular, Hawking and Ellis (1973) 
prove a conservation theorem: Essentially, if the energy-momentum tensor obeys 
the DEC and vanishes in some spacelike region, then it will necessarily vanish 
everywhere in the future domain of dependence of that region (see Section 2.7 for 
the definition of the future domain of dependence). Thus, energy cannot sponta-
neously appear from nothing, nor can it sneak outside the light cone. The theorem 
does not include the converse statement (that sources violating the DEC are nec-
essarily acausal), so it pays to be careful. 
4.7 • THE EQUIVALENCE PRINCIPLE REVISITED 
In this section we will examine more carefully the underpinnings and conse-
quences of the Principle of Equivalence, which we used in Section 4.1 to motivate 
the minimal-coupling procedure for generalizing physics to curved spacetime. We 
will see that the Principle of Equivalence is not a sacred physical law, nor is it even 
a mathematically rigorous statement; at a more fundamental level, it arises as a 
consequence of the nature of general relativity as an effective field theory valid 
at macroscopic distances, and our job is to determine which kinds of couplings 
between matter and the metric we would expect in such a theory. 
In practice, it is common to invoke the Equivalence Principle to justify any of 
the following four ideas: 
1. Laws of physics should be expressed (or at least be expressible) in generally 
covariant form. 
2. There exists a metric on spacetime, the curvature of which we interpret as 
gravity. 
3. There do not exist any other fields that resemble gravity. 
4. The interactions of matter fields to curvature are minimal: they do not in-
volve direct couplings to the Riemann tensor or its contractions. 
These very different statements each have a very different status: the first is vacu-
ous, the second is both profound and almost certainly true, the third is interesting 
and testable, and the fourth is just a useful approximation. Let's examine each of 
them in turn. 
The first statement is sometimes called the Principle of Covariance. It is more 
or less content-free. "Generally covariant" simply means that all of the terms in 
an equation transform in the same way under a change of coordinates, so that 
the form of the equation is coordinate-invariant. Due to the universal nature of 
the tensor transformation law, the most straightforward way of achieving this aim 
is to make the equation manifestly tensorial. Certainly there is nothing wrong 
if a law is expressed in a form that is not generally covariant, as long as we 

178 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
know that it is possible to rewrite it in a coordinate-independent way. On the 
other hand, it is always possible to write laws in a coordinate-independent way, 
if the laws are well-defined to begin with. A physical system acting in a certain 
way doesn't know which coordinate system you are using to describe it; conse-
quently, anything deserving of the name "law of physics" (as opposed to some 
particular statement of that law) must be independent of coordinates. An insis-
tence on explicit coordinate-independence says nothing about the adaptation of 
laws to curved spacetime; as we have seen, manifestly tensorial equations take on 
the same form regardless of the geometry. 
Consider Maxwell's equations in flat spacetime, as we wrote them in Chap-
ter 1: 
(4.109) 
The right-hand side is a well-defined tensor, while the left-hand side is not, due 
to the appearance of the partial derivative. That's okay, since we know that this 
equation is valid only in inertial coordinates in Minkowski space. A coordinate-
invariant way of expressing the same law is 
(4.110) 
No physical principle needs to be invoked to conclude that this is the correct 
formulation in Minkowski space; it is the unique tensorial equation, which is 
equivalent to (4.109) in inertial coordinates. It is DQt the unique generalization 
to curved spacetime, since we could imagine new terms involving products of 
Fµv and RP aµv; the status of such additional terms is directly addressed by the 
minimal-coupling assumption, point four in the above list. By itself, however, 
making things "tensorial" or "generally covariant" is a simple matter of logical 
necessity, not a physical principle that one could imagine disproving by experi-
ment. (Another spin on the same idea is "diffeomorphism invariance;' discussed 
in the Appendix B.) 
The second purported consequence of the Equivalence Principle from our list 
above is much deeper, and by no means obvious. Although he was inspired by the 
EP, this geometric insight was Einstein's great breakthrough. At the beginning of 
Chapter 2 we discussed why such an insight was warranted: the EP implies that 
gravity is universal, which implies in turn that gravitational fields become impos-
sible to measure in small regions of spacetime, a feature which in turn is most 
directly implemented by identifying gravitation with the effects of spacetime ge-
ometry. These steps are well-motivated suggestions, not rigorously derived con-
sequences; once we have the idea that there is a metric whose curvature gives rise 
to gravity, we can check its usefulness by comparing with experiment. As we've 
mentioned, it passes with flying colors. An accumulation of evidence (such as the 
gravitational redshift discussed in Chapter 2) is consistent with the idea that ide-
alized rods and clocks behave as they should if the geometry of spacetime were 
curved. Still, one should not imagine proving that there really is a metric with the 
desired properties; we make the hypothesis, test it against ever-more precise ex-

4.7 
The Equivalence Principle Revisited 
179 
periments, and deduce its range of usefulness. Indeed, the demands of eventually 
reconciling general relativity with quantum mechanics suggest to many that the 
metric will ultimately be revealed as a concept derived from a more fundamental 
collection of degrees of freedom. For our present purposes this ultimate resolu-
tion doesn't matter; the idea of a curved metric has proven its usefulness beyond 
a reasonable doubt, and we work to extend out understanding of its properties 
until they run up against insurmountable obstacles (either theoretical or empiri-
cal). 
Given our conviction that the effects of gravitation are best ascribed to the cur-
vature of a metric on spacetime, what would we conclude if experiments were to 
detect an apparent violation of the Equivalence Principle? For example, we might 
imagine an experiment that revealed that the acceleration of test bodies in the 
direction of the Earth or Sun actually did depend, ever so slightly, on the compo-
sition of the test body. (The best current limits on such anomalous accelerations 
constrain them to be less than 10- 12 times that due to gravity.)3 In such a cir-
cumstance, nobody would really be tempted to declare that general relativity had 
been completely undermined and it was necessary to start over. Rather, we would 
return to the definition of "test body," which includes the proviso that the body 
be uncharged. An electron, for example, would not make a good test body, as it 
would be buffeted about by ambient electromagnetic fields as well as by gravity. 
Similarly, by far the most straightforward explanation of any hypothetical anoma-
lous acceleration on purportedly neutral test bodies would be to imagine that we 
had discovered the existence of a new long-range field, under which our test bod-
ies were actually charged. To have remain undetected thus far, such a field must 
be either very weakly coupled, or must couple almost universally, so as to mimic 
the effects of gravity. We could imagine, for example, scalar fields that couple to 
the trace of the energy-momentum tensor, or vector fields that couple to baryon 
number. The mass of ordinary test bodies is almost proportional to their baryon 
number, which counts the number of protons and neutrons in the body. It is there-
fore sometimes convenient to think of "tests of the Equivalence Principle" as tests 
of the third of our statements above-that there do not exist any other fields that 
resemble gravity (where a field resembles gravity if it is long-range and couples 
almost universally to mass). Again, detecting a violation of this hypothesis would 
be most directly interpreted as discovery of a new "fifth force" rather than as a 
repudiation of Einstein's ideas. As to whether we should expect to discover such 
a new field if we improve upon current experiments, it is hard to say; on the one 
hand, it is easy to concoct models with new long-range forces, but on the other 
hand, they would typically be strong enough to already have been detected. At 
this stage it is still worthwhile to keep an open mind. 
Beyond the very existence of the metric, the heart of the Equivalence Principle 
lies in the fourth of our formulations, that the interactions of matter fields to cur-
vature are minimal: they do not involve direct couplings to the Riemann tensor or 
its contractions. For example, we could consider the following possible alternative 
3y Su et al .• Phys. Rev. D SO. 3614 (1994). 

180 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
to the conventional geodesic equation: 
d2xµ 
dxP dxa 
dxµ dxa 
d>..2 + r~a di.. di.. =a ('VaR) di.. di.. , 
(4.111) 
where R is the Ricci scalar and a is a coupling constant. This equation also re-
duces to straight-line motion in flat spacetime, but would allow for direct detec-
tion of spacetime curvature in small regions by measurement of the coupling to 
'Va R. Why, then, does nature choose the simple geodesic equation? As a first step 
toward an answer, consider the dimensions of the coupling a. Since c = 1 and 
space and time have the same units, we can use length as our basic dimension. 
The metric, the inverse metric, and d xµ /di.. are then dimensionless. The partial 
derivative operator has units of inverse length, as does the covariant derivative. 
The Christoffel symbols involve first derivatives of the metric, and thus have di-
mensions of inverse length; similarly, the Riemann tensor, Ricci tensor, and Ricci 
scalar have dimensions of inverse length squared: 
[dxµ] 
[ µv] 
Lo 
di.. 
= (gµv) = g 
= ' 
[R] = L - 2. 
(4.112) 
To be consistent, the coupling a must have dimensions of length squared: 
[a]= L 2. 
(4.113) 
The square root of a therefore defines a length scale; what should the length scale 
be? We don't know for sure, but there is every reason to believe it should be 
extremely small. There are two arguments for this. One is that, since the coupling 
represented by a is of gravitational origin, the only reasonable expectation for the 
relevant length scale is 
a -l~, 
(4.114) 
where lp is the Planck length. Another reason is simply a more sophisticated ver-
sion of this "what else could it be?'' rationale. Although general relativity is a clas-
sical theory, at a deeper level we expect that it is merely an effective field theory 
describing an underlying quantum-mechanical structure. Even without knowing 
what this structure may be, a generic expectation (derived from our experience 
with quantum field theories we do understand) is that the effective classical limit 
should contain all possible interactions, but with dimensionful length parameters 
representing scales at which new degrees of freedom become important (recall 
our discussion of effective field theory at the end of Chapter 1 ). Thus, the Fermi 
theory of the weak interactions contains a length scale, which we now know to 
correspond to the scale of electroweak symmetry breaking where W and Z bosons 
become relevant. Since we do not expect new gravitational physics to arise before 
the Planck scale, the higher-order interactions associated with gravity should be 
suppressed by appropriate powers of the Planck length. 

4.8 
Alternative Theories 
181 
How much suppression does this represent? One measure would be to compare 
lp (and thus the likely value of the parameter a) to a typical gravitational length 
scale near the vicinity of the Earth. The strength of gravity on Earth is character-
ized by the acceleration due to gravity, ag = 980 cm/sec2. To construct a quantity 
with dimensions of length, we define 
(4.115) 
where the symbol EB in this context stands for the Earth (not a direct sum). So the 
relative strength of higher-order gravitational effects is measured by 
(4.116) 
In fact, since we expect a -
l~, the suppression will be of order 10-102• Con-
sequently, there seems to be little need to worry about the possible role of such 
couplings. But dramatic departures should be kept in mind; recent ideas about 
large extra dimensions have opened up the possibility of observing direct gravita-
tional interactions at particle accelerators. Ultimately, there is no way to resolve 
these problems by pure thought alone; only experiment can decide among the 
alternatives. 
4.8 • ALTERNATIVE THEORIES 
General relativity has passed a wide variety of experimental tests. Nevertheless, 
it is always possible that the next experiment we do will reveal a deviation from 
Einstein's original formulation. Let us therefore briefly consider ways in which 
general relativity could be modified. There are an uncountable number of such 
ways, but we will consider four different possibilities: 
• gravitational scalar fields 
• extra spatial dimensions 
• higher-order terms in the action 
• nonChristoff el connections 
A popular set of alternative models are known as scalar-tensor theories of 
gravity, since they involve both the metric tensor, gµv and a scalar field, A.. In 
particular, the scalar field couples directly to the curvature scalar, not simply to 
the metric (as the Equivalence Principle would seem to imply). The action can be 
written as a sum of a gravitational piece, a pure-scalar piece, and a matter piece: 
(4.117) 

182 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
where 
SJR = J 
d4xv'-i fCA)R, 
(4.118) 
sl = J 
d4x./=i [-4h(A)gµ"(3µA)(3,A) - U(A)J, 
(4.119) 
and 
(4.120) 
Here, f CA), h('A) and U('A) are functions that define the theory, and the matter 
Lagrangian ~ 
depends on the metric and a set of matter fields 1/1;, but not on 
A.. By change of variables we can always set h(A.) = 1, but we leave it here to 
facilitate comparison with models found in the literature. 
The equations of motion for this theory include the gravitational equation 
(from varying with respect to the metric), and the scalar equation (from vary-
ing with respect to A.), as well as the appropriate matter equations. Let's start with 
the gravitational equation, which we can derive by following the same steps as for 
the ordinary Hilbert action ( 4.55). We consider perturbations of the metric, 
(4.121) 
Following the procedure from Section 4.3, the variation of the gravitational part 
of the action is 
8StR = J d4x.J=i !<'-{ ( Rµ, - 4Rgµ,) 8gµ" +Vu vu (gµ,8gµ") 
- Vµ V,(8gµ")l 
(4.122) 
For the Hilbert action, f is a constant, so the last two terms are total derivatives, 
which can be converted to surface terms through integration by parts and therefore 
ignored. Now integration by parts (twice) picks up derivatives off, and we obtain 
(4.123) 
where G µ v is the Einstein tensor. We have discarded surface terms as usual, al-
though there are subtleties concerning boundary contributions in this case; see 
Wald (1984) for a discussion. The gravitational equation of motion, including 
contributions from S>.. and SM, is thus 
(4.124) 

4.8 
Alternative Theories 
183 
where the energy-momentum tensors are T~iJ = -2(-g)- 112oS;/ogµv; in partic-
ular, 
(4.125) 
From looking at the coefficient of T~~> in ( 4.124 ), we see that when the scalar 
field is constant (or practically so), we may identify f CA)= l/(16:7rG), as makes 
sense from the original action (4.118). Meanwhile, if A. varies slightly from point 
to point in spacetime, it would be interpreted as a spacetime-dependent Newton's 
constant. The dynamics that control this variation are determined by the equation 
of motion for A., which is straightforward to derive as 
(4.126) 
where primes denote differentiation with respect to A.. Notice that if we set h (A.) = 
1 to get a conventional kinetic term for the scalar, A. obeys a conventional scalar-
field equation of motion, with an additional coupling to the curvature scalar. In 
the real world, we don't want f (A.) to vary too much, as it would have observ-
able consequences in the classic experimental tests of GR in the solar system, 
and also in cosmological tests such as primordial nucleosynthesis. This can be 
ensured either by choosing U (A.) so that there is a minimum to the potential and 
A. cannot deviate too far without a large input of energy-in other words, A. has a 
large mass-or by choosing f (A.) and h(A.) so that large changes in A. give rise to 
relatively small changes in the effective value of Newton's constant. 
One of the earliest scalar-tensor models is known as Brans-Dicke theory, and 
corresponds in our notation to the choices 
A. 
f (A.) = 16:7r' 
w 
h(A.) = -8JT A.' 
U(A.) = 0. 
where w is a coupling constant. The scalar-tensor action takes the form 
I 
4 
r-:: [ 
A. 
w 
µv {C)µA.)(()vA.)] 
Seo= 
dxv-g -R--g 
. 
16JT 
16JT 
A. 
(4.127) 
(4.128) 
In the Brans-Dicke theory, the scalar field is massless, but in the w ~ oo limit 
the field becomes nondynamical and ordinary GR is recovered. CmTent bounds 
from Solar System tests imply w > 500, so if there is such a scalar field it must 
couple only weakly to the Ricci scalar. 
A popular approach to dealing with scalar-tensor theories is to perform a con-
formal transformation to bring the theory in to a form that looks like conventional 
GR. We define a conformal metric 
(4.129) 
where G will become Newton's constant in the conformal frame. Using formulae 
for conformal transformations from the Appendix G, the action Sf R from ( 4.118) 

184 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
becomes 
SJR = J 
d4xv'-i JCA)R 
= J d4x/"::C (16JrG)-
1 [ii- ~r r
2 (~{) 
2 
<V.AHVaA>], 
(4.130) 
where as usual we have integrated by parts and discarded surface terms. In the 
conformal frame, therefore, the curvature scalar appears by itself, not multiplied 
by any function of A.. This frame is sometimes called the Einstein frame, since 
Einstein's equations for the conformal metric g µ v take on their conventional form. 
The original frame with metric gµv is called the Jordan frame, or sometimes the 
string frame. (String theory typically predicts a scalar-tensor theory rather than 
ordinary GR, and the string worldsheet responds to the metric g µ v.) 
Before going on with our analysis of the conformally-transformed theory, con-
sider what happens if we choose 
f(A.) = e>-fvJ, 
h(A.) = 0, 
U(A.) = 0, 
(4.131) 
a specific choice for f (A.), but turning off the pure scalar terms in S>.. Then we 
notice that the Einstein frame action ( 4.130) actually includes a conventional ki-
netic term for the scalar, even though it wasn't present in the Jordan frame action 
( 4.118). Even without an explicit kinetic term for A., the degrees of freedom of this 
theory include a propagating scalar as well as the metric. This should hopefully 
become more clear after we examine the degrees of freedom of the gravitational 
field in Chapter 7. There we will find that the metric gµv actually includes scalar 
(spin-0) and vector (spin-I) degrees of freedom as well as the expected tensor 
(spin-2) degrees of freedom; however, with the standard Hilbert action, these de-
grees of freedom are constrained rather than freely propagating. What we have 
just found is that multiplying R by a scalar in the action serves to bring the scalar 
degree of freedom to life, which is revealed explicitly in the Einstein frame. 
If we do choose to include the pure-scalar action S>., we obtain 
!d
4 ~[ R 
1 
-pa -
-
U(A.) 
] 
SJR+S>.= 
Xy-g ---2 K(A.)g 
(VpA.){VaA.)-
-
2 2 
, 
lforG 
(lforG) f (A.) 
(4.132) 
where 
K(A.) = 
1
-
2 [! h + 3(f')2]. 
lforGJ 
(4.133) 

4.8 
Alternative Theories 
185 
We can make our action look utterly conventional by defining a new scalar field 
4> via 
4> =I Kl/2 dJ.., 
in terms of which the action becomes 
(4.134) 
SJR + sl =I d
4xA [ 16:G - ~gpu(Vp¢)(Vu¢)- V(ef>)]' 
(4.135) 
where 
U(A(Q>)) 
V(Q>) = (16JTG)2 J2(A(Q>)) 
(4.136) 
Amazingly, in the Einstein frame we have a completely ordinary theory of a scalar 
field in curved spacetime. So long as f (J..) is well-behaved, the variables (gµv, 4>) 
can be used instead of (gµv, J..), in the sense that varying with respect to the new 
variables is equivalent to starting with the original equations of motion ( 4.124) 
and (4.126) and then doing the transformations (4.129) and (4.134). 
Finally, we add in the matter action (4.120). Varying with respect to gµv will 
yield an energy-momentum tensor in the Einstein frame. In the original variables 
(gµv. J..), we knew that SM was independent of>.., but now it will depend on both 
of the new variables (gµv. 4> ); we can use the chain rule to characterize this depen-
dence. Let us also assume that SM depends on gµv only algebraically, not through 
derivatives. This will hold for ordinary scalar-field or gauge-field matter; things 
become more complicated for fermions, which we won't discuss here. We obtain 
(4.137) 
A similar trick works for the coupling of matter to Q>, which comes from varying 
SM with respect to Q>, using gaf3 = 16JTG f gaf3: 
oSM 
agaf3 oSM 
oQ> = a;p ogaf3 
( 
-df -a/3) ( 1 ~ M) 
= 
16JTG dQ> g 
-2v-gTaf3 
= __ 
1 df Af'M 
(4.138) 
2f dQ> 
' 

186 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
where 
(4.139) 
is the trace of the energy-momentum tensor in the conformal frame. 
Varying (4.135) with respect to gµv and</> returns equations of motion equiv-
alent to Einstein's equations and an equation for <f>. The gravitational equation 
is 
(4.140) 
where 
(4.141) 
and the scalar field equation is 
O _ dV = _1 df f<M). 
</> 
d<f> 
2f d<f> 
(4.142) 
Given that (4.140) looks just like Einstein's equation with both matter and 
scalar-field sources, why should we even bother to call this scalar-tensor theory 
an alternative to GR? Isn't it the same theory, just in different variables? In fact 
it is not the same, because of the dependence of SM on </> in the Einstein frame. 
In particular, physical test particles will move along geodesics of gµv' which will 
not generally coincide with those of gµv· The original metric is the one that test 
particles "see." So either we work in the original variables (gµv. A.), where the 
gravitational field equation is altered, or we use the new variables (gµv. <f>), in 
which the equations of motion for matter are altered; either way, there will be 
unambiguously measurable departures (in principle) from ordinary GR. 
Another way to modify general relativity is to allow for the existence of extra 
spatial dimensions; in fact the physical consequences of extra dimensions turn 
out to be closely related to those of scalar-tensor theories. By extra dimensions 
we don't simply mean considering GR in higher-dimensional spaces, but rather 
considering models in which the spacetime appears four-dimensional on large 
scales even though there are really 4 + d total dimensions. The simplest way for 
this to happen is if the extra d dimensions are "compactified" on some manifold; 
it is this possibility we consider here.4 Models of this kind are known as Kaluza-
Klein theories. 
Let Gab be the metric for a (4 + d)-dimensional spacetime with coordinates 
xa, where indices a, b run from 0 to d + 3. 
4We follow the analysis of S.M. Carroll, J. Geddes, M. Hoffman, and R.M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D 66, 
024036 (2002); http://arxiv.org/hep-th/0110149. The original papers on extra dimensions are 
those by Kaluza and Klein: T. Kaluza, Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (Math. Phys.) Kl, 966 
(1921); 0. Klein, Z. Phys. 37, 895 (1926) [Surveys High Energ. Phys. S, 241 (1926)); 0. Klein, Nature 
118, 516 (1926). 

4.8 
Alternative Theories 
187 
(4.143) 
where the xµ are coordinates in the four-dimensional spacetime and the yi are co-
ordinates on the extra-dimensional manifold, taken to be a maximally symmetric 
space with metric Yij. Of course the geometry of the extra dimensions is actu-
ally something dynamical that should be detennined by solving the full equations 
of motion, but we are going to take (4.143) as a simplifying ansatz. (In a more 
complete treatment, we would expand the dynamical modes of the compactified 
geometry as a Fourier series, and show that the modes we are presently neglecting 
have larger masses than the overall-size mode we are choosing to examine.) The 
action is the ( 4 + d)-dimensional Hilbert action plus a matter term: 
S = f tf4+d X r-<J ( 16lf~4+d R[Gabl +CM) , 
(4.144) 
where r-G is minus the square root of the detenninant of Gab, R[Gabl is the 
Ricci scalar of Gab, and CM is the matter Lagrange density with the metric deter-
minant factored out. 
The first step is to dimensionally reduce the action ( 4.144 ). By this we mean to 
actually perform the integral over the extra dimensions, which is possible because 
we have assumed that the extra-dimensional scale factor b is independent of yi. 
Therefore we can express everything in terms of gµv' Yt 1, and b(x), integrate over 
the extra dimensions, and arrive at an effective four-dimensional theory. From the 
metric (4.143) we have 
and we can evaluate the curvature scalar for this metric to obtain 
R[Gabl = R[gµv] + b-2R[yij] - 2db- 1gµaVµ Vab 
- d(d - l)b- 2gµa (Vµb)(Vab), 
(4.145) 
(4.146) 
where V µ is the covariant derivative associated with the four-dimensional metric 
gµv· We denote by V the volume of the extra dimensions when b = 1; it is given 
by 
(4.147) 
The four-dimensional Newton's constant G4 is determined by evaluating the co-
efficient of the curvature scalar in the action; we find that G 4 is related to its 
higher-dimensional analogue by 
v 
(4.148) 
We are thus left with 

188 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
S = f d4x.J=i { 16;G
4 
[bd R[gµv] + d(d - l)bd-Zgµ"(V µb)(V,b) 
+d(d- l)Kbd-2] + Vbd.CM }· 
(4.149) 
where we have integrated by parts for convenience, and introduced the curvature 
parameter K of Yij, given by 
R[yij] 
K = ---'-
d(d - 1). 
(4.150) 
Comparing to ( 4.117)-( 4.120), we see that the dimensionally-reduced action 
is precisely that of a scalar-tensor theory; the size of the extra dimensions plays 
the role of the scalar field. We can therefore make it look more conventional by 
performing a change of variables and a conformal transformation, 
f3(x) = In b, 
gµv = edfi gµv' 
(4.151) 
which turns the reduced action into that of a scalar field coupled to gravity in the 
Einstein frame. Following the same procedure as outlined in our discussion of 
scalar-tensor theories yields 
S = f d4xR{ 16;G
4 
[ R[8µv] - ~d(d + 2)8µ"(Vµ{J)(V,/J) 
+ d(d - l)Ke<d+Z>P] + Ve-dP (M}, 
(4.152) 
where we have dropped terms that are total derivatives. 
To turn f3 into a canonically normalized scalar field, we make one final change 
of variables, to 
fd(d+2) -
<l>=y~mpf3, 
(4.153) 
where the reduced Planck mass is mp= (8JTG4)- 112• We are then left with 
s = f d
4xR{ 16;G/18µv]- ~gµ•(Vµ</>)(V,<J>) 
+ ~Kd(d _ J)m~e-J2(d+2)/dN,;;p + Ve-J2d/(d+2)4>/mpzM }· 
(4.154) 

4.8 
Alternative Theories 
189 
The scalar </> is known as the dilaton or radion, and characterizes the size of the 
extra-dimensional manifold. 
The last two terms in ( 4.154) represent (minus) the potential V ( </> ). If we ignore 
the matter term ~, the behavior of the dilaton will depend only on the sign of K. 
If the extra-dimensional manifold is flat (K = 0), the potential vanishes and we 
simply have a massless scalar field; this possibility runs afoul of the experimental 
constraints on scalar-tensor theories mentioned above. If there is curvature (K ~ 
0), the potential has no minimum; for K > 0 the field will roll to -oo, while for 
K < 0 the field will roll to +oo. But </> ex In b, so this means the scale factor 
b(x) of the extra dimensions either shrinks to zero or becomes arbitrarily large, in 
either case ruining the hope for stable extra dimensions. Stability can be achieved, 
however, by choosing an appropriate matter Lagrangian, and an appropriate field 
configuration in the extra dimensions. 
Let us now move on to a different kind of alternative theory, those that feature 
Lagrangians of more than second order in derivatives of the metric. We could 
imagine an action of the form 
where the a's are coupling constants and the dots represent every other scalar 
we can make from the curvature tensor, its contractions, and its derivatives. Tra-
ditionally, such terms have been neglected on the reasonable grounds that they 
merely complicate a theory that is already both aesthetically pleasing and empiri-
cally successful. There is also, classically speaking, a more substantive objection. 
In conventional form, Einstein's equation leads to a well-posed initial value prob-
lem for the metric, in which coordinates and momenta specified at an initial time 
can be used to predict future evolution. With higher-derivative terms, we would 
require not only those data, but also some number of derivatives of the momenta; 
the character of the theory is dramatically altered. 
However, there are also good reasons to consider such additional terms. As 
mentioned in our brief discussion of quantum gravity, one of the technical ob-
stacles to consistent quantization of general relativity is that the theory is non-
renormalizable: Inclusion of higher-order quantum effects leads to infinite an-
swers. With the appropriate combination of higher-order Lagrangian terms, it 
turns out that you can actually render the theory renormalizable, which gives some 
hope of constructing a consistent quantum theory.5 Unfortunately, it turns out 
that renormalizability comes at too high a price; these models generally feature 
negative-energy field excitations (ghosts). Consequently, the purported vacuum 
state (empty space) would be unstable to decay into positive- and negative-energy 
modes, which is inconsistent with both empirical experience and theoretical prej-
udice. 
Nevertheless, the prevailing cmTent view is that GR is an effective theory valid 
at energies below the Planck scale, and we should actually include all of the pos-
5 See, for example, K.S. Stelle, Phys. Rev. 016, 953 (1977). 

190 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
sible higher-order terms; but they will suppressed by appropriate powers of the 
Planck scale, just as we argued in our discussion of the Equivalence Principle in 
Section 4.7. They will therefore only become important when the length scale 
characteristic of the curvature approaches the Planck scale, which is far from any 
plausible experiment. Higher-order terms are therefore interesting in principle, 
but not in practice. On the other hand, similar reasoning would lead us to expect 
a huge vacuum energy term, since it is lower-order than the Hilbert action, which 
we know not to be true; so we should keep an open mind. 
As a final alternative to general relativity, we should mention the possibility 
that the connection really is not derived from the metric, but in fact has an inde-
pendent existence as a fundamental field. As one of the exercises you are asked to 
show that it is possible to consider the conventional action for general relativity 
but treat it as a function of both the metric g µ v and a torsion-free connection r~a, 
and the equations of motion derived from varying such an action with respect 
to the connection imply that r~a is actually the Christoffel connection associ-
ated with gµv· We could drop the demand that the connection be torsion-free, 
in which case the torsion tensor could lead to additional propagating degrees of 
freedom. The basic reason why such theories do not receive much attention is 
simply because the torsion is itself a tensor; there is nothing to distinguish it from 
other, nongravitational tensor fields. Thus, we do not really lose any generality 
by considering theories of torsion-free connections (which lead to GR) plus any 
number of tensor fields, which we can name what we like. Similar considerations 
apply when we consider dropping the requirement of metric compatibility-any 
connection can be written as a metric-compatible connection plus a tensorial cor-
rection, so any such theory is equivalent to GR plus extra tensor fields, which 
wouldn't really deserve to be called an "alternative to general relativity". 
4.9 • EXERCISES 
1. The Lagrange density for electromagnetism in curved space is 
(4.156) 
where J µ is the conserved current. 
(a) Derive the energy-momentum tensor by functional differentiation with respect to 
the metric. 
(b) Consider adding a new tenn to the Lagrangian, 
.C' = {JRµv gPa FµpFva· 
How are Maxwell's equations altered in the presence of this tenn? Einstein's equa-
tion? Is the current still conserved? 
2. We showed how to derive Einstein's equation by varying the Hilbert action with respect 
to the metric. They can also be derived by treating the metric and connection as inde-
pendent degrees of freedom and varying separately with respect to them; this is known 

4. 9 
Exercises 
191 
as the Palatini formalism. That is, we consider the action 
where the Ricci tensor is thought of as constructed purely from the connection, not us-
ing the metric. Variation with respect to the metric gives the usual Einstein's equations, 
but for a Ricci tensor constructed from a connection that has no a priori relationship 
to the metric. Imagining from the start that the connection is synunetric (torsion free), 
show that variation of this action with respect to the connection coefficients leads to the 
requirement that the connection be metric compatible, that is, the Christoffel connec-
tion. Remember that Stokes's theorem, relating the integral of the covariant divergence 
of a vector to an integral of the vector over the boundary, does not work for a general 
covariant derivative. The best strategy is to write the connection coefficients as a sum 
of the Christoffel symbols r~ v and a tensor cA. µ V• 
).., 
-).., 
).., 
r µv = r µv + c µv• 
and then show that cA. µ v must vanish. 
3. The four-dimensional D-function on a manifold Mis defined by 
(4.157) 
for an arbitrary function F(xµ). Meanwhile, the energy-momentum tensor for a pres-
sureless perfect fluid (dust) is 
(4.158) 
where p is the energy density and Uµ is the four-velocity. Consider such a fluid that 
consists of a single particle traveling on a world line xµ (r), with r the proper time. The 
energy-momentum tensor for this fluid is then given by 
(4.159) 
where m is the rest mass of the particle. Show that covariant conservation of the energy-
momentum tensor, V µ Tµ v = 0, implies that xµ ( r) satisfies the geodesic equation. 
4. Show that the energy-momentum tensors for electromagnetism and for scalar field the-
ory satisfy the dominant energy condition, and thus also the weak, null, and null domi-
nant conditions. Show that they also satisfy w ~ -1. 
5. A spacetime is static if there is a timelike Killing vector that is orthogonal to space-
like hypersurfaces. (See the Appendices for more discussion, including a definition of 
Raychaudhuri 's equation.) 
(a) Generally speaking, if a vector field vµ is orthogonal to a set of hypersurfaces 
defined by f = constant, then we can write the vector as v µ = h V µ f (here both f 
and h are functions). Show that this implies 
V[a V µ Vv] = 0. 

192 
Chapter 4 Gravitation 
(b) Imagine we have a perfect fluid with zero pressure (dust), which generates a so-
lution to Einstein's equations. Show that the metric can be static only if the fluid 
four-velocity is parallel to the timelike (and hypersurface-orthogonal) Killing vec-
tor. 
(c) Use Raychaudhuri's equation to prove that there is no static solution to Einstein's 
equations if the pressure is zero and the energy density is greater than zero. 
6. Let K be a Killing vector field. Show that an electromagnetic field with potential 
Aµ =Kµ solves Maxwell's equations if the metric is a vacuum solution to Einstein's 
equations. This is a slight cheat, since you won't be in vacuum if there is a nonzero 
electromagnetic field strength, but we assume the field strength is small enough not to 
dramatically affect the geometry. 

CHAPTER 
5 
The Schwarzschild Solution 
5.1 • THE SCHWARZSCHILD METRIC 
The most obvious application of a theory of gravity is to a spherically symmetric 
gravitational field. This would be the relevant situation to describe, for example, 
the field created by the Earth or the Sun (to a good approximation), in which ap-
ples fall or planets move. Furthermore, our first concern is with exterior solutions 
(empty space surrounding a gravitating body), since understanding the motion of 
test particles outside an object is both easier and more immediately useful than 
considering the relatively inaccessible interior. In addition to its practical useful-
ness, the answer to this problem in general relativity will lead us to remarkable so-
lutions describing new phenomena of great interest to physicists and astronomers: 
black holes. In this chapter we examine the simple case of vacuum solutions with 
pe1f ect spherical symmetry; in the next chapter we consider features of black 
holes in more general contexts. 
In GR, the unique spherically symmetric vacuum solution is the Schwarz-
schild metric; it is second only to Minkowski space in the list of important space-
times. In spherical coordinates {t, r, (), </> }, the metric is given by 
( 
2GM) 
( 
2GM)-I 
ds 2 = -
1 - -,.-
dt 2 + 1 - -,.-
dr2 + r 2 dQ.2, 
(5.1) 
where dfl.2 is the metric on a unit two-sphere, 
dfl.2 = dfJ 2 + sin2 () d</>2. 
(5.2) 
The constant M is interpreted as the mass of the gravitating object (although some 
care is required in making this identification). In this section we will derive the 
Schwarzschild metric by trial and error; in the next section we will be more sys-
tematic in both the derivation of the solution and its consequences. 
Since we are interested in the solution outside a spherical body, we care about 
Einstein's equation in vacuum, 
Rµv = 0. 
(5.3) 
193 

194 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
Our hypothesized source is static (unevolving) and spherically symmetric, so we 
will look for solutions that also have these properties. Rigorous definitions of both 
"static" and "spherically symmetric" require some care, due to subtleties of co-
ordinate independence. For now we will interpret static to imply two conditions: 
that all metric components are independent of the time coordinate, and that there 
are no time-space cross terms (dtdx; + dx; dt) in the metric. The latter condition 
makes sense if we imagine performing a time inversion t ~ -t; the dt2 term 
remains invariant;· as do any dx; dxj terms, while cross terms would not. Since 
we hope to find a solution that is independent of time, it should be invariant under 
time reversal, and we therefore leave cross terms out. To impose spherical symme-
try, we begin by writing the metric of Minkowski space (a spherically symmetric 
spacetime we know something about) in polar coordinates xµ = (t, r, (), </>): 
ds~iokowski = -dt2 + dr2 + ,.2 dQ.2. 
(5.4) 
One requirement to preserve spherical symmetry is that we maintain the form 
of dfl.2; that is, if we want our spheres to be perfectly round, the coefficient of 
the d</>2 term should be sin2 () times that of the dfJ2 term. But we are otherwise 
free to multiply all of the terms by separate coefficients, so long as they are only 
functions of the radial coordinate r: 
ds2 = -e2a(r) dt2 + e2fi(r) dr2 + e2y(r)r2 dQ.2. 
(5.5) 
We've expressed our functions as exponentials so that the signature of the metric 
doesn't change. In a full treatment, we would allow for complete freedom and see 
what happens. 
We can use our ability to change coordinates to make a slight simplification to 
the static, spherically-symmetric metric (5.5), even before imposing Einstein's 
equation. Unlike other theories of physics, in general relativity we simultane-
ously define coordinates and the metric as a function of those coordinates. In 
other words, we don't know ahead of time what, for example, the radial coordi-
nate r really is; we can only interpret it once the solution is in our hands. Let us 
therefore imagine defining a new coordinate r via 
(5.6) 
with an associated basis one-form 
ctr = e• cir + e• r dy = (I + r ~~ ) e• cir. 
(5.7) 
In terms of this new variable, the metric (5.5) becomes 
ds2 = -e2a<d dt2 + (I + r ~~ )-
2 
e2P<n-2r<dd;2 + r2 dfl.2, 
(5.8) 
where each function of r is a function of r in the obvious way. But now let us 
make the following relabelings: 

5.1 
The Schwarzschild Metric 
195 
r~r 
(5.9) 
( 
d )-2 
1 +rd~ 
e2fi(r)-2y(r) ~ e2fi. 
(5.10) 
There is nothing to stop us from doing this, as they are simply labels, with no 
independent external definition. If you wish you can continue to use r, and set 
(5.10) equal to e2fi, but we won't bother. Our metric (5.8) becomes 
ds2 = -e2a(r) dt 2 + e2fi(r) dr2 + r 2 dQ.2. 
(5.11) 
This looks exactly like (5.5), except that the e2Y factor has disappeared. We have 
not set e2Y equal to one, which would be a statement about the geometry; we 
have simply chosen our radial coordinate such that this factor doesn't exist. Thus, 
(5.11) is precisely as general as (5.5). 
Let's now take this metric and use Einstein's equation to solve forthe functions 
a(r) and 13(r). We begin by evaluating the Christoffel symbols. If we use labels 
(t, r, (), </>) for (0, l, 2, 3) in the usual way, the Christoffel symbols are given by 
r:r = ara 
re -
~ 
re -
r 
r~"' = -re-2fi sin2 () 
r;t = e2<a-jj) ara 
fee = -re-2fi 
r:"' = - sin() cos() 
r~r = arl3 
r"' - ! 
r<J> -
r 
r"' = cos() 
eq, 
sin() 
(5.12) 
Anything not written down explicitly is meant to be zero, or related to what is 
written by symmetries. From these we get the following nonvanishing compo-
nents of the Riemann tensor: 
Rt rrr = araarl3 - a;a - (()ra)2 
Rtete = -re-2fiara 
Rt </>t<P = -re-2fi sin2 () ara 
Rr ere = re-2fi arl3 
Rr <Pr<P = re-2fi sin2 () arl3 
Re q,eq, = (1 - e-2fi) sin2 (). 
Taking the contraction as usual yields the Ricci tensor: 
R11 = e2<a-fi> [ a;a + (()ra)2 - araarl3 + ~ara] 
Rrr = -a;a -
(()ra)2 + araarl3 + ~arl3 
Ree = e-2fi[r(arl3 - ara) -
1) + 1 
Rq,q, = sin2 ()Ree, 
(5.13) 
(5.14) 

196 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
and for future reference we calculate the curvature scalar, 
R = -2e-2P [a,2a + (3,a)2 - a,a3,/J + ~(3,a - 3,/J) + ,1
2 (1 - e2P)]. 
(5.15) 
With the Ricci tensor calculated, we would like to set it equal to zero. Since 
Ru and R,, vanish independently, we can write 
0 = e2<fi-a> Ru+ R,, = ~(a,a + a,{3), 
r 
(5.16) 
which implies a = -/3 + c, where c is some constant. We can set this constant 
equal to zero by rescaling our time coordinate by t ~ e-ct, after which we have 
a= -/3. 
Next let us turn to Ree = 0, which now reads 
This is equivalent to 
We can solve this to obtain 
e2a (2ra,a + 1) = 1. 
e2a = 1 - Rs' 
r 
(5.17) 
(5.18) 
(5.19) 
(5.20) 
where Rs is some undetermined constant. With (5.17) and (5.20), our metric be-
comes 
ds2 = -(1 - ~s) dt2 + (1 - ~s )-' ctr2 +r2 dQ2. 
(5.21) 
We now have no freedom left except for the single constant Rs, so this form had 
better solve the remaining equations Ru = 0 and R,, = 0; it is straightforward to 
check that it does, for any value of Rs. 
The only thing left to do is to interpret the constant Rs, called the Schwarz-
schild radius, in terms of some physical parameter. Nothing could be simpler. In 
Chapter 4 we found that, in the weak-field limit, the tt component of the metric 
around a point mass satisfies 
811 = - (I -
2~ M) . 
(5.22) 
The Schwarzschild metric should reduce to the weak-field case when r » 2G M, 
but for the tt component the forms are already exactly the same; we need only 
identify 
Rs= 2GM. 
(5.23) 
This can be thought of as the definition of the parameter M. 

5.2 
Birkhoff's Theorem 
197 
Our final result is the Schwarzschild metric, (5.1 ). We have shown that it is a 
static, spherically symmetric vacuum solution to Einstein's equation; M functions 
as a parameter, which we happen to know can be interpreted as the conventional 
Newtonian mass that we would measure by studying orbits at large distances from 
the gravitating source. It won't simply be the sum of the masses of the constituents 
of whatever body is curving spacetime, since there will be a contribution from 
what we might think of as the gravitational binding energy; however, in the weak 
field limit, the quantities will agree. Note that as M ~ 0 we recover Minkowski 
space, which is to be expected. Note also that the metric becomes progressively 
Minkowskian as r ~ oo; this property is known as asymptotic flatness. A more 
technical definition involves matching regions at infinity in a conformal diagram, 
as discussed in the next chapter. 
5.2 • BIRKHOFF'S THEOREM 
Birkhoff's theorem is the statement that the Schwarzschild metric is the unique 
vacuum solution with spherical symmetry (and in particular, that there are no 
time-dependent solutions of this form); proving it is an instructive exercise, which 
consists of three major steps. First, we argue that a spherically symmetric space-
time can be foliated by two-spheres-in other words, that (almost) every point lies 
on a unique sphere that is left invariant by the generators of spherical symmetry. 
Second, we show on purely geometric grounds that the metric on such a space can 
always (at least in a local region) be put in the form 
(5.24) 
where (a, b) are coordinates transverse to the spheres, and r is a function of these 
coordinates. Third, we plug this metric into Einstein's equation in vacuum to show 
that Schwarzschild is the unique solution. We will argue in favor of the first two 
points at a level of rigor that is likely to be convincing to most physicists, although 
mathematicians will be uneasy; the third point is straightforward calculation. For a 
more careful treatment see Hawking and Ellis (1973). We will use a few concepts 
from Appendix C, which may be useful to read at this point. Of course, if you 
are more interested in exploring properties of the Schwarzschild solution than in 
proving its uniqueness, you are welcome to skip right to the next section. 
We begin with the concept of a four-dimensional spherically symmetric space-
time M. Spherically symmetric means having the same symmetries as a sphere. 
(In this chapter the word sphere refers specifically to S2, not spheres of other di-
mension.) The symmetries of a sphere are precisely those of ordinary rotations 
in three-dimensional Euclidean space; in the language of group theory, they com-
prise the special orthogonal group S0(3). (Recall the discussion of the Lorentz 
and rotation groups in Chapter 1.) In the case of a metric on a manifold, symme-
tries are characterized by the existence of Killing vectors. In Section 3.8 we found 
the three Killing vectors of S2, labeled (R, S, T); in (fJ, </>)coordinates they take 

198 
z 
R3 --~-< ;·:t· ·! .. ; • 
. 
.:iH.~·~;~'.~ ~ .. 
x -·~~lj:~;:w. 
y 
FIGURE 5.1 Foliating R3 
(minus the origin) by two-
spheres. 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
the form 
R = aiP 
S = cos </> ae - cot B sin </> aiP 
T = - sin </> ae - cot B cos </> aiP. 
(5.25) 
A spherically symmetric manifold is one that has three Killing vector fields that 
are the same as those on S2. But how do we know, in a coordinate-independent 
way, that a set of Killing vectors on one manifold is the same as that on some other 
manifold? The structure of a set of symmetry transformations is given by the com-
mutation relations of the transformations, which express the difference between 
performing two infinitesimal transformations in one order versus the reversed or-
der. In group theory these are expressed by the Lie algebra of the symmetry gen-
erators, while in differential geometry they are expressed by the commutators of 
the Killing vector fields. There is a deep connection here, which we don't have 
time to pursue; see Schutz (1980). In the Exercises for Chapter 3 you verified that 
the commutators of the rotational Killing vectors (R, S, T) satisfied 
[R, S] = T 
[S, T] = R 
[T, R] = S. 
(5.26) 
This algebra of Killing vectors fully characterizes the kind of symmetry we have. 
A manifold will be said to possess spherical symmetry if and only if there are 
three Killing fields satisfying (5.26). 
In Appendix C we discuss Frobenius's theorem, which states that if you have a 
set of vector fields whose commutator closes-the commutator of any two fields 
in the set is a linear combination of other fields in the set-then the integral curves 
of these vector fields fit together to describe submanifolds of the manifold on 
which they are all defined. The dimensionality of the submanifold may be smaller 
than the number of vectors, or it could be equal, but obviously not larger. Vec-
tor fields that obey (5.26) will of course form 2-spheres. Since the vector fields 
stretch throughout the space, every point will be on exactly one of these spheres. 
(Actually, it's almost every point-we will show below how it can fail to be ab-
solutely every point.) Thus, we say that a spherically symmetric manifold can be 
foliated into spheres. 
Let's consider some examples to bring this down to earth. The simplest ex-
ample is flat three-dimensional Euclidean space. If we pick an origin, then R3 is 
clearly spherically symmetric with respect to rotations around this origin. Under 
such rotations (that is, under the flow of the Killing vector fields), points move 
into each other, but each point stays on an S2 at a fixed distance from the ori-
gin. 
These spheres foliate R3, as depicted in Figure 5.1. Of course, they don't really 
foliate all of the space, since the origin itself just stays put under rotations-it 

FIGURE 5.2 Foliation of a 
wormhole by two-spheres. 
5.2 
Birkhoff's Theorem 
199 
doesn't move around on some two-sphere. But it should be clear that almost all 
of the space is properly foliated, and this will turn out to be enough for us. 
We can also have spherical symmetry without an origin to rotate things around. 
An example is provided by a wormhole, with topology R x s2. If we suppress 
a dimension and draw our two-spheres as circles, such a space might look like 
Figure 5.2. In this case the entire manifold can be foliated by two-spheres. 
Given that manifolds with S0(3) symmetry may be foliated by spheres, our 
second step is to show that the metric on M can be put into the form (5.24). The 
set of all the spheres forms a two-dimensional space (since a four-dimensional 
spacetime is being foliated with two-dimensional spheres). You might hope we 
could simply put coordinates (8, </>)on each sphere, and coordinates (a, b) on the 
set of all spheres, for a complete set of coordinates (a, b, e, </>)on M. Then each 
sphere is specified by a = constant, b = constant. We know that the metric on 
a round sphere is dfl.2, so this strategy would be sufficient to guarantee that the 
metric restricted to any fixed values a = ao and b = bo (so that da = db = 0) 
takes the form 
ds 2(ao, bo, e, </>) = f(ao, bo)dfl.2• 
(5.27) 
In particular, the function f must be independent of e and <f>, or the sphere would 
be lumpy rather than round. Furthermore, it's equally clear that the metric re-
stricted to any fixed values e = Bo and</> = <Po (so that dB = d<f> = 0) takes the 
form 
ds 2(a, b, Bo, </>o) = dr 2(a, b). 
(5.28) 
Again, any dependence on e or </> would destroy the symmetry; it would mean 
that the geometry transverse to the spheres depended on where you were on the 
sphere. 
However, we have been too reckless by slapping down these coordinates, since 
we cannot rule out cross terms of the form dad8 + d8da and so on. In other words, 
we must be careful to line up our spheres appropriately, so that travel along a 
curve that is perpendicular to one of the spheres keeps us at constant e and <f>. To 
guarantee this we need to be more careful in setting up our coordinates. Begin 
by conside1ing a single point q lying on a sphere Sq (note that q must not be a 
degenerate point at which all of the Killing vectors vanish). Put coordinates (8, </>) 
on this particular sphere only, not yet through the manifold. At each point p on 
Sq, there will be a two-dimensional orthogonal subspace 0 P' consisting of points 
along geodesics emanating from p whose tangent vectors at p are orthogonal to 
Sq. Note that there will be a one-dimensional subgroup RP of rotations that leave 
p fixed; indeed, these rotations keep fixed any direction perpendicular to Sq at p, 
and hence the entire two-smface 0 P is left invariant by RP. 
Consider a point r that is not on Sq, but on some other sphere S, in the foliation, 
and that lies in the two-smface Op orthogonal to Sq at p. Since p is arbitrary, 
this includes any possible point r in a neighborhood of Sq. Note that 0 P will be 
orthogonal to S, as well as to Sq. To see this, consider the two-dimensional plane 

200 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
V, of vectors in the tangent space T, M that are orthogonal to the two-surface 0 P. 
Since Op is left invariant by the rotations Rp, these rotations must take V, into 
itself, because they are an isometry, and hence preserve orthogonality. But Rp 
also takes the set of vectors tangent to Sq into itself, since these rotations leave 
the spheres invariant. In four dimensions, two planes that are both orthogonal to a 
given plane at the same point must be the same plane; hence, the vectors tangent 
to S, must be orthogonal to 0 P. 
There will be a unique geodesic that is orthogonal to Sq and connects p to r. 
Traveling down such geodesics provides a map f : Sq ~ S,, which is both one-
to-one and onto (at least in a neighborhood of the 01iginal sphere). We use this 
map to define coordinates on S, (and, similarly, on any other sphere) by assign-
ing the same values of (8, </>) tor E S, that were the coordinates at p E Sq. We 
have therefore defined (8, </>)throughout the manifold. Now to define coordinates 
(a, b), choose two basis vectors S, T for the subspace of TqM that generates the 
orthogonal space Oq. Any other sphere will be connected to q by a unique orthog-
onal geodesic, with tangent vector aS + bT e TqM. Assign those components 
(a, b) as coordinates everywhere on that sphere. This defines the full set of coor-
dinates (a, b, 8, </>)throughout the manifold. 
The metric in these coordinates satisfies (5.27) and (5.28); it remains to be 
shown that there are no cross terms between directions along the spheres and those 
transverse. This means, for example, that the vector field aa should be orthogonal 
to ae, and so on; it is straightforward to vetify that this is so. First, consider a0 
at some point r E S,; this vector is the directional derivative along a curve of 
the form xµ(8) = (a,, b,, 8, <f>,). Since a and b are constant along the curve, 
the entire curve remains in the sphere S,, so that ae is tangent to the sphere. 
Meanwhile, aa is a derivative along xµ(a) = (a, b,, 8,, </>,). Since this curve 
remains in the orthogonal subspace 0,, aa will be orthogonal to S,, and hence to 
ae. Similar arguments guarantee that there will be no cross terms between (a, b) 
and (8, </>). 
We have thus succeeded in putting the metric on a sphetically symmettic 
spacetime in the form 
ds 2 = gaa(a, b) da2 + gab(a, b)(dadb + dbda) + gbb(a, b) db2 + r 2(a, b) dfl.2. 
(5.29) 
Here r(a, b) is some as-yet-undetermined function, to which we have merely 
given a suggestive label. There is nothing to stop us, however, from changing 
coordinates from (a, b) to (a, r) by inverting r(a, b), unless r were a function 
of a alone; in this case we could just as easily switch to (b, r), so we will not 
consider this situation separately. The metric is then 
ds 2 = gaa(a, r) da 2 + ga,(a, r)(da dr +dr da) + g,,(a, r) dr2 +r2 dfl.2. (5.30) 
Our next step is to find a function t(a, r) such that, in the (t, r) coordinate system, 
there are no cross terms dtdr + drdt in the mettic. Notice that 
at 
at 
dt = -
da + -
dr, 
aa 
ar 
(5.31) 

5.2 
Birkhoff's Theorem 
201 
so 
dt
2 = G~) 
2 
da
2 + C~) c:) (dadr + drda) + c:) 
2 
ctr2• 
(5.32) 
We would like to replace the first three terms in the metric (5.30) by 
(5.33) 
for some functions m and n. This is equivalent to the requirements 
(5.34) 
( at )
2 
n +m -
= g,,, 
ar 
(5.35) 
and 
(5.36) 
We therefore have three equations for the three unknowns t(a, r), m(a, r), and 
n(a, r),just enough to determine them precisely, up to initial conditions fort. (Of 
course, they are "determined" in terms of the unknown functions gaa• ga,, and 
g,,, so in this sense they are still undetermined.) We can therefore put our metric 
in the form 
ds2 = m(t, r) dt2 + n(t, r) dr2 + r2 dQ.2. 
(5.37) 
To this point the only difference between the two coordinates t and r is that 
we have chosen r to be the one that multiplies the metric for the two-sphere. This 
choice was motivated by what we know about the metric for flat Minkowski space, 
which can be written ds2 = -dt2 + dr2 + r2 dQ.2. We know that the spacetime 
under consideration is Lorentzian, so either m or n will have to be negative. Let 
us choose m, the coefficient of dt2, to be negative. This is not a choice we are 
simply allowed to make, and in fact we will see later that it can go wrong; but we 
will assume it for now. The assumption is not completely unreasonable, since we 
know that Minkowski space is itself spherically symmetric, and will therefore be 
described by (5.37). With this choice we can trade in the functions m and n for 
new functions a and f3, such that 
ds2 = -e2a(t.r) dt2 + e2fi(t.r) dr2 + ,.2 dQ.2. 
(5.38) 
This is the best we can do using only geometry; sphetical symmetry is certainly 
not enough to say anything substantive about the functions a(t, r) and f3(t, r). Our 
next step is therefore to actually solve Einstein's equation; the steps follow closely 

202 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
along those of Section 5.1, in which we considered a metric similar to (5.38) but 
with the additional assumption of time-independence. Here we will see that this 
assumption was unnecessary, as the solution will necessarily be static. 
The nonvanishing Christoffel symbols for (5.38) are 
r:r = ara 
r;t = e2<a-IJ) ara 
re -
~ 
re -
,. 
r~"' = -re-2.B sin2 e 
r:r = ara 
r;r = arf3 
roe = -re-2.B 
r:"' = - sine cose 
rt = e2(,8-a) a f3 
rr 
t 
r~r = ar/3 
r"' -
~ 
r<P -
r 
r"' - cose 
eq, -
sine' 
the following nonvanishing components of the Riemann tensor are 
(5.39) 
R1 rtr = e2<.B-a>[a12{3 + (()r/3)2 - a1aa1{3] + [araar/3 - a;a - (()ra)2] 
R1 ere = -re-2.Bara 
R1 
</>I</> = -re-2.B sin2 e ara 
R1 ere= -re-2aa113 
R1 q,rq, = -re-2a sin2 e a1{3 
Rr ere= re-2.Bar/3 
Rr <t>r<P = re-2.B sin2 e ar/3 
Re q,eq, = (1 - e-2.B) sin2 e, 
and the Ricci tensor is 
(5.40) 
R11 = [ a;,6 + (31,6)2 - a,a31,6] + e2<•-Pl [ a;a + (3,a)2 - a,aa,,6 + ~a,a] 
R,, = -[a;a + (3,a)2 - a,aa,,IJ - ~a,,6 J 
+ e2<,8-a) [a?13 + (()r/3) 2 - a1aa1f3] 
2 
Rrr = -ar/3 
,. 
Ree = e-2.B [r(arf3 - ara) - 1) + 1 
Rq,q, =Ree sin2 e. 
(5.41) 
Our job is to solve Einstein's equation in vacuum, Rµv = 0. From Rrr = 0 we get 
(5.42) 

5.2 
Birkhoff's Theorem 
203 
If we consider taking the time derivative of Ree = 0 and using at f3 = 0, we get 
ata,a = 0. 
(5.43) 
We can therefore write 
f3 = f3(r) 
a = f (r) + g(t). 
(5.44) 
The first term in the metric (5.38) is thus -e2f(r)e2g(t) dt 2. But we can always 
simply redefine our time coordinate by replacing dt ~ e-g(t) dt; in other words, 
we are free to choose t such that g(t) = 0, whence a(t, r) = f (r). We therefore 
have 
ds2 = -e2a(r) dt2 + e2fi(r) dr2 + ,.2 dQ.2. 
(5.45) 
All of the metric components are independent of the coordinate t. We have there-
fore proven a crucial result: any spherically symmetric vacuum metric possesses 
a timelike Killing vect01: 
This property is so interesting that it gets its own name: a metric that possesses 
a Killing vector that is timelike near infinity is called stationary. (Often, includ-
ing in Schwarzschild, the Killing vector that is timelike at infinity will become 
spacelike somewhere in the interior.) In a stationary metric we can choose coor-
dinates (t, x 1, x 2, x 3) in which the Killing vector is at and the metric components 
are independent oft; the general form of a stationary metric in these coordinates 
is thus 
(5.46) 
There is also a more restrictive property: a metric is called static if it possesses a 
timelike Killing vector that is orthogonal to a family of hypersmfaces. (For more 
details on hypersmfaces, see Appendix D.) In the Exercises for Chapter 4 you 
showed that a hypersurface-orthogonal vector field vµ obeys 
V[µ VvVa) = 0. 
(5.47) 
But there is a simpler diagnostic; if we have adapted coordinates so that the com-
ponents gµv are all independent oft, the surfaces to which the Killing vector will 
be orthogonal are defined by the condition t = constant. Operationally, this means 
that the time-space cross terms in (5.46) will be absent; the general static metric 
can be written 
(5.48) 
We notice that only even powers of the time coordinate t appear in this form; thus, 
an alternative definition of "static" is "stationary, and invariant under time rever-
sal (t ~ -t)." The metric (5.45) is clearly static. You should think of stationary 
as meaning "doing exactly the same thing at every time," while static means "not 

204 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
doing anything at all." For example, the static sphetically symmetric metric (5.45) 
will describe nonrotating stars or black holes, while rotating systems that keep ro-
tating in the same way at all times will be described by metrics that are stationary 
but not static. 
Notice that (5.45) is precisely the same as (5.11 ), the metric we originally used 
to derive the Schwarzschild solution in Section 5.1. We have therefore proven 
Birkhoff's theorem, that the unique sphetically symmetric vacuum solution is the 
Schwarzschild metric, 
( 2GM) 
( 
2GM)-I 
ds 2 = -
1 - -,.-
dt 2 + 
1 - -,.-
dr2 +r2 dfl.2, 
(5.49) 
as promised. 
We did not say anything about the source of the Schwarzschild metric, except 
that it be spherically symmetric. Specifically, we did not demand that the source 
itself be static; it could be a collapsing star, as long as the collapse is symmetric. 
Therefore a process such as a supernova explosion would generate very little grav-
itational radiation (in comparison to the amount of energy released through other 
channels) if it were close to spherically symmetric, which a realistic supernova 
may or may not be depending on its origin. This is the same result we would have 
obtained in electromagnetism, where the electromagnetic fields around a spherical 
charge distribution do not depend on the radial distribution of the charges. 
5.3 • SINGULARITIES 
Before exploring the behavior of test particles in the Schwarzschild geometry, 
we should say something about singularities. From the form of (5.1), the metric 
coefficients become infinite at r = 0 and r = 2G M-an apparent sign that some-
thing is going wrong. The metric coefficients, of course, are coordinate-dependent 
quantities, and as such we should not make too much of their values; it is certainly 
possible to have a coordinate singularity that results from a breakdown of a spe-
cific coordinate system rather than the underlying manifold. An example occurs at 
the origin of polar coordinates in the plane, where the metric d s2 = dr2 + r 2d82 
becomes degenerate and the component gee = ,.-2 of the inverse metric blows 
up, even though that point of the manifold is no different from any other. 
What kind of coordinate-independent signal should we look for as a warn-
ing that something about the geometry is out of control? This turns out to be 
a difficult question to answer, and entire books have been written about the na-
ture of singularities in general relativity. We won't go into this issue in detail, 
but rather tum to one simple criterion for when something has gone wrong-
when the curvature becomes infinite. The curvature is measured by the Riemann 
tensor~ and it is hard to say when a tensor becomes infinite, since its compo-
nents are coordinate-dependent. But from the curvature we can construct vari-
ous scalar quantities, and since scalars are coordinate-independent it is meaning-
ful to say that they become infinite. The simplest such scalar is the Ricci scalar 

5.4 Geodesics of Schwarzschild 
205 
R = gµv Rµv, but we can also construct higher-order scalars such as Rµv Rµv, 
Rµvpa Rµvpa' Rµvpa Rpa>..r R>..rµv, and so on. If any of these scalars (but not nec-
essarily all of them) goes to infinity as we approach some point, we regard that 
point as a singularity of the curvature. We should also check that the point is not 
infinitely far away; that is, that it can be reached by traveling a finite distance 
along a curve. 
We therefore have a sufficient condition for a point to be considered a singu-
larity. It is not a necessary condition, however, and it is generally harder to show 
that a given point is nonsingular; for our purposes we will simply test to see if 
geodesics are well-behaved at the point in question, and if so then we will con-
sider the point nonsingular. In the case of the Schwarzschild metric (5.1 ), direct 
calculation reveals that 
µvpa 
48G2M 2 
R 
Rµvpa = 
6 
,. 
(5.50) 
This is enough to convince us that r = 0 represents an honest singularity. 
The other trouble spot is r = 2GM, the Schwarzschild radius. You could 
check that none of the curvature invariants blows up there. We therefore begin to 
think that it is actually not singular, and we have simply chosen a bad coordinate 
system. The best thing to do is to transform to more appropriate coordinates if 
possible. We will soon see that in this case it is in fact possible, and the surface r = 
2G M is very well-behaved (although interesting) in the Schwarzschild metric-it 
demarcates the event horizon of a black hole. 
Having worried a little about singularities, we should point out that the be-
havior of the Schwarzschild metric inside the Schwarzschild radius is of little 
day-to-day consequence. The solution we derived is valid only in vacuum, and 
we expect it to hold outside a spherical body such as a star. However, in the case 
of the Sun we are dealing with a body that extends to a radius of 
(5.51) 
Thus, r = 2G M0 is far inside the solar interior, where we do not expect the 
Schwarzschild metric to apply. In fact, realistic stellar interior solutions consist of 
matching the exterior Schwarzschild metric to an interior metric that is perfectly 
smooth at the origin. Nevertheless, there are objects for which the full Schwarz-
schild metric is required-black holes-and therefore we will let our imaginations 
roam far outside the solar system in this chapter. 
5.4 • GEODESICS OF SCHWARZSCHILD 
The first step we will take to understand the Schwarzschild metric more fully is 
to consider the behavior of geodesics. We need the nonzero Christoffel symbols 
for Schwarzschild: 

206 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
r 
GM . 
2 
r 11 = -
3 (1 -
GM) 
,. 
-GM 
rr =----
rr 
r(r - 2G M) 
rt - __ 
G_M __ 
tr -
r(r - 2G M) 
1 
re - -
re -
,. 
r~<P = -(r - 2G M) sin2 e 
r0e = -(r - 2G M) 
r:"' =-sine cose 
r"' - ~ 
r<P -
r 
r"' = _co_s_e 
eq, 
sine 
(5.52) 
The geodesic equation therefore turns into the following four equations, where A. 
is an affine parameter: 
d2t + 
2GM 
dr dt = O, 
d)...2 
r(r - 2GM) d)... d)... 
d2r 
GM 
(dt)
2 
GM 
(dr)
2 
d)...2 + -;:r-(r - 2GM) 
d)... 
- r(r - 2GM) 
d)... 
-(r - 2G M) [ ( ~~) 
2 
+ sin2 0 G~) 
2
] = 0, 
d2e 2 de dr 
. 
(d</>)
2 
-+----smecose -
=0 
dA.2 
,. di.. di.. 
di.. 
' 
d2
</> + ~ d<f> dr + 2cose de d<f> = o. 
dA.2 
,. d)... d)... 
sine d)... d)... 
(5.53) 
There does not seem to be much hope for simply solving this set of coupled 
equations by inspection. Fortunately our task is greatly simplified by the high 
degree of symmetry of the Schwarzschild metric. We know that there are four 
Killing vectors: three for the spherical symmetry, and one for time translations. 
Each of these will lead to a constant of the motion for a free particle. If K µ is a 
Killing vector, we know that 
dxµ 
Kµ di.. =constant. 
(5.54) 
In addition, we always have another constant of the motion for geodesics: the 
geodesic equation (together with metric compatibility) implies that the quantity 
(5.55) 
is constant along the path. (For any trajectory we can choose the parameter A. 
such that E is a constant~ we are simply noting that this is compatible with affine 
parameterization along a geodesic.) Of course, for a massive particle we typically 
choose A. = r, and this relation simply becomes E = -gµvUµuv = +l. For 
massless particles, which move along null trajectories, we always have E = 0, 

5.4 Geodesics of Schwarzschild 
207 
and this equation does not fix the parameter A.. As discussed in Section 3.4, it 
is convenient to normalize A. along null geodesics such that the four-momentum 
and four-velocity are equal, pµ = dxµ /di... We might also be concerned with 
spacelike geodesics (even though they do not correspond to paths of particles), 
for which we will choose E = -1. 
Rather than immediately writing out explicit expressions for the four conserved 
quantities associated with Killing vectors, let's think about what they are telling 
us. Notice that the symmetries they represent are also present in flat spacetime, 
where the conserved quantities they lead to are very familiar. Invariance under 
time translations leads to conservation of energy, while invariance under spatial 
rotations leads to conservation of the three components of angular momentum. 
Essentially the same applies to the Schwarzschild metric. We can think of the 
angular momentum as a three-vector with a magnitude (one component) and di-
rection (two components). Conservation of the direction of angular momentum 
means that the particle will move in a plane. We can choose this to be the equa-
torial plane of our coordinate system; if the particle is not in this plane, we can 
rotate coordinates until it is. Thus, the two Killing vectors that lead to conserva-
tion of the direction of angular momentum imply that, for a single particle, we 
can choose 
(5.56) 
The two remaining Killing vectors correspond to energy and the magnitude of 
angular momentum. The energy arises from the timelike Killing vector 
(5.57) 
The Killing vector whose conserved quantity is the magnitude of the angular mo-
mentum is 
(5.58) 
In both cases it is convenient to lower the index to obtain 
(5.59) 
and 
(5.60) 
Since (5.56) implies that sine = 1 along the geodesics of interest to us, the two 
conserved quantities are 
E = -K dxµ = (l _ 2GM) dt 
µ di.. 
,. 
di.. 
(5.61) 

208 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
and 
(5.62) 
For massless particles, these can be thought of as the conserved energy and an-
gular momentum, while for massive particles they are the conserved energy and 
angular momentum per unit mass of the particle. In the discussion of rotating 
black holes in the next chapter, we will use E and L to refer to the actual energy 
and angular momentum, not "per unit mass"; the meaning should be clear from 
context. Note that the constancy of (5.62) is the GR equivalent of Kepler's second 
law--equal areas are swept out in equal times. 
Recall that in Section 3.4 we claimed that the energy of a particle with four-
momentum pµ, as measured by an observer with four-velocity Uµ, would be 
-pµ Uµ. This is not equal, or even proportional, to (5.61), even if the observer is 
taken to be stationary (U; = 0). Mathematically, this is because the four-velocity 
is normalized to U µ U µ = -1, which the Killing vector K µ is not: If we tried to 
normalize it in that way, it would no longer solve Killing's equation. At a slightly 
deeper level, - p µ U µ may be thought of as the inertial/kinetic energy of the par-
ticle, while - p µ K µ is the total conserved energy, including the potential energy 
due to the gravitational field. The notion of gravitational potential energy is not 
always well-defined, but the total energy is well-defined in the presence of a time-
like Killing vector. We will presently use E to help characterize geodesics of 
Schwarzschild; later we will also use - p µ U µ for massless particles, where it can 
be thought of as the observed frequency of a photon, to describe gravitational 
redshift. 
Together the conserved quantities E and L provide a convenient way to un-
derstand the orbits of particles in the Schwarzschild geometry. Let us expand the 
expression (5.55) for E to obtain 
( 
2GM) (dt )2 ( 
2GM)-t (dr)2 (d</>)2 
-
1- -,.-
di.. 
+ 1- -,.-
di.. 
+r2 
di.. 
= -€. (5.63) 
If we multiply this by (1 - 2G M / r) and use our expressions for E and L, we 
obtain 
-£2 + -
+ 1 - --
-
+ € = 0. 
(dr)2 ( 
2GM) (L2 
) 
di.. 
,. 
,.2 
. 
(5.64) 
This is certainly progress, since we have taken a messy system of coupled equa-
tions and obtained a single equation for r(/..). It looks even nicer if we rewrite it 
as 
1 (dr )
2 
2 di.. 
+V(r)=t', 
(5.65) 

5.4 Geodesics of Schwarzschild 
209 
FIGURE 5.3 Orbits around a star are characterized by giving the radius r as a function 
of a parameter .A. 
where 
1 
GM 
L2 
GML2 
V(r) = -€ -€- + -
- --
2 
,. 
2,.2 
,.3 
(5.66) 
and 
(5.67) 
In (5.65) we have precisely the equation for a classical particle of unit mass and 
"energy"£ moving in a one-dimensional potential given by V(r). It's a little con-
fusing, but not too bad: the conserved energy per unit mass is E, but the effective 
potential for the coordinate r responds to£ = £ 2 /2. 
Of course, our physical situation is quite different from a classical particle 
moving in ".>ne dimension; the trajectories under consideration are orbits around 
a star or other object, as shown in Figure 5.3. The quantities of interest to us are 
not only r(A.), but also t(A.) and </>(A.). Nevertheless, we can go a long way toward 
understanding all of the orbits by understanding their radial behavior, and it is a 
great help to reduce this behavior to a problem we know how to solve. 
A similar analysis of orbits in Newtonian gravity would have produced a simi-
lar result; the general equation (5.65) would have been the same, but the effective 
potential (5.66) would not have had the last term. (Note that this equation is not 
a power series in 1 / r, it is exact.) In the potential ( 5.66) the first term is just a 
constant, the second term corresponds exactly to the Newtonian gravitational po-
tential, and the third term is a contribution from angular momentum that takes 
the same form in Newtonian gravity and general relativity. The last term, the GR 
contribution, will tum out to make a great deal of difference, especially at small r. 
Let us examine the effective potentials for different kinds of possible orbits, 
as illustrated in Figures 5.4 and 5.5. There are different curves V (r) for different 
values of L; for any one of these curves, the behavior of the orbit can be judged 
by comparing £ to V (r). The general behavior of the particle will be to move in 
the potential until it reaches a "turning point" where V (r) =£,when it will begin 

210 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
IO 
20 
30 
r 
r 
FIGURE 5.4 Effective potentials in Newtonian gravity. Five curves are shown. corresponding to the listed values of the 
angular momentum (per unit mass) L. and we have chosen GM = I. Note that. for large enough energy. every orbit reaches 
a turning point and returns to infinity. 
moving in the other direction. Sometimes there may be no turning point to hit, in 
which case the particle just keeps going. In other cases the particle may simply 
move in a circular orbit at radius re = constant; this can happen at points_ where 
the potential is flat, dV /dr = 0. Differentiating (5.66), we find that the circular 
orbits occur when 
(5.68) 
where y = 0 in Newtonian gravity and y = 1 in general relativity. Circular orbits 
will be stable if they correspond to a minimum of the potential, and unstable if 
they coll'espond to a maximum. Bound orbits that are not circular will oscillate 
around the radius of the stable circular orbit. 
Turning to Newtonian gravity, we find that circular orbits appear at 
l2 
re= EGM' 
(5.69) 
For massless particles, E = 0, and there are no circular orbits; this is consistent 
with the first plot in Figure 5.4, which illusu·ates that there are no bound orbits 
of any sort. Although it is somewhat obscured in polar coordinates, massless par-
ticles actually move in a su·aight line, since the Newtonian gravitational force on 
a massless particle is zero. Of course the standing of massless particles in Newto-
nian theory is somewhat problematic, so you can get different answers depending 
on what assumptions you make. In terms of the effective potential, a photon with 
a given energy E will come in from r = oo and gradually slow down (actually 
dr/dA. will decrease, but the speed of light isn't changing) until it reaches the 

5.4 Geodesics of Schwarzschild 
211 
0.6 
V(r) 0.4 
0.2 
10 
20 
30 0 
10 
20 
30 
r 
r 
FIGURE 5.5 Effective potentials in general relativity. Again, five curves are shown, co1Tesponding to the listed values of 
the angular momentum (per unit mass) l, and we have chosen GM = 1. In GR there is an inne1most circular orbit greater 
than or equal to 3G M, and any orbit that falls inside this radius continues tor = 0 (for particles on geodesics). 
turning point, when it will start moving away back tor = oo. The lower values of 
L, for which the photon will come closer before it starts moving away, are sim-
ply those trajectories that are initially aimed closer to the gravitating body. For 
massive particles there will be stable circular orbits at the radius (5.69), as well 
as bound orbits that oscillate around this radius. If the energy is greater than the 
asymptotic value E = l, the orbits will be unbound, describing a particle that 
approaches the star and then recedes. We know that the orbits in Newton's theory 
are conic sections-bound orbits are either circles or ellipses, while unbound ones 
are either parabolas or hyperbolas-although we won't show that here. 
In general relativity the situation is different, but only for r sufficiently small. 
Since the difference resides in the tenn -GM L 2 / r 3, as r ~ oo the behaviors 
are identical in the two theories. But as r ~ 0 the potential goes to -oo rather 
than +oo as in the Newtonian case. At r = 2G M the potential is always zero; 
inside this radius is the black hole, which we will discuss more thoroughly later. 
For massless particles there is always a barrier (except for L = 0, for which the 
potential vanishes identically), but a sufficiently energetic photon will neverthe-
less go over the barrier and be dragged inexorably down to the center. Note that 
"sufficiently energetic" means "in comparison to its angular momentum"-in fact 
the frequency of the photon is immaterial, only the direction in which it is point-
ing. At the top of the barrier are unstable circular orbits. For E = 0, y = l, we 
can easily solve (5.68) to obtain 
re= 3GM. 
(5.70) 

212 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
This is borne out by the first part of Figure 5.5, which shows a maximum of V (r) 
at r = 3G M for every L. This means that a photon can orbit forever in a circle at 
this radius, but any perturbation will cause it to fly away either to r = 0 or r = oo. 
For massive particles there are once again different regimes depending on the 
angular momentum. The circular orbits are at 
(5.71) 
For large L there will be two circular orbits, one stable and one unstable. In the 
L ~ oo limit their radii are given by 
(5.72) 
In this limit the stable circular orbit becomes farther away, while the unstable one 
approaches 3G M, behavior that parallels the massless case. As we decrease L, 
the two circular orbits come closer together; they coincide when the discriminant 
in (5.71) vanishes, which is at 
L=~GM, 
(5.73) 
for which 
re= 6GM, 
(5.74) 
and they disappear entirely for smaller L. Thus 6G M is the smallest possible ra-
dius of a stable circular orbit in the Schwarzschild metric. There are also unbound 
orbits, which come in from infinity and tum around, and bound but noncircular 
orbits, which oscillate around the stable circular radius. Note that such orbits, 
which would describe exact conic sections in Newtonian gravity, will not do so 
in GR, although we would have to solve the equation for d<J>/d'A to demonstrate 
it. Finally, there are orbits that come in from infinity and continue all the way in 
to r = O; this can happen either if the energy is higher than the barrier, or for 
L < ~GM, when the barrier goes away entirely. 
We have therefore found that the Schwarzschild solution possesses stable cir-
cular orbits for r > 6G M and unstable circular orbits for 3G M < r < 6G M. It's 
important to remember that these are only the geodesics; there is nothing to stop 
an accelerating particle from dipping below r = 3GM and emerging, as long as 
it stays beyond r = 2G M. 
5.5 • EXPERIMENTAL TESTS 
Most experimental tests of general ·relativity involve the motion of test particles 
in the solar system, and hence geodesics of the Schwarzschild metric. Einstein 

5.5 
Experimental Tests 
213 
FIGURE 5.6 Orbits in general relativity describe precessing ellipses. 
suggested three tests: the deflection of light, the precession of perihelia, and grav-
itational redshift. The deflection of light is observable in the weak-field limit, and 
is therefore discussed in Chapter 7. In this section we will discuss the precession 
of perihelia and the gravitational redshift. (The perihelion of an elliptical orbit is 
its point of closest approach to the Sun; orbits around the Earth or a star would 
have perigee or periastron, respectively.) 
The precession of perihelia reflects the fact that noncircular orbits in GR are 
not pe1f ect closed ellipses; to a good approximation they are ellipses that precess, 
describing a flower pattern as shown in Figure 5.6. Despite its conceptual simplic-
ity, the rate of perinelion precession is somewhat cumbersome to calculate; here 
we follow d'lnvemo ( 1992). The strategy is to describe the evolution of the radial 
coordinate r as a function of the angular coordinate <f>; for a perfect ellipse, r(<f>) 
would be periodic with period 2rr, reflecting the fact that perihelion occurred at 
the same angular position each orbit. Using perturbation theory we can show how 
GR introduces a slight alteration of the period, giving rise to precession. 
We start with our radial equation of motion of a massive particle in a Schwarz-
schild metric (5.65). To get an equation for dr/d</> we multiply by 
(d</>)-2 = ,.4 
di.. 
L2' 
(5.75) 
which yields 
-
+ _,.4 - __ ,.3 + ,.2 - 2G Mr = _,.4 
(
dr ) 2 
1 
2GM 
2£ 
d</> 
L2 
L2 
L2 
. 
(5.76) 
Two tricks are useful in solving this equation. The first trick is to define a new 
variable 

214 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
L2 
x=--. 
GMr 
(5.77) 
From (5.69) we see that x = 1 at a Newtonian circular orbit. Our equation of 
motion (5.76) becomes 
(
dx) 2 
L2 
2 
2G2M2 
3 
2£L2 
d<f> 
+ G2 M2 - 2x + x -
L2 
x = G2 M2. 
(5.78) 
The second trick is to differentiate this with respect to <f>, obtaining a second-order 
equation for x(<f>): 
(5.79) 
In a Newtonian calculation, the last term would be absent, and we could solve for 
x exactly; here, we can treat it as a perturbation. 
We expand x into a Newtonian solution plus a small deviation, 
X =XO +x1. 
The zeroth-order part of (5.79) is then 
and the first-order part is 
d2xo 
---I+xo=O 
d</>2 
The solution for the zeroth-order equation can be written 
XO = 1 + e COS</>. 
(5.80) 
(5.81) 
(5.82) 
(5.83) 
This is the standard result of Newton or Kepler; it describes a perfect ellipse, with 
e the eccentricity. An ellipse is specified by the semi-major axis a, the distance 
from the center to the farthest point on the ellipse, and the semi-minor axis b, 
the distance from the center to the closest point. The eccentricity satisfies e2 = 
1 - b2 /a 2. 
Plugging the Newtonian solution into the first-order equation (5.82), we obtain 
d2x1 
3G2M2 
d</>2 +x1 = 
L2 
(1 +ecos<J>)2 
= 
3
G~ :1
2 
[ (I + ~e2) + 2e cos If>+ ~e
2 cos 2¢] . (5.84) 

5.5 
Experimental Tests 
215 
To solve this equation, notice that 
d2 
. 
) 
. 
d </>2 ( </> sm </> + </> sm </> = 2 cos</> 
(5.85) 
and 
d2 
d <J>2 (cos 2</>) + cos 2</> = - 3 cos 2</>. 
(5.86) 
Comparing these to (5.84), we see that a solution is provided by 
3G2M2 [( 
1 ) 
1 
] 
x1 = 
L2 
1 + 2e2 + e<f> sin</> - 6e2 cos 2</> , 
(5.87) 
as you are welcome to check. The three terms here have different characters. The 
first is simply a constant displacement, while the third oscillates around zero. The 
important effect is thus contained in the second term, which accumulates over 
successive orbits. We therefore combine this term with the zeroth-order solution 
to write 
3G2M 2e 
x = 1 +ecos<f> + 
L2 
<J>sin<f>. 
(5.88) 
This is not a full solution, even to the perturbed equation, but it encapsulates the 
part that we care about. In particular, this expression for x can be conveniently 
rewritten as the equation for an ellipse with an angular period that is not quite 2rr: 
x = 1 + e cos [ (1 - a)</>), 
(5.89) 
where we have introduced 
3G2M2 
a=---
L2 
(5.90) 
The equivalence of (5.88) and (5.89) can be seen by expanding cos[(l - a)<f>] as 
a power series in the small parameter a: 
d 
cos ((1 - a)</>]= cos</>+ a da cos [(1 - a)<f>la=O 
= cos </> + a</> sin </>. 
(5.91) 
We have therefore found that, during each orbit of the planet, perihelion ad-
vances by an angle 
(5.92) 
To convert from the angular momentum L to more conventional quantities, we 
may use expressions valid for Newtonian orbits, since the quantity we're looking 

216 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
at is already a small perturbation. An ordinary ellipse satisfies 
(1 - e2)a 
r- ----
-
1 + ecos<f) 
(5.93) 
where a is the semi-major axis. Comparing to our zeroth-order solution (5.83) 
and the definition (5.77) of x, we see that 
(5.94) 
This is an approximation, valid if the orbit were a perfect closed ellipse. Plugging 
this into (5.92) and restoring explicit factors of the speed of light, we obtain 
61rGM 
D.<J>----
-
c2(1 - e2)a · 
(5.95) 
Historically, the precession of Mercury was the first test of GR. In fact it was 
known before Einstein invented GR that there was an apparent discrepancy in 
Mercury's orbit, and a number of solutions had been proposed (including "dark 
matter" in the inner Solar System). Einstein knew of the discrepancy, and one of 
his first tasks after formulating GR was to show that it correctly accounted for 
Mercury's perihelion precession. For the motion of Mercury around the Sun, the 
relevant orbital parameters are 
GM0 
s 
-
2- = 1.48 x IO cm, 
c 
a= 5.79 x 1012 cm 
e = 0.2056, 
and of course c = 3.00 x 1010 cm/sec. This gives 
b.</>Mercury = 5.01 x 10-7 radians/orbit= 0.103"/orbit, 
(5.96) 
(5.97) 
where " stands for arcseconds. It is more conventional to express this in terms of 
precession per century; Mercury orbits once every 88 days, yielding 
b.</>Mercury = 43 .O" /century. 
(5.98) 
So the major axis of Mercury's orbit precesses at a rate of 43.0 arcsecs every 100 
years. The observed value is 5601 arcsecs/100 years. However, much of that is 
due to the precession of equinoxes in our geocentric coordinate system; 5025 arc-
secs/100 years, to be precise. The gravitational perturbations of the other planets 
contribute an additional 532 arcsecs/100 years, leaving 43 arcsecs/100 years to be 
explained by GR, which it does quite well. You can imagine that Einstein must 
have been very pleased when he first figured this out. 
In Chapter 2 we discussed the gravitational redshift of photons as a conse-
quence of the Principle of Equivalence. The Schwarzschild metric is an exact 

5.5 
Experimental Tests 
217 
solution of GR, and should therefore predict a redshift that reduces to the EP 
prediction in small regions of spacetime. Let's see how that works. 
Consider an observer with four-velocity U µ, who is stationary in the Schwarz-
schild coordinates (U; = 0). We could allow the observer to be moving, but that 
would merely superimpose a conventional Doppler shift over the gravitational ef-
fect. The four-velocity satisfies U µ U µ = -1, which for a stationary observer in 
Schwarzschild implies 
o 
( 
2GM)-l/2 
u = 1---
,. 
(5.99) 
Any such observer measures the frequency of a photon following along a null 
geodesic xµ(I,.) to be 
dxv 
w = -gµvUµ-;n:· 
Indeed, this relation defines the normalization of A.. We therefore have 
w = (l _ 
2GM)
112 
dt 
,. 
dA. 
( 
2GM)- 112 
= 1- --
E, 
,. 
(5.100) 
(5.101) 
(5.102) 
where E is defined by (5 .61 ), applied to the photon trajectory. E is conserved, so 
w will clearly take on different values when measured at different radial distances. 
For a photon emitted at r1 and observed at r2, the observed frequencies will be 
related by 
W2 = ( 1 - 2GM/r1) 
112 
w1 
1 - 2GM/r2 
(5.103) 
This is an exact result for the frequency shift; in the limit r » 2G M we have 
w2 
GM 
GM 
-=l--+-
w1 
r1 
r2 
= 1 + <1>1 -
<1>2, 
(5.104) 
where <I> = -GM/ r is the Newtonian potential. This tells us that the frequency 
goes down as <I> increases, which happens as we climb out of a gravitational field: 
thus, a redshift. (Photons that fall toward a gravitating body are blueshifted.) We 
see that the r » 2G M result agrees with the calculation based on the Equivalence 
Principle. 
The gravitational redshift was first detected in 1960 by Pound and Rebka, using 
gamma rays traveling upward a distance of only 72 feet (the height of the physics 
building at Harvard). Subsequent tests have become increasingly precise, often 

218 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
making use of artificial spacecraft or atomic clocks carried aboard airplanes. The 
agreement with Einstein's predictions has been excellent in all cases. 
Since Einstein's proposal of the three classic tests, further tests of GR have 
been proposed. The most famous is of course the binary pulsar, to be discussed 
in Chapter 7. Another is the gravitational time delay, discovered and observed 
by Shapiro, also discussed in Chapter 7. In a very different context, Big-Bang 
nucleosynthesis provides a cosmological test of GR at an epoch when the universe 
was only seconds old, as discussed in Chapter 8. Modem advances have also 
introduced a host of new tests; for a comprehensive introduction see Will (1981). 
5.6 • SCHWARZSCHILD BLACK HOLES 
We now know something about the behavior of geodesics outside the trouble-
some radius r = 2G M, which is the regime of interest for the solar system and 
most other astrophysical situations. We next tum to the study of objects that are 
described by the Schwarzschild solution even at radii smaller than 2G M-black 
holes. (We'll use the term "black hole" for the moment, even though we haven't 
introduced a precise meaning for such an object.) 
One way to understand the geometry of a spacetime is to explore its causal 
structure, as defined by the light cones. We therefore consider radial null curves, 
those for which e and</> are constant and ds 2 = 0: 
2 
( 
2GM) 
2 
( 
2GM)-l 
2 
ds = 0 = -
1 - -,.-
dt + 1 - -,.-
dr , 
(5.105) 
from which we see that 
dt = ± (l _ 
2GM)-l 
dr 
r 
(5.106) 
This of course measures the slope of the light cones on a spacetime diagram of 
the t-r plane. For larger the slope is ±1, as it would be in flat space, while as 
we approach r = 2G M we get d t / d r ~ ±oo, and the light cones "close up," as 
shown in Figure 5.7. Thus a light ray that approaches r = 2GM never seems to 
get there, at least in this coordinate system; instead it seems to asymptote to this 
radius. 
As we will see, the apparent inability to get to r = 2G M is an illusion, and 
the light ray (or a massive particle) actually has no trouble reaching this radius. 
But an observer far away would never be able to tell. If we stayed outside while 
an intrepid observational general relativist dove into the black hole, sending back 
signals all the time, we would simply see the signals reach us more and more 
slowly, as portrayed in Figure 5.8. In the Exercises you are asked to look at this 
phenomenon more carefully. As an infalling observer approaches r = 2GM, 
any fixed interval ~ r1 of their proper time corresponds to a longer and longer 
interval ~ r2 from our point of view. This continues forever; we would never see 

5.6 Schwarzschild Black Holes 
219 
' 
..
... ,, 
; 
./'J 
/ 
2GM 
r 
FIGURE S. 7 In Schwarzschild coordinates, light cones appear to close up as we ap-
proach r = 2GM. 
the observer cross r = 2G M, we would just see them move more and more 
slowly (and become redder and redder, as if embarrassed to have done something 
as stupid as diving into a black hole).· 
The fact that we never see the infalling observer reach r = 2G M is a mean-
ingful statement, but the fact that their trajectory in the t-r plane never reaches 
there is not. It is highly dependent on our coordinate system, and we would like 
to ask a more coordinate-independent question (such as, "Does the observer reach 
this radius in a finite amount of their proper time?"). The best way to do this is 
to change coordinates to a system that is better behaved at r = 2G M. We now 
set out to find an appropriate set of such coordinates. There is no way to "derive" 
a coordinate transformation, of course, we just say what the new coordinates are 
and plug in the formulas. But we will develop these coordinates in several steps, 
in hopes of making the choices seem somewhat motivated. 
/ 
/ 
/ 
~T2 > ~'T2 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I 
/ 
I 
/ 
I 
/ 
~'T2 
I 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~'T1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~'Tl 
I 
2GM 
·r 
FIGURE 5.8 A beacon falling freely into a black hole emits signals at intervals of con-
stant proper time !)., r1 . An observer at fixed r receives the signals at successively longer 
time intervals f).. r2. 

220 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
The problem with our cmTent coordinates is that dt / dr ~ oo along radial null 
geodesics that approach r = 2G M; progress in the r direction becomes slower 
and slower with respect to the coordinate time t. We can try to fix this problem by 
replacing t with a coordinate that moves more slowly along null geodesics. First 
notice that we can explicitly solve the condition (5.106) characterizing radial null 
curves to obtain 
t = ±r* + constant, 
where the tortoise coordinate r* is defined by 
r* = r + 2GM ln (-,.- - 1). 
2GM 
(5.107) 
(5.108) 
(The tortoise coordinate is only sensibly related to r when r ~ 2G M, but beyond 
there our coordinates aren't very good anyway.) In terms of the tortoise coordinate 
the Schwarzschild metric becomes 
(5.109) 
where r is thought of as a function of r*. This represents some progress, since 
the light cones now don't seem to close up, as shown in Figure 5.9; furthermore, 
none of the metric coefficients becomes infinite at r = 2G M (although both g11 
and g,•r* become zero). The price we pay, however, is that the surface of interest 
at r = 2G M has just been pushed to infinity. 
Our next move is to define coordinates that are naturally adapted to the null 
geodesics. If we let 
v = t + r* 
u = t - r*, 
(5.110) 
r* 
-~~i~~nr.ta~· 
;=2GM 
r* = -oo 
FIGURE 5.9 Schwarzschild light cones in tortoise coordinates, equation (5.109). Light 
cones remain nondegenerate, but the surface r = 2G M has been pushed to infinity. 

5.6 Schwarzschild Black Holes 
221 
then infalling radial null geodesics are characterized by v =constant, while the 
outgoing ones satisfy u = constant. Now consider going back to the original ra-
dial coordinate r, but replacing the timelike coordinate t with the new coordinate 
v. These are known as Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates. In terms of these 
coordinates the metric is 
( 
2GM) 
ds 2 = -
1 - -,.-
dv2 + (dv dr + drdv) + r 2 dQ2. 
(5.111) 
Here we see our first sign of real progress. Even though the metric coefficient gvv 
vanishes at r = 2G M, there is no real degeneracy; the detenninant of the metric 
is 
(5.112) 
which is perfectly regular at r = 2G M. Therefore the metric is invertible, and we 
see once and for all that r = 2G M is simply a coordinate singularity in our origi-
nal (t, r, e, </>) system. In the Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates the condition for 
radial null curves is solved by 
dv = { 0,( 
2G M )-1 
(infalling) 
dr 
2 1 - --
(outgoing) 
,. 
(5.113) 
We can therefore see what has happened: In this coordinate system the light cones 
remain well-behaved at r = 2G M, and this surface is at a finite coordinate value. 
There is no problem in tracing the paths of null or timelike particles past the 
surface. On the other hand, something interesting is certainly going on. Although 
the Light cones don't close up, they do tilt over, such that for r < 2G M all future-
directed paths are in the direction of decreasing r, as shown in Figure 5 .10. 
r 
': 
·:/ 
.·•, 
~~ 
-~ ·-j -
v = constant 
r 
r = 0 
r = 2GM 
FIGURE 5.10 Schwarzschild light cones in the (v, r) coordinates of (5.111). In these 
coordinates we can follow future-directed timelike paths past r = 2G M. 

222 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
The surface r = 2G M, while being locally pe1f ectly regular, globally func-
tions as a point of no return-once a test particle dips below it, it can never come 
back. We define an event horizon to be a surface past which particles can never 
escape to infinity; in Schwarzschild the event horizon is located at r = 2G M. 
(This is a rough definition; we will be somewhat more precise in the next chap-
ter.) Despite being located at fixed radial coordinate, the event horizon is a null 
surface rather than a timelike one, so it is really the causal structure of spacetime 
itself that makes it impossible to cross the horizon in an outward-going direction. 
Since nothing can escape the event horizon, it is impossible for us to see inside-
thus the name black hole. A black hole is simply a region of spacetime separated 
from infinity by an event horizon. The notion of an event horizon is a global one; 
the location of the horizon is a statement about the spacetime as a whole, not 
something you could detennine just by knowing the geometry at that location. 
This will continue to be true in more general spacetimes. 
We should mention a couple of features of black holes that sometimes get 
confused in the popular imagination. First, the external geometry of a black hole 
is the same Schwarzschild solution that we would have outside a star or planet. 
In particular, a black hole does not suck in everything around it any more than 
the Sun does; a particle well outside r = 2G M behaves in exactly the same way 
regardless of whether the gravitating source is a black hole or not. Second, there is 
a misleading Newtonian analogy for black holes. The Newtonian escape velocity 
of a particle at distance r from a gravitating body of mass M is 
Vesc = J2GM_ 
,. 
(5.114) 
If we naively ask where the Newtonian escape velocity equals the velocity of 
light, we find exactly r = 2G M. Despite the fact that the speed of light plays 
no fundamental role in Newtonian theory, it might seem provocative that light, 
thought of as inertial particles moving at a velocity c, is seemingly not able to 
escape from a body with mass M and radius less than 2G M. But there is a pro-
found difference between this case and what we see in GR. The escape velocity 
is the velocity that a particle would initially need to have in order to escape from 
a gravitating source on a free trajectory. But nothing stops us from considering 
accelerated trajectories; for example, one could imagine an acceleration chosen 
such that the particle moved steadily away from the massive body at some con-
stant velocity. Therefore, a purported Newtonian black hole would not have the 
crucial property that nothing can escape; whereas in GR, arbitrary timelike paths 
must stay inside their light cones, and hence never escape the event horizon. 
5.7 • THE MAXIMALLY EXTENDED SCHWARZSCHILD SOLUTION 
Let's review what we have done. Acting under the suspicion that our coordinates 
may not have been good for the entire manifold, we have changed from our origi-
nal coordinate t to the new one v, which has the nice property that if we decrease 

5.7 The Maximally Extended Schwarzschild Solution 
223 
r along a radial null curve v = constant, we go right through the event horizon 
without any problems. Indeed, a local observer actually making the trip would 
not necessarily know when the event horizon had been crossed-the local geom-
etry is no different from anywhere else. We therefore conclude that our suspicion 
was correct and our initial coordinate system didn't do a good job of covering the 
entire manifold. The region r :S 2G M should certainly be included in our space-
time, since physical particles can easily reach there and pass through. However, 
there is no guarantee that we are finished; perhaps we can extend our manifold in 
other directions. 
In fact there are other directions. In the (v, r) coordinate system we can cross 
the event horizon on future-directed paths, but not on past-directed ones. This 
seems unreasonable, since we started with a time-independent solution. But we 
could have chosen u instead of v, in which case the metric would have been 
( 
2GM) 
ds 2 = -
1 - -,.-
du 2 -
(dudr + drdu) + r 2 dfl.2. 
(5.115) 
Now we can once again pass through the event horizon, but this time only along 
past-directed curves, as shown in Figure 5.11. 
This is perhaps a surprise: we can consistently follow either future-directed or 
past-directed curves through r = 2G M, but we arrive at different places. It was 
actually to be expected, since from the definitions (5.110), if we keep v constant 
and decrease r we must have t ~ +oo, while if we keep u constant and decrease 
r we must have t ~ -oo. (The tortoise coordinate r* goes to -oo as r ~ 2G M .) 
So we have extended spacetime in two different directions, one to the future and 
one to the past. 
The next step would be to follow spacelike geodesics to see if we would un-
cover still more regions. The answer is yes, we would reach yet another piece of 
the spacetime, but let's shortcut the process by defining coordinates that are good 
all over. A first guess might be to use both u and v at once (in place oft and r ), 
u 
/;;. __ . .,> ---·'t- u =constant 
r 
r= 0 
r= 2GM 
FIGURE 5.11 Schwarzschild light cones in the (u, r) coordinates of (5.115). In these 
coordinates we can follow past-directed timelike paths past r = 2G M. 

224 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
which leads to 
ds 2 = --
1 - --
(dvdu +du dv) + r 2 dQ2, 
1 ( 
2GM) 
2 
,. 
(5.116) 
with r defined implicitly in terms of v and u by 
1 
( 
,. 
) 
-(v - u) = r + 2GM ln -- - 1 . 
2 
2GM 
(5.117) 
We have actually reintroduced the degeneracy with which we started out; in these 
coordinates r = 2G M is "infinitely far away" (at either v = -oo or u = +oo ). 
The thing to do is to change to coordinates that pull these points into finite coor-
dinate values; a good choice is 
v' = evf4GM 
u' = -e-uf4GM, 
which in terms of our original (t, r) system is 
v' = (-,.- - 1)1/2 e<r+t)/4GM 
2GM 
u' = - (-,.- - 1)1/2 e<r-1)/4GM 
2GM 
. 
In the ( v', u', e, </>) system the Schwarzschild metric is 
16G3M 3 
ds 2 = -
e-rf2GM (dv'du' + du'dv') + r 2 dQ2. 
,. 
(5.118) 
(5.119) 
(5.120) 
Finally the nonsingular nature of r = 2G M becomes completely manifest; in 
this form none of the metric coefficients behaves in any special way at the event 
horizon. 
Both v' and u' are null coordinates, in the sense that their partial derivatives 
a/ av' and a/ au' are null vectors. There is nothing wrong with this, since the 
collection of four partial derivative vectors (two null and two spacelike) in this 
system serve as a perfectly good basis for the tangent space. Nevertheless, we 
are somewhat more comfortable working in a system where one coordinate is 
timelike and the rest are spacelike. We therefore define 
T = -(v' + u') = -- - 1 
erf4GM sinh --
1 
( 
,. 
) 1 /2 
( 
t 
) 
2 
2GM 
4GM 
(5.121) 
and 
R = -(v - u) = -- - 1 
e 
cosh --
1 
t 
t 
( 
r 
) l /2 r/4G M 
( 
t 
) 
2 
2GM 
4GM ' 
(5.122) 

5.7 The Maximally Extended Schwarzschild Solution 
225 
in terms of which the metric becomes 
(5.123) 
where r is defined implicitly from 
T2 _ R2 = (1 __ ,._) erf2GM 
2GM 
. 
(5.124) 
The coordinates (T, R, e, </>) are known as Kruskal coordinates, or sometimes 
Kruskal-Szekres coordinates. 
The Kruskal coordinates have a number of miraculous properties. Like the 
(t, r*) coordinates, the radial null curves look like they do in flat space: 
T = ± R + constant. 
(5.125) 
Unlike the (t, r*) coordinates, however, the event horizon r = 2G M is not in-
finitely far away; in fact it is defined by 
T=±R, 
(5.126) 
consistent with it being a null surface. More generally, we can consider the sur-
faces r =constant. From (5.124) these satisfy 
T 2 -
R2 = constant. 
(5.127) 
Thus, they appear as hyperbolae in the R-T plane. Furthermore, the surfaces of 
constant t are given by 
!_ = tanh (-
1 
) 
R 
4GM ' 
(5.128) 
which defines straight lines through the origin with slope tanh(t /4G M). Note that 
as t ~ ±oo (5.128) becomes the same as (5.126); therefore t = ±oo represents 
the same surface as r = 2G M. 
Our coordinates (T, R) should be allowed to range over every value they can 
take without hitting the real singularity at r = O; the allowed region is therefore 
-oo ~ R ~ oo 
T2 < R2 + 1. 
(5.129) 
From (5.121) and (5.122), T and R seem to become imaginary for r < 2G M, but 
this is an illusion; in that region the (r, t) coordinates are no good (specifically, 
It I > oo ). We can now draw a spacetime diagram in the T -R plane (with e and 
</>suppressed), known as a Kruskal diagram, shown in Figure 5.12. Each point 
on the diagram is a two-sphere. This diagram represents the maximal extension 

226 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
T 
R 
FIGURE 5.12 The Kruskal diagram-the Schwarzschild solution in Kruskal coordi-
nates, where all light cones are at ±45°. 
of the Schwarzschild ge~metry; the coordinates cover what we should think of as 
the entire manifold described by this solution. 
The original Schwarzschild coordinates (t, r) were good for r >. 2G M, which 
is only a part of the manifold portrayed on the Kruskal diagram. It is conve-
nient to divide the diagram into four regions, as shown in Figure 5.13. Region 
I corresponds tor > 2G M, the patch in which our original coordinates were 
well-defined. By following future-directed null rays we reach region II, and by 
following past-directed null rays we reach region m. If we had explored space-
like geodesics, we would have been led to region IV. The definitions (5.121) and 
(5.122), which relate (T, R) to (t, r), are really only good in region I; in the other 
regions it is necessary to introduce appropriate minus signs to prevent the coordi-
nates from becoming imaginary. 
FIGURE 5.13 Regions of the Kruskal diagram. 

5.7 The Maximally Extended Schwarzschild Solution 
227 
Having extended the Schwarzschild geometry as far as it will go, we have de-
scribed a remarkable spacetime. Region II, of course, is what we think of as the 
black hole. Once anything travels from region I into Il, it can never return. In fact, 
every future-directed path in region II ends up hitting the singularity at ,. = O; 
once you enter the event horizon, you are utterly doomed. This is worth stressing; 
not only can you not escape back to region I, you cannot even stop yourself from 
moving in the direction of decreasing r, since this is simply the timelike direc-
tion. This could have been seen in our original coordinate system; for r < 2G M, 
t becomes spacelike and r becomes timelike. Thus you can no more stop mov-
ing toward the singularity than you can stop getting older. Since proper time is 
maximized along a geodesic, you will live the longest if you don't struggle, but 
just relax as you approach the singularity. Not that you will have long to relax, 
nor will the voyage be very relaxing; as you approach the singularity the tidal 
forces become infinite. As you fall toward the singularity your feet and head will 
be pulled apart from each other, while your torso is squeezed to infinitesimal thin-
ness. The grisly demise of an astrophysicist falling into a black hole is detailed in 
Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler (1973), Section 32.6. Note that they use orthonor-
mal frames, as we discuss in Appendix J (not that it makes the trip any more 
enjoyable). 
Regions Ill and IV might be somewhat unexpected. Region Ill is simply the 
time-reverse of region Il, a part of spacetime from which things can escape to us, 
while we can never get there. It can be thought of as a white hole. There is a 
singularity in the past, out of which the universe appears to spring. The boundary 
of region Ill is the past event horizon, while the boundary of region Il is the 
future event horizon. Region IV, meanwhile, cannot be reached from our region 
I either forward or backward in time, nor can anybody from over there reach us. 
It is another asymptotically flat region of spacetime, a mirror image of ours. It 
can be thought of as being connected to region I by a wormhole (or Einstein-
Rosen bridge), a neck-like configuration joining two distinct regions. Consider 
slicing up the Kruskal diagram into spacelike surfaces of constant T, as shown in 
Figure 5.14. Now we can draw pictures of each slice, restoring one of the angular 
coordinates for clarity, as in Figure 5.15. In this way of slicing, the Schwarzschild 
geometry describes two asymptotically flat regions that reach toward each other, 
join together via a wormhole for a while, and then disconnect. But the wormhole 
closes up too quickly for any timelike observer to cross it from one region into 
the next. 
As pleasing as the Kruskal diagram is, it is often even more useful to collapse 
the Schwarzschild solution into a finite region by constructing its conformal dia-
gram. The idea ofa conformal diagram is discussed in Appendix H; it is a crucial 
tool for analyzing spacetimes in general relativity, and you are encouraged to re-
view that discussion now. We will not go through the manipulations necessary to 
construct the conformal diagram of Schwarzschild in full detail, since they par-
allel the Minkowski case with considerable additional algebraic complexity. We 
would start with the null version of the Kruskal coordinates, in which the metric 

228 
A 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
D 
' 
/ 
' 
/ 
' 
/ 
c 
/ ' 
/ 
' 
B 
/ 
' 
A 
FIGURE 5.14 Spacelike slices in Kruskal coordinates. 
takes the form 
16G3 M3' 
ds 2 = -
e-rf2GM (dv'du' + du'dv') + r 2 dfl.2, 
(5.130) 
,. 
where r is defined implicitly via 
v'u' = -c~·M - 1) erf2GM. 
(5.131) 
Then essentially the same transformation used in the flat spacetime case suffices 
to bring infinity into finite coordinate values: 
B 
.. 
c 
v" = arctan ( 
v' 
) 
J2GM 
u" = arcmn (~), 
D 
~-~ 
c;··: 
··· .... 
------------------------------------•v 
FIGURE 5.15 Geometry of the spacelike slices in Figure 5.14. 
(5.132) 
E 

5.8 Stars and Black Holes 
229 
r=O 
;+ 
r =constant 
;-
r= 0 
;-
FIGURE S.16 Conformal diagram for Schwarzschild spacetime. 
with ranges 
7r 
II 
7r 
-- < v < +-
2 
2 
7r 
II 
7r 
-- < u < +-
2 
2 
The (v,
11 u
11 ) part of the metric (that is, at constant angular coordinates) is now 
conformally related to Minkowski space. In the new coordinates the singularities 
at r = 0 are straight lines that stretch from timelike infinity in one asymptotic 
region to timelike infinity in the other. 
The conformal diagram for the maximally extended Schwarzschild solution 
thus looks like Figure 5.16. The only real subtlety about this diagram is the. ne-
cessity to understand that i+ and i- (future and past infinity) are distinct from 
r = 0-there are plenty of timelike paths that do not hit the singularity. As in 
the Kruskal diagram, light cones in the conformal diagram are at 45°~ the ma-
jor difference is that the entire spacetime is represented in a finite region. Notice 
also that the structure of conformal infinity is just like that of Minkowski space, 
consistent with the claim that Schwarzschild is asymptotically flat. 
5.8 • STARS AND BLACK HOLES 
The maximally extended Schwarzschild solution we have just constructed tells a 
remarkable story, including not only the sought-after black hole, but also a white 
hole and an additional asymptotically flat region, connected to our universe by 
a wormhole. It would be premature, however, to imagine that such features are 
common in the real world. The Schwarzschild solution represents a highly ide-
alized situation: not only spherically symmetric, but completely free of energy-
momentum throughout spacetime. Birkhoff's theorem implies that any vacuum 

230 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
region of a spherically symmetric spacetime will be described by part of the 
Schwarzschild metric, but the existence of matter somewhere in the universe may 
dramatically alter the global picture. 
A static spherical object-let's call it a star for definiteness-with radius larger 
than 2G M will be Schwarzschild in the exterior, but there won't be any singulari-
ties or horizons, and the global structure will actually be very similar to Minkow-
ski spacetime. Of course, real stars evolve, and it may happen that a star eventually 
collapses under its own gravitational pull, shrinking down to below r = 2G M and 
further into a singularity, resulting in a black hole. There is no need for a white 
hole, however, because the past of such a spacetime looks nothing like that of 
the full Schwarzschild solution. A conformal diagram describing stellar collapse 
would look like Figure 5.17. The interior shaded region is nonvacuum, so is not 
described by Schwarzschild; in particular, there is no wormhole connecting to an-
other universe. It is asymptotically Minkowskian, except for a future region giving 
rise to an event horizon. We see that a realistic black hole may share the singu-
larity and future horizon with~ the maximally extended Schwarzschild solution, 
without any white hole, past horizon, or separate asymptotic region. 
We believe that gravitational collapse of this kind is by no means a necessary 
endpoint of stellar evolution, but will occur under certain conditions. General rel-
ativity places rigorous limits on the kind of stars that can resist gravitational col-
lapse; for any given sort of matter, enough mass will always lead to the collapse 
to a black hole. Furthermore, from astrophysical observations we have excellent 
evidence that black holes exist in our universe. 
To understand gravitational collapse to a black hole, we should first understand 
static configurations describing the interiors of spherically symmetric stars. We 
won't delve into this subject in detail, only enough to get a feeling for the basic 
features of interior solutions. Consider the general static, spherically symmetric 
;-
FIGURE 5.17 Confonnal diagram for a black hole fonned from a collapsing star. The 
shaded region contains matter, and will be described by an appropriate dynamical interior 
solution; the exterior region is Schwarzschild. 

5.8 Stars and Black Holes 
231 
metric from (5.11): 
ds2 = -e2a(r) dt2 + e2/3(r) dr2 + ,.2 dQ.2. 
(5.133) 
We are now looking for nonvacuum solutions, so we tum to the full Einstein 
equation, 
(5.134) 
The Einstein tensor follows from the Ricci tensor (5.14) and curvature scalar 
(5.15), 
G11 = ,.1
2 e2<a-/3) ( 2rorf3 - 1 + e2!3) 
1 ( 
2/3) 
Grr = ,.2 2rora + 1 - e 
Goo = r2e-2P [ a,2a + (3,a)2 - a,a3,/J + ~(3,a - 3,/J)] 
Gq,q, = sin2 8 Gee· 
We model the star itself as a perfect fluid, with energy-momentum tensor 
(5.135) 
(5.136) 
The energy density p and pressure p will be functions of r alone. Since we seek 
static solutions, we can take the four-velocity to be pointing in the timeli.ke direc-
tion. Normalized to UµUµ = -1, it becomes 
(5.137) 
so that the components of the energy-momentum tensor are 
(5.138) 
We therefore have three independent components of Einstein's equation: the tt 
component, 
(5.139) 
the,.,. component, 
(5.140) 

232 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
and the ee component, 
,-zp [a;a + (O,a)2 - o,ao,p + ~(O,a - a,m] = 81CGp. 
(5.141) 
The </></> equation is proportional to the ee equation, so there is no need to consider 
it separately. 
We notice that the tt equation (5.139) involves only f3 and p. It is convenient 
to replace f3(r) with a new function m(r), given by 
1 
m(r) = 2G (r - re-213), 
(5.142) 
or equivalently 
(5.143) 
so that 
[ 
2Gm(r)]-l 
ds 2 = -e2a(r) dt 2 + 1 -
,. 
dr2 + r 2 dfl.2. 
(5.144) 
The metric component grr is an obvious generalization of the Schwarzschild case, 
but this will not be true for g11 • The tt equation (5.139) becomes 
which can be integrated to obtain 
dm 
2 
-
= 4:rrr p. 
dr 
m(r) = 41' lo' p(r')rridr'. 
(5.145) 
(5.146) 
Let's imagine that our star extends to a radius R, after which we are in vacuum 
and described by Schwarzschild. In order that the metrics match at this radius, the 
Schwarzschild mass M must be given by 
M = m(R) = 41' foR p(r)r2dr. 
(5.147) 
It looks like m (r) is simply the integral of the energy density over the stellar 
interior, and can be interpreted as the mass within a radius r. 
There is one subtlety with interpreting m(r) as the integrated energy density; 
in a proper spatial integral, the volume element should be 
(5.148) 
where 
(5.149) 

5.8 Stars and Black Holes 
is the spatial metric. The true integrated energy density is therefore 
M = 4ir LR p(r)r2eP<'l dr 
{R 
p(r)r2 
= 4ir Jo 
[I - 2G;<'l r2 dr. 
233 
(5.150) 
The difference, of course, arises because there is a binding energy due to the 
mutual gravitational attraction of the fluid elements in the star, which is given by 
Es= M-M > 0. 
(5.151) 
The binding energy is the amount of energy that would be required to disperse 
the matter in the star to infinity. It is not always a well-defined notion in general 
relativity, but makes sense for spherical stars. 
In terms of m(r), the,.,. equation (5.140) can be written 
da 
Gm(r) + 4JTGr3 p 
= 
dr 
r[r - 2Gm(r)] · 
(5.152) 
It is convenient not to use the ee equation directly, but instead appeal to energy-
momentum conservation, 'VµTµv = 0. For our metric (5.144), it is straightfor-
ward to derive that v = r is the only nontrivial component, and it gives 
da 
dp 
(p + p) d,. = - d,. . 
(5.153) 
Combining this with (5.152) allows us to eliminate a(r) to obtain 
dp 
(p + p)[Gm(r) + 4JTGr3 p] 
= 
dr 
r[r - 2Gm(r)] 
(5.154) 
This is the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equation, or simply the equation of 
hydrostatic equilibrium. Since m(r) is related to p(r) via (5.146), this equation 
relates p(r) to p(r). To get a closed system of equations, we need one more 
relation: the equation of state. In general this will give the pressure in terms of the 
energy density and specific entropy, p = p(p, S). Often we care about situations 
in which the entropy is very small, and can be neglected; the equation of state 
then takes the form 
p = p(p). 
(5.155) 
Astrophysical systems often obey a polytropic equation of state, p = K pY for 
some constants K and y. 
A simple and semi-realistic model of a star comes from assuming that the fluid 
is incompressible: the density is a constant p* out to the surface of the star, after 

234 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
which it vanishes, 
(,.) = l 
P*' 
,. < R 
P 
0, 
r > R. 
(5.156) 
Specifying p(r) explicitly takes the place of an equation of state, since p(r) can 
be determined from hydrostatic equilibrium. It is then straightforward to integrate 
(5.146) to get 
{ 
1 .... ,.3p 
3 J• 
*' 
m(r) = 
~7rR
3 p* = M, 
(5.157) 
,. > R. 
Integrating the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium yields 
[ 
RJR -2GM - JR3 -2GMr2] 
p(r) = p* 
. 
JR3 - 2GMr2 - 3RJR -2GM 
(5.158) 
Finally we can get the metric component g11 = -e2a(r) from (5.152); we find that 
ea<r> = ~ (1 - 2GM)l/2 - ~ (1 - 2GMr2)1;2 
,. < R. 
2 
R 
2 
R3 
' 
(5.159) 
The pressure increases near the core of the star, as one would expect. Indeed, 
for a star of fixed radius R, the central pressure p(O) will need to be greater than 
infinity if the mass exceeds 
4 
Mmax = 9GR. 
(5.160) 
Thus, if we try to squeeze a greater mass than this inside a radius R, general rela-
tivity admits no static solutions; a star that shrinks to such a size must inevitably 
keep shrinking, eventually forming a black hole. We derived this result from the 
rather strong assumption that the density is constant, but it continues to hold 
when that assumption considerably weakened; Buchdahl's theorem states that 
any reasonable static, spherically symmetric interior solution has M < 4R/9G. 
Although a careful proof requires more work, this result makes sense; if we imag-
ine that there is some maximum sustainable density in nature, the most massive 
object we could in principle make would have that density everywhere, which is 
the specific case we considered. 
Of course, this still doesn't mean that realistic astrophysical objects will al-
ways ultimately collapse to black holes. An ordinary planet, supported by material 
pressures, will persist essentially forever (apart from some fantastically unlikely 
quantum tunneling from a planet to something very different, or the possibility 
of eventual proton decay). But massive stars are a different story. The pressure 
supporting a star comes from the heat produced by fusion of light nuclei into 
heavier ones. When the nuclear fuel is used up, the temperature declines and the 

5.8 Stars and Black Holes 
235 
star begins to shrink under the influence of gravity. The collapse may eventually 
be halted by Fermi degeneracy pressure: Electrons are pushed so close together 
that they resist further compression simply on the basis of the Pauli exclusion 
principle (no two fermions can be in the same state). A stellar renmant supported 
by electron degeneracy pressure is called a white dwarf; a typical white dwarf 
is comparable in size to the Earth. Lower-mass particles become degenerate at 
lower number densities than high-mass particles, so nucleons do not contribute 
appreciably to the pressure in a white dwarf. White dwarfs are the end state for 
most stars, and are extremely common throughout the universe. 
If the total mass is sufficiently high, however, the star will reach the Chan-
drasekhar limit, where even the electron degeneracy pressure is not enough 
to resist the pull of gravity. Calculations put the Chandrasekhar limit at about 
1.4 M0, where M0 = 2 x 1033 g is the mass of the Sun. When it is reached, the 
star is forced to collapse to an even smaller radius. At this point electrons com-
bine with protons to make neutrons and neutrinos (inverse beta decay), and the 
neutrinos simply fly away. The result is a neutron star, with a typical radius of 
about 10 km. Neutron stars have a low total luminosity, but often are rapidly spin-
ning and possess strong magnetic fields. This combination gives rise to pulsars, 
which accelerate particles in jets emanating from the magnetic poles, appearing 
to rapidly flash as the neutron star spins. Pulsars were discovered by Bell in 1967; 
after a brief speculation that they might represent signals from an extraterrestrial 
civilization, the more prosaic astrophysical explanation was settled on. 
Since the conditions at the center of a neutron star are very different from those 
on Earth, we do not have a perfect understanding of the equation of state. Nev-
ertheless, we believe that a sufficiently massive neutron star will itself be unable 
to resist the pull of gravity, and will continue to collapse; current estimates of 
the maximum possible neutron-star mass are around 3-4 M0 , the Oppenheimer-
Volkoff limit. Since a fluid of neutrons is the densest material we know about 
(apart from some very speculative suggestions), it is believed that the outcome of 
such a collapse is a black hole. 
How would we know if there were a black hole? The fundamental obstacle 
to direct detection is, of course, blackness: a black hole will not itself give off 
any radiation (neglecting Hawking radiation, which is a very small effect to be 
discussed in Chapter 9). But black holes will feature extremely strong gravita-
tional fields, so we can hope to detect them indirectly by observing matter being 
influenced by these fields. As matter falls into a black hole, it will heat up and 
emit X-rays, which we can detect with satellite observatories. A large number of 
black-hole candidates have been detected by this method, and the case for real 
black holes in our universe is extremely strong.1 The large majority of candidates 
fall into one of two classes. There are black holes with masses of order a solar 
mass or somewhat higher; these are thought to be the endpoints of evolution for 
very massive stars. The other category describes supermassive black holes, be-
1 For a review on astrophysical evidence for black holes, see A. Celotti, J.C. Miller, and D.W. Sciama 
(1999), Class. Quant. Grav. 16, A3; http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9912186. 

236 
Chapter 5 The Schwarzschild Solution 
tween I 06 and I 09 solar masses. These are found at the centers of galaxies, and 
are thought to be the engines that powered quasars in the early era of galaxy for-
mation. Our own Millcy Way galaxy contains an object (Sgr A*) that is believed 
to be a black hole of at least 2 x I 06 M0 . The precise history of the formation of 
these supermassive holes is not well understood. Other possibilities include very 
small primordial black holes produced in the very early universe, and so-called 
"middleweight" black holes of order a thousand solar masses. 
As matter falls into a black hole, it tends to settle into a rotating accretion 
disk, and both energy and angular momentum are gradually fed into the hole. 
As a result, the black holes we expect to see in astrophysical situations should 
be spinning, and indeed observations are consistent with very high spin rates for 
observed black holes. In this chapter we have excluded the possibility of black 
hole spin by focusing on the spherically symmetric Schwarzschild solution; in 
the next chapter we tum to more general types of black holes. 
5.9 • EXERCISES 
1. A space monkey is happily orbiting a Schwarzschild black hole in a circular geodesic 
orbit. An evil baboon, far from the black hole. tries to send the monkey to its death inside 
the black hole by dropping a carefully timed coconut radially toward the black hole, 
knowing that the monkey can't resist catching the falling coconut. Given the monkey's 
mass and initial orbital radius and the mass of the coconut, explain how you would go 
about solving the problem (but do not do the calculation). What are the possible fates 
for our intrepid space monkey? 
2. Consider a perfect Hu id in a static, circularly symmetric (2 + 1 )-dimensional spacetime, 
equivalently, a cylindrical configuration in (3 + 1) dimensions with perfect rotational 
symmetry. 
(a) Derive the analogue of the Tolman-Oppenhiemer-Volkov (TOV) equation for 
(2 + 1) dimensions. 
(b) Show that the vacuum solution can be written as 
ds2 = -dt2 + 
1 
dr2 + r2d82 
1-SGM 
Here M is a constant. 
(c) Show that another way to write the same solution is 
ds2 = -dr:2 + d~2 + ~2d</J2 
where<P E (0, 2JT(l - 8GM)lf2]. 
(d) Solve the (2 + 1) TOV equation for a constant density star. Find p(r) and solve for 
the metric. 
(e) Solve the (2 + 1) TOV equation for a star with equation of state p = Kp312• Find 
p(r) and solve for the metric. 
(f) Find the mass M(R) = J~" foR pdrd8 and the proper mass M(R) = J~" foR 
pyCg drd8 for the solutions in parts (d) and (e). 

5.9 Exercises 
237 
3. Consider a particle (not necessaiily on a geodesic) that has fallen inside the event hori-
zon, r < 2G M. Use the ordinary Schwarzschild coordinates (t, r, 8, <P ). Show that the 
radial coordinate must decrease at a minimum rate given by 
Calculate the maximum lifetime for a particle along a trajectory from r = 2G M to 
r = 0. Express this in seconds for a black hole with mass measured in solar masses. 
Show that this maximum proper time is achieved by falling freely with E ~ 0. 
4. Consider Einstein's equations in vacuum, but with a cosmological constant, G µv + 
Agµv = 0. 
(a) Solve for the most general spherically synunetric metric, in coordinates (t, r) that 
reduce to the ordinary Schwarzschild coordinates when A = 0. 
(b) Write down the equation of motion for radial geodesics in tenns of an effective 
potential, as in (5.66). Sketch the effective potential for massive particles. 
S. Consider a comoving observer sitting at constant spatial coordinates (r *• 8*, <P* ), around 
a Schwarzschild black hole of mass M. The observer drops a beacon into the black 
hole (straight down, along a radial trajectory). The beacon emits radiation at a constant 
wavelength Aem (in the beacon rest frame). 
(a) Calculate the coordinate speed d r / d t of the beacon, as a function of r. 
(b) Calculate the proper speed of the beacon. That is, imagine there is a comoving 
observer at fixed r, with a locally inertial coordinate system set up as the beacon 
passes by, and c~culate the speed as measured by the comoving observer. What is 
itatr = 2GM? 
(c) Calculate the wavelength Aoos• measured by the observer at r*, as a function of the 
radius rem at which the radiation was emitted. 
(d) Calculate the time lobs at which a beam emitted by the beacon at radius rem will be 
observed at r *. 
(e) Show that at late times, the redshift grows exponentially: Aoos/Aem ex: e10h~f T. Give 
an expression for the time constant T in tenns of the black hole mass M. 

CHAPTER 
6 
More General Black Holes 
6.1 • THE BLACK HOLE ZOO 
238 
Birkhoff's theorem ensures that the Schwarzschild metric is the only spherically 
symmetric vacuum solution to general relativity. This shouldn't be too surprising, 
as it is reminiscent of the situation in electromagnetism, where the only spheri-
cally symmetric field configuration in a region free of charges will be a Coulomb 
field. Moving beyond spherical symmetry, there is an unlimited variety of pos-
sible gravitational fields. For a planet like the Earth, for example, the external 
field will depend on the density and profile of all the various mountain ranges and 
valleys on the surface. We could imagine decomposing the metric into multipole 
moments, and an infinite number of coefficients would have to be specified to 
describe the field exactly. 
It might therefore come as something of a surprise that black holes do not 
share this property. Only a small number of stationary black-hole solutions exist, 
described by a small number of parameters. The specific set of parameters will 
depend on what matter fields we include in our theory; if electromagnetism is the 
only long-range nongravitational field, we have a no-hair theorem: 
Stationary, asymptotically flat black hole solutions to general rela-
tivity coupled to electromagnetism that are nonsingular outside the 
event horizon are fully characterized by the parameters of mass, elec-
tric and magnetic charge, and angular momentum. 
Stationary solutions are of special interest because we expect them to be the end 
states of gravitational collapse. The alternative might be some sort of oscillating 
configuration, but oscillations will ultimately be damped as energy is lost through 
the emission of gravitational radiation; in fact, typical evolutions will evolve quite 
rapidly to a stationary configuration. 
We speak of "a" no-hair theorem, rather than "the" no-hair theorem, because 
the result depends not only on general relativity, but also on the matter content 
of our theory. In the Standard Model of particle physics, electromagnetism is the 
only long-range field, and the above theorem applies; but for different kinds of 
fields there might be other sorts of hair. 1 Examples have even been found of static 
(nonrotating) black holes that are axisymmetric but not completely spherically 
1 For a discussion see M. Heusler, "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond," Living Rev. Rel-
ativity I, ( 1998), 6; http: I /www. li vingreviews. org/ Articles/Volume! /1998-6heusler /. 

6.2 
Event Horizons 
239 
symmetric. The central point, however, remains unaltered: black hole solutions 
are characterized by a very small number of parameters, rather than the potentially 
infinite set of parameters characterizing, say, a planet. 
As we will discuss at the end of this chapter and again in Chapter 9, the no-
hair property leads to a puzzling situation. In most physical theories, we hope to 
have a well-defined initial value problem, so that infonnation about a state at any 
one moment of time can be used to predict (or retrodict) the state at any other 
moment of time. As a consequence, any two states that are connected by a solu-
tion to the equations of motion should require the same amount of infonnation 
to be specified. But in GR, it seems, we can take a very complicated collection 
of matter, collapse it into a black hole, and end up with a configuration described 
completely by mass, charge, and spin. In classical GR this might not bother us so 
much, since the inf onnatfon can be thought of as hidden behind the event horizon 
rather than truly being lost. But when quantum field theory is taken into account, 
we find that black holes evaporate and eventually disappear, and the information 
seems to be truly lost. Conceivably, the outgoing Hawking radiation responsible 
for the evaporation somehow encodes infonnation about what state was originally 
used to make a black hole, but how that could happen is completely unclear. Un-
derstanding this "infonnation loss paradox" is considered by many to be a crucial 
step in building a sensible theory of quantum gravity. 
In this chapter, however, we will stick to considerations of classical GR. We 
begin with some general discussion of black hole properties, especially those of 
event horizons and Killing horizons. This subject can be subtle and technical, and 
our philosophy here will be to try to convey the main ideas without being rigorous 
about definitions or proofs of theorems. We then discuss the specific solutions 
corresponding to charged (Reissner-Nordstrom) and spinning (Kerr) black holes; 
consistent with our approach, we will not carefully go through the coordinate re-
definitions necessary to construct the maximally extended spacetimes, but instead 
simply draw the associated confonnal diagrams. The reader interested in further 
details should consult the review article by Townsend,2 or the books by Hawking 
and Ellis ( 1973) and Wald ( 1984 ), all of which we draw on heavily in this chapter. 
6.2 • EVENT HORIZONS 
Black holes are characterized by the fact that you can enter them, but never exit. 
Thus, their most important feature is actually not the singularity at the center, but 
the event horizon at the boundary. An event horizon is a hypersurface separating 
those spacetime points that are connected to infinity by a timelike path from those 
that are not. To understand what this means in practice, we should think a little 
more carefully about what we mean by "infinity." In general relativity, the global 
structure of spacetime can take many different fonns, with correspondingly dif-
ferent notions of infinity. But to think about black holes in the real universe, we 
2P.K. Townsend, "Black Holes: Lecture Notes," http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9707012. 

240 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
\ 
\ 
\ 
I 
\ 
/ 
/ 
' ' 
,,,,,-
"' 
' ......... 
FIGURE 6.1 
An asymptotically flat spacetime is one for which infinity in a confonnal 
diagram matches that of Minkowski spacetime, with future null infinity !J>+, spacelike 
infinity ;O, and past null infinity !/>-. The future event horizon is the boundary of the past 
of !J>+. The dashed region represents the rest of the spacetime, which may take a number 
of different fonns in different examples. 
aren't actually concerned with what happens infinitely far away; we use infinity as 
a proxy for "well outside the black hole," and imagine that spacetime sufficiently 
far away from the hole can be approximated by Minkowski space. 
As mentioned in the Chapter 5, a spacetime that looks Minkowskian at infinity 
is referred to as asymptotically flat. The meaning of this concept is made clear in 
a conformal diagram such as in Figure 6.1. From our discussion in Appendix H of 
the confonnal diagram for Minkowski, we know that conformal infinity comes in 
five pieces: future and past timelike infinity i±, future and past null infinity ji±, 
and spatial infinity i0. An asymptotically flat spacetime (or region of spacetime) 
is one for which ji± and i 0 have the same structure as for Minkowski; timelike 
infinity is not necessary. Such spacetimes will have the general form shown in 
Figure 6.1. 
With this picture, it is clear how we should think of the future event horizon: 
it is the surface beyond which timelike curves cannot escape to infinity. Recalling 
that the causal past 1- of a region is the set of all points we can reach from that 
region by moving along past-directed timelike paths, the event horizon can be 
equivalently defined as the boundary of 1- (9'+), the causal past of future null 
infinity. (The event horizon is really the boundary of the closure of this set, but 
we're not being rigorous.) Analogous definitions hold for the past horizon. As we 
have seen in the case of maximally extended Schwarzschild, there may be more 
than one asymptotically flat region in a spacetime, and correspondingly more than 
one event horizon. 
From the definition, it is clear that the event horizon is a null hypersmface. 
Properties of null hypersurfaces are discussed in Appendix D; here we can recall 
the major features. A hypersurface l; can be defined by f (x) = constant for some 
function f (x). The gradient <Jµf is nonnal to l;; if the normal vector is null, the 
hypersurface is said to be null, and the nonnal vector is also tangent to l;. Null 
hypersmfaces can be thought of as a collection of null geodesics xµ(A.), called 
the generators of the hypersmface. The tangent vectors ~ µ to these geodesics are 

6.2 
Event Horizons 
241 
proportional to the nonnal vectors, 
(6.1) 
and therefore also serve as normal vectors to the hypersmface. We may choose 
the function h(x) so that the geodesics are affinely parameterized, so the tangent 
vectors will obey 
(6.2) 
For future event horizons, the generators may end in the past (for example, when 
a black hole is formed by stellar collapse) but will always continue indefinitely 
into the future (and similarly with future and past interchanged). 
Because the event horizon is a global concept, it might be difficult to actually 
locate one when you are handed a metric in an arbitrary set of coordinates. Fo11u-
nately, in this chapter we will be concerned with quite special metrics-stationary, 
asymptotically flat, and containing event horizons with spherical topology. In such 
spacetimes, there are convenient coordinate systems in which there is a simple 
way to identify the event horizon. For the Schwarzschild solution, the event hori-
zon is a place where the light cones "tilt over" so that r = 2G M is a null surface 
rather than a timelike surface, as r = constant would be for large r. Light-cone 
tilting is clearly a coordinate-dependent notion (it doesn't happen, for example, 
in Kruskal coordinates), but the metrics of concern to us will allow for analo-
gous constructions. A stationary metric has a Killing vector a1 that is asymptot-
ically timelike, and we can adapt the metric components to be time-independent 
(()1gµv = 0). On hypersurfaces t =constant, we can choose coordinates (r, e, </>) 
in which the metric at infinity looks like Minkowski space in spherical polar co-
ordinates. Hypersmfaces r = constant will be timelike cylinders with topology 
S2 x Rat r ~ oo. Now imagine we have chosen our coordinates cleverly, so that 
as we decrease r from infinity the r = constant hypersmfaces remain timelike 
until some fixed r = Ill, for which the surface is everywhere null. (In nonclever 
coordinates, r = constant hypersurfaces will become null or spacelike for some 
values of e and</> but remain timelike for others.) This will clearly represent an 
event horizon, since timelike paths crossing into the region r < 'H will never be 
able to escape back to infinity. Detennining the point at which r = constant hy-
persurfaces become null is easy; aµr is a one-form normal to such hypersmfaces, 
withnonn 
(6.3) 
We are looking for the place where the nonn of our one-form vanishes; hence, in 
the coordinates we have described, the event horizon r = Ill will simply be the 
hypersmface at which grr switches from being positive to negative, 
(6.4) 

242 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
This criterion clearly works for Schwarzschild, for which grr = 1 - 2G M / r. We 
will present the Reissner-Nordstrom and Kerr solutions in coordinates that are 
similarly adapted to the horizons. 
The reason why we make such a big deal about event horizons is that they are 
nearly inevitable in general relativity. This conclusion is reached by concatenat-
ing two interesting results: Singularities are nearly inevitable, and singularities 
are hidden behind event horizons. Of course both results hold under appropriate 
sets of assumptions; it is not that hard to come up with spacetimes that have no 
singularities (Minkowski would be an example), nor is it even that hard to find 
singularities without horizons (as we will see below in our discussion of charged 
black holes). But we believe that "generic" solutions will have singularities hid-
den behind horizons. 
The ubiquity of singularities is guaranteed by the singularity theorems of 
Hawking and Penrose. Before these theorems were proven, it was possible to hope 
that collapse to a Schwarzschild singularity was an artifact of spherical symmetry, 
and typical geometries would remain nonsingular (as happens, for example, in 
Newtonian gravity). But the Hawking-Penrose theorems demonstrate that once 
collapse reaches a certain point, evolution to a singularity is inevitable. The way 
we know there is a singularity is through geodesic incompleteness-there exists 
some geodesic that cannot be extended within the manifold, but nevertheless ends 
at a finite value of the affine parameter. The way we know collapse has reached 
a point of no return is the appearance of a trapped surface. To understand what 
a trapped surface is, first picture a two-sphere in Minkowski space, taken as a set 
of points some fixed radial distance from the origin, embedded in a constant-time 
slice. If we follow null rays emanating into spacetime from this spatial sphere, 
one set (pointed inward) will describe a shrinking set of spheres, while the other 
(pointed outward) will describe a growing set of spheres. But this would not be 
the case for a sphere of fixed radius r < 2G M in the Schwarzschild geometry; 
inside the event horizon, both sets of null rays emanating from such a sphere 
would evolve to smaller values of r (since r is a timelike coordinate), and thus 
to smaller areas 4JT r2. This is what is meant by a trapped surface: a compact, 
spaceli.ke, two-dimensional submanifold with the property that outgoing future-
directed light rays converge in both directions everywhere on the submanifold. 
(The fonnal definition of "converge" is that the expansion e, as described in the 
discussion of geodesic congruences in Appendix F, is negative.) 
With these definitions in hand, we can present an example of a singularity 
theorem. 
Let M be a manifold with a generic metric gµv. satisfying Einstein's 
equation with the strong energy condition imposed. If there is a 
trapped surface in M, there must be either a closed timelike curve 
or a singularity (as manifested by an incomplete timelike or null 
geodesic). 
In this case, by "a generic metric" we mean that the generic condition is satisfied 
for both timelike and null geodesics. For timelike geodesics, the generic condition 

6.2 
Event Horizons 
243 
states that every geodesic with tangent vector Uµ must have at least one point 
on which Raf3yS ua U 0 ~ 0; for null geodesics, the generic condition states that 
every geodesic with tangent vector kµ must have at least one point on which 
k[aRf3Jyo[€k{]kY k0 ~ 0. These fancy conditions simply serve to exclude very 
special metrics for which the curvature consistently vanishes in some directions. 
Singularity theorems exist in many fonns, proceeding from various differ-
ent sets of assumptions. The moral of the story seems to be that typical time-
dependent solutions in general relativity usually end in singularities. (Or begin 
in them; some theorems imply the existence of cosmological singularities, such 
as the Big Bang.) This represents something of a problem for GR, in the sense 
that the theory doesn't really apply to the singularities themselves, whose exis-
tence therefore represents an incompleteness of description. The traditional atti-
tude toward this issue is to hope that a sought-after quantum theory of gravity will 
somehow resolve the singularities of classical GR. 
In the meantime, we can take solace in the idea that singularities are hidden 
behind event horizons. This belief is encompassed in the cosmic censorship con-
jecture: 
Naked singularities cannot form in gravitational collapse from 
generic, initially nonsingular states in an asymptotically flat space-
time obeying the dominant energy condition. 
A naked singularity is one from which signals can reach j>+; that is, one that is 
not hidden behind an event horizon. Notice that the conjecture refers to the for-
mation of naked singularities, not their existence; there are certainly solutions in 
which spacelike naked singularities exist in the past (such as the Schwarzschild 
white hole) or time like singularities exist for all times (such as in super-extremal 
charged black holes, discussed below). The cosmic censorship conjecture has not 
been proven, although a great deal of effort has gone into finding convincing coun-
terexamples, without success. The requirement that the initial data be in some 
sense "generic" is important, as numerical experiments have shown that finely-
tuned initial conditions are able to give rise to naked singularities. A precise proof 
of some fonn of the cosmic censorship conjecture remains one of the outstanding 
problems of classical general relativity.3 
A consequence of cosmic censorship (or of certain equivalent assumptions) is 
that classical black holes never shrink, they only grow bigger. The size of a black 
hole is measured by the area of the event horizon, by which we mean the spatial 
area of the intersection of the event horizon with a space like slice. We then have 
Hawking's area theorem: 
Assuming the weak energy condition and cosmic censorship, the area 
of a future event horizon in an asymptotically flat spacetime is non-
decreasing. 
3For a review of cosmic censorship see R.M. Wald, "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship," 
http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9710068. 

244 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
For a Schwarzschild black hole, the area depends monotonically on the mass, so 
this theorem implies that Schwarzschild black holes can only increase in mass. 
But for spinning black holes this is no longer the case; the area depends on a 
combination of mass and angular momentum, and we will see below that we can 
actually extract energy from a black hole by decreasing its spin. We can also de-
crease the mass of a black hole through quantum-mechanical Hawking radiation; 
this can be traced to the fact that quantum field theory in curved spacetime can 
violate the weak energy condition. 
6.3 • KILLING HORIZONS 
In the Schwarzschild metric, the Killing vector K = a1 goes from being timeli.ke 
to spacelike at the event horizon. In general, if a Killing vector field x µ is null 
along some null hypersurface l;, we say that l; is a Killing horizon of xµ. Note 
that the vector field xµ will be normal to l;, since a null surface cannot have two 
linearly independent null tangent vectors. 
The notion of a Killing horizon is logically independent from that of an event 
horizon, but in spacetimes with time-translation symmetry the two are closely 
related. Under certain reasonable conditions (made explicit below), we have the 
following classification: 
Every event horizon l; in a stationary, asymptotically flat spacetime 
is a Killing horizon for some Killing vector field xµ. 
If the spacetime is static, x µ will be the Killing vector field K µ = 
(()1 )µ representing time translations at infinity. 
If the spacetime is stationary but not static, it will be axisymmetric 
with a rotational Killing vector field Rµ = (()IP)µ, and xµ will be a 
linear combination K µ + QH Rµ for some constant QH. 
For example, below we will examine the Kerr metric for spinning black holes, 
in which the event horizon is a Killing horizon for a linear combination of the 
Killing vectors for rotations and time translations. In Kerr, the hypersmface on 
which a1 becomes null is actually timelike, so is not a Killing horizon. 
Let's be precise about the conditions under which this classification scheme 
actually holds.4 Carter has shown that, for static black holes, the event horizon is 
a Killing horizon for K µ; this is a purely geometric fact, which holds even without 
invoking Einstein's equation. In the stationary case, if we assume the existence of 
a rotational Killing field Rµ with the property that 2-planes spanned by K µ and 
Rµ are orthogonal to a family of two-dimensional surfaces, then the event horizon 
will be a Killing horizon for a linear combination of the two Killing fields, again 
from purely geometric considerations. If on the other hand we only assume that 
the black hole is stationary, we cannot prove in general that the event horizon 
4For a discussion see R. M. Wald, "The thennodynamics of black holes," Living Rev. Rel. 4, 6 (200 I), 
http://arxiv.org/gr-qc/9912119. 

6.3 
Killing Horizons 
245 
is axisymmetric. Given Einstein's equation and some conditions on the matter 
fields, Hawking was able to show that the event horizon of any stationary black 
hole must be a Killing horizon for some vector field, and furthennore that such 
horizons must either be stationary or axisymmetric. For the rest of this chapter we 
will speak as if the above classification holds; however, making assumptions about 
matter fields is notoriously tricky, and we should keep in mind the possibility in 
principle of finding black holes that are not static or axisymmetric, for which the 
event horizon might not be a Killing horizon. 
It's important to point out that, while event horizons for stationary asymptot-
ically flat spacetimes will typically be Killing horizons, it's easy to have Killing 
horizons that have nothing to do with event horizons. Consider Minkowski space 
in inertial coordinates, ds2 = -clt 2 + clx2 + dy2 + dz2; clearly there are no 
event horizons in this spacetime. The Killing vector that generates boosts in the 
x-direction is 
(6.5) 
with nonn 
XµXµ = -x2 + t2. 
(6.6) 
This goes null at the null surfaces 
x = ±t, 
(6.7) 
which are therefore Killing horizons. By combining the boost Killing vector with 
translational and rotational Killing vectors, we can move these horizons through 
the manifold; there are Killing horizons all over. In more interesting spacetimes, 
of course, there will be fewer Killing vector fields, and the associated horizons (if 
any) will have greater physical significance. 
To every Killing horizon we can associate a quantity called the surface grav-
ity. Consider a Killing vector xµ with Killing horizon l;. Because xµ is a nonnal 
vector to l;, along the Killing horizon it obeys the geodesic equation, 
(6.8) 
where the right-hand side arises because the integral curves of xµ may not be 
affinely parameterized. The parameter K is the surface gravity; it will be constant 
over the horizon, except for a "bifurcation two-sphere" where the Killing vec-
tor vanishes and K can change sign. (This happens, for example, at the center 
of the Kruskal diagram in the Schwarzschild solution.) Using Killing's equation 
Y'(µXv) = 0 and the fact that X(µ Y'vXaJ = 0 (since xµ is nonnal to l;), it is 
straightforward to derive a nice fonnula for the surface gravity: 
(6.9) 
The expression on the right-hand side is to be evaluated at the horizon l;. You are 
encouraged to check this fonnula yourself. 

246 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
The surface gravity associated with a Killing horizon is in principle arbitrary, 
since we can always scale a Killing field by a real constant and obtain another 
Killing field. In a static, asymptotically flat spacetime, the time-translation Killing 
vector K = a1 can be normalized by setting 
(6.10) 
This in tum fixes the surface gravity of any associated Killing horizon. If we 
are in a stationary spacetime, where the Killing horizon is associated with a linear 
combination of time translations and rotations, fixing the normalization of K = a1 
also fixes this linear combination, so the surface gravity remains unique. 
The reason why K is called the "surface gravity" becomes clear only when the 
spacetime is static. In that case we have the following interpretation: 
In a static, asymptotically flat spacetime, the surface gravity is the 
acceleration of a static observer near the horizon, as measured by a 
static observer at infinity. 
To make sense of such a statement, let's first consider static observers. By a 
static observer we mean one whose four-velocity Uµ is proportional to the time-
translation Killing field K µ: 
(6.11) 
Since the four-velocity is normalized to U µ U µ = -1, the function V is simply 
the magnitude of the Killing field, 
(6.12) 
and hence ranges from zero at the Killing horizon to unity at infinity. V is some-
times called the "redshift factor," since it relates the emitted and observed fre-
quencies of a photon as measured by static observers. Recall that the conserved 
energy of a photon with four-momentum pµ is E = -pµ Kµ, while the frequency 
measured by an observer with four-velocity Uµ will be w = -pµUµ. Therefore 
E 
w=-, 
v 
(6.13) 
and a photon emitted by static observer 1 will be observed by static observer 2 to 
have wavelength A. = 2JT / w given by 
V2 
A.2 = -A.1. 
Vt 
(6.14) 
In particular, at infinity where V = 1, we will observe a wavelength A.00 = A.1 /Vt. 
Now we tum to the idea of "acceleration as viewed from infinity." A static 
observer will not typically be moving on a geodesic; for example, particles tend to 
fall into black holes rather than hovering next to them at fixed spatial coordinates. 

6.3 
Killing Horizons 
247 
We can express the four-acceleration aµ = ua Va U µ in terms of the redshift 
factor as 
aµ='VµlnV, 
(6.15) 
as you can easily check. The magnitude of the acceleration, 
(6.16) 
will go to infinity at the Killing horizon-it will take an infinite acceleration to 
keep an object on a static trajectory. But an observer at infinity will detect the 
acceleration to be "redshifted" by a factor V; this turns out to be the surface 
gravity. Thus, we claim that 
(6.17) 
evaluated at the horizon l;. You can check that this expression agrees with (6.9). 
The surface gravity is the product of zero (V) and infinity (a), but will typically 
be finite. When we say that the observed acceleration is redshifted, we have in 
mind stretching a test string from a static object at the horizon to an observer at 
infinity, and measuring the acceleration on the end of the string at infinity. (It is 
worth taking the time to see if you can promote this hand-waving argument to 
something more rigorous.) 
What goes wrong with the above considerations if the spacetime is station-
ary but not static? We still have an asymptotically time-translation Killing vector 
K = a1, and we can define stationary observers as ones whose four-velocities 
are parallel to Kµ, as in (6.11); the redshift will continue to be given by (6.14). 
The problem is that Kµ won't become null at a Killing horizon, but generally at 
some timelike surface outside the horizon. This place where K µ K µ = 0 is called 
the stationary limit surface (or sometimes "ergosmface"), since inside this sur-
face K µ is spacelike, and consequently no observer can remain stationary, even 
if it is still outside the event horizon. Such an observer has to move with respect 
to the Killing field, but need not move in the direction of the black hole. From 
(6.12) and (6.14), the redshift of a stationary observer diverges as we approach 
the stationary limit surface, which is therefore also called the infinite redshift 
surface. As we will see in our discussion of the Kerr metric, the region between 
the stationary limit surface and the event horizon, the ergosphere, is a place where 
timelike paths are inevitably dragged along with the rotation of the black hole. We 
will continue to use "surface gravity" as a label in stationary spacetimes, which 
we will calculate using the Killing vector xµ, which actually does go null on the 
event horizon, even if the resulting quantity cannot be interpreted as the gravita-
tional acceleration of a stationary observer as seen at infinity. 
Let's apply these notions to Schwarzschild to see how they work. For the metric 
( 
2GM) 
( 
2GM)-t 
ds2 = -
1 - -,.-
dt 2 + 1 - -,.-
dr2 + r 2dfl.2, 
(6.18) 

248 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
the Killing vector and static four-velocity are 
K" = (I, 0, 0, 0). 
U" = [ (I -
2~ M )-l/Z , O. 0, O] , 
(6.19) 
so the redshift factor is 
(6.20) 
(Note the agreement with our calculation of the redshift in the previous chapter.) 
From (6.15), the acceleration is 
aµ= 
( 
Vµr, 
,.2 1 _ 2~M) 
GM 
(6.21) 
where of course V µr = o~. The magnitude of the acceleration is thus 
GM 
(6.22) 
a= 
1;2· 
,.2 ( 1 _ 2~M) 
The surface gravity is K = Va evaluated at the event horizon r = 2G M, and 
GM 
Va= - 2-, 
,. 
so the surface gravity of a Schwarzschild black hole is 
1 
K=--. 
4GM 
(6.23) 
(6.24) 
It might seem surprising that the surface gravity decreases as the mass increases, 
but a glance at (6.23) reveals what is going on; at fixed radius increasing M acts to 
increase the combination Va, but increasing the mass also increases the Schwarz-
schild radius, and that effect wins out. Thus, the surface gravity of a big black 
hole is actually weaker than that of a small black hole; this is consistent with an 
examination of the tidal forces, which are also smaller for bigger black holes. 
6.4 • MASS, CHARGE, AND SPIN 
Since we have claimed above that the most general stationary black-hole solution 
to general relativity is characterized by mass, charge, and spin, we should consider 
how these quantities might be defined in GR. Charge is the easiest to consider, so 
we start there; more details are found in our discussion of Stokes's theorem in 
Appendix E. We'll look specifically at electric charge, although magnetic charge 
could be examined in the same way. 

6.4 Mass, Charge, and Spin 
249 
Maxwell's equations relate the electromagnetic field strength tensor Fµv to the 
electric cmTent four-vector J;'-, 
(6.25) 
The charge passing through a spacelike hypersmface l; is given by an integral 
over coordinates xi on the hypersurface, 
Q = -h 
d3x,JYnµJ;'-
= - h 
d3x,JYnµ 'VvFµv, 
(6.26) 
where Yij is the induced metric, and nµ is the unit normal vector, associated with 
l;. The minus sign ensures that a positive charge density and a future-pointing 
normal vector will give a positive total charge. Stokes's theorem can then be used 
to express the charge as a boundary integral, 
Q = -
{ 
d2x~ 
llµ<1vFµv, 
la'E 
(6.27) 
where the boundary al;, typically a two-sphere at spatial infinity, has metric Y;j2) 
and outward-pointing normal vector aµ. The magnetic charge could be deter-
mined by replacing Fµv with the dual tensor *Fµv = !Eµvpa Fpa· Thus, to cal-
culate the total charge, we need know only the behavior of the electromagnetic 
field at spatial infinity. In Appendix Ewe do an explicit calculation for a point 
charge in Minkowski space, which yields a predictable result but serves as a good 
check that our conventions work out correctly. 
We tum now to the concept of the total energy (or mass) of an asymptotically 
flat spacetime. This is a much trickier notion than that of the charge; for one thing, 
energy-momentum is a tensor rather than a vector in general relativity, and for 
another, the energy-momentum tensor Tµv only describes the properties of matter, 
not of the gravitational field. But recall that in Chapter 3 we discussed how we 
could nevertheless define a conserved total energy if spacetime were stationary, 
with a timelike Killing vector field K µ. We first construct a current 
(6.28) 
where Tµv is the energy-momentum tensor. Because this cmTent is divergence-
less (from Killing's equation and conservation of Tµv), we can find a conserved 
energy by integrating over a spacelike surface l;, 
ET= h 
d3x,JYnµJj, 
(6.29) 
just as for the charge. As interesting as this expression is, there are clearly some 
inadequacies with it. For example, consider the Schwarzschild metric. It has a 

250 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
Killing vector, but Tµv vanishes everywhere. Is the energy of a Schwarzschild 
black hole therefore zero? On both physical and mathematical grounds, there is 
reason to suspect not; there is a singularity, after all, which renders the integral 
difficult to evaluate. Furthermore, a Schwarzschild black hole can evolve from a 
massive star with a definite nonzero energy, and we might like that energy to be 
conserved. It is worth searching for an alternative definition of energy that better 
captures our intuitive picture for black hole spacetimes. 
Sticking for the moment to spacetimes with a timelike Killing vector K µ, con-
sider a new current 
J µ -
K Rµv 
R -
v 
. 
(6.30) 
Using Einstein's equation, we can equivalently write this as 
(6.31) 
The Ricci tensor is not divergenceless; instead we have the contracted Bianchi 
identity, 
(6.32) 
But this and Killing's equation suffice to guarantee that our new current is con-
served. To see this, we simply compute 
(6.33) 
The first term vanishes because Rµ v is symmetric and V µ K v is antisymmetric 
(from Killing's equation). Using (6.32) we therefore have 
(6.34) 
which we know vanishes because the directional derivative of R vanishes along a 
Killing vector, (3.178). 
As before, we can define a conserved energy associated with this cmTent, 
(6.35) 
where the normalization is chosen for future convenience. The energy ER will be 
independent of the spacelike hypersmface l;, and hence conserved. This notion 
of energy has a significant advantage over ET, arising from the fact that ER can 
be rewritten as a surface integral over a two-sphere at spatial infinity. To see this, 
recall from (3 .177) that any Killing vector satisfies V µ V v K µ = K µ R µ v; the 
cmTent itself can thus be written as a total derivative, 
(6.36) 

6.4 
Mass, Charge, and Spin 
251 
so that 
(6.37) 
Note that, from raising indices on KHling's equation, Vµ Kv = -vv Kµ. We can 
therefore again use Stokes's theorem just as we did for electric charge, to write 
ER as an· integral at spatial infinity, 
(6.38) 
This expression is the Komar integral associated with the time like Killing vector 
K µ; it can be interpreted as the total energy of a stationary spacetime. 
To convince ourselves that we're on the right track, let's calculate the Komar 
integral for Schwarzschild, with metric (6.18). The normal vectors, normalized to 
nµnµ = -1 andaµaµ = +1, have nonzero components 
( 
2GM)-t/2 
O't = 
1- --
' 
,. 
with other components vanishing. We therefore have 
The Killing vector is Kµ = (1, 0, 0, 0), so we can readily calculate 
VOKI = goo'VoK' 
= g00 (aoK 1 + rJ>-K>-) 
= gOOrJoKO 
= -(l _ 
2GM)-t GM (l _ 
2GM) 
,. 
,.2 
,. 
GM 
=-~. 
The metric on the two-sphere at infinity is 
so that 
j;m = r 2 sine. 
(6.39) 
(6.40) 
(6.41) 
(6.42) 
(6.43) 

252 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
Putting it all together, the energy of a Schwarzschild black hole is 
ER= 4:G J 
d9dtf>r2 sin9 ( ~~) 
=M. 
(6.44) 
This is of course the desired result, explaining the nonnalization chosen in (6.35). 
Despite getting the right answer, we should think about what just happened. In 
particular, we obtained this energy by integrating the current 1; = KvRµ.v over 
a spacelike slice, finding that the result could be written as an integral at spatial 
infinity. But for Schwarzschild, the metric solves the vacuum Einstein equation, 
Rµ.v = O; it therefore seems difficult to get a nonzero answer from integrating 1;, 
just as it did for (6.29). If we think about the structure of the maximally extended 
Schwarzschild solution, we realize that we could draw two kinds of spacelike 
slices: those that extend through the wormhole to the second asymptotic region, 
and those that end on the singularity. If the slice extends through the wormhole, 
the other asymptotic region provides another component to al:, and thus another 
contribution to (6.38); this contribution would exactly cancel, so the total energy 
would indeed be zero. If the slice intersected the singularity, we wouldn't know 
quite how to deal with it. Nevertheless, in either case it is sensible to treat our 
result (6.44) as the correct answer. The point is that, since (6.38) involves contri-
butions only at spatial infinity, it should be a valid expression for the energy no 
matter what happens in the interior. We could even imagine time-dependent be-
havior in the interior; so long as KJJ. was asymptotically a timelike Killing vector, 
the Komar energy will be well-defined. We could, for example, consider spheri-
cally symmetric gravitational collapse from an initially static star. Evaluating the 
integral (6.35) directly over E would give a sensible answer for the total mass, 
which should not change as the star collapsed to a black hole (we are imagining 
spherical symmetry, so that gravitational radiation cannot carry away energy to 
infinity). So the Komar integral (6.38), which would be valid before the collapse, 
may be safely interpreted as the energy even after collapse to a black hole. Of 
course for some purposes we might want to allow for energy loss through gravi-
tational radiation, in which case we need to be careful about how we extend our 
slice to infinity; one can define a "Bondi mass" at future null infinity which allows 
us to keep track of energy loss through radiation. 
Another worry about the Komar fonnula is whether it is really what we should 
think of as the "energy," which is typically the conserved quantity associated with 
time translation invariance. The best argument in favor of this interpretation is 
simply that ER is certainly a conserved quantity of some sort, and it agrees with 
what we think should be the energy of Schwarzschild (and of a collection of 
masses in the Newtonian limit, as you could check), so what else could it be? 
Alternatively, one could think about a Hamiltonian fonnulation of general rela-
tivity, and carefully define the generator of time translations in an asymptotically 
flat spacetime, and then identify that with the total energy. This was first done by 
Arnowitt, Deser, and Misner, and their result is known as the ADM energy. In an 

6.4 Mass, Charge, and Spin 
253 
asymptotically flat spacetime, we can write the mettic just as we do in perturba-
tion theory, 
gµ.v = Y/µ.v + hµ.v, 
(6.45) 
except that here we only ask that the components h µ.v be small at spatial infinity, 
not necessarily everywhere. The ADM energy can then be written as an integral 
over a two-sphere at spatial infinity, as 
(6.46) 
where spatial indices are raised with ~ij (the spatial metric at infinity). This for-
mula looks coordinate-dependent, but is actually well-defined under our assump-
tions. If hµ.v is time-independent at infinity, it can be verified that the ADM energy 
and the Komar energy actually agree. This gives us even more confidence that the 
Komar integral really represents the energy. However, there is a sense in which 
the ADM energy is more respectable; for example, the Komar integral can run 
into tt·ouble if we have long-range scalar fields nonminimally coupled to gravity. 
But for our immediate purposes the Komar energy is quite acceptable. 
One quality that we would like something called "energy" to have is that it 
be positive for any physical configuration; otherwise a zero-energy state could 
decay into pieces of positive energy and negative energy. The energy conditions 
discussed in Chapter 4 give a notion of positive energy for matter fields, but we 
might worry about a negative gravitational conttibution leading to problems. Hap-
pily, in GR we have the positive energy theorem, first proven by Shoen and Yau: 
The ADM energy of a nonsingular, asymptotically flat spacetime 
obeying Einstein's equation and the dominant energy condition is 
nonnegative. Furthermore, Minkowski is the only such spacetime 
with vanishing ADM energy. 
If we allow for singularities, there are clearly counterexamples, such as Schwarz-
schild with M < 0. However, if a spacetime with a singularity (such as Schwarz-
schild with M > 0) is reached as the evolution of nonsingular initial data, the 
theorem will apply. Thus we seem to be safe from negative-energy isolated sys-
tems in general relativity. 
Finally, we may tum to spin (angular momentum), which is perfectly straight-
forward after our discussion of energy. Imagine that we have a rotational Killing 
vector R = aq,. In exact analogy with the time-translation case, we can define a 
conserved current 
(6.47) 
which will lead to an expression for the conserved angular momentum J as an 
integral over spatial infinity, 

254 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
(6.48) 
(It is too bad that "J" is used for both the current and the angular momentum, just 
as it is too bad that "R" is both the rotational Killing vector and the Ricci tensor. 
But there are only so many letters to go around.) Just as with the energy, this 
expression will still be valid even if RJJ. is only asymptotically a Killing vector. 
Note that the nonnalization is different than in the energy integral; it could be 
justified, for example, by evaluating the expression for slowly-moving masses 
with weak gravitational fields. 
6.5 • CHARGED (REISSNER-NORDSTROM) BLACK HOLES 
We tum now to the exact solutions representing electrically charged black holes. 
Such solutions are not extremely relevant to realistic astrophysical situations; in 
the real world, a highly-charged black hole would be quickly neutralized by in-
teractions with matter in the vicinity of the hole. But charged holes nevertheless 
illustrate a number of important features of more general situations. In this case 
the full spherical symmetry of the problem is still present; we know therefore that 
we can write the met.lie as 
(6.49) 
Now, however, we are no longer in vacuum, since the hole will have a nonzero 
elecu·omagnetic field, which in tum acts as a source of energy-momentum. The 
energy-momentum tensor for electromagnetism is given by 
(6.50) 
where Fµ.v is the electromagnetic field strength tensor. Since we have spherical 
symmetry, the most general field strength tensor will have components 
Ftr = f(r, t) = -Frt 
Fo<t> = g(r, t) sin8 = -F<1>0, 
(6.51) 
where f (r, t) and g(r, t) are some functions to be detennined by the field equa-
tions, and components not written are zero. Frr corresponds to a radial electric 
field, while Fo<t> corresponds to a radial magnetic field. For those of you wonder-
ing about the sin 8, recall that the thing that should be independent of 8 and </> 
is the radial component of the magnetic field, Br = EOlµ.v Fµ.v· For a spherically 
symmetric metric, 
Epuµ.v = _I _Epuµ.v 
Fi 
is proportional to (sin 8 )- 1 , so we want a factor of sin 8 in Fo<t>. 

6.5 
Charged (Reissner-Nordstrom) Black Holes 
255 
The field equations in this case are both Einstein's equation and Maxwell's 
equations: 
gµ.vv µ.Fva = 0 
V[µ.FvpJ = 0. 
(6.52) 
The two sets are coupled together, since the electromagnetic field strength tensor 
enters Einstein's equation through the energy-momentum tensor, while the metric 
enters explicitly into Maxwell's equations. 
The difficulties are not insunnountable, however, and a procedure similar to 
the one we followed for the vacuum case leads to a solution for the charged case 
as well. We will not go through the steps explicitly, but merely quote the final 
answer. The solution is known as the Reissuer-Nordstrom (RN) metric, and is 
given by 
(6.53) 
where 
2GM 
G(Q2 + P2) 
~=1---+ 
2 
• 
r 
r 
(6.54) 
In this expression, M is once again interpreted as the mass of the hole; Q is 
the total electric charge, and P is the total magnetic charge. Isolated magnetic 
charges (monopoles) have never been observed in nature, but that doesn't stop us 
from writing down the metric that they would produce if they did exist. There are 
good theoretical reasons to think that monopoles may exist if forces are "grand 
unified" at very high energies, but they must be very heavy and extremely rare. 
Of course, a black hole could possibly have magnetic charge even if there aren't 
any monopoles. In fact, the electric and magnetic charges enter the metric in the 
same way, so we are not introducing any additional complications by keeping P 
in our expressions. Conservatives are welcome to set P = 0 if they like. The 
electromagnetic fields associated with this solution are given by 
Q 
Er= Fr1 = 2 
r 
Br = __!!±__ = p . 
r2 sin fJ 
r2 
(6.55) 
The I/ r 2 dependence of these fields is just what we are used to in flat space; of 
course, here we know that this depends on our precise choice of radial coordinate. 
The RN metric has a true curvature singularity at r = 0, as could be checked 
by computing the curvature invariant scalar Rµ.vpa Rµ.vpa. The horizon structure, 
however, is more complicated than in Schwarzschild. In the discussion of event 
horizons above, we suggested that grr = 0 would be a useful diagnostic for locat-

256 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
r+/1GM 
r 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
//""-p=q=O 
/ 
(Schwarzschild) 
FIGURE 6.2 The function A(r) = 1 - 2GM/r + G(Q2 + P2)/r2 for the Reissner-
Nordstrom solutions; zeroes indicate the location of an event horizon. 
ing event horizons, if we had cleverly chosen coordinates so that this condition is 
satisfied at some fixed value of r. Fortunately the coordinates of (6.53) have this 
property, and the event horizon will be located at 
rr 
2GM 
G(Q2 + p2) 
g (r) = Mr) = 1 - -- + 
2 
= 0. 
r 
r 
(6.56) 
This will occur at 
r± =GM± JG2M2 - G(Q2 + p2). 
(6.57) 
As shown in Figure 6.2, this might constitute two, one, or zero solutions, depend-
ing on the relative values of G M2 and Q2 + P2. We therefore consider each case 
separately. 
Case One: GM2 < Q2 + P2 
In this case the coefficient l!:. is always positive (never zero), and the metric is 
completely regular in the (t, r, 8, </>) coordinates all the way down to r = 0. The 
coordinate t is always timelike, and r is always spacelike. But still there is the 
singularity at r = 0, which is now a timelike line. Since there is no event horizon, 
there is no obstruction to an observer traveling to the singularity and returning to 
report on what was observed. This is a naked singularity, as discussed earlier. A 
careful analysis of the geodesics reveals that the singularity is repulsive-timelike 
geodesics never intersect r = O; instead they approach and then reverse course 
and move away. (Null geodesics can reach the singularity, as can nongeodesic 
timelike curves.) 

6.5 
Charged (Reissner-Nordstrom) Black Holes 
r= 0 
(singularity) 
;+ 
257 
FIGURE 6.3 Confonnal diagram for Reissner-Nordstrom solution with Q2 + p2 > 
G M2. There is a naked singularity at the origin. 
As r ~ oo the solution approaches flat spacetime, and as we have just seen the 
causal structure seems normal everywhere. The confonnal diagram will therefore 
be just like that of Minkowski space, except that now r = 0 is a singularity, as 
shown in Figure 6.3. 
The nakedness of the singularity off ends our sense of decency, as well as the 
cosmic censorship conjecture. In fact, we should never expect to find a black hole 
with G M2 < Q2 + P2 as the result of gravitational collapse. Roughly speaking, 
this condition states that the total energy of the hole is less than the contribution to 
the energy from the electromagnetic fields alone-that is, the mass of the matter 
that carried the charge would have had to be negative. This solution is therefore 
generally considered to be unphysical. Notice also that there are no Cauchy sur-
faces in this spacetime, since timelike lines can begin and end at the singularity. 
Case Two: GM2 > Q2 + P2 
We expect this situation to apply in realistic gravitational collapse; the energy 
in the electromagnetic field is less than the total energy. In this case the metric 
coefficient ~(r) is positive at large r and small r, and negative inside the two 
vanishingpointsr± = GM±JG2M2 - G(Q2 + p2). The metric has coordinate 
singularities at both r + and r _; in both cases these could be removed by a change 
of coordinates as we did with Schwarzschild. 
The surfaces defined by r = r ± are both null, and they are both event hori-
zons. The singularity at r = 0 is a timelike line, not a spacelike surface as in 
Schwarzschild. If you are an observer falling into the black hole from far away, 
r + is just like 2G M in the Schwarzschild metric; at this radius r switches from 
being a spacelike coordinate to a timelike coordinate, and you necessarily move in 
the direction of decreasing r. Witnesses outside the black hole also see the same 

258 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
phenomena that they would outside an uncharged hole-the infalling observer is 
seen to move more and more slowly, and is increasingly redshifted. 
But the inevitable fall from r + to ever-decreasing radii only lasts until you 
reach the null surface r = r _, where r switches back to being a spacelike coor-
dinate and the motion in the direction of decreasing r can be arrested. Therefore 
you do not have to hit the singularity at r = O; this is to be expected, since r = 0 
is a timelike line (and therefore not necessarily in your future). In fact you can 
choose either to continue on to r = 0, or begin to move in the direction of in-
creasing r back through the null surface at r = r _. Then r will once again be a 
timelike coordinate, but with reversed orientation; you are forced to move in the 
direction of increasing r. You will eventually be spit out past r = r + once more, 
which is like emerging from a white hole into the rest of the universe. From here 
you can choose to go back into the black hole-this time, a different hole than the 
one you entered in the first place-and repeat the voyage as many times as you 
like. This little story corresponds to the conformal diagram in Figure 6.4, which 
of course can be derived more rigorously by choosing appropriate coordinates and 
analytically extending the Reissner-Nordstrom metric as far as it will go. 
Reissner-Nordstrom: 
GM2 > p2 + q2 
r =constant 
FIGURE 6.4 Conformal diagram for Reissner-Nordstrom solution with GM2 > Q2 + 
P2. There are an infinite number of copies of the region outside the black hole. 

r = 0 
FIGURE 
6.5 
Confonnal 
diagram 
for the extremal 
Reissner-Nordstrom solution, 
GM2 = Q2 + P2. There 
is a naked singularity at the 
origin, and an infinite number 
of external regions. 
6.5 
Charged (Reissner-Nordstrom) Black Holes 
259 
How much of this is science, as opposed to science fiction? Probably not much. 
If you think about the world as seen from an observer inside the black hole who 
is about to cross the event horizon at r _, you notice that the observer can look 
back in time to see the entire history of the external (asymptotically flat) universe, 
at least as seen from the black hole. But they see this (infinitely long) history 
in a finite amount of their proper time-thus, any signal that gets to them as they 
approach r _ is infinitely blueshifted. Therefore it is likely that any nonspherically-
symmetric perturbation that comes into an RN black hole will violently disturb 
the geometry we have described. It's hard to say what the actual geometry will 
look like, but there is no very good reason to believe that it must contain an in-
finite number of asymptotically flat regions connecting to each other via various 
wormholes.5 
Case Three: GM2 = Q2 + P2 
This case is known as the extreme Reissner-Nordstrom solution. On the one hand 
the extremal hole is an amusing theoretical toy; this solution is often examined in 
studies of the role of black holes in quantum gravity. In supersymmetric theories, 
extremal black holes can leave certain symmetries unbroken, which is a consider-
able aid in calculations. On the other hand it appears unstable, since adding just a 
little bit of matter will bring it to Case Two. 
The extremal black holes have ~(r) = 0 at a single radius, r = GM. This 
represents an event horizon, but the r coordinate is never timelike; it becomes 
null at r = GM, but is spacelike on either side. The singularity at r = 0 is a 
timelike line, as in the other cases. So for this black hole you can again avoid the 
singularity and continue to move to the future to extra copies of the asymptotically 
flat region, but the singularity is always "to the left." The confonnal diagram is 
shown in Figure 6.5. 
A fascinating property of extremal black holes is that the mass is in some 
sense balanced by the charge. More specifically, two extremal holes with same-
sign charges will attract each other gravitationally, but repel each other electro-
magnetically, and it turns out that these effects precisely cancel. Indeed, we can 
find exact solutions to the coupled Einstein-Maxwell equations representing any 
number of such black holes in a stationary configuration. To see this, tum first to 
the Reissner-Nordstrom metric itself, and let's stick with electric charges rather 
than magnetic charges, just for simplicity. At extremality, G M 2 = Q2, and the 
metric takes the fonn 
2 
( 
GM)2 
2 
( 
GM)-2 
2 
2 
2 
ds = -
1 - -r-
dt + 1 - -r-
dr + r dQ . 
(6.58) 
By defining a shifted radial coordinate 
p=r-GM, 
(6.59) 
5For some work on this issue, see E. Poisson and W. Israel, Phys. Rev. D 41, 1796 ( 1990). 

260 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
the metric takes the isotropic fonn 
ds2 = -H-2(p)dt 2 + H 2(p)[dp2 + p2df22], 
(6.60) 
where 
GM 
H(p) = 1 + -. 
p 
(6.61) 
Because dp2 + p2dn2 is just the flat metric in three spatial dimensions, we can 
write (6.60) equally well as 
ds2 = -H-2(x)dt 2 + H 2(x)[dx 2 + dy2 + dz2J, 
(6.62) 
where H can be written 
(6.63) 
In the original r coordinate, the electric field of the extremal solution can be ex-
pressed in tenns of a vector potential Aµ. as 
Q 
Er = Fri = 2 = ar Ao, 
r 
where the timelike component of the vector potential is 
Q 
Ao=--, 
r 
(6.64) 
(6.65) 
and we imagine the spatial components vanish (having set the magnetic field to 
zero). In our new p coordinate, and with the extremality condition Q2 = G M 2, 
this becomes 
or equivalently 
JGM 
Ao= - p+GM' 
(6.66) 
(6.67) 
But now let's forget that we know that H obeys (6.61), and simply plug the 
metric (6.62) and the electrostatic potential (6.67) into Einstein's equation and 
Maxwell's equations, imagining that His time-independent (aoH = 0) but other-
wise unconstrained. We can straightforwardly show (see the Exercises) that they 
can be simultaneously satisfied by any time-independent function H (x) that obeys 
V2H = 0, 
(6.68) 
where V2 = a; +a;+ a;. This is simply Laplace's equation, and it is straightfor-
ward to write down all of the solutions that are well-behaved at infinity; they take 
the fonn 

6.6 Rotating (Kerr) Black Holes 
261 
N 
GMa 
H=l+L--· 
a=l Ix - Xal 
(6.69) 
for some set of N spatial points defined by Xa. These points describe the locations 
of N extremal RN black holes with masses Ma and charges Qa = JGM0 • This 
multi-extremal-black hole metric is undoubtedly one of the most remarkable exact 
solutions to Einstein's equation. 
6.6 • ROTATING (KERR) BLACK HOLES 
We could go into a good deal more detail about the charged solutions, but let's 
instead move on to rotating black holes. To find the exact solution for the metric 
in this case is much more difficult, since we have given up on spherical symmetry. 
Instead we look for solutions with axial symmetry around the axis of rotation that 
are also stationary (a timelike Killing vector). Although the Schwarzschild and 
Reissner-Nordstrom solutions were discovered soon after general relativity was 
invented, the solution for a rotating black hole was found by Kerr only in 1963. 
His result, the Kerr metric, is given by the following mess: 
2 
( 
2GMr) d 2 
2GMar sin
2
(J d d 
d d 
ds = -
1 - --
t -
( t </> + </> t) 
p2 
p2 
p2 
sin2 () [ 
J 
+ ~dr
2 + p 2de 2 + -pr- (r2 + a 2)2 - a2 l!:. sin2 () d</>2, 
(6.70) 
where 
l!:.(r) = r2 -2GMr +a2 
(6.71) 
and 
p 2(r, ()) = r 2 + a2 cos2 (). 
(6.72) 
The two constants M and a parameterize the possible solutions. To verify that the 
mass Mis equal to the Komar energy (6.38) is straightforward but tedious, while 
a is the angular momentum per unit mass, 
a= J/M, 
(6.73) 
where J is the Komar angular momentum (6.48). It is easy to include electric and 
magnetic charges Q and P, simply by replacing 2GMr with 2GMr - G(Q2 + 

262 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
P 2); the result is the Kerr-Newman metric. The associated one-fonn potential 
has nonvanishing components 
A _ Qr - Pa cos() 
t -
2 
' 
p 
-Qar sin2 () + P(r2 + a 2) cos() 
Aq, = 
2 
p 
(6.74) 
All of the essential phenomena persist in the absence of charges, so we will set 
Q = P = 0 from now on. 
The coordinates (t, r, (),</>)are known as Boyer-Lindquist coordinates. It is 
straightforward to check that as a ~ 0 they reduce to Schwarzschild coordinates. 
If we keep a fixed and let M ~ 0, however, we recover flat spacetime but not in 
ordinary polar coordinates. The metric becomes 
(r2 + a2 cos2 (J) 
ds2 = -dt2 + 
dr2 + (r2 +a2 cos2 (J)2de2 + (r2 +a2) sin2 () d</>2, 
(r2 +a2) 
(6.75) 
and we recognize the spatial part of this as flat space in ellipsoidal coordinates, 
as shown in Figure 6.6. They are related to Cartesian coordinates in Euclidean 
3-space by 
x = (r2 +a2)112sin(J cos</> 
y = (r2 + a 2) 112 sin() sin</> 
z = r cos(). 
(6.76) 
There are two Killing vectors of the metric (6.70), both of which are manifest; 
since the metric coefficients are independent oft and </>, both K = a, and R = aq, 
are Killing vectors. Of course RJJ. expresses the axial symmetry of the solution. 
The vector K µ. is not orthogonal to t = constant hypersurfaces, and in fact is 
not orthogonal to any hypersurf aces at all; hence this metric is stationary, but not 
r =constant 
a 
FIGURE 6.6 Ellipsoidal coordinates (r, 9), used in the Kerr metric. r = 0 is a two-
dimensional disk; the intersection of r = 0 with 9 = 7r /2 is the ring at the boundary of this 
disk. 

6.6 
Rotating (Kerr) Black Holes 
263 
static. This makes sense; the black hole is spinning, so it's not static, but it is 
spinning in exactly the same way at all times, so it's stationary. Alternatively, the 
metric can't be static because it's not time-reversal invariant, since that would 
reverse the angular momentum of the hole. 
The Kerr metric also possesses a Killing tensor. These were defined in Chapter 
3 as any symmetric (0, n) tensor CTµ. 1 ... µ.,, satisfying 
In the Kerr geometry we can define the (0, 2) tensor 
CTµ.v = 2p2l(µ.nv) + r 2gµ.v• 
In this expression the two vectors land n are given (with indices raised) by 
µ. 
1 ( 2 
2 
) 
l = fl. r +a , fl., 0, a 
µ. 
1 (2 
2 
) 
n = 2p2 r +a , -fl., 0, a . 
Both vectors are null and satisfy 
/JJ.iµ. = 0, 
n/J.nµ. = 0, 
/JJ.nµ. = -1. 
(6.77) 
(6.78) 
(6.79) 
(6.80) 
With these definitions, you can check for yourself that CTµ.v is a Killing tensor. 
We have chosen coordinates for Kerr such that the event horizons occur at 
those fixed values of r for which grr = 0. Since grr = fl./ p2, and p2 :;:::: 0, this 
occurs when 
tl.(r) = r 2 - 2GMr + a2 = 0. 
(6.81) 
As in the Reissner-Nordstrom solution, there are three possibilities: GM > a, 
GM = a, and GM < a. The last case features a naked singularity, and the 
extremal case GM = a is unstable, just as in Reissner-Nordstrom. Since these 
cases are of less physical interest, we will concentrate on GM > a. Then there 
are two radii at which fl. vanishes, given by 
(6.82) 
Both radii are null surfaces that will tum out to be event horizons; a side view of a 
Kerr black hole is portrayed in Figure 6.7. The analysis of these smfaces proceeds 
in close analogy with the Reissner-Nordstrom case; it is straightforward to find 
coordinates that extend through the horizons. 
Because Kerr is stationary but not static, the event horizons at r ± are not Killing 
horizons for the asymptotic time-translation Killing vector K = a,. The norm of 
K µ. is given by 
(6.83) 

264 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
ergosphere 
I 
stationary limit surf ace 
FIGURE 6.7 Horizon structure around the Kerr solution (side view). The event horizons 
are null surfaces that demarcate points past which it becomes impossible to return to a 
certain region of space. The stationary 1imit surf ace, in contrast, is timelike except where 
it is tangent to the event horizon (at the poles); it represents the place past which it is 
impossible to be a stationary observer. The ergosphere between the stationary limit surface 
and the outer event horizon is a region in which it is possible to enter and leave again, but 
not to remain stationary. 
This does not vanish at the outer event horizon; in fact, at r = r + (where !:l. = 0), 
we have 
(6.84) 
So the Killing vector is already spacelike at the outer horizon, except at the north 
and south poles (8 = 0, :rr) where it is null. The locus of points where KJJ. Kµ. = 0 
is of course the stationary limit surface, and is given by 
(6.85) 
while the outer event horizon is given by 
(6.86) 
There is thus a region between these two surfaces, known as the ergosphere. 
Inside the ergosphere, you must move in the direction of the rotation of the black 
hole (the</> direction); however, you can still move toward or away from the event 
horizon (and have no trouble exiting the ergosphere). The ergosphere is evidently 
a place where interesting things can happen even before you cross the horizon; 
more details on this later. 
Before rushing to draw conformal diagrams, we need to understand the nature 
of the true curvature singularity; this does not occur at r = 0 in this spacetime, 
but rather at p = 0 (where the curvature invariant Rpaµ.vRpaµ.v diverges). Since 
p 2 = r 2 + a2 cos2 () is the sum of two manifestly nonnegative quantities, it can 

6.6 Rotating (Kerr) Black Holes 
265 
only vanish when both quantities are zero, or 
r =0, 
(6.87) 
This seems like a funny result, but remember that r = 0 is not a point in space, 
but a disk; the set of points r = 0, () = 7r /2 is actually the ring at the edge of this 
disk. The rotation has "softened" the Schwarzschild singularity, spreading it out 
over a ring. 
What happens if you go inside the ring? A careful analytic continuation (which 
we will not perfonn) would reveal that you exit to another asymptotically flat 
spacetime, but not an identical copy of the one you came from. The new spacetime 
is described by the Kerr metric with r < 0. As a result, l!:. never vanishes and 
there are no horizons. The confonnal diagram, Figure 6.8, is much like that for 
Reissner-Nordstrom, except now you can pass through the singularity. Because 
the Kerr metric is not spherically symmetric, the confonnal diagram is not quite 
timelike trajectories 
,g,- (r = -oo) 
FIGURE 6.8 Confonnal diagram for the Kerr solution with G2 M2 > a2. As with the 
analogous charged solution, there are an infinite number of copies of the region outside the 
black hole. 

266 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
as faithful as in the previous cases; a single point on the diagram represents fixed 
values oft and r, and will have a different geometry for different values of(). 
Not only do we have the usual strangeness of these distinct asymptotically 
flat regions connected to ours through the black hole, but the region near the 
ring singularity has additional pathologies: closed timelike curves. If you consider 
trajectories that wind around in </> while keeping () and t constant and r a small 
negative value, the line element along such a path is 
( 
2GM) 
ds2 ~ a 2 1 + -r-
d</>2, 
(6.88) 
which is negative for small negative r. Since these paths are closed, they are ob-
viously CTCs. You can therefore meet yourself in the past, with all that entails. 
Of course, everything we say about the analytic extension of Kerr is subject to 
the same caveats we mentioned for Schwarzschild and Reissner-Nordstrom; it is 
unlikely that realistic gravitational collapse leads to these bizarre spacetimes. It 
is nevertheless always useful to have exact solutions. Furthennore, for the Kerr 
metric strange things are happening even if we stay outside the event horizon, to 
which we now tum. 
We begin by considering more carefully the angular velocity of the hole. Ob-
viously the conventional definition of angular velocity will have to be modified 
somewhat before we can apply it to something as abstract as the metric of space-
time. Let us consider the fate of a photon that is emitted in the</> direction at some 
radius r in the equatorial plane (() = rr /2) of a Kerr black hole. The instant it is 
emitted its momentum has no components in the r or () direction, and therefore 
the condition that the trajectory be null is 
ds 2 = 0 = gudt2 + g1q,(dtd</> + d</>dt) + gq,q,d</>2. 
(6.89) 
This can be immediately solved to obtain 
(6.90) 
If we evaluate this quantity on the stationary limit surface of the Kerr metric, we 
have gtt = 0, and the two solutions are 
d</> 
-=0, 
dt 
d</> 
a 
dt = 2G2M2 +a2· 
(6.91) 
The nonzero solution has the same sign as a; we interpret this as the photon mov-
ing around the hole in the same direction as the hole's rotation. The zero solu-
tion means that the photon directed against the hole's rotation doesn't move at 
all in this coordinate system. Note that we haven't given a full solution to the 
photon's trajectory, only shown that its instantaneous velocity is zero. This is an 
example of a phenomenon known as the "dragging of inertial frames"; it is ex-

6.7 
The Penrose Process and Black-Hole Thermodynamics 
267 
plored more in one of the exercises to Chapter 7. Massive particles, which must 
move more slowly than photons, are necessarily dragged along with the hole's 
rotation once they are inside the stationary limit surface. This dragging continues 
as we approach the outer event horizon at r +; we can define the angular velocity 
of the event horizon itself, QH, to be the minimum angular velocity of a particle 
at the horizon. Directly from (6.90) we find that 
( d</>) 
a 
QH = -d 
(r+) = 2 
2. 
t 
_ 
r+ +a 
(6.92) 
6.7 • THE PENROSE PROCESS AND BLACK-HOLE THERMODYNAMICS 
Black hole thennodynamics is one of the most fascinating and mysterious subjects 
in general relativity. To get there, however, let us begin with something appar-
ently very straightforward: motion along geodesics in the Kerr metric. We know 
that such a discussion will be simplified by considering the conserved quantities 
associated with the Killing vectors K = a, and R = aq,. For the purposes at hand 
we can restrict our attention to massive particles, for which we can work with the 
four-momentum 
dxJJ. 
pµ. = m-, 
dr 
(6.93) 
where m is the rest mass of the particle. Then we can take as our two conserved 
quantities the actual energy and angular momentum of the particle, 
E=-K p/J.=m 1--- -+ 
sin()-
( 
2GMr) dt 
2mGMar 
2 
d</> 
µ. 
p2 
dr 
p2 
dr 
(6.94) 
and 
_ 
µ._ 
2mGMar. 2 () dt 
m(r2 +a2)2 -mtl.a2 sin2e. 2()d</> 
L - Rµ.p - -
2 
sm 
d + 
2 
sm 
d . 
p 
r 
p 
r 
(6.95) 
These differ from the definitions for the conserved quantities used in the last chap-
ter, where E and L were taken to be the energy and angular momentum per unit 
mass. They are conserved either way, of course. 
The minus sign in the definition of E is there because at infinity both K µ. and 
pJJ. are timelike, so their inner product is negative, but we want the energy to be 
positive. Inside the ergosphere, however, K µ. becomes spacelike; we can therefore 
imagine particles for which 
(6.96) 

268 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
The extent to which this bothers us is ameliorated somewhat by the realization 
that all particles must have positive energies if they are outside the stationary 
limit surface; therefore a particle inside the ergosphere with negative energy must 
either remain in the ergosphere, or be accelerated until its energy is positive if it 
is to escape. 
Still, this realization leads to a way to extract energy from a rotating black 
hole; the method is known as the Penrose process. The idea is simple; starting 
from outside the ergosphere, you arm yourself with a large rock and leap toward 
the black hole. If we can the four-momentum of the (you + rock) system p<O>µ., 
then the energy £<0> = -K µ.P(O)µ. is certainly positive, and conserved as you 
move along your geodesic. Once you enter the ergosphere, you hurl the rock with 
an your might, in a very specific way. If we can your momentum pO>µ. and that of 
the rock p<2>µ., then at the instant you throw it we have conservation of momentum 
just as in special relativity: 
(6.97) 
Contracting with the Killing vector K µ. gives 
(6.98) 
But, if we imagine that you are arbitrarily strong (and accurate), you can arrange 
your throw such that £<2> < 0, as per (6.96). Furthennore, Penrose was able 
to show that you can arrange the initial trajectory and the throw as shown in 
Figure 6.9, such that afterward you fonow a geodesic trajectory back outside the 
stationary limit surface into the external universe. Since your energy is conserved 
(top view) 
FIGURE 6.9 The Penrose process (top view). An object falls toward a Kerr black hole 
and splits in two while in the ergosphere (within the stationary limit surface, but outside the 
outer event horizon). One piece falls into the horizon with a negative energy E<2>, while 
the other escapes to infinity with a larger energy than that of the original infalling object. 

6.7 
The Penrose Process and Black-Hole Thermodynamics 
269 
along the way, at the end we will have 
£(1) > £(0). 
(6.99) 
Thus, you have emerged with more energy than you entered with. 
There is no such thing as a free lunch; the energy you gained came from some-
where, and that somewhere is the black hole. In fact, the Penrose process extracts 
energy from the rotating black hole by decreasing its angular momentum; you 
have to throw the rock against the hole's rotation to get the trick to work. To see 
this more precisely. recall that we claimed earlier in this chapter that any event 
horizon in a stationary spacetime would be a Killing horizon for some Killing 
vector. For Kerr this is a linear combination of the time-translation and rotational 
Killing vectors, 
(6.100) 
where QH is precisely the angular velocity of the horizon as defined in (6.92). 
Using K = 81 and R = 8q,, it is straightforward to verify that xµ. becomes null 
at the outer event horizon. The statement that the particle with momentum p<2>JJ. 
crosses the event horizon "moving forward in time" is simply 
(6.101) 
Plugging in the definitions of E and L, we see that this condition is equivalent to 
£(2) 
i<2> < -QH. 
(6.102) 
Since we have arranged £<2> to be negative, and QH positive. we see that the 
particle must have a negative angular momentum-it is moving against the hole's 
rotation. Once you have escaped the ergosphere and the rock has fallen inside the 
event horizon, the mass and angular momentum of the hole are what they used to 
be plus the negative contributions of the rock: 
~M = £<2> 
(6.103) 
where J =Ma is the angular momentum of the black hole. Then (6.102) becomes 
a limit on how much you can decrease the angular momentum: 
~M 
~J < QH. 
(6.104) 
If we exactly reach this limit, as the rock we throw in becomes more and more 
null, we have the "ideal" process, in which ~J = ~M / QH. 
We will now use these ideas to verify that, although you can use the Penrose 
process to extract energy from the black hole (thereby decreasing M). you cannot 

270 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
violate the area theorem: The area of the event horizon is nondecreasing. Although 
the mass decreases. the angular momentum must also decrease, in a combination 
which only allows the area to increase. To see this. let's calculate the area of the 
outer event horizon, which is located at 
(6.105) 
The induced metric YiJ on the horizon (where i and j run over {8, </>}) can be 
found straightforwardly by setting r = r + (so l!:. = 0), dt = 0 and dr = 0 in 
(6.70): 
. 
. 
2 
Y;1dx'dx 1 = ds (dt = 0, dr = 0, r = r +) 
= (r 2 + a2 cos2 8)d82 + 
+ 
d</>2. (6.106) 
[ 
(r 2 + a 2)2 sin2 e] 
+ 
ri + a2 cos2 e 
The horizon area is then the integral of the induced volume element. 
A = J JiYT d8d</>. 
(6.107) 
The detenninant is 
(6.108) 
so the horizon area is simply 
A = 4:rr(ri + a 2). 
(6.109) 
To show that the area doesn't decrease, it is convenient to work instead in tenns 
of the irreducible mass of the black hole, defined by 
2 
A 
Mirr= 16:rrG2 
= _l_ (r2 + a2) 
4G2 + 
= ~ ( M 2 + J 
M4 - (Ma/G) 2) 
= ~ ( M2 + J 
M4 - (JI G)2) . 
(6.110) 
We can differentiate to obtain, after a bit of work, how Mirr is affected by changes 
in the mass or angular momentum. 
(6.111) 

6.7 
The Penrose Process and Black-Hole Thermodynamics 
271 
Then our limit (6.104) becomes 
(6.112) 
The irreducible mass can never be reduced; hence the name. It follows that the 
maximum amount of energy we can extract from a black hole before we slow its 
rotation to zero is 
1 ( 
) 1/2 
M - Mirr = M - ,./2. M2 + J 
M 4 -
( J / G)2 
(6.113) 
The result of this complete extraction is a Schwarzschild black hole of mass Mirr. 
It turns out that the best we can do is to start with an extreme Kerr black hole; 
then we can get out approximately 29% of its total energy. 
The irreducibility of Mirr leads immediately to the fact that the area A can 
never decrease. From (6.110) and (6.111) we have 
which can be recast as 
K 
f>M = -8 -f>A + QHfJJ, 
rrG 
where we have introduced 
JG2M2-a2 
K - ------;::=;::=:::;==:;;:-
- 2GM(GM + JG2M2 -a2). 
(6.114) 
(6.115) 
(6.116) 
The quantity K is of course just the surface gravity of the Kerr solution, as you 
could verify by plugging (6.100) into (6.9). 
Equations like (6.115) first started people thinking about a correspondence be-
tween black holes and thermodynamics. Consider the first law of thermodynam-
ics, 
dE=TdS-pdV, 
(6.117) 
where T is the temperature, S is the entropy, p is the pressure, and V is the vol-
wne, so the pd V tenn represents work we do to the system. It is natural to think 
of the tenn QHf>J in (6.115) as work that we do on the black hole by throwing 
rocks into it. Then the correspondence begins to take shape if we think of iden-
tifying the thennodynamic quantities energy, entropy, and temperature with the 
black-hole mass, area, and surface gravity: 
E~M 
S ~ A/4G 
T ~ K/2rr. 
(6.118) 

272 
Chapter 6 More General Black Holes 
(Remember we are using units in which h = c = k = 1.) In the context of classi-
cal general relativity the analogy is essentially perfect, with each law of thenno-
dynamics corresponding to a law of black hole mechanics. A system in thermal 
equilibrium will have settled to a stationary state, corresponding to a stationary 
black hole. The zeroth law of thennodynamics states that in thennal equilibrium 
the temperature is constant throughout the system; the analogous statement for 
black holes is that stationary black holes have constant surface gravity on the en-
tire horizon. This will be true, at least under the same reasonable assumptions 
under which the event horizon is a Killing horizon. As we have seen, the first law 
(6.117) is equivalent to (6.115). The second law, that entropy never decreases, 
is simply the statement that the area of the horizon never decreases. Finally, the 
usual statement of the third law is that it is impossible to achieve T = 0 in any 
physical process, or that the entropy must go to zero as the temperature goes to 
zero. For black holes this doesn't quite work; it turns out that K = 0 corresponds 
to extremal black holes, which don't necessarily have a vanishing area. But the 
thermodynamic third law doesn't really work either, in the sense that there are 
ordinary physical systems that violate it; the third law applies to some situations 
but is not truly fundamental. 
We have cheated a little in proposing the correspondence (6.118)~ you will 
notice that by equating TdS with KdA/8rrG we do not know how to separately 
nonnalize S /A or T / K, only their combination. As we will discuss in Chapter 9, 
however, Hawking showed that quantum fields in a black-hole background allow 
the hole to radiate at a temperature T = K /2rr. Once this is known, we can 
interpret A/4G as an actual entropy of the black hole. Bekenstein has proposed 
a generalized second law, that the combined entropy of matter and black holes 
never decreases: 
8 ( s + 4~) ?: o. 
(6.119) 
The generalized second law can actually be proven under a variety of assumptions. 
Usually, however, we like to associate the entropy of a system with the logarithm 
of the number of accessible quantum states. There is therefore some tension be-
tween this concept and the no-hair theorem, which indicates that there are very 
few possible states for a black hole of fixed charge, mass, and spin (only one, in 
fact). It seems likely that this behavior is an indication of a profound feature of 
the interaction between quantum mechanics and gravitation. 
6.8 • EXERCISES 
1. Show that the coupled Einstein-Maxwell equations can be simultaneously solved by the 
metric (6.62) and the electrostatic potential (6.67) if H (x) obeys Laplace's equation, 
v2 H = 0. 
(6.120) 
2. Consider the orbits of massless pruticles, with affine parameter A., in the equatorial plane 
of a Kerr black hole. 

6.8 
Exercises 
273 
(a) Show that 
(
dr)2 
I:2 
dA. 
= P4 (E - LW+(r))(E - LW-(r)), 
(6.121) 
where I:2 = (r2 + a2)2 - a2 ~(r) sin2 (), E and L are the conserved energy and 
angular momentum, and you have to find expressions for W±(r). 
(b) Using this result, and assuming that I:2 > 0 everywhere, show that the orbit of a 
photon in the equatorial plane cannot have a turning point inside the outer event 
horizon'+· This means that ingoing light rays cannot escape once they cross r+. 
so it really is an event horizon. 
3. In the presence of an electromagnetic field, a particle of charge e and mass m obeys 
d2xµ. 
dxP dxa 
e 
dxv 
--+rµ.a __ = -Fµ.v-. 
(6.122) 
dr2 
P dr dr 
m 
dr 
Imagine that such a particle is moving in the field of a Reissner-Nordstrom black hole 
with charge Q and mass M. 
(a) Show that the energy 
E = m (1 - 2GM + GQ2) :!!_ + eQ 
(6.123) 
r 
,2 
dr 
r 
is conserved. 
(b) Will a Penrose-type process work for a charged black hole? What is the change in 
the black hole mass, f>M, for the maximum physical process? 
4. Consider de Sitter space in static coordinates: 
ds2 = - (1 - ~,2) d12 + 
dr2 
+ ,2dn2. 
3 
l - -4r2 
This space has a Killing vector 81 that is timelike near r = 0 and null on a Killing hori-
zon. Locate the radial position of the Killing horizon, 'K. What is the surface gravity, K, 
of the horizon? Consider the Euclidean signature version of de Sitter space obtained by 
making the replacement t ~ i r. Show that a coordinate transfonnation can be made to 
make the Euclidean menic regular at the horizon, so long as r is made periodic. 
S. What is the magnetic field seen by an observer orbiting a Riessner-Nordstrom black 
hole of elecnic charge Q and mass M in a circular orbit with circumference 27r R? 
6. Consider a Kerr black hole with an accretion disk of negligible mass in the equatorial 
plane. Assume that particles in the disk follow geodesics (that is, ignore any pressure 
support). Now suppose the disk contains some iron atoms that are being excited by a 
source of radiation. When the iron atoms de-excite they emit radiation with a known 
frequency vo. as measured in their rest frame. Suppose we detect this radiation far from 
the black hole (we also lie in the equatorial plane). What is the observed frequency of 
photons emitted from either edge of the disk, and from the center of the disk? Consider 
cases where the disk and the black hole are rotating in the same and opposite directions. 
Can we use these measurements to determine the mass and angular momentum of the 
black hole? 

CHAPTER 
7 
Perturbation Theory and 
Gravitational Radiation 
7.1 • LINEARIZED GRAVITY AND GAUGE TRANSFORMATIONS 
274 
When we first derived Einstein's equation, we checked that we were on the right 
track by considering the Newtonian limit. We took this to mean not only that 
the gravitational field was weak, but also that it was static (no time derivatives), 
and that test particles were moving slowly. The weak-field limit described in this 
chapter is less restrictive, assuming that the field is still weak but it can vary with 
time, and without any restrictions on the motion of test particles. This will allow 
us to discuss phenomena that are absent or ambiguous in the Newtonian theory, 
such as gravitational radiation (where the field varies with time) and the deflection 
of light (which involves fast-moving particles). 
The weakness of the gravitational field is once again expressed as our ability 
to decompose the metric into the flat Minkowski metric plus a small perturbation, 
gµ.v = 1Jµ.v + hµ.v. 
lhµ.v I « l. 
(7.1) 
We will restrict ourselves to coordinates in which 1Jµ.v takes its canonical fonn, 
1Jµ.v = diag(-1, + 1, + 1, + 1). The assumption that hµ.v is small allows us to 
ignore anything that is higher than first order in this quantity, from which we 
immediately obtain 
(7.2) 
where hµ.v = 17JJ.P17vu hpu· As before, we can raise and lower indices using 11µ.v 
and 11µ.v. since the corrections would be of higher order in the perturbation. In 
fact, we can think of the linearized version of general relativity (where effects of 
higher than first order in hµ.v are neglected) as describing a theory of a symmet-
ric tensor field hµ.v propagating on a flat background spacetime. This theory is 
Lorentz invariant in the sense of special relativity; under a Lorentz transfonnation 
xJJ.' = Aµ.' µ.Xµ., the flat metric 1Jµ.v is invariant, while the perturbation transforms 
as 
µ.' 
v' 
hµ.'v' = A µ.A vhµ.v· 
(7.3) 

7.1 
Linearized Gravity and Gauge Transformations 
275 
Note that we could have considered small perturbations about some other back-
ground spacetime besides Minkowski space. In that case the metric would have 
been written gµ.v = gi0J + hµ.v. and we would have derived a theory of a symmet-
ric tensor propagating on the curved space with metric gi0J. Such an approach is 
necessary, for example, in cosmology. 
We want to find the equations of motion obeyed by the perturbations hµ.v• 
which come by examining Einstein's equation to first order. We begin with the 
Christoffel symbols, which are given by 
f~v = !gP\aµ.gv>., +avg>..µ. - a>.,gµ.v) 
= !11p>..(aµ.hv>.. + avh>..µ. - a>..hµ.v). 
(7.4) 
Since the connection coefficients are first-order quantities, the only contribution 
to the Riemann tensor will come from the derivatives of the f's, not the r 2 tenns. 
Lowering an index for convenience, we obtain 
Rµ.vpa = 17µ.>..ap f~a -
17µ.>..aa f~ 
= !<apavhµ.a + aa aµ.hvp - aa avhµ.p - apaµ.hva ). 
(7.5) 
The Ricci tensor comes from contracting over µ and p, giving 
Rµ.v = !<aa avha µ. + aa aµ.ha v - aµ.avh - Dhµ.v). 
(7.6) 
which is manifestly symmetric inµ and v. In this expression we have defined the 
trace of the perturbation ash = 17µ.v hµ.v = hµ. µ..and the d' Alembertian is simply 
the one from flat space, 0 = -al + a; + a; + a;. Contracting again to obtain the 
Ricci scalar yields 
(7.7) 
Putting it all together we obtain the Einstein tensor: 
Gµ.v = Rµ.v - !17µ.vR 
= !<aa avha µ. + aa aµ.ha v - aµ.avh - Dhµ.v -11µ.vapa>..hp>.. + 17µ.vDh). 
(7.8) 
Consistent with our interpretation of the linearized theory as one describing a 
symmetric tensor on a flat background, the linearized Einstein tensor (7.8) can be 
derived by varying the following Lagrangian with respect to hµ.v: 
c = H 
(aµ.hµ.vHavh) - <aµ.hpa )(aphµ. a)+ !11µ.v<aµ.hpa Havhpa) 
- !11µ.v(aµ.h)(avh)]. 
(7.9) 
You are asked to verify the appropriateness of the Lagrangian in the exercises. 

276 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
The linearized field equation is of course Gµ.v = 8rrGTµ.v. where Gµ.v is given 
by (7.8) and Tµ.v is the energy-momentum tensor, calculated to zeroth order in 
hµ.v· We do not include higher-order corrections to the energy-momentum ten-
sor because the amount of energy and momentum must itself be small for the 
weak-field limit to apply. In other words, the lowest nonvanishing order in Tµ.v 
is automatically of the same order of magnitude as the perturbation. Notice that 
the conservation law to lowest order is simply aµ. T µ.v = 0. We will often be con-
cerned with the vacuum equation, which as usual is just Rµ.v = 0, where Rµ.v is 
given by (7 .6). 
With the linearized field equation in hand, we are almost prepared to set about 
solving it. First, however, we should deal with the thorny issue of gauge invari-
ance. This issue arises because the demand that gµ.v = 1]µ.v + hµ.v does not com-
pletely specify the coordinate system on spacetime; there may be other coordinate 
systems in which the metric can still be written as the Minkowski metric plus a 
small perturbation, but the perturbation will be different. Thus, the decomposition 
of the metric into a flat background plus a perturbation is not unique. To examine 
this issue, we will draw upon ideas about diffeomorphisms discussed in Appen-
dices A and B; readers who have not yet read those sections can skip to equation 
(7.14) and the two paragraphs following, which contain the essential ideas. 
Let's think about gauge invariance from a highbrow point of view. The no-
tion that the linearized theory can be thought of as one governing the behavior 
of tensor fields on a flat background can be formalized in terms of a background 
spacetime Mth a physical spacetime MP• and a diffeomorphism </> : Mb ~ Mp· 
As manifolds Mb and MP are the same (since they are diffeomorphic), but we 
imagine that they possess some different tensor fields; on Mb we have defined 
the flat Minkowski metric 1Jµ.v. while on MP we have some metric ga/3 that obeys 
Einstein's equation. (We imagine that Mb is equipped with coordinates xJJ. and 
MP is equipped with coordinates ya, although these will not play a prominent 
role.) The cliffeomorphism </>allows us to move tensors back and forth between 
the background and physical spacetimes, as in Figure 7 .1. Since we would like to 
construct our linearized theory as one taking place on the flat background space-
time, we are interested in the pullback (</>* g) µ.v of the physical metric. We can 
define the perturbation as the difference between the pulled-back physical metric 
~·y. •
..... ~r:·~.it· ... ~ 
• 
.. 
FIGURE 7.1 
A diffeomorphism relating the background spacetime Mb (with Hat metric 
11µ.v) to the physical spacetime Mp· 

7.1 
Linearized Gravity and Gauge Transformations 
;<,:·cl~.,. "' '·-·o·"· 
M,, 
t'l'E~ 
· .. \~"-t:~::~.;" 
"'T~· 
.... ,.r:~· . 
..,. .. l' 
It~ 
(<f> _'o,lfle)* 
277 
FIGURE 7.2 
A one-parameter family of diffeomorphisms 1/te, generated by the vector 
field~µ. on the background spacetime Mb. 
and the flat one: 
hµ.v = (</>*g)µ.v -
1]µ.v· 
(7.10) 
From this definition, there is no reason for the components of hµ.v to be small; 
however, if the gravitational fields on Mp are weak, then for some diff eomor-
phisms </>we will have lhµ.vl « 1. We therefore limit our attention only to those 
diffeomorphisms for which this is true. Then the fact that ga/3 obeys Einstein's 
equation on the physical spacetime means that hµ.v will obey the linearized equa-
tion on the background spacetime (since</>, as a diffeomorphism, can be used to 
pull back Einstein's equation themselves). 
In this language, the issue of gauge invariance is simply that there are a large 
number of pennissible diffeomorphisms between Mb and MP (where "pennis-
sible" means that the perturbation is small). Consider a vector field ~JJ.(x) on the 
background spacetime. This vector field generates a one-parameter family of dif-
feomorphisms l/Je : Mb ~ Mb, as shown in Figure 7.2. For E sufficiently small, 
if </> is a diff eomorphism for which the perturbation defined by (7 .10) is small, 
then so will (</> o l/Je) be, although the perturbation will have a different value. 
Specifically, we can define a family of perturbations parameterized by E: 
h~~ = [(</> O l/le)*g]µ.v -
1]µ.v 
= £1/l;(<J>*g))µ.v - 1]µ.v· 
(7.11) 
The second equality is based on the fact that the pullback under a composition 
is given by the composition of the pullbacks in the opposite order, which follows 
from the fact that the pullback itself moves things in the opposite direction from 
the original map. Plugging in the relation (7 .10), we find 
h~~ = lfJ;(h + 1])µ.v -
1]µ.v 
= lfJ;(hµ.v) + 1/1;(1]µ.v) -
1]µ.v, 
(7.12) 
since the pullback of the sum of two tensors is the sum of the pullbacks. Now we 
use our assumption that E is small; in this case lfJ;(hµ.v) will be equal to hµ.v to 
lowest order, while the other two terms give us a Lie derivative: 

278 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
h~! = 1/t;(hµ.v) + f [ 1/t;(qµ.~ - qµ.v] 
= hµ.v + € C,~1]µ.v· 
(7.13) 
In Appendix B we show that the Lie derivative of the metric along a vector field 
~µ. is C,~gµ.v = 2V(µ.~v>- In the current context the background metric is flat, and 
covariant derivatives become partial derivatives; we therefore have 
(7.14) 
This fonnula represents the change of the metric perturbation under an infinites-
imal diffeomorphism along the vector field€~µ.: we will call this a gauge trans-
formation in linearized theory. 
The diffeomorphisms l/Je provide a different representation of the same phys-
ical situation, while maintaining our requirement that the perturbation be small. 
Therefore, the result (7 .12) tells us what kind of metric perturbations denote phys-
ically equivalent spacetimes-those related to each other by 2E a(µ.~v)t for some 
vector~µ.. The invariance of our theory under such transformations is analogous 
to traditional gauge invariance of electromagnetism under Aµ. ~ Aµ. + aµ.A. 
(The analogy is different from another analogy we draw with electromagnetism 
in Appendix J, relating local Lorentz transfonnations in the orthononnal-frame 
fonnalism to changes of basis in an internal vector bundle.) In electromagnetism 
the invariance comes about because the field strength Fµ.v = aµ. Av - av Aµ. is left 
unchanged by gauge transfonnations; similarly, we find that the transfonnation 
(7.14) changes the linearized Riemann tensor by 
~Rµ.vpa = 1<apavaµ.~a + apavaa~µ. + aa aµ.av~p + aa aµ.ap~v 
-
aaavaµ.~p -
aaavap~µ. -
apaµ.av~a -
apaµ.aa~v) 
=0. 
(7.15) 
Our abstract derivation of the appropriate gauge transformation for the metric per-
turbation is verified by the fact that it leaves the curvature (and hence the physical 
spacetime) unchanged. 
Gauge invariance can also be understood from the slightly more lowbrow 
but considerably more direct route of infinitesimal coordinate transfonnations. 
Our diff eomorphism l/le can be thought of as changing coordinates from xµ. to 
xJJ. -
€~µ.. (The minus sign, which is unconventional, comes from the fact that 
the "new" metric is pulled back from a small distance forward along the integral 
curves, which is equivalent to replacing the coordinates by those a small distance 
backward along the curves.) Following through the usual rules for transfonn-
ing tensors under coordinate transfonnations, you can derive precisely (7 .14 )-
although you have to cheat somewhat by equating components of tensors in two 
different coordinate systems. 

7 .2 
Degrees of Freedom 
279 
7.2 • DEGREES OF FREEDOM 
With the expression (7.8) for the linearized Einstein tensor, and the expression 
(7.14) for the effect of gauge transfonnations, we could immediately set about 
choosing a gauge and solving Einstein's equation. However, we can accumu-
late some additional physical insight by first choosing a fixed inertial coordinate 
system in the Minkowski background spacetime, and decomposing the compo-
nents of the metric perturbation according to their transfonnation properties un-
der spatial rotations. You might worry that such a decomposition is contrary to the 
coordinate-independent spirit of general relativity, but it is really no different than 
decomposing the electromagnetic field strength tensor into electric and magnetic 
fields. Even though both E and Bare components of a (0, 2) tensor, it is neverthe-
less sometimes convenient to assume the role of some fixed observer and think of 
them as three-vectors. 1 
The metric perturbation is a (0, 2) tensor, but symmetric rather than antisym-
metric. Under spatial rotations, the 00 component is a scalar, the Oi components 
(equal to the i 0 components) form a three-vector, and the i j components form 
a two-index symmetric spatial tensor. This spatial tensor can be further decom-
posed into a trace and a trace-free part. (In group theory language, we are looking 
for "irreducible representations" of the rotation group. In other words, we decom-
pose the tensor into individual pieces, which transfonn only into themselves under 
spatial rotations.) We therefore write hµ.v as 
hoo = -2<1> 
ho;= Wj 
(7.16) 
where \II encodes the trace of hij, and Sij is traceless: 
1 .. 
"' = - 6f>'l hij 
Sij = ~ ( hij -
!f>k/ hk/tJij) • 
(7.17) 
The entire metric is thus written as 
(7.18) 
1 The discussion here follows that in E. Benschinger, "Cosmological Dynamics," a talk given at Sum-
mer School on Cosmology and Large Scale Structure (Session 60), Les Houches, France, 1-28 Aug 
1993; http: I I arXi v. org/ abs/ astro-ph/9503125. Benschinger focuses on cosmological per-
turbation theory, in which spacelike hypersurfaces are expanding with time, but it is simple enough to 
specialize to the case of a nonexpanding universe. 

280 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
We have not chosen a gauge or solved any equations, just defined some conve-
nient notation. The traceless tensor s;1 is known as the strain, and will tum out to 
contain gravitational radiation. Sometimes the decomposition of the spatial com-
ponents into trace and trace-free parts is not helpful, and we can just stick with 
hiJ; we will use whichever notation is appropriate in individual cases. Note that, 
just as in Chapter 1, the spatial metric is now simply ~ii, and we can freely raise 
and lower spatial indices without changing the components. 
To get a feeling for the physical interpretation of the different fields in the 
metric perturbation, we consider the motion of test particles as described by the 
geodesic equation. The Cluistoffel symbols for (7 .18) are 
r8o = ao<I> 
rbo = a;<I> + aow; 
rJo = a1<1> 
j 
1 
r 10 = ali w;1 + 2 aohiJ 
rJk = -a<JWk> + !aohJk 
(7.19) 
In these expressions we have stuck with hiJ rather than s;1 and \II, since they 
enter only in the combination hiJ = 2siJ -
2'11~iJ. The distinction will become 
important once we start taking traces to get to the Ricci tensor and Einstein's 
equation. Since we have fixed an inertial frame, it is convenient to express the 
four-momentum p/J. = dxJJ. /d'A (where A = r/m if the particle is massive) in 
tenns of the energy E and three-velocity vi= dxi /dt, as 
(7.20) 
Then we can take the geodesic equation 
(7.21) 
move the second tenn to the right-hand side so that it takes on the appearance of 
a force tenn, and divide both sides by E to obtain 
(7.22) 
The µ = 0 component describes the evolution of the energy, 
(7.23) 

7 .2 
Degrees of Freedom 
281 
You might think that the energy should be conserved, but E = po = my only 
includes the "inertial" energy of the particle-in the slowly-moving limit, the rest 
energy and the kinetic energy-and not the energy from interactions with the 
gravitational field. 
The spatial components µ = i of the geodesic equation become 
dpi 
[ 
. 
( 
1 
) 
] 
dt = -E ();<I>+ ()ow;+ 2(q;Wj] + ()ohij)V1 + 
()(jhk)i - 2
a;hjk vivk . 
(7.24) 
To interpret this physically, it is convenient to define the "gravito-electric" and 
"gravito-magnetic" three-vector fields, 
G; = -a;<I> - ()ow; 
Hi = (V x w); = EiJkaJwk. 
(7.25) 
which bear an obvious resemblance to the definitions of the ordinary electric and 
magnetic field in tenns of a scalar and vector potential. Then (7.24) becomes 
dpi 
[ . 
. 
. 
( 
1 
) 
. k] 
dt = E G' + (v x H)' - 2(()ohiJ)v1 -
a(Jhk>i - 2a;hJk vlv 
. 
(7.26) 
The first two tenns on the right-hand side describe how the test particle, moving 
along a geodesic, responds to the scalar and vector perturbations <I> and w; in a 
way reminiscent of the Lorentz force law in electromagnetism. We also find cou-
plings to the spatial perturbations hiJ, of linear and quadratic order in the three-
velocity. The relative importance of the different perturbations will of course de-
pend on the physical situation under consideration, as we will soon demonstrate. 
In addition to the motion of test particles, we should examine the field equa-
tions for the metric perturbations, which are of course the linearized Einstein 
equations. The Riemann tensor in our variables is 
Ro101 = a1a,<1> + aoa(Jwo -
!aoaoh11 
Ro1k1 = a1 alkw11 - aoa[kh1v 
R;1k1 = aAkh11; - a;a[kh1v. 
(7.27) 
with other components related by symmetries. We contract using 1Jµ.v to obtain 
the Ricci tensor, 
Roo = V2
<1> + aoakwk + 3a5"1 
Ro1 = -!V2w1+!aJakwk+2()o()J'll +()oaks/ 
Rij = -a;a1(<I> -
\II) - aoa(iwj) + O'll~iJ - DsiJ + Wka(iSJ/. 
(7.28) 

282 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
where V2 = ~il a; al is the three-dimensional flat Laplacian. Since the Ricci tensor 
involves contractions, the trace-free and trace parts of the spatial perturbations 
now enter in different ways. Finally, we can calculate the Einstein tensor, 
Goo = 2V2'11 + aka1i1 
Go1 = -!v2w1 + !a1akwk +1aoa1"1 +aoaks/ 
Gij = (~ijv
2 - a;a1)(4> - \II) +~ijaoakwk -
aoa(jWj) 
+ wii a6 \II - DsiJ + iak a(i s n k -
~ii ak a1 sk1. 
(7.29) 
Using this expression in Einstein's equation Gµ.v = 8rrGTµ.v reveals that only 
a small fraction of the metric components are true degrees of freedom of the 
gravitational field; the rest obey constraints that determine them in tenns of the 
other fields. To see this, start with Goo = 8rrGToo. which we write using (7.29) 
as 
(7.30) 
This is an equation for \II with no time derivatives; if we know what Too and s;1 are 
doing at any time, we can determine what \II must be (up to boundary conditions 
at spatial infinity). Thus, \II is not by itself a propagating degree of freedom; it is 
determined by the energy-momentum tensor and the gravitational strain s;1. Next 
tum to the 0 j equation, which we write as 
(7.31) 
This is an equation for wi with no time derivatives; once again, if we know the 
energy-momentum tensor and the strain (from which we can find \II), the vector 
wi will be detennined. Finally, the i j equation is 
(~iJ v2 -
a; a1 )4> = SrrGTiJ + (~iJ v2 -
a; a1 -
2~iJ a6)"1 
k 
k 
'/ 
-
~ijaoakw + aoa(iWj) + Dsij - 2aka(iSj) -
~ijaka1s 1
. 
(7.32) 
Once again, we see that there are no time derivatives acting on 4>, which is there-
fore determined as a function of the other fields. 
Thus, the only propagating degrees of freedom in Einstein's equations are 
those in the strain tensor s;1; as we will see, these are used to describe gravita-
tional waves. The other components of hµ.v are determined in tenns of s;1 and 
the matter fields-they do not require separate initial data. In alternative theories, 
such as those discussed in Section 4.8 with either additional fields or higher-order 
tenns in the action, the other components of the metric may become dynamical 
variables. As we discuss briefly at the end of Section 7.4, propagating tensor fields 
give rise upon quantization to particles of different spins, depending on the behav-

7 .2 
Degrees of Freedom 
283 
ior of the field under spatial rotations. Thus, the scalars <I> and \II would be spin-0, 
the vector w; would be spin-I, and the tensor S;j is spin-2. Only the spin-2 piece 
is a true particle excitation in ordinary GR. 
In the previous section we showed how gauge transfonnations hµ.v ~ hµ.v + 
aµ.~v + av~µ. are generated by a vector field~µ.. Henceforth we set the parameter 
E of (7.14) equal to unity, and think of the vector field~µ. itself as being small. 
Under such a transformation, the different metric perturbation fields change by 
<I> ~ <I>+ ao~O 
. 
0 
w; ~ w; + ao~' - a;~ 
1 
. 
"' ~ "' -
3a;~' 
s;1 ~ s;1 +a(i~n- jak~k~;1 , 
(7.33) 
as you can easily check. Just as in electromagnetism and other gauge theories, 
different gauges can be appropriate to different circumstances; here we list some 
popular choices. 
Consider first the transverse gauge (a generalization of the confonnal New-
tonian or Poisson gauge sometimes used in cosmology.) The transverse gauge is 
closely related to the Coulomb gauge of electromagnetism, a; A; = 0. We begin 
by fixing the strain to be spatially transverse, 
(7.34) 
by choosing ~ i to satisfy 
(7.35) 
The value of ~o is still undetennined, so we can use this remaining freedom to 
render the vector perturbation transverse, 
(7.36) 
by choosing ~o to satisfy 
(7.37) 
The meaning of transverse becomes clear upon taking the Fourier transfonn, af-
ter which a vanishing divergence implies that a tensor is orthogonal to the wave 
vector. Neither (7.35) nor (7.37) completely fixes the value of~µ.; they are both 
second-order differential equations in spatial derivatives, which require boundary 
conditions to specify a solution. For our present purposes, it suffices that solutions 
will always exist. The conditions (7.34) and (7.36) together define the transverse 
gauge. In this gauge, Einstein's equation becomes 
Goo = 2V2'11 = 8:rrGToo. 
(7.38) 

284 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
(7.39) 
and 
(7.40) 
In the remainder of this chapter, we will use these equations to find weak-field 
solutions in different situations. 
Another popular gauge is known as the synchronous gauge. It is equivalent 
to the choice of Gaussian nonnal coordinates, discussed in Appendix D. It may 
be thought of as the gravitational analogue of the temporal gauge of electromag-
netism, A 0 = 0, since it kills off the nonspatial components of the perturbation. 
We begin by setting the scalar potential <I> to vanish, 
<I>= 0, 
(7.41) 
by choosing ~o to satisfy 
(7.42) 
This leaves us the ability to choose ~;. We can set the vector components to zero, 
(7.43) 
by choosing~; to satisfy 
(7.44) 
The metric in synchronous gauge therefore takes on the attractive fonn 
2 
2 
. 
. 
ds = -dt + (~iJ + hiJ )dx' c1x1. 
(7.45) 
This is just a matter of gauge choice, and is applicable to any spacetime slightly 
perturbed away from Minkowski. It is straightforward to write down Einstein's 
equation in synchronous gauge, but we won't bother as we won't actually be 
using it in the rest of this chapter. 
In addition to transverse and synchronous gauges, in calculating the pro-
duction of gravitational waves it is convenient to use yet a third choice, the 
Lorenz/hannonic gauge. As we will discuss below, it is equivalent to setting 
(7.46) 

7 .2 
Degrees of Freedom 
285 
where h = 11µ.v hµ.v· This gauge does not have any especially simple expression 
in tenns of our decomposed perturbation fields, but it does make the linearized 
Einstein equation take on a particularly simple fonn. 
Before moving on to applications of the weak-field limit, we conclude our 
discussion of degrees of freedom by drawing attention to the distinction between 
our algebraic decomposition of the metric perturbation components in (7 .16), and 
an additional decomposition that becomes possible if we consider tensor fields 
rather than tensors defined at a point. This additional decomposition helps to bring 
out the physical degrees of freedom more directly, and is crucial in cosmological 
perturbation theory. Its basis is the standard observation that a vector field can be 
decomposed into a transverse part w~ and a longitudinal part wi
1
: 
j 
j + 
j 
W = W.1 
Wll, 
(7.47) 
where a transverse vector is clivergenceless and a longitudinal vector is curl-free, 
(7.48) 
Notice that these are differential equations, so clearly they only make sense when 
applied to tensor fields. A trans verse vector can be represented as the curl of 
some other vector ~;, although the choice of~; is not unique unless we impose a 
subsidiary condition such as a;~; = 0. A longitudinal vector is the divergence of 
a scalar .A, 
(7.49) 
Just like our original decomposition of the metric perturbation into scalar, vector 
and tensor pieces, this decomposition of a vector field into parts depending on 
a scalar and a transverse vector is invariant under spatial rotations. The scalar .A 
clearly represents one degree of freedom; the vector~; looks like three degrees of 
freedom, but one of these is illusory due to the nonuniqueness of the choice of~; 
(which you will notice is equivalent to the freedom to make gauge transfonnations 
~; ~ 
~; + a;w). There are thus three degrees of freedom in total, as there should 
be to describe the original vector field wi. 
A similar procedure applies to the traceless symmetric tensor ii, which can 
be decomposed into a transverse parts~, a solenoidal parts~, and a longitudinal 
ij 
part Sii , 
. . 
iJ' 
i1' 
iJ' 
s'1 = s .l + ss + s
11 
• 
(7.50) 
The transverse part is divergenceless, while the divergence of the solenoidal part 
is a transverse (divergenceless) vector, and the divergence of the longitudinal part 
is a longitudinal (curl-free) vector: 

286 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
a;a1 s~ = o 
"kl 
. 
E1 aka;su' 1 = o. 
(7.51) 
This means that the longitudinal part can be derived from a scalar field(), and the 
solenoidal part can be derived from a transverse vector{;, 
where 
s11;1 = (a;a1 -
t~iJv
2 ) e 
ssiJ = a(i{J» 
(7.52) 
(7.53) 
Thus, the longitudinal part describes a single degree of freedom, while the 
solenoidal part describes two degrees of freedom. The transverse part cannot 
be further decomposed; it describes the remaining two degrees of freedom of 
the symmetric traceless 3 x 3 tensor s;1. Later in this chapter we will introduce 
the transverse-traceless gauge for describing gravitational waves propagating in 
vacuum; in this gauge, the only nonvanishing metric perturbation is the transverse 
tensor perturbations~. 
With this decomposition of tensor fields, we have succeeded in writing the 
original ten-component metric perturbation hµ.v in tenns of four scalars (<I>, \II, A, 
and (J) with one degree of freedom each, two transverse vectors (~; and{;) with 
two degrees of freedom each, and one transverse-traceless tensor (s~) with two 
degrees of freedom. People refer to this set of fields when they speak of "scalar," 
"vector," and "tensor" modes. We can then decompose the energy-momentum 
tensor in a similar way, write Einstein's equation in terms of these variables, and 
isolate the physical (gauge-invariant) degrees of freedom. We won't use this de-
composition in this book, but you should be aware of its existence when referring 
to the literature. 
7.3 • NEWTONIAN FIELDS AND PHOTON TRAJECTORIES 
We previously defined the "Newtonian limit" as describing weak fields for which 
sources were static and test particles were slowly moving. In this section we will 
extend this definition somewhat, still restricting ourselves to static sources but 
allowing the test particles to move at any velocity. There is clearly an important 
difference, as we previously only needed to consider effects of the goo compo-
nent of the ~·etric, but we will find that relativistic particles respond to spatial 
components of the metric as well. 
We can model our static gravitating sources by dust, a pe1fect fluid for which 
the pressure vanishes. (Most of the matter in the universe is well approximated by 
dust, including stars, planets, galaxies, and even dark matter.) We work in the rest 

7.3 
Newtonian Fields and Photon Trajectories 
287 
frame of the dust, where the energy-momentum tensor takes the fonn 
T,,,, = pU,,,U, = ( p 
O O J . 
(7.54) 
Since our background is flat Minkowski space, it is straightforward to accommo-
date moving sources by simply Lorentz-transfonning into their rest frame; what 
we are unable to deal with in this limit is multiple sources with large relative 
velocities. 
Tum to Einstein's equation in the transverse gauge, (7.38)-(7.40). For static 
sources we drop all time-derivative tenns, and simultaneously plug in the energy-
momentum tensor (7 .54 ), to obtain 
V2\ll = 4rrGp 
V2wj = 0 
(~ijV
2 - 8;8j)(4> -
\II) - V 2s;j = 0. 
(7.55) 
We will look for solutions that are both nonsingular and well-behaved at infinity; 
consequently, only those fields that are sourced by the right-hand side will be 
nonvanishing. For example, the second equation in (7 .55) immediately implies 
wi = 0. We next take the trace of the third equation (summing over ~ij): 
(7.56) 
This enforces equality of the two scalar potentials, 
4> = \II. 
(7.57) 
Recall that in our initial discussion of the Newtonian limit in Chapter 4, we argued 
that the 00 component 4> of the perturbation (which is responsible for the motion 
of nonrelativistic particles) obeyed the Poisson equation; from (7.55) it appears 
as if it is actually the scalar perturbation \II to the spatial components that obeys 
this equation. The implicit connection is provided by (7 .56), which sets the two 
potentials equal when the trace of Tij (the sum of the three principle pressures) 
vanishes. Finally we can plug 4> = \II into the last equation of (7 .55) to get 
V 2s;j = 0, 
(7.58) 
which implies Sij = 0 for a well-behaved solution. 
The perturbed metric for static Newtonian sources is therefore 
ds2 = -(1 + 24>)dt2 + (1 - 24>)(dx2 + dy 2 + dz2), 
(7.59) 

288 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
FIGURE 7.3 A deHected geodesic xµ.(A.), decomposed into a background geodesic 
x<O)µ. and a perturbation xO>µ.. The deHection angle a represents (minus) the amount by 
which the wave vector rotates along the path. A single mass M with impact parameter b is 
depicted, although the setup is more general. 
or equivalently 
(
-2<1> 
hµ.v = 
-2<1> _J· 
-2<1> 
where the potential obeys the conventional Poisson equation, 
V2<1> = 4rrGp. 
(7.60) 
(7.61) 
This is an important extension of our result from Chapter 4, since we now know 
the perturbation of the spatial metric as well as hoo. 
Now let us consider the path of a photon (or other massless particle) through 
this geometry; in other words, solve the perturbed geodesic equation for a null 
trajectory xµ.(A). 2 The geometry we consider is pmtrayed in Figure 7.3. Recall 
that our philosophy is to consider the metric pe1turbation as a field defined on 
a flat background spacetime. Similarly, we can decompose the geodesic into a 
background path plus a perturbation, 
(7.62) 
where x<0>µ. solves the geodesic equation in the background (in other words, is just 
a straight nun path). We then evaluate all quantities along the background path, to 
solve for xO>µ.(A). For this procedure to make sense, we need to assume that the 
potential <I> is not appreciably different along the background and true geodesics; 
this condition amounts to requiring that xO>ia;<I> « <I>. If this condition is not 
true, however, all is not lost. If we consider only very short paths, the deviation 
2The approach we use is outlined in T. Pyne and M. Birkinshaw, Astrophys. Jounz. 458, 46 ( 1996), 
http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9504060. 

7.3 
Newtonian Fields and Photon Trajectories 
289 
xO>J.t will necessarily be small, and our approximation will be valid. But then we 
can assemble larger paths out of such short segments. As a result, we will derive 
true equations, but the paths over which we integrate will be the actual path xJ.t(A), 
rather than the background path x<0>J.t(A). As long as this is understood, our results 
will be valid for any trajectories in the perturbed spacetime. 
For convenience we denote the wave vector of the background path as kJ.l, and 
the derivative of the deviation vector as f,J.l: 
dx(l)µ 
f_J.l=--
-
d.A. 
. 
The condition that a path be null is of course 
dxJ.l dxv 
g ---0 
µv d.A. dA -:-
' 
(7.63) 
(7.64) 
which we must solve order-by-order. At zeroth order we simply have 1JµvkJ.lkv = 
0, or 
(7.65) 
where k is the three-vector with components ki. This equation serves as the defi-
nition of the constant k. Then at first order we obtain 
(7.66) 
or 
-ke0 + i. k = 2k2<1>. 
(7.67) 
We now tum to the perturbed geodesic equation, 
(7.68) 
The Christoffel symbols can be found by setting wi = 0 and hij = - 2<1>t5;j in 
(7.19): 
0 
j 
f o; = f oo = 8;<1>, 
r~k = t5jk8;<1> - tS;kaj<I> - t5;jak<1>."-· 
(7.69) 
The zeroth-order geodesic equation simply tells us that x<O>µ is a straight trajec-
tory, while at first order we have 
(7 .70) 

290 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
There are no factors of f,/J. on the right-hand side, since the Christoffel symbols 
are already first-order in the perturbation. Theµ= 0 component of (7.70) is 
df,O 
-
... 
dA = -2k(k · V<I>), 
(7.71) 
while the spatial components are 
di 
2-
dA = -2k V .1 <I>. 
(7.72) 
Here we have introduced the gradient transverse to the path, defined as the total 
gradient minus the gradient along the path, 
v .i <1> = v<1> - v 11 <1> 
= v<1> - k-2(i<. V<l>)k. 
(7.73) 
In all of these expressions, the path means the background path. 
Note that, to first order in <I>, the spatial wave vector perturbation i is orthogo-
nal to the original spatial wave vector k. To see this, we can get an expression for 
f,O by integrating (7 .71) to get 
o J 
deod 
f, = 
-
A 
dA 
= -2k J (k. V<l>)dA 
J (
dx 
... 
) 
= -2k 
dA · V<I> dA 
= -2k f v<1> ·dx 
= -2k<I>. 
(7.74) 
The constant of integration is fixed by demanding that e0 = 0 when <I> = 0. 
Plugging this into (7 .67) reveals 
(7.75) 
verifying that i and k are orthogonal to first order. 
The deflection angle a is the amount by which the original spatial wave vector 
is deflected as it travels from a source to the observer; it is a two-dimensional 
vector in the plane perpendicular to k. (We use the notation a rather than a, as the 
latter is used for the reduced deflection angle introduced in Chapter 8.) From the 
geometry portrayed in Figure 7 .3, the deflection angle can be expressed as 

7.3 
Newtonian Fields and Photon Trajectories 
291 
(7.76) 
where the minus sign simply accounts for the fact that the deflection angle is 
measured by an observer looking backward along the photon path. The rotation 
of the wave vector can be calculated from (7.72) as 
~ J di 
/:).f, = 
-d'A 
d'A 
= -2k2 f V.i<l>d'A. 
(7.77) 
The deflection angle can therefore be expressed as an integral over the physical 
spatial distance traversed, s = kA, as 
(7.78) 
We can evaluate the deflection angle in the case of a point mass, where we 
imagine the background path to be along the x-direction with an impact parameter 
defined by a transverse vector b pointing from the path to the mass at the point of 
closest approach. Setting b = lbl, the potential is 
<l>-_GM __ 
GM 
-
r 
-
(b2 +x2)1/2' 
(7.79) 
and its transverse gradient is therefore 
(7.80) 
The deflection angle is thus 
.-. 
J 
dx 
a= 2GMb 
(b2 + x2)3/2 
I 
4GM 
=-b-, 
(7.81) 
where the integral has been taken from -oo to oo, presuming that both source 
and observer are very far from the deflecting mass. Note that c = 1 in our units; a 
factor of c2 should be inserted in the denominator of (7 .81) in other systems. 
Deflection of light by the Sun was historically a crucial test of general relativ-
ity. Einstein proposed three such tests: precession of the perihelion of Mercury, 
gravitational redshift, and deflection oflight. The precession of Mercury's perihe-
lion was successfully explained by GR, but this explained a discrepancy that had 
already been observed; gravitational redshift was not observed until much later, 

292 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
so deflection of light was the first time that Einstein's theory correctly predicted a 
phenomenon that had not yet been detected. A famous expedition led by Edding-
ton observed the positions of stars near the Sun during a 1919 total eclipse; the ob-
servations were in agreement with the GR prediction, leading to front-page stories 
in newspapers around the world. The predicted effect is quite small: for the Sun 
we have GM0 /c2 = 1.48 x 105 cm, and the solar radius is R0 = 6.96 x 1010 cm, 
leading to a maximum deflection angle of a = 1.75 arcsecs. Later re-evaluation 
of Eddington's results has cast doubt upon whether he actually obtained the preci-
sion that was originally claimed; contemporary measurements use high-precision 
inte1ferometric observations of quasars passing behind the Sun to obtain very ac-
curate tests of GR (which it has so far passed). Meanwhile, observation of light 
deflection by astrophysical sources such as galaxies and stars has become a vi-
brant area of research, under the name of "gravitational lensing." Of course in 
these circumstances we rarely know the mass of the lens well enough to provide 
precision tests of GR; instead, it is more common to use the observed deflection 
angle as a way to measure the mass. We will discuss lensing more in Chapter 8. 
In addition to the deflection of light, in 1964 Shapiro pointed out another ob-
servable consequence of weak-field general relativity on photon trajectories: grav-
itational time delay. The total coordinate time elapsed along a null path is 
J 
dxo 
I= 
d'A d'A. 
(7.82) 
We are putting ourselves in the position of an observer far from any sources, at 
rest in the background inertial frame, so coordinate time is our proper time. In 
the presence of a Newtonian potential, the photons appear to "slow down" with 
respect to the background light cones, leading to an additional time delay of 
J 
dx(l)O 
/:)./ = 
---;n:- d'A 
= J e0 d'A 
= -2k J 
<l>d'A, 
(7.83) 
or 
l!:.t = -2 J 
<l>ds. 
(7.84) 
According to our rules, the integral is pe1formed over the background path. In 
addition to this Shapiro delay, there can be an additional "geometric" time delay 
because the spatial distance traversed by the real path is longer than that of the 
background path. For deflection of light by the Sun the geometric delay effect is 
negligible, but in cosmological applications it can be comparable to the Shapiro 

7.4 Gravitational Wave Solutions 
293 
effect. The time delay has been observed, most precisely by making use of space-
craft rather than naturally-occurring objects; for details see Will ( 1981 ). 
The motion of photons through a Newtonian potential, leading to both the de-
flection of light and the gravitational time delay, could equivalently be derived by 
imagining that the photons are propagating in a medium with refractive index 
n = 1 - 2<1>, 
(7.85) 
to first order. Indeed, we could have found the equations of motion for the photon 
by using Fennat's principle of least time; you are asked to demonstrate this in the 
exercises. 
7.4 • GRAVITATIONAL WAVE SOLUTIONS 
An even more exciting application of the weak-field limit is to gravitational ra-
diation. Here we are studying the freely-propagating degrees of freedom of the 
gravitational field, requiring no local sources for their existence (although they 
can of course be generated by such sources). We therefore tum once again to the 
weak-field equations in transverse gauge, (7 .38)-(7.40), this time keeping time 
derivatives but completely turning off the energy-momentum tensor, Tµ.v = 0. 
The 00 equation is then 
v2'11 = o, 
(7.86) 
which with well-behaved boundary conditions implies \II = 0. Then the 0 j equa-
tion is 
(7.87) 
which again implies w j = 0. 
We tum next to the trace of the ij equation, which (plugging in the above 
results) yields 
(7.88) 
which implies <I> = 0. 
We are therefore left with the trace-free part of the ij equation, which becomes 
a wave equation for the traceless strain tensor: 
Dsij = 0. 
(7.89) 
Although it has been convenient thus far to work with s;j, it is far more common in 
the literature to find expressions written in terms of the entire metric perturbation 
hµ.v• but in an ansatz where all of the other degrees of freedom (<I>, \II, w;) are 
set to zero (and s;j is transverse). This is commonly known as the transverse 

294 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
traceless gauge, in which we have 
0 
0 
(7.90) 
The equation of motion is then 
(7.91) 
To make it easier to compare with other resources, in our discussion of gravita-
tional waves we will use h ~ rather than S;j, keeping in mind that h ~ is purely 
spatial, traceless and transverse: 
h'fJ = 0 
1]µ.v h'Jl = 0 
8µ.hri = 0. 
(7.92) 
From the wave equation (7.91) we begin finding solutions. Those familiar with 
the analogous problem in electromagnetism will notice that the procedure is al-
most precisely the same. A particularly useful set of solutions to this wave equa-
tion are the plane waves, given by 
(7.93) 
where C µ.v is a constant, symmetric, (0, 2) tensor, which is obviously traceless 
and purely spatial: 
Cov =0 
1]µ.vCµ.v =0. 
(7.94) 
Of course eikax" is complex, while h~ is real; we carry both real and imaginary 
parts through the calculation, and take the real part at the end. The constant vector 
ka is the wave vector. To check that we have a solution, we plug in: 
_ 
pa-:i -:i hTT 
-
1] 
UpUa µ.v 
= 1Jpa 8 (ik h TI) 
p 
a µ.v 
= -17Pak k hTT 
p a µ.v 
= -kaka h'Jl. 
(7.95) 

7.4 Gravitational Wave Solutions 
295 
Since, for an interesting solution, not all of the components of h ~ will be zero 
everywhere, we must have 
(7.96) 
The plane wave (7.93) is therefore a solution to the linearized equation if the wave 
vector is null; this is loosely translated into the statement that gravitational waves 
propagate at the speed of light. The timelike component of the wave vector is 
the frequency of the wave, and we write ka = (w, k 1, k2, k3). (More generally, 
an observer moving with four-velocity Uµ. would observe the wave to have a 
frequency w = -kµ. Uµ. .) Then the condition that the wave vector be null becomes 
2 
. . 
(l) = ~ijk
1 k1 . 
(7.97) 
Of course our wave is far from the most general solution; any (possibly infinite) 
number of distinct plane waves can be added together and will still solve the linear 
equation (7.91). Indeed, any solution can be written as such a superposition. 
We still need to ensure that the perturbation is trans verse. This means that 
0 = 8µ.hri 
(7.98) 
which is only true if 
(7.99) 
We say that the wave vector is orthogonal to cµ.v. 
Our solution can be made more explicit by choosing spatial coordinates such 
that the wave is traveling in the x 3 direction; that is, 
kµ. = (w, 0, 0, k3) = (w, 0, 0, w), 
(7.100) 
where we know that k3 = w because the wave vector is null. In this case, kµ.C µ.v = 
0 and Cov = 0 together imply 
C3v = 0. 
(7.101) 
The only nonzero components of Cµ.v are therefore C11, C12, C21, and C22. But 
Cµ.v is traceless and symmetric, so in general we can write 
(
0 
0 
C 
_ 
0 
C11 
µ.v -
0 
C12 
0 
0 
(7.102) 
Thus, for a plane wave in this gauge traveling in the x 3 direction, the two com-
ponents C11 and C12 (along with the frequency w) completely characterize the 
wave. 

296 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
To get a feeling for the physical effect of a passing gravitational wave, consider 
the motion of test particles in the presence of a wave. It is certainly insufficient 
to solve for the trajectory of a single particle, since that would only tell us about 
the values of the coordinates along the world line. In fact, for any single particle 
we can find transverse traceless coordinates in which the particle appears sta-
tionary to first order in h'JJ,. To obtain a coordinate-independent measure of the 
wave's effects, we consider the relative motion of nearby particles, as described 
by the geodesic deviation equation. If we consider some nearby particles with 
four-velocities described by a single vector field UJJ.(x) and separation vector SJJ., 
we have 
D
2 
Sµ. 
Rµ. 
uvupsa 
dr2 
= 
vpa 
. 
(7.103) 
We would like to compute the right-hand side to first order in h'JJ,. If we take 
our test particles to be moving slowly, we can express the four-velocity as a unit 
vector in the time direction plus corrections of order h'JJ, and higher; but we know 
that the Riemann tensor is already first order, so the corrections to uv may be 
ignored, and we write 
uv = (1, 0, 0, 0). 
(7.104) 
Therefore we only need to compute RJJ.ooa, or equivalently Rµ.oOa· From (7.5) we 
have 
Rµ.oOa = !<8o8oh~ + 8a8µ.h~ - 8a8oh'Jl -
8µ.8oh~). 
(7.105) 
But h'Jl = 0, so 
(7.106) 
Meanwhile, for our slowly-moving particles we have r = x0 = t to lowest order, 
so the geodesic deviation equation becomes 
~sµ. -
~sa ~hTIµ. 
81 2 
-
2 
81 2 
a. 
(7.107) 
For our wave traveling in the x 3 direction, this implies that only S 1 and S2 will be 
affected-the test particles are only disturbed in directions perpendicular to the 
wave vector. This is of course familiar from electromagnetism, where the electric 
and magnetic fields in a plane wave are perpendicular to the wave vector. 
Our wave is characterized by the two numbers, which for future convenience 
we will rename as follows: 
(7.108) 

7.4 
Gravitational Wave Solutions 
297 
so that 
(7.109) 
Let's consider their effects separately, beginning with the case h x = 0. Then we 
have 
(7.110) 
and 
f._52 = _!52f_(h eik0 x"). 
()12 
2 
812 
+ 
(7.111) 
These can be immediately solved to yield, to lowest order, 
51 = ( 1 + !h+eikax") 51 (0) 
(7.112) 
and 
52 = ( 1 - !h+eikax") 52(0). 
(7.113) 
Thus, particles initially separated in the x 1 direction will oscillate in the x 1 direc-
tion, and likewise for those with an initial x2 separation. That is, if we start with a 
ring of stationary particles in the x-y plane, as the wave passes they will bounce 
back and forth in the shape of a"+," as shown in Figure 7.4. On the other hand, 
the equivalent analysis for the case where h+ = 0 but h x # 0 would yield the 
solution 
(7.114) 
and 
(7.115) 
y 0000000 
x 
FIGURE 7.4 The effect of a gravitational wave with+ polarization is to distort a circle 
of test particles into ellipses oscillating in a+ pattern. 

298 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
y 
OCJOOOCJO 
x 
FIGURE 7.5 The effect of a gravitational wave with x polarization is to distort a circle 
of test particles into ellipses oscillating in a x pattern. 
In this case the circle of particles would bounce back and forth in the shape of 
a "x," as shown in Figure 7.5. The notation h+ and hx should therefore be clear. 
These two quantities measure the two independent modes of linear polarization of 
the gravitational wave, known as the "plus" and "cross" polarizations. ff we liked 
we could consider right- and left-handed circularly polarized modes by defining 
1 
hR = ,J2(h+ + ihx), 
1 
hi= ,J2(h+ - ihx). 
(7.116) 
The effect of a pure hR wave would be to rotate the particles in a right-handed 
sense, as shown in Figure 7.6, and similarly for the left-handed mode hi. Note 
that the individual particles do not travel around the ring; they just move in little 
epicycles. 
We can relate the polarization states of classical gravitational waves to the 
kinds of particles we would expect to find upon quantization. The spin of a quan-
tized field is directly related to the transformation properties of that field un-
der spatial rotations. The electromagnetic field has two independent polarization 
states described by vectors in the x-y plane; equivalently, a single polarization 
mode is invariant under a rotation by 360° in this plane. Upon quantization this 
theory yields the photon, a massless spin- I particle. The neutrino, on the other 
hand, is also a massless particle, described by a field that picks up a minus sign 
under rotations by 360°; it is invariant under rotations of 720°, and we say it has 
y 
x 
FIGURE 7.6 The effect of a gravitational wave with R polarization is to distort a circle 
of test particles into an ellipse that rotates in a right-handed sense. 

7 .4 
Gravitational Wave Solutions 
299 
spin-!. The general rule is that the spin S is related to the angle () under which 
the polarization modes are invariant by S = 360° /(). The gravitational field, 
whose waves propagate at the speed of light, should lead to massless particles 
in the quantum theory. Noticing that the polarization modes we have described 
are invariant under rotations of 180° in the x-y plane, we expect the associated 
particles-gravitons-to be spin-2. We are a long way from detecting such par-
ticles (and it would not be a surprise if we never detected them directly), but any 
respectable quantum theory of gravity should predict their existence. 
In fact, starting with a theory of spin-2 gravitons and requiring some simple 
properties provides a nice way to derive the full Einstein's equation of general rel-
ativity. Imagine starting with the Lagrangian (7.9) for the symmetric tensor hµ.v, 
but now imagining that this "really is" a physical field propagating in Minkow-
ski spacetime rather than a perturbation to a dynamical metric. (This Lagrangian 
doesn't include couplings to matter, but it is straightforward to do so.) Now make 
the additional demand that hµ.v couple to its own energy-momentum tensor (dis-
cussed below), as well as to the matter energy-momentum tensor. This induces 
higher-order nonlinear tenns in the action, and consequently induces additional 
"energy-momentum" terms of even higher order. By repeating this process, an 
infinite series of tenns is introduced, but the series can be summed to a simple 
expression, perhaps because you already know the answer-the Einstein-Hilbert 
action (possibly with some higher-order tenns). In the process, we find that matter 
couples to the unique combination gµ.v = 1Jµ.v + hµ.v· In other words, by asking 
for a theory of a spin-2 field coupling to the energy-momentum tensor, we end 
up with the fully nonlinear glory of general relativity. The background metric 1Jµ.v 
becomes completely unobservable. Of course, some of the global geometric as-
pects of GR are obscured by this procedure, which ultimately is just another way 
of justifying Einstein's equation. 
While we are noting amusing things, let's point out that the behavior of gravita-
tional waves yields a clue as to why string theory gives rise to a quantum theory of 
gravity. Consider the fundamental vibrational modes of a loop of string, as shown 
in Figure 7. 7. There are three lowest-energy modes for a loop of string: an over-
FIGURE 7.7 The three fundamental vibrational modes of a loop of string. The overall 
"breathing" mode (far left) is invariant under rotations, and gives rise to a spin-0 particle. 
The other two modes match the two polarizations of a gravitational wave. and represent 
the two states of a massless spin-2 particle. 

300 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
all oscillation of its size, plus two independent ways it can oscillate into ellipses. 
These give rise to three massless degrees of freedom: a spin-0 pa11icle (the dila-
ton) and a massless spin-2 particle (the graviton). Notice the obvious similarity 
between the string oscillations and the motion of test pa11icles under the influ-
ence of a gravitational wave: this is no accident, and is the reason why quantized 
strings inevitably give rise to gravity. (String theory was originally investigated as 
a theory of the strong interactions. but different models would inevitably predict 
an unnecessary massless spin-2 particle; eventually it was realized that this flaw 
could be a virtue, if the theory came to be thought of as a quantum theory of grav-
ity.) The extra unwanted spin-0 (scalar) mode reflects the fact that string theory 
actually predicts a scalar-tensor theory of gravity (as discussed in Section 4.8) 
rather than ordinary GR. Since a massless scalar of this sort is not observed in 
nature. some mechanism must work to give a mass to the scalar at low energies. 
7.5 • PRODUCTION OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVES 
With plane-wave solutions to the linearized vacuum equation in our possession, 
it remains to discuss the generation of gravitational radiation by sources. For 
this purpose it is necessary to consider Einstein's equation coupled to matter, 
Gµ.v = 8rrGTµ.v· Because Tµ.v doesn't vanish, the metric perturbation will in-
clude nonzero scalar and vector components as well as the strain tensor represent-
ing gravitational waves; we cannot assume that our solution takes the transverse-
traceless fonn (7.90). Instead, we will keep the entire perturbation hµ.v and solve 
for the produced gravitational wave far from the source, where we can then im-
pose transverse-traceless gauge. 
There are still some convenient simplifications we can introduce, even in the 
presence of sources. We first define the trace-reversed pe11urbation, 
(7.117) 
The name of the trace-reversed perturbation makes sense. since 
(7.118) 
Obviously we can reconstruct the original perturbation from the trace-reversed 
fonn, so no infonnation has been lost. Note also that, if we are in vacuum far away 
from any sources and can go to transverse-traceless gauge, the trace-reversed per-
turbation will be equal to the original perturbation, 
(7.119) 
Meanwhile. we are still free to choose some sort of gauge. Under a gauge 
transfonnation (7 .14 ), the trace-reversed perturbation transforms as 
(7.120) 

7 .5 
Production of Gravitational Waves 
301 
By choosing a gauge parameter~µ. satisfying 
(7.121) 
we can therefore set 
(7.122) 
This condition is known as the Lorenz gauge, analogous with the similar condi-
tion aµ.Aµ. = 0 often used in electromagnetism.3 Note that the original perturba-
tion is not transverse in this gauge; rather, we have 
(7.123) 
Plugging the definition of the trace-reversed perturbation into our expression 
for the Einstein tensor (7 .8), and using the Lorenz gauge condition, yields the very 
concise expression 
(7.124) 
The analogous expression in terms of the original perturbation hµ.v is slightly 
messier; this is the reason for introducing hµ.v· The linearized Einstein equation 
in this gauge is therefore simply a wave equation for each component, 
Dhµ.v = -16:rrGTµ.v· 
(7.125) 
The solution to such an equation can be obtained using a Green function. in pre-
cisely the same way as the analogous problem in electromagnetism. Here we will 
review the outline of the method, following Wald (1984). 
The Green function G (xa - ya) for the d' Alembertian operator 0 is the solu-
tion of the wave equation in the presence of a delta-function source: 
(7.126) 
where Dx denotes the d' Alembertian with respect to the coordinates xa. The use-
fulness of such a function resides in the fact that the general solution to an equa-
tion such as (7 .125) can be written 
hµ.v(Xa) = -16:rrG J 
G(xa -ya)Tµ.v(Ya) d4y, 
(7.127) 
as can be verified immediately. (Notice that no factors of ,J=g are necessary, 
since our background is simply flat spacetime.) The solutions to (7.126) have of 
course been worked out long ago, and they can be thought of as either "retarded" 
or "advanced," depending on whether they represent waves traveling forward or 
3Note the spelling. The "gauge" was originated by Ludwig Lorenz (1829-1891), while the more 
famous "transfonnation" was invented by Hendrick Antoon Lorentz (1853-1928). See J.D. Jackson 
and L.B. Okun, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 663 (2001). 

302 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
i 
I 
. 
I 
'-
I \L 
·'·,,_ 
(1,.. yi); 
FIGURE 7.8 Disturbances in the gravitational field at (1. xi) are calculated in tenns of 
events on the past light cone. 
backward in time. Our interest is in the retarded Green function. which represents 
the accumulated effect of signals to the past of the points under consideration. It 
is given by 
(7.128) 
Here we have used boldface to denote the spatial vectors x = (x 1, x 2• x3) and 
y = (y 1.y2.y3), with nonn Ix -yl = 
[~ij(xi -
y'°)(xj - yj)] 112• The theta 
function 8(x0 - y0) equals 1 when x 0 > y0, and zero otherwise. The derivation 
of (7 .128) would take us too far afield, but it can be found in any standard text on 
electrodynamics or partial differential equations in physics. 
Upon plugging (7.128) into (7.127), we can use the delta function to perform 
the integral over y0, leaving us with 
-
J 1 
3 
hµ.v(t. x) = 4G 
--Tµ.v(t - Ix - yl, y) d y, 
lx-yl 
(7.129) 
where t = x0. The tenn "retarded time" is used to refer to the quantity 
t,. = t - Ix - YI· 
(7.130) 
The interpretation of (7 .129) should be clear: the disturbance in the gravitational 
field at (t, x) is a sum of the influences from the energy and momentum sources 
at the point (t,.. x - y) on the past light cone, as depicted in Figure 7.8. 
Let us take this general solution and consider the case where the gravitational 
radiation is emitted by an isolated source, fairly far away, comprised of nonrela-
tivistic matter; these approximations will be made more precise as we go on. First 
we need to set up some conventions for Fourier transfonns, which always make 
life easier when dealing with oscillatory phenomena. Given a function of space-
time </>(t. x), we are interested in its Fourier transfonn (and inverse) with respect 
to time alone, 

7 .5 
Production of Gravitational Waves 
-
1 J . 
</>(w, x) = ,J2ii 
dt e'lt>l </>(t, x), 
1 J . -
</>(t, x) = ,J2ii 
dw e-ilt>l </>(w, x). 
Taking the transform of the metric perturbation, we obtain 
-h-
( 
) 
1 J 
d 
ilt>lh-
( 
) 
µ.v w, x = ,J2ii 
t e 
µ.v t, x 
4G J 
d d3 
iwt Tµ.v(t - Ix - yl, y) 
=--
t 
ye 
,J2i 
Ix -yl 
-
4G J 
dt d3 
ilt>lr iwlx-yl Tµ.v(I,., y) 
- .J2i 
,. 
ye 
e 
Ix - YI 
= 4G J 
d3y eiwlx-yl Tµ.v(W, y). 
lx-yl 
303 
(7.131) 
(7.132) 
In this sequence, the first equation is simply the definition of the Fourier trans-
form, the second line comes from the solution (7 .129), the third line is a change 
of variables from t to t,., and the fourth line is once again the definition of the 
Fourier transform. 
We now make the approximations that our source is isolated, far away, and 
slowly moving. This means that we can consider the source to be centered at 
a (spatial) distance r, with the different pa1ts of the source at distances r + ~r 
such that ~r « r, as shown in Figure 7.9. Since it is slowly moving, most of 
the radiation emitted will be at frequencies w sufficiently low that ~r « w- 1• 
(Essentially, light traverses the source much faster than the components of the 
source itself do.) Under these approximations, the term eiwlx-yl /Ix - yl can be 
replaced by eiwr / r and brought outside the integral. This leaves us with 
-
3 
-
-
eiwr J 
h µ. v ( w, x) = 4G -r-
d y T µ. v ( w, y). 
(7.133) 
observer 
source 
·:~/;·: 
FIGURE 7.9 
A source of size 8r, at a distance r from the observer. 

304 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
In fact there is no need to compute all of the components of hµ.v(w, x), since 
the Lorenz gauge condition aµ.fiµ.v (t, x) = 0 in Fourier space implies 
(7.134) 
We therefore only need to concern ourselves with the spacelike components of 
hµ.v(w, x), and recover J;ov from (7.134). The first thing to do is to set v = j to 
find J;oj from hij, which we would then use to find J;oo from J;;o. From (7 .133) 
we therefore want to take the integral of the spacelike components of Tµ.v(w, y). 
We begin by integrating by parts in reverse: 
(7.135) 
The first term is a surface integral which will vanish since the source is isolated, 
while the second can be related to fOj by the Fourier-space version of aµ.Tµ.v = 0: 
(7 .136) 
Thus, 
J 
d3y fij (w, y) = iw J /fOj d3y 
= i; J 
(/TOj + yjfOi) d3y 
= ;; J [a1(/yjfO') - /yj(ado')] d3y 
= - ~2 J 
yiyjfOO d3y. 
(7.137) 
The second line is justified since we know that the left-hand side is symmetric in i 
and j, while the third and fourth lines are simply repetitions of reverse integration 
by parts and conservation of TJJ.v. It is conventional to define the quadrupole 
moment tensor of the energy density of the source, 
(7.138) 
a constant tensor on each surface of constant time. The overall normalization of 
the quadrupole tensor is a matter of convention, and by no means universal, so be 
careful in comparing different references. In terms of the Fourier transform of the 
quadrupole moment, our solution takes on the compact form 
-
eiwr 
-
2 
-
h;j(W, x) = -2Gw -lij(W). 
r 
(7.139) 

7 .5 
Production of Gravitational Waves 
We can transform this back to t to obtain the quadrupole formula, 
where as before t,. = t - r. 
-
2G d2lu 
hu(t, x) = --d 
2 (t,.), 
r 
t 
305 
(7.140) 
The gravitational wave produced by an isolated nonrelativistic object is there-
fore proportional to the second derivative of the quadrupole moment of the energy 
density at the point where the past light cone of the observer intersects the source. 
In contrast, the leading contribution to electromagnetic radiation comes from the 
changing dipole moment of the charge density. The difference can be traced back 
to the universal nature of gravitation. A changing dipole moment corresponds to 
motion of the center of density~harge density in the case of electromagnetism, 
energy density in the case of gravitation. While there is nothing to stop the center 
of charge of an object from oscillating, oscillation of the center of mass of an 
isolated system violates conservation of momentum. (You can shake a body up 
and down, but you and the earth shake ever so slightly in the opposite direction 
to compensate.) The quadrupole moment, which measures the shape of the sys-
tem, is generally smaller than the dipole moment, and for this reason, as well as 
the weak coupling of matter to gravity, gravitational radiation is typically much 
weaker than electromagnetic radiation. 
One case of special interest is the gravitational radiation emitted by a binary 
star (two stars in orbit around each other). For simplicity let us consider two stars 
of mass M in a circular orbit in the x 1-x2 plane, at distance R from their common 
center of mass, as shown in Figure 7 .10. We will treat the motion of the stars in the 
Newtonian approximation, where we can discuss their orbit just as Kepler would 
have. Circular orbits are most easily characterized by equating the force due to 
gravity to the outward "centrifugal" force: 
GM2 
Mv2 
(2R)2 = R' 
which gives us 
The time it takes to complete a single orbit is simply 
T= 2:rrR. 
v 
but more useful to us is the angular frequency of the orbit, 
Q = 2:rr = (GM)t/2 
T 
4R3 
(7.141) 
(7.142) 
(7.143) 
(7.144) 

306 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
FIGURE 7.10 A binary star system. Two stars of mass M orbit in the x 1-x2 plane with 
an orbital radius R. 
In terms of Q we can write down the explicit path of star a, 
x~ = R sin Qt, 
(7.145) 
and star b, 
x1! = -Rcosnt, 
x~ = -RsinQt. 
(7.146) 
The corresponding energy density is 
T00(t,x) = M~(x
3 )[~(x
1 -
Rcosf2t)~(x
2 - RsinQt) 
+ ~(x 1 + R cos Qt)~(x
2 + R sin Qt)]. 
(7.147) 
The profusion of delta functions allows us to integrate this straightforwardly to 
obtain the quadrupole moment from (7 .138): 
111 = 2M R2 cos2 nt = M R2(1+cos2f2t) 
/i2 = 2M R2 sin2 f2t = M R2(1 - cos 2Qt) 
112 = hi = 2M R2(cos f2t)(sin f2t) = M R2 sin 2Qt 
/i3 = 0. 
(7.148) 
From this in tum it is easy to get the components of the metric perturbation from 
(7.140): 

7.6 
Energy Loss Due to Gravitational Radiation 
307 
_ 
8G M 
2 2 (- cos 2f2tr 
h;j(I, x) = --Q R 
- sin 2f2tr 
r 
0 
- sin 2f2tr 0) 
cos~f2tr 
~ . 
(7.149) 
The remaining components of hµ.v could be derived from demanding that the 
Lorenz gauge condition be satisfied. 
7.6 • ENERGY LOSS DUE TO GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION 
It is natural at this point to talk about the energy emitted via gravitational radia-
tion. Such a discussion, however, is immediately beset by problems, both techni-
cal and philosophical. As we have mentioned before, there is no true local measure 
of the energy in the gravitational field. Of course, in the weak field limit, where 
we think of gravitation as being described by a symmetric tensor propagating on 
a fixed background metric, we might hope to derive an energy-momentum ten-
sor for the fluctuations hµ.v. just as we would for electromagnetism or any other 
field theory. To some extent this is possible, but still difficult. As a result of these 
difficulties there are a number of different proposals in the literature for what we 
should use as the energy-momentum tensor for gravitation in the weak field limit; 
all of them are different, but for the most part they give the same answers for 
physically well-posed questions such as the rate of energy emitted by a binary 
system. 
At a technical level, the difficulties begin to arise when we consider what 
form the energy-momentum tensor should take. We have previously mentioned 
the energy-momentum tensors for electromagnetism and scalar field theory, both 
of which share an important feature-they are quadratic in the relevant fields. By 
hypothesis, our approach to the weak field limit has been to keep only terms that 
are linear in the metric perturbation. Hence, in order to keep track of the energy 
carried by the gravitational waves, we will have to extend our calculations to at 
least second order in hµ.v· In fact we have been cheating slightly all along. In dis-
cussing the effects of gravitational waves on test particles, and the generation of 
waves by a binary system, we have been using the fact that test particles move 
along geodesics. But as we know, this is derived from the covariant conservation 
of energy-momentum, V µ. Tµ.v = 0. In the order to which we have been work-
ing, however, we actually have aµ. Tµ.v = 0, which would imply that test particles 
move on straight lines in the flat background metric. This is a symptom of the 
inability of the weak field limit to describe self-gravitating systems. In practice, 
the best that can be done is to solve the weak field equation to some appropriate 
order, and then justify after the fact the validity of the solution. We will follow the 
procedure outlined in Chapters 35 and 36 of Misner, Thome, and Wheeler ( 1973 ), 
where additional discussion of subtleties may be found. See also Wald (1984) and 
Schutz (1985). 
Let us now examine Einstein's vacuum equation Rµ.v = 0 to second order, and 
see how the result can be interpreted in terms of an energy-momentum tensor for 

308 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
the gravitational field. We expand both the metric and the Ricci tensor, 
gµ.v = 1Jµ.v + h~J + hfJ 
R = R<O> +RO> + R<2> 
µ.v 
µ.v 
µ.v 
µ.v• 
(7.150) 
where Ri1J is taken to be of the same order as h~J, while Rj}J and hfJ are of 
order (h~J) 2
. Because we work in a flat background, the zeroth-order equation 
Ri0J = 0 is automatically solved. The first-order vacuum equation is simply 
(7.151) 
which determines the first-order perturbation h~J (up to gauge transformations). 
The second-order perturbation hfJ will be detennined by the second-order equa-
tion 
(7.152) 
The notation Ri1J[h<2>] indicates the parts of the expanded Ricci tensor that are 
linear in the metric perturbation, as given by (7.6), applied to the second-order 
perturbation hfJ; meanwhile, Rj}J[h<l)] stands for the quadratic part of the ex-
panded Ricci tensor, 
RfJ = !hpa aµ.avhpa + ! (aµ.hpa )avhpa + (aa hP v)a[ahp]µ. - hpa apa(µ.hv)a 
+ !aa(hpaaphµ.v) - !<aphµ.v)aPh - (aahpa - !aPh)a(µ.hv>P• 
(7.153) 
applied to the first-order perturbation h~J. There are no cross terms, as they would 
necessarily be higher order. 
Now let's write the vacuum equation as G µ.v = O; this is of course equivalent 
to Rµ.v = 0, but will enable us to express the result in a suggestive form. At 
second order we have 
RO>[h<2>] - l17Pa RO>[h<2>]11 
- 8-Gt 
µ.v 
2 
pa 
µ.v -
H 
µ.v• 
(7.154) 
where we have defined 
t 
= __ 
l_ IR(2)[h(l)] - !,,pa R(2)[h(l)]1] I 
µ.v -
8rrG 
µ.v 
2 
pa 
µ.v 
. 
(7.155) 
Notice a couple of things about this expression. First, we have not included terms 
of the form h(l)pa R~~[h<O], since Ri1J[h<O] = 0. Second, the left-hand side of 
(7 .154) is not the full second-order Einstein tensor, as we have moved terms in-
volving Rj}J[h<O] to the right-hand side and provocatively relabeled them as an 
energy-momentum tensor for the first-order perturbations, tµ.v· Such an identifi-

7.6 Energy Loss Due to Gravitational Radiation 
309 
cation seems eminently reasonable; lµ.v is a symmetric tensor, quadratic in hµ.v· 
which represents how the perturbations affect the spacetime metric in just the way 
that a matter energy-momentum tensor would. (Linear terms in hµ.v have no ef-
fect, since G~~[h<l)] is simply set to zero by the first-order equation.) Notice that 
tµ.v is also conserved, in the background flat-space sense, 
(7.156) 
which we know from the Bianchi identity aµ.GJJ.V = 0. 
Unfortunately there are some limitations on our interpretation of tµ.v as an 
energy-momentum tensor. Of course it is not a tensor at all in the full theory, but 
we are leaving that aside by hypothesis. More importantly, it is not invariant un-
der gauge transformations (infinitesimal diffeomorphisms), as you could check 
by direct calculation. One way of circumventing this difficulty is to average the 
energy-momentum tensor over several wavelengths, an operation we denote by 
angle brackets ( · · ·). This procedure has both philosophical and practical advan-
tages. From a philosophical viewpoint, we know that our ability to choose Rie-
mann normal coordinates at any one point makes it impossible to define a reliable 
measure of the gravitational energy-momentum that is purely local (defined at 
each point in terms of the metric and its first derivatives at precisely that point). If 
we average over several wavelengths, however, we may hope to capture enough 
of the physical curvature in a small region to describe a gauge-invariant measure. 
From a practical standpoint, any terms that are derivatives (as opposed to products 
of derivatives) will average to zero, 
(<Jµ.(X)) = 0. 
(7.157) 
We are therefore empowered to integrate by parts under the averaging brackets, 
(7.158) 
which will greatly simplify our expressions. 
With this in mind, let us calculate tµ.v as defined in (7.155), using the expres-
sion (7 .153) for the second-order Ricci tensor. (Henceforth we will no longer use 
superscripts on the metric perturbation, as we will only be interested in the first-
order perturbation.) Although part of the motivation for averaging is to obtain a 
gauge-invariant answer, the actual calculation is a mess, so for illustrative pur-
poses we will carry it out in transverse-traceless gauge, 
(7.159) 
Don't forget that we are only allowed to choose this gauge in vacuum. The non-
vanishing parts of Rj}JTI in this gauge can be written as 
R~JTT = !hriaµ.avh°!J + ~(<Jµ.h!'J)avhri + !11P>-(aa h~)<Jah'[! 
- !<aa h!J)aPh'!! -
hriapa(µ.h~ + !hriaaaph~. 
(7.160) 

310 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
Now let's apply the averaging brackets, and integrate by parts where convenient. 
The last three terms in (7 .160) all go away, as integration by parts leads to diver-
gences that vanish. We are left with 
{RiJTI) = -! {<aµh'J;JHavhri) + 2,,PA(Oh-:J;)hf!_). 
(7.161) 
But the perturbation obeys the first-order equation of motion, which sets Oh~= 
0. So we are finally left with 
{ RiJTI) = -! { 
(aµh -:;JHavhri)). 
(7.162) 
We can take the trace to get the curvature scalar; after integration by parts we 
again find a Oh~ tenn which we set to zero, so 
{ ,,J.lV RiJTT) = 0. 
(7.163) 
These expressions can be inserted into (7 .155) to obtain a simple expression for 
the gravitational-wave energy-momentum tensor in transverse-traceless gauge: 
(7.164) 
Remember that, in this gauge, nonspatial components vanish, h'fJ = 0. You will 
therefore sometimes see the above expression written with spatial indices ij in-
stead of spacetime indices p(J; the two versions are clearly equivalent. If we had 
been strong enough to do the corresponding calculation without first choosing a 
gauge, we would have found 
1 ( 
pa 
1 
tµv = 32:rrG (aµhpaHavh 
) - 2(aµh)(avh) 
-
(aph pa )(a,,_h va) -
(aphpa )(avh µ.a)}· 
(7.165) 
A bit of straightforward manipulation suffices to check that this expression is 
actually gauge invariant, as you are asked to show in the exercises. 
Let's calculate the transverse-traceless expression (7.164) for a single plane 
wave, 
(7.166) 
We have taken the real part and set the phase arbitrarily so that the wave is a sine 
rather than cosine. The energy-momentum tensor is then 
lµv = - 1-kµkvCpaCpa {cos2(k).XA)). 
32:rrG 
(7.167) 

7.6 
Energy Loss Due to Gravitational Radiation 
311 
Averaging the cos2 term over several wavelengths yields 
(7.168) 
For simplicity we can take the wave to be moving along the z-axis, so that 
k>.. = (-w, 0, 0, w) 
the minus sign coming from lowering an index on k>.., and from (7 .109), 
CpaCpa = 2(ht + h~). 
(7.169) 
(7.170) 
It is more common in the gravitational-wave literature to express observables in 
terms of the ordinary frequency f = w /2rr, rather than the angular frequency w. 
Putting it all together reveals 
0 0 -1) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
. 
0 0 
1 
(7.171) 
As we will discuss in the next section, typical gravitational-wave sources we 
might expect to observe at Earth will have frequencies between 1 o-4 and 104 Hz, 
and amplitudes h '"V 10-22. It is therefore useful to express the energy flux in the 
z direction, -To,, at an order-of-magnitude level as 
-J; 
'"V 10-4 -
+ 
x --
( f ) 
2 (h 2 + h 2 ) 
erg 
Oz 
Hz 
00-21)2 cm2·s· 
(7.172) 
This is the amount of energy that could in principle be deposited in each square 
centimeter of a detector every second. As pointed out by Thome,4 this is actually 
a substantial energy flux, especially at the upper end of the frequency range. For 
comparison purposes, a supernova at cosmological distances is characterized by 
a peak electromagnetic flux of approximately 10-9 erg/cm2/s; the gravitational-
wave signal, however, only lasts for milliseconds, while the visible electromag-
netic signal extends for months. 
Now let's use our formula for the gravitational-wave energy-momentum tensor 
to calculate the rate of energy loss from a system emitting gravitational radiation 
according to the quadrupole formula (7.140). The total energy contained in grav-
itational radiation on a surface ~ of constant time is defined as 
E = ~ tood3x, 
(7.173) 
while the total energy radiated through to infinity may be expressed as 
4K.S. Thorne, in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 

312 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
l!:.E = J Pdt, 
(7.174) 
where the power Pis 
(7.175) 
Here, the integral is taken over a two-sphere at spatial infinity s&i. and n/J. is a unit 
spacelike vector normal to s&i. In polar coordinates { t, r, (), </>}, the components 
of the normal vector are 
nµ. = (0, 1, 0, 0). 
(7.176) 
We would like to calculate the power P using our expression for tµ.v. (7.164). 
The first issue we face is that this expression is written in terms of the transverse-
traceless perturbation, while the quadrupole formula (7.140) is written in terms 
of the spatial components hij of the Lorenz-gauge trace-reversed perturbation. 
The simplest procedure (although it's not that simple) is to first convert hij into 
transverse-traceless gauge, which is permissible because we are interested in the 
behavior of the waves in vacuum, far from the source from which they are emitted, 
plug into the formula for tµ.v. then convert back into nontransverse-traceless form. 
Let's see how this works. 
We begin by introducing the (spatial) projection tensor 
Pij = ~ij - n;nj. 
(7.177) 
which projects tensor components into a surface orthogonal to the unit vector 
n1". (See Appendix D for more discussion.) In our case, we choose n; to point 
along the direction of propagation of the wave, so that Pij will project onto the 
two-sphere at spatial infinity. We can use the projection tensor to construct the 
transverse-traceless version of a symmetric spatial tensor X ij via 
(7.178) 
You can check for yourself that XTJ is indeed transverse and traceless. Because 
it is traceless, iiTf is equal to the original perturbation hTf; plugging into the 
quadrupole formula (7 .140), we get 
TI 
-rr 
2G d2 Il! 
h·· =h·· = ---(t-r) 
I] 
I) 
r 
dt2 
' 
(7.179) 
where the transverse-traceless part of the quadrupole moment is also constructed 
via (7 .178). In fact the quadrupole moment defined by (7 .138) is not the most 
convenient quantity to use in expressing the generated wave, as it involves an 

7.6 Energy Loss Due to Gravitational Radiation 
313 
integral over the energy density that might be difficult to detennine. Instead we 
can use the reduced quadrupole moment, 
(7.180) 
which is just the traceless part of lij. The reduced quadrupole moment has the 
nice propeny of being the coefficient of the r- 3 term in the multi pole expansion 
of the Newtonian potential, 
GM 
G 
. 
3G 
.. 
<I> - --- - -D·x' - -l··x'xl + ... 
-
r 
r3 
' 
2rs 'J 
' 
(7.181) 
and is therefore more readily approximated for realistic sources. (Here D; is the 
dipole moment, D; = J T00xi d 3x.) Of course, the transverse-traceless part of 
the quadrupole moment is the same as the transverse-traceless part of the reduced 
(that is, traceless) quadrupole moment, so (7.179) becomes 
TI 
2G d2177 
h .. =---2-(t-r). 
I} 
r 
dt 
(7.182) 
To calculate the power, we are interested in toµ.nµ. = tor· Because the 
quadrupole moment depends only on the retarded time tr = t - r, we have 
TI 
2Gd3177 
<Johij = --d 
3 
' 
r 
t 
TI 
2G d 3 177 
2G d2177 
ar h ij = - --;:- ---;fi3 - -;:r di2 
2G d 3 l'Yf 
,..._, 
I} 
,.., - --;:- ---;fi3 ' 
(7.183) 
where we have dropped the r- 2 tenn because we are interested in the r --+ oo 
limit. The important component of the energy-momentum tensor is therefore 
tor = _ _!l__ ((d
3
177) (d
31.g.)). 
8:rrr2 
dt3 
dt3 
(7.184) 
The next step is to convert back to lij from the transverse-traceless part. Applying 
(7 .178) and some messy algebra, it is straightforward to show that 
TI i . 
. . 
. 
. k 
I 
. . 
kl 
I 
2 
.. 
Xij X.fr = XijX'l -2X;l X' njnk + 2x
11 X n;njnkn1 - 2x + XX'ln;nj, 
(7.185) 
where X = ~ij Xij. Because lij is traceless, we have 
(7.186) 

314 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
and the power is 
1 d3Jij d3Jkl 
) 
+ l --;J/3---;J/3n;n jnkn1 dQ. 
(7.187) 
To evaluate this expression, it is best to switch back to Cartesian coordinates in 
space, where n; = xi /r. The quadrupole tensors are independent of the angular 
coordinates, since they are defined by integrals over all of space. We may therefore 
pull them outside the integral, and use the identities 
J 
dQ =4:rr 
J 
n;nj dQ = 
4
; f>;j 
J 
n;n jnkn1 dQ = ~~ (f>uf>k1 + f>;kf> jl + f>af> jk ). 
(7.188) 
When all is said and done, the expression for the power collapses to 
p = - G ( d3 Ju d3 Jij) ' 
5 
dt3 
dt3 
(7.189) 
where we should remember that the quadrupole moment is evaluated at the re-
tarded time tr = t - r. Our fonnula has a minus sign because it represents the rate 
at which the energy is changing, and radiating sources will be losing energy. 
For the binary system represented by (7.148), the reduced quadrupole moment 
is 
MR2 ((1+3cos2rlt) 
3sin2rlt 
Ju = --
3 sin 2rlt 
(1 - 3 cos 2rlt) 
3 
0 
0 
~)' 
-2 
and its third time derivative is therefore 
d3 J·. 
( sin 2rlt 
-jL = SM R2rl.3 
- cos 2rlt 
dt 
0 
-cos2rlt 0) 
-
si~2rlt 
~ . 
The power radiated by the binary is thus 
p = - 128 GM2R4rz6, 
5 
or, using expression (7.144) for the frequency, 
2G4M5 
P=-5[i5· 
(7.190) 
(7.191) 
(7.192) 
(7.193) 

7.7 
Detection of Gravitational Waves 
315 
Of course, energy loss through the emission of gravitational radiation has been 
observed. In 1974 Hulse and Taylor discovered a binary system, PSR1913+16, in 
which both stars are very small, so classical effects are negligible, or at least under 
control, and one is a pulsar. The period of the orbit is eight hours, extremely small 
by astrophysical standards. The fact that one of the stars is a pulsar provides a very 
accurate clock, with respect to which the change in the period as the system loses 
energy can be measured. The result is consistent with the prediction of general 
relativity for energy loss through gravitational radiation. 
7.7 • DETECTION OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVES 
One of the highest-priority goals of contemporary gravitational physics and as-
trophysics is to detect gravitational radiation directly. (By direct we mean "by 
observing the influence of the gravitational wave on test bodies," in contrast to 
observing the indirect effect of energy loss, as in the binary pulsar.) There is every 
reason to believe that such a detection will happen soon, either in already-existing 
gravitational-wave observatories or those being planned for the near future. Once 
we detect gravitational radiation, of course, the goal will immediately become to 
extract useful astrophysical infonnation from the observations. Our current under-
standing of the universe outside the Solar System comes almost exclusively from 
observations of electromagnetic radiation, with some additional input from neu-
trinos and cosmic rays; the advent of gravitational-wave astrophysics will open an 
entirely new window onto energetic phenomena in the distant universe.5 
Before discussing how we might go about detecting astrophysical gravitational 
waves, we should think about what sources are likely to be most readily observ-
able. The first important realization is that the necessary conditions for the gener-
ation of appreciable gravitational radiation are very different from those for elec-
tromagnetic radiation. The difference can be traced to the fact that gravitational 
waves are produced by the bulk motion of large masses, while electromagnetic 
waves are produced (typically) by incoherent excitations of individual particles. 
Electromagnetic radiation can therefore be produced by a source that is static in 
bulk, such as a star, which is a substantial advantage to the astronomer. However, 
gravitational waves are produced coherently by large moving masses (every par-
ticle in the mass contributes in the same sense to the wave), which can partially 
compensate for the impossibility of emission from static sources. 
We therefore need massive sources with substantial bulk motions. As a simple 
example, consider the binary system of Section 7.5, in which both stars have mass 
M and the orbital radius is R. We will cheat somewhat by applying the Newtonian 
fonnulae for the orbital parameters in a regime where GR has begun to become 
important, but this will suffice for an order-of-magnitude estimate. The relevant 
parameters can be distilled down to the Schwarzschild radius Rs = 2G M / c2, 
5For an overview of gravitational-wave astrophysics, see S.A. Hughes, S. Marka, P.L. Bender. 
and C.J. Hogan, "New physics and astronomy with the new gravitational-wave observatories, .. 
http://arxiv.org/astro-ph/0110349. 

316 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
the orbital radius R, and the distance r between us and the binary. (We will now 
restore explicit factors of c, to facilitate comparison with experiment.) In terms of 
these, the frequency of the orbit and thus of the produced gravitational waves is 
approximately 
Q 
cR 112 
f = 2:rr,...., 10;3;2· 
(7.194) 
From the formula (7 .149) for the resulting perturbation, we can estimate the 
gravitational-wave amplitude received as 
R2 
h ,...., -1. 
rR 
(7.195) 
Let's see what this implies for the kind of source we might hope to observe. A 
paradigmatic example is the coalescence of a black-hole/black-hole binary. For 
typical parameters we can take both black holes to be 10 solar masses, the binary 
to be at cosmological distances ,...., 100 Mpc, and the components to be separated 
by ten times their Schwarzschild radii: 
Rs,...., 106 cm 
R,...., 107 cm 
r,...., 1026 cm. 
Such a source is thus characterized by 
h,...., 10-21. 
(7.196) 
(7.197) 
If we are to have any hope of detecting the coalescence of a binary with these 
parameters, we need to be sensitive to frequencies near 100 Hz and strains of 
order 10-21 or less. 
Fortunately, these parameters are within the reach of our experimental capa-
bilities (with the heroic efforts of many scientists). The most promising technique 
for gravitational-wave detection currently under consideration is interferometry, 
and here we will stick exclusively to a discussion of interferometers, although it 
is certainly conceivable that a new technology could be invented that would have 
better sensitivity. 
Recall that the physical effect of a passing gravitational wave is to slightly per-
turb the relative positions of freely-falling masses. If two test masses are separated 
by a distance L, the change in their distance will be roughly 
f>L ,...., h. 
L 
(7.198) 
Imagine that we contemplate building an observatory with test bodies separated 
by some distance of order kilometers. Then to detect a wave with amplitude of 

7.7 
Detection of Gravitational Waves 
317 
order h ,...., 10-21 would require a sensitivity to changes of 
-16 ( 
h 
) ( L ) 
f>L ,...., 10 
10-21 
km 
cm. 
(7.199) 
Compare this to the size of a typical atom, set by the Bohr radius, 
ao ,...., 5 x 1 o-9 cm, 
(7.200) 
or for that matter the size of a typical nucleus, of approximately a Fenni, 
1fm=10- 13 cm. 
(7.201) 
The point we are belaboring here is that a feasible terrestrial gravitational-wave 
observatory will have to be sensitive to changes in distance much smaller than 
the size of the constituent atoms out of which any conceivable test masses would 
have to be made. 
Laser interferometers provide a way to overcome the difficulty of measuring 
such miniscule perturbations. Consider the schematic set-up portrayed in Fig-
ure 7 .11. A laser (typically with characteristic wavelength A ,...., 1 o-4 cm) is di-
rected at a beamsplitter, which sends the photons down two evacuated tubes of 
length L. At the ends of the cavities are test masses, represented by mirrors sus-
pended from pendulums. The light actually bounces off partially-reflective mir-
rors near the beamsplitter. so that a typical photon travels up and down the cavity 
FIGURE 7.11 A schematic design for a gravitational-wave interferometer. 

318 
Chapter 7 Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
of order I 00 times before returning to the beamsplitter and being directed into 
a photodiode. The system is arranged such that, if the test masses are perfectly 
stationary, the returning beams destructively interfere, sending no signal to the 
photodiode. As we have seen, the effect of a passing gravitational wave will be 
to perturb orthogonal lengths in opposite senses, leading to a phase shift in the 
laser pulse that will disturb the destructive interference. During I 00 round trips 
through the cavity arms. the accumulated phase shift will be 
Ot/> - 200 (2;) OL - 10-9, 
(7.202) 
where 200 rather than I 00 represents the fact that the shifts in the two arms add 
together. Such a tiny shift can be measured if the number of photons N is suffi-
ciently large to overcome the "shot noise"; in particular, if .JN> ~</>. 
The technological challenges associated with building sufficiently quiet and 
sensitive gravitational-wave observatories are being tackled in a number of dif-
ferent locations, including the United States (LIGO), Italy (Virgo), Germany 
(GEO), Japan (TAMA). and Australia (ACIGA). LIGO (Laser Interferometric 
Gravitational-Wave Observatory) is presently the most advanced detector; it con-
sists of two facilities (one in Washington state and one in Louisiana), each with 
four-kilometer arms. A single gravitational-wave observatory will be unable to 
localize a source's position on the sky; multiple detectors will be crucial for this 
task (as well as for verifying that an apparent signal is actually real). 
Fundamental noise sources limit the ability of terrestrial observatories to de-
tect low-frequency gravitational waves. Figure 7.12 shows the sensitivity regions. 
as a function of frequency, for two dramatically different designs: a terrestrial 
observatory such as LIGO, and a space-based mission such as LISA (Laser In-
terferometer Space Antenna). The general principle behind LISA is the same as 
any other interferometer, but the implementation is (or will be, if it is actually 
built) dramatically different. Current designs envision three spacecraft orbiting 
the Sun at approximately 30 million kilometers behind the Earth, separated from 
each other by S million kilometers. Due to the much larger separations, LISA is 
sensitive to frequencies in the vicinity of 10-2 Hz. The sensitivities portrayed in 
this plot should be taken as suggestive, as they depend on integration times and 
other factors. 
Many potential noise sources confront the gravitational-wave astronomer. For 
ground-based observatories, the dominant effect at low frequencies is typically 
seismic noise, while at high frequencies it comes from photon shot noise and at 
intennediate frequencies from thennal noise. Advanced versions of ground-based 
detectors may be able to compensate for seismic noise at low frequencies, but will 
encounter irreducible noise from gravity gradients due to atmospheric phenomena 
or objects (such as cars) passing nearby. Satellite observatories, of course, are 
immune from such effects. Instead, the fundamental limitations are expected to 
come from errors in measuring changes in the distances between the spacecraft 
(or more properly, between the shielded proof masses within the spacecraft) and 
from nongravitational accelerations of the spacecraft. 

7.7 
Detection of Gravitational Waves 
10-18 
10-4 
10-2 
100 
NS-NS and BH-BH 
coalescence 
319 
j 
SN core collapse 
LIGO 
frequency (Hz) 
FIGURE 7.12 Sensitivities as a function of frequency for representative ground-based 
(LIGO) and space-based (LISA) gravitational-wave observatories, along with the ex-
pected signals from possible sources. Figure from the LISA collaboration home page 
(http://lisa.jpl.nasa.gov/~ 
We can conclude with a very brief overview of possible sources for gravi-
tational-wave observatories. We have already mentioned the possibility of com-
pact binaries of various sorts. For ground-based observatories, such sources will 
not become visible until they are very close to coalescence, and then only if the 
components are sufficiently massive (neutron stars or black holes). Extrapolating 
from what we know about such systems suggests that there may be several coa-
lescences per year within a distance of a few hundred Mpc. Another promising 
possibility is core collapse in massive stars, giving rise to supernovae. Although 
a perfectly spherically-symmetric collapse would not generate any gravitational 
waves, realistic events are expected to be subject to instabilities that would break 
this symmetry. An exciting prospect is the coordinated observation of supernovae 
by ordinary telescopes and gravitational-wave observatories. Lastly, among pos-
sible sources for ground-based observatories are periodic sources such as (not-
completely-axially-symmetric) rotating neutron stars. The amplitudes from such 
sources are expected to be small, but not necessarily completely out of reach of 
advanced detectors. 
The interesting sources for space-based detectors are somewhat different. Most 
importantly, the known population of binaries in our galaxy will certainly provide 
a gravitational-wave signal of detectable magnitude. Indeed, unresolved binaries 
represent a source of confusion noise for the detector, as it will be impossible to 
pick out individual low-intensity sources from the background. Nevertheless, nu-
merous higher-intensity sources should be easily observable. In addition, various 

320 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
processes in the evolution of supennassive black holes (greater than I 000 M0 . 
such as those found in the centers of galaxies) lead to interesting sources: the for-
mation of such objects, their subsequent growth via accretion of smaller objects, 
and possible coalescence of multiple supennassive holes. Tracking the evolution 
of the gravitational-wave signal from a solar-mass black hole orbiting and even-
tually falling into a supennassive hole will allow for precision mapping of the 
spacetime metric, providing a novel test of GR. 
In addition to waves produced by localized sources, we also face the possibility 
of stochastic gravitational-wave backgrounds. By this we mean an isotropic set of 
gravitational waves, perhaps generated in the early universe, characterized by a 
smoothly-varying power spectrum as a function of frequency. One possibility is 
a nearly scale-free spectrum of gravitational waves produced by inflation, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 8. Such waves will be essentially impossible to detect directly 
on the ground (falling perhaps five orders of magnitude below the capabilities 
of advanced detectors), or even by LISA, but could conceivably be observable 
by a next-generation space-based mission. More likely, any such waves will first 
become manifest in the polarization of the cosmic microwave background. An-
other possibility, however, is generation of primordial gravitational waves from 
a violent (first-order) phase transition. Such waves will have a spectrum with a 
well-defined peak frequency, related to the temperature T of the phase transition 
by 
-3 ( 
T 
) 
f peak '"V IO 
I 000 Ge V 
Hz. 
(7.203) 
Thus, a first-order electroweak phase transition (T '"V 200 GeV) falls within the 
band potentially observable by LISA. This is especially intriguing, as some mod-
els of baryogenesis require a strong phase transition at this scale: it is provoca-
tive to think that we could leam something significant about electroweak physics 
through a gravitational experiment. 
7 .8 • EXERCISES 
1. Show that the Lagrangian (7.9) gives rise to the linearized version of Einstein's equa-
tion. 
2. Consider a thin spherical shell of matter. with mass M and radius R, slowly rotating 
with an angular velocity n. 
(a) Show that the gravito-electric field G vanishes, and calculate the gravito-magnetic 
field if in terms of M, R, and n. 
(b) The nonzero gravito-magnetic field caused by the shell leads to dragging of iner-
tial frames, known as the Lense-Thirring effect. Calculate the rotation (relative 
to the ine1tial frame defined by the background Minkowski metric) of a freely-
falling observer sitting at the center of the shell. In other words, calculate the 
precession of the spatial components of a parallel-transported vector located at 
the center. 

7 .8 
Exercises 
321 
3. Fermat's principle states that a light ray moves along a path of least time. For a medium 
with refractive index n(x), this is equivalent to extremizing the time 
(7.204) 
along the path. Show that Fermat's principle. with the refractive index given by n = 
I -
2<1>, leads to the correct equation of motion for a photon in a spacetime perturbed 
by a Newtonian potential. 
4. Show that the Lorenz gauge condition oµ)iJJ.V = 0 is equivalent to the harmonic 
gauge condition. This gauge is defined by 
Oxµ.= 0, 
(7.205) 
where each coordinate x/J. is thought of as a scalar function on spacetime. (Any func-
tion satisfying Of= 0 is known as an "harmonic function.") 
5. In the exercises for Chapter 3, we introduced the metric 
ds 2 = -(du dv + dv du)+ a 2(u)ctx2 + b2(u)dy2, 
(7.206) 
where a and b are unspecified functions of u. For appropriate functions a and b, this 
represents an exact gravitational plane wave. 
(a) Calculate the Christoffel symbols and Riemann tensor for this metric. 
(b) Use Einstein's equation in vacuum to derive equations obeyed by a(u) and b(u). 
(c) Show that an exact solution can be found. in which both a and bare determined 
in terms of an arbitrary function j(u). 
6. Two objects of mass M have a head-on collision at event (0, 0. 0, 0). In the distant 
past, t ~ -oo, the masses started at x ~ ±oo with zero velocity. 
(a) Using Newtonian theory. show that x (1) = ±(9Mt2/8) 1 /3. 
(b) For what separations is the Newtonian approximation reasonable? 
(c) Calculate hIT<n at (x, y, z) = (0, R, 0). 
7. Gravitational waves can be detected by monitoring the distance between two free fly-
ing masses. If one of the masses is equipped with a laser and an accurate clock, and the 
other with a good mirror. the distance between the masses can be measured by timing 
how long it takes for a pulse of laser light to make the round-trip journey. How would 
you want your detector oriented to register the largest response from a plane wave of 
the form 
ds 2 = -dt2 +[I+ A cos(w(I - z))] dx2 +[I - A cos(w(t - z))] dy2 + dz2? 
If the masses have a mean separation L. what is the largest change in the anival time 
of the pulses caused by the wave? What frequencies w would go undetected? 
8. The gravitational analog of bremsstrahlung radiation is produced when two masses 
scatter off each other. Consider what happens when a small mass m scatters off a 
large mass M with impact parameter b and total energy E = 0. Take M » m and 
M/b « I. The motion of the small mass can be described by Newtonian physics, 
since M / b « I. lf the orbit lies in the (x, y) plane and if the large mass sits at 

322 
Chapter 7 
Perturbation Theory and Gravitational Radiation 
(x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0), calculate the gravitational wave amplitude for both polarizations 
at (x, y, z) = (0, 0, r). Since the motion is not periodic, the gravitational waves will 
be burst-like and composed of many different frequencies. On physical grounds, what 
do you expect the dominant frequency to be? Estimate the total energy radiated by the 
system. How does this compare to the peak kinetic energy of the small mass? 
Hint: The solution for the orbit can be found in Goldstein (2002). The solution is: 
2b 
r= 
' 
I+ cos8 
{2b3( 8 I 
8) 
t = y M 
tan 2 + J tan3 2 . 
Time rnns from t = (-oo, oo). Rather than using the above implicit solution for 8(1) 
you might want to use 
. 
{M 
2 
8 = v 8b3 (I + cos 8) . 
9. Verify that the expression (7 .165) for the gravitational-wave energy-momentum tensor 
is invariant under gauge transformations hµ.v -. hµ.v + 28(µ.~v)· 
10. Show that the integral expression (7.173) for the total energy in gravitational pertur-
bations is independent of the spatial hypersurface :E. 

CHAPTER 
8 
Cosmology 
8.1 • MAXIMALLY SYMMETRIC UNIVERSES 
Contemporary cosmological models are based on the idea that the universe is 
pretty much the same everywhere-a stance sometimes known as the Copernican 
principle. On the face of it, such a claim seems crazy; the center of the sun, 
for example, bears little resemblance to the desolate cold of interstellar space. 
But we take the Copernican principle to apply only on the very largest scales, 
where local variations in density are averaged over. Its validity on such scales 
is manifested in a number of different observations, such as number counts of 
galaxies and observations of diffuse X-ray and y-ray backgrounds, but is most 
clear in the 3K cosmic microwave background (CMB). Although we now know 
that the microwave background radiation is not perfectly smooth (and nobody 
ever expected that it was), the deviations from regularity are on the order of 10-5 
or less, certainly an adequate basis for an approximate description of spacetime 
on large scales. 
The Copernican principle is related to two more mathematically precise prop-
erties that a manifold might have: isotropy and homogeneity. Isotropy applies 
at some specific point in the manifold, and states that the space looks the same 
no matter in what direction you look. More fonnally, a manifold M is isotropic 
around a point p if, for any two vectors V and W in TpM. there is an isometry 
of M such that the pushforward of Wunder the isometry is parallel with V (not 
pushed forward). It is isotropy of space that is indicated by the observations of the 
microwave background. 
Homogeneity is the statement that the metric is the same throughout the man-
ifold. In other words, given any two points p and q in M, there is an isometry that 
takes p into q. Note that there is no necessary relationship between homogene-
ity and isotropy; a manifold can be homogeneous but nowhere isotropic (such as 
R x S2 in the usual metric), or it can be isotropic around a point without being 
homogeneous (such as a cone, which is isotropic around its vertex but certainly 
not homogeneous). On the other hand, if a space is isotropic everywhere, then it 
is homogeneous. Likewise if it is isotropic around one point and also homoge-
neous, it will be isotropic around every point. Since there is ample observational 
evidence for isotropy, and the Copernican principle would have us believe that we 
are not the center of the universe and therefore observers elsewhere should also 
observe isotropy, we will henceforth assume both homogeneity and isotropy. 
323 

324 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
The usefulness of homogeneity and isotropy is that they imply that a space is 
maximally symmetric. Think of isotropy as invariance under rotations, and homo-
geneity as invariance under translations, suitably generalized. Then homogeneity 
and isotropy together imply that a space has its maximum possible number of 
Killing vectors. An extreme application of the Copernican principle would be to 
insist that spacetime itself is maximally symmetric. In fact this will tum out not to 
be true; observationally we know that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic 
in space, but not in all of spacetime. However, it is interesting to begin by con-
sidering spacetimes that are maximally symmetric (which are, after all, special 
cases of the more general situation in which only space is maximally symmetric). 
As we shall see, there is a sense in which such universes are "ground states" of 
general relativity. This discussion is less relevant to the observed universe than 
subsequent parts of this chapter, and empirically-minded readers are welcome to 
skip ahead to the next section. 
We mentioned in Chapter 3 that the Riemann tensor for a maximally symmetric 
n-dimensional manifold with metric gµ.v can be written 
(8.1) 
where K is a normalized measure of the Ricci curvature, 
R 
K= 
' 
n(n -
1) 
(8.2) 
and the Ricci scalar R will be a constant over the manifold. Since at any single 
point we can always put the metric into its canonical form (gµ.v = 1Jµ.v), the kinds 
of maximally symmetric manifolds are characterized locally by the signature of 
the metric and the sign of the constant K. The modifier "locally" is necessary to 
account for possible global differences, such as between the plane and the torus. 
We are interested in metrics of signature (- + ++).For vanishing curvature (K = 
0) the maximally symmetric spacetime is well known; it is simply Minkowski 
space, with metric 
ds2 = -dt2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz2. 
(8.3) 
The conformal diagram for Minkowski space is derived in Appendix H. 
The maximally symmetric spacetime with positive curvature (K > 0) is called 
de Sitter space. Consider a five-dimensional Minkowski space with metric ds~ = 
-du2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz2 + dw2, and embed a hyperboloid given by 
-u2 + x2 + y2 + z2 + w2 = a2. 
(8.4) 
Now induce coordinates {t, x, 8, </>} on the hyperboloid via 
u = a sinh(t /a) 
w =a cosh(t /a) cos x 

FIGURE 8.1 
Confonnal di-
agram for de Sitter spacetime. 
Spacelike slices are three-
spheres, so that points on 
the diagram represent two-
spheres except for those at 
left and right edges, which are 
points. 
8.1 
Maximally Symmetric Universes 
x =a cosh(t /a) sin x cos8 
y =a cosh(t /a) sin x sin 8 cos</> 
z =a cosh(t /a) sin x sin 8 sin</>. 
The metric on the hyperboloid is then 
325 
(8.5) 
ds2 = -dt 2 + a 2cosh2(t/a) [dx 2 + sin2 x(d82 + sin28d¢2)]. 
(8.6) 
We recognize the expression in round parentheses as the metric on a two-sphere, 
dQ~, and the expression in square brackets as the metric on a three-sphere, dQ~. 
Thus, de Sitter space describes a spatial three-sphere that initially shrinks, reach-
ing a minimum size at t = 0, and then re-expands. Of course this particular 
description is inherited from a certain coordinate system; we will see that there 
are equally valid alternative descriptions. 
These coordinates cover the entire manifold. You can generally check this by, 
for example, following the behavior of geodesics near the edges of the coordinate 
system; if the coordinates were incomplete, geodesics would appear to tenninate 
in finite affine parameter. The topology of de Sitter is thus R x S3• This makes 
it very simple to derive the confonnal diagram, since the important step in con-
structing confonnal diagrams is to write the metric in a fonn in which it is confor-
mally related to the Einstein static universe (a spacetime with topology R x S3, 
describing a spatial three-sphere of constant radius through time). Consider the 
coordinate transformation from t tot' via 
1 
cosh(t/a) = --. 
cos(t') 
The metric (8.6) now becomes 
a2 
ds2 = ---ds2, 
cos2(t') 
where ds2 represents the metric on the Einstein static universe, 
ds2 = -(dt')2 + dx 2 + sin2 x dQ~. 
The range of the new time coordinate is 
-7r /2 < t' < 7r /2. 
(8.7) 
(8.8) 
(8.9) 
(8.10) 
The confonnal diagram of de Sitter space will simply be a representation of the 
patch of the Einstein static universe to which de Sitter is confonnally related. 
It looks like a square, as shown in Figure 8.1. A spacelike slice of constant t' 
represents a three-sphere; the dashed lines at the left and right edges are the north 
and south poles of this sphere. The diagonal lines represent null rays; a photon 
released at past infinity will get to precisely the antipodal point on the sphere at 

326 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
future infinity. Keep in mind that the spacetime "ends" to the past and the future 
only through the magic of confonnal transfonnations; the actual de Sitter space 
extends indefinitely into the future and past. Note also that two points can have 
future (or past) light cones that are completely disconnected; this reflects the fact 
that the spherical spatial sections are expanding so rapidly that light from one 
point can never come into contact with light from the other. 
A similar hyperboloid construction reveals the K < 0 spacetime of maximal 
symmetry, known as anti-de Sitter space. Begin with a fictitious five-dimensional 
flat manifold with metric ds~ = -du2 - dv2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz2, and embed a 
hyperboloid given by 
-u2 _ v2 +x2 + y2 + z2 = -a2. 
(8.11) 
Note all the minus signs. Then we can induce coordinates { t', p, (), </>} on the 
hyperboloid via 
u =a sin(t') cosh(p) 
v =a cos(t') cosh(p) 
x = a sinh(p) cos() 
y = a sinh(p) sin() cos</> 
z = a sinh(p) sin() sin</>, 
yielding a metric on this hyperboloid of the fonn 
ds2 = a 2( - cosh2(p) dt'2 + dp2 + sinh2(p) dQ~). 
(8.12) 
(8.13) 
These coordinates have a strange feature, namelx that t' is periodic. From (8.12), 
t' and t' + 2:rr represent the same place on the hyperboloid. Since a,, is everywhere 
timelike, a curve with constant {p, (),</>}as t' increases will be a closed timelike 
curve. However, this is not an intrinsic property of the spacetime, merely an ar-
tifact of how we have derived the metric from a particular embedding. We are 
welcome to consider the "covering space" of this manifold, the spacetime with 
metric given by (8.13) in which we allow t' to range from -oo to oo. There are 
no closed timelike curves in this space, which we will take to be the definition of 
anti-de Sitter space. 
To derive the confonnal diagram, perform a coordinate transfonnation analo-
gous to that used for de Sitter, but now on the radial coordinate: 
so that 
1 
cosh(p) = --, 
cosx 
2 
2 
a 
-2 
ds = --2-ds , 
cos x 
(8.14) 
(8.15) 

8.1 
Maximally Symmetric Universes 
327 
t' = 1T 
anti-de Sitter 
t' = 0 
FIGURE 8.2 Conformal diagram for anti-de Sitter spacetime. Spacelike slices have the 
topology of R3, which we have represented in polar coordinates, so that points on the 
diagram stand for two-spheres except those at the left side, which stand for single points at 
the spatial origin. Infinity is a timelike surface at the right side. 
where ds2 represents the metric on the Einstein static universe (8.9). Unlike in 
de Sitter, the radial coordinate now appears in the conformal factor. In addition, 
for anti-de Sitter, the t' coordinate goes from minus infinity to plus infinity, while 
the range of the radial coordinate is 
(8.16) 
Thus, anti-de Sitter space is conformally related to half of the Einstein static uni-
verse. The conformal diagram is shown in Figure 8.2, which illustrates a few 
representative timelike and spacelike geodesics passing through the point t' = 0, 
x = 0. Since x only goes to 7r /2 rather than all the way to 7r, a spacelike slice 
of this spacetime has the topology of the interior of a hemisphere of S3; that is, 
it is topologically R3 (and the entire spacetime therefore has the topology R4). 
Note that we have drawn the diagram in polar coordinates, such that a point on 
the left side represents a point at the spatial origin, while one on the right side rep-
resents a two-sphere at spatial infinity. Another popular representation is to draw 
the spacetime in cross-section, so that the spatial origin lies in the middle and the 
right and left sides together comprise spatial infinity. 
An interesting feature of anti-de Sitter is that infinity takes the form of a time-
like hypersurface, defined by x = rr /2. Because infinity is timelike, the space 
is not globally hyperbolic, we do not have a well-posed initial value problem in 
terms of information specified on a spacelike slice, since information can always 
"flow in from infinity." Another interesting feature is that the exponential map is 
not onto the entire spacetime; geodesics, such as those drawn on the figure, which 
leave from a specified point do not cover the whole manifold. The future-pointing 
timelike geodesics, as indicated, can initially move radially outward from t' = 0, 
x = 0. but eventually refocus to the point t' = rr, x = 0 and will then move 
radially outward once again. 

328 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
As an aside, it is irresistible to point out that the timelike nature of infinity en-
ables a remarkable feature of string theory, the "AdS/CFT correspondence." Here, 
AdS is of course the anti-de Sitter space we have been discussing, while CFT 
stands for a confonnally-invariant field theory defined on the boundary [which is, 
for an n-dimensional AdS, an (n - 1 )-dimensional spacetime in its own right]. The 
AdS/CFT correspondence suggests that, in a certain limit, there is an equivalence 
between quantum gravity (or a supersymmetric version thereof) on an AdS back-
ground and a confonnally-invariant nongravitational field theory defined on the 
boundary. Since we know a lot about nongravitational quantum field theory that 
we don't know about quantum gravity, this correspondence (if it is true, which 
seems likely but remains unproven) reveals a great deal about what can happen in 
quantum gravity.1 
So we have three spacetimes of maximal symmetry: Minkowski (K = 0), 
de Sitter (K > 0), and anti-de Sitter (K < 0). Are any one of these useful models 
for the real world? For that matter, are they solutions to Einstein's equation? Start 
by taking the trace of the Riemann tensor as given by (8.1 ), specifying to four 
dimensions: 
Rµ.v = 3Kgµ.v. 
R = 12K. 
(8.17) 
So the Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric in a maximally symmetric space. 
A spacetime with this property is sometimes called an Einstein space; the Ein-
stein static universe is not an example of an Einstein space, which can sometimes 
be confusing. What is worse, we will later encounter the Einstein-de Sitter cos-
mology, which is not related to Einstein spaces, the Einstein static universe, or to 
de Sitter space. The Einstein tensor is 
G µ.v = Rµ.v - ! Rgµ.v = -3Kgµ.v· 
(8.18) 
Therefore, Einstein's equation Gµ.v = 8rrGTµ.v implies (in a maximally symmet-
ric spacetime, not in general) that the energy-momentum tensor is proportional to 
the metric: 
3K 
Tµ.v = - 8rrGgµ.v· 
(8.19) 
Such an energy-momentum tensor corresponds to a vacuum energy or cosmologi-
cal constant, as discussed in Chapter 4. The energy density and pressure are given 
by 
3K 
P = -p = 8rrG· 
(8.20) 
If p is positive, we get a de Sitter solution; if p is negative, we get anti-de Sitter. 
But in our universe, we have ordinary matter and radiation, as weU as a pos-
sible vacuum energy. Our maximally symmetric spacetimes are not compatible 
1 For a comprehensive review article, see 0. Aharony, S.S. Gubser, J.M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri, and 
Y. Oz, Phys. Rept. 323, 183 (2000), http: //arxiv.org/hep-th/9905111. 

8.2 
Robertson-Walker Metrics 
329 
with a dynamically interesting amount of matter and/or radiation. Furthermore, 
since we observe the visible matter in the universe to be moving apart (the uni-
verse is expanding, as discussed below), the density of matter was higher in the 
past; so even if the matter contribution to the total energy were negligible today, 
it would have been appreciable in the earlier universe. The maximally symmetric 
spacetimes are therefore not reasonable models of the real world. They do, how-
ever, represent the (locally) unique solutions to Einstein's equation in the absence 
of any ordinary matter or gravitational radiation; it is in this sense that they may 
be thought of as ground states of general relativity. 
8.2 • ROBERTSON-WALKER METRICS 
To describe the real world, we are forced to give up the "perfect" Copernican prin-
ciple, which implies symmetry throughout space and time, and postulate some-
thing more forgiving. It turns out to be straightforward, and consistent with ob-
servation, to posit that the universe is spatially homogeneous and isotropic, but 
evolving in time. In general relativity this translates into the statement that the uni-
verse can be foliated into spacelike slices such that each three-dimensional slice 
is maximally symmetric. We therefore consider our spacetime to be Rx~. where 
R represents the time direction and ~ is a maximally symmetric three-manifold. 
The spacetime metric thus takes the form 
ds2 = -dt2 + R2(t)du 2, 
(8.21) 
where t is the timelike coordinate, R(t) is a function known as the scale factor, 
and du 2 is the metric on~. which can be expressed as 
du 2 = Yij (u) du; duj, 
(8.22) 
where (u 1, u2, u3) are coordinates on ~ and Yij is a maximally symmetric three-
dimensional metric. The scale factor tells us how big the spacelike slice ~ is at 
the moment t. (Don't confuse it with the curvature scalar.) The coordinates used 
here, in which the metric is free of cross tenns dt du; and coefficient of dt 2 is 
independent of the ui, are known as comoving coordinates, a special case of the 
Gaussian nonnal coordinates discussed in Appendix D. An observer who stays at 
constant ui is also called "comoving." Only a comoving observer will think that 
the universe looks isotropic; in fact on Earth we are not quite comoving, and as a 
result we see a dipole anisotropy in the cosmic microwave background as a result 
of the conventional Doppler effect. 
Our interest is therefore in maximally symmetric Euclidean three-metrics Yij. 
We know that maximally symmetric metrics obey 
<3> R;jkl = k(YikYjl - YilYjk), 
(8.23) 
where for future convenience we have introduced 
k = <3> R/6, 
(8.24) 

330 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
and we put a superscript <3> on the Riemann tensor to remind us that it is associated 
with the three-metric YU, not the metric of the entire spacetime. The Ricci tensor 
is then 
(8.25) 
If the space is to be maximally symmetric, then it will certainly be spherically 
symmetric. We already know something about spherically symmetric spaces from 
our exploration of the Schwarzschild solution; the metric can be put in the fonn 
(8.26) 
where f is the radial coordinate and the metric on the two-sphere is dQ2 = 
d8 2 + sin2 8 d</>2 as usual. The components of the Ricci tensor for such a metric 
can be obtained from (5.14), the Ricci tensor for a static, spherically symmetric 
spacetime, by setting a = 0 and r = f, which gives 
<3> Ru = _;a1,B 
r 
<3> R22 = e- 213 (ra1,B -
1) + 1 
<3>R33 = [e-2f3(fa1,B -1) + l]sin28. 
(8.27) 
We set these proportional to the metric using (8.25), and can solve for ,B(f): 
,8 = -
~ ln(l - kf2), 
(8.28) 
which yields the metric on the three-surface ~, 
(8.29) 
Notice from (8.24) that the value of k sets the curvature, and therefore the size, of 
the spatial surfaces. It is common to nonnalize this so that 
ke{+l,0,-1}, 
(8.30) 
and absorb the physical size of the manifold into the scale factor R(t). 
The k = -1 case corresponds to constant negative curvature on ~. and is 
sometimes called open; the k = 0 case corresponds to no curvature on ~. and 
is called flat; the k = + 1 case corresponds to positive curvature on ~. and is 
sometimes called closed. The physical interpretation of these cases is made more 
clear using an alternative fonn of the metric, obtained by introducing a new radial 
coordinate x defined by 
(8.31) 

8.2 
Robertson-Walker Metrics 
331 
This can be integrated to obtain 
(8.32) 
where 
{ 
sin(x), 
k = +l 
Sk(X) = X, 
k = 0 
sinh(x), 
k = -1, 
(8.33) 
so that 
(8.34) 
For the flat case k = 0, the metric on ~ becomes 
du2 = dx2 + x2dn2 
= dx2 + dy2 + c1z2, 
(8.35) 
which is simply flat Euclidean space. Globally, it could describe R3 or a more 
complicated manifold, such as the three-torus S1 x S1 x S1. For the closed case 
k = +l we have 
du 2 = dx 2 + sin2 x drl.2, 
(8.36) 
which is the metric of a three-sphere. In this case the only possible global structure 
is the complete three-sphere (except for the nonorientable manifold RP3, obtained 
by identifying antipodal points on S3). Finally in the open k = -1 case we obtain 
(8.37) 
This is the metric for a three-dimensional space of constant negative curvature, a 
generalization of the hyperboloid discussed in Section 3.9. Globally such a space 
could extend forever (which is the origin of the word "open"), but it could also 
describe a nonsimply-connected compact space (so "open" is really not the most 
accurate description). 
The metric on spacetime describes one of these maximally-symmetric hyper-
surfaces evolving in size, and can be written 
(8.38) 
This is the Robertson-Walker (RW) metric. We have not yet made use of Ein-
stein's equation; that will detennine the behavior of the scale factor R(t). Note 
that the substitutions 

332 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
(8.39) 
leave (8.38) invariant. Therefore we can choose a convenient normalization. In 
the variables where the curvature k is normalized to { + 1, 0, - 1}, the scale factor 
has units of distance and the radial coordinate r (or x) is actually dimensionless; 
this is the most popular choice. We will flout the conventional wisdom and instead 
work with a dimensionless scale factor 
R(t) 
a(t) = -, 
Ro 
a coordinate with dimensions of distance 
r = Ror. 
and a curvature parameter with dimensions of (length)-2, 
k 
K=2· 
Ro 
(8.40) 
(8.41) 
(8.42) 
Note that K can take on any value, not just { + 1, 0, -1}. In these variables the 
Robertson-Walker metric is 
(8.43) 
To convert to the more common notation, just plug in the relations (8.40), (8.41 ), 
and (8.42). 
With the metric in hand, we can set about computing the connection coeffi-
cients and curvature tensor. Setting a = da/dt, the Christoffel symbols are given 
by 
aa 
ro11 = --....,... 
1 - Kr2 
r o 
· 2 
22 = aar 
rJ1 = r52 
fh = -r(l - Kr2) 
2 
3 
1 
f12=f13=-r 
r~3 = - sin () cos() 
fl _ 
Kr 
ll -
1 - Kr2 
r~3 = aar2 sin2 () 
3 
a 
fo3 = -a 
f!3 = -r(l - Kr2) sin2 () 
r~3 =cote, 
(8.44) 

8.3 
The Friedmann Equation 
333 
or related to these by symmetry. The nonzero components of the Ricci tensor are 
ii 
Roo = -3-a 
aa + 2a2 + 2K 
Ru = 
1 
2 
-Kr 
R22 = r 2(aii + 2a2 + 2K) 
RJ3 = r 2(aii + 2a2 + 2K) sin28, 
(8.45) 
and the Ricci scalar is then 
(8.46) 
8.3 • THE FRIEDMANN EQUATION 
The RW metric is defined for any behavior of the scale factor a(t); our next step 
will be to plug it into Einstein's equation to derive the Friedmann equation(s) 
relating the scale factor to the energy-momentum of the universe. We will choose 
to model matter and energy by a perfect fluid. It is clear that, if a fluid that is 
isotropic in some frame leads to a metric that is isotropic in some frame, the two 
frames will coincide; that is, the fluid will be at rest in comoving coordinates. The 
four-velocity is then 
uµ. = o, o, o, O), 
(8.47) 
and the energy-momentum tensor 
(8.48) 
becomes 
(
p 0 
Tµ.v = 
~ 
0 
(8.49) 
With one index raised this takes the convenient form 
Tµ. v = diag(-p, p, p, p). 
(8.50) 
Note that the trace is given by 
(8.51) 
Before plugging in to Einstein's equation, it is educational to consider the zero 
component of the conservation of energy equation: 

334 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
0 = Vµ.Tµ.o 
= aµ.Tµ.o + r~>.. T>..o -
r~0 Tµ.>.. 
a 
= -<Jop - 3-(p + p). 
a 
(8.52) 
To make progress we can choose an equation of state, a relationship between p 
and p. Often the perfect fluids relevant to cosmology obey the simple equation of 
state 
p= wp, 
(8.53) 
where w is a constant independent of time. Of course we are free to define the 
parameter w = p / p whether or not it remains constant; if w varies, however, it is 
not really legitimate to call p = wp the "equation of state." The conservation of 
energy equation becomes 
I> 
a 
- = -3(1 + w)-. 
P 
a 
If w is a constant, this can be integrated to obtain 
p <X a-3(l+w). 
(8.54) 
(8.55) 
To get an idea about what values of ware allowed, refer to the discussion of energy 
conditions in Chapter 4. The Null Dominant Energy Condition, which allows for a 
vacuum energy of either sign but otherwise requires matter that cannot destabilize 
the vacuum, implies 
lwl ~ 1. 
(8.56) 
While this requirement is by no means set in stone, it seems like a sensibly con-
servative starting point for investigations of what might happen in the real world. 
The two most popular examples of cosmological fluids are known as matter 
and radiation. Matter is any set of collisionless, nonrelativistic particles, which 
will have essentially zero pressure: 
PM =0. 
(8.57) 
Examples include ordinary stars and galaxies, for which the pressure is negligible 
in comparison with the energy density. Matter is also known as dust, and universes 
whose energy density is mostly due to matter are known as matter-dominated. 
The energy density in matter falls off as 
(8.58) 
This is simply interpreted as the decrease in the number density of particles as the 
universe expands. For matter the energy density is dominated by the rest energy, 

8.3 
The Friedmann Equation 
335 
which is proportional to the number density. Radiation may be used to describe 
either actual electromagnetic radiation, or massive particles moving at relative ve-
locities sufficiently close to the speed of light that they become indistinguishable 
from photons (at least as far as their equation of state is concerned). Although 
an isotropic gas of relativistic particles is a perfect fluid and thus has an energy-
momentum tensor given by (8.48), we also know that Tµ.v for electromagnetism 
can be expressed in terms of the field strength as 
(8.59) 
The trace of this is given by 
(8.60) 
But this must also equal (8.51 ), so the equation of state is 
PR= ~PR· 
(8.61) 
A universe in which most of the energy density is in the form of radiation is known 
as radiation-dominated. The energy density in radiation falls off as 
(8.62) 
Thus, the energy density in radiation falls off slightly faster than that in matter; 
this is because the number density of photons decreases in the same way as the 
number density of nonrelativistic particles, but individual photons also lose energy 
as a- 1 as they redshift, which we will see later. Likewise, massive but relativis-
tic particles will lose energy as they "slow down" in comoving coordinates. We 
believe that today the radiation energy density is much less than that of matter, 
with PM/ PR '"V 103. However, in the past the universe was much smaller, and the 
energy density in radiation would have dominated at very early times. 
As we have discussed, vacuum energy also takes the form of a perfect fluid, 
with an equation of state p A = - PA. The energy density is constant, 
0 
PA oc a . 
(8.63) 
Since the energy density in matter and radiation decreases as the universe expands, 
if there is a nonzero vacuum energy it tends to win out over the long term, as long 
as the universe doesn't start contracting. If this happens, we say that the universe 
becomes vacuum-dominated. de Sitter and anti-de Sitter are vacuum-dominated 
solutions. 
We now tum to Einstein's equation. Recall that it can be written in the form 
(4.45): 
(8.64) 

336 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
The µ v = 00 equation is 
ii 
-3- = 4:rrG(p + 3p), 
a 
and the µv = ij equations give 
ii 
(a)
2 
K 
- + 2 -
+ 2- = 4:rr G (p -
p ). 
a 
a 
a2 
(8.65) 
(8.66) 
There is only one distinct equation from µ v = i j, due to isotropy. We can use 
(8.65) to eliminate second derivatives in (8.66), and do a little cleaning up to 
obtain 
( ~)
2 = 8:rrG P _ !...., 
a 
3 
a2 
(8.67) 
and 
ii 
4:rrG 
- = --(p + 3p). 
a 
3 
(8.68) 
Together these are known as the Friedmann equations, and metrics of the form 
(8.43) obey these equations define Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) uni-
verses. In fact, if we know the dependence of p on a, the first of these (8.67) 
is enough to solve for a(t); when you hear people refer to the Friedmann equa-
tion, this is the one to which they are refening, whereas (8.68) is sometimes called 
the second Friedmann equation. 
A bunch of terminology is associated with the cosmological parameters, and 
we will just introduce the basics here. The rate of expansion is characterized by 
the Hubble parameter, 
(8.69) 
The value of the Hubble parameter at the present epoch is the Hubble constant, 
Ho. Current measw-ements lead us to believe that the Hubble constant is 70 ± 
I 0 km/sec/Mpc. (Mpc stands for megaparsec, which is 3.09 x 1024 cm.) Since 
there is still some uncertainty in this value, we often parameterize the Hubble 
constant as 
Ho = 1 OOh km/sec/Mpc, 
(8.70) 
so that h ~ 0.7. 'fypical cosmological scales are set by the Hubble length 

8.3 
The Friedmann Equation 
and the Hubble time 
dH = H0
1c 
= 9.25 x I027h- 1 cm 
= 3.00 x I03h- 1 Mpc, 
H -1 
IH = 
o 
= 3.09 x I017h- 1 sec 
= 9.78 x I09h- 1 yr. 
337 
(8.71) 
(8.72) 
Of course since we usually set c = l, you will see H0
1 referred to as both the 
Hubble length and the Hubble time. There is also the deceleration parameter, 
aa 
q = -"72, 
a 
which measures the rate of change of the rate of expansion. 
Another useful quantity is the density parameter, 
8:rrG 
p 
f2=-p=-, 
3H2 
Pcrit 
where the critical density is defined by 
3H2 
Pcrit = 8:rrG· 
(8.73) 
(8.74) 
(8.75) 
This quantity, which will generally change with time, is called the critical density 
because the Friedmann equation (8.67) can be written 
(8.76) 
The sign of K is therefore detennined by whether n is greater than, equal to, or 
less than, one. We have 
P < Pcrit 
# 
Q < 1 
P = Pcrit 
~ Q = 1 
open 
flat 
p > Pcrit 
~ n > 1 
~ K > 0 
~ closed. 
The density parameter, then, tells us which of the three Robertson-Walker ge-
ometries describes our universe. Detennining it observationally is of crucial im-
portance; recent measurements of the cosmic microwave background anisotropy 
lead us to believe that n is very close to unity. 

338 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
8.4 • EVOLUTION OF THE SCALE FACTOR 
Given a specification of the amounts of energy density Pi in different species 
i, along with their equations of state p; = p; (p; ), and the amount of spatial 
curvature K, one can solve the Friedmann equation (8.67) to obtain a complete 
history of the evolution of the scale factor, a(t). In general we simply numerically 
integrate the Friedmann equation (which is just a first-order differential equation), 
but it is useful to get a feeling for the types of solutions appropriate to different 
cosmological parameters. 
To simplify our task, let us imagine that all of the different components of 
energy density evolve as power laws, 
Pi = p;oa-n;. 
(8.77) 
Comparing to (8.55), this is equivalent to positing that each equation-of-state pa-
rameter Wi = Pi I Pi is a constant equal to 
Wi = ~n; -1. 
(S.78) 
We can further streamline our expressions by treating the contribution of spatial 
curvature as a fictitious energy density 
3K 
Pc 
5 
- 8rrGa2 ' 
(8.79) 
with a corresponding density parameter 
K 
nc = - ff2a2· 
(8.80) 
It's not an energy density, of course, so don't forget that this is just notational 
sleight-of-hand. The behaviors of our favorite sources are summarized in the fol-
lowing table. 
Wj 
ni 
matter 
0 
3 
radiation 
1 
4 
(8.81) 
31 
curvature 
-3 
2 
vacuum 
-1 
0 
In these variables, the Friedmann equation (8.67) can be written 
H 2 _ 8:rrG ~ . 
-
L.,,p,, 
3 
i(c) 
(8.82) 
where the notation Li(c) indicates that we sum not only over all the actual com-
ponents of energy density Pi, but also over the contribution of spatial curvature 

8.4 
Evolution of the Scale Factor 
339 
Pc· Note that if we divide both sides by H 2, we obtain 
t=Lni. 
(8.83) 
i(c) 
The right-hand side is not the total density parameter Q, which only gets contri-
butions from actual energy density (not curvature); we therefore have 
(8.84) 
Let's begin by asking what can happen if all of the Pi 's (including Pc) are non-
negative. Because H2 is proportional to Li(c) p;, the universe will never undergo 
a transition from expanding to contracting so long as Li(c) Pi =fa 0. We can also 
take the time derivative of the Hubble parameter, 
. 
a 
a 
.. (. )2 
H=~-
~ 
' 
and plug in the two Friedmann equations (8.67) and (8.68) to obtain 
iI = -4rrG Lo+ Wi)Pi· 
i (c) 
(8.85) 
(8.86) 
Since we are imagining that lw;I ~ l, when all the Pi's are nonnegative we will 
always have if ~ 0. In other words, the universe keeps expanding, but the expan-
sion rate continually decreases (which suggests the excellent question, what made 
it so large in the first place?). 
From (8.85) we see that a can be positive and if be negative at the same time-
the scale factor can be "accelerating" even though the expansion rate as measured 
by the Hubble parameter is decreasing (for example, if a oc t 2). This is an un-
avoidable subtlety of non-Euclidean geometry. The Hubble parameter and the 
derivative of the scale factor are the answers to two different questions. If we set 
two test particles at a fixed initial distance, and ask by how much they have sepa-
rated a short time thereafter, the answer is given by the Hubble parameter. If, on 
the other hand, we pick some fixed source, and ask how it appears to move away 
from us with time, the answer is given by the change in the scale factor. There 
are consequently two very different and equally legitimate senses of "accelerat-
ing" (or "decelerating"). In practice, "accelerating" usually refers to a situation in 
which a > 0, even if if < 0. This discussion is not completely academic; as we 
will see below, our current real universe seems to be of this type. 
It is by no means necessary that each p; should be nonnegative. Matter and 
radiation arise from dynamical particles and fields, and we consequently expect 
that their energy densities will never be negative; if they could be, empty space 
could decay into a collection of positive- and negative-energy fields. But vacuum 
and curvature are different stories. Vacuum energy is nondynamical, so a nega-
tive value cannot induce any instabilities, while curvature is simply a property 
of the spatial geometry, and can have either sign. If we therefore have either a 

340 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
negative vacuum energy or a positive spatial curvature (remember Pc oc -K), the 
Hubble parameter can vanish and even change sign. An example is provided by 
the de Sitter metric (8.6), which has a positive vacuum energy but also a positive 
spatial curvature; it describes a universe that initially collapses, reaches a turning 
point, and thereafter begins to expand. 
The real world is an untidy place, consisting of numerous different kinds of 
energy density. Because different sources evolve at different rates, however, for 
long periods the energy density will be clearly dominated by one kind of source. 
It is therefore very useful to examine solutions to the Friedmann equation when 
there is only one kind of energy density p oc a-n. Because we are including 
spatial curvature as an effective energy source, this means we are considering 
either flat universes dominated by a single source, or completely empty universes 
with spatial curvature. The Friedmann equation then implies 
a ()( a 1-n /2. 
(8.87) 
This can be immediately integrated to obtain 
I a O< 12/n 
(8.88) 
Consider for example a flat universe dominated by matter, Q = QM = 1; this 
is known as the Einstein-de Sitter model, and for a long time was the favorite 
(at least among theorists) to describe the real world. In an Einstein-de Sitter 
universe, the scale factor evolves as a oc 1213• A flat radiation-dominated uni-
verse, meanwhile, evolves as a oc t 112. The confonnal diagram for any such 
universe with n > 2 is derived in Appendix H. Even though we believe there 
are nonzero amounts of matter, radiation, and vacuum energy in the real universe, 
these solutions are still very useful; as we discuss later, the universe was radiation-
dominated at early times, and was matter dominated as the universe expanded 
from a,...., 1/3000 to a,...., 1/2. 
These solutions all feature a singularity at a = 0, known as the Big Bang. It 
represents the creation of the universe from a singular state, not an explosion of 
matter into a pre-existing spacetime. It might be hoped that the perfect symmetry 
of our FRW universes is responsible for this singularity, but in fact that's not 
true; cosmological singularity theorems show that any universe with p > 0 and 
p 2: 0 must have begun at a singularity. Of course the energy density becomes 
arbitrarily high as a ~ 0, and we don't expect classical general relativity to 
be an accurate description of nature in this regime; presumably quantum gravity 
becomes important, although it is unclear how at present. 
Looking at (8.88), we see that a universe dominated by vacuum energy (n = 0) 
is clearly a special case. The scale factor then expands as an exponential rather 
than a power law; the entire metric is 
(8.89) 

8.4 Evolution of the Scale Factor 
341 
where the Hubble parameter H is a constant. Of course, in Section 8.1 we al-
ready described a cosmological spacetime with a positive cosmological constant: 
de Sitter space, which featured K > 0 and a oc cosh(t /a). What is the relationship 
between that solution and the one here, with K = 0 and a oc exp(Ht)? They are 
the same spacetime, represented in different coordinates. One way to verify this 
is to calculate the Riemann tensor for (8.89) and check that it has the characteris-
tic fonn of a maximally symmetric spacetime, (8.1 ). Since maximally symmetric 
spacetimes with positive curvature are locally unique, the metrics (8.6) and (8.89) 
must describe the same manifold, or parts thereof. In fact, the coordinates of (8.89) 
only cover part of de Sitter; they are incomplete in the past. In the exercises you 
are asked to show that comoving geodesics in these coordinates reach t = -oo in 
finite affine parameter; they run into the edge of the coordinates. In the confonnal 
diagram of Figure 8.1, these coordinates cover the upper-right triangular portion 
of the square. See Hawking and Ellis (1973) for a more complete description of 
different coordinate systems on de Sitter and anti-de Sitter. 
Another interesting special case is the completely empty universe, with p = 0, 
but with spatial curvature. The Friedmann equation becomes 
2 
K 
H =-2, 
a 
(8.90) 
so the curvature K must be negative. Thinking of curvature as a fictitious energy 
density Pc oc a-2, from (8.88) we know that such a universe will expand linearly, 
a oc t. This spacetime is known as the Milne universe. However, just as with 
de Sitter, we know of another cosmological spacetime with p = 0-in this case, 
flat Minkowski space. Once again, the Milne spacetime is just a patch of Minkow-
ski in a certain incomplete coordinate system. It can be thought of as the interior 
of the future light cone of some fixed point in Minkowski, foliated by negatively-
curved hyperboloids. To check, it would suffice to calculate all of the components 
of the Riemann tensor, which tum out to vanish; any spacetime with vanishing 
Riemann curvature is locally Minkowski. 
In contrast to these idealized solutions, a realistic cosmology will feature sev-
eral fonns of energy-momentum. In the current universe, we feel confident that 
the radiation density is significantly lower than the matter density, but that vac-
uum and matter are both dynamically important. It is therefore convenient to 
parameterize universes like ours by QM and QA, with the curvature fixed by 
QC = 1 -
QM -
QA. The expansion history of some particular examples of 
such universes is shown in Figure 8.3. As these universes expand, the relative 
influences of matter, curvature, and vacuum are altered, since the corresponding 
densities evolve at different rates: 
(8.91) 
As a ~ 0 in the past, curvature and vacuum will be negligible, and the universe 
will behave as Einstein-de Sitter. As a ~ oo in the future, curvature and matter 
will be negligible, and the universe will asymptote to de Sitter; unless the scale 

342 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
HoU - to) 
FIGURE 8.3 Expansion histories for different values of QM and QA. From top to bot-
tom, the curves describe (QM, QA)= (0.3, 0.7), (0.3, 0.Q), (1.0, 0.0), and (4.0, 0.0). 
factor never reaches infinity, because the universe begins to recollapse at some 
finite time. 
Recollapse will always occur if the vacuum energy is negative; as the universe 
expands, the vacuum energy eventually dominates, and the effect of QA < 0 
is to cause deceleration and recollapse (just as the effect of QA > 0 is to push 
the universe apart). Recollapse is also possible with QA 2: 0, if QM is sufficiently 
large that it halts the universal expansion before QA has a chance to take over. The 
possibilities are expressed as different regions of the QM/ QA parameter space in 
Figure 8.4. The diagonal line represents Qtotal = l, implying K = 0. 
To detennine the dividing line between perpetual expansion and eventual rec-
ollapse, note that collapse requires the Hubble parameter to pass through zero as 
it changes from positive to negative. The scale factor a* at which this turnaround 
occurs can be found by setting H = 0 in the Friedmann equation, 
2 
8:rrG ( 
-3 
-2) 
H = 0 = -3-
PMoa* +PAO+ Pcoa* 
. 
(8.92) 
We can divide this by HJ, use Qco = 1 -
QMo -
QAo, and rearrange a bit to 
obtain 
(8.93) 
This is a cubic equation for a*, the scale factor at turnaround. Of course we don't 
actually care very much about a*; what we care about are the values of QAo, 
given QMo, for which a real solution to (8.93) exists. Solving the cubic equation 
and doing some math, we find that the value of QAO for which the universe will 
expand forever is given by 

8.4 
Evolution of the Scale Factor 
0.5 
positive 
spatial 
curvature 
expands 
forever 
nA 
01----~~~~r.-~----.__~;--~ 
-0.5 
negative ,., 
spatial ,;-/. 
curvature 
i ,, 
recoJJapses 
-1.___ ____ _,_ ______ .__ ____ _._ ____ __.. __ _, 
0 
0.5 
1.5 
2 
343 
FIGURE 8.4 Properties of universes dominated by matter and vacuum energy, as a func-
tion of the density parameters QM and QA. The circular region in the upper-Jeft comer 
represents roughly those values favored by experimental data (as of 2003). 
(8.94) 
Note that, when nAo = 0, open and flat universes (Qo = nMo ~ 1) will expand 
forever, while closed universes (Qo = f2Mo > 1) will recollapse. Traditional 
disdain for the the cosmological constant has led to a folk belief that this is a 
necessary correspondence; once the possibility of vacuum energy is admitted, 
however, any combination of spatial geometry and eventual fate is possible. 
In the upper-left comer of Figure 8.4, we have indicated the currently favored 
values of the cosmological parameters: QMO ,...., 0.3, QAO ,...., 0.7, as we will dis-
cuss in Section 8.7. This is well into the regime of perpetual expansion; if the 
vacuum energy remains truly constant (which it might not), our universe is fated 
to continue its expansion for all time. 
We end this section by noting the difficulty of finding static solutions to the 
Friedmann equations. To be static, we must have not only a = 0, but also a = 0. 
From (8.68), this can only happen if the pressure is 
(8.95) 
and from (8.67), there must be a nonvanishing spatial curvature 
K 
8:rrG 
2=--p. 
a 
3 
(8.96) 

344 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
Because the energy density and pressure must be of opposite sign, these condi-
tions can't be fulfilled if we only invoke matter or radiation. When Einstein first 
looked for cosmological solutions in GR, astronomers had not yet discovered that 
the universe was expanding, so the lack of static solutions was considered prob-
lematic. This provided the motivation for Einstein to introduce the cosmological 
constant; the static conditions can be satisfied by a combination of matter and 
vacuum energy, with 
(8.97) 
along with the appropriate positive spatial curvature. These parameters describe 
the Einstein static universe. Today we know that the universe is expanding, so 
this solution is of little empirical interest; it is, however, extremely useful to the-
orists, providing the basis for the construction of confonnal diagrams. 
8.5 • REDSHIFTS AND DISTANCES 
It is clear that we would like to determine a number of quantities observationally 
to decide which of the FRW models corresponds to our universe. Obviously we 
would like to determine Ho, since that is related to the age of the universe. We 
would also like to know Q, which determines K through (8.76). To understand how 
these quantities might conceivably be measured, let's consider geodesic motion in 
an FRW universe. There are a number of spacelike Killing vectors, but no timelike 
Killing vector to give us a notion of conserved energy. There is, however, a Killing 
tensor. If UJJ. = (1, 0, 0, 0) is the four-velocity of comoving observers, then the 
tensor 
(8.98) 
satisfies V(a Kµ.v) = 0 (as you can check), and is therefore a Killing tensor. This 
means that if a particle has four-velocity VJJ. = dxJJ. /dA., the quantity 
K2 = Kµ.v Vµ.Vv = a2[Vµ. Vµ. + (Uµ. VJJ.)2] 
(8.99) 
will be a constant along geodesics. Let's think about this, first for massive par-
ticles. Then we will have V µ. V µ. = - l, so 
(Vo)2 = 1 + iv12, 
where I Vl2 = g;j V; V j. We also have U µ. VJJ. = -v0, so (8.99) implies 
-
K 
IVI = -. 
a 
(8.100) 
(8.101) 
The particle therefore "slows down" with respect to the comoving coordinates as 
the universe expands. In fact this is an actual slowing down, in the sense that a gas 
of particles with initially high relative velocities will cool down as the universe 
expands. 

8.5 
Redshifts and Distances 
345 
A similar thing happens to null geodesics. In this case Vµ VJ.t = O, and (8.99) 
implies 
(8.102) 
But the frequency of the photon as measured by a comoving observer is w = 
-U µ VJ.l. The frequency of the photon emitted with frequency Wern will therefore 
be observed with a lower frequency Wobs as the universe expands: 
Wobs 
aern 
--=-
Wern 
aobs 
(8.103) 
Cosmologists like to speak of this in tenns of the redshift z between the two 
events, defined by the fractional change in wavelength: 
Aobs -
Aern 
Zern = 
Aern 
(8.104) 
If the observation takes place today (aobs = ao = 1 ), this implies 
1 
aern = 
· 
1 + Zern 
(8.105) 
So the redshift of an object tells us the scale factor when the photon was emitted. 
Notice that this redshift is not the same as the conventional Doppler effect; it 
is the expansion of space, not the relative velocities of the observer and emitter, 
which leads to the redshift. Nevertheless, if we observe galaxies over distances 
that are small compared to the Hubble radius H0
1 and the radius of spatial cur-
vature K- 112, the expansion of the universe looks very much like a set of galaxies 
moving apart from each other and the redshift looks very much like the Doppler 
effect. Consequently, astronomers often think of the redshift in tenns of a "veloc-
ity" v = cz, where c is the speed of light. Even though we know you can't really 
speak of the relative velocities between two objects at different points of a curved 
spacetime, the fiction works well over sufficiently short distances. Within this ap-
proximation, the "distance" d from us to a galaxy can be taken to be the instanta-
neous physical distance dp (the distance, in physical units such as centimeters, 
between us and the location of the galaxy along our current spatial hypersurface). 
Let's write the RW metric in the fonn 
ds 2 = -dt 2 + a2(t)R5 [ dx 2 + Sk2(x)dn2], 
(8.106) 
where Sk (X) is defined by (8.33), and k E { + l, 0, -1}. In this fonn, the instanta-
neous physical distance as measured at time t between us (X = 0) and a galaxy 
at comoving radial coordinate x is 
dp(t) = a(t)Rox, 
(8.107) 

346 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
where x remains constant because we assume both we and the observed galaxy 
are perfectly comoving. (They might not be, in which case it is trivial to include 
the corrections due to so-called "peculiar velocities.") Of course "distance" is in 
quotes because there are several inequivalent useful notions of distance once we 
leave this approximation, but they all agree when dp is small. Then the observed 
velocity (as inferred from the redshift) is simply 
. 
a 
v = dp = aRox = -dp. 
a 
Evaluated today, this becomes 
v = Hodp, 
(8.108) 
(8.109) 
the famous Hubble law: the observed recession velocity is directly proportional 
to the distance, for galaxies that are not too far away. 
If the redshift is not very small, we have to think more carefully about what 
we mean by "distance" in cosmology. The instantaneous physical distance is a 
convenient construct, but not itself observable, since observations always refer to 
events on our past light cone, not our current spatial hypersurface. In Euclidean 
space there are a number of different ways to infer the distance of an object; 
we could for example compare its apparent brightness to its intrinsic luminosity, 
or its apparent angular velocity to its intrinsic transverse speed, or its apparent 
angular size to its physical extent. For each of these cases, we can define a kind 
of distance that is what we would infer if space were Euclidean and the universe 
were not expanding. 
Let's start with the luminosity distance di, defined to satisfy 
2 
L 
di=--, 
4rrF 
(8.110) 
where Lis the absolute luminosity of the source and Fis the flux measured by the 
observer (the energy per unit time per unit area of some detector). This definition 
comes from the fact that in flat space, for a source at distance d the flux over 
the luminosity is just one over the area of a sphere centered around the source, 
F / L = 1/ A(d) = l/4rrd2• In an FRW universe, however, the flux will be diluted. 
Conservation of photons tells us that all of the photons emitted by the source will 
eventually pass through a sphere at comoving distance x from the emitter. But 
the flux is diluted by two additional effects: the individual photons redshift by a 
factor (1 + z), and the photons hit the sphere less frequently, since two photons 
emitted a time ~t apart will be measured at a time (1 + z)~t apart. Therefore we 
will have 
(8.111) 

8.5 
Redshifts and Distances 
347 
The area A of a sphere centered at comoving distance x can be derived from the 
coefficient of drl.2 in (8.106), yielding 
(8.112) 
where we have set a(t) = 1 because we are observing the photons today. Putting 
it all together yields 
(8.113) 
The luminosity distance di is something we might hope to measure, since there 
are some astrophysical sources whose absolute luminosities are known. But x is 
not observable, so we have to remove that from our equation. On a null geodesic 
(chosen to be radial for convenience) we have 
(8.114) 
or 
X = R-1 J dt = R-1 J da 
' 
0 
a 
0 
a2H(a) 
(8.115) 
where we have used H = a/ a. It is conventional to convert the scale factor to 
redshift using a= 1/(1 + z), so we have 
(8.116) 
In order to evaluate the Hubble parameter in this integral we use the Friedmann 
equation (8.67), which we write as in the previous section as 
(8.117) 
To simplify things, we may again assume that each density component evolves as 
a power law, 
p;(z) = p;oa-n; = p;o(l + z)n;, 
(8.118) 
Then we can write 
H(z) = HoE(z), 
(8.119) 
where 
[ 
] 
1/2 
E(z) = L rl.;o(l + z)n; 
, 
i (c) 
(8.120) 

348 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
where the density parameters Q; are defined by (8.74). The equations below in-
volving E(z) will be true whether or not the energy sources evolve as power laws; 
if they do not, simply use E(z) = H(z)/ Ho [where H(z) is determined by the 
Friedmann equation] rather than (8.120). 
So the luminosity distance is 
(8.121) 
Note that Ro drops out when k = 0, which is good, because in that case it is 
a completely arbitrary parameter. Even when it is not arbitrary, it is still more 
common to speak in tenns of f2co = -k/ R5HJ, which can be measured either 
directly through determinations of the spatial curvature, or by measuring the den-
sity parameter and using f2co = 1 - no. In tenns of this parameter we have 
(8.122) 
We therefore write the luminosity distance in tenns of measurable cosmological 
parameters as 
(8.123) 
Although it appears unwieldy, this equation is of central importance in cosmol-
ogy. Given the observables Ho and f2;o, we can straightforwardly calculate the 
luminosity distance to an object at any redshift z; equally well, we can measure 
di (z) for objects at a range of redshifts, and from that infonnation extract Ho 
and/or the Q;o's. 
Along with the luminosity distance are two other related distance measures. 
Just as the luminosity distance is the distance we infer from the intrinsic and 
observed luminosity of the source if we were in flat space, the proper motion 
distance dM is the distance we infer from the intrinsic and observed motion of 
the source. It is defined to be 
(8.124) 
where u is the proper transverse velocity (something you would measure, for ex-
ample, in k/s) and Bis the observed angular velocity. The angular diameter dis-
tance, meanwhile, is the distance we infer from the intrinsic and observed size of 
the source; it is defined to be 
R 
dA = -, 
() 
(8.125) 

8.6 
Gravitational Lensing 
349 
where R is the proper size of the object and () is its observed angular diameter. 
In both cases we can derive fonnulas analogous to (8.123); fortunately, the un-
wieldy dependence on the cosmological parameters is common to all the distance 
measures, and we are left with a simple dependence on redshift: 
(8.126) 
as you are encouraged to check. So if we measure one such distance, we can easily 
convert to any other; or we can measure different distances independently and use 
(8.126) to test the consistency of the RW framework. 
While we're contemplating distances, let's also consider the elapsed time be-
tween now and when the light from an object at redshift z was emitted. If the 
age of the universe today is to and the age when the photon was emitted is t*, the 
lookback time is 
to - t* = j'
0 
dt 
'* 1
1 
da 
= a. aH(a) 
- H-1 t°* __ 
d_z_' __ 
-
0 lo 
(1 + z')E (z') 
For example, consider a flat (k = 0) matter-dominated (p = PM 
universe. Then 
E(z) = (1 + z)312, 
so 
(8.127) 
(8.128) 
(8.129) 
The total age of a matter-dominated universe is obtained by letting t* ~ 0 (z* ~ 
00), 
to(MD) = ~Ho
1
• 
(8.130) 
For universes that are not completely matter-dominated, the factor of ~ will be not 
quite right, but for reasonable values of the cosmological parameters we usually 
H -1 
get to,...., 
0 . 
8.6 • GRAVITATIONAL LENSING 
In Chapter 7 we introduced the concept of gravitational lensing: the deflection and 
time delay of light by a Newtonian gravitational field. In addition to providing a 

350 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
FIGURE 8.5 The geometry of gravitational lensing, encapsulated in the lens equation 
(8.132). The effect of the lens is to distort the angles f3 that would be observed in a Hat 
Minkowski background into the angles 8. 
test of GR in the Solar System, lensing occurs in numerous astrophysical contexts, 
and has become an indispensable part of modem cosmology.2 
Two important features distinguish cosmological lensing from the case we dis-
cussed earlier: a Robertson-Walker metric replaces the Minkowski background, 
and the lenses themselves are often more complex than simple point masses. A 
typical lensing geometry is portrayed in Figure 8.5. Throughout this discussion 
we will assume that the lens is "thin"-much smaller in spatial extent than the 
distances between the source, lens, and observer. In this case we can sensibly 
speak of a unique distance to the lens, di, and between the lens and the source, 
dis. 
We describe a (possibly complicated) image on the sky by a set of angles be-
tween different components of the image. These angles can be thought of as two-
dimensional vectors on the sky. The effect of the lens is to distort the angles that 
would be observed in the absence of any deflection, such as the angle fi between 
the source and the lens, into a new image characterized by a set of angles B. We 
assume that the angles are small throughout. This map is described by the re-
duced lensing angle a = B - fi. According to the geometry shown in Figure 8.5, 
it is related to the actual deflection angle Ci by 
-
dis-. 
a=-a. 
ds 
(8.131) 
2 An excellent overview of gravitational lensing. from which our discussion bon·ows. can be found in 
R. Narayan and M. Bartelmann, "Lectures on GravitationaJ Lensing;• 13th Jerusalem Winter School 
in Theoretical Physics. http://arxiv.org/astro-ph/9606001. 

8.6 
Gravitational Lensing 
We therefore get the lens equation 
fi = e - disc;. 
ds 
The lens equation simply describes ray-tracing in a perturbed spacetime. 
351 
(8.132) 
Of course, we should think carefully about the "distances" d; portrayed in the 
figure. Lensing occurs in an expanding universe, which might also have spatial 
curvature. The lens equation will nevertheless hold if we define the distances d; 
to be such that the geometrical relations described by the lens equation hold. In 
other words, these are the distances that we would inf er, given the angles and 
transverse physical sizes, in a static Euclidean spatial background. But this is 
precisely the definition of the angular diameter distance (8.125). We therefore take 
all distances in this section to be angular-diameter distances. Note that angular-
diameter distances do not necessarily add, so that ds =I= di+ dis. 
As a simple example, consider a point mass lens. In our investigation of the 
Newtonian limit in Chapter 7, we found that the deflection angle for a photon 
traveling through a gravitational potential <I> is given by 
a= 2 f V.i<l>ds, 
which for a point mass M at an impact parameter b becomes 
....... 
4GM 
a=-b-. 
(8.133) 
(8.134) 
The impact parameter can be expressed as b = di8. The lens equation (8.132) 
becomes 
dis 4GM 
fJ=8---. 
dsdi e 
(8.135) 
It is illuminating to consider the simplest situation, in which the source and lens 
are collinear (fJ = 0). In that case, the source will be lensed into an Einstein ring 
surrounding the lens, at an angular separation given by the Einstein angle: 
BE= 
(8.136) 
The Einstein angle sets a characteristic scale for lensing, even in more compli-
cated configurations. We can also define an associated distance scale, the Einstein 
radius: 
(8.137) 

352 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
When converting to centimeters or other physical units, don't forget that c = 
in all of our equations. To get a feeling for the amount of lensing in typical as-
trophysical situations, we can consider two common occurrences: "microlensing" 
by approximately solar-mass objects within our galaxy, and cosmological lens-
ing by galaxies or clusters. In the fonner case the Einstein angle will be of order 
milliarcseconds, while in the latter case it will be of order arcseconds: 
llE = 0.9 C~J (1 O ;pc) milliarcsecs 
=0.9 
( 
1~ ) ( Gpc) arcsecs. 
10 M0 
D 
(8.138) 
Sticking for the moment with the point-mass lens, most often we will not be 
lucky enough to have source and lens perfectly aligned, although a number of 
spectacular examples of Einstein rings have been observed. Then we can solve 
(8.135) to obtain two values of the image angle, 
(8.139) 
The image at B+ will always be outside the Einstein angle, while ()_ will be in-
side. In fact this fonnula is somewhat misleading, as there will always be an odd 
number of images; for a point mass lens, the third image would be located at the 
same position as the lens itself. 
Now let's consider more general lenses than point masses. We know that the 
deflection angle will be given in tenns of the Newtonian gravitational potential 
by (8.133). We can define the lensing potential by integrating over past-directed 
geodesic paths emanating from the observer, as 
(8.140) 
In tenns of the lensing potential, we can straightforwardly derive the reduced 
lensing angle by taking the gradient, 
a= Vol/I 
dis J 
~ 
= 2-
V .L <l>ds. 
ds 
(8.141) 
Notice that the angular gradient Vo is related to VJ., the gradient with respect 
to transverse distance at the location of the lens, by a factor of di. The thin-
lens approximation allows us to collapse the integral to quantities evaluated at 
the location of the lens. We can also take the (two-dimensional) Laplacian of the 
lensing potential to obtain the convergence K, via 
f 

8.6 Gravitational Lensing 
353 
-
1 2 
K(8) = ·:{\19 l/f 
= di~is J 
v2<1> ds. 
(8.142) 
The convergence can be thought of as a measure of the integrated mass density. 
We can invert the above expressions to write both the lensing potential and the 
reduced deflection angle in tenns of the convergence, as 
l/J(B) = ~ J 
K(B') In IB - B'I d28' 
(8.143) 
and 
_ ... 
1 J -, e - e' 
2 , 
a(8) = -
K(8 ) ... 
... d 8 . 
7r 
18 - 8'1 
(8.144) 
To check these equations, remember that the vectors are defined only in the two 
transverse dimensions. 
The convergence describes the focusing of light rays by the gravitational lens. 
This focusing causes the source to appear larger (just as in a magnifying glass). 
According to Liouville's theorem of conservation of phase-space density for the 
photons emitted by the source, the surface brightness of the source will be con-
served under lensing; the increase in size therefore leads to magnification of the 
brightness. At the same time, we can have distortion caused by twisting of the 
light rays through the lens, which leads to shear of the shape of the image. To 
describe both phenomena, we consider the 2 x 2 matrix of derivatives of the lens 
map, 
(8.145) 
Note that there is no real distinction between upper and lower indices, as they are 
defined in a two-dimensional Euclidean plane. Since fi = B - a, we have 
aai 
Aij = ~ij -
a9j 
= ~ij -
1/1;1, 
where we have introduced the notation 
(8.146) 
(8.147) 
This matrix A encodes the local properties of the lensing map. Its inverse matrix 
is known as the magnification tensor, 

354 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
(8.148) 
Why does it get this name? The lens distorts an area element described by fi into 
one described by 8, and the change in area is described by the Jacobian of this 
map, which is simply the determinant of M. This determinant is defined as the 
magnification µ, 
1 
µ=IMI=-. 
IAI 
(8.149) 
The absolute magnitude ofµ tells us the actual change in brightness of the source; 
µ may be negative, which means that the parity of the image has been flipped. We 
speak of magnification because lensing is only noticeable if the lens and source 
are near to each other on the sky, in which case the focusing effect leads only to 
increases in the apparent brightness; a lens far away from the source (in position 
on the sky) would lead to a miniscule decrease in the luminosity that will never 
be noticed. (If there are multiple images, the sum of the brightnesses of all the 
images will exceed that of the undistorted source.) 
The components of A can be decomposed into the effects of convergence and 
shear. For the convergence, from K = ~ V~'l/I we have 
(8.150) 
The shear, meanwhile, distorts the shape of the source; if an initially circular 
source is distorted into an ellipse of ellipticity y and position angle </>, we define 
the two components of the shear to be 
YI = y cos(2</>) 
Y2 = y sin(2</>), 
(8.151) 
so that the total shear is y = J d + yf. In tenns of the lensing potential the 
components are given by 
YI = ! ( 
1/111 - 1/122) 
Y2 = 1/II2 = 1/12I · 
Inverting these relationships to find the components of A yields 
( 
1 -
K -
YI 
A= 
-y2 
-y2 
) 
1 -
K +YI 
. 
(8.152) 
(8.153) 
We can therefore express the magnification in tenns of the convergence and shear, 
as 
1 
µ-------=--____,... 
-
(1 _ K)2 _ y2. 
(8.154) 

8.7 
Our Universe 
355 
These features of lensing are becoming increasingly important in observational 
cosmology. The obvious case of interest is so-called "strong lensing," when the 
source is within the Einstein radius of the lens, and multiple images are possible. 
By observing several images of a single source, we can infer properties of the lens 
mass distribution (for example, to search for dark matter); we can also use the time 
delay along different paths to measure the Hubble constant, and the statistical fre-
quency of lensing to constrain other cosmological parameters. However, lensing 
need not be strong to have an important effect. "Weak lensing," when the source 
and lens are separated by more than an Einstein radius, will generally lead to 
small amounts of magnification and shear which are impossible to detect without 
a priori knowledge of the properties of the source. However, the shearing effect 
can be detected statistically, by looking at the shapes of thousands of galaxies that 
are assumed to be intrinsically random in their orientations. Shearing by weak 
lensing leads to correlated distortions in the shapes, which can reveal a great deal 
about the distribution of matter between the observer and the distant sources. 
8.7 • OUR UNIVERSE 
Throughout our discussion of the behavior of FRW cosmologies, we have alluded 
to the actual values of the cosmological parameters corresponding to the universe 
in which we live. Let us now be more systematic, and discuss both the universe we 
see today and a plausible extrapolation back to early times. Our discussion will 
necessarily be brief, both for reasons of space and because cosmology is an active 
area of research; look for recent review articles to get up-to-date descriptions of 
current views. 
Many of our direct determinations of the expansion rate rely on the luminosity-
distance fonnula (8.123) applied to some type of object whose intrinsic luminos-
ity is assumed to be known, which we call standard candles. (Occasionally we 
measure the angular diameters of objects whose intrinsic size is assumed to be 
known: standard rulers.) The Hubble constant, for example, is measured with a 
variety of standard candles, and a consensus of different methods has converged 
on the value Ho= 70± 10 km/sec/Mpc, mentioned above. Deviations at high red-
shift from the linear Hubble law (8.109) can yield infonnation about the density 
parameters Q;o, but only if we have very bright objects whose intrinsic luminos-
ity is accurately known. These are provided by 'fype Ia supernovae, which are 
thought to be explosions of white dwarf stars that have accreted enough mass to 
surpass the Chandrasekhar limit. Since the Chandrasekhar limit is close to univer-
sal, the associated explosions are essentially of equal brightness (and some of the 
intrinsic variability can actually be accounted for by following the evolution of 
the brightness through time). It was measurements of SNe Ia at redshifts z > 0.3 
that provided the first direct evidence for a nonzero cosmological constant; these 
observations imply that QA is actually larger than QM. Recall that matter is pres-
sureless, PM = 0, whereas vacuum energy is associated with a negative pressure, 
PA = -PA· Plugging into the second Friedmann equation (8.68) we find that a 

356 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
universe with both matter and A obeys 
a 
4:rrG 
~ = --3-(PM - 2pA). 
(8.155) 
Thus, if PA is sufficiently large compared to PM (as the supernova observations 
indicate), we can have a > 0, an accelerating universe (in the sense described in 
Section 8.4). 
The matter density itself is measured by a variety of methods, often involving 
measuring the density PM by looking for the gravitational effects of clustered 
matter and then extrapolating to large scales. Because PM = (3H2 /8:rrG)QM, 
limits obtained in this way are often quoted in terms of f2Mh 2, where h is defined 
in (8.70). These days the uncertainty on Ho appears to be small enough that it is 
fairly safe to take h2 ~ 0.5, which we do henceforth. Most contemporary methods 
are consistent with the result 
f2MO = 0.3 ± 0.1. 
(8.156) 
Before there was good evidence for a cosmological constant, this low matter 
density was sometimes taken as an indication that space was negatively curved, 
K < 0. 
In addition to matter and cosmological constant, we also have radiation in the 
universe. Ordinary photons are the most obvious component of the radiation den-
sity, but any relativistic particle would contribute. For photons, most of the en-
ergy density resides in the cosmic microwave background, the leftover radiation 
from the Big Bang. Besides photons, the only obvious candidates for a radiation 
component are neutrinos. We expect that the number density of relic background 
neutrinos is comparable to that of photons; the photon density is likely to be some-
what larger, as photons can still be created after the number of neutrinos has be-
come fixed. However, if the mass of the neutrinos is sufficiently large (greater 
than about 10-4 eV), they will have become nonrelativistic today, and contribute 
to matter rather than to radiation. Current ideas about neutrino masses suggest 
that this probably is the case, but it is not perfectly clear. Furthermore, it is con-
ceivable that there are as-yet-undetected massless particles in addition to the ones 
we know about (although they can't be too abundant, or they would suppress the 
fonnation of large-scale structure.) Altogether, it seems likely that the total radia-
tion density is of the same order of magnitude as the photon density; in this case 
we would have 
(8.157) 
As mentioned before, it is not surprising that the radiation density is lower than 
the matter density, as the fonner decays more rapidly as the universe expands. 
The radiation density goes as a-4, while that in matter goes as a-3; so the epoch 
of matter-radiation equality occurred at a redshift 
nMo 
3 
Zeq ~ -
,...., 3 X 10 . 
(8.158) 
f2RO 

8.7 Our Universe 
357 
A further crucial constraint on the cosmological parameters comes from 
anisotropies in the temperature of the microwave background. The average tem-
perature is TcMB = 2.74K, but in 1992 the COBE satellite discovered fluctuations 
from place to place at a level of !!:. T / T '"" 10-5. These anisotropies arise from a 
number of sources, including gravitational redshlft/blueshift from photons mov-
ing out of potential wells at recombination (the Sachs-Wolfe effect, dominant on 
large angular scales), intrinsic temperature fluctuations at the surface of last scat-
tering (dominant on small angular scales), and the Doppler effect from motions of 
the plasma. The physics describing the evolution of CMB anisotropies is outside 
the scope of this book. A map of the CMB temperature over the entire sky clearly 
contains a great deal of infonnation, but no theory predicts what the temperature 
at any given point is supposed to be. Instead, modem theories generally predict 
the expectation value of the amount of anisotropy on any given angular scale. We 
therefore decompose the anisotropy field into spherical harmonics, 
(8.159) 
The expectation value of la1m 12 is likely to be independent of m; otherwise the 
statistical characteristics of the anisotropy will change from place to place on 
the sky (although we should keep an open mind). The relevant parameters to be 
measured are therefore 
(8.160) 
Since for any fixed l, there are 21 + 1 possible values of m (from -l to l), at 
all but the lowest l's there are enough independent measurements of the aim 's to 
accurately determine their expectation values. The irreducible uncertainty at very 
small / is known as cosmic variance. 
Numerous experiments have measured the C1 's (the so-called CMB power 
spectrum), and improving these measurements is likely to be an important task 
for a number of years. (In addition to the temperature anisotropy, a great deal of 
infonnation is contained in the polarization of the CMB, which is another target of 
considerable experimental effort.) To tum these observations into useful infonna-
tion, we need a specific theory to predict the CMB power spectrum as a function 
of the cosmological parameters. There are two leading possibilities (although one 
is much more leading than the other): either density perturbations are imprinted on 
all scales at extremely early times even modes for which the physical wavelength 
A was much larger than the Hubble radius H- 1, or local dynamical mechanisms 
act as sources for anisotropies at all epochs. The latter possibility has essentially 
been ruled out by the CMB data; if anisotropies are produced continuously, we 
expect a relatively smooth, featureless spectrum of C1 's, whereas the observations 
indicate a significant amount of structure. It is therefore much more popular to 
imagine a primordial source of perturbations, such as inflation (discussed in the 
next section). Inflationary perturbations are adiabatic-perturbations in the mat-

358 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
ter density are correlated with those in the radiation density-and of nearly equal 
magnitude at all scales. With this input, we can make definite predictions for the 
C1 's as a function of all the cosmological parameters. Perhaps the most significant 
constraint obtained from experiments thus far is that universe is spatially flat, or 
nearly so; IQcol < 0.1. Combined with the measurements of the matter density 
QM~ 0.3, we conclude that the vacuum energy density parameter should be 
QAo = 0.1 ± o.I. 
(8.161) 
This is nicely consistent with the Type Ia supernova results described above; the 
concordance picture described here is that indicated in Figure 8.4. Converting 
from density parameter to physical energy density using Ho = 70 km/sec/Mpc 
yields 
Pvac ~ 10-8 erg/cm3, 
(8.162) 
as mentioned in our discussion of vacuum energy in Section 4.5. 
One more remarkable feature completes our schematic picture of the present-
day universe. We have mentioned that about 30% of the energy density in our 
universe consists of matter. But to a cosmologist, "matter" is any coUection of 
nonrelativistic particles; the matter we infer from its gravitational influence need 
not be the same kind of ordinary matter we are familiar with from our experience 
on Earth. By ordinary matter we mean anything made from atoms and their 
constituents (protons, neutrons, and electrons); this would include all of the stars, 
planets, gas, and dust in the universe, immediately visible or otherwise. Occasion-
ally such matter is referred to as baryonic matter, where baryons include protons, 
neutrons, and related particles (strongly interacting particles carrying a conserved 
quantum number known as baryon number). Of course electrons are conceptually 
an important part of ordinary matter, but by mass they are negligible compared to 
protons and neutrons: 
mp= 0.938 GeV 
mn = 0.940 GeV 
me = 0.511 x 10-3 GeV. 
(8.163) 
In other words, the mass of ordinary matter comes overwhelmingly from baryons. 
Ordinary baryonic matter, it turns out, is not nearly enough to account for the 
observed density QM ~ 0.3. Our cwTent best estimates for the baryon density 
yield 
Qb = o.04 ± 0.02, 
(8.164) 
where these error bars are conservative by most standards. This determination 
comes from a variety of methods: direct counting of baryons (the least precise 
method), consistency with the CMB power spectrum (discussed above), and 
agreement with the predictions of the abundances of light elements for Big-Bang 
nucleosynthesis (discussed below). Most of the matter density must therefore be 

8.7 
Our Universe 
359 
in the form of nonbaryonic dark matter, which we will abbreviate to simply 
"dark matter." (Baryons can be dark, but it is increasingly common to reserve the 
terminology for the nonbaryonic component.) Essentially every known particle 
in the Standard Model of particle physics has been ruled out as a candidate for 
this dark matter. Fortunately, there are a number of plausible candidates beyond 
the Standard Model, including neutralinos (the lightest of the additional stable 
particles predicted by supersymmetry, with masses 2:: 100 Ge V) and axions (light 
pseudoscalar particles arising from spontaneous breakdown of a hypothetical 
Peccei-Quinn symmetry invoked to explain conservation of CP in the strong 
interactions, with masses ,...., 10-4 e V). One of the few things we know about 
the dark matter is that it must be cold-not only is it nonrelativistic today, but 
it must have been that way for a very long time. If the dark matter were hot, it 
would have free-streamed out of overdense regions, suppressing the fonnation 
of galaxies. The other thing we know about cold dark matter (COM) is that it 
should interact very weakly with ordinary matter, so as to have escaped detection 
thus far. Nevertheless, ambient dark matter particles may occasionally scatter 
off carefully shielded detectors in terrestrial laboratories; the attempt to directly 
detect dark matter by searching for the effects of such scatterings will be another 
significant experimental effort in the years to come. 
The picture in which QM = 0.3 and QA = 0.7 seems to fit an impressive 
variety of observational data. The most surprising part of the picture is the cos-
mological constant. In Chapter 4 we mentioned that a na1ve estimate of the vac-
uum energy yields a result many orders of magnitude larger than what has been 
measured. In fact there are three related puzzles: Why is the cosmological con-
stant so much smaller than we expect? What is the origin of the small nonzero 
energy that comprises 70% of the current universe? And, why is the current value 
of the vacuum energy of the same order of magnitude as the matter density? The 
last problem is especially severe, as the vacuum energy and matter density evolve 
rapidly with respect to each other: 
(8.165) 
If QM and QA are comparable today, in the past the vacuum energy would have 
been undetectably small, while in the future the matter density will be negligible. 
This "coincidence problem" has thus far proven to be a complete mystery. One 
suggested solution involves the "anthropic principle." If there are many distinct 
parts of the universe (in space, or even in branches of the wavefunction) in which 
the cosmological constant takes on very different values, intelligent life is most 
likely to arise in those places where the absolute magnitude is not too large-a 
large positive A would tear particles apart before galaxies could fonn, while a 
large negative A would cause the universe to recollapse before life could evolve. 
The anthropic explanation of the observed vacuum energy provides a good fit to 
the data, although the need to invoke such an elaborate scheme to explain this one 
quantity strikes some as slightly extravagant. 

360 
V(<f>) 
FIGURE 8.6 Potential en-
ergy 
for 
a slowly-rolling 
scalar field. 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
Another possibility that may (or may not) bear on the coincidence problem is 
the idea that we have not detected a nonzero cosmological constant, but rather a 
dynamical component that closely mimics the properties of vacuum energy. Con-
sideration of this possibility has led cosmologists to coin the tenn dark energy 
to describe whatever it is that has been detected, whether it is dynamical or turns 
out to be a cosmological constant after all. What we know about the dark energy 
is that it is relatively smoothly distributed through space (or it would have been 
detected through its local gravitational field, just like dark matter) and is evolving 
slowly with time (or it would not make the universe accelerate, as indicated by 
the supernova data). A simple candidate for a dynamical source of dark energy is 
provided by a slowly-rolling scalar field. Consider a field</> with the usual action 
for which the energy-momentum tensor is 
and the equation of motion is 
dV 
D</>- -
=0. 
d</> 
(8.166) 
(8.167) 
(8.168) 
Assume that the field is completely homogeneous through space ((J;</> = 0). Then 
using the Christoffel symbols (8.44 ), we may express the d' Alembertian in tenns 
of time derivatives and the Hubble constant to write (8.168) as 
•• 
• 
dV 
</>+3H</>+- = 0. 
d</> 
(8.169) 
We see that the Hubble parameter acts as a friction tenn; the field will tend to roll 
down the potential, but when H is too large the motion will be damped. Therefore, 
a scalar field with a sufficiently shallow potential (as portrayed in Figure 8.6) will 
roll very slowly, leading to a kinetic energy much smaller than the potential energy 
V(</>). The energy-momentum tensor is then 
(8.170) 
where</> ~constant. Comparing to (4.96), we see that the scalar field potential 
is mimicking a vacuum energy. As a simple example consider a quadratic po-
tential, V (</>) = !m2</>2. Then (8.169) describes a damped harmonic oscillator, 
and overdamping will occur if H > m. But in particle-physics units, the Hubble 
constant today is Ho ~ 10-33 eV, so the mass of this scalar field would have to 
be incredibly tiny compared to the masses of the familiar elementary particles in 
equation (8.163). This seems to be an unnatural fine-tuning. Nevertheless, models 

8.7 
Our Universe 
361 
of dynamical dark energy are being actively explored, partially in the hope that 
they will lead somehow to a solution of the coincidence problem. 
With this view of the contemporary situation, we can imagine what the early 
universe must have been like to have produced what we see today. For purposes 
of physical intuition it is often more helpful to keep track of the era under consid-
eration by indicating the temperature rather than the redshift or time since the Big 
Bang. The temperature today is 
To= 2.74 K = 2.4 x 10-4 eV. 
(8.171) 
Of course, by "temperature" we mean the apparent blackbody temperature of the 
cosmic microwave background; in fact the CMB has not been in thermal equi-
librium since recombination, so one should be careful in taking this concept too 
literally. Under adiabatic expansion, the temperature decreases as each relativistic 
particle redshifts, and we have T oc a- 1• But there will be nonadiabatic phase 
transitions at specific moments in the early universe; in such circumstances the 
temperature doesn't actually increase, but decreases more gradually. To help relate 
the temperature, density, and scale factor, we introduce two different measures of 
the effective number of relativistic degrees of freedom: g* and g*s (where S 
stands for entropy). Consider a set of bosonic and fermionic species, each with 
their own effective temperature T;, and number of spin states g;. For example, a 
massless photon has two spin states, so gy = 2; a massive spin-! fermion also 
has two spin states, so ge- = ge+ = 2. The two different versions of the effective 
number of relativistic degrees of freedom obey 
(T;)4 7 
(T;)4 
g* = L g; T 
+ 8 ~ g; T 
bosons 
fenruons 
(8.172) 
and 
(T;)3 7 
(T;)3 
g*s = L g; T 
+ 8 ~ g; T 
bosons 
fenruons 
(8.173) 
The mysterious factors of ~ arise from the difference between Bose and Fermi 
statistics when calculating the equilibrium distribution function. For any species 
in thennal equilibrium, the temperature T; will be equal to the background tem-
perature T; but we might have decoupled species at a lower temperature, which 
contribute less to the effective number of relativistic degrees of freedom. The rea-
son why we need to define two different measures is that they play different roles; 
the first relates the temperature to the energy density (in relativistic species) via 
7r2 
PR= 30g*T4, 
(8.174) 
while the second relates the temperature to the scale factor, 
T 
-1/3 -1 
°' g*s a 
(8.175) 

362 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
In fact, g* and g*s are expected to be approximately equal so long as the rela-
tivistic degrees of freedom are those of the Standard Model of particle physics. A 
very rough guide is given by 
{ 
100 
T > 300 Me V 
g* ~ g*s "" 
3
10 
300 MeV > T > 1 MeV 
T < 1 MeV. 
(8.176) 
As we will discuss shortly, the events that change the effective number of rel-
ativistic degrees of freedom are the QCD phase transition at 300 Me V, and the 
annihilation of electron/positron pairs at 1 Me V. 
With this background, let us consider the evolution of the universe from early 
times to today. To begin we imagine a Robertson-Walker metric with matter 
fields in thennal equilibrium at a temperature of 1 TeV = 1000 GeV. The high-
temperature plasma is a complicated mixture of elementary particles (quarks, lep-
tons, gauge and Higgs bosons). The dominant fonn of energy density will be rela-
tivistic particles, so the early universe is radiation-dominated. It is also very close 
to flat, since the curvature tenn in the Friedmann equation evolves more slowly 
than the matter and radiation densities. The Friedmann equation is therefore 
H2 = 8:rrG PR 
3 
(8.177) 
where the reduced Planck scale is mp= (8:rrG)- 112 ~ 1018 GeV. If the radiation-
dominated phase extends back to very early times, the age of the universe will be 
approximately t ,..._, H- 1, or 
In conventional units this becomes 
mp 
t ,..._, T2. 
(8.178) 
(8.179) 
Current experiments at particle accelerators have provided an accurate picture 
of what physics is like up to perhaps 100 Ge V, so an additional order of magnitude 
is within the realm of reasonable extrapolation. At higher temperatures we are 
less sure what happens; there might be nothing very interesting between 1 Te V 
and the Planck scale, or this regime could be filled with all manner of surprises. 
Of course it is also conceivable that cosmology provides surprises at even lower 
temperatures, even though the Standard Model physics is well understood; in this 
section we are describing a conservative scenario, but as always it pays to keep an 
open mind. 

8.7 
Our Universe 
363 
A crucial feature of the Standard Model is the spontaneously broken sym-
metry of the electroweak sector. In cosmology, this symmetry breaking occurs 
at the electroweak phase transition, at T ,...., 200 GeV. Above this temperature 
the symmetry is unbroken, so that elementary fermions (quarks and leptons) and 
the weak interaction gauge bosons are all massless, while below this temperature 
we have the pattern of masses familiar from low-energy experiments. The elec-
troweak phase transition is not expected to leave any discernible impact on the 
late universe; one possible exception is baryogenesis, discussed below. 
At these temperatures the strong interactions described by quantum chromo-
dynamics (QCD) are not so strong. At low energies/temperatures, QCD exhibits 
"confinement"--quarks and gluons are bound into composite particles such as 
baryons and mesons. But above the QCD scale AQco ,...., 300 MeV, quarks and 
gluons are free particles. As the universe expands and cools, the confinement of 
strongly-interacting particles into bound states is responsible for the first drop in 
the effective number of relativistic degrees of freedom noted in (8.176). The QCD 
phase transition is not expected to leave a significant imprint on the observable 
universe. 
Just as the strong interactions are not very strong at high temperatures, the 
weak interactions are not as weak as you might think; they are still weak in the 
sense of being accurately described by perturbation theory, but they occur rapidly 
enough to keep weakly-interacting particles, such as neutrinos, in thermal equi-
librium. This ceases to be the case when T ,...., 1 MeV. This is also approximately 
the temperature at which electrons and positrons become nonrelativistic and anni-
hilate, decreasing the effective number of relativistic degrees of freedom, but the 
two events are unrelated. For temperatures below I MeV, we say the weak interac-
tions are "frozen out" -the interaction rate drops below the expansion rate of the 
universe, so interactions happen too infrequently to keep particles in equilibrium. 
It may be the case that cold dark matter particles decouple from the plasma at this 
temperature. More confidently, we can infer that neutrons and protons cease to 
interconvert. The equilibrium abundance of neutrons at this temperature is about 
~the abundance of protons (due to the slightly larger neutron mass). The neutrons 
have a finite lifetime ( tn = 890 sec) that is somewhat larger than the age of the 
universe at this epoch, t(l MeV) ~ I sec, but they begin to gradually decay into 
protons and leptons. Soon thereafter, however, we reach a temperature somewhat 
below 100 keV, and Big-Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) begins. 
The nuclear binding energy per nucleon is typically of order 1 Me V, so you 
might expect that nucleosynthesis would occur earlier; however, the large num-
ber of photons per nucleon prevents nucleosynthesis from taking place until the 
temperature drops below 100 ke V. At that point the neutron/proton ratio is approx-
imately ~. Of all the light nuclei, it is energetically favorable for the nucleons to 
reside in 4He, and indeed that is what most of the free neutrons are converted into; 
for every two neutrons and fourteen protons, we end up with one helium nucleus 
and twelve protons. Thus, about 25% of the baryons by mass are converted to 
helium. In addition, there are trace amounts of deuterium (approximately I o-5 
deuterons per proton), 3He (also,.,.., 10-5), and 7Li (,.,.., 10-10). 

364 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
Of course these numbers are predictions, which are borne out by observations 
of the primordial abundances of light elements. (Heavier elements are not syn-
thesized in the Big Bang, but require stellar processes in the later universe.) We 
have glossed over numerous crucial details, especially those that explain how the 
different abundances depend on the cosmological parameters. For example, imag-
ine that we deviate from the Standard Model by introducing more than three light 
neutrino species. This would increase the radiation energy density at a fixed tem-
perature through (8.174), which in tum decreases the timescales associated with 
a given temperature (since t ,...., H- 1 oc PR" 112). Nucleosynthesis would there-
fore happen somewhat earlier, resulting in a higher abundance of neutrons, and 
hence in a larger abundance of 4He. Observations of the primordial helium abun-
dance, which are consistent with the Standard Model prediction, provided the 
first evidence that the number of light neutrinos is close to three. Similarly, all of 
the temperatures and timescales associated with nucleosynthesis depend on the 
baryon-to-photon ratio; agreement with the observed abundances requires that 
there be approximately 5 x 1 o- 10 baryons per photon, which is the origin of the 
estimate (8.164) of the baryonic density parameter, and the associated need for 
nonbaryonic dark matter. 
For our present purposes, perhaps the most profound feature of primordial nu-
cleosynthesis is its sensitive dependence on the Friedmann relation between tem-
perature and expansion rate, and hence on Einstein's equation. The success of 
BBN provides a stringent test of GR in a regime very far from our everyday expe-
rience. The fact that Einstein's theory, derived primarily from a need to reconcile 
gravitation with invariance under the Lorentz symmetries of electromagnetism, 
successfully describes the expansion of the universe when it was only one second 
old is a truly impressive accomplishment. To this day, BBN provides one of the 
most powerful constraints on alternative theories of gravity; in particular, it is the 
earliest epoch about which we have any direct observational signature. 
Subsequent to nucleosynthesis, we have a plasma dominated by protons, elec-
trons, and photons, with some helium and other nuclei. There is also dark matter, 
but it is assumed not to interact with the ordinary matter by this epoch. The next 
important event isn't until recombination, when electrons combine with protons 
(they combine with helium slightly earlier). Recombination happens at a temper-
ature T ~ 0.3 eV; at this point the universe is matter-dominated. Again, since the 
binding energy of hydrogen is 13.6 e V, you might expect recombination to occur 
earlier, but the large photon/baryon ratio delays it. The crucial importance of re-
combination is that it marks the epoch at which the universe becomes transparent. 
The ambient photons interact strongly with free electrons, so that the photon mean 
free path is very short prior to recombination, but it becomes essentially infinite 
once the electrons and protons combine into neutral hydrogen. These ambient 
photons are visible today as the cosmic microwave background, which provides 
a snapshot of the universe at T ~ 0.3 e V, or a redshift z ~ 1200. Recombina-
tion is a somewhat gradual process, so any specification of when it happens is 
necessarily approximate. 

8.8 
Inflation 
365 
Subsequent to recombination, the universe passes through a long period known 
as the "dark ages," as galaxies are gradually assembled through gravitational in-
stability, but there are as yet no visible stars to light up the universe. The dark ages 
are a mysterious time; the processes by which stars and galaxies fonn are highly 
complicated and nonlinear, and new kinds of observations will undoubtedly be 
necessary before this era is well understood. 
Our story has now brought us to the present day, but there are a couple of miss-
ing points we should go back and fill in. One is the asymmetry between matter 
and antimatter in the universe. Essentially all of the visible matter in the uni-
verse seems to be composed of protons, neutrons, and electrons, rather than their 
antiparticles; if distant galaxies were primarily antimatter, we would expect to 
observe high-energy photons from the occasional annihilation of protons with an-
tiprotons at the boundaries of the matter/antimatter domains. While it is possible 
to build in an asymmetry as an initial condition, this seems somehow unsatisfying, 
and most physicists would prefer to find a dynamical mechanism of baryogene-
sis by which an initially matter/antimatter symmetric state could evolve into our 
present universe. Such broken symmetries are common in particle physics, and 
indeed numerous mechanisms for baryogenesis have been proposed (generally at 
temperatures at or above the electroweak scale). None of these specific schemes, 
however, has proven sufficiently compelling to be adopted as a standard scenario. 
It seems probable that we will need a better understanding of physics beyond the 
Standard Model to understand the origin of the baryon asymmetry. 
The other missing feature we need to mention is that the universe is not, of 
course, perfectly homogeneous and isotropic; the cwTent large-scale structure in 
the universe seems to have evolved from adiabatic and nearly scale-free pertur-
bations present at very early times at the level of f>p / p ,...., 1 o-5. Evidence for 
the adiabatic and scale-free nature of these perturbations comes from a combina-
tion of observations of the CMB and large-scale structure. Both the high degree 
of isotropy and homogeneity, and the small deviations therefrom, are simply im-
posed as mysterious initial conditions in the conventional cosmology. A possible 
dynamical origin for both is provided by the inflationary-universe scenario, to 
which we now tum. 
8.8 • INFLATION 
In the conventional understanding of the Big-Bang model, the universe is taken 
to be radiation-dominated at early times and matter-dominated at late times, with, 
as we now suspect, a very late transition to vacuum-domination. This picture has 
met with great success in describing a wide variety of observational data; never-
theless, we may still ask whether the initial conditions giving rise such a universe 
seem natural. This is the kind of question one might ask in cosmology but not 
in other sciences. Typically, as physicists we look for laws of nature, and imag-
ine that we are free to specify initial conditions and ask how they evolve under 
such laws. But the universe seems to have only one set of initial conditions, so it 

366 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
seems sensible to wonder if they are relatively generic or finely-tuned. Within the 
conventional picture, the early universe is indeed finely tuned to incredible preci-
sion. In particular, two features of our universe seem highly nongeneric: its spatial 
flatness, and its high degree of isotropy and homogeneity. It might be that this is 
just the universe we are stuck with, and it makes no sense to ask about the likeli-
hood of different initial conditions. Alternatively, it might be that these conditions 
are more likely than they appear at first, if there is some dynamical mechanism 
that can take a wide spectrum of initial conditions and evolve them toward flat-
ness and homogeneity/isotropy. The inflationary universe scenario provides such 
a mechanism (and more, besides), and has become a central organizing principle 
of modem cosmology, even if we are still far from demonstrating its truth. 
Before describing inflation, let's describe the two problems of unnaturalness 
it claims to solve: the flatness problem and the horizon problem associated with 
homogeneity/isotropy. The ftatness problem comes from considering the Fried-
mann equation in a universe with matter and radiation but no vacuum energy, 
which for later convenience we write in tenns of the reduced Planck mass mp = 
(8:rrG)- 112 as 
2 
1 
K 
H = ~(PM+PR)- 2· 
3mp 
a 
(8.180) 
The curvature tenn -K/a2 is proportional to a-2 (obviously), while the energy 
density tenns fall off faster with increasing scale factor, PM oc a- 3 and PR oc a-4. 
This raises the question of why the ratio (Ka- 2)/(p /3m~) isn't much larger than 
unity, given that a has increased by a factor of perhaps 1030 since the Planck 
epoch. Said another way, the point Q = 1 is a repulsive fixed point in a mat-
ter/radiation dominated universe-any deviation from this value will grow with 
time, so why do we observe n ,...., 1 today? 
The horizon problem stems from the existence of particle horizons in FRW 
cosmologies, as illustrated in Figure 8.7. Horizons exist because there is only a fi-
nite amount of time since the Big Bang singularity, and thus only a finite distance 
that photons can travel within the age of the universe, as we briefly discussed 
in Chapter 2. Consider a photon moving along a radial trajectory in a flat uni-
verse (the generalization to nonflat universes is straightforward). A radial null 
path obeys 
0 = ds2 = -dt2 + a2 dr 2, 
(8.181) 
so the comoving (coordinate) distance traveled by such a photon between times 
t1 and t2 is 
1
t2 dt 
!:l.r = ti a(t). 
(8.182) 
To get the physical distance as it would be measured by an observer at any time t, 
simply multiply by a(t ). For simplicity let's imagine we are in a matter-dominated 

8.8 
Inflation 
367 
x 
FIGURE 8.7 Past light cones in a universe expanding from a Big Bang singularity, illus-
trating particle horizons in cosmology. Points at recombination, observed today as parts of 
the cosmic microwave background on opposite sides of the sky, have nonoverlapping past 
light cones (in conventional cosmology); no causal signal could have influenced them to 
have the same temperature. 
universe, for which 
a= m2/3 
Remember ao = 1. The Hubble parameter is therefore given by 
H = jt- 1 
= a- 312 Ho. 
Then the photon travels a comoving distance 
l!:.r = 2H0
1 (Ja2 - JGI). 
(8.183) 
(8.184) 
(8.185) 
The comoving horizon size at any fixed value of the scale factor a = a* is the 
distance a photon travels since the Big Bang, 
(8.186) 
The physical horizon size, as measured on the spatial hypersurface at a*, is there-
fore simply 
(8.187) 
Indeed, for any nearly-flat universe containing a mixture of matter and radiation, 
at any one epoch we will have 
(8.188) 

368 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
where the Hubble distance dH was introduced in (8.71). This approximate equal-
ity leads to a strong temptation to use the terms "horizon distance" and "Hubble 
distance" interchangeably; this temptation should be resisted, since inflation can 
render the fonner much larger than the latter, as we will soon demonstrate. 
The horizon problem is simply the fact that the CMB is isotropic to a high 
degree of precision, even though widely separated points on the last scattering 
surface are completely outside each others' horizons. When we look at the CMB 
we are observing the universe at a scale factor acMB ~ 1/1200; from (8.185), the 
comoving distance between a point on the CMB and an observer on Earth is 
!!:.r = 2H0- 1 (1 - JacMs) 
~2Ho1· 
However, the comoving horizon distance for such a point is 
lbor(GCMB) = 2Ho- 1.JacMB 
~ 6 x 10-2H0
1• 
(8.189) 
(8.190) 
Hence, if we observe two widely-separated parts of the CMB, they will have 
nonoverlapping horizons; distinct patches of the CMB sky were causally dis-
connected at recombination. Nevertheless, they are observed to be at the same 
temperature to high precision. The question then is, how did they know ahead of 
time to coordinate their evolution in the right way, even though they were never in 
causal contact? We must somehow modify the causal structure of the conventional 
FRW cosmology. 
Let's consider modifying the conventional picture by positing a period of in-
ftation: an era of acceleration (a > 0) in the very early universe, driven by 
some component other than matter or radiation that redshifts away slowly as 
the universe expands. Then the flatness and horizon problems can be simultane-
ously solved. For simplicity consider the case where inflation is driven by a con-
stant vacuum energy, leading to exponential expansion. Then, during the vacuum-
dominated era, p /3m~ oc a0 grows rapidly with respect to -K / a2, so the universe 
becomes flatter with time (Q is driven to unity). If this process proceeds for a suf-
ficiently long period, after which the vacuum energy is converted into matter and 
radiation, the density parameter will be sufficiently close to unity that it will not 
have had a chance to noticeably change into the present era. The horizon problem, 
meanwhile, can be traced to the fact that the physical distance between any two 
comoving objects grows as the scale factor, while the physical horizon size in a 
matter- or radiation-dominated universe grows more rapidly, as dhor ,..._, anf2H0
1• 
This can again be solved by an early period of exponential expansion, in which 
the true horizon size grows to a fantastic amount, so that our horizon today is 
actually much larger than the nruve estimate that it is equal to the Hubble radius 
H -1 
0 . 
In fact, a truly exponential expansion is not necessary; for any accelerated ex-
pansion, the spatial curvature will diminish with respect to the energy density, 

8.8 
Inflation 
369 
and the horizon distance will grow rapidly. Typically we require that this acceler-
ated period be sustained for 60 or more e-folds (where the number of e-folds is 
N = l!:. Ina) which is what is needed to solve the horizon problem. It is easy to 
overshoot, and inflation generally makes the present-day universe spatially flat to 
incredible precision. 
Now let's consider how we can get an inflationary phase in the early universe. 
The most straightforward way is to use the vacuum energy provided by the po-
tential of a scalar field, the inftaton. Imagine a universe dominated by the energy 
of a spatially homogeneous scalar. The relevant equations of motion are precisely 
those of our discussion of dynamical dark energy in Section 8.7; the only differ-
ence is that the energy scale of inflation is much higher. We have the equation of 
motion for a scalar field in an RW metric, 
lfi + 3H<i> + V'(</>) = 0, 
(8.191) 
as well as the Friedmann equation, 
2 1 (1 ·2 
) 
H = 3m~ 2 
</> + V ( </>) 
• 
(8.192) 
We have ignored the curvature tenn, since inflation will flatten the universe any-
way. Inflation can occur if the evolution of the field is sufficiently gradual that the 
potential energy dominates the kinetic energy, and the second derivative of</> is 
small enough to allow this state of affairs to be maintained for a sufficient period. 
Thus, we want 
<i>2 « V(</>), 
llfil « 13H <i>I, IV'I. 
(8.193) 
Satisfying these conditions requires the smallness of two dimensionless quantities 
known as slow-roll parameters: 
(8.194) 
Note that E 2: 0, while 1J can have either sign. Note also that these definitions are 
not universal; some people like to define them in tenns of the Hubble parameter 
rather than the potential. Our choice describes whether a field has a chance to 
roll slowly for a while; the description in terms of the Hubble parameter describes 
whether the field actually is rolling slowly. When both of these quantities are small 
we can have a prolonged inflationary phase. They are not sufficient, however; no 
matter what the potential looks like, we can always choose initial conditions with 
1¢1 so large that slow-roll is never applicable. However, most initial conditions are 
attracted to an inflationary phase if the slow-roll parameters are small. 

370 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
It isn't hard to invent potentials that satisfy the slow-roll conditions. Consider 
perhaps the simplest possible example,3 V(</>) = !m2</>2. In this case 
2m 2 
~-,,-
p 
<;" 
-
-
-2-· 
</> 
(8.195) 
Clearly, for large enough</>, we can get the slow-roll parameters to be as small as 
we like. However, we have the constraint that the energy density should not be as 
high as the Planck scale, so that our classical analysis makes sense; this implies 
</> « m~/ m. If we start the field at a value </>;, the number of e-folds before 
inflation ends (that is, before the slow-roll parameters become of order unity) will 
be 
N = l'e H dt 
t, 
--21</>e V 
~-mp 
-;d</> 
</>; 
v 
</>~ 
1 
,..._, 
I 
""4m~ - 2· 
(8.196) 
The first equality is always true, the second uses the slow-roll approximation, and 
the third is the result for this particular model. To get 60 e-folds we therefore 
need</>; > 16mp. Together with the upper limit on the energy density, we find 
that there is an upper limit on the mass parameter, m « mp/16. In fact the size 
of the observed density fluctuations puts a more stringent upper limit on m, as 
we will discuss below. But there is no lower limit on m, so it is easy to obtain 
appropriate inflationary potentials only if we are willing to posit large hierarchies 
m « mp, or equivalently a small dimensionless number m/mp. Going through 
the same exercise with a A</>4 potential would have yielded a similar conclusion, 
that A would have had to be quite small; we often say that the inflaton must be 
weakly coupled. Of course, there is a sense in which we are cheating, since for 
field values</> > mp we should expect additional tenns in the effective potential, 
of the fonn mi-n </>n with n > 4, to become important. So in a realistic model it 
can be quite hard to get an appropriate potential. 
At some point inflation ends, and the energy in the inflaton potential is con-
verted into a thennalized gas of matter and radiation, a process known as "reheat-
ing." A proper understanding of the reheating process is of utmost importance, 
as it controls the production of various relics that we may or may not want in 
our universe. For example, one important beneficial aspect of inflation is that it 
can "inflate away" various relics that could be produced in the early universe, 
but are not observed today. A classic example occurs in the context of grand uni-
fied theories of P,article physics, which generically predict the existence of super-
3we follow the exposition in A.R. Liddle, "An Introduction to Cosmological Inffation," 
http://arxiv.org/astro-ph/9901124. 

8.8 Inflation 
371 
heavy magnetic monopoles, with an abundance many orders of magnitude greater 
than allowed by observations. Historically, the monopole problem was the pri-
mary motivation for the invention of inflation by Guth; solutions to the flatness 
and horizon problems were considered a bonus. Inflation can dilute the monopole 
abundance appropriately, but they will be produced anew if the universe reheats to 
above the temperature of the grand-unification phase transition; fortunately, this 
is not a stringent constraint on most models. Similar considerations apply to other 
unwanted relics; in supersymmetric models, an especially worrisome problem is 
raised by the abundance of gravitinos (supersymmetric partners of the graviton). 
At the same time, it is necessary to reheat to a sufficiently high temperature to 
allow for some sort of baryogenesis scenario. For any specific implementation 
of inflation within a particle-physics model, it is crucial to check that unwanted 
relics are dispersed while wanted relics (such as baryons) are preserved. 
A crucial element of inflationary scenarios is the production of density pertur-
bations, which may be the origin of the CMB temperature anisotropies and the 
large-scale structure in galaxies that we observe today. The idea behind density 
perturbations generated by inflation is fairly straightforward. Inflation will attenu-
ate any ambient particle density rapidly to zero, leaving behind only the vacuum. 
But the vacuum state in an accelerating universe has a nonzero temperature, the 
Gibbons-Hawking temperature, analogous to the Hawking temperature of a black 
hole. We won't be able to explore this subject in detail; here we simply outline 
the basic results. 
For a universe dominated by a potential energy V the Gibbons-Hawking tem-
perature is given by 
H 
y112 
ToH = -
""-_-. 
2rr 
mp 
(8.197) 
Corresponding to this temperature are fluctuations in the inflaton field </> at each 
wavenumber k, with magnitude 
(8.198) 
Since the potential is by hypothesis nearly flat, the fluctuations in</> lead to small 
fluctuations in the energy density, 
f>p = V' (</>)f></>. 
(8.199) 
Inflation therefore produces density perturbations on every scale. The amplitude 
of the perturbations is nearly equal at each wavenumber, but there will be slight 
deviations due to the gradual change in V as the inflaton rolls. Describing the per-
turbations is a messy subject, involving countless different notations. A sensible 
place to start is root-mean-square (RMS) density fluctuation, 
(8.200) 

372 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
where the angle brackets represent an average over spatial locations. For statisti-
cally isotropic perturbations (the expected amplitude is independent of direction), 
a bit of Fourier analysis allows us to write 
( ~ lnnY = f .12(k) d(lnk), 
where we have introduced the dimensionless power spectrum, 
k
3 1~ 12 
/:).2(k) = --~-. 
2:rr 
(8.201) 
(8.202) 
and ~k is the expectation value of the Fourier transfonn of the fractional density 
perturbation, 
~ = 
1 j e-ik·x ~p d3x 
k 
(2:rr)3/2 
p 
' 
(8.203) 
which we've assumed to be isotropic. The dimensionless power spectrum is a 
function of time, as the amplitude for each mode evolves; it is most common 
to express the predictions of any specific model in tenns of the amplitude of the 
perturbations at the moment when the physical wavelength of the mode, A= a/ k, 
is equal to the Hubble radius H- 1, 
(8.204) 
Thus, As(k) measures the amplitude for different modes at different times. For 
inflation driven by a slowly-rolling scalar field, As(k) is related to the potential 
via 
(8.205) 
We have intentionally suppressed dimensionless numerical factors, which differ 
widely from reference to reference, in favor of highlighting the dependence on 
the potential. 
The spectrum is given the subscript "S" because it describes scalar fluctuations 
in the metric. These are tied to the energy-momentum distribution, and the density 
fluctuations produced by inflation are adiabatic-fluctuations in the density of all 
species are correlated. The fluctuations are also Gaussian, in the sense that the 
phases of the Fourier modes describing fluctuations at different scales are uncor-
related. These aspects of inflationary perturbations-a nearly scale-free spectrum 
of adiabatic density fluctuations with a Gaussian distribution-are all consistent 
with current observations of the CMB and large-scale structure, and new data 
scheduled to be collected in years to come should greatly improve the precision 
of these tests. 

8.8 
Inflation 
373 
It is not only the nearly-massless inflaton that is excited during inflation, but 
also any other nearly-massless particle. The other important example is the gravi-
ton, which corresponds to tensor perturbations in the metric (propagating excita-
tions of the gravitational field). Tensor fluctuations have a spectrum 
(8.206) 
Importantly, the tensor amplitude depends only on the potential, not on its deriva-
tives; observations of tensor perturbations would therefore give direct infonnation 
about the energy scale of inflation. 
For purposes of understanding observations, it is useful to parameterize the 
perturbation spectra in terms of observable quantities. We therefore write 
(8.207) 
and 
(8.208) 
where ns and nT are the spectral indices. They are related to the slow-roll param-
eters of the potential by 
ns = I - 6E + 211 
(8.209) 
and 
(8.210) 
In models of the type we have considered (driven by single slowly-rolling scalar 
fields), there is a consistency relation relating the amplitudes and spectral indices 
of the scalar and tensor modes. It can be expressed in a convention-independent 
way as a relation between observable quantities, temperature fluctuations !:l. T due 
to the different perturbations, as 
(!:l.T/T)f 
(!:l.T/T)§ = -7nT. 
(8.211) 
The existence of tensor perturbations is a crucial prediction of inflation that 
may in principle be verifiable through observations of the polarization of the 
CMB. Polarization is also induced by ordinary density fluctuations, through 
the anisotropy of the Thompson scattering cross-section in an inhomogeneous 
plasma. Fortunately, we can imagine decomposing the polarization vector field 
on the sky into a curl-free part (£-modes) and a curl part (B-modes); the scalar 
perturbations lead to £-mode polarization, whereas tensor perturbations lead to 
B-modes (up to some inevitable processing in the post-recombination universe). 
CMB polarization has been detected; the challenge for the future will be to sepa-

374 
Chapter 8 Cosmology 
rate out the scalar and tensor contributions, to test the prediction (8.211) of simple 
inflationary models. Of course this requires not only detecting the tensor-induced 
polarization, but measuring its spectral index with some precision. 
Our current knowledge of the amplitude of the perturbations already gives us 
important infonnation about the energy scale of inflation. The tensor perturbations 
depend on V alone, not its derivatives; if the CMB anisotropies seen by COBE 
are due to tensor fluctuations (possible, although unlikely), we can instantly derive 
Vinftarion ,...., ( 1016 Ge V)4• Here, the value of V being constrained is that which was 
responsible for creating the observed fluctuations; namely, 60 e-folds before the 
end of inflation. This is remarkably reminiscent of the grand unification scale, 
which is very encouraging. Even in the more likely case that the perturbations 
observed in the CMB are scalar in nature, we can still write 
1/4 
1/4 
16 
\tinnarion "" E 
10 
Ge V' 
(8.212) 
where Eis the slow-roll parameter defined in (8.194). Although we expect E to 
be small, the 1/4 in the exponent means that the dependence on E is quite weak; 
unless this parameter is extraordinarily tiny, it is very likely that Vi~~!rion ,...., 1015-
1016 GeV. The fact that we can have such infonnation about such tremendous 
energy scales is a cause for great wonder. 
8.9 • EXERCISES 
1. Consider an (N + n + 1 )-dimensional spacetime with coordinates {t, x 1, yi }, where I 
goes from 1 to N and i goes from 1 ton. Let the metric be 
(8.213) 
where 8 u is the usual Kronecker delta and Yij (y) is the metric on an n-dimensional 
maximally synunetric spatial manifold. Imagine that we nonnalize the metric y such 
that the curvature parameter 
k = 
R(y) 
n(n -
1) 
(8.214) 
is either + l, 0, or -1, where R(y) is the Ricci scalar corresponding to the metric Yij. 
(a) Calculate the Ricci tensor for this metric. 
(b) Define an energy-momentum tensor in tenns of an energy density p and pressure 
in the x1 and yi directions, p<N> and p<n>: 
Too =p 
Tu= a2p<N>r,IJ 
Tij =b2p(n)Yij· 
(8.215) 
(8.216) 
(8.217) 
Plug the metric and Tµ.v into Einstein's equations to derive Friedmann-like equa-
tions for a and b (three independent equations in all). 

8. 9 
Exercises 
375 
(c) Derive equations for the energy density and the two pressures at a static solution 
where a = b = a = b = 0, in tenns of k, n, and N. Use these to derive ex-
• 
• 
(N) 
(N) 
(n) 
(n) 
press1ons for the equation-of-state parameters w 
= p 
/ p and w 
= p 
/ p, 
valid at the static solution. 
2. Consider de Sitter space in coordinates where the metric takes the form 
ds 2 = -dt2 + eH1[dx 2 + dy2 + dz2]. 
(8.218) 
Solve the geodesic equation for comoving observers (xi =constant) to find the affine 
parameter as a function oft. Show that the geodesics reach t = -oo in a finite affine 
parameter, demonstrating that these coordinates fail to cover the entire manifold. 
3. In Appendix F we discuss Raychaudhuri's equation. Show that, applied to a Robertson-
Walker cosmology, the Raychaudhuri equation is equivalent to the second Friedmann 
equation, (8.68). 
4. Consider the best-fit universe, with density parameters ORO = 1 o-4, OMO = 0.3, 
QAO = 0.7. Make a plot of the three O; 's as a function of the scale factor a, on a log 
scale, from a = 10-35 to a = 1035. Indicate the Planck time. nucleosynthesis, and 
today. 
S. In a flat spacetime, objects of a fixed physical size subtend smaller and smaller angles 
as they are further and further away; in an expanding universe this is not necessarily 
so. Consider the angular size 9(z) of an object of physical size L at redshift z. In a 
matter-dominated flat universe, at what redshift is 9(z)/ L a minimum? If all galaxies 
are at least 10 kpc across (and always have been), what is the minimum angular size 
of a galaxy in such a universe? Express your result both in terms of Ho. and plugging 
in Ho = 70 km/s/Mpc. 
6. In cosmology we tend to idealize nonrelativistic particles as having zero temperature 
T and pressure p. In reality, random motions will give them some temperature and 
pressure, satisfying p oc Tp. 
(a) How does the pressure of a gas of massive particles decay as a function of the 
scale factor? 
(b) Suppose neutrinos have a mass m v = 0.1 e V, and a current temperature Tvo = 2K. 
At about what redshift did the neutrinos go from being relativistic to nonrelativis-
tic? 
7. Suppose that the universe started out in a state of equipartition at the Planck time (so 
that the energy density in matter and radiation are of order the Planck density, and 
the temporal and spatial curvature radii are of order the Planck length). Neglecting 
any spatial inhomogeneity, calculate how long a positively curved universe will last, 
and how old a negatively curved universe would be when the temperature reaches 3K. 
How old would a flat universe be when the temperature reaches 3K? How old would a 
flat universe be by the time the expansion rate slows to Ho = 70 km s- 1 Mpc- 1? 

CHAPTER 
9 
Quantum Field Theory 
in Curved Spacetime 
9.1 • INTRODUCTION 
376 
Nobody believes that general relativity is the final word as far as gravity is con-
cerned. The singularity theorems provide internal evidence that the theory is 
somehow incomplete; more convincing, however, is the fact that GR is a classical 
theory, while the world is fundamentally quantum-mechanical. The search for a 
working theory of quantum gravity drives a great deal of research in theoretical 
physics today, and much has been learned along the way, but convincing success 
remains elusive. 
There are two parts to general relativity: the framework of spacetime curva-
ture and its influence on matter, and the dynamics of the metric in response to 
energy-momentum (as described by Einstein's equation). Lacking a true theory 
of quantum gravity, we may still take the first part of GR-the idea that matter 
fields propagate on a curved spacetime background-and consider the case where 
those matter fields are quantum-mechanical. In other words, we take the metric to 
be fixed, rather than obeying some dynamical equations, and study quantum field 
theory (QFT) in that curved spacetime. 
The epochal event in the study of QFT in curved spacetime was Hawking's 
realization in 1976 that black holes are not really black, but instead emit thennal 
radiation at a Hawking temperature proportional to the surface gravity K, 
~ 
~ 
(9.1) 
(Recall that our units set Ii = c = k = 1; the Hawking temperature is actually 
proportional to Ii and inversely proportional to Boltzmann's constant k.) Since this 
remarkable discovery, QFT in curved spacetime has been put on a fairly rigorous 
theoretical footing, although its range of applicability is generally thought to be 
quite far away from any possible experimental probes. The Hawking temperature 
of a Schwarzschild black hole, for which K = 1/4G M, can be written 
1 
26 (lg) 
-8 (Mo) 
T = Srr GM = 1.2 x 10 K 
M = 6.0 x 10 
K 
M 
, 
(9.2) 
where Mo ,...., 1033 g is the mass of the Sun. So the radiation from a realistic 
astrophysical black hole is at a much lower temperature even than the 3K cosmic 
microwave background, and thus would be hopelessly unobservable. 

9.1 
Introduction 
377 
Recent observations in cosmology, however, have changed this situation some-
what. One example is the apparent discovery that the universe is accelerating, 
which is most readily interpreted as evidence for a nonzero vacuum energy 
(as discussed in Chapter 8). Although the magnitude of the vacuum energy re-
mains a profound mystery, it seems clear that an understanding of how quantum-
mechanical matter behaves in curved spacetime will play an important role in 
any eventual resolution to the puzzle. The other example comes from cosmolog-
ical perturbations. Observations of the microwave background and large-scale 
structure provide strong evidence in favor of a nearly scale-free spectrum of pri-
mordial perturbations, including at wavelengths that would be much larger than 
the horizon size in a conventional cosmology. The leading theory for the origin 
of these perturbations comes from inflation. In the inflationary scenario, cosmo-
logical perturbations originate in the vacuum fluctuations of quantum fields in 
an inflating uni verse. If this picture is correct, what we are seeing in maps of the 
CMB is the imprint of primordial quantum fluctuations. greatly stretched by the 
expansion of the universe, and it is these fluctuations which eventually grew via 
gravitational instability into the galaxies and clusters we see today. At the very 
least, then, cosmological observations provide strong incentive for the study of 
QFT in curved spacetime. 
Even without this empirical motivation. thought experiments based on QFT in 
curved spacetime have proven very fruitful in our tentative explorations of quan-
tum gravity. In particular, the evaporation of black holes as predicted by Hawking 
radiation has led to the infonnation-loss paradox, which we will discuss below. 
Since it is so difficult to do real experiments that bear directly on questions of 
quantum gravity, we must rely on thought experiments that focus on the tension 
between GR and quantum mechanics, much as Einstein used thought experiments 
in his attempts to reconcile classical dynamics with the Lorentz invariance of elec-
tromagnetism. 
With these considerations in mind, the goal of the present chapter is to provide 
a brief introduction to some of the ideas and results of QFT in curved spacetime. 
Many introductory GR books do not cover this subject, usually because familiar-
ity with ordinary QFT in flat spacetime should not be a prerequisite for studying 
GR. The happy fact is, however, that a familiarity with QFT in flat spacetime is 
by no means necessary for studying QFT in curved spacetime. This is because the 
features of QFT that are most interesting and useful in flat spacetime are almost 
completely distinct from those that are interesting and useful in curved space-
time. Deep down, a quantum field theory is simply an example of a quantum-
mechanical system, just like a square well or a helium atom. Once a field theory 
is defined, applications in flat spacetime (to particle physics or condensed mat-
ter) will naturally focus on the issue of interactions between the various fields, 
often treated as perturbations around some natural vacuum state. In curved space-
time, however, we are generally interested in the effects of spacetime itself on 
the fields, for which the interactions are beside the point. We therefore can con-
sider free (noninteracting) fields, but we will have to take great care in defining 
what an appropriate vacuum state should be. (Indeed, as we will see, almost all of 

378 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
the states we deal with will be vacuum states!) Consequently, knowledge of QFT 
in flat spacetime is not only unnecessary for the present discussion, it probably 
won't even be of much help; the only prerequisite is a familiarity with the basics 
of ordinary quantum mechanics. 
We will gradually work our way up to quantum field theory in curved space-
time, beginning with a review of the quantum mechanics of the system to which 
every physicist turns when the going gets rough: the simple harmonic oscillator. 
This is, of course, a paradigmatic example of the principles of the workings of 
quantum mechanics, but there is a bonus: When we next tum to field theory, we 
will find that the quantum mechanics of a free field in flat spacetime is precisely 
that of an infinite number of ha1monic oscillators. (It is not that there is one os-
cillator at every point in space, but that each mode in the Fourier transfonn of the 
field acts like an ha1monic oscillator.) The transition to field theory is then fairly 
straightforward. Once we grasp the basics of field theory, given our previous study 
of GR, it is not very difficult to generalize to curved spacetime, although a num-
ber of subtleties are encountered along the way. Our discussion will necessarily 
be somewhat superficial, focused on the goal of understanding the physical basis 
of Hawking radiation through an understanding of the Unruh effect in flat space-
time. In particular, we won't be discussing the important applications of QFT in 
curved spacetime to cosmology, nor will we be entering into detailed examina-
tion of renormalization and related issues. We will largely follow the discussion 
in Birrell and Davies (1982); look there or in Wald (1994) or in the review by 
Ford 1 for further discussion. 
9.2 • QUANTUM MECHANICS 
A quantum field theory is just a particular example of a quantum-mechanical sys-
tem, so we can begin by reminding ourselves what that means. Of course, al-
though the world is fundamentally quantum-mechanical, our intuition tends to 
align more readily with classical physics, so let's set the stage by thinking about 
classical mechanics. Any physical theory describing a certain system, classical or 
quantum, consists of the answers to three questions: 
1. What are the possible states of the system? In classical mechanics, the space 
of states is typically given by a set of coordinates and momenta (what we 
might think of as "initial conditions" for the system). They can be specified 
exactly, and that is all there is to know about the state of the system. 
2. What can we observe about the system? This question is often addressed 
only implicitly in classical mechanics, since the answer is trivial: any func-
tion of the coordinates and momenta qualifies as an observable. 
3. How does the system evolve? This is usually expressed by a set of equa-
tions of motion. Given the state and the equations of motion, the subsequent 
1L. H. Ford, "Quantum field theory in curved spacetime," (1997), http://arxiv.org/gr-qc/ 
9707062. 

9.2 
Quantum Mechanics 
379 
evolution is uniquely defined; as a result, the space of initial conditions is 
equivalent to the space of classical solutions to the theory. 
To make these ideas more concrete, and also because it will be directly relevant 
to our study of field theory, let's consider the simple haimonic oscillator. A simple 
haimonic oscillator may be thought of as a particle in one dimension subject to 
a quadratic potential. The state is specified by a single coordinate x, and a single 
momentum p. To get the equations of motion, we could start with the Lagrangian, 
which is written in tenns of x and its time derivative x as 
(9.3) 
where we have set the mass of the oscillator to unity for convenience. We can 
immediately derive the equation of motion 
(9.4) 
For the transition to quantum mechanics, however, it is more convenient to work 
in tenns of the Hamiltonian, which is a function of x and p rather than x and x. 
The Hamiltonian is related to the Lagrangian by a Legendre transfonnation, 
H = px -L, 
where the momentum satisfies 
aL 
. 
P =ax = x. 
We therefore have the Hamiltonian for the oscillator, 
and Hamilton's equations 
dx 
- =apH= p, 
dt 
dp 
2 
- = -axH = -w x, 
dt 
(9.5) 
(9.6) 
"(9.7) 
(9.8) 
serve as equations of motion. The solutions are, of course, straightforward; it is 
useful to express them as complex numbers 
x(t) = xoeiwt+ao' 
(9.9) 
where xo is the amplitude and ao is a phase. We can take the real part at the end 
of the day to get the physical answer. 
Now we tum to quantum mechanics. Although quantum mechanics is pro-
foundly different from classical mechanics, a given theory still consists of the an-
swers to the same three questions listed above, with the answers taking somewhat 
different fonns. 

380 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
1. The state of the system is represented as an element of a Hilbert space. 
Mathematically, a Hilbert space is just a complex vector space equipped 
with a complex-valued inner product with the property that taking the inner 
product of two states in the opposite order is equivalent to complex conju-
gation. We denote elements of the Hilbert space as 11/1} and elements of the 
dual space as ( l/f I, so that the inner product of I l/11} and I l/12} is ( l/12 I l/11}, and 
obeys 
(9.10) 
(We are glossing over technical requirements concerning completeness of 
the space.) In quantum mechanics the Hilbert spaces of interest are very 
often infinite-dimensional. For example, if a classical system is represented 
by coordinate x and momentum p, the Hilbert space could be taken to con-
sist of all square-integrable complex-valued functions of x, or equivalently 
all square-integrable complex-valued functions of p (but not both at once). 
2. Observables are represented by self-adjoint operators on the Hilbert space. 
The definition of "self-adjoint" is actually very subtle, but in simple circum-
stances amounts to our usual understanding of an Hermitian operator, 
(9.11) 
where At obeys 
(9.12) 
for all states ll/11 }, ll/12}. Of course many operators will not be Hermitian, 
but observables should have this property. In general such operators do not 
commute, so we cannot simultaneously specify the precise values of every-
thing we might want to measure about the system; there will be a complete 
set of commuting observables that represents all we can say about a system 
at once. 
3. Evolution of the system may be represented in one of two ways: as unitary 
evolution of the state vector in Hilbert space (the Schrodinger picture), or 
by keeping the state fixed and allowing the observables to evolve according 
to equations of motion (the Heisenberg picture). 
Strictly speaking, quantum mechanics is just different from classical mechanics; 
it is by no means necessary to start with a classical model and "quantize" it. Nev-
ertheless, we usually do exactly that. Even for simple classical models, there is 
more than one way to construct a quantized version; these include canonical quan-
tization and path-integral quantization, as well as more exotic procedures. What 
is worse, there is no simple map between classical and quantum theories; there 
are classical theories with no well-defined quantum counterpart, classical theo-
ries with multiple quantum versions, and quantum theories without any classical 

9.2 
Quantum Mechanics 
381 
analogue. For our present purposes, we may blithely ignore all of these subtleties, 
and proceed directly with canonical quantization. 
Once again, the simple ha1monic oscillator provides a useful example. Con-
sider first the familiar Schrodinger picture, in which states are represented by 
complex-valued wave functions that evolve with time, such as lf!(x, t). The wave 
function is really the set of components of the state vector 11"}, expressed in the 
"delta-function position basis" Ix}, so that 11/!(t)} = J dx lf!(x, t)lx}. Canonical 
quantization consists of imposing the canonical commutation relation, 
c.x • .01 = ;, 
(9.13) 
on the coordinate operator x and its conjugate momentum p. For states repre-
sented as wave functions depending on x and t, x is simply multiplication by x, 
so (9.13) can be implemented by setting 
(9.14) 
The Hamiltonian operator is 
H =-!a;+ !w2x2, 
(9.15) 
and the equation of motion is the SchrOdinger equation, 
(9.16) 
Since the Hamiltonian is time-independent, solutions to this equation separate 
into functions of space and functions of time, lf!(x, t) = f(t)g(x). The solu-
tions then come in a discrete set labeled by an integer n 2: 0, and we find (up to 
nonnalization) 
(9.17) 
where Hn is a Hermite polynomial of degree n, and 
En= (n + !)w. 
(9.18) 
These states are all eigenfunctions of H, and E11 is the energy eigenvalue. An 
arbitrary state of the oscillator will simply be a superposition of the energy eigen-
states, 
lf!(x, t) = L Cnlf!n(X, t), 
(9.19) 
n 
for some set of appropriately nonnalized coefficients en. 
A number of important features of the quantum-mechanical oscillator are con-
tained in this brief overview. There is a discrete spectrum of energy eigenstates; 
this is why it's called "quantum" mechanics (even though it is not hard to find 

J82 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
systems with continuous spectra). There is a ground state of lowest energy, plus a 
set of excited states uniquely labeled by their energy eigenvalue. The ground state 
has a nonvanishing energy, 
Eo = !w, 
(9.20) 
sometimes called the "zero-point" energy. It is interesting to note that the min-
imum energy of the classical system would have been zero, representing a par-
ticle with x = 0 and p = 0. The quantum zero-point energy can be traced to 
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which forbids us from localizing a state si-
multaneously in both position and momentum; there is consequently a minimum 
amount of "jiggle" in the oscillator, leading to a nonzero ground-state energy. On 
the other hand, we could certainly have chosen to examine an oscillator with a 
potential given by V(x) = !w2x 2 - !w; our analysis would have been identical, 
except that the factor of! in (9.18) would have been missing, and the ground-state 
energy would have been zero. Quantum mechanics does not insist on a nonvan-
ishing zero-point energy, it simply displaces the energy from the classical value. 
An alternative way to solve the simple hannonic oscillator is to introduce cre-
ation and annihilation operators at and a (often called raising and lowering oper-
ators), defined by 
" 
1 ( " 
. ") 
a= ~ wx+ip , 
v2w 
"t 
1 ( " 
") 
a=-- wx-ip, 
.Ji;; 
(9.21) 
so that 
" 
1 
" 
"t 
x = 
~(a +a), 
v2w 
" 
. /w(" 
"t 
p=-i.y 2 a-a). 
(9.22) 
Given our previous expressions for the commutation relations (9.13) and Hamil-
tonian (9.7), we can easily calculate the commutation relation for the creation and 
annihilation operators, 
and the new expression for the Hamiltonian, 
H=(ata+!)w. 
The creation/annihilation operators commute with the Hamiltonian via 
[H,aJ = -wa 
[H, at]= wat. 
(9.23) 
(9.24) 
(9.25) 
Comparing this version of the Hamiltonian to the energy eigenvalues (9.18), we 
are inspired to define a number operator 
(9.26) 

9.2 
Quantum Mechanics 
383 
Let's think about why the creation/annihilation operators and the number op-
erator deserve their names. Consider an eigenstate In} of the number operator, 
nln} = nln}, 
(9.27) 
where the n on the left stands for the number operator, while the first n on the 
right stands for the actual number n. (This fonnula is the most charming in all 
of quantum mechanics.) By playing with the commutation relations, it is easy to 
show that 
nat In} = (n + 1 )at In} 
naln} = (n - l)aln}. 
(9.28) 
Thus, when at acts on In}, it gives another eigenstate of n with eigenvalue raised 
by 1, while a gives an eigenstate with eigenvalue lowered by 1. As before we can 
show that n takes integral values from 0 to oo, so there must be a vacuum state 
10} satisfying 
alO} = 0. 
(9.29) 
From this state we can construct all of the eigenstates by successive operation by 
creation operators, 
(9.30) 
The number operator counts the number of excitations above the ground state. The 
set of eigenstates In} acts as a basis; any state is an appropriate linear combination 
of these states. The creation and annihilation operators act on them according to 
aln} = Jilin - l} 
atln} = Jn"+lln + l}, 
(9.31) 
and the energy of each state is of course given by (9.18). The basis states are taken 
to be time-independent, so a physical system obeying Schrodinger's equation will 
be described by a state 
11/t(t)} = L Cne-iEntln}, 
(9.32) 
n 
where again the en's are constant coefficients. 
For purposes of smoothing the transition to field theory, it is useful to trans-
late this Schrodinger-picture description into the Heisenberg picture, in which the 
states are fixed and the operators evolve with time. Given SchrOdinger's equation 
(9.16), any state can be written fonnally as some fixed initial state acted on by a 
unitary time-evolution operator 
11/t(t)} = U(t)ll/t(O)}, 
(9.33) 

384 
Chapter 9 
Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
where 
U(t) = e-if Hdt. 
(9.34) 
(By unitary we mean ut U = 1.) If the Hamiltonian is time-independent, of 
course, we simply have U(t) = e-iHt. The Schrodinger-picture expression for 
the matrix element of a time-independent operator A between time-dependent 
states ll/11 (t)} and ll/t2(t)} can then be written as a Heisenberg-picture expression 
in terms of a time-dependent operator A(t) and time-independent states as 
( l/t2(t) I A I l/11 (t)} = (l/12(0) I ut (t )AU (t) I l/11 (0)} 
= (l/t2IA(t)ll/t1}. 
where clearly the Heisenberg-picture operator is given by 
A(t) = ut (t)AU(t). 
Such an operator satisfies the Heisenberg equation of motion, 
dA(t) 
. 
di= i[H, A(t)], 
(9.35) 
(9.36) 
(9.37) 
which takes the place of SchrOdinger's equation in this picture. For the ha1monic 
oscillator, we would find 
da 
. ,. 
- = -l(J)Q, 
dt 
with solutions 
a(t) = e-iwt a(O), 
From this we immediately find 
d "t 
a 
"t 
-
= iwa , 
dt 
n(t) = a(t) t a(t) = a(O) t a(O), 
which reflects the fact that the number operator is conserved. 
(9.38) 
(9.39) 
(9.40) 
It is common to say that in the Heisenberg picture the states are time-
independent; this is somewhat confusing, if nevertheless true. It might be better 
to say that the states extend throughout time, rather than only being defined at a 
fixed time. To make this more clear, consider a simple harmonic oscillator subject 
to an external influence, for example by simply adding a forcing term to the 
Hamiltonian, 
H = !P2 + !w2x2 + F(t), 
where the function F(t) vanishes outside an interval, 
F(t) = { ~(t) 
t < t1 
t1 ~ t ~ t2 
t2 < t. 
(9.41) 
(9.42) 

9.3 
Quantum Field Theory in Flat Spacetime 
385 
We can think of someone coming along and shaking our oscillator for a short 
while, and then leaving it alone after that. In the SchrOdinger picture, we would 
say that an oscillator that started in its ground state would be excited by the ex-
ternal force, and the final state would not be the ground state. In the Heisenberg 
picture, however, we take the state to be a solution to the equation of motion for 
all times, and say that the number operator went from being zero to some other 
value. 
For the oscillator subject to a transient external force, there are clearly a set 
of states that look like energy eigenstates at early times, although they don't look 
that way in the future; we might can such states the "in states" lnin}. with the 
property that 
(9.43) 
There is also a separate set of states that look like energy eigenstates at late times, 
correspondingly caned "out states" In out}, and obeying 
(9.44) 
Both sets of states exist at an times, but they look like energy eigenstates only in 
the appropriate asymptotic regime. Either set forms a basis for the entire Hilbert 
space, so in particular we could decompose one set in tenns of the other. For 
example, by multiplying by a complete set of in states, we can write 
lnout} = L (minlnout}lmio}. 
(9.45) 
m 
The complex numbers (minlnout} are matrix elements, which could, in principle, 
be calculated from the Hamiltonian (9.41); together they comprise the S-matrix. 
An observer equipped with a way to detect excitations of the oscillator would 
find that the number of excitations was changed by the applied force, ~d the 
S-matrix encodes the infonnation necessary to characterize these changes be-
tween the asymptotic past and future. All of this discussion, needless to say, car-
ries over essentially without modification to field theory. For particle physics, the 
role of the external force is played by the interactions between different particles, 
whereas for our purposes it will be played by the curvature of spacetime. 
9.3 • QUANTUM FIELD THEORY IN FLAT SPACETIME 
As we have already mentioned, quantum field theory is just a particular example 
of a quantum-mechanical system, in which we are quantizing a field (a function, 
or more generany some tensor field, defined on spacetime) rather than a single os-
cinator. We begin with the simplest possible example, of a free scalar field in flat 
spacetime; only a couple of generalizations are necessary to make the transition 
from a single oscillator to this field theory. Extending the theory to curved space-
time is straightforward as usual, involving writing the theory in a covariant form 

386 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
and declaring it to be true. Once we lose the symmetries of Minkowski space, 
however, some of the ideas we think of as central in a quantum field theory will 
no longer seem so crucial; in particular, the notions of "vacuum" and "particles" 
will lose their privileged positions. (Expositions of quantum mechanics will occa-
sionally make the point that waves and particles are complementary notions with 
different domains of validity, but don't be misled; in quantum field theory it is 
the fields that are truly fundamental, while the particles are approximate notions 
useful in certain restricted circumstances.) In this section we study QFT in flat 
spacetime, before generalizing to curved spacetime in the next section. 
We start with the classical theory, in this case a real scalar field </>(x/J.) in flat 
spacetime, just as we considered in Chapter l, this time generalized to n dimen-
sions. The action is the spacetime integral of the Lagrange density, S = J dn x £,; 
we will consider the Klein-Gordon Lagrangian 
(9.46) 
It is not necessary to include the volume-element factor Jjgj, since we are using 
inertial coordinates in Minkowski space, with metric 
ds 2 = -dt 2 + (dx)2. 
The equation of motion is the Klein-Gordon equation, 
D</>-m2</> =0. 
(9.47) 
(9.48) 
Translation into a Hamiltonian description for the field theory is straightforward. 
The conjugate momentum for a field is simply the derivative of the Lagrange 
density with respect to the time derivative of that field, 
ac 
7r=--. 
<J(<Jo</>) 
For the Klein-Gordon Lagrangian (9.46), this is 
7r = ¢. 
(9.49) 
(9.50) 
Of course, referring to the time derivative assumes that we have chosen a partic-
ular inertial frame; consequently, the Hamiltonian procedure necessarily violates 
manifest Lorentz invariance. If we are careful, however, observable quantities in 
the resulting theory will still be Lorentz-invariant. The Hamiltonian itself can be 
expressed as an integral over space of a Hamiltonian density, 
H = J 
dn-lx1t, 
which is related to the Lagrangian by a Legendre transformation, 
1t(</>, rr) = rr<b - C(</>, <Jµ.</>) 
= !rr2 + !<V</>)2 + !m2</>2, 
(9.51) 
(9.52) 

9.3 Quantum Field Theory in Flat Spacetime 
387 
where (V</>)2 = ~ij ((J;<J>)(<Jj</>). The correspondence between this field theory and 
the ha1monic oscillator should be clear: the field value </> (x) plays the role of 
the coordinate x, with momentum field :rr(x) instead of a single momentum p. 
Instead of the state being specified by two numbers (x and p) at some fixed time, 
we would have to give field values [</>(xi) and :rr(xi)] all over space at some fixed 
time as initial data, and there is an additional gradient tenn that was missing in 
the oscillator case; but otherwise the formalism is very similar. 
We should emphasize that </>(xJJ.) is not a wave function; it is a dynamical 
variable, generalizing the single degree of freedom x in the case of the ha1monic 
oscillator. In a SchrOdinger-picture quantization of the field theory, we would de-
fine a complex wave functional \11[</>(xJJ.)), which would represent the probability 
amplitude for finding the field in each configuration. Instead, however, we will 
use the Heisenberg picture, so that our primary concern will be to promote </> to a 
quantum operator. 
First, we should complete the classical analysis by actually solving this theory. 
It is not hard to write down solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation. One good 
example is a plane wave, 
where the wave vector has components 
kµ. = (w, k), 
and the frequency must satisfy the dispersion relation 
w2 = k2 +m2. 
(9.53) 
(9.54) 
(9.55) 
There is a clear similarity between such a solution and that for the simple har-
monic oscillator, given by (9.9). But there is also an important difference: For 
the oscillator, there is only one independent solution. Because the oscillator has 
a unique frequency, when we add two solutions with specified amplitude xo and 
phase ao, they combine to give a third solution with the same frequency but dif-
ferent amplitude and phase. This is no longer true in field theory. Given (9.55), the 
frequency is determined by the spatial wave vector k, at least up to sign. There-
fore, instead of a single kind of solution, we have a set parameterized by k and 
the sign of w. 
However, we can still write down the most general solution by constructing a 
complete, orthonormal set of modes in tenns of which any solution may be ex-
pressed. To make sense of "orthononnal," we need to define an inner product on 
the space of solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation. Although the modes them-
selves are functions of spacetime, the appropriate inner product can be expressed 
as an integral over a constant-time hypersurface ~,, 
(9.56) 

:18 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
As we would hope, the inner product is actually independent of the hypersurface 
~, over which the integral is taken, as you can easily check by using Stokes's 
theorem and the Klein-Gordon equation. Applying this inner product to two plane 
waves of different wave vectors gives 
(eikf xµ, eikf xµ) 
= -i ( 
(e-iw1t+ik1 ·xa,eiw2t-ik2·x _ eiwit-ik2·xa,e-iw1t+ik1 ·x) dn-1 x 
JE, 
= (w2 +wl)e-i(w1-w2)t { ei(k1-k2)·xdn-lx 
JE, 
(9.57) 
where we have used 
J 
eik·x dn-1 x = (2:rr)n-l~(n-l)(k). 
(9.58) 
The inner product thus vanishes unless the spatial wave vectors k, and hence the 
frequencies w, are equal for both modes. An orthononnal set of mode solutions is 
thus given by 
eikµXµ 
fk(xµ.) = [(2:rr)n-l 2w]l/2' 
(9.59) 
with kµ. obeying (9.55), so that 
(./k, • fk2) = ~(n-l)(k1 - k2). 
(9.60) 
Given the dispersion relation (9.55), k only determines the frequency up to an 
overall sign. Our strategy will be to insist that w always be a positive number, and 
complete the set of modes by including the complex conjugates fk(xµ.). (Com-
plex conjugation changes the sign of the k tenn in the exponent as well as the w 
tenn, but the components of k are defined from -oo to oo already.) The fk modes 
are said to be positive-frequency, meaning they satisfy 
a,Jk = -iwfk, 
W> 0, 
(9.61) 
while the fk modes are negative-frequency, satisfying 
W> 0. 
(9.62) 
(Be careful; these modes are called negative-frequency even though w > 0, be-
cause the time derivative pulls down a factor +iw rather than -iw.) The complex 
conjugate modes are orthogonal to the original modes, 
(9.63) 

9.3 Quantum Field Theory in Flat Spacetime 
and orthononnal with each other but with a negative nonn, 
(fk, • Jk2) = -~(n-l)(k1 - k2). 
389 
(9.64) 
Together, the modes fk and fk fonn a complete set, in tenns of which we can 
expand any solution to the Klein-Gordon equation. 
To canonically quantize this theory, we promote our classical variables (the 
fields and their conjugate momenta) to operators acting on a Hilbert space, and 
impose the canonical commutation relations on equal-time hypersurfaces: 
[</>(t, x), </>(t, x')] = 0 
[:rr(t, x), :rr(t, x')] = 0 
[</>(t, x), :rr(t, x')] = i~(n-I>(x - x'). 
(9.65) 
In field theory we need to state explicitly that the field and its momentum com-
mute with themselves throughout space; for a single oscillator this is implicit, 
since there is only a single coordinate and momentum, each of which will nec-
essarily commute with itself. The delta function implies that operators at equal 
times commute everywhere except at coincident spatial points; this feature arises 
from the demands of causality (operators at spacelike separation cannot influence 
each other). 
Just as classical solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation can be expanded in 
tenns of the modes (9.59), so can the quantum operator field </>(t, x). Denoting 
the coefficients of the mode expansion of the field operator by a~ and tlk, we have 
</>(t' x) = J 
dn- l k [akfk(t' x) + a~fk(t' x)]. 
(9.66) 
Plugging this expansion into (9.65), we find that the operators a~ and ak obey 
commutation relations 
(9.67) 
These operators thus obey the commutation relations characteristic of creation 
and annihilation operators, familiar from (9 .23) for the simple ha1monic oscillator. 
The difference, of course, is that there are an infinite number of such operators, 
indexed by k. We can see the relevance of dividing the modes into positive- and 
negative-frequency; the positive-frequency modes are coefficients of annihilation 
operators, while negative-frequency modes are coefficients of creation operators. 
The idea of positive- and negative-frequency modes will tum out to generalize to 
static spacetimes, although not to arbitrary spacetimes. 
In the case of the hannonic oscillator, we used the creation and annihilation 
operators to define a basis for the Hilbert space in which the basis states were 

~o 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
eigenstates of the number operator. The same procedure works for the free scalar 
field, although now we have to keep track of separate numbers of excitations for 
each spatial wave vector k. There will be a single vacuum state 10}, characterized 
by the fact that it is annihilated by each ak, 
for all k. 
(9.68) 
A state with nk particles with identical momenta k is created by repeated action 
b At 
yak, 
while a state with n; excitations of various momenta k; would be 
(9.69) 
Acting on such a state, the creation and annihilation operators change the number 
of excitations, as expected: 
a~; ln1. n2 •... 'n;, ... 'nj} = ~ln1. 
n2, ... 'n; + 1, ... 'nj}. 
(9.71) 
We can define a number operator for each wave vector, 
(9.72) 
which obeys 
(9.73) 
The states that are eigenstates of the number operators fonn a basis for the entire 
Hilbert space, known as the Fock basis; the space constructed from this basis is 
often called "Fock space," but of course it is just the original Hilbert space. 
One thing we might want to investigate is how our Fock basis behaves under 
Lorentz transfonnations. We have clearly been taking advantage of the symme-
tries of Minkowski space, for example in using plane waves as a basis for so-
lutions to the Klein-Gordon equation. The crucial aspect of these modes is our 
ability to distinguish between positive and negative frequencies, allowing for an 
interpretation of their coefficients in the mode expansion of</> as annihilation and 
creation operators. Now consider a boost by velocity v = dx/dt, leading to new 
coordinates xµ.' given by 
t' = yt - yv · x, 
x' = yx - yvt, 
(9.74) 
where y = l/~. 
and the inverse transfonnation is given by 
t = yt' + yv · x', 
x = yx' + yvt'. 
(9.75) 

9.3 
Quantum Field Theory in Flat Spacetime 
The time derivative of our mode functions in the boosted frame is 
axµ. 
where 
a,, fk = a1' aµ.fk 
= y(-iw)fk + yv · (ik)fk 
= -iw'fk 
w' = yw- yv · k 
391 
(9.76) 
(9.77) 
is simply the frequency in the boosted frame. Clearly, then, a state describing a 
collection of particles with certain momenta is boosted into a state describing the 
same particles, but with boosted momenta. Thus, the total number operator in the 
two frames will coincide, and in particular the vacuum state will coincide. In this 
sense, our original choice of inertial frame was irrelevant. In the next section we 
will see that our ability to find positive- and negative-frequency solutions can be 
traced to the existence of a timelike Killing vector a, in Minkowski spacetime, 
while the invariance of the Fock space under changes of basis can be traced to the 
fact that all such timelike Killing vectors are related by Lorentz transfonnations. 
Therefore, even if the frequency of a mode depends on the choice of inertial frame, 
the decomposition into positive and negative frequencies is invariant. 
We would like to express the Hamiltonian 
H = f dn-1 x [~4>2 + ~(V4>)2 + ~m24>2 J 
(9.78) 
in terms of the creation and annihilation operators, just as we did for the ha1monic 
oscillator. We can analyze this expression term-by-tenn, starting with the <1>2 term 
for simplicity: 
~m2 f dn-lx</>2 
1 2/ dn-1 dn-lkdn-lk' ("Ji 
"tJi*) (" Ji 
"t Ji*) 
= 2m 
x 
ak k + ak k 
ak' k' + ak' k' 
(9.79) 
Zooming in on the first tenn in parentheses, and ignoring for the moment the 
integral over k, we can plug in the explicit fonn of the mode functions (9.59) to 
obtain 
f 
dn-1 dn- lk'" " 
~Ji f dn-1 dn- lk'" " e-i(w+w')t ei(k+k')-x 
x 
akak'JK k' = 
x 
akak' 
~ 
2(2rr)n- l v ww' 

92 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
e-2iwt 
=llkll-k--. 
2w 
(9.80) 
where we have used (9.58) again. Evaluating the other tenns in (9.79) similarly, 
we find that the potential-energy contribution to the Hamiltonian therefore be-
comes 
~m2 f a"-'x4>2 = ~m2 f a"-'k (L) [ak,;_k.-2i"" 
+ atak + akat + ata~ke
2iwr J. 
(9.81) 
For the kinetic-energy and gradient-energy pieces, the derivatives pull down fac-
tors of wand k respectively; we obtain 
and u 
d"- 1x(V¢)2 = u 
d"- 1k (~:) [aka-ke-2iwt 
+ atak + akat + ata~ke
2iwr J. 
(9.83) 
Using w2 = k2 + m2, we can put it all together to write the Hamiltonian for the 
scalar field theory as 
(9.84) 
where the last step invokes the commutation relation (9.67) and the number oper-
ator nk = atak. By similar logic, we can construct an operator corresponding to 
the spatial components of the total momentum, which works out to be 
(9.85) 
As we might expect, energy eigenstates will be those with fixed numbers of 
excitations, each of which carries an energy w. The excitations in the Fock basis 

9.3 Quantum Field Theory in Flat Spacetime 
393 
are interpreted as particles. This is how particles arise in a quantum field theory: 
energy eigenstates are collections of particles with definite momenta. Of course, 
our modes are plane waves that extend throughout space, not the localized tracks 
in bubble chambers that come to mind when we think of particles. What is worse, 
in a curved spacetime the wave equation will not have plane-wave solutions of 
definite frequency that we can interpret as particles. The solution to both issues 
is to think operationally, in tenns of what would be observed by an experimental 
apparatus. The best strategy is to define a sensible notion of a particle detector 
that reduces to our intuitive picture in flat spacetime, and then define "particles" 
as "what a particle detector detects." For a properly defined particle detector, our 
plane wave modes can be shown to "leave tracks" in the way we would hope; in 
an array of such detectors, if a plane wave sets off one detector, there is a high 
probability that it will set off other detectors along a path from the first one in 
a direction given by the wave vector. (We should point out that, if you visit an 
actual particle accelerator at a place like Fermilab or CERN, the detectors bear 
little resemblance to those invented by theorists studying quantum field theory in 
curved spacetime; deep down, however, there is a fundamental similarity.) For a 
discussion of particle detectors see Birrell and Davies (1982). 
You might worry about the factor ~(n-l)(O) in the Hamiltonian (9.84), and 
well you should. It means that the Hamiltonian is infinite even when measured 
in the vacuum state 10}. This term is the field-theory analogue of the hannonic-
oscillator zero-point energy (9 .20). In our discussion of the cosmological constant 
in Chapter 4, we mentioned that quantum fluctuations induced a fonnally infi-
nite displacement of the classical vacuum energy; this infinite contribution to the 
scalar-field Hamiltonian will, when gravity is included, show up as a divergent 
cosmological constant. The fact that it is an integral over an infinite range of k 
of the infinite quantity ~(n - l > (0) can be translated into the statement that the total 
energy is an integral over an infinitely big space of an infinite energy density. But 
the energy density contributed by high-frequency modes is the real problem, ~ot 
the infinite volume; if we regularized the calculation by performing it in a box of 
volume L n - l, we would find 
(9.86) 
which diverges even for finite L, since k (and thus w) can be arbitrarily large. 
Putting a cutoff at some high momentum kmax would recover (4.104). 
In the case of the simple hannonic oscillator, we pointed out that the zero-
point energy could have been avoided had we chosen a classical potential with 
a negative minimum; the quantum-mechanical contribution does not necessarily 
represent the true answer, only the displacement of the energy from its classical 
value. The same holds in field theory; we are free to define our original classi-
cal scalar field theory so that the quantum-mechanical vacuum energy vanishes. 
However, we cannot simply subtract off a finite energy mode by mode, since our 
freedom is only to add a single constant to the potential, and thus to the Hamil-

394 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
tonian density (9.52). To obtain a finite Hamiltonian for the vacuum state, this 
constant would have to be infinite. There is nothing wrong with subtracting off 
an infinite constant; it is a venerable technique in quantum field theory, known as 
"renonnalization." At times renonnalization can seem scary or somehow iUegit-
imate, but in truth it is perfectly sensible; infinities only arise in the relationship 
between quantum theories and their classical counterparts, not in any observable 
quantities. Since Nature presumably doesn't know or care about our fondness for 
classical mechanics, there should be nothing deeply disturbing about renormal-
ization. 
Of course, once we renonnalize to obtain a finite vacuum energy, this energy 
could be anything we like; it is completely arbitrary. This continues to hold for 
quantum field theory in curved spacetime; we might not be able to decompose 
the field into modes of definite frequency, and it is therefore impossible to assign 
a vacuum energy contribution to each mode, but a careful analysis allows one to 
renonnalize the vacuum energy to whatever number you like. Again, nothing pro-
found has happened; the vacuum energy was completely arbitrary in our classical 
model in the first place, we simply chose it to be zero for convenience. The cosmo-
logical constant problem does not arise because quantum mechanics contributes 
a huge amount of vacuum energy, since this contribution can be straightforwardly 
renonnalized away; the problem arises because there is no reason for the resulting 
arbitrary number to be close to zero. As discussed before, from the point of view 
of effective field theory the problem is somewhat sharper, since there is a logical 
expectation for the scale of the vacuum energy, namely the Planck scale at which 
unknown quantum-gravity effects should be contributing. Throughout this chap-
ter, however, we will only be concerned with the propagation of quantum fields in 
fixed spacetime backgrounds, not in using the quantum energy-momentum tensor 
as a source for Einstein's equation; we can therefore choose to ignore the cosmo-
logical constant problem. 
9.4 • QUANTUM FIELD THEORY IN CURVED SPACETIME 
In Chapter 4 we discussed how easy it is to generalize physical theories from flat 
to curved spacetime-we simply express the theories in a coordinate-invariant 
fonn, and assert that they remain true when spacetime is curved. This procedure 
remains valid for quantum field theory, although we will need to give up on some 
of the concepts that seemed indispensable in flat spacetime. 
We start with the Lagrange density of a scalar field in curved spacetime, 
(9.87) 
Aside from the predictable appearance of the metric gµ.v and its determinant, we 
have also included a direct coupling to the curvature scalar R, parameterized by a 
constant~. Since~ is dimensionless, there is no reason to expect that it is small; 

9.4 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
395 
indeed, it should naturally be of order unity. In the literature there are two fa-
vorite choices for the value of ~: minimal coupling simply turns off the direct 
interaction with R, 
while conformal coupling sets 
(n - 2) 
~ = 4(n - 1)' 
(9.88) 
(9.89) 
which is~ = ~ in four dimensions. Using the fonnulas in Appendix G, it is easy 
to check that when ~ takes on this value and m = 0, the scalar field theory is 
invariant under conformal transfonnations gµ.v ~ w2(x)gµ.v· In fact, there is no 
good reason to choose either minimal or confonnal coupling in the real world; no 
symmetry is enhanced by minimal coupling, and conformal invariance is certainly 
not a symmetry of most physical theories. (Since confonnal transfonnations are 
local changes of scale, theories characterized by dimensionful parameters such as 
masses will generally not be conformally invariant.) Even if a classical theory is 
conformally invariant, quantization can break this symmetry, which happens for 
example in the theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) coupled to massless 
quarks. Generally, in four dimensions it is difficult to find exactly confonnally 
invariant interacting theories, although some models with high degrees of super-
symmetry are known to be conformally invariant. 
We may proceed to quantize the theory as before. The conjugate momentum is 
ac 
7r = <J(Vo</>)' 
which for the Lagrangian (9 .87) is 
7r =~Vo</>. 
We can impose canonical commutation relations 
[</>(t,x),<J>(t,x')] = 0 
[rr(t, x), rr(t, x')] = 0 
[</>(!, x), rr(t, x')] = 
~~(n-I>(x - x'). 
v-g 
The equation of motion for the scalar field is 
(9.90) 
(9.91) 
(9.92) 
(9.93) 
For a spacelike hypersurface ~ with induced metric Yij and unit nonnal vector 
nJJ., the inner product on solutions to this equation is 

396 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
(9.94) 
which is independent of the choice of ~. 
So far, so good. To continue the steps we took in flat space, we would now 
introduce a set of positive- and negative-frequency modes fonning a complete 
basis for solutions to (9.93), expand the field operator</> in tenns of these modes, 
and interpret the operator coefficients as creation and annihilation operators. It is 
at this point where our procedure breaks down. Since there will generically not 
be any timelike Killing vector, we will not in general be able to find solutions to 
the wave equation that separate into time-dependent and space-dependent factors, 
and correspondingly cannot classify modes as positive- or negative-frequency. We 
can find a set of basis modes, but the problem is that there will generally be many 
such sets, with no way to prefer one over any others, and the notion of a vacuum 
or number operator will depend sensitively on which set we choose. 
Let's see what we can do. We will always be able to find a set of solutions 
f; (xµ.) to (9.93) that are orthonormal, 
(/;' fj) = ~ij' 
(9.95) 
and corresponding conjugate modes with negative nonn, 
(/;*' !/} = -~;j. 
(9.96) 
The index i may be continuous or discrete; for the moment we will adopt notation 
appropriate to the discrete case. These modes can be chosen to be a complete set, 
so that we may expand our field as 
</> = L (a,.J; +aI !;*). 
j 
(9.97) 
The coefficients a; and a,! have commutation relations 
ca,.,a)J=~,.j· 
(9.98) 
There will be a vacuum state 10 f} that is annihilated by all the annihilation oper-
a tors, 
for all i. 
(9.99) 
From this vacuum state we can define an entire Fock basis for the Hilbert space. 
As before, a state with n; excitations is created by repeated action by aj, 

9.4 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
397 
1 ("'t)n; 
In;} = v'ni! a; 
10 J }, 
(9.100) 
and likewise for states with different kinds of excitations. We can even define a 
number operator for each mode, 
(9.101) 
The subscript f on the vacuum state and the number operator reminds us that they 
are defined with respect to the set of modes f;. 
This apparatus seems quite similar to what we had in flat space; why can't we 
declare the excitations created by aj to be particles and be done with it? We could, 
but we must face the fact that there are other choices we could have made; the 
basis modes f; (xJ.l) are highly nonunique. Consider an alternative set of modes 
g;(xJ.l) with all of the properties that our original modes possessed, including 
forming (along with conjugate modes gn a complete basis with respect to which 
we can expand our field operator, 
~ 
("' 
"'t *) 
</> = L..,, b;g; +b,.g,. . 
j 
(9.102) 
The annihilation and creation operators b; and bj have commutation relations 
[b;, bj] = 0 
"'t "'t 
[b; 'bj] = 0 
A 
"'t 
[b;, bj] = tJ;j. 
(9.103) 
and there will be a vacuum state IOg} that is annihilated by all the annihilation 
operators, 
· 
for all i. 
(9.104) 
We can construct a Fock basis by repeated application of creation operators on 
this vacuum, and define a number operator 
A 
"'t A 
ng; = b; b;. 
(9.105) 
What we have lost in the transition from flat to curved spacetime is any reason to 
prefer one set of modes over any other. In flat spacetime, we were able to pick out 
a natural set of modes by demanding that they be positive-frequency with respect 
to the time coordinate, as defined by (9.61 ). The time coordinate is not unique, 
since we are free to perfonn Lorentz transfonnations; but we saw that the vacuum 
state and total number operators are invariant under such transfonnations. Thus, 
every inertial observer will agree on what is the vacuum state, and how many 
particles are around. 

398 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
In the more general context we are considering now, if one observer defines 
particles with respect to a set of modes f; and another observer uses a set of 
modes g;, they will typically disagree on how many particles are observed (or 
even if particles are observed at all). To see this, it is convenient to expand each 
set of modes in tenns of the other, 
g; = L ( 
CXjj fj + /Jij f j) 
j 
f; = L: ( aj;gj - /Jj;gj). 
j 
(9.106) 
The transformation from one set of basis modes into another is known as a Bogol-
ubov transformation, and the matrices <Xij and /Jij implementing the transfonna-
tion are Bogolubov coefficients. Using the orthononnality of the mode functions, 
they can be expressed as 
<X;j = (g;' fj) 
/Jij = -(g;' fj). 
They satisfy their own normalization conditions, 
L: ( a;kajk - fJ;kfJjk) = ~ij 
j 
L: (a;k/Jjk - fJ;k<Xjk) = o. 
j 
(9.107) 
(9.108) 
As well as describing a transformation between modes, the Bogolubov coeffi-
cients can be used to transfonn between the operators, 
a;= L: (aj;bj + fJj;bj) 
j 
(9.109) 
Now imagine that the system is in the /-vacuum 10 f}, in which no /-particles 
would be observed; we would like to know how many particles are observed by 
an observer using the g-modes. We therefore calculate the expectation value of 
the g number operator in the /-vacuum: 
(o11ng;101> = (o11hlb;101> 
= (011 ~ (a;jti} -Pijtij) (a:kak -P;ktit} 101) 
= L: (-/Jij) (-fJtk) (01lajat101> 

9.4 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
= L,B;j,B;*k(o11 (a!aj +~jk) 101> 
jk 
= L,Bij,8;~~jk(01I01} 
jk 
= L: ,Bij ,B;j. 
j 
399 
(9.110) 
The number of g-particles in the /-vacuum can thus be expressed in terms of the 
Bogolubov coefficients as 
(011ng;101> = L: 1,Bij12. 
j 
(9.111) 
There is no reason for this to vanish; what looks like an empty vacuum from one 
perspective will be bubbling with particles according to another. If any of the ,B;j 
are nonvanishing, the vacuum states will not coincide. We can understand why this 
is by looking at (9.109), where we see that ,Bij describes the admixture of creation 
operators from one basis into the annihilation operators in the other basis. 
This talk about modes and number operators may seem unnecessarily abstract; 
certainly, if an actual particle detector is traveling along some trajectory in a 
possibly-curved spacetime, it will either detect particles or not, without know-
ing what set of basis modes we are using for field theory. How do we know what 
definition of "particles" is actually being used by such a detector? The answer 
is that a detector measures the proper time r along its trajectory, and will define 
positive- and negative-frequency with respect to that proper time. Thus, if a set of 
modes f; can be found that obey 
D 
. 
-
f; = -iwf;, 
dr 
(9.112) 
we can use these modes to calculate how many particles the detector will see. Of 
course, it will generally not be possible to find such modes all over the space-
time. The one time that it might be possible is in a static spacetime, when we 
have a hypersurface-orthogonal timelike Killing vector KJJ.. In that case we can 
choose coordinates in which the metric components are independent of the time 
coordinate t, and there are no time-space cross tenns: 
go; =0. 
(9.113) 
(Indices i, j are now spatial components, not mode labels.) For such a metric, the 
d' Alembertian acting on some mode function f(t, x) works out to be 
(9.114) 

JOO 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
The equation of motion (9.93) can thus be written in the form 
a5f = -(g00)-
1 
[gija;aj + !g00gij(<J;goo)<Jj - gijrtak - (m 2 +~R)] f. 
(9.115) 
The operator on the left is a pure time derivative, while the operator on the right 
involves only spatial derivatives and functions of space alone. We can therefore 
find separable solutions 
fw(t, X) = e-iwt /w(X), 
(9.116) 
which can be described as positive-frequency, 
<J, f w(t, X) = -iwf w(t, X), 
(J) > 0. 
(9.117) 
This relation can be recast in a coordinate-invariant fonn as 
(J) > 0, 
(9.118) 
where CK fw denotes the Lie derivative of f w along K. There will also be 
negative-frequency conjugate modes, 
(J) > 0. 
(9.119) 
Together, the modes (f w. f:) will form a basis for solutions to the wave equa-
tion in a static background. The existence of such modes won't help us unless 
they are relevant for our detector; if the detector's trajectory follows along or-
bits of the Killing field (the four-velocity Uµ. = dxµ. /dr is proportional to Kµ.), 
the proper time will be proportional to the Killing time t, and modes that are 
positive-frequency with respect to this Killing vector will serve as a natural basis 
for describing Fock space. We will see this phenomenon at work in our discussion 
of the Unruh effect in the next section. 
In the last section we mentioned the need to renonnalize the vacuum energy 
in quantum field theory. This requirement still exists in curved spacetime, but 
an appropriate renonnalization procedure is harder to construct, since there is 
no preferred mode basis. Nevertheless, algebraic methods have been developed 
to define a renonnalized energy-momentum tensor rigorously, at least in cer-
tain cases; we won't delve into this subject in detail, but should at least present 
some of the underlying philosophy. The basic idea is that, even in the presence 
of curvature, spacetime should look Minkowskian on small enough scales. Be-
cause the vacuum-energy divergence we found in flat spacetime was due to short-
wavelength modes, we should be able to match the behavior of fields in curved 
spacetime on very small scales to those in flat spacetime, and subtract off any 
divergences that appear. In particular, we consider the two-point function of a 
quantum field</> in some state 11/t}, 

9.4 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
401 
(9.120) 
where x 1 and x2 are two spacetime points. The two-point function in the Min-
kowski vacuum becomes singular as x 1 and x2 are brought close to each other. 
We would like to characterize this singularity, and insist that it hold for any reg-
ular state in curved spacetime. By "brought close to each other" we mean that 
cr(x1, x2), the squared distance along the shortest geodesic connecting the two 
points, goes to zero. In the limit as x1 and x2 are very close, the squared geodesic 
distance is simply 
(9.121) 
Of course, in a Lorentzian manifold, the geodesic distance will vanish when points 
are null separated, not only when they are coincident. We therefore include a small 
imaginary part and take the limit as it goes to zero, by defining 
(9.122) 
Here, t is the timelike coordinate, and the limit as E ~ o+ is assumed. (The mani-
fest coordinate-dependence of this fonnula will be irrelevant in this limit.) Then it 
turns out that there is a unique singularity structure for the natural vacuum in Min-
kowski spacetime, such that the two-point function (in four dimensions) contains 
a leading singularity of the fonn l/(4:rr 2cre) and a subleading one proportional to 
In ere, with all other terms being regular. We therefore require that any physically 
reasonable quantum state in curved spacetime obey 
(9.123) 
where the functions U(x1,x2), V(x1,x2), and W(x1.x2) are all regular at x1 = 
x2, and U (x, x) = 1. A state with this property is said to be a Hadamard state. It 
can be shown that the renonnalized energy-momentum tensor is well-defined and 
nonsingular in all Hadamard states, and furthennore that it will be singular in any 
non-Hadamard state. If the Hadamard condition is obeyed on some partial Cauchy 
surface, it will also be obeyed everywhere in the domain of dependence; in other 
words, the energy-momentum tensor may become singular on a horizon, but not 
within the Cauchy development of some well-posed initial data. States of this 
form, therefore, seem appropriate for consideration in QFT on curved spacetime. 
For details see Wald ( 1994 ). 
We see that QFT in curved spacetime shares most of the basic features of QFT 
in flat spacetime; the crucial difference involves what we cannot do, namely de-
cide on a natural set of basis modes that all inertial observers would identify as 
particles. At the end of Section 9.2 we briefly discussed an oscillator subject to 
a transient force, and how to define an S-matrix relating number eigenstates at 

402 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
early times to number eigenstates at late times. The same set of ideas translates 
directly to quantum field theory. If we have a situation in which spacetime is static 
in the asymptotic past and future, but with some disturbance in between, we can 
define in- and out-states that are energy eigenstates at early and late times, and 
a set of Bogolubov coefficients describing how the in-vacuum (for example) will 
be described as a multiparticle configuration in tenns of the out-states. This phe-
nomenon goes by the name of particle production by gravitational fields; relevant 
physical examples include the early universe and black holes.2 
9.5 • THE UNRUH EFFECT 
We must admit that, having put so much effort into understanding the basics of 
quantum field theory in curved spacetime, we won't actually do any detailed cal-
culations in a curved background. Instead, we will investigate a phenomenon that 
relies on the ideas we have introduced, but is manifested even in flat spacetime: 
the Unruh effect, which states that an accelerating observer in the traditional Min-
kowski vacuum state will observe a thennal spectrum of particles. Historically, 
the Unruh effect was discovered in an attempt to understand the physics under-
lying the Hawking effect (thennal radiation in the presence of a black hole event 
horizon). Our strategy will be to carefully derive the Unruh effect, and in the next 
section argue under reasonable assumptions that this implies the Hawking effect, 
which is more difficult to derive directly just because it's harder to solve wave 
equations in curved spacetime than in flat spacetime. 
The basic idea of the Unruh effect is simple: it is a manifestation of the idea 
that observers with different notions of positive- and negative-frequency modes 
will disagree on the particle content of a given state. For a uniformly accelerated 
observer in Minkowski space, the trajectory will move along orbits of a time-
like Killing vector, but not that of the usual time-translation symmetry. We can 
therefore expand the field in modes appropriate to the accelerated observer, and 
calculate the number operator in the ordinary Minkowski vacuum, where we will 
find a thennal spectrum of particles. Different sets of explanatory words can be 
attached to this result; the basic lesson to learn is that what we think of as an inert 
vacuum actually has the character of a thennal state. 
In the interest of discarding all possible complications to get at the underly-
ing phenomenon, we consider a quantum field theory that is as simple as it can 
be without becoming completely trivial: a massless (m = 0) scalar field in two 
spacetime dimensions (n = 2). In two dimensions, conformal coupling and mini-
mal coupling coincide, so we do not include any direct interaction with the curva-
ture scalar. (We're in flat spacetime, so such a coupling wouldn't have any effect 
anyway.) The relevant wave equation is thus 
D</>=0. 
(9.124) 
2 Interestingly, the first discussion of particle prc:>duction in curved spacetime was given by ScltrOdinger 
himself; see E. SchrOdinger (1939), Physica (Utrecht) 6, 899. 

9.5 
The Unruh Effect 
403 
Before diving into the quantization of this field theory, let's think about two-
dimensional Minkowski space as seen by a unifonnly accelerating observer. We 
know that the metric can be written in inertial coordinates as 
ds 2 = -dt 2 + dx2. 
(9.125) 
Consider an observer moving at a unifonn acceleration of magnitude a in the 
x-direction. We claim that the resulting trajectory xJ.t(r) will be given by 
1 .nh 
t(r) = - s1 
(ar) 
a 
1 
x(r) = - cosh(ar). 
a 
(9.126) 
Let's verify that this path corresponds to constant acceleration. The acceleration 
two-vector is given in the globally inertial coordinate system by 
(9.127) 
where the covariant derivative along the path is equal to the ordinary derivative 
because the Christoffel symbols vanish in these coordinates. The components of 
aJ.l are thus 
and the magnitude is 
a' =a sinh(ar) 
ax =a cosh(ar), 
JaµaJ.t = J-a2 sinh2(ar) + a2 cosh2(ar) =a. 
(9.128) 
(9.129) 
The path therefore corresponds to a constant acceleration of magnitude a, as de-
sired. The trajectory of our accelerated observer obeys the relation 
(9.130) 
and thus describes an hyperboloid asymptoting to null paths x = -t in the past 
and x = t in the future. The accelerated observer travels from past null infinity to 
future null infinity, rather than timelike infinity as would be reached by geodesic 
observers. 
We can choose new coordinates (17, ~)on two-dimensional Minkowski space 
that are adapted to unifonnly accelerated motion. Let 
1 
x = -ea~ cosh(a17) 
a 
(x > ltl). 
(9.131) 

404 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
x 
FIGURE 9.1 
Minkowski spacetime in Rindler coordinates. Region I is the region acces-
sible to an observer undergoing constant acceleration in the +x-direction. The coordinates 
(17, ~) can be used in region I, or separately in region IV, where they point in the opposite 
sense. The vector field a,, corresponds to the generator of Lorentz boost symmetry. The 
horizons H ± are Killing horizons for this vector field, and also represent boundaries of the 
past and future as witnessed by the Rindler observer. 
The new coordinates have ranges 
-oo < 17, ~ < +oo, 
(9.132) 
and cover the wedge x > It I, labeled as region I in Figure 9.1. In these coordi-
nates, the constant-acceleration path (9.126) is given by 
a 
17(r) = -r 
a 
~(r)=~ln(~). 
(9.133) 
so that the proper time is proportional to 1J and the spatial coordinate ~ is constant. 
In particular, an observer with a = a moves along the path 
1J = r, 
~ =0. 
(9.134) 
The metric in these coordinates takes the fonn 
(9.135) 
Region I, with this mellic, is known as Rindler space, even though it is obvi-
ously just a part of Minkowski space. A Rindler observer is one moving along 

9.5 
The Unruh Effect 
405 
a constant-acceleration path, as in (9 .133 ). The causal structure of Rindler space 
resembles the region r > 2G M of the maximally extended Schwarzschild solu-
tion of Figure 5.12. In particular, the null line x = t, labeled ff+ in Figure 9.1, is 
a future Cauchy horizon for any 11 =constant spacelike hypersurface in region I; 
similarly, H- is a past Cauchy horizon. These horizons are reminiscent of the 
event horizons in the Kruskal diagram, with static observers (r = constant) in 
Schwarzschild being related to constant-acceleration paths in Rindler space. 
The metric components in (9.135) are independent of 17, so we immediately 
know that a,, is a Killing vector. But of course this is just Minkowski spacetime, 
so we think we know what all of the Killing vectors are. Indeed, if we express a,, 
in the (t, x) coordinates, we find 
at 
ax 
a,,= -a,+ -ax 
a11 
a11 
=ea~ [cosh(a17)a, + sinh(a17)ax] 
= a(xa, +tax). 
(9.136) 
This is nothing more or less than the Killing field associated with a boost in the 
x-direction. It is clear from this expression that this Killing field naturally extends 
throughout the spacetime; in regions II and IIl it is spacelike, while in region IV it 
is timelike but past-directed. The horizons we have identified are actually Killing 
horizons for a,,. The redshift factor, defined in (6.12) as the magnitude of the norm 
of the Killing vector, is 
(9.137) 
The surface gravity K = JVµ. V V µ. V of this Killing horizon is thus 
K =a. 
. (9.138) 
There is no real gravitational force, since we're in flat space; but this surface 
gravity characterizes the acceleration of Rindler observers. 
We can also define coordinates (17, ~) in region IV by flipping the signs in 
(9.131), 
1 
. 
t = -
-ea~ smh(a17), 
a 
1 
x = -
-ea~ cosh(a17) 
a 
(x < ltl). 
(9.139) 
The sign guarantees that a,, and a, point in opposite directions in region IV. 
Strictly speaking, we cannot use (17, ~) simultaneously in regions I and IV, since 
the ranges of these coordinates are the same in each region, but we will be okay 
so long as we explicitly indicate to which region we are referring. The reason 
why it's better to use the same set of coordinate labels twice, rather than simply 
introducing new coordinates, is that the metric (9.135) will apply to both region I 
and region IV. 

406 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
Along the surface t = 0, a,, is a hypersurface-orthogonal timelike Killing vec-
tor, except for the single point x = 0 where it vanishes. This vector can therefore 
be used to define a set of positive- and negative-frequency modes, on which we 
can build a Fock basis for the scalar-field Hilbert space. The massless Klein-
Gordon equation in Rindler coordinates takes the fonn 
(9.140) 
A nonnalized plane wave gk = (4:rrw)-
1 1 2e-iw71 +ik~, with w = lkl, solves this 
equation and apparently has positive frequency, in the sense that a,,gk = -iwgk. 
But we need our modes to be positive-frequency with respect to a future-directed 
Killing vector, and in region IV that role is played by a<- 11> =-a,, rather than a,,. 
To deal with this annoyance, we introduce two sets of modes, one with support in 
region I and the other in region IV: 
I 
IV 
I 
IV 
(9.141) 
We take w = lkl in each case; in two dimensions, the spatial wave vector is just 
the single number k. Each set of modes is positive-frequency with respect to the 
appropriate future-directed timelike Killing vector, 
a,,gil) = -iwgil) 
a(-71)gi2) = -iwgi2)' 
w> 0. 
(9.142) 
These two sets, along with their conjugates, fonn a complete set of basis modes 
for any solutions to the wave equation throughout the spacetime. (The single point 
x = t = 0 is a set of measure zero, so we shouldn't have to worry about it.) Both 
sets are nonvanishing in regions IT and III of the Rindler diagram; this is obscured 
by writing them in tenns of the coordinates 1J and ~, but these functions can be 
analytically extended into the future and past regions. Denoting the associated 
'h'I . 
b"O 2> 
• 
anm 1 at10n operators as k • , we can wnte 
</> - J 
dk (f,O>g(l) + b(l)tg(l)* + b(2)g(2) + b(2)tg(2)*) 
-
k 
k 
k 
k 
k 
k 
k 
k. 
(9.143) 
This expansion is an alternative to our expression (9.66) in tenns of the original 
Minkowski modes, which in two dimensions takes the fonn 
(9.144) 

9.5 
The Unruh Effect 
407 
It is straightforward to check that the modes (9.141) are properly nonnalized 
with respect to the inner product (9.94). In the metric (9.135), the future-directed 
unit nonnal to the surface 1J = 0 is nonnalized to 
(9.145) 
or 
(9.146) 
Meanwhile, the spatial metric determinant satisfies 
(9.147) 
We therefore have n° ,JY = 1, and the calculation of the inner product of the 
Rindler modes follows precisely that of ordinary Minkowski modes. We end up 
with 
(gk:)' gi!)) = ~(k1 - k2) 
(gk~)' gi;>) = ~(k1 - k2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(gk, 'gk2 ) = O, 
and similarly for the conjugate modes. 
(9.148) 
There are thus two sets of modes, Minkowski and Rindler, with which we can 
expand solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation in a flat two-dimensional space-
time. Although the Hilbert space for the theory is the same in either representa-
tion, its interpretation as a Fock space will be different; in particular, the vacuum 
states will be different. The Minkowski vacuum l<>M}, satisfying 
(9.149) 
will be described as a multi-particle state in the Rindler representation; likewise, 
the Rindler vacuum IOR}, satisfying 
(9.150) 
will be described as a multi-particle state in the Minkowski representation. At 
a practical level, the difference arises because an individual Rindler mode can 
never be written as a sum of positive-frequency Minkowski modes; at t = 0 the 
Rindler modes only have support on the half-line, and such a function cannot be 
expanded in purely positive-frequency plane waves. Thus, the Rindler annihila-
tion operators used to define IOR} are necessarily superpositions of Minkowski 
creation and annihilation operators, so the two vacua cannot coincide. 
A Rindler observer will be static with respect to orbits of the boost Killing 
vector a,,. Such an observer in region I will therefore describe particles in tenns 

408 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
of the Rindler modes gkl), and in particular will observe a state in the Rindler 
vacuum to be devoid of particles, a state bkl)tlOR} to contain a single particle of 
frequency w = lkl, and so on. Conversely, a Rindler observer traveling through 
the Minkowski vacuum state will detect a background of particles, even though 
an inertial observer would describe the state as being completely empty. What 
kind of particles would the Rindler observer detect? We know how to answer 
this question: Calculate the Bogolubov coefficients relating the Minkowski and 
Rindler modes, and use them to determine the expectation value of the Rindler 
number operator in the Minkowski vacuum. This is straightforward but tedious, 
so we will take a shortcut due to Unruh. We will find a set of modes that share the 
same vacuum state as the Minkowski modes (although the description of excited 
states may be different), but for which the overlap with the Rindler modes is more 
direct. The way to do this is to start with the Rindler modes, analytically extend 
them to the entire spacetime, and express this extension in tenns of the original 
Rindler modes. 
To see how this works, notice from (9.131) and (9.139) that we have the fol-
lowing relationships between the Minkowski coordinates (t, x) and Rindler coor-
dinates (17, ~) in regions I and IV: 
e-•<o-l;l = {a(-/+ x) 
I 
a(t - x) 
IV 
e•<o+i;l = { a(t + x) 
I 
(9.151) 
a(-t-x) IV 
We can therefore express the spacetime dependence of a mode gk1> with k > 0 
(so w = k) in tenns of Minkowski coordinates in region I as 
~ 
gkl) = e-iw11+ik~ 
= e-iw(11-~> 
= aiw/a (-t + x)iw/a. 
(9.152) 
The analytic extension of this function throughout spacetime is straightforward; 
we simply use this final expression for any values of (t, x). But we would like to 
express the result in tenns of the original Rindler modes everywhere; since the 
gk1> modes vanish in region IV, we need to bring the modes gk2> into play. When 
we express them in terms of the Minkowski coordinates in region IV, for k > 0 
we obtain 
~gk2) = e+iw11+ik~ 
= e+iw(11H> 
= a-iw/a(-t - x)-iw/a. 
(9.153) 

9.5 
The Unruh Effect 
409 
This doesn't match the behavior of (9.152) that we want. But if we take the com-
plex conjugate and reverse the wave number, we obtain 
The combination 
~gc:r = e-iw11+ik~ 
= e-iw(11-~> 
= aiw/a (t - x)iw/a 
= aiw/a[e-i11' (-t + x)]iw/a 
= aiw/aerrw/a(-t + x)iw/a. 
~ 
(gil) + e-rrw/a g<_!k*) = aiw/a(-t + x)iw/a 
(9.154) 
(9.155) 
is therefore well-defined along the whole surface t = 0. We have explicitly exam-
ined the case k > 0, but an identical result obtains fork < 0. 
A properly nonnalized version of this mode is given by 
(9.156) 
This is an appropriate analytic extension of the gk1
> modes; to get a complete 
set, we need to include the extensions of the gf> modes, which by an analogous 
argument are given by 
(9.157) 
To verify the nonnalization, for example for hkl), we use (9.148): 
(hkl), hkl)) = 
1 
[err(w1 +wi)/2a (gkl), gkl)) 
1 
2 
2Jsinh (";1 ) sinh (7) 
1 
2 
+ -rr(w1 +w2)/2a ( (2)* 
(2)*) ] 
e 
g_k, 'g-k2 
= 
1 
[err(w1+wi)/2a~(k1 - k2) 
2J sinh ( ";1 ) sinh ( 7) 
+ e-rr(wi +w:?)/2a~(-k1 + k2)] 

410 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
(9.158) 
just as we would like. 
We can now expand our field in these modes, 
</> -Jdk (c<l)h0 > +c<l)th0 >* +2<2>h<2> +2<2>th<2>*) 
-
k 
k 
k 
k 
k 
k 
k 
k. 
(9.159) 
From our discussion of Bogolubov transformations in Section 9.4, we know that 
the expressions (9.156) and (9.157) for the hil.2) modes in tenns of the gkI. 2> 
modes implies corresponding expressions for the Rindler operators hil.2) in tenns 
of the operators cil,2)' as 
hil) = 
1 
(e7Tw/2acrl) + e-1Tw/2ac~r) 
J2 sinh ("aw) 
hi2> = 
1 
(e"w/2aci2> + e-rrw/2ac~r). 
J2 sinh ("aw) 
(9.160) 
We can therefore express the Rindler number operator in region I, 
n~> (k) = hil)t hil), 
(9.161) 
in tenns of the new operators ci1 ·2>. 
The original positive-frequency Minkowski plane-wave modes with k > 0, 
fk oc e-iw(t-x), are analytic and bounded for complex (t, x) so long as lm(t -
x) ~ 0. (Such modes are called "right-moving," as they describe waves propagat-
ing to the right.) The same holds for our new modes hi1
> so long as we take the 
branch cut for the imaginary power to lie in the upper-half complex (t - x) plane, 
as we can see from examination of (9.152) and (9.154); this is consistent with our 
setting -1 = e-irr in (9.154). Similar considerations apply to the hf> modes, 
which are analytic and bounded in the lower-half complex (t + x) plane, as are 
the positive-frequency Minkowski plane-wave modes with k < 0 (left-moving). 
Consequently, unlike the original Rindler modes gi1•2>, we know that the modes 
hk1.2> can be expressed purely in terms of positive-frequency Minkowski modes 
fk. They therefore share the same vacuum state IOM}, so that 
... (1) 10 } -
... (2) 1n.. ·} - 0 
ck 
M -
ck 
VM 
-
• 
(9.162) 
The excited states will not coincide, but that won't bother us, since we are inter-
ested in what a Rindler observer sees when the state is precisely in the Minkowski 
vacuum. An observer in region I, for example, will observe particles defined by 
the operators hi1>; the expected number of such particles of frequency w will be 
given by 

9.5 
The Unruh Effect 
411 
e-rrw/a 
= 2 sinh ("aw) ~(O) 
= 
1 
~(0) 
e2rrw/a - 1 
' 
(9.163) 
where we have used the fact that a cil)tlOM} is a nonnalized one-particle state, 
(9.164) 
The delta function in (9.163) is merely an artifact of our use of (nonsquare-
integrable) plane wave basis modes; had we constructed nonnalized wave packets, 
we would have obtained a finite result with an identical spectrum. 
The result (9.163) is a Planck spectrum with temperature 
a 
T= 2rr· 
(9.165) 
Thus, an observer moving with uniform acceleration through the Minkowski vac-
uum observes a thermal spectrum of particles. This is the Unruh effect. Of 
course, there is more to thennal radiation than just the spectrum (9.163); to be 
truly thennal, we should check that there are no hidden correlations in the ob-
served particles. This has been verified; the radiation detected by a Rindler ob-
server is truly thennal. At the most basic level, the Unruh effect shows how two 
different sets of observers (inertial and Rindler) will describe the same state in 
very different tenns; at a slightly deeper level, it reveals the essentially thennal 
nature of the vacuum in quantum field theory. 
The temperature T = a/2rr is what would be measured by an observer moving 
along the path ~ = 0, which feels an acceleration a = a. Using (9 .133), we know 
that any other path with ~ = constant feels an acceleration 
a= ae-a~ 
(9.166) 
and thus should measure thennal radiation with a temperature a /2rr. This is con-
sistent with our discussion in Chapter 6 of the redshift witnessed by static ob-
servers moving along orbits of some Killing vector KJJ.; we found that radiation 
emitted with frequency WI at a point XI would be observed at a point x2 with a 
frequency 
VI 
w2 =-WI, 
V2 
(9.167) 
where the redshift factor V is the nonn of the Killing vector. In (9.137) we found 
that the redshift factor associated with a,, is v = ea~' so that 
(9.168) 

412 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
Thus, if an observer at ~1 = 0 detects a temperature T = a/2rr, the observer at 
~2 = ~ will see it to be redshifted to a temperature T = ae-a~ /2rr, just as in 
(9.166). In particular, the temperature redshifts all the way to zero as~ ~ +oo. 
This makes sense, since a Rindler observer at infinity will be nearly inertial, and 
will define the same notion of vacuum and particles as an ordinary Minkowski 
observer. 
The Unruh effect tens us that an accelerated observer will detect particles in the 
Minkowski vacuum state. An inertial observer, of course, would describe the same 
state as being completely empty; indeed, the expectation value of the energy-
momentum tensor would be (Tµv} = 0. But if there is no energy-momentum, 
how can the Rindler observers detect particles? This is a subtle issue, but by no 
means a contradiction. If the Rindler observer is to detect background particles, 
she must carry a detector-some sort of apparatus coupled to the particles being 
detected. But if a detector is being maintained at constant acceleration, energy is 
not conserved; we need to do work constantly on the detector to keep it accel-
erating. From the point of view of the Minkowski observer, the Rindler detector 
emits as wen as absorbs particles; once the coupling is introduced, the possibility 
of emission is unavoidable. When the detector registers a particle, the inertial ob-
server would say that it had emitted a particle and felt a radiation-reaction force in 
response. Ultimately, then, the energy needed to excite the Rindler detector does 
not come from the background energy-momentum tensor, but from the energy we 
put into the detector to keep it accelerating. 
9.6 • THE HAWKING EFFECT AND BLACK HOLE EVAPORATION 
Even though it occurs in flat spacetime, the Unruh effect teaches us the most 
important lesson of QFT in curved spacetime, the idea that "vacuum" and "par-
ticles" are observer-dependent notions rather than fundamental concepts. In fact, 
given our understanding of the Unruh effect, we can see almost immediately how 
the Hawking effect arises. This should not be too surprising, as we have already 
noted the similarity between the causal structure of Rindler space and that of the 
maximally-extended Schwarzschild spacetime describing an eternal black hole. 
We will therefore be able to argue in favor of Hawking radiation without ever 
doing an explicit calculation in curved spacetime; of course, there are many fea-
tures that you might like to investigate in more detail, for which the fun power of 
the curved metric is necessary. In addition to Birren and Davies (1982) and Wald 
(1994), there are good review articles where you can find a more fun discussion 
of the issues discussed here. 3 Our derivation of Hawking radiation fonows that of 
Jacobson. 
3T.A. Jacobson. "Introductory Lectures on Black Hole Thennodynamics," Lectures at Uni-
versity of Utrecht ( 1996). http: I /ww. fys. ruu. nlrwwthe/lectures/ i tfuu-0196. ps; 
R.M. Wald. "The thennodynamics of black holes," Living Rev. Rel. 4, 6 (2001). http:// 
arxi v. org/gr-qc/9912119; J. Traschen. "An introduction to black hole evaporation" (2000). 
http://arxiv.org/gr-qc/0010055. 

9.6 The Hawking Effect and Black Hole Evaporation 
413 
Consider a static observer at radius r1 > 2G M outside a Schwarzschild black 
hole. Such an observer moves along orbits of the timelike Killing vector K = 
a,. In Chapter 6 we showed that the redshift factor V = J- K µ. K µ. for static 
observers in Schwarzschild is given by 
with a corresponding magnitude of the acceleration given by 
GM 
a = -r ..;---;==r ==-==2==c==M== 
(9.169) 
(9.170) 
For observers very close to the event horizon, ri - 2G M « 2G M, this accelera-
tion becomes very large compared to the scale set by the Schwarzschild radius, 
(9.171) 
The Schwarzschild radius in tum sets the radius of curvature of spacetime near the 
horizon. Therefore, as observed over length- and timescales set by a} 1 « 2G M, 
spacetime looks essentially flat. Let us make the crucial assumption that the quan-
tum state of some scalar field</> looks like the Minkowski vacuum (free of any par-
ticles) as seen by freely-falling observers near the black hole. This assumption is 
reasonable, since the event horizon is not a local barrier; a freely-falling observer 
sees nothing special happen when crossing the horizon. Then the static observer 
looks just like a constant-acceleration observer in flat spacetime, and will detect 
Unruh radiation at a temperature T1 = a1 /2rr. 
Now consider a static observer at infinity, or at least a distance r2 large com-
pared to 2G M. In that case there is no sense in which the spacetime curvature can 
be neglected over timescales a:; 1 » 2G M, so there is no reason to expect that 
they will see radiation with a temperature a2/2rr, where a2 is evaluated at r2. But 
the radiation observed near the horizon will propagate to infinity with an appro-
priate redshift. We can apply the argument used at the end of the last section to 
determine what such an observer should see; they should detect thennal radiation 
redshifted to a temperature 
V1 
V1 a 
T2=-T1=--. 
V2 
V2 2rr 
At infinity we have V2 ~ 1, so the observed temperature is 
V1a1 
K 
T= 
Jim -- = -, 
r1-2GM 2rr 
2rr 
(9.172) 
(9.173) 
where K = lim(Va) is the surface gravity; for Schwarzschild, K = l/4G M. 
Unlike for accelerating observers in flat spacetime, in Schwarzschild the static 
Killing vector has finite nonn at infinity, and the radiation near the horizon red-
shifts to a finite value rather than all the way to zero. Observers far from the black 

414 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
hole thus see a flux of thennal radiation emitted from the black hole at a temper-
ature proportional to its surface gravity. This is the celebrated Hawking effect, 
and the radiation itself is known as Hawking radiation. 
Despite its slickness, there is nothing dishonest about this derivation of the 
Hawking effect. In particular, the relation to acceleration makes it clear why the 
temperature is proportional to the black hole surface gravity (which continues to 
hold for more general black holes, not only Schwarzschild). However, we need 
to be clear about the assumption we made that the vacuum state near the horizon 
looks nonsingular to freely-falling observers. In technical tenns, the renonnalized 
energy-momentum tensor is taken to be finite at the horizon, or equivalently, the 
two-point function obeys the Hadamard condition (9.123). 
The meaning of this assumption becomes more clear by considering possible 
vacuum states in the maximally extended Schwarzschild geometry. Such states 
are not necessarily physically relevant to a realistic black hole fonned by gravita-
tional collapse, but the possibilities that arise in the idealized case carry instruc-
tive lessons for the real world. We will only describe the states, not specify them 
quantitatively or derive any of their properties; for more details see the references 
above. 
In searching for a vacuum state, we might begin by looking for a state that is 
regular [in the Hadamard sense, (9.123)) throughout spacetime. For maximally 
extended Schwarzschild, such a state was found by Hartle and Hawking, so we 
call it the Hartle-Hawking vacuum; indeed, this is the unique vacuum state that 
is regular everywhere and invariant under the Schwarzschild Killing vector a, 
representing time translations at infinity. In particular, recalling the confonnal 
diagram of Schwarzschild shown in Figure 5.16, the Hartle-Hawking vacuum 
is regular on the past and future event horizons ff± at r = 2G M, and also on 
past and future null infinity ,g,±. From the consideration of static observers as 
outlined above, we should then expect that the Hartle-Hawking vacuum features 
thennal radiation being emitted from the black hole, and indeed this turns out to 
be true. However, a close examination of this state reveals that there is an equal 
flux of thennal radiation coming in from past null infinity (9'-) toward the black 
hole; in other words, it represents a black hole in thennal equilibrium with its 
environment. This is not what we would use to model a realistic black hole in our 
universe. Another vacuum, more closely analogous to that of a black hole fonned 
via gravitational collapse, is the Unruh vacuum, which is nonsingular on ff+ 
(and therefore predicts outgoing Hawking radiation), but exhibits no incoming 
radiation from ,g,-. The Unruh vacuum turns out to be singular on the past horizon 
ff- of Schwarzschild; this doesn't bother us if we are only using it as a model 
for realistic black holes, since a spacetime featuring gravitational collapse as in 
Figure 5.17 would not have a white hole or any past horizons. Finally, we might 
look for a vacuum state in which no particles come into the black hole, nor escape 
to infinity; in other words, vanishing flux at ,g,±. There is such a state, called the 
Boulware vacuum. The existence of such a state seems to be in conflict with 
our argument for the Hawking effect from the Unruh effect, except that a careful 
analysis reveals that the Boulware vacuum is singular both on ff- and ff+. Thus, 

9.6 The Hawking Effect and Black Hole Evaporation 
415 
the assumption that the vacuum is regular as seen by freely-falling observers near 
the horizon is violated in this state. 
So a careful examination of vacuum states in an eternal Schwarzschild metric 
is consistent with our reasoning from the Unruh effect; states that are regular on 
ff+ predict Hawking radiation of the expected fonn. Note that the existence of 
an event horizon is crucial to the argument; without such an horizon, the require-
ment that the state be regular on the horizon has no force. Consider for example 
a neutron star, whose radius may be close to the Schwarzschild radius but for 
which the spacetime is free of any horizons. Neutron stars do not emit any Hawk-
ing radiation. One way to understand this is to recognize that a static neutron-star 
mellic features a Killing vector that is timelike everywhere, and can be used to 
define positive-frequency modes that extend throughout the spacetime and match 
the Minkowski modes at infinity. The resulting vacuum state would actually re-
semble the Boulware vacuum, free of flux at ,g,±; the fact that the full Boulware 
vacuum is singular on the horizon doesn't bother us in the neutron-star case, since 
there aren't any horizons. 
To be absolutely sure that we have correctly chosen a vacuum state appropriate 
to realistic black holes, we should consider gravitational collapse in a spacetime 
that is nearly Minkowskian in the past and Schwarzschild in the future, as in 
Figure 5.17. If the vacuum takes the standard Minkowski fonn on ,g,-, we can 
ask how the modes propagate through the collapse geometry to ,g,+, defining an 
S-mallix as in (9.45) to determine what would be seen by asymptotic observers. 
This is in fact what Hawking did when he first discovered black hole radiation; 
the calculations involve some messy algebra but are basically straightforward, 
with the same answer for the temperature as we derived above. 
Of course, from a complete calculation we can learn more than just the black-
body temperature; we might ask, for example, what happens when the wavelength 
of the emitted radiation is comparable to the Schwarzschild radius, in which case 
our approximations clearly break down. If we were to carefully investigate the 
emission of arbitrary species of particles from any kind of black hole (that is, 
allowing for both charge and spin), we would find that the spectrum of emitted 
radiation takes the fonn 
" 
r(w) 
(nw} = e2rr(CJ>-µ.)/K ± 1 . 
(9.174) 
Here, K is of course the surface gravity. The parameter µ is a chemical poten-
tial, characterizing the tendency of the black hole to shed its conserved quantum 
numbers; a charged black hole preferentially emits particles with the same-sign 
charge as the hole, while a rotating black hole preferentially emits particles with 
the same-sign angular momentum as the hole. Hawking radiation therefore tends 
to bring black holes to a Schwarzschild state. r(w) is a greybody factor, which 
can be thought of as arising from backscattering of wavepackets off of the gravi-
tational field and into the black hole. In the high-frequency limit the wavelength 
is very small and backscattering can be neglected; at very low frequencies the 
wavelength becomes greater than the Schwarzschild radius and backscattering 

416 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
becomes important. Although an analytic expression for the greybody factor is 
hard to derive, in the limiting cases of large and small frequencies the greybody 
factor for a scalar field obeys 
r(w) ~ 1, 
A 
r(w) ~ -w2, 
4:rr 
where A is the area of the black hole. 
1 
w»--
GM 
1 
w «GM' 
(9.175) 
The discovery that black holes emit thennal radiation is certainly surprising 
from the point of view of classical general relativity, where we emphasized the 
impossibility of escape to infinity from points inside the event horizon. One pic-
turesque way to understand what is going on is to think of vacuum fluctuations 
in tenns of Feynman diagrams, with the fluctuations being represented by vir-
tual particle/antiparticle pairs popping in and out of existence. This picture is also 
helpful, for example, in understanding observed phenomena such as the Lamb 
shift, in which atomic spectra are affected by the interaction of photons with vir-
tual electron/positron pairs. Normally, the pairs will always annihilate, and their 
effect is only indirect, through a renonnalization of processes coupled to the vir-
tual particles. In the presence of an event horizon, however, occasionally one 
member of a virtual pair will fall into the black hole while its partner escapes 
to infinity, as depicted in Figure 9.2. In this picture, it is these escaping virtual 
particles that we observe as Hawking radiation. The total energy of the virtual 
pair must add to zero, but the infalling particle can have a negative energy as 
viewed from infinity, because the asymptotically-timelike Killing vector is space-
like inside the horizon. The picture is somewhat infonnal, but provides a useful 
heuristic for what is going on. 
Once we know the fonnula for the temperature of a black hole we can fix the 
proportionality constants in the relationships between black hole parameters and 
I ,v--
1 : e-0 
: 
e+ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
r= 2GM 
r 
FIGURE 9.2 Vacuum fluctuations occasionally result in one of a particle/antiparticle 
pair falling into the event horizon, and the other escaping to infinity as Hawking radiation. 

9.6 The Hawking Effect and Black Hole Evaporation 
417 
thennodynamic variables, as listed in (6.118). Hawking radiation essentially con-
summates the marriage of black hole mechanics and thermodynamics; stationary 
black holes act just like bodies of energy E = M in thermal equilibrium with 
temperature T = K /2rr and entropy S = A/4G. This is a very large entropy in-
deed. For matter fields in the universe, the entropy is approximately equal to the 
number of relativistic particles; within one Hubble radius, this number works out 
to be 
(9.176) 
Meanwhile, the entropy of a black hole is the area of its horizon measured in 
Planck units (remember that we have been setting Ii = 1 all along). We can con-
vert to astrophysical units to obtain 
(9.177) 
Thus, a single million-solar-mass black hole (such as can be found at the center 
of our galaxy, and many other galaxies) has more entropy than all of the matter 
in the visible universe. The total entropy of the universe is much smaller than we 
could make it, just by putting more mass into black holes. (When cosmologists 
say that the entropy SM is large, they mean it is surprising that so much entropy is 
found within one curvature radius.) Presumably the reason why we are in such a 
low-entropy state has to do with initial conditions, and perhaps with inflation. 
Coming back to black hole mechanics, we see a puzzle: The entropy of a 
macroscopic black hole will be huge, but from a statistical-mechanical point of 
view the entropy is supposed to measure the logarithm of the number of accessible 
states. A classical black hole is specified by a small number of parameters (mass, 
charge, and spin), so it is hard to know what those states could be. Nevertheless, 
we could take the attitude that this discrepancy doesn't really matter, since any 
infonnation about the state of a black hole would presumably be hidden behind 
the event horizon. 
The inclusion of quantum mechanics makes the puzzle worse rather than better, 
because black holes will not only radiate but also evaporate. When we started our 
investigation of QFT in curved spacetime, one of the rules we set was that we 
would assume a fixed background mellic, and not woITy about the effect of the 
energy-momentum tensor of the quantum fields themselves. Nevertheless, even in 
quantum mechanics we have conservation of energy (in the sense, for example, 
of a conserved ADM mass in an asymptotically flat spacetime). Hence, when 
Hawking radiation escapes to infinity, we may safely conclude that it will can-y 
energy away from the black hole, which must therefore shrink in mass. (This 
phenomenon does not violate the area theorem, since the quantum field energy-
momentum tensor will not obey the weak energy condition near the horizon.) As 
the mass shrinks, the surface gravity increases, and with it the temperature; there 
is a runaway process in which the entire mass evaporates away in a finite time. 

418 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
Plugging in the numbers gives a lifetime of order 
tsH ,..._, ( M )3 Ip,..._, ( M )3 x 1011 sec, 
mp 
M0 
(9.178) 
where mp ,..._, 10-5 g is the Planck mass and Ip ,..._, 10-43 sec is the Planck time. 
Since the Hubble time is H0- 1 "" 1018 sec, a solar-mass black hole has a lifetime 
of order I 053 times the age of the universe. This seems like a long time, but we 
are speaking of questions of principle here. 
You can see why the question of the black hole entropy has become so severe: 
Once the black hole has evaporated, we can no longer appeal to the event horizon 
as a way to hide purported states of the black hole. There is no black hole any 
more, just the Hawking radiation it produced. The fact that this radiation is sup-
posed to be precisely thennal (no hidden correlations in the outgoing particles) 
means that it has no way of conveying the vast amount of information needed 
to specify the states implied by our entropy calculation. Thus, if we assemble 
two very different original states and collapse them into two black holes of the 
same mass, charge, and spin, they will radiate away into two indistinguishable 
clouds of Hawking particles. The infonnation that went into the specification of 
the system before it became a black hole seems to have been erased; this is the 
information loss paradox. Both quantum field theory and general relativity fea-
ture unitary evolution-the infonnation required to specify a state at early times is 
precisely equal to that needed to specify a state at later times, since they are con-
nected by the equations of motion. But in the process of combining QFT with GR 
this unitarity has apparently been violated. It seems likely that we have made an 
inappropriate assumption somewhere in our argument, but it is hard to see where. 
One way of conveying the essence of the infonnation loss paradox is to con-
sider a hypothetical confonnal diagram for an evaporating black hole, shown in 
Figure 9.3. We don't really know what the full spacetime should look like, but 
here we have made the plausible assumptions that a singularity fonns, along with 
an associated event horizon, both of which disappear when the black hole has 
fully evaporated, leaving behind a spacetime with a Minkowskian causal struc-
ture. The problem is then obvious if we think in tenns of Cauchy surfaces. The 
future domain of dependence of an achronal surface stretching from spacelike in-
finity ;0 to a point with r = 0 to the past of the singularity would be the entire 
spacetime, so such a surface would be a Cauchy surface. But a similar surface 
stretching to a point with r = 0 to the future of the singularity would not be 
a Cauchy surface, since the region behind the event horizon would not be in its 
domain of dependence. Thus, the past cannot be retrodicted from the future, due 
to the disappearance of infonnation into the singularity. In other words, this pro-
cess seems to be time-irreversible (in a microscopic sense, not merely a statistical 
sense), even though the dynamical laws that were used to predict it were fully 
invariant under time reversal. 
In addressing the infonnation loss paradox, keep in mind that our analysis of 
black-hole evaporation has only been in the context of a hybrid theory of quantum 

9.6 
The Hawking Effect and Black Hole Evaporation 
419 
;+ 
;O 
r= 0 
;-
FIGURE 9.3 
Hypothetical confonnal diagram for an evaporating black hole. Energy is 
carried away by the Hawking radiation, so that the black hole eventually evaporates away 
entirely, leaving a future with the causal structure of Minkowski space. Infonnation that 
falls past the event horizon into the singularity appears to be lost. 
field theory coupled to general relativity, not in a realistic theory of quantum grav-
ity. What might be going on in the real world? One possibility is that infonnation 
really is lost, unitarity is violated, and we just have to learn to live with it. Many 
physicists find the introduction of such a fundamental breakdown of predictabil-
ity to be unpalatable, and arguments have also been made that unitarity violations 
would necessarily lead to violations of energy conservation. Another possibility 
is that unitarity appears to be violated in our world, but only because the infor-
mation that entered the black hole has somehow escaped to a disconnected region 
of space (a baby universe). General relativity predics a singularity at the center 
of the black hole, not creation of a disconnected region, but clearly we are in a 
regime where quantum effects will dramatically alter our classical expectations, 
so we should keep an open mind. 
Some evidence against information loss comes from string theory. String the-
ory is naturally defined in 10 or 11 spacetime dimensions, and features not only 
one-dimensional extended objects (strings), but also various types of higher-
dimensional extended objects known collectively as "branes." A crucial aspect 
of string theory is a high degree of supersymmetry relating bosons to fermions. 
In the real world supersymmetry must be spontaneously broken if it exists at 
all, since we don't observe a bosonic version of the electron with the same mass 
and charge. But as a tool for thought experiments, supersymmetry is invaluable. 
Supersymmetric configurations of strings and branes can be assembled that de-
scribe black hole geometries in various dimensions. In string theory there is a 
free parameter (really a scalar field), the string coupling, that controls the strength 
of gravity as well as the strength of other forces. If we consider a configuration 
describing a black hole at a certain value of the string coupling, as we decrease 
the coupling the Schwarzschild radius will eventually shrink below the size of 

420 
Chapter 9 Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime 
the configuration, which thus turns into a collection of weakly-coupled strings 
and branes. Due to the high degree of supersymmetry, we can be confident that 
various characteristics of the state remain unchanged as we vary the slling cou-
pling; in particular, we expect that the number of degrees of freedom (and thus 
the entropy) is unaltered. But in the weakly-coupled regime there is no black 
hole, we simply have a "gas" of conventional degrees of freedom (admittedly, 
of extended objects in higher dimensions), whose entropy we should be able to 
reliably calculate. 
Strominger and Vafa considered this process for a particular type of five-
dimensional supersymmetric black hole with different kinds of charges.4 They 
found a remarkable result: the number of degrees of freedom of the system at 
weak coupling matches precisely that which would be predicted based on the 
entropy of the black hole at strong coupling. Since the black hole entropy de-
pends nontrivially on the charges of the configuration, it seems unlikely that this 
agreement is simply an accident. Subsequent investigations have extended this 
analysis to other kinds of black holes, for which agreement continues to be found. 
Furthennore, we can even calculate the greybody factors expected for the black 
hole by considering scattering off of the weakly-coupled system; again, the result 
matches the strong-coupling expectation. Thus, in string theory at least, there is 
excellent reason to believe that the degrees of freedom implied by black hole 
radiation are really there. 
Unfortunately, the slling theory counting of states provides little direct under-
standing of how infonnation about the black hole state could somehow be con-
veyed to the outgoing Hawking radiation. Nevertheless, we should certainly take 
seriously the possibility that this is what happens, even if there are severe dif-
ficulties in imagining how such a process might actually work. The difficulties 
arise when considering some information, perhaps in the fonn of a volume of an 
encyclopedia, being tossed into a large black hole, long before it has evaporated 
away. At this stage the black hole temperature is low, there is very little surface 
gravity, and the spacetime curvature near the event horizon is quite small. From 
the point of view of the encyclopedia, nothing special happens at the horizon, 
and we should expect it to fall through essentially unmolested. In particular, it is 
hard to imagine how the infonnation in the encyclopedia can be transferred to the 
Hawking radiation being emitted at early times. In unitary evolution, the infonna-
tion cannot be duplicated; either it falls past the horizon with the encyclopedia, 
or it needs to be effectively extracted just before the horizon is crossed, which 
seems implausible. We might hope that the infonnation accompanies the ency-
clopedia into a region near the singularity, and is somehow preserved there until 
late times when the hole is very small. But by then most of the radiating particles 
have already been emitted, and the number of states accessible to the final burst 
of radiation will generally be smaller than required to describe the different states 
that could have fallen into the hole. 
4 A. Strominger and C. Vafa, "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawk.ing entropy," Phys. 
Leu. B 379, 99 (1996), http: I /arxi v. org/hep-th/9601029. For reviews see Johnson 
(2003) or A.W. Peet, "TASI lectures on black holes in string theory," (2001), http:// 
arxiv.org/hep-th/0008241. 

9.6 The Hawking Effect and Black Hole Evaporation 
421 
To imagine that the infonnation is somehow encoded in the outgoing radiation, 
it therefore seems necessary to encode correlations in the Hawking particles even 
at early times. We just argued that this is hard to do, given that the horizon is an 
unremarkable place when the black hole is large. One conceivable way out of this 
dilemma is to take the dramatic step of giving up on local quantum field theory. In 
other words, we have been making the implicit assumption that infonnation can 
be sensibly described as being located in some region of space; this is an indis-
putable feature of ordinary quantum field theories. But perhaps quantum gravity 
is different, and the infonnation contained in the black hole is somehow spread 
out nonlocally across the horizon. By itself this suggestion doesn't lead directly to 
a mechanism for getting the infonnation into the outgoing Hawking radiation, but 
it does call into question some of the arguments we have given for why it would 
be difficult to do so. 
A particular realization of nonlocality goes under the name of the holographic 
principle. This is the idea, suggested originally by 't Hooft and Susskind, that 
the number of degrees of freedom in a region of space is not proportional to the 
volume of the region (as would be expected in a local field theory), but rather to 
the area of the boundary of the region. 5 The inspiration comes of course from 
black hole entropy, which scales as the area of the event horizon; if the entropy 
counts the number of accessible states, holography would account for why it is the 
area rather than the enclosed volume that matters. You might woITy about how to 
deal with closed universes, in which a region might consist of almost all of space 
but have a very small boundary, but a more covariant version of the holographic 
principle may be fonnulated by replacing the region of space by a set of "light-
sheets" extending inward from the boundary. The great triumph of holography has 
been in the AdS/CFT correspondence, mentioned in Chapter 8. There, the physics 
of quantum gravity in an anti-de Sitter background is equivalent to a confonnal 
field theory without gravity defined on the boundary of AdS, which has one lower 
dimension. One can imagine that all of the physical phenomena we .observe in 
the universe could be described by the nonlocal holographic projection of some 
ordinary nongravitational theory defined in lower dimensions; it is by no means 
clear how we should go about constructing such a correspondence or connecting 
it with observations, but considerations of cosmology and the large-scale structure 
of the universe might be a promising place to start. 
These remarks about black hole entropy, string theory, and holography are ob-
viously not intended as a careful introduction to what is a very active area of 
research. Rather, they are meant to indicate some of the possibilities being ex-
plored at the forefront of gravitational physics. Classical general relativity is the 
most beautiful physical theory invented to date, but we have every right to expect 
that a synthesis of GR with other areas of physics will reveal layers of beauty we 
can only now imagine. 
5For a review see R. Bousso, "The Holographic Principle" (2002), http: I I arxi v. org/hep-th/ 
0203101. 


APPENDIX 
A 
Maps between Manifolds 
When we discussed manifolds in Chapter 2, we introduced maps between two 
different manifolds and how maps could be composed. Here we will investigate 
such maps in much greater detail, focusing on the use of such maps in carrying 
along tensor fields from one manifold to another. The manifolds in question might 
end up being a submanifold and the bigger space in which it is embedded, or we 
might just have two different copies of the same abstract manifold being mapped 
to each other. 
Consider two manifolds M and N, possibly of different dimension, with coor-
dinate systems xµ. and ya, respectively. We imagine that we have a map</> : M ~ 
Nanda function f: N ~ R. Obviously we can compose</> with f to construct 
a map (f o </>) : M ~ R, which is simply a function on M. Such a construction 
is sufficiently useful that it gets its own name; we define the pullback off by</>, 
denoted</>* f, by 
</>* f = (f o<J>). 
(A.I) 
The name makes sense, since we think of </>* as "pulling back" the function f 
from N to M (see Figure A. I). 
0 
' l ya 
' 
J, 
D 
D 
FIGURE A.1 
The pullback of a function f from N to M by a map </> : M ~ N is 
simply the composition of</> with f. 
423 

424 
Appendix A Maps between Manifolds 
We can pull functions back, but we cannot push them forward. If we have a 
function g : M ~ R, there is no way we can compose g with </> to create a 
function on N; the arrows don't fit together correctly. But recall that a vector can 
be thought of as a derivative operator that maps smooth functions to real numbers. 
This allows us to define the pushforward of a vector; if V (p) is a vector at a point 
p on M, we define the pushforward vector</>* Vat the point</>(p) on N by giving 
its action on functions on N: 
(</>* V)(f) = V (</>* f). 
(A.2) 
So to push forward a vector field we say "the action of </>* V on any function is 
simply the action of V on the pullback of that function." 1 
This discussion is a little abstract, and it would be nice to have a more concrete 
description. We know that a basis for vectors on M is given by the set of partial 
derivatives aµ. = a;axµ., and a basis on N is given by the set of partial derivatives 
aa = a/aya. Therefore we would like to relate the components of V = Vµ.aµ. to 
those of(</>* V) = (</>* V)a aa. We can find the sought-after relation by applying 
the pushed-forward vector to a test function and using the chain rule (2.12): 
(</>* V)aaaf = vµ.aµ.(</>* f) 
= vµ.aµ.(f o </>) 
= vµ. aya a f 
axµ. 
(X 
• 
(A.3) 
This simple fonnula makes it irresistible to think of the pushforward operation</>* 
as a matrix operator, (</>* V)a = (</>*)aµ. Vµ., with the matrix being given by 
aya 
(</>*)(X µ. = axµ.. 
(A.4) 
The behavior of a vector under a pushforward thus bears an unmistakable resem-
blance to the vector transformation law under change of coordinates. In fact it is 
a generalization, since when M and N are the same manifold the constructions 
are (as we shall discuss) identical; but don't be fooled, since in general µ and a 
have different allowed values, and there is no reason for the matrix aya ;axµ. to 
be invertible. 
It is a rewarding exercise to convince yourself that, although you can push 
vectors forward from M to N (given a map</> : M ~ N), you cannot in general 
pull them back-just keep trying to invent an appropriate construction until the 
futility of the attempt becomes clear. Since one-fonns are dual to vectors, you 
should not be surprised to hear that one-fonns can be pulled back (but not in 
general pushed forward). To do this, remember that one-fonns are linear maps 
from vectors to the real numbers. The pullback </>*w of a one-fonn won N can 
1 Unfortunalely lhe location of lhe aslerisks is nol complelely slandard; some references use a super-
scripl * for pushforward and a subscripl * for pullback, so be careful. 

Appendix A Maps between Manifolds 
425 
therefore be defined by its action on a vector V on M, by equating it with the 
action of w itself on the pushforward of V: 
(</>* w)(V) = w(</>S). 
(A.5) 
Once again, there is a simple matrix description of the pullback operator on fonns, 
(</>*w)µ. = (</>*)µ.'xwa, which we can derive using the chain rule. It is given by 
(</>*) a = aya. 
µ. 
axµ. 
(A.6) 
That is, it is the same matrix as the pushforward (A.4), but of course a different 
index is contracted when the matrix acts to pull back one-fonns. 
There is a way of thinking about why pullbacks and pushforwards work on 
some objects but not others, which may be helpful. If we denote the set of smooth 
functions on M by :F(M), then a vector V (p) at a point p on M (that is, an 
element of the tangent space TpM) can be thought of as an operator from :F(M) 
to R. But we already know that the pullback operator on functions maps :F(N) to 
:F(M), just as</> itself maps M to N, but in the opposite direction. Therefore we 
can define the pushforward </>* acting on vectors simply by composing maps, as 
we first defined the pullback of functions; this is shown in Figure A.2. Similarly, 
if Tq N is the tangent space at a point q on N, then a one-fonn w at q (that is, 
an element of the cotangent space r; N) can be thought of as an operator from 
Tq N to R. Since the pushforward </>* maps TpM to T<f>(p) N, the pullback </>* of 
a one-fonn can also be thought of as mere composition of maps, as indicated in 
Figure A.3. If this is not helpful, don't woITy about it. But do keep straight what 
exists and what doesn't; the actual concepts are simple, it's just forgetting which 
map goes what way that leads to confusion. 
You will recall fm1her that a (0, /) tensor-one with l lower indices and no 
upper ones-is a linear map from the direct product of l vectors to R. We can 
therefore pull back not only one-forms, but tensors with an arbitrary number of 
lower indices. The definition is simply the action of the original tensor on the 
pushed-forward vectors: 
<<1>*T)(v< 1>, v<2>, ... , v<I)) = T(</>* vo>, </>* v<2>, ... , </>* vm), 
(A.7) 
R 
FIGURE A.2 Pushing forward a vector, thought of as composition of a map between the 
spaces of functions on N and M, and a map from functions on M to R. 

426 
Appendix A Maps between Manifolds 
R 
<I>. 
T,,M 
.,,~.,, ........ ~•'!•,;<;4!'<!· T<f><t»N 
FIGURE A.3 
Pulling back a one-fonn, thought of as composition of a map between 
tangent spaces TpM and T</>(p)N and a map from T</>pN to R. 
where T0q ... a1 is a (0, l) tensor on N. We can similarly push forward any (k, 0) 
tensor StJ.1 .. ·fJ.k by acting it on pulled-back one-fonns: 
(</>*S)(w(l), w<2>, ... , w<k>) = S(</>*w(l), </>* w<2>, ... , <1>*w<k>). 
(A8) 
Fortunately, the matrix representations of the push forward (A.4) and pullback 
(A.6) extend to the higher-rank tensors simply by assigning one matrix to each 
index; thus, for the pullback of a (0, l) tensor, we have 
(A.9) 
while for the pushforward of a (k, 0) tensor we_ have 
(A.10) 
Our complete picture is therefore as portrayed in Figure A.4. Note that tensors 
with both upper and lower indices can generally be neither pushed forward nor 
pulled back. 
(~) 
0 
(~) 
FIGURE A.4 
A map <J> : M ~ N allows us to pull back (0, /) tensors and push forward 
(k, 0) tensors. 

Appendix A Maps between Manifolds 
427 
This machinery becomes somewhat less imposing once we see it at work in 
a simple example. One common occwTence of a map between two manifolds is 
when M is actually a submanifold of N, which we will discuss more carefully in 
Appendix C. The basic idea is that there is a map from M to N that just takes an 
element of M to the "same" element of N. Consider the two-sphere embedded 
in R3, thought of as the locus of points a unit distance from the origin. If we put 
coordinates xµ = (8, </>) on M = 52 and ya = (x, y, z) on N = R3, the map 
</> : M ~ N is given by 
</>(8, </>)=(sin() cos</>, sin() sin</>, cos()). 
(A.11) 
Sticking the sphere into R3 in this way induces a metric on 52, which is just the 
pullback of the flat-space mellic. The simple-minded way to find this is to start 
with the metric ds 2 = dx 2 + dy 2 + dz2 on R3 and substitute (A.11) into this 
expression, yielding a metric d8 2 + sin2 () d</>2 on 52• Let's see how this answer 
comes about using the more respectable fonnalism. (Of course it would be easier 
if we worked in spherical coordinates on R3, but doing it the hard way is more 
illustrative.) The matrix of partial derivatives is given by 
aya _ ( cos() cos</> 
cos() sin</> 
- sin()) 
axµ -
-sin(Jsin</> 
sin(Jcos</> 
0 
. 
(A.12) 
The metric on 52 is obtained by simply pulling back the mellic from R3, 
* 
aya ayf3 
(</> g)µv= axJJ.axvg<Xfj 
= (~ si~O)' 
(A.13) 
as you can easily check. So the answer really is the same as you would get by 
naive substitution, but now we know why. 


APPENDIX 
B 
Diffeomorphisms and 
Lie Derivatives 
In this Appendix we continue the explorations of the previous one, now focusing 
on the special case when the two manifolds are actually the same. Thus far, we 
have been careful to emphasize that a map </> : M ~ N can be used to pull 
certain things back (A.9) and push other things forward (A.10). The reason why 
it generally doesn't work both ways can be traced to the fact that</> might not be 
invertible. If </> is invertible (and both </> and </>- l are smooth, which we always 
implicitly assume), then it defines a diffeomorphism between Mand N. This can 
only be the case if M and N are actually the same abstract manifold; indeed, 
the existence of a diff eomorphism is the definition of two manifolds being the 
same. The beauty of diff eomorphisms is that we can use both</> and </>- 1 to move 
tensors from M to N; this will allow us to define the pushforward and pullback 
of arbitrary tensors. Specifically, for a (k, l) tensor field TJJ. 1 '"/J.k v1 ... v1 on M, we 
define the pushforward by 
(</>* T)(a/i), ... , w<k), yO), ... , v<n) 
= T(</>*wm, ••. '</>*w(k)' [</>-l]* y<l), ... '[</>-l]* y<n), 
(8.1) 
where the w<n's are one-forms on N and the v<n's are vectors on N. In compo-
nents this becomes 
The appearance of the inverse matrix axv jay~ is legitimate because</> is invert-
ible. Note that we could also define the pullback in the obvious way, but there is 
no need to write separate equations because the pullback</>* is the same as the 
pushforward via the inverse map, [</>- 1 )*. 
We are now in a position to explain the relationship between diff eomorphisms 
and coordinate transformations: they are two different ways of doing precisely 
the same thing. If you like, diffeomorphisms are "active coordinate transforma-
tions," while traditional coordinate transformations are "passive." Consider an 
n-dimensional manifold M with coordinate functions xJJ. : M ~ R". To change 
coordinates we can either simply introduce new functions y/J. : M ~ R" ("keep 
the manifold fixed, change the coordinate maps"), or we could just as well in-
troduce a diffeomorphism </> : M ~ M, after which the coordinates would just 
be the pullbacks (</>*x)JJ. : M ~ R" ("move the points on the manifold, and then 
429 

430 
Appendix B Diffeomorph isms and Lie Derivatives 
evaluate the coordinates of the new points"), as shown in Figure 8.1. In this sense, 
(8.2) really is the tensor transformation law, just thought of from a different point 
of view. 
Since a diffeomorphism allows us to pull back and push forward arbitrary ten-
sors, it provides another way of comparing tensors at different points on a man-
ifold. Given a diffeomorphism </>: M ~Mand a tensor field Tµ., .. ·µ.kv1 ... v1(x), 
we can fonn the difference between the value of the tensor at some point p and 
</>*[Tµ. 1"'µ.kv 1 ... v1(</>(p))], its value at </>(p) pulled back top. This suggests that 
we could define another kind of derivative operator on tensor fields, one that cat-
egorizes the rate of change of the tensor under the flow of the diffeomorphism. 
For that, however, a single discrete diff eomorphism is insufficient; we require a 
one-parameter family of diff eomorphisms, </>1• This family can be thought of as a 
smooth map R x M ~ M, such that for each t E R we have a diff eomorphism 
</>1, satisfying <l>s o </>1 = </>s+t· This last condition implies that </>o is the identity 
map. 
One-parameter families of diffeomorphisms can be thought of as arising from 
vector fields (and vice-versa). If we consider what happens to the point p under 
the entire family </>1, it is clear that it describes a curve in M; since the same thing 
will be true of every point on M, these curves fill the manifold (although there can 
be degeneracies where the diffeomorphisms have fixed points). We can define a 
vector field V µ.(x) to be the set of tangent vectors to each of these curves at every 
point, evaluated at t = 0. An example on S2 is provided by the diff eomorphism 
</>1(8, </>) = (8, </> + t), shown in Figure 8.2. We can reverse the construction to 
define a one-parameter family of diffeomorphisms from any vector field. Given a 
vector field Vµ.(x), we define the integral curves of the vector field to be those 
curves xµ.(t) that solve 
(8.3) 
Note that this familiar-looking equation is now to be interpreted in the opposite 
sense from our usual way; we are given the vectors, from which we define the 
curves. Solutions to (8.3) are guaranteed to exist as long as we don't do any-
thing silly like run into the edge of our manifold; the proof amounts to finding 
a coordinate system in which the problem reduces to the fundamental theorem 
.. ~1.-:.-t~·'"'"1·;;.;:1.:"!:,.~ 
-':1.,,-t. D 
yµ 
<-<.'4-•{(» ... --;;i;'I'.!'<': . .-::;~~~-' 
FIGURE B.1 
A coordinate change induced by the diffeomorphism </> : M ~ M. 

Appendix B Diffeomorph isms and Lie Derivatives 
431 
FIGURE B.2 A diffeomorphism on the two-sphere, given by a rotation about its axis. 
of ordinary differential equations. Our diffeomorphisms </>1 represent "flow down 
the integral curves:· and the associated vector field is referred to as the generator 
of the diffeomorphism. (Confusingly. vector fields and their integral curves also 
appear in the context of null hypersurfaces, where it is the curves rather than the 
vector fields that are called "generators.") Integral curves are used all the time in 
elementary physics. just not given the name. The "lines of magnetic flux" traced 
out by iron filings in the presence of a magnet are simply the integral curves of 
the magnetic field vector B. 
Given a vector field VJJ.(x). then, we have a family of diffeomorphisms param-
eterized by t. and we can ask how fast a tensor changes as we travel down the 
integral curves. For each t we can define this change as the difference between 
the pullback of the tensor to p and its original value at p. 
Note that both terms on the right-hand side are tensors at p. as shown in Fig-
ure B.3. We then define the Lie derivative of the tensor along the vector field 
as 
(
fl. TJJ.I .. "/J.k 
) 
I" 
TJJ.1 .. ·JJ.k 
_Ii 
t 
v1···v1 
,...,v 
v1···Vf -
m 
. 
r-o 
t 
(B.5) 
The Lie derivative is a map from (k, /) tensor fields to (k, /) tensor fields, which 
is manifestly independent of coordinates. Since the definition essentially amounts 
to the conventional definition of an ordinary derivative applied to the component 
functions of the tensor. it should be clear that it is linear, 
Cv(aT + bS) = aCvT + bCvS. 
(B.6) 

432 
Appendix B Diffeomorphisms and Lie Derivatives 
FIGURE 8.3 The rate of change of a tensor along the integral curves of a vector field 
is computed by comparing the original tensor T(p) at a point p to the value of Ta point 
</>t(p) by pulling T(</>,(p)) back top. 
and obeys the Leibniz rule, 
Cv(T ® S) = (CvT) ® S + T ® (CvS), 
(B.7) 
where S and T are tensors and a and b are constants. The Lie derivative is in 
fact a more primitive notion than the covariant derivative, since it does not require 
specification of a connection (although it does require a vector field, of course). A 
moment's reflection will convince you that it reduces to the ordinary directional 
derivative on functions, 
(B.8) 
To discuss the action of the Lie derivative on tensors in terms of other oper-
ations we know, it is convenient to choose a coordinate system adapted to our 
problem. Specifically, we will work in coordinates xJJ. = (x 1, ••• xn), such that 
x 1 is the parameter along the integral curves and the other coordinates are cho-
sen any way we like. Then the vector field takes the form V = a ;ax 1; that 
is, it has components VJJ. = (1, 0, 0, ... , 0). The magic of this coordinate sys-
tem is that a diffeomorphism by t amounts to a coordinate transformation from 
xJJ. to yJJ. = (x 1 + t, x 2, •.. , xn). Thus, from (A.6) the pullback matrix is sim-
ply 
(B.9) 
and the components of the tensor pulled back from </>1 (p) to p are simply 
</> [TJJ.1···JJ.k 
(</> ( ))] _ TJJ.1···JJ.k 
( 1 
2 
n) 
t* 
vi···Vf 
t P 
-
vi···vi X +I, X , ••• , X 
• 
(B.10) 

Appendix B Diffeomorphisms and Lie Derivatives 
In this coordinate system, then, the Lie derivative becomes 
and in particular the derivative of a vector field UJJ.(x) is 
<JUJJ. 
CvUµ. = --. 
<Jxl 
433 
(B.11) 
(B.12) 
Although this expression is clearly not covariant, we know that the commutator 
[V, U] is a well-defined tensor, and in this coordinate system 
[V, U]µ. = vvavUµ. - uvav Vµ. 
auµ. 
= ax 1 • 
(B.13) 
Therefore the Lie derivative of U with respect to V has the same components in 
this coordinate system as the commutator of V and U; but since both are vectors, 
they must be equal in any coordinate system: 
(B.14) 
As an immediate consequence, we have £, v U = - Cu V. It is because of (B.14) 
that the commutator is sometimes called the Lie bracket. 
To derive the action of Cv on a one-form wµ., begin by considering the action 
on the scalar w µ. U µ. for an arbitrary vector field U µ.. First use the fact that the Lie 
derivative with respect to a vector field reduces to the action of the vector itself 
when applied to a scalar: 
Cv(wµ.Uµ.) = V(wµ.Uµ.) 
= vvav(wµ.Uµ.) 
= Vv(avwµ.)Uµ. + vvwµ.(avUJJ.). 
(B.15) 
Then use the Leibniz rule on the original scalar: 
Cv(wµ.Uµ.) = (Cvw)µ.Uµ. + wµ.(CvU)µ. 
= (Cvw)µ.Uµ. + Wµ. vvavuµ. - Wµ.Uvav VJJ.. 
(B.16) 
Setting these expressions equal to each other and requiring that equality hold for 
arbitrary UJJ., we see that 
(B.17) 
which (like the definition of the commutator) is completely covariant, although 
not manifestly so. 

434 
Appendix B Diffeomorphisms and Lie Derivatives 
By a similar procedure we can define the Lie derivative of an arbitrary tensor 
field. The answer can be written 
Cv TJJ.i/J.2""/J.k VJ v2· .. V[ = ya aa TJJ.iJJ.2···JJ.k VJ v2 .. ·v1 
- (a, yJJ.i)T>..µ.2 .. ·JJ.k 
11. 
VJ V2•••V[ 
-
(a>.. V/J.2)T/J.JA""/J.kviv2···v1 -
••• 
+(a V >..)T/J.JJJ.2···JJ.k, 
VJ 
11.v2···v1 
+ (a V A) TJJ.J JJ.2···JJ.k 
+ 
V2 
VJA···V[ 
• '. • 
(B.18) 
Once again, this expression is covariant, despite appearances. It would undoubt-
edly be comforting, however, to have an equivalent expression that looked mani-
festly tensorial. In fact it turns out that we can write 
Cv T/J.J /J.2""/J.k vi vi· .. v1 = ya Va T/J.J µ.2···/J.k VJ v2···v1 
_ 
(~ y/J.J )T>..µ.2···/J.k 
v >.. 
vi v2· .. v1 
_ 
(~ y/J.2)T/J.JA"·/J.k 
_ ••• 
VA 
VJ v2···V[ 
(~ v>..)TJJ.iJJ.2···JJ.k 
+ v v2 
vi A··· V/ + · · · ' 
(B.19) 
where V µ.represents any symmetric (torsion-free) covariant derivative (including, 
of course, one derived from a metric). You can check that all of the terms that 
would involve connection coefficients if we were to expand (B.19) would cancel, 
leaving only (B.18). Both versions of the formula for a Lie derivative are useful 
at different times. A particularly useful formula is for the Lie derivative of the 
metric: 
or 
Cvgµ.v = vavagµ.v + (Vµ.V>..)g>..v + (VvV>..)gµ.>.. 
= Vµ. Vv + Vv Vµ., 
where V µ. is the covariant derivative derived from gµ.v· 
(B.20) 
(B.21) 
Let's put some of these ideas into the context of general relativity. You will 
often hear it proclaimed that GR is a "diffeomorphism invariant" theory. What 
this means is that, if the universe is represented by a manifold M with metric 
gµ.v and matter fields l/J, and </> : M ~ M is a diffeomorphism, then the sets 
(M, gµ.v. l/J) and (M, </>* gµ.v. </>*l/I) represent the same physical situation. Since 
diffeomorphisms are just active coordinate transformations, this is a highbrow 

Appendix B Diffeomorphisms and Lie Derivatives 
435 
way of saying that the theory is coordinate invariant. Although such a statement 
is true, it is a source of great misunderstanding, for the simple fact that it conveys 
very little information. Any semi-respectable theory of physics is coordinate in-
variant, including those based on special relativity or Newtonian mechanics; GR 
is not unique in this regard. When people say that GR is diffeomorphism invari-
ant, more likely than not they have one of two (closely related) concepts in mind: 
the theory is free of "prior geometry," and there is no pref erred coordinate system 
for spacetime. The first of these stems from the fact that the metric is a dynamical 
variable, and along with it the connection and volume element and so forth. Noth-
ing is given to us ahead of time, unlike in classical mechanics or SR. As a conse-
quence, there is no way to simplify life by sticking to a specific coordinate system 
adapted to some absolute elements of the geometry. This state of affairs forces us 
to be very careful; it is possible that two purportedly distinct configurations (of 
matter and metric) in GR are actually "the same," related by a diffeomorphism. In 
a path integral approach to quantum gravity, where we would like to sum over all 
possible configurations, special care must be taken not to overcount by allowing 
physically indistinguishable configurations to contribute more than once. In SR or 
Newtonian mechanics, meanwhile, the existence of a preferred set of coordinates 
saves us from such ambiguities. The fact that GR has no preferred coordinate sys-
tem is often garbled into the statement that it is coordinate invariant (or "generally 
covariant," or "diffeomorphism invariant"); both things are true, but one has more 
content than the other. 
On the other hand, the fact of diffeomorphism invariance can be put to good 
use. Recall that the complete action for gravity coupled to a set of matter fields 
l/Ji is given by a sum of the Hilbert action for GR plus the matter action, 
(B.22) 
The Hilbert action SH is diffeomorphism invariant when considered in isolation, 
so the matter action SM must also be if the action as a whole is to be invariant. 
We can write the variation in SM under a diffeomorphism as 
(B.23) 
We are not considering arbitrary variations of the fields, only those that result 
from a diffeomorphism. Nevertheless, the matter equations of motion tell us that 
the variation of SM with respect to l/Ji will vanish for any variation, since the 
gravitational part of the action doesn't involve the matter fields. Hence, for a dif-
feomorphism invariant theory the first term on the right-hand side of (B.23) must 
also vanish. If the diffeomorphism is generated by a vector field V µ. (x ), the in-
finitesimal change in the metric is simply given by its Lie derivative along VJJ.; by 
(B.20) we have 

436 
Appendix B Diffeomorphisms and Lie Derivatives 
Setting ~SM = 0 then implies 
~gµ.v = Cv gµ.v 
= 2V(µ. Vv>-
(B.24) 
(B.25) 
where we are able to drop the symmetrization of V(µ. Vv) since ~SM/~gµ.v is 
already symmetric. Demanding that (B.25) hold for diffeomorphisms generated 
by arbitrary vector fields V µ., and using the definition ( 4. 73) of the energy-
momentum tensor, we obtain precisely the law of energy-momentum conserva-
tion, 
(B.26) 
Conservation of Tµ.v is a powerful statement, and it might seem surprising that we 
derived it from as weak a requirement as diff eomorphism invariance. Actually we 
sneaked in a much stronger assumption, namely that there is a clean separation 
between the "matter" and "gravitational" actions (in the sense that no matter fields 
appeared in the gravitational action). If there were, for example, a scalar field 
multiplying the curvature scalar and also appearing in the matter action (as in the 
scalar-tensor theories discussed in Chapter 4), this assumption would have been 
violated, and Tµ.v would not be conserved by itself. 
Recall that in Chapter 3 we spoke of symmetries and Killing vectors, with 
repeated appeals to look in the Appendices. Now that we understand more about 
diff eomorphisms, it is perfectly straightforward to understand symmetries. We say 
that a diff eomorphism </> is a symmetry of some tensor T if the tensor is invariant 
after being pulled back under <J>: 
</>*T = T. 
(B.27) 
Although symmetries may be discrete, it is also common to have a one-parameter 
family of symmetties </>1• If the family is generated by a vector field VJJ.(x), then 
(B.27) amounts to 
CvT = 0. 
(B.28) 
By (B.12), one implication of a symmetry is that, if T is symmetric under some 
one-parameter family of diff eomorphisms, we can always find a coordinate sys-
tem in which the components of T are all independent of one of the coordinates 
(the integral curve coordinate of the vector field). The converse is also true; if 
all of the components are independent of one of the coordinates, then the partial 

B.1 
Exercises 
437 
derivative vector field associated with that coordinate generates a symmetry of the 
tensor. 
The most important symmetries are those of the mellic, for which </>* gµ.v = 
g µ.v. A diff eomorphism of this type is called an isometry. If a one-parameter fam-
ily of isometries is generated by a vector field KJJ.(x), then KJJ. turns out to be a 
Killing vector field. The condition that K µ. be a Killing vector is thus 
LKgµ.v = 0, 
(B.29) 
or from (B.20), 
(B.30) 
We recognize this last version as Killing's equation, (3.174). From our discussion 
in Chapter 3 we know that, if a spacetime has a Killing vector, we can find a 
coordinate system in which the mellic is independent of one of the coordinates, 
and the quantity pµ.KJJ. will be constant along geodesics with tangent vector pJJ.. 
Once we have set up the machinery of diff eomorphisms and Lie derivatives, the 
derivation of Killing vectors proceeds much more elegantly. 
B.1 • EXERCISES 
8. In Euclidean three-space, find and draw the integral curves of the vector fields 
y-xa 
x+ya 
A=-------
r 
ax 
r 
ay 
and 
a 
2 a 
B=xy--y -
ax 
ay 
Calculate C =CAB and draw the integral curves of C. 


APPENDIX 
c 
Submanifolds 
The notion of a submanifold, some subset of another manifold which might be 
(and usually is) of lower dimension, is intuitively straightforward; it should come 
as no surprise, however, to learn that a certain amount of fonnalism comes along 
for the ride. Submanifolds arise all the time in general relativity-as boundaries 
of spacetimes, hypersurfaces at fixed time, spaces into which larger spaces are 
foliated by the action of symmetries-so it is worth our effort to understand how 
they work. 
Consider an n-dimensional manifold M and an m-dimensional manifold S, 
with m ~ n, and a map</> : S ~ M. If the map</> is both C00 and one-to-one, 
and the inverse </>- 1 : </>[M] ~ S is also one-to-one, then we say that the the 
image </>[M) is an embedded submanifold of M. If</> is one-to-one locally but 
not necessarily globally (that is, there may be self-intersections of </>[M) in M), 
then we say that </>[M) is an immersed submanifold of M. When we speak of 
"submanifolds" without any particular modifier, we are imagining that they are 
embedded. An m-dimensional submanifold of an n-climensional manifold is said 
to be of codimension n - m. 
As discussed in Appendix A, the map </> : S ~ M can be used to push forward 
(k, 0) tensors from S to M, and to pull back (0, /)tensors from M to S. In partic-
ular, given a point q E Sand its image </>(q) e M, the tangent space Tq,(q)</>[S) 
is naturally identified as an m-dimensional subspace of the n-dimensional vec-
tor space Tq,(q)M. If you think about the definition of a vector as the directional 
derivative along a curve, this makes perfect sense; any curve y : R ~ S clearly 
defines a curve in M via composition(</> o y : R ~ M), which in tum defines a 
directional derivative. Similarly, differential fonns in M can be pulled back to S 
by resllicting their action to vectors in the subspace Tq,(q)</>[S). 
Another way to define submanifolds is as places where a collection of func-
tions takes on some specified fixed set of values. An m-dimensional submanifold 
of M can be specified in tenns of n - m functions r(x), where a runs from 1 to 
n - m, as the set of points x, where the fa's are equal to some constants J:: 
/ 1(x) = f; 
f 2(x) = f! 
(C.l) 
439 

440 
Appendix C Submanifolds 
The functions should be nondegenerate, so that the submanifold really is of 
dimension m. Notice that the submanifold defined in this way is an actual subset 
of M; it is equivalent to what we called</>[ SJ in our previous definition. For conve-
nience, we will henceforth tend to blur the distinction between the original space 
and its embedding as a submanifold, and simply refer to "the submanifold S." 
To see the relationship between the two definitions of a submanifold. imagine 
constructing a set of coordinates xJJ. = lr, ya} in a neighborhood of </>[SJ c M. 
consisting of the n - m functions r and an additional m function ya. Then we can 
pull back the functions ya to serve as coordinates on S, and the map</> : S ~ M 
is simply given by 
(C.2) 
A simple example is the two-sphere S2, which in fact we defined as the set of 
points a unit distance from the origin in R3. In polar coordinates (r, (), </>), this 
is equivalent to the requirement r = 1, so the coordinate r plays the role of the 
function f (x), while () and </> are induced coordinates on S2• 
We have already mentioned in (B.3) that specifying a single vector field 
leads to a family of integral curves. which are simply one-dimensional submani-
folds. We might imagine generalizing this construction by using a set of several 
vector fields to define higher-dimensional submanifolds. Imagine we have an 
n-dimensional manifold M, an m-dimensional submanifold S. and a set of p 
linearly independent vector fields Via>" with p ::::, m. Then the notion that these 
vector fields "fit together to define S" means that each vector is tangent to S 
everywhere, so that the Via> 's span each tangent space TpS; we say that Sis an 
integral submanifold of the vector fields. However, any given set of vector fields 
may or may not actually fit together to define such submanifolds. Whether they do 
or not is revealed by Frobenius's theorem: a set of vector fields vra> fit together 
to define integral submanifolds if and only if all of their commutators are in the 
space spanned by the vra) 's; that is, if 
(C.3) 
for some set of coefficients ac(x). (In the language of group theory, this means 
that the vector fields form a Lie algebra.) We won't provide a proof, but hopefully 
the result makes some mathematical sense. If the vector fields are going to fit to-
gether to form a submanifold S, they must remain tangent to S everywhere. But 
the commutator [ V. WJ is equivalent to the Lie derivative C v W, which measures 
how W changes as we travel along V. If this Lie derivative doesn't remain in the 
space defined by the vectors, it means that W starts sticking out of the subman-
ifold S. Examples of vector fields fitting together to form submanifolds are easy 
to come by; in Section 5.2 we discussed how the three Killing vectors associated 
with spherical symmetry define a foliation of a three-dimensional space into two-
spheres. (Notice that the dimensionality of the integral submanifold can be less 

Appendix C Submanifolds 
441 
than the number of vector fields.) For a discussion of Frobenius's theorem, see 
Schutz ( 1980). 
An interesting alternative fonnulation of Frobenius's theorem uses differential 
forms. First notice that any set of p linearly independent one-forms w~> defines 
an (n - p)-dimensional vector subspace of TpM, called the annihilator of the set 
of fonns, consisting of those vectors VJ.l E TpM satisfying 
(C.4) 
for all w~>. So instead of asking whether a collection of vector fields fit together 
to define a submanifold, we could ask whether a collection of one-forms w~> 
define a set of vector subspaces that fit together as tangent spaces to a set of sub-
manifolds. To understand when this happens, recall the definition (C. l) of an m-
dimensional submanifold as a place where a set of p = n - m functions r (x) are 
set equal to constants. A constant function is one for which the exterior derivative 
(dr)µ = V µr vanishes; but if a function is constant only along some subman-
ifold, that means that 
(C.5) 
for all vectors VJ.l tangent to the submanifold, VJ.l e TpS. It also goes the other 
way; if a vector v J.l is annihilated by all of the gradients v J.l r' it is necessarily 
tangent to the corresponding submanifold S. Therefore, if a set of one-fonns are 
each exact, w~> = V µfa, the vector spaces they annihilate will certainly define 
submanifolds, namely those along which the r·s are constant. But if a set of p 
one-fonns annihilates a certain subspace, so will any other set of p one-fonns that 
are linear combinations of the originals. We therefore say that a set of one-forms 
w~> is surface-forming if every member can be expressed as a linear combination 
of a set of exact fonns; that is, if there exist functions gab (x) and fa (x) such 
that 
,,,(a) _ '°" ga ~ Jb 
o.vJ.l 
-
~ /JVµ 
• 
(C.6) 
b 
Of course, when handed a set of fonns, it might be hard to tell whether there 
exist functions such that this condition is satisfied; this is where the dual formu-
lation of Frobenius's theorem comes in. This version of the theorem states that 
a set of one-fonns w~> is surface-forming if and only if every pair of vectors in 
the annihilator of the set is also annihilated by the exterior derivatives dw<a>. In 
other words, the set w~> will satisfy (C.6) if and only if, for every pair of vec-
tors VJ.l and WJ.t satisfying w~> VJ.l = 0 and w~> WJ.l = 0 for all a, we also 
have 
~ 
(a)yµwv 
0 
V(µWv) 
= 
. 
(C.7) 

442 
Appendix C Submanifolds 
A set of forms w~> satisfying this condition is sometimes called "closed,'. 
which is obviously a generalization of the notion of a single fonn being closed 
(namely, that its exterior derivative vanishes). We won't prove the equivalence 
of the dual formulation of Frobenius' theorem with the vector-field version. 
but it clearly involves acting our set of fonns on the vector-field commutator 
(C.3). 

APPENDIX 
D 
Hypersurfaces 
A hypersurface is an (n - 1)-dimensional (codimension one) submanifold ~of 
an n-dimensional manifold M. (Of course if n = 3, ~ might as well just be called 
a "surface," but we'll continue to use "hyper-" for consistency.) Hypersurfaces are 
of great utility in general relativity, and a lot of fonnalism goes along with them. 
In this Appendix we collect a set of results in the study of hypersurfaces: nonnal 
vectors, generators of null hypersurfaces, Frobenius's theorem for hypersurfaces, 
Gaussian nonnal coordinates, induced metrics, projection tensors, extrinsic cur-
vature, and manifolds with boundary. It's something of a smorgasbord, with all 
the messiness that implies, but hopefully appetizing and nutritious as well. 
One way to specify a hypersurface ~ is by setting single function to a constant, 
f(x) = f*· 
(D. l) 
The vector field 
(D.2) 
will be nonnal to the surface, in the sense that it is orthogonal to all vectors in 
Tp~ c TpM. If{µ. is timeli.ke, the hypersurface is said to be spacelike; if{µ. is 
spaceli.ke the hypersurface is timeli.ke, and if{µ. is null the hypersurface is also 
null. Any vector field proportional to a nonnal vector field, 
(D.3) 
for some function h (x), will itself be a nonnal vector field; since the normal vector 
is unique up to scaling, any normal vector can be written in this fonn. For timelike 
and spacelike hypersurfaces, we can therefore define a nonnalized version of the 
normal vector, 
(D.4) 
Then nJJ.nµ. = -1 for spacelike surfaces and nJJ.nµ. = + 1 for timelike surfaces; 
up to an overall orientation, such a nonnal vector field is unique. For spacelike 
surfaces the sign is typically chosen so as to make nJJ. be future-directed. 
Null hypersurfaces have a special feature: they can be divided into a set of 
null geodesics, called generators of the hypersurface. Let's see how this works. 
443 

444 
Appendix D 
Hypersurf aces 
Notice that the normal vector {µ. is tangent to ~ as well as normal to it, since 
null vectors are orthogonal to themselves. Therefore the integral curves xJJ.(a), 
satisfying 
dxJJ. 
{µ. = da ' 
(D.5) 
will be null curves contained in the hypersurface. These curves xJJ.(a) necessarily 
tum out to be geodesics, although a might not be an affine parameter. To verify 
this claim, recall that the general form of the geodesic equation can be expressed 
as 
(D.6) 
where 17(a) is a function that will vanish if a is an affine parameter. We simply 
plug in (D.2) and calculate: 
{µ.V µ.{v = {µ.V µ. V vf 
= {µ.Vv Vµ.f 
= {µ.V v{µ. 
= ! Vv({µ.{µ.). 
(D.7) 
In the second line we used the torsion-free condition, that covariant derivatives 
acting on scalars commute. Note that. even though {µ.{µ. = 0 on ~ itself, we 
can't be sure that Vv({µ.{µ.) vanishes, since{µ.{µ. might be nonzero off the hyper-
surface. If the gradient vanishes, (D.7) is the geodesic equation, and we're done. 
But if it doesn't vanish, we can use {µ.{µ. = 0 as an alternative way to define 
the submanifold ~.and its derivative defines a normal vector. Therefore, we must 
have 
where g(x) is some scalar function. We then plug into (D.7) to get 
{µ.V µ.{v = !g{v. 
(D.8) 
(D.9) 
which is equivalent to the geodesic equation (D.6). Of course. once we know that a 
path xJJ. (a) is a geodesic, we are free to re-parameterize it with an affine parameter 
.A(a). Equivalently, we scale the normal vector field by a scalar function h(x), 
(D.10) 
such that {JJ.V µ.{ v = 0. It is conventional to do exactly this, and use the corre-
sponding tangent vectors 
(D.11) 

Appendix D Hypersurfaces 
445 
as nonnal vectors to ~.The null geodesics xJ.t(.A.), whose union is the null hyper-
surface ~, are the generators of ~. · 
From (D.3) we know that a vector field nonnal to a hypersurface can be written 
in the fonn ~µ = hVJ.l f. In the exercises for Chapter 4 you were asked to show 
that this implies 
~{µ Vv~a] = 0, 
(D.12) 
or in differential forms notation, 
(0.13) 
The converse, that any vector field satisfying this equation is orthogonal to a hy-
·persurface, is harder to show from first principles, but is a direct consequence of 
the dual fonnulation of Frobenius's theorem. Imagine we have two vectors VJ.t 
and WJ.t, both of which are annihilated by a one-fonn ~µ obeying (D.12). From 
Frobenius's theorem (C.7), ~µ will define a hypersurface if and only if 
(D.14) 
Applying the expression in (D.12) to V J.l wv and expanding the amisymmetriza-
tion brackets, we get 
~{µ Vv~a] VJ.lWV = !<~µ V{v~a] + ~v V[a~µJ) VJ.lWv + Ha V[µ~v] VµWv 
(D.15) 
where in the last line we used the fact that V J.t and W J.l are annihilated by ~w But 
since V[µ~vJVJ.lWv is a scalar and ~a is a nonvanishing one-form, the only way 
(D.15) can vanish is if (D.14) holds. Therefore, (D.12) will be true ifand only if 
~µis hypersurface-orthogonal. 
It is often convenient to put a coordinate system on a manifold (or part of 
it) that is naturally adapted to some hypersurface ~ 
~ Gaussian normal coordi-
nates provide a convenient way to do just that. First choose coordinates yi = 
{y 1, ... , yn- l} on ~. At each point p e ~. construct the (unique) geodesic 
for which nJ.t is the tangent vector at p. Let z be the affine parameter on each 
geodesic. [This parameter is unique if nJ.t is nonnalized and z(p) = 0.) Any 
point q in a neighborhood of ~ lives on one such geodesic. To each such point 
we assign coordinates {z, y 1 •••• , yn- 1}, where the /'s are the coordinates of 
the point p connected to q by the geodesic we have constructed. These coordi-
nates { z, y 1, •.. , yn- l} are Gaussian normal coordinates (not to be confused 
with "Riemann normal coordinates," constructed by following geodesics in all 
directions from a single point p ). These coordinates will eventually fail to be 
well-defined if we reach a point where geodesics focus and intersect, but they 
will always exist in some region including ~. All of our statements about Gaus-
sian normal coordinates should be taken as applying in the region where they are 
well-defined. 

446 
Appendix D Hypersurfaces 
Associated with the coordinate functions (z, y 1, .... yn-l} are coordinate-
basis vector fields (8,, 81 .... , 8n-d· For notational convenience let's label these 
vector fields 
(8,)µ. = nµ., 
(8;)µ. = Y(;>, 
(D.16) 
where the first line makes sense because 8, is simply the extension along the 
geodesics of the original nonnal vector nJJ.. With respect to these basis vectors, 
the metric takes on a simple fonn. To start, we know that 
(D.17) 
since nJJ. is just the nonnalized tangent vector to the geodesics emanating from L. 
To encapsulate the sign ambiguity, let's label this cr: 
(D.18) 
But it is also the case that g,; = nµ.Y(;> = 0, as we can straightforwardly check. 
Start at the original surface L, where nµ.Y(;> = 0 by hypothesis (since nJJ. is 
nonnal to L). Then we calculate 
D 
yJJ. 
v 
µ. 
dz (nµ. (i)) = n Vv(nµ.Y(i)) 
= nvnµ. VvY(;) 
= Y(j)nµ. Vvnµ. 
1 v 
µ. 
= l Y(i) Vv(nµ.n ) 
=0. 
(D.19) 
Let's explain this derivation line-by-line. The first line is simply the definition 
of the directional covariant derivative D /dz. The second uses the Leibniz rule, 
plus the fact that nµ. is parallel-transported along the geodesic (nvVvnµ. = 0). 
The third line uses the fact that nJJ. and Y(l) are both coordinate basis vectors, so 
their Lie bracket vanishes: [n, Y(i)]µ. = nvVvY(;> - Y(l) Vvnµ. = 0. The fourth 
line again uses Leibniz and the fact that nµ. is parallel-transported, while the fifth 
simply reflects the fact that nµ.nµ. = cr is a constant. 
We can therefore write the metric in Gaussian nonnal coordinates as 
(D.20) 
where Yij = g ( 8;, 8 j) will in general be a function of all the coordinates 
(z, y 1, ••• , yn-l }. We haven't made any assumptions whatsoever about the ge-
ometry; we have simply chosen a coordinate system in which the metric takes a 

Appendix D Hypersurfaces 
447 
certain fonn. Notice that setting z = constant defines a family of hypersurfaces 
diffeomorphic to the original surface ~; the lack of off-diagonal tenns g,; in 
(D.20) reflects the fact that the vector field nJJ. is orthogonal to all of these sur-
faces, not just the original one. Gaussian nonnal coordinates are by no means 
exotic; we use them all the time. Simple examples include inertial coordinates on 
Minkowski space, 
ds2 = -dt2 + dx2 + dy2 + dz2• 
(D.21) 
or polar coordinates in Euclidean 3-space, 
ds2 = dr2 + r 2d82 + r 2 sin2 e d</>2• 
(D.22) 
Ordinary Robertson-Walker coordinates in cosmology provide a slightly less triv-
ial example, 
ds2 = -dt2 + a2(t) 
+ r 2drl.2 • 
[ 
dr2 
] 
} -
Kr2 
(D.23) 
Of course, the RW geometries are highly symmetric (homogeneous and isotropic). 
But, since we have just seen that Gaussian nonnal coordinates can always be de-
fined, we know that we can describe a perfectly general geometry by altering the 
spatial components of the metric. This provides one popular way of describing 
cosmological perturbations; we define "synchronous gauge" for flat spatial sec-
tions as 
(D.24) 
where hu (t, x) is the metric perturbation. (The generalization to curved spatial 
sections is immediate.) Again, we have not made any assumptions about the ge-
ometry, only chosen a potentially convenient coordinate system. 
Recall that the map </> : ~ ~ M that embeds any submanifold allows us to 
pull back the metric from M to~. Given coordinates/ on~ and xJJ. on M, we 
define the induced metric on the submanifold as 
()x/J. axv 
(</>*g)ij = <Jyi <Jyjgµ.v· 
(D.25) 
In the case where the submanifold is a hypersurface, this induced metric is pre-
cisely the same as the YiJ appearing in (D.20). To see this, notice that Gaussian 
nonnal coordinates are a special case of the natural embedding coordinates de-
scribed by (C.2). We have a hypersurface ~defined by z = z* on M, with coor-
dinates/ defined on~. and a map</>:~~ M given by 
(D.26) 
Given the fonn of the metric (D.20) on M, it is immediate that under this map the 
pullback (D.25) is simply 
(</>* g);j = YiJ. 
(D.27) 

448 
Appendix D Hypersurfaces 
Keep in mind that this equation should only be evaluated in Gaussian nonnal 
coordinates; otherwise the right-hand side doesn't even make sense. 
Along with an induced metric, submanifolds inherit an induced volume ele-
ment from the manifold in which they are embedded. Recall that a volume ele-
ment on an n-dimensional manifold with metric gµ.v is given by the Levi-Civita 
tensor, which can be expressed as 
E = .Jfil dx 1 /\ ••• /\ c1xn. 
(D.28) 
To get a volume element on a submanifold ~, it is convenient to introduce Gaus-
sian nonnal coordinates (z, y 1, ... yn-l), in which the metric takes the fonn 
(D.20). The volume element E' on ~ will then take the form 
(D.29) 
(By choosing the first coordinate to be the one normal to the hypersurface, we 
have implicitly chosen a convention for how the orientation on M defines an ori-
entation on~.) In these coordinates we have 
.Jfil = JIYi' 
(D.30) 
and the volume element on M therefore becomes 
E = JIYi dz/\ dy 1 /\ • • • /\ dyn-l. 
(D.31) 
We can relate the two volume elements by using the nonnal vector to ~.which 
has components 
nµ. = (1, 0, .. ., 0). 
(D.32) 
The contraction of E with nJJ. can be denoted 
(D.33) 
It is then clear that, in these coordinates, we have 
E(n) = JIYi dy 1 /\ ... /\ dyn-1 
=E'. 
(D.34) 
Thus, the induced volume element has components 
(D.35) 
But this is a relation between tensors, so will be true in any coordinate system. 
We can also reconstruct E from E' and nJJ., via 
(D.36) 

Appendix D Hypersurfaces 
449 
as can easily be checked by contracting with n v. The notion of a submanifold 
volume element will be crucial in our discussion of Stokes's theorem below. 
Another concept closely related to the induced metric on a hypersurface is that 
of the projection tensor for a hypersurface ~ with unit nonnal vector nJJ., given 
by 
(D.37) 
where (J = nµ.nµ.. Let's collect some useful properties of this object. Given any 
vector V µ. in TpM, P µ.v will project it tangent to the hypersurface (that is, orthog-
onal to nJJ.): 
(Pµ.v V/J.)nv = gµ.v Vµ.nv - (Jnµ.nv Vµ.nv 
= V/J.nµ. -
(1 2 V/J.nµ. 
=0. 
(D.38) 
Acting on any two vectors VJJ. and wv that are already tangent to~. the projection 
tensor acts like the metric: 
Pµ.v V/J. Wv = gµ.v V/J. Wv - (Jnµ.nv V/J. wv 
= gµ.v vµ.wv. 
(D.39) 
Finally, the projection tensor is idempotent; acting two (or more) times produces 
the same result as only acting once: 
pJJ.>..p>.. v = (<St -
(Jnµ.n>..)(<S~ - (Jn>..nv) 
= <S~ - (Jn/J.nv - (Jn/J.nv + (J 3n/J.nv 
= pJJ. V• 
(D.40) 
P µ.v is sometimes called the first fundamental form of the hypersurface. Because 
it really does act like the metric for vectors tangent to ~.and hypersurfaces are 
often spacelike, you will sometimes see it referred to as the "spatial metric." 
Long ago when we first spoke of manifolds and curvature, we were careful 
to distinguish between the "intrinsic" curvature of a space, as measured by the 
Riemann tensor, and the "extrinsic" curvature, which depends on how the space 
is embedded in some larger space. For example, a two-torus can have a flat metric, 
but any embedding in R3 makes it look curved. We are now in a position to give 
a fonnal definition of this notion, which makes sense for hypersurfaces. Let's 
assume we have a family of hypersurfaces ~ with unit vector field nJJ., and we 
extend nJJ. through a region (any way we like). Then the extrinsic curvature of 
~ is simply given by the Lie derivative of the projection tensor along the nonnal 
vector field, 
(D.41) 

450 
Appendix D Hypersurfaces 
The extrinsic curvature, sometimes called the second fundamental form of the 
submanifold, is thus interpreted as the rate of change of the projection tensor (the 
spatial metric, if~ is spaceli.ke) as we travel along the nonnal vector field; it is 
independent of the extension of n/J. away from~. It is the work of a few lines to 
show that this definition is equivalent to the projected Lie derivative of the mellic 
itself, 
(D.42) 
We know from (B.20) that the Lie derivative of gµ.v is given by the symmetrized 
covariant derivative of the normal vector, so we have 
(D.43) 
Since we are not assuming that the integral curves of n/J. are geodesics, we can 
define the acceleration as 
(D.44) 
Then it is the work of a few more lines to show that (D.43) is equivalent to 
I K,,.. = v,,.n. - un,,.a •. I 
(D.45) 
The extrinsic curvature has a number of nice properties. It is symmetric, 
(D.46) 
which looks obvious from (D.41 ), although not from (D.45). You can check that 
(D.45) really is symmetric, taking advantage of the fact that nJJ. is hypersurface-
orthogonal. The extrinsic curvature is also orthogonal to the nonnal direction 
("purely spatial"), 
nµ. Kµ.v = nµ.Vµ.nv - un/J.nµ.av 
=av - u 2av 
=0. 
(D.47) 
We can define a covariant derivative acting along the hypersurface, V µ.. by 
taking an ordinary covariant derivative and projecting it. For example, on a ( 1, 1) 
tensor X µ. v we would have 
(D.48) 
From this we can construct the curvature tensor on the hypersurface RP uµ.v. for 
example by considering the commutator of covariant derivatives acting on a vector 
field VJJ., which is tangent to the hypersurface (PJJ. v vv = V/J.), 
(D.49) 

Appendix D 
Hypersurf aces 
451 
1\vo important equations relate the n-dimensional Riemann curvature to the hy-
persurface Riemann curvature and the extrinsic curvature. Gauss's equation is 
(D.50) 
We can take the appropriate traces to get the hypersurf ace curvature scalar, 
(D.51) 
where K = gµ.v Kµ.v· We also have Codacci's equation, 
t7 K µ. -
I pa R 
P 
v[µ. 
v] 
-
2 
v pun . 
(D.52) 
Together, (D.50) and (D.52) are, imaginatively enough, called the Gauss-Codacci 
equations. 
To stave off confusion, we should note that the definition of extrinsic curvature 
tends to vary from reference to reference. In some sources the nonnal vector field 
is taken to be geodesic everywhere (aJJ. = 0); things then simplify considerably, 
and it's straightforward to show that in this case we have 
Kµ.v = ! .Cn Pµ.v 
= !.Cngµ.v 
= Vµ.nv. 
(D.53) 
(If we are given an entire set of hypersurfaces ahead of time, we cannot simply 
assume that integral curves of the unit nonnal vector field are geodesics. However, 
we are often given just a single surface, in which case we are allowed to extend 
the nonnal vector field off the surface by solving the geodesic e..9uation.) Other 
references prefer to think of the extrinsic curvature as a tensor Kij living on ~ 
rather than in M. If we have an embedding</> : yi ~ xJJ., this version of the 
extrinsic curvature is given by the pullback, 
-
* 
Kij = (</> K);j 
8x/J. axv 
= <Jyi 8yi Kµ.v· 
(D.54) 
Finally, some sources like to define the extrinsic curvature to be minus our defini-
tion. It should be straightforward to convert back and forth between the different 
conventions. 
To conclude our discussion, we mention that a very common appearance of 
hypersurfaces is as the boundary of a closed region N of a manifold M, conven-
tionally denoted a N. If for example N consists of all the elements of Rn that lie at 
a distance from the origin r ~ 1, the boundary 8 N is clearly the (n - 1 )-sphere de-
fined by r = 1. We may extend this notion to cases where we are not considering a 
closed region, but an entire manifold with a boundary attached. A manifold with 

452 
Appendix D 
Hypersurf aces 
boundary is a set equipped with an atlas of coordinate charts, exactly as in our 
definition of a manifold in Chapter 2, except that the charts are taken to be maps 
to the upper half of Rn: the set of n-tuples (x 1, ••• , xn} with x 1 2: 0. The bound-
ary 8 M is the set of points that are mapped to x 1 = 0 by the charts. Then 8 M is 
naturally an (n -
1 )-dimensional submanifold (without boundary). An example 
of a boundary of a manifold will appear in our later discussion of confonnal dia-
grams, in which confonnal infinity can be thought of as a boundary to spacetime. 
By continuity, we can treat the boundary as a hypersurface, including inducing 
metrics and so on; occasionally we need to be careful in taking derivatives on the 
boundary, but for the most part we can trust our intuition. 

APPENDIX 
E 
Stokes's Theorem 
In Section 2.10 we introduced the idea that integration on a manifold maps n-form 
fields to the real numbers. This point of view leads to an elegant statement of one 
of the most powerful theorems of differential geometry: Stokes's theorem. This 
theorem is the generalization of the fundamental theorem of calculus, Jba dx = 
a -b. Imagine that we have an n-dimensional region M (which might be an entire 
manifold) with boundary <JM, and an (n - 1)-form won M. We will soon explain 
what is meant by the boundary of a manifold. Then dw is an n-form, which can 
be integrated over M, while w itself can be integrated over <JM. Stokes's theorem 
is simply 
(E. l) 
Different special cases of this theorem include not only the fundamental theorem 
of calculus, but also the theorems of Green, Gauss, and Stokes, familiar from 
vector calculus in three dimensions. 
The presentation (E. l) of Stokes's theorem is extremely elegant, almost too 
elegant to be useful. We can, fortunately, recast it in pedestrian coordinate-and-
index notation. It is convenient to first write the (n - 1 )-form was the Hodge dual 
of a one-form V, 
with components 
W=*V, 
Wµ.1···µ.n-I = (*V)µ.1···µ.n-I 
=Ev µ.1···µ.n-I Vv 
= Evµ.1· .. µ.n-I Vv, 
(E.2) 
(E.3) 
where E is the Levi-Civita n-form on M and we have raised the index on V in the 
last line. If we wanted to construct V from w, we apply the Hodge operator again 
to obtain 
V = (-l)s+n-1 * *V = (-l)s+n-1 * w, 
(E.4) 
453 

454 
Appendix E Stokes's Theorem 
where s equals -1 for Lorentzian signatures and + l for Euclidean signatures. 
The exterior derivative of w = * V is an n-fonn, given by 
(dwh.J.L1· .. J.Ln-l = (d * Vh.µ1 .. ·J.Ln-l 
= nVp .. (ElvlJ.L1···J.Ln-d Vv) 
= nEv[J.L1 ... J.Ln-1 V>..J vv, 
(E.5) 
where n is the dimensionality of the region, not to be confused with the nonnal 
vector nJ.L to the boundary. But any n-fonn can be written as a function f (x) times 
E, or equivalently as the Hodge dual off (x ), 
dw=fE=*f. 
Taking the dual of both sides gives 
f = (- l)s * * f = (- l)s * dw. 
In our case, 
= 
1 
(-l)s(n -
l)!~>..v vv 
(n-1)! 
v 
>.. 
= (-l)sVv yv. 
Finally we recall that the Levi-Civita tensor is simply the volume element, 
E = .jjgj dxl /\ ... /\ c1xn 
= .jjgj dn X. 
Putting it all together, we find 
dw = V v V v .jjgj dn x. 
(E.6) 
(E.7) 
(E.8) 
(E.9) 
(E.10) 
So the exterior derivative of an (n -
l )-fonn on an n manifold is just a slick way 
of representing the divergence of a vector (times the metric volume element). 
To make sense of the right-hand side of (E. l ), we recall from the previous Ap-
pendix that the induced volume element on a hypersurface (such as the boundary) 
is given by 
(E.11) 
where Yij is the induced metric on the boundary in coordinates yi. The compo-
nents of? in the xJ.L coordinates on M are 
(E.12) 

Appendix E Stokes's Theorem 
455 
where nJJ. is the unit normal to the boundary. For a general hypersurface, the sign 
of nJJ. is arbitrary; when the hypersurface is the boundary of a region, however, 
we have a notion of inward-pointing and outward-pointing. A crucial point is 
that, to correctly recover Stokes's theorem, n/J. should be chosen to be inward-
pointing if the boundary is timelike, and outward-pointing if it's spacelike. Since 
w is an (n -
l )-form. it must be proportional to E' when restricted to the (n -
l )-
dimensional boundary. Following in the path of the previous paragraph. we derive 
(E.13) 
Stokes's theorem therefore relates the divergence of the vector field to its value 
on the boundary: 
(E.14) 
This is the most common version of Stokes's theorem in general relativity. 
You shouldn't get the impression that we need to descend to index notation 
to put Stokes's theorem to use. As a simple counterexample. let's show that the 
charge associated with a conserved current is "conserved" in a very general sense: 
Not only is it independent of time in some specific coordinate system, but also the 
charge passing through a spacelike hypersurface ~ is (under reasonable assump-
tions) completely independent of the choice of hypersurface. Start by imagining 
that we have a current J µ. that is conserved, by which we mean 
(E.15) 
In terms of the one-form 1µ. = gµ.viv, we can translate the conservation condition 
into 
(E.16) 
We then define the charge passing through a hypersurf ace ~ via 
QE = -l *J. 
(E.17) 
Typically we will choose ~ to be a hypersurface of constant time, so that Q 't is 
the total charge throughout space at that moment in time; but the formula is appli-
cable more generally. The minus sign is a convention, which can be understood 
by converting (temporarily) to components. Comparing to (E.2) and (E.13), we 
can tum (E.17) into 
(E.18) 
We see that the minus sign serves to compensate for the minus sign that the time 
component of nJJ. picks up when we lower the index, so that a positive charge 

456 
FIGURE E.1 A region R of 
spacetime with spatial bound-
aries at infinity; the future and 
past boundaries include the 
two spatial hypersurfaces I:1 
and I:2. 
Appendix E Stokes's Theorem 
density p = 1° yields a positive integrated total charge. Next imagine a four-
dimensional spacetime region R, defined as the region between two spatial hyper-
surfaces ~1 and ~2, as shown in Figure E. l; the part of the boundary connecting 
these two hypersurfaces is assumed to be off at infinity where all of the fields van-
ish, and can be ignored. The conservation law (E.16) and Stokes's theorem (E. l) 
then give us 
(E.19) 
The minus sign in the third line is due to the orientation on ~2 inherited from 
R; the nonnal vector is pointing inward, which is opposite from what wouJd be 
the conventional choice in an integral over ~2· We see that QE will be the same 
over any spacelike hypersurface ~ chosen such that the current vanishes at infin-
ity. Thus, Stokes's theorem shows how the existence of a divergenceless current 
implies the existence of a conserved charge. 
Another use of Stokes's theorem (corresponding to the conventional use of 
Gauss's theorem in three-dimensional Euclidean space) is to actually calculate 
this charge Q by integrating over the hypersurface. Thinking momentarily about 
the real world, let's consider Maxwell's equations in a four-dimensional space-
time. These equations describe how the electromagnetic field strength tensor Fµ.v 
responds to the conserved current four-vector, 
Vµ.Fvµ. = Jv. 
(E.20) 
We can therefore plug V µ.Fvµ. into (E.18) to calculate the charge: 
Q = -L 
d 3yJiYT nµ. VvFµ.v. 
(E.21) 
Whenever we are faced with the divergence of an antisymmellic tensor field 
FJJ.v = - Fvµ. integrated over a hypersurface ~' we can follow similar steps 
to those used to arrive at (E.14), to relate the divergence to the value of FJJ.v on 
the boundary, this time at spatial infinity (if the hypersurface is timelike): 
(E.22) 
where the za's are coordinates on 8~, y~gE> is the induced metric on 8~, and (Jµ. 
is the unit nonnal to 8~. You might worry about the integral over a~, since the 

Appendix E Stokes's Theorem 
457 
boundary of a boundary is zero; but ~ is not the entire boundary of any region. 
just a piece of one, so it can certainly have a boundary of its own. 
Just to make sure we know what we're doing, let's verify that we can actually 
recover the charge of a point particle in Minkowski space. We write the metric in 
polar coordinates, 
ds2 = -dt2 + dr2 + r 2d8 2 + r 2 sin2 e d</>2• 
(E.23) 
The electric field of a charge q in our units (Lorentz-Heaviside conventions. 
where there are no 4rr's in Maxwell's equations) is 
Er= ~2' 
4rrr 
(E.24) 
with other components vanishing; this is related to the field strength tensor by 
The unit nonnal vectors are 
so that 
nµ. = (1, 0, 0, 0). 
(Jµ. = (0, }, 0, 0), 
nµ.(JvFµ.v =-Er= -~2
. 
4rrr 
The metric on the two-sphere at spatial infinity is 
so the volume element is 
d2zJy<S2
> = r2sin8d8d<J>. 
Plugging (E.27), (E.29), and (E.21) into (E.22) gives 
Q = - Jim f d8d<J>r 2 sin8 (-~) 
r~oo ls2 
4rrr 
=q, 
which is just the answer we're looking for. 
(E.25) 
(E.26) 
(E.27) 
(E.28) 
(E.29) 
(E.30) 


APPENDIX 
F 
Geodesic Congruences 
In Section 3.10 we derived the geodesic deviation equation, governing the evo-
lution of a separation vector connecting a one-parameter family of neighbor-
ing geodesics. A more comprehensive picture of the behavior of neighboring 
geodesics comes from considering not just a one-parameter family, but an en-
tire congruence of geodesics. A congruence is a set of curves in an open region 
of spacetime such that every point in the region lies on precisely one curve. We 
can think of a geodesic congruence as tracing the paths of a set of noninteracting 
particles moving through spacetime with nonintersecting paths. If the geodesics 
cross, the congruence necessarily comes to an end at that point. Clearly, in a multi-
dimensional congruence there is a lot of infonnation to keep track of; we will be 
interested in the local behavior in the neighborhood of a single geodesic, for which 
things become quite tractable. 
Let UJJ. = dxJJ. /dr be the tangent vector field to a four-dimensional timelike 
geodesic congruence; equivalently, the four-velocity field of some pressureless 
fluid. (If the fluid were not pressureless, integral curves of UJJ. would not in gen-
eral describe geodesics.) Null geodesics present special problems, which we will 
return to later; for now stick with the timelike case. For reference we recall that 
the tangent field is normalized and obeys the geodesic equation: 
(F. l) 
When we discussed the geodesic deviation equation in Section 3.10, we consid-
ered a separation vector V µ. pointing from one geodesic to a neighboring one, and 
found that it obeyed 
(F.2) 
where 
(F.3) 
(In Chapter 3 we used T instead of U, and S instead of V.) The tensor Bµ.v there-
fore can be thought of as measuring the failure of VJJ. to be parallel-transported 
along the congruence; in other words, it describes the extent to which neighboring 
geodesics deviate from remaining perfectly parallel. 
To deal with an entire congruence, rather than just a one-parameter family of 
curves, we can imagine setting up a set of three normal vectors orthogonal to our 
459 

460 
Appendix F Geodesic Congruences 
timelike geodesics, and following their evolution. The failure of this set of vectors 
to be parallel-transported will tell us how nearby geodesics in the congruence are 
evolving. Equivalently, we can imagine a small sphere of test particles centered at 
some point, and we want to describe quantitatively the evolution of these particles 
with respect to their central geodesic. Fortunately, all we have to keep track of is 
the behavior of Bµ.v· 
Given the vector field UJJ., at each point p we consider the subspace of TpM 
corresponding to vectors normal to UJJ.. Any vector in TpM can be projected into 
this subspace via the projection tensor 
(F.4) 
familiar from our discussion of submanifolds in Appendix D. In this case we are 
not projecting onto a submanifold, only onto a vector subspace of the tangent 
space, but the idea is the same. We notice that Bµ.v is already in the normal sub-
space, since 
Uµ. Bµ.v = Uµ.VvUµ. = 0 
uv Bµ.v = UvVvUµ. = 0. 
(F.5) 
The first of these follows from V v ( U µ. U µ.) = V v ( -1) = 0, while the second 
follows from the geodesic equation. We should not confuse Bµ.v with the extrinsic 
curvature K µ.v from (D.53); the difference is that our tangent vector field UJJ. will 
generally not be orthogonal to any hypersurface. 
As a (0. 2) tensor, Bµ.v can be decomposed into symmetric and antisymmetric 
parts, and the symmetric part can further be decomposed into a trace and a trace-
free part. Since Bµ.v is in the normal subspace, we can use Pµ.v to take the trace in 
this decomposition. The result can be written 
Bµ.v = je Pµ.v + (Jµ.v + Wµ.v· 
(F.6) 
Here we have introduced three quantities describing the decomposition, starting 
with the expansion 8 of the congruence, 
(F.7) 
which is simply the trace of Bµ.v· The expansion describes the change in volume 
of the sphere of test particles centered on our geodesic. It is clearly a scalar, which 
makes sense, since the overall expansion/contraction of the volume is described 
by a single number. The shear (J µ.v is given by 
(F.8) 
It is symmetric and traceless. The shear represents a distortion in the shape of 
our collection of test particles, from an initial sphere into an ellipsoid; symme-
try represents the fact that elongation along (say) the x-direction is the same as 

Appendix F Geodesic Congruences 
461 
elongation along the -x direction. Finally we have the rotation wµ.v, given by 
Wµ.v = B[µ.v]· 
(F.9) 
It is an antisymmetric tensor, which also makes sense; the xy component (for 
example) describes a rotation about the z axis, while the yx component describes 
a rotation in the opposite sense around the same axis. 
The evolution of our congruence is described by the covariant derivative of 
these quantities along the path, D / d r = ua Va. We can straightforwardly calcu-
late this for the entire tensor Bµ.v, and then take the appropriate decomposition. 
We have 
DBµ.v 
a 
a 
~ 
= U VaBµ.v = U Va VvUµ. 
= uavv VaUµ. + ua RAµ.vaU>.. 
= Vv(UaVaUµ.) - (VvUa)(VaUµ.)- R>..µ.vaUau>.. 
(F.10) 
Taking the trace of this equation yields an evolution equation for the expansion, 
(F.11) 
This is Raychaudhuri's equation, and plays a crucial role in the proofs of the sin-
gularity theorems. [Sometimes the demand that the congruence obey the geodesic 
equation is dropped; this simply adds a term Vµ.(UvVvUJJ.) to the right-hand 
side.] Similarly, the symmetric trace-free part of (F. l 0) is 
where Rµ.v is the spatially-projected trace-free part of Rµ.v, 
(F.13) 
and the antisymmetric part of (F. l 0) is 
(F.14) 
These equations do not get used as frequently as Raychaudhuri's equation, but 
they're nice to have around. 

462 
Appendix F Geodesic Congruences 
Let's give a brief example of the way in which Raychaudhuri's equation gets 
used. First notice that, since the shear and rotation are both "spatial" tensors, we 
have 
(F.15) 
Next, notice that the last term in (F.11) is just what appears if we combine Ein-
stein's equation with the Strong Energy Condition; from Einstein's equation we 
know 
(F.16) 
and the SEC demands that the right-hand side of this expression be nonnegative 
for any timelike UJJ.. We therefore have 
(F.17) 
if the SEC holds. Finally, note that Wµ.v = 0 if and only if the vector field UJJ. is 
orthogonal to a family of hypersurfaces. This follows straightforwardly from the 
facts that the rotation is a spatial tensor(UJJ.wµ.v = 0), and by Frobenius's theorem 
a necessary and sufficient condition for a vector field UJJ. to be hypersurface-
orthogonal is U[µ. VvUpJ; the details are left for you to check. Therefore, if we 
have a congruence whose tangent field is hypersurface-orthogonal, in a spacetime 
obeying Einstein's equations and the SEC, Raychaudhuri's equation implies 
de < _ !e2 
dr -
3 
This equation is easily integrated to obtain 
e- 1(r) 2: eo- 1 +1r. 
(F.18) 
(F.19) 
Consider a hypersurface-orthogonal congruence, which is initially converging 
(Bo < 0) rather than expanding. Then (F.19) tells us convergence will continue, 
and we must hit a caustic (a place where geodesics cross) in a finite proper time 
r ~ - 380
1• In other words, matter obeying the SEC can never begin to push 
geodesics apart, it can only increase the rate at which they are converging. Of 
course, this result only applies to some arbitrarily-chosen congruence, and the 
appearance of caustics certainly doesn't indicate any singularity in the spacetime 
(geodesics cross all the time, even in flat spacetime). But many of the proofs of the 
singularity theorems take advantage of this property of the Raychaudhuri equation 
to show that spacetime must be geodesically incomplete in some way. 
We tum next to the behavior of congruences of null geodesics. These are trick-
ier, essentially because our starting point (studying the evolution of vectors in a 
three-dimensional subspace normal to the tangent field) doesn't make as much 
sense, since the tangent vector of a null curve is normal to itself. Instead, in the 
null case what we care about is the evolution of vectors in a two-dimensional sub-
space of "spatial" vectors normal to the null tangent vector field k/J. = dxJJ. / dA.. 

Appendix F Geodesic Congruences 
463 
Unfortunately, there is no unique way to define this subspace, as observers in 
different Lorentz frames will have different notions of what constitutes a spatial 
vector. Faced with this dilemma, we have two sensible approaches. A slick ap-
proach would be to define an abstract two-dimensional vector space by starting 
with the three-dimensional space of vectors orthogonal to kµ, and then taking 
equivalence classes where two vectors are equivalent if they differ by a multiple 
of kµ. The grungier approach, which we will follow, is simply to choose a second 
"auxiliary" null vector /JJ., which (in some frame) points in the opposite spatial 
direction to kµ, nonnalized such that 
(F.20) 
We furthennore demand that the auxiliary vector be parallel-transported, 
(F.21) 
which is compatible with (F.20) because parallel transport preserves inner prod-
ucts. The auxiliary null vector [JJ. is by no means unique, since as we've just noted 
the idea of pointing in opposite spatial directions is frame-dependent. Neverthe-
less, we can make a choice and hope that important quantities are independent of 
the arbitrary choice. Having done so, the two-dimensional space of normal vec-
tors we are interested in, called TJ., consists simply of those vectors Vµ that are 
orthogonal to both k µ and l µ, 
(F.22) 
Our task now is to follow the evolution of deviation vectors living in this subspace, 
which represent a family of neighboring null geodesics. 
Projecting into the normal subspace T 1. requires a slightly modified definition 
of the projection tensor; it turns out that 
(F.23) 
does the trick. Namely, Qµv will act like the metric when acting on vectors VJ.1., 
WJJ. in TJ., while annihilating anything proportional to kµ or /JJ.. Some useful 
properties of this projection tensor include 
Qµv vvwv = gµv vµwv 
Qµvvv = vµ 
Qµvkv =0 
Qµvlv = 0 
Qµ v Q v (f = Qµ (f 
k(f v (f Qµ v = 0. 
(F.24) 

464 
Appendix F Geodesic Congruences 
Just as for timelike geodesics, the failure of a normal deviation vector VJ.l to 
be parallel-propagated is governed by the tensor BJ.t v = V vkJ.l, in the sense that 
DVJ.l 
-- = kv'Vv VJ.l = BJ.lv Vv. 
dA. 
(F.25) 
However, in the null case the tensor Bµv is actually more than we need; the rele-
vant information is completely contained in the projected version, 
B-µ -
QJ.l Q~ Ba 
v -
Ct 
v 
~· 
(F.26) 
To see this, we simply play around with (F.25), using the various properties in 
(F.24): 
DVJ.l 
-- =kv'V VJ.l 
dA. 
v 
= kv'Vv(QJ.l p VP) 
= QJ.l pkv'Vv VP 
= QJ.l pBPv Vv 
= QJ.lpBPvQvava 
=BJ.la Va. 
(F.27) 
So we only have to keep track of the evolution of this projected tensor, not the full 
Bµv· 
To understand that evolution, we again decompose into the expansion, shear, 
and rotation: 
B-
l()Q 
-
-
µv = 2 
µv + CTµv + Wµv, 
(F.28) 
where 
-
-
1 Q 
CTµv = B(µv) -
2() 
µv 
Wµv = B[µv]· 
(F.29) 
We find factors of ~ rather than ! because our normal space Tl. is two-dimen-
sional, reflected in the fact that QJ.tv Qµv = 2. As in the timelike case, Wµv = 0 
is a necessary and sufficient condition for the congruence to be hypersurface-
orthogonal. The evolution of Bµv along the path is given by 

Appendix F Geodesic Congruences 
465 
(F.30) 
Continuing to follow our previous logic, we can take the trace of this equation to 
find an evolution equation for the expansion of null geodesics, 
d() -
_ !()2 - -.. --µ.v +-.. --µ.v - R kµ.kv 
dA. -
2 
(Jµ.v(J 
Wµ.vW 
µ.v 
· 
(F.31) 
Happily, this equation turns out to be completely independent of our arbitrarily 
chosen auxiliary vector /JJ.. First, the expansion itself is independent of /JJ., as we 
easily verify: 
() = Qµ.v Bµ.v 
= Qµ.v Bµ.v 
= gµ.v Bµ.v, 
(F.32) 
where the second line follows from Qµ.v Qcx v = Qµ.cx, and the third from kµ. Bµ.v = 
kv Bµ.v = 0. (This is why we never put a hat on() to begin with.) Second, both 
Uµ.v<iµ.v and Wµ.vwµ.v are likewise independent of /J..I. (as you are welcome to ver-
ify), even though Uµ.v and wµ.v themselves are not. Finally, the projection tensors 
dropped out of the curvature-tensor piece when we took the trace. We therefore 
have a well-defined notion of the evolution of the expansion, independent of any 
arbitrary choices we made. Notice that, because kµ. is null, Einstein's equation 
implies 
Rµ.vkµ.kv = 8:rrG (Tµ.v - !Tgµ.v)kµ.kv 
= 8:rrGTµ.vkµ.kv. 
(F.33) 
For this to be nonnegative, we need only invoke the Null Energy Condition, which 
is the least restrictive of all the energy conditions we discussed in Chapter 3. Thus, 
null geodesics tend to converge to caustics under more general circumstances than 
timelike ones. 
We can continue on to get evolution equations for the shear, 
and for the rotation, 
Du µ.v _ 
-.. 
ex 
~ 
>.. a 
dJ:: - -()(Jµ.v - Q µ. Q vCµ.>..vak k , 
Dwµ.v 
-.. 
-- = -ewµ.v· 
dA. 
(F.34) 
(F.35) 
These equations are less natural than the one for the expansion, since the shear 
and rotation do depend on our choice of /JJ.; nevertheless, they can be useful in 
specific circumstances. 


APPENDIX 
G 
Conformal Transformations 
A conformal transformation is essentially a local change of scale. Since dis-
tances are measured by the metric, such transformations are implemented by mul-
tiplying the metric by a spacetime-dependent (nonvanishing) function: 
(G.l) 
or equivalently 
(G.2) 
for some nonvanishing function w(x). (Here x is used to denote the collection 
of spacetime coordinates xµ..) Note that the inverse conformal transformation is 
trivial: gµ.v = w-28µ.v· Transformations of this sort have a number of uses in 
GR; our favorite purposes will be to change dynamical variables in scalar-tensor 
theories (as in Section 4.8), and to remap spacetimes into convenient conformal 
diagrams (as in the following Appendix). 
We first mention one critical fact: null curves are left invariant by conformal 
transformations. By this we mean simply that, if xlL(A.) is a curve that is null with 
respect to gµ.v, it will also be null with respect to 8µ.v· This follows immediately 
once we understand that a curve xµ.(A.) is null if and only if its tangent vector 
dxµ. /dA. is null, 
dxµ. dxv 
g ---0 
µ.v dA. dA. -
. 
Then in the conformally-related metric we have 
dxµ. dxv 
2 
dxµ. dxv 
8µ.v dA. dA. = W (x)gµ.v dA. dA. = 0. 
(G.3) 
(G.4) 
Thus, curves that are null as defined by one metric will also be null as defined 
by any conformally-related metric. We may say that "conformal transformations 
leave light cones invariant." (Indeed, you can check that they leave angles between 
any two four-vectors invariant, a feature that our conformal transformations share 
with the familiar conformal transformations of complex analysis.) 
Let us next consider how geometrical quantities change under conformal trans-
formations. A conformal transformation is not a change of coordinates, but an ac-
tual change of the geometry-timelike geodesics of gµ.v, for example, will gener-
ally differ from timelike geodesics of gµ.v· However, we can use conformal trans-
formations to change our dynamical variables: anything that is a function of gµ.v 
467 

468 
Appendix G Conformal Transformations 
can be equally well thought of as a function of gµ.v and w(x). We then say that 
the quantities are expressed in the conformal frame. In this Appendix we collect 
some expressions for how quantities in the original metric gµ.v are related to those 
in the conformal metric gµ.v· 
We begin by considering the Christoffel symbols. Because the connection coef-
ficients are linear in derivatives of the metric and also linear in the inverse metric, 
the conformally-transformed connection takes the form 
(G.5) 
CP µ.v is clearly a tensor, as it is the difference of two connections. An explicit 
calculation reveals it to be given by 
This formula immediately becomes useful when we consider how the Riemann 
tensor behaves under conformal transformations. In fact under any change of con-
nection of the form (G.5), we have 
Thus it is a matter of simply plugging in and grinding away to get 
RP aµ.v =RP aµ.v - 2 (15(µ.15~115~ -
ga[µ.l5~lgp,8) w- 1(Va V,sw) 
+ 2 ( W(µ.15~115~ -
2ga[µ.l5~lgp,8 + ga[µ.l5~1 ga,8) w-2(VawHV,sw). 
(G.8) 
Contracting the first and third indices yields the Ricci tensor, 
Rav= Rav-[(n-2)15~15e +gavga,8]w- 1(VaV,sw) 
+ [2(n -
2)15~15e - (n - 3)gavga.B] w-2(VawHV,sw), 
(G.9) 
where n is the number of dimensions. Raising an index (with gµ.v = w-2gµ.v) and 
contracting again gets us the curvature scalar, 
R = w- 2R - 2(n - l)ga,8w- 3(Va V,sw) - (n - l)(n - 4)ga,8w-4(Vaw)(V,sw). 
(G.10) 
Another useful quantity is the covariant derivative of a scalar field</>. The first 
covariant derivative is equal in the original or conformal frame, since they are 
both equal to the partial derivative: 
(G.11) 

G.1 
Exercises 
469 
The second derivative, however, involves the Christoffel symbol, and therefore 
has a nontrivial transformation: 
Vµ. Vv</> = Vµ. 'Vv</> -
(15~15e + 15!15~ -
gµ.vg'x~) w-
1 (Vaw)(V~</>). 
(G.12) 
We can contract this with gµ.v to obtain the D' Alembertian, 
D</> = w-20</> + (n -
2)ga~w-
3 (Vaw)(V~</>). 
(G.13) 
Finally, we may want to go backward, and express quantities in the original 
metric in terms of the conformal metric. This is simply a matter of tedious com-
putation, the answers to which are reproduced here for convenience. The curvature 
tensor and its contractions are 
and 
R P 
R-P 
2(r:Pr:Otr:~ 
-
r:Ot-p~) -1<"" ) 
aµ.v = 
aµ.v + 
o[µ.ov]oa - ga[µ.ov]g 
W 
va v~W 
+ 2g-
r:P g-a~w- 2 (" w)(t; aw) 
a[µ.ov] 
v Ct 
v,., 
, 
Rav = Rav + [ (n -
2)15~15e + 8av80t~] w- 1 (Va V ~w) 
-
(n -
08av80t~w-
2 (Vaw)(V~w), 
while the covariant derivatives of a scalar field are given by 
v µ. v v<I> = v 
µ. v 
v<I> + (15~ 15e + 15! 15~ -
8µ.v80t~) w- 1 <v awHV ~</>) 
and 
G.1 • EXERCISES 
(G.14) 
(G.15) 
(G.16) 
(G.17) 
(G.18) 
1. Show that confonnal transfonnations leave null geodesics invariant, that is. that the null 
geodesics of gµ.v are the same as those of w2gµ.v· (We already know that they leave null 
curves invariant; you have to show that the transfonned curves still are geodesics.) What 
is the relationship between the affine parameters in the original and confonnal metrics? 
9. Show that in two dimensions, a confonnal transfonnation can always be found (pro-
vided that the operator Vµ. V µ. is invertible) such that the curvature of the transfonned 
metric vanishes, at least in some coordinate chart. (It can't in general be done simulta-
neously over the entire manifold.) This means that any two-dimensional metric can be 
written locally as a flat metric multiplied by a confonnal factor. 
10. Suppose that two metrics are related by an overall confonnal transfonnation of the fonn 
-
_ 
Ot(X) 
gµ.v - e 
gµ.v· 
(G.19) 

470 
Appendix G Conformal Transformations 
(a) Show that if~µ. is a Killing vector for the metric gµ.v, then it is a confonnal Killing 
vector for the metric gµ.v· A conformal Killing vector obeys the equation 
(G.20) 
(b) Show that ~µ.kµ. is constant along photon geodesics in 'iµ.v· Here k/J. is the photon's 
4-momentum. 
(c) Show that the confonnal timer/ = J dt / R(t) is associated with a confonnal Killing 
vector ~ = a,,. 
(d) Use part (c) to rederive the relationship between the scale factor and redshift. 

APPENDIX 
H 
Conformal Diagrams 
Curved spacetime manifolds can in principle be impossibly complex; fortunately, 
we may often approximate physically realistic situations by manifolds with high 
degrees of symmetry (especially spherical symmetry). Even symmetric space-
times, however, can pose fonnidable challenges to our powers of visualization, if 
we try to imagine the global structure of such manifolds. It is therefore useful to be 
able to draw standardized representations of spacetime diagrams that capture the 
global properties and causal structure of sufficiently symmetric spacetimes. (By 
"causal structure" we mean the relationship between the past and future of differ-
ent events, as defined by their light cones.) An elegant fulfillment of this wish is 
provided by conformal diagrams (or Carter-Penrose, or just Penrose diagrams). 
A conformal diagram is simply an ordinary spacetime diagram for a metric on 
which we have performed a particularly clever coordinate transformation. Since 
our goal is to portray the causal structure of the spacetime, which is defined by its 
light cones, "clever" means that the new coordinates xµ.' have a "timelike" coordi-
nate and a "radial" one, with the feature that radial light cones can be consistently 
portrayed at 45° on a spacetime diagram. In addition, we aim for coordinates in 
which "infinity" is only a finite coordinate value away, so that the structure of the 
entire spacetime is immediately apparent. 
As explained in the previous Appendix, conformal transformations leave light 
cones invariant. Since we would like to find coordinates in which light cones are at 
45°, we need only find coordinates in which the metric of interest is conformally 
related to a different metric for which we know that the light cones are at 45°. 
(Of course the angle at which our light cones are drawn depends on our units, or 
equivalently how we draw our axes; what we really mean is a set of coordinates 
T, R in which radial null rays satisfy dT /dR = ±1.) 
Let's begin with Minkowski space to see how the technique works. The Min-
kowski metric in polar coordinates is 
(H. l) 
where drl.2 = d8 2+sin2 Bd</>2 is the metric on a unit two-sphere. Here it is already 
true that we can draw light cones at 45° everywhere (the trajectories t = ±r are 
null), but we would like to make the causal structure of the entire spacetime more 
transparent by switching to coordinates with finite ranges. Nothing unusual will 
happen to the 8, </> coordinates, but we will want to keep careful track of the ranges 
471 

472 
Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
of the other two coordinates. To start with of course we have 
-oo < t < oo, 
0 ~ r < oo. 
(H.2) 
Technically, the worldline r = 0 represents a coordinate singularity and should 
be covered by a different patch, but we all know what is going on so we'll just act 
like r = 0 is well-behaved. 
A first guess (which turns out not to work) might be simply to rescale the 
timelike and radial coordinates so that they cover a finite range. A good candidate 
is to use the arctangent, portrayed in Figure H. l, and define t = arctan t, r = 
arctan r. The metric then would take the form [using d tan x = (I/ cos2 x )dx] 
ds2 = - - 1-_ d/2 + - 1- dr2 + tan2 r drl.2, 
cos4 t 
cos4 r 
(H.3) 
with 
(H.4) 
The good news is that the new coordinates have finite ranges; the bad news is that 
the slope of the light cones (given by d I/ d r = ± cos2 t / cos2 r) is not equal to 
± l, as we wished. If we were to draw the appropriate spacetime diagram (which 
you might want to do, just for fun), it would not be clear where null rays traveled, 
especially at the edges of the spacetime. 
The way out of this cul-de-sac is, instead of straightforwardly manipulating the 
original coordinates t and r, to be even more clever and switch to null coordinates: 
u = t -r 
v = t + r, 
(H.5) 
arctanx 
1T 
2 
-------------- -------------
x 
1T 
2 
FIGURE H.1 The arctangent maps the real line to a finite interval. 

Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
473 
u =constant 
FIGURE H.2 Null radial coordinates on Minkowski space. 
with corresponding ranges given by 
-oo < u < 00, 
-oo < v < 00, 
u ~ v. 
(H.6) 
These coordinates are as portrayed in Figure H.2, on which each point represents 
a 2-sphere of radius r = !<v - u). The Minkowski metric in null coordinates is 
given by 
ds2 = -!(dudv + dvdu) + ~(v - u)2drJ.2. 
(H.7) 
Now we use the arctangent to bring infinity into a finite coordinate value, letting 
U = arctanu 
V = arctan v, 
(H.8) 
· with ranges 
-rr/2 < U < rr/2, 
-rr/2 < V < rr/2, 
U ~ V. 
(H.9) 
We then have 
I 
dudv +dvdu = 
2 
2 
(dUdV +dVdU), 
cos u cos v 
(H.10) 
and 
(v - u) 2 = (tan V - tan U)2 = 
2 
1 
2 
(sin V cos U - cos V sin U)2 
cos Ucos V 
I 
. 2 
= cos2 U cos2 V sm (V - U), 
(H.11) 

474 
Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
so that the metric (H. 7) in these coordinates is 
ds2 = 
2 l 
2 
[-2(dUdV+dVdU)+sin2(V-U)drJ.2]. 
(H.12) 
4cos U cos V 
This fonn has a certain appeal, since the metric appears as a fairly simple 
expression multiplied by an overall factor. We can make it even better by trans-
fonning back to a timelike coordinate T and a radial coordinate R, via 
T = V + U, 
R = V - U, 
(H.13) 
with ranges 
0 ~ R < rr, 
ITI + R < rr. 
(H.14) 
Now the metric is 
(H.15) 
where 
w = 2cos U cos V 
= 2 cos [ ! (T - R)] cos [ ! (T + R)] 
= cos T + cos R. 
(H.16) 
The original Minkowski metric, which we denoted ds2, may therefore be thought 
of as related by a confonnal transfonnation to the "unphysical" metric 
ds2 = w2(T, R)ds2 
= -dT2 + dR2 + sin2 R drl.2. 
(H.17) 
This describes the manifold R x 53, where the 3-sphere is purely spacelike, per-
fectly round, and unchanging in time. There is curvature in this metric, unlike in 
Minkowski spacetime. This shouldn't bother us, since it is unphysical; the true 
physical metric, obtained by a confonnal transfonnation, is simply flat spacetime, 
no matter what coordinates we choose. In fact the metric (H.17) is that of the "Ein-
stein static universe," a static solution to Einstein's equation with a perfect fluid 
and a cosmological constant (Figure H.3). Of course, the full range of coordinates 
on Rx 53 would usually be -oo < T < oo, 0 ~ R ~ rr, while Minkowski space 
is mapped into the subspace defined by (H.14). The entire Rx 53 can be drawn as 
a cylinder, in which each circle of constant T represents a 3-sphere. The shaded 
region represents Minkowski space. We can W'lfoll the shaded region to portray 
Minkowski space as a triangle, as shown in Figure H.4. This is the confonnal 
diagram. Each point represents a two-sphere. 

Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
475 
FIGURE H.3 The Einstein static universe, R x S3, portrayed as a cylinder. The shaded 
region is confonnally related to Minkowski space. 
In fact Minkowski space is only the interior of the above diagram (including 
R = 0); the boundaries are not part of the original spacetime. The boundaries 
are referred to as conformal infinity, and the union of the original spacetime 
with confonnal infinity is the conformal compactification, which is a manifold 
with boundary. The structure of the conformal diagram allows us to subdivide 
confonnal infinity into a few different regions: 
;+ 
L, 
t 
R = 0/1--~-1--~ 
;o 
R, r 
;-
FIGURE H.4 The confonnal diagram of Minkowski space. Light cones are at ±45° 
throughout the diagram. 

476 
Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
;+ =future timelike infinity (T = rr, R = 0) 
;0 = spatial infinity (T = 0, R = rr) 
;- =past timelike infinity (T = -rr, R = 0) 
~+ =future null infinity (T = rr - R, 0 < R < rr) 
~- =past null infinity (T = -rr + R, 0 < R < rr) 
(~+ and~- are pronounced as "scri-plus" and "scri-minus," respectively.) Note 
that ;+, ;0, and ;- are actually points, since R = 0 and R = rr are the north 
and south poles of 53. Meanwhile ~+ and ~- are actually null surfaces, with the 
topology of R x 52. 
The confonnal diagram for Minkowski spacetime contains a number of im-
portant features. Radial null geodesics are at ±45° in the diagram. All timelike 
geodesics begin at;- and end at;+; all null geodesics begin at~- and end at~+; 
all spacelike geodesics both begin and end at ;0. On the other hand, there can be 
nongeodesic timelike curves that end at null infinity, if they become "asymptoti-
cally null." 
It is nice to be able to fit all of Minkowski space on a small piece of paper, 
but we don't really learn much that we didn't already know. Confonnal diagrams 
are more useful when we want to represent slightly more complicated spacetimes, 
such as those for black holes. As discussed in Chapter 6, asymptotically flat space-
times (or regions of a spacetime) are those that share the structure of~+, ;0, and 
~-with Minkowski space. Equally importantly, the confonnal diagram gives us 
an idea of the causal structure of the spacetime, for example, whether the past 
or future light cones of two specified points intersect. In Minkowski space this is 
always true for any two points, but curved spacetimes can be more interesting, as 
we saw for the case of an expanding universe in Chapter 2. 
Let's consider the confonnal diagram for the cosmological spacetime intro-
duced in Chapter 2, which provides a vivid illustration of the usefulness of this 
technique. When we put polar coordinates on space, the mellic becomes 
(H.18) 
where we have chosen to consider power-law behavior for the scale factor, a(t) = 
tq, and 0 < q < 1. A crucial difference between this metric and that of Minkow-
ski space is the singularity at t = 0, which restricts the range of our coordinates: 
O<t<OO 
0 ~ r < oo. 
(H.19) 
(H.20) 
Other than this restricted coordinate range, our analysis follows almost precisely 
that of the case of flat spacetime. This is because we can bring the metric (H.18) 
to the fonn of flat spacetime times a confonnal factor; once done, we need only 
to reproduce our previous coordinate transfonnations to express our expanding-
universe metric as a confonnal factor times the Einstein static universe. 

Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
477 
We begin by choosing a new time coordinate 17, sometimes called conformal 
time, which satisfies 
(H.21) 
or 
1 
1J = __ ,1-q 
l-q 
(H.22) 
This simple choice allows us to bring out the scale factor as an overall confonnal 
factor, 
(H.23) 
The range of 1J is the same as that of t, 
0 < 1J < 00. 
(H.24) 
Note that 1J is a timelike coordinate [in the sense that the vector 811 is time-
like, ds2(811 , 811 ) < O], but it does not measure the proper time of a comov-
ing clock (one with constant spatial coordinates). If we consider a trajectory 
xJ.t(.A.) = (17(.A), 0, 0, 0), and calculated the proper time r(17), we would find that it 
was equal to our previous time coordinate but not our new one: r oc t oc 17110-q). 
So 1J is a timelike coordinate, but not the time that anyone would measure. This 
is perfectly okay, and simply serves as an illustration of the independence of the 
notions of observable quantities and spacetime coordinates. 
Now that we have our expanding-universe metric in the fonn of a confor-
mal factor times Minkowski, we can perfonn the same sequence of coordinate 
transfonnations-(H.5), (H.8), and (H.13)-where we allow 1J to take the place 
oft. These changes transform our coordinates from (17, r) to (T, R), where the 
ranges are now 
0 ~ R, 
0 < T, 
T + R < rr. 
(H.25) 
The metric (H.23) becomes 
ds2 = w-2(T, R) (-dT2 + dR2 + sin2 R dn2), 
(H.26) 
where some heroic use of trigonometric identities reveals that the confonnal factor 
is of the fonn 
(
cos T +cos R) 2q 
w(T, R) = 
2 . 
(cos T +cos R). 
smT 
(H.27) 
The precise fonn of the confonnal factor is actually not of primary importance; 
the crucial feature is that we have once again expressed our metric as a confonnal 
factor times that of the Einstein static universe. The important distinction between 

478 
Appendix H Conformal Diagrams 
;+ 
L 
R 
;-
FIGURE H.S 
Confonnal diagram for a Robertson-Walker universe with a(t) ex tq for 
0 < q < I. The dashed line represents the singularity at t = 0 (which also corresponds to 
T = 0). 
this case and that of flat spacetime is that the timelike coordinate ends at the singu-
larity at T = O; otherwise the spacetime diagram is identical. We therefore have 
the confonnal diagram of Figure H.5, which resembles the upper half of the Min-
kowski diagram (Figure H.4 ). Once again, light cones appear at 45°. We see how 
the confonnal diagram makes the causal structure apparent; it is straightforward 
to choose two events in the spacetime with the property that their past light cones 
will hit the singularity before they intersect (while future light cones will always 
overlap). For more complicated geomellies, this convenient way of representing 
a spacetime will be even more useful. 

APPENDIX 
I 
The Parallel Propagator 
The idea of parallel-transporting a tensor along a curve is obviously of central 
importance in GR. For a vector VJ.t being transported down a path xJ.t(A), the 
equation of parallel transport is 
dxJ.l v vv = dxJ.l a vv 
dxJ.l rv ya = 0. 
dA 
J.l 
dA 
J.l 
+ dA 
µa 
(I. I) 
It turns out to be possible to write down an explicit and general solution to this 
equation; it's somewhat fonnal, but interesting both in its own right and for its 
connections to techniques in quantum field theory. 
We begin by noticing that for some path y : A ~ xa (A), solving the parallel 
transport equation for a vector VJ.t amounts to finding a matrix PJ.l p(A, Ao), which 
relates the vector at its initial value VJ.l(Ao) to its value somewhere later down the 
path: 
(1.2) 
Of course the matrix PJ.l p(A, Ao), known as the parallel propagator, depends on 
the path y (although it's hard to find a notation that indicates this without making 
y look like an index). If we define 
dxa 
Aµ (A)= -rµ -
P 
ap dA ' 
(1.3) 
where the quantities on the right-hand side are evaluated at xv (A), then the parallel 
transport equation becomes 
d 
-VJ.l =AJ.l VP 
dA 
p 
(1.4) 
Since the parallel propagator must work for any vector, substituting (1.2) into (1.4) 
shows that PJ.t p(A, Ao) also obeys this equation: 
d 
J.l 
J.l 
a 
dA P p(A, Ao) =A a (A)P p(A, Ao). 
To solve this equation, first integrate both sides: 
pJ.t p(A, Ao) = 15~ + 1>.. AJ.l a (17)Pa p(1J, Ao) d17. 
>..o 
(1.5) 
(1.6) 
479 

480 
Appendix I The Parallel Propagator 
The Kronecker delta, it is easy to see, provides the correct nonnalization for 
A= Ao. 
We can solve (1.6) by iteration, taking the right-hand side and plugging it into 
itself repeatedly, giving 
Pµ. p(A, Ao)= '5~ + 1>.. Aµ. p(1J) d17+1>..1
11 
Aµ. a (17)Aa p(17
1
) d17' d17 + · · ·. 
>..o 
>..o 
>..o 
(1.7) 
The nth tenn in this series is an integral over an n-dimensional right triangle, or 
n-simplex: 
See Figure I. I . 
1
>.. A(111) d171 
>..o 
It would simplify things if we could consider such an integral to be over an 
n-cube instead of an n-simplex. Is there some way to do this? There are n! such 
simplices in each cube, so we would have to multiply by I/ n ! to compensate for 
this extra volume. But we also want to get the integrand right; using matrix no-
tation, the integrand at nth order is A(11n)A(1Jn-1) · · · A(111), but with the special 
property that 1Jn 2: 1Jn-l 2: · · · 2: 111. We therefore define the path-ordering 
symbol, P, to ensure that this condition holds. In other words, the expression 
P[A(1Jn}A(1Jn-d · · · A{1Jl )] 
(1.8) 
stands for the product of the n matrices A(17; ), ordered in such a way that the 
largest value of 1]; is on the left, and each subsequent value of 1Ji is less than or 
'Y/1 
'Y/J 
'Y/3 
I 
I 
I 
..._ 
I,.. 
' .. V 
FIGURE 1.1 
n-simplices (n-dimensional right triangles) for n = I, 2, 3. 
'Y/2 

Appendix I The Parallel Propagator 
481 
equal to the previous one. We then can express the nth-order term in (1.7) as 
(1.9) 
This expression contains no substantive statement about the matrices A(17; ); it is 
just notation. But we can now write (I. 7) in matrix form as 
00 1 1>.. 
P(A, Ao)= 1 +LI 
'P[A(17n)A(11n-I} · · · A(171)]dn17. 
n=l n. 
>..o 
(1.10) 
This formula is just the series expression for an exponential; we therefore say that 
the parallel propagator is given by the path-ordered exponential 
P(J.., Ao)= Pexp ({ A(q) dq), 
(1.11) 
where once again this is just notation; the path-ordered exponential is defined to 
be the right-hand side of (1.10). We can write it more explicitly as 
(1.12) 
It's nice to have an explicit formula, even if it is rather abstract. The same kind of 
expression appears in quantum field theory as "Dyson 's Formula," where it arises 
because the Schrodinger equation for the time-evolution operator has the same 
form as (1.5). 
An especially interesting example of the parallel propagator occurs when the 
path is a loop, starting and ending at the same point. Then if the connection is 
metric-compatible, the resulting matrix will just be a Lorentz transformation on 
the tangent space at the point. This transformation is known as the "holonomy" 
of the loop. If you know the holonomy of every possible loop, that turns out to 
be equivalent to knowing the metric. One can then examine general relativity in 
the "loop representation," where the fundamental variables are holonomies rather 
than the explicit metric. A program called "loop quantum gravity" attempts to di-
rectly quantize general relativity in these variables (as opposed to something like 
string theory, in which GR falls out in some limit). A great deal of mathematical 
progress has been made in this direction, but fundamental obstacles remain. 1 
1 For a review of this approach, see C. Rovelli, "Loop quantum gravity," Living Rev. Rel. 1, I (I 998) 
http://arxiv.org/gr-qc/9710008. 


APPENDIX 
J 
Noncoordinate Bases 
Early on in our study of manifolds, we made a decision to choose bases for our 
tangent spaces that were adapted to coordinates. For both aesthetic and pragmatic 
reasons, we should consider once again the formalism of connections and cur-
vature, but this time using sets of basis vectors in the tangent space that are not 
derived from any coordinate system. It will tum out that this slight change in em-
phasis reveals a different point of view on the connection and curvature, one in 
which the relationship to gauge theories of particle physics is much more transpar-
ent. In fact the concepts to be introduced are very straightforward, but the subject 
is a notational nightmare, so it looks more difficult than it really is. 
Until now we have been taking advantage of the fact that a natural basis for 
the tangent space Tp at a point pis given by the partial derivatives with respect to 
the coordinates at that point, e<µ.> = aw Similarly, a basis for the cotangent space 
T; is given by the gradients of the coordinate functions, §<µ.> = dxJJ.. Nothing 
stops us, however, from setting up any bases we like. Let us therefore imagine 
that at each point in the manifold we introduce a set of basis vectors e(a) (indexed 
by a Latin letter rather than Greek, to remind us that they are not related to any 
coordinate system). We will choose these basis vectors to be "orthonormal," in a 
sense that is appropriate to the signature of the manifold on which we are working. 
That is, if the canonical form of the metric is written 1Ja/J, we demand that the inner 
product of our basis vectors be 
(J. l) 
where g( , ) is the usual metric tensor. Thus, in a Lorentzian spacetime 1Jab rep-
resents the Minkowski metric, while in a space with positive-definite metric it 
would represent the Euclidean metric. The set of vectors comprising an orthonor-
mal basis is sometimes known as a tetrad (from Greek tetras, "a group of four") 
or vielbein (from the German for "many legs"). In different numbers of dimen-
sions it occasionally becomes a vierbein (four), dreibein (three), zweibein (two), 
and so on. Just as we cannot in general find coordinate charts that cover the entire 
manifold, we will often not be able to find a single set of smooth basis vector fields 
that are defined everywhere. As usual, we can overcome this problem by working 
in different patches and making sure things are well-behaved on the overlaps. 
The point of having a basis is that any vector can be expressed as a linear 
combination of basis vectors. Specifically, we can express our old basis vectors 
483 

484 
Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
e(µ.) = aµ. in terms of the new ones: 
(J.2) 
The components eµ.a form an n x n invertible matrix. (In accord with our usual 
practice of blurring the distinction between objects and their components, we will 
refer to the e µ.a as the tetrad or vielbein, and often in the plural as "vielbeins.") 
We denote their inverse by switching indices to obtain eJJ. a. which satisfy 
(J.3) 
These serve as the components of the vectors e(a) in the coordinate basis: 
(J.4) 
In terms of the inverse vielbeins, (J.1) becomes 
(J.5) 
or equivalently 
(J.6) 
This last equation sometimes leads people to say that the vielbeins are the "square 
root" of the metric. 
We can similarly set up an orthonormal basis of one-forms in Tp, which we 
denote e<a>. They may be chosen to be compatible with the basis vectors, in the 
sense that 
()"(a)(" 
) 
~a 
e(/J) = OIJ• 
(J.7) 
An immediate consequence is that the orthonormal one-forms are related to their 
coordinate-based cousins e<µ.) = dx/J. by 
(J.8) 
and 
(J.9) 
The vielbeins eµ. a thus serve double duty as the components of the coordinate 
basis vectors in terms of the orthonormal basis vectors, and as components of the 
orthonormal basis one-forms in terms of the coordinate basis one-forms; while 
the inverse vielbeins serve as the components of the orthonormal basis vectors 
in terms of the coordinate basis, and as components of the coordinate basis one-
forms in terms of the orthonormal basis. 

Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
485 
Any other vector can be expressed in terms of its components in the orthonor-
mal basis. If a vector V is written in the coordinate basis as VJ.le(µ) and in the 
orthonormal basis as vae(a)' the sets of components will be related by 
(J.10) 
So the vielbeins allow us to "switch from Latin to Greek indices and back." The 
nice property of tensors, that there is usually only one sensible thing to do based 
on index placement, is of great help here. We can go on to refer to multi-index 
tensors in either basis, or even in terms of mixed components: 
(J.11) 
Looking back at (J.5), we see that the components of the metric tensor in the or-
thonormal basis are just those of the flat metric, 1Jab. (For this reason the Greek 
indices are sometimes referred to as "curved'' and the Latin ones as "flat.") In fact 
we can go so far as to raise and lower the Latin indices using the flat metric and its 
inverse ,,ab. You can check for yourself that everything works (for example, that 
the lowering an index with the metric commutes with changing from orthonor-
mal to coordinate bases). In particular, our definition of the inverse vielbeins is 
consistent with our usual notion of raising and lowering indices, 
µ 
µv 
b 
e a = g 
1Jabe v • 
(J.12) 
We have introduced the vielbeins ev a as components of a set of basis vectors, 
evaluated in a different basis. This is equivalent to thinking of them as the com-
ponents of a ( 1, 1) tensor, 
(J.13) 
But this is actually a tensor we already know and love: the identity map. If we act 
this tensor on a vector, we get back the same vector, just in a different basis; that's 
the content of (J.10). Likewise, if we use the inverse vielbein e~ to convert the 
Latin index on ev a to a Greek index, according to (J.3) we get the Kronecker delta 
15~, which of course is the identity map on vectors (or one-forms). This point is 
worth emphasizing because we could also choose to interpret ev a as a set of vector 
components (and some references do so), in which case the covariant derivative 
would look different. By introducing a new set of basis vectors and one-forms, 
we necessitate a return to our favorite topic of transformation properties. We've 
been careful all along to emphasize that the tensor transformation law was only 
an indirect outcome of a coordinate transformation; the real issue was a change 
of basis. Now that we have noncoordinate bases, these bases can be changed in-
dependently of the coordinates. The only restriction is that the orthonormality 
property (J. l) be preserved. But we know what kind of transformations preserve 
the flat metric-in a Euclidean signature metric they are orthogonal transforma-

486 
Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
tions, while in a Lorentzian signature metric they are Lorentz transformations. We 
therefore consider changes of basis of the form 
(J.14) 
where the matrices A a a' (x) represent position-dependent transformations which 
(at each point) leave the canonical form of the metric unaltered: 
/\ a Ab 
a' 
IJ'1Jab = 1Ja'b'· 
(J.15) 
In fact these matrices correspond to what in flat space we called the inverse 
Lorentz transformations (which operate on basis vectors); as before we also have 
ordinary Lorentz transformations A a' a• which transform the basis one-forms. As 
far as components are concerned, as before we transform upper indices with A a' a 
and lower indices with A a a'. 
So we now have the freedom to perform a Lorentz transformation (or an or-
dinary Euclidean rotation, depending on the signature) at every point in space. 
These transformations are therefore called local Lorentz transformations, or 
LLT's. We still have our usual freedom to make changes in coordinates, which 
are called general coordinate transformations, or GCT's. Both can happen at 
the same time, resulting in a mixed tensor transformation law: 
a µ.' 
v 
a'µ.' 
a' 
x 
b ax 
aµ. 
T 
b'v' =A a--/\ b1 --, T 
bv· 
axµ. 
axv 
(J.16) 
Translating what we know about tensors into noncoordinate bases is for the 
most part merely a matter of sticking vielbeins in the right places. The crucial 
exception comes when we begin to differentiate things. In our ordinary formalism, 
the covariant derivative of a tensor is given by its partial derivative plus correction 
terms, one for each index, involving the tensor and the connection coefficients. 
The same procedure will continue to be true for the noncoordinate basis, but we 
replace the ordinary connection coefficients r~v by the spin connection, denoted 
wµ. ab· Each Latin index gets a factor of the spin connection in the usual way: 
(J.17) 
(The name "spin connection" comes from the fact that this can be used to take co-
variant derivatives of spinors, which is actually impossible using the conventional 
connection coefficients.) In the presence of mixed Latin and Greek indices we get 
terms of both kinds. 
The usual demand that a tensor be independent of the way it is written allows 
us to derive a relationship between the spin connection, the vielbeins, and the 
r~>.. 's. Consider the covariant derivative of a vector X, first in a purely coordinate 
basis: 
V X = (V µ.Xv)dxµ. ®av 
=(aµ. Xv+ r~>..X>..)dxµ. ®av. 
(J.18) 

Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
487 
Now find the same object in a mixed basis, and convert into the coordinate basis: 
V X = (VµXa)dxµ ® e<a> 
= (aµXa +wµabxb)dxJ.l ®e<a> 
= (()µ(eva Xv)+ Wµ abe>..b X>..)dxJ.l@ (ea aaa) 
=ea a(evaaµXv + xvaµeva +wµabe/X>..)dxµ ® aa 
= (aµXv +evaaµe>..ax>.. +evae/wµabX>..)dxJ.l®av. 
Comparison with (J.18) reveals 
r v 
v a 
a+ v 
b 
a 
µ>.. = e a µ e>.. 
e ae>.. Wµ b, 
or equivalently 
a 
a >.. rv 
>.. a 
a 
wµ b = e v e b µ>.. - e b µ e >.. . 
(J.19) 
(J.20) 
(J.21) 
A bit of manipulation allows us to write this relation as the vanishing of the co-
variant derivative of the vielbein, 
=0, 
(J.22) 
which is sometimes known as the "tetrad postulate." Note that this is always true; 
we did not need to assume anything about the connection in order to derive it. 
Specifically, we did not need to assume that the connection was metric compatible 
or torsion free. We did, however, implicitly take ev a to represent the (1, 1) tensor 
(J.13); since this tensor is the identity map, it is no surprise that its covariant 
derivative vanishes. (Not all references have this philosophy, so be careful.) 
Since the connection may be thought of as something we need to introduce in 
order to fix up the transformation law of the covariant derivative, it should come 
as no surprise that the spin connection does not itself obey the tensor transfor-
mation law. Actually, under GCT's the one lower Greek index does transform in 
the right way, as a one-form. But under LLT's the spin connection transforms 
inhomogeneously, as 
a' 
a' 
b 
a 
c 
a' 
Wµ b' = A a A /J'Wµ b -
A b' aµ A 
C• 
(J.23) 
You are encouraged to check for yourself that this results in the proper transfor-
mation of the covariant derivative. 
So far we have done nothing but empty formalism, translating things we al-
ready knew into a new notation. But the work we are doing does buy us two things. 
The first, which we already alluded to, is the ability to describe spinor fields on 
spacetime and take their covariant derivatives; we won't explore this further here. 
The second is a change in viewpoint, in which we can think of various tensors 
as tensor-valued differential forms. For example, an object like X µa, which we 

488 
Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
think of as a (1, 1) tensor written with mixed indices, can also be thought of as 
a "vector-valued one-form." It has one lower Greek index, so we think of it as a 
one-form, but for each value of the lower index it is a vector. Similarly a tensor 
Aµva/J, antisymmetric inµ, and v, can be thought of as a "(l, 1)-tensor-valued 
two-form." Thus, any tensor with some number of antisymmetric lower Greek in-
dices and some number of Latin indices can be thought of as a differential form, 
but taking values in the tensor bundle. (Ordinary differential forms are simply 
scalar-valued forms.) The usefulness of this viewpoint comes when we consider 
exterior derivatives. If we want to think of X µa as a vector-valued one-form, we 
are tempted to take its exterior derivative: 
(J.24) 
It is easy to check that this object transforms like a two-form [that is, according 
to the transformation law for (0, 2) tensors] under GCT's, but not as a vector un-
der LLT's (the Lorentz transformations depend on position, which introduces an 
inhomogeneous term into the transformation law). But we can fix this by judi-
cious use of the spin connection, which can be thought of as a one-form, but not a 
tensor-valued one-form, due to the nontensorial transformation law (J.23). Thus, 
the object 
as you can verify, transforms as a proper tensor. 
An immediate application of this formalism is to the expressions for the torsion 
and curvature, the two tensors that characterize any given connection. The torsion, 
with two antisymmetric lower indices, can be thought of as a vector-valued two-
form Tµv a. The curvature, which is always antisymmetric in its last two indices, 
is a (1, 1 )-tensor-valued two-form, Ra bµv· Using our freedom to suppress indices 
on differential forms, we can express these in terms of the basis one-forms 
(J.26) 
and the spin-connection one-forms 
(J.27) 
Notice that we have switched notations, defining ea = e<a>. This is fairly conven-
tional, as well as cleaner. The defining relations for the torsion and curvature are 
then 
(J.28) 
and 
(J.29) 

Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
489 
Keep in mind that Rab represents the entire Riemann tensor, with Greek indices 
suppressed; don't confuse it with the Ricci tensor. These are known as the Cartan 
structure equations. They are equivalent to the usual definitions; let's go through 
the exercise of showing this for the torsion, and you can check the curvature for 
yourself. We have 
.,. 
>.. 
>.. .,. 
a 
l.µ.v = e al.µ.v 
>.. (a 
a a 
a + 
a 
b 
a 
b) 
= e a 
µ.ev 
-
veµ. 
Wµ. bev 
-
Wv beµ. 
= r~v -
r~µ.. 
(J.30) 
which is just the original definition we gave. Here we have used (J.20), the ex-
pression for the r~v 'sin terms of the vielbeins and spin connection. We can also 
express identities obeyed by these tensors as 
(J.31) 
and 
(J.32) 
The first of these is the generalization of RP[aµ.vJ = 0. while the second is the 
Bianchi identity V[>..I RP alµ.vJ = 0. (Sometimes both equations are called Bianchi 
identities.) 
The form of these expressions leads to an almost irresistible temptation to de-
fine a "covariant-exterior derivative," which acts on a tensor-valued form by tak-
ing the ordinary exterior derivative and then adding appropriate terms with the 
spin connection, one for each Latin index. Although we won't do that here, it is 
okay to give in to this temptation, and in fact the right-hand side of (J.28) and 
the left-hand sides of (J.31) and (J.32) can be thought of as just such covariant-
exterior derivatives. But be careful, since (J.29) cannot be; you can't take any sort 
of covariant derivative of the spin connection, since it's not a tensor. 
So far our equations have been true for general connections; let's see what we 
get for the Christoffel connection. The torsion-free requirement is just that (J.28) 
vanish; this does not lead immediately to any simple statement about the coeffi-
cients of the spin connection. Metric compatibility is expressed as the vanishing 
of the covariant derivative of the metric: V g = 0. We can see what this leads to 
when we express the metric in the orthonormal basis, where its components are 
simply 1Jab: 
= -Wµ.ab -
Wµ.ba. 
(J.33) 
Then setting this equal to zero implies 
Wµ.ab = -Wµ.ba · 
(J.34) 

490 
Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
Thus, metric compatibility is equivalent to the antisymmetry of the spin connec-
tion in its Latin indices. (As before, such a statement is only sensible if both 
indices are either upstairs or downstairs.) These two conditions together allow us 
to express the spin connection in terms of the vielbeins. An explicit formula ex-
presses this solution, but in practice it is easier to simply solve the torsion-free 
condition 
(J.35) 
using the asymmetry of the spin connection, to find the individual components. 
One of the best reasons for thinking about noncoordinate bases is that they 
actually lead to great simplifications in certain cases, including the calculation of 
the curvature tensor. Let's see how this works in a simple example, a spatially flat 
expanding universe, with metric 
(J.36) 
We will use the differential-forms notation of (J.26) and (J.27); calculations such 
as this are good evidence that this language is practically useful as well as elegant. 
The metric is thus written (for any geometry) 
(J.37) 
We need to choose basis one-forms ea such that this matches our metric (J.36). 
There are many choices (related by local Lorentz transformations), but one obvi-
ous one: 
e0 = dt 
(J.38) 
We would now like to solve for the spin connection using (J.35). The good news 
is that we basically can do it by guessing. First, by appropriately raising and low-
ering indices (with 1Jab and 1Jab) we derive the consequences of the antisymmetry 
of Wab: 
w0o = 0 
wo j = wj o 
{J); j = -{J)j;. 
(J.39) 
We next calculate the right-hand side of (J.35), 
de0 = 0 
de; = da /\ dx; = adt /\ dx;' 
(J.40) 

Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
491 
and then the left, 
{J} b /\ eb = w0 j /\ ej = aw0 j /\ dxj 
w; b /\ eb = w; o /\ e0 + w; j /\ ej = w; o /\ dt + w; j /\ dxj. 
(J.41) 
Plugging into (J.35) yields 
w0 j " dxj = o 
w; o " dt + w; j " c1xj = -adt " c1x;. 
(J.42) 
We would like to solve these equations for wa b· It is tempting to guess w0 j = O; 
but then to solve the second equation we would require w; j = -a~~dt, which is 
incompatible with w; j = -wj; from (J.39). But we can solve the first equation by 
setting w0 j proportional to dxj (due to the antisymmetry of the wedge product). 
Indeed, if we choose 
we find that both equations in (J.42) are solved by setting 
{J); j = 0. 
(J.43) 
(J.44) 
Now that we know the spin connection, we can easily get the curvature through 
We first calculate the exterior derivative of the spin connection forms, 
dw; o = iidt /\ dx; 
dw0 j = iidt /\ dxj 
dw; j = 0, 
and then the wedge products, 
wo c "wco = o 
{J); c /\ wco = 0 
{J); c /\ {J)c j = a2dxi /\ dxj. 
We therefore obtain the curvature two-form, 
R0o =0 
Ro j = iidt /\ dxj 
R;o = adt /\ dx; 
R; j = a2dx; /\ dxj. 
(J.45) 
(J.46) 
(J.47) 
(J.48) 

492 
Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
For purposes of comparison, we can use vielbeins to convert Ra bµ.v to our con-
ventional expression RP a µ.v, using 
R P 
_ 
p 
bRa 
aµ.v-e aea 
bµ.v· 
(J.49) 
In component form the vielbeins (J.38) and their inverse are 
(J.50) 
We will also need to evaluate the components of the wedge products of basis 
forms, which is straightforward enough, 
(dxa /\ c1x.B)µ.v = 15~15e -
15~15{ 
Putting it all together yields the components RP a µ.v, 
R0 jOI = aiil5 jl 
. 
ii . 
R'oko = --151 
a 
R; 
·2(~;~ 
~;~ ) 
jk/ = 0 
OkOj/ -
O[Ojk , 
(J.51) 
(J.52) 
as well as ones obtained by antisymmetry in the last two indices. We may contract 
to get the components of the Ricci tensor Rav = R>..a>..v, 
a 
Roo = -3-a 
R;o = 0 
Rij = (aii + 2a2)15ij. 
(J.53) 
You can check that this agrees with our results from Chapter 8. Already in 
this simple example, the tetrad method was computationally simpler than the 
coordinate-basis method; in more complicated metrics the comparative advan-
tage continues to grow. 
In the language of noncoordinate bases, it is possible to compare the formalism 
of connections and curvature in Riemannian geometry to that of gauge theories 
in particle physics. In both situations, the fields of interest live in vector spaces 
that are assigned to each point in spacetime. In Riemannian geometry the vec-
tor spaces include the tangent space, the cotangent space, and the higher tensor 
spaces constructed from these. In gauge theories, on the other hand, we are con-
cerned with "internal" vector spaces. The distinction is that the tangent space and 
its relatives are intimately associated with the manifold itself, and are naturally de-
fined once the manifold is set up; the tangent space, for example, can be thought 
of as the space of directional derivatives at a point. In contrast, an internal vector 

Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
493 
space can be of any dimension we like, and has to be defined as an independent 
addition to the manifold. In math jargon, the union of the base manifold with the 
internal vector spaces (defined at each point) is a fiber bundle, and each copy of 
the vector space is called the "fiber" (in accord with our definition of the tangent 
bundle). 
Besides the base manifold (for us, spacetime) and the fibers, the other impor-
tant ingredient in the definition of a fiber bundle is the "structure group," a Lie 
group that acts on the fibers to describe how they are sewn together on overlap-
ping coordinate patches. Without going into details, the structure group for the 
tangent bundle in a four-dimensional spacetime is generally GL(4, R), the group 
of real invertible 4 x 4 matrices; if we have a Lorentzian metric, this may be re-
duced to the Lorentz group S0(3, 1 ). Now imagine that we introduce an internal 
three-dimensional vector space, and sew the fibers together with ordinary rota-
tions; the structure group of this new bundle is then S0(3). A field that lives in 
this bundle might be denoted </>A(xJJ.), where A runs from one to three; it is a 
three-vector (an internal one, unrelated to spacetime) for each point on the man-
ifold. We have freedom to choose the basis in the fibers in any way we wish; 
this means that "physical quantities" should be left invariant under local S0(3) 
transfonnations such as 
(J.54) 
where oA' A(x/J.) is a matrix in S0(3) that depends on spacetime. Such transfor-
mations are known as gauge transformations, and theories invariant under them 
are called "gauge theories." 
For the most part it is not hard to arrange things such that physical quan-
tities are invariant under gauge transfonnations. The one difficulty arises when 
we consider partial derivatives, aµ. </>A. Because the matrix 0 A' A (xJJ.) depends on 
spacetime, it will contribute an unwanted tenn to the transfonnation of the partial 
derivative. By now you should be able to guess the solution: introduce a connec-
tion to correct for the inhomogeneous tenn in the transfonnation law. We therefore 
define a connection on the fiber bundle to be an object Aµ. AB, with two "group in-
dices" and one spacetime index. Under GCT's it transforms as a one-fonn, while 
under gauge transformations it transforms as 
(J.55) 
(Beware: our conventions are different from those in the particle physics litera-
ture.) With this transfonnation law, the "gauge covariant derivative" 
D
A 
a 
A 
AA 
B 
µ.</> 
= 
µ.</> + µ. 
B</> 
(J.56) 
transfonns "tensorially" under gauge transformations, as you are welcome to 
check. [In ordinary electromagnetism the connection is just the conventional vec-
tor potential. No indices are necessary, because the structure group U(l) is one-
dimensional.] 

494 
Appendix J Noncoordinate Bases 
It is clear that this notion of a connection on an internal fiber bundle is 
very closely related to the connection on the tangent bundle, especially in the 
orthonormal-frame picture we have been discussing. The transformation law 
(J.55), for example, is exactly the same as the transformation law (J.23) for the 
spin connection. We can also define a curvature or "field strength" tensor which 
is a two-form 
(J.57) 
in exact correspondence with (J.29). We can parallel transport things along paths, 
and there is a construction analogous to the parallel propagator; the trace of the 
matrix obtained by parallel transporting a vector around a closed curve is called a 
"Wilson loop." 
We could go on in the development of the relationship between the tangent 
bundle and internal vector bundles, but that would be another book. Let us instead 
finish by emphasizing the important difference between the two constructions. 
The difference stems from the fact that the tangent bundle is closely related to 
the base manifold, while other fiber bundles are tacked on after the fact. It makes 
sense to say that a vector in the tangent space at p "points along a path" through 
p; but this makes no sense for an internal vector bundle. There is therefore no 
analogue of the coordinate basis for an internal space-partial derivatives along 
curves have nothing to do with internal vectors. It follows in tum that there is 
nothing like the vielbeins, which relate orthonormal bases to coordinate bases. 
The torsion tensor, in particular, is only defined for a connection on the tangent 
bundle, not for any gauge theory connections; it can be thought of as the covariant 
exterior derivative of the vielbein, and no such construction is available on an 
internal bundle. You should appreciate the relationship between the different uses 
of the notion of a connection, without getting carried away. 
J.1 • EXERCISES 
1. In (J .37) we mention that the metric in an orthononnal basis can be written 
ds2 = 1Jabea ® eb. 
(J.58) 
How can this possibly be? If the components of the metric are 1Jab everywhere, how 
can we know what the geometry is? 
2. Calculate the connection one-fonns, curvature two-fonns, and hence the components 
of the Riemann tensor for the Mixmaster universe. The metric is given by 
ds2 = -dt ® dt +a2 CTI® CTI+ /32CT2 ® CT2 + Y2CT3 ® CT3. 
Here a, {3, y are functions oft only and the one-fonns CT; are given by 
CT I =cos Y, d() +sin Y, sin() d</> 
CT 2 =sin Y, d() - cos Y, sin() d<J> 
CT 3 = dY, +cos() d<J>. 

Bibliography 
I have made no attempt to provide careful citations to the original literature in 
the text. In keeping with the philosophy of focusing on pedagogy, I have included 
references to recent review articles where appropriate. Here I list a number of 
books that might be useful supplements to the one you are reading; the list is not 
meant to be comprehensive, and focuses on books that are in print and with which 
I happen to be familiar. 
There are two websites that are invaluable resources for keeping up with recent 
work in gravitational physics. The first is the ArXiv e-print server for general 
relativity and quantum cosmology: 
http://arxiv.org/form/gr-qc/ 
This is where researchers all over the world put their most recent papers, which 
can then be easily downloaded. There are similar servers for other areas of 
physics. The other website is for Living Reviews in Relativity: 
http://www.livingreviews.org/ 
Living Reviews is an on-line journal specializing in review articles in all areas 
of gravitational physics. It is an excellent starting point for anyone interested in 
exploring recent work in a topic of cwTent interest. 
Special Relativity 
E. Taylor and J. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics (Freeman, 1992). A very nice intro-
duction to special relativity, making a great effort to explain away the "para-
doxes" this subject seems to engender. 
A.P. French, Special Relativity (W.W. Norton, 1968). Somewhat less colorful than 
Taylor and Wheeler, but a straightforward introduction to special relativity. 
Undergraduate General Relativity 
B.F. Schutz, A First Course in General Relativity (Cambridge, 1985). This is a 
very nice introductory text, making a real effort to bridge the transition from 
common topics in undergraduate physics to the language and results of GR. 
J.B. Hartle, Gravity: An Introduction to Einstein's General Relativity (Addison-
Wesley, 2002). Eases the exploration of GR by concentrating on examples of 
495 

496 
Bibliography 
curved spacetimes and the behavior of particles in them, putting physics before 
formalism whenever possible. 
E.F. Taylor and J.A. Wheeler, Exploring Black Holes: An Introduction to General 
Relativity (Benjamin Cummings, 2002). Uses black holes as a way to introduce 
physical principles of GR. 
Graduate General Relativity 
R. Wald, General Relativity (Chicago, 1984 ). Thorough discussions of a number 
of advanced topics, including black holes, global structure, and spinors. An 
invaluable reference, this is the book to tum to if you need the right answer to 
a well-posed GR question. 
C. Misner, K. Thome and J. Wheeler, Gravitation (Freeman, 1973). The book 
that educated at least two generations of researchers in gravitational physics. 
Comprehensive and encyclopedic, the book is written in an often-idiosyncratic 
style that you will either like or not. 
S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, 1972). A great book at what it 
does, especially strong on astrophysics, cosmology, and experimental tests. 
However, it takes an unusual non-geometiic approach to the material, and 
doesn't discuss black holes. Weinberg is much better than most of us at crank-
ing through impressive calculations. 
R. D'Invemo, Introducing Einstein's Relativity (Oxford, 1992). A sensible and 
lucid introduction to general relativity, with solid coverage of the major topics 
necessary in a modem GR course. 
A.P. Lightman, W.H. Press, R.H. Price, and S.A. Teukolsky, Problem Book in 
Relativity and Gravitation (Princeton, 1975). A sizeable collection of problems 
in all areas of GR, with fully worked solutions, making it all the more difficult 
for instructors to invent problems the students can't easily find the answers to. 
Advanced General Relativity 
S. Hawking and G. Ellis, The Large-Scale Structure of Space-Time (Cambridge, 
1973). An advanced book that emphasizes global techniques, differential 
topology, and singularity theorems; a classic. 
F. de Felice and C. Clarke. Relativity on Curved Manifolds (Cambridge, 1990). A 
mathematical approach, but with an excellent emphasis on physically measur-
able quantities. 
R. Sachs and H. Wu, General Relativity for Mathematicians (Springer-Verlag. 
1977). Just what the title says, although the typically dry mathematics prose 
style is here enlivened by frequent opinionated asides about both physics and 
mathematics (and the state of the world). 
J. Stewart. Advanced General Relativity (Cambridge, 2003). A short but sweet 
introduction to some advanced topics, especially spinors. asymptotic structure, 
and the characteristic initial-value problem. 

Bibliography 
497 
Mathematical Background 
B. Schutz, Geometrical Methods of Mathematical Physics (Cambridge, 1980). 
Another good book by Schutz, this one covering some mathematical points 
that are left out of the GR book (but at a very accessible level). Included are 
discussions of Lie derivatives. differential fonns. and applications to physics 
other than GR. 
T. Frankel. The Geometry of Physics: An Introduction (Cambridge. 2001 ). A rich, 
readable book on topics in geometry that are of real use to physics, including 
manifolds. bundles. curvature, Lie groups, and algebraic topology. 
M. Nakahara, Geometry, Topology and Physics (Institute of Physics, 2003). An 
accessible introduction to differential geometry and topology, with an empha-
sis on topics of interest to physicists. 
F.W. Warner, Foundations of Differentiable Manifolds and Lie Groups (Springer-
Verlag, 1983). A standard text in the field, includes basic topics such as mani-
folds and tensor fields as well as more advanced subjects. 
Specialized Topics 
J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, 1999). The classic reference for 
graduate-level electromagnetism. The problems have left indelible marks on 
generations of graduate students. 
H. Goldstein et al., Classical Mechanics (Prentice-Hall, 2002). The classic refer-
ence for graduate-level mechanics. An updated edition adds more discussion 
of nonlinear dynamics. 
V.I. Arnold. Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics (Springer-Verlag, 
1989). A scary book for some physicists. but an inspiring treatment of clas-
sical mechanics from a mathematically sophisticated point of view. A lot of 
good differential geometry here. 
E.W. Kolb and M.S. Tumer, The Early Universe (Perseus. 1994). Has become a 
standard reference for early-universe cosmology, including dark matter. phase 
transitions, and inflation. 
A.R. Liddle and D. Lyth, Cosmological Inflation and Large-Scale Structure 
(Cambridge. 2000). Focusing on inflation and its implications for large-scale 
structure. gives a careful treatment of cosmological perturbation theory. 
B.S. Ryden. Introduction to Cosmology (Addison-Wesley. 2002). A very mod-
em and physical introduction to topics in contemporary cosmology, aimed at 
advanced undergraduates or beginning graduate students. 
S. Dodelson. Modern Cosmology (Academic Press, 2003). A graduate-level in-
troduction to cosmology, emphasizing cosmological perturbations, large-scale 
structure, and the cosmic microwave background. 
C.M. Will. Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics (Cambridge, 1993). 
A useful compendium of alternatives to GR and the experimental constraints 
on them, including a discussion of the parameterized post-Newtonian fonnal-
ism. 

498 
Bibliography 
S.L. Shapiro and S.A. Teukolsky, Black Holes, White Dwarfs and Neutron Stars: 
The Physics of Compact Objects (Wiley. 1983). A self-contained introduction 
to the physics and astrophysics of compact stars and black holes. 
M.E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder. An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (West-
view Press. 1995). Has quickly become the standard textbook in quantum field 
theory. 
J. Polchinski. String Theory (Cambridge. 1998). The standard two-volume intro-
duction to modem string theory. including discussions of D-branes and string 
duality. 
C.V. Johnson. D-Branes (Cambridge. 2003). A detailed introduction to the ex-
tended objects called D-branes. which have become an indispensable part of 
string theory; prior knowledge of string theory itself is not required. 
E.E. Falco. P. Schneider, and J. Ehlers. Gravitational Lenses (Springer Verlag, 
1999). A thorough introduction to the theory and applications of gravitational 
lensing. 
N.D. Birrell and P.C. Davies, Quantum Fields in Curved Spacetime (Cambridge, 
1984). The standard book for those who want a practical introduction to quan-
tum field theory in curved spacetime. including the Hawking effect. 
R.M. Wald, Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime and Black Hole Thermo-
dynamics (Chicago. 1994). A careful and mathematically rigorous exposition 
of quantum fields in curved spacetimes: if you really want to know what a 
vacuum state is, look here. 
Popular Books 
K.S. Thome, Black Holes and Time Watps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy (W.W. 
Norton, 1994). Thome is one of the world·s leading researchers in gravita-
tional physics of all kinds, and he offers both a history of work in GR and an 
introduction to very up-to-date research topics. 
R. Geroch, General Relativity from A to B (Chicago. 1981). A truly beautiful 
exposition of the workings of spacetime. 
B. Greene. The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the 
Quest for the Ultimate Theory (W.W. Norton, 1999). A timely and personal in-
troduction to the physics of string theory. Not afraid to discuss quite advanced 
concepts, but aims at a general audience all along; very well written. 
A.H. Guth, The Inflationary Universe: The Quest for a New Theory of Cosmic 
Origins (Perseus, 1998). A thorough and lucid introduction to all of modem 
cosmology, focusing on inflation. 
L. Smolin, Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (Basic Books, 2002). The "three 
roads" are slling theory, loop quantum gravity, and something more profound; 
Smolin is a partisan for loop quantum gravity, but the discussion should be 
interesting for everyone. 
G. Kane, Supersymmetry: Unveiling the Ultimate Laws of Nature (Perseus, 2001 ). 
A nice introduction to supersymmetry, a hypothetical symmetry between 

Bibliography 
499 
bosons and fermions that may be within the reach of particle accelerators 
soon. 
A. Einstein, H.A. Lorentz, H. Weyl, and H. Minkowski, The Principle of Relativity 
(Dover, 1924). Actually not a "popular" book at all; rather, a collection of 
the original research articles on special and general relativity, translated into 
English. 
A. Pais, Subtle ls the Lord: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford, 
1983 ). A scientific biography of Einstein, complete with equations. 


Acceleration 
inflation in early universe, 368 
Newton's theory, I, 151 
relative between geodesics, 145 
in SR (special relativity), 11 
viewed from infinity, 246-247 
Achronal set, 79 
Action 
classical field theory, 37 
Hilbert, 161 
ADM energy (Arnowitt, Deser, 
and Misner), 252-253 
AdS/CFf correspondence, 328, 
421 
Affine parameter, 109 
Angle 
deflection, 352 
Einstein, 351 
Angular diameter distance, 
348-349 
Angular separation, gravitational 
lensing, 351 
Angular velocity, rotating black 
holes, 266 
Annihilation/creation operators, 
383,397 
Annihilator, set of forms, 441 
Anthropic principle, 359 
Anti-de Sitter space, 326-328, 335 
Antimatter, 365 
Area theorem, event horizons, 
243-244 
Antisymmetric tensors, 26 
Antisymmetry 
manifolds, integration, 88-89 
product of Kronecker deltas, 
83-84 
of Riemann tensor, 126-127 
Index 
square brackets, 27 
Asymptotic flatness, 197, 249-253 
Axions, 359 
Baryonic matter, 358, 364-365 
Basis modes, 397 
Basis vectors, 16-17, 74, 483 
BBN. See Big Bang 
Nucleosynthesis 
Bekenstein generalized second 
law, 272 
Bell, Jocelyn, 235 
Bianchi identity, 128-129 
Big Bang 
described, 76, 340 
heavier elements and, 364 
leftover radiation, 356 
singularity, 76, 340 
Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN), 
363 
Binary pulsar, 218 
Birkhoff's theorem, 197-204 
Black holes 
charged (Reissner-Nordstrom), 
254-261 
creation of, 230, 234 
described, 238-239 
entropy, 271, 417 
event horizons, 205, 222, 
239-244 
Hawking temperature, 376, 414, 
416 
Killing horizons, 244-248 
mass balanced by charge, 259 
mass, charge, and spin, 248-254 
parameters, proportionality to 
thermodynamics, 416-417 
radiation from, 412-421 
rotating (Kerr), 244, 261-267 
Schwarzschild solution, 193, 
218-222,229-236 
supermassive, evolution of, 320 
thermodynamics and Penrose 
process, 267-272 
Bogolubov transformations, 
398-399,408 
Boosts, 12 
Boulware vacuum, 414-415 
Boundary 
black hole, 239 
manifold with, 451-452 
of region and, 421 
Stokes's Theorem, 455 
Boyer-Lindquist coordinates, 
262 
Brightness, source, 354 
Buchdahl's theorem, 234 
Canonical commutation relations, 
381,389,395 
Cartan structure equations, 
488-489 
Carter-Penrose diagrams. See 
conformal diagrams 
Cauchy horizon, 79-81 
Cauchy surlace 
causality, 80 
entropy, black hole, 418 
Causality 
achronal, 79 
Cauchy horizon, 80-81 
chronological future, 79 
curve, defining, 79 
future, 79-80 
initial-value problems, 78 
light cones, 4-5, 9 
501 

502 
Causality (continued) 
Misner space, 81 
partial Cauchy surlace, 80 
singularities, 81-82 
COM (cold dark matter), 359 
Chain rule, 62, 64-65, 152 
Chandrasekhar limit, 235, 355 
Charge density, 305 
Charged black holes. See 
Reissner-Nordstrom black 
holes 
Christoff el connection, 99-100, 
IOI, 108, 489 
Christoffel symbol 
conformal transformation, 
468-469 
defined,93,99 
expanding-universe metric, 
calculating, 113-115 
vanishing, Riemann tensor and, 
126 
Chronological future, 79 
Circular orbits, 305 
Classical field theory 
action, 37-38, 159 
curved spacetime, 159-160 
d' Alembertian, 41, 160, 360 
effective field theory, 45, 180, 
189 
energy-momentum tensor, 44, 
164-165 
Euler-Lagrange equations, 37, 
39,40, 160 
gauge invariance and 
transformation, 42 
Klein-Gordon equation, 42 
Lagrange density, 38, 44-45, 
159-160 
natural units, 38 
scalar field, 40, 160, 164, 360, 
369 
surlace term, converting by 
Stokes's theorem, 39-40 
vector potential, 42-43 
Clocks, synchronizing, 7 
Closed universe, 330, 337, 343 
Closed forms, 85, 441-442 
Closed timelike curves, 80-81, 
266 
Index 
CMB. See Cosmic Microwave 
Background 
Codacci's equation, 451 
Codimension, 439 
Coincidence problem, 359 
"Comma-Goes-to-Semicolon" 
rule, 152 
Commutator, vector, 67 
Comoving coordinates, 329 
Compactification, conformal, 
475-476 
Components 
dual vector, 19, 68-69 
noncoordinate basis, 483-486 
vector, 17, 65-66 
tensor, 21-22, 69 
Cones, light. See light cones 
Conformal coupling, 395 
Conformal diagrams 
anti de Siner, 327 
asymptotically flat, 240 
collapsing star, 230 
de Siner, 325 
defined,471-478 
evaporating black hole, 419 
Kerr, 265 
Minkowski, 475 
Reissner-Nordstrom, 257-259 
Robertson-Walker, 4 78 
Schwarzschild, 229 
Conformal frame, 468 
Conformal infinity, 475-476 
Conformal tensor. See Weyl tensor 
Conformal transformations, 
467-469 
Congruence, 459-465 
Conjugate momentum, 395 
Connection 
covariant derivatives, 95-96, 
99-100 
curvature, manifesting, 93 
spin, 486 
torsion tensor involving, 
128-129 
Conservation 
energy-momentum, law of, 35, 
118, 153 
phase-space density, Liou ville 's 
theorem of, 353 
Conserved energy, 137-138, 344 
Continuity of a map, 58 
Contraction, tensor 
forming Ricci, 129 
manipulating, 25 
Contravariant vectors, 19 
Convergence lensing potential, 
352-253 
Coordinate basis, 65-66 
Coordinates 
Boyer-Lindquist, 262 
changes in, transformation law, 
66-67,69,429-430,486 
comoving, 329 
Gaussian normal, 445 
Kruskal, 225-226 
locally inertial, 74-76, 112 
Riemann normal, 112-113 
Schwarzschild, reducing 
Boyer-Lindquist to, 262 
spacetime, denoting, 8 
transformation, 66, 68-69, 
429-430 
Copernican principle, 323 
Core collapse, 319 
Cosmic censorship conjecture, 
243 
Cosmic microwave background 
(CMB) 
anisotropy, 329, 337, 357-358, 
365,371-374 
energy density, 356 
and geometry of the universe, 
337,358 
gravitational waves, 320, 
373-374 
horizon problem, 368 
isotropy, 323 
polarization, 320, 373-374 
recombination, 364, 368 
temperature, 361, 371 
Cosmological redshift, 116-117, 
344-345 
Cosmological constant. See 
vacuum energy 
Cosmology 
Friedmann equation, 333-337 
gravitational lensing, 349-355 
inflation, 365-374 

maximally symmetric universes, 
323-329 
nontrivial Lorentzian geometry 
example, 76 
parallel transport, 104 
redshifts and distances, 344-349 
Robinson-Walker metrics, 
329-333 
scale factor, evolution of, 
338-344 
universe, currently and in 
distant past, 355-365 
Cotangent bundle, 19 
Cotangent space, 18-19 
Coulomb gauge, 283 
Covariant derivatives 
connection coefficients, 95-96 
connection, defining unique, 
98-99,486-487 
curved space, I 0 I 
defining, 94-95, 98, 486 
general expression, 97 
metric-compatible connection, 
99-100 
of one-forms, 96-97 
parallel transport, I 05 
partial derivatives, converting 
to, 101-102 
semicolon notation, 97 
spin connection, 486 
Covariant vectors, 19 
Creation/annihilation operators, 
383,389-390,397 
Critical density, 337 
Current 4-vector, 29-30 
Curvature 
Christoffel connection, 
vanishing, 101 
Christoffel symbol, 93 
covariant derivatives, 94-102 
described, 93-94 
Einstein Equivalence Principle 
(EEP), 50, 151 
expanding universe, 113-120 
extrinsic, 449-450 
flat space versus, 103 
gravity as, 1-2, 50-54, 
153-154, 156-158 
hypersurf ace, 451 
Index 
integral curves, 430 
laws of physics, generalizing, 
152-153 
maximally symmetric spaces, 
139-144 
notion of a straight line in 
Euclidean space. See 
geodesics 
open, flat, and closed, 330 
parallel postulate, 144 
parallel transport and geodesics, 
102-108 
Riemann tensor, 121-133 
symmetries and killing vectors, 
133-139 
two-form, 488-489 
Curvature scalar, 129-130 
Curvature tensor. See Riemann 
tensor 
Curved spacetime 
Einstein Equivalence Principle 
(EEP), 53-54 
gravitation, 151-155 
Taylor expansion in, 107 
d' Alembertian operator 
conformal transformation, 469 
defined, 41 
Green function, 301-302 
Dark ages, 365 
Dark energy. 360 
DEC. See Dominant Energy 
Condition 
Deceleration parameter, 337 
Deflection angle, 290-292, 352 
Degrees of freedom 
boundary of region and, 421 
effective number of relativistic, 
361 
flat spacetime, 387 
gravitational, 279-286 
Delta function, 47, 191, 302 
Density. See also energy density 
root-mean-square (RMS) 
fluctuation, 371 
tensor, 82-84 
universes, variations in, 323 
Density parameter, 337 
Dependence, future domain of, 79 
De Sitter space 
described,324-326 
503 
positively curved maximally 
symmetric spacetime, 144 
vacuum-dominated universe, 
335 
Deviation, geodesic, 144 
Diffeomorphisms, 59, 276-278, 
429-431 
Differentiable manifolds. See 
manifolds 
Differential fonns 
closed, 85 
curvature, 488-489 
defined, 84 
dimensionality of cohomology, 
85-86 
exact, 85 
exterior derivative, 84-85 
Hodge duality, 86, 87 
Levi-Civita, 86 
spin connection, 488 
torsion, 488 
vacuum Maxwell's equations, 
87 
vector potential, 87 
wedge product, 84 
Differentiation 
covariant.94-99,486 
covariant exterior, 489 
exterior, 84 
Lie, 429 
partial, 20, 29 
Dilaton, 189, 300 
Dimension, 17, 54-55, 59-60 
Dirac's quantization condition, 87 
Directional covariant derivative, 
105 
Directional derivatives, 63-64 
Dominant Energy Condition, 
175-177 
Doppler effect, 52-53, 329 
Dot product. See inner product 
Dual vectors 
action, 19-20 
cotangent space, 18-19 
covariant/contravariant vectors, 
19 
covariant derivatives, 96-97 

504 
Dual vectors (continued) 
gradient of a scalar function, 
20 
orthonormal, 484 
pullback operator, 425-426 
surlace-fonning, 441 
transformation law, 20, 68-69 
Dwnrny indices, 9 
Dust 
matter behaving like, 119, 334 
number-flux four-vector, 33-34 
static gravitating forces, 
modeling, 286-287 
Dyson's Formula, 481 
Eddington, Sir Arthur, 292 
EEP. See Einstein Equivalence 
Principle 
Effective field theory, 45, 180, 189 
Effective number of relativistic 
degrees of freedom, 361 
Eigenstates, energy, 381-382 
Einstein 
equation of general relativity. 
See Einstein's equation 
theory of space, time, and 
gravitation. See general 
relativity (GR) 
view of deflection of light by 
sun, 291-292 
Weak Equivalence Principle 
(WEP), generalizing, 
48-50 
Einstein angle, 351, 352 
Einstein-de Sitter model, 340 
Einstein Equivalence Principle 
(EEP) 
curvature of spacetime and, 50 
gravitational redshift, 52-53 
gravity as manifestation of 
curvature of spacetime, 
48-54, 151-153 
Einstein frame, 184-189 
Einstein-Hilbert action. 161, 299 
Einstein radius, 351 
Einstein ring, 351 
Einstein's equation 
derived, 155-165,299 
properties, 164-171 
Index 
perturbed, 275-276, 281-285, 
307-308 
transverse gauge, 287 
Einstein space, 328 
Einstein static universe, 325-327, 
344,474-475 
Einstein tensor 
degrees of freedom, 282-283 
Riemann tensor, 130-131 
Electromagnetic radiation, 315 
Electromagnetism 
black holes, 238-239 
classical field theory, 42 
Coulomb gauge, 283 
curved spacetime, 178 
energy-momentum tensor, 44, 
254 
field strength, 24-25 
gauge invariance, 278 
Maxwell's equation, 29-30 
quantum electrodynamics 
(QED), 87 
Stokes's theorem, 456 
tensors, differential forms, 
86-87 
vector potential, 87 
Electron recombination, 364 
Embedded submanifold, 439 
Embedding theorem, Whitney's, 
60 
Energy. See also 
energy-momentum tensor 
ADM energy, 252-253 
expanding universe, 120 
extracting from rotating black 
hole, 267-272 
Komar integral, 249-251 
loss rate in gravitational 
radiation, 307-315 
mass as manifestation of, 49 
momentum four-vector, 31-32 
positive energy theorem (Shoen 
and Yau), 253 
static spacetime, 137 
vacuum. See vacuum energy 
Energy conditions, 174-177 
Energy density 
defined, 33-37 
Friedmann equation, 338, 340 
gravitational waves, 304 
in matter, 119, 334-335 
negative, 339-340 
radiation, 119, 335 
vacuum, 35, 119, 171-174, 335, 
341-344,358 
Energy eigenstates, 381-382 
Energy-momentum tensor 
classical field theory, 44 
conservation equation, 35, 
118, 153, 435-436 
defined,33, 164-165 
dust, 34 
electromagnetism, 44, 254 
energy density, 33-37 
fluid, 33 
generalizing to curved 
spacetime, 153, 164-165 
gravitation, 307-310 
Minkowski spacetime, 
30-31 
number-flux four-vector, 
33-34 
perfect fluid, 34-37 
pressure, 33 
scalar field, 44 
symmetry, 33 
vacuum, 35, 171-172 
positive energy theorem (Shoen 
and Yau), 253 
statz spacetime, 137 
vacuum. See vacuum energy 
Entropy, 272, 417-418 
Equation-of-state parameter, 
175-176, 334-335, 
338-340 
Equilibrium distribution function, 
361 
Equivalence principle 
and curved spacetime, 48-54, 
151-153 
Einstein (EEP), 50 
gravitational redshift, 52-53 
interpretation, 177-181 
strong (SEP), 50 
weak (WEP), 48-50 
Ergosphere, 264, 268 
Ergosurlace. See stationary limit 
surface 

Euclidean geometry 
isometrics, 139-140 
maximally symmetric space, 
141-143 
metric, 13 
metric tensor, 73 
orthogonal transformations, 485 
parallel postulate, 144 
Euler equation, 37 
Euler-Lagrange equation 
classical field theory, 37, 39, 40 
curved space ti me, 159-160 
geodesics, I 07 
vector potential, 42-43 
Evaporation, black hole, 239, 
412-422 
Event, 4 
Event horizons 
area theorem (Hawking), 
243-244 
black holes, evaporated, 418 
defined,222,239-240 
finding, 241-242 
future, 241 
as null hypersurlace, 240-241 
singularities, 242-243 
Expansion 
deceleration parameter, 337 
geodesic congruence, 460, 464 
Hubble parameter, 336 
universe, example, 76-78, 
113-120, 476-478, 
490-492 
Exponential map, 111 
Exterior derivative of differential 
form, 84-85 
Extra dimension, 60, 181, 
186-189,374-375 
Extrinsic curvature, 449-450 
Fermat's principle of least time, 
293 
Fennions,44,235,361 
Feynman diagrams, 166-167, 416 
Fiber bundle, 16, 493-494 
Field 
classical, see classical field 
theory 
dual vector, 19 
Index 
electromagnetic, see 
electromagnetism 
quantum, see quantum field 
theory 
scalar, 19, 40-42, 160, 164, 360, 
369, 386-411 
tensor, 23 
vector, 16 
First fundamental form, 
hypersurf ace, 449 
Flat universe, 76-78, 113-120, 
330,337,343 
Flat space. See Euclidean 
geometry, Minkowski 
space 
Fluids 
cosmological, 334 
energy and momentum, 33, 
34-37 
expanding universe metric, 
118-119 
perfect, 34 
Fock basis, 390-393, 396-397 
Fourier transform, 283-284, 
303-304 
Four-vector. See vector 
Frame 
conformal, 468 
inertial, 6-7 
locally inertial, 50-51 
Freedom, degrees of. See degrees 
of freedom 
Free particle 
geodesics, moving along, 
152-153 
response to space ti me curvature, 
2 
test particles, I 08 
Friction, Hubble, 360-361 
Friedmann equation 
cosmology, 333-337 
energy density, 338, 340 
flatness problem, 366 
static solutions, finding, 343 
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker 
universes. See FRW 
universes 
Frobenius's theorem, 198, 
440-442,445 
FRW (Friedman-Robertson-
Walker) universes, 
336 
Future, 79-80 
505 
Gauge fields, 44 
Gaugeinvariance,42,276-277, 
493 
Gauge transformation 
field strength tensor property, 
42, 300-301, 493 
perturbationtheory,274-278 
Gauss-Bonnet theorem, 143 
Gaussian normal coordinates 
hypersurlaces, 445-447 
synchronous gauge as, 284 
Gauss's equation, 451, 456 
General coordinate 
transformations, 486 
General relativity (GR). See also 
causality, Einstein's 
equation 
as classical field theory, 37, 
159-165 
connection on which based, 
99-100 
described, 1-3 
gravitation, 151-192 
Mercury's perihelion, 
precession of, 291-292 
spin, 253-254 
symmetry and, 133-134 
total energy of asymptotically 
flat spacetime, 249-253 
Generator 
diffeomorphism, 431 
hypersurface, 443-444 
Generic condition, 242-243 
Geodesic deviation, 144-146 
Geodesics 
Christoffel connection, I 08 
congruences,459-465 
defined,2, 105-106 
equation, I 06-113 
Euler-Lagrange equations, I 07 
exponential map, 111 
Gaussian normal coordinates, 
445-447 
locally inertial coordinates, 112 

506 
Geodesics (continued) 
as maxima of proper time, 
110-111 
movement along in Kerr metric, 
267 
null paths, 109-110 
parameterization, I 09 
perturbed,288-293 
relative acceleration between, 
145 
Riemann normal coordinates, 
112-113 
Schwarzschild solution, 
205-212 
shortest-distance definition, 
106-107 
singularities in manifold, 
111-112 
test particle, 108, 152 
timelike paths, writing equation, 
109 
unchanging character, 110 
Geometric time delay, 292-293 
Geometry. See also curvature 
defined as deviating from 
Pythagorean theorem, 2, 
71-76 
gravity as, 48-54 
Gibbons-Hawking temperature, 
371 
GR. See general relativity 
Gradient 
exterior derivative of differential 
form, 84-85 
of a scalar function, 20 
Gravitation. See also general 
relativity 
alternative theories, 181-190 
curved spacetime, 53-54, 
151-155 
Einstein's equation, 155-159, 
164-171 
energy conditions, 174-177 
energy-momentum, 307-310 
equivalence principle, 177-181 
Lagrangian formulation, 
159-165 
locally inertial frames, 50 
Newton's law of gravity, 48~9 
Index 
scalar-tensor theories, 
181-184 
uni form acceleration, 
distinguishing, 49 
Gravitational collapse, 230, 
234-236,415 
Gravitational constant, Newton's, 
151 
Gravitational lensing, 349-355 
Gravitational radiation. See also 
gravitational waves 
energy loss rate, 307-315 
perturbation theory, 274-322 
Gravitational redshift, 52-53, 
216-218 
Gravitational time delay, 292 
Gravitational waves 
Fourier transform, 303-304 
gauge transformation, 300-30 I 
Lorenz gauge, 30 I 
metric perturbation, 306-307 
observatory, 316-319 
quadrupole moment tensor and 
formula, 304-306 
solutions 
described, 29 3 
frequency, 295 
plane wave solution, 294, 295 
polarization states, 298-299 
speed of light propagation, 
295 
string theory, clues to, 
299-300 
test particles, 296-298 
transverse traceless gauge, 
293-294 
Gravity. See gravitation 
Green function, 301-302 
Hadamard state, 40 I 
Half-plane geometry, 141-142 
Hannonic gauge, 284-285, 301, 
321 
Hannonic oscillator 
classical, 41 ~2. 379 
quantum, 381-385 
Hartle-Hawking vacuum, 414 
Hawking 
area theorem, 243-244 
effect and black hole 
evaporation, 412~22 
event horizon of stationary 
black hole, 244-245 
radiation, 239, 412~22 
singularity theorems, 242 
temperature, 376, 413~14 
Heisenberg equation of motion, 
384 
Heisenberg picture, 380, 383-384 
Higgs fields, 44 
Hilbert action, 161, 299 
Hilbert space, 380, 390, 435 
Hodge duality, 86, 87 
Holographic principle, 421 
Holonomy of loop, 481 
Homogeneity, 323-324, 366, 369 
Horizon problem, 366 
Hubble constant, 336, 355-356 
Hubble law, 346 
Hubble length, 336-337 
Hubble parameter 
defined,336 
expansion rate, decreasing, 
339 
as friction term, 360-361 
slow-roll, 369-370 
Hubble time, 337 
Hydrostatic equilibrium, equation 
of. See Tolman-
Oppenheimer-Volkoff 
equation 
Hypersurlace 
boundary of black holes, 239 
congruence, 462 
extrinsic curvature, 449~5 I 
first fundamental form, 449 
Gaussian normal coordinates, 
445-447 
generator, 443~ 
induced metric, 427, 447 
properties, 44~52 
second fundamental form, 450 
Stokes's Theorem, 455 
Identity map, 23, 96, 485 
Immersed submanifold, 439 
Independent components, 
Riemann tensor, 127-128 

Indices 
antisynunetry,26-28 
basis vectors, 17 
contraction, 25, 28 
dununy,9 
order, 22 
orthononnal (Hat), 483-486 
raising and lowering, 25 
spatial, 8 
sununation convention, 8-9 
synunetry, 26-28 
Induced metric, submanifold, 427, 
447-448 
Inertial coordinates. See also 
locally inertial coordinates 
Minkowski space, 6-8 
synchronizing clocks in, 7 
Inertial frame. See inertial 
coordinates 
Infinite redshift surface, 247 
Infinity 
acceleration viewed from, 
246-247 
anti-de Sitter space, 327-328 
asymptotic Hatness, 197, 
249-253 
confonnal, 475-476 
Inflation, 320, 365-374, 369, 377 
lnfonnation loss paradox, 
418-420 
Initial-value problems, 78 
Inner product, 23 
Instantaneous physical distance, 
345 
Integral curves, 430 
Integral submanifold, 440 
Integration on manifolds, 88-90, 
453-457 
Interferometers, 317-318 
Interval 
proper time, 9 
spacetime, 7 
Inverse map, 58 
Inverse metric tensor, 23-24, 71 
Invertible map, 58 
Irreducible mass of black hole, 
270 
Isolated magnetic charges 
(monopoles), 255 
Index 
lsometries, 134-139, 436-437 
Isotropy, 323-324, 366 
Jacobian of map, 62 
Jordan frame, 184 
Kerr (rotating) black holes 
angular velocity, 266 
Boyer-Lindquist coordinates, 
262 
ergosphere, 264 
Killing tensor, 263 
metrics, 262-263 
singularity, 265 
synunetry, 261 
Killing horizon 
acceleration viewed from 
infinity, 246-247 
defined, 244 
event horizon versus, 244-245 
Minkowski space, 245, 
405 
stationary, nonstatic spacetime, 
247-248 
surface gravity, 245-246 
Killing's equation, 136, 437 
Killingtenso~ 136-137,263,344 
Killing vectors 
confonnal, 495 
conserved energy, 137-138, 344 
defined, 135-137,436-437 
Euclidean space, 138-139 
Komar integral, 251-252 
maximally synunetric space, 
140 
Minkowski space, 149, 245, 405 
Riemann tensor, relating 
derivatives, 137 
Schwarzschild metric, 206-208 
spherical synunetry, 138-139, 
149, 197-198 
spin, 253-254 
Klein bottle, 60 
Klein-Gordon equation, 42, 160, 
360,386-389 
Komar integral, 251-252 
Kronecker delta, 23, 83-84 
Kruskal coordinates and diagram, 
225-226 
507 
Lagrange density, 38, 159-160 
Lagrangian fonnulation of GR, 
159-165 
Lagrangian, 37 
Laser interferometers, 317-318 
Latin index, orthononnal bases, 
483 
Leibniz rule, 67 
Lens equation, 351 
Lense-Thirring effect, 320 
Lensing 
cosmological, 349-355 
Minkowski background, 
288-293 
potential, 352-353-
strong, 355 
weak, 355 
Leptons, 44, 363 
Levi-Civita connection. See 
Christoffel connection 
Levi-Civita tensor, 24, 82-83, 86, 
90,448 
Lie bracket, 67, 433 
Lie derivatives, 429-437 
Light. See also null geodesics 
deHection by sun, 291-292 
rays, convergence, 353 
speed of, 7-8 
Light cones 
confonnal transfonnations, 4 71 
curved geometry, defining, 
76-77 
defined, 4-5, 9 
in universe expanding from Big 
Bang singularity, 367 
invariance under Lorentz 
transfonnation, 15 
Lightlike (null). See Null paths, 
Null separated 
Linearized gravity, 274-286 
Line element, 11, 71 
Liouville's theorem, 353 
Locally inertial coordinates, 
73-76, 111-113 
Locally inertial frames, 50-51, 
73-74,483-486 
Lookback time, 349 
Loop, holonomy of, 481 
Lorentz force, 32-33 

508 
Lorentzian or pseudo-Riemannian 
metric tensor, 73 
Lorentz transfonnation 
basis vectors, 18 
defined, 12-15 
dual vector, 20 
Fock basis, 390-393 
inverse, 18 
local, 486 
tensor, 22 
vectors, 17 
Lorenz gauge, 284-285, 301, 321 
Luminosity, 346-348, 355 
Magnetic charges, isolated, 255 
Magnification, 354 
Magnification tensor, 353-354 
Manifolds 
base, union with vector spaces, 
16,493-494 
with boundary, 451-452 
causality, 78-82 
chart, covering, 60-62 
confonnal diagrams, 471-478 
curvature, describing, 72 
described, 3, 54-62 
diffeomorphisms and lie 
derivatives, 429-437 
differential fonns, 84-87 
extra-dimensional, size of, 189 
four-dimensional Minkowski 
space,9 
gravity as geometry, 48-54 
integration, 88-90, 453-458 
maps between, 423-427 
maximally symmetric space, 
140-144,323-329 
metric tensor, 71-76 
noncoordinate bases, 483-495 
objects that are not, 56-57 
region, mapping tangent space 
to, 111 
Riemann tensor, 124-125 
singularities, l l l-112, 
204-205 
Stokes's Theorem, 453-458 
submanifolds, 439-452 
Mapping 
manifold, 57, 423-427 
Index 
tangent space manifold region, 
111 
Mass 
acceleration, according to 
Newton, I 
asymptotically Hat spacetime, 
249-253 
black holes, 248-254, 259, 270 
special relativity (SR), 49-50 
Matter 
asymmetry, 365 
dark, 359 
as dust, 33, 119-120, 334 
energy density, 119-120, 
334-335,338-343,356 
ordinary, 358-359 
response to spacetime curvature, 
2 
universe dominated by, 76, 334, 
340,365 
Maximally extended 
Schwarzschild solution, 
222-229 
Maximally symmetric space 
Euclidean, 140 
isometries, 139-140 
Minkowski space, 144 
Poincare half-plane, 141-142 
Riemann tensor, 140-141, 324 
spacetimes, 323-329 
spheres, 140 
Maxwell's equations 
curved spaceti me, 178 
Hat spacetime, 29-30 
differential fonns, 86-87 
Mercator projection, 61 
Mercury's perihelion, precession 
of, 291-292 
Metric 
compatible connection, 99-100 
defined, 8 
induced, 427-447 
locally inertial coordinates, 
73-74 
response to energy and 
momentum. See Einstein's 
equation 
sign convention, 8 
canonical fonn, 73 
indefinite (Lorentzian or 
pseudo-Riemannian), 73 
positive (Euclidean or 
Riemannian), 73 
properties, 71-7 5 
signature, 73 
on two vectors (inner 
product), 23 
Metric perturbation. See 
Weak-field limit 
Microlensing, 352 
Milne universe, 341 
Minimal-coupling principle, 
152-153, 179-181,395 
Minkowski space 
classical field theory, 37-45 
confonnal diagrams, 471-476 
described, 4-11 
dual vectors, 18-20 
electromagnetism, 29-30 
energy and momentum, 30-37 
inertial coordinates, 6-8 
isometries, 134, 149, 245, 405 
Killing horizon, 245, 405 
Lorentz transfonnations, 12-15 
maximally symmetric 
spaceti me, 144 
point particle charge, 457 
quantum field theory, 385-394, 
402-412 
spacetime diagram, 9 
tensors, 21-29 
topology of, 85-86 
Unruh effect, 402-412 
vectors, 15-18 
Misner space, 81 
Momentum four-vector, 31-32, 
109. See also 
energy-momentum tensor 
Monopoles, 255 
Naked singularity, 243, 256-257 
Natural units, 38 
NEC. See Null Energy 
Condition 
Negatively curved universe. See 
open universe 
Neutralinos, 359 
Neutrinos, 363-364 

Neutron star 
creation, 235 
gravitational radiation from, 319 
vacuum state, 415 
Newton's theories 
acceleration, I, 151 
gravitational constant, 151 
of gravity, I, 48-49, 153-154 
as limit of GR, 153-154, 
157-158,286-293 
Second Law, 1, 32-33 
No-hair theorem, 238-239 
Noise, gravitational-wave 
observatories, 318 
Nonbaryonic dark matter, 359 
Noncoordinate bases, 74, 483-495 
Nonn of a vector, 23 
n-sphere, 55 
n-torus, 55 
Nucleon, nuclear binding energy, 
363 
Nucleosynthesis, 364 
Null Energy Condition, 175-176 
Null hypersurface, 240-241, 
244-245,443-445 
Null paths 
defined, 31 
geodesics, 109-110 
as hypersurface generators, 
443-445 
Null separated, 9 
Number density, 33-34, 335 
Number-Hux four-vector, 33-34 
Number operator, 382-383, 390, 
397, 410-411 
One-fonns. See dual vectors 
One-to-one map, 57 
Open balVset, 59 
Open universe, 330, 337, 343 
Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, 235 
Ordinary matter, 358-359 
Orthogonal transfonnations, 13, 
485 
Orthogonal vectors, 23 
Orthononnal basis, 483-484 
Palatini fonnalism, 191 
Parallel postulate, 144 
Index 
Parallel propagator, 479-481 
Parallel transport 
described, 103-104 
directional covariant derivative, 
105 
propagator, 479-481 
Riemann curvature tensor, 122 
straight line, 106 
Partial Cauchy surface, 80 
Partial derivatives 
commuting, 29 
covariant derivatives, converting 
to, 101-102 
gradient, 20 
tensors, 28, 70 
Particle accelerator, 393 
Particles 
detecting, 398, 399 
energy and momentum, 32, 47 
flat spacetime, 386 
in Minkowski vacuum state, 
412 
test, 108 
Unruh effect, 402 
Path 
locus through spacetime, 4-5 
of shortest possible distance. 
See geodesics 
vector, moving along and 
keeping constant. See 
parallel transport 
Path-ordering symbol, 480-481 
Peccei-Quinn symmetry, 359 
Penrose 
diagrams, 471-478 
process for black holes, 
267-272 
singularity theorems, 242 
Perihelion, precession of 
Mercury's, 291-292 
Pe1turbation theory 
energy loss due to gravitation 
radiation, 307-315 
freedom, degrees of, 279-286 
gravitational waves 
detecting. 315-320 
producing, 300-307 
solutions, 293-300 
inflation and, 377 
509 
linearized gravity and gauge 
transfonnations, 274-278 
Newtonian limit, 153-154, 
157-158,286-293 
string theory, 143-144 
Phase-space density, Liouville's 
conservation theorem, 353 
Photons 
as component of radiation, 356 
creation, 349 
energy, 110 
null geodesics, 109-110 
number density, 335 
path of in static Newtonian 
field, 288-289 
shot noise, 318 
speed, 7-8 
trajectories in perturbation 
theory, 286-293 
wavelength inverse to 
frequency. See redshift 
Planck spectrum, 411 
Plane waves, 294, 295, 387-388 
Poincare 
transfonnations, 14 
half-plane, 141-142 
Point, individual in spacetime. See 
event 
Point mass 
deflection angle, evaluating, 291 
gravitational lensing, 351 
Point particle charge, 457 
Poisson equation 
derived from GR, J 58, 287-288 
Einstein's equation superseding, 
155 
Newtonian gravity, I, 151 
Polarization 
CMB, 373-374 
gravitational wave solutions, 
298-299 
Positive energy theorem (Shoen 
and Yau), 253 
Positively curved universe. See 
Closed universe 
Preimage, 58 
Pressure. See also energy-momen-
tum tensors, equation-of-
state parameter 

510 
Pressure (continued) 
defined, 33-37 
energy conditions, 174-177 
matter (dust), 85, 234 
perfect Huid, 34 
radiation, 35, 335-336 
in second Friedmann equation, 
336 
vacuum, 35, 335-336 
>rinciple of Equivalence. 
See Equivalence 
principle 
>rojection, Mercator, 61 
>rojection tensor, 36, 312, 
449-451, 460, 
463-465 
>roper motion distance, 348 
>roper time 
as affine parameter, I 09 
geodesics as maxi ma of, 
106-108, 110-111 
spacetime interval, 9 
>rotons, 358, 363-365 
>ullback,423,425-426 
>ulsars, 235 
>ushforward, 424-425 
~uadrupole moment, 304-306, 
312-314 
~uantum chromodynamics 
(QCD), 167, 363 
~uantum electrodynamics (QED), 
87, 166-167 
~uantum field theory (QFf) 
black holes, evaporation and 
disappearance of, 239, 
412-422 
curved spaceti me, 394-402 
effective field theory, 45, 180, 
189 
Feynman diagrams, 166-167, 
416 
Hat spacetime, 385-394 
parallel transport, 479 
Unruh effect, 402-412 
!uantum theory of gravity, 
166-167, 170-171, 
299-300,376,418-421 
!uarks, 44, 362-363 
Index 
Radiation 
Big Bang, leftover from, 
356-358 
energy density, 335, 356 
equation of state, 119, 
334-335 
Hawking, 239, 412-422 
universe dominated by 
components, 356 
early period, 365 
expansion, 76, 340 
Radion, 189 
Radius 
Einstein, 351 
Schwarzschild, 413-414 
of sphere, 132-133 
Raychaudhuri's equation, 149, 
167-168, 191-192,375, 
461-462 
Real vector space, 16 
Recession velocity, 346 
Recollapse, 342-343 
Recombination, 364, 367-368 
Redshift 
cosmological, 116-117, 
344-349 
factor, 246, 411-412 
gravitational, 52-54, 216-218 
radiation density, 335 
Reduced lensing angle, 350 
Reduced quadrupole moment, 
313 
Reissner-Nordstrom black holes, 
254-261 
Relative acceleration between 
geodesics, 145 
Relativity. See general relativity, 
special relativity 
Ricci scalar, 129-130 
Ricci tensor 
confonnal transfonnation, 468 
defined, 129 
maximally symmetric space, 
328 
tracing, 129-130 
Riemann nonnal coordinates, 
112-113 
Riemann surfaces, 55-56, 
143-144 
Riemann tensor 
Cartan structure equations, 
488-489 
characterizing curvature, 
124-126 
commutator of covariant 
derivatives, 122-123 
confonnal transfonnation, 468 
contraction, 129-131 
defined, 122 
geodesic deviation, 144 
independent components, 
127-128 
maximally symmetric manifold, 
141, 324 
parallel transport around a loop, 
121, 148 
noncoordinate bases, 488-489 
relating derivatives of Killing 
vectors, 137 
trace-free parts, capturing (Weyl 
tensor), 130 
trace-reversed version of Ricci 
tensor (Einstein tensor), 
130-131 
Rindler observer, 404-405, 
407-408 
Rindler space, 404, 407-408, 
410-411 
Ring singularity, rotating (Kerr) 
black holes, 265 
RMS (root-mean-square) density 
Huctuation, 371 
Robertson-Walker metric. See 
also Cosmology 
confonnal diagram, 478 
described,329-333 
in Hat universe, 76, 78, 113-120 
Gaussian nonnal coordinates, 
447 
Rotating black holes. See Kerr 
black holes 
Rotations 
geodesic congruence, 461, 464 
invariance under (isotropy), 
324 
Lorentz transfonnation, 12 
Round sphere, 132-133 
Round/square brackets, 27 

Satellite gravitational-wave 
observatories, 318, 
319-320 
Scalar field. See Field, scalar 
Scalar function, 19-20, 28 
Scalar product. See inner product 
Scalar-tensor theories, 181-184, 
300 
Scale factor, 76-78, 113-120, 329, 
338-344 
SchrOdinger picture, 380, 383-384 
Schwarzschild geometry 
Birkhoff's theorem, 197-204 
circular orbits, 211-212 
confonnal diagram, 229 
conserved quantities, 206-208 
Eddington-Finkelstein 
coordinates, 220-221 
event horizon, 222, 241-242 
geodesics, 205-212 
gravitational redshift, 216-218 
Killing horizon, 247-248 
Killing vectors, 197-198, 
203-204,207 
Kruskal (maximal) extension, 
222-228 
mass, 193, 196, 251-252 
metric, 193-197 
precession of perihelia, 213-216 
Schwarzschild radius, 196, 205, 
222 
singularities, 204-205 
surface gravity, 247-248 
tortoise coordinate, 220 
white hole, 227 
wormhole, 227-228 
Second fundamental fonn of 
submanifolds, 450 
Seismic noise, 318 
Self-adjoint operators, 380 
Semicolon 
"Comma-Goes-to-Semicolon" 
rule, 152 
covariant derivatives, 97 
SEP. See Strong Equivalence 
Principle 
Set, 15-16 
Shapiro time delay, 218, 
292-293 
Index 
Shear 
geodesic congruence, 460-461, 
464 
gravitational lensing, 354 
Shot noise, 318 
Signature metric, 73 
Singularities 
Big Bang, 76, 340 
causality, 81-82 
cosmic censorship, 243 
coordinate, 204 
Kerr,264-265 
in manifold (geodesically 
incomplete), 111-112 
naked,243,256-257 
Reissner-Nordstrom, 256-259 
Schwarzschild, 204-205 
Singularity theorems, 242-243, 
376,461-462 
Slow-roll parameters, 369-370 
S-matrix, 385 
Smooth maps, 58 
Spacelike separated, 9 
Spacetime 
causality, 4-5, 9, 78-82 
coordinates, denoting, 8 
curvature. See Curvature 
defined, 4 
dual vectors (one-fonns), 
18-20,68 
energy and momentum, 30-37 
gravity as curvature of, 1-2, 
50-54, 153-154, 156-158 
Lorentz transfonnations, 12-15 
maximal symmetry, listed, 328 
Newtonian, 3-4 
tensors, 21-29, 68-70 
vectors, 15-18, 63-67 
Spacetime, curved. See Curvature, 
General relativity, 
Spacetime 
Spacetime interval, 7 
Spacetime diagram, 9 
Special relativity (SR) 
acceleration, 11 
background, 1-3 
described, 3-11 
energy and momentum, 30-37 
inertial frame, 6-7 
511 
Minkowski space, 8 
Speed of light. See Light, speed of 
Sphere, 55, 60-62, 132-133, 139, 
141 
Spherical symmetry, 139, 149, 
194, 197-201 
Spin 
black holes, 248-254 
connection, 486 
gravitational wave solutions, 
299 
Spinor, 44 
SR. See special relativity 
Standard Model of particle 
physics, 44, 359 
State, equation of, 33. See also 
equation-of-state 
parameter 
Static gravitating forces, 
modeling, 286-287 
Static metric, 191-192, 203-204, 
244-248 
Stationary limit surf ace, 247 
Stationary metric, 203-204, 238, 
244-248 
Stellar interior solutions, 229-235 
Stokes's theorem, 39-40, 453-458 
Stress-energy tensor. See 
energy-momentum tensor 
String frame, 184 
String theory 
AdS/CFf correspondence, 328, 
421 
and black hole entropy, 419-420 
gravitational wave clues, 
299-300 
holographic principle, 421 
perturbation theory in, 143-144 
as quantum theory of gravity, 
171 
Strong Energy Condition, 
175-176,462 
Strong Equivalence Principle 
(SEP), 50 
Sub manifolds 
defined, 439-440 
hypersurfaces, 443-452 
Summation convention, 9 
Sun, light deHection by, 291-292 

512 
Supe111ovae,319,355-356 
Surface-fonning one-fonns, 441 
Surface gravity, 245-248, 271, 
413 
Surface tenn, converting by 
Stokes's theorem, 39-40, 
160, 162 
Symmetric tensors, 26 
Symmetry. See also Killing 
vectors 
antimatter and matter, 365 
conserved quantities, 133-139 
denoting with round/square 
brackets, 27 
diffeomorphism invariance, 
434-436 
general relativity (GR) and, 
133-134 
isometries, 134-139, 436-437 
modeling. See confonnal 
diagrams 
Riemann tensor components, 
vanishing or related by, 
133 
rotating black holes, 261 
spherical, 238 
tensors, manipulating, 27 
Synchronizing clocks, 7 
Synchronous gauge, 284, 447 
Tangent bundle, 16 
Tangent vector, 15-16, 63, 64-65 
Taylor expansion in curved 
spacetime, 107 
Temperature 
of accelerating universe 
(Gibbons-Hawking), 371 
of a black hole (Hawking), 376, 
414 
CMB, 357, 361 
of expanding universe, 
361-362 
quantum chromodynamics 
(QCD), 363 
seen by accelerating observer 
(Unruh effect), 411 
Tensor product, 21 
Tensors 
defined, 21 
Index 
densities 
antisymmetrical product of 
Kronecker deltas, 83-84 
Levi-Civita symbol, 82-83 
weight (Jacobian, power 
raised to), 83 
differential fonns 
closed, 85 
defined,84 
dimensionality of 
cohomology spaces, 85-86 
exact, 85 
exterior derivative, 84-85 
Hodge duality, 86, 87 
Levi-Civita, 86 
wedge product, 84 
dual vectors, 18-19, 68-69 
electromagnetic field strength, 
24-25 
inverse metric, 23-24, 71 
Levi-Civita symbol, 24 
Levi-Civita tensor, 83-84 
Lie derivative along vector field, 
431-433 
Lorentz transfonnation, 22, 486 
manifolds, 68-70 
manipulating 
antisymmetric, 26 
contraction, 25 
indices, raise and lower, 
25-26 
partial derivatives, 28 
symmetric, 26, 27 
trace, 28 
metric 
canonical fonn, 73 
coordinates, 71-72, 74-76 
defining, 8, 71 
indefinite (Lorentzian or 
pseudo-Riemannian), 73 
positive (Euclidean or 
Riemannian), 73 
signature, 73 
on two vectors (inner 
product), 23 
parallel-transporting, 102-105, 
479-481 
transfonnation law, 22, 69, 
429-430,486 
Terrestrial gravitational-wave 
observatory, 316-319 
Test particles 
geodesics, I 08 
gravitational wave solutions, 
296-298 
Tetrad, 483, 487 
Thennodynamics, black hole, 
267-272,416-417 
Time 
confonnal, 477 
gravitational delay, 292 
Hubble, 336-337 
proper, 9, 11 
Timelike paths, I 09 
Timelike separated, 9 
Time-translation invariance, 
120 
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff 
equation, 233 
Torsion tensor 
connection involving, 128-129 
defined, 98 
one-fonn, 488-489 
Torus, 55, 131-132 
Total energy of asymptotically Hat 
spacetime, 249-253 
Trace 
parts free of, capturing (Weyl 
tensor), 130 
reversed version of Ricci tensor, 
130-131 
tensors, manipulating, 28 
Transfonnation. See also Lorentz 
transfonnation 
Bogolubov, 398-399, 408 
confonnal, 467-469 
coordinate, 66-67, 69, 429-430, 
486 
Fourier, 283-284 
gauge,42,274-278,300-301, 
493 
general coordinate, 486 
holonomy of loop, 481 
Poincare, 12-14 
set of continuous, 56 
Translations, 12, 134-135, 324 
Transport. See parallel transport 
Transverse gauge, 283, 287 

Transverse traceless gauge, 
293-294 
Trappedsurface,242 
Twin paradox, I 0 
Two-sphere. See Sphere. 
Universe. See Cosmology 
Unruh effect, 402-412 
Unruh vacuum, 414 
Vacuum. See also vacuum energy 
Boulware vacuum, 414 
Hadamard condition, 40 I 
Hartle-Hawking vacuum, 414 
inHation, 371-374 
maximally symmetric 
spacetimes, 323-329 
quantum, 382, 390-391, 
396-401 
Unruh effect, 407-412 
Unruh vacuum, 414 
Vacuum energy 
coincidence problem, 359 
cosmological constant, 
171-174,359 
cosmological effects, 335, 
338-344,355-356 
energy-momentum tensor, 35, 
171-172 
evolution, 119-120, 338, 341 
expected value, 172-174, 190, 
393-394 
inHation, 368 
Index 
measured, 174, 343, 355-356, 
358-361 
quantum field theory, 173, 
393-394,400-401 
Vector 
collection that can be added and 
multiplied by real 
numbers, 16 
commutator, 67 
components, 17 
coordinate basis, 65-66 
diffeomorphisms, 430 
di mens ion, 17 
as directional derivatives, 63-64 
divergence to value on boundary 
(Stokes's Theorem), 455 
dual (one-fonns), 18-20 
four-dimensional (four-vectors), 
15 
Lie derivative along field, 
431-433 
Lorentz transfonnation, 17-18, 
66 
noncoordinate basis, 483-486 
potential, 42, 87 
pushforward, 424-425 
tangentspace,63-65 
transfonnation law under 
changes in coordinates, 
66-67 
Velocity 
angular, rotating (Kerr) black 
holes, 266 
513 
constant velocity vector, 
Lorentz transfonnation, 12 
cosmology, 345-346 
of light, 7-8 
Vielbein, 483, 484-485, 487 
Volume, integrating manifolds, 
89-90 
Wave equation, 396 
Weak Energy Condition, 
174-176 
Weak Equivalence Principle 
(WEP), 48-50 
Weak field limit, 153-154, 
157-158,274-286 
WEC. See Weak Energy 
Condition 
Wedge product, 84 
Weight, tensor densities, 83 
WEP. See Weak Equivalence 
Principle 
Weyl tensor, 130, 169-170 
White dwarf, 235 
White hole, 227 
Whitney's embedding theorem, 
60 
Worldline, 4 
X-rays, detecting black holes by, 
235-236 
Zero-point energy, 173, 382. See 
also vacuum energy 


www.pearson.com/uk 
lSB I 9~ - 1 292 2 6 3-
9 781292 J 6633 > 
PEARSON 
ALWAYS LEARN I NG 

