P E N G U I N (i) C L A S S I C S 
" 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 

PENGUIN @ 
CLASSICS 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
A. K. Ramanujan was hom in South India and has degrees in 
English and in Linguistics. He is now Professor in the Depart-
ment of South Asian Languages and Civilizations at the 
University of Chicago. He has held teaching appointments at 
the Universities of Baroc!.1 (India), Wisconsin, Berkeley, and 
Michigan and is a Fellow of the School of Letters at Indiana 
University. He has contributed articles in linguistics, folklore 
and Indian literature to many journals and books; his poetry 
and translations (from Kannada, Tamil, and Malayalam) have 
been widely published in India, the United States, and Great 
Britain. His publications include Proverbs (in Kannada, 1955), 
The Striders (Poetry Book Society Recommendation, 1966), 
The Interior Landscape (translations from Classical Tamil, 
1970), Hokk11lalli Huvilla (Kannada poems, 1969), and 
Relations (poems, 1971). His work in progress includes a 
volume of South Indian folk-tales, and further translations 
from Classical Tamil. 


SPEAKING OF SIVA 
* 
TRANSLATED WITH AN 
INTRODUCTION BY 
A. K. RAMANUJAN 
PENGUIN BOOKS 

Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworrh, Middlesex, England 
Viking Penguin Inc., 40 West 23rd Street, New York, New York 10010, U.S.A. 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia 
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario, Canada L3R 104 
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, Auckland 10, New Zealand 
First published 1973 
Reprinted 1979, 198 s 
Copyright© A. K. Ramanujan, 1973 
All rights reserved 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
Cox & Wyman Ltd, Reading 
Set in Monotypc Bembo 
Except in the United Stares of America, 
this book is sold subject to the condition 
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 
be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 
without the publisher's prior consent in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is 
published and without a similar condition 
including this condition being imposed 
on the subsequent purchaser 

This is one of the volumes sponsored by the Asian 
Literature Program of the Asia Society. 
Versions of these traJlSlations appeared in: The East--
West Rwitw, Spring and Summer 1966, Volume II, 
Number 3; TriQuarterly, Number II, Winter 1968; 
Vedant4 & the West, November/December 1970, 
Number 206; and Transpacific, Number 7, Volume II. 
Number 3, Spring 1971. 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translations 
Series of the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (Unesco). 


for my father 
Attippat Asiiri Krishnaswami 
(1892-1953) 


Translator's Note 
Acknowledgements 
Introduction 
Contents 
Further Readings in English 
The Poems: 
II 
17 
19 
S7 
Basavawa 
61 
Devara Dasimayya 
91 
~adeviyakka 
111 
Allama Prabhu 
143 
Appendix L The Six-Phase System 
169 
Appendix IT. On Lingayat Culture 
by William McCormack 
175 
Notes to the Poems 
189 


Translator's Note 
Speaking of Siva is a book of vacanas. A vacana is a religious 
lyric in Kannada free verse; vacana means literally 'saying, 
thing said'. 
Kannada is a Dravidian language, spoken today in the 
south Indian state of Mysore by nearly 2.0 million people. 
Of the four major Dravidian languages, Kannada is second 
only to Tamil in antiquity of literary tradition. There is 
evidence for at least fifteen centuries of literary work in 
K.annada. Yet in all the length and variety of this literature, 
there is no body of lyrics more strikingly original and 
impassioned than the vacanas of the medieval Vira!aiva1 
saints. TheyallspeakofSivaandspeaktoSiva:hencethetitle. 
The most intense and significant period of vacana poetry 
was a span of two centuries between the tenth and the twelfth. 
Four saints of the period are represented here: Dasim.ayya, 
Basavar;u;ta, Allama, and Mahadeviyakka, without doubt the 
greatest poets of the vacana tradition. Though vacanas 
continue to be written to this day and later writers have 
occasionally composed striking ones, not one of the later 
300 or more vacanakaras comes anywhere close to these four 
saint ... poets in range, poetry, or passion.z 
I. 'ViraJaiva' means 'militant or heroic wvism or faith in ~iva'. 
The ViraWvas are also commonly known as lli\giyatas: 'those who 
wear the litiga, the symbol of Siva'. Orthodox lli\giyatas wear the 
l.iilga, stone emblem of Siva, in a silver casket round their necks 
symbolizing His personal and near presence. ~iva, the 'awpiciow 
one', is elsewhere one of the Hindu trinity of gods: Brahma the creator, 
Vi$QU the preserver, Siva the destroyer. In the vacanas, Siva is the 
supreme god. 
2. Many thousand vacanas are attributed to each major saint. The 
legends, given to excesses, speak. of millions. Over 300 vacana-writers 

12 
SPEAKING OF §IvA 
In these Vttdaiva saint-poets, experience spoke in a mother 
tongue. Pan-Indian Sanskrit, the second language of cultured 
Indians for centuries, gave way to colloquial Kannada. 
The strictness of traditional metres, the formality of literary 
genres, divisions of prose :md verse, gave way to the innova-
tions and spontaneity of free verse, a poetry that was not 
recognizably in verse. The poets were not bards or pundits 
in a court but men and women speaking to men and women. 
They were of every class, caste and trade; some were out-
castes, some illiterate. 
Vacanas are literature, but not merely literary. They 
are a literature in spite of itself, scorning artifice, ornament, 
learning, privilege: a religious literature, literary because 
religious; great voices of a sweeping movement of protest 
and reform in Hindu society; witnesses to conBict and ecstasy 
in gifted mystical men. Vacanas are our wisdom literature. 
They have been called the Kannada Upani~ds; Some hear 
the tone and voice of Old Testament prophets or the Chuang-
Tzu here. Vacanas are also our psalms and hymns. Analogues 
may be multiplied. The vacanas may be seen as still another 
version of the Perennial Philosophy. But that is to forget 
particulars. 
Faced with such an embarrassment of riches, no clear 
principle would do for the choice of poems for translation. 
So, giving in to the vacana spirit, I have let the vacanas 
choose me, letting them speak to my biases; translating what-
ever struck me over the' past two decades. A translation has 
to be true to the translator no less than to the originals. 
He cannot jump off his own shadow. Translation is choice, 
are known to date. Many more are being discovered. Several thousand 
vacanas are in print and on palmJeaf. Scholars at the Kamatak Univer-
sity, Dharwar, and elsewhere, are engaged in the task of collecting, 
collating and editing the manuscripts. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTB 
13 
interpretation, an assertion of taste, a betrayal of what 
answers to one's needs, one's envies. I can only hope that 
my needs are not entirely eccentric or irrelevant to the needs 
of others in the two traditions, the one I translate from and 
the one I translate into. I have tried to choose (a) good poems, 
(b) poetry representative of the poet, (c) poems thematically 
typical of the vacana tradition, and (d) a few unique in idea, 
image, or form. 
In the act of translating, 'the Spirit killeth and the Letter 
giveth Life'. Any direct attack on the 'spirit of the work' 
is foredoomed to fuzziness. Only the literal text, the word 
made flesh, can take us to the word behind the words. I 
have tried therefore to attend closely to the language of the 
originals, their design, detail by detail; not to match the 
Kannada with the English, but to map the medieval Kannada 
onto the soundlook of modern English; in rhythm and punc-
tuation, in phrase-breaks, paragraphs and lineation to suggest 
the inner form of the originals as I see them. Medieval Kannada 
manuscripts we no punctuation, no paragraph-, word-, or 
phrase-divisions, though modern editions print the vacanas 
with all the modern conventions. The few liberties I have 
taken are towards a close structural mimicry, a re-enactment 
in English, the transposition of a structure in one texture onto 
another. Valery said of a translation of StJohn of the Cross: 
'This is really to translate, which is to reconstitute as nearly 
as possible the rjfect of a certain cawe '. The relevant formal 
features of the vacanas are discussed in the Introduction. 
There are three parts to this book: an introduction, the 
poems, appendixes and notes. There are short biographical 
notes on each of the four saint-poets represented. The book 
ends with two appendixes, one on Vtta5aiva religiow phil-
osophy, and one on the contemporary Lingayat community 
by anthropologist William McCormack; and notes on a few 
textual points and allusions. 

14 
SPEAKING OP §IVA 
The editions I have used are acknowledged at the end of 
each section-note. The poems follow the Kannada editions 
in numbering and arrangement. 
NOTB ON TRANSLITERATION 
The transliteration system used for Kannada names and words 
in this book is very close to the accepted Sanskrit trans-
literation system. The only difference is in marking length 
for the mid-vowels e e o o, whereas Sanskrit has only e o. 
Words of Sanskrit origin are given in their Kannada forms: 
e.g., Kamalati in Sanskrit would become Kamalate in 
Kannada. I have transliterated tlie anusvara by the appropriate 
nasal which one hears in pronunciation: e.g. for limga, 
I write linga. 
VOWELS 
FRONT 
CENTRAL 
BACK 
short 
long 
short 
long 
short 
long 
HIGH 
i 
u 
ii 
MID 
e 
e 
0 
0 
LOW 
a 
i 
Diphthongs: 
ai 
au 
CONSONANTS 
velar1 
palatal retroflex alveolar 
dental 
labial 
stops2 
k kh 
c ch 
~ Pt 
t 
th 
p ph 
g gh 
j jh 
4 4h 
d dh 
b bh 
nasals 
1i 
ii 
J;l 
n 
m 
fricatives 
h 
' 
' 
s 
liquids 
1 
I 
r 
semi vowels 
y 
v 
I. Velar, palatal etc. indicate positions of articulation. 
.2. Stops, nasals etc. iiidicate manner of articulation. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
IS 
1he above charts indicate rather roughly the phonetic values of the 
letters. A few striking features of Kannada pronunciation may be 
pointed out for the use of English readers interested in trying to 
pronounce the Kannada words the Kannada way. 
I. Kannada long voweis are simple long vowels, unlike their 
English counterparts, which are (usually) diphthongs as in b::,t, ·boot, 
boat. 
2. Among other things, Kannada has three kinds of consonants un-
f.un.iliar to English speakers: the dentals {t th d dh), the retroftexes 
(l ~ 4 4hJ} '1), the aspirated stops (kh gh chjh th db~ 4h ph bh). 
1he dcntals arc pronounced with the tongue stopping the breath 
at the teeth, somewhat like French or Italian dentals, in words like 
tu, du, Dante. 
- The -;etrofiexes are made by curling back the tongue towards the 
roof of the mouth, somewhat as in some American English pronun-
ciations of pa!!J. mo'!!Jng,gi~. 
The Kannada sounds represented by ph, th, ch, kh, etc. are aspirated 
(but more strongly} like English word-initial stops as in pin, ~in, !in. 
In Kannada, even the voiced stops bh, db, gh, etc. are aspirated, unlike 
any English voiced consonant. 1he sounds represented by p t ~ c k are 
unaspirated everywhere, sounded somewhat like the English con-
sonants in SJ!.in, s~ain, s~in. 
3. 1here are no alveolar stops in Kannada corresponding to English 
t, d; but Kannada s, I, n are produced by the tongue at the alveolar 
position as in English. 
4.1her;c are long {or double) consonants in the middle of Kannada 
words. English has them only across words: hot..!!_n, seve~ights, 
sick cow etc. They are indicated in the texts by double letters as in 
Kannada, BasavaJ}J}a. 
.s. 1hc K~da r is flapped or trilled somewhat as in the British 
pronunciation of _!ing, be!9'. 


Acknowledgements 
IN translating medieval Kannada to modem English, many 
hands and minds have helped. My thanks are due to The Asia 
Society, New York, and personally to Mrs Bonn.ie Crown, 
Director of the Asian Literature Program, for support, 
publishers, advice, deadlines streaked with kindness; William 
McCormack for an anthropological essay on Lingayat 
Culture written specially for this volume (pp. I7S-I87): M. 
Cidananda Murti, who read critically each translation, 
checked it against the texts and his accurate learning; M. G. 
Krishnamurti, Girish Kamad and C. Kambar, who read and 
discussed with me the early drafts and increased my under-
standing of the poetry of the originals; Leonard Nathan, 
poet and translator, for his suggestions regarding the English 
detail; my colleagues, Edward Dimock, Milton Singer, 
J. A. B. van Buitenen, Norman Zide and Ron Inden, for 
discussions on bhakti; the Staff of the Department of South 
Asian Languages and Civilization for making the illegible 
legible, in more sens~ than the obvious; my wife for her 
scepticism and her faith; her perceptions have chastened and 
enriched page after page. 
Acknowledgements have to stop somewhere. 'What do 
I have that I have not received?' 
Chicago, 1969 
A. K. RAMANUJAN 


Introduction 
THE TEMPLE AND THE BODY 
The rich 
will make temples for ~iva. 
What shall I, 
a poor man, 
do? 
My legs are pillars, 
.the body the shrine, 
the head a cupola 
of gold. 
s 
Listen, 0 lord of the meeting rivers, 
IO 
things standing shall fall, 
but the moving ever shall stay. 
BASAVAf!lf!lA 820 
B ASA v A~~ A was the leader of the medieval religious 
movement, V1ra8aivism, of which the Kannada vacanas are 
the most important texts. If one were to choose a single 
poem to represent the whole extraordinary body of religious 
lyrics called the vacanas, one cannot do better than choose 
the above poem of Basaval).l).a's. It dramatizes several of the 
themes and oppositions characteristic of the protest or 'protes-
tant' movement called V1rasaivism. 
For instance: Indian temples are traditionally built in the 
image of the human body. The ritual for building a temple 
begins with digging in the earth, and planting a pot of seed. 
The temple is said to rise from the implanted seed, like a 
human. The different parts of a temple are named after body 
parts. The two sides are called the hands or wings, the hasta; 
a pillar is called a foot, pada. The top of the temple is the head, 

20 
SPBAXING Of hVA 
the likhara. The shrine, the innermost and the darkest 
sanctum of the temple, is a garbhagrha, the womb-house. 
The temple thus carries out in brick and stone the primordial 
blueprint of the human body.I 
But in history the human metaphor fades. The model, 
the meaning, is submerged. ·The temple becomes a static 
standing. thing that has forgotten its moving originals. 
BasavaJ;IJJ.a's poem calls for a return to the original of all 
temples, preferring the body to the embodiment. 
The poems as well as the saints' legends suggest a cycle 
of transformations -
temple into body into temple, or 
a circle of identities - a temple is a body is a temple. The 
legend of saint GhaJ;ItikarJJ.a is a striking example: when the 
saint realized that Siva was the supreme god, he gave himself 
as an offering to Siva. His body became the threshold of a 
Siva temple, his limbs the frame of the door, his head the 
temple bell. 
The poem draws a distinction between making and being. 
The rich can only make% temples. They may not be or become 
temples by what they do. Further what is made is a mortal 
·artifact, but what one is is immortal (lines n-12). 
This opposition, the standing v. the moving, sthavara 
v. jangama, is at the heart of Vudaivism. The Sanskrit 
word sthiivara, containing the same Indo-European root as 
in English words like 'stand •, 'state •, 'estate •, 'stature •, 
'static', 'status', carries connotations of these related words. 
J:uigama contains a cognate of English go. Sthavara is that 
which stands, a piece of property, a thing inanimate. Ja:ilgama 
1. Some interpreters extend the symbolism further: if a temple 
has three doors, they represent the three states Qf consciousness (sleep, 
waking, and dream) through any of which you may reach the I.ord 
within; if it has five doors, they represent the five senses etc. 
2. A distinction often found in Ind~European languages between 
making and doing is suggested by lines 2 and .s. Kannada has only one 
wordforboth: 'ma4u'. 

INTRODUCTION 
21 
is moving, moveable, anything given to going and coming. 
Especially in VJ.ra§aiva religion a Jaiigama is a religious man 
who has renounced world and home, moving from village 
to village, representing god to the devoted, a god incarnate. 
Sthavara could mean any static symbol or idol of god, a 
temple, or a linga worshipped in a temple. Thw the two words 
carry a contrast between two opposed conceptions of god 
and of worship. Basavar;tl}a in the above poem prefers the 
original to the symbol, the body that remembers to the temple 
that forgets, the poor though living moving jangama to the 
rich petrified temple, the sthavara, standing out there. 
The poem opens by relating the temple to the rich. Medi-
eval South Indian _temples looked remarkably like palaces 
with battlements; they were richly endowed and patronized 
by the wealthy and the powerful, without whom the mass-
ive structures housing the bejewelled gods and sculptured 
pillars would not have been possible. The Vtra5aiva move-
ment was a social upheaval by and for the poor, the low-
caste and the outcaste against the rich and the privileged; it 
was a rising of the unlettered against the literate pundit, 
flesh and blood against stone. 
The poem enacts this conflict. Lines I-S speak of 'making 
temples'. 'They' are opposed to 'I', the poor man, who 
can neither make nor do anything. In lines 6-9 the poet 
recovers from the despair with an assertion of identities 
between body and temple; legs are pillars, the body a shrine, 
the head a cupola, a defiant cupola of gold. From 'making' 
the poem has moved to 'being'. Lines Io-1.2 sum up the 
contrasts~ asserting a universal: What's made will crumble, 
what's standing will fall; but what is, the living moving 
jangama, is immortal. 
The first sentence of the poem has a clear tense, 3 placing 
3· In one textual variant, the tense is the future tense; in others, the 
past. 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
the making of temples in time and history. The second 
movement Qines 6-9) asserting identities, has no tense or 
verb in the Kannada original, though one has to use the verb 
to be in the English translation for such equations, e.g., 
'My legs are pillars'; Kannada has o!liy 'My legs themselves, 
pillars'. The polarities are lined up and judged: 
the rich 
: the poor 
temple 
: body 
make 
: be 
the standing (sthavara) : the moving Uatigama) 
The sthavara/jangama contrast is not merely an opposi-
tion of thing and person. The Virdaiva trinity consists 
of guru, li.Iiga, and jangama- the spiritual teacher, the sym-
bolic stone-emblem of Siva, and His wandering mendicant 
representative. They are three yet one. Basaval).l).a insists, 
in another poem, 'sthavara and jangama are one' to the truly 
worshipful spirit. Yet if a devotee prefer external worship 
of the stone li.Iiga (sthavara) to serving a human jangama, 
he would be worthy of scorn . 
. Ja.tigama in the last sentence of the poem is in the neuter 
(jangamakke). This makes it an abstraction, raising the parti-
cular living/dying Jatigama to a universal immortal principle. 
But the word jatigama also carries its normal association of 
'holy person', thus including the Living and the Living-
forever. 
VACANAS AND HINDUISM 
Anthropologists like Robert Redfield and Milton Singer 
speak of 'great' and 'litde' traditions in Indian civilization; 
other pairs of terms have been proposed: popular/learned, 
folk/classical, low/high, parochial/universal, peasal}.t/aristo-
cratic, lay/hieratic. The native Indian tradition speaks of 

INTRODUCTION 
23 
marga ('classical') and defi ('folk'). The several pairs capture 
di.lferent aspects of a familiar dichotomy, though none of 
them is satisfactory or definitive. We shall use 'great' and 
'little' here as convenient labels. Reservations regarding the 
concepts and the dichotomy will appear below. 
The 'great' tradition in India would be inter-regional, 
pan-Indian; its vehicle, Sanskrit. The 'little' tradition would 
consist of many regional traditions, carried by the regional 
languages. It should not be forgotten that many of the reg-
ional languages and cultures themselves, e.g., Tamil, have long 
traditions, divisible into 'ancient' and 'modern' historically, 
'classical' and 'folk' or 'high' and 'low' synchronically. 
Such languages have a formal 'high' style and many informal 
colloquial 'low' dialects. These colloquial dialects may be 
either social or sub-regional. Cultural traditions too tend to 
be organized similarly into related yet distinct sub-cultures 
socially and regionally. Even the so-called 'great' tradition is 
not as monolithic as it is often assumed to be. Still, taken in 
the large, one may speak of pan-Indian Sanskritic 'great' 
traditions and many regional 'little' traditions. But traditions 
are not divided by impermeable membranes; they interflow 
into one another, responsive to differences of density as in an 
osmosis. It is often difficult to isolate elements as belonging 
exclusively to the one or the other. 
A Sanskrit epic like the Mahabharata contains in its ency-
clopedic range much folk material, like tales, beliefs, proverbs, 
picked obviously from folk sources, refurbished, Sanskritized, 
fixed forever in the Sanskritic artifice of eternity. But in a 
profoundly oral culture like the Indian, the Sanskrit Mahiib-
hiirata itself gets returned to the oral folk-traditions, contri-
buting the transformed materials back to the 'little' traditions 
to be further diffused and diffracted. It gets 'translated' 
from the Sanskrit into the regional languages; in the course 
of the 'translations', the regional poet infuses it with his rich 

SPEAKING OF ~IVA 
local traditions, combining not only the pan-Indian 'great' 
with the regional 'little', but the regional 'great' with the 
regional 'little' traditions as well. Thus many cycles of give-
and-take are set in motion. Such interaction and exchange is 
well expressed in the following parable of the transposed heads: 
A sage's wife, Mariamma, was sentenced by her husband to 
death. At the moment of execution she embraced an outcaste 
woman, Ellamma, for her sympathy. In the fray both the outcaste 
woman and the brahmin lost their heads. Later, the husband re-
lented, granted them pardon and restored their heads by his 
spiritual powers. But the heads were transposed by mistake. To 
Mariamma (with a brahmin head and an outcaste body) goats and 
cocks but not buffaloes were sacrificed; to Ellamma (outcaste head 
and brahmin body) buffaloes instead of goats and cocks. 
According to Whitehead's Village Gods of South India, 
the legend probably represents the fusion of the Aryan 
and Dravidian cults in the days when the Aryan culture 
first found its way into (South) India. It could stand just as 
well for transpositions in the 'great' and 'little' traditions. 
For the sake of exposition we may speak of several parallel 
components in the 'great' and 'little' traditions in Hinduism. 
We may consider these under four tentative heads: (a) social 
organization, (b) text, (c) performance, (d) mythology. For 
the 'great' traditions they would be respectively, (a) the caste 
hierarchy, (b) the Vedas, {c) the Vedic rituals, (d) the pan-
Indian pantheon ofVigm, Siva, Indra etc. 
We may recognize elements parallel to these four for the 
'little' traditions. Instead of the Vedic texts there would be 
puriit;~as, saints' legends, minor mythologies, systems of magic 
and superstition - often composed in the regional languages. 
These are mostly local traditions, though they may seek, 
and often find, prestige by being re-written in Sanskrit 
and absorbed into the pan-Indian corpus. Parallel to the Vedic 

INTRODUCTION 
25 
rituals, every village has its own particular kinds of • cultural 
performance' -
local animal sacrifices, magical practices, 
wakes, vigils, fairs. The social organization of the 'little' 
traditions would be the local sects and cults; the mythology 
would centre round regional deities, worship of stone, trees, 
crossroads and rivers. (See diagram on page 34.) 
Vacanas are bhakti poems, poems of personal devotion 
to a god, often a particular form of the god. The vacana 
saints reject not only the • great' traditions of Vedic religion, 
but the 'little' local traditions as well. They not only scorn 
the effectiveness of the Vedas as scripture; they reject the little 
legends of the local gods and goddesses. The first of the follow-
ing examples mocks at orthodox ritual genuflections and reci-
tations; the second, at animal sacrifice in folk-religion: 
See-saw watermills bow their heads. 
So what? 
Do they get to be devotees 
to the Master? 
The tongs join hands. 
So what? 
Can they be humble in service 
to the Lord? 
Parrots recite. 
So what? 
Can they read the Lord? 
How can the slaves of the Bodiless God, 
Desire, 
know the way 
our Lord's Men move 
or the stance of their standing? . 
BASAVA~~A I2S 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
The sacrificial lamb brought for the festival 
ate up the green leaf brought for the decorations. 
Not knowing a thing about the kill, 
it wants only to £ill its belly: 
born that day, to die that day. 
But tell me: 
did the killers survive, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers? 
BASAVAf!Jl!JA I29 
Religions set apart certain times and places as specially 
sacred: rituals and worship are performed at appointed 
times, pilgrimages are undertaken to well-known holy places. 
There is a holy map as well as a holy calendar. If you die in 
Benares, sinner though you are, you will go straight to heaven. 
The following vacana represents the contempt of the saint 
for all sacred space and sacred time: 
To the utterly at-one with Siva 
there's no dawn, 
no new moon, 
no noonday, 
nor equinoxes, 
nor sunsets, 
nor full moons; 
his front yard 
is the true Benares, 
0 Rimanatha. 
DASJMA yy A 98 
In his protest against traditional dichotomies, he rejects 
also the differences between man and woman as superficial: 

INTRODUCTION 
If they see 
breasts and long hair coming 
they call it woman, 
if beard and whisken 
they call it man: 
but, look, the self that hoven 
in between 
is neither man 
nor woman 
0 Rimanitha 
DASIMAYYA 133 
27 
The Vll'a5aiva saints - unlike exponents of other kinds of 
Hinduism, and like other bhakti movements of India - do 
not believe that religion is something one is hom with or into. 
An orthodox Hindu believes a Hindu is hom, not made. 
With such a belief, there is no place for conversion in Hindu-
ism; a man hom to his caste or faith cannot choose and change, 
nor can others change him. But if he believes in acquiring 
merit only by living and believing certain things, then .there is 
room for choosing and changing his beliefS. He can then 
convert and be converted. If, as these saints believed, he also 
believes that his god is the true god, the only true god, it be-
comes imperative to convert the misguided and bring light to 
the benighted. Missions are born. Bhakti religions proselytize, 
unlike classical Hinduism. Some of the incandescence of 
Vira§aiva poetry is ~e white heat of truth-seeing and truth-
saying in a dark deluded world; their monotheism lashes out 
in an atmosphere of animism and polytheism. 4 
4· In the light of these considerations, it is not surprising that 
Christian missionaries were greatly attracted to South Indian bhakti 
texts and traditions, often translated them, speculated that bhakti 
attitudes were the result of early Christian influence. Also, Christian 
texts and lives (especially the New Testament, and the lives of saints) 
strike many Hindus as variants ofbhak:ti. 

28 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
How can I feel right 
about a god who eats up lacquer and melts, 
who wilts when he sees fire? 
How can I feel right 
about gods you sell in your need, 
and gods you bury for fear of thieves? 
The lord of the meeting rivers, 
self-born, one with himself; 
he alone is the true god. 
BASAVA~~A SS8 
The pot is a god. The winnowing 
fan is a god. The stone in the 
street is a god. The comb is a 
god. The bowstring is also a 
god. The bushel is a god and the 
spouted cup is a god. 
Gods, gods, there are so many 
there's no place left 
for a foot. 
There is only 
one god. He is our Lord 
of the Meeting Rivers. 
BASAVA~~A 563 

INTRODUCTION 
The crusading militancy at the heart of bhaktiS makes 
it double-edged, bisexual, as expressed in poems like the follow-
ing: 
Look here, dear fellow: 
I wear these men's clothes 
only for you. 
Sometimes I am man. 
sometimes I am woman. 
0 lord of the meeting rivers 
I'll make war for you 
but I'll be your devotees' bride. 
BASAVAJ:iiJ:iiA 703 
THE 'UNMBDIATED VISION' 
Why did the vacanakaras {and certain other bhakti traditions 
in India and elsewhere) reject, at least in their more intense 
moods, the 'great' and 'little' traditions? I think it is because 
the 'great' and 'little' traditions, as we have described them, 
together constitute 'establishment' in the several senses of 
the word. They are the establishment, the stable, the secure, 
s. The vacanas often divide the world of men between bhakta 
(devotee) and bhavi (worldling), men of faith and the infidels - remini-
scent ofChristianfHeathen,JewfGentile, divisions. One amusing legend 
speaks of a Saiva saint who lived in the world, devoting his energies 
to converting worldlings to the Saiva faith - by any means whatever: 
bribes, favours, love, and if needed physical force, coercing or per-
suading them to wear the Saiva emblem of holy ash on the forehead. 
One day, Siva himself came down in disguise to see him. But he did 
not recognize Siva and proceeded to convert him, offering him holy 
ash, trying to force it on him when he seemed reluctant. When his 
zeal became too oppressive, Siva tried in vain to tell him who he 
was, but was forced down on his knees for the baptism of ash - even 
Siva had to become a Saiva. 

30 
SPEAKING OF ~IVA 
the sthavara, in the social sense. In another sense, such tradi-
tions symbolize man's attempt to establish or stabilize the 
universe for himself. Such traditions wish to render the uni-
verse manipulable, predictable, safe. Every prescribed ritual 
or magical act has given results. These are spelled out in 
clear terms in a phalaJruti.6 
Ritual, superstition, sacred space and sacred tiJ;ne, pil-
grimage and temple-going, offerings to god and priest, 
prayers and promises - all forms of 'making' and 'doing' -
all of them are performed to get results, to manipulate 
and manage carefully the Lord's universe to serve one's 
own purposes, to save one's soul or one's skin. Salvation, 
like prosperity, has a price. It can be paid - by oneself or 
by proxy. The 'great' and 'little' traditions organize and 
catalogue the universe, and make available the price-list. 
But the vacanakaras have a horror of such bargains, such 
manipulations, the arrogance of such predictions. The Lord's 
world is unpredictable, and all predictions are false, ignorant, 
and worse. 
Thus, classical belief systems, social customs and super-
stitions (Basava~;w.a S8I, 105), image worship (Basaval}J)a 
ssS), the caste system (Dasimayya 96), the Vedic ritual of 
yajna (Basaval}l}a 125), as well as local sacrifices of lambs 
and goats (Basaval}l}a 129) -all of them are fiercely questioned 
and ridiculed. 
Vacanas often go further and reject the idea of doing good 
so that one may go to heaven. Righteousness, virtue, being 
correct, doing the right things, carry no guarantee to god. 
6. A phalalruti is 'an accowlt of the merit which accrues through 
a religous act. For pilgrimage, it is of the general form "the place of 
x ... when visited at the time . . . together with the performance of 
observance a, b, c, d, ... yields the following results"; they are almost 
always both secular and religious, as the curing of a disease and securing 
a better existence in the next life.' Agehananda Bharati, 'Pilgrimage in 
the Indian Tradition', in History of Religions, vol. 3, no. I, p. 145· 

INTRODUCTION 
]I 
One may note here again that making and doing are both 
opposed to being or knowing (in a non-discursive sense). 
Feed the poor 
tell the truth 
make water-places 
and build tanks for a town -
you may then go to heaven 
after death, but you'll get nowhere 
near the truth of our Lord 
And the man who knows our Lord. 
he gets no results. 
ALLAMA 959 
All true experience of god is krpa, grace that cannot 
be called, recalled, or commanded. The vacanas distinguish 
anubhava 'experience', and anubhava 'the Experience'. 
The latter is a search for the 'unmediated vision', the uncon-
ditioned act, the unpredictable experience. Living in history, 
time and cliche, one lives in a world of the pre-established, 
through the received (sruti) and the remembered (sf!!rti). 
But the Experience when it comes, comes like a storm to all 
such husks and labels. In a remarkable use of the well-known 
opportunist proverb ('Winnow when the wind blows'), 
Chow9ayya the Ferryman says: 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
Winnow, winnow I 
Look here, fellows 
winnow when the wind blows. 
Remember, the winds 
are not in your hands, 
Remember, you cannot say 
I'll winnow, I'll winnow 
tomorrow. 
When the winds of the Lord's grace 
lash, 
quickly, quickly winnow, winnow, 
said our Chowc;layya of the Ferrymen. 
CHO~AYYA OF THE FERRYMEN 
A mystical opportunist can only wait for it, be prepared 
to catch It as It passes. The grace of the Lord is nothing he 
can invoke or wheedle by prayer, rule, ritual, magical word 
or sacrificial offering.? In anubhiiva he needs nothing, he is 
7. Though the saints generally reject external ceremony the Vira-
§aivas have developed their own ceremony and symbols; but they 
are nothing elaborate like the Vedic. ViraSaiva orthodoxy depends 
on the eight coverings or emblems, theanavarar_ta. Some of the vacanas 
mention these, but they are clearly'secondary, and mere literal observ-
ance of these will not make one a bhakta. 
i. The guru or the spiritual guide leads the soul to ~iva. 
ii. The lmga, the only symbol of ~iva, is to be worn inseparably 
on his body by the devotee. There is no suggestion in any of the known 
vacanas that the lmga was a phallic symbol. The l.iiiga is ~iva himself, 
externalized as a form by the guru. 
iii. The jangama is a travelling religious teacher, ideally free and 
pure. To the Virabivas the jailgama is the lord on earth, as liilga and 
guru are other aspects of Him. The jangama also represents the com-
munity of saints, for which every vacanakara thirsts. 
iv. The padodaka is the holy water from the feet of the guru, 
imbibed by the devotee as a mark of his devotion. All things are sancti-
fied by guru, liilga and jangama. 

INTRODUCTION 
33 
Nothing; for to he someone, or something, is to be differen-
tiated and separate from God.When he is one with him, he is 
the Nothing without names. Yet we must not forget that 
this fierce rebellion against petrification was a rebellion only 
against contemporary Hindu practice; the rebellion was a call 
to return to experience. Like European Protestants, the 
Virasaivas returned to what they felt was the original inspira-
tion of the ancient traditions no different from true and present 
experience. 
Defiance is not discontinuity. Alienation from the imme-
diate environment can mean continuity with an older ideal. 
Protest can take place in the very name of one's opponents' 
ideals. 
We should also remember that the vacana ideals were not 
all implemented in the Vrrasaiva community; the relation 
of ideals to realization, the city of god and the city of man, 
is a complex relation, and we shall not embark here on an 
v. The prasada, or 'favour', is signified by food consecrated by the 
touch of the guru. In Hinduism privilege of food and drink mark 
and separate caste from caste, male from female, the pure from the 
polluted. Ideally, padodaka and prasada unite the devotees through 
commensality and companionship, whatever be their rank, sect or 
occupation. Such identity and equality are achieved by bhakti to the 
guru. Note also the importance of water in the ritual, unlike the 
Vedic fires. 
vi. The vibhiiti is holy ash prepared by a man of virtue and learning 
according to elaborate rules, to the accompaniment of sacred chants. 
Ash is also associated with Siva, the ascetic who covered His body 
with it. 
vii. The rudrikp, 'the eyes of Siva', are seeds sacred to all Siva-
wonhippers, strung into necklaces, bracelets and prayer beads. 
viii. The mantra, a sacred formula of five syllables (paiicak$3ri: 
Namas-Sivaya 'Obeisance to Siva'), is the King of Mantras, the only 
one accepted by the Virabivas. According to all Saivas, these five 
syllables arc 'far weightier than the 70 million other mantras put 
together'. S. C. Nandimath, A Handbook ofViralaivism, p. 63. 

34 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
anthropology& of contemporary Lingayat community, for 
it would require no less to describe the texts in context. 
What we have said so far may be summarized in a chart. 
The dotted lines indicate the 'permeable membranes' that 
allow transfusion. 
HINDUISM 
STRUCTURE 
ANTI-STJI. UCTURB 
Protest: 
Establishment: 
'Personal' 
'Public' Religion 
Religion 
Great 
Little 
Tradition 
Tradition 
Text 
Vedas etc. 
Local 
Puranas etc. 
Performance 
Vedic ritual 
Local sacri-
v.Bhakti 
fices etc. 
Social organi-
Caste-
Sects and 
zation 
hierarchy 
cults 
Mythology 
Pan-Indian 
Regional 
deities 
deities 
Following Victor Turner in The Ritual Process, .I am using 
the terms structure and anti-structure. I would further dis-
tinguish between anti-structure and counter-structure. Anti-
B. cf. L. Dumont's Homo Hierarchicus, Chicago, 1970. See also W. 
McCormack's anthropological appendix to this work. 

INTRODUCTION 
3S 
structure is anti- 'structure', ideological rejection of the idea 
of structure itsel£ Yet bhakti-communities, while proclaim-
ing anti-structure, necessarily develop their own structures 
for behaviour and belief, often minimal, frequently composed 
of elements selected from the very structures they deny or 
reject. The V1I3saiva saints developed in their community, 
not a full-scale 'Communitas' of equal beings- but a three-
part hierarchy, based not on birth or occupation, but on 
mystical achievement: the Guru, the Elders, and the Novices. 
{Poems like Mahadevi 45, 6o, 77 celebrate this mystical 
hierarchy.) The saints are drawn from every social class, 
caste and trade, touchable and nntouchable - from kings 
and ministers to manual workers - lanndrymen, boatmen, 
leatherworkers. Such collapsing of classes and occupa-
tions in the new community of saints and saints-to-be, 
however short-lived, led to Vrra5aiva slogans like kiiyakave 
kailiisa (Basavaooa), 'Work is heaven', 'to work is to be in 
the Lord's Kingdom'. Kayaka could also mean the work of 
ritual or other worship; here I think it means 'labour, work'. 
Furthermore, in the new community, instead of the multiple 
networks of normal social relationships, we have face-to-face 
dyadic relations with each other, with the guru, especially 
with God. Such dyads are symbolized by intimate relation-
ships: lover/beloved, father/son, mother/child, whore/cus-
tomer, master/man (e.g., Basaval}l}a 62, 70,97 etc.). 
There are many varieties of bhakti ;9 here we refer only 
to the kind exemplified by the vacanas. In the Northern 
g. Two kinds arc broadly distinguished: nirgutJa and sagutJa. Nirg111,1a 
bbakti is personal devotion offered to an impersonal attributelcss 
godhead (nirgw.ta), without 'body, parts or passion'; though he 
may bear a name like Siva, he does not have a mythology, he is not 
the Siva of mythology. By and large, the ViraSaiva saints are nirg111,1a 
bhaktas, relating personally and passionately to the Infmite Absolute. 
Sagw.ta bbakti is bhakti for a particular god with attributes (sagW)a), 
like Krishna. The woman saint Mahadeviyakka, in this selection, comes 

SPEAKING OP hVA 
traditions, Kabir's poems would be a parallel example. The 
'great' and the 'little' traditions Bow one into the other, 
as in an osmosis. They together constitute the 'public religion' 
of Hinduism, its 'establishment' or 'structure' as defined 
above. Bhakti as anti-structure begins by denying and defying 
such an establishment; but in course of time, the heretics 
are canonized; temples are erected to them, Sanskrit hagio-
graphies are composed about them. Not only local legend 
and ritual, but an elaborate theology assimilating various 
'great tradition' dements may grow around them. They 
become, in retrospect, founders of a new caste, and are 
defied in turn by new egalitarian movements. 
Virasaivas were protesters not only against the Hinduism 
of their time, but also against Jainism, the powerful competitor 
to Hinduism. BasavaJJ.JJ.a's and Dasimayya's lives were des-
perate struggles against both Brahminism and Jainism.The 
jainas were politically powerful in the area and represented 
privilege. Ideologically, their belief in karma was absolute; 
the individual had inexorably to run through the entire chain 
of action and coruequence, with no glimmer of grace. To 
this absolute determinism, the V1rdaiva saints opposed their 
sense of grate and salvation through bhakti. Yet they shared 
with Jainism and Buddhism the doctrine of ahimsa or non-
violence towards all creation (c£ Dasareswara, · p. S4), the 
abhorrence of animal sacrifice and ritual orthodoxy. Saivism 
in general, and V1rasaivism even more so, has been rightly 
described as 'a revolt from within, while Buddhism and 
Jainism were revolts from the outside'. (Nandimath, p. S3·) 
close to being a good example, though not a full-blown one - for she 
speaks little of the mythological or other attributes of Siva, say, his 
divine consort Parvati or his mythic battles with evil demons. Yet 
she is in love with him, her sensuality is her spiritual metaphor. 
Vai,Q.ava bhakti, bhakti for Krishna or Rama, generally offer the best 
examples of sagUQa bhakti. 

INTRODUCTION 
37 
Some Vrrasaivas, however, disclaim all connections with 
Hinduism. 
THE VACANA FORM AND ORAL POETICS 
The Sanskrit religious texts are described as sruti and s~?~rti. 
S111rti is what is remembered, what is memorable; sruti, 
what is heard, what is received. Virasaiva saints called their 
compositions vacana, or 'what is said'. Vacana, as an active 
mode, stands in opposition to both sruti and St]lTti: not what 
is heard, but what is said; not remembered or received, but 
uttered here and now. To the saints, religion is not a spectator 
sport, a reception, a consumption; it is an experience of Now, 
a way of being. This distinction is expressed in the language 
of the vacanas, the forms the vacanas take. Though medieval 
Kannada was rich in native Dravidian metres, and in borrowed 
Sanskritic forms, no metrical line or stanza is used in the vac-
anas.10 The saints did not follow any of these models. Basav-
a~;u;ta said: 
I don't know anything like timebeats and metre 
nor the arithmetic of strings and drums; 
I don't know the count of iamb and dactyl. 
My lord of the meeting rivers, 
as nothing will hurt you · 
I'll sing as I love. 
BASAVA!ll'!ll'A 949 
It is not even he that sings; the Lord sings through him. 
10. One of the general meanings of'vacana' is 'prose'. The vacana-
karas did not think of themselves as poets, for Poetry (poesy?) too is 
part of court and temple and punditry, part of sth:ivara. 

SPEAKING OF §IVA 
The instrument is not what is 'made', but what one 'is'. 
The body can be lute as it can be temple. 
Make of my body the beam of a lute 
of my head the sounding gourd 
of my nerves the strings 
of my fingers the plucking rods. 
Clutch me close. 
and play your thirty-two songs 
0 lord of the meeting rivers! 
BASAVA~~A SOO 
The vacana is thus a rejection of premeditated art, the 
sthavaras of form. It is not only a spontaneous cry but a 
cry for spontaneity - for the music of a body given over 
to the lord. 
The traditional time-beat, like the ritual gesture, was felt 
to be learned, passive, inorganic; too well organized to be 
organic. Here too, the sthavara, the standing thing, shall fall, 
but the jatigama shall prevail. The battles that were fought 
in Europe under the banners of Classical/Romantic, rhetoric/ 
sincerity, impersonal/personal, metrefvers fibre were fought 
in Indian literature in genres like the vacana. 
But then 'spontaneity' has its own rhetorical structure; 
no free verse is truly free. Without a repertoire of structures 
to rely on, there can be no spontaneity. In the free-seeming 
verse, there are always patterns that loom and withdraw, 
figures of sound that rhyme and ring bells with the figures 
of meaning. It is not surprising that M. Cidananda Murti11 
has shown how the apparently metreless metre of the vacanas 
has a tripadi-base. Tripadi is a popular 3-line form of the 
oral tradition used widely both in folk song and in folk 
epigram. 
u.ln a Kannada article published in his Samsodhana taranga, Mysore, 
1966, pp. IS)0-204-

INTRODUCTION 
39 
Scholars like Parry and Lord have studied the techniques 
of oral verse-making in folk-epics. They have paid little 
attention to shorter forms. Several features noted for heroic 
oral poetry do appear in the vacanas: in particular a common 
stock of themes that occur in changing forms, repetitions of 
phrases and ideas, the tendency to cycles or sequences of poems. 
But the extensive use of formulae and substitutes in the strict 
sense and a distinct given prosody, both characteristic of the 
oral bardic traditions, are generally absent in the vacana, 
a genre of epigram and lyric. 
The vacanakaras, however, did use stock phrases, proverbs, 
and religious commonplaces of the time. This stock, shared 
by Southern and Northern saints, the Upani~ads and the folk 
alike, included figures, symbols and paradoxes often drawn 
from an ancient and pan-Indian pool of symbology. Bhakti 
saints, like the vacanakaras, have been called the 'great inte-
grators ', 12 bringing the high to the low, esoteric paradox 
to the man in the street, transmuting ancient and abstruse 
ideas into live contemporary experiences; at the same time, 
finding everyday symbols for the timeless. 
They also travelled within and across regions, claimed 
kindred saints of other regions in their geneological tree 
of gurus. Thus the Vrrasaiva saints named the 63 Tamil 
Saints among their forebears. Saivism knits faraway Kashmir 
with South India, and within South India the saints of 
Tamil, Kannada and Telugu. Both Kabir of the Hindi region, 
12. See V. Raghavan, The Great Integrators: the Saiut-singers of India, 
Delhi, 1966, for a discussion of saints from other regions, as well as 
their relation to each other and the Indian heritage. Here, we omit 
other parallels of, and influences on bhakti, like the Muslim Sufi 
mystics, the esoteric cults of tantra and yoga in their Hindu, Buddhist 
and Jaina versions. Nor can we consider here the gifts of bhakti poets 
to modem India, in poetry (e.g. Tagorc in Bengal, Bharati in Tamil); 
in politics (Gandhi), religion and philosophy (Sri Ramakrishna and 
Sri Aurobindo). 

40 
SPEAKING Of §IVA 
and .Caitanya ofBengal, were inspired by southern precedents. 
Chronologically from the seventh century on, century after 
century, bhakti movements have arisen in different regions 
and languages, spanning the whole Indian sub-continent, in 
Tamil, Kannada, Marathi, Gujerati, Hindi, Bengali, Assamese, 
and Punjabi, roughly in that order. Like a lit fuse, the passion 
of bhakti seems to spread from region to region, from 
century to century, quickening the religious impulse. Arising 
in particular regions, speaking the local spoken languages, 
it is yet inter-regional - both 'parochial' and 'universal'. 
Even modem urban bhakti groups include in their hymnals, 
songs of several languages and ages. 
So it is not surprising that 
from the Upani~ads onwards, a large number of similes and anal-
ogies have been pressed into service, 'the Seed and the Tree, the Sea 
and the Rivers, the Spider and its Self-woven web, the Thread 
and the Gems, the Warp and the Woof, the River and the Boat, 
the Chariot and the Charioteer, the King and his Subjects, the Child 
and its fantasies, the Stage and Acting, the Puppet and Puppeteer, 
the Dream, the Dance, and the Sport (Lila)'. u 
To take a few examples: see Mahadeviyakka 17 for the 
Spider and its self-woven Web (as silkworm and cocoon), 
20 for the puppet at the end of a string; BasavaQJ).a 8 for 
the Sea of Life, 33 for the mind as monkey; 144 for the 
river and the sea. 
Yet it should not be imagined that the common stock 
was used in exactly similar ways. Only the components 
were the same; the functions, the emerging meanings, were 
often startlingly different. For instance, the image of the 
insect weaving a web out of its body is an ancient one. 
The Brhadiira~;~yaka Upani~ad has this description of Brahman, 
the creator: 
13. Raghavan, op. cit., p. 37· 

INTRODUCTION 
As a spider emerges (from itself) by 
(spinning) threads [out of its own body) ••• 
so too from this self do all the life-breaths, 
all the worlds, all the gods, and all contin-
gent beings rise up in all directions.14 
Mahideviyakka/ has the following: 
Like a silkworm weaving 
her house with love 
from her marrow, 
and dying 
in her body's threads 
winding tight, round 
and round, 
I bum 
desiring what the heart desires. 
Cut through. 0 lord, 
my heart's greed, 
and show me 
your way out, 
0 lord white as jasmine. 
MAHADBVIY AKKA 17 
41 
Note the startling difference in the feeling-tone of these 
passages, the coolness of the Upani~ad and the woman-
saint's heart-rending cry for release. The classical text des-
cribes the object, the Cosmic creator; the vacana describes 
the subject, the speaker's feelings towards hersel£ The one 
describes creation by and out of the creator; the other des-
cribes the self trammelled in its self-created illusions. One 
speaks of the birth of worlds, awesome, wondrous, non-
human; the other speaks of a death, small, calling for com-
passion, all too human. 
Though Basava~;t~;ta says in the poem quoted earlier, 
14. ll-1.20 trans. R. C. Zacbner, Hindu Scriptures, New York., 1966, 
P·4+ 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
'I'll sing as I love,' rejecting conventional patterns of verse-
making, the vacanas evolve a distinctive structure (as, in the 
religious dimension, anti-structure develops a counter-
structure). Their metre is not syllabic but syntactic; the regu-
larities and returning units are not usually units of sound, 
but units of syntax and semantics. The oral origins of the 
poetry are clear in its favourite structure. The poetics of the 
vacana is an oral poetics. 
'Grammatical parallelism rs belongs to the poetic canon 
of numerous folk-patterns,' says Roman Jakobson. He also 
cites work on parallelisms in Vedic, Chinese, Finnish and 
notably Hebrew verse. While this is no place to undertake a 
full teclmical analysis, it is necessary to indicate a few major 
symmetries and patterns in vacana poetry and their function. 
A simple-looking poem like the following has many sym-
metries: 
I. The master of the house, is he at home, or isn't he? 
2. Grass on the threshold, 
3· dirt in the house: 
4· The master of the house, is he at home, or im't he? 
S· Lies in the body, 
6. lust in the heart: 
7. no, the master of the house is not at home, 
8. our Lord of the Meeting Rivers. 
BASAVA~~A 97 
English syntax does not allow a natural and succinct 
translation of all these symmetries. A literal translation will 
indicate some of them, including the actuai word repetitions, 
and suggest the departures that the present translation has 
made from the original~ 
IS. Roman Jakobsen, 'Grammatical parallelism and its Russian 
facet', Language, Vol. 42.2. {1966), pp. 399-420. 

INTRODUCTION 
I. numeyo/age numeyo4eyaniJJiln6 illa11o? 
2. hostilalli hullu huyi, 
3· maneyo/age raja tumbi, 
4- maneyo/age numeyo~aniJJlno illavo 1 
S· tanu11o/age husi tumbi, 
6. manado/age 11ilaya tumbi, 
7· maneyo/age maneyo4eyanilla, 
8. kil4alasatigama tli11iii6 
43 
The literal translation is as follows, with parallel grammatical 
constructions indicated by letters (A, B, C, D, a, b, c); 
similarly structured 'metrical' lines by roman numerals 
(I. n. n): 
A 
B 
c 
D 
t. 
I 
house-inside houso-master is-he, or is-he-not?' 
a 
b 
c 
2. 
li 
threshold-on grass having-growu. 
a 
b 
c 
3· 
li 
houso-inside dust havmg-Dlled 
A 
B 
c 
D· 
... 
I 
-house-inside houso-master is-he, or iKO-not1 
a 
b 
c; 
S· 
li 
body-inside lies having-Dlled, 
a 
b 
c 
6. 
li 
heart-inside c:amal-desires havmg-£lled, 
A 
B 
c 
7· 
I 
house-inside house-master iHlot 
8. m 
Meet:ing-«-Rivers God 
16. We must remember that all the line-divisions are arbitrary. 
Though editors make their own 'cuts' according to syntax, the ori-
ginal manusaipt has no indication of line-, phrase- or word-division, 
nor punctuation. Note also the absence of distinctions like housefhome; 
both are mane in Kannada. 

44 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
For instance, lines I and 4 are simple repetitions, enclosing 
2 and 3 which use the same basic phrase pattern in the Kannada 
original: 
2. hostilalli hullu huni: threshold-on grass having-grown 
3· maneyoJage raja tumbi: house-inside dust having-filled 
The syntactic construction is the same, but the slots are 
filled with different words. 
Lines s and 6, like 2 and 3 use the same syntactic construc-
tion but the words are chosen from entirely different semantic 
domains: body and mind. Because the syntax is the same in 
2, 3 and s. 6, a metaphoric ratio is created by the parallelism: 
threshold: house:: body: heart 
Line 7, 'The master of the house is not at home' repeats 
the construction in I and 4, with a difference: I and 4 are 
questions, and 7 is the answer to it. (c£ the original and the 
literal translation above.) 
The last line 'Lord of the Meeting Rivers' is the regular 
signature-line which appears in poem after poem - a singular 
line with no parallels within the poem but repeated as a 
refrain across poems: it has the effect of binding together 
into a cycle all the poems of the saint. Further, the signature-
line, though repeated in every poem, does not have every-
where the same vocative function. For instance in poem 97, 
it is ambiguous: it is both an address to the lord, and an 
attribute of'the master of the house'; ~o that the whole poem 
is about the absence of the Lord of the Meeting Rivers in the 
heart of the devotee. As elsewhere in parallelistic texts (e.g., 
Vedic Sanskrit, Chinese, Russian, Biblical Hebrew) 'the-
occasional isolated single lines' chiefly signal the beginning 
or the end of an entire text or its paragraphs.17 
But the repetitions or parallelisms are also ordered towards 
17. Jakobson, op. cit., p. 409· 

INTRODUCTION 
45 
a crescendo. In the above poem, it is a climax of denial. 
In Basav~a 563 (quoted on p. 2.8) after a disgusted crescendo 
listing of 'the pot is a god. The winnowing/fan is a god. 
The stone in the street is a god etc.', there is a climax of asser-
tion: 'There is only/one god. He is our Lord/of the Meeting 
Rivers.' Sometimes there are inverse parallels - a 'chiasm' : 
in 105, 'a snake-charmer and his noseless wife' meet head-on 
'a noseless woman/and her snake-charming husband' - the 
inversion representing the mirror-effect of this encounter 
with the Self as the Other. 
In Mahidevi 336, the three central images are parallel 
constructions, each therefore a metaphor for the other and 
all of them approximations to a description of the lord's 
perfect love. But the three metaphors (arrow, embrace, 
welding), chosen from three different semantic areas, are 
also a progression, three phases oflove as well as the act oflove. 
Repetition of word and construction, repetitions with a 
difference, combined with progressions towards a climax 
of assertion or reversal are devices of oral composition. These 
carry with them a number of paired opposites or lexical 
partners which appear in similar syntactic positions; they 
imply each other, they negate each other; they are often 
held together as a pair by rhyme or alliteration (e.g., liil.ga/ 
ailga). 
As shown earlier, a poem like 8w is built around several 
pairs of such oppositions: temple/body (dehafdegula), sthavara/ 
jailgama. Some of the other pairs are body/mind (B. 36), 
creature/creator, the faithful/the unbeliever (bhaktafbhavi), 
lordfhumansoul(fuiga/ail.ga), othergods/Siva(quoted on p. 19). 
The oral origins and qualities of this poetry are demonstra-
ted and reinforced by the never-failing vigorous tones of 
speech, the imperatives (Basaval)l)a 162.), instructions (soo, 
quoted on p. 38), warnings (2.12.), pleas (350), curses (639), 
questions and answers (97), oaths (430), 'Vocatives (848), 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
outcries (8), chatty talk (703) and the recurring invocation 
to Siva, the eternal addressee. 
Linguistically too, the vacana-poets were the first to use 
the changing local sub-standard spoken dialects of their birth-
places in poetry, while contemporary poets wrote in a highly 
stylized archaic language, preferring again the jangamas of 
language to the sthavaras. In fact vacanas and inscriptions 
are the most important witnesses to the dialectal speech of 
medieval Kannada country. In their urgency and need for 
directness, they defied standard upper-class educated speech 
and stylized metrical literary genres, as they defied ritual and 
orthodoxy. Such untrammelled speech in poetry has a fresh 
'modern' ring to it in imagery, rhythm and idiom - a 
freedom that modem literary writers in Kannada have not 
yet quite won. 
The common language of the vacanas did not exclude 
Sanskrit words (and even common Sanskrit quotations); 
instead the vacanakaras used Sanskrit with brilliant and com-
plex effects of contrast, setting it off against the native dialectal 
Kannada. To take one instance, Mahadevi 17 (quoted on 
p. 41) opens with the sentence: 
terat;~iyahu/u tanna snehadinJa maneya miiji Ianna 
niilu tannane sutti sutti siiva teranante 
Like a silkworm weaving 
her house with love 
from her marrow, 
and dying 
in her body's threads 
winding tight, round 
and round ••• 
In that Kannada clause, there is only one Sanskrit-derived 
word sneha, meaning in common usage 'friendship, fondness, 
love, any attachment'; but etymologically it means 'sticky 
substance' like oil or marrow (in my translation of the un-

INTRODUCTION 
47 
translatable I have tried to suggest both by 'love' and 
'marrow'). The word stands out (like the Greek/Latin in 
Shakespeare's Anglo-Saxon) gathering double meanings to 
itsel£ The sticky substance out of which the worm weaves 
its threads, as well as the attachments in which humans tram-
mel themselves, are suggested and inter-related in one stroke 
by the word sneha. Furthermore, here as elsewhere in the 
vacanas, the use of Sanskrit itself becomes symbolic, symbolic 
of abstraction. The god's names are partly Sanskrit: e.g., in 
Cennamallikarjuna, cenna 'lovely' is Kannada, the rest 
Sanskrit. But, because of the transparent Kannada, the 
Sanskrit too is never opaque or distant for long; it becomes 
double-faced as in the case of sneha above, by etymological 
recovery: even linguistically the Body stirs in the Temple. 
The etymologies of. the Sanskrit names are never far from the 
surface, and often participate in the poetry. The proper name 
Guhesvara 'Lord of Caves' is appropriate to Allama: his 
favourite imagery is of dark and light (e.g., 219, on p. 154). 
Mallikarjuna ('Arjuna, Lord of goddess Mallika' -the god's 
name including His beloved - or literally, 'Lord White as 
Jasmine'), is appropriate to Mahli.devi whose metaphor is love 
itself, and who is ever thrilled by the lord's beauty. Rlimanlitha, 
or Siva as worshipped by Rlima as his lord, is right for 
Dlisimayya who urges the greatness of Siva over all other 
gods. With his water-imagery (c£ 8) and themes of merging 
social differences, BasavaJ;tJ;ta' s god is Kii<;ialasangamadeva, the 
Lord of the Meeting Rivers. Interestingly enough, the last 
name combines in itself both Kannada (kiiQalu, 'meeting of 
rivers') and Sanskrit (sailgama, synonymous with ku<;ialu). 
Such quickening of etymologies in the poetry is one reason for 
translating attributive proper names into literal English -
hoping that by using them constantly as a repetitive formula 
they will keep their chanting refrain quality and work as 
unique proper names. 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
THB 'LANGUAGE OF SECRECY' (SANDHYABHASA) 
The range of vacana expression spans a pan-Indian stock 
of figures, homely images of everyday experience, the sense 
and idiom of the earth, as well as an abstruse esoteric symbol-
ism. The esoteric vacanas are callec! be4agina vacana (fancy 
poems), more riddle than poem and, oftentimes, with a 
whole occult glossary for key. This glossary is made up of a 
common pool of symbols and concepts drawn from yogic 
psychology and tantric philosophy. Allamaprabhu, the most 
metaphysical of the vacanakaras, has many be4agina vacanas, 
and we have included a few. For instance, Allama 218: 
They don't know the day 
is the dark's face, 
and dark the day's. 
A necklace of nine jewds 
lies buried, intact, in the face of the night; 
in the face of day a tree 
with leaves of nine designs. 
When you feed the necklace 
to the tree, 
the Breath enjoys it 
in the Lord of the Caves. 
The paradoxical images of this poem have a surrealist brilliance 
in themselves. To a learned Vttasaiva, the poem would mean 
the following: 
The night and day are obviously ignor:mce and awareness. It is in 
the experience of the ignorant that we find the jewd of wisdom, 
a necklace of nine lingas. In awareness is knowledge and discrimina-
tion (the tree), carefully nurtured. But only when the wisdom of the 

INTRODUCTION 
49 
ignorant experience is fed to the discrimination of the aware, the 
Liilga of the Breath finds true joy. 
Such a dark, ambiguous language of ciphers (sant!hyiibh~a 
or 'intentional language') has been much discussed by 
scholars of Yoga and tantra. 18 Riddles and enigmas were 
used even in Vedic times. In the heterodox and esoteric 
cults, such systems of cryptography were intended to conceal 
the secret doctrine from the uninitiated and the outsider. 
But riddle and paradox are also meant to shatter the ordi-
nary language of ordinary experiences, baftling the rational 
intelligence to look through the glass darkly till it begins 
to see. Oust as often, it may degenerate into a mere mental 
gymnastic.) It is • a process of destroying and reinventing lan-
guage' till we find ourselves in • a universe of analogies, 
homologies, and double meanings' .19 
A related device is a favourite with vacanas: extended 
metaphor, a simile which projects a whole symbolic situation 
suppressing one part of the comparison, as in BasavaJ;tJ;ta III. 
One of the most moving uses of the extended analogue is 
.Mahadeviyakka's love of God, where all the phases of love 
become metaphors for the phases of mystical union and aliena-
tion. For instance: 
I have Maya for mother-in-law; 
the world for father-in-law; 
three brothers-in-law like tigersJ 
and the husband's thoughts 
arc full of laughing women: 
DO god. this man. 
And I cmnot aoss the sister-in-law. 
18. cf. Eliadc's Yoga, pp. 2.49-S.f. 
J9o ibid.,p.2Sio 

so 
SPEAKING OF §IVA 
But I will 
give this wench the slip 
and go cuckold my husband with Hara, my lord. 
My mind is my maid: 
by her kindness, I join 
my Lord, 
my utterly beautiful Lord 
from the mountain-peaks 
my lord as white as jasmine 
and I will make Him 
my good husband. 
MAHADEVIY AKKA 328 
Mahadeviyakka's poem explicitly takes over conventions 
of Indian love-poetry {available in Sanskrit as in the regional 
languages).:z.o An abhisarika, a woman stealing out of a 
houseful of relatives to meet her lover, is the central imag~ 
The method is the method of allegory, explicitly equating, 
one-for-one, various members of a household with various 
abstractions: Maya or Primal Illusion is the mother-in-law, 
the world is the father-in-law. Some of the equations are 
implicit, and they draw on a common background of philoso-
phical concepts. For instance, the three brothers-in-law are the 
three gut;as, the three ultimate components which make 
all the particulars of nature what they are; these three are 
inescapable as long as one is part of nature, they keep a 
tiger-vigil. The husband is Karma, the past of the ego's 
many lives. The sister-in-law, who also keeps the speaker 
imprisoned, is apparently the viisana, the binding memory 
20. Vai~!)ava bhakti poems make the fullest use of these conventions, 
especially in the personnel and affairs ofKnl)a and Radha. For examples, 
see In Praise of Krishna, Songs from tile Bengali, translated by E. D. 
Dimock and D. Levertov, New York, 1967. 

INTRODUCTION 
SI 
or 'smell' that the Karma-Past carries with it. The kind confi-
dante or maid is the Mind, who alone helps her meet her 
Lord and keep the tryst. 
Note how all the relationships mentioned are those 'made' 
by marriage. The house is full of in-laws, 21 acquired, social 
ties. Not one person is related to the woman by birth. (The 
mother-in-law in a South Indian family of this region could 
be a blood-relation, a paternal aunt. This only adds a further 
nuance, the conversion by ritual of a blood-kin into an 
in-law.) A net of marriage rules and given relations binds her. 
These are what you make and enter into, not what you are 
hom with. This elaborate build-up of social bonds is shattered 
by the cuckolding climax of the poem, with the Lord as the 
adulterous lover. Here a vulgar Kannada word is used to 
speak of the 'cuckolding', the 'fornication'. The whole 
poem, written in a colloquial, vigorous speaking style, 
moves toward the word hadara or fornication, enacting by 
linguistic shock the shock of her explosive desire to shatter 
the entire framework of so-called legitimacies. Elsewhere also 
Mahadeviyakka rejects outright all notions of modesty as a 
virtue. She is supposed to have thrown off her clothes at one 
point, in defiance of the indecent pruderies of the society 
around her. 
This stresses the view that love of God is not only 
an unconditional giving up of all, but it is necessarily 
anti-'structure', an anti-social 'unruly' relationship -
un-
making, undoing, the man-made. It is an act of violation 
against ordinary expected loyalties, a breakdown of the 
predictable and the secure. Some such notion is at the heart 
of this complex of metaphoric action. The Lord is the Illicit 
21. The English over~phasizes the 'law' aspects, by its various 
'in-law' compounds in the kinship system. Kannada has unitary words 
for all the 'made' relations: atte (mother-in-law), m411a (father-in-law), 
etc. 

52 
SPEAKING OP §IVA 
Lover; He will break up the world of Karma and normal 
relationships, the husband's family that must necessarily be 
violated and trespassed against, if one should have anything 
to do with God. 
Such a poem is an allegory with no need for a key. Some--
times in the vacanakara's quest for the unmediated vision, 
there comes a point when language, logic and metaphor 
are not enough; at such points, the poet begins with a striking 
traditional metaphoru and denies it at the end: 
Looking for your light, 
I went out: 
it was like the sudden dawn 
of a million million suns, 
a ganglion of lightnings 
for my wonder. 
0 Lord of Caves, 
if you are light, 
there can be no metaphor. 
ALLAMA f)'p. 
CONCLUSION 
In describing some of the general characteristics ofV1ra~aivism 
through the vacanas, we have also described aspects of other 
bhakti-movements in India. The supreme importance of a 
guru, the celebration of a community of saints, worship as a 
personal relationship, the rejection of both great and little 
2.2. The Bhagavadgitii XI, 12 'If in [bright) heaven together arise 
the shining brilliance of a thousand suns, then would that perhaps 
resemble the brillianceofthat[God)sogreat ofSei£'Tr. R. C. Zacbner, 
Oxford, 1969. 

INTRODUCTION 
53 
traditions (especially caste barriers), the wandering nature of 
the saint, the use of a common stock of rdigious ideas and 
symbols in the spoken language of the region, and the use of 
certain esoteric systems, these are only some of the shared 
characteristics. Such sharing actually makes for one more 
pan-Indian tradition, bhakti, with regional variations. 
Both the classical (in Sanskrit and in the regional languages) 
and folk literature of India work with well-established lan-
guages of convention, given personae, and elaborate metrical 
patterns that mediate and depersonalize literary expression. 
The literary ideal is impersonality. But vacanas are personal 
literature, personal in several senses: 
(a) Many of them express the real conflicts of real persons, 
represent a life more fully than anything in the older literature. 
For instance, Basavar;u;ta speaks of himself as the minister of 
of a non-Vrra5aiva king, accused by his own men of betraying 
his god for a king. 
(b) They are uttered, not through a persona or mask, 
but directly in the person of the poet himself, in his native 
local dialect and idiom, using the tones and language of 
personal conversation or outcry. 
(c) Even the few given conventional stances of bhakti are 
expressed in terms of deeply-felt personal relations; the loves 
and frustrations of bhakti are those of lover and beloved 
(e.g., Mahadevi), mother and child, father and son, master 
and servant, even whore and customer. 
(d) Compared to other Indian rdigious literatures like 
the Vedic hymns, the vacanas describe the devotee's state 
directly and the god only by implication; the concern is 
with the subject rather than the object (of worship). 
Furthermore, bhakti religions like Vrrasaivism are Indian 
analogues to European protestant movements. Here we sug-
gest a few parallels: protest against mediators like priest, 
ritual, temples, social hierarchy, in the name of direct, 

S4 
SPJ!AX:ING OP §IvA 
individual, original experience; a religious movement of 
and for the underdog, including saints of all castes and trades 
(like Bunyan, the tinker), speaking the sub-standard dialect 
of the region, producing often the first authentic regional 
expressions and translations of inaccessible Sanskritic texts 
Qike the translations of the Bible in Europe); a religion 
of arbitrary grace, with a doctrine of the mystically ·chosen 
elect, replacing a social hierarchy-by-birth with a mystical 
hierarchy-by-experience; doctrines of work as worship lead-
ing to a puritan ethic; monotheism and evangelism, a mix-
ture of intolerance and humanism, harsh and tender. 
The vacanas express a kin-sense and kindness for all 
living things - not unknown to classical Hindu religion, 
but never so insistent and ardent - a love of man, beast and 
thing, asserting everywhere that man's arrangements are 
for man and not man for them. Basava1,11;ta cries out in one 
vacana(194): 
They say: Pour, pour the milk! 
when they see a snake image in a stone. 
But they ay: Kill, kill! 
when they meet a snake for real. 
His most-quoted saying in Kannada asks, 'Where is religion 
without loving-kindness?' A poignant example of such loving-
kindness towards all creation was the saint named Dasareswara. 
He did not even pick Bowers to offer them to a god; he 
gathered only blossoms that fell of themselves: 
Knowing one's lowliness 
in every word; 
the spray of insects in the air 
in every gesture of the hand; 
things living, things moving 
come sprung from the earth 
under every footfall; 

INTRODUCTION 
and when holding a plant 
or joining it to another 
or in the letting it go 
to be all mercy 
to be light 
as a dusting brush 
of peacock feathers: 
such moving, such awareness 
is love that makes us one 
with the Lord 
Dasareswara. 
DASARUWARA 
ss 


Further Readings in English 
Bhandarkar, R. G., Vai$t.ravism, Saivism, and Other Minor Religious 
Syste~s. Strassburg, 1913. 
Bhoosnurmath, S. S., and Menezes, L. M. A., Sunyasampadane, 
Vol. II {text and English translation). Dharwar, 1968; Vol. ill, 1969. 
Eliade, M., Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. New York, 19s8. 
Hastings, James, (ed.). Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. New York. 
1928. 13 volumes._ 
Especially: Enthoven, R. E., 'Lingayats', Vol. VIII. 
Grierson, G. A., 'Bhakri-marga', Vol. II. 
Lord, A. B., The Singer of Tales. Cambridge, Mass., x9(So. 
McCormack, W., 'The Forms of Communication in Vrra.Saiva 
Religion', Traditional India: Structure and Change, ed. M. Singer, 
Philadelphia, I9S7· 
Nandimath, S. C., Menezes, L. M. A., and Hiremath, R. C. Sunya-
smhpadane Vol. I (text and English translation). Dharwar: Karnatak 
University, 196s. 
Nandimath, S. C., A Handbook ofViraJaivism. Dharwar, 1942. 
Raghavan, V., The Great Integrators. New Delhi, 1966. 
Singer, M., When a Great Tradition Modernizes, an anthropological 
approach to Indian Civilization. New York, 1972. 
Tipperudraswami, H., The ViraJaiva Saints. Translated from the 
Kannada by S. M. Angadi. Mysore, x968. 
Turner, V., The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Chicago, 
1969· 
Weber, M., The Religion of India. Translated by Hans H. Gerth and 
Don Martindale. Glencoe, 19s8. 
Whitt"head, H., The Village Gods of South India. Calcutta, I92I, 
Zaehner, R. C., The Bhagavadgitii. Oxford, x969. 


SPEAKING OF SIVA 


BASAVA~~A 
THE biography ofBasaval}l}a has many contradictory sources: 
controversial edicts, deifying accpunts by Vtrabiva followers, 
poetic life-histories, pejorative accounts by his Jaina oppon-
ents mentioned in the vacanas of contemporary and later 
saints. Basavai}Qa was a political activist and social reformer, 
minister to a king in a troubled century; it is not surprising 
that he should have been praised as a prophet by followers 
and condemned as a zealot and conspirator by his enemies, 
of whom he had many. 
Leaving aside the scholarly and other controversies re-
garding the dates and the events of BasavaJ;u;ta's life, here is 
one generally accepted version: 
BasavaQQa was hom in A.D. no6 and died in n67 or 
n68. His birthplace was probably MaQigavalli. His parents 
seem to have died early in his childhood and he grew up 
under a grandmother's care; he was later looked after by his 
foster-parents, Madiraja (or Midarasa) and Mlidambike of 
BagevaQi, who are 1 often considered his own parents. His 
foster-father, Madiraja, appears to have been learned in the 
traditional classics; jjasavai}Qa's Sanskrit learning obviously 
derives from his early education and environment. There are 
also records of a brahminical initiation ceremony (upanayana) 
in III4 A.D. There is some reason to believe that Bijjala, 
later Basavai}Qa' s patron and king, married the daughter 
of Mlidiraja, .and so was well-known to BasavaQQa even 
from his early years. 
BasavaJJ.Qa had always been devoted to Siva; by the time 
he was sixteen he decided to spend his life in the worship and 
service of ~iva. He found the caste-system of his society 
and the ritualism of his home shackling and senseless. As 

62 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
Harihara, his fifieenth-century poet-biographer says, ' "Love 
of Siva cannot live with ritual." So saying, he tore off 
his sacred thread which bound him like a past-life's deeds ..• 
and lefi the shade of his home, disregarded wealth and pro-
priety, thought nothing of relatives. Asking no one in town, 
he left Bagevac;li, raging for the Lord's love, eastwards ••• 
and entered Kappac;lisangama' where three rivers meet. 
The Lord of the Meeting Rivers, Ku4alasangamadeva, 
becomes his chosen god; every vacana by Basaval}J}a has 
his chosen god's name in it, usually as the closing signature-
line. 
In KiicJalasangama, he found a guru, with whom he studied 
the Vedas and other religious texts. Though he began his 
worship with an external symbol (sthiivaralinga), he soon 
found his #talinga, his own personal, chosen, linga. Legend 
says that the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, 
'Son, Basaval}J}a, we want to raise you in the world; go to 
Matiga)avac;la where King Bijja)a reigns.' Basaval}J}a woke 
up and found it unbearable to follow the Lord's decree, 
leaving the temple and the Lord of the Meeting Rivers be-
hind. He cried out that the Lord was merciless, 'taking away 
earth from under a man falling from the sky, cutting the 
throat of the faithful'. The Lord appeared to him again in a 
dream in the midst of his distress and said to him that he 
would appear next day to him through the mouth of the 
Sacred Bull. Next day ~bile Basaval}J}a waited worshipfully, 
leaning his body on the Stone Bull in the temple, the Lord 
formed a linga in the heart-lotus of the Bull, and enthroned 
on the tongue, came into Basaval}Qa's hand, and initiated him. 
From then on, Basaval}J}a was freed from places. He was his 
Lord's man and prepared himself to create a society of Siva's 
men. 
Basaval}J}a then went to Kalyal}a where his uncle Baladeva 
was Bijjala's minister, and married his uncle's daughter 

BASA VA~~A 
63 
Gangambike. Soon he was a trusted friend of King Bijjala. 
and rose in his court. When his uncle Baladeva died, Basava\1\).a 
succeeded him as Bijjala's minister, and assumed many powers 
of state. He also gave his foster-sister, Nilal&ane, to Basav-
aQ\}a in marriage. 
Meanwhile, Basava\}Qa's devotion matured from strength 
to strength. 'Not only was he the king's treasurer (bhatJ4ari) 
but he became the Treasurer of the Lord's Love (bhakti-
bhatJ4ari)'. As the Lordandhisjangamas (wandering devotees) 
are both one, he fed and served the Lord's men. For 'they 
are the face and mouth of the Lord, as the root below is the 
mouth of a tree'. Devotees from far and near walked a beaten 
path to Kalya\la to see BasavaQQa and enjoy his hospitality. 
Many were converted to Siva-worship by the fire of Basav-
aQQa's zeal and stayed in Kalya\].a, thus swelling the numbers 
ofVrra5aivas. Basava\}r;ta also undertook the work of initiating 
the newcomers himsel£ A new community with egalitarian 
ideals disregarding caste, class and sex grew in Kalya\la. 
challenging orthodoxy, rejecting social convention and reli-
gious ritual. A political crisis was at hand. 
Naturally, there was fierce opposition to this rising utopian 
ginger-group. Its enemies gathered around Bijjala and 
battered at his faith in his minister with gossip and accusa-
tion. Bijjala was swayed by this barrage of accusations and 
waited for a suitable opportunity to curb the rise of VttaSaiv-
ism in his country. 
In the new egalitarian Vrrdaiva community a wedding 
took place between two devotees; the bridegroom was a for-
mer outcaste and the bride an ex-brahmin. The traditionalists 
thought of this unorthodox marriage as the frrst blow against 
a society built on the caste-system. So Bijjala sentenced the 
fathers of the bride and the bridegroom to death; they were 
dragged to death in the dust and thorn of the streets. The 
Vrra5aiva community, instead of being cowed by it. was 

SPEAKING OF ~IVA 
roused to revenge and violence against 'state and society'. 
BasavaQQa, committed to non-violence, tried hard to convert 
the extremists but failed. In his failure, he left KalyaQa and 
returned to Kappac;lisangama, where he died soon after 
(u66/n68?). 
Meanwhile, extremist youths were out for revenge; 
they stabbed Bijjala and assassinated him. In the riots and 
persecution that followed Vttasaivas were scattered in all 
directions. 
But in the brief period, probably the span of one genera-
tion, BasavaQQa had helped create a new community. 
Many great men like Allamaprabhu, saint of saints, were in 
KalyaQa in that period. He helped clear and shape the ideas 
of the Vttasaivas. Many others like Siddharama, Macideva, 
Bommayya ('the lute-playing Bommayya '), and the remark-
able radical woman-saint Mahadeviyakka were part of the 
company of saints. A religious centre called An~;~bhava­
mal}!apa {'the Hall of Experience') was established in which 
the great saints met for dialogue and communion, shaping 
the growing new community. A hundred and ninety 
thousand jangamas or mendicant devotees are counted as 
having lived in KalyaQa under BasavaQtta's direction, help-
ing spread the new religion. 
. 
BasavaQI}a's achievement, in addition to the great vacanas 
he composed, was the establishment of a Vmsaivism, with 
eight distinctive features, 1 based on a rejection of inequality 
of every kind, of ritualism and taboo, and exalting work 
(kay aka) in the world in the name of the Lord. 
BasavaQI}a's vacanas have often been arranged according 
to an enlarged six-phase system (c£ appendix). For instance, 
Basavana), following no doubt earlier editors and com-
mentators, divides the phases into several sub-phases; the 
rationale for such divisions is esoteric and technical. I shall 
I. cf. footnote p. 32. 

BASAVAJ:lJ:lA 
content myself here with an indication of the main six-phase 
classification, according to the editor: 
BhakttJ 
MahiJvara 
Prasadi 
PraiJalitigi 
Aikya 
1-527 
528-765 
766--?95 
796--918 
919-958 
It is significant that though each saint goes through all 
the stages, he is most intensely expressive in some rather than 
in all equally. Further studies of this interesting typological 
framework and these expressive distributions in the saints' 
works will be rewarding. For instance, nearly half the vacanas 
of Basavaf)Qa are in the first phase of a man struggling with 
the world, its ills and temptations (compare Allama). 
For the texts, the order and the numbering of the Basavaf)Qa 
vacanas I have used S. S. Basavanal's edition (Dharwar, 
1962). 


BASAVA~~A 
8 
Look, the world, in a swell 
of waves, is beating upon my face. 1* 
Why should it rise to my heart, 
tell me. 
0 tell me, why"is it 
rising now to my throat? 
Lord, 
how can I tell you anything 
when it is risen high 
over my head 
lord lord 
listen to my cries 
0 lord of the meeting riversz 
listen. 
9 
I added day by day 
a digitl of light 
like the moon. 
The python-world, 
omnivorous Rah.u, 4 
devoured me. 
Today my body 
is in eclipse.s 
When is the rdease, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers? 
• Notes to poems begin on p. 189. 

68 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
21 
Father, in my ignorance you brought me 
through mothers' wombs, 
through unlikely worlds. 
Was it wrong just to be born, 
0 lord? 
Have mercy on me for being hom 
once before. 
I give you my word, 
lord of the meeting rivers, 
never to be hom again. 
33 
Like a monkey on a tree 
it leaps from branch to branch: 
how can I believe or trust 
dllsburningthing,dllsheart~ 
It will not let me go 
to my Father, 
my lord of the meeting rivers. 

BASAVA~~A 
36 
Nine hounds unleashed 
on a hare, 
the body's lusts 
cry out: 
Let go! 
Let go! 
Let go! Let go! 
cry the lusts 
of the mind. 
Will my heart reach you, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers, 
before the sensual bitches7 
touch and overtake? 
52 
Like a cow fallen into a quagmireS 
I make mouths at this comer and that, 
no one to look for me 
or find me 
till my lord sees this beast 
and lifts him out by the horns. 

70 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
59 
Cripple me, father, 
that I may not go here and there. 
Blind me, father, 
that I may not look at this and that. 
Deafen me, father, 
that I may not hear anything else. 
Keep me 
at your men's 9 feet 
looking for nothing else, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers. 10 
62. 
Don't make me hear all day 
'Whose man, whose man, whose man is this?' 
Let me hear, 'This man is mine, mine, 
this man is mine.' 
0 lord of the meeting rivers, 
make me feel I'm a son 
of the house.n 

BASAVAl:fl:fA 
64 
Siva, you have no mercy. 
Siv" you have no heart. 
Why why did you bring me to birth, 
wretch in this world, 
exile from the other? 
Tell me, lord, 
don't you have one more 
little tree or plant 
made just for me? 
70* 
As a mother runs 
close behind her child 
with his hand on a cobra 
or a fire, 
the lord of the meeting rivers 
stays with me 
every step of the way 
and looks after me. 
71 
*This poem is taken from Basavanal's appendix to the 
poems. 

72 
SPEAKING OP SIVA 
97 
The master of the house, is he at home, or isn't he? 
Grass on the threshold, 
dirt in the house: 
The master of the house, is he at home, or isn't he? 
Lies in the body, 
lust in the heart: 
no, the master of the house is not at home, 
our Lord of the Meeting Rivers. 
99 
Does it matter how long 
a rock soaks in the water: 
will it ever grow soft? 
Does it matter how long 
I've spent in worship, 
when the heart is fickle? 
Futile as a ghost 
I stand guard over hidden gold, u 
0 lord of the meeting rivers. 

BASAVA~~A 
IOI 
When a whore with a child 
takes on a customer for money, 
neither child. nor lecher 
will get enough ofher. 
She'll go pat the child once, 
then go lie with the man once, 
neither here nor there. 
Love of money is relentless, 
my lord of the meeting rivers. 13 
73 

74 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
IOS 
A snake-charmer and his noseless wife, 14 
snake in hand, walk carefully 
trying to read omens 
for a son's wedding, 
but they meet head-on 
a nosdess woman 
and her snake-charming husband, 
and cry 'The omens are bad!' 
His own wife has no nose; 
tliere's a snake in his hand. 
What shall I call such fools 
who do not know themselves 
and see only the others, 
0 lord 
of the meeting 
rivers! 

BASAVA~~A 
III 
I went to fornicate, 
but all I got was counterfeit. 
I went behind a ruined wall, 
but scorpions stung me. 
The watchman who heard my screams 
just peeled off my clothes. 
I went home in shame, 
my husband raised weals on my back. 
All the rest, 0 lord of the meeting rivers, 
the king took for his fines. 
75 

SPBAXING OP SIVA 
us 
See-saw watermills bow their heads. 
So what? 
Do they get to be devotees 
to the Master? 
The tongs join hands. 
So what? 
Can they be humble in service 
to the Lord? 
Parrots recite. 
So what? 
Can they read the Lord? 
How can the slaves of the Bodiless God,1S 
Desire, 
know the way 
our Lord's Men move 
or the stance of their standing? 
129 
The sacrificial lamb brought for the festival 
ate up the green leaf brought for the decorations. 16 
Not knowing a thing about the kill, 
it wants only to fill its belly: 
hom that day, to die that day. 
But tell me: 
did the killers survive, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers? 

BASAVA~~A 
132 
You can make them talk 
if the serpent 
has stung 
them. 
You can make them talk 
if they're struck 
by an evil planet. 17 
But you can't make them talk 
if they're struck dumb 
by riches. 
Yet when Poverty the magician 
enters, they'll speak 
at once, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers. 
144 
The crookedness of the serpent 
is straight enough for the snake-hole. 
The crookedness of the river 
is straight enough for the sea. 
And the crookedness of our Lord's men 
is straight enough for our Lord! 
77 

SPEAKING OF §IVA 
I6I 
Before 
the grey reaches the cheek, 
the wrinkle the rounded chin 
and the body becomes a cage of bones: 
before 
with fallen teeth 
and bent back 
you are someone else's ward: 
before. 
you drop your hand to the knee 
and clutch a staff: 
before 
age corrodes 
your form: 
before 
death touches you: 
worship 
our lord 
of the meeting rivers! 

Look at them, 
busy, making an iron fi:ameiB 
for a bubble on the water 
to make it safe I 
Worship the all-giving lord, 
and live 
without taking on trwt 
the body's firmness. 
212 
Don't you take on 
this thing called bhakti: 
like a saw 
it cuts when it goes 
and it cuts again 
when it comes. 
If you risk your hand 
with a cobra in a pitcherl9 
will it let you 
pass? 
79 

8o 
SPEAKING OP §IVA 
3SO*· 
a grindstone hung at the foot 
a deadwood log at the neck 
the one will not let me float 
and the other will not let me sink 
0 time's true enemy 
0 lord of the meeting rivers 
tide me over this life at sea20 
and bring me to 
* This poem is taken from Basavanal' s appendix. 
420 
The root is the mouth 
of the tree: pour water there 
at the bottom 
and, look, it sprouts green 
at the top. 
The Lord's mouth is his moving men, 
feed them. The Lord will give you all. 
You'll go to hell, 
if, knowing they are the Lord, 
you treat them as men. zx 

BASAVAI!'Il!'IA 
430 
Out of your eighty-four hundred thousand2Z faces 
put on just one 
and come test me, ask me. 
If you don't come and ask me, 
I'll swear by the names of your elders. 
Come in any face and ask me; 
I'll give, 
my lord of the meeting rivers. 
468 
I drink the water we wash your feet with, 2l 
I eat the food of worship, 
and I say it's yours, everything, 
goods, life, honour: 
he's really the whore who takes every last bit 
of her night's wages, 
and will take no words 
for payment, 
he, my lord of the meeting rivers! 
81 

SPBAXING OF SIVA 
487 
Feet will dance, 
eyes will see, 
tongue will sing, 
and not find content. 
What else, what else 
shall I do? 
I worship with my hands, 
the heart is not content. 
What else shall I do? 
Listen, my lord, 
it im't enough. 
I have it in me 
to cleave thy belly 
and enter thee 
0 lord of the meeting rivers I 
494 
I don't know anything like time-beats and metre 
nor the arithmetic of strings and drums; 
I don't know the count of iamb and dactyl.24 
My lord of the meeting rivers, 
as nothing will hurt you 
I'll sing as I love. 

BASAVA~~A 
soo 
Make of my body the beam of a lute 
of my head the sounding gourd 
of my nerves the strings 
of my fingers the plucking rods. 
Clutch me close 
and play your thirty-two songs 
0 lord of the meeting rivers 1 
Certain godsZS 
always stand watch 
sss 
at the doors of people. 
Some will not go if you ask them to go. 
Worse than dogs, some others. 
What can they give, 
these gods, 
who live off the charity of people 
0 lord of the meeting rivers? 

SPEAKING OF bVA 
sss 
How can I feel right 
about a god who eats up lacquer and melts, 
who wilts when he sees fire?a6 
How can I feel right 
about gods you sell in your need, 
and gods you bury for fear of thieves? 
The lord of the meeting rivers, 
self-hom, one with himself, 
he alone is the true god. 
563 
The pot is a god. The winnowing 
fan is a god. The stone in the 
street is a god. The comb is a 
god. The bowstring is also a 
god. The bushel is a god and the 
spouted cup is a god. 
Gods, gods, there are so many 
there's no place left 
for a foot. 
"I:here is only 
one god. He is our Lord 
of the Meeting Rivers. 

BASAVA~~A 
581 
They plunge 
wherever they see water. 
They circumambulate 
every tree they see. 
How can they know you 
0 Lord 
who adore 
waters that run dry 
trees that wither? 
ss6 
In a brahmin house 
where they feed the fire27 
as a god. 
when the fire goes wild 
and burns the house 
they splash on it 
the water of the gutter 
and the dust of the street, 
beat their breasts 
and call the crowd. 
These men then forget their worship 
and scold their fire, 
0 lord of the meeting rivers! 
ss 

86 
SPEAKING Of hVA 
639 
You went riding elephants. 
You went riding horses. 
You covered yourself 
with vermilion and musk. 
0 brother, 
but you went without the truth. 
you went without sowing and reaping 
the good. 
Riding rutting elephants 
of pride, you turned easy target 
to fate. 
You went without knowing 
our lord of the meeting rivers. 
You qualified for hell. 
686 
He'll grind till you're fine and small. 
He'll file till your colour shows. 
If your grain grows fine 
in the grinding, 
if you show colour. 
in the filing, 
then our lord of the meeting rivers 
will love you 
and look after you. 

BASAVA~~A 
703 
Look here, dear fellow: 
I wear these men's clothes 
only for you. zs 
Sometimes I am man. 
sometimes I am woman. 
0 lord of the meeting rivers 
I'll make wars for you 
but I'll be your devotees' bride. 
70S 
If a rich son is born 
to one hom penniless, 
he'll delight his father's heart 
with gold counted in millions; 
if a warrior son is hom 
to a milk-livered king 
who doesn't know which way 
to face a battle, he'll console 
his father with a battlefront 
sinking and floating 
in a little sea of blood; 
so will I console you 
0 lord of the meeting rivers, 
if you should come 
and ask me. 

88 
SPEAKING OP §IVA 
820 
The rich29 
will make temples for Siva. 
What shall I, 
a poor~ 
do? 
My legs are pillars, 
the body the shrine, 
the head a cupola30 
of gold. 
Listen, 0 lord of the meeting rivers, 
things standingl 1 shall fall, 
hut the moving32 ever shall stay. 
I'm no worshipper; 
I'm no giver; 
I'm not even beggar, 
0 lord 
without your grace. 
Do it all yourself, my lord of meeting rivers, 
as a mistress would 
when maids are sick.Jl 

BASAVA~~A 
When 
like a hailstone crystal 
like a waxwork image 
the flesh melts in pleasure 
how can I tell you? 
The waters of joy 
broke the banks 
and ran out of my eyes. 
I touched and joined 
my lord of the meeting rivers. 
How can I talk to anyone 
of that? 
848 
Sir, isn't the mind witness ~ough, 
for the taste on the tongue? 
Do buds wait for the garland maker's word 
to break into flower? 
Is it right, sir, to bring out the texts 
for everything? 
And, sir, is it really right to bring into the open 
the mark on our vitals 
left by our lord's love-play? 

SPEAKING Of SIVA 
86o 
The eating bowl is not one bronze 
and the looking glass another. 
Bowl and mirror are one metal. 
Giving back light 
one becomes a mirror. 
Aware, one is the Lord's; 
unaware, a mere human. 
Worship the lord without forgetting, 
the lord of the meeting rivers. 
sss 
Milk is left over 
from the calves. 
Water is left over 
from the fishes, 
flowers from the bees. 
How can I worship you, 
0 Siva, with such offal? 
But it's not for me 
to despise left-overs, 
so take what comes, 
lord of the meeting rivers. 

D~V ARA DASIMA YY A 
DEVARA DlsiMAYYA or 'God's Dasimayya' was probably 
the earliest of the vacana poets. Commentators, and later 
saints like BasavaQQa, make admiring references to him in 
their writings. 
. 
He is said to have been hom in Mudaniiru, a village full 
of temples, in the tenth century. His village has a Ramanatha 
temple among its many temples, dedicated to ~iva as wor-
shipped by Rama, the epic hero, an incarnation of Vi~Qu. 
Every vacana of Dasimayya is addressed to Ramanatha, 
'Rima's lord'. 
Legend says that he performed ascetic penance in a dense 
forest when ~iva appeared to him, advised him not to punish 
his body to follow the way of the linga, the all-encompassing 
symbol. The Lord taught him that working in the world 
(kayaka) was a part of worshipping and reaching Him. 
Dasimayya became a weaver. So he is also known as Jecj.ara 
Dasimayya or 'Dasimayya oftheweavers'. 
Today in Mudaniiru, popular tradition identifies several 
places where Dasimayya set up his weaver's looms. 
Many stories are told about Dasimayya' s achievements as 
a propagator of VIIa5aiva religion. Once he met jungle 
tribes who hunted wild animals and lived on their Besh. 
He converted them to the non-violent wap oflinga worship 
and taught them the use of the oil-press for their living. 
Another time, he was challenged by brahmins. They said 
to him: 'Your ~iva is the chieftain of demons; he covers 
his body with ash. Give him up. Worship our V~u and find 
a place for yoursel£' He answered: 'Your ViRtu in his 
incarnations has come through the womb of a pig; and stolen 
butter from villagers. Was that right and proper?' In the course 

92 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
of the argument he said that ~iva was everywhere. The 
brahmins challenged him to show ~iva in their V~t.tu temple. 
Dasimayya accepted the challenge, and invoked ~iva. When 
they all entered the temple, the image in the shrine was not 
that ofVintu but a linga. The brahmins, struck by the miracle, 
were all converted.• 
When he decided to marry, he found suitable a girl named 
Duggale. He went to her parents in the village of ~ivapura. 
Showing them some sand, he said he would marry their 
daughter if she could boil it into edible rice. z Dugga{e, a 
devotee, washed the saint's feet, sprinkled the sand with some 
of the washings and cooked it. The sand became rice. Dasi-
mayya, convinced that Duggale was a true devotee, married 
her. 
Once he started weaving on his loom an enormous turban-
cloth in the Lord's name. It was a marvd of workmanship. 
When he took it to the fair to sell it, no buyer could price 
such beauty. When a thief in the crowd tried to steal it, a 
sharp whed whirled out of it and slashed his hand. The 
people thought that the cloth was holy and magical and would 
not buy it. On his way back home he was met by an old 
man. The old man was shivering in the cold and asked him 
for the cloth. Dasimayya gave it to him at once. The old 
man laughed, tore up the precious piece to bits right before 
his eyes, wrapped one strip on his head, another round his 
body, still another on his hand; the rest he swathed round 
his staff. Dasimayya looked on and said calmly: 'It is yours. 
You can use. it as you wish.' He brought the eccentric old 
I. This legend, taken with poems regarding the supremacy of 
~iva over ;ill other gods (e.g. 4), speaks of the struggle of Virahivism 
in the saint's times. • Virahivism' means 'militant or heroic ~aivism '. 
Dasimayya's signature Ramanitha, 'Lord of Rima', is also signifi-
cantly chosen to assert ~iva's primacy. 
2. A common marriagt>-test for brides in Indian folklore - somewhat 
like spinning straw into gold in the Rumpelstiltskin tale. 

DEVARA D!SIMAYYA 
93 
man home, fed him and served him in all possible ways. The 
old man was Siva himsel£ Pleased with Dasimayya and his 
wife, and their way of life, and filled with compassion for 
their hardship and poverty, Siva gave Duggale a handful 
of rice. He asked her to mix it with the rest of her store. 
The divine rice made her store inexhaustible (alqaya) and 
self-renewing. 
Dasimayya became a famous teacher in the kingdom of 
Jayasirilh.a .the calukya king. The king was a jaina. But 
Suggale, his queen, came from a Saivite family and received 
initiation from Dasimayya. The king and his jaina followers 
were outraged by this act and planned to defeat the saint in 
argument. Once they hid a boy in the bole of a tree and told 
Dasimayya that their omnipresent god was also in the. tree. 
In demonstration, they called out to the tree. But no answer 
came as expected. When they looked into the tree, the boy 
was dead. The boy's mother cried and begged ofDasimayya 
to give him life, which he did. His enemies also tested him 
by asking him to drink of a filthy poisoned tank; by the help 
of Siva, Dasimayya drew away all the filth and poison and 
drarik. the water without harm. Dasimayya's body, inviolate, 
foiled all assassins. Finally his enemies went to the king, 
complained to him about all the jaina temples that had be-
come rededicated to Siva since the queen's initiation. The 
king had an argument with his queen, who was living apart. 
She told him that Siva was the true god and challenged all 
the anti-Saivites to an argument with Dasimayya. A day was 
set. Pundits of every cult and colour joined the religious 
battle in the king's court. Dasimayya's arguments were 
I 
unanswerable and silenced all opponents. Yet the jainas, 
thinking evil in their hearts, brought a deadly serpent hidden 
in a pitcher and asked Dasimayya to show his god in it. 
When he took off the lid, the serpent spread out its hood and 
hissed venomously. The saint said, 'Siva is the only god,' 

94 
SPBAKING OF SIVA 
and held the reptile in his hand. At once it turned. into a 
crystallinga which he set down, establishing a temple on the 
spot. The king was converted; he and all his family received 
initiation from Dasimayya. The 700 jaina temples were 
converted into lliiga temples, and the 20,000 citizens of the 
city became Saivites. 
Dasim.ayya returned to Mudaniiru and resumed his weaving. 
When he wished to give up the world and enter god, he went 
to the Rimanitha temple and told Rimanatha: •rve lived 
my life and done everything by your grace. Now you must 
return me to yoursel£' Rimanitha was pleased and appeared 
to him in his true form. Disimayya' s wife Duggale said 
to the Lord: • My husband's path is mine. With him you must 
take me too.' So he and Duggale praised the Lord together 
and entered the infinite. 
All these legends speak eloquently of Disimayya, the mis-
sionary for Vua~aivislll, and the way he converted men of 
all sorts, jungle tribes, brahmins and jaina kings, to his religion. 
They also speak of the early conflicts of Vudaivism with all 
the contemporary religions. Sri Saila, the centre for Vuasaiva 
saints, seems to have become such a centre as early as the 
tenth century, the time of the earliest vacana saint, Dasimayya. 
His vacanas do mention earlier saints and their vacanas but 
his and others' references are all we have for evidence. 
We are indebted to Rao Bahadiir Pha. Gu. Halaka~p's 
(Bijapur) 1955 edition for the vacana texts and the above 
legends. The order and numbering of the vacanas follow his 
arrangement. 
The first twenty-one vacanas of Dasimayya deal with a 
variety of themes like the nature of god (e.g. 4), salvation, 
etc. The rest are arranged by the editor according to the 
six-phase system (cf. Appendix I): 

DEVARA DASIMAYYA 
Bhakta phase 23-87 
Mahe!vara 
88-98 
Prasadi 
99-113 
Pra~;~alitigi 
114-124 
Sara~;~a 
125-141 
Aikya 
142-147 
95 


DEVARA DASIMAYYA 
4 
You balanced the globe 
on the waters. 
and kept it from melting away,34 
you made the sky stand 
without pillar or prop. 
o Rimanatha, 
which gods could have 
done this? 
23 
In the mother's womb 
the child does not know 
his mother's face 
nor can she ever know 
his face. 
The man in the world's illusion 
does not know the Lord 
nor the Lord him, 
Ramanatha. 
97 

SPEAKING OP bVA 
24 
If this is my body 
would it not follow my will? 
If this is your body 
would it not follow your will? 
Obviously, it is neither your body 
nor mine: 
it is the fickle body 
of the burning world you made, 
25 
Hunger the great serpent 
has seized the vitals 
and the venom is mounting 
from foot to brow. 
Only he is the true Snake-man 
in all the world 
who can feed this hunger food 
and bring the poison down, 
R.amanitha.JS 

DEVARA DASIMAYYA 
A fire 
in every act and look and word. 
Between man and wife 
a fire. 
In the plate of food 
eaten after much waiting 
a fire. 
In the loss of gain 
a fire. 
And in the infatuation 
of coupling 
a fire. 
You have given us 
five fires 
and poured dirt in our mouths 
0 Ramanatha. 
~ 
A man filled grain 
in a tattered sack 
and walked all night 
fearing the toll-gates 
but the grain went through the tatters 
and all he got was the gunny sack. 
It is thus 
with the devotion 
of the faint-hearted 
· 0 Ramanatha. 
99 

100 
SPBAXING OF SIVA 
43 
Can assemblies in session 
give charities to men? 
Everyone who goes to war 
goes only to die. 
Only one in a hundred, 
may be one in a thousand, 
gets to spear the enemy. 
o Ramanatha 
how can every tamarind flower 
be fruit?36 
44 
For what 
shall I handle a dagger 
0 lord? 
What can I pull it out o£ 
or stab it in, · 
when You are all the world, 
o Ramanatha? 

DEVARA DASIMAYYA 
4S 
The five elements 
have become one. 
The sun and the moon, 
0 Rider of the Bull,37 
aren't they really 
your body? 
I stand, 
look on, 
you're filled 
with the worlds. 
What can I hurt now 
after this, Ramanatha? 
49 
For your devotees 
I shall be 
bullock; for your devotees 
I shall be 
menial, 
slave and watchdog 
at the door: 
Maker of all things, for men 
who raise their hands 
in your worship 
I shall be the fence of thorns 
on their backyard 
o Ramanatha. 
IOI 

102 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
ss 
When a man is of the Lord 
and his wife, of the world, 
what they eat is still 
shared equally: 
it is like 
bringing a dead dog 
into the attic 
and sharing bits 
of its carcass, 
0 Ramanatha.3B 
72 
You have forged 
this chain 
of eighteen links39 
and chained us humans: 
you have ruined us 
0 Ramanatha 
and made us dogs forever 
on the leash. 

DiV A.B.A. DASIMA. YY A. 
8o 
The earth is your gift, 
the growing grain your gift, 
the blowing wind your gift. 
What shall I call these curs 
who eat out of your hand 
and praise everyone else? 
87 
Whatever It was 
that made this earth 
the base, 
the world its life, 
the wind its pillar, 
arranged the lotus and the moon, 
and covered it all with folds 
of sky 
with Itself inside, 
to that Mystery 
indiiferent to differences, 
to It I pray, 
0 IUmanatha. 
103 

104 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
90 
He will make them roam the streets; 
scrape them on stone for colour of gold; 
grind them for sandal; 
like a stick of sugarcane 
he will slash them to look inside. 
If they do not wince or shudder, 
he will pick them up by the hands, 
will our Ramanatha. 
94 
What does it matter 
if the fox roams 
all over the Jambu island? 
Will he ever stand amazed 
in meditation of the Lord? 
Does it matter if he wanders 
all over the globe 
and bathes in a million sacred rivers?40 
A pilgrim who's not one with you, 
Ramanatha, 
roams the world 
like a circus man. 

DEVARA DASIMAYYA 
96 
Did the breath of the mistress 
have breasts and long hair? 
Or did the master's breath 
wear sacred thread? 
Did the outcaste, last in line, 
hold with his outgoing breath 
the stick of his tribe? 
What do the fools of this world know 
of the snares you set, 
0 Ramanatha? 
98 
To the utterly at-one with Siva 
there's no dawn, 
no new moon, 
no noonday, 
nor equinoxes, 
nor sunsets, 
nor full moons; 
his front yard 
is the true Benares, 
0 Ramanatha. 
lOS 

Io6 
SPIIAXING OF SIVA 
12.0 
I'm the one who has the body, 
you're the one who holds the breath. 
You know the secret of my body, 
I know the secret of your breath. 
That's why your body 
is in mine. 
You know 
and I know, Ramanitha, 
the miracle 
of your breath 
in my body. 
I2I 
God of my clan, 
I'll not place my feet 
but where your feet 
have stood before: 
I've no feet 
ofmyown. 
How can the immoralists 
of this world know 
the miracle, the oneness 
of your feet 
and mine, 

DEVARA DASIMAYYA 
Bodied, 
one will hunger. 
Bodied, 
one will lie. 
0 you, don't you rib 
and taunt me 
again 
for having a body: 
body Thyself for once 
like me and see 
what happens, 
0 Ramanatha. 
124 
When, to the hungerless figure, 
you serve waters of no thirst, 
whisper the sense-less word 
in the heart, 
and call without a name, 
who is it that echoes 0 I 
in answer, 
0 Ramanatha, 
is it you, 
or is it me? 
107 

108 
SPEAKING OF §IVA 
126 
Unless you build, 
Space will not get inside 
a house; 
unless the eye sees, 
mind will not decide 
on forms; 
without a way 
there's no reaching 
the other; 
0 Ramanatha 
how will men know 
that this is so? 
127 
Fire can bum 
but cannot move. 
Wind can move 
but cannot bum. 
Till ftre joins wind 
it cannot take a step. 
Do men know 
it's like that 
with knowing and doing? 

DBVARA DASIMA YYA 
128 
Can the wind bring out 
and publish for othen 
the fragrance 
in the little bud? 
Can even begetters, father and mother, 
display for onlooken' eyes 
the future breast and flowing hair 
in the little girl 
about to be bride? 
Only ripeness 
can show consequence, 
Ramanatha. 
I3I 
Ramanatha, 
who can know the beauty 
of the Hovering One 
who's made Himself form 
and of space 
the colours? 
109 

IIO 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
133 
If they see 
breasts and long hair coming 
they call it woman, 
if beard and whiskers 
they call it man: 
but, look, the self that hovers 
in between 
is neither man 
nor woman 
144 
Suppose you cut a tall bamboo 
in two; 
make the bottom piece a woman, 
the headpiece a man; 
rub them together 
till they kindle: 
tell me now, 
the fire that's born, 
is it male or female, 
o Ramanatha? 

MAHAD.P.VIY AKKA 
MAHADEVI, a younger contemporary of Basaval}l}a and 
Allama in the twelfth century, was hom in UQutaQi, a 
village in Sivamogga, near the birthplace of Allama. At ten, 
she was initiated to Siva-worship by an unknown guru. 
She considered that moment the moment of her real birth. 
Apparently, the form of Siva at the UQUtaQi temple was 
Mallikarjuna, translated either as 'the Lord White as Jasmine' 
or as 'Arjuna, Lord of goddess Mallika '. 'Cenna' means 
'lovely, beautiful'. She fell in love with Cennamallikiirjuna 
and took his name for a 'si8J1ature' (atikita) in all her vacanas. 
She betrothed herself to Siva and none other, but human 
lovers pressed their suit. The rivalry between the Divine 
Lover and all human loves was dramatized by the incidents 
of her own life {vacana II4). Kawika, the king {or chieftain) 
of the land, saw her one day and fell in love with her. He 
sent word to her parents, asking for her hand. In addition to 
being only human, he disqualified himself further by being a 
bhavi, an unbeliever. Yet he persuaded her, or rather her 
parents, partly by show of force, and partly by his protesta-
tions of love. It is quite likely that she married him and lived 
with him, though some scholars dispute the tainting fact. 
Anyhow it must have been a trying marriage for both. 
Kawika, the wordling, full of desire for her as a mortal, was 
the archetype of sensual man; Mahadevi, a spirit married 
already to the Lord White as Jasmine, scorning all human 
carnal love as corrupt and illegitimate, wife to no man, exile 
bound to the world's wheeling lives, archetypal sister of all 
souls. Significandy she is known as Akka 'elder sister'. Many 
of Mahadevi' s most moving vacanas speak of this conflict 
(cf. II4). Sometimes, the Lord is her illicit lover (cf. 88), 

II2 
SPEAKING OF §IvA 
sometimes her only legitimate husband (c£ 283). This 
ambiguous alternation of attitudes regarding the legitimacy 
of living in the world is a fascinating aspect of Mahadevi' s 
poetry. 
At one point, Kawika appears to hav:e tried to force his 
will on her and so she leaves him, cutting clean her relations 
with the whole world of men. like many another saint, 
enacting his true homelessness by his wanderings, she left 
birthplace and parents (ro2). She appears to have thrown 
away even modesty and clothing, those last conceSsions to 
the male world, in a gesture of ultimate social defiance, and 
wandered about covered in her tresses (124}. 
Through a world of molesting male attentions she 
wandered, defiant and weary (294), asserting the legitimacy 
of her illicit love for the Lord, searching for him and 
his devotees. She walked towards KalyaQa, the centre of 
V1rasaiva saints, the 'halls of Experience' where Allama 
and Basaval)Qa ran a school for kindred spirits. 
Allama did not accept her at once. A remarkable conversa-
tion ensued, a dialogue between sceptic and love-child which 
turned into a catechism between guru and disciple. Many of 
Mahadevi' s vacanas are placed by legend in this famous 
dialogue.1 When Allama asked the wild-looking woman for 
her husband's identity, she replied she was married forever 
to Cennama11ikarjuna. He asked her then the obvious 
question: 'Why take off clothes, as if by that gesture you 
could ped off illusions? And yet robe yourself in tresses of 
hair? If so free and pure in heart, why replace a sari with a 
covering of tresses?' Her reply is honest: 
Till the fruit is ripe inside 
the skin will not fall off. 
x. Recorded or reconstructed in 
~iinyasampadane (ca. fifteenth 
century) c£ note on Allama Prabhu, p. 144-

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
I'd a feeling it would hurt you 
ifl displayed the body's seals of love. 
0 brother, don't tease me 
needlessly. I'm given entire 
into the hands of my lord 
white as jasmine. 
MAHADEVIYAKKA 183 
II3 
For other such contexts, see also vacanas I04, IS7, I84, 25I, 
283, and the notes on them. 
At the end of this ordeal by dialogue she was accepted into 
the company of saints. From then begins the second lap of 
her journey to her Lord. She wandered wild and god-intoxi-
cated, in love with him, yet not finding him. Restless, she 
left KalyaQa and wandered off again towards Sri5aila, the 
Holy Mountain, where she fow1d him and lost hersel£ Her 
search is recorded in her vacanas as a search for her love, 
following all the phases of human love as set forth by the 
conventions of Indian, especially Sanskrit, poetry. The three 
chiefforms oflove, love forbidden (e.g., 328), love in separa-
tion (e.g., 3I8) and love in union (e.g., 336) are all expressed 
in her poems, often one attitude informing and complicating 
another in the same poem (e.g., 3r8). 
She was recognized by her fellow-saints as the most 
poetic of them all, with a single symbolic action unifying all 
her poetry. She enlists the traditional imagery of pan-
Indian ~ecular love-poetry for personal expression. In her, 
the phases of human love are metaphors for the phases 
of mystic ascent. In this search, unlike the other saints, she 
involves all of nature, a sister to bird, beast and tree (e.g., 73). 
Appropriately, she chose for adoration an aesthetic aspect 
of Siva, Siva as Cennamalliklirjuna, or the Lovely Lord 
White as Jasmine. 
Like other bhaktas, her struggle was with her condition, 
as body, as woman, as social being tyrannized by social roles, 

II4 
SPEAKING OP hVA 
as a human confined to a place and a time. Through these 
shackles she bunts, defiant in her quest for ecstasy. 
. 
According to legend, she died into 'oneness with ~iva' 
when she was hardly in her twenties - a brief bright burning. 
I have used L. Basavaraju's edition of Mahadeviyakka's 
vacanas: Akkana Vacanaga/u {Mysore, 1966). The numbers 
follow Basavaraju's edition, which does not classify her 
vacanas according to the six-phase system. 

MAHAD EVIY AKKA 
2 
Like 
treasure. hidden in the ground 
taste in the fruit 
gold in the rock 
oil in the seed 
the Absolute hidden away 
in the heart 
no one can know 
the ways of our lord 
white as jasmine. 41 
II 
You're like milk 
in water:•z I cannot tell 
what comes before, 
what after; 
which is the master, 
which the slave; 
what's big, 
what's small. 
0 lord white as jasmine 
if an ant should love you 
and praise you, 
will he not grow 
to demon powers? 
IIS 

II6 
SPEAKING OP hVA 
I2 
My body is dirt, 43 
my spirit is space: 
which 
shall I grab, 0 lord? How, 
and what, 
shall I think of you? 
Cut through 
my illusions, 
lord white as jasmine. 
17 
Like a silkworm44 weaving 
her house with love 
from her marrow, 
and dying 
in her body's threads 
winding tight, round 
and round, 
I bum 
desiring what the heart desires. 
Cut through, 0 lord, 
my heart's greed, 
and show me 
your way out, 
0 lord white as jasmine. 

MAHADEVIYAKKA 
18 
Not one, not two, not three or four, 
but through eighty-four hundred thousand•s vaginas 
have I come, 
I have come 
through unlikely worlds, 
guzzled on 
pleasure and on pain. 
Whatever be 
all previous lives, 
show me mercy 
this one day, 
0 lord 
white as jasmine. 
20 
Monkey on monkeyman' s stick 
puppet at the end of a string 
I've played as you've played 
I've spoken as you've told me 
I've been as you've let me be 
0 engineer of the world 
lord white as jasmine 
I've run 
till you cried halt. 
117 

II8 
SPEAKING OP hVA 
26 
musion has troubled body as shadow 
troubled life as a heart 
troubled heart as a memory 
troubled memory as awareness. 
With stick raised high, IDusion herds 
the worlds. 
Lord white as jasmine 
no one can overcome 
your musion. 
45 
It was like a stream 
running into the dry bed 
of a lake, 
like rain 
pouring on plants 
parched to sticks. 
It was like this world's pleasure 
and the way to the other. 
both 
walking towards me. 
Seeing the feet of the master, 
0 lord white as jasmine, 
I was made 
worthwhile. 

MAHADEVIYAKKA 
so 
When I didn't know myself 
where were you? 
Like the colour in the gold, 
you were in me. 
I saw in you, 
lord white as jasmine, 
the paradox of your being 
in me 
without showing a limb. 
6o 
Not seeing you 
in the hill, in the forest, 
from tree to tree46 
I roamed, 
searching, gasping: 
Lord, my Lord, come 
show me your kindness! 
till I met your men 
and found you. 
You hide 
lest I seek and find. 
Give me a clue, 
0 lord 
white as jasmine, 
to your hiding places. 
II9 

120 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
6s 
If sparks By 
I shall think my thirst and hunger quelled. 
If the skies tear down 
I shall think them pouring for my bath. 
If a hillside slide on me 
I shall think it .flower for my hair. 
0 lord white as jasmine, if my head falls from my shoulders 
I shall think it your offering. 
68 
Locks of shining red hair 
a crown of diamonds47 
small beautiful teeth 
and eyes in a laughing face 
that light up fourteen worlds -
I saw His glory, 
and seeing, I quell today 
the famine in my eyes. 
I saw the haughty Master 
for whom men, all men, 
are but women, wives. 
I saw the Great One 
who plays at love 
with Sakti, 
original to the world, 
I saw His stance 
and began to live. 

MAHADEVIYAKKA 
69 
0 mother48 I burned 
in a flameless fire 
0 mother I suffered 
a bloodless wound 
mother I tossed 
without a pleasure: 
loving my lord white as jasmine 
I wandered through unlikely worlds. 
73 
0 twittering birds, 
don't you know? don't you know? 
0 swans on the lakeshore, 
don't you know? don't you know? 
0 high-singing koils, 40 
don't you know? don't you know? 
0 circling swooping bees, 
don't you know? don't you know? 
0 peacocks in the caverns, 
don't you know? 
don't you know? 
Tell me if you know: 
where is He, 
my lord 
white as jasmine? 
12.1 

122 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
0 swarm of bees 
0 mango tree 
0 moonlight 
0 koilbird 
I beg of you all 
one 
favour: 
74 
If you should see my lord anywhere 
my lord white as jasmine 
call out 
and show him to me. 
7S 
You are the forest 
you are all the great trees 
in the forest 
you are bird ana beast 
playing in and out 
of all the trees 
0 lord white as jasmine 
filling and filled by all 
why don't you 
show me your face? 

MAH!DBVIYAXXA 
77 
Would a circling surface vulture 
know such depths of sky 
as the moon would know? 
would a weed on the riverbank 
know such depths of water 
as the lotus would know? 
would a fly darting nearby 
know the smell of Bowers 
as the bee would know? 
0 lord white as jasmine 
only you would know 
the way of your devotees: 
how would these, 
these 
mosquitoes 
on the buffalo's hide? 
123 

124 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
79 
Four parts of the dayso 
I grieve for you. 
Four parts of the night 
I'm mad for you. 
I lie lost 
sick for you, night and day, 
0 lord white as jasmine. 
Since your love 
was planted, 
I've forgotten hunger, 
thirst, and sleep. 
87 
Listen, sister, listen. 
I had a dream 
I saw rice, betd, palmleaf 
and coconut. 
I saw an asceticS 1 
come to beg, 
white teeth and small matted curls. 
I followed on his heels 
and held his hand, 
he who goes breaking 
all bounds and beyond. 
I saw the lord, white as jasmine, 
and woke wide open. 

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
88 
He bartered my heart, 
looted my Besh, 
claimed. as tribute 
my pleasure, 
took over 
all of me. 
I'm the woman oflove 
for my lord, white as jasmine. 
93 
Other men are thorn 
under the smooth leaf. 
I cannot touch them, 
go near them, nor trust them, 
nor speak to them confidences. 
Mother,sz 
because they all have thorns 
in their chests, 
I cannot take 
any man in my arms but my lord 
white as jasmine. 
us 

12.6 
SPEAKING OP ~IVA 
102 
When one heart touches 
and feels another 
won't feeling weigh over all, 
can it stand any decencies then? 
0 mother,s3 you must be crazy, 
I fell for my lord 
white as jasmine, 
I've given in utterly. 
Go, go, I'll have nothing 
of your mother-and-daughter stuf£ 
You go now. 
104 
Till you've earned 
knowledge of good and evil 
it is 
lust's body, 
site of rage, 
ambush of greed, 
house of passion, 
fence of pride, 
mask of envy. 
Till you know and lose this knowing 
' 
youveno way 
of knowing 
my lord white as jasmine.s4 

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
I14 
Husband inside, 
lover outside. 
I can't manage them both. 
This world 
and that other, 
cannot manage them both. 
0 lord white as jasmine 
I cannot hold in one hand 
both the round nutss 
and the long bow. 
Il7 
Who cares 
who strips a tree of leaf 
once the fruit is plucked? 
Who cares 
who lies with the woman 
you have left? 
Who cares 
who ploughs the land 
you have abandoned? 
Mter this body has known my lord 
who cares if it feeds 
a dog 
or soaks up water? 

128 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
II9 
What's to come tomorrow 
let it come today. 
What's to come today 
let it come right now. 
Lord white as jasmine, 
don't give us your nows and thens! 
Breath for fragrance, 
who needs Bowers? 
120 
with peace, patience, forgiving and self-command, 
who needs the Ultimate Posture? 
The whole world become oneself 
who needs solitude, 
0 lord white as jasmine.s6 

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
124 
You can confiscate 
money in hand; 
can you confiscate 
the body's glory? 
Or peel away every strip 
you wear, 
but can you peel 
the Nothing, the Nakedness 
that covers and veils?s7 
To the shameless girl 
wearing theWhiteJasmine Lord's 
light of morning, 
you fool, 
where's the need for cover and jewel? 
129 

130 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
IJI 
Sunlight made visible 
the whole length of a sky, 
movement of wind, 
leaf, flower, all six colourssB 
on tree, bush ancf creeper: 
all this 
is the day's worship. 
The light of moon, star and fire, 
lightnings and all things 
that go by the name of light 
are the night's worship. 
Night and day 
in your worship 
I forget myself 
0 lord white as jasmine. 

MAHADEVIYAKKA 
157 
If one could 
draw the fangs of a snake 
and charm the snake to play. 
it's great to have snakes. 
People. 
If one can single out 
the body•s ways 
it's great to have bodies. 
The body's wrong 
is like mother turning vampire. 
Don't say they have bodies 
who have Your love, 
0 lord 
white as jasmine.s9 
male and female, 
blush when a doth covering their shame 
comes loose. 
When the lord of lives 
lives drowned without a face 
in the world, how can you be modest? 
When all the world is the eye of the lord, 
onlooking everywhere. what can you 
cover and conceal? 
131 

132 
SPEAKING OF §IvA 
1!)9 
For hunger, 
there is the town's rice in the begging bowl. 
For thirst, 
there are tanks, streams, wells, 
For sleep, 
there are the ruins of temples.6o 
For soul's company 
I have you, 0 lord 
white as jasmine. 
200 
Make me go from house to house 
with arms stretched for alms. 
If I beg, make them give nothing. 
If they give, make it fall to the ground. 
If it falls, before I pick it up, make a dog take it, 
0 lord 
white as jasmine. 

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
251 
Why do I need this dummy 
of a dying world? 
illusion's chamberpot, 
hasty passions' whorehouse, 
this crackpot 
and leaky basement? 
Finger may squeeze the fig 
to feel it, yet not choose 
to eat it. 
Take me, flaws and all, 
0 lord 
white as jasmine. 
274 
Every tree 
in the forest was the All-Giving Tree, 
every bush 
the life-reviving herb, 
every stone the Philosophers' Stone, 
all the land a pilgrim's holy place, 
all the water nectar against age, 
every beast the golden deer, 
every pebble I stumble on 
the Wishing Crystal: 
walking round 
the Jasmine Lord's favourite hilL 
I happened 
on the Plantain Grove.61 
133 

134 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
283 
I love the Handsome One: 
he has no death 
decay nor form 
no place or side 
no end nor birthmarks. 
I love him 0 mother. Listen. 
I love the Beautiful One 
with no bond nor fear 
no clan no land 
no landmarks 
for his beauty. 
So my lord, white as jasmine, is my husband. 
Take these husbands who die, 
decay, and feed them 
to your kitchen fires I 

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
294 
0 brothers,6z why do you talk 
to this woman, 
hair loose, 
face withered, 
body shrunk? 
0 fathers, why do you bother 
with this woman? 
Spe has no strength of limb, 
has lost the world, 
lqst power of will, 
turned devotee, 
she has lain down 
with the Lord, white as jasmine, 
and has lost caste. 
I3S 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
313 
Like an elephant 
lost from his herd 
suddenly captured, 
remembering his mountains, 
his Vindhyas, 
I remember. 
A parrot 
come into a cage 
remembering his mate, 
I remember. 
0 lord white as jasmine 
show me 
your ways. 
Call me: Child, come here, 
come this way. 
317 
Riding the blue sapphire mountains 
wearing moonstone for slippers 
blowing long horns 
0 ~iva 
when shall I 
crush you on my pitcher breasts 
0 lord white as jasmine 
when do I join you 
stripped of body's shame 
and heart's modesty? 

MAHADEVIYAKKA 
318 
If He says 
He has to go away 
to fight battles at the frontfiJ 
I understand and can be quiet. 
But how can I bear it 
when He is here in my hands 
right here in my heart 
and will not take me? 
0 mind, 0 memory of pasts, 
if you will not help me get to Him 
how can I ever bear it? 
137 

SPEAKING OF ~IVA 
319 
What do 
the barren know 
of birthpangs? 
Stepmothers, 
what do they know 
of loving care? 
How can the unwounded 
know the pain 
of the wounded? 
0 lord white as jasmine 
your love's blade stabbed 
and broken in my flesh, 
I writhe. 
0 mothers 
how can you know me? 

MAHADEVIY AXXA 
321 
The heart in misery 
has turned 
upside down. 
The blowing gentle breeze 
is on fire. 64 
0 friend moonlight bums 
like the sun. 
Like a tax-collector in a town 
I go restlessly here and there. 
Dear girl go tell Him 
bring Him to His senses. 
Bring Him back. 
My lord white as jasmine 
is angry 
that we are two. 
322 
My husband comes home today. 
Wear your best, wear your jewels. 
The Lord, white as jasmine, 
will come anytime now. 
Girls, come 
meet Him at the door. 
139 

140 
SPEAKING OF §IVA 
323 
I look at the road 
for his coming. 
If he isn't coming, 
I pine and waste away. 
If he is late, 
I grow lean. 
0 mother, if he is away 
for a night, 
I'm like the lovebird6s 
with nothing 
in her embrace. 
324 
Better than meeting 
and mating all the time 
is the pleasure of mating once 
after being far apart. 
When he's away 
I cannot wait 
to get a glimpse of him. 
Friend, when will I have it 
both ways, 
be with. Him 
yet not with Him, 
my lord white as jasmine? 

MAHADEVIY AKKA 
328 
I have Maya for mother-in-law; 
the world for father-in-law; 
three brothers-in-law, like tigers; 
and the husband's thoughts 
are full of laughing women: 
no god, this man. 
And I cannot cross the sister-in-law. 
But I will 
give this wench the slip 
and go cuckold my husband with Hara, my Lord. 
My mind is my maid: 
by her kindness, I join 
my Lord, 
my utterly beautiful Lord 
from the mountain-peaks, 
my lord white as jasmine, 
and I will make Him 
my good husband. 
141 

142 
SPEAKING OF hvA 
Look at 
love's marvellous 
ways: 
if you shoot an arrow 
plant it 
till no feather shows; 
if you hug 
a body, bones 
must crunch and crumble; 
weld, 
the welding must vanish. 
Love is then 
our lord's love. 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
TBERB are two traditions regarding Allama's life. One con-
siders him Siva himself, arriving in the world to teach the 
way of freedom. To try him, Siva's consort, Parvati, sent 
down her dark side, Maye or Illusion. Allama' s parents 
are named allegorically 'Selfiessness' (nirahankara) and 'The 
Wise One' (sujnani). Maye was hom to parents named 
'Selfishness' (mamakara) and 'Lady Illusion' (mayiidevi). 
In this version, Allama was not even hom: his parents under-
took penance for their • truth-bringing sorrowless' son, and 
found by their side a shining child. Thus, unborn, he descended 
into the world. Later, when he was playing the drum in a 
temple, Maye fell in love with him, and appointed him her 
dancing master. She tried all her charms on him but could 
not move him. Parvati, who had sent him the temptation, 
realized that tempting him was useless and withdrew Maye 
to hersel£ A more human variant of this Descent-version 
speaks of Allama and the enchantress as minions of Siva and 
Parvati, cursed to be hom in the world. 
There are differences from variant to variant in the names 
of the parents, the place, and manner of birth. The most 
vivid tradition of this kind is the earliest, written up by 
Harihara, a brilliant fifteenth-century poet who wrote the 
lives of the V1Ia§aiva saints in galloping blank verse. AccOJ;d-
ing to Harihara: Allama, talented temple-drummer, son of 
a dance teacher, falls in love with K.amalate ('love's tendril'). 
In marriage, they were new lovers; their love was without 
• end, beginning, or middle'; • droWned in desire' knowing 
no weight or impediment. But Kamalate was suddenly 
stricken down by a fever and died soon after. Allama wanders 
in his grief like a madman, benumbed, his memory eclipsed, 

144 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
his heart broken, calling out for the dead Kamalate, in field, 
forest, village. While he was sitting in an out-of-town grove, 
downcast, scratching the ground idly with his toenail, he saw 
something: the golden kala5a (pinnacle, cupola} of a temple 
jutting forth from the earth, like 'the nipple-peak on the 
breast of the Goddess of Freedom'. When he got the place 
dug and excavated, however, there was no Kamalate. But 
before him stood the closed door of a shrine. Careless of 
consequence, Allama kicked the door open, and entered. 
He saw before him a yogi in a trance, concentrated on the 
Iniga. His eyes and face were all aglow, his locks glowing, 
a garland of rudralqi seeds1 round his neck, serpent ear-
rings on his ears. Like the All-giving Tree, he sat there in the 
heart of the temple. The yogi's name was Animi~yya (the 
One without eyelids, the open-eyed one}. While Allama 
stood there astonished, Animi~ayya gave into his hand a 
li.nga. Even as he handed over the li.nga, Animi~yya's life 
went out. In that moment of transference, Allama became 
enlightened, and wandered henceforth where the Lord called 
him and where the Lord took him. 
This experience of the secret underground, the cave-temple, 
is what is probably celebrated in the name Guhesvara or Lord 
of Caves, which appears in almost every Allama vacana. 
Other vacana saints recognized him instantly as the Master. 
BasavaQ.J}.a, Mahadevi, Cennabasava, Siddharama, Muktayakka 
and others considered him their guru. Basava was known as 
A~~a 'elder brother', Mahadevi as Akka 'elder sister', but 
Allama was Prabhu or Master to everyone. A later poet, 
Omarasa, devoted an entire work Prabhulitigalile to the 
Master's life, miracles and teachings. The Sunyasampiidane or 
'the Achievement of Nothingness', an important source for 
Vuasaiva thought and poetry, was written round the life 
I. Sacred to ~iva, also used as prayer beads; serpents as ornaments 
arc also characteristic of Siva. 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
I4S 
and work of Allama, and describes his encounters with 
contemporary saints. According to all accounts, KalyaJ).a 
was established as the rallying centre of Vtmaiva saints by 
Allama's spiritual presence as much as by BasavaJ).JJ.a's efforts 
as minister of state. The company of saints, presided over by 
Allama, came to be known as anubhava mat:Jtapa or 'the 
mansion of Experience'. 
Allama's rejection of external ritual and worship was most 
complete. In his encounters with BasavaJ).J).a, Mahadeviyakka 
(c£ section-notes on them) and others he leads them to under-
stand their own imperfect rejection of externals: he teases, 
probes, questions their integrity. He stresses BasavaJJ.JJ.a's 
temptations in the world to which he has yielded even 
though in good works. He mocks at Mahadevi flatmting 
her nudity to the gaze of the world and yet covering herself 
with her tresses. The Vttabiva rejection of various occult 
practices of the time is best illustrated by the episode of 
Gorak~a. GOr~a was the leader of Siddhas or occult practi-
tioners in search of supernatural powers (probably not to be 
identified with Gorakhnitha dated between the ninth and 
twelfth century, the master of a medieval occult tradition in 
North India, z despite the similarity of name and other circum~ 
stances). Whatever be the historical truth of the legend, the 
significance is clear. 
Siddhas were after Siddhis, or 'miraculous powers'. In 
the course of yogic practices, the yogi acquires inevitably 
certain occult powers, suspending various powers of nature: 
being one he becomes many, or having become many, becomes one 
again; he becomes visible or invisible; he goes, feeling no obstruc-
tion, to the further side of a wall or rampart or hill, as if through 
air; he penetrates up and down through solid ground, as if through 
2. For a succinct account of Siddhas cf. M. Eliade's Yoga:Immortality 
and Freedom, New York, 1958, pp. JOI-'7. 

SPEAKING OF hVA 
water; he walks on water without breaking through, as if on solid 
ground; he travels cross-legged in the sky,like the birds on the wing; 
even the Moon and the Sun • • • does he touch and feel with his 
hand; he reaches in the body even up to the heaven Brahama ••• 3 
While such powers are essential indications of the saint's 
progressive release from the conditions of earthly existence, 
they are also temptations to power, tempting the yogi to a 
vain magical. mastery of the world (Eliade's phrase).• Both 
Hindu and Buddhist doctrines warn the novice against these 
temptations on the way to samadhi or nirva~;~a, or 'release'. 
Allama's magical contest with and victory over Gorak~ is 
symbolic ofVuasaivism's rebuke to occult practices. 
Gorak~a, the leader of the Siddhas, had a magical body, 
invulnerable as diamond. Allama mocked at his body, his 
vanity. Legend says that he gave Allama a sword and invited 
him to try cutting his body in two. Allama swung the sword 
at him, but the sword clanged on the solid diamond-body 
of Gorak~a; not a hair was severed. GOrak~a laughed in pride. 
Allamaprabhu laughed at this show-off and returned the 
sword, saying, 'Try it on me now.' 
Gorak~ came at 
Allama with his sword with all his strength. The sword 
swished through Allama' s body as if it were mere space. 
Such were Allama's powers of self-emptying, his 'achieve-
ment of Nothingness'. GOrak~ was stunned- he felt acutely 
the contrast between his own powers and Allama's true 
realization, between his own diamond-body in which the 
carnal body had become confirmed and Allama's body which 
was no body but all spirit. This revelation was the beginning 
ofhis enlightenment. Allama said to him:s 
3. From a buddhist text quoted by Eliade, op. dt., p. 178. 
4· ibid., p. 177· 
S· Sunyasampadane, ed. S. S. Bhoomurmath, Dharwar, ISlSB, p. 449-

ALLAMA PRABHU 
With your alchemies, 
you achieve metals, 
but no essence. 
With all your manifold yogas. 
you achieve 
a body, but no spirit. 
With your speeches and arguments 
you build chains of words 
but cannot deDn.e the spirit. 
If you say 
you and I are one, 
you were me 
but I was not you. 
147 
Legend describes Allama's perfect interiorization: To 
men living and dying in lust, he taught the divine copulation 
of yogic practice; to alchemists, he brought the magical in-
ward drop of essence that transmuted the base metal of fear; 
to holy men living in the fearful world, exploiting trees for 
clothing, stripping root and branch in their hunger, drinking 
up river and lake in their thirst, Allama taught the spirit's 
sacrifice, converting 1hem from the practice of animal 
sacrifice to the sacrifice ofbestial sel£ 
Thus by mockery, invective, argument, poetry, loving 
kindness and sheer presence, Allama brought enlightment to 
laymen, and release to the saints themselves. 
Allama' s vacanas say little of his early life, passions or 
conflicts. His vacanas were all uttered after he reached full 
enlightenment. Unlike others (e.g. Basaval}.J}.a), he leaves 
few traces of early struggle or his biographical past. In a saint 
like Allama, ~the butterfly has no memory of the caterpillar'. 
According to some, such an image of Allama, untempted 
and undivided by human passions, is a censored image, 
clipped and presented by scholars who love absolutes. 

SPEAKING OP §IvA 
Allama' s vacanas have been distributed in the Basavaraju 
edition (Allamana Vacana Candrike, Mysore, 196<>) as follows: 
Preliminary vacanas 
1-63 
Bhakta 
64-112 
MahiJvara 
113-156 
Prasiidi 
157-173 
Prif!lalitigi 
174-310 
SaratJ.a 
311-6o6 
Aikya 
600-1321 
{including songs set to music 1289-1321) 
The overwhelming impression that Allama leaves of 
masterful wisdom and awareness without lapses is clearly 
reflected in the proportions of his vacanas in the different 
phases, or sthalas: over half the vacanas are about the later 
steps of the saint's ascent, the largest number are about the 
state of union and realization. Compare these proportions 
with those of BasavaQJ}.a, where the greatest number is in the 
first bhakta-stage. 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
Look here, 
the legs are two wheels; 
the body is a wagon 
full of things. 
Five men66 drive 
the wagon 
and one man is not 
like another. 
Unless you ride it 
in full knowledge of its ways 
the axle 
will break, 
0 Lord of Caves. 
S9 
Where was the mango tree, 
where the koilbird? fn 
when were they kin? 
Mountain gooseberry68 
and sea salt: 
when 
were they kin? 
and when was I 
kin to the Lord 
of Caves? 
149 

ISO 
SPl!AXING OP §IVA 
95 
A little bee hom 
in the heart's lotus 
flew out and swallowed 
the sky. 
In the breeze 
of his wing, three worlds 
turned upside down. 
When 
the cage of the five-coloured swan 
was broken, the bee fell 
to the ground with broken wings. 
Living among your me~ 
0 Lord of Caves, 
I saw the lovely tactic 
of truth's coming on. 69 
101 
I saw: 
heart conceive, 
hand grow big with child; 
ear drink up the smell 
of camphor, nose eat up 
the dazzle of pearls; 
hungry eyes devour 
diamonds. 
In a blue sapphire 
I saw the three worlds 
hiding, 
0 Lord ofCaves.711 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
109 
If mountains shiver in the cold 
with what 
will they wrap them? 
If space goes naked 
with what 
shall they clothe it? 
If the lord's men become worldlings 
where will I find the metaphor, 
0 Lord of Caves 
211 
I saw an ape tied up 
at the main gate of the triple city, 
taunting 
every comer. 
When the king came 
with an army, 
he broke them up at one stroke 
and ate them. 
He has a body, no head, this ape: 
legs without footsteps, 
hands without fingers; 
a true prodigy, really. 
ISI 

152 
SPEAKING OF §IVA 
Before anyone calls him, he calls them. 
I saw him clamber over the forehead of the wild dephant 
born in his womb 
and sway in play 
in the dust of the winds. 
I saw him juggle his body as a ball 
in the depth of the sky, 
play with a ten-hooded snake 
in a basket; saw him blindfold 
the eyes of the five virgins. 
I saw him trample the forehead 
of the lion that wanders in the ten streets, 
I saw him raise the lion's eyebrows. 
I saw him grow from amazement 
to amazement, holding a diamond 
in his hand. 
Nothing added, 
nothing taken, 
the Lord's stance 
is invisible 
to men untouched 
by the Lmga of the Breath.'I 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
213 
With a whole temple 
in this body 
where's the need 
for another? 
No one asked 
for two. 
0 Lord of Caves, 
if you are stone, 
what am I? 
218 
They don't know the day 
is the dark's face, 
and the dark the day's. 
A necklace of nine jewels 
lies buried, intact, in the face of the night; 
in the face of day a tree 
with leaves of nine designs. 
When you feed the necklace 
to the tree, 
the Breath enjoys it 
in the Lord of Caves.7z 
IS3 

154 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
219 
It's dark above the clutching hand. 
It's dark over the seeing eye. 
It's dark over the remembering heart. 
It's dark here 
with the Lord of Caves 
out there. 
277 
When the toad 
swallowed the sky, 
look, Rahu 
the serpent mounted 
and wonder of wonders! 
the blind man 
caught the snake. 
Thus, 0 Lord, 
I learned 
without telling the world.73 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
299 
I heard the dead rooster crow 
that the cat74 devoured. 
I saw the black koil come 
and eat up the sun. 
The casket burned and left 
only the sacred thread. 
The Litiga of the Breath 
breaks all rules 
and grows unorthodox. 
No one may trace 
the footstep on the water; 
the sound of the word 
Guhesvara* 
is neither here 
nor there. 
* Lord of Caves 
316 
What's this darkness 
on the eyes? 
this death on the heart? 
this battlefidd within, 
this coquetry without, 
this path familiar to the feet? 
ISS 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
319 
A wilderness grew 
in the sky.75 
In that wilderness 
a hunter. 
In the hunter's hands 
a deer. 
The hunter will not die 
till the beast 
is killed. 
Awareness is not easy, 
is it, 
0 Lord of Caves? 
I was 
as if the fire in the tree 
burned the tree 
as if the sweet smells 
of the winds of space 
took over the nostrils 
as if the doll of wax 
went up in flames 
I worshipped the Lord 
and lost the world. 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
429 
When the honey-bee came 
I saw the smell76 of flowers 
run. 
0 what miracles! 
Where the heart went 
I saw the brain 
run. 
When the god came, 
I saw the temple run. 
431 
Outside city limits 
a temple. 
In the temple, look, 
a hermit woman. 
In the woman's hand 
a needle, 
at needle's end 
the fourteen worlds. 
0 Lord of Caves, 
I saw an ant 
devour whole 
the woman, the needle, 
the fourteen worlds." 
IS7 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
45! 
Show me once 
the men 
who have cut the guts 
of the eye 
roasted the kernels 
of the heart 
and learned 
the beginnings 
of the word 
0 Lord of Caves.78 
459 
The world tires itself thinking 
it has buried all shadow. 
Can shadows die 
for limbed animals? 
If you rage and curse here 
at the thief out there 
on the other shore, 
will he just drop dead? 
These men, they do not know 
the secret, 
the stitches of feeling; 
would our Lord of Caves 
come alive 
just because they wish it? 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
461 
For a wedding of dwarfS 
rascals beat the drums 
and whores 
carry on their heads 
holy pitchers; 
with hey-ho's and loud hurrahs 
they crowd the wedding party 
and quarrel over flowers and betelnuts; 
all three worlds are at the party; 
what a rumpus this is, 
without our Lord of Caves. 
492 
0 Happening that never happened, 
0 Extremist Character, 
why get worshipped 
at the hands 
of the dying? 
0 Lord of Caves, 
it's a shame 
to get worshipped 
at the hands 
of men 
who get hurt 
and die. 
IS9 

IOO 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
S3.Z 
A tree79 hom 
in a land without soil, 
and look! 
ei~ht flowers 
thunderbolt-coloured. 
Fruit on the branch 
ripen at the root. 
0 Lord of Caves, 
only he is truly your man 
who has eaten 
of fruit fallen 
loose from the stalk 
in places no eye has seen: 
only he, 
no one dse. 
S31 
The fires of the city8° burned in the forest, 
forest fires burned in the town. 
Listen, listen to the flames 
of the four directions. 
Flapping and crackling in the vision 
a thousand bodies dance in it 
and die coundess deaths, 
0 Lord of Caves. 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
541 
He's powerful, this policeman! 
broke off the hands and feet of water 
lopped off the nose and ears of .fire 
beheaded the winds 
and impaled the sky on a stake.B1 
Destroyed the king and his two ministers. 
Closed and shot the bolts of the nine gates 
and locked them up 
killed nine thousand men 
till he was left alone 
our Lord of Caves. 
sso 
Poets of the past 
are the children of my concubines. 
Poets to come 
are infants of my pity. 
The poets of the sky 
are babies in my cradle. 
Vigm and Brahma 
are my kinsmen and sidekicks. 
You are the father-in-law 
and I the son-in-law, 
0 Lord of Caves.Bz 
I6I 

SPEAKING OF hvA 
ss6 
If it rains fu:e83 
you have to be as the water; 
if it is a deluge of water 
you have to be as the wind; 
if it is the Great Flood, 
you have to be as the sky; 
and if it is the Very Last Flood of all the worlds, 
you have to give up self 
and become the Lord. 
616 
Who can know green grass flames 
seeds of stone 
reflections of water 
smell of the wind 
the sap of fu:e 
the taste of sunshine on the tongue84 
and the lights in oneself 
except your men? 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
One dies, 
another bears him to the burial ground: 
still another takes them b~th 
and bums them. 
No one knows the groom 
and no one the bride. 
Death falls across 
the wedding. 
Much before the decorations fade 
the bridegroom is dead. 
lord, only your men 
have no death. 
In the mortar without water,Bs 
pestles without shadows. 
Women without bodies 
pound rice without grains, 
and sing lullabies 
to the barren woman's son. 
Under streamers of fire, 
plays the child of the lord. 

SPEAKING OF hVA 
668 
The wind sleeps 
to lullabies of sky. 
Space drowses, 
infinity gives it suck 
from her breast. 
The sky is silent. 
The lullaby is over. 
The Lord is 
as if He were not.86 
Light 
devoured darkness. 
I was alone 
inside. 
Shedding 
the visible dark 
I 
was Your target 
0 Lord of Caves. 

ALLAM.& PRABHU 
699 
Sleep, great goddess sleep, 
heroine of three worlds, 
spins and sucks up 
all, draws breath 
and throws them down 
sapless. 
I know of no hero 
who can stand before her. 
Struck by her arrows, 
people rise and fall. 
77S 
A running river 
is all legs. 
A burning fire 
is mouths all over. 
A blowing breeze 
is all hands. 
So, lord of the caves, 
for your men, 
every limb is Symbol. 
I6S 

166 
SPEAKING OP SIVA 
802 
Whoever knew 
that It is body of body, 
breath ofbreath 
and feeling of feding? 
Thinking that it's far, 
it's near, 
it's out here 
and in there, 
they tire themselves out. 
Some say 
they saw It. 
What is It, 
the circular sun, 
the circle of the stars? 
The Lord of Caves 
lives in the town 
of the moon mountain. 

ALLAMA PRABHU 
836 
For all their search 
they cannot see 
the image in the mirror. 
It blazes in the circles 
between the eyebrows. 
Who knows this 
has the Lord. 
959 
Feed the poor 
tell the truth 
make water-places 
for the thirsty 
and build tanks for a town -
you may then go to heaven 
after death, but you'll get nowhere 
near the truth of Our Lord. 
And the man who knows Our Lord, 
he gets no results. 

168 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
966 
For the wildfire, the forest is the target; 
for the waterfrreB7, the water; 
for the body's fire, the body; 
for death' s conflagration, the worlds 
are target; 
for the angry fire of your men, all men of ill-will; 
yet for your illusion's lashing flames 
I'm no target, 0 Lord of Caves. 
972 
Looking for your light, 
I went out: 
it was like the sudden dawn 
of a million million suns, 
a ganglion of lightnings 
for my wonder. 
0 Lord of Caves, 
if you are light, 
there can be no metaphor. 

APPENDIX I 
The Six-Phase System 
(~atsthala SiJJhiinta) 
A RATHER esoteric intellectual system underlies the native arrange-
ment of vacanas. Though not strictly relevant for the appreciation 
of vacana poetry, such a system is one of the many 'contexts' of 
these texts. 
The vacanas and later VJ.Idaiva texts in Kannada and Sanskrit 
speak of the mystical process as a succession of stages, a ladder of 
ascent, a metamorphosis from egg to larva to pupa to the final 
freedom of winged being. Often the devotee in his impatience 
asks to be cut loose from these stages of metamorphosis as in 
.Mahidcvi 17. 
Six phases or steps (sthalir, sopana) are recognized. The devotee 
at each stage has certain characteristics; each stage has a specific 
relationship between the atiga or the soul and the litiga or the Lord. 
Liliga creates all of creation out of no purpose, for it has no desires; 
so creation is described as Lila or the Lord's play. The Lord's creative 
power is known as Maya or Sakti, often translated as nlusion. 
Creation comes into being by the lord's engagement {pravrtti); 
liberation for the aJiga is attained through disengagement (nivrtta). 
The description of the first is a cosmology, not very diJferent from 
the Sankhya philosophy. The description of. the disengagement 
is in the form of the Six phases. Maya or Sakti creates desire and 
engagement not only for all creation but for each individual creature; 
bhakti {'devotion'), love for the Liliga, is the'.counter-move. Bhakti 
disengages the creature from Maya. and takes him step by step 
nearer to the Lmga till he becomes one with him. Both ~ti and 
bhakti arc therefore powers of the Lord, moves and countermoves, 
not diJferent from one another except in direction; one evolves, 
another devolves: one breathes in, the other breathes out. 

170 
SPEAKING OF hVA 
The Linga has six sthalas or phases; the aiiga or creature has a 
corresponding six. These are best displayed in two corresponding 
diagrams, with somewhat rough glosses: 
I 
I 
Wiga 
adga 
aeator 
creature 
iftaliilga 
priQalliiga 
bhavaliilga 
(desire) 
(life) 
(feeling or experience 
I 
1 
of the lord) 
,.., ----1 
I 
I 
j~o-----.1 
ijmga ~ga fi~ lga ~ga mabrnga 
kriyasakti 
jfiana§kati icclWakti adUakti 
parUakti 
cidakti 
power of 
power of power of primal 
ultimate 
power o£ 
action 
knowing will 
creativity power 
supmnc 
Aspects of Linga (the LorJ) 
intclli-
gence 
Note that each of the liilgas (aspects of the creator} is associated 
with a specific Sakti, a motive for evolution, just as each of the 
angas (stages of the creature) has a specific bhakti, a motive for 
disengagement. 
From left to right, we see a hierarchic arrangement for Sakti as 
well as well as for bhakti. In the liilga diagram, it is probably 
better to speak of the various lingas and their attendant Saktis as 
aspects in the order of importance; for the aliga, they are stages. 
One may also observe here that the tree-arrangement is by binary 
oppositions. In the first branch, it is linga 11. anga. In the second 
branching, it is a ~ombination of two oppositions, a Hegel-like 
dialectical triad. In diagram I, it is (i1!a and priina} 11. bhiiva, represent-
ing the opposition of Life in the World (Desire and Life) and the 
Life in the Lord (Experience of God). In diagram 2, it is (tyiiga and 

I 
bhakta 
devotee 
l 
sadbhakt:i 
feeling, 
'bhakti 
proper• 
APPENDIX I 
I 
liriga 
~iva 
I 
I 
anga 
tyaganga 
hhogacga 
yo ganga 
renunciation 
enjoyment 
union 
I 
I 
I 
I 
mahe§a 
prasadi 
p~iarru;la 
master 
the lord's 'the liriga the sur-
grace 
in one's 
rendered 
I 
life>-breath' I 
I 
na4Pka-
avadhana- anubhiva ananda-
bhakt:i 
bhakt:i 
bhakt:i 
discipline reception mystical 
bliss 
experience 
Stages of Atiga (human souQ 
I 
aikya 
the one 
with the 
lord 
I 
samarasa-
bhakti 
oneness 
bhoga) v. yoga, the opposition of the means in the world (Renuncia-
tion and Enjoyment) to the end beyond {Union with the Lord). 
It is obvious that the members of the two triads, like all the members 
of the final sestets, correspond to one another precisely: as the 
identity of anga and linga would require. Such identity is the be-
ginning of creation as it is the 'end' of the creature; all differentiations 
(and diagrams) are only in the middle. 
Further, the last six-way branch is the result of binary divisions 
under each of the previous three. The two members of each binary 
are related to each other as complements: kriyiifjiiiina or doing/ 
knowing; icchiifiidi or will/primal creation; pariifdt or the ultimate 
power/the ultimate intelligence in diagram I; saJbhaktifnai~.tikabhakti 
or devotion/discipline; avadhiinafanubhiiva or receiving/experiencing; 
iinandafsamarasaor bliss/harmonious union in diagram 2. In some texts 
these six are made to correspond with six inner organs (antabkaratJa) 
and the six outer organs of classical Hindu psychology; the latter 
correspond (somewhat asymmetrically) to the five dements. These 

172 
SPEAKING OP §IvA 
correspondences, including the anga/li.liga sets, are best expounded 
in table form: 
The 
Outer 
Inner 
Sakti-
linga-
Sthala 
Kind of 
elements Senses 
Senses 
type 
type 
Phase 
Bhakti 
Earth 
smell 
citta 
kriyii or 
iiciira 
bhakti 
Jraddha 
action 
or sad-
bhakti 
Water 
taste 
buddhi 
jiiiina or guru 
maheJ-
nillhe 
knowing 
vara 
Fire 
sight 
ahair-
icchii or 
Siva 
prasiidi 
ava&na 
kiira 
will 
Air 
touch 
manas 
iidi or 
jangama 
prana-
anubhiiva 
primal 
lingi 
power 
Sky or hearing jiiiina 
pariior 
prasada 
Jart11J4 
iinanda 
Space 
ultimate 
power 
Sky or 
heart(?) bhiiva 
cit or 
rruzha 
aikya 
samarasa 
Space 
supreme 
intelli-
gence 
Some would add to this table a set of corresponding cakras or 
centres of power in the human body, a hierarchy or route of ascent 
for the life-force beginning with the peritonium through the genitals, 
umbilicus, heart, neck, between-the-eyes, and the crown of the 
head. Reaching the last would result in union with the supreme reality, 
aikya or samarasa according to the VIrah.iva chart. 
We should say a little more about the phases ofbhakti, the •stages 
of Life's way' for the devotee. These stages, described by an expert 
theologian of the movement, Cennabasava, fit remarkably well the 
actual stages of each saint's development. It is a convenient typology 
of saints' legends. The poems in our selection, following the Kannada 
editions, are arranged according to this six-phase order (c£ section-
introductions to BasavaJ}l}a, Dasimayya and Al1ama pp. 6s, 95, 148). 
I. In the bhakta-phase he practises bhak.ti (devotion) and wonhips 
acarali.liga, which is attended by kriyasakti or the power of action. 
Example: Basava.QJ}.a S9· 

APPENDIX I 
173 
2. In the next phase, he moves nom bhakti to ~Pte or discipline. 
This is a phase of endurance, or ordeals and temptations. Poems in 
this phase, like BasavaQI}a S63, lash out against the unregenerate 
and the unfaithful, often ambiguously addressed to oneself as well 
as to other sinners. 
3. 1he third phase, prasadi, is more peaceful than the second. 
In this phase, the devotee realizes that he is secure in the Lord's lceep 
and sees his workings everywhere. All things are offerings, all acts 
acts of devotion. The very senses that tempted the devotee by their 
blandishments become sites for the Lord's six-fold presence: the six 
aspects of the Lmga are distributed through the six senses. 
'1he nostrils are acaraliilga 
The tongue is guruliilga 
1he eyes are Sivaliilga 
The tongue is jaiigamaliDga 
The ears are prasadaliDga, 
And feeling (bhava} is mahaliDga • • . thus your devotee receives 
the Lord tin every limb,' says Cennabasava. Each sense dedicates 
its special experience as its offering: the nostrils their sense of the 
world's smells, the eyes vision, the tongue its taste, etc. Thus are the 
senses transformed. So is the world of experience. In thi~ stage, no 
explicit offering need be made. For 'sound, touch, shape, taste, 
smell and the five senses move constantly towards the liDga. Each 
[sense] knows its erijoyment is all for the Lord and towards Him' 
(Cennabasava). 'When the ground turns policeman where can the 
burglar run? Is there anything held back nom the man whose every 
limb is Lmga?' Before they touch one's senses, sensations are already 
dedicated to the Lmga. For in this stage, the Lord is 'the hearing ear 
in the ear, the seeing eye in the eye'. One's limbs and senses are 
Siva's limbs, Siva's senses; Thus I becomes Thou. His acts cease to be 
karma, they cannot smear him. This bhakti is avadhana or' receiving'. 
4· In the next stage, avadhana ('receiving') gives place to anubhava 
('experiencing'), for the devotee moves nom the outer world to the 
inner. Seeing Siva in all things, he is filled with compassion. As all 
things are offerings, he 'fasts, partaking of a feast,' 'uses pleasure and 
yet is virgin' (Basavaooa). In the above three, the actions of the 
bhakta are still important; in the next three his awareness becomes 

174 
SPEAKING OP hVA 
primary. So far, he is a novitiate, disciplining body and mind, 
controlling their distractions, making the outer inner. In the fourth 
stage or pranalitigi (devoted to the linga in the breath) the devotee 
turns inward. His heart is cleansed, his intelligence clear, his ego 
and senses stilled, he begins to see the light of the Lord in himself. 
For the LiJiga of the Breath (pravaliriga), 'the body is the altar, its 
ritual bath is in the Ganges of the sky, it worships with fragrance 
without Bowers. In the heart's lotus, the sound of Siva Siva. Such is 
oneness, 0 Lord of Caves' (Allama). 
s. In the fifth stage, he is with the Lord and suffers only as a loving 
woman suffers her lover's absence, living in two worlds, half-mad, 
half in a coma, 'a fool of god'. Many of .Mahidevi' s vacanas belong 
to this phase: e.g. 79, 120. In this Wa!].asthala, he knows he is not 
contained in his skin, nor made of earth, water, air, fire, and space, 
nor a tbi~ of the five senses. 
6. As Siva and Sakti are primordially one, W:ma and Lmga be-
come one. There is no worship any more, for who is out there 
to receive such worshipi' This is Oneness or aileyasthala. Like space 
joining space, water water, the devotee dissolves nameless in the 
Lord, who is not another. 
Characteristically, the devotee believes that all schemes may 
dissolve and all stages may merge. The vacanakaras say that in any 
one sthala all other sthalas are inherent; that the six stages may only 
be a manner of speaking of the unspeakable, an ascent on the ladder 
with no rungs. 
On the other hand, later theologians with their penchant for 
systems have given each phase six sub-phases, each sub-phase further 
phases and detail as many as 216 stages in life's way. But such excesses 
need not detain us and are inimical to the true vacana-spirit. 
As some of the considerations of the six phases of the 'pilgrim's 
progress' illuminate certain vacanas, we have offered, in the introduc-
tion to each section, a chart of each saint's vacanas classified according 
to the six-phase system. Such classifications are traditional, and do 
not fit everywhere. But they make, if nothing else, a useful index 
of themes. 

APPENDIX II 
On Lingayat Culture 
by William McCormack 
Lingayats are members of a Kannada-speaking caste-sect of southern 
India who qualify, by virtue of wearing on their bodies the symbol 
(litiga) of their god Siva, to receive His blessings. A modem attempt 
was made to show Lingayats as having a religion separate from 
'Hindu' when 'Lingayats' received discrete entry in the Indian 
Constitution of 1950. But we believe Lingayats to be Hindus because 
their beliefs are syncretistic and include an assemblage of many 
Hindu elements, including the name of their god, Siva, who is one 
of the chief figures of the Hindu pantheon. A. K. Ramanujan docu-
ments this point in his introduction to the present book, where he 
discusses Hindu symbolic elements in vacanas. 
It is true that the Lingayat founding prophet, Basavai}.I].a, preached 
against Hindu caste in his vacanas and seemingly attacked the reli-
gious and secular mediator role of Brahmans, who are Hinduism's 
hereditary caste of priests. But Lingayats today, like other Hindus, 
accommodate to teachings of Hinduism which hold the terms 
'Brahmanism' and 'Hinduism' to be interchangeable, .. and place 
Brahman priests at the head of society, its social as well as its religious 
leaders, and its models for personal and moral worth. If this fact of a 
Hindu's unquestioned acceptance of the honourable precedence of 
Brahman priests above 'ordinary' men is fully grasped, then we can 
better understand how close religion is to the Hindu's perc;:eption of 
his combined social and personal self. As a Hindu, one does not 
readily admit to one's own lack of understanding of the Brahman's 
beliefs and religious practices. Such an admission would be a kind of 
sin. At the same time, it would also amount to an admission of 
social incompetence, for acknowledgement of imperfection in 
these matters would be to lower oneself on a ladder of personal 

SPBAKING OF SIVA 
worth which derives its symbols of moral success always from what 
Brahmans have already ostensibly achieved. Caste thus sets very severe 
limits to hwnan understanding and the expression of personal interests 
and inner feelings. It is this limitation on self-expression, set by the 
multitude of rules of 'correct' behaviour appropriate to one's 
hereditary caste station in life, that Indian poets and prophets like 
Basaval}l}ll reacted against. In reporting· their inner emotional ex-
periences to others, they often effectually symbolize a freedom of 
emotional life about which ordinary persons may only dream. For 
Basavai}Qa, caste exacted too high a price in terms of individual 
development and feelings of independence for the self- a price which 
BasavaJ].I}ll and other medieval and modem Indian poets have been 
spiritually unwilling or unable to pay. Therankandfile ofLingayats, 
on the other hand, have been less able to resist the all-encompassing 
socio-cultural mesh of Brahmanism: 'As in the case of Christianity 
in some parts of India, the social barriers of caste have proved too 
strong for the .•. orthodox [Lingayat] religion' ('Lingayats', in 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Scribner's Sons, New York, 1909 ). 
BasavaJ].I)ll's importance in the Kannada country has been verified 
in the archaeology of the region, for inscriptions have been deciphered 
which mention his life in the twelfth century. No inscription men-
tions the other writers whom Lingayats believe to have been Basa-
vaJ].I}ll's contemporaries. Thus BasavaJ].I}ll's putative nephew is 
singled out in the above-mentioned article as 'perhaps only a mythi-
cal person'. Similarly, there are no contemporary biographies of 
Allama Prabhu, who perhaps taught philosophical monism through 
his vacanas. Nor is there a biography of Akkamma (.Mahadevi), a 
female ascetic and mystic associated with the SriSaila shrine in the 
Telegu-speaking region of South India. 'Akkarruna' means 'respected 
elder sister', and she is recognized in popular lithographs by her 
absence of clothing save for a hair cloak. We lack documentation 
for the details of even Basaval)l)ll' s life. 
Lacking information on the lives of these saints, I attempted an 
effort to ascertain their emotional attitudes and outlooks by analysis 
of the content of their writings, and thus made a frequency count of 
selected categories of metaphors in vacanas attributed to BasavaJ].I}a, 
Allama Prabhu, and .Mahadevi. The categories chosen were metaphors 

APPENDIX II 
177 
about animals, about persons, about natural objects (including plants), 
and about objects of cultural interest (meaningful because local or 
Hindu traditions have selected them for attention, e.g., preference 
for one art style rather than another). The frequency count for a 
very large sample ofBasava~:t~:ta's vacanas revealed the pattern that his 
metaphors concerned either persons (nearly so per cent) or cultural 
categories (so per cent), and practically excluded the other two cate-
gories. (For an adaptation of this method to computer technology, 
see B. N. Colby, 'Cultural Patterns in Narrative', Scieuce, Vol. ISI, 
18 February 1966, pp. 793-8.) When Basava~:tQa did very rarely 
select an animal metaphor, it pertained to the dog, an animal he 
apparently disliked. For Hindus, the dog is associated with impurity: 
it eats garbage and human faeces, and if a Hindu priest is bitt~ by a 
dog, he is forever disbarred from performing rituals for his clients. 
One can speculate that the dog symbolized impurity to Basava~:t~:ta's 
unconscious as well, though at a conscious level he rejected the 
significance ofimpurity and rejected especially, according to Lingayat 
traditions, the Hindu beliefs about the impurity of women. On the 
other hand, an historical interpretation of BasavaJ:t~:ta's dislike for 
dogs is equally interesting, in that the black dog cult of Siva was in 
competition with early Lingayatism for the allegiance of Siva 
worshippers. Yet a third interpretation of Hindu ambivalence 
about animals and women is the psychoanalytic one, and for this the 
reader is referred to E. Erikson's book on Gaudhi's Truth (Faber & 
Faber, 1970). 
Lingayats, sometimes styled as 'strict Siva-devotees', or Vrrasaivas, 
were estimated to number nearly four million in I9S9· They then 
constituted about 16 per cent of the total population of Mysore 
State, a Kannada-speaking state drawn in 19S6 along linguistic 
lines according to the Indian States Reorganization Act of 1955. 
The general elections of I9S7. 1962, and 1967 showed Lingayats to 
be the most popular and powerful political force in Mysore, due to 
their position as the single largest caste group, with a voting plurality, 
in the state. Before the I9S6 state reorganization, state politics had 
been putatively controlled by the Vokkaliga, or 'farmer', caste, and 
Lingayats too were and are mainly farmers. But the reorganization 
of the state enlarged its territory by adding Kannada-speaking areas 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
where Lingayats made up as much as .so per cent of the population. 
Of Lingayat subcastes, the two largest are known by the names of 
occupations which only a minority can practise: the jangamas, or 
priests, and the banajigas, or traders. The current president of the 
National Congress Party of India, Sri Nijaliligappa, would trace his 
ethnic origins to the banajiga subcaste of Lingayats. Thus a social-
science value to this book and to A. K. Ramanujan's explication of 
vacana symbolism is that we here make a beginning in communicat-
ting certain universal aspects of symbols which give Lingayats a 
certain regional integration and historical continuity as a group. 
In the southern districts of modem Mysore State, and especially 
in Mysore District itself where is situated the palace of the former 
princely ruler of the state, there is a tendency to regard jangamas and 
aradhya (Saiva) Brahmans as closely related if not identical castes. 
In these districts, priestly fUnctions such as the ministration of life-
cycle rituals - that is, the public ceremonies which mark the changes 
in the status and life-pattern of individuals (birth, marriage, death 
rituals) - may be performed for Lingayats by priests of either caste. 
The other major function of jangamas pertains to Lingayats every-
where, and is not open to aradhya Brahmans: this is to provide most 
of the recruits for the Lingayat ascetic orders, especially for the order 
of the red-robed virakta monks. As is the case with Brahmanism 
generally, priests who officiate at life-cycle rituals may be married, 
but ascetics like the Lingayat viraktas are celibate, preside over their 
own monasteries, and do not perform birth, marriage, or death 
sacraments. Viraktas are not drawn exclusively from the j:ulgama 
subcaste, but there has been a tendency to favour recruiting boys 
from the priestly jangama families - which are bound by that restric-
tion against widow or divorcee remarriage which is generally felt 
to be a Brahman trait in southern India. 
The chief occasions which traditionally require the presence of 
jangama (or aradhya) priests are the ceremonies perfonned at the 
birth of a child, its naming about a fortnight after birth, the puberty 
maturation of a girl (first menstruation), marriage, and death. The 
audience for these life-crisis rituals is drawn from relatives, friends, 
and neighbours, so that no new fiiendships are established by these 
celebrations. It is a case of strengthening and reinforcing old acquain-

APPENDIX II 
179 
tances, and renewing the ties of blood and kin relationship. In the 
same way, the marriage contract negotiated by the parents of bridal 
couples tend toward the renewal of old kinship bonds, the preferred 
spouse among Kannada-speaken being a mother's brother's, or a 
father's sister's, child. Or, a mother's brother may wed his sister's 
daughter, ~hereby contracting a marriage which cross-cuts the 
'generation gap'. 
When a child is hom, the father sends for that jailgama priest who 
serves the family by hereditary right, and the priest initiates the infant 
by ceremonially tying a linga to the child's body. Thus a child born 
to Lingayat parents is the recipient of full sectarian membership 
soon after his birth. On some occasions, usually at a Lingayat 
monastery, the initiation ceremony may be repeated in more elab-
orate form. Those who are not born Lingayats undergo this same 
ritual if they agree to perform a lifetime vow of strict vegetarianism. 
The cabalistic interpretation of linga-wearing is that the linga repre-
sents the wearer's soul, which is not different from the divinity, 
Siva. Thus the personal liilga is a small replica of the black stone 
image of Siva found in temples. The linga worn by adults, however, 
is covered over with a black tar-like substance which hardens so 
that the whole resembles a robin's egg in shape and size, and is worn 
in a silver case suspended from the neck by a special cord to slightly 
above belt level. 
When a boy receives the initiation rite in a monastery, it provides 
him with a kind of licence for priesthood, and as such the ceremony 
is slightly different for him and his peen. The ritual proceeds in three 
stages, and requires several hours for completion. First, the five found-
ing fathers of Lingayat priestly lineages are wonhipped in the form 
of five pots which have been ritually dressed and enthroned on a 
ceremonially cleaned place. If jailgama boys are being initiated, a 
string connects each with his own ancestral pot. In the second stage, 
the importance of the linga is dramatized by the chanting of Sanskrit 
magical formulae. Then the linga is tied to each initiate, and the 
sacred six syllables of Siva are whispered into each candidate's ear. 
Finally, there is a period of advice on religious and social conduct, 
during which the group is lectured by the officiating teacher, who 
must he a celibate and has a special tide(pattadswamy). 

180 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
Water is prominent in the worship of Siva, and in Lingayat 
rituals it is usually applied to the feet, especially the toes, of an 
officiating jailgama priest. Cabalistically, the worship of the jangama' s 
feet symbolizes the unity of the worshipper's inner self with the 
jangama, and of all with the Holy Spirit of Siva. The water itself is 
regarded as consecrated by these acts - like the water poured in 
worship of the liriga in a Siva temple, or the waters of the Ganges 
River. After the ritual address to the jailgama's feet, both he and the 
worshipper pour the consecrated water over their own lingas, held 
in the left hand. '!his· water they drink, in the belief that it carries 
Siva's blessing, as a Hindu would drink Ganges water or the temple 
'lmga water'. 
Most Lingayat life-cycle rituals include worship of the priest's feet. 
Funerals present a practical difficulty, since the decedent, the principal 
actor in the ritual, cannot actively worship, but the clifficulty is 
resolved by the priest's placing his foot on the head of the corpse. 
At weddings the bridal couple are themselves worshipped by partici-
pants as embodiments of Siva and his heavenly consort Parvati, thus 
foot-worship and water ritual find no prominent place. Worship 
of the jailgama' s feet is performed in the Lingayat' s home on holidays 
forming part of the local festival calendar, on fortnights when the 
moon changes its course as between waxing and waning, on Mondays 
(Siva's sacred day), and on special occasions at the will of the house-
holder. 
Jangamas, like Brahman priests, serve as astrological advisers. 
They can also serve as matchmaker for their client families when 
those families are unrelated and the anticipated marriage is not to be 
between cousins or between an uncle and his niece. 
Folksongs form an integral part of the Lingayat religion, and are 
not unrelated to life-cycle ceremonies. Women sing traditional songs 
at the first menstruation ceremony for a matured girl and at all 
stages of the marriage ritual, that is, on the day of betrothal, on the 
wedding day, on the day the marriage is consununated, and on 
We4nesdays and Saturdays in the respective houses of the bridal 
couple for one to five weeks after the marriage. Funerals are an 
occasion for male folk-singing, performed with more elaborate 
instrumental accompaniment and greater professionalism than 

APPENDIX II 
I8I 
female singing, by more or less permanent musical groups. The 
themes of female folksongs are in line with female interests: women 
sing from legends about Lingayat heroines, and in praise of the 
Goddess, who takes many forms including those of first cause of 
the universe (Siva's mother) and Parvati (Siva's wife). The folksongs 
also describe the delights of holidays and the psychology of family 
living. The same songs are sung when women are working at home 
or in the fields, at leaisure in the evenings, carrying a coconut or other 
sacrificial offering to a temple or to graves of Lingayat saints or 
heroes, and so on. Singing groups include anyone who is available 
for the ·occasion and wishes to participate, thus they are mixed in 
age and made up of relatives, neighbours, and friends belonging to 
the same village, but women rarely visit other villages or towns to 
perform their folksongs. One popular folksong illustrates how themes 
of family psychology can be mixed with legend and symbolization 
of caste purity. This is the song which pits Parvati, Siva's pure but 
dissatisfied wife, against his beloved mistress, Ganga ('water', 
mother of rivers, symbol of fertility, shown iconographically in 
association with Siva's head), who is quiet and beautiful but was hom 
to a very low caste status. The pattern of village prostitution does 
draw women from low castes to serve men of higher birth, so there 
is a note of realistic feminine jealousy in this situation. The folksong 
first presents Parvati ridiculing Ganga's. low birth and scorning 
Ganga's dietary habits of allegedly eating fish and crocodile, for, as a 
member of a fisher and ferryman caste, Ganga does presumably eat 
non-vegetarian, therefore ritually 'unclean', food. Parvati then 
imagines the sorry spectacle of Ganga in working dress carrying a 
basket of stinking fish on her head. Siva is upbraided for his loss of 
wisdom in bringing such a girl into the Wnily, and is even accused 
ofhaving made the mistake without benefit of free will: 'It is written 
in fate that you will catch the feet of a dirty girl.' Finally, Parvati 
complains that Siva has brought this tongue-tied Ganga from a low 
social position and placed her, however impure, in a position of 
superiority over herself, the legal wife. 
The folksong performances of male singers are much more organ-
ized affairs, for the groups often have leaden and choral arrangements, 
and the occasion and purpose of the singing are more defui.ed. But 

182. 
SPEAKING OF ~IVA 
there is also a recreational aspect to male folk-singing, or bhajana, 
and the more professional male groups receive travel expenses from 
the organizers of religious fairs, festivals, and processions in diverse 
villages and towns. Because vacanas enjoy wide public interest and 
often have professional status, men perform them more frequently 
than do women. The relatively simple language of some of the 
vacana lyrics lend themselves to singing, but the structures and sense 
of longer sentences is sometimes broken by the requirements of 
melodic line and repetition. Similar alterations of the vacana texts 
occur when the (ew classical artists who sing them perform over 
local radio or in concerts. 
Another type of cultural performance is the readings of purana 
stories in praise of Lingayat saints and deities, and this inspires 
gatherings in the Lingayat monasteries every evening during the 
holy month. of 'Shravana' (July-August). In a modem-oriented 
monastery, the evening purana programme may include items of 
contemporary interest, such as the dedication of a Lingayat author's 
book or a musical performance. But there will also be purana stories 
about nineteenth-and twentieth-century Lingayat saints. For example, 
one of these concerns the virakta Hangal Kumarswamy, who was 
active in organizing educational institutions and free boarding clubs 
to assist rural students in gaining modem education. The traditional 
purana themes, like the folksongs, are more concerned with praising 
saints and deities in order to win symbolic merit for the audience, 
and with advising people on the perennial problems in family psy-
chology. The specialist's skill in purana performance consists, not in 
reading the text aloud- an assistant often does that- but in explaining 
and making relevant to the lives of the assembled persons the passage 
which is read out. Most Lingayat puranas are written in a six-line 
verse form, and one stanza, or as little as two to four lines, is read out 
and explained, often at great length, before another section is taken 
up. In a month's reading, perhaps 25 to 35 per cent of the written 
text will be covered. Along with prabacan, which is a much simpler 
performance and not limited to exposition of.one text, the purana 
readings ritually express a distinct Lingayat theosophy. This mystical 
doctrine is usually explained in terms of the 'six principles' (shatsthala) 
for individual spiritual development, and Lingayats feel that it ranks 

APPENDIX II 
with any that Brahmanism has produced. Indeed, according to the 
Lingayat Sanskrit scholar, DrS. C. Nandimath (Handbook ofViraJaiv-
ism, Dharwar, 1941), there are philosophical similarities with the 
monism preached by the eighth-century Vedantin, Sankaracharya. 
For the average villager, the most concrete and therefore the most 
meaningfUl manifestations of Lingayat ritual are the several religious 
fairs which are celebrated to honour Lingayat saints and heroes. 
These fairs, held mainly during the slack season for agriculture and 
during Shravana, provide an opportunity for individuals, bhajatla 
singing groups, and whole families to vacation away from the village. 
Besides enjoying relief from the village pressures for conformity, 
some villagers bring oxen to these meets and engage in trade. The 
main business of fairs is a religious procession, for which an image or 
picture of the deity or saint in whose name the fair is held is placed 
in a chariot, usually a four-wheeled wooden vehicle with a tower-like 
superstructure. The date of the fair is fixed by calendar, but the exact 
time of the procession is fixed by astrological calculation, in the 
belief that spiritual beings draw the chariot which only seems to 
move by human traction. Thus procession time is a very lucky time 
to be at the place of procession, and a tremendous flocking of pil-
grims characterizes the scene, in a way that is analogous, though on 
smaller scale, to the crowding to reach the confluence of the Ganges 
and Jumna rivers at Allahabad during the world-famous Kumbha 
Mda fair. Several smaller processions with bhajatla accompaniment 
go along with· the main chariot, and may also receive offerings and 
honour from the crowd as they pass. Ahead of the chariot stretch 
many groups of drummers and dancers, costumed to represent legen-
dary figures of Siva's heavenly court. Jn front of the chariot, teams of 
meri carry one or more tall flag poles, which are believed to have 
protective power for what comes behind, so that there is a competitive 
show of devotion by the pole-bearers to carry the heavy pole reck-
lessly forward alone and unassisted for some few yards. Usually 
water is poured on the ground before the chariot to ritually purify 
the ground and show honour, and the image in the chariot receives 
food-offerings and honour from the waving of burning oil lamps 
that are affixed to the platters of food. The platters are carried to the 
chariot by women, but priesdy attendants receive the offerings to 

SPEAKING OP §IVA 
the image - as they would do in a temple - and these priestly media-
tors then return a portion of the offerings to the givers. 
On the occasion of a fair, sacrificial offerings are made also to 
any near and relevant temple deity, usually at dawn, in late after-
noon, or in early evening. There are stalls at the religious fairs for 
the sale of ritual articles, like liitgas, the white ash (vibhuti} which 
Siva-worshippers wear on the forehead, or religious beads (the so-
called 'Siva's eyes', or rudrakshi beads). Besides these, there are food 
and drink stalls, as also publishers' stalls selling pictures of the saints 
and deities, framed or unframed, and various popular books and 
religious pamphlets at prices ranging from a quarter of a rupee to as 
much as seven or eight rupees for the larger astrological handbooks. 
The ten- to seventy-page pamphlets are produced for purely com-
mercial sale by twenty or so small family firms, and arc regularly 
available on railway platforms, from street-pedlars on market day, 
and from the small book stalls in the bazaars. The same or similar 
materials are published by several different firms, so that a would-be 
purchaser will not have difficulty in finding a popular item. Thecate-
gory of popular books includes the larger collections of vacanas and 
the more complete printed texts of purana stories, whereas pamphlets 
include only fragments. It is the more educated and sophisticated 
people who form the audience for the popular books, and they obtain 
them from the publishers, from monasteries (which often are pub-
lishers for the longer puranas), and in a few general bookstores 
which typically sell also English publications and Kannada novels. 
Women do not serve on the committees which manage the fairs, 
nor on the various temple and monastery trust committees as a rule, 
but women do sponsor cultural performances through their own 
'Akkanuna' or 'Big Sister' clubs. These arc mainly urban phen-
omena, and one of their main interests, the adv~ement of women's 
education, is an urban idea. Another, closely related, interest is the 
protection of female orphans. To this end women arrange for the 
marriages of nubile orphans, and feed, clothe, and house orphans 
with the help of state grants allotted to 'orphanages'. Folk-singing 
is a regular adjunct to a women's club meeting, but many of these 
songs derive their themes from participation in the new national life 
in India, and some may be in Hindi. Besides Hindi, some clubs teach 

APPENDIX II 
185 
handiwork. as inspired by Gandhian idealism, and regularly conduct 
public celebrations of Gandhi's birthday and the new local holidays 
(nadhabba, so-called 1 district festivals') which symbolize patriotism. 
In at least three cities, the Akkamma clubs provide nursery-school 
services. 
The strongest forces in Lingayat educational development have 
been the virakta monks, who have been active in this field since 1900 
and whose efforts have had general impact since 1920. The main 
thrust of their efforts at organization has been towards providing 
free boardin~ hostels in places where high schools and colleges can 
service village boys. In a few cases the monks have started their own 
colleges and high schools, in cities as also in rural areas. State financial 
assistance is forthcoming for most of these efforts. In providing 
hostelry to village children, the monks not only give financial assis-
tance - charity cases are handled from the general funds of the 
monasteries - but also provide a kind of social and human environ-
ment which the village parents and castemen approve o£ The hostels 
are a kind of way-station to the more secular and interdenominational 
life of the urban universe, and in some cities, paying guests are so 
numerous at the hostel that it takes on the appearance of an American 
college dormitory. There are many more applicants than places in 
the dormitory, so screening hearings are held before admission is 
granted. This makes for a certain 1 esprit de corps' among those 
admitted and also gives the students experience more status value 
to the parents and their castemen. A nice balance has to be struck in 
these matters, however, as dormitories qualify for state assistance only 
if they are open to children of all castes and sects. 
Thus alongside of the more traditional forms ofVtra.Saiva religious 
communication described above - the life-cycle rituals, religious 
fairs, purana and folksong performances, and so forth - there has 
arisen a new form of sectarian communication that is more closely 
geared to contemporary Indian national educational and political 
institutions. One of the more significant new rituals is instruction 
and written examination over book-learned sectarian doctrine. This 
new type of 1 initiation' ritual serves to rehearse individuals in 
educational processes for gaining positions in the state bureaucracy 
through merit achievement rather than by birth into a particular 

186 
SPEAKING OF §IVA 
family and caste status. Any interpretation of the degree to which 
traditional birth-status criteria still play a role in recmiunent to 
office, in spite of the modernist thrust of achievement orientation, is 
a difficult one, however, and the question of Lingayats qua Lingayats 
in education is fraught with nearly as many twists and turns and 
sensitivities to special privilege as the debates about state support to 
private schools in America. Ethnic politics generally operate in 
Mysore State through an infonnal and pragmatic control of elections 
and appoinunents by the dominant faction in the 'dominant caste' 
(i.e., the caste with the statewide plurality). Thus there is no 'caste 
state' to attract the criticism of a watchful public. But the official 
definition of 'social and educational backwardness' made in the late 
1950s and early 196os seems- even today, after a series of experi-
ments and a Supreme Court decision (M. R. Balaji and others versus 
the State ofMysore, All bulia Reporter, 1963)- to double the ordinary 
chances of a Lingayat's gaining state aid in high school or college, 
or gaining admission to medical and engineering schools financed by 
the state. The present definition of' backwardness' is that the income 
of the student's family not exceed an annual figure ofRupees 1,200, 
and to the watchful public, this seems a defmition much subject to 
manipulation. Relatively little is known on the degree of Lingayats' 
involvement in Sanskritic philosophical learning, ordinarily ex-
clusively a Brahman privilege in traditional Hinduism, which might 
show that an element of 'structural rivalry' had existed for a long 
time in prelude to the situation here described. It is known that in the 
nineteenth century, Lingayat and Brahman Sanskrit scholars (or 
Sastris) sometimes engaged in public challenges and debates, anticipat-
ing the present competition between Lingayats and Brahmans for 
top positions in the educational system. The traditional shatsthiila 
philosophy of Lingayats, referred to above and also explicated by 
A. K. Ram:inujan in the Introduction, is often regarded by modernists 
as if it were a 'contraculture' (see Werner Stark, The Sociology of 
Religio11, Vol. ll, Sedaria~~ Religion, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1967, 
pp. 95, 129) to Brahmanist learning - in the fashion of sects every-
where - and its function does seem to be more to express sectarian 
competitiveness than to transmit a set of sectarian beliefs. This com-
petition has been described for contemporary Mysore by several 

APPENDIX II 
knowledgeable observers, including M. N. Srinivas, a leading 
anthropologist in India, who views the competition as a persistence 
of traditional caste attitudes (Caste in Motlem India and Other Essays, 
Asia Publishing House, New York, 1962). 
In conclusion, we have seen that the Lingayats are a numerous 
caste-sect, who are composed of several occupational subcastes of 
the Kannada-speaking country, and who have a particular stake in 
the worship of Siva according to their own special views. Where 
the general psychology governing their religion touches on other 
than universals of human nature, it can be seen to be Hindu, though 
their belief in special features of their worship is strong, perhaps 
partly because wearing one's own personallinga is a kind of commit-
ment that others, who only visit the lliiga representation in Siva 
temples, do not have. A modem development in Lingayatism has 
been the group's commitment to secular educational achievement, 
especially as guided by the celibate viraktas who are today living out 
the paradox that, though ideally committed to a life of ascetic with-
drawal from society, they are in &ct leading the society towards 
modernization. 
It does seem fitting that in the country where Gandhi, a 'mahatma' 
or religious figure, led the first drive for nationhood, monks prove 
to be the most successful in generating and mobilizing support for 
educational progress and social change. In addition, it can be noted 
that vacanas are today understood by many modernist Lingayats 
to have autobiographical significance; thus for some Lingayats 
the vacanas hold a position analogow to the position that Gandhi's 
Autobiography holds for some Gandhians. The point is that these 
writings set forth life-principles which exemplify ethical progress, 
and they could thus be made to serve as a solid foundation for a 
revitalization of Indian traditions and national identity. Those criteria 
for ethical progress sought by the Lingayat modernists in the vacanas, 
namely, humanism and universalism, are not significantly different 
from those proposed for modem anthropology by the Gandhian 
and anthropologist, Nirmal Kumar Bose (his Cultural Anthropology, 
Asia Publishing House, 19()2, pp. 103-7). 
The University of Calgary 
JO September 1969 
WILLIAM MCCORMACK 


Notes to the Poems 
These notes offer brief glosses on images, conventions, 
technical terms, ambiguities, subtleties of form or 
meaning in the Kannada original which the English 
translation could not quite convey. Cross-references 
to other poems, themes, and to relevant portions of 
the Introduction and the Appendixes, are also included. 
The numbers in the notes refer to vacana texts. 
BASAVA~~A 
I. The world as raging sea: a traditional metaphor, Sarhsiirasiigara; 
sarhsiira is 'world', or 'life-in-the-world'. Basavawa was both 
statesman and saint, living in two worlds. In these and other 
poems he expresses the conflict of the two worlds . 
.2. Lord of the meeting rivers: Ku4alasatigamatliva, a form of Siva, 
Basavai}l].a's chosen personal god. Kii9alasangama: a holy 
place in North Kamatak {South India) where two rivers meet. 
BasaV3I}l].3 first found enlightenment here. 
Ahnost every poem of Basaval}l}a is. addressed to Siva as the 
lord of the meeting rivers. In this poem, the name is not just a 
formula or a signature line, but participates in the water-imagery 
of the poem. 
3. J~it: digits or phases of the moon. 
4· Riihu: the cosmic serpent of Indian mythology who devours 
·the moon, causing eclipses. 
. 
S· The eclipse-image here, unlike the sea in 8, carries with it the 
hope of natural release (mok$a). 
6. The heart as monkey: a traditional image for the restless dis-
tracted heart (manas). In Kannada, the word mana or manas 
could mean either heart and mind. c£ 36. In this and the previous 
poem, the Lord is the Father: a favourite stance ofbhakti or personal 
devotion. Other stances are Lover/Beloved and Master/Servant. 
7. sensual bitches: karal}indriyatiga/erilba SOIJaga. karal}endriya's are 

190 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
the various faculties or sense-organs of mind (or heart, manas} 
and body. The ni_ne sense-organs is a puzzle. The numbers 
differ in different texts. Here is an upani~adic list - the senses of 
apprehension are eye, ear, nose, tongue, skin; and the senses of 
performance are vocal organs for speech, hands for prehension, 
feet for locomotion, sex organ for procreation, and the organ 
of elimination of waste (S. K. Ramachandra Rao, The Develop-
ment of Indian Psychology, Mysore, 1963, p. 22). 
The poem uses forms of manas for what I have rendered as mind 
(1.9) and as heart (!.10). The heart is the quarry in this hunt. 
8 .The soul as a cow (pam) in a quagmire: one of the attributes of 
Siva is pa.fupati, the lord of beasts. Pasu in Kannada has a double 
sense of both 'cow or bull' and 'beast, creature'. The Tamil 
Saiva doctrines speak of three elements: pasu, creature or crea-
tion, pati, the lord or creator, and pasam, the attachment or 
love of the two. Vacana 52 makes indirect use of the three-
fold doctrine of pa.fu-pati-pasam. 
9. your men: sarana, a Vira5aiva technical term, literally 'the ones 
who have surrendered (to god)'. 
10. Like 33 and 36, 59 is also about the distractions of a worldling, 
struggling for oneness with the Lord. This struggle is related 
to the yogic ideal of 'stilling the waves of the mind', reducing 
the distractions of the senses. 
II. In a world of disrelations, the devotee seeks relation and belong-
ing. Son of the house (maneya maga) may be taken in the obvious 
sense, as a legitimate heir of the house, to express Basavai}I}a' s 
need for belonging. Or it may refer to the practice of rich masters 
and kings adopting servants as 'sons of the house' who lived 
inseparably with them, and committed ritual suicide when the 
masters died, Inscriptions of the period amply attest to the prac-
tice. M. Cidanandamurti in his Kannada book, Kanna4a sasan-
aga/a samskrtika adhyayana, The Cultural Study of Kannada In-
scriptions {Mysore, 1966), has a chapter on ritual suicide in the 
Kannada area {c£ especially pp. 306-7). In a footnote {312) he 
ev~ makes the suggestion that the devotee's relation to the 
litiga he wore on his body was that of a 'son of the house' : 
when the liiiga was accidentally lost, the devotee often committed 

NOTES TO THE POEMS 
191 
suicide. Later saints condemn such excessive practices. In 62 
the father/son and master/servant stances merge. 
I2. Ghosts are believed to stand guard over hidden treasure, though 
they cannot touch it. The rock/water relation is reversed in ghost/ 
gold: the rock is not affected by water, but the ghost cannot affect 
the gold. The gold symbolizes the worldling's untouched spirit. 
I]. Vacanas are often ironic parables. c£ also xos, III. 
14. Snake-charmers are bad omens if met on the way. The noseless 
wife may either mean a dumb woman or a deformed one, 
another bad omen. 
15. The god of love, Kama, once tried to distract Siva's penance. 
Siva opened his fiery third eye and burned him down. From then 
on, Love became ana1iga, the bodiless or limbless one. Siva's 
burning down of the god of Desire is the ideal paradigm for 
all ascetic conquest of temptations. 
16. Local animal sacrifices, no less than Vedic sacrifi.ces, are abhorrent 
to Vira5aivas. 
I7. Struck by an evil planet: struck by misfortune, the action of malefic 
planets. The rich unregenerate worldling is a familiar target in the 
vacanas. c£ 820. The V"ua5aiva movement was a movement of 
the poor, the underdog. 
I8. iron frame: the original words kabbunatla katJu are ambiguous. 
Here is an alternative translation: 
Look at them, 
busy, giving iron tonics 
to a bubble on the water 
to make it strong! 
It is customary in North Kamatak to give an 'iron decoction' -
water boiled with iron - to weakling children to strengthen them. 
19. Love of god, like liberty, is a matter of eternal vigilance. The 
traditional Indian metaphor for the 'strait and narrow path' 
is asidhilrilvrata, 'walking the razor's edge'. Here the bhakta 
being sawn by the saw of bhakti is obverse of the traditional 
'walking on the razor's edge'. 
The cobra in the pitcher is one of many ordeals or truth-tests 
to prove one's trustworthiness, chastity, etc. Other such tests 
are walking on fire, drinking poison. 

192 
SPEAKING OF SIVA, 
20. The world as sea: cf. note on 8. 
21. Lmga and jatigama are one. J:uigama is Siva's devotee, his repre-
sentative on earth; literally j:uigama means 'the moving man'. 
cf. 820. 
22. 84 and its various multiples are familiar figures in Indian esoteric 
literature: 84 is the number of yogic postures; and the number 
of Siddhas (occult masters); the soul goes through a cycle of 
84,000 births. 
23. I drink the water we wash your ftet with: a Vrrasaiva ritual, piidodaka. 
The devout Vrra5aiva washes the feet of his guru and imbibes 
the water as holy. Offerings of food, or prasiida, are also part of 
the guru-worship ritual (c£ Introduction, p. 33). Note also how the 
lord is not satisfied with even Vira5aiva ritual offerings. Ninda-
stuti, the ambivalent, invective-like invocation or prayer to a 
god, is a well-known genre of Indian religious poetry. Here, for 
instance, the god is called a whore. 
24. The familiar vacana opposition of measure v. spontaneity. Iamb 
and dactyl are here used as loose English equivalents for the 
Kanna4a amrtagat}a and devagana, kinds of metrical unit. 
25. This and the next three poems attack idolatry: the folk-worship 
of menial gods, man-made images, vessels, trees and rivers. 
26. One of the earliest references to the 'lost wax method' of making 
images. 
27. The allusion is to the sacrificial fire of Vedic ritual. Virasaivism 
has no fire-rituals. 
28. The bisexuality of the bhakta- c£ Mahadevi 68, Dasimayya 133. 
29. c£ Introduction, pp. 19-22. 
30. cupola: kalasa, often translated 'pinnacle'. 
31. things standing: sthavara, the static temple. 
32. things moving: jatigama, the living moving representative of 
Litiga on the earth. 
33· The master/servant stance (diisa-bhiiva). 
DASIMAYYA 
34. The phrase karagadantiriside in the first sentence is ambiguous 
and can also be rendered thus: 

NOTES TO THE POEMS 
You balanced the globe 
on the waters 
like a pot on a dancer's head. 
193 
3S· The punctuation in the Halakani edition is obviously wrong. 
I have made a small correction in the punctuation to make sense 
of the syntax. 
36. As in JS, I have corrected the punctuation to make sense of the 
syntax. The first lines suggest that large assemblies do not act, 
only the king gets to give charities -just as only one in a thousand 
gets to kill the enemy and the rest die routine deaths. 
37· Rider of the Bull: a mythological attributt: of Siva. Such attributes 
are rarely mentioned in these poems. However, the phrase 
na11Jlviihana may also refer to Siva's 'bull-riding minions,' 
hisgatlas. 
38. The contrast in this vacana between the bhakta 'devotee, man of 
the lord', and the bhavi 'worldly man' is a favourite contrast 
with the vacana-poets. As in this vacana, bhavi usually means 
also a non-Vira5aiva; the contrast is not without its overtones of 
zealotry as Christianfheathen,Jew/Gentile. 
39· The eigiJtem li11ks are the traditional eighteen bonds listed in 
Hindu texts: past, present, and future acts; body, mind, and 
wealth, substance, life, and self-regard; gold, land, and woman; 
lust, anger, greed, infatuation, pride, and envy. 
40. a111l bathes in a million sacred rivers: this could also be, 'or bathes 
in Ko~tirtha,' a sacred place on the Narmada river. 
MAHADEVIY AKKA 
41. I have, as elsewhere, taken the liberty of translating literally 
into English the name of Siva here, Cennamallikarjuna. For 
such names carry aspects and attributes of Siva. Further, such 
proper nouns, if left as they are in the English translation, are 
inert and cannot participate in the poems as they do in the ori-
ginals. Other possible translations of the name are 'Arjuna of 
Jasmines' or 'Arjuna, Lord of goddess Mallika '. 'Arjuna' means 
'white, bright'. 
The first four similes for the mystery of immanence are traditional, 
and used by other vacana writers as well. 

194 
SPEAKING OF §IVA 
42· A fresh use of conventional metaphor, 'milk and water'. When 
milk and water are mingled, no-one can separate them, except the 
legendary swan gifted in discrimination. The swan is the wisdom 
of the guru. 
43. Akka has several complex attitudes towards the body- rejection, 
indifference and qualified acceptance. cf. also 17, 104. II7, 157· 
Her attitude to clothes and modesty are also part of her 'body-
image'. 
44· The spider and its web-house of illusions is an ancient Indian 
image for Maya or illusion. Here Akka appropriately changes 
the spider into a silkworm. (cf. Introduction, p. 41). 
45· eighty-Jour hundred thousand: c£ note on Basaval}lfa 430. Karma 
and the chain of births are cut short by bhakti. Bhakti, and its 
faith in the Lord's grace, is the answer to the inexorable logic of 
Karma. 
46. Akka, more than all other vacanakaras, is aware of the world 
of nature. Hers is an outdoor world. c£ 73, 74, etc. 
47· One of the few descriptions in vacanas of Siva as a personal god, 
with a crown of diamonds. 'All men are His wives' gives 
another tum to Akka's attitude to human males- transforming 
her love of the lord as representative of all human/divine rela-
tions. Siva and Sakti, the Lord and his Creative Power, are the 
eternal primordial pair in tantra and in yoga. 
48. mother: avva could be her own mother, or any female companion. 
49· The koil is the Indian cuckoo. 
so. parts of the day: jiiva or Sanskrit yiima, a unit equal to about three 
hours. 
51. Siva (unlike the crowned image of 68) is here seen in his more 
normal aspect, as an ascetic- a captivating, not forbidding ascetic. 
52. avva, as in 69, a general vocative for female addressees. Unlike 
other poems (e.g. 69), this poem is apparently addressed to her 
own mothe_r. 
53· Here two words are used, avva and avve, the latter meaning her 
own. mother. This is emphasized by the last part of the poem. 
54· This vacana is part of Akka's answer to Allama according to 
Sunyasathpadane (c£ p. 112). Allarna asked why Akka is using her 
hair to cover her body while she professed to have given up all. 

NOTES TO THB POEMS 
I9S 
She replied that the skin will fall off when the fruit is really ripe. 
He counters it with 'You don't know whether you're in the 
lord or the lord in you. If the skin breaks before its time, the 
juice within will rot.' To this she answered with vacana 104 -
till one has full kno~ledge of good and evil (gunaJo$a), the body 
is still the house of passioris etc.; nor can you reach the lord 
without such knowing. She is going through such an ordeal 
by knowledge. c£ 251, which continues her reply. 
55· round nut: be/avalaJa kiiyi, a large unripe hard-shelled nut. 
56. The interiorization of ritual offering. (c£ Introduction). Compare 
it with 131, where ritual is rendered unnecessary because all 
nature is in a state of worship. 
57· Reference to her nakedness, her defiance of notions of modesty. 
58. Leaf and flower as well as lamps and camphorfire are regular 
offerings (piije) to the lord in homes and temples. Here, Akka sees 
day and night offering such worship themselves, replacing ritual. 
59· This poem on the body is usually cited as Akka's answer to 
Allama's challenge: 'As long as you carry the pollutions of a body 
and the [five] senses, you cannot even touch the Lord.' 
6_(). In the way of bhakti, it is customary to reject privilege and com-
fort, and court exile and beggary - in an effort to d~ude one-
self and to throw oneself entirely on the lord's mercy. 
61. 274 is supposedly Akka's exclamation on reaching the paradisal 
Srisaila, the Holy Mountain. The All-giving Tree, the life-
reviving herb etc. are all attributes of an alchemist's paradise, 
a paradise that various occult sects seek, where there is no 
want, disease, base metal, or unfulfilled wish. The plantain 
grove was the abode of Gorakhnatha, the master-magician or 
Siddha - c£ note on Allama. 
62. Addressed to men who molested her, when she wandered naked. 
63. The hero's going to war is one of the conventional reasons for 
separation oflovers in Indian love-poetry. 
64. The typical accompaniments of fulfilled love, like soft breeze 
and moonlight, do not comfort a love-sick woman; they bum. 
Another conventional reason for separation is the lover's pique. 
65. lovebird: jakkavakki or cakravaka, a fabled bird that cannot live 
apart from its mate. 

SPEAKING OF §IvA 
ALLAMA PRABHU 
The word prabhu, 'lord, master', is an honorific ti~le added to the 
name Allama. There are controversies about the name Allama as 
well as his signature--line GuheSvara, here translated as 'lord of 
caves'. Guhesvara is one of Siva's names and points up His yogic 
aspects. It is significant that Allama, preoccupied with awareness 
and ignorance, obsessed with images of light and darkness, should 
have chosen Guhesvara as his favourite name for Siva. Several forms 
of the name appear in the texts: Guhesvara, Gohesvara, Gogesvara, 
Goggesvara. 
66. Five men: the five senses. 
67. Koilbirds {Indian cuckoos, songbirds) come to mango trees in 
springtime. Both are celebrated in Indian poetry as indispensable 
to spring. 
68. Mountain gooseberry and salt from the sea, though far from each 
other in origin, come together in the preparation of gooseberry 
pickle. Al1ama here alludes to a common Kannada proverb, as 
in the first sentence he alludes to a common poetic theme. 
69. A be~gina vacana, a 'fancy poem' or riddle poem (see Introduc-
tion p. 48). L. Basavaraju's edition contains several traditional 
commentaries on the esoteric symbolism of such poems. The 
following notes are directly indebted to L. Basavaraju's colla-
tions. 
Poem 95 may be glossed as follows: ignorance (the bee) born 
in the heart, obscures the light, overturns the worlds, even though 
it begins in a small way. Only when one realizes the imper-
manence of the body (five--coloured cage of the swan, traditional 
symbol for the soul), does the bee lose its power. 
70. Another riddle poem. The litiga (or Siva) is born in the heart, 
manifests itself in the hand as an i~talinga for action and worship. 
{For the different litigas, see Appendix I.) The camphor is self-
awareness, perhaps because camphor sublimates, bums without 
residue. The pearl (by a pun on the word mukti, meaning both 
pearl and salvation) is a symbol of salvation. Diamonds are the 

NOTES TO THE POEMS 
197 
cosmic meanings. The blue sapphire is Maye, illusion. Note the 
dazzling use of synaesthesia, the surrealist 'disarrangement of 
the senses', to express mystical experience. 
71. In this superb and difficult vacana, Allama speaks about the 
different stages of ignorance and realization. The triple city 
represents the three kinds of bodies everyone has: sthiila or the 
gross (material, perishable), siik$ma or the subtle (invested by 
the material frame), litiga or the imperishable original of the 
gross visible body. The triple city has one main gate, life-in-the-
world or smi1siira. The mind-monkey mocks every comer, even 
the king (soul) with his army (senses). The mind-monkey has 
form and movement, but no awareness (no head); one can see 
it move, but not track down its movements (legs without foot-
steps); it has a will but no grasp (hand without fingers). Self-love 
(the wild elephant) is his offspring, which he rides and plays 
tricks on. Capturing the tenfold senses (ten-hooded snake) held 
in his will (basket), he blindfolds the five higher Powers (five 
virgins = the five saktis: icchii or wish, kriyii or power of action, 
mantra or power of the word, iidi or the primal creativity, parii 
or the transcendent power; see Appendix I) with smilsiira or 
worldliness. The lion in the ten streets is the life-breath in the 
ten paths of the body; the monkey tramples on the life-breath-
but in this contact with the breath of life, he reaches enlighten-
ment, holding true knowledge (diamond) in his will (hand). 
The last section describes the experience of such enlightenment: 
'nothing added, nothing taken'. (For the Litiga of the Breath 
or prii11aliriga, see Appendix I.) 
72. For explanation, see Introduction, p. 48. 
73. A description of enlightenment. The sky is the soul, the toad is 
the life-breath in its highest centre (brahmara11dra); Rahu the cos-
mic serpent (see note on BasaVaJ).l}a 9) is the serpent-path that 
winds through the body's centres (cakras) awakened by yoga. 
(For the cakras, see M. Eliade's Yoga, pp. 241-5.) Nowhere 
are the complex relationships between bhakti, tantra and yoga 
more richly expressed than in these vacanas of Allama. He uses 
yogic and tantric imagery and terminology, alludes to their 
techniques of ecstasy, yet finally rejects them in favour of bhakti, 

SPEAKING OF SIVA 
grace, awareness. See pp. 145-7. The blind man is the devotee 
who sees without the benefit of eyes and grasps the cosmic serpent. 
74· The cat is supreme knowledge, the rooster worldly knowledge. 
When supreme knowledge takes over worldly concern, the latter 
'dies into life'. The black koilbird is the power of action or 
kriyiiJakti, who takes over revealed knowledge (sun). The mind 
(casket) is abolished, only the experience (sacred thread) re-
mains. No one can trace the process of enlightenment (footstep 
on the water); the experience of God (the sound of the word 
Guheswara) is indivisible, cannot be located as being here or 
there. 
75· In the soul (sky) grows the wilderness (unawareness). Desire (the 
hunter) hunts down life (deer). Till life ends, desire has no end 
either. 
76. The smell is vasanii, 'latencies', the smell of past lives. As often 
in these riddle poems, the symbol is suggested by a pun: vasanii, 
while a teclmical term for 'latencies', literally means 'smell'. 
Poetic, mystical as well as dream-symbols are often such puns. 
The bee here is perfect knowledge of god (note the different 
meaning for bee in Allama 95). Heart (manas) and mind as intel-
lect (buddhi) are distinguished here. The temple is the body 
(see BasavaJ.U].a 82o). 
77- The city-limits symbolize the physical limits of the body; the 
temple, the inner mental form (citpiv4a). The power ofknowledge, 
or j1iiina$akti, is the hermit-woman, holding the mind (needle) 
on which are balanced the fourteen worlds. When the great 
enlightenment begins (the ant), it devours all these distinctions. 
78. This vacana speaks of the devotee's discipline: the conquest of 
the eye's illusions, the burning-away of the heart's self-will and 
self-doubt, the intervening creations oflanguage. 
79· Awareness (tree) arises after the clearing of the physical nature 
Qand without soil), yields eight kinds of subtle bodies (flowers) 
that become fruit on the branches (of right living), finally reaching 
basic (root) knowledge. 
So. In the natural body (city), made of the five elements, arises the 
fire of supreme knowledge which burns the forest of worldly 
life - after which this very fire returns to consume the body. 

NOTES TO THE POEMS 
199 
8 I. The body is made of the five elements. Four are mentioned here: 
water, fire, wind, sky. The policeman is the devotee's awareness; 
the king and his two ministers are apparently the soul, its will 
and its history (or conduct). The nine-gated city is the body 
with its nine openings. The 9,000 men are the impressions of the 
many inner and outer senses. 
82. Past, future, and present are conquered by the devotee. To such 
a devotee, even Vi~I].U and Brahma (two out of the great Hindu 
trinity, Vi~I].U, Brahma and Siva) are sidekicks. The mind-
Jakti (cicchakti, Appendix I) is born (daughter) of Siva-conscious-
ness, the devotee is wedded to it - hence he is the son-in-law of 
Siva. soo is an excellent example of some vacana-characteristics: 
the familiar irreverence towards the great gods, the cheeky 
name-dropping, the playful use of deeper meanings and esoteric 
categories. 
83. The poem alludes to pralayas or 'deluges' that end each of the 
four eras of the cycle of creation. 
84. References to symbolic conceptions of immanence: fire is hidden 
in wood and grass (which makes them inB.ammable; seeds of self 
in stone-like insensitiveness. The reflections of water are the 
illusions of a mind never still; the smell of wind is the smell of 
past lives, the latencies (see note on 429), that attend the breath 
of life. The body's heat (fire} has in it the sap of worldly desire. 
The carnal tongue must learn to taste the sunshine of awareness, 
must 'taste the light'. 
8s. mortar without water: the body purged of mind's will and its 
distortions. 
pestle without shadows: the sense of the One. 
women without bodies: the six Powers or Jaktis (see Appendix I). 
rice without grains: truth being pounded and purified. 
the barren woman's son: the Unborn Lord, without beginnning 
or end. 
86. This vacana describes the last stages of the process of enlightenment. 
The wind is the devotee's life-breath; the sky, the soul; the lul-
labies are the words sivoham Sivoham, 'I am Siva, I am Siva.' 
87. The waterfire refers to the belief that the oceans contain a core 
of fire. 


PENGUIN@ CLASSICS 
, 
SPEAKING OF SIVA 
TRANSLATED WITH AN INTRODUCTION 
BY A. K. RAMANUJAN 
Speaking of Siva is a collection of 'vacanas' or free-verse 
lyrics written by four major saints of the great 'bhakti' 
protest movement which originated in the tenth 
century A.D. 
Composed in Kannada, a Dravidian language of South 
ll)dia, the poems are lyrical expressions of love for the god 
Siva. They mirror the urge to bypass tradition and ritual, 
to concentrate on the subject rather than the object of 
worship, and to express kinship with all living things in 
moving terms. Passionate, personal, fiercely monotheistic, 
these free verses possess an appeal which is timeless 
and universal. 
The cover shows an clcvcmh-century bronze figure depicting Siva as god of the 
Dance, in the Mus<'e Guimet, Paris 
Religion & Mythology 
U.K. 
£3.95 
AUST. 
$6.95 
(recommended} 
N.Z. 
$9.95 
CAN. 
$7.95 
042588 
Ulf6SD2$>>595 
AX 
., • 
/ 
U.S.A. 
$5.95 
ISBN 0-14-044270-7 

