
BASIC COLOR THEORY

Color is a universal gift of beauty. Because it requires no effort to perceive and
enjoy it, we often take it for granted. However, its absence in our lives is
unthinkable. Consider a world wherein brilliant sunsets, vivid flower gardens,
shimmering butterflies, and tropical fish shed their multicolored hues and
morphed into monochromatic shades of gray. The experiences that we love and
live for would change drastically! Would we still plant flower beds? Bird-watch?
Sightsee? The implications are immense; such is our love affair with color.
—Patti Mollica

CONTENTS
What Is Color?
Understanding Light
The Color Wheel
Color Properties
Color & Value
Color Temperature
Color, Light & Shadow
Color Schemes
Pigment Types
Color Mixing
Color & Mood
Final Thoughts

WHAT IS COLOR?
Artists must understand color to know how to use it properly. Although
there will always be some personal influence in the way we interpret and
display it, we must understand color relationships before we can organize
it in our paintings.
In the late 1600s, Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727) conducted and published a
series of experiments involving prisms, light, and color, which form the basis of
our current understanding of color. These experiments involved refracting white
light through a prism—a simple triangular glass object that separates light waves
into individual colors. The results revealed that light could actually be broken
down into seven individual colors: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and
violet. Until this discovery, it was assumed that a prism somehow “colored” the
light passing through it. To prove this wrong, Newton reversed the process: He
projected the colors back into the prism, which resulted in pure white light.
Artists and scientists alike were amazed by this breakthrough discovery that light
is the source of all color.

© Shutterstock
As white light hits a prism, the light refracts and separates into the colors of the rainbow.

Scientist Sir Isaac Newton provided the foundation for color theory as we understand it today.

UNDERSTANDING LIGHT
The colors that we see when light strikes an object are the result of
certain wavelengths (individual colors) being absorbed by the object while
other wavelengths are being reflected back to us. Those reflected back to
us are the colors that we see.
LIGHT & REFLECTED COLOR
As light hits a yellow object, yellow is reflected; all other colors are absorbed.
As light hits an orange object, yellow, orange, and red are reflected; all other colors are
absorbed.

As light hits a purple object, red, blue, and violet are reflected; all other colors are absorbed.

THE COLOR WHEEL
A color wheel is a visual representation of colors arranged according to
their chromatic relationship. The basic color wheel consists of 12 colors
that can be broken down into three different groups: primary, secondary,
and tertiary.

One of the easiest things to create is a 12-color color wheel with just the three primaries: red,
yellow, and blue. All colors are derived from these three. Beginners should mix a color wheel
with both the primaries and secondaries. This can help you understand how to create additional
colors, see how colors interact, and see your palette of colors in spectrum order.
Color wheel made with three primaries

Color wheel made with primaries and secondaries

THE BASICS OF COLOR
Primary Colors
The primary colors are red, yellow, and blue. These colors cannot be created by
mixing any other colors, but in theory, all other colors can be mixed from them.
Secondary Colors
Secondary colors are created by mixing any two primary colors; they are found
in between the primary colors on the color wheel. Orange, green, and purple are
secondary colors.

Tertiary Colors
If you mix a primary color with its adjacent secondary color, you get a tertiary
color. These colors fill in the gaps and finish the color wheel. Tertiary colors are
red-orange, red-violet, yellow-orange, yellow-green, blue-green, and blue-violet.


COLOR SCHEMES
Choosing and applying a color scheme (or a selection of related colors) in your
painting can help you achieve unity, harmony, or dynamic contrasts. This page
showcases a variety of common color combinations. Explore these different
schemes to familiarize yourself with the nature of color relationships and to
practice mixing colors.
Complementary Color Schemes Complementary colors are opposite each other on the color wheel.
Red and green (shown above), orange and blue, and yellow and purple are examples of
complementary colors. When placed adjacent to each other in a painting, complements make each
other appear brighter. When mixed, they have the opposite effect, neutralizing (or graying) each
other.

Triadic Color Scheme This scheme consists of three colors that form an equilateral triangle on the
color wheel. An example of this would be blue-violet, red-orange, and yellow-green (shown above).

Tetradic Color Schemes Four colors that form a square or a rectangle on the color wheel create a
tetradic color scheme. This color scheme includes two pairs of complementary colors, such as
orange and blue and yellow-orange and blue-violet (shown above). This is also known as a “double-
complementary” color scheme.

Analogous Color Schemes Analogous colors are adjacent (or close) to each other on the color
wheel. Analogous color schemes are good for creating unity within a painting because the colors
are already related. You can do a tight analogous scheme (a very small range of colors) or a loose
analogous scheme (a larger range of related colors). Examples of tight analogous color schemes
would be red, red-orange, and orange; or blue-violet, blue, and blue-green (shown at left). A loose
analogous scheme would be blue, violet, and red.

Split-Complementary Color Schemes This scheme includes a main color and a color on each side
of its complementary color. An example of this (shown at left) would be red, yellow-green, and
blue-green.

COLOR PROPERTIES
Hue, saturation (or intensity), and value are the three characteristics that
help us describe and categorize a color. For instance, if we say an object
is red, we can more specifically describe the color by answering the
following questions: Is it an orangey red or a crimson red? Is it brilliant or
muted? Is it light or dark? With this understanding, you can identify and
describe any color.
HUE
The term “hue,” which is often used interchangeably with the word “color,”
refers to the family to which a particular color belongs. Rose, burgundy,
magenta, and candy apple are all in the red hue family. Chartreuse, leaf green,
and sea-foam are all in the green hue family, and so on. In essence, when one
uses the word “color,” one is referring to its hue. Below are five swatches of
blue that show different hues within the same color family.
Phthalo blue:
a greenish blue

Cobalt turquoise light:
a bright, greenish blue
Cerulean blue:
a bright, grayish blue
Ultramarine blue:
a cool, reddish blue

Cobalt blue:
a pure blue

VALUE
Within each hue, you can achieve a range of values—from dark shades to light
tints. However, each hue has a value relative to others on the color wheel. For
example, yellow is the lightest color and violet is the darkest. To see this clearly,
photograph or scan a color wheel and use computer-editing software to view it in
grayscale. It is also very helpful to create a grayscale chart of all the paints in
your palette so you know how their values relate to one another.
Besides a color’s inherent value on the wheel, a hue itself can vary in value. The
simplest way to explore a color’s range of value is to create a value scale. In this
example, work from left to right in watercolor, starting with a very strong wash
and adding more water for successively lighter values.
SATURATION & INTENSITY

A color’s saturation, also called its “intensity” or “chroma,” refers to its level of
brilliance or dullness. A highly saturated color is very vibrant. Many beginners
who strive to create brilliant, colorful paintings work with a palette of only—or
mostly—highly saturated colors. This can defeat their purpose, however,
because when too many brilliant colors are placed together in the same painting,
each color competes for the viewer’s attention. An effective way to use saturated
color is in conjunction with unsaturated color (or neutrals), so that some parts of
the painting demand the attention while others fade back and play supportive
roles.
Brilliantly saturated colors (A) and muted tones (B) can be lovely on their own, but often the key to
a successful work is a balance of the two (C).
NEUTRAL COLORS
Neutral colors are low in saturation. Although they are not on the color wheel,
these beautiful tones appear frequently in nature and can have a calming effect in
art. Neutrals include browns and grays, both of which contain all three primary
colors in varying proportions. Neutral colors are often dulled with white or
black. Artists also use the word neutralize to describe the act of dulling a color
by adding its complement.

In this painting, acrylic artist Varvara Harmon employs mostly neutrals within the composition to
keep the viewer’s focus on the more colorful macarons.

COLOR & VALUE
For most paintings to be successful, there should be a good value pattern
across the painting, which means a clear and definite arrangement of
dark, middle, and light values. This will create an effective design, which
is pleasing to the eye. It also helps communicate the point of your
painting in a clear and uncluttered manner. Keep in mind that these
values should not be equal in a painting but rather predominantly light or
dark. Equal amounts of light and dark result in a static image that lacks
movement, drama, and—most important—interest.
Predominantly light painting

Predominantly dark painting
TIP
Make a black-and-white print of your painting. Can you see a separation of
elements and objects without having to rely on the colors? If so, your values are
working for you.
To demonstrate the importance of value, the same painted scene appears three
times (see below). The first of three paintings uses the appropriate colors and
values. The middle painting uses the correct colors, but its values are similar to
one another. The last of the three paintings uses the correct values, but all the
wrong colors. Which of these makes a better painting—the image in the middle
or the last image? (Hint: The one with the correct values, last).

Correct colors, correct values

Correct colors, incorrect values

Incorrect colors, correct values

APPLE VALUE STUDY
Follow this exercise to get in the habit of assigning three values—black, white,
and gray—to depict your subject and composition. Experiment with various
value combinations and see which arrangement creates the most pleasing light,
middle, and dark shapes. Pay attention only to the “big areas” of your subject.
Once you have value “maps” to work from, experiment with color options. Use
whatever colors you want—just make sure they are the correct values.

1. Choose a simple subject, such as apples. Make sure your subject is partially in
light and partially in shadow.

2. Interpret the values of your composition in four different ways to create a
“value map,” swapping middle and dark values to create pleasing arrangements.

Four Apples, acrylic
3. Following your value sketches like a map, paint your subject four times using
the colors of your choice. Squint often and compare the values of your colors to
the values of your sketch. Bright, vibrant colors can seem to be lighter than they
actually are; squinting will help you see value more clearly. Another method for
judging color values involves mixing on a middle-gray palette. This will help
you see whether a color leans light or dark.

COLOR TEMPERATURE
Color temperature refers to the feeling one gets when viewing a color or
set of colors. Generally, yellows, oranges, and reds are considered warm,
whereas greens, blues, and purples are considered cool. When used within
a work of art, warm colors seem to advance toward the viewer, and cool
colors appear to recede into the distance. This dynamic is important to
remember when suggesting depth or creating an area of focus.
Divide the color wheel in half by drawing a line from a point between red and
red-violet to a point between yellow-green and green. This makes a visual
distinction between the warm and cool colors.


RELATIVE TEMPERATURE
Within individual colors exist warm and cool varieties. If a color leans toward
red on the color wheel, it is considered warmer than a version of the color that
leans blue. Relative to each other, cadmium yellow leans red and lemon yellow
leans blue; therefore, cadmium yellow (far left) is warmer than lemon yellow
(near left).

COLOR RELATIVITY
While colors are generally classified as warm or cool, they can also be relatively
warm or cool within their hue. Although red is considered the warmest color,
there are cool reds and warm reds. A cool red contains more blue (such as
magenta), and a warm red contains more yellow (such as coral). By virtue of the
relative warmness or coolness of a color, artists can manipulate space and
influence how the viewer perceives a color. This leads us to the importance of
color relationships. The way we perceive a color’s characteristics is relative to
its surroundings. By using contrasts in temperature, value, and chroma, we can
make colors appear warmer or cooler, lighter or darker, and brighter or duller
simply by the colors we place next to them.
Relative Temperature A color’s temperature is influenced by surrounding colors. Note how the
same pink circle appears cooler set against orange (A) than blue (B).

Relative Value Our perception of a color’s value depends on its surrounding color. Note how the
same pink circle appears lighter in example C than in example D.
Relative Chroma A color’s chroma can appear different depending on nearby colors. Note how the
same pink circle appears dull against yellow (E) and bright against gray (F).
To summarize:
• How do you make a color appear warmer? Place a cooler color adjacent to it.
• How do you make a color lighter? Place a darker color adjacent to it.
• How do you make a color appear brighter? Place a duller color adjacent to it.

COLOR, LIGHT & SHADOW
The interplay of light and shadow is a common area of focus for artists, as
this can heavily influence the mood, drama, and realism of a painting. To
begin understanding how light affects an object, think of it as though it is
made up of three basic parts: lights, local color, and shadows.
The local color of an object refers to its actual or natural color, without taking
lights and shadows into account. The lights are illuminated by a light source,
whether it’s the sun, moon, artificial light, or candlelight. A bright, sunny day
warms an object with a yellow cast, while creating cool areas of shadow. In
contrast, a gray, wintery day illuminates the lights with cool tones, and its
shadows appear warmer. Simply stated, the general rule is this: Warm light
yields cool shadows; cool light yields warm shadows.

This pear is painted in warm light coming from the upper left, which produces
cool shadows.

This pear is painted in cool light coming from the upper left, which produces
warm shadows.

VISUAL INTEREST WITH LIGHT & SHADOW
Besides creating the illusion of form and dimension, the interplay between light
and shadow also can be used to pique a viewer’s interest in a scene. Because
contrasting values attract the eye, incorporating subtle, natural contrasts between
light and dark can add vitality and drama to a painting. For example, sunlight
filtering through the leaves of a tree forms a variety of fascinating shapes that
engage the viewer’s interest. And sometimes patterns of light and shadow can be
so compelling that they become the focus of the painting in lieu of the physical
elements of the scene!
Engaging the Viewer The irregular patches of sun and a range of warm values make this scene
compelling and inviting.

Focusing on Shadows This snapshot captures the natural, delicate balance between light and
shadow. For the painting (see next image), simplify the shadows but try to retain the delicate lace-
like quality that makes them so interesting.


COLOR SCHEMES
Over time, certain color combinations have been established as especially
agreeable to viewers. These combinations consist of two or more colors
that have a fixed relationship on the color wheel and are pleasing when
viewed together (creating “color harmony”). This includes tints, tones,
and shades of the colors within a scheme; simply be aware of the balance
of warm to cool hues, as well as saturated to neutral colors. In this
section, explore the most commonly used color schemes through a
selection of paintings by artist Patti Mollica.
MONOCHROMATIC SCHEME
The monochromatic color scheme uses a single color throughout, along with
variations of the color’s shades, tints, and tones. While it’s not known to be the
most exciting color scheme, a monochromatic palette is elegant, easy on the
eyes, and soothing. This is the easiest color scheme to create; just use a chosen
color, black, and white paints.

Chrysler Building by Patti Mollica, acrylic

ANALOGOUS SCHEME
The analogous scheme is made of colors that sit adjacent to one another on the
color wheel. Most often, one color serves as the dominant color, with others used
to accent and enhance the overall scheme. Although the lack of contrasting
colors yields a simplistic look, this scheme—like the monochromatic—has a
simple elegance that is pleasing to the eye.
Orange on Pink by Patti Mollica, acrylic

TRIADIC SCHEME
The triadic color scheme uses three colors equally spaced around the color wheel
(for example, red-orange, blue-violet, and yellow-green). Many artists enjoy
using this scheme because, unlike the previous two, there is ample color contrast
and a natural color balance. One color serves as the dominant color, while the
other two act as subordinate hues.
Deli & Pizza by Patti Mollica, acrylic

COMPLEMENTARY SCHEME
The complementary scheme offers the most visual contrast because it is made up
of two colors that sit opposite each other on the color wheel. It is most
successfully used when one color acts as the dominant color with the other in a
supporting role. The two colors should not be of the same saturation intensity
and must be visually balanced. For example, in the painting at left, the subdued
purple takes up the most space of the painting but is balanced by the more
saturated yellow of the flower.
Daffy by Patti Mollica, acrylic

SPLIT COMPLEMENTARY SCHEME
The split complementary scheme uses a color and the two colors adjacent to its
complement (for example, red, yellow-green, and blue-green). This scheme still
features good color contrast, but it conveys less tension than the complementary
scheme.
Moonshine Mama by Patti Mollica, acrylic

ANALOGOUS COMPLEMENTARY SCHEME
This scheme combines the analogous and complementary schemes,
incorporating three side-by-side hues plus the complement of the center color
(for example, red, blue-green, green, and yellow-green).
Vernazza Colors by Patti Mollica, acrylic

TETRAD SCHEME
The tetrad color scheme uses two hues that are separated by one color on the
wheel, plus the complement of each hue (for example, red, green, orange, and
blue). Because this scheme can overwhelm with visual tension, it’s a good idea
to choose one dominant color and accent with the rest.
Field and Sky by Patti Mollica, acrylic

NEUTRAL SCHEME
As the opposite of the saturated scheme, the neutral scheme uses colors that have
been grayed down. This diffused palette is perfect for foggy landscapes, white-
on-white subjects, and scenes with a soft, mellow mood.
White Teapot by Patti Mollica, acrylic

PIGMENT TYPES
Pigments are classified into two groups based on their origins. Pigments
are either derived from the earth (called “inorganic” or “mineral”
pigments), or they are created synthetically in a chemical laboratory
(called “organic” or “modern” pigments). Although they share some
similar characteristics, the makeup and behavior of mineral and modern
pigments are very different. Knowing their unique characteristics will help
you make more effective color mixing choices.
When using oil or acrylics, use mineral colors to completely cover the surface or
color beneath, and use modern colors to glaze and allow the surface or color
beneath to show through. Artists are not limited to choosing one or the other;
they can mix mineral and modern paints together to achieve greater color
subtleties and nuances.
Mineral pigments have earthy-sounding names like sienna, ochre, cadmium, cobalt, and
ultramarine. They are generally characterized by
• high opacity (very opaque)
• low chroma (less vibrant)
• low tinting strength (do not strongly change the colors they are mixed with)
Modern pigments have names that allude to their chemical origins like quinacridone, phthalo,
hansa, dioxazine, and anthraquinone. They are generally characterized by
• high translucency (very transparent)
• high chroma (very vibrant)
• high tinting (strongly change the colors they are mixed with)

This acrylic paint chart illustrates the difference in opacity between mineral pigments (top row)
and modern pigments (bottom row). Paint names on top, left to right: ultramarine blue, cobalt teal,
cobalt violet hue, yellow ochre, cadmium red light, and burnt sienna. Paint names on bottom, left
to right: phthalo blue (red shade), green gold, dioxazine purple, nickel azo gold, napthol red, and
transparent pyrrole orange.
STAINING VS. NONSTAINING
Pigments are classified as staining or nonstaining. Staining pigments, such as
alizarin crimson and the phthalocyanines, immediately absorb into the paper’s
surface and are impossible to lift or dab away completely. Nonstaining pigments,
such as burnt umber and the cadmiums, sit on the surface of the paper and lift
away easily. This pigment quality is most relevant to watercolor, particularly
when working with techniques that call for dabbing away the pigment. If you
want to use staining colors but need the ability to lift them away, you can apply
watercolor lifting preparation medium to your paper before applying paint,
which makes lifting possible with any pigment.

To test the staining quality of a paint, apply a rich stroke of the color to paper and allow it to dry.
Use a wet brush to loosen an area of pigment and dab with a paper towel. The more color that
remains, the higher the staining quality. Above is a staining test performed with phthalo blue
(staining) and burnt umber (nonstaining).

MASSTONE VS. UNDERTONE
When assessing a paint, artists often refer to its masstone and undertone.
Masstone is the paint as it appears in a thick scoop from the tube, whereas
undertone is the paint as it appears thinly over a white support. A pigment’s
masstone and undertone can vary quite a bit in hue and value.
Permanent rose (acrylic)
Phthalo green (acrylic)
Lightfastness refers to the ability of pigment to resist fading over time, particularly when
exposed to UV light. Lightfast pigments are not prone to fading and are considered to be more

permanent than nonlightfast pigments. Nonlightfast—or fugitive—pigments lighten and lose
their intensity quicker. The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) has developed a
rating system for lightfastness; a paint’s rating is visible on its tube. It is measured on a scale
of I to V, with I and II being the only acceptable ratings for professional artists.

COLOR MIXING
Bold and basic, the primaries are the fundamental colors of the color
wheel. Using predominantly primary colors to create a work of art yields
dynamic and accessible results. Because they are equidistant on the color
wheel, they create a triadic color scheme.
USING PRIMARIES TO CREATE SECONDARIES
We may know that red and yellow make
orange, blue and yellow make green, and blue
and red make purple, but the actual
possibilities are a little more complex! We can
blend them to create secondary colors, tertiary
colors, and neutral colors, but you cannot
create primaries using other colors. Below are
a few basic guidelines for creating secondaries,
along with a few sample mixes to get started.

Oranges Mixing cadmium yellow, cadmium red, and titanium white produces a wide range of basic
oranges.

Greens Blends of cadmium yellow and phthalo blue produce a range of bold and vibrant greens.
Violets A mix of phthalo blue and cadmium red yields a beautiful variety of purples and mauves.

WORKING WITH SECONDARIES
Secondary colors add dimension to the color
wheel with three festive hue families—violet,
green, and orange. Each of these colors is a
mix of two primary colors. Violet is a
combination of red and blue, green is a
combination of blue and yellow, and orange is
a combination of yellow and red. When mixing
secondaries for a painting, consider the
following: Mixing colors that lean toward each
other on the color wheel will create vibrant
results. Mixing colors that lean away from
each other on the color wheel will create muted
results. Both vibrant and muted colors have a place in painting, so it’s best to
master both styles of mixing to find color combinations that suit a particular
subject and style.


COMMON GREEN PIGMENTS
Green is a fresh, cool-leaning color that suggests fertility and nature, ranging
from deep, earthy tones to the bright greens of spring. Below are a few common
paint colors shown in masstone (with thickness), undertone (spread thinly), and
mixed with white. Note that every paint color varies somewhat between
manufacturers.
Phthalo green is a cool, blue-leaning green.
Moss green, which is similar to sap green, has a vibrant, orange-leaning undertone. This is a wonderful tool
for painting foliage.

Chromium oxide green is cool, earthy, muted, and very opaque.
Cobalt green is a vibrant, blue-leaning green pigment.
For most colors, pushing a mix toward red warms the color, and pushing a mix toward blue
cools it. Green, however, is the complement of red, so push warm greens toward yellow and
cool greens toward blue.


COMMON VIOLET PIGMENTS
Violet is the darkest hue on the wheel and is quite versatile in its associations; its
deepest, richest forms suggest royalty and strength, whereas its lightest tints and
muted tones appear dreamy and feminine.
Dioxazine purple is a cool, transparent, staining pigment that has a very dark masstone and an
intensely vibrant undertone.
Cobalt violet is a popular medium-violet pigment that creates soft, muted tints.

Quinacridone magenta is on the cusp of the purple family near red, resembling the hue of magenta
ink.
Dioxazine purple is a versatile mixing tool often used to deepen colors in place of black.
However, use this pigment with some restraint, as it can quickly overpower a mix.
Working with Violets Create depth and dimension by incorporating a variety of purples. The warm
and cool purples work together to excite the eye as they suggest light and shadow. Use dioxazine
purple for the deepest colors, cobalt violet for the highlights, and ultramarine blue to deepen and
shape the flower clusters.

COMMON ORANGE PIGMENTS
Orange is a bold, warm, and invigorating color often associated with fire and
autumn. Its hues can be deep and fiery or pale and delicate, like apricots or light
skin tones.
Cadmium orange is a premixed paint color of cadmium red and cadmium yellow pigments.
Perinone orange is an intense, red-leaning orange that thins to produce beautiful, transparent
washes for florals or skin-tone mixes.
Quinacridone burnt orange is a transparent, deep, rich orange that resembles a neutral reddish
brown.

Working with Oranges In this palette knife painting, a wide range of oranges is used to suggest the
landscape. A complementary blue is used in the sky for a vibrant visual dynamic, and the tree is
accented with dabs of bright green to complement the deep red-oranges of the tree.
Mixing Neutrals Neutrals are blends of all three primaries: red, yellow, and blue
—plus white when desired for softening and lightening. To create neutrals that
lean warm or cool, simply adjust the proportions of pigments. Red-and orange-
leaning neutrals appear much warmer than blue-or green-leaning neutrals.
Experiment with the pigments on the palette to discover the wide range of
neutrals at your fingertips.

Cadmium red medium, cadmium yellow medium, and ultramarine blue combine to create a range
of rich neutrals.
Using the same primary colors, add white for a range of softer tones. Add more blue for darker,
cooler mixes, and add more yellow and white for lighter mixes.
For a warm brown, try mixing red and yellow with just a touch of blue in the bristles.
In this example, the top mix contains more yellow, whereas the bottom mix contains more red.

In this example, the top mix contains more yellow, whereas the bottom mix contains more red.
For cool browns and grays, blend yellow, blue, and white with just a touch of red in the bristles.
Working with Black Not considered a hue on the color wheel, black is just
black—right? Not exactly, There are differences in appearance, consistency, and
mixability among black pigments. Some artists choose to avoid blacks and grays
altogether by mixing them for a more natural look (see below).
TIP
Using black to deepen or neutralize a color can overwhelm and deaden the
other pigments in a mix. Remember, a little dab goes a long way.
Mixing Blacks Black pigments tend to look unnatural and flat set against the
rest of a color palette. However, mixed blacks (or deep, dark colors) often suit
the overall color balance of a painting. Mixed blacks have a subtle sense of color
and depth, which help create deep, lively shadows with dimension.

Mixing equal parts burnt sienna and ultramarine blue yields a dark, earthy black with a slight hint
of blue.
Blending cadmium red medium with dioxazine purple yields a red-leaning black, which can be
used for tree branches and trunks.
Cobalt violet and phthalo green creates an effective cool black for the deepest ocean colors in
seascapes.

Mixing equal parts cerulean blue and crimson red gives a deep, purple-leaning black. As more red
is added, the mix becomes more of a dark brown.

MIXING FOR VIBRANCE
We’ve learned that mixing complementary colors together yields neutrals, grays,
and browns. Now we need to learn the basic ideas behind mixing secondary and
tertiary colors according to our needs, whether vibrant or muted. To achieve the
most saturated, brilliant secondary and tertiary colors, mix colors that lean
toward each other. For example, mix a vibrant purple using ultramarine blue
(which leans red) and quinacridone magenta (which leans blue). Mixing phthalo
blue and cadmium red yields a completely different result, as they both lean
yellow. Because yellow is the complement of purple, the mixture is naturally
muted.
Note the differences in chroma between the secondary acrylic mixes at right. On
the opposite page is a color wheel to help create the cleanest, most vibrant
mixtures of primary colors based on the direction they lean.
The acrylic mixtures below show an example of vibrant mixing and an example
of dull mixing for each secondary color—purple, green, and orange.

Vibrant
Quinacridone magenta (leans blue) + ultramarine blue (leans red)

Less Vibrant
Cadmium red light + phthalo blue (both lean yellow)

Vibrant
Phthalo blue (leans yellow) + cadmium lemon yellow (leans blue)

Less Vibrant
Ultramarine blue + cadmium yellow medium (both lean red)

Vibrant
Cadmium red light (leans yellow) + cadmium yellow medium (leans red)

Less Vibrant
Alizarin crimson + cadmium yellow medium (both lean blue)

Vibrant Mixing Chart
TIP
To mix the most vivid secondary and tertiary colors from primary colors, use
colors within the boundary lines of the pie chart above. For less vibrant
mixtures, use primary colors that lie outside of the lines.

COLOR MIXING SAMPLES
Below are some of the most vibrant secondary and tertiary color mixes possible.
Practice mixing these oil and acrylic colors, and refer to this as a guide when
painting.

TIP
Using a Palette Knife
The palette knife is a useful tool with a handle and a flexible blade that allows artists to scoop,
flatten, and mix paint on a palette. A palette knife can also be used to apply paint to a canvas.
Many artists create paintings using only palette knives; they apply the paint as if they are
frosting a cake. This will result in a thicker, richer application of paint and produces a very
different look than a paintbrush does. Some prefer metal palette knives with a diamond shape
and point at the tip. This allows the artist to create fine lines and detail, such as branches,
sailboat masts, telephone lines, and so on.
© Shutterstock

Vibrant Tertiaries


COLOR & MOOD
Color psychology refers to the influence of color on our behavior and
perception of the world around us. Although we may not consciously think
about it, our perception of color is affected by our gender, age, culture,
and ethnic background, among other factors. These differences play a part
in how each of us responds to color or color groups. However, there are
certain similar universal reactions to color that transcend the individual
variables.

Yellow is the cheerful color of sunshine. It conveys warmth, happiness, hope,
and positivity. It also exudes childlike simplicity and innocence.
Yellow Rose, acrylic

A color commonly associated with fire and blood, red conveys energy, power,
passion, and love. It stimulates excitement and has been shown to raise blood
pressure and heart rate. It is used often in restaurants because it is considered an
appetite stimulant.
Red Macs, acrylic

Pink is a psychologically powerful color that represents the feminine principle
and is associated with love and romance. Pink is thought to have a calming
effect, although too much of it is physically draining and can be emasculating.
Pink Brigade, acrylic

When used in light, airy pastel tints, blue is associated with the sky, water, and
feelings of serenity, relaxation, and calm. Deeper shades, however, are related to
sadness and despair.
Rainy Day, Times Square, acrylic

Purple has long been associated with royalty because only aristocrats could
afford the expensive pigment. During Roman times, it took 4 million crushed
mollusk shells to produce one pound of purple pigment. This royal color
conveys elegance, dignity, and sophistication.
Purple Imperial, acrylic

The color black (or lack thereof) is associated with fear, death, evil, negativity,
formality, and solemnity. Black can be used alongside other colors to make them
stand out, and it contrasts well with bright colors.
53rd and Third, acrylic

As the color of snow, white symbolizes cleanliness, goodness, innocence, and
purity. It is considered the color of perfection.
Mimi’s Bouquet, acrylic

The color of nature, green symbolizes freshness, fertility, and harmony. It is
considered the most restful color to the eye and imbibes the cheeriness of yellow
with the calmness of blue.
End the War, acrylic

The human eye perceives orange as the warmest color. Orange mimics the heat
of a flame and combines the vibrance of yellow with the intensity of red. It
represents enthusiasm, creativity, and invigoration.
Red Hot Jazz, acrylic

FINAL THOUGHTS
Color is a broad topic and this book covers the basics, but there is more to
discover. Applying an understanding of color is part technique and part
intuition; the best way to nurture intuition is to practice. Take ample
opportunities to choose color schemes, evoke specific moods, play with
color and light, and try new combinations.

Park off Park, acrylic

