
SPECIAL RELATIVITY,
ELECTRODYNAMICS,
AND GENERAL
RELATIVITY
From Newton to Einstein
SECOND EDITION
JOHN B. KOGUT
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
125 London Wall, London EC2Y 5AS, United Kingdom
525 B Street, Suite 1800, San Diego, CA 92101-4495, United States
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing
Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by
the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices,
or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein.
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the
safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of
products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods,
products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-12-813720-8
For information on all Academic Press publications visit our
website at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals
Publisher: John Fedor
Acquisition Editor: Anita A. Koch
Editorial Project Manager: Amy M. Clark
Production Project Manager: Bharatwaj Varatharajan
Designer: Christian J. Bilbow
Typeset by TNQ Books and Journals

ABOUT THE BOOK COVER
The book cover presents pictures of ﬁve of the most famous physiciste
mathematicians of history. On the left-hand side we ﬁnd Carl Friedrich
Gauss (1777e1855) and above him Bernhard Riemann (1826e66). On
the right-hand side we have Isaac Newton (1642e1727) and above him
James Clerk Maxwell (1831e79). And at the pinnacle, Albert Einstein
(1879e1955). The ﬁgure depicts two parallel developments, mathematics
on one side and physics on the other, that culminated with the founding of
modern physics: Gauss and Riemann developed the mathematics critical
for the expressions of the physical laws discovered by Newton and Maxwell,
all of which led to the grand synthesis: Einstein’s theories of special and
general relativity. This book focuses on the concepts these great scientists
developed. It shows which ones have survived the tests of time
(localitydinteractions occur at spaceetime points, causalitydinformation
travels at the speed of light, and covariancedphysical laws should hold in all
frames of reference) and which have fallen over time (action at a distance,
nonlocal conservation laws). With a minimum of technical trickery but a
large dose of fundamentals, the book develops special relativity, electro-
magnetism, and general relativity from these basic principles.
ix

PREFACE
1. SPECIAL RELATIVITY WITH A MISSION
This book is a revision and extension of “Introduction to Relativity.” That
book presents an approach to relativity in which the theory is developed
through “thought experiments” that illustrate the concepts in simple
fashions. For example, to derive time dilation and Lorentz contraction, a
clock is constructed out of mirrors and a light beam, and we learn how it
works in its rest frame and in a frame in which it moves with velocity v.
This analysis is simple and direct because light beams and rods are
governed by the postulates of special relativity:
1. The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames of reference.
2. There is a common ﬁnite speed limit c in all inertial frames.
Throughout the book the rules of nonrelativistic physics (Newton’s
world) are contrasted with relativistic physics (Einstein’s world). It is the
second postulate that distinguishes Newtonian rules from Einstein’s. In
Newton’s world, velocities are unbounded but in Einstein’s world, the
speed of light c is an upper bound. The existence of a speed limit combined
with Postulate 1, that all inertial frames are equivalent, produces relativistic
spaceetime.
The book shows that time dilation, Lorentz contraction, and the
relativity of simultaneity, that clocks which are separated in space and
synchronized in one frame are not synchronized in a frame in relative
motion, are intimately related.
The book builds the subject from the ground up. It uses Minkowski
spaceetime diagrams, which show the spatial and temporal coordinates of
two frames in relative motion v. Time dilation, Lorenz contraction, and
the relativity of simultaneity can be understood through simple pictures
(cartoons, really), both qualitatively and quantitatively. From this perspective,
we study the twin paradox and see that there is nothing really paradoxical
about itdwhen one twin leaves the other and takes a round trip, she returns
younger than her sibling. It is fun to see how it works out!
Once we have mastered kinematicsdthe measurement of space and
time intervalsdwe move to dynamics, the study of energy, momentum,
interactions and equations of motion. In Newtonian mechanics there is
momentum conservation, on the one hand, and mass conservation, on the
xi

other. In relativity, however, once we have ﬁgured out how spatial and
temporal measurements are related in inertial frames, the properties of
momentum, energy, and mass are determined. We present another of
Einstein’s famous thought experiments that show that energy and inertia
(mass) are two aspects of one concept, relativistic energy, and ﬁnd E ¼ mc2.
The properties of relativistic momentum then follow from the properties of
spatial and temporal measurements and we learn that momentum and
energy conservation must go hand in hand.
Since Newton’s second law, force equals mass time acceleration, is not
consistent with the existence of a speed limit, we must modify it and invent
a new force law that is relativistic. We do this aided, again, by the original
thought experiments of the masters, Einstein and Max Born. In this case, a
close look at an inelastic collision in several frames of reference leads us to
relativistic momenta and energy. From there we obtain the relativistic
version of Newton’s second law. We then consider high-energy collisions
between particles and illustrate how energy can be converted into mass and
how mass can be converted into energy. These illustrations show that
Newton’s concept of the integrity of a particle is violated in relativity.
There is no way in relativity to restrict one’s attention to the “single particle
sector.” The fundamentals of relativity simply do not allow it. This fact has
consequences beyond the scope of this book and ﬁnds its fruition in
relativistic ﬁeld theories of particle physics.
In the ﬁrst edition of this book we were satisﬁed with introductory
work on relativistic dynamics. In this extended book we have greater
ambitions. We will start with electrostatics, that there is a static force which
falls off as the square of the distance between charges. We will use this fact
coupled with special relativity to deduce:
1. The existence of magnetism, a ﬁeld that is generated by electric
currents,
2. The Lorentz force law, which states that particles are deﬂected by
electric ﬁelds and also by magnetic ﬁelds in which case the force is
proportional to the particle’s velocity,
3. Maxwell’s equations: the AmpereeMaxwell equation predicting how
currents produce magnetic ﬁelds and Faraday’s law, which predicts
how changing magnetic ﬁelds produce electric forces (electromotive
forces),
4. The wave equation for electromagnetism and the demonstration that
light travels at the speed limit c of special relativity in all inertial
reference frames.
xii
Preface

The book emphasizes that magnetism is a consequence of relativityd
that Newton’s world, a world without a speed limit, has no place for this
phenomenon. In addition, magnetism produces velocity-dependent forces
on charged particles that do not satisfy Newton’s third law, that action
equals reaction. Once we understand that Newton’s third law fails, we must
look elsewhere for an understanding of momentum conservation in
dynamical interactions.
Once we have derived the Lorentz force law, we are able to deduce
how electric and magnetic ﬁelds transform under boosts. We learn from
carrying out this exercise that electric and magnetic ﬁelds mix under
transformations between frames of reference. These effects are conse-
quences of the fact that space and time mix under such transformations.
These results illustrate one of Einstein’s famous remarks that “electric forces
in one frame can be interpreted as magnetic effects in another.” The
problem sets in this part of the book consider more traditional ways of
obtaining the same results, considering capacitors and solenoids in various
reference frames.
These arguments elucidate the nature of magnetism, but they do not
quite get to the heart of the matter. Electrostatics states that charges are the
sources of electric ﬁelds. This is stated quantitatively through Gauss’ law.
On the other hand, we learn that electric currents are the sources of
magnetic ﬁelds. Since electric currents are produced from charge densities
by Lorentz transformations (“boosts”), it must be that the equation that
predicts that magnetic ﬁelds are produced from electric currents can be
obtained by boosting Gauss’ law. We carry out this exercise and discover
AmpereeMaxwell’s equation. This is Ampere’s law corrected for nonsta-
tionary currents by Maxwell’s displacement current. Similarly, we obtain
Faraday’s law from the divergence-free character of magnetic ﬁelds.
This book shows the student that a scientist can build the theory of
electromagnetism from electrostatics and special relativity. Unlike con-
ventional textbooks, we learn to manipulate differential equations and
accomplish our goals in general fundamental terms rather than working
through myriad illustrations of devices. Once we have Maxwell’s equations,
it is an easy task to show that relativity elevates electromagnetic ﬁelds to
independent dynamical degrees of freedom, which propagate at the speed
limit c.
In this journey we ﬁnd it necessary to forsake Newtonian ideas and
replace them with modern concepts: forces lead to ﬁelds, which become
dynamical objects that propagate nonlocal conservation laws such as
Preface
xiii

Newton’s law of actionereaction are thrown over and are replaced by local
conservation laws, which are compatible with the relativistic notion of causality
and the ﬁniteness of the speed of propagation of information. In addition, the
integrity of particle number, so crucial in Newton’s world, is replaced by
particle creation and destruction, which is forced upon us by the energyemass
relationship, causality and locality of relativistic interactions of relativity, etc.
Thus our introduction to electrodynamics is an alternative to the
traditional approach popularized by the textbooks of J. D. Jackson [1] and
his many followers. Our book starts with postulates 1 and 2 of special
relativity and the primitive notion that charges are the local sources of
electric ﬁelds, and develops the fundamentals of electromagnetism: uniﬁed
magnetic and electric ﬁelds, the Lorentz force law, Maxwell’s equations,
and the wave equation. After mastering these fundamentals, the student is
in a position to do more complex applications of relativity and electrody-
namics. The approach in this book is simple and straightforward. The
derivation of Maxwell’s equations, having come from such humble
beginnings in Chapter 1, should be an epiphany for the student.
2. GENERAL RELATIVITY
Our last topic in this book is the general theory of relativity, where we
consider accelerated reference frames in Einstein’s world. The key insight
here is Einstein’s version of the equivalence principle: there is no local,
physical means to distinguish a uniform gravitational ﬁeld from an accel-
erated reference frame.
This principle has many interesting forms and applications. Suppose you
are on the surface of Earth and want to understand the inﬂuence of the
gravitational ﬁeld on your measuring sticks and clocks compared to those of
your assistant who is at a greater height in the Empire State Building.
Einstein suggests that the assistant jump out the window, because in a freely
falling frame all effects of gravity are eliminated and we have a perfectly
inertial environment where special relativity holds to arbitrary precision!
During his descent, your assistant can make measurements of clocks and
meter sticks ﬁxed at various heights along the building and measure how
their operation depends on their gravitational potential. We pursue ideas
like this one in the book to derive the gravitational redshift, the fact that
clocks close to stars run more slowly than those far away from stars; the
resolution of the twin paradox as a problem in accelerating reference
frames; and the bending of light by gravitational ﬁelds.
xiv
Preface

A fascinating aspect of the equivalence principle is its universality, which
becomes particularly clear when we calculate the bending of light as a ray
glances by the Sun. Why does the light ray feel the presence of the mass of
the Sun? The equivalence principle states that an environment with a
uniform gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to an environment in an acceler-
ating reference framedexplicit acceleration clearly affects the trajectory of
light and any other physical phenomena. So gravity becomes a problem in
accelerated reference frames, which is just a problem in coordinate trans-
formations, which is an aspect of geometry! We show that this problem in
geometry must be done in the context of four-dimensional spaceetime,
our world of Minkowski diagrams. Einstein’s theory of gravity brought
modern geometry, the study of curved spaces, into physics forever.
As long as we concentrate on uniform gravitational ﬁelds of ordinary
strength, we are able to use the equivalence principle to make reliable, accurate
predictions. The equivalence principle reduces gravity to an apparent force,
much like the centrifugal or Coriolis forces that we feel when riding on a
carousel. In fact, we use relativistic turntables and rotating reference frames
as an aide to studying and deriving relativistic gravitational effects.
However, we are also interested in strong non-uniform gravity, situa-
tions where the equivalence principle is not sufﬁcient to describe the
physics. We discuss tidal forces, which are at the heart of the dynamics of
general relativity. This is done both within Newton’s world and general
relativity where we learn that tidal forces and the curvature of spaceetime
are two sides of the same coin. Since curvature is the essence of the dy-
namics of general relativity, we review classical differential geometry and
learn about the curvature of curves and the curvature of two-dimensional
surfaces. Gaussian curvature is introduced and the fundamental theorems
of classical differential geometry are derived and discussed.
These developments lead to a discussion of modern general relativity.
The critical symmetries of special relativity were Lorentz transformations
(boosts) and in general relativity these symmetries are elevated to local
symmetries, general coordinate transformations. The Riemann tensor is
introduced as a measure of the local, intrinsic curvature of spaceetime.
These ideas lead to the central idea of general relativity, that local energy
momentum produce local spaceetime curvature. This idea is expressed
quantitatively through Einstein’s ﬁeld equation, which is introduced as a
grand extension of Newton’s equation for the gravitational potential. We
solve these equations in the case of a static, symmetric mass distribution,
which gives rise to the Schwarzschild metric. This metric contains a black
Preface
xv

hole, which we study in considerable detail. We ﬁnd that there is an “event
horizon,” the Schwarzschild radius, inside of which there is no escape. We
also consider the production and propagation of gravitational waves. We
see that gravity waves are described by ﬂuctuations of the spaceetime
metric that travel at the speed limit of special relativity and are generated by
oscillating quadrupole moments of mass distributions. We review the
“Advanced LIGO” experiment that discovered gravity waves generated
from the violent merger of two black holes over one billion light-years
away from earth.
We end our discussion of general relativity by comparing its funda-
mentals with modern theories of elementary particles, which are also based
on local symmetry groups, as well as a look at current puzzles and unsolved
problems, such as dark energy.
3. BACKGROUND READING AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
FUTURE READING
Although the perspective of this book is its own, it owes much to other
presentations. The inﬂuence of A. P. French’s 1968 book [2] Special
Relativity is considerable, and references throughout the text indicate
where my discussions follow his. To my knowledge, this is the ﬁnest
textbook written on the subject because it balances theory and experiment
perfectly. The reader will ﬁnd discussions of the MichelsoneMorley
experiment and early tests of relativity there. French’s discussions of
energy and momentum are reﬂected in my later chapters, and his problem
sets are a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on those included here. The present book
goes beyond French’s when we derive the Lorentz transformation laws for
the electric and magnetic ﬁeld and then deduce all of Maxwell’s equations
by boosting Gauss’ law. We include a shortened version of French’s
demonstration that the magnetic attraction between parallel current
carrying wires is due to a minuscule Lorentz contraction effect. We show
that the force between such wires is strong enough to bend typical copper
wires because the huge number of electrons in the wire multiplies the tiny
Lorentz contraction they experience due to their tiny velocities relative to
the wire’s stationary Cuþ ions. This observation explains why magnetic
forces can be substantial under ordinary lab conditions even though
magnetism is a pure relativistic effect. These numbers underlie how rel-
ativity was discovered at the turn of the 20th century, long before the
xvi
Preface

modern era of particle accelerators where particle velocities close to the
speed limit were possible.
Another inﬂuential book is The Classical Theory of Fields by L. D. Landau
and E. M. Lifshitz [3]. Unlike most books on electromagnetism, which
follow the historical development of the ﬁeld and introduce relativity toward
the end, Landau and Lifshitz start with relativity and build the theory of
relativistic particles and light. The emphasis is on fundamental principles
rather than applications. Unfortunately, the book is aimed at advanced
students and most editions are ﬂush with typographical errors. Nonetheless,
the book is very inspiring and has unique insights into the subject. Several of
the more challenging problems in chapters 7e10 in this volume were
inspired by Landau and Lifshitz. This book also introduces general relativity
and includes derivations of the Schwarzschild metric, gravitational waves, the
bending of light rays in a gravitational ﬁeld, etc. The discussions are brief and
powerful, the essence of Landau’s brilliant approach to physics.
The exposition by N. D. Mermin [4] inﬂuenced several discussions of
the paradoxes of special relativity. This book is also recommended to the
student because it shows a condensed matter physicist learning the subject
and ﬁnding a comfort level in it through thought-provoking analyses that
avoid lengthy algebraic developments. The huge book by J. A. Wheeler
and E. F. Taylor [5] titled Spacetime Physics inspired several of our discussions
and problem sets. This book, a work that only the unique, creative soul of
John Archibald Wheeler could produce, is recommended for its leisurely,
interactive, thought-provoking character. Finally, the books by W. Rindler
[6,7], a pioneer in modern general relativity, are also recommended. His
book Essential Relativity [7] is a solid introduction to general relativity
rooted in the era of Einstein and the pioneers. After the student has
mastered electricity and magnetism and Lagrangian mechanics, he or she
could tackle The Classical Theory of Fields by L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz
[3] and Essential Relativity [7].
The future of research in relativity and ﬁeld theory is bright. Hopefully
this book will spark some interest in its future practitioners.
“Time travels in diverse paces with diverse persons,” Rosalind, from Act 3,
Scene 2, “As You Like It” by William Shakespeare.
“Mathematics allows you to exceed your imagination,” Lev Landau,
Moscow, 1952.
“Magic!”, student, anonymous, 2018.
Preface
xvii

REFERENCES
[1] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1962.
[2] A.P. French, Special Relativity, W. W. Norton, New York, 1968.
[3] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Pergamon Press, Oxford,
1962.
[4] N.D. Mermin, Space Time in Special Relativity, Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, IL,
1968.
[5] E.F. Taylor, J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics, W. H. Freeman, New York, 1992.
[6] W. Rindler, Introduction to Special Relativity, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1991.
[7] W. Rindler, Essential Relativity, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
xviii
Preface

CHAPTER 1
Physics According to Newtond
A World With No Speed Limit
Contents
1.1 Newton’s World: Laws and Measurements
1
1.2 Newton’s World: No Place for Magnetism
8
1.1 NEWTON’S WORLD: LAWS AND MEASUREMENTS
When you set up a problem in Newtonian mechanics, you choose a
reference frame. This means that you set up a three-dimensional coordinate
system, for example, so any point r can be labeled with an x measurement
of length, a y measurement, and a z measurement, r ¼ (x, y, z). In addition,
you place clocks at convenient points in the coordinate system so you can
make measurements and record when and where they occurred.
Newton imagined carrying out experiments on a mass point m in this
coordinate system. He imagined that the coordinate system was far from
any external inﬂuences, and under those conditions he claimed, on the basis
of the experiments of Galileo and others, that the mass point would move
in a straight line at a constant velocity. Newton labeled such a frame of
reference “inertial.” This idea is codiﬁed in Newton’s ﬁrst law:
Law 1. A body in an inertial reference frame remains at rest or in uni-
form motion unless acted on by a force.
Newton and others realized that there must be a wide class of inertial
frames. If we discovered one frame that was inertial, then Newton
argued that other inertial reference frames could be generated by
1. Translationdmove the coordinate system to a new origin and use that
system.
2. Rotationdrotate the coordinate system about some axis to a ﬁxed, new
orientation.
3. Boostsdconsider a frame moving at velocity v with respect to the ﬁrst.
Properties 1 and 2 are referred to as the uniformity and isotropy of
space. Property 3 is referred to as Galilean invariance: the Galilean boost
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00001-5
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
1

is a symmetrydit maps the physical system to another inertial reference
frame, and this process has no physical impact on the system.
Newton’s concept of relativity can now be stated: All inertial frames are
physically equivalent. This means that the laws of physics are the same in all
of them.
The reader should be aware that Newton and his colleagues argued
constantly about these points. What is the origin of inertia? Why are inertial
frames so special? Can’t we generalize the Properties 1e3 to a wider class of
reference frames? We will not discuss these historical issues here, but the
reader might want to pursue them for a greater interesting perspective. Our
approach is complementary to the traditional one and is forward looking
rather than historical.
Underlying Newtonian mechanics are his era’s concepts of space and
time. To measure the distance between points, we imagine a measuring
rod. Starting from an origin (0, 0, 0), we lay down markers in the x and y
and z directions so we can measure a particle’s position r ¼ (x, y, z) in this
inertial frame. Next we need a clock. A simple device such as a simple
harmonic oscillator will do. Take a mass point m on the end of a spring, and
let it execute periodic motion back and forth. Make a convention that one
unit of time passes when the mass point goes through one cycle of motion.
In this way we construct a clock and measure speeds of other masses by
noting how far they move in several units of timedin other words, we
compare the motion of our “standard” simple harmonic oscillator with the
motion of experimental particles. Note that this is just what we mean by
time in day-to-day situations. To make an accurate clock, we need one
with a sufﬁciently short unit of time, or period. Clocks based on the inner
workings of the atom can be used in demanding, modern circumstances.
Just as it was convenient to place distance markers along the three spatial
axes r ¼ (x, y, z), it is convenient to place clocks on the spatial gridwork.
This will make it easy to measure velocities of moving particlesdwe just
record the positions and times of the moving particle on our grid of
measuring rods and clocks. When the moving particle is at the position r
and the clock there reads a time t, we record the event. Measuring two such
events allows us to calculate the particle’s velocity in this frame at and near
that spatial position. In setting up the grid of clocks, we must synchronize
them so we can obtain meaningful time differences. This is easy to do. Place
a clock at the origin and one at r ¼ (1, 0, 0). Then, at the halfway point
between them, place a beacon that sends out a signal in all directions.
Because space is homogeneous and isotropic, the signal travels at the same
2
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

speed toward both clocks. Set the clocks to zero, say, when they both
receive the signal. The two clocks are synchronized, and we did not even
need to know the speed of the signal emitted from the beacon. Clearly, we
could use this method to synchronize all the clocks on the grid.
Now we are ready to do experiments involving spaceetime measure-
ments in this frame of reference. Call this frame S. It consists of the grid-
work of measuring rods and clocks, all at rest, with respect to each other.
Now, suppose we want to compare our experimental results with those
obtained by a friend of ours at rest in another frame that moves at constant
velocity v ¼ (vx, 0, 0) with respect to us. According to our postulates, his or
her measurements are as good as ours and all our physical laws can be
written in his or her frame of reference S0 without any change (Fig. 1.1).
The measuring rods in S0 are identical to those in S; the clocks in S0 are
also identical to those in S. Suppose that the origin of S and S0 coincide
when the clock at the origin in S reads time t ¼ 0 and the clock at the
origin in S0 reads t0 ¼ 0. Now for the crucial question: Do the other grid
markings and clocks at those markings also agree in the two frames S and S0?
There are two distinct physics issues to consider here. The ﬁrst is the
operation of the clocks and rods in each frame. Following Newton’s
principle of relativity, that all inertial reference frames are equivalent, all the
clocks and rods in S work exactly the same as those at rest in S0. We need
only know that both frames are inertialdthe relative velocity between the
frames is physically irrelevant to the dynamics within each. The second issue
is the physical mechanism by which we can transmit the information in one
grid of rods and clocks to the other at relative velocity v. In Newton’s
world, objects can move with unbounded relative velocities relative to one
another, as we shall discuss further in Eq. (1.2). Accordingly, signals and
information can be transmitted at unbounded velocities, essentially
Figure 1.1 Two inertial frames of reference in relative motion.
Physics According to NewtondA World With No Speed Limit
3

instantaneously. Therefore, the spatial gridwork and the times on each clock
in S0 can be instantaneously broadcast to the corresponding rods and clocks
in the frame S. Therefore, the gridwork of coordinates and times in both
frames must be identical, even though they are in relative motion. So, the
lengths of measuring rods and the rates of clocks are independent of their
relative velocities. We therefore need only one measuring rod and one
clock at one point in one inertial frame, and we know the positions and
times of all measuring rods and clocks in any other inertial frame. For the
purposes of this book, this serves as the meaning of “absolute space” and
“absolute time” in Newtonian mechanics. We need not hypothesize about
these notions from a philosophical basis, as was done historically, but can
deduce them from the fact that in Newtonian mechanics there is no speed
limitdinformation can be transmitted instantaneously.
Now consider the rule by which times and position measurements are
compared between the two frames, S and S0, in relative motion in
Newton’s world,
x ¼ x0 þ vt
y ¼ y0
z ¼ z0
t ¼ t0;
(1.1)
where x, y, z, and t are measurements in S and x0, y0, z0, and t0 are the cor-
responding measurements in S0. For example, if we measure the position of
a particle in S0 to be x0, y0, and z0, at time t0, then the coordinates of this
event (measurement) in frame S are given by Eq. (1.1). These relations,
which are so familiar and “obvious,” are called Galilean transformations.
Note that the ﬁrst of them, x ¼ x0 þ vt, states that the position of the par-
ticle at time t consists of two pieces: (1) the distance vt between the origins
of the two frames at time t and (2) the distance x0 from the origin to the
particle in the frame S0. This rule contains the notion “absolute” spacedit
uses the fact that in a Newtonian world the distance x0 in the frame S0 is also
measured as x0 in the frame S. The last equation in Eq. (1.1) is the statement
of “absolute” time. Note also that if the particle has a velocity v0
p with
respect to the frame S0 in the x0 direction, then x0 ¼ v0
pt0 ¼ v0
pt; and its
position in frame S is x ¼

v0
p þ v

t; so its velocity relative to the origin
of frame S is vp,
vp ¼ v0
p þ v;
(1.2)
4
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which is the familiar rule called “addition of velocities.” It rests on
Newton’s ideas of absolute space and time. It will be interesting indeed
to see how the results from Eqs. (1.1) and (1.2) are different in Einstein’s
world!
We can go slightly further than Eq. (1.2) by considering a sequence of
frames. Let S1 move at velocity v10 along the x-axis with respect to S, let S2
move at velocity v21 along the x-axis with respect to S1. Then the velocity
of a particle in S, vp,0, is related to its velocity measured in frame S2 by
adding up the relative velocities,
vp;0 ¼ vp;2 þ v2;1 þ v1;0
(1.3)
There is nothing stopping us from generalizing this process again and
again to Sn frames until vp,0 is a velocity as large as one wishes. In other
words, velocities in Newton’s world are unbounded because of the addition
law for velocities.
Perhaps, it has not occurred to the reader before that information could
be transmitted instantaneously in a Newtonian world. Actually, if the reader
recalls some elementary problems in dynamics, the assumption was lurking
just under the surface.
Suppose you consider the collision of a point particle and a rod, as
shown in Fig. 1.2.
Figure 1.2 Collision between a particle and the upper edge of a rod.
Physics According to NewtondA World With No Speed Limit
5

When you solve this problem using Newtonian mechanics using con-
servation of linear and angular momentum, you implicitly assume that the
impact at the upper edge of the rigid rod instantaneously accelerates the
center of mass of the rod and begins rotating the bottom end of the rod to
the left. If information was transmitted at a ﬁnite velocity, call it c, the lower
edge of the rod could not know about the collision until a later time, t ¼ [/c
where [ is the length of the rod. It is clear that the very notion of rigid
bodies requires a theoretical basis where information is transmitted instan-
taneously. Rigid bodies cannot exist in Einstein’s world. Of course, in
practical problems where [ is a few meters, say, and c is enormous,
c z 3.0$108 m/s, the time delay encountered here is usually considered
negligible. (But it certainly would be signiﬁcant if [ were the diameter of a
star.) Nonetheless, the matter of principle is our major concern in these
discussions.
Another place where instantaneous transmission of information occurs
in Newtonian mechanics problems is in the use of potentials. When we
have two bodies interacting through a mutual force that is described
through a potential that depends on the distance between the particles, we
are assuming that the force on each particle is determined by the relative
position of the other particle at that exact moment. No account is given of
the transmission of that information between the separate particles. This
Newtonian notion is called “action at a distance,” and it underlies some of
the greatest successes of nonrelativistic mechanics. We will see that it is
absolutely impossible in Einstein’s world.
Now let us move on to discussions of Newton’s second and third laws.
The second law introduces dynamics:
Law 2. If a particle of mass m is subject to a force f, then it experiences
an acceleration a given by,
f ¼ ma.
(1.4)
In slightly more generality,
f ¼ d
dt p
(1.5)
where p is the particle’s momentum, p ¼ mv. Before discussing the
second law further, it helps to introduce Newton’s third law:
Law 3. When one particle exerts a force on a second particle, the
second one exerts an equal and opposite force on the ﬁrst.
6
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This law is the basis of a conservation law: the conservation of
momentum. Consider two interacting particles. Denote the force of
particle 1 on particle 2 F12 and the force 2 on 1 F21. The third law states
that,
F12 ¼ F21
(1.6)
Notice that this is a vector equation: the forces are equal in magnitude but
opposite in direction. We can see that the total momentum of the system,
p1 þ p2 is constant in time,
d
dt ðp1 þ p2Þ ¼ d
dt p1 þ d
dt p2 ¼ F21 þ F12
¼ F21  F21 ¼ 0
(1.7)
Conservation laws are fundamental to all subﬁelds of physics. Newton’s
third law is an essential ingredient in mechanics. But it is important to note
something very perplexing about the third law: it is a nonlocal conservation
law. The forces of action and reaction cancel as stated in Eq. (1.7), but the
action and reaction forces act on different particles, which could be very far
from each other if the force acts over long distances such as electrostatics or
gravity. Eq. (1.7) makes the remarkable statement that at every instant of
time t, particle 1 responds to the motion of particle 2 just so the sum of their
momenta is a constant even if the particles are thousands of meters apart.
This is possible in a causal world only if information travels instantaneously.
Clearly the third law will not survive in this form in Einstein’s world where
information cannot travel faster than c, the speed of light. The implications
of the failure of the third law will be more profound than we can imagine at
this point in our studies.
The mass m in Eq. (1.4) is clariﬁed in part by the third law, the law of
actionereaction, which implies in the case of two interacting particles that
m1a1 ¼ m2a2.
(1.8)
So, if the ﬁrst body is chosen to set the scale for inertia, in other words, if
we deﬁne m1 h 1, then m2 is determined from Eq. (1.8). The third law
provides an operational meaning to the “mass” or “inertia” of a particle.
Are the laws of dynamics, Newton’s second and third laws, compatible
with Newton’s principle of relativity, that all inertial reference frames are
physically equivalent? The key observation is that acceleration is a “Galilean
invariant,” which means that an acceleration a is the same in all inertial
Physics According to NewtondA World With No Speed Limit
7

reference frames. This follows from Eq. (1.2). Differentiate it with respect
to time, use the fact that v is a constant and learn that,
ap ¼ a0
p
(1.9)
We learn that forces are Galilean invariants. We are using the fact that
masses are Galilean invariant in Newton’s world to make this observation.
This property was assumed in Newton’s era and was veriﬁed experimentally
to reasonable precision at modest velocities. We shall see that masses are not
invariant in Einstein’s world, and the implications of this fact will prove to
be very signiﬁcant.
We have dealt with these issues very explicitly because they will help us
appreciate special relativity, where there is a speed limit, the speed of light.
In all the rules of Newtonian mechanics, the rules of how things work, the
second and third laws, do not distinguish between inertial frames. The
dynamics do satisfy a principle of relativity. The difference between the two
theories comes from the fact that one has a speed limit and the other does
not. This affects how information is shared between frames. It also affects
the dynamics within each framedEinstein’s form of Newton’s “force
equals mass times acceleration” is different because it must not permit
velocities greater than the speed limit. But each theory is consistent within
its own rules.
1.2 NEWTON’S WORLD: NO PLACE FOR MAGNETISM
It is instructive to return to our example of electrostatics and consider
Newtonian dynamics in more detail. The goal to this discussion is to
demonstrate that if you accept Newton’s laws 1e3 and you know
Coulomb’s law, then you can rule out the very existence of magnetism!
What do we mean by magnetism in this context? We accept the
experimental fact that electric charges produce electrostatic forces. We will
write down Coulomb’s law and will manipulate it and study it. Magnetic
forces are, by deﬁnition, those forces produced by electric currents. For
example, if a thin wire carries a current I, this means that electrons are
ﬂowing in the wire at a rate of I Coulomb’s per second passing a ﬁxed point
along the wire. The wire is uncharged but electrons ﬂow along it. We
know from our experiences in the lab, perhaps making an electromagnet
and bending charged particle trajectories with it, that there is a magnetic
ﬁeld in the lab and its strength is proportional to the current I. In addition, if
8
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

a single charge such as a free electron, whose charge we label q and measure
in units of coulombs, has a ﬁxed position r in a reference frame S then it
produces a Coulomb ﬁeld emanating from r. If the electron is viewed from
the perspective of a frame S0, which moves with velocity v along the x axis,
then the electron has a velocity v in this frame so it also has a current, qv,
in S0. From our experiences in the lab, we know that there will be a
magnetic ﬁeld in S0whose strength is proportional to qv.
Let us see where Newton gets into trouble with these simple obser-
vations. Let us return to our example of electrostatics. Let particle 1 be at
rest at the origin r ¼ (0,0,0) in a frame S. The electric ﬁeld generated by the
charge q1 is,
EðrÞ ¼ k q1
r2 br
(1.10)
where k is constant determined experimentally. The electric ﬁeld is intro-
duced so the force on charge q2 at position r ¼ r2 can be written as,
F ¼ q2Eðr2Þ
(1.11)
As we will motivate in later chapters, these equations mean that the charge
q1 at the origin generates a static electric ﬁeld E(r) around it that produces a
force on other charged particles. Now suppose that the charge q2 has a
velocity v2(t) in frame S. At time t q2 is at position r2(t) and experiences the
electric ﬁeld there. So, the force it experiences becomes time dependent,
FðtÞ ¼ q2Eðr2ðtÞÞ
(1.12)
According to Newton’s third law, the charge q1 experiences a force eF(t).
We can view the force in the following way: the moving charge q2 gen-
erates an electric ﬁeld of magnitude kq2=jr  r2ðtÞj2 in the direction rr2(t).
Multiplying this ﬁeld by q1 gives the force on particle 1.
We learn from all this that the force between particle 1 and particle 2 is
independent of the velocities of either particle and depends only on the
instantaneous positions of each particle.
F12ðtÞ ¼ k
q1q2
jr1ðtÞ  r2ðtÞj2br12ðtÞ
(1.13)
So, in Newton’s world, the force between charge q1 and q2 depends only
on the particles’ instantaneous positions and not on their velocities. This is a
very perplexing result because, as promised, it rules out the existence of
Physics According to NewtondA World With No Speed Limit
9

magnetism in Newton’s world. This vital ﬂaw will be cured by special
relativity. Special relativity and Coulomb’s law will be shown to imply
magnetic forces of just the sort observed in the lab and will, in fact, produce
all of Maxwell’s equations, and the wave equation for electromagnetic
waves that travel at the speed limit of relativity, c.
To emphasize the failure of Newton’s laws to accommodate magnetism,
consider an even simpler example that does not use the third law. Imagine
two charges q1 and q2 moving parallel to one another with a common
velocity v as shown in Fig. 1.3. We want to calculate the force between
them. To do this, we view the charges from the perspective of their rest
frame. In this frame, we know the answer immediately: Coulomb’s law
applies and the particles experience a force that acts on the line between
them and that falls off as the square of the distance between them. This
produces a formula for each particle’s acceleration. But in Newton’s world,
accelerations are independent of the inertial frame in which they are
calculated. Therefore, the particles experience the same acceleration a in
the frame S where they are moving and are producing currents. This
demonstrates that these currents do not effect the acceleration of the
charges, and magnetic forces are ruled out yet again.
In Chapter 9, we will see that the origin of magnetic forces and the
magnetic ﬁeld B is the spaceetime of special relativity. We will go further
and derive all of electromagnetism (Maxwell’s laws, including Ampere’s law
of magnetic ﬁelds and the displacement current and Faraday’s law of
electromagnetic induction) from special relativity and Coulomb’s law of
electrostatics. From there we shall see that electromagnetic waves exist and
travel with a universal speed limit, c. But before we head off in that
direction let us learn the basics of the physics of spaceetime measurements
according to Einstein.
Figure 1.3 Two charges moving parallel to one another at a common velocity in
the lab.
10
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 2
SpaceeTime Measurements
According to Einstein
Contents
2.1 A World With a Speed Limit
11
2.2 Making a Clock With Mirrors and Light
13
2.3 Lorentz Contraction
17
2.4 The Relativity of Simultaneity
19
2.5 Time Dilation Revisited
22
2.6 Lorentz Contraction Revisited
24
Problems
27
Reference
29
2.1 A WORLD WITH A SPEED LIMIT
According to Newtonian mechanics, you could place a charged particle
(charge q, mass m) into a constant electric ﬁeld E and accelerate it to an
arbitrary velocity, v(t) ¼ (qE/m)t. In addition, you could consider inertial
frames in relative motion and the relative velocity could be arbitrarily large.
Unfortunately, nature does not allow such freedom. Modern accelerator
experiments indicate that particles cannot be accelerated beyond a universal
speed limit, which is the speed of light, c ¼ 2.9979.$108 m/s. Light is
nature’s fastest runner. Although historically the fact that the speed of light
is the speed limit was extraordinarily important, it is not important for the
logical development of the subject. Just the existence of a speed limit is all
that really matters. We do not need to know anything about electromag-
netism to derive time dilation and Lorentz contraction and thereby over-
throw Newton’s vision of absolute space and time. But it is crucial to
understand that the existence of a speed limit must be compatible with
Postulate 1 of relativity, that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial
frames. This means that all inertial frames must ﬁnd the same universal value
for the speed limit through their own experiments.
In particular, suppose that an experimenter at rest in frame S0 shown in
Fig. 2.1 turns on a ﬂashlight and points it to the right. Those light rays can
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00002-7
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
11

be measured as traveling at the speed limit c with respect to any observer at
rest in frame S0. But an experimenter in frame S must also measure the
speed of the light ray to be the speed limit c, independent of v! Just for fun,
take an extreme example. Choose v/c ¼ 0.99999999 and point the ﬂash-
light to the left, in the direction opposing the velocity v. An observer at rest
in frame S0 measures the velocity of the light rays emanating from the
ﬂashlight and ﬁnds c z 3$108 m/s to the left, as usual. But an observer at
rest in frame S measures the velocity of light rays, too, and ﬁnds
c z 3$108 m/s to the left as well, instead of the value 3 m/s to the left that
we would predict in Newton’s world! The speed of the source of light, the
ﬂashlight, is utterly irrelevant! Both observers must measure the same speed
limit because the laws of physics are identical in both of their frames. The
Galilean result of Eq. (1.3), known as addition of velocities, which we have
held as obvious, is just plain wrong. It will take us some time and effort to
feel comfortable with the physics in Einstein’s world!
In summary, the two postulates of Einstein’s special relativity are as
follows:
1. The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames.
2. There is a speed limit.
The rest of this book will work out the implications of these two
postulates. We begin by studying how measurements of rods and clocks are
related between different inertial frames. Then we turn back to Postulate 1
and see how Newton’s laws must be modiﬁed, how momentum and en-
ergy should be deﬁned and related, to be compatible with the existence of a
universal speed limit.
Figure 2.1 A ﬂashlight at rest in a moving frame beams its light in its direction of
motion.
12
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

2.2 MAKING A CLOCK WITH MIRRORS AND LIGHT
Just as in our discussion of Newtonian measurements of the positions and
times of events, we set up a gridwork of coordinates and clocks in two
frames, S and S0, which are both inertial and have a relative velocity v in the
x direction, as depicted Fig. 2.1. We synchronize clocks in frames S and S0
just as we described in the Newtonian world of Chapter 1. Our next task is
to compare the positions and times on the clocks in S with those in S0.
We need to construct a clock so that we can understand its operation
using just Postulates 1 and 2. Einstein thought up a simple clock whose two
ingredients, a basic length and a basic velocity, are easily understood in
terms of Postulates 1 and 2. Take two mirrors at rest in S0 and let them be
separated by a distance [o in the y0 direction. Both mirrors move relative to
S in the x direction at velocity v and maintain their separation [o as
measured in either frame. Now let a beam of light bounce between the
mirrors. Because light travels at the speed limit c, it takes a time Dt0 ¼ 2[o/c
for light to travel from one mirror, call it A, to the second mirror, call it B,
and then back to mirror A (see Fig. 2.2). Because the clock is at rest in frame
S0, it is conventional to call the interval Dt0 “proper time” and denote it
Ds ¼ 2[o/c. These simple clocks could be the ones we place along the
gridwork in the frame S0 to measure the position and time of events.
Figure 2.2 A beam of light travels from mirror A to mirror B at rest in frame S
0.
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
13

Now view the clock’s operation from the perspective of an observer at
rest in S. Now the clock moves to the right at velocity v, and the light ray
takes the path in frame S as shown in Fig. 2.3. In the frame S, the light ray
travels along the line segment AB and then along BA back to mirror A. The
distance mirror A in Fig. 2.3 travels between sending and receiving the light
ray is vDt. From Fig. 2.3, the distance the light ray travels is
AB þ BA ¼ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
[2
o þ ðyDt=2Þ2
q
.
(2.1)
But the light ray also travels at the speed limit c in frame S according to
Postulate 2, so
AB þ BA ¼ cDt.
(2.2)
This is the essential point in this argumentdthe universal speed limit enters
here, and we have a clear qualitative distinction from the rules of Newtonian
mechanics. Combining Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2), we ﬁnd
cDt ¼ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
[2
o þ ðyDt=2Þ2
q
;
(2.3)
which allows us to solve for Dt,
Dt ¼
2[o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c2  y2
p
¼
2[o=c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
Dt ¼ Ds
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
q
:
(2.4)
Figure 2.3 Fig. 2.2 viewed from frame S
0.
14
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This result is called “time dilation”dthe time interval in frame S, Dt, is
dilated by a factor of
gh1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
(2.5)
compared with the proper time Ds measured in frame S0.
A look at the ﬁgure reveals why Dt is greater than Ds, the proper time
interval measured on the clock in its rest frame. When the light travels from
A to B and back in the frame S, it does so at the speed limit, following
Postulate 2. In a Newtonian world where all velocities satisfy the addition
of velocities theorem of Galilean transformations, the velocity would be
vx ¼ v and vy ¼ c, producing a speed in frame S of
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c2 þ v2
p
. Substituting
this into Eq. (2.3) leads to the Newtonian result, Dt ¼ 2[o/c ¼ Ds
(Newton). But in the real world of Einstein where Eq. (2.2) rules, the speed
of light is c in all frames, and the time it takes to transverse the path AB þ
BA is longer than Newton would calculate. The universal nature of the
speed limit produces time dilation.
A skeptic might complain that this curious result is particular to the type
of clock we made and would not be true of a clock made of springs and
masses. We can rule out this objection by appealing to Postulate 1. Consider
the clock made of mirrors and light at rest in frame S0, and place next to it a
mechanical clock made of springs and masses. Synchronize the two clocks.
Now do the same in the frame S, which is moving at a relative velocity v.
This is guaranteed to work in frame S as well as in the original frame S0
because of Postulate 1. The two clocks made of mirrors and light experience
time dilation, and the mechanical clocks must also because each is syn-
chronized to a clock of mirrors and light at rest with respect to it. The clocks
of mirrors and light can be dispensed with at this point, and we arrive at the
conclusion that the mechanical clocks experience time dilation, too. (Of
course, it remains to be seen if we can lay down laws of mechanics that
satisfy Postulates 1 and 2. When we discuss the relativistic versions of energy,
momentum, and Newton’s second law, we shall carry out this promise.)
As exotic as Eq. (2.4) for time dilation might seem, the reader should
understand that for relative velocities that are small compared with the
speed
limit,
c ¼ 3.0$108 m/s,
the
effect
is
very
tiny.
Take
v ¼ 1000 mph z 490 m/s, so v/c z 1.6$106, and using the expansion
and approximations reviewed in Appendix C,
Dt z Ds

1 þ 1
2
y2
c2

z Dsð1 þ 1:33$1012Þ.
(2.6)
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
15

The relativistic correction to the Newtonian result of the equality of Dt and
Ds is suppressed by a factor of the square of the speed limit and is tiny in
present everyday situations.
If you live and work at a high-energy accelerator center where
elementary particles achieve speeds within a fraction of a percent of c, rela-
tivistic effects are commonplace. For example, consider the muon, a heavy
relative of the electron, which is a common ingredient in cosmic rays and is
produced copiously in high-energy collisions. It is an unstable particle with a
half-life Ds z 2.2$106 s, so a population of muons, at rest in the frame S0,
decays according to N(t0) ¼ No exp(0.693t0/Ds). (The funny factor of
0.693 is just the natural logarithm of 2.) At an accelerator center, this pop-
ulation of muons might be moving in a beam at velocity v comparable to c
and the exponential decay law in the frame S, the lab frame, would be
N(t) ¼ No exp(0.693 t/gDs). This expression for N(t) has incorporated the
quantity gDs in its exponential, so the average expected lifetime of a moving
muon is dilated to gDs. Modern accelerators produce beams with v/
c z 0.99c for which g z 7.1. This is a huge effect that is easily detected.
For example, if you have a bunch of muons with No ¼ 1000, they travel
across a detector of 1000 m at v/c ¼ 0.99 in the time interval 1000/
(0.99$3$108) z 3.4$106 s. Therefore, Newton predicts that 1000$exp
(0.693$3.4$106/2.2$106) z 1000 exp(1.06) z 346 would survive,
because in his world the muon lifetime is Ds z 2.2$106 s in all inertial
frames. On the other hand, Einstein predicts that 1000 exp(1.06/7.1) z
1000 exp(0.149) z 862 would survive. The Einstein result (time dila-
tion) is easily conﬁrmed at high-energy accelerator centers.
We see that by boosting the muons to a velocity v/c z 1, we can slow
down their internal workings relative to the lab frame. Accelerator centers
also make beams of other particles such as protons, which are composed of
quarks and gluons, according to modern theories of strongly interacting
subnucleon particles. By boosting them to velocities close to the speed of
light, we can slow down their internal dynamics so we can probe inside
them and learn how quarks interact. We can scatter high-energy quanta of
light off the accelerated protons and effectively take a snapshot of their
internal state when doing high-energy scattering experiments. This is how
quarks were discovered as the internal constituents of protons in the classic
experiments at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center in the 1960s and
1970s. In that case the protons were at rest in the lab and a high-energy
beam of electrons provided the (virtual) light quanta that probed their
structure. It was from the perspective of the electrons that the internal
16
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

dynamics of the proton were slowed down and their constituents were
revealed.
But there is a puzzle here. If we view the muon decay process in the
frame S0 where the muons are at rest, how can we understand that 862 of
them survive the trip to the end of the detector and not 346? Obviously,
observers in both frames must agree on how many muons get through the
detectordboth observers can just count them! If relativity is consistent, it
must be true that t0/Ds ¼ t/gDs, so the two exponential decay laws give
identical predictions. We computed t ¼ do/v, where do is the length of the
detector in the frame S where it is at rest. Substituting into t0/Ds ¼ t/gDs,
we learn that t0 ¼ do/gv. How can we understand this? In the frame S0 the
detector is racing toward the muons at velocity v, so t0 should be the length
of the moving detector divided by the velocity v. It must be that the length
of the detector measured in the frame where it is moving is contracted by a
factor of g, t0 ¼ d0/v with d0 ¼ do/g! This is indeed the case. The effect is
called Lorentz contraction, named after the physicist who ﬁrst deduced the
effect in the context of the theory of electricity and magnetism at the very
beginning of the 20th century. We look more closely at this important
effect in the next section.
2.3 LORENTZ CONTRACTION
If the constancy of the speed limit implies time dilation, it must also affect
the measurements of lengths of moving objects. This effect, called Lorentz
contraction, is also easily obtained from Einstein’s clock.
To begin, take the clock at rest in frame S0 and rotate it by 90 degrees so
that its length [o is parallel to v, the relative velocity of the second frame S.
It is conventional to call [o the proper length of the clock because this is its
length in the frame in which it is at rest. Because space is homogeneous in
an inertial frame, the rotated clock works as it did before. In frame S0, we
had Ds ¼ 2[o/c. As before, this proper time interval Ds must be dilated
when measured in frame S because the rotation of the clock cannot affect
its internal workings. But now view the path of the light ray in the frame S,
as shown in Fig. 2.4.
We label the length of the clock, from A to B, as measured in frame S as
[. In the ﬁrst image of Fig. 2.4, light leaves the mirror and heads toward
mirror B. In the second image, the light ray reaches mirror B after a time
Dt1. The mirror A has moved a distance vDt1 to the right, so
cDt1 ¼ [ þ yDt1:
(2.7)
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
17

In the third image of Fig. 2.4, the light that left mirror B reaches mirror A
and is reﬂected. Between images 2 and 3, a time Dt2 has passed in frame S,
so the mirror A moves an additional distance vDt2,
cDt2 ¼ [  yDt2;
(2.8)
where the minus sign occurs because the light ray is moving from mirror B
to A while mirror A is moving to the right. Finally, the sum of Dt1 and Dt2
is the time that passes in frame S corresponding to one period of the clock.
We know that this time is Dt, and we computed it to be g(2[o/c), where g
denotes, as usual, 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
: So, using Eqs. (2.7) and (2.8),
Dt ¼ Dt1 þ Dt2
Dt ¼
[
c  y þ
[
c þ y
Dt ¼
2[=c
1  y2=c2 .
(2.9)
Figure 2.4 The rotated clock viewed from frame S.
18
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

But Dt ¼ g(2[o/c), so we learn that
[ ¼ [o=g ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
[o.
(2.10)
This is the result we wanteddit is called Lorentz contraction because [ is
less than [o. Although H. A. Lorentz discovered this result, it was not until
Einstein’s derivation that the universality of the result was understood.
We learn that when an observer measures the length of a rod moving in
the direction of its length, the observer will obtain a result contracted by a
factor of g. This derivation shows that this effect follows from the same
considerations that led to time dilationdthe universal character of the speed
limit. But we need to understand this contraction in a more explicit fashion.
There are no forces at play here, so what does it mean that the rod is
contracted? The effect clearly has nothing to do with how rods are put
togetherdthe effect just states how measurements of lengths transform
between inertial frames. We see in the next section that Lorentz contraction
is only really clariﬁed by a discussion of the synchronization of spatially
separated moving clocks.
2.4 THE RELATIVITY OF SIMULTANEITY
It is clear from our ﬁrst look at time dilation and Lorentz contraction that
the universal nature of the speed of light produces puzzling results. The
simplest spaceetime measurements we can imagine are those that started
this chapterdthe setting up of a grid of coordinates and clocksdso we will
return to it here to understand it better. In particular, let a grid of co-
ordinates and clocks be set up in frame S0, which is moving with respect to a
frame S at a relative velocity of v to the right. The clocks along the x0, y0,
and z0 axes are synchronized in frame S0 in the usual way. We want to
consider the synchronization procedure from the perspective of observers at
rest in frame S. For example, an observer in S0 synchronizes two clocks
separated by a distance [0 in the y0 direction by placing a source of light
halfway between them, sending a signal out in all directions and insisting
that the two clocks read the same time when the signals arrive (Fig. 2.5).
From the perspective of the observer in frame S, the source and both clocks
are moving to the right at velocity v. Both the light rays travel at velocity c
with respect to frame S, so the light rays arrive at the two clocks simulta-
neously in frame S. Clearly the synchronization procedure devised in frame
S0 is acceptable to frame S, and all is well. Also, because each clock is
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
19

moving with velocity v transverse to the separation between them of [0,
their positions are x1 ¼ vt, y1 ¼ 0, z1 ¼ 0 for the lower clock and x2 ¼ vt,
y2 ¼ [, z2 ¼ 0 for the upper clock (no surprises here). These preliminary
considerations underlie our discussion of time dilation of the clock with
mirrors in Section 2.2.
Things get more interesting when we consider the synchronization
procedure for clocks at rest in S0 but separated in the x0 direction. Let the
distance between the clocks in their rest frame S0 be Dx0 ¼ [0 ¼ [o. A signal
generator is placed halfway between them, a pulse is sent out in all di-
rections, and the clocks are synchronized. If we say that t0 ¼ 0 when the
light is emitted, then both clocks register t0 ¼ [o/2c when the light rays
arrive. All observers in all inertial frames will agree that the faces of the two
clocks read t0 ¼ [o/2c when the light rays are received (Fig. 2.6).
Now view the procedure from frame S. An observer in frame S will
measure that light reaches clock 1 before it reaches clock 2 because clock 1
is racing toward the rays and clock 2 is racing away from them! The in-
dividual times are given by the same sort of considerations we saw in
Section 2.3,
ct2 ¼ [=2 þ yt2
ct1 ¼ [=2  yt1;
(2.11)
where t1 is the time for light to reach clock 1, and t2 is the time for light to
reach clock 2. Note that Eq. (2.11) incorporates the universal nature of the
speed of lightdregardless of its direction of motion, light travels at speed c
Figure 2.5 Synchronizing two clocks at rest in frame S
0.
20
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

with respect to frame S. So we should appreciate, before extracting quan-
titative details from Eq. (2.11), that an observer in frame S concludes that
the two clocks are not synchronized in his or her rest framed“clocks that
are synchronized in one inertial frame are not synchronized in another in-
ertial frame if there is a nonzero relative velocity along the line of sight be-
tween the clocks.” This startling result, which lies at the core of Lorentz
contraction, follows simply from the fact that the speed limit is the same
in all frames and violates Galileo’s law of addition of velocities.
Now let us work out the time difference t2  t1 as measured in frame S.
The time difference is
Dt ¼ t2  t1
Dt ¼ [=2
c  y  [=2
c þ y
Dt ¼
[y=c2
1  y2=c2 .
(2.12)
But [ is the length measured in the frame S moving with velocity v with
respect to the frame S0 where the clocks are at rest. So, [ is related to [o, the
proper distance between them, by the Lorentz contraction effect
[ ¼ [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
. Thus Eq. (2.12) can be written Dt ¼ g[ov/c2.
Next we need to calculate the time that an observer in frame S measures
as passing in frame S0. Recall from time dilation, that, as measured in frame
S, the clocks in frame S0 run slowly. Therefore, if a time Dt0 passes on a
Figure 2.6 Synchronizing two clocks at rest in frame S
0 separated in the x
0 direction.
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
21

clock at rest in frame S0, then Dt ¼ gDt0 gives the time interval that passes
on a clock at rest in frame S. So, an observer in frame S states that there was
a time difference of Dt0 ¼ [ov/c2 in frame S0 between the time clock 2
received the light ray and the time clock 1 received its ray. But all observers
in all frames have noted that clocks 1 and 2 have identical readings when
the light rays reach them. Therefore, an observer in frame S concludes that
clock 1 was set ahead of clock 2 by an amount [ov/c2. In other words, when
an observer at time t in frame S inquires what the time t0 is in frame S0, the
observer ﬁnds that t0 depends on x0: t0 varies as x0v/c2.
The lesson we learn heredthat clocks that are synchronized in one
frame are not synchronized when measured in a frame at relative motion
along the line between the clocksdis crucial to understanding time dilation
and Lorentz contraction. It is called the “relativity of simultaneity.” These
three effects must be taken all together (more on this later).
2.5 TIME DILATION REVISITED
The purpose of this discussion is to understand how time dilation, the
relativity of simultaneity, and Lorentz contraction conspire together to
produce a consistent picture of time measurements of moving clocks [1].
We have already seen that, if two frames S and S0 are in relative motion, an
observer in each says that the other’s clock runs slowly. This sounds par-
adoxical. Let us take a closer look from both observers’ perspectives and see
that each agrees with the observations of the other.
Suppose that there are two synchronized clocks at rest in the frame S
and separated by a proper distance [o in the x direction. As usual, let frame
S0 be moving to the right at velocity v, as shown in Fig. 2.7. Let the clock in
frame S0 be synchronized with clock 1, which is at rest in frame S. They
pass each other at x ¼ x0 ¼ 0, t ¼ t0 ¼ 0, as shown in Fig. 2.7A. We wish to
know what Sʹ’s clock will read when it passes S’s clock 2, as shown in
Fig. 2.7B. Will observers at rest in both frames make the same prediction
even though they see one another’s clocks running slowly?
First, consider the measurement from the perspective of an observer at rest
in frame S. The clock in frame S0 is moving at velocity v with respect to that
observer, so clock 2 will read t ¼ [o/v when the clocks pass. Because the
observer in frame S sees frame Sʹ’s clocks running slowly, the observer predicts
that Sʹ’s clock will read t
0 ¼ [0
v
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
when the clocks pass each other.
So, the observer in S notes that although clock 1 and Sʹ’s clock were syn-
chronized, clock 2 is not synchronized with the moving clock!
22
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Now consider the measurements again by treating frame S0 as the one at
rest and frame S as moving to the left at velocity v, as shown in Fig. 2.8.
From the perspective of the observer in frame S0, the distance between
clocks 1 and 2 is contracted to [
0 ¼ [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
; so the observer’s clock
Figure 2.7 In part (A) the clock at rest in frame S
0 is synchronized with a clock at rest in
frame S. In part (B) the time on the clock at rest in frame S
0 is recorded when it passes a
second clock at rest in frame S.
Figure 2.8 The events in Fig. 2.7A and B from the perspective of frame S
0.
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
23

will read t
0 ¼ [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
=v when it reaches clock 2. So we learn that S
and S0 do agree on this point, as they must.
Next consider the observation of clock 2 by the observer in S0. This is
the tricky part! The left-hand clocks coincide at t ¼ t0 ¼ 0, as shown in
Fig. 2.8A. The clock 2 is measured by the observer in S0 to be
[o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
to the right and to be [ov/c2 ahead of clock 1! In Fig. 2.8b, a
time interval [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2=
p
=v has passed in S0, so the observer in S0 states
that a time interval

[o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
=v

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
has passed in frame S
(this time must dilate to [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
=v when measured in frame S0). So,
clock 2 must read [ov=c2 þ [oð1  v2=c2Þ=v when the clocks coincide, the
observer in frame S0 reasons. And this agrees with the observer in frame S,
who simply calculates the time by dividing distance by velocity, [o/v.
In summary, each observer sees the other clocks running slower than his
or her own, but, because of the relativity of simultaneity and Lorentz
contraction, they both agree that t ¼ [o/v and t
0 ¼ [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
=v when
the right-hand clock in S coincides with the clock in S0.
2.6 LORENTZ CONTRACTION REVISITED
Now we want to consider Lorentz contraction again, but this time keep
track of the times of the measurements of the positions of the ends of a
moving rod [1]. We shall see in this way that the crux of the matter here is
the relativity of simultaneitydthat spatially separate clocks that are syn-
chronized in one frame are not synchronized in a moving frame. So, when
one observer notes the positions of the ends of a rod simultaneously in his
or her frame, an observer moving by notes that those measurement events
are not simultaneous in his or her frame. This effect, then, explains why
observers in relative motion measure different lengths for a given physical
rod.
For example, let there be a rod of length [o at rest in a frame S, which
moves to the left at velocity v with respect to frame S0 as shown in Fig. 2.9.
When an observer at rest in frame S0 measures the length of the rod, the
observer gets an answer [0, which must be related to [o in a linear fashion
with, perhaps, a prefactor f that can depend on the dimensionless ratio v/c,
[0 ¼ f(v/c)[o. The structure of this formula is a consequence of dimensional
analysis. Our task is to ﬁnd (and understand) the prefactor f(v/c). When the
observer in S0 makes the measurement, the observer notes the positions of
24
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the end of the rod at one instant in his or her frame, as shown in Fig. 2.9,
because the observer does not want the rod to move during the
measurement.
Consider the perspective of the observer in frame S on the measure-
ments. The observer’s rod of proper length [o is aligned along the direction
of Sʹ’s relative velocity v and there is a rod of length [0, as measured by the
observer in S0, moving to the right at velocity v. At t ¼ t0 ¼ 0, let the left
ends of the rods coincide as shown in Fig. 2.10A. At this moment the
Figure 2.9 Measuring the length of a moving rod of proper length l0 in frame S
0.
Figure 2.10 The measurements of the ends of the moving rod from the perspective of
frame S: the left end in (A) and the right end in (B).
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
25

observer in S notes that the clock on the right end of Sʹ’s rod reads
t0 ¼ [0v/c2 by the relativity of simultaneity formula. Later, the right ends
of the rods are seen to coincide in S, and the clock on that end of the
moving rod must read t0 ¼ 0, as shown in Fig. 2.10B, because the observer
in S0 is making the measurement at one time in his or her frame. Since
t0 ¼ [0v/c2 is the time on the right-hand clock in Fig. 2.10A and is t0 ¼ 0
in Fig. 2.10B, the time elapsed is [0v/c2, which is dilated to g[0v/c2 in frame
S. When the observer in S measures the length of the moving rod, he or she
measures a length f(v/c)[0 ¼ f 2(v/c)[o. So, the observer in S can measure the
length of the rod [o at rest in his or her frame by following Fig. 2.10: add
the length of the moving rod, f 2(v/c)[o, to the distance its right end moves,
(g[0v/c2)$v ¼ gf [ov2/c2. So,
f 2[o þ f g[oy2=c2 ¼ [o;
(2.13)
which determines f through a quadratic equation,
f 2 þ gy2=c2f  1 ¼ 0;
(2.14)
which has solutions
f ¼ 1=2

 y2g=c2 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
y4g2=c4 þ 4
p

(2.15)
and
which
can
be
simpliﬁed
using
g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
to
f ¼ 1=g ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
or f ¼ g. This last solution is negative and
unphysical. So, we have one physical solution,
f ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
;
(2.16)
and we have successfully rederived the Lorentz contraction formula,
[
0 ¼ f ðy=cÞ[o ¼ [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
.
(2.17)
In summary, we see the consistency of the Lorentz contraction formula,
[
0 ¼ [o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
; with time dilation and the relativity of simultaneity.
But this time we see how it works and why both observers in relative
motion can consistently say that they measure one another’s rods as
contracteddthey observe the ends of the moving rods at different times in
the rod’s rest frame.
26
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

PROBLEMS
2-1. A spaceship (frame S0) passes Earth (frame S) at velocity 0.6c. The two
frames synchronize their clocks at x ¼ x0 ¼ 0 to read t ¼ t0 ¼ 0 when
they pass one another (call this event 1). Ten minutes later, as
measured by Earth clocks, a light pulse is emitted toward the spaceship
(call this event 2). Later, the light pulse is detected on the spaceship
(call this event 3).
a. Is the time interval between events 1 and 2 a proper time interval
in the spaceship frame? In the Earth frame?
b. Is the time interval between events 2 and 3 a proper time interval
in the spaceship frame? In the Earth frame?
c. Is the time interval between events 1 and 3 a proper time interval
in the spaceship frame? In the Earth frame?
d. What is the time of event 2 as measured by the spaceship?
e. According to the spaceship, how far away is Earth when the light
pulse is emitted?
f. From your answers in parts (d) and (e), what does the spaceship
clock read when the light arrives?
g. Find the time of event 3 according to Earth’s clock by analyzing
everything from Earth’s perspective.
h. Are your answers to parts (f) and (g) consistent with your conclu-
sions from parts (a), (b), and (c)?
2-2. Rockets A and B, each having a proper length 100 m, pass each other
moving in opposite directions. According to clocks on rocket A, the
front end of rocket B takes 1.5$106 s to pass the entire length of A.
a. What is the relative velocity of the rockets?
b. According to clocks on rocket B, how long does the front end of
A take to pass the entire length of rocket B?
c. According to clocks on rocket B, how much time passes between
the time when the front end of A passes the front end of B and the
time when the rear end of A passes the front end of B? Does this
time interval agree with your answer to part (b)? Should it?
2-3. Short-lived particles are produced in high-energy collisions at acceler-
ator centers such as Fermilab in Batavia, Illinois. The study of such
particles teaches us about the fundamental building blocks of matter,
how nuclei in atoms such as uranium ﬁssion and produce energy, how
the universe evolved from its origin as a big bang, and so on.
One particularly important particle that is produced copiously in
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
27

high-energy collisions between protons is the pion. It is the carrier of
the nuclear force and has been the subject of much research since the
1950s. Pions decay in their own rest frame according to
N

t
0
¼ No2t
0=T;
where T is the half-life, T z 1.8$108 s. Imagine that experimenters
create pulses of pions at Fermilab and observe that two-thirds of the
pions in a particular pulse reach a detector at a distance of 35 m from
the point where they were created. All the pions have the same
velocity.
a. What is the velocity of the pions?
b. What is the distance from the target to the detector in the rest
frame of the pions?
2-4. The distance from Planet X to a nearby star is 12 light-years (a light-
year is the distance light travels in 1 year as measured in the rest frame
of Planet X). The relative velocity between Planet X and the nearby
star is negligible.
a. How fast must a spaceship travel from Planet X to the star to reach
the star in 7 years according to a clock ﬁxed on the spaceship?
b. How long would the trip take according to a clock ﬁxed on
Planet X?
c. What is the distance from Planet X to the nearby star, according to
an astronaut on the spaceship?
2-5. A spaceship of proper length [o travels at a constant velocity v relative
to a frame S, as shown in Fig. 2.11. The nose of the ship (A0) passes
point A in frame S at time t ¼ t0 ¼ 0, when a light signal is sent from
A0 to B0, the tail of the spaceship.
a. When does the signal reach the tail, B0, according to spaceship
time t0?
b. At what time t1 in the frame S does the signal reach the tail B0?
c. At what time t2 in the frame S does the tail of the spaceship, B0,
pass point A?
Figure 2.11 A rocket ship travels at velocity v with respect to frame S.
28
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

2-6. A ﬂash of light is emitted at position x1 and is absorbed at position
x2 ¼ x1 þ [. In a reference frame moving with velocity v along the
x axis:
a. What is the spatial separation [0 between the point of emission and
the point of absorption?
b. How much time elapses between the emission and absorption of
the light?
2-7. At 1:00, a spaceship passes Earth with a velocity 0.8c. Observers on the
ship and on Earth synchronize their clocks at that moment. Just to
make this exercise interesting, answer each question from both the
viewpoint of Earth and the spaceship.
a. At 1:30, as recorded in the spaceship’s frame, the ship passes
another space probe that is ﬁxed relative to Earth and whose
clocks are synchronized with respect to Earth. What time is it ac-
cording to the space probe’s clock?
b. How far from Earth is the probe, as measured by Earth’s
coordinates?
c. At 1:30, spaceship time, the ship sends a light signal back to Earth.
When does Earth receive the signal by Earth time?
d. Earth sends another light signal immediately back to the spaceship.
When does the spaceship receive that signal according to spaceship
time?
2-8.
a. Two particles move along the x axis at velocities 0.8c and 0.9c,
respectively. The faster one is 1 m behind the slower 1 at t ¼ 0.
How many seconds elapse before they collide?
b. A rod of proper length 0.10 m moves longitudinally along the x
axis of frame S at speed 0.50c. How long in frame S does it take
a particle moving oppositely at the same speed to pass the rod?
REFERENCE
[1] N.D. Mermin, Space Time in Special Relativity, Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, IL,
1968.
SpaceeTime Measurements According to Einstein
29

CHAPTER 3
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski
Diagrams and the Twins
Contents
3.1 Space and Time Axes for Inertial Frames and the Constancy of the Speed of
Light
31
3.2 Visualizing the Relativity of Simultaneity, Time Dilation, and Lorentz Contraction
37
3.3 The Doppler Effect
42
3.4 The Twin Paradox
44
3.5 Einstein Meets ShakespearedRelativistic History
50
3.6 Reality, Horse Racing, and the Speed Limit
50
Problems
51
References
54
3.1 SPACE AND TIME AXES FOR INERTIAL FRAMES AND
THE CONSTANCY OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT
The effects discussed in Chapter 2 follow from the two postulates of rel-
ativity. The constancy of the speed limit played a central role in them, and,
thinking back, we could argue that the qualitative nature of time dilation,
Lorentz contraction, and the relativity of simultaneity followed. All this can
be done visually using Minkowski diagrams. These pictures of time and
position measurements date to the earliest days of relativity. The relativity
of simultaneity follows from these diagrams particularly simply, and some of
our quantitative results can be obtained anew with less (!) effort.
To begin, set up a space axis x and a time axis t. The transverse di-
rections y and z will be omitted. We choose to display the time t on a clock
at rest in frame S as an axis perpendicular to the x axis, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
Note that we plot ct on the vertical axis, so both axes have units of length.
The depiction of light rays is particularly convenient if we do this. It will
prove convenient, especially when we discuss the Doppler shift and the
twin paradox, to use light-years as the units along the ct axis. A light-year is
the distance light travels in 1 year. For example, if ct ¼ 5 light-years, then t
is simply 5 years.
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00003-9
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
31

Now consider the synchronization of two clocks at rest in this frame,
one at point A and the second at point C. We emit light from point B
midway between A and C. The light is recorded on the clocks at events A1
and C1, as shown in Fig. 3.2.
What do the lines in Fig. 3.2 mean? The vertical line AA1 indicates that
the clock A is at rest in this frame. The fact that the dashed line A1C1 is
horizontal indicates that events A1 and C1 are simultaneous in this frame.
Note that the two light rays, x ¼ xB  ct, are drawn at 45 degrees inclined
to the x axisdincluding the factor c in the time axis produces this handy
result. In fact, if we shot off a light ray from the origin of the frame to the
right, x ¼ ct, then its path, called a world line, appears as shown in Fig. 3.3.
Figure 3.1 Space and time axes.
Figure 3.2 Synchronizing two clocks in the frame S.
32
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Minkowski diagrams really become useful when we visualize spacee
time measurements made in two inertial frames, S and S0, in relative mo-
tion. The ctex axes are laid down. How shall the ct0ex0 axes be put on the
same ﬁgure in a way that is consistent with the postulates of relativity? The
ct0 axis is the path (world line) in the ctex graph of the origin x0 ¼ 0 of
the S0 frame. But, any point at rest in S0 moves to the right in frame S with
velocity v, so x0 ¼ 0 corresponds to x ¼ vt. So, the ct0 axis is inclined at an
angle q, tan q ¼ v/c, to the ct axis as shown in Fig. 3.4 (no surprises, so far).
Figure 3.3 The path of a light ray plotted on the space and time axes in frame S.
Figure 3.4 Adding the time axis of frame S0 into Fig. 3.3.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
33

However, now we need to put the x0 axis into Fig. 3.4. We have put
the world line of a light ray in the ﬁgure because the second postulate of
relativity, that light travels at the speed limit in any inertial frame, guides us.
The light ray bisects the angle between the ct and x axes to guarantee that its
velocity is measured as c, x ¼ ct. But, it must also bisect the angle between ct0
and the x0 axis so that its velocity is also c in this frame! Thus, the x0 axis
must be tilted at an angle q, tan q ¼ v/c, above the x axis as shown in
Fig. 3.5.
Because the central results of relativity, time dilation, Lorentz
contraction, and the relativity of simultaneity, follow simply from this
result, Fig. 3.5, let us discuss it in more detail. Note that the ct0ex0 coor-
dinate system is not orthogonal. The ctex and the ct0ex0 coordinate systems
are not related to one another by a rotation. How do we read off the
coordinates of a spaceetime event in a coordinate system with non-
orthogonal axes? Lines of constant ct0 are parallel to the x0 axis and lines of
constant x0 are parallel to the ct0 axis. So, the event P has the coordinate ct
0
p
and x
0
p; as shown in Fig. 3.6.
Recall that we drew the ct and x axes orthogonally. This was convenient
and familiar, but the ct0ex0 coordinate system shows that we must learn to
use nonorthogonal systems. If the relative velocity is negative, so that S0 is
moving to the left in frame S, then Fig. 3.6 becomes Fig. 3.7. Lines of
constant ct0, indicating a line of events that are simultaneous in frame S0, are
Figure 3.5 Adding the space axis of frame S0 into Fig. 3.3.
34
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Figure 3.6 Labeling a point P in nonorthogonal coordinates, ct0  x0.
Figure 3.7 Spaceetime coordinates for frames S and S0 if S0 moves to the left relative
to frame S.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
35

parallel to the x0 axis, which has t0 ¼ 0. The line PQ is a line of constant t0.
Finally, the line PR is a line of constant x0 and so is parallel to the t0 axis.
Fig. 3.5 is so central to relativity that we should derive it in yet another
way. The x0 axis was drawn so that the frame S0 measures the same speed
limit c as does frame S. The x0 axis consists of events that are simultaneous in
frame S0, events with t0 ¼ 0. Because this axis is tilted with respect to the x
axis, events that are simultaneous in one frame are not simultaneous in the
other. We know this from considerations in Chapter 2, but Minkowski
diagrams bring that fact to the forefront.
We could also have found the x0 axis by boosting the clocks A and C
and the signal generator B into the S0 frame, giving them a common ve-
locity v with respect to the S frame. Then the world lines of the clocks
would tilt to the right by an angle q, tan q ¼ v/c (Fig. 3.8). We have ar-
ranged the ctex world lines so that the signal generator passes x ¼ 0 at
t ¼ 0. The world lines of A, B, and C have a common tilt of q because they
all have a common velocity v with respect to frame S. The dashed line in
Fig. 3.8 denotes the light rays that are tilted by 45 degrees, one to the right
and one to the left, off the t axis. The intersection of the light rays with the
world lines of the clocks synchronizes them in the moving framedthe
signal generator lies halfway between the clocks, and all light rays travel at
velocity c with respect to the moving objects, so light reaches the clocks
simultaneously in the moving frame. So we have drawn the line
t0 ¼ constant accordingly in Fig. 3.8. It is clearly tilted with respect to the
Figure 3.8 Synchronization of two clocks at rest in frame S0 from the perspective of
frame S.
36
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

x axis. In fact, the time it takes light to reach clock C is ctc ¼ [0 þ vtc, and
the time it takes light to reach clock A is ctA ¼ [0  vtA. Here [0 is the
distance, measured in frame S, between the signal generator and one of the
clocks. The slope of the t0 axis is then
Slope ¼ ðctc  ctAÞ=ðctc þ ctAÞ.
(3.1)
Substituting ctc ¼ [0 þ vtc and ctA ¼ [0  vtA into the numerator of Eq.
(3.1) shows that the slope is v/c. This simply conﬁrms that the x0 axis, a line
of constant t0 along which the moving clocks are synchronized, is tilted at
the same angle above the x axis as the ct0 axis is tilted below the ct axis. The
constancy of the speed limit forces this result on us any way we choose to
look at it. Note that [0 cancels out of these considerationsdall we need to
know is that the signal generator lies halfway between the clocks.
3.2 VISUALIZING THE RELATIVITY OF SIMULTANEITY,
TIME DILATION, AND LORENTZ CONTRACTION
Let us use Minkowski diagrams to understand the three basic relativistic
phenomena we have been discussing. The Minkowski diagram, because it
shows both the ctex and ct0ex0 axes, will allow us to view all the phe-
nomena from both points of view and see how paradoxes are avoided.
First, consider the relativity of simultaneity. In Fig. 3.9 we show two
clocks at rest in frame S and separated by a proper distance [o. We show the
Figure 3.9 Illustration of the relativity of simultaneity: clocks synchronized in frame S
are not synchronized in frame S0.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
37

two clocks at t ¼ 0 and at some later time t. We also show the x0 axis, points
of constant t0, for the frame S0 moving with velocity v, tan q ¼ v/c. We see
instantly that the clocks at rest in frame S are not synchronized in frame S0 if
they are separated in the direction x. We also see that clock 1 is behind
clock 2 when viewed in frame S0. This conﬁrms the result of Chapter 2, but
in a totally transparent fashion. In fact, it is trivial to calculate the basic
formula of the relativity of simultaneity from the geometry of Fig. 3.9. We
see in the ﬁgure that the distance d ¼ [o tan q ¼ [ov/c. Because d ¼ ct, we
have t ¼ [ov/c2, the time difference between clocks 1 and 2 in Fig. 3.9 at a
speciﬁed t0.
Even more interesting, we can now turn the tables and view clocks at
rest in frame S0 from the perspective of an observer at rest in frame S.
Consider the world line of two clocks at rest in S0 in Fig. 3.10. The clocks
on the x0 axis (t0 ¼ 0) are synchronized as shown. Therefore, when
compared at the same value of t, along the x axis as shown in the ﬁgure,
clock 2 is behind clock 1. The moving clock that is spatially ahead lags in
time. The quantitative effect can also be read off Fig. 3.10. By the law of
sines, we read off the triangle,
Figure 3.10 Illustration of the relativity of simultaneity: clocks synchronized in frame S0
are not synchronized in frame S.
38
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

d
[ ¼
sin q
sinðp=2 þ qÞ ¼ sin q
cos q ¼ tan q ¼ y
c .
(3.2)
Because d ¼ ct0, the time difference between the clocks in frame S0, we
again have t0 ¼ [v/c2, where [ is the distance between the clocks in their rest
frame S0.
Now turn to the visualization of Lorentz contraction using Minkowski
diagrams. First, however, we must settle on the units of length and times
used on the unprimed and primed axes in the diagram. The relation of
spaceetime measurements in frame S and frame S0 does not preserve angles,
as is evident from our Minkowski diagram pictures. It also does not preserve
lengths as we have seen in our discussions of time dilation and Lorentz
contraction. This means that the scale of lengths of the x0 and ct0 axes
relative to the x and ct axes is not unity. To see this, consider two frames
having relative velocity v and g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
. Consider a rod of unit
length at rest in the moving frame S0. By Lorentz contraction, we measure
this length if we observe a rod of length g in the frame S. We show this
situation in Fig. 3.11dthe rod at rest in frame S lies along OA, which has a
length g. The world lines of the ends of the rod are shown as the vertical
lines in the Minkowski diagram.
Figure 3.11 Setting the scales of relative lengths and times in a Minkowski diagram.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
39

Because OA ¼ g units of length in the S frame and because tan q ¼ v/c,
the segment AB ¼ vg

c. Therefore, the length OB, which is the length of
the rod as measured in the frame S0, is
OB ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
y2
c2g2 þ g2
r
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

1 þ y2
c2

g2
s
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

1 þ y2
c2

1  y2
c2

s
. (3.3)
But OB represents the length of a rod of unit length in the S0 frame. So,
in the Minkowski diagram there is a change of scale between the frames:
S0=S ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

1 þ y2
c2

1  y2
c2

s
:
(3.4)
This effect only occurs when we visualize lengths of two frames on a single
Minkowski diagram. It will show up in no other parts of our analysis, and
we need it just to draw our ﬁgures accurately.
To visualize Lorentz contraction, choose v/c ¼ 3/5, so the arithmetic
works out neatly and g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
is exactly g ¼ 5/4. The scale
factor is S0/S ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
34
p

4 z 1.46. So, if we consider a rod of unit length at
rest in the frame S0, we generate the Minkowski diagram in Fig. 3.12,
where the length of the rod of unit proper length is measured as having a
length Dx ¼ 1/g ¼ 1/(5/4) ¼ 0.8 in the frame S, by the Lorentz
contraction formula. Turning the tables, a rod of unit length at rest in the
frame S, whose ends sweep out the world lines x ¼ 0 and x ¼ 1.0, the
dashed line, is measured to have length 0.8 along the x0 axis. Again, we see
from Fig. 3.12 that each observer measures the length of a moving rod as
contracted by a factor of 1.25. The Minkowski diagram also shows that the
reason for this contraction is the fact that simultaneous measurements in one
frame are not simultaneous in a moving frame.
The visualization of time dilation is similar. Consider a clock at rest in
frame S and let frame S0 be moving to the right at relative velocity v/c ¼
3/5, so g ¼ 5/4 again. The t and t0 axes are shown in Fig. 3.13. We have
drawn the tick marks on the ct0 axis to scale, S0/S ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
34
p

4 z 1:46: At
ct ¼ 5 the observer at rest in frame S notes that the clock at rest in frame S0
reads ct0 ¼ 4 because the dashed horizontal line of ct ¼ 5 intercepts the ct0
axis at ct0 ¼ 4. This is time dilation, ct ¼ gct0, which reads 5 ¼ (5/4)$4. The
observer at rest in frame S states that the moving clock at rest in frame S0 is
running slowly by a factor of 1/g. Similarly, the observer at rest in frame S0
40
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

notes that where his clock reads ct0 ¼ 5 the clock in frame S reads ct ¼ 4
(follow the dash-dot line in Fig. 3.13).
In summary, both observers agree that moving clocks run slowly. There
is no contradiction in this statement because the two observers do not share
the same time axis.
Figure 3.12 Illustration of Lorentz contraction on a Minkowski diagram.
Figure 3.13 Illustration of time dilation on a Minkowski diagram.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
41

3.3 THE DOPPLER EFFECT
Everyone knows that a train whistle sounds higher when it is approaching
and lower when it is receding. A similar effect occurs in relativity when we
observe a traveling wave. We need the quantitative details of this effect for
light before we analyze the twin paradox. The Doppler effect is very
important in astronomy, so it is worth examining in some detail.
Suppose that there is a signal generator at rest in frame S0, which is
moving at velocity v with respect to frame S, and an observer at rest in
frame S sees the signal generator approaching her (Fig. 3.14). Let the wave
train consist of n cycles that the observer detects in the course of a time
interval Dt. Because light moves at velocity c with respect to frame S and
the signal generator approaches at velocity v, the length of the wave train,
nl, observed in frame S is
nl ¼ cDt  yDt;
(3.5)
where l is the wavelength of the light in frame S. As wavelength and
frequency are related by vl ¼ c, we can write Eq. (3.5) as
n ¼ nð1  y=cÞDt.
(3.6)
But we can also write n in terms of quantities observed in frame S0. The
source is at rest there and produces a frequency vo, say, over a time interval
Dt0, so another expression for n is
n ¼ noDt
0.
(3.7)
But Dt0 is the proper time interval for the signal generator, so Dt is given by
time dilation,
Dt ¼ gDt
0;
(3.8)
Figure 3.14 An observer at rest in frame S detects a light ray produced by a signal
generator moving to the left at velocity v.
42
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

and Eqs. (3.6)e(3.8) give
noDt=g ¼ nð1  y=cÞDt.
(3.9)
Solving for the frequency detected in frame S,
n ¼
n0
g

1  v
c
 ¼ n0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ v=c
1  v=c
s
ðapproachingÞ
(3.10)
So, the observer at rest in frame S measures the frequency of the light to be
higher due to the approaching motion of the source.
Clearly, if the source had been receding we would have v # v, in Eq.
(3.10),
n ¼ ne
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v=c
1 þ v=c
s
ðrecedingÞ
(3.11)
This effect is particularly important in astronomy where it produces the red
shift of distant receding starsdthe frequency of light coming from rapidly
receding stars is reduced, as described by Eq. (3.11).
Consider a numerical example we use later in a discussion of the twin
paradox. Let a source generate a light pulse once a year and suppose it
moves away from us at v/c ¼ 0.8. How long is the interval between the
pulses that we receive? Substituting into Eq. (3.11), we ﬁnd
n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  0:8
1 þ 0:8
r
no ¼ no
.
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
¼ no=3.
(3.12)
So, we receive one signal every 3 years. If the source were moving
toward us at v/c ¼ 0.8, then we would observe v ¼ 3vo; that is, we would
receive a signal every 4 months.
It will prove instructive to visualize the Doppler shift effect on a
Minkowski diagram. Let the source be at rest in frame S, and let the frame
S0 recede at v/c ¼ tan q ¼ 0.8. The Minkowski diagram is shown in
Fig. 3.15.
We have set the scale using S
0
S ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 þ y2=c2Þ=ð1  y2=c2Þ
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
41
p

3 z 2:13. We see in Fig. 3.15 that the clock at rest in frame S emits a
light pulse at ct ¼ 1, which is detected by the clock at rest in frame S0 at
ct0 ¼ 3. We were careful in the ﬁgure to set the relative scales of the time
axes when we drew the tick marks, and we were careful to draw the light
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
43

ray with slope 1. We will see that the Doppler shift gives us a convenient
way of monitoring the readings on clocks in relative motion. This will be
handy in our discussion of the twin paradox.
3.4 THE TWIN PARADOX
Probably the most famous paradox in all of science is the twin paradox. We
will resolve this paradox in several ways because it overthrows the notion of
Newtonian time so dramatically. We do so in the context of Minkowski
diagrams, although the algebra that could accompany the diagrams would
do as well.
The paradox is the following. Suppose there are two identical twins,
Mary and Maria. They have a terrible ﬁght and Maria rockets away at a
velocity of 80% of the speed of light, tan q ¼ v/c ¼ 4/5 for 5 years, as
measured by Mary, at rest in frame S. Then Maria has a change of heart.
She returns as quickly as she departed and throws herself into Mary’s arms as
Figure 3.15 An observer at rest in frame S0 detects a light beam produced annually in
frame S. The observer receives one signal every 3 years.
44
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Mary’s clock strikes a decade. They embrace and make up, but something is
not quite rightdMaria looks considerably younger than Mary. In fact,
Maria’s clock indicates that only 6 years has passed! Yes, indeed, Maria is
now 4 years younger than Mary. They are no longer identical twins!
Is this possible? Mary, who knows relativity, tries to understand the
result by noting that Maria had a relative velocity of v/c ¼ 0.8 throughout a
decade, so 10 years must be the time-dilated interval of the time passed on a
wristwatch attached to Maria. Because g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  0:82
p
¼ 5
.
3, time
dilation implies Dt ¼ gDt0 or 10 ¼ (5/3)$6, Mary feels that she understands
the time interval involved. But Maria, distraught at now being Mary’s
“younger” sister, contends that Mary was, from her perspective, racing
away at a relative velocity 0.8c and she should have aged more slowly! How
can both see one another’s clocks as running slowly and a paradoxical
situation not be found when their trips are over?
In light of our earlier discussions of time dilation, Lorentz contraction,
and the relativity of simultaneity, the reader, hopefully, is not as puzzled by
this apparent paradox as the uninitiated. Let us go through the Minkowski
diagram analysis of the trips and see that all works out. Yes, Maria ends up
4 years younger than Mary and has to live with thatdat least until the next
trip.
The trip is shown in Fig. 3.16. Mary and her clock reside at x ¼ 0 and
10 years click off. Maria dashes off at v/c ¼ 0.8 for 5 years according to
Figure 3.16 The spaceetime trips of the twins: Mary, who stays home, and Maria, who
travels out and back.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
45

Mary and then returns at v/c ¼ 0.8 for another 5 years. From Mary’s
perspective, Maria’s clock, her wristwatch, say, is running slowly, and
Dt ¼ gDt0 applies with g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  0:82
p
¼ 5
.
3; so
Maria ages 3 years during her outbound trip and 3 more years during her
inbound trip.
All of this seems clear, except the portion of Maria’s trip where she turns
around. At this point she experiences acceleration and her frame is no
longer inertial. There is a simple way to deal with this. We could consider
the outbound leg of the trip as made by one rocket with v/c ¼ 0.8 and the
inbound trip as made by another rocket with v/c ¼ 0.8. Let the inbound
and outbound rockets pass closely by one another at ct ¼ 5 and synchronize
their clocks. In this way we never have to consider acceleration, and our
analysis holds without compromise.
To get the full understanding we seek, we must consider the trip from
the perspective of Maria. She travels outbound for 3 years as measured on her
wristwatch. From Maria’s perspective, Mary is racing away at v/c ¼ 0.8.
Maria observes Mary’s clock running slowly and records that Mary ages
by an amount Dt0/g ¼ 3/(5/3) ¼ 9/5 ¼ 1.8 years. We see this in the
Minkowski diagram, as shown more explicitly in Fig. 3.17, where the line
AB of constant t0 is parallel to the x0 axis. So, Maria measures that Mary has
aged only 1.8 years throughout her outbound trip.
Now, something special happens at the point B where Maria turns back
toward her sisterdthe line of constant t0 tilts because we are jumping onto a
new inertial frame, one with v/c ¼ 0.8. This frame is shown in Fig. 3.18.
Thus, during the inbound portion of the trip, the lines of constant t0 are
parallel to the x0 axis in Fig. 3.18, which tilt by angle q below the x axis.
The lines of constant t0 are shown in Fig. 3.19 for both legs of the trip.
We see that the turnaround, where ct0 ¼ 3 light-years, corresponds to both
ct ¼ 1.8 light-years and ct ¼ 8.2 light-years. Then, when ct0 ¼ 4, ct ¼ 8.8
light-years, and when ct0 ¼ 5, ct ¼ 9.4 light-years. It is quite interesting that
Maria concludes that 8.2e1.8 ¼ 6.4 years pass on Mary’s clock during the
turnaround! (When we analyze the twin paradox in the context of general
relativity in Chapter 11, our focus will be the turnaround and its acceler-
ation.) Maria can now understand how 10 years pass on Mary’s clock, even
though Maria measures that Mary’s clock runs slower than her own!
Another perspective on this curious sequence of events is afforded by
the Doppler effect. This was ﬁrst illustrated by the mathematician C. G.
Darwin [1]. Mary and Maria can monitor one another’s clocks by agreeing
46
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

to send one another signals on their birthdays. So, Mary sends a greeting to
Maria on each of her 10 birthdays. This is shown in Fig. 3.20.
Mary sends a birthday greeting at ct ¼ 1 light-year, and Maria receives it
at the turnaround point ct0 ¼ 3 light-years, as shown. This agrees with the
Doppler formula v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1  v=cÞ=ð1 þ v=cÞ
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1  4=5Þ=ð1 þ 4=5Þ
p
¼
1

3: So, 3 years pass in Maria’s frame before she receives the birthday
greeting from Mary.
Figure 3.17 Mary’s aging from Maria’s perspective during her outbound trip.
Figure 3.18 The coordinates ct0  x0 of Maria’s rest frame during her inbound trip back
to Mary.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
47

Figure 3.19 The dash-dotted lines are lines of constant t0, Maria’s time, during the
outbound and inbound portions of her trip.
Figure 3.20 Mary sends 10 birthday greetings by light pulses (dashed lines) to Maria
during the round trip.
48
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Maria’s position is xm ¼ (4/5)ct during the outbound trip, and the light
ray sent by Mary on her ﬁrst birthday travels on x ¼ c(t  1). So, Maria
receives the signal at (4/5) t ¼ t  1 or t ¼ 5. Maria is now 4 light-years
from Earth and is about to turn around. The next eight light rays sent by
Mary and received by Maria are shown in the ﬁgure. Maria receives nine
signals during the second half of her journey (the inbound part) and just one
during the ﬁrst half. She receives 10 signals and knows that Mary ages
10 years while she ages only 6 years. The Doppler formula for the inbound
part
of
Maria’s
journey
reads
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 þ v=cÞ=ð1  v=cÞ
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 þ 4=5Þ=ð1  4=5Þ
p
¼ 3; so Maria receives three signals each year from
Mary for the duration of the inbound journey, 3 years on Maria’s wrist-
watch, accounting for nine signals.
Finally, we turn the tables again and suppose that Maria sends greetings
to Mary on each of her birthdays. This situation is shown in Fig. 3.21.
During the outbound trip, Maria sends three greetings and Mary receives
one every 3 years, at years 3, 6, and 9 on her clock. Then after the turn-
around, Maria sends three more greetings and Mary receives them every
4 months between years 9 and 10 on her wristwatch. Again, both Mary and
Maria agree that Mary has aged 10 years while Maria has aged 6.
Figure 3.21 Maria sends six birthday greetings by light pulses (dashed lines) to Mary
during the round trip.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
49

3.5 EINSTEIN MEETS SHAKESPEAREdRELATIVISTIC
HISTORY
The twin paradox illustrates how much of present culture and history is tied
to the Newtonian concept of absolute time. In a world where space travel
at relative speeds approaching the speed limit would be possible, everything
would be so different. For example, the ascendancy of the throne in the
days of the kings of England would have to be revised. The very idea that
the son of the king of England will later become the king who will have
another son who will then become king, and so on, is rooted in the notion
of absolute time. For example, say that Prince William was jealous of his
older brother Prince Harry because Prince William has little chance to rule
as king. Well, he could always take a relativistic journey akin to that taken
by Maria and time things so that on his return King Harry, who, we
suppose, is childless, is on his deathbed while he, Prince William, has aged
only a few years. Shortly, then, Prince William would become King
William and rule a long and glorious timedbarring other surprises!
3.6 REALITY, HORSE RACING, AND THE SPEED LIMIT
The fact that the speed of light is independent of the speed of its source is
quite hard to grasp intuitively. It emphasizes that we, humans, have our
intuitions rooted in the particulars of our existence on earth where massive
bodies typically have relative speeds, which are small compared with the
speed of light, and Newtonian kinematics seem adequate.
Because of this, it is worthwhile to demonstrate this fact that the speed
of light is independent of the speed of its source, using the principles of
relativity directly. Let us do this by considering a “horse race” where the
fastest horse, “Lightening,” can run arbitrarily close to c. Lightening runs a
race in the frame S where the track is at rest and beats his two competitors,
Georgie and Dickie, in that order. Track ofﬁcials have found that Georgie
and Dickie have a history of cheating, so they set up a camera at the ﬁnish
line, which takes pictures of each horse’s front paw as it touches the ﬁnish
line. There is also a clock at the ﬁnish line to record the time of the event in
frame S. The horses run the race and try as they may; Georgie and Dickie
ﬁnish in second and third place. Each horse is awarded a picture of their
ﬁnish showing the time and place so there can be no doubt.
Now let us observe the same race in a frame S0, which moves at a
velocity v with resect to S. Of course the results of the race are the same in
50
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

every frame, so any observer at rest in S0 ﬁnds that Lightening beats Georgie
who beats Dickie. The order of the three ﬁnishes does not depend on the
frame in which the race is viewed: the reality of the race does not depend
on how you view it. The pictures taken by the camera cannot lie and can
be passed from frame to frame.
All this is patently self-evident. But now realize that the same result
applies to any race: Lightening always wins because he runs arbitrarily close
to the speed limit c in the original frame S. Try as they may, Georgie and
Dickie cannot beat him. But this means that he, Lightening, must be
running arbitrarily close to c in any frame as he wins all possible races.
Returning to experiments with light, we learn that the principles of
relativity alone dictate that a beam of “light” travels at the speed limit c in all
frames if it does so in any particular frame. It does not matter how you
created the beam.
It will be interesting to see how these matters of principle work out
when we derive the generalization of the addition of velocities for Ein-
stein’s relativity. Somehow that formula must have the property that when
the speed of light is added to any ordinary velocity, the result will be just
the speed of light!
When stated this way, our little exercise at the track looks quite
perplexing indeed!
PROBLEMS
3-1. Two inertial coordinate systems S and S0 are moving with respect to
one another at a relative velocity c/2. Draw a Minkowski diagram
relating these two frames.
a. Calibrate the axes and mark a unit length along each following Eq.
(3.4).
b. Plot the events on the diagram: (1) ct ¼ 1, x ¼ 1; (2) ct ¼ 2, x ¼ 0;
(3) ct0 ¼ 1, x0 ¼ 1; and (4) ct0 ¼ 2, x0 ¼ 0.
c. Take each event in part (b) and determine from the Minkowski
diagram its coordinates in the other frame.
3-2. Radar trap! A policeman aims his stationary radar transmitter back-
ward along the highway toward oncoming trafﬁc. His radar detector
picks up the reﬂected waves and analyzes their frequencies. Suppose
that his transmitter generates waves at a frequency vo and detects
the waves reﬂected by an approaching speeding car at frequency vr.
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
51

a. Draw a Minkowski diagram showing the world lines of the sta-
tionary policeman, the approaching speeding car, and several
transmitted and reﬂected radar waves.
b. From the geometry of your Minkowski diagram, relate the time
between transmitted radar waves to the time between reﬂected
waves, as detected by the stationary policeman, and derive
vr ¼ [(1 þ v/c)/(1  v/c)]vo.
c. Use this result to derive the Doppler shift formula obtained in the
chapter above. Call the frequency that an observer in the speeding
car measures v0. Argue on the basis of the ﬁrst principle of relativity
that v0/vo ¼ vr/v0. Combine this result with part (b) to derive the
standard Doppler shift formula, v
0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 þ v=cÞ=ð1  v=cÞ
p
vo.
d. Suppose that the car’s speed is 100 mph and vo ¼ 1010 cps. Predict
vr approximately by linearizing the formula in part (b). (Because
100 mph is tiny compared with the speed of light, this approxi-
mate treatment is very good.) Can handheld radar equipment car-
ried by your local law enforcement department detect such a small
fractional frequency shift? [2].
3-3. Transverse (quadratic) Doppler shift. The Doppler shift we have dis-
cussed so far occurs when the transmitter and the detector of the
waves are heading directly toward or away from one another. It might
happen, however, that the transmitter and the detector approach one
another at an angle q as shown in Fig. 3.22. The ﬁgure shows the
transmitter with a velocity v traveling past an observer with the dis-
tance of closest approach, labeled R. When q ¼ 90 degrees, we
have the transverse Doppler shift.
Figure 3.22 Set up of transmitter and observer O for the transverse Doppler effect.
52
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

a. Show that there is a Doppler shift in the case q ¼ 90 degrees,
which is given just by time dilation. Calling vo the frequency of
light in the rest frame of the transmitter and v0 the frequency of
light in the rest frame of the observer, at the origin in the ﬁgure,
derive v0 ¼ vo/g, where g ¼ 1

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1  v2=c2Þ
p
; as usual. Note that
for small v2/c2, v0 z (1  v2/2c2)vo and hence the name quadratic
Doppler shift.
b. Armed with the result of part (a) and the standard Doppler shift
formula for head-on motion, obtain the Doppler shift formula
for the general case shown in the ﬁgure, v0 ¼ vo/[g(1  (v/c) cos
q)]. (Hint: Resolve the relative motion between the transmitter
and the observer into radial motion, along the radius r shown in
the ﬁgure, and transverse motion.)
3-4. Two photons travel along the x axis of frame S with a constant dis-
tance d between them. Prove that in frame S0 the distance between
the photons is d
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 þ v=cÞ=ð1  v=cÞ
p
. (Hint: One approach is to
write the Doppler shift formula for the wavelength of light instead
of its frequency.)
3-5. When we resolved the twin paradox, we noted that from Maria’s
perspective, Mary ages 6.4 years as Maria jumps from the outgoing
to the incoming rocket. Obtain this numerical result from our relativ-
ity of simultaneity formula, vx/c2, by noting that v changes by 2v as
Maria jumps between the rockets. Choose v ¼ 0.8c.
3-6. Here is a relatively easy paradox based on an incomplete understand-
ing of time dilationdyour task is to resolve it.
Suppose that frame S0, a huge transport rocket, moves in the x
direction relative to frame S, a space station, at velocity v, as usual.
Suppose that there is an astronaut in the huge transport rocket,
who has a rocket-powered backpack and is traveling in the x
direction at speed v relative to the transport rocket. Therefore,
our astronaut is actually at rest with respect to the space station. A
critic of relativity might argue that time dilation states that clocks
at rest in the transport rocket run slowly compared with those at
rest in the space station, and the astronaut’s clock runs slowly
compared with those at rest in the transport rocket. Therefore, the
astronaut’s clock is predicted to run slow-squared compared with
those at rest in the space station! But the astronaut is actually at
rest in the space station, so we have an apparent contradiction!
Visualizing RelativitydMinkowski Diagrams and the Twins
53

What’s wrong with this argument? Clarify it with a Minkowski
diagram showing the three relevant time axes and spatial axes of
the three frames involved.
3-7. Consider Problem 2.1 once more. Diagram the events and world lines
of that problem in a Minkowski diagram. Establish the scales on the
time and spatial axes so you can make quantitative predictions from
the Minkowski diagram itself in either frame. Answer Problem
2.1(a)e(h) directly from your Minkowski diagram.
3-8. The wavelength of a spectral line measured to be l on earth is found
to increase by 50% on a far distant galaxy. What is the speed of the
galaxy relative to the earth?
REFERENCES
[1] C.G. Darwin, The clock paradox in relativity, Nature 180 (1957) 976.
[2] T.M. Kalotas, A.R. Lee, Am. J. Phys. 58 (1990) 187.
54
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 4
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts),
Addition of Velocities, and
Invariant Intervals
Contents
4.1 Lorentz Transformation (Boosts)
55
4.1.1 Time Dilation
57
4.1.2 Lorentz Contraction
57
4.1.3 Relativity of Simultaneity
58
4.2 Relativistic Velocity Addition
59
4.3 Causality, Light Cones, and Proper Time
61
Problems
65
References
70
4.1 LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION (BOOSTS)
Now that we understand how relativity works, let us derive the general-
ization of the Galilean transformation relating the time and position of an
event measured in one inertial frame to those measurements in another
inertial frame. Recall the Galilean result. We have a frame S0 moving along
the x axis of frame S at velocity v. Then if a point x0 is observed at time t0 in
frame S0, an observer in frame S would assign the values
x ¼ x0 þ yt
(4.1a)
t ¼ t0
(4.1b)
to the point, assuming that the origins of the two frames, x ¼ x0 ¼ 0,
coincided at t ¼ t0 ¼ 0.
In relativity, Eqs. (4.1a) and (4.1b) are replaced by the Minkowski
diagram shown in Fig. 4.1. Instead of the picture, we want explicit formulas
for x and t, given x0 and t0 for an event in Fig. 4.1. Armed with our
knowledge of Lorentz contraction, time dilation, and the relativity of
simultaneity, this is a snap.
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00004-0
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
55

Consider the relativistic generalization of Eq. (4.1a) in Fig. 4.2. Galileo
states that the distance vt and x0 add up to x. However, because x0 is
measured in frame S0, Lorentz contraction shrinks it to x0/g when observed
in frame S. So, Eq. (4.1a) is replaced by
x ¼ x0=g þ yt;
Figure 4.1 Minkowski diagram showing the spaceetime coordinates of inertial frames
S and S0 in relative motion.
Figure 4.2 Spaceetime visualization of the x  x0 transformation law.
56
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which can be solved for x0,
x0 ¼ gðx  ytÞ.
(4.2a)
This tells us how the x0 axis in the Minkowski diagram Fig. 4.1 is related to
the x and ct axes there.
Next we need the generalization of Eq. (4.1b). In other words, we
need to know how the ct0 axis in the Minkowski diagram Fig. 4.1 is related
to the ct and x axes there. But this relation must have the same form as
Eq. (4.2a), in order that both frames S and S0 observe the same speed
of light. In other words, take Eq. (4.2a) and replace x0 with ct0, x with ct
and t with x/c. So,
ct0 ¼ gðct  yx=cÞ
or
t0 ¼ gðt  yx=c2Þ.
(4.2b)
Once more with emphasisdthe central idea in this derivation is the con-
stancy of the speed of lightdonce we know how x0 is related to x and t, t0
must be related to x and t so that both frames measure the identical speed of
light, as expressed pictorially in the Minkowski diagram.
Eqs. (4.2a) and (4.2b) constitute the Lorentz transformations, often
called “boosts.” It is a central result of special relativity. It incorporates all
we know about time dilation, Lorentz contraction, and the relativity of
simultaneity. To see how the formulas work, let us obtain our three basic
results by taking special cases of Eqs. (4.2a) and (4.2b).
4.1.1 Time Dilation
Consider two times t2 and t1 that occur on a clock at rest in frame S. From
Eq. (4.2b) an observer in S0 would measure the time interval
t2
0  t1
0 ¼ g
h
t2  t1  y
c2 ðx2  x1Þ
i
¼ gðt2  t1Þ;
where we used the fact that the clock is at rest in frame S, so x2 ¼ x1. This is
our usual time dilation formula because t2  t1 ¼ Ds, the proper time
interval.
4.1.2 Lorentz Contraction
Consider a rod at rest in frame S0 extending from x10 to x20. Its length is
measured in frame S by noting the corresponding x1 and x2 at a given time
t2 ¼ t1. Eq. (4.2a) predicts
x2
0  x1
0 ¼ gðx2  x1Þ.
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
57

Because x20  x10 ¼ [o is the proper length of the rod, we have Lorentz
contraction, Dx ¼ [o/g.
4.1.3 Relativity of Simultaneity
Consider ﬁve clocks at rest and synchronized in frame S [1]. Let each clock
be separated from its neighbor by [o (Fig. 4.3). Now measure the time of
each clock in frame S0, as shown in the Minkowski diagram (Fig. 4.4). We
observe the times on each clock at a given single time t 0 in frame S0, as
shown in the diagram. Let us apply Eq. (4.2b) and note that clock C at
x ¼ 0 gives the value of t0 directly, t0 ¼ gtc. So,
gtc ¼ g

t  y
c2 x

;
which we solve for t,
tðxÞ ¼ tc þ y
c2 x
t0 ¼ constant.
(4.3)
Figure 4.3 Five clocks at rest in frame S each separated in the x direction by a proper
distance l0.
Figure 4.4 The ﬁve clocks of Fig. 4.3 as perceived in frame S0 at a given time t0.
58
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This result expresses the relativity of simultaneity effectdthe clocks that are
moving in frame S are not synchronized, with the leading clock A behind
the trailing clock E by an amount vDx/c2.
The Lorentz transformation formulas are easy to apply, but they
frequently do not elucidate as much as more elementary but logically
challenging arguments as presented in Chapter 2.
4.2 RELATIVISTIC VELOCITY ADDITION
One of the hallmarks of Newtonian physics is the “obvious” fact that
velocities add. Consider the Galilean transformation Eq. (4.1a) and let the
particle move at velocity yp0 relative to frame S0. What then is its velocity,
vp ¼ x/t, with respect to frame S? Substituting into Eq. (4.1a) we have
ypt ¼ yp
0t0 þ yt.
Using the absolute nature of Newtonian time, t ¼ t0, we see that
yp ¼ yp
0 þ y.
(4.4)
This result is used in day-to-day physics problems and serves us well as
long as all the velocities are small compared to the speed limit c. It is clearly
inconsistent with special relativity because it does not respect the existence
of a speed limitdby adding velocities linearly we can generate a velocity for
a physical particle as high as we like.
We need to know what replaces Eq. (4.4) in special relativity. To
answer this, we go back to the Lorentz transformations, Eqs. (4.2a) and
(4.2b) and substitute in x0 ¼ yp0 t0 and x ¼ vpt to describe a particle in
uniform motion. Now Eq. (4.2a) becomes
yp
0t0 ¼ gðypt  ytÞ ¼ gðyp  yÞt.
(4.5a)
Eq. (4.2b) becomes, upon substituting, x ¼ vpt,
t0 ¼ g

t  y
c2 ypt

¼ g

1  yyp
c2

t.
(4.5b)
where the second term expresses the relativity of simultaneity effect.
Substituting back into Eq. (4.5a), we have
yp
0 ¼
yp  y
1  yyp=c2 .
(4.5c)
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
59

We can also solve Eq. (4.5c) for vp,
yp ¼
yp0 þ y
1 þ yyp0
c2 .
(4.5d)
Note that this result is nonlinear in v and yp0 in just the right way to
enforce the speed limit! For example, let the particle move at the speed
limit in frame S0, yp0 ¼ c. Then,
yp ¼
c þ y
1 þ yc=c2 ¼ c$c þ y
c þ y ¼ c:
In other words, light has velocity c with respect to both frames S and S0
even though they are in relative motion! This result was built into our
formalism by the second postulate of relativity, but it is still interesting to
see how it is enforced. The reader should check the even more peculiar case
of letting yp0 ¼ c in Eq. (4.5d). Again we ﬁnd vp ¼ c for all v, no matter
how large!
This derivation also suggests that although transverse distances y and z
are uneffected by the boost between frames S and S0,
y0 ¼ y
z0 ¼ z;
it is not true that transverse velocities are the same in both frames. Let the
particle again have a velocity of vp in the x direction in frame S but let it also
have a y component of velocity, y ¼ upt. In the frame S0 we have y0 ¼ up0t0,
and up0 can be computed using Eq. (4.5b),
up
0 ¼ y0
t0 ¼ y
t0 ¼ upt
t0 ¼
up
gð1  yyp=c2Þ .
(4.6)
This complicated formula involves both the velocities in the x direction, v
and vp, and those in the y direction, up and u0p. We will need Eq. (4.6) later
when we discuss dynamics and relativistic momentum.
In summary, it is interesting to revisit Eq. (4.5d) and reiterate the
source of the crucial nonlinearity, the denominator, 1 þ vvp/c2. Which of
the three effects, Lorentz contraction, time dilation, or the relativity of
simultaneity, is responsible here? The g factors in Eqs. (4.5a) and (4.5b)
cancel out of (4.5c), so Lorentz contraction and time dilation are not the
culprits here. Inspecting Eq. (4.5b), we see the relativity of simultaneity at
workdthe fact that a moving clock that is attached to the particle is
60
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

increasing its x0 coordinate as v
0
pt
0, produces the nonlinearity that makes
the speed of light truly universal.
4.3 CAUSALITY, LIGHT CONES, AND PROPER TIME
When observers measure physical phenomena, such as the position and
time of events, they record spaceetime coordinates whose values depend
on their coordinate systems. Some quantities are the same in all reference
frames and they are particularly useful and signiﬁcant. The speed of light is
such an invariantdit is measured to be the speed limit, 3.0$1010 cm/s, in all
inertial frames. The proper times of clocks and proper lengths of rods are
also invariants. This last remark might sound trivialdto measure the proper
time of a clock, we must boost ourselves to the rest frame of the clock of
interest and note a proper time interval. Similarly, for a proper length of a
rod. The term “proper” indicates exactly how the measurement is to be
done.
All this would be more interesting if we could infer the proper time
interval passing on a clock by making measurements in another inertial
frame. Suppose the clock is at rest in frame S and a proper time Ds passes.
In another inertial frame S0, a time interval Dt0 will pass while the clock
moves a distance Dx0 ¼ vDt0. Dt0 is related to Ds by time dilation:
Dt
0 ¼ Ds

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
. However, we would like to have a relation
between Ds, Dt0, and Dx0 so we can calculate Ds from Dt0 and Dx0 without
knowing v. This would be an expression of the invariance of Ds.
This problem is analogous to a familiar one in Euclidean geometry. We
consider a rotation by angle q between two frames (Fig. 4.5). In the frame
O, the point P has coordinates (x, y) and in O0 it has coordinates (x0, y0).
They are related by a rotation,
x0 ¼ x cos q þ y sin q
y0 ¼ y cos q  x sin q:
So, (x, y) is related to (x0, y0) by a linear transformation. We want to know
what quantities are the same in both frames O and O0. In other words, what
quantities are preserved by rotation? Intrinsic geometrical relations are
preserved, such as the angles between vectors and the lengths of vectors. For
example, the distance P from the origin is independent of the choice of
coordinates,
x2 þ y2 ¼ x
02 þ y
02.
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
61

This relation is independent of qdit is true for any two frames related by
rotation.
What is the analogous result for Lorentz transformations? These trans-
formations, as is clear from Minkowski’s diagrams, do not preserve angles or
Euclidean
distances.
So,
c2(Dt0)2 þ (Dx0)2
will
not
work.
Using
Dt
0 ¼ Ds

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
and Dx
0 ¼ yDt
0 ¼ yDs

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
; we can
calculate c2(Dt0)2 þ (Dx0)2 and check that it is not an invariant. But in so
doing, we note that a change of sign does the trick:
c2
Dt
02 

Dx
02 ¼ ðDsÞ2
c2
1  y2=c2  ðDsÞ2
y2
1  y2=c2 ¼ c2ðDsÞ2.
We learn from this that we can tell time in frame S by using
measurements in another inertial frame S0,
cDs ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðcDt
0Þ2  ðDx
0Þ2
q
.
(4.7)
We also learn that (cDt)2  (Dx)2 is an invariant (i.e., it is the same in all
inertial frames), and so is called a “Lorentz invariant.”
Figure 4.5 A rotation in two-dimensional Euclidean geometry.
62
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This analysis also applies to the proper length of a rod, l0. Let the rod
be at rest in the frame S and orient the rod so that one end lies at x ¼ 0
and the other is at x ¼ l0, so Dx ¼ l0 and Dt ¼ 0. In the frame S0, Dx0 ¼ gl0
and Dt0 ¼ gvDx/c2 ¼ gvl0/c2. Therefore the invariant interval is,
c2
Dt
02 

Dx
02 ¼ g2v2l2
0

c2  g2l2
0 ¼ g2l2
0ðv2=c2  1Þ ¼ l2
0
which shows the invariant interval also allows us to measure proper
distances without knowledge of v, the speed between the inertial frames.
These results are more general than our discussion so far. Take two
events, one at P1 ¼ (ct1, x1, y1, z1) and the second at P2 ¼ (ct2, x2, y2, z2).
Then deﬁning the differences cDt ¼ ct2  ct1, and so on, we can check using
the Lorentz transformation formulas Eqs. (4.2a) and (4.2b) that
ðDsÞ2hðcDtÞ2  ðDxÞ2  ðDyÞ2  ðDzÞ2
is the same in all other frames. Unlike the invariant distance of Euclidean
space, x2 þ y2 þ z2, this invariant interval can be either positive, negative,
or zero.
Let us illustrate these three possibilities and choose P1 ¼ (0, 0, 0, 0) and
P2 ¼ (ct, x, 0, 0) for easy visualization. Clearly if P1 and P2 are connected by
a light ray,
ðDsÞ2 ¼ 0
ðlight  likeÞ.
The fact that (Ds)2 ¼ 0 in all inertial frames means that if light travels at the
speed limit c in one frame, then it does so in all. This follows from writing
out (Ds)2 ¼ 0 in frames S and S0,
ðDsÞ2 ¼ ðcDtÞ2  ðDxÞ2 ¼ ðcDt0Þ2  ðDx0Þ2 ¼ 0
(4.8)
where we took the x direction as the direction of light propagation.
Eq. (4.8) states that if Dx ¼ cDt, then Dx0 ¼ ct0.
The light ray (Ds)2 ¼ 0 separates our spaceetime plot into a region I
where (Ds)2 > 0 and a region II where (Ds)2 < 0 (Fig. 4.6). For P2 in region
I, we can boost to a frame where P1 and P2 occur at the same x0. In other
words, the two events could be the ticks on a clock at rest in a frame S0. In
that frame, Dx0 ¼ 0 and Dt0 is just the proper time Ds. Similarly, if P2 lies in
region II, we can boost to a frame S0 where P1 and P2 occur simultaneously,
Dt0 ¼ 0, so  (Ds)2 then represents the proper length squared of a rod
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
63

extending from P1 to P2. It is conventional to label region I time-like
because (Ds)2 > 0 and to label region II space-like because (Ds)2 < 0.
Another important invariant distinction between regions I and II
involves causality. If the event P2 lies in region I for t > 0, one can ﬁnd a
frame S0 where it occurs at the same x0 as P1 but at a later time t0. Clearly
then, an action at P1 could cause a result at P2. We say that the spaceetime
points P1 and P2 are causally connected and that P2 lies in P1’s “forward
light cone.” Similarly, if P2 lies in the region I for t < 0, then an action at
P2 could cause a result at P1 and the points are again causally connected.
However, if P2 lies in region II, one can ﬁnd a physical frame S0 where P1
and P2 are simultaneous. There is no way for them to communicate
without inventing a signal that violates the speed limit c, and so they are
not causally connected. In fact, we can also ﬁnd a frame S00 where P2
occurs before P1, as shown in Fig. 4.7. Spaceetime points separated by a
negative interval (Ds)2 do not have a unique time ordering and cannot
inﬂuence one another. The region II is sometimes called “elsewhere”
because of this.
We return to some of these notions when we discuss dynamics, a topic
in which causality plays a particularly important role.
Figure 4.6 A spaceetime diagram showing regions causally connected to the origin
(I) and those not (II).
64
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

PROBLEMS
4-1. Two events occur at the same place in the frame S and are separated
by a time interval of 5 s. What is the spatial separation between these
two events in frame S0 in which the events are separated by a time
interval of 7 s? Frame S0 moves at a constant velocity along the x
direction of frame S.
4-2. Two events occur at the same time in the frame S and are separated
by a distance of 2 km along the x axis. What is the time difference
between these two events in frame S0 in which their spatial separa-
tion is 4 km? Frame S0 moves at a constant velocity along the x
direction of frame S.
4-3. An event occurs at x0 ¼ 100 m, t0 ¼ 9$108 in frame S0. If this frame
moves with velocity 4c/5 along the x axis of frame S, what are the
spaceetime coordinates of the event in frame S?
4-4. The space and time coordinates of two events are measured in frame
S to be
Event 1: x1 ¼ L, t1 ¼ L/c
Event 2: x2 ¼ 2L, t2 ¼ L/2c
Figure 4.7 Spaceetime events P1 and P2 lie in region II and have different time
orderings in different frames.
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
65

a. Find the velocity of a frame S0 in which both events occur at the
same time.
b. What is the time t0 that both events occur in S0?
4-5. Frame S0 has a speed of 0.8c relative to S.
a. An event occurs at t ¼ 5$107 s and x ¼ 100 m in frame S.
Where and when does it occur in S0?
b. If another event occurs at t ¼ 7$107 s and x ¼ 50 m, what is the
time interval between the events in frame S0?
4-6. In parts (b) and (c) of this problem, we measure the times and loca-
tions of events by looking at them. In other words, instead of
recording locations and times by being at the event, the event will
send us a light signal that takes some additional time to propagate
to us. This extra time must be taken into account accordingly.
Astronomical data are of this type. For example, we see the Sun
approximately 8 min in its past.
Suppose a meter stick, aligned along the x direction, moves with
velocity 0.8c and its midpoint passes through the origin at t ¼ 0. Let
there be an observer at x ¼ 0, y ¼ 1 m, z ¼ 0.
a. Where in the observer’s frame are the end points of the meter
stick at t ¼ 0?
b. When does the observer see the midpoint pass through the
origin?
c. Where do the end points appear to be at this time, as seen by the
observer?
4-7. Frame S0 has velocity 0.6c relative to frame S. At t0 ¼ 107 s, a par-
ticle leaves the point x0 ¼ 12 m, traveling in the negative x0 direction
with a velocity u0 ¼ c/3. It is brought to rest suddenly at time
t0 ¼ 3$107 s.
a. What was the velocity of the particle as measured in the frame S?
b. How far did it travel as measured in the frame S?
4-8. Frame S0 has velocity v relative to frame S. At time t ¼ 0, a light ray
leaves the origin of S, traveling at a 45 degrees angle with the x axis.
a. What angle does the light ray make with respect to the x0 axis in
the frame S0?
b. Repeat part (a) replacing the light ray with a particle of mass m
and speed u.
c. Repeat part (a) replacing the light ray with a rod that is stationary
in frame S.
66
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

4-9. The Fizeau Experiment. Light propagates more slowly through a
material medium than through a vacuum. If vm is the speed of light
in a medium and the medium is moving with respect to the frame S
at the velocity v, ﬁnd an expression for the velocity of light in the
frame S, assuming that the light ray propagates in the same direction
as v. Show that when v is much smaller than c, this general expression
reduces to vm þ v

1  v2
m

c2
, to leading order in v. (This expression
was tested by H. Fizeau in the mid-19th century using interferom-
etry techniques.)
4-10. The Cerenkov Radiation. Although light travels at the speed limit in
empty space, its speed is diminished as it propagates through mate-
rials, as discussed in the Fizeau experiment. The process by which
light is slowed is complicateddthe waves scatter from the atoms
making up the material and a light wave can lose speed and coher-
ence in the process. We learn about these scattering processes in
quantum mechanics. Nonetheless, light may not even be the fastest
racer in a particular material. When a charged particle moves
through the material faster than the speed of light in that material,
it radiates coherent light in a cone that trails behind it, as shown
in Fig. 4.8. Note in the ﬁgure that the charged particle is shown
to radiate light at several points, and the resulting wave front of
Cerenkov radiation, the conical surface BC, is perpendicular to
the direction of propagation of the light rays.
Figure 4.8 Illustration of Cerenkov radiation.
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
67

a. Show that the half-angle of the cone of Cerenkov radiation, f, is
cos f ¼ vm/v, where vm is the speed of light in the material and v
is the speed of the charged particle. (In high energy physics and
cosmic ray experiments, Cerenkov radiation and this formula are
used to measure the speeds of exotic charged particles).
b. Compare this phenomenon to these well-known ones: When a
speed boat travels at high velocity over the water, it leaves a sharp
wake behind it; and when a jet plane travels faster than the speed
of sound, it makes a sonic boom.
4-11. Stellar Aberration. Imagine that Earth were at rest with respect to a
distant star and that an earthbound telescope had to be pointed at an
angle q above the horizon to view the star. Now suppose that there
is a relative velocity v between Earth and the star. The angle q would
change to q0.
a. Show that q0 is given by cos q0 ¼ (cos q þ v/c)/[1 þ (v/c) cos q].
b. If v/c is very small, show that the formula in part (a) reduces to
cos q0 z cos q þ (v/c) sin2 q.
c. Because the difference between q and q0 is very small under the
conditions of part (b), it is convenient to introduce the angle
a h q0  q. Show that part (b) reduces to the prediction
a z (v/c) sin q.
This result is called stellar aberration and is signiﬁcant in astro-
nomical observations. It is particularly important when we
compare the position of a star in the sky in winter to its position
in summer, because the velocity of Earth reverses relative to the
star every 6 months.
4-12. Use the velocity transformation formulas to derive the “particle
aberration formula,”
tan a
0 ¼
sin a
gðvÞðcos a  v=uÞ
where the particle moves in frame S with a velocity u making an
angle a with the x axis and the frame S0 moves in the x direction
with velocity v, as usual, and the angle a0 is the corresponding angle
in the frame S0.
4-13. Headlight Effect. Suppose that a car’s headlight sends out light rays
into a forward hemisphere. Use the result of Problem 4.11a to
deduce that the maximum angle of the light with respect to the
68
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

line of motion of the car is cos q0 ¼ v/c in the rest frame of the road.
Explain. (This result is called the headlight effect.)
4-14. A frame S0 moves along the x axis of frame S at a velocity v. A par-
ticle moves with a velocity vx0 ¼ 0 and vy0s0 in the S0 frame. (a)
What are vx, and vy in the frame S? (b) Why are y
0
y and vy different?
4-15. Two particles are shot out simultaneously from a given point with
equal speed u in orthogonal directions. Show that the speed of
each particle relative to the other is u
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  u2=c2
p
.
4-16. Show that relativistically “adding” a velocity u to a velocity v is not
generally the same as “adding” velocity v to velocity u. [Hint. Take
an example such as u ¼ (0,u,0) and v ¼ (v,0,0)]
4-17. A frame S0 moves along the x axis of frame S at a velocity v. In frame
S there is a meter stick parallel to the x axis and moving in the y
direction with a velocity vy, as shown in Fig. 4.9. The center of
the meter stick passes the point x ¼ y ¼ x0 ¼ y0 ¼ 0 at t ¼ t0 ¼ 0.
a. Argue, on the basis of the relativity of simultaneity, and without
calculation, that the meter stick is measured as tilted upward in
the positive x0 direction in the frame S0!
b. Calculate the angle of the tilt, f0, in frame S0, as shown in the
ﬁgure, by answering several easy questions. Where and when
does the right end of the meter stick cross the x axis as observed
in the frame S0? (You might answer this question ﬁrst in the
frame S and then transform this information to the frame S0.).
Figure 4.9 A meter stick parallel to the x axis in frame S but moving vertically is
measured to be tilted in frame S0.
Lorentz Transformations (Boosts), Addition of Velocities, and Invariant Intervals
69

Referring to Problem 4.14 for the velocity of the meter stick in
the frame S0, determine where the right end of the meter stick is
at time t0 ¼ 0 when the center is at the origin. Your formula for
f0 follows from this Ref. [2].
4-18. A stick of length l0 in its rest frame is situated at angle q to the x axis.
a. What is the length of the rod as measured by an observer at rest
in the frame S0 which moves along the x axis at speed v?
b. What is the orientation of the rod as measured in frame S0?
4-19. A race car speeds past two markers spaced a distance 100 m apart in a
time 0.04 ms as measured by an observer on the ground.
a. How far apart are the markers as measured by the racer?
b. What time does the racer measure when he/she passes the second
marker?
c. What speeds do the racer and observer on the ground measure?
REFERENCES
[1] A.P. French, Special Relativity, W. W. Norton, New York, 1968.
[2] Shaw, Am. J. Phys. 30 (1972) 72.
70
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 5
Illustrations and Problems in
SpaceeTime Measurements
Contents
5.1 A Spaceship Rendezvous
71
5.2 A Hole in the Ice
73
5.3 A Velocity Greater Than the Speed Limit?
76
Problems
78
References
80
Let us apply the principles we have learned so far to some interesting
problems. Some of these problems are solved in several different ways to
illustrate pitfalls and strategies.
5.1 A SPACESHIP RENDEZVOUS
A spaceship of length 100 m has a radio receiver in its nose [1]. It travels at a
velocity v ¼ 0.6c relative to a space station. A radio pulse is emitted from
the space station just as the tail of the spaceship passes by the transmitter.
1. How far from the space station is the nose of the spaceship when it
receives the radio signal?
2. How long did it take the radio pulse to reach the nose of the spaceship
from the perspective of the space station?
3. How long did it take the radio pulse to reach the nose of the spaceship
from the perspective of the spaceship?
Consider Fig. 5.1, showing the emission and reception of the radio
pulse. From the perspective of the space station, the radio pulse travels a
distance ct and goes a distance vt plus the length of the spaceship in its
(the space station’s) rest frame. This distance is 100 m/g. So,
ct ¼ 100
g þ yt:
The relevant distance is 100 m/g because the spaceship’s proper length,
100 m, is being measured in a frame at relative velocity v. Since v ¼ 0.6c,
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00005-2
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
71

we
compute
g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
¼ 5
.
4
and
solve
for
ct,
ﬁnding
ct ¼ 200 m.
This
answers
part
a.
For
part
b,
t ¼ 200 m/c ¼ 200/
(3$108) z 6.67$107 s. Now we need the time elapsed in the spaceship’s
frame t0. Over this time interval, light travels from the rear of the spaceship
to its nose, a distance of 100 m, at velocity c. So, t0 ¼ 100/c ¼ 3.37$107 s,
which answers part c.
Where did we use the principles of relativity? First, we had Lorentz
contraction in part a, and second, in part c we used the fact that light travels
at the speed limit c in any inertial frame. Easy problemdbut wait, why are
the times t and t0 not related by time dilation, a factor of g ¼ 5/4? Instead,
we found in a most elementary way that t0 ¼ t/2. This is puzzling, until you
notice that the events, the emission and absorption of the radio pulse, occur
at separate points in the spaceship frame. From the perspective of the space
station, a clock in the tail of the spaceship and one in the nose are not
synchronized, and this time difference contributes to t0.
To see the effect, let us redo the problem by plugging into our Lorentz
transformation formulas. First, we need the spaceetime coordinates of the
two events in the spaceship frame. A radio pulse is emitted at t0
1 ¼ x0
1 ¼ 0
and
is
received
in
the
nose
of
the
spaceship
at
x0
2 ¼ 100 m;
t0
2 ¼ x0
2

c ¼ 100 m=ð3$108Þ m=s ¼ 3:33$107 s. So, in the space station’s
frame the second event occurs at
x2 ¼ g

x0
2 þ yt0
2

¼ 5
4 ð100 þ 0:6$100Þ ¼ 5
4$1:6$100 ¼ 200 m
as we calculated before from the space station’s perspective. The reception
of the radio pulse occurs at
t2 ¼ g

t0
2 þ y
c2x0
2

¼ 5
4
100
c
þ 0:6 100
c
	
¼ 5
4$1:6$100
c
¼ 200
c
¼ 6:67$107 s
Figure 5.1 Emission of a radio pulse from a space station and its reception on a
moving rocket ship.
72
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

as before. Here we see the relativity of simultaneity at work. The formula
states that t2 is not time dilation applied to t0
2; it is time dilation applied to
t0
2 þ ðv=c2Þx0
2. We recognize this as the time that the space station says passes
on a clock at the nose of the spaceship between the two events. Multiplying
by g gives the time in the space station’s frame. The term vx0
2

c2 is the extra
time that the space station says must pass on the clock at the nose of the
spaceship because that clock is vx0
2

c2 seconds behind the clock at the tail.
All this becomes evident if we make a Minkowski diagram of the sit-
uation (see Fig. 5.2). Note that the clocks in the tail and the nose are
synchronized in the spaceship frame, S0. We see that, from the point of
view of the space station, the clock in the nose is vx0
2

c2 behind the clock in
the tail and that ct2 is related by time dilation to the sum of ct0
2 ¼ 100 and
vx0
2

c ¼ 0:6$100 m.
5.2 A HOLE IN THE ICE
A relativistic skater with 15-inch-long blades on his skates travels at v ¼ 0.8c
over an icy surface. There is a hole in the ice of diameter 10 in. before the
ﬁnish line. The skater decides to skate over the hole to win the race. He
Figure 5.2 Emission and reception of a radio pulse in a Minkowski diagram, showing
measurements in the rocket and the space station frames.
Illustrations and Problems in SpaceeTime Measurements
73

ﬁgures that this is safe because the diameter of the hole is Lorentz con-
tracted in his frame to 10/g ¼ 10/(5/3) ¼ 6 in., which is less than the
length of his blade. A judge at the ﬁnish line sees the skater approaching and
tries to wave him off because in her frame the length of the skater’s blade is
15/g ¼ 15$(3/5) ¼ 9 in., so the entire blade will ﬁt into the hole and the
skater will fall through the ice and be injured. Which person is right? We
better get the right answer because a serious accident lies in the balance!
This is a paradox of relativity almost as famous as the twin paradox. Let
us describe it in a Minkowski diagram in which frame S is the rest frame of
the ice (or the judge) and S0 is the rest frame of the skater’s blade (or the
speed skater). The world lines of the edges of the hole and the ends of the
blade are shown in Fig. 5.3 [2].
Now we want to describe these events in various frames where we lay
down lines of constant time at various angles. From the perspective of the
ice (or the judge), the lines of constant time t are horizontals as shown in
Fig. 5.4. At t1, the front of the blade reaches the edge of the hole. At t2, the
back of the blade does the same. Between t2 and t3, the entire blade is inside
the hole. At time t3, the front end of the blade hits the other edge of the
hole and the skater falls! Fig. 5.4 ignores this and shows the blade emerging
from the hole, and ﬁnally, at t4, the back end of the blade comes out of the
hole.
From the perspective of the skater, things are quite different because his
lines of constant time t0 are inclined to the horizontals by an angle tan
q ¼ v/c ¼ 0.8. These lines are shown in Fig. 5.5. Inspecting this diagram,
Figure 5.3 The world lines (vertical) of the edges of the hole and the ends (tilted) of
the skater’s blade.
74
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

we see that the skater’s impressions were also correctdat no time t0 are both
ends of his blade inside the holedand even the time order of the events is
different than that given in frame S. In S0, the front of the blade emerges
from the hole (at t0
2) before the back end comes in (at t0
3). We can easily check
Figure 5.4 Fig. 5.3 with lines of constant time t in the frame of the ice (stationary
judge).
Figure 5.5 Fig. 5.3 with lines of constant time t0 in the frame of the skater’s blade.
Illustrations and Problems in SpaceeTime Measurements
75

that the invariant interval (Ds)2 for the two events, the back end of the
skater’s blade reaches the left edge of the hole and the front end of the blade
reaches the right edge of the hole, is negative. So, the events are not casually
connected and their time ordering is frame dependent. This is obvious from
the Minkowski diagram. We could also imagine that the back end of the
skate emits a light pulse when it reaches the left edge of the hole. The pulse
reaches the right end of the hole after a time interval of 10/c in the rest
frame of the hole. The front end of the skate reaches the right edge of the
hole after a much shorter time interval, (10  9)/v ¼ 5/4c.
So, does the skater fall or not? Yes, he falls, and our discussion of
causality should remind us of a ﬂaw in the skater’s description of his blade.
When he claimed that his skate could not ﬁt into the hole in the ice, he was
thinking nonrelativistically, where rigid bodies exist. But in a relativistic
world where information cannot travel faster than light, the blade is not
rigid and the front end is pulled down by the force of gravity when
t0
2 > t0 > t0
1. It is easy to check that if the front end of the skater’s blade sent
a radio pulse to the back end at time t0
1, when the front end reaches the left
edge of the hole, the pulse does not reach the back end of the blade until
well after the front end has hit the right edge of the hole. In other words,
the back end of the blade does not even know that there is a hole in the ice
until after the accident!
This example suggests that Lorentz invariant methods would be the best
tools to analyze dynamic, relativistic problems involving extended objects.
Our frame-dependent discussion comes complete with biases and arbi-
trariness that can be misleading. In fact, high-energy theorists who study
relativistic strings as a framework for grand uniﬁcation almost exclusively
use invariant methods so that they concentrate on the physical content of
processes involving stringsdthose aspects that all observers in any inertial
frame can agree on.
5.3 A VELOCITY GREATER THAN THE SPEED LIMIT?
Consider three frames of reference. An observer O sees an observer S
moving to her right at speed v ¼ 0.8c and another observer S0 moving to
her left at the same rate.
1. The observer O says, “The velocity difference between S and S0 is 1.6c,
so the distance between them, d ¼ 1.6ct, is growing at a rate in excess of
76
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the speed of light c.” Is this statement correct? Does it contradict Postu-
late 2 of special relativity?
2. If S0 measures the velocity of S, what does he ﬁnd?
3. If a transmitter at rest with S0 broadcasts light with a frequency
v0 ¼ 10 cps, what frequency is measured by O and what frequency is
measured by S?
Begin with a picture of the three observers shown in Fig. 5.6. There is
no doubt that O measures the distance between S and S0 to be d ¼ 1.6ct.
This is just arithmetic. But 1.6c does not represent the speed of one object
relative to another, so there is no contradiction with relativity. No physical
object is moving in an inertial frame with a speed in excess of c. We see this
explicitly by considering the next part of the problem. Using our relativistic
addition of velocities formula, the speed of S in the frame of S0 consists of
two pieces: the speed of S in the rest frame of O, v, and the speed of O
relative to S0, v again. So, the speed of S measured by S0 is
u ¼
ðy þ yÞ

1 þ y2
c2
	 ¼
1:6c
ð1 þ 0:8Þ2 ¼ 1:6c
1:64 ¼ 0:9756c;
which is, indeed, slightly less than c. All is well.
It is amusing to note in passing that the situation depicted here ap-
proximates several natural phenomena studied in astrophysical research
journals. Some researchers have presented analyses of “superluminal” jets of
gases streaming from spinning black holes, much as S and S0 are racing away
from O. When observed through an Earth-bound telescope, the jets appear
to be diverging at a rate exceeding c. These and other optical effects are
sometimes raised in the popular science literature as threats to relativity.
They do not last long.
Back to our problem. The relation between the frequency v0 and the
frequency vo, observed by O, is given by the Doppler formula,
no ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
n0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  0:8
1 þ 0:8
r
n0 ¼ 10
3 cps.
Figure 5.6 An observer O with two frames receding to the left and right at
velocities þv and v.
Illustrations and Problems in SpaceeTime Measurements
77

Finally, we can calculate the frequency v measured by S by noting that he
observes the wave train in O’s reference frame as Doppler shifted by
another factor of
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1  v=cÞ=ð1 þ v=cÞ
p
because the relative speed between
O and S is v,
n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
no ¼
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
	
n0 ¼ 1  0:8
1 þ 0:8$10 ¼ 10
9 cps.
Alternatively we could calculate v directly in terms of v0 by again applying
the Doppler formula, but using the relative velocity u between S and S0.
Call b ¼ v/c, so
n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u=c
1 þ u=c
s
n0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2b

1 þ b2
1  2b

1 þ b2
s
n0 ¼
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
	
n0;
where we did some algebra in the previous step and found agreement with
the earlier result.
PROBLEMS
5-1. The scissors paradox. A long straight rod that is inclined at an angle q
to the x axis has a velocity v downward as shown in Fig. 5.7.
a. Derive a formula for the speed vr of the intersection of the rod
with the x axis in terms of v and q.
b. Can you choose values for v and q so that vr is greater than the
speed limit c?
c. Can you transmit information along the x axis at speeds greater
than c using this trick?
Figure 5.7 The scissors paradox. The blade of the scissors is tilted with respect to the
horizontal and moves vertically down with velocity v. Its point of intersection with the
horizontal moves to the right at velocity vr.
78
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

5-2. Tricks your eyes can play. Consider a rocket that goes from point 1 to
point 2, a total distance d, in time t at velocity v. At both points it ra-
diates a pulse of light, and these pulses are detected by an observer O
at rest to the right of point 2, as shown in Fig. 5.8.
a. Show that the time interval between the reception of the pulses at
O is T ¼ [1  (v/c)]t, where t is the time it took the rocket to
travel from point 1 to point 2, d ¼ vt.
b. Because the light pulses provide observer O with two images of
the rocket, one at point 1 and the other at point 2, a distance
d to the right of point 1, argue that the observer sees the rocket
moving with an apparent speed d/T ¼ v/[1  (v/c)], which is
greater than c, whenever c/2 < v < c!
c. Suppose that there is a stationary observer O0 to the left of point 1.
Find a formula for the apparent speed that he attributes to the
rocket. What is its maximum value?
This
problem
illustrates
the
visual
effects
that
occur
in
astrophysical observations of moving and exploding stars. Interpreting
astronomical data can get pretty tricky! If you pursue astrophysics, you
will see more such effects in more realistic settings. This problem also
illustrates why we are so particular about how measurements are made
in relativitydwhy we phrase measurements in terms of events,
specifying the time an event occurs on a clock at that exact spot.
Figure 5.8 A rocket goes from point 1 to point 2, and at both points it radiates a pulse
of light, which are detected by an observer O at rest to the right of point 2. Another
observer O0 is at rest to the left of point 1.
Figure 5.9 Two long parallel conducting rails are open at one end, but connected
electrically at the other end through a lamp and battery. An H-shaped slider, whose
vertical pieces are made of copper but whose horizontal piece is an insulator, moves
along the rails. The upper portion of the ﬁgure shows the lab frame view of the
experiment, and the lower portion shows the slider view.

5-3. A project to elucidate the physics of Section 5.2. Two long parallel
conducting rails are open at one end, but connected electrically at
the other end through a lamp and battery, as shown in Fig. 5.9. An
H-shaped slider, whose vertical pieces are made of copper but whose
horizontal piece is an insulator, moves along the rails. Let the length of
the slider be 2 m, matching the rest length of the region AB, and let
the height of the slider match the distance between the rails, except
in the special region AB where the rails are further apart. Suppose
that the H-shaped slider moves at a large velocity, so that it contracts
by a factor of 2 relative to the region AB. In the rest frame of the rails,
an observer concludes that there is a period of time when the slider
does not complete the circuit between the battery and the lamp, so
the lamp must go dark for a moment. However, from the perspective
of the slider, the region AB is contracted by a factor of 2, so an
observer on the slider predicts that the circuit is always completed
and the lamp will always shine. Analyze this system as we analyzed
the ice skate and the hole problem in Section 5.2 and resolve the
paradox. Does the lamp go dark for an instant or not?
This project assumes that the reader knows how signals, current,
and voltages propagate along a wire. The time delay between the
arrival of the right end of the slider at point B and the transmission
of that information from point B back to point A on the wire is an
important part of the resolution of this puzzle. (It is the analogue of
the time it takes the back end of the skate to know that the front
end crashed into the far side of the hole.) This challenging problem
can be used as a fascinating research project involving the reading
and mastery of the material in Ref. [3].
REFERENCES
[1] A.P. French, Special Relativity, W. W. Norton, New York, 1968.
[2] N.D. Mermin, Space Time in Special Relativity, Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, IL,
1968.
[3] G.P. Sastry, Am. J. Phys. 55 (1987) 943.
80
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 6
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
Contents
6.1 Energy, Light, and E ¼ mc2
81
6.2 Patching Up Newtonian DynamicsdRelativistic Momentum and Energy
84
6.3 Relativistic Force and Energy Conservation
92
6.4 Energy and Momentum Conservation, and Four-Vectors
96
6.5 Focusing on Four-Vectors, Tensors, and Notation
99
6.6 Collisions and Conservation LawsdConverting Mass to Energy and Energy to
Mass, Producing and Destroying Particles
104
Problems
112
References
121
6.1 ENERGY, LIGHT, AND E [ MC2
We have spent all our time so far discussing how measurements of
spaceetime coordinates transform between inertial frames in such a way
that there is a universal speed limit. Has this been an empty exercise? We
need to see that we can write down a scheme of relativistic dynamics that
satisﬁes Postulate 1 of relativitydthat the relative speed between inertial
frames has no material inﬂuence on the dynamics in either frame. We know
that the transformation laws between inertial frames in a Newtonian world,
the Galilean transformations we have discussed in previous sections, are
consistent with Newton’s laws of motion. Now we need the relativistic
laws of motion to underpin the Lorentz transformations.
The hallmarks of Newtonian mechanics are the second law (that force
equals inertia times acceleration) and the third law (that action equals
reaction; i.e., if I push on you, you push on me in an equal and opposite
fashion). These results lead to momentum conservation. The Galilean
transformations then imply that if momentum conservation is true in one
inertial frame, it is true in them of all. These transformations implement the
idea that all inertial frames are equivalent.
Let us brieﬂy review these Newtonian developments before moving on
to relativistic dynamics. The logic here is important. Consider two point
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00006-4
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
81

particles of mass m1 and m2 and let them collide in an inertial frame where,
by deﬁnition, there is no external force. So, if f12 is the force that particle
1 exerts on particle 2 and f21 is the force that particle 2 exerts on particle 1,
Newton’s second and third laws imply
d
dt ðp1 þ p2Þ ¼ f 21 þ f 12 ¼ 0;
where p1 is the momentum of particle 1, p1 ¼ m1v1, and p2 ¼ m2v2. So,
the total momentum is conserved, m1v1 þ m2v2 ¼ constant. This means
that the center of mass R ¼ (m1x1 þ m2x2)/(m1 þ m2) travels with a
constant velocity, (d/dt) R ¼ constant, and we can boost to a frame where
R is the origin and remains there forever. But we can also view the collision
in another frame S0, which moves with velocity v with respect to frame S.
By Galilean invariance, we have the nonrelativistic rule of addition of
velocities, so the velocities of the particles in frame S0 read
v0
1 ¼ v1  v;
v0
2 ¼ v2  v.
So, in the frame S0,
p0
1 ¼ m1v0
1 ¼ m1v1  m1v ¼ p1  m1v
p0
2 ¼ m2v0
2 ¼ m2v2  m2v ¼ p2  m2v .
So,
d
dt0

p0
1 þ p0
2

¼ d
dt ðp1 þ p2Þ ¼ 0
because v is a constant. So, the same dynamics holds in either frame and, if
we have momentum conservation in one inertial frame, we have it in all of
them.
In short, Newtonian dynamics works together with Galilean invariance
to assure that physics satisﬁes Newton’s version of relativity. The extension
of this consistency to the relativistic domain will take some work because,
although relativistic dynamics must reduce to Newtonian dynamics when
all the relative velocities involved are small compared with the speed limit c,
Lorentz transformations are more intricate than Galilean transformations.
We can anticipate that the Newtonian notion of momentum p ¼ mv will
not work in Einstein’s world because the frame independence of
momentum conservation used the addition of velocities rule, which is not
true relativistically.
So, we will follow Einstein and rethink the notions of momentum,
mass, and energy. To begin, let us present one of Einstein’s famous thought
82
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

experiments, which shows that relativistic energy and inertia must be
uniﬁed into one concept in the new dynamics.
Consider a box of mass M and length L, and suppose that radiant
energy (light) E is emitted from one end and absorbed by the other
(Fig. 6.1). We need to know one fact about light, which we will
understand in more detail later: if a wave carries energy E, it also carries
momentum p and they are related by E ¼ pc. So, when light is emitted
from the left end of the box, as shown in the top half of Fig. 6.1, the box
recoils with a momentum E/c. The box then moves to the left with
velocity v ¼ E/Mc, supposing that M is so large that v is very small,
v  c, and the box’s motion is well described by Newtonian nonrelativ-
istic considerations. Then, the light reaches the right end of the box in
time Dt ¼ L/c and is absorbed. Now, the box should be at rest again, but
apparently it has moved by a distance Dx ¼ vDt ¼ EL/Mc2! But this is
crazydthe center of mass of the system cannot move because there are no
external forces to push it. If our expression for Dx were correct, we could
repeat this process as often as we wished and move the box as far as we
liked to the left. Something is wrong! M is large and Newtonian
mechanics should work to describe it.
It must be that when energy E moves from one end of the box to the
other it must deposit some mass m on the right-hand end of the box, so
the center of mass of the heavy box does not move. How much should m
Figure 6.1 Upper portion of the ﬁgure shows radiation being emitted from the left-
hand side of a box, and the lower portion shows that radiation being absorbed on
the right-hand side as the box recoils.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
83

be to do the trick? Certainly m  M. The condition that Dx (the change in
the position of the center of mass) vanishes reads
Dx ¼ 0 ¼ mL þ MDx.
Solving for m,
m ¼ M
L Dx ¼ M
L
EL
Mc2 ¼ E=c2.
In other words,
E ¼ mc2.
(6.1)
This means that the energy carried by the light wave results in a mass
increase of m ¼ E/c2 when it is absorbed as heat on the end of the box.
Because c is so large, m is extraordinarily tiny, and this thought experiment
is not practical. However, in the realm of nuclear and high-energy physics,
dramatic illustrations of Eq. (6.1) can be found. Some will be discussed
later.
Eq. (6.1) is one of the most famous equations in physics. When we study
elementary particle collisions later, we shall see that it predicts that we can
convert the rest mass of heavy particles into the kinetic energy of lighter
ones. The equation underlies nuclear power.
Because mass can be converted into energy and vice versa, according to
Eq. (6.1), one of the sacred conservation laws of Newton must be modiﬁed,
that conservation law states that mass, as well as total momentum, is
conserved in a collision of particles in an inertial frame,
p1 þ p2 ¼ p0
1 þ p0
2
m1 ¼ m0
1;
m2 ¼ m0
2
.
According to Newton, there is separate overall momentum conservation
and mass conservation for each elementary particle. Our next task is to
ﬁnd the relativistic generalization of these statements.
6.2 PATCHING UP NEWTONIAN DYNAMICSdRELATIVISTIC
MOMENTUM AND ENERGY
Can we invent a formula for momentum, a relativistic analogue to p ¼ mv,
so that relativistic momentum is conserved in the collision of particles in an
inertial frame, and the conservation law is truly relativistic (i.e., it holds in all
inertial frames if it holds in one)? Let us take a simple collision.
84
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

First, consider a Newtonian inelastic collision, shown in Fig. 6.2. Initially,
there is a particle of mass m at rest in the lab, and a particle of the same mass
but with velocity u collides and sticks to it. The ﬁnal composite particle of
mass 2m recoils with velocity u; determined by momentum conservation,
mu ¼ 2mu.
So,
u ¼ 1
2 u
Because the initial kinetic energy is T NR
i
¼ ð1=2Þmu2 (NR denotes
“nonrelativistic,”
or
Newtonian)
and
the
ﬁnal
kinetic
energy
is
T NR
f
¼ ð1=2Þð2mÞu2 ¼ ð1=4Þmu2; heat Q is generated,
Q ¼ T NR
i
 T NR
f
¼ 1
4 mu2.
In this discussion, we assumed that the mass of the composite particle
was twice the mass of its parts. Actually, the additivity of mass is forced on
us by Postulate 1 and the form of the Newtonian momentum. To see this,
call the mass of the composite particle Mo and view the collision in a frame
S0, which has a transverse velocity v (Fig. 6.3).
Figure 6.2 A two-body inelastic collision.
Figure 6.3 The collision of Fig. 6.2 viewed from a frame with a transverse velocity v down.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
85

Conservation of transverse momentum reads
mv þ mv ¼ Mcv.
So, we read off Mc ¼ 2m, as expected. What is the point of this discussion?
Conservation of momentum must hold in any inertial frame, and it will do
so only if masses add in a Newtonian world.
Now we want a relativistic description of this process that will satisfy
Postulate 1dthe law of conservation of momentum must be the same in all
frames [1]. Our task is to ﬁnd an expression for the relativistic momentum
that accomplishes this. The expression must reduce to its nonrelativistic
cousin, p ¼ mv, when the velocity is small compared with the speed limit c.
The beam particle in the initial state in Fig. 6.2 has relativistic momentum,
which must have the mathematical form
p ¼ f ðu=cÞmu.
This expression should accommodate what we know about the mo-
mentum. A study of the collision should determine the function f. Why
have we written this form for p? First, we have chosen p to point in the
direction u because that is the only vector in the problem. We have taken
p to be proportional to the inertia m so its dimensions are correct. Finally,
there is the possibility that f depends on the dimensionless ratio u/c, the ratio
of the magnitude of u to the speed limit. The dimensionless function f
incorporates features of p that we need to determine. It is conventional
to write m(u) h f(u/c)m and call m(u) the relativistic mass.
Because there are no external forces, we require that relativistic mo-
mentum be conserved,
mðuÞu ¼ MðuÞu
(6.2)
where MðuÞ will be determined by momentum conservation and Postulate
1. We do not assume MðuÞ ¼ 2mðuÞ, as nonrelativistic reasoning might
suggest. In fact, this is not true!
To see how Postulate 1 constrains all the apparent arbitrariness here,
view the collision in a frame S0, where the beam particle of Fig. 6.2 is at rest
as in Fig. 6.4. In this frame the collision is just turned around. But frame S0
is obtained from frame S by a boost (Fig. 6.5). So, the velocity of the
composite particle, as measured in frame S, must also be given by an
application of the addition of velocities formula,
u ¼ u þ u
1  uu=c2 ;
86
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which we can solve for u,
u ¼
2u
1 þ u2
c2 .
(6.3)
Is this result reasonable? Well, if u  c; then u z 2u; and we are back to
the Newtonian result we had before. All is well, so far.
To determine MðuÞ by Postulate 1 of relativity, view the collision in a
frame with a small transverse velocity in the y direction (Fig. 6.6). In the
frame S0, the beam particle (see “Before” in Fig. 6.7) then has v0
y ¼ v, the
transverse velocity between the frames. The beam particle had velocity u in
the x direction in the lab frame, so in frame S0
u0
x ¼ x0
t0 ¼
x
gðyÞt ¼
1
gðyÞ u;
Figure 6.4 The collision of Fig. 6.2 in the rest frame of the beam particle.
Figure 6.5 The ﬁnal state of the collision in the frame S0. S0 is related to frame S by a
boost through velocity u.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
87

where gðvÞ ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
; using our time dilation formula. Now we
can write momentum conservation for the collision in frame S0 (Fig. 6.7).
But in the frame S0 the mass of the beam particle is a function of the
length of the velocity u0, which is u02 ¼ v2 þ u02
x ¼ v2 þ u2ð1  v2=c2Þ.
The same remark applies to u0, the velocity of the composite particle, u02 ¼
v2 þ u02
x ¼ v2 þ u2ð1  v2=c2Þ. So, conservation of the y component of
momentum in frame S0 reads
mðu0Þv þ mðyÞv ¼ Mðu0Þv;
which gives the composite mass Mðu0Þ. We only need this general formula
for the special situation v / 0,
mðuÞ þ mð0Þ ¼ MðuÞ.
(6.4)
This formula tells us how to add the relativistic masses of the colliding
particles to make up the mass of the composite. It is a statement of mass
conservation for relativistic systems where mass must depend on velocity.
Without Eq. (6.4) we could not have conservation of relativistic
Figure 6.6 View of the collision in a frame S0 with a small transverse velocity v in
the y direction.
Figure 6.7 The collision in the frame S0 of Fig. 6.6.
88
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

momentum. Substituting into Eq. (6.2), momentum conservation in the lab
frame S,
mðuÞu ¼ MðuÞu ¼ ðmðuÞ þ mð0ÞÞu;
we can now determine the velocity dependence of the relativistic mass,
mðuÞ ¼ mð0Þ$
u
u  u .
This result is useful when we express u in terms of u, the velocity of a beam
particle in the lab frame. This can be done using Eq. (6.3), giving
u
u  u ¼
u
2u
1 þ u2
c2  u
¼ 1 þ u2
c2
1  u2
c2 ;
(6.5)
where we also did some algebra to get the last expression. The right-hand
side of Eq. (6.5) must be written in terms of u. Using the identity
ð1  u2
c2Þ
2 ¼ ð1 þ u2
c2Þ
2  4u2
c2
we have
1  u2
c2
1 þ u2
c2
2
¼ 1 
4u2
c2
ð1 þ u2
c2Þ
2 ¼ 1  u2=c2;
where we identiﬁed Eq. (6.3), u ¼ 2u

1 þ u2
c2
; in the last step. So, we
end with the elegant result,
u
u  u ¼ gðuÞ;
which gives the relativistic mass
mðuÞ ¼ gðuÞmð0Þ ¼ mð0Þ
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2=c2
p
.
In summary, we have the very important result for the relativistic
momentum of a particle of rest mass m(0) ¼ m and velocity u,
p ¼ gmu;
g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2=c2
p
.
(6.6)
What do we learn from all this? What are the special features of p? p has
a factor of g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2=c2
p
; which crept in from the exercise in
addition of relativistic velocities. The factor of g, therefore, is forced on us
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
89

by the way positions and times transform from one inertial frame to
another.
Because Eq. (6.6) is much simpler than its derivation, we must ﬁnd a
more fundamental derivation for it. We will return to this later.
One of the satisfying features of Eq. (6.6) is that it is consistent with the
speed limit c. Because g grows without bound as u approaches c, the
relativistic mass m(u) and the relativistic momentum p ¼ m(u)u do so as
well.
There is still more to be learned from our inelastic collision. Let us look
at the mass of the composite particle in more detail. To do this, boost to yet
another frame, the center-of-momentum frame where the total mo-
mentum vanishes. This frame is clearly obtained from the lab frame by a
boost to the left through velocity u; just sufﬁcient to bring the composite
particle to rest. The collision is shown in Fig. 6.8.
Just as we found mðuÞ þ mð0Þ ¼ MðuÞ by considering momentum
conservation in the lab frame, we now ﬁnd mðuÞ þ mð uÞ ¼ Mð0Þ.
Because
m
depends
only
on
the
magnitude
of
its
argument,
mð uÞ ¼ mðuÞ; we have, more simply,
M ¼ 2mðuÞ ¼
2m
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2
c2
q
.
(6.7)
This result replaces the Newtonian conservation law in which M would
be just twice m. If u2
c2  1; Eq. (6.7) will not deviate much from its
Newtonian limit. Using the expansion from Appendix C,
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2
c2
q
z 1 þ 1
2
u2
c2 þ O
u4
c4

;
we have
M z 2m

1 þ 1
2
u2
c2

¼ 2m þ 2$mu2
2c2 .
(6.8)
Figure 6.8 The inelastic collision in the center-of-momentum frame.
90
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Here we can identify the nonrelativistic kinetic energy T NR ¼ mu2
2. The
total kinetic energy, 2$

mu2
2

; is converted to heat Q in this inelastic
collision, so Eq. (6.8) can be written
M z 2m þ Q=c2.
Identifying the inertial mass in this inelastic collision,
DMhM  2m ¼ Q=c2;
we obtain Einstein’s famous formula,
Q ¼ DMc2;
which states that heat Q is equivalent to rest mass DM through a conversion
factor of c2. This is the same result as in Section 6.1, obtained from a
different perspective.
To assimilate all these statements about energy and mass, we deﬁne the
relativistic energy to be
E ¼ gmc2
(6.9)
for a rest mass m having velocity u, g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2=c2
p
; in a certain inertial
frame. This deﬁnition then uses the concept of relativistic mass m(u) that
has proved so convenient and fundamental in our study of the inelastic
collision. The fact that the relativistic mass is conserved, and this conserva-
tion law satisﬁes Postulate 1 (it retains its form and is true in all inertial
frames) means that the relativistic energy is a conserved quantity. This is
the relativistic generalization of the conservation of rest mass that is an
essential aspect of Newtonian mechanics.
Eq. (6.9) also suggests a deﬁnition of relativistic kinetic energy that
generalizes the Newtonian quantity, m v2/2. Because E reduces to mc2 for a
body at rest, the difference, E  mc2, is a relativistic measure of the energy
due to velocity. Call this difference the relativistic kinetic energy T,
ThE  mc2 ¼ ðg  1Þmc2.
When y2/c2  1, T reduces to the familiar quantity mu2/2, because
T ¼ ðg  1Þmc2 z

1 þ 1
2
u2
c2

 1
	
mc2 ¼ 1
2 mu2.
T proves to be a handy quantity in relativistic kinematics problems.
Most textbooks on relativity work with the relativistic energy E ¼ gmc2
and rest mass m rather than with the relativistic mass, a velocity-dependent
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
91

quantity, m(u) ¼ gm. We shall do the same from here on to avoid possible
confusion. Mass means rest mass m, just as in Newton’s world. Relativistic
energy is E ¼ gmc2 and relativistic momentum is p ¼ gmu. The factor of g
will be written out explicitly.
6.3 RELATIVISTIC FORCE AND ENERGY CONSERVATION
To do problems in relativity with a given applied force that generates
acceleration, we need the relativistic generalization of Newton’s second
law, F ¼ (d/dt)p, p ¼ mv. In many situations, F varies from point to point
in a simple way. For example, to describe gravitational attraction between
masses m and M a distance r apart, we know from Newton’s law of gravity
that
F ¼ GmM
r2
br;
where br is a unit vector in the direction pointing from particle M to m, G is
Newton’s constant, and F is the force that M exerts on m. In the case of a
harmonic oscillator,
F ¼ krbr;
where a particle is attracted to the origin by a force proportional to its
distance away from the origin. If the particle is constrained to move along
the positive x axis, then the harmonic force reads kx. In all these cases, we
can introduce the concept of potential energy and write the force as the
spatial rate of change of the potential energy. Because the problems
we deal with here are essentially one dimensional, we illustrate this just
for motion along the x axis.
In the case of the harmonic oscillator, then, it proves useful to introduce
the potential energy U(x) ¼ (1/2)kx2, so for positive x,
FðxÞ ¼ kx ¼  d
dx UðxÞ.
The harmonic oscillator illustrates a general strategy: Given a general func-
tion U(x), we can calculate the force by computing the spatial rate of
change F(x) ¼ dU/dx. We introduce the potential energy because it
simpliﬁes problem solving and leads to energy conservation. For example,
the work that the force does on a particle of mass m when it is moved from
point 1 to point 2 along the positive x axis is
92
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

W12 ¼
Z 2
1
FðxÞdx ¼ 
Z 2
1
dUðxÞ
dx
dx ¼ Uð1Þ  Uð2Þ.
(6.10)
But, using the equation of motion, we can calculate W12 in another way,
W12 ¼
Z 2
1
Fdx ¼
Z 2
1
d
dt

pdx ¼
Z 2
1
m d
dt y$ydt;
where we noted that distance is velocity times time, dx ¼ vdt. But the
integral can be done exactly, noting that (d/dt) (mv2/2) ¼ mvdv/dt,
W12 ¼
Z 2
1
d
dt
1
2 my2

dt ¼ T NR
2
 T NR
1
;
(6.11)
where TNR (the nonrelativistic kinetic energy) ¼ (1/2)mv2. Combining
Eqs. (6.10) and (6.11), we have
Uð1Þ  Uð2Þ ¼ T NR
2
 T NR
1
;
or
T NR
1
þ U1 ¼ T NR
2
þ U2.
In other words, the total energy ENR ¼ TNR þ U is conserved in Newton’s
world whenever an x-dependent static potential energy U(x) exists.
In summary, using Newton’s second law, F ¼ dp/dt, we derive energy
conservation under appropriate conditions. These two concepts are central
in the solution of nonrelativistic mechanics problems.
The issue here is the generalization of these ideas to the relativistic world
of Einstein. Certainly the momentum in Newton’s second law must
become its relativistic cousin,
F ¼ d
dt ðgmvÞ.
(6.12)
In a force-free environment, this equation predicts conservation of the
relativistic momentum, as desired. If several particles are interacting among
themselves, but the total of the forces sum to zero, then the total relativistic
momentum is conserved. In this way, Eq. (6.12) becomes the underpinning
of our previous discussion of the inelastic collision.
Let us do a simple practice problem with Eq. (6.12) before continuing
[2]. Place a charged particle of mass m in a constant electric ﬁeld. The
electric force will accelerate the particle and, in a Newtonian description,
the particle’s velocity will increase without bound. But in relativity there is
a speed limit, so v will increase arbitrarily closely to c, never attaining it
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
93

because of the factor of g ¼ 1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
in Eq. (6.12), which grows
without bound as v approaches c. In more detail, let the particle have an
initial velocity of 0, v(t ¼ 0) ¼ 0, and let it be subjected to a constant force
F in the x direction. Then,
F ¼ d
dt p.
So, p will increase linearly with t,
gmy ¼ Ft.
(6.13)
Because g ¼ 1

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2ðtÞ=c2
p
; we can solve Eq. (6.13) for v(t) and ﬁnd,
after some algebra,
yðtÞ ¼
c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ ðmc=FtÞ2
q
.
(6.14)
We see, as expected, that y(t) is always less than c, but approaches it when Ft
[ mc. At the other extreme, if Ft  mc, then y(t) z (c/(mc/Ft)) ¼ (F/m)
t  c and we retrieve Newton’s result that the particle experiences a constant
acceleration F/m that produces a velocity that grows linearly with time.
In summary, our relativistic dynamics has passed an important testdwe
cannot accelerate a massive body beyond the speed limit. Furthermore,
Eq. (6.14) predicts v(t) for a particle in a linear accelerator, so its functional
form can be compared with experimental data. Of course, in the real world
there are complications, such as the fact that accelerated charged particles
radiate energy, which must be accounted for in quantitative tests. After all
such effects are dealt with, relativistic dynamics with all the trimmings
proves to be an unparalleled success.
Our next big task is to ﬁnd the relativistic generalization of energy
conservation for forces that are obtained from a static potential. As in the
nonrelativistic world,
W12 ¼
Z 2
1
Fdx ¼ 
Z 2
1
dU
dx dx ¼ Uð1Þ  Uð2Þ.
Now we need to use the equation of motion to see how the force changes
the particle’s relativistic energy:
W12 ¼
Z 2
1
Fdx ¼
Z 2
1
d
dt ðgm yÞydt.
(6.15)
94
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Can we write the integrand as a total time derivative? Inspired by the
nonrelativistic derivation, we hope that the answer will involve the relativ-
istic energy,
E ¼ gmc2.
Let us write Eq. (6.15) in terms of just the relativistic momentum and
energy by writing the velocity as,
v ¼ c2 gmv
gmc2 ¼ c2 p
E
so Eq. (6.15) reads,
W12 ¼ c2
Z 2
1
p
E
dp
dt dt ¼ c2
Z 2
1
1
2E
dp2
dt dt
Now we must relate p2 to E2. Using p ¼ gmv and E ¼ gmc2, we calculate,
1
c2E2  p2 ¼ g2m2c2  g2m2v2 ¼ g2m2c2

1  v2
c2

¼ m2c2
where we used g2 ¼

1  v2
c2
1
in the last step. The important point in
this “Energyemomentum” relation is the fact that the right-hand side is a
constant, Lorentz invariant quantity, the rest mass of the particle squared.
Now p2 can be replaced by E2/c2 in the expression for W12,
W12 ¼
Z 2
1
1
2E
dE2
dt dt ¼
Z 2
1
dE
dt dt ¼ E2  E1 ¼ T2  T1
(6.16)
which is the relativistic analogue of Eq. (6.11)! Combining Eqs. (6.15) and
(6.16),
T1 þ U1 ¼ T2 þ U2;
(6.17)
and the total energy, relativistic kinetic and potential, is conserved under
these conditions.
Note that since T ¼ E  mc2, we could put either T or E into
Eq. (6.17). We used the relativistic kinetic energy just to mirror the
nonrelativistic discussion.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
95

6.4 ENERGY AND MOMENTUM CONSERVATION, AND
FOUR-VECTORS
Our formulas for the relativistic momentum and energy, p ¼ gmv
and E ¼ gmc2, are much simpler than their derivations. We aim to remedy
this problem here. Both of these quantities were determined to satisfy
Postulate 1. The factors of g are forced on us by the transformation laws of
space and time measurements between inertial frames. In Newton’s world,
the momentum inherits its transformation properties from those of space
and time,
p ¼ m dx
dt
ðNewtonÞ.
(6.18)
x transforms according to Galileo, x ¼ x0 þ vt, y0 ¼ y, z0 ¼ z, and t is
universal, t ¼ t0. Eq. (6.18) then implies that p transforms as a velocity,
and because velocities add in Newton’s world, we can show that if there
is momentum conservation in one inertial frame, there is momentum
conservation in all.
Can we write a relativistic generalization of Eq. (6.18)? The key in
Eq. (6.18) is that the numerator is a distance that transforms simply and the
denominator is an invariant. Because the proper time s is an invariant in a
relativistic world, we should try
p ¼ m dx
ds
ðEinsteinÞ:
(6.19)
Eq. (6.19) reproduces p ¼ gmv because ds is related to the time interval dt
by time dilation, ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
dt. The truly crucial feature of Eq. (6.19)
is that p transforms between inertial frames in the same way as x because ds
is an invariant.
There is still a puzzle here. When x transforms between frames, the
time variable mixes in. In other words, it takes four quantities, the three
components of x and t, to write an expression for the transformation law of
any one of them. So, Eq. (6.19) must be supplemented by an expression
involving t. Clearly, dt/ds is the ﬁrst candidate to come to mind and
because this derivative is g, we are led to
E ¼ mc2dt
ds ¼ gmc2;
96
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

where hindsight led us to include the factor of c2 and identify the relativistic
energy. So, E gives the zeroth component of a four-vector of energye
momentum. We write,
pm ¼
E
c ; p1; p2; p3

where m is an index that can take the values 0, 1, 2, or 3 and po ¼ E/c, and
so on.
Our original four-vector is spaceetime,
xm ¼ ðct; x1; x2; x3Þ
and the crucial feature about this quantity is its transformation law under
boosts, the Lorentz transformation,
t0 ¼ g

t  v
c2x1
x01 ¼ gðx1  vtÞ
x02 ¼ x2
x03 ¼ x3
The transformation laws for p, E are now immediate:
E0 ¼ mc2dt0
ds ¼ gmc2
dt
ds  v
c2
dx1
ds

¼ gðE  vp1Þ
p01 ¼ m dx01
ds ¼ gm
dx1
ds  v dt
ds

¼ g

p1  v
c2 E

p02 ¼ p2
p03 ¼ p3
(6.20)
Knowing the transformation law Eq. (6.20) will help us solve problems in
relativistic collisions and help us formulate how charged particles respond to
electric and magnetic ﬁelds.
The reader should be careful not to confuse the g factors in the
expression for p and E with the g factors in Eq. (6.20). In the ﬁrst case, g
contains the velocity of the particle in a given frame, and in the trans-
formation formulas Eq. (6.20), g contains the relative velocity between two
inertial frames.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
97

We learn several points from Eq. (6.20). First, momentum and energy
conservation are uniﬁed. Because momentum and energy mix under a
boost, we must have conservation of all four components of the energye
momentum four-vector together. It would be inconsistent with Postulate 1
to have fewer. Second, because p and E form a four-vector, we should be
able to construct an invariant frame-independent quadratic form in analogy
to the invariant interval
c2t2  x2 ¼ c2t02  x02
For energyemomentum, we have
1
c2E2  p2 ¼ 1
c2g2m2c4  g2m2u2 ¼ g2m2ðc2  u2Þ
¼
m2c2
1  u2=c2 ð1  u2=c2Þ ¼ m2c2.
by the same algebra we used in Section 6.3. So, we have rederived the
energyemomentum relation for a particle of mass m,
E2 ¼ p2c2 þ m2c4.
(6.21)
This is the relativistic version of the energyemomentum relation of
Newtonian physics,
T NR ¼ 1
2 mu2 ¼ p2
2m .
(6.22)
Note that Eq. (6.21) is quite different from Eq. (6.22). Substituting the
relativistic kinetic energy T ¼ E  mc2 into Eq. (6.21) gives
T 2 þ 2mc2T ¼ p2c2.
(6.23)
If v/c  1, then we observed earlier that T z (1/2) mv2 so T  mc2 and
Eq. (6.23) reduces to
T z p2=2m
as expected.
But for v z c, pc [ mc, so Eq. (6.21) becomes
E z pc.
Therefore, E and p, the magnitude of p

ph
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
1 þ p2
2 þ p2
2
p

; become
linearly related.
Finally, note that if the rest mass of the particle vanishes, it can still carry
momentum and energy, and we have exactly,
98
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

E ¼ pc.
(6.24)
This is the exact energyemomentum relation for light, as we mentioned
early in this chapter. Light travels at the speed limit because it has no rest
mass. Maxwell’s wave theory of light predicts Eq. (6.24) from ﬁrst principles
as we shall derive in Chapter 9. This relation is particularly important in the
quantum theory of light, as we illustrate in Section 6.6.
6.5 FOCUSING ON FOUR-VECTORS, TENSORS, AND
NOTATION
In the previous section, we discovered that the energyemomentum of a
free particle in relativity has the property that it transforms under boosts in
the same fashion as the spaceetime coordinates. This makes the four-vector
pm ¼

E

c; px; py; pz

a particularly signiﬁcant and useful quantity. We
should think more generally about four-vectors for this reason.
First, we noted that the “length” of a four-vector is invariant under
Lorentz transformations (“Lorentz invariant”). You will see how powerful
this point is in problem solving in Section 6.6. We will write the length of a
four-vector am as a$a ¼ a2
0  a2
x  a2
y  a2
z. If we have two four-vectors, am
and bm, we can take their “inner product,” a$b ¼ a0b0  axbx  ayby  azbz.
This is also a Lorentz invariant quantity as straightforward algebra shows.
Note that it is also invariant under ordinary rotations in three space.
Take a useful example, p$x ¼ Et  pxx  pyy  pzz. Consider a light
ray
propagating
in
the
x
direction.
In
this
case
E ¼ pxc,
so
p$x ¼ Et  pxx ¼ Eðt  x=cÞ. We recognize this as the phase of the light
ray. The phase depends on the combination t  x/c, indicating that points
on the wave of constant phase move at the speed limit c. Also, since the
phase is Lorentz invariant, observers measure the phase to be the same in all
frames, p$x ¼ p0$x0 ¼ Eðt  x=cÞ ¼ E0ðt0  x0=cÞ, which states that the
wave travels at the speed limit in all frames.
It will help us make further progress in special relativity, if we
modernize our notation for Lorentz transformations, four-vectors, etc.
Better notation will also prepare us for general relativity where we will go
beyond the requirement that physics satisﬁes the principle of relativity
within inertial frames to the requirement that physics satisﬁes the principle
of relativity in a general noninertial frame including curved spaceetimes.
We start with the Minkowski metric gmn, which relates our coordinate mesh
to invariant intervals,
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
99

ds2 ¼ c2dt2  dx2  dy2  dz2 h
X
mn
gmndxmdxn
(6.25)
Here the metric gmn acts as a 4  4 matrix. In fact, it is a “second rank”
tensor as we will discuss in Chapters 11 and 12. In the case of Minkowski
space,
its
only
nonzero
elements
are
on
the
diagonal,
g00 ¼  g11 ¼ g22 ¼  g33 ¼ þ1. Of course we could choose spherical
or cylindrical coordinates and then the appearance of the metric will
change. In spherical coordinates,
ds2 ¼ c2dt2  dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qdf2
In these coordinates (ct, r, q, f) the metric reads,
g00 ¼ 1;
g11 ¼ 1;
g22 ¼ r2;
g33 ¼ r2 sin2 q
But we really want to consider more possibilities where gmn has off diagonal
elements because this is unavoidable in curvilinear coordinates that occur
in general relativity. To accommodate these possibilities we introduce “up-
per” and “lower” indices. Covariant four-vectors Am have lower indices and
contravariant four-vectors Am have upper indices. Given Am we convert it to
a covariant four-vector by lowering its indices using the metric,
Am ¼
X
n
gmnAn
(6.26)
For the Minkowski metric in Cartesian coordinates this is simple,
A0 ¼ A0;
A1 ¼ A1;
A2 ¼ A2;
A3 ¼ A3
Why should we make these deﬁnitions? Because the inner product of four-
vectors can now be written more simply! Note that
A$B ¼ A0B0  A1B1  A2B2  A3B3 ¼ A0B0 þ A1B1 þ A2B2 þ A3B3
A$B ¼
X
m
AmBm
(6.27)
So, using the upper and lower indices we have a much briefer way of
writing invariants without the explicit appearance of the metric. Take an
example, the “length” of the energyemomentum four-vector,
p2 ¼ p$p ¼
X
m
pmpm ¼ E2=c2  p2 ¼ m2c2
The real payoff occurs when we meet generalizations of four-vectors,
second-rank tensors. These are quantities such as the energyemomentum
100
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

stress tensor Tmn, which depends on two four-vector indices and the metric
tensor gmn. The energyemomentum stress tensor Tmn is the source for
spaceetime curvature in general relativity, so we will see more of this
tensor later. The term tensor means that it transforms from one inertial
frame to another like the “outer” product of two four-vectors, AmBn. Let us
write the Lorentz transformation of a four-vector in matrix notation,
ct0 ¼ gðct  vx=cÞ;
x0 ¼ gðx  vct=cÞ;
y0 ¼ y;
z0 ¼ z
Equivalently,
 ct0
x0

¼
0
B
B
@
g
v
c g
v
c g
g
1
C
C
A
 ct
x

(6.28a)
Or, writing out all four members of (x0, x1, x2, x3) ¼ (ct, x, y, z) in matrix
notation, which respects covariant and contravariant indices,
x0m ¼
X
n
Lm
nxn
(6.28b)
where the sum over n ranges over 0, 1, 2, 3, and we read off Eq. (6.28a) that
L0
0 ¼ g; L0
1 ¼ v
c g; L1
0 ¼ v
c g; L1
1 ¼ g; L2
2 ¼ 1; L3
3 ¼ 1
and
all other elements in the Lorentz transformation Lm
n are zero in this
Cartesian basis for boosts in the x direction.
Let us illustrate this notation further. First, the outer product of two
four-vectors transforms under boosts as,
A0mB0n ¼
X
s
Lm
sAs
 
! X
l
Ln
lBl
 
!
¼
X
sl
Lm
sLn
lAsBl
(6.29)
We will ﬁnd mathematical objects with two four-vector indices as we delve
deeper into special and general relativity. They are called “second-rank
tensors,” and they transform by this rule even if they can not be expressed
as the outer product of two four-vectors,
T 0mn ¼
X
sl
Lm
sLn
lT sl
(6.30)
The metric is a second-rank tensor, but a very simple and special one in
special relativity,
g0mn ¼
X
sl
Lm
sLn
lgsl
(6.31)
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
101

In this case the metric is unaffected by boosts. We know this because of the
invariance of the invariant interval under boosts,
ds2 ¼ c2dt2  dx2  dy2  dz2 ¼ c2dt02  dx02  dy02  dz02
So, g0mn ¼ gmn. We can check this explicitly from Eq. (6.31),
g000 ¼
X
sl
L0
sL0
lgsl ¼ g2g00 þ
v
c g

2
g11 ¼ g2  g2v2
c2 ¼ 1
g011 ¼
X
sl
L1
sL1
lgsl ¼ g2g11 þ
v
c g

2
g00 ¼ g2 þ g2v2
c2 ¼ 1
g001 ¼
X
sl
L0
sL1
lgsl ¼ g2v
cg00  g2v
cg11 ¼ g2v
c  g2v
c ¼ 0
g022 ¼
X
sl
L2
sL2
lgsl ¼ g22 ¼ 1
g033 ¼
X
sl
L2
sL2
lgsl ¼ g33 ¼ 1
and so on. Of course, all of this arithmetic “worked out” because Lorentz
transformations were designed to leave ds2 invariant, ds2 ¼ ds02. A fuller
discussion can be found in Problem 6.42.
There are many observations we could make about the algebra of Lm
s,
gmn, four-vectors and tensors. For example, Lm
s is a function of the velocity
of the boost v. If we boost in the x direction by v and then boost in the x
direction by ev, we should arrive where we started. In other words,
Lm
s v
ð
Þ should be the inverse of Lm
s vð Þ,
X
m
Ls
m v
ð
ÞLm
n vð Þ ¼ ds
n
(6.32)
where the “Kronecker” symbol ds
n is short hand for the identity matrix,
ds
n ¼ 1 if s ¼ n and zero otherwise. The explicit veriﬁcation of this iden-
tity is left to the problem set.
Tensors as well as four-vectors can be written with upper or lower
indices. The metric illustrates this formalism. Start with the invariant in-
terval, and write it in terms of dxm instead of dxm,
ds2 ¼
X
mn
gmndxmdxn ¼
X
sr
gsrdxsdxr
Clearly gmn ¼ gmn in Cartesian coordinates, and if Am ¼ P
n gmnAn; then
As ¼ P
l gsrAr, and P
n gmngnr ¼ dm
r. Of course, since gmn is just
102
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

on-diagonal (1, 1, 1, 1) in Cartesian coordinates, this notation is rather
excessive! It gains value, however, when we work in curvilinear coordinates.
We have written Lorentz transformations for contravariant four-vectors
xm and pm, etc. We can write these transformation laws for xm and pm, etc., as
well. Recall that we raise or lower indices with the metric tensor,
xm ¼
X
n
gmnxn;
xm ¼
X
n
gmnxn
(6.33)
We see that gmn is the inverse of gmn,
X
n
gmngnr ¼ dm
r
(6.34)
as we noted earlier. Since xm transforms from frame S to S0 by a Lorentz
transformation,
x0m ¼
X
s
Lm
sxs
(6.35)
and since,
x0 ¼ x0;
x1 ¼ x1;
x2 ¼ x2;
x3 ¼ x3
(6.36)
we have sufﬁcient information to see how xm transforms under a boost.
Write out Eq. (6.28a),
x00 ¼ gðx0  vx1=cÞ;
x01 ¼ gðx1  vx0=cÞ;
x02 ¼ x2;
x03 ¼ x3
Substituting Eq. (6.36),
x0
0 ¼ gðx0 þ vx1=cÞ;
x0
1 ¼ gðx1 þ vx0=cÞ;
x0
2 ¼ x2;
x0
3 ¼ x3 (6.37)
Using the metric to raise and lower indices in Eq. (6.35), we can write the
boost for xm,
x0
m ¼
X
s
L
s
m
xs
(6.38)
and read off from Eq. (6.37), L 0
0 ¼ g, L 1
0 ¼ v
c g, L 0
1 ¼ v
c g, L 1
1 ¼ g,
L 2
2 ¼ 1, and L 3
3 ¼ 1.
Next, let us turn to the transformation laws of operators. It will serve us
well to ﬁnd the transformation laws of v/vxm and v/vxm. To begin, write
the inverse relation to Eq. (6.37),
x0 ¼ g

x0
0  vx0
1

c

;
x1 ¼ g

x0
1  vx0
0

c

;
x2 ¼ x0
2;
x3 ¼ x0
3
so we can compute the partial derivatives,
vx0
vx0
0
¼ g;
vx1
vx0
0
¼ v
c g;
vx0
vx0
1
¼ v
c g;
vx1
vx0
1
¼ g
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
103

So, using the chain rule,
v
vx0
0
¼
X
m
vxm
vx0
0
v
vxm
¼ vx0
vx0
0
v
vx0
þ vx1
vx0
0
v
vx1
¼ g
 v
vx0
 v
c
v
vx1

v
vx0
1
¼
X
m
vxm
vx0
1
v
vxm
¼ vx0
vx0
1
v
vx0
þ vx1
vx0
1
v
vx1
¼ g
 v
vx1
 v
c
v
vx0

which we identify as the Lorentz transformation for xm. So we learn that
v/vxm transforms as an upper index four-vector, so we write,
vm ¼ v=vxm
Similarly we ﬁnd,
vm ¼ v=vxm
A simple illustration of this formalism displays its usefulness. Consider
the inner product of vm and vm,
X
m
vmvm ¼ v2
c2vt2  V2
This is an invariant operator because vm transforms as xm and vm transforms
as xm and P
m
xmxm is an invariant. The operator character of vm and vm is not
important here. The transformation law is important. So,
X
m
vmvm ¼
X
m
v0mv0
m ¼ v2
c2vt2  V2 ¼
v2
c2vt02  V02
This is the wave operator of electrodynamics. We shall see it again in
Chapter 9.
The meaning of contravariant and covariant vectors is discussed from
the perspective of linear algebra and differential geometry in Appendix C,
Section D. The student interested in spaceetime curvature should have a
look.
6.6 COLLISIONS AND CONSERVATION LAWSdCONVERTING
MASS TO ENERGY AND ENERGY TO MASS, PRODUCING
AND DESTROYING PARTICLES
It is interesting to consider relativistic collisions and decay processes that
illustrate the energyemomentum conservation laws. Some of these
processes involve light that satisﬁes the energyemomentum relation,
104
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

E ¼ pc. In addition, if we deal with individual quanta of light, then the
energy comes in a packet E ¼ hv, where v is the frequency of the light wave
and h is Planck’s constant, h ¼ 6.627$1034 J-s, which sets the scale of
quantum physics. We certainly will not be doing any quantum mechanics
here, so we just borrow E ¼ hv to illustrate relativity in interesting settings
involving elementary particles.
As we pursue dynamics further in the following chapters, we will see
that we must carefully distinguish between particles that are outside the
range of nontrivial forces of other particles and those that are not. The
kinematics of collisions are greatly simpliﬁed by the assumption that
the particles in the initial and ﬁnal states are so well separated that they
experience no forces and move with constant velocities. It is only when the
particles come within range of one another and interact that energy and
momentum are transferred between them, and they experience forces that
change their velocities. The interaction mechanisms must conserve energy
and momentum locally in a relativistic, causal theory. That description will
require us to replace the nonrelativistic notion of forces with the relativistic
notion of dynamical ﬁelds. We will learn more about this in later chapters,
but a full accounting requires the development of ﬁeld theory. Nonetheless,
we will learn a lot about relativistic collisions, the equivalence of mass and
energy, particle creation and destruction and conservation laws in this
section.
Let us take an example. Consider a nucleus of rest mass Mo that absorbs a
photon of energy Q. The ﬁnal state consists of an excited nucleus of rest
mass M 0 and recoil velocity v. We want to ﬁnd M 0 and v in terms of Mo and
Q. The process is shown in Fig. 6.9. Energy conservation reads
Q þ Moc2 ¼ gM 0c2
and momentum conservation reads
Q=c ¼ gM 0y.
Combining these equations, we ﬁnd
Figure 6.9 Photon absorption by a nucleus of mass M0 at rest.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
105

y
c ¼
Q
gM 0c2 ¼
Q
Q þ Moc2 ;
which gives the recoil velocity. Finally, we can solve for M 0,
M 0 ¼ Mo
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2Q=Moc2
p
.
(6.39)
Note that M0c2 is less than the sum of the initial relativistic energies,
Moc2 þ Q, because some energy goes into M0s recoil. This is how the
kinematics works out. It is interesting that this process may not be possible
and may not occur. The point is that the laws of nuclear physics (quantum
mechanics) predict a discrete list of possible states and possible M0 values for
each nucleus. If the M0 of Eq. (6.39) does not match one of these allowed
values, the initial photon will not be absorbed. Scattering of the photon
might be the actual physical event in that case.
It is interesting to turn this process around and consider photon emission
from an excited atom. The process is shown in Fig. 6.10. Conservation of
energy and momentum reads
Moc2 ¼ E0 þ Q
0 ¼ p0  Q=c;
(6.40)
where E0 and p0 label the relativistic energy and momentum of the ﬁnal
(unexcited) atom of mass M0
o. Let us say that we detect the photon and
measure its energy Q. So, we need to eliminate E0 and p0 from
Eq. (6.40). A slick way to do this is to use the energyemomentum relation
E02 ¼ p02c2 þ M02
o c4. Rearranging Eq. (6.40) gives
E0 ¼ Moc2  Q
p0 ¼ Q=c.
So,
E02  p02c2 ¼ ðMoc2  QÞ
2  Q2 ¼ M 02
o c4.
Finally,
M 2
o c4  2Moc2Q ¼ M 02
o c4.
(6.41)
Figure 6.10 Photon emission from an excited atom of mass M0 at rest.
106
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Let us write this in terms of the energy difference between the initial and
ﬁnal atoms, taken at rest,
DE h Moc2  M 0
oc2.
(6.42)
We focus on DE because this would be the energy difference between
discrete quantum energy levels of the atom. One could calculate such a
difference from ﬁrst principles in quantum mechanics. Solving Eq. (6.42)
for M0
oc2,
Moc2  DE ¼ M 0
oc2.
Squaring gives
M 2
o c4  2Moc2DE þ ðDEÞ2 ¼ M 02
o c4.
Combining this with Eq. (6.41) gives
Q ¼ DE

1  DE
2Moc2

.
(6.43)
This is the desired result. We learn that recoil, a consequence of energye
momentum conservation, has reduced the energy of the photon from
DE to DE(1 e DE/2Moc2). If we observe the photon and measure Q,
we must use Eq. (6.43) to predict DE to compare with predictions of quan-
tum mechanics. For heavy atoms, the recoil is a small effect. For example,
consider 198Hg, which emits photons with an energy 412 keV. Because
Mo ¼ 198 amu ¼ 3.28$1025 kg, we compute DE/2Moc2 z 106. This
is small but not really negligible in our quantum world. For example, if
the emitted photon were incident on another 198Hg, it could not be
absorbed because its energy does not quite match the needed DEdit is
not quite energetic enough to cause the transition.
There is a way around this dilemma, ﬁrst developed by Mössbauer. Let
the atom that emits the photon be part of a large regular crystal. Then,
when it emits the photon, the recoiling momentum, if it is sufﬁciently
small, is imparted to the entire crystal! The recoil term, DE/2Moc2, is now
reduced by the number of atoms in the crystal and becomes truly negligible,
less than the intrinsic energy spread of each spectral line. Using this
observation, Mössbauer studied spectral lines in detail. His experimental
apparatus employed two crystals, one emitting and the other absorbing, at a
relative velocity v, as in Fig. 6.11. If v is too large, then the energy of the
photons in the rest frame of the atoms in crystal B is too large to match
the energy difference between the quantum states, even accounting for
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
107

their intrinsic uncertainties (widths). In fact, a tiny v on the order of a
few centimeters per second is sufﬁcient to produce a photon energy that
misses DE. By varying v, the detailed structure of spectral lines can be
mapped out.
Now let us turn to several illustrations of particle creation in high-
energy physics collisions. At an accelerator center, researchers convert
kinetic energy into mass and search for new elementary particles.
Colliding beams are a particularly effective way of achieving this goal, and
important discoveries of new resonances, evidence for the existence of
heavy quarks, were made this way. Consider protoneproton collisions in
the center-of-momentum frame and suppose we wish to create a pion, the
particle responsible for the nuclear force as you will learn in quantum
mechanics:
P þ P/P þ N þ pþ.
The collision is shown in Fig. 6.12. We want to know the minimal velocity
u that will make it possible to create the extra particle, a pion. The rest
masses involved are
mp=mP z 0:149;
mPc2 z 938 MeV
Figure 6.11 The two crystals at relative velocity v in a Mössbauer experiment.
Figure 6.12 A protoneproton collision that produces a pion, a proton, and a neutron
in the center-of-momentum frame.
108
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

and the proton and neutron have approximately equal masses (actually the
neutron is slightly heavier than the proton, approximately 0.1%). We can
compute the required u, and thus know how powerful an accelerator is
required. Using relativistic energy conservation,
2gmPc2 ¼ 2mpc2 þ mpc2.
Therefore,
g ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2=c2
p
¼ 1 þ mp
2mP
z 1:074:
Doing the arithmetic gives
u=c z 0:37:
To put this result into perspective, imagine a collision at another
accelerator center where one proton is speeding along in a beam and the
other proton is in a stationary target. How fast would the proton in
the beam have to be to create a pion again? Call this velocity n. We can get
this answer by boosting our center-of-momentum analysis. Consider a
frame S moving to the left in Fig. 6.12 at velocity u, so that the proton with
velocity u in the center-of-momentum frame is brought to rest
(Fig. 6.13). The left proton has a velocity
y ¼
u þ u
1 þ u2=c2
in the lab frame, using the addition of velocity formula. Since u/c ¼ 0.37,
we learn that v ¼ 0.65c and the relativistic kinetic energy of the beam
proton
is
ðg  1Þmc2 ¼

1
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
 1

mc2 z ð1:31  1Þ 938
Figure 6.13 Boosting the collision of Fig. 6.12 to the lab frame.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
109

MeV ¼ 290 MeV. We learn from this that the proton in the beam needs
to have more than twice the kinetic energy of the rest mass of the pion we
are trying to create. Mass creation in this sort of experiment is much less
efﬁcient than that in the center-of-momentum frame because of mo-
mentum conservationdthe three particles in the ﬁnal state must have
net momentum to the right to match the momentum of the initial proton
in the beam, so we cannot convert all the kinetic energy to mass. This
calculation illustrates why colliding beam experiments are best in
exploring the world of new, higher energy states of matter. Unfortunately,
it is harder to make colliding beam machines with beams intense enough
to make such experiments practical than it is to make ﬁxed target
accelerators.
Finally, let us consider a scattering process in three dimensions.
Consider Compton scattering, the elastic scattering of a photon off an
atom or any charged particle. Studies of this process were important in
establishing the quantum theory of light. A photon of energy Qo scatters
off a stationary electron, and the photon emerges at an angle q with
diminished energy Q, while the electron recoils through angle 4 with
ﬁnal energy E and momentum p. This is shown in Fig. 6.14, where we
have labeled the direction of the initial photon with the unit vector bno and
the direction of the ﬁnal photon with the unit vector bn. Writing out the
conservation laws,
Qo þ mc2 ¼ E þ Q
bnoQo=c ¼ bnQ=c þ p .
(6.44)
Suppose our experiment just detects the ﬁnal photon, so we want to
eliminate E and 4 from the kinematics. Solving Eq. (6.44) for E and pc gives
E ¼ ðQo  QÞ þ mc2
pc ¼ ðbnoQo  bnQÞ
.
Figure 6.14 Compton scattering: the elastic scattering of a photon off an electron
initially at rest in the lab.
110
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Squaring each equation gives
ðQo  QÞ2 þ 2ðQo  QÞmc2 þ m2c4 ¼ E2
Q2
o  2QoQ cos q þ Q2 ¼ c2p2
where we identiﬁed bn$bno ¼ cos q. Now subtract these equations using the
energyemomentum relative for the recoiling electron, E2 ¼ p2c2 þ m2c4:
2QoQð1  cos qÞ  2ðQo  QÞmc2 ¼ 0:
Dividing through by 2QoQmc2 gives
1
Q ¼ 1
Q0
þ 1
mc2 ð1  cos qÞ
(6.45)
So, if the photon scatters through an angle q, its energy is diminished
from Qo to Q according to the Compton formula. This result is usually
quoted in the context of quantum mechanics where the energy of a single
quantum of light is related to its frequency v by Planck’s constant h,
h ¼ 6.627$1034 J-s,
Q ¼ h n.
Because v ¼ c/l for a wave traveling with the speed of light, we can replace
1/Q by l/hc in Eq. (6.45) and get
l  lo ¼ h
mc ð1  cos qÞ.
In other words, when light scatters, its wavelength increases proportionally
to 1 minus the cosine of its scattering angle. Setting the scale of the effect
with Planck’s constant, h ¼ 6.627$1034 J-s, the characteristic length in the
Compton formula,
h
mc z 0:02426
A
0
¼ 2:4$1012m;
which is often referred to as the Compton wavelength of the electron, a
very small distance on the scale of atomic physics. If the initial photon
were an X-ray with lo ¼ 0.7 Å (angstrom, Å, is a convenient unit of length
in atomic physics, Å h 1010 m) and we take scattering through 45
degrees, then
l ¼ lo þ h
mc ð1  cos qÞ ¼ 0:7 þ 0:02426ð0:7071Þ z 0:7018A
0
.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
111

Scattering experiments such as this, coupled with quantum mechanics
calculations of the cross sections involved, played a central role in the devel-
opment of atomic physics.
PROBLEMS
6-1. Our galaxy is approximately 105 light-years across, and the most en-
ergetic naturally occurring particles have an energy of approximately
1019 eV. How long would it take a proton with this energy to travel
across the galaxy as measured in the rest frame of (a) the galaxy or
(b) the particle?
6-2. An electron is accelerated from rest through a voltage drop of 105 V
and then travels at constant velocity.
a. How long does it take the electron to travel 10 m, after it has
reached its ﬁnal velocity?
b. What is the distance measured in the rest frame of the electron?
6-3. If all the energy used in running the accelerator at Fermilab for a full
day could be collected in a box, how much heavier would the box
become. (Find out about the energy requirements at Fermilab
through their website, www.fnal.gov.)
6-4. Plot the total energy E versus momentum p for a particle of rest mass
mo for the cases (a) Newtonian kinematics, (b) relativistic kinematics,
and (c) relativistic kinematics for a massless particle, mo ¼ 0. Note the
ranges in momentum where two or more of the three curves are
good approximations of one another.
6-5. In the chapter, we derived the Lorentz transformation law for energy
and momentum between a frame S and a frame S0 moving to
the right at velocity v. Specialize to the case of the energy and
momentum carried by light, P ¼ E/c, and show that the transforma-
tion for radiant energy between frames S and S0 for light traveling in
the x direction is
E0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
E.
Note that this result is algebraically the same as the Doppler shift
for the frequencies of light observed in the two frames. In other
words, the transformation laws for energy and frequency of light
are identical. This is an important result for both the basic theory
112
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

of electromagnetic phenomena and quantum mechanics, in which
the quantum of electromagnetic energy, the photon, carries energy
proportional to its frequency, E ¼ hv, where h is Planck’s constant,
the cornerstone of quantum theory.
6-6. Radiant energy from the Sun is received on Earth at a rate of about
1370 J/s-m2 on a surface perpendicular to the Sun’s rays.
a. What total force would be exerted on all of Earth if all the light
energy were absorbed?
b. Is this a large or a small force? (Compare it to the total gravita-
tional force that the Sun exerts on the Earth.)
6-7. The average rate at which solar radiant energy reaches Earth is about
1. 37  103 W/m2. Assume that all this energy results from the con-
version of mass to energy.
a. Calculate the rate at which solar mass is being lost.
b. If this rate is maintained, calculate the remaining lifetime of the
Sun. (The mass of the Sun is 332,830 times the mass of the Earth,
and the mass of the Earth is 5.976  1024 kg.)
6-8. A star of mass 1032 kg is surrounded by a thin, ﬂexible spherical
shell of mass 1025 kg. The star loses mass at the rate 1010 kg/s in
the form of light. Suppose that all of this radiant energy is absorbed
on the shell. What must the radius of the shell be so that the
radiation pressure from the light balances its gravitational attraction
to the star?
6-9. Light rays from the Sun hit the Earth at the rate of 1370 J/s-m2 on a
surface perpendicular to the Sun’s rays.
a. How much mass in the Sun is converted to energy per second to
account for the radiant energy hitting Earth? (The radius of Earth
is roughly 6.4$106 m and the distance from Earth to the Sun is
approximately 1.5$1011 m)
b. What is the total mass converted to energy in the Sun to supply
this radiant energy?
c. Estimate the mass of hydrogen that must be converted to helium
per second to supply this radiant energy. (Recall that most of the
Sun’s energy comes from fusing hydrogen into helium. The mass
of a hydrogen nucleus is 1.67262$1027 kg, and the mass of a he-
lium nucleus is 6.64648$1027 kg.)
d. Estimate how long the Sun will warm Earth, accounting only for
the hydrogen fusion process.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
113

6-10. The physicist Sir Arthur Eddington, who did pioneering work in
cosmology, pointed out the strength of unscreened electrostatic
forces in the following dramatic fashion. Take 1 g of electrons and
place them uniformly at rest in a spherical container of radius
10 cm. Calculate the mass associated with their electrostatic potential
energy, and verify that it is on the order of 1010 kg! (Recall from
electricity and magnetism that electrons repel one another through
the inverse square law F ¼ kq2/r2, where q is the electronic charge
in coulombs and k is approximately 9$109 N-m2/C2. The electro-
static energy of a uniformly charged sphere of total charge Q and
radius r is 3kQ2/5r. The charge of an electron is q ¼ 1.6$1019 C,
and its mass is m ¼ 9.11$1031 kg.)
This alarming answer shows how important the neutrality of bulk
matter really is. The negative charges of the electrons in the paper
of this book, which weighs under a pound, are neutralized by the
positive charges of the protons in the nuclei of the atoms that
bind them, and the powerful long-range electromagnetic forces
that interested Sir Arthur Eddington are canceled out.
6-11. Our derivation of E ¼ mc2 in the text using Einstein’s box made two
simpliﬁcations. First, we ignored the distance that the box recoils
when light is in transit from one end to the other. And second,
we ignored the decrease in the mass of the box when the light is
in transit. Include these effects in a calculation of the same problem,
and show that E ¼ mc2 can be derived perfectly.
6-12. A particle is given a relativistic kinetic energy equal to twice its rest
mass. Find its resulting speed and momentum. How do these results
change if the relativistic kinetic energy is ﬁve times the particle’s rest
mass?
6-13. Through what voltage would you have to accelerate an electron to
boost its speed from rest to 99% of the speed of light? Repeat your
calculation for a proton.
6-14. A relativistic electron moving in the x direction enters a region of
space where there is a uniform electric ﬁeld in the y direction.
a. Write down the relativistic equations of motion that describe this
situation. Following Section 6.3, you will have two equations,
one for the x component of the force and one for the y
component.
114
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

b. Discuss the solution of the equations in part (a) qualitatively.
For example, identify conserved quantities and time variable
quantities. Show that the x component of the velocity of the
particle decreases with time.
c. Solve for vx(t) and vy(t), assuming that initially the electron had a
velocity vo in the x direction. Denote the component of the force
in the y direction Fy.
d. Suggest some practical uses for a device based on your results in
an accelerator center where the electrons have vo values very
close to the speed limit c.
6-15. In science ﬁction stories, we ﬁnd space vehicles that consist of
large sails that deﬂect light so that the recoil of the light propels
the vehicle to amazing speeds. Suppose that the Department of
Energy has funded such a project, and there is a sailship in free space
that feels the push of a strong, steady laser beam of light directed at
it from Earth. If the sail is perfectly reﬂecting, calculate the mass
equivalent of light required to accelerate a vehicle of rest mass mo
up to a ﬁxed g.
6-16. A laser with a mass of 10 kg is in free space with its beam directed
toward Earth. The laser continuously emits 1020 photons/s of wave-
length 6000 Å, as measured in its own rest frame. At t ¼ 0 the laser is
at rest with respect to Earth.
a. Initially how much radiant energy per second is received on
Earth? (Planck’s constant h ¼ 6.627$1031 kg-m2/s, and the en-
ergy of a photon is E ¼ hv.)
b. The radiation emitted toward Earth causes the laser to recoil
away from Earth. What is the velocity of the laser relative to
Earth after 10 years have elapsed on a clock at rest with respect
to the laser?
c. At the time when the laser is moving with velocity v relative to
Earth, how much less is the rate at which energy is received on
Earth than the original rate when v ¼ 0? Evaluate this for
t ¼ 10 years, laser time.
d. Show how an observer on Earth can explain the continually
decreasing rate of reception in terms of energy considerations.
6-17. A photon rocket uses light as a propellant. If the initial and ﬁnal
rest masses of the rocket are Mi and Mf, show that the ﬁnal velocity
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
115

v of the rocket relative to its initial rest frame is given by the
equation
Mi=Mf ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 þ y=cÞ=ð1  y=cÞ
p
.
Problems on Collisions and Conservation Laws
6-18. Consider two lumps of clay each with a rest mass of m. They collide
head on, one traveling to the right at speed 3
5 c and the other traveling
to the left at the same speed. They stick together.
a. What is the mass M of the composite lump?
b. Explain how M can be greater than 2m.
6-19. Consider the decay of a charged pion of mass mp initially at rest in
the lab. It decays into a muon of mass mm and a neutrino, which
we treat as massless. Find the relativistic energy, momentum, and
speed of the muon in terms of mp and mm.
6-20. A pion collides with a proton initially at rest in the lab and the
process p þ p / K þ S occurs. What is the minimum (threshold)
momentum of the pion for this process to be possible? Use these
experimental
masses:
mpc2 ¼ 139 MeV,
mKc2 ¼ 494 MeV,
mpc2 ¼ 938 MeV and mSc2 ¼ 1192 MeV. (Hint: Consider the kine-
matics in the center-of-momentum and use invariants.)
6-21. When a Ko meson decays at rest into a pþ and a p meson, each
escapes with a speed of approximately 0.85c. Now consider a Ko
meson that is traveling at a speed of 0.9c relative to the lab frame.
If it then decays, what is the greatest speed that one of the pions
can have in the lab frame? What is the least speed?
6-22. Two identical particles, A and B, are approaching each other along a
common straight line. Each particle has the same speed v, as
measured in the lab. Show that the energy of particle A as measured
by B is (1 þ v2/c2) (1  v2/c2)1 Moc2, where Mo is A’s rest mass.
6-23. A photon has energy 200 MeV and is traveling along the x axis.
Suppose another photon has energy 400 MeV and is traveling along
the y axis.
a. What is the total energy of this system? What is its total
momentum?
b. If a single particle had the same energy and momentum, what
would its mass be? What would its direction of travel, and
what would its speed be?
116
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

6-24. A particle of mass M decays into two distinguishable particles of m1
and m2.
a. Find the energies of particles 1 and 2 in terms of M, m1 and m2.
A particle of energy E1 and mass m1 strikes a particle of mass
m2 at rest in the lab.
b. Calculate the velocity of the center-of-momentum frame in the
lab.
c. Calculate the mass of the composite system of particles 1 and 2 in
terms of m1, m2, and E1.
6-25. A particle of rest mass mo and relativistic kinetic energy 3moc2 strikes
and sticks to a stationary particle of rest mass 2mo. Find the rest mass
Mo of the resulting composite particle.
6-26. Kinematics of an absorption process.
a. A photon of energy E is absorbed by a stationary particle of rest
mass mo. What is the velocity and rest mass of the resulting com-
posite particle?
b. Repeat part (a) replacing the photon by a particle of rest mass mo
and speed 0.8c.
6-27. An atom in an excited state of energy Qo above the ground state
moves toward a scintillation counter with speed v. The atom decays
to its ground state by emitting a photon of energy Q, as measured by
the counter, coming completely to rest as it does so. If the rest mass
of the atom is m, show that Q ¼ Qo [1 þ (Qo/2mc2)].
6-28. A neutral pion decays into two photons. The pion’s rest mass is
135 MeV. Suppose it is in a secondary beam at Fermilab with a
relativistic kinetic energy of 1 GeV.
a. What are the energies of the photons if they are emitted in
opposite directions along the pion’s original line of motion.
b. What angle is formed between the two photons if they are
emitted at equal angles to the direction of the pion’s motion?
6-29. An antiproton of kinetic energy 1 GeV strikes a proton at rest in the
lab. (The proton and its antiparticle have identical masses, about
938 MeV/c2.) They annihilate, and two photons emerge from the
reaction, one traveling forward and one backward along the beam
direction.
a. What are the energies of the two photons?
b. As measured in a reference frame of the antiproton, what energy
does each photon have?
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
117

6-30. According to Newtonian mechanics, when a beam particle collides
off an identical particle originally at rest, they emerge with an angle
between them of exactly 90 degrees in all cases. Contrast this result
to a relativistic collision:
a. If a proton of kinetic energy 500 MeV collides elastically with a
proton at rest, and the protons rebound with equal energies,
what is the angle between them?
b. Repeat this exercise with a proton having an initial kinetic
energy of 100 GeV.
6-31. Suppose a photon has a head-on collision with an electron. What
initial velocity must the electron have if the collision results in a
photon recoiling straight backward with the same energy Q as it
had initially?
6-32. A photon of energy E collides elastically with an electron at rest.
After the collision, the photon’s energy is reduced by half, and its
scattering angle is 60 degrees.
a. What was its original energy? Is the frequency of this photon in
the visible range?
b. A photon of energy E collides with an excited atom at rest. After
the collision, the photon has the same energy, but its direction
has changed by 180 degrees. If the atom is in its ground state after
the collision, what was its original excitation energy?
6-33. A K meson, rest mass approximately 494 MeV/c2, is in motion and
decays into two pions, rest mass approximately 137 MeV/c2. One of
the pions emerges from the decay process at rest.
a. What is the energy of the other pion?
b. What was the energy of the original K meson?
6-34. An electronepositron pair can be produced by a gamma ray striking
a stationary electron, g þ e / e þ eþ þ e. What is the mini-
mum gamma ray energy that will allow this process to occur?
(The positron is the electron’s antiparticle. It has the same rest
mass as the electron, 0.511 MeV/c2, but the opposite charge.).
6-35. Suppose that an accelerator can give protons a kinetic energy
of 300 GeV. (The rest mass of a proton is roughly 938 MeV/c2.)
Calculate the largest possible rest mass Mx of a new particle X that
could be produced when the beam proton hits a stationary proton
in a target, p þ p / p þ p þ X.
118
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

6-36. A positron of kinetic energy 0.511 MeV annihilates with an electron
at rest, creating two photons. One photon emerges at an angle 90
degrees to the incident positron direction.
a. What are the energies of both photons? (The rest mass of an
electron is 0.511 MeV/c2. The rest mass of the positron is exactly
the same.)
b. What is the direction of the second photon?
6-37. A particle of kinetic energy K collides elastically with an identical
particle at rest. The two outgoing particles emerge with equal
and opposite angles q/2 with respect to the incoming particle.
Find the energy and momentum of each outgoing particle. Find
the angle q in terms of K and the rest mass m of one of the initial
particles.
6-38. A beryllium nucleus consists of four protons and three neutrons. The
mass of the beryllium nucleus is 6536 MeV/c2, the proton is
938.28 MeV/c2, and the neutron is 939.57 MeV/c2.
a. Find the binding energy of beryllium. (The binding energy of a
nucleus is the difference between its rest mass and the sum of the
rest masses of its free constituents.)
b. Consider the reaction in which an extra neutron at rest is
absorbed by a beryllium nucleus also at rest, which subsequently
decays into two alpha particles. (An alpha particle consists of two
protons and two neutrons bound together. Its rest mass is
3728 MeV/c2.) What is the kinetic energy of each of the alpha
particles?
6-39. What is the minimum proton energy needed in an accelerator to
produce an antiproton p by the reaction p þ p/p þ p þ ðp þ pÞ.
(The mass of the proton is mpc2 ¼ 938 MeV, and the mass of the
antiproton is the same.)
a. Do this for a colliding beam machine. (This is an accelerator,
which produces two beams of equal energy that collide head
on.)
b. Do this for a ﬁxed target machine. (This is a machine, which
produces one beam that is incident on a target at rest in the lab.)
c. What is the velocity of one of the ﬁnal-state particles in part b?
6-40. Verify Eq. (6.32) explicitly by using the Lorentz transformation
matrix written in Eq. (6.28a).
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
119

6-41. Consider a frame S00 moving in the þx direction with velocity w
with respect to frame S0. Let S0 move in the þx direction with
velocity v with respect to frame S. A four-vector x00n measured in
frame S00 is related to xs measured in frame S by the composition
of two Lorentz boosts,
x00n ¼
X
m
Ln
m w
ð Þx0m ¼
X
ms
Ln
m w
ð ÞLm
l vð Þxl
In addition, denote the relative velocity between frames S00 and S u,
so
x00n ¼
X
m
Ln
m u
ð Þxm
1. Show that,
gðuÞ ¼ gðvÞgðwÞð1 þ vw=c2Þ
ugðuÞ ¼ ðv þ wÞgðvÞgðwÞ
2. Solve for u and verify the “addition of velocities” formula,
u ¼
v þ w
ð1 þ vw=c2Þ
6-42. In the text we asserted that the metric transforms as a second-rank
tensor under boosts. To show this directly, write the invariant inter-
val in terms of x and x0, which are related by a boost x0m ¼ P
n
Lm
nxn,
ds2 ¼
X
mn
g0
mndx0mdx0n ¼
X
mnrs
g0
mnLm
sLn
rdxsdxr ¼
X
sr
gsrdxsdxr
Verify,
gsr ¼
X
mn
Lm
sLn
rg0
mn
Invert this expression and ﬁnd the equivalent statement in the text,
g0mn ¼
X
sl
Lm
sLn
lgsl
6-43. Inertia and energy
Consider a point particle with velocity v in the x direction in
frame S. Its relativistic energy is E ¼ g(v)Mc2, where M is its rest
120
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

mass. Suppose that the point particle is replaced by a composite
particle. Take the simplest example: a collection of point particles,
of masses mi and velocities u0
i, in the frame S0. As usual, the frame
S0 moves in the x direction at velocity v. Suppose that S0 is the
composite particle’s rest frame: the total three momentum of the
point particles of masses mi vanishes in S0. Call the total relativistic
energy of the collection of point particles E0 in the frame S0.
Show that E, the composite particle’s relativistic energy in frame S is,
E ¼ gðvÞMc2
where Mc2hE0 ¼ P
i
g

u0
i

mic2.
We learn that the energy (divided by c2) of the “parts” of the
composite particle in its overall rest frame is the composite particle’s
invariant mass (inertia).
The generalization of these ideas to a realistic situation (for
example, a proton is a bound state of strongly interacting [conﬁned]
quarks) is nontrivial and requires the full machinery of ﬁeld theory.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Born, Einstein’s Theory of Relativity, Dover Publications, New York, 1962.
[2] A.P. French, Special Relativity, W. W. Norton, New York, 1968.
Relativistic Dynamics: First Steps
121

CHAPTER 7
Acceleration and Forces in
Relativity: The Birth of Dynamical
Fields
Contents
7.1 Acceleration in Relativity
123
7.2 Transformation Properties of Forces
125
7.3 The Death of Newton’s Third Law, and Static Forces: The Birth of Fields
127
Problems
130
7.1 ACCELERATION IN RELATIVITY
Acceleration is a particularly signiﬁcant and simple quantity in Newtonian
mechanics: it is frame independent and establishes the differential equation
that predicts the time evolution of mechanical systems, “force equals mass
times acceleration.” In relativity, however, the acceleration a is a compli-
cated quantity that will play a less important role in the time evolution of
relativistic systems. We need to understand it relativistically, however, on
our road to Maxwell’s equations.
To begin, we need to derive the rules for transforming a from one frame
to another. We begin with two reference frames S and S0. S0 moves along
the positive x-axis with a velocity v. We have seen in Chapter 4 that if a
particle has velocity u ¼ (ux, uy, uz) in S and velocity u0 ¼

u
0
x; u
0
y; u
0
z

in
S0, then
ux ¼
u'
x

v
1 þ vu'
x
c2
; uy ¼ u'
x

g
1 þ vu'
x
c2
; uz ¼ u'
z

g
1 þ vu'
x
c2
(7.1)
And time transforms according to the Lorentz transformation law,
t ¼ gðt0 þ vx0=c2Þ
(7.2)
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00007-6
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
123

Now consider the motion of the particle in S0. In the time interval dt0, it
moves a distance dx
0 ¼ u
0
xdt
0 in the x-direction. According to Eq. (7.2), the
corresponding time interval in S is,
dt ¼ g

dt
0 þ vdx
0
c2

¼ g

1 þ vu
0
x
c2

dt
0
(7.3)
Eq. (7.3) includes the phenomena of time dilation g and the relativity of
simultaneity, 1 þ vu
0
x
c2 .
According to Eq. (7.1), a change in the velocity ux transforms to
reference frame S0,
dux ¼
du
0
x
1 þ vu
0
x

c2 
"

u
0
x þ v


1 þ vu
0
x

c2 2
vdu
0
x
c2
#
dux ¼
"
1 þ vu
0
x

c2

1 þ vu
0
x

c22 

vu
0
x þ v2
c2

1 þ vu
0
x

c2 2
#
du
0
x ¼ ð1  v2=c2Þdu
0
x

1 þ vu
0
x

c2 2
¼
du
0
x
g2 
1 þ vu
0
x

c2 2
(7.4)
Dividing Eq. (7.4) by (7.3), we have the relation between a
0
x and ax,
dux
dt ¼
du
0
x

dt
0
g3
1 þ vu
0
x

c23
or,
ax ¼
a
0
x
g3
1 þ vu
0
x

c23
(7.5)
So, in contrast to Newtonian physics where the acceleration is independent
of the inertial frame in which it is calculated, here the x-components of
the acceleration are proportional to one another, but the proportionality
depends on v; u
0
x and c2 through algebraic factors that we have studied
before.
The analogous expressions for ax and ay are even more complicated. We
begin by differentiating uy in Eq. (7.1),
duy ¼
du
0
y
g

1 þ vu
0
x

c2 
u
0
y
g

1 þ vu
0
x

c22
vdu
0
x
c2
(7.6)
124
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Now, dividing by Eq. (7.3),
duy
dt ¼
du
0
y
.
dt0
g2
1 þ vu
0
x

c22 
u
0
y
g2
1 þ vu
0
x

c23
vdu
0
x

dt0
c2
(7.7)
or,
ay ¼
a
0
y
g2
1 þ vu
0
x

c22 

vu
0
y
.
c2
a
0
x
g2
1 þ vu
0
x

c23
(7.8)
The expression for az is obtained from Eq. (7.8) by replacing y / z.
We learn from Eq. (7.8) that ay receives contributions from both the
accelerations in the x and y directions in the frame S0. For example, suppose
the particle is not accelerating in the y direction in S
0
a
0
y ¼ 0

, but it has
nonzero velocity in the y direction in S0 
u
0
y s0

and is accelerating in the
x direction in S0 
a
0
xs0

, then it is accelerating in the y direction in S!
There is a special case of some utility in problem solving which is not
complicated. Consider a particle at rest in S0,

u
0
x ¼ u
0
y ¼ u
0
z ¼ 0

. Then its
acceleration in S reads
ax ¼ a
0
x

g3;
ay ¼ a
0
y
.
g2;
az ¼ a
0
z

g2
(7.9)
You can trace the factors of g here to Lorentz contraction and time dilation
(see the problems). Note that even in this case that the vectors a and a0 are
not even parallel.
7.2 TRANSFORMATION PROPERTIES OF FORCES
Now we want to understand how equations of motion and forces behave
under Lorentz transformations. This discussion will be general. In other
words, the results will apply to any sort of force. We will only use the
force’s transformation laws under boosts in this development. We shall learn
some general principles and see how they apply to electromagnetism later.
Suppose the force F0 acts on a particle in S0,
F0 ¼ dp0
dt0
(7.10)
Acceleration and Forces in Relativity: The Birth of Dynamical Fields
125

Since we know the transformation properties of p0and t0, we can infer the
transformation properties of the force. This is our goal here.
The particle has velocity u0 in frame S0, and velocity u in frame S. To
relate Eq. (7.10) to the same equation in S, we recall the transformation
properties of momentum, and energy,
p
0
x ¼ gðpx  vE=c2Þ;
p
0
y ¼ py;
p
0
z ¼ pz;
E0 ¼ gðE  vpxÞ
(7.11)
and time,
t
0 ¼ gðt  vx=c2Þ
(7.12)
To write Eq. (7.10) in terms of quantities measured in frame S, we use Eqs.
(7.11) and (7.12) to compute dt0 and dp
0
x separately. First, we relate dt0 to dt,
which is the time interval over which the particle travels through a distance
dx ¼ uxdt, so
dt0 ¼ gðdt  uxvdt=c2Þ ¼ gð1  uxv=c2Þdt
(7.13)
Now we can return to Eq. (7.11) and deduce how Fx transforms between
frames,
F
0
x ¼ dp
0
x
dt0 ¼ gðdpx  vdE=c2Þ
gð1  uxv=c2Þdt ¼ dpx=dt  ðv=c2ÞdE=dt
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(7.14)
The second term in Eq. (7.14) indicates that the force in S0 depends on the
power dE/dt provided by the force in S. We can write the power in
terms of force and velocity of the particle in S, inspired by a similar
argument in Newtonian mechanics. Begin with the energyemomentum
relation,
E2 ¼ m2
0c4 þ c2p$p
(7.15)
Taking the time derivative gives
d
dtE2 ¼ 2E dE
dt ¼ 2c2p$dp
dt
(7.16)
So,
dE
dt ¼ c2p
E $dp
dt
(7.17)
126
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

The right-hand side can be simpliﬁed. E ¼ gm0c2 and p ¼ gm0u, so
c2p/E ¼ u, and Eq. (7.17) becomes,
dE
dt ¼ F$u
(7.18)
which is identical to the power formula in Newton’s world.
Now Eq. (7.14) becomes the transformation equation for the x
component for the force,
F
0
x ¼ Fx  ðv=c2ÞF$u
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(7.19)
Using the same manipulations, we can calculate F
0
y and F
0
z in terms of
Fx, and Fy.
F
0
y ¼
Fy
gð1  uxv=c2Þ;
F
0
z ¼
Fz
gð1  uxv=c2Þ
(7.20)
Finally, since the power F$u enters Eq. (7.19), we should calculate how this
quantity transforms. Since E0 ¼ g(E  vpx) and t0 ¼ g(t  vx/c2),
dE
0
dt
0 ¼ gðdE  vdpxÞ
gð1  uxv=c2Þdt ¼ dE=dt  vdpx=dt
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(7.21)
or,
F0$u0 ¼ F$u  vFx
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(7.22)
We learn that the four quantities (Fx, Fy, Fz) and F$u transform linearly
among themselves. In general, the transformation laws are quite compli-
cated. The transformation laws do simplify in the special case where the
particle is instantaneously at rest in S, u ¼ 0. Then,
F
0
x ¼ Fx;
F
0
y ¼ gFy;
F
0
z ¼ gFz
(7.23)
7.3 THE DEATH OF NEWTON’S THIRD LAW, AND STATIC
FORCES: THE BIRTH OF FIELDS
Let us contrast these rules with Newtonian dynamics. In Newton’s world,
force is invariant for point particles of ﬁxed masses. In particular, if a force is
velocity independent, such as the electrostatic force or the gravitational force,
then it is velocity independent in all frames. This is clearly inconsistent with
Acceleration and Forces in Relativity: The Birth of Dynamical Fields
127

special relativity! We see from Eq. (7.19) that velocity-dependent forces are
the norm. This implies that Newton’s third law, that action and reaction are
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction, is generally untrue! How
important is this? Very! Recall that Newton’s third law is the basis of mo-
mentum conservation in Newton’s world. In the real world, energye
momentum conservation is a fundamental building block. How can it be
that energyemomentum conservation is a property of the real world if
action is not equal and opposite to reaction? We will discuss this point further
in several sections below. There is much to learn from this failure.
Let us understand more simply why the failure of Newton’s third law is
an unavoidable aspect of relativity. Consider a force, which acts between
two particles that are a considerable distance apart. The force between
particles 1 and 2 will depend on the distance between particles 1 and 2 as
well as their velocities, as we have learned above. (Electrodynamics will be a
prime example, which we will study in detail.) Particle 1 will exert a force
F12 on particle 2, and particle 2 will exert a force F21 on particle 1. Note
that these forces act at different points, at the position of particle 2 and
particle 1. So, we must compare F21 at r1 with F12 at r2 simultaneously. Label
the two spaceetime points as (r1, t) and (r2, t). We are interested in mo-
mentum conservation at time t in this frame. But the events where we
measure F21 and F12 are connected by a space-like interval. They are not
causally connected! And here is the point: by viewing the events in different
inertial frames, we can even change their time ordering, so they are not
simultaneous in other frames of reference. This is an application of the
“relativity of simultaneity” discussed at length in Chapters 2 and 3, and it
demonstrates that the concept of actionereaction for a force that acts over a
nonzero distance is inherently nonrelativistic: if one observed the validity of
Newton’s third law in one frame, then it need not hold in other frames. We
appear to be forced to the conclusion that the total momentum of the two
interacting particles is not generally conserved.
We appear to be at an impasse! How do we understand energy and
momentum conservation for interacting particles in Einstein’s world? Our
study of collisions where the particles are well separated and noninteracting
in their initial and ﬁnal states were exquisite validations of the conservation
of energy and momentum. We now see, however, that if we try to analyze
the states of the particles when they are within each other’s range of
interaction, we would be at a loss. Somehow energy and momentum
conservation must be true for all times in the collision process, early on
when the particles are moving at constant velocities, far after the collision
128
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

process when the particles are again moving at constant but different ve-
locities, and even for those times when the forces between the particles are
nonnegligible and are deﬂecting the particles.
Up until this point, we have been able to take Newtonian concepts such as
momentum, energy, force, point particles, and time and space measurements,
and carefully generalize them to a relativistic world. Now it appears that
something conceptual is missing! We need a new idea! In the history of physics
the missing idea was that of the electromagnetic “ﬁeld.” The ﬁeld concept
grew from the early experiments in electromagnetism and culminated in the
experiments of Faraday who investigated how time varying electric and
magnetic effects interplayed. When Maxwell synthesized 200 years of
experiments in electromagnetism into his theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
the ground work was laid for the theory of special relativity.
Let us summarize: In Newton’s world, we can have conservation laws
that are nonlocal. This works because information can travel at inﬁnite
speed. The earth attracts the moon with the same force that the moon
attracts the earth. The two forces act at different points, but they always sum
to zero so the momentum of the earthemoon system is conserved. There is
no problem here because the forces can be compared at one instant at
distant points because information can be shared instantaneously between
the earth and the moon in Newton’s world. The action and reaction forces
are causally connected even though they are spatially separated. But, in a
relativistic world this simple picture fails. Instantaneous events on the earth
and the moon are not causally connected. In fact, by viewing the planetary
system in two different frames, the time ordering of the events can be
changed. So, the entire notion that action and reaction can be equal but
opposite and the notion of action at a distance have no role in relativity.
Of course there is one situation where the actionereaction principle can
apply in a relativistic world and that is where the two points of action and
reaction are coincident. Then the conservation law becomes “local,” and
there is no conﬂict with causality. We will see as we develop the idea of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld that this is the way to generalize the successes of
Newtonian mechanics to a relativistic world. We are forced to turn from forces
to ﬁelds. And the ﬁelds must become dynamical variables capable of carrying energy
and momentum. We are forced to formulate the theory in terms of local equations.
The concept of a “ﬁeld of force” allows us to describe the interactions of
particles in relativity. Instead of saying that one particle acts on another, as
in Newton’s world, the rules of relativity lead us to see that the particle
creates a ﬁeld around itself and a force acts on any particle located in this
Acceleration and Forces in Relativity: The Birth of Dynamical Fields
129

ﬁeld. In Newton’s world, the ﬁeld just provides a static description of the
interaction between particles: it is just a handy way of describing the
instantaneous force between two separate particles. However, in the theory
of relativity, because of the ﬁnite velocity of the propagation of interactions,
the force acting on a particle at a given time is not determined by the other
particle’s position at that time. A change in the position of one of the
particles inﬂuences other particles only after the lapse of a certain time
interval. This means that the ﬁeld itself acquires physical realitydthe ﬁeld must
become a dynamical degree of freedom with its own equation(s) of motion. When
distant particles interact, we must describe the phenomenon as a sequence
of local and causal events: one particle interacts with the ﬁeld at its position
and a subsequent interaction occurs between that propagating ﬁeld and the
other particle at its distant position.
We will see how this works out in the case of electromagnetism in some
detail. Maxwell’s equations and the wave equation will provide the
description of a fundamentally new phenomenon. All this will become
clearer through concrete developments in the next few chapters.
PROBLEMS
7-1. The relationship between acceleration and force in special relativity is
quite subtle:
a. Show that Fx ¼ g3m0ax in frame S.
b. Relate the acceleration ax in frame S to that in the instantaneous
rest frame (u0x ¼ 0) a0x, a0x ¼ g3ax.
c. The results of parts a. and b. imply that Fx ¼ m0a0x, so the force in
the x direction is the same in the frame in which the particle is
instantaneously at rest. Is this true in the transverse directions?
Show that Fy ¼ 1
gF0y, so the conjecture is untrue.
d. Show that Fy
Fx ¼ 1
g2
ay
ax.
7-2. A space traveler accelerates continually at a rate of 10 m/s2 in her
instantaneous rest frame.
a. If she starts at rest from earth, how far has she traveled at earth time t?
b. How long does it take before she attains a speed of 0.90c?
(Hint: You may apply ax ¼
a
0
x
g3ð1þvu0
x=c2Þ
3 with u
0
x ¼ 0 and realizing
that g(v) becomes a function of time.)
130
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 8
Boosting the Electrostatic Force,
Electromagnetic Fields and More
on Four-Vectors
Contents
8.1 The Electric Field Around a Moving Point Charge
131
8.2 The Force Between Two Moving Charges
133
8.3 Transforming E and B Between Frames
137
8.4 More on Invariants and Four-Vectors
140
Problems
142
References
148
8.1 THE ELECTRIC FIELD AROUND A MOVING POINT
CHARGE
Now we want to take what we have learned about the transformation
properties of generic forces and apply it to electrostatics [1]. This exercise
will lead to our discovery of the magnetic ﬁeld, the Lorentz force law of
electrodynamics and eventually Maxwell’s equations.
Recall some basic facts of electrostatics: If a charge is at rest, then
Coulomb’s law gives the electrostatic ﬁeld it produces. As long as the source
of the ﬁeld q1is at rest, then a charge q2 experiences that ﬁeld regardless of its
state of motion. So, consider two frames S and S0 where S0 moves with
velocity v in the x direction and the origins of the two frames coincide at
t ¼ t0 ¼ 0. If there is a point charge q1 at rest at the origin of frame S0 then
the charge q2, which is at rest at position r in the frame S and is at position r0
2
in S0 experiences a force at t0 ¼ 0 in S0,
F0 ¼ k q1q2
r02 br 0
(8.1)
where r0 is the vector distance between the two particles in the frame S0 and
br 0 is a unit vector in that direction at t0 ¼ 0, as shown in Fig. 8.1A and B.
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00008-8
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
131

Before we continue, we should discuss the constant k and the charge q
in Coulomb’s law. The constant k is determined experimentally and carries
the appropriate dimensions so that the left-hand side of Eq. (8.1) is a force.
Later in this book we will do some numerical examples. Here we just need
to note that k is deﬁned to be a numerical constant and so it has no
transformation properties. The charge q is a physical quantity and its
transformation properties must be determined experimentally. In fact, it
is a Lorentz invariant quantity. The experimental evidence for this fact is
very precise: we are able to study the interactions of charged electrons,
for example, in many environments where they have vastly different
velocities. Those interactions are always given quantitatively by the
hypothesis that q is velocity independent. For example, modern linear
accelerators produce electrons with energies 100,000 times the electron’s
rest
energy
(0.511 MeV).
These
electrons
are
traveling
at
speeds
approaching the speed limit, v

c z 1  1
2  1010, and scattering experi-
ments show no perceptible change in the electron’s charge q.
Now let us return to the problem at hand and calculate the force
F in frame S. At t ¼ 0 q1 is at the origin of S moving with velocity v in
the x direction. The charge q2 is at position (x, y, z) at t ¼ 0, and this
position maps onto (x0, y0, z0) at t ¼ 0. It helps to write Eq. (8.1) in
components,
F0
x ¼ kq1q2
x0
r03;
F0
y ¼ kq1q2
y0
r03;
F0
z ¼ kq1q2
z0
r03
(8.2)
Figure 8.1 (A) The conﬁguration of the two charges in the frame S where q1
has velocity v at time t ¼ 0 and q2 is at rest at position (x, y, z). (B) Same situation
shown in (A) but from the perspective of frame S0 where the charge q1 is at rest at
the origin.
132
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

where we used br 0 ¼ ðx0=r0; y0=r0; z0=r0Þ. It is easy to transform the force to
frame S because the charge q2 is at rest in frame S at t ¼ 0, so Eq. (7.23)
applies,
Fx ¼ F0
x; Fy ¼ gF0
y; Fz ¼ gF0
z
(8.3)
Finally we need to relate (x, y, z) at t ¼ 0 to (x0, y0, z0). The Lorentz
transformation reads x0 ¼ g(xvt), y0 ¼ y, z0 ¼ z, so at t ¼ 0, x0 ¼ gx,
y0 ¼ y, z0 ¼ z. Therefore,
r0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
x02 þ y02 þ z02
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g2x2 þ y2 þ z2
p
(8.4)
Finally,
Fx ¼ gkq1q2
x
r03; Fy ¼ gkq1q2
y
r03; Fz ¼ gkq1q2
z
r03
(8.5)
Notice a few features of the answer. First, Fx : Fy : Fz ¼ x : y : z, so F
points in the r direction at t ¼ 0. This is the vector distance between the
charge q2 and the charge q1 at t ¼ 0. We can write,
F ¼ gkq1q2
r
r03 ¼ kq1q2
gr
ðg2x2 þ y2 þ z2Þ3=2 ¼ q2E
(8.6)
We learn that the motion of q1 produces a ﬁeld E ¼ gkq1r/r03, which is
not spherically symmetric but is radial, i.e., it points in the direction r. It
turns out to be a central force, and it obeys Newton’s third law. Note that
relativistic effects are important in the expression for E. As compared with
the usual Coulomb force that would act on q2 if q1 were also at rest in frame
S, the force in this case is decreased by a factor of g2 if q2 is on the x axis,
weaker behind or ahead of q1 (set y ¼ z ¼ 0 in Eq. (8.4)), and is increased
by a factor of g if q2 is to the side of q1 (set x ¼ 0 in Eq. (8.4)). These aspects
of the ﬁeld E are pursued further in the problems.
8.2 THE FORCE BETWEEN TWO MOVING CHARGES
To uncover velocity-dependent forces in electrodynamics and to see the
failure of Newton’s third law, we need to generalize our example of
Section 8.1 so that both charges are moving in frame S. To keep the algebra
under control, but to illustrate the general case, let q2 have a velocity u in
the y direction at t ¼ 0, as shown in Fig. 8.2A and B. In addition, choose
the y axis so that q2 lies in the x-y plane at t ¼ 0 and z0 ¼ z ¼ 0 at t ¼ 0.
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
133

The other charge q1 is at rest in frame S0, so we know that Coulomb’s law
applies there, F0 ¼ kq1q2r0/r 03. In components,
F0
x ¼ kq1q2
x0
r03; F0
y ¼ kq1q2
y0
r03; F0
z ¼ 0
(8.7)
We want to transform the force back to S where q1 is moving with
velocity v and is generating an electric current q1v and q2 has a velocity u in
the y direction at t ¼ 0. To do the transformation we need to calculate
u0 ¼

u0
x; u0
y; 0

in terms of u and v,
u0
x ¼
ux  v
1  vux=c2 ¼ v;
u0
y ¼
uy=g
1  vux=c2 ¼ uy=g;
u0
z ¼ 0
(8.8)
Now we have all the ingredients to calculate F using Eqs. (7.19)e(7.20),
Fx ¼
F0
x þ v
c2

F0
xu0
x þ F0
yu0
y

1 þ vu0
x

c2
¼
F0
x þ v
c2

 F0
xv þ F0
yuy
.
g

1  v2=c2
¼ F0
x þ g2 vuy
gc2 F0
y
Now use Eq. (8.7) and x0 ¼ gx, y0 ¼ y and ﬁnd,
Fx ¼ kq1q2
x0
r03 þ g vuy
c2 kq1q2
y0
r03 ¼ gkq1q2
x
r03 þ gkq1q2
vuy
c2
y
r03
where r0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g2x2 þ y2 þ z2
p
and we can collect terms into an “expected”
electrostatic piece and a new piece, which is velocity dependent,
Figure 8.2 (A) Same situation as in Fig. 8.1A except charge q2 has a velocity in the y
direction, and it lies in the (x, y) plane. (B) Same situation shown in (A) but from the
perspective of frame S0 where the charge q1 is at rest at the origin.
134
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Fx ¼ gkq1q2
r03

x þ vuy
c2 y

(8.9)
Next,
Fy ¼
F0
y

g
1 þ vu0
x

c2 ¼ kq1q2y0=gr03
1  v2=c2 ¼ gkq1q2
y
r03
(8.10)
Finally,
Fz ¼ 0
(8.11)
Let us focus on the piece of the force Eq. (8.9), which depends on the
velocity of the second particle,
Fx;mag ¼ gkq1q2
r03
vuy
c2 y
(8.12)
where we have put a subscript “mag” on this component of the force
because it will be interpreted in terms of a magnetic ﬁeld produced by
the moving charge q1. In fact, Eq. (8.12) is one example of the Lorentz
force law, which we are developing step by step. Let us anticipate its
ﬁnal form: the Lorentz force law for a particle of charge q2 and velocity
u propagating through an electric ﬁeld E and a magnetic ﬁeld B is,
F ¼ q2ðE þ u  BÞ
(8.13)
Note the cross product of two vectors, u  B, which appears here. Its
deﬁnition and properties are probably familiar, but they are reviewed in
Appendix D for completeness. Recall that the direction of the cross product
of two vectors is given by the “right-hand rule.” Since Eq. (8.12) states
that the magnetic force is in the x direction and the velocity u is in the y
direction, the magnetic ﬁeld B must point in the z direction so that the
cross product u  B is in the x direction. We can read off the magnitude of
B from Eq. (8.12),
B ¼ gkq1
r03
vy
c2
(8.14)
Now we can write F in terms of E and B,
Fx ¼ q2Ex þ q2uyB;
Fy ¼ q2Ey;
Fz ¼ 0
(8.15)
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
135

Now let us get the vector character of F, E, and B in one equation.
Since B points in the z direction and is made up of v and r (see Eq. (8.14)),
and since v points in the x direction and r lies in the x-y plane, the cross
product of v and r lies in the z direction. So, we infer that,
B ¼ gkq1
r03
v  r
c2
(8.16)
where we observed that v  r ¼ vxybz by writing out the cross product. It is
even more instructive to identify E in Eq. (8.16),
B ¼ 1
c2 v 
gkq1
r03 r

¼ 1
c2 ðv  EÞ
(8.17)
where we identiﬁed E from Eq. (8.6). The virtue of Eq. (8.17) is that it
shows that B is generated by the motion (velocity v) of the source q1 of
the electric ﬁeld.
B is not an independent, new concept. It is a consequence of special relativity
and the existence of Coulomb’s law for static charges. Note that since the electric
ﬁeld is radial, the magnetic ﬁeld circulates around the moving charge.
Let us discuss this discovery. In the frame S0 where q1 is at rest, we have
Coulomb’s law for the static electric ﬁeld. The physics in the moving
frame S where q1 has a velocity v is obtained from the physics in the frame
S0 by applying a Lorentz transformation. There is nothing really “new”
heredjust consequences of special relativity. We ﬁnd a force in the x
direction, which depends on v, the velocity of the Lorentz transformation,
and u, the velocity of the charge q2. When we take the force apart into the
terms q2u  B, we see that B is generated by the current q1v of the source
charge q1 in the frame S and that the B ﬁeld exerts a force on q2
proportional to its current q2u. In the problem set we ﬁll out the
derivation of the Lorentz force law by considering additional kinematic
arrangements of q1 and q2.
Finally let us discuss the failure of Newton’s third law in the context of
Eq. (8.15). We see that q2 experiences a magnetic force in the x direction
due to the motion of charge q1 in the x direction. Similarly, we could
change our perspective and calculate the magnetic force on charge q1 due to
the motion of q2. Similar steps to those above show that the magnetic force
on q1 points in the y direction and has the same magnitude. So, the two
magnetic forces cannot sum to zero!
This observation leaves us with the puzzle discussed brieﬂy in Chapter 7:
energyemomentum conservation is a basic principle of all theories of
136
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

physics, but how can this principle apply to electromagnetism where
Newton’s third law is violated? Some new concepts must appear in the
relativistic theory to insure energyemomentum conservation. We had a
short discussion of these new concepts (ﬁelds and new dynamical degrees of
freedom) in Chapter 7, but there is more to come in later portions of this
and the following chapter.
8.3 TRANSFORMING E AND B BETWEEN FRAMES
We will see that a consequence of relativity is that the electric and magnetic
ﬁelds develop dynamics given by Maxwell’s equations. Our next step
toward this goal is to obtain their properties under boosts between inertial
frames. One way to do this is to study devices such as capacitors and
solenoids and describe them in frames related by boosts. We can calculate
how charges, charge densities, and currents transform, and their trans-
formation laws will determine those of the ﬁelds. This traditional approach
is illustrated in the problems. The approach we take here is to exploit the
Lorentz force law. We have derived the Lorentz force law for a particle of
charge q moving with velocity u in frame S,
F ¼ qðE þ u  BÞ
(8.18)
This law should hold in all inertial frames such as S0,
F0 ¼ qðE0 þ u0  B0Þ
(8.19)
Since we know how a generic force F transforms, we can infer from
Eq. (7.19)e(7.22) how E and B transform. Let us do the details.
To begin, recall the transformation laws for the components of a force,
F0
x ¼ Fx  ðv=c2ÞF$u
ð1  uxv=c2Þ ;
F0
y ¼
Fy
gð1  uxv=c2Þ;
F0
z ¼
Fz
gð1  uxv=c2Þ
(8.20)
F0$u0 ¼ F$u  vFx
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(8.21)
We use the ﬁrst equation of Eq. (8.20) to transform the x component of the
Lorentz force,
q

E0
x þ ðu0  B0Þx
	
¼
q

Ex þ ðu  BÞx  v
c2 F$u

ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(8.22)
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
137

Now we need to write out the cross products in Eq. (8.22) in components,
and we need to evaluate F$u for the Lorentz force,
F$u ¼ qðE þ u  BÞ$u ¼ qE$u
(8.23)
Now Eq. (8.22) becomes,
E0
x þ u0
yB0
z  u0
zB0
y ¼
Ex  vux
c2 Ex þ uyBz  uzBy  vuy
c2 Ey  vuz
c2 Ez
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
Now we can use our transformation laws for velocities to replace primed
quantities by unprimed ones on the left-hand side and on the right-hand
side we can isolate Ex,
E0
x þ
uyB0
z  uzB0
y
gð1  uxv=c2Þ ¼ Ex þ
uyBz  uzBy  vuy
c2 Ey  vuz
c2 Ez
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
(8.24)
This equation is hiding three independent equations in it. The point is that
uy and uz are independent variables, so the only way Eq. (8.24) can be true
in general is if the coefﬁcients of uy and uz are separately zero. We learn
three transformation laws,
E0
x ¼ Ex;
B0
y ¼ g

By þ v
c2Ez

;
B0
z ¼ g

Bz  v
c2Ey

(8.25)
We see that the components of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds mix
among themselves under boosts! This indicates that electric effects in one
frame can be interpreted as magnetic effects in another.
But we are not done. There are three more components in the two
vectors E and B. We turn to the second equation in Eq. (8.20). We
specialize to the Lorentz force again and have,
q

E0
y þ ðu0  B0Þy

¼
q

Ey þ ðu  BÞy
	
gð1  uxv=c2Þ
(8.26)
Now we write the cross product in components, and we use the trans-
formation law for velocities to eliminate u0,
E0
y  u0
xB0
z þ u0
zB0
x ¼ E0
y 
ðux  vÞB0
z þ uz
gB0
x
ð1  uxv=c2Þ
¼ Ey  uxBz þ uzBx
gð1  uxv=c2Þ
138
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Matching the coefﬁcients of uz, we learn that,
B0
x ¼ Bx
(8.27)
Now we multiply through by (1  uxv/c2) and ﬁnd,
E0
y  vux
c2 E0
y þ vB0
z  uxB0
z ¼ 1
gEy  ux
gBz þ uz
gBx
(8.28)
But we know from Eq. (8.25) how B0
z transforms, B0
z ¼ g

Bz  v
c2Ey

.
Substituting into Eq. (8.28) gives,
E0
y  vux
c2 E0
y þ gvBz  g v2
c2Ey  uxgBz þ uxg v
c2Ey ¼ 1
gEy  ux
gBz þ uz
gBx
The coefﬁcient of ux must be zero, so
v
c2E0
y  gBz þ g v
c2Ey ¼ 1
gBz
Finally, combining the two terms proportional to Bz, we have

g  1
g

¼ g v2
c2,
giving,
v
c2E0
y ¼ g v
c2Ey þ g v2
c2Bz
which becomes the transformation law for E0
y,
E0
y ¼ gðEy  vBzÞ
(8.29)
And ﬁnally, we could do the same analysis on the z component of
Eq. (8.26), or argue by symmetry and ﬁnd our last transformation law,
E0
z ¼ gðEz þ vByÞ
(8.30)
The virtue of these derivations is their fundamental character: the
requirement of the “covariance” of the Lorentz force law dictates how
the components of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds mix with each other
under boosts. Various exercises in the problem set below present physical
illustrations of these general, rather abstract results.
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
139

8.4 MORE ON INVARIANTS AND FOUR-VECTORS
At this point in our studies we have met many quantities with different
transformation properties under boosts. The most important were four-
vectors. Recall the four coordinates,
xm ¼ ðx0; x1; x2; x3Þ ¼ ðct; x; y; zÞ
that transforms under boosts according to the Lorentz transformation rules,
x00 ¼ g

x0  v
cx1
;
x01 ¼ g

x1  v
cx0
;
x02 ¼ x2;
x03 ¼ x3
We have met other collections of four variables that transform in this
fashion. The energyemomentum four-vector is a particularly signiﬁcant
one. If we can express physical laws in terms of four-vectors, we can
formulate Postulate 1 of relativity particularly elegantly.
Let us review some of the properties of four-vectors and let us discover
more. We write four-vectors Am ¼ (A0, A1, A2, A3) and Bm ¼ (B0, B1, B2, B3).
The “square” or “length” of a four-vector is
A2 ¼ A$A ¼ A2
0  A2
(8.31)
We can also deﬁne the “inner product” of two four-vectors,
A$B ¼ A0B0  A1B1  A2B2  A3B3
(8.32)
and can show that the inner product of two four-vectors is a Lorentz
invariant.
We can construct additional four-vectors that are related to the three
vectors we have already studied. Recall the differential element,
dxm ¼ ðdx0; dx1; dx2; dx3Þ
(8.33)
It has an invariant length,
ds2 ¼ dx$dx ¼ c2dt2  dx2
(8.34)
The proper time ds is related to the invariant interval ds2, if it is time-like,
ds2 > 0,
ds2 ¼ ds2=c2 ¼ dt2  1
c2 dx2
(8.35)
For a particle moving with velocity u,
140
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

ds2 ¼ dt2  1
c2 u2dt2 ¼ dt2=g2
(8.36)
which is an expression of time dilation,
dt=ds ¼ gðuÞ
(8.37)
Using ds we can construct other four-vectors. The “four-velocity” is,
um ¼ dxm
ds ¼

c dt
ds; dx
ds

(8.38)
Using Eq. (8.37) we have,
um ¼

c dt
ds; dx
dt
dt
ds

¼ gðuÞðc; uÞ
(8.39)
um provides a natural way to generalize the three velocity to the four-
dimensional world of Minkowski. The invariant length of um is,
u2 ¼ g2c2  g2u2 ¼
1
ð1  u2=c2Þ ðc2  u2Þ ¼ c2
(8.40)
An easier way to evaluate the invariant u2 is to choose a convenient frame.
This is the rest frame of the particle where um ¼ (c, 0) and the result u2 ¼ c2
is immediate.
We can similarly generalize the three-dimensional acceleration to four
dimensions with the four-acceleration,
am ¼ dum
ds ¼ d2xm
ds2
(8.41)
am has a more complicated relation to a than um has to u,
am ¼ g dum
dt ¼ g
dg
dt c; dg
dt u þ ga

(8.42)
Note that in the instantaneous rest frame of the particle where u ¼ 0 and
g ¼ 1 and dg/dt ¼ 0,
am ¼ ð0; aÞ.
We have already introduced the relativistic momentum, p ¼ gmu, and
energy E ¼ gmc2. We have formed the four-momentum, pm ¼ ( p0, p1, p2, p3)
¼ (E/c, p) ¼ gm(c, u). We observed earlier that,
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
141

pm ¼ m dxm
ds ¼ mum
The fact that u2 ¼ u$u ¼ c2 gives the energyemomentum relation of a free
particle,
p$p ¼ E2=c2  p2 ¼ m2u$u ¼ m2c2
E2 ¼ p2c2 þ m2c4
The usefulness of pm suggests that we introduce a “four-force,”
f m ¼ dpm
ds ¼ m dum
ds ¼ m d2xm
ds2
(8.43)
Recall that the three-dimensional force f ¼ dp/dt and the power
dE/dt ¼ u$f mix under boosts. We can relate these quantities to the four-
force,
f m ¼ dpm
ds ¼ gðuÞ d
dt ðE=c; pÞ ¼ gðuÞð f $u=c; f Þ
(8.44)
The four-force will be useful when we write the Lorentz force law in a
covariant fashion. It will also be important when we develop the equation
of motion of particles in general relativity.
The virtue in deﬁning and identifying four-vectors is that four-vectors
all share the same simple transformation law, the Lorentz transformation
law of xm. Under boosts the components of each four-vector mix among
themselves in a universal fashion. This is much simpler than our particular
transformation laws for the various three-vector quantities that initiated this
development. Relations between four-vectors are “physical” in the sense
that they have the same form in every reference frame. The covariance of
the laws of physics is well expressed in this language.
PROBLEMS
8-1. Let us consider the boosted Coulomb ﬁeld in more generality by
generalizing the discussion in Section 8.1.
Calculate the electric and magnetic ﬁelds of a point charge
moving with velocity v. The particle starts at the origin at t ¼ 0.
We measure the electric ﬁeld E at point r. Express your answers
in terms of the vector R ¼ r  vt, which is the vector between
142
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the point where you measure the electric ﬁeld and the position of
the charge at time t.
8-2. Let us consider more conﬁgurations of the two particles in Section 8.2
to develop a full derivation of the Lorentz force law from electrostatics
and relativity.
In the frame S at t ¼ 0 let q1 be at the origin and moving along
the x axis at velocity v, and let q2 be at point y on the y axis and also
moving along the x axis at velocity v. So, both particles are at rest in
frame S0 at t0 ¼ 0. In S0 we have,
F0
x ¼ 0;
F0
y ¼ kq1q2
y02 ;
F0
z ¼ 0
a. Show that,
Fy ¼ 1
g
kq1q2
y2
b. If q2 had been stationary in S, show that we would have had,
Felec
y
¼ g kq1q2
y2
c. Show that the difference of these two forces in part a and b is,
Fmag
y
¼ v2
c2Felec
y
and can be interpreted as a magnetic force exerted on the moving
charge q2 by the moving source q1.
8-3. Redo the analysis in problem Section 8.2 in the case where q2 moves
with the velocity ux in the x direction in frame S and q1is moving
along the x axis at velocity v and at t ¼ 0 is at the origin in frame
S. Show that,
Fmag
y
¼ vux
c2 Felec
y
8-4. Let us obtain the Lorentz transformations of electric and magnetic
ﬁelds in some special cases using the construction of capacitors and
solenoids.
Consider a capacitor at rest in frame S. Its square plates of side
l are parallel to the x-z plane. The plates have a charge/area of s
and es in frame S.
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
143

a. What is the electric ﬁeld strength E inside the capacitor in terms
of s?
b. Now measure the electric ﬁeld E0 in a frame S0, which moves in
the x direction at velocity v. Show that E0
y ¼ gEy.
c. Now orient the capacitor so that its plates are parallel to the y-z
plane. Show that E0
x ¼ Ex.
Now consider a solenoid oriented along the x axis. It has n
turns of wire per length, and its length l is much longer than
its radius r. The wire carries a current I.
d. Find the magnetic ﬁeld inside the solenoid in terms of n and I.
e. Now measure the properties of the solenoid in frame S0. How
are n0, l0, and B0, related to n, l, and B?
8-5. Show that the Lorentz force law is unchanged under time reversal:
t / t, E / E, and B / B. Explain the change in sign of mag-
netic ﬁeld under time reversal.
8-6. Using the transformation rules for the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
between frames, show that these two quantities are invariant under
boosts,
a. E2  c2B2 and
b. E$B
We learn that 1. If the magnitudes of E and cB are equal in
any frame, then they are equal in all frames, and 2. If E and B
are perpendicular in any reference frame, then they are perpen-
dicular in all frames.
8-7. Let us consider the motion of a relativistic particle in a uniform elec-
tric ﬁeld in more detail.
The particle has charge e, and the uniform electric ﬁeld E points
in the x direction. The motion will be conﬁned to a plane, which
we label x-y. Initially px,0 ¼ 0, py,0 ¼ p0, x0 ¼ 0, and y0 ¼ 0.
a. Show that the particle’s relativistic energy Ekin at time t > 0 is,
Ekin ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0 þ ðceEtÞ2
q
b. Use v ¼ pc2/Ekin to ﬁnd,
dx
dt ¼
c2eEt
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0 þ ðceEtÞ2
q
144
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which we can integrate and ﬁnd,
xðtÞ ¼ 1
eE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0 þ ðceEtÞ2
q
c. Similarly, show that,
dy
dt ¼
c2p0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0 þ ðceEtÞ2
q
which you can integrate and ﬁnd,
yðtÞ ¼ cp0
eE sinh1
 
ceEt
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0
p
!

Hint: To do the integral; note d sinh1 z
dz
¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þz2
p

d. Solve the result of part b. for t, substitute into the result of part c.
and ﬁnd the curve along which the particle moves,
x ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0
p
eE
cosh
eEy
cp0

(Hint: Use the formula coshðxÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ sinh2
p
x)
e. This curve is called a “catenary” in classical differential geometry.
Draw it using a graphics program for various choices of parame-
ters. Suppose that v  c. Show that the catenary reduces to a
parabola, a familiar result in classical mechanics,
x ¼ eE
2mv2
0
y2 þ const
f. In this relativistic mechanics problem, the x and y motions do not
decouple as they do in Newtonian mechanics. Consider the
equation for dy/dt and explain the new ingredient. Compare
the large t behavior of y(t) in part c. with the Newtonian result.
8-8. Let us solve the problem of a charged particle moving in a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld.
The Lorentz force law of a charged particle in a constant uniform
B chosen in the z direction,
d
dt p ¼ ev  B
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
145

Write p ¼ Ev/c2 and realize that the relativistic energy E is
constant in time because the magnetic ﬁeld does no work. The
equation of motion simpliﬁes,
E
c2
dv
dt ¼ ev  B
Show that this vector equation can be written in Cartesian
coordinates,
d
dt vx ¼ uvy;
d
dt vy ¼ uvx;
d
dt vz ¼ 0
where u ¼ eBc2/E. Identify two coupled oscillators with the
solution,
vxðtÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
x þ v2
y
q
cosðut þ aÞ; vyðtÞ ¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
x þ v2
y
q
sinðut þ aÞ
where a is a constant and
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
x þ v2
y
q
is also time independent. Now
show that,
xðtÞ ¼ x0 þ r sinðut þ aÞ;
yðtÞ ¼ y0 þ r cosðut þ aÞ
where the radius of the circular motion is r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
x þ v2
y
q

u. Also,
zðtÞ ¼ z0 þ v0zt
So the three-dimensional motion is a helix.
8-9. Consider the relativistic motion of a charged particle in parallel and
uniform electric and magnetic ﬁelds, following a discussion in
Landau and Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields [2].
Let E and B point in the z direction.
The magnetic ﬁeld has no inﬂuence on the z direction so we
know from previous problems that,
zðtÞ ¼ 1
eE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0 þ ðceEtÞ2
q
¼ Ekin=eE
For the motion in the x-y plane, start with the Lorentz force law
and then substitute v ¼ pc2/Ekin,
d
dt px ¼ eBvy;
d
dt py ¼ eBvx
d
dt px ¼ eBc2
Ekin
py;
d
dt py ¼ eBc2
Ekin
px;
146
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

So, we have coupled oscillators, but the effective angular
frequency has its own t dependence. So deﬁne,
d
dt 4 ¼ eBc2=Ekin
a. Show that the coupled equations are solved by,
px ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
cosð4Þ; py ¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
sinð4Þ
where
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
is constant in time.
b. Show that
ct ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0
p
eE
sinh
E
cB 4

by integrating the differential equation for 4 and using the
integral
Z
dx
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2 þ x2
p
¼ sinh1
x
a

c. The equation for px can be written as an equation for dx=d4
using d
dt 4 ¼ eBc2=Ekin. Use this strategy and show that,
dx
d4 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
eB
cosð4Þ; dy
d4 ¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
eB
sinð4Þ
Therefore,
xðtÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
eB
sinð4Þ; yðtÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2
x þ p2
y
q
eB
cosð4Þ
d. Combine the formulas above for z(t) with the result from part b.
and ﬁnd,
zð4Þ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2c4 þ c2p2
0
p
eE
cosh
E
cB 4

Now we can describe the resulting motion: the trajectory is a
helix with ﬁxed radius
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2xþp2y
p
eB
, but an increasing stretch in the z
Boosting the Electrostatic Force, Electromagnetic Fields and More on Four-Vectors
147

direction, along which the particle moves with a decreasing
angular velocity d4=dt ¼ eB=Ekin and a velocity in the z direc-
tion, which increases toward the limit c.
8-10. Consider the transformation equations relating E and B in frame S to
E0 and B0 in frame S0.
a. Show that if B0 ¼ 0 in S0, then in S, B ¼ v  E/c2.
b. Show that if E0 ¼ 0 in S0, then in S, E ¼ v  B.
c. Prove that if E and B are perpendicular in some frame S, then
there exists a frame S0 in which the ﬁeld is purely electric or
purely magnetic. The velocity v of S0 relative to S is perpendic-
ular to E and B and equal to c2B/E in the ﬁrst case and E/B in
the second.
REFERENCES
[1] A.P. French, Special Relativity, W.W. Norton, New York, 1968.
[2] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Pergamon Press, Oxford,
1962.
148
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 9
Maxwell’s Equations of
Electrodynamics and the Wave
Equation
Contents
9.1 Boosting Gauss’ Law and Discovering Maxwell’s Equations
149
9.2 The Wave Equation for Light and the Derivation That Light Travels at the
Speed Limit
159
Problems
164
9.1 BOOSTING GAUSS’ LAW AND DISCOVERING
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS
Now we are almost ready to obtain Maxwell’s equations from electrostatics
and special relativity, but we need to write Coulomb’s law in a more
fundamental fashion. We have been writing,
F ¼ k q1q2
r2 br ¼ q2EðrÞ
(9.1)
for the force between a charge q1 at rest at the origin of frame S and a
charge q2 at position r. This formula applies when these are the only charges
in the system. If there are other charges or boundary conditions in the
system then they will effect the electric ﬁeld at position r. This will not
do. We need a precise statement of the fact that the charge at the origin
produces an electric ﬁeld in its immediate vicinity. This will have to be a
differential equation. When that equation is solved under appropriate
conditions, Coulomb’s law Eq. (9.1) should follow.
To do this, we note that the electric ﬁeld in Eq. (9.1) falls off as the
square of the distance from the charge. Following the original ideas of the
great mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, this means that we can detect
the presence of the charge at the origin by measuring the electric ﬂux
through a distant closed surface surrounding the origin. Let da be an
inﬁnitesimal element of surface area. da has a magnitude equal to the area of
the surface element, and it has a direction perpendicular to the inﬁnitesimal
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00009-X
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
149

surface element. Consider a sphere of radius R around the origin and
calculate the total electric ﬂux through it from Eq. (9.1),
%E$da ¼ %k q1
R2 br$da ¼ %k q1
R2R2dU ¼ 4pkq1
(9.2)
Here dU is the inﬁnitesimal solid angle on the sphere of radius R. R2dU is
the magnitude of the inﬁnitesimal surface element da. Note that the factors
of R cancel in the integranddthe R2 fall off of the electric ﬁeld is canceled
by the R2 growth of the surface area of the sphere. The solid angle integrates
to 4p for a sphere that encloses the origin. The reader can consult Appendix
D for a summary of these and other useful results from vector calculus.
There are two more observations about this equation that are useful.
First, recall Gauss’ theorem that relates the integral of the ﬂux of any vector
ﬁeld V(r) through a closed surface to the volume integral of the divergence
of that vector ﬁeld inside the surface,
%V$da ¼ &V$V d3r
(9.3)
This wonderful theorem, which is also reviewed in Appendix D, frees our
discussion Eq. (9.2) from the speciﬁc spherical surface used there. Here V is
the gradient operator, which in Cartesian coordinates reads V ¼

v
vx; v
vy; v
vz

and the “divergence” of V is V$V ¼

vVx
vx ; vVy
vy ; vVz
vz

. The second obser-
vation is that q1 in Eq. (9.2) might be a macroscopic charge, which is
concentrated around the origin and can be expressed as a volume integral
over a charge density r,
q1 ¼ &r d3r
(9.4)
Taking V ¼ E, and substituting Eqs. (9.3) and (9.4) into Eq. (9.2) we
learn that,
&V$E d3r ¼ 4pk &r d3r
(9.5)
But this equality must hold for any volume surrounding the origin, which
includes the charge. This can only be true if the integrands themselves are
equal point-by-point,
V$E ¼ 4pkr
(9.6)
This is the local differential equation we sought. It expresses the fact that
charge densities generate electric ﬁelds locally. It is fundamental.
150
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Another critical property of Eq. (9.6) is that it is a “linear system.” For
example, if we have a problem where r1 is the source of an electric ﬁeld E1,
and we have another problem where r2 is the source of an electric ﬁeld E2,
V$E1 ¼ 4pkr1;
V$E2 ¼ 4pkr2
(9.7)
then if we add the two equations, we see that r1 þ r2 is the source of an
electric ﬁeld E1 þ E2,
V$ðE1 þ E2Þ ¼ 4pkðr1 þ r2Þ
(9.8)
This has the important consequence that Eq. (9.6) is true for a general
charge distribution r.
Eq. (9.6) is so general and useful, because it is a local differential
equation, that it is generally given the name “Gauss’ law,” named after its
inventor.
In the problem set at the end of this chapter, we show that if r is
concentrated at the origin and there are no other charges in the system,
then Coulomb’s law Eq. (9.1) follows from Gauss’ law. But Eq. (9.6) is
particularly useful because it is a local differential equation that expresses the
idea that charges are the sources of electric ﬁelds point-by-point in
spaceetime. It also applies to the case where r has explicit time depen-
dence. Eq. (9.6) works in this case because r and E enter the equation at the
same spaceetime point. On the other hand, Coulomb’s law Eq. (9.1) is not
true for a time-dependent r because information travels at the speed limit
and the resulting electric ﬁeld must contain this fact in its spatial depen-
dence far from the origin. If r has time dependence then currents must be
ﬂowing, as we will discuss below, and these currents will generate time-
dependent
magnetic
ﬁelds,
which
will
generate
additional
time-
dependent electric ﬁelds. In those cases Gauss’ law will not be sufﬁcient
to calculate the total electric ﬁeld. When we derive Maxwell’s equations
below, we will see how things work out in this general case.
Now let us study the charge density, in more detail. Suppose that all the
charges are at rest in the frame S, and label the charge density there r0.
When we boost a charge density to a velocity u, we generate a new charge
density r and we create a current density J ¼ ru. Since r is a ratio of charge
per volume, and the charge is invariant under boosts while volumes
contract in the direction of the boost by a factor g(u), we learn that,
r ¼ q
V ¼
q0
V0=g ¼ g q0
V0
¼ gr0
(9.9)
and the current density is J ¼ ru ¼ gr0u.
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
151

Compare these results to the energyemomentum carried by a particle,
E ¼ gm0c2 and p ¼ gm0u. We see that r and J share the same kinematics
factors with E and p, and thus form a four-vector,
Jm ¼ ðcr; Jx; Jy; JzÞ
(9.10)
And this implies that they obey the Lorentz transformation laws between
frames S and S0,
r0 ¼ g

r  v
c2 Jx

;
J0
x ¼ gð Jx  vrÞ;
J0
y ¼ Jy;
J0
z ¼ Jz
(9.11)
We see that r and Jx mix under boosts such as E and px or such as t and x!
Since r is the source of electric ﬁelds and Jx is the source of magnetic ﬁelds,
this mixing can also be viewed as a consequence of the mixing of electric
and magnetic ﬁelds that we derived earlier from requiring that the Lorentz
force law applies in all inertial frames, Section 8.3. We will see that Eq.
(9.11) is an essential ingredient in our derivation of Maxwell’s equations
below.
Another crucial property of the charge density and the current density is
conservation of charge. As we discussed earlier when considering Newton’s
third law, conservation laws should be expressed through local equations in
relativity. Gauss’ theorem will be essential here. Conservation of charge
means that charge is neither created nor destroyed in physical processes.
However, currents ﬂow and change the local charge density when they do
so. Consider the ﬂow of current through an inﬁnitesimal surface area, J$da.
This quantity counts the amount of charge passing through the surface
element per second. So, if one sums up this quantity over a closed surface
enclosing a volume V, one counts up the amount of charge leaving that
volume per second,
%J$da ¼ d
dt &r d3r
(9.12)
Using Gauss’ theorem, we can write for a stationary volume,
&V$Jd3r ¼ & vr
vtd3r
(9.13)
Since this equality holds for any volume, it must be true as a local differen-
tial equation,
V$J þ vr
vt ¼ 0
(9.14)
This is an elegant expression of charge conservation. In fact this
equation is fully relativistic! It can be written as the inner product of two
152
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

four-vectors, following the notation introduced in Chapter 6, Section 6.5.
There we saw that vm ¼ v=vxm ¼ ðv=vct; v=vx; v=vy; v=vzÞ ¼ ðv=vct; VÞ
is a covariant four-vector, so
v$J ¼
X
m
vm Jm ¼ v
vct$cr þ V$J ¼ vr=vt þ V$J ¼ 0
(9.15)
is a Lorentz invariant conservation law,
v$J ¼ v0$J0 ¼
X
m
vm Jm ¼
X
m
v0
m J0m ¼ vr=vt þ V$J
¼ vr0=vt0 þ V0$J0 ¼ 0
(9.16)
Let us check explicitly that it is true in any inertial frame, if it is true in
one of them. In other words, consider the expression Eq. (9.14) in frame S0,
V0$J0 þ vr0
vt0 ¼ 0. We know how each variable in this equation transforms
between frames, so we can rewrite it in terms of variables referred to frame
S. Since vm ¼ v/vxm ¼ (v/vct, V) is a covariant four-vector, it transforms as
xm ¼ P
s
gmsxs ¼ ðct; x; y; zÞ,
v
vt0 ¼ g
v
vt þ v v
vx

;
v
vx0 ¼ g
 v
vx þ v
c2
v
vt

;
v
vy0 ¼ v
vy;
v
vz0 ¼ v
vz
(9.17)
So, we can check Eq. (9.16) explicitly using Eq. (9.11), the transformation
law for the four-vector current Jm, and Eq. (9.17),
V0$J0 þ vr0
vt0 ¼ g
 v
vx þ v
c2
v
vt

gð Jx  vrÞ þ vJy
vy þ vJz
vz
þ g
v
vt þ v v
vx

g

r  v
c2 Jx

V0$J0 þ vr0
vt0 ¼ g2
vJx
vx  v vr
vx þ v
c2
vJx
vt  v2
c2
vr
vt

þ vJy
vy þ vJz
vz
þ g2
vr
vt  v
c2
vJx
vt þ v vr
vx  v2
c2
vJx
vx

V0$J0 þ vr0
vt0 ¼ g2

1  v2
c2
 vJx
vx þ g2

1  v2
c2
 vr
vt þ vJy
vy þ vJz
vz
V0$J0 þ vr0
vt0 ¼ V$J þ vr
vt ¼ 0
(9.18)
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
153

So, after a ﬂurry of algebra all is well: we have the same conservation law
(called the “continuity” equation) in all frames.
This work emphasizes that local differential equations allow us to cap-
ture conservation laws, equations of motion and dynamics in a fashion that
makes the relativistic character, and causality of the physics manifest. The
covariant four-vector vm ¼ ðv0; v1; v2; v3Þ ¼

v
vx0; V

will prove useful in
other applications and theoretical developments.
Now we are in position to turn to the central result of this chapter: the
derivative of Maxwell’s equation from electrostatics and special relativity.
We have discussed at length why such a derivation should be possible, and
now we have the machinery to carry it out. We begin with Gauss’ law
Eq. (9.6), our expression of the fact that charge densities are the sources of
electric ﬁelds as a local differential equation. This equation must be true in
all frames, and yet it is puzzling because it involves only derivatives in the
spatial variables and none in time! It is not like an equation of motion,
which has a ﬁrst or second time derivative in it and predicts how a physical
system evolves in time. In “old-fashioned” language it is called an “equation
of constraint.” If we assume the validity of this equation in frame S0 and
then boost to frame S, we will generate an equation with time derivatives.
How does this work?
Let us do the exercise. We begin with,
V0$E0 ¼ 4pkr0
And we use Eq. (9.17) to write the gradient in terms of derivatives in S, we
use Eqs. (8.25), (8.29) and (8.30) to transform the ﬁelds and Eq. (9.11) to
transform the charge density,
g
 v
vx þ v
c2
v
vt

Ex þ v
vy gðEy  vBzÞ þ v
vz gðEz þ vByÞ ¼ 4pkg

r  v
c2 Jx

gðV$E  4pkrÞ  vg

 vEx
c2vt  vBz
vy þ vBy
vz  4pk
c2 Jx

¼ 0
(9.19)
The overall factor of g in Eq. (9.19) can be divided out. Now we have two
expressions in the two parentheses, one is multiplied by the arbitrary ve-
locity v of the boost and the other is not. How can their sum be zero? It
must be that each term is individually zero! The ﬁrst expression in parentheses in
Eq. (9.18) is just Gauss’ law in frame S. Since this expression must vanish,
154
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

we learn that Gauss’ law must hold in all frames if it holds in one. This
leaves the second parentheses, which also must vanish. This is clearly one
component of a vector equation. If we did the boost in the y direction, we
would get the second component and if we did the boost in the z direction,
we would get the third component. Identifying a “curl” of the magnetic
ﬁeld, V  B, we have,
V  B ¼ 4pk
c2 J þ 1
c2
vE
vt
(9.20)
which we recognize as the AmpereeMaxwell equation with the “displace-
ment” current, 1
c2 vE
vt , predicted from ﬁrst principles! This equation makes
precise and in full generality that moving charges, currents, create magnetic
ﬁelds, and time-varying electric ﬁelds.
This equation was ﬁrst discovered in lab experiments, which involved
quasistationary currents and so the last term in the equation, the displace-
ment current, was missed. When Maxwell put the equations of electric and
magnetic ﬁelds into one system, he found that they were inconsistent with
current conservation. He invented the displacement current to patch up
that ﬂaw. Experiments with strongly time-dependent currents, executed by
H. Hertz two decades after Maxwell invented his equations, validated the
discovery. Those experiments discovered electromagnetic radiation. We
will see below that the displacement current is an essential ingredient in the
propagation of electromagnetic ﬁelds. In our approach, current conserva-
tion is incorporated from the beginning so we evaded history’s error! (Ah,
hindsight!) To see the necessity of the displacement current, take the
divergence of Eq. (9.20),
V$ðV  BÞ ¼ 4pk
c2 V$J þ 1
c2
vV$E
vt
(9.21)
Now use the identity “the divergence of a curl of any vector ﬁeld is zero”
to see that the left-hand side of this equation vanishes identically. (The
proof of this identity can be done by simply writing out the expression in
Cartesian coordinates, as reviewed in Appendix D, and noting that all the
terms cancel.) Now, on the right-hand side replace the divergence of the
electric ﬁeld with 4pkr using Gauss’ law. Then Eq. (9.21) becomes our
equation for current conservation, Eq. (9.14), and we are done.
Before we discuss the physical content of the AmpereeMaxwell
equation, let us derive the remaining Maxwell equation. Our discussion
here started with Gauss’ law, a constraint equation for the electric ﬁeld. We
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
155

have a similar equation for the magnetic ﬁeld. The absence of magnetic
charges implies that,
V$B ¼ 0
(9.22)
In analogy to Gauss’ law for the electric ﬁeld, this equation means that
there are no magnetic monopoles, the analogue of electric charge. We
know from experience in the lab that magnetic ﬁelds are generated by
electric currents. We also know that permanent magnets have individual
North and South poles. We do not ﬁnd localized magnetic poles
(“monopoles”) in our world, so the right-hand side of Eq. (9.22) is zero.
Eq. (9.22) is usually taken for granted in the world of physics, so it does not
even have a special name! If magnetic monopoles are eventually discovered,
there will be regions of space where the right-hand side of Eq. (9.22) is
nonzero. But as of today, there are no magnetic monopoles so Eq. (9.22)
stands and the only source of magnetic ﬁelds in classical physics are electric
currents.
Eq. (9.22) is a “constraint” equation similar to Gauss’ law for electro-
statics. Let us see what we learn by viewing it from a different inertial frame.
We start with Eq. (9.22) in frame S0,
V0$B0 ¼ 0
(9.23)
Now substitute the variables in frame S0 with variables in frame S using Eq.
(9.17) and Section 8.3,
g
 v
vx þ v
c2
v
vt

Bx þ v
vy g

By þ v
c2Ez

þ v
vz g

Bz  v
c2Ey

¼ 0
g
 v
vxBx þ v
vyBy þ v
vzBz

 vg

 1
c2
vBx
vt  1
c2
vEz
vy þ 1
c2
vEy
vz

¼ 0
gðV$BÞ  vg

 1
c2
vBx
vt  1
c2ðV  EÞx

¼ 0
By the same argument we applied to understand and extract the content
from Eq. (9.19), we learn that V$B ¼ 0, and that,
V  E ¼ vB=vt
(9.24)
where, as in our derivation of the AmpereeMaxwell equation, we have
anticipated that boosts in the y and z directions will provide the full vector
character of the result, which we recognize as Faraday’s law! Recall
that Faraday’s law was discovered in lab experiments by observing that
156
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

time-varying magnetic ﬁelds induced “electromotive” forces in closed
loops. This phenomenon was the basis of myriad inventions in electromag-
netic motors, generators, and other devices.
To obtain Maxwell’s equations in their full generality, we must
accommodate general currents and charge densities. We already argued in
the case of Gauss’ law of electrostatics that we can obtain the law for a
general charge density r from the special case of a point charge by using the
principle of linear superposition. Now we need to do the same for the
current density J in the AmpereeMaxwell law. In Eq. (9.6), we could
consider inﬁnitesimal pointlike charge densities and generate inﬁnitesimal
pointlike currents in a particular direction by performing the appropriate
boost. But then we could consider boosts of any velocity in any direction in
our x-y-z space and by linearly superposing the resulting Amperee
Maxwell equations, we could obtain the general case. For example, we
could even generate the case of a closed loop of electric current and could
predict the magnetic ﬁeld everywhere in that environment. The only
constraint that our resulting distribution of current density J and charge
density r satisfy is that of current conservation, V$J þ vr
vt ¼ 0, which is built
into the construction as we have already discussed.
Now we have all of Maxwell’s equations,
V$E ¼ 4pkr
ðGauss' LawÞ
V  B ¼ 4pk
c2 J þ 1
c2
vE
vt
ðAmpere  Maxwell LawÞ
V$B ¼ 0
ðNo Magnetic MonoplesÞ
V  E ¼ vB=vt
ðFaraday's LawÞ
We should reﬂect on what has been accomplished here. We started with
Coulomb’s law of electrostatics, wrote it as a local differential equation,
Gauss’ law for a point particle, and then generalized it to an arbitrary charge
distribution using the principle of linear superposition. Then we boosted
Gauss’ law to a moving frame where we calculated the transformed charge
density and current density. Since we had inferred how electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds, coordinates, and time and their derivatives transformed under
boosts, we could compute all the pieces of the equation from ﬁrst princi-
ples. We did the same for Gauss’ law for the magnetic ﬁeld. The result was
Maxwell’s equations. Finally, since the equations are linear we could invoke
the principle of linear superposition again and infer that they applied to a
general distribution of charges and currents that satisfy current conservation.
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
157

We have learned that for Gauss’ law, V$E ¼ 4pkr, to make sense
relativistically, it must be accompanied by three other equations, the
MaxwelleAmpere equations, V  B ¼ 4pk
c2 J þ 1
c2 vE
vt . These four equations
are in fact intertwined inexorably by relativitydyou cannot have one
without the others because they mix under boosts. The physical reality is
the group of four of them. Similarly, for V$B ¼ 0 and Faraday’s law.
The right-hand side of Gauss’ law is the charge density, which is the
zeroth component of the four-vector Jm, the electric current. The
MaxwelleAmpere law has the currents Ji, i ¼ 1, 2, 3, on their right-hand
sides. The fact that all four components of Jm mix under boosts is the reason
why Gauss’ law becomes four equations (a quartet) in relativity. This
suggests that our work is not done until we learn to write the left-hand side
of Gauss’ law and MaxwelleAmpere’s law in terms of four-vectors and
tensors. Only then will we see the true physical law residing there. We shall
accomplish this goal in the next chapter. We shall also make similar progress
on V$B ¼ 0 and Faraday’s law.
Now we can apply Maxwell’s equations to all the electromagnetic
devices invented over the years. When we choose convenient frames of
reference to solve particular problems, we can use our knowledge of rel-
ativity to provide the needed transformations.
Let us put Ampere’s and Faraday’s laws into a more physical and familiar
context. Consider a closed loop l, which is the boundary of a surface S.
Denote an inﬁnitesimal surface area on S as da, and take the surface integral
of AmpereeMaxwell’s law,
%V  B$da ¼ 4pk
c2 %J$da þ 1
c2 % vE
vt $da
(9.25)
We need to make two observations here to write this result in standard
form. First, there is Stoke’s theorem from vector calculus (Appendix D):
Consider a vector ﬁeld V. The ﬂux of the curl of the vector ﬁeld V through
a surface S equals the line integral of V around the boundary l of the surface,
%V  V$da ¼
H
V$dl
(9.26)
We apply this famous theorem to the left-hand side of Eq. (9.25), which
becomes
H
B$dl, the line integral of the magnetic ﬁeld around the closed
loop l that forms the boundary of the surface S. Our second observation is
that on the right-hand side of Eq. (9.25) we have the quantity %J$da which
is the amount of charge that passes through the surface S per second. It is
158
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

traditional to call this quantity I. If the electric current were conﬁned to a
wire at rest in the lab, then I is the amount of charge that passes a point on
the wire per second. Now Eq. (9.26) becomes,
H
B$dl ¼ 4pk
c2 I þ 1
c2 %vE
vt $da
(9.27)
This expression reduces to Ampere’s law for stationary currents because the
displacement current vanishes in that case. In problems with simple ge-
ometries, Ampere’s law is a convenient way to calculate the magnetic ﬁeld
generated by time-independent currents. Some applications are included in
the problems that follow this chapter, but traditional textbooks on elec-
tromagnetism have a wealth of challenging examples.
Finally, let us apply Stoke’s theorem to Faraday’s law,
%V  E$da ¼ % vB
vt $da
H
E$dl ¼ d
dt %B$da
(9.28)
which states that the “time rate of change of the magnetic ﬂux through a
ﬁxed surface induces an electromotive force
H
E$dl around its boundary.”
In traditional textbooks, this form of Faraday’s law is applied to devices with
simple geometries where both sides are easily evaluated and used to make
quantitative predictions. We also include some examples in the problems
at the end of the chapter. The minus sign in Eq. (9.28) is the source of
“Lenz’s law,” also discussed in the problems.
9.2 THE WAVE EQUATION FOR LIGHT AND THE
DERIVATION THAT LIGHT TRAVELS AT THE SPEED
LIMIT
We have been assuming throughout our discussions that light provides an
example of the speed limit c of special relativity. Now that we have
Maxwell’s equations it is a “simple” exercise to demonstrate this fact, which
plays such an important role in physics. When Maxwell ﬁrst derived the
wave equation, physicists were not comfortable with the idea of waves
propagating though empty space, and they held onto Newton’s vision of
spaceetime. It took the work of many physicists to ﬁnd the path forward,
and it was Einstein’s synthesis and emphasis on fundamentals that brought
us to the modern view that we present here.
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
159

Maxwell’s equations state that electric and magnetic ﬁelds are generated
by charges and currents. To make a wave of electric and magnetic ﬁelds, we
must impart some energy into these ﬁelds. We can do this by accelerating
some charges somewhere in space. It is analogous to shaking the end of a
taut long rope and creating waves traveling down it. As the waves travel
away from the shaking end, they take on dynamics of their own and travel
with a particular amplitude and speed and carry energy and momentum
with them. A wave traveling in a direction k at velocity v can be described
by a function,
Aðk$ðr  vtÞÞ
(9.29)
Choosing the “wave vector” k in the x direction, the argument of the
function A becomes kx(x  vxt). Note that if t increases by Dt, then x must
increase by vxDt to keep the argument (phase) of the function A un-
changed. This observation establishes that v is the velocity of the wave.
Since the argument of the function A should be dimensionless, the “wave
vector” k has dimensions length1. In applications with periodic motion,
the wave number jkj is 2p/l, where l is the wavelength. More on this
below.
We learn from these preliminaries that for a traveling electromagnetic
wave, the electric and magnetic ﬁelds have the functional forms, E(k$(r  vt))
and B(k$(r  vt)). In regions of space far from their sources, they must satisfy
Maxwell’s equations without sources,
V$E ¼ 0
V$B ¼ 0
V  B ¼ 1
c2
vE
vt
V  E ¼ vB
vt
Substituting the traveling wave functional form into the ﬁrst equation,
Gauss’ law in empty space, gives, deﬁning the phase a ¼ k$(r  vt),
V$Eðk$ðr  vtÞÞ ¼ k$vEðaÞ
va
¼ v
va k$EðaÞ ¼ 0
where we used the fact that k is a constant. We learn that k$E ¼ 0. This is
called the “transversality condition.” It means that the electric ﬁeld is
perpendicular to the propagation direction of the wave. If k points in the
x direction and the wave is linearly polarized, then E could point in the
160
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

y direction. Let us analyze this case ﬁrst where the phase simpliﬁes to
a ¼ kx(x  vxt) and E ¼ (0, Ey, 0).
Similarly
V$B ¼ 0
implies
that
k$B ¼ 0,
another
transversality
condition.
Now we need to determine the relative orientation of B and E. Since E
is in the y direction, V  E ¼ bz vEy
vx where we used the fact that E depends
only on x, not y or z. From Faraday’s law, this implies that B lies in the z
direction.
In summary, we see that both E and B are perpendicular to the di-
rection of propagation of the wave, and they are perpendicular to each
other with E  B pointing in the direction of propagation of the wave, k.
Note that these aspects of the traveling wave are true in every frame. This
follows from the fact that Maxwell’s equations hold in any inertial frame, or
from the fact that light travels at the speed limit and therefore its state must
be Lorentz invariant, as we shall now discuss in more detail.
Let us ﬁnd the wave equation that applies here. Ampere’s and Faraday’s
laws reduce to,
vEy
vx ¼ vBz
vt ;
vBz
vx ¼ vEy
c2vt
(9.30)
Therefore, the time dependence in the electric ﬁeld feeds into the magnetic
ﬁeld (the displacement current in Maxwell’s equation is essential here), and
the time dependence of the magnetic ﬁeld feeds into the electric ﬁeld. This
is analogous to the equations for coupled oscillators familiar from classical
mechanics. We can decouple these equations by applying
v
c2vt to the ﬁrst of
these equations and  v
vx to the second equation,
v2Ey
c2vtvx ¼ v2Bz
c2vt2;
v2Bz
vx2 ¼ v2Ey
c2vxvt
Now add these two equations to produce a second-order differential
equation for Bz,
 v2
vx2  v2
c2vt2

Bz ¼ 0
(9.31)
Analogous manipulations produce a decoupled differential equation for Ey,
 v2
vx2  v2
c2vt2

Ey ¼ 0
(9.32)
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
161

Each of these equations is solved with a traveling wave form, E(kx(x  vxt))
and B(kx(x  vxt)). Now substitute this wave form into Eq. (9.31) and use
the chain rule to ﬁnd,
 v2
vx2  v2
c2vt2

Bzðk$ðr  vtÞÞ ¼ k2
x

1  v2
c2
 d2Bz
d2a ¼ 0
We learn that the traveling wave form is indeed a solution, but Maxwell’s
equations imply that the wave must travel at the speed limit, v ¼ c, as promised
in Chapter 1. A similar argument applies as well to Ey.
It is easy to generalize this discussion to wave propagation in a general
direction k. We would then ﬁnd the wave equations,
 v2
vx2 þ v2
vy2 þ v2
vz2  v2
c2vt2

B ¼ 0;
 v2
vx2 þ v2
vy2 þ v2
vz2  v2
c2vt2

E ¼ 0
(9.33)
The transversality conditions read k$B ¼ 0 and k$E ¼ 0. In addition,
Faraday’s and Ampere’s laws imply that B and E are perpendicular, and the
ratio of their magnitudes is,
E
B ¼ c
(9.34)
The “wave operator”

v2
vx2 þ v2
vy2 þ v2
vz2 
v2
c2vt2

¼

V$V 
v2
c2vt2

, is very
important in electrodynamics and ﬁeld theory in general. It is an invariant
operator, and this fact implies that electromagnetic waves travel at the speed
limit c independently of the velocity of the wave’s source. Let us check
these points. The claim is that

V$V 
v2
c2vt2

is invariant under boosts,

V$V  v2
c2vt2

¼

V0$V0 
v2
c2vt0 2

(9.35)
To prove this, we apply the Lorentz transformation equations for the de-
rivatives, Eq. (9.17), and carry through some algebra, which should be quite
familiar by now. Or we can note that the wave operator is the length
squared of a four-vector operator and therefore is guaranteed to be an
invariant,
v$v ¼ v2
0  v2
1  v2
2  v2
3 ¼ v2
c2vt2  V$V
162
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

v$v ¼ v0$v0 ¼ v02
0  v02
1  v02
2  v02
3 ¼
v2
c2vt02  V0$V0
This invariance proves that if an electromagnetic wave travels at a speed c in
one frame, then it does so in all inertial frames. This provides an example of
Postulate 2 of special relativity. This completes an important logical loop in
this development of the theory.
A familiar and useful wave form for traveling waves is a sinusoidal
function such as sin(k$(r  vt)) or cos(k$(r  vt)). Substituting these ex-
pressions into Maxwell’s equations without sources and into the wave
equation, we verify that these are solutions as long as jvj ¼ c. The reader
should verify that k ¼ jkj ¼ 2p/l and c/l ¼ n where n is the frequency of
the wave in cycles per second and l is the wavelength of the regular pe-
riodic oscillation.
Since these waves satisfy a Lorentz invariant wave equation, they can be
written in invariant form. All observers in different inertial frames must
measure the same phase of a wave of light since the wave propagates at the
speed limit with respect to all of them. This suggests that we can introduce a
four-vector, which has the wave vector k as its spatial components,
km ¼ ð2p=l; kÞ
Let us justify this construction. First, km is lightlike, k$k ¼

2p
l
2
 k2 ¼ 0,
and second, the inner product of km and xm gives the phase of the wave,
a ¼ k$x ¼ 2p
l $ct  k$x, which equals 2p
l ðct  xÞ if k points along the x axis.
Since km ¼ vma and a is Lorentz invariant, km must be a four-vector because
vm is one. So, in the discussion above, one could write A(k$x) for the
traveling electromagnetic wave and write sin(k$x) or cos(k$x) in the si-
nusoidal special cases.
In this discussion, we have emphasized linearly polarized waves for
simplicity, but we can also make circularly polarized waves by taking linear
superpositions. For example, to make a right-handed circularly polarized
wave propagating in the z direction, we can take the sum of waves linearly
polarized in the x and y directions,
ðEx; Ey; EzÞwðcos kðct  zÞ; sin kðct  zÞ; 0Þ
Maxwell’s equations predict a magnetic ﬁeld ðBx; By; BzÞw1c ð  Ey; Ex; 0Þ,
which is perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld with E  B pointing along
the þz axis. Note that (Ex, Ey)w(cos k(ct  z), sin k(ct  z)) describes a
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
163

vector of unit length that at ﬁxed z ¼ 0 rotates around the origin in the x-y
plane in a counterclockwise direction with a period DT ¼ 2p/kc ¼ 1/n.
This is a right-handed circularly polarized wave. To make a left-handed
circularly polarized wave, replace Ey with Ey in the expression for the
electric ﬁeld. In the quantum description of radiation, right-handed (left-
handed) circularly polarized waves describe a photon with its spin 1
aligned (antialigned) with the propagation direction of the wave. The spin
of the photon will be discussed further in Chapter 11.
PROBLEMS
9-1. Let us do some introductory problems in Gauss’ law in integral form,
Eqs. (9.2)e(9.5).
a. Find the electric ﬁeld E outside a uniformly charged solid sphere
of radius R and total charge Q.
b. Repeat part a. for a very long cylinder, which has a charge density
r ¼ r0. If the cylinder has a radius R, get the E ﬁeld both inside
and outside the cylinder.
c. Repeat part b. for an inﬁnite plane that carries a uniform surface
charge/area s ¼ s0.
9-2. Let us do some introductory problems on Ampere’s law in its integral
form, Eq. (9.27).
a. Find the magnetic ﬁeld B outside an inﬁnite uniform surface cur-
rent, S ¼ Sbx, ﬂowing over the x-y plane as shown in Fig. 9.1.
Here S has the units of charge/length.
Figure 9.1 There is a surface current in the (x, y) plane and a loop in the (y, z) plane.
Applying Ampere’s law to the loop yields a formula for the magnetic ﬁeld generated
by the uniform, stationary surface current.
164
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

b. Find the B ﬁeld inside a long solenoid consisting of n closely
wound turns per unit length on a cylinder of radius R and carrying
a steady current I.
9-3. Let us analyze an experiment on Faraday’s law that you may have
done in a physics lab.
A metal bar of mass m slides without friction on two parallel
conducting rails a distance l apart as shown in Fig. 9.2. A resistor R
is connected between the rails and a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B point-
ing upward ﬁlls the entire region.
a. If the bar moves at velocity v as shown, what is the current in the
resistor? In what direction does it ﬂow? (Recall Ohm’s law,
V ¼ RI, where V is the voltage drop across the resistor,
V ¼
R
E$dl, and the line integral is taken from the beginning
to the end of the resistor. R is the resistance.)
b. What is the magnetic force on the bar? What is its direction?
c. Suppose the initial velocity of the bar was v0. Its initial kinetic
energy was 1
2 mv2
0 (v2
0  c2, so Newtonian kinematics work very
accurately.). Show that all this energy shows up in the resistor
by the time the bar comes to rest.
9-4. Faraday’s law plays a central role in many alternating current (AC)
devices. Here is a generator.
A square loop of side a is mounted on a vertical shaft and rotated
at an angular velocity u. A uniform magnetic ﬁeld B points to the
right in Fig. 9.3. Find a formula for the electromotive force in the
wire.
Figure 9.2 The bar travels at velocity v and Faraday’s law implies that the variable
magnetic ﬂux through the circuit formed by the bar, the wires, and the resistor causes
a current to ﬂow.
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
165

9-5. Here is a puzzling lab demonstration illustrative of Faraday’s law.
A line of charge per unit length l is glued onto the rim of a wheel
of radius b, which is suspended horizontally so that it is free to rotate.
In the central region, out to radius a, there is a uniform magnetic ﬁeld
B pointing up. Now the ﬁeld is turned off. What happens?
Student A says that nothing happens because the magnetic ﬁeld
does not touch the rim.
Student B says that the wheel rotates and she calculates the angular
frequency u of the rotation using Faraday’s law.
a. Which student is right? Explain.
b. If you voted for student B, calculate u assuming all the mass of the
wheel is on its rim. Show that u does not depend on the rate at
which the magnetic ﬁeld was turned off.
Now for a puzzle. If student B were right, then we have gener-
ated a ﬁnal state with nonzero angular momentum. But conserva-
tion of angular momentum is a sacred principle of physics. Where
might the angular momentum have been in the initial setup of the
demonstration? (We will see later in the text that electromagnetic
ﬁelds carry energy, momentum, and angular momentum. This is a
challenging subject!)
Figure 9.3 The rotating square loop experiences a variable magnetic ﬂux that causes
an electromotive force to develop in the loop in accord with Faraday’s law.
166
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

9-6. In the text, we saw many examples where electromagnetic ﬁelds carry
energy and momentum. Let us see how energy ﬂow and energy con-
servation follows directly from Maxwell’s equations.
We begin with Faraday’s law and AmpereeMaxwell’s law,
V  B ¼ 1
c2
vE
vt þ 4pk
c2 J
V  E ¼ vB
vt
a. Take the dot product of the ﬁrst equation with E, and take the dot
product of the second equation with B, add them and
simplify and verify,
1
2
v
vt
1
c2E2 þ B2

¼ 4pk
c2 E$J  V$ðE  BÞ
(Hint: Use the vector identity V$(F  G) ¼ G$(V  F)
e F$(V  G), which holds for any F and G.)
b. If the current is generated by an ensemble of point particles show
that,
RRR
J$Ed3r ¼
X
ev$E ¼ v
vtEkin
where Ekin is the sum of the relativistic energies of the ensemble of
particles. (Hint: The last equality was illustrated in the text for a
single particle. It is a consequence of the Lorentz force law and
the fact that electric ﬁelds do work on charged particles.)
c. Integrate the result of part a., integrate it over a spatial volume, use
part b. and Gauss’ theorem to derive,
v
vt

&
E2 þ c2B2
8pk

d3r þ Ekin

¼ %
 c2
4pk E  B

$da
where Ekin includes only those particles inside the volume.
This equation is an expression of energy conservation: the rate
of change of the total energy inside a volume is accounted for by
the energy per unit time that ﬂows into the volume through its
boundary surface. Further work on this topic shows that
W ¼ E2þc2B2
8pk
is the energy density stored in the electromagnetic
ﬁelds, and S ¼
c2
4pk E  B is the energy ﬂux carried by the ﬁelds
(Poynting vector, famous in the subject).
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
167

The general case of momentum involves more mathematical
technology, and you will learn about it in more advanced courses.
Conservation laws that supplant Newton’s third law follow.
9-7. Let us illustrate the concepts of energy density and energy ﬂux in
some simple problems. The goal of this problem is to motivate
some of the work and comments in Problem 9-6. Refer to that prob-
lem for various deﬁnitions.
Consider a capacitor with large isolated square plates L  L, which
are at distance d apart. Suppose that d  L. The capacitor is initially
uncharged. Charge it up slowly by taking positive charge from one
plate directly to the other until an electric ﬁeld E0 exists between
the plates.
a. Show that the energy required is
Etot ¼
 1
8pkE2
0

L2d
Next, consider a very long solenoid of n closely wound turns of
wire per length on a cylinder of radius R and length L. Use
Faraday’s law to calculate the energy required to slowly bring
the magnetic ﬁeld in the solenoid to a value B0.
b. Show that the energy required is
Etot ¼
 c2
8pkB2
0

ðpR2LÞ
Consider current ﬂowing down a wire of length L and radius
R. There is a potential difference of V between the ends of the
wire so the electric ﬁeld along it is E ¼ V
L. A current I ﬂows
down the wire. The current produces a magnetic ﬁeld around
the wire.
c. Calculate the magnetic ﬁeld at the surface of the wire from
Ampere’s law,
B ¼
I
2pR
d. Calculate the Poynting vector on the surface of the wire, and
verify that its magnitude is,
S ¼ V
L
I
2pR ¼
VI
2pRL
Verify that it points radially inward.
168
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Note that the power developed by the circuit is VI. (A charge
Q is being transported through a potential difference of V, so the
energy required is VQ and the power is the time derivative of this,
V d
dt Q ¼ VI.) So the Poynting vector is indeed the power per
area.
Maxwell’s Equations of Electrodynamics and the Wave Equation
169

CHAPTER 10
Magnetism in the Lab, the
Discovery of Relativity, and the
Way Forward
Contents
10.1 How Can Magnetic Forces Be Large If They Are Relativistic Effects?
171
10.2 Electrodynamics Formulated in Covariant Notation
178
10.3 Next Steps
183
Problems
185
Reference
188
10.1 HOW CAN MAGNETIC FORCES BE LARGE IF THEY
ARE RELATIVISTIC EFFECTS?
Let us consider the puzzling fact that magnetic forces are large in the lab
although magnetic effects are relativistic and are suppressed relative to
electric effects by powers of c z 3.0  108 m/s. This experimental fact is a
counterexample to the widely held belief that relativistic effects are only
sizeable for particles traveling near the speed limit c. In this example, we
shall see that the electrons that move through a typical conducting wire
travel at speeds of a fraction of a millimeter per second and are the sources
of the powerful magnetic ﬁelds in typical electromagnets.
To begin, consider an electron moving parallel to an uncharged con-
ducting wire, which carries a current I as shown in Fig. 10.1. Label the
Figure 10.1 A charge q moves parallel to an uncharged conducting wire, which carries
a current I. The charge’s velocity v matches the velocities of the electrons in the wire.
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00010-6
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
171

charge of the electron q, its velocity v, and its transverse distance from the
wire b. Choose v to match the velocities of the electrons in the wire. To
calculate the force on the electron, we could calculate the magnetic ﬁeld
generated by the current I using Ampere’s law in the lab frame. Then the
Lorentz force law would give us the force on the electron. But it will teach
us more to do the calculation in the rest frame of the electron.
Before doing any quantitative calculations, let us argue that there is an
attractive force between the electron and the wire in the electron’s rest
frame. In Fig. 10.2 we show the single electron q moving parallel to the
wire with velocity v and distance b from it. Inside the wire we show the
heavy Cuþ ions that are at rest in the lab frame, and we show the electrons
moving with velocity v in the wire. We have noted carefully that in the lab
frame the distance between neighboring stationary Cuþ ions is identical to
the distance between the moving electrons, l0. This equality must be true
because we can measure to very high precision that the wire is locally
electrically neutral in the lab frame. In our model, think of the electrons as
moving through the wire in a “musical chairs” fashion, canceling the
positive charges of the Cuþ ions as they go.
We display these ideas in Fig. 10.3, a Minkowski diagram of the world
lines of the electrons and the Cuþ ions. The world lines of the Cuþ ions are
vertical because they are at rest in the lab frame S, and the world lines of the
electrons tilt to the right with tan q ¼ v/c. The distances between neigh-
boring Cuþ ions is l0 and the distance between neighboring electrons is
also, l0. This is shown in the ﬁgure and is true on any line of given t, any
horizontal cut through the ﬁgure.
Figure 10.2 Same as Fig. 10.1 but showing the moving electrons and the stationary
copper ions in the wire in the lab frame.
172
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Now for the interesting part. Let us check that the electron q at distance
b from the wire measures a positive charge per length on the wire. In other
words, there is an electric ﬁeld present in the frame of the electron and since
it corresponds to a positive charge per unit length on the wire, it produces
an attraction. When we do a short calculation of the Lorentz contraction,
we shall see that this electric ﬁeld gives the correct attractive force.
To understand this we take the Minkowski diagram we have just drawn
and put the x0 axis on it, as shown in Fig. 10.3. The x0 axis is the line of
constant ct0 ¼ 0 in the electron’s rest frame S0. Note that the world lines of
any of the electrons are parallel to the ct0 axis, and the x0 axis tilts up, above
the x axis, by tan q ¼ v/c. In this frame the distance between neighboring
Cuþ ions is lþ, and the distance between neighboring electrons in the wire
is labeled l. These distances are measured at constant ct0, along any line
parallel to the x0 axis. Because of the tilt of the x0 axis, we immediately see
that l > lþ. But this means that the negative charge per unit length due to
the electrons is smaller than that due to the Cuþ ions. Therefore, the
electron at distance b from the wire is attracted to it by an electric force in its
rest frame!
Now let us solve the problem quantitatively. In Fig. 10.4, we show the
electron’s rest frame S0, and we use the same labeling as in the Minkowski
diagram. To begin, we need to compare the two ﬁgures showing the frames
S and S0, so we can relate the distances l0, lþ, and l. Since the electrons in
the wire are at rest in S0, l is the proper distance between them. Since they
Figure 10.3 Minkowski diagram of Fig. 10.2. The x0 axis is the line of constant ct0 ¼ 0 in
the electron’s rest frame S0.
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
173

are moving with velocity v in the lab frame S where the distance between
them is called l0, the lengths are related by Lorentz contraction,
l0 ¼ l=g
(10.1)
If we deﬁne l0 to be the charge per unit length of the Cuþ ions in the lab,
then l0 is the charge per unit length of the electrons in the lab since the
wire is neutral there. Since the distance between the electrons is larger in S0
by a factor of g, l ¼ gl0, the charge per unit length of the electrons in S0,
l, is reduced accordingly,
l ¼ l0=g
(10.2)
Similarly, since the Cuþ ions have velocity v in S0, the distance between
them in S0 contracts,
lþ ¼ l0=g
(10.3)
and their charge density increases,
lþ ¼ gl0
(10.4)
Collecting these results, the net charge density of the wire in the frame S0, is
l0 ¼ lþ þ l ¼ l0

g  1
g

(10.5)
This charge density generates an electric ﬁeld in S0, which we calculate us-
ing Gauss’ law,
1
4pk %E0$da0 ¼ Q
(10.6)
In this application, we choose the closed surface to be a cylinder concentric
with the wire and having radius b and height h0 as shown in Fig. 10.5. Since
Figure 10.4 View of the wire from the perspective of the electron’s rest frame S0.
174
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the symmetry of the ﬁgure indicates that the electric ﬁeld E0 points radially
outward, we can evaluate both sides of Eq. (10.6) and learn that,
1
4pk 2pbh0E0 ¼ l0h0
So,
E0 ¼ 2k l0
b
(10.7)
Now we can write down the force on the electron of charge q in its rest
frame S0,
F0
y ¼ 2k l0
b q ¼ 2kl0
b

g  1
g

q ¼ g 2kl0
b

1  1
g2

q ¼ g v2
c2
2kl0
b
q
(10.8)
where we observed that the force is transverse to the wire, and we called
this direction y.
Our last task consists of relating F0
y to Fy, the force that the electron
experiences in the lab. Since F0
y ¼ dp0
y
.
dt0, we need only recall the Lorentz
transformations to complete this task. First, py is invariant under boosts in
the x direction, so dp0
y ¼ dpy. Next, dt0 is the proper time of the electron
because it is at rest in S0. Therefore, dt ¼ gdt0. We conclude that,
F0
y ¼
dp0
y
dt0 ¼ dpy
dt=g ¼ g dpy
dt ¼ gFy
(10.9)
Now we have our ﬁnal result. The force that the moving electron feels in
the lab frame is,
Fy ¼ v2
c2
2kl0
b
q
(10.10)
Figure 10.5 Gaussian cylinder used to calculate the electric ﬁeld E0 in the frame S0 of
the moving electrons.
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
175

Since q is negative for an electron, the force is attractive, as observed above.
In addition, it appears to be tiny because it is of order v2
c2. However, as a
lecture demonstration with ordinary parallel wires shows, the force is
appreciable for typical conditions. Unscreened electric forces such as 2k l0
b
are gigantic and are typically not seen in applications because bulk matter is
usually neutral. (If you studied Problem 6.9, you learned this earlier.) We
will estimate the forces between parallel wires in more detail later in this
section.
Let us check that this approach to our problem gets the conventional
answer.
First, in the conventional calculation we obtain the magnetic ﬁeld in the
lab from Ampere’s law, as illustrated in Fig. 10.6. Ampere’s law states that
the line integral of the magnetic ﬁeld around a closed loop C is proportional
to the current that pierces the surface spanned by C,
I
B$dl ¼ 4pk
c2 I
(10.11)
One can argue on the basis of the symmetry of the straight wire in the
ﬁgure that the magnetic ﬁeld circulates round the wire. Choosing the
closed loop in Ampere’s law to be a circle concentric with the wire and of
radius b, we see that B is parallel to dl and the integral becomes 2pbB, so
B ¼ 2kI
c2b
(10.12)
where the current I, the amount of charge passing a ﬁxed point in the wire
per second, is l0v.
Therefore, the electron at distance b from the wire feels a magnetic ﬁeld,
B ¼ v
c2
2kl0
b
(10.13)
Figure 10.6 An imaginery loop C around the wire used to apply Ampere’s law for the
calculation of the magnetic ﬁeld generated by the current I in the lab frame.
176
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

where the minus sign indicates that B comes out of the paper as shown in
Fig. 10.7. The Lorentz force law, F ¼ qv  B, produces an attractive force
between the negatively charged electron and the wire of magnitude,
vBq ¼ v2
c2
2kl0
b
q
(10.14)
which agrees perfectly with Eq. (10.10).
Now let us consider two parallel wires at distance b apart each carrying a
current I in the same direction. There is the wire of the previous discussion
and the second wire at the distance b from the ﬁrst wire where the electron
had been. So, the magnetic ﬁeld due to the ﬁrst wire at the position of the
second wire is given by Eq. (10.12) and is perpendicular to the plane
containing the wires. We can easily calculate the force that this ﬁeld pro-
duces on all the electrons in the length l of the second wire. The amount of
charge in the length l of wire is l0l and its velocity is v, so the Lorentz force
law predicts the force on this length of wire to be,
F ¼ vðl0lÞB ¼ vðl0lÞ 2kl
c2b ¼ 2k
c2
I2
b l
(10.15)
We can substitute typical parameters into this formula to compare with
lab demonstrations of magnetic forces. First, the constant k, which estab-
lishes the scale of forces in Coulomb’s law is roughly 8.99  109 Nm2/C2.
Let the wires be 1 cm apart and choose currents of 10 A. Then the arith-
metic yields F ¼ 2$103newtons per meter, which is a sufﬁcient force to
bend typical copper wires as they attract one another. (Recall that 1 pound-
force ¼ 4.45 N) In fact, if you have ever constructed electromagnets from
typical wire coils, you know how effective they are at picking up nails,
deﬂecting compass needles, etc.
So far we have not calculated the electron’s velocity v in the wire. It is
instructive to do this, following in the foot steps of A. P. French [1]. We
Figure 10.7 The magnetic ﬁeld generated by the current in the wire at the location of
the moving electron at a transverse distance b from the wire.
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
177

will start with the experimental current I ¼ 10 A and calculate v, the ve-
locity of the electrons producing that current. 10 A means that 10 C pass
any ﬁxed point on the wire per second. Since each electron carries a charge
of roughly 1.6  1019 C, 10/1.6  1019 z 6  1019 electrons pass any
ﬁxed point on the wire per second. Suppose the cross-sectional area of
the wire is 1 mm2 ¼ 102 cm2. Then in 1 s all the electrons in a volume of
size v  102 cm2 pass any ﬁxed point on the wire. How many electrons
are in this volume? We need the properties of Cu to calculate this. The
molar mass of Cu is 63.54, so 63.54 g of Cu contains Avogadro’s
number (6.02  1023) of Cu atoms. The density of Cu is 8.96 g/cm3.
So,
1 cm3
contains
8.96/63.54 z 0.14 M
of
Cu,
which
contains
0.14  6.02  1023 z 0.85  1023 Cu atoms. Since one Cu atom con-
tributes one mobile electron to the wire, this is also the number of mobile
electrons in a cubic centimeter of wire. Combining these facts, the number
of electrons that pass a ﬁxed point on the wire per second is,
0:85  1023ðv$102Þ z 6$1019
(10.16)
Solving this equation for n we learn that the velocity of the electrons in the
wire is really tiny,
v z 0:07 cm=s
(10.17)
We come to the astonishing conclusion that v is a tiny velocity on the scale
of the speed limit,
v2
c2 z ð2:3  1012Þ
2 z 5:3  1024
(10.18)
The reader should reﬂect on the fact that this number is responsible for the
discovery of special relativity! The experiments of Ampere, Faraday, and
others who discovered that magnetism was produced by currents were
actually measuring a Lorentz contraction factor that deviated from unity
by 2.65  1024.
Curious.
10.2 ELECTRODYNAMICS FORMULATED IN COVARIANT
NOTATION
Now that we have derived the Lorentz force law and Maxwell’s equations
from electrostatics and special relativity, it is time to write these equations in
a language that embodies the principles of relativity. Recall that when we
found the transformation laws for the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, we left
178
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the subject in an unﬁnished state. Under boosts the electric and magnetic
ﬁelds satisfy the rules,
E0
x ¼ Ex;
E0
y ¼ gðEy  vBzÞ;
E0
z ¼ gðEz þ vByÞ
B0
x ¼ Bx;
B0
y ¼ g

By þ v
c2Ez

;
B0
z ¼ g

Bz  v
c2Ey

(10.19)
So, all the components of the two three-vectors mix under boosts. This
teaches us that one must think of the collection of two three-vectors as the
“electromagnetic ﬁeld.” This is the quantity that has true physical existence.
It is not E or B alone since their components mix. As you discovered in the
problem sets, under various physical circumstances one can transform to a
frame where “magnetic effects” become “electric effects” and vice versa.
The problem we face here is how to express these results in a relativistic
language that remains true in all inertial frames. We know how to proceed
with the four-vector position, velocity, energyemomentum, etc. But what
about the six components of these two three-vectors?
We need a relativistic object that can accommodate six three-vector
components and can incorporate the transformation law Eq. (10.19). A
second rank tensor Tmn has 4  4 ¼ 16 components, so this does not ﬁt.
The metric tensor gmn is symmetric, gmn¼gnm, so it has 10 independent
components. We need a quantity with six independent components. As we
noted above, the six components are two three-vectors. So, if some second
rank tensor is required, its zeroezero component, F00, say, must vanish. To
be relativistic, its 0  0 component must then vanish in every frame to
accommodate Eq. (10.19), F000 ¼ F00 ¼ 0. This requirement puts re-
strictions on the tensor Fmn and tells us how to construct it. Being a second
rank tensor, it must transform under boosts as,
F0mn ¼
X
sl
Lm
sLn
lFsl
(10.20)
where Lm
s are the coefﬁcients of the Lorentz transformation,
x0m ¼
X
n
Lm
nxn
(10.21)
with L0
0 ¼ g; L0
1 ¼ v
c g; L1
0 ¼ v
c g; L1
1 ¼ g; L2
2 ¼ 1; L3
3 ¼ 1
and all other elements in the Lorentz transformation vanishing. If we write
out the transformation for F00 we ﬁnd,
F000 ¼
X
sl
L0
sL0
lFsl
¼ L0
0L0
0F00 þ L0
1L0
0F10 þ L0
0L0
1F01 þ L0
1L0
1F11
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
179

For F000 ¼ 0 if F00 ¼ 0, we see that F11 must vanish and F10 ¼ F01. If we
consider boosts in the y direction and in the z direction, we learn
F20 ¼ F02, F30 ¼ F03 and F22 ¼ F33 ¼ 0. Progress!
We can dig deeper into Fmn now that we know how the ﬁrst row is
related to the ﬁrst column, F0m ¼ Fm0. Consider the transformation law
for F02 and F20,
F002 ¼
X
sl
L0
sL2
lFsl ¼ L0
0L2
2F02 þ L0
1L2
2F12
F020 ¼
X
sl
L2
sL0
lFsl ¼ L2
2L0
0F20 þ L2
2L0
1F21
Since F02 ¼ F20 we learn that F12 ¼ F21 as well. More considerations
of this type show that Fij ¼ Fji for i and j ranging from 1 to 3.
Collecting everything, we learn that Fmn must be antisymmetric,
Fmn ¼ Fnm. This symmetry reduces the number of independent com-
ponents of Fmn to six, so the electric and magnetic ﬁelds ﬁt perfectly! But
we still must check that Eq. (10.20) reproduces Eq. (10.19) for an anti-
symmetric ﬁeld tensor Fmn. Let us write out Eq. (10.20) using the Lm
n co-
efﬁcients in Eq. (10.21). Some algebra yields,
F001 ¼ F01;
F002 ¼ g

F02  v
cF12
;
F003 ¼ g

F03 þ v
cF31
F023 ¼ F23;
F031 ¼ g

F31 þ v
cF03
;
F012 ¼ g

F12  v
cF02
(10.22)
We see a perfect match with either,
F0i ¼ Ei=c;
F12 ¼ B3;
F31 ¼ B2;
F23 ¼ B1
or,
eF
0i ¼ Bi;
eF
12 ¼ E3=c;
eF
31 ¼ E2=c;
eF
23 ¼ E1=c
Note that eF
mn is obtained from Fmn using the substitution Ei/c / Bi and
Bi/Ei/c. This is the symmetry, called “electromagnetic duality,” we
noticed before in the problem sets that interchanges Faraday’s law with
AmpereeMaxwell’s law in regions of spaceetime where the current
density vanishes, Jm ¼ 0.
As matrices Fmn and eF
mn read,
Fmn ¼
0
B
B
B
@
0
Ex=c
Ey=c
Ez=c
Ex=c
0
Bz
By
Ey=c
Bz
0
Bx
Ez=c
By
Bx
0
1
C
C
C
A
(10.23a)
180
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

and,
eF mn ¼
0
B
B
B
@
0
Bx
By
Bz
Bx
0
Ez=c
Ey=c
By
Ez=c
0
Ex=c
Bz
Ey=c
Ex=c
0
1
C
C
C
A
(10.23b)
When physicists talk about “the electromagnetic ﬁeld” they are refer-
ring to Fmn. They are not referring to either E or B. We have seen in the
problem sets how electric effects become magnetic effects under boosts, and
we have learned a lot about electricity and magnetism through these ex-
ercises. However, everything electromagnetic resides in Fmn. Its compo-
nents transform under boosts, and some elements can vanish in certain
frames, and other components made more prominent. Fmn cannot be
boosted to zero, because if Fmn ¼ 0 in one frame it would be zero in all
frames according to Eq. (10.20).
Our next task is to write the Lorentz force law and Maxwell’s equations
in terms of Fmn and its dual. First, consider the two Maxwell equations with
sources,
V$E ¼ 4pkr
(10.24a)
V  B  1
c2
vE
vt ¼ 4pk
c2 J
(10.24b)
We have vm, Fmn, and Jm to work with. The gradient vm should apply to Fmn
because Maxwell’s equations have the gradients of ﬁeld strengths on the
left-hand side of Eq. (10.24). Jm should appear on the right-hand side. Note
that P
n
vnFmn transforms as a four-vector Vm because the other index n is
fully contracted. One can check using the transformation laws for vm, and
Fmn that this is so (see the problem set). So, let us try,
X
n
vnFmn ¼ 4pk
c2 Jm
(10.25)
Let us check the m ¼ 0 component of this equation ﬁrst,
X
n
vnF0n ¼ v0F00 þ v1F01 þ v2F02 þ v3F03
X
n
vnF0n ¼ 1
c
vEx
vx þ vEy
vy þ vEz
vz

¼ 1
c ðV$EÞ ¼ 4pk
c2 J0 ¼ 4pk
c2 cr
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
181

So, we have Gauss’ law, Eq. (10.24a)! We leave it to the problem set to
check that the
P
n
vnFin components of this equation produce the
MaxwelleAmpere equation Eq. (10.24b).
This gives two of the Maxwell equations. The homogeneous equations
are given by the dual of Fmn,
X
n
vneF
mn ¼ 0
(10.26)
Writing out the m ¼ 0 component gives,
X
n
vneF
0n ¼ v0eF
00 þ v1eF
01 þ v2eF
02 þ v3eF
03
X
n
vneF
0n ¼ vBx
vx þ vBy
vy þ vBz
vz ¼ V$B ¼ 0
which reproduces the constraint equation, the absence of magnetic mono-
poles. The equations P
n
vneF
in ¼ 0 for i ¼ 1, 2, 3 produce Faraday’s equa-
tion, V  E ¼ vB/vt, as discussed in the problem set.
What have we achieved? Now the four Maxwell equations are
expressed as two covariant equations. This makes explicit that they are true
in all inertial frames. Expressing the equations in terms of four-vectors and
tensors, objects which have a frame-independent physical signiﬁcance,
shows their compatibility with the two postulates of special relativity.
Writing the equations in terms of components (indices) allows us to
manipulate them in conventional terms, but their physical signiﬁcance
transcends these technicalities. Modern mathematical notation, which we
cannot present here, emphasizes the frame independence of these equations
ab initio.
Next we must write the Lorentz force law in this language. The force
law reads,
dp
dt ¼ F ¼ qðE þ v  BÞ
(10.27)
Here p ¼ gmv is the relativistic three-momentum, which comprises three
components of the relativistic four-momentum, pm ¼ mum, and um is the
four-vector velocity, um ¼ dxm/ds, and ds ¼ dt/g is the proper time dif-
ferential. Let us write the right hand side of Eq. (10.27) in covariant form.
We have the four-vector um and tensor Fmn at our disposal and have to
generate a four-vector dpm/ds. The ﬁrst construction to try is,
182
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

dpm=ds ¼ q
X
n
unFnm
(10.28)
Let us write out the m ¼ 1 component of this conjecture,
dp1=ds ¼ q
X
n
unFn1 ¼ qðu0F01  u1F11  u2F21  u3F31Þ
dp1=ds ¼ gdp1=dt ¼ qðgcEx=c þ gvyBz  gvzByÞ ¼ gq

Ex þ ðv  BÞx

And, we see that the g factors cancel to reproduce the x component of
Eq. (10.27)!
This completes our discussion of the relativistic character of Maxwell’s
equations and the Lorentz force law. These equations make the compati-
bility of these equations with the postulates of relativity explicit. The “old-
fashioned” way of writing these equations obscured their relativistic nature.
However, for practical applications and physical insight and intuition, the
“old” expression of the physics is often much more immediate. However, a
true master of this subject can jump between formulations as needed.
10.3 NEXT STEPS
Let us review some of the lessons we have learned.
Special relativity has shown us that Newton’s concept of a force, which
acts as “action at a distance” does not generalize to Einstein’s world.
Newton’s third law fails as a consequence. These concepts are replaced by
local conservation laws, local differential equations, and ﬁelds.
The electrostatics of Newton’s world produces the Lorentz force law
when special relativity is applied. Velocity-dependent forces that violate
Newton’s third law are unavoidable. In addition, when Coulomb’s law is
expressed as a local differential equation, Gauss’ law, special relativity ele-
vates the electric ﬁeld to a dynamical variable and AmpereeMaxwell’s
equation is a consequence. Similarly, the absence of magnetic monopoles
expressed as a local condition implies Faraday’s law, and the magnetic ﬁeld
becomes a dynamical variable. As a consequence we no longer think of
separate electric and magnetic effects: under Lorentz transformations,
electric effects in one frame become magnetic effects in another. In fact we
saw that the electromagnetic ﬁeld satisﬁes a Lorentz invariant wave equa-
tion, which implies that light travels at the speed limit in all inertial frames.
In Newton’s world the dynamical variable in these developments was
just the charged particle. It was the source of electrostatic forces. The
charged particle consisted of one degree of freedom. The electric ﬁeld was
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
183

given by a constraint equation and had no dynamics of its own. In Einstein’s
world the validity of the constraint equations, Gauss’ law for the electric
ﬁeld and the divergence-free condition for the magnetic ﬁeld (no mono-
poles), in all inertial frames imply that the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
become dynamical variables, and Maxwell’s equations were found. In fact
the electromagnetic ﬁeld brings two new degrees of freedom into the
theory. There are two degrees of freedom because a freely propagating
electromagnetic ﬁeld is described by transverse electric and magnetic ﬁelds.
The electric ﬁeld could be chosen in either of two directions perpendicular
to the direction of propagation of the wave. In both cases the magnetic ﬁeld
was determined in terms of the electric ﬁeld. The two independent po-
larization states of the electric ﬁeld are the two independent degrees of
freedom of the new dynamical ﬁeld.
So relativity has profoundly changed our understanding of electricity
and magnetism. But what of the charged particle? We have not made much
progress here. We went from Newtonian kinematics to relativistic kine-
matics. However, our formulation has not embodied the principles and
phenomena of relativity that we have discussed for the electromagnetic
ﬁeld. When we discussed collisions and used the conservation of
energyemomentum to answer kinematic questions, we referred to the fact
that special relativity allows for the conversion of mass to energy and energy
to mass to motivate the creation of elementary particles in relativistic col-
lisions. Those collisions were constrained by conservation laws of the un-
derlying theories of elementary particles, but the details were not discussed.
Nonetheless, this phenomenology displays that in relativistic theories we
can expect particle number conservation to be violated, collisions starting
with two particles but ending with 10, 20, or more are commonplace at
high-energy physics labs. In Newton’s world the integrity of a particle and
its mass were paramount, but in relativity the creation and destruction of
particles is fundamental. Therefore, our formulation of particle mechanics
in this book is incomplete.
How could we formulate particle creation and destruction? We should
copy the success we have had with the electromagnetic ﬁeld and look for a ﬁeld
description of matter! This would have to be done within the context of
quantum physics. Such a development is beyond the scope of this book, but
it is good to see where we are headed. It turns out that particle creation and
annihilation are required processes, just as photon creation and absorption
are in a quantum formulation of electrodynamics. We saw how Maxwell’s
equations led to the wave equation describing freely propagating
184
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

electromagnetic waves. In a ﬁeld theory of particles, the creation and
destruction of particles are equally inevitable. The theory would be
inconsistent without these effects just as electromagnetism would be
inconsistent if radiation were somehow suppressed.
Let me tell you a little about how things work out. In a quantum ﬁeld
theory of particles you need to formulate locality following our develop-
ment of electromagnetism. When you do that you can build in energye
momentum conservation for interacting particles. You also learn the
wonderful fact that to preserve locality in the interactions, the theory predicts
the existence of antiparticles and associated processes such as electrone
positron production in variable electromagnetic ﬁelds! The mathematics of
local ﬁeld theory causes the proliferation of degrees of freedom again.
Attempts to describe radiation and absorption of photons within a single
charged particle framework will necessarily fail. Another element in
Newton’s world must be abandoned for a richer alternative.
All of this constitutes another developing, modern story that you can
look forward to participating in.
PROBLEMS
10-1. Generalize the problem of two parallel wires carrying identical cur-
rents I to the case where wire 1 carries current I1 and wire 2 carries
current I2. These different currents come about because in the lab
frame the mobile electrons in wire 1 move in the x direction with
velocity v1, and the mobile electrons in wire 2 move with velocity
v2. Show that the force on a length l of wire is,
F ¼ 2k
c2
I1I2
b l
where b is the distance between the wires and the force is attractive if
the currents are in the same direction and repulsive otherwise.
10-2. Consider an electron e at distance b from the wire again. But in this
case suppose that the electron e is at rest in the lab frame S. Recall
that the wire is electrically neutral and carries a current I in the lab.
We model the current as before by supposing that the mobile elec-
trons have a velocity v to the right, and the Cuþ ions are at rest in the
lab. As before, call the frame in which the mobile electrons are at rest
S0.Since the wire is neutral in the lab and the electron e is not mov-
ing, it experiences no force in the lab.
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
185

a. Argue that since the electron e experiences no force in the lab
frame, it experiences no force in any inertial frame.
b. Consider the wire and electron e in the rest frame of the mobile
electrons S0. Show that the net charge per unit length of the wire
in the frame S0is v2
c2 glþ where lþ is the charge per unit length of
the Cuþ ions in the lab frame S.
c. Calculate the electric ﬁeld at the position of the electron in the
frame S0 using Gauss’ law and the result of part b.
d. Calculate the magnetic ﬁeld at the position of the electron in the
frame S0 using the AmpereeMaxwell law and the result of part b.
e. Calculate the electric force on the electron e in frame S0, and
calculate the magnetic force on the electron e in frame S0 using
the Lorentz force law. Show that these two forces cancel and
give the required result that the force on the electron e is zero
in frame S0.
10-3. Relativistic notation for Maxwell’s equations and the Lorentz force
law.
Let us ﬁll out some of the discussion and derivations in Section
10.2.
a. Using the transformation laws for vn and Fmn, show that P
n
vnFmn
transforms as a four-vector Vm. In other words, when upper and
lower indices, such as n, are fully contracted (summed over) they
effectively produce a scalar.
b. Show that P
m
vmFmi ¼ 4pk
c2 Ji for i ¼ 1, 2, 3 produce the Maxwell
eAmpere equation.
c. Show that P
m
vmeF
mi ¼ 0 for i ¼ 1, 2, 3 produce Faraday’s
equation.
d. Write out the m ¼ 0 component of dpm=ds ¼ q P
n
unFnm and
compare it to the equations in our discussion of forces, work,
and energy.
10-4. The four-vector potential and Maxwell’s equations.
In Appendix F we introduced the four-vector potential for the
electromagnetic ﬁeld,
186
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Am ¼ ðV=c; AÞ
which could be used to generate the electric and magnetic ﬁelds,
E ¼ VV  vA=vt;
B ¼ V  A
(10.29)
Let us write the ﬁeld tensor Fmn in terms of vn and Am. Since Fmn is
antisymmetric, a candidate formula that has the correct transforma-
tion laws is,
Fmn ¼ vmAn  vnAm
(10.30)
a. Show that Eq. (10.30) produces Eq. (10.29) when you write out
the Cartesian coordinates. Note that this is an elegant discovery
because it shows us that you can make
Fmn out of two four-vectors! This is much less clumsy than
the discussion in the text, but it relies on using the four-vector
Am, which is not directly measureable in the lab (only E and B
are physical).
Recall that we chose the Lorenz gauge in Appendix F to ﬁnd
the wave equation for Am. The Lorenz gauge condition was,
V$A ¼ 1
c2
vV
vt
(10.31)
b. Show that the Lorenz gauge condition can be written,
X
m
vmAm ¼ 0
which shows that it is fully relativistic, i.e., if it is chosen in one
frame, it is true in all frames.
c. Show that the potential formulation of Fmn ¼ vmAnvnAm, auto-
matically solves the two homogeneous Maxwell equations,
P
n
vneF
mn ¼ 0.
d. Write out the Maxwell equations P
n
vnFmn ¼ 4pk
c2 Jm in terms of
Am using Eq. (10.30), and show that in the Lorenz gauge
P
m
vmAm ¼ 0, they become the wave equation,
X
n
vnvnAm ¼
1
c2
v2
vt2  V$V

Am ¼ 4pk
c2 Jm
Magnetism in the Lab, the Discovery of Relativity, and the Way Forward
187

10-5. Electrodynamic
invariants.
Maxwell
energyemomentum
stress
tensor.
The ﬁeld strength tensor Fmn and its dual eF
mn can be used to make
electrodynamic invariants. Consider the “contractions,”
X
mn
FmnFmn ;
X
mn
FmneFmn;
X
mn
eFmneFmn
a. Evaluate each of these expressions in terms of E and B, and relate
them to the invariants discussed in the problem set on electrody-
namic invariants in Chapter 8.
We can make another second rank tensor, which is quadratic
in the electric and magnetic ﬁelds P
s
FmsFn
s. This becomes the
Maxwell stress tensor if we make it traceless,
T mn ¼
X
s
FmsFn
s  1
4 gmn
 X
ls
FlsFls
!
b. Show
that
T mn
is
symmetric,
T mn ¼ T nm,
and
traceless,
P
m
T m
m ¼ 0.
c. Write out the T 0i, i ¼ 1, 2, 3, components and compare with the
Poynting vector introduced in Problem 8.9. Recall that the
Poynting vector gives the energy per unit area passing through
a surface per unit time (“energy ﬂux”). Interpret T00 as well.
d. Show that Tmn is conserved, vmTmn ¼ 0, in a source-free ( Jm ¼ 0)
region of spaceetime. You will learn in your ﬁrst ﬁeld theory
course that the energyemomentum carried by charged matter
ﬁelds can also be expressed as a second rank tensor, T mn
M , and
the sum, T mn þ T mn
M , is conserved, vm

T mn þ T mn
M

¼ 0. This
implies that energy and momentum can ﬂow between the matter
and the electrodynamic ﬁelds, but it does so in a locally conserved
fashion.
REFERENCE
[1] A.P. French, Special Relativity, W. W. Norton, New York, 1968.
188
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

CHAPTER 11
Introduction to General Relativity
Contents
11.1 The Equivalence Principle, Gravity, and Apparent Forces
189
11.2 Motion in a Rotating, Relativistic Reference Frame: Spatial Curvature and
Thomas Precession
200
11.3 Tidal Forces, Non-Euclidean Geometry, and the Meaning of “Local Inertial
Reference Frame”
209
11.4 Gravitational Redshift
212
11.4.1 A Freely Falling Inertial Frame
212
11.4.2 An Accelerating Spaceship
214
11.4.3 Gravitational Redshift and the Relativity of Simultaneity
215
11.4.4 A Rotating Reference Frame
216
11.4.5 A Famous Experimental Test of Gravitational Redshift
218
11.4.6 Gravitational Redshift and Energy Conservation
219
11.5 The Twins Again
221
11.6 An Aging Astronaut
223
11.7 Bending of Light in a Gravitational Field
225
11.8 Similarities and Differences of Electromagnetism and Gravity
229
11.9 Making the Most Out of Time
237
Problems
238
References
239
11.1 THE EQUIVALENCE PRINCIPLE, GRAVITY, AND
APPARENT FORCES
Everyone knows the story of Isaac Newton and the falling apple. There was
a plague in Great Britain, so the students were sent out of the cities to
reduce their chances of catching the contagion. Supposedly Newton
relaxed under an apple tree in his childhood home, Woolsthrope Manor,
contemplating the current ideas of mechanics. When an apple fell on his
head, he invented the idea of the gravitational forcedEarth’s enormous
mass exerted a force on the apple, breaking its stem and causing a collision
with Newton’s precious head. This event led Newton, over the course of
later months back at the university, to the force law of gravity,
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00011-8
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
189

F12 ¼ G m1m2
r2
12
br12;
(11.1)
where G is Newton’s constant (G z 6.67$1011 Nm2/kg2), which sets
the scale for gravitational forces; m1 and m2 are the masses, which are a
distance r12 apart; F12 is the force that m1 exerts on m2; and br12 is the
unit vector pointing from m1 to m2. Newton arrived at the inverse square
character of the force law, Eq. (11.1), to explain the extensive planetary data
accumulated by Kepler and others. In fact, as recorded in the Principia
Mathematica, Newton derived the force law Eq. (11.1) from Kepler’s three
laws of planetary motion using the foundations of the differential geometry
of curves which he also invented. Choosing m1 to be the mass Ms of the Sun
and m2 to be the mass of Earth Me, the equation of motion of the Earth
around the Sun is given by Newton’s second law, force equals mass times
acceleration (see also Fig. 11.1).
Me€re ¼ G
MeMs
jre  rsj2 bres.
(11.2)
A crucial element of Eq. (11.2) is the fact that the mass of the accel-
erating body, Earth in this case, cancels out of the equation of motion. We
describe this by saying that the inertial mass, the mass on the left-hand side
of Newton’s second law (mass times acceleration equals force), equals the
gravitational mass, the mass in the gravitational force expression. It is said
that Galileo was the ﬁrst physicist to investigate this point, before Newton
codiﬁed classical dynamics, and establish the equality of these two masses
Figure 11.1 Coordinates of the EartheSun system used in Newton’s gravitational
force law.
190
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

experimentally. Galileo, through his assistants, dropped masses off the
Leaning Tower of Pisa and observed that they accelerated identically in the
gravitational ﬁeld provided by Earth. Modern experiments pioneered by
Lörand Eötvös in the early days of the 20th century and many others in
modern times have established the equality of the gravitational and inertial
masses to high precision, better than one part in 1013! The axiom that the
two masses are strictly identical evolved into a central ingredient in the
soon-to-be famous equivalence principle. Under Einstein, the equivalence
principle developed into the statement that there is no way to distinguish
the local effects of a gravitational ﬁeld from those in an accelerating
reference frame free of external forces. The equivalence principle allows us
to understand accelerating reference frames in terms of gravity and gravity
in terms of accelerating reference frames. This principle is explained and
discussed in much greater detail as we journey forth.
The equivalence principle and the inverse square law of gravity are both
under constant experimental scrutiny by high-precision experiments. We
accept both ideas as exact throughout our discussions. However, if one or
both should fail ever so slightly, many topics of theoretical physics would
need fundamental changes.
Classical physicists understood that the principle of equivalence made
gravity a very special phenomenon. Other forces (such as electrostatics) or
mechanical devices (such as springs) produce accelerations that are
inversely proportional to the mass of the body. However, there are forces
besides gravity which are familiar from day-to-day experiences that pro-
duce accelerations that are independent of the mass of the body. These are
called “apparent” forces and are strictly geometrical in origin. For
example, when you drive a car and accelerate from a stop sign or decel-
erate at a red trafﬁc light, you experience forces of this type. Another
example consists of centripetal and Coriolis forces. These are the forces
that occur when you measure acceleration in a rotating coordinate system,
called a noninertial frame of reference. Recall that an inertial frame is one
in which an isolated body moves in a straight line at constant velocity. To
change the body’s velocity, a force must be applied. The velocity of the
body changes according to Newton’s second law, f ¼ ma, where f is the
applied force and a is the body’s acceleration, a ¼ d2r/dt2. A simple
example of a rotating, noninertial frame is afforded by a turntable spinning
at a constant angular velocity u in an otherwise inertial environment.
From the perspective of a coordinate system ﬁxed in the rotating turn-
table, a body moving at a constant velocity in the inertial frame is
Introduction to General Relativity
191

accelerating. Clearly this acceleration is independent of the body’s mass
and is purely a result of the coordinate transformation between the inertial
and the rotating noninertial frames.
Let us work out the details of the centrifugal and Coriolis accelerations
from scratch in the context of Newton’s world. Later we will revisit
rotating reference frames in the context of general relativity.
If a mass m is at rest on a turntable that is rotating in an otherwise inertial
frame, the mass experiences a centripetal force; and if it is moving with
respect to the turntable, it experiences a Coriolis force as well. To begin,
pin the mass at distance r from the axis of the turntable. If the angular
velocity of the turntable is u, then the transverse velocity vt of the mass is
ur, as shown in Fig. 11.2.
Because the direction of vt is changing, the mass is subject to an inward
acceleration, called the centripetal acceleration. We can calculate it by
viewing Fig. 11.3, which shows the velocity at time t and at time t þ Dt.
The angle between the two velocities in the ﬁgure is uDt, so the change in
the velocity is vtuDt and its direction is inward. So,
dyt=dt ¼ ytu ¼ ru2 ¼ y2
t

r;
which is the familiar expression for the centripetal acceleration. If we release
the mass abruptly, it accelerates outward, as viewed in the rotating frame,
with an acceleration equal and opposite to the centripetal acceleration.
Figure 11.2 Transverse velocity of a rotating particle a distance r from the center of a
turntable.
192
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This acceleration is called the centrifugal acceleration. When you swing a
mass on a string, you feel the centrifugal acceleration pulling the string taut.
Next, recall the Coriolis acceleration. This acceleration acts perpen-
dicular to the direction of motion of the mass relative to the turntable
(to the right of the particle’s velocity if u is positive) and has a magnitude of
2v0u, where y0 is the velocity of m relative to the turntable. Let us derive
this result from scratch. First, we consider transverse motion, motion at a
constant r around a circle, and then we look at radial motion.
So, consider a particle with a given transverse velocity v. Decompose v
into two pieces: the velocity of the turntable at r, vt ¼ ur; and the velocity
difference, y0 ¼ v  vt, or the velocity of the mass m relative to the turntable
at that point. The full centripetal acceleration is then
y2
r ¼ ðyt þ y0Þ2
r
¼ y2
t
r þ 2y0u þ y02
r .
The second term on the right-hand side is the Coriolis acceleration. For the
particle to remain on a circle of ﬁxed r, its contact to the turntable must
provide this additional inward acceleration, 2y0u. The particle itself pushes
on the turntable with a force 2y0um, which is called the Coriolis force.
The third term in the equation, y02/r, is the additional centripetal acceler-
ation produced by the increased speed.
Figure 11.3 Calculation of the centripetal acceleration of a rotating mass point. The
particle’s transverse velocity is shown at time t and at time t þ Dt and the difference
Dvt is taken.
Introduction to General Relativity
193

Next, let m have a radial velocity v0 along an axis of the turntable. As the
particle travels outward, its transverse velocity increases and its direction of
motion changes, so there are two contributions to its acceleration. Because
the angular velocity u of the turntable is ﬁxed, its transverse velocity is
vt ¼ ur. But r changes because the mass has a radial velocity v0 with respect
to the turntable, Dr ¼ v0 Dt. So, the magnitude of the transverse velocity
changes Dvt ¼ uDr ¼ v0uDt, and we see that the ﬁrst contribution to the
acceleration, which is clearly perpendicular to its direction of motion, is v0
u. The second contribution to the acceleration comes from the change in
direction of v0 as the mass m moves radially on the rotating turntable.
Because the turntable rotates through the angle uDt in the time interval Dt,
the mass develops an additional transverse velocity, v0 uDt. We see that
both contributions to the particle’s transverse velocity act in the same
direction and sum to 2v0 u, as shown in Fig. 11.4.
If we speak about forces, we see that the turntable pushes on the mass
with a transverse force of 2v0um, so that it continues in a radial direction.
Figure 11.4 Calculation of the Coriolis force on a particle moving radially on a turn-
table. Part (A) shows the component due to the particle’s change in its radial position,
and part (B) shows the component due to the change in the direction of its radial
velocity.
194
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

So, if the particle is not attached to the turntable, it accelerates to the right
of its direction of motion, as measured in the turntable frame, at a rate
aCoriolis ¼ 2y0u;
which is the well-known Coriolis acceleration result we sought.
In summary, for both radial and transverse velocities relative to the
turntable, we have the same expression for the Coriolis acceleration.
Because any velocity can be decomposed into a radial component and a
transverse component, our result for the Coriolis acceleration is perfectly
general.
Let us collect these results in two formulas expressing Newton’s second
law in a rotating frame described by plane polar curvilinear coordinates (r, q).
The relation between the Cartesian coordinates in the inertial frame and the
rotating plane polar coordinates is,
x ¼ r cosðq þ utÞ
y ¼ r sinðq þ utÞ
(11.3)
where u is the rate of rotation of the turntable. Our exercise in kinematics
above produced the equations of motion for the radial and angular variables
complete with centripetal forces, Coriolis forces and external forces ( fr, fq),
d2r
dt2  r

u þ dq
dt
2
¼ fr
(11.4a)
d2q
dt2 þ 2
r
dr
dt

u þ dq
dt

¼ fq
(11.4b)
It is easy to check in special cases that these equations capture all the ingre-
dients in the intuitive discussion of centripetal and Coriolis effects above. It
is instructive, but somewhat tedious, to begin with Newton’s second law
written in Cartesian coordinates,
d2x
dt2 ¼ fx
d2y
dt2 ¼ fy
(11.5)
apply the transformation Eq. (11.3) and arrive at Eq. (11.4). We will
develop systematic ways to do such calculations in Chapter 12. (see Prob-
lems 12.8 and 12.25)
This exercise teaches us that there are two sources of “apparent” forces in
the equations of motion Eq. (11.4): a. the use of curvilinear coordinates, the
case u ¼ 0 in Eq. (11.4), and b. the noninertial character of the rotating
Introduction to General Relativity
195

frames, u s 0. There are clearly two distinct geometrical effects and are
usually discussed separately. We will not follow tradition here because they
enter the equations of motion in the same fashion. When we develop the
equations of general relativity, we will see that sources of energye
momentum produce curved spaceetime and noninertial frames, and all
these effects will be rederived in a new context. We will see that gravita-
tional “forces” enter equations such as Eq. (11.4) on the left-hand side with
“apparent” forces and not on the right-hand side where the Lorentz force of
electromagnetism, for example, will appear!
What have we learned so far? We see that force-free straight-line
motion in an inertial frame is interpreted as accelerated motion in a non-
inertial frame. If we introduce forces to describe the accelerated motion in
the noninertial frame, we should use the term “apparent” for this reason.
These accelerations are determined purely by the relation of the inertial and
the noninertial coordinate systems and can be derived without any
knowledge of mechanics. All we need is geometry.
Now we come to the good stuff. Einstein argued that gravity is also an
apparent force! Consider ﬁrst a body moving in a constant gravitational ﬁeld
where it experiences a constant acceleration g independent of its mass.
This problem is indistinguishable from the motion of a body in a frame free
of gravity but accelerating upward at the rate g. These facts were well
appreciated by classical physicists in Newton’s era, but this statement of the
equivalence principle was popularized and pursued in the context of
the relativistic theory of spaceetime by Einstein. Einstein posed the
equivalencedthe impossibility of distinguishing the physics in a constant
gravitational ﬁeld from that in an accelerating framedby imagining a
physicist doing experiments in an elevator. The elevator is accelerating
upward at a rate g, and, Einstein claimed, if the elevator has no windows so
the physicist cannot see the tricks being played on him, there is no local
experiment he can run that can distinguish this environment from one at
rest on the surface of a planet where gravity generates the approximately
uniform acceleration g. (On the surface of Earth, Newton’s gravitational
force law gives g ¼ GMe

R2
e z 9:8 m=s2, where Re is the radius of Earth,
neglecting all other planetary masses.)
We come to the conclusion that uniform gravity is an apparent force
much like centripetal and Coriolis forces, familiar from our experiences
with turntables. As with any apparent force, we can transform to another
coordinate system where the apparent force vanishes identically. In the case
196
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

of a constant gravitational ﬁeld, we can just consider an observer in free fall
in that environment. According to the equivalence principle, this free-
falling frame of reference is force-free and is an inertial frame where
isolated masses travel along straight lines.
The idea that gravity can be transformed away by passing to a free-
falling, inertial frame of reference is very useful. Since we know that
masses move along straight lines in inertial frames, we can use the equiv-
alence principle to solve any mechanics problem in a small enough region
of spaceetime where a given gravitational ﬁeld can be treated as
uniformdjust consider the motion from the perspective of a freely falling
frame where special relativity holds, solve the problem, and ﬁnally map it
back to the coordinates an observer would use at rest in the gravitational
ﬁeld. (It is important here to check that there are no external nongravita-
tional forces, such as electrostatics, in the environment. These forces are not
“apparent” and cannot be transformed away by a slick choice of reference
frame.)
But, as emphasized by Einstein, one can also go beyond ordinary mechanics
problems because the equivalence principle applies to any process. An
interesting application concerns the deﬂection of light by a gravitational
ﬁeld. Because light moves along straight lines in inertial frames, the
equivalence principle implies that it experiences an acceleration when it
moves transverse to a gravitational ﬁeld, as shown in Fig. 11.5. Consider an
initially horizontal beam of light in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld, labeling x
Figure 11.5 A light ray moving in a uniform transverse gravitational ﬁeld.
Introduction to General Relativity
197

as the horizontal position and y the vertical position. Then the equivalence
principle predicts the local bending of light,
d2y
dx2y d2y
c2dt2y  g
c2
As emphasized by Rindler [1], this is a remarkable result, which has far
reaching implications. It states that since light travels at a ﬁnite speed, it
has “weight”! No other assumptions about light need be invoked in this
argument. Light, and all other physical phenomena, must travel on locally
curved paths in gravity. This point strongly motivates the idea that gravity is
an aspect of geometry and does not belong in the menagerie of forces! The
argument above just gives the local bending of light in a uniform gravita-
tional ﬁeld. To compare to experiments we need to consider the path light
traverses past a stellar object such as the Sun. The full machinery of general
relativity is required here, as we will illustrate later in this chapter.
Historically the deﬂection of light by the gravitational ﬁeld of the Sun
was computed using Newtonian mechanics in the early days of the 19th
century. Einstein repeated the calculation in the context of relativistic,
curved spaceetime in 1919 and found that the Newtonian prediction is
too small by a factor of two.
The experimental observation of the deﬂection of light in a gravita-
tional ﬁeld comes from a lensing effect, as illustrated in Fig. 11.6. When
light passes by a large astronomical object, it is “attracted,” as implied by
the equivalence principle, and it is deﬂected as shown in the ﬁgure. The
effect was observed originally by carefully measuring the background stars
around the halo of the Sun during an eclipse and comparing those mea-
surements to the positions of the background stars when the Sun is in a
different part of the sky. These measurements are difﬁcult; only after data
were accumulated over many years was it possible to rule in favor of the
relativistic prediction. In fact, modern radio astronomy techniques using
Figure 11.6 Light rays are attracted to a massive body. A lensing effect.
198
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

interferometry were the ﬁrst to give decisive results with small enough
errors to really distinguish between Newton and Einstein.
Finally, let us reconsider the scattering of light in the presence of a large
star somewhat more critically. Because the direction of the gravitational
acceleration varies as we move around the star, the use of the equivalence
principle must be stated more carefully. As we pass around the Sun, the
equivalence principle can be applied only locally; that is, only over a region of
spaceetime where the gravitational ﬁeld is essentially uniform can we ﬁnd a
freely falling inertial frame in which the ﬁeld is essentially eliminated. The
theory speaks of “local inertial frames” to accommodate spatially varying
gravitational ﬁelds. We certainly cannot eliminate the effects of gravity from
large spaceetime regions! The spatial dependence of gravitational ﬁelds
means that the mathematical details of the theory change from point to point.
For example, a body falling in a spatially varying gravitational ﬁeld executes
straight-line motion in each local inertial frame approximating the varying
gravitational ﬁeld. The actual trajectory of the body is obtained by patching
together its simple trajectories in contiguous inertial frames. This sounds
awfully complicated. Mathematically, the language for this motion is neatly
given by differential geometry. It will take several sections and developments
to make these ideas precise and to obtain some classic predictions of general
relativity, the gravitational redshift, the resolution of the twin paradox, the
deﬂection of light in a gravitational ﬁeld, and other related phenomena.
In later sections of this chapter and in Chapter 12, we will introduce and
illustrate the concepts and equations of differential geometry and general
coordinate transformations so that we can consider the motion of particles
and light in strong gravitational ﬁelds, such as those near a Schwarzschild
black hole. We shall see that there is a distance from the black hole, called
the Schwarzschild radius, which acts as a point of no return: although a
particle can pass through this distance from the outside, nothing from the
inside can ever return to the outside. There is no equivalent to such a
phenomenon in Newtonian physics because it is a consequence of the
geometry of spaceetime inside the Schwarzschild radius. The geodesic
equations for particle motion in a curved spaceetime will be developed as
well and will be illustrated in classic differential geometry where visuali-
zation is possible and helpful. Tidal forces will be analyzed in the context of
the geometry of spaceetime and non-Euclidean geometry, and intrinsic
curvature of spaceetime will emerge. Gravitational waves will be consid-
ered and the realistic situation where gravitational waves are observed as
small variations on a ﬂat Minkowski spaceetime of special relativity will be
Introduction to General Relativity
199

developed in some detail. The ﬁrst detection of gravitational waves in 2015
by the LIGO collaboration will be presented and discussed. We shall see
that gravitational waves are emitted from oscillating quadrupole moments
of binary systems, and we will make estimates of the physical parameters
involved. Along the way, we will introduce the Einstein ﬁeld equations.
Our discussions will be limited because this is a preﬁeld theory course, so
that only simple examples of the energyemomentum tensor are accessible
to us. We will see in several cases that the equivalence principle will serve us
well both for physical arguments as well as in mathematical developments,
but we shall travel beyond it and discuss the general relativistic version of
tidal forces, spaceetime curvature, the intrinsic nonlinearity of general
relativity, and the physics of the event horizon around a black hole. We will
compare and contrast electromagnetism, special relativity, and general
relativity. In general relativity we will see that the Newtonian gravitational
potential is replaced by the metric, which will become a dynamical ﬁeld
that will be the origin of dynamical spaceetime geometry. This develop-
ment will parallel our earlier discussion where special relativity forced the
electrostatic potential to be replaced by the dynamic electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Many of these concepts will play out in a discussion of the generation and
observation of gravitational waves.
11.2 MOTION IN A ROTATING, RELATIVISTIC REFERENCE
FRAME: SPATIAL CURVATURE AND THOMAS
PRECESSION
In special relativity, we plot the world line of a particle’s motion on a
Minkowski diagram (Fig. 11.7). In general relativity we will use notions
such as the invariant interval, metrics, proper time, and proper length more
than we did in our discussions of special relativity. So, let us review these
ideas brieﬂy and see that we can read effects such as time dilation, Lorentz
contraction, and the relativity of simultaneity from expressions for the
invariant interval. A problem familiar from elementary mechanics, such as
the rotating reference frame, helps us move gradually into new, uncharted
subjects.
Recall that the proper time ds that passes on a clock attached to the
moving particle can be calculated from the invariant interval ds,
ds2 ¼ c2dt2  dx2  dy2  dz2.
(11.6)
200
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Consider the meaning of the symbols in this formula. In a frame S, we
imagine two events, one at (ct, x, y, z) and another at (ct þ cdt, x þ dx,
y þ dy, z þ dz). ds is then the invariant interval between them. The events
might be ticks on a clock, measurements of the ends of a rod, or whatever.
The crucial point is that ds is the same in all reference frames, as we discussed
in Section 4.3, so if we can calculate and understand it in one frame, we
have its value in all frames. So, the proper time ds that passes on a clock
attached to the moving particle can be computed from ds by boosting to
a frame S0 where the particle is at rest. In S0, dt0 ¼ ds (proper time),
dx0 ¼ dy0 ¼ dz0 ¼ 0, so ds2 ¼ c2ds2. This means that if the particle is moving
along the x axis at velocity v, so dx ¼ v$dt, dy ¼ 0, and dz ¼ 0, then
Eq. (11.6) reduces to
ds2 ¼ c2ds2 ¼ c2dt2  y2dt2 ¼ ðc2  y2Þdt2
or
ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
dt h dt=g;
which is just the expression of time dilationdthe moving clock runs slowly.
Minkowski diagrams, spaceetime pictures, are the natural arena for dis-
cussing dynamics because they show time and position information together.
Because space and time mix under boosts, we must work in four-dimensional
spaceetime. If a free particle’s world line passes through P1 ¼ (ct1, x1) and
P2 ¼ (ct2, x1), we know its velocity v ¼ (x2  x1)/(t2  t1) and its path.
As a ﬁrst step toward developing relativistic particle motion in a grav-
itational ﬁeld, consider relativistic force-free motion in a rotating reference
Figure 11.7 World line of a particle’s motion on a Minkowski diagram.
Introduction to General Relativity
201

frame. In rotating frames, there are centripetal and Coriolis “apparent”
forces. Choose a cylindrical spatial coordinate system,
x ¼ r cos 4;
y ¼ r sin 4;
z ¼ z
as shown in Fig. 11.8. Then the spatial distance becomes
dx2 þ dy2 þ dz2 ¼ dr2 þ r2d42 þ dz2
and the spaceetime invariant interval reads
ds2 ¼ c2dt2  ðdr2 þ r2d42 þ dz2Þ.
To describe a turntable that is rotating about the z axis at angular velocity
u, as in Fig. 11.9, we introduce a new azimuthal angle 40,
40 ¼ 4  ut;
(11.7)
so a point with ﬁxed 40 has its 4 increasing as ut. This simple equation
mixes the time coordinate with a spatial coordinate, so
d40 ¼ d4  udt
and the invariant interval written in terms of the rotating coordinates
becomes
ds2 ¼ ðc2  u2r2Þdt2  ðdr2 þ r2d402 þ 2ur2d40dt þ dz2Þ
(11.8)
and does not neatly separate into a spatial and temporal part.
Before dealing with ds2 in its full glory, consider a clock at rest in the
rotating reference frame and a distance r from the z axis. Two ticks of the
Figure 11.8 Cylindrical coordinate system used to parametrize motion on a relativistic
turntable.
202
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

clock occur at a given r, 40, and z, so dr ¼ d40 ¼ dz ¼ 0, and Eq. (11.8)
reduces to
ds2 ¼ c2ds2 ¼ ðc2  u2r2Þdt2.
So, the proper time kept by the clock is
ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
dt.
(11.9)
This result is the usual time dilation formula because the velocity of the
clock relative to the inertial x, y, z frame is v ¼ ur: as r increases, the clock’s
velocity (transverse) increases proportionally, and the time dilation effect is
enhanced. We must restrict the possible values of u and r so that ur < c, so
that expressions such as Eq. (11.9) remain physical.
Now consider the cross term, 2ur2d40dt, which mixes time and space
intervals. To appreciate what is going on, imagine setting up a cylindrically
symmetrical gridwork of rods and synchronized clocks to make position
and time measurements in the rotating reference frame. First, consider two
clocks having the same r and 40 but different z values, as shown in
Fig. 11.10. The clocks are rotating about the z axis at an angular velocity u.
We place a signal generator halfway between them, at rest in the rotating
frame, to synchronize them. Because clocks 1 and 2 have velocities trans-
verse to z, they receive the light pulses simultaneously in both the ﬁxed
(x, y, z) inertial frame and the rotating frame. The synchronization pro-
cedure produces clocks that are synchronized in both frames.
Figure 11.9 The primed coordinate system rotates at angular velocity u relative to the
unprimed system.
Introduction to General Relativity
203

However, clocks at the same r and z but different 40 suffer a different
fate, as illustrated in Fig. 11.11, where the view is from above. We have
placed our signal generator halfway between the two clocks at their
common r and z values. But wait! The signal generator and the two clocks
are each moving in separate directions, and each is experiencing a different
centrifugal acceleration. We do not know how to handle this sort of
Figure 11.10 Synchronizing clocks at different heights on a rotating turntable.
Figure 11.11 Synchronizing clocks at different angular positions on a rotating
turntable.
204
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

situation using the principles of special relativity and the equivalence
principle. However, if we move clocks 1 and 2 nearby, so they are sepa-
rated by just an inﬁnitesimal distance, we have a more secure, familiar
situation. In this case, all three objects have essentially the same velocity,
and they can be viewed from a locally inertial frame moving at their
common velocity. Because clocks 1 and 2 are separated in their direction of
motion, we know from our discussion of the relativity of simultaneity that
they are not synchronized in the inertial frame deﬁned by the coordinates
(ct, x, y, z). The reason for this is cleardsince light travels at the speed limit c
with respect to any inertial observer, an observer at rest in the (ct, x, y, z)
frame notes that clock 2 receives the light signal from the signal generator
after clock 1 does because clock 2 is racing away from the source and clock
1 is racing toward the source. So, events that are synchronous in the
rotating frame (clocks 1 and 2, for example) are not synchronous in the
ﬁxed inertial frame (ct, x, y, z) if they occur at different 4 values. In fact, we
know how large this effect is from our discussion of the relativity of
simultaneitydit is the product of the velocity of the moving clocks times
the distance between them in their rest frame divided by c2. The relevant
velocity is ur. The relevant distance in the inertial frame (ct, x, y, z) is rd4,
which corresponds to a larger distance g(r)rd40 in the clock’s rest frame.
Here g(r) ¼ (1  u2r2/c2)1/2, so we have explicitly written g as a function
of r. (The notion of a local inertial frame is certainly important here.) So,
(ur)[g(r)rd40]/c2 is the time discrepancy that the frame (ct, x, y, z) notes on
the clocks. But this is a time interval in the rotating frame, and we want the
time difference in the ﬁxed frame. This is given by multiplying by another
factor of g(r) to account for time dilation, so the time difference is
g2ðrÞur2d40
c2
¼ ur2d40
c2  u2r2 .
But the two clocks are synchronized in the rotating frame, so the time that
passes there, dt0, must be related to dt, the time that passes in the inertial
frame, by
dt0 ¼ dt 
ur2
c2  u2r2 d40.
It must be that if we use this t0 axis, the invariant interval will split into a
spatial part and a temporal part. Substituting dt ¼ dt0 þ ur2d40/(c2  u2r2)
into Eq. (11.8), we ﬁnd
Introduction to General Relativity
205

ds2 ¼ ðc2  u2r2Þdt02 

dr2 þ c2r2d402
c2  u2r2 þ dz2

(11.10)
and everything has worked out ﬁne.
To interpret Eq. (11.10), we can compare it to the invariant interval of
an inertial frame of reference chosen to approximate the transverse velocity
ur locally. For example, taking a clock at rest in the rotating frame,
ds2 ¼ (c2  u2r2)dt02, and comparing it to a clock at rest in a locally inertial
frame. ds2 ¼ c2ds2, we have time dilation again, ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
dt0.
Similarly, taking a meter stick pointing in the transverse direction at radius r,
ds2 ¼ c2r2d402/(c2  u2r2) and comparing that to a meter stick pointing in
the same direction in a locally inertial frame, ds2 ¼ r2d42, we have d4 ¼
d40
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
; which is Lorentz contraction again because rd4 is the
proper length of the stick. These observations explain why the dt02 term in
Eq. (11.10) has a prefactor (c2  u2r2) and the d402 term has that factor in
the denominator. We see similar systematics in other invariant intervals
in other applications for the same physical reasondthe time dilation factor
in special relativity is the same as the Lorentz contraction factor.
What kind of spatial geometry would an observer living on the turn-
table experience? The interval Eq. (11.10) does not resemble anything
familiar. It is instructive to begin these considerations with a familiar
example: the surface of a sphere. For a two-dimensional surface, such as a
sphere, embedded in ordinary three-dimensional ﬂat space, the metric is
non-Euclidean, and the surface has intrinsic curvature as we will discuss in
Section 12.1. There we construct a circle on the surface of the sphere of
radius R and compare its circumference C to its geodesic radius a on the
sphere itself. The curvature of the sphere causes C to be less than 2pa. The
Gaussian curvature of the spherical surface is,
K ¼ 3
p lim
a/0
2pa  C
a3

(11.11)
and we will compute K ¼ 1/R2 in this case. So, smaller spheres have greater
curvature that larger ones, an intuitively appealing answer. Eq. (11.11) will
be derived in Chapter 12 where differential geometry and curvature will be
introduced quantitatively.
In the four-dimensional spaceetime of general relativity, there is a
generalization of curvature. Instead of one number K characterizing the
curvature at a point, we need a whole collection of numbers, called the
206
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Riemann curvature tensor, because the curvature in spaceetime depends
on the direction in which we make measurements.
Consider a rotating coordinate system again and its spatial curvature.
Imagine a circle of radius r whose center coincides with that of the
turntable. In the nonrotating inertial frame, the circumference of the
circle, C, is 2pr. But what does an observer at rest at radius r in the rotating
reference frame measure? When the observer at radius r0 at rest in the
rotating frame measures her circumference C0, she places her meter stick
down on the rotating turntable, making sure that it is perpendicular to the
radius r0. An observer at rest in the nonrotating, inertial frame observes
Lorentz contraction of this meter stick by a factor of g1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
and concludes that the number of meter sticks the rotating
observer must place to go all the way around the circumference is g2pr.
Both observers agree that r0 ¼ r because the velocity of rotation is
everywhere perpendicular to the spokes of the turntable. So, the space on
the turntable is not ﬂat, because the circumference C0 is not 2p times the
radius r0. We can calculate the curvature K using Eq. (11.11) and ﬁnd for
y2/c2  1 that K ¼ 3 y2/c2r2. Because y ¼ ur for the rotating turntable,
we have the curvature at r ¼ 0, K ¼ 3 u2/c2. Space on the rotating
frame has a negative curvature because C0 > 2pr0.
In summary, this effect comes from the metric, Eq. (11.10), for the
turntable:
ds2 ¼ ðc2  u2r2Þdt02 

dr2 þ c2r2df02
c2  u2r2 þ dz2

.
(11.10)
We took a meter stick pointing in the transverse direction at radius r,
ds2 ¼ c2r2d402/(c2  u2r2) and compared that to a meter stick pointing
in the same direction in a locally inertial frame, ds2 ¼ r2d42. So we found
d4 ¼ d40.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
; and letting 4 range from 0 to 2p, we saw that
40 changes by less, D40 ¼ 2p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
; and we have another indica-
tion of curvature.
A well-known consequence of the Lorentz contraction of the
circumference of the relativistic turntable is “Thomas precession” [2] of
atomic spectroscopy fame. Imagine that a tiny gyroscope is on the turntable
at radius r. It rotates at an angular velocity u ¼ 2p/T (T is the period of
rotation). When the turntable rotates through an angle 4, shown in
Fig. 11.12A, the vector tangent to the rotating circumference rotates
Introduction to General Relativity
207

through a greater angle a0 because the circumference is contracted by a
factor of 1/g as measured by an observer who rotates with the turntable,
a0 ¼ dr0
t
dr0
k
¼ drt
drk

g ¼ g drt
drk
¼ g4
where drt and drk are shown in Fig. 11.12B. The difference of the angles in
the
inertial
frame
is Daha0  4 ¼ 4ðg  1Þ.
For
a
full
rotation
Da ¼ 2pðg  1Þ and the rate of precession of the gyroscope in the inertial
frame is,
up
u ¼ Da=T
2p=T ¼ g  1
The angular precession in one revolution is,
2pðg  1Þ z 2p
1
2
v2
c2

¼ p u2r2
c2
if v2/c2  1.
In atomic physics, this effect reduces the strength of the relativistic spin
orbit coupling of spin-1/2 electrons orbiting a proton by a factor of two
relative to a calculation where the electron travels on a linear trajectory
past the proton. This subtle effect is discussed in textbooks on atomic
Figure 11.12 (A) Rotation of a vector tangent to the turntable. (B) Instantaneous
transverse and longitudinal displacements of the tangent vector shown in (A).
208
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

spectroscopy and quantum mechanics, and it played an important role in
the development of that subject [2]. The “best” derivation of the effect
comes from the Dirac equation, which describes the quantum spin-1/2
electron relativistically. The relativistic energy of the stationary states of
the electron bound in the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the proton automati-
cally incorporates Thomas precession since the Dirac equation has rela-
tivity built in.
There is much more to say about precession of gyroscopes in general
relativity. The example of Thomas precession has just touched the surface
of a broad and interesting ﬁeld with many applications to the space science
of orbiting vehicles.
The relativistic turntable is certainly instructive, but, since it rests on a
simple coordinate transformation, it cannot illustrate all the basic principles
of differential geometry and general relativity we are ultimately interested
in. We will discuss curved surfaces and non-Euclidean geometry exten-
sively in Chapter 12. But ﬁrst let us consider the equivalence principle more
critically.
11.3 TIDAL FORCES, NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY, AND
THE MEANING OF “LOCAL INERTIAL REFERENCE
FRAME”
There are aspects of the equivalence principle, which are quite subtle. The
claim is that freely falling reference frames are locally inertial frames where
the rules of special relativity hold. The key word is “local.” What does
that mean quantitatively? Let us answer the question with a thought
experiment.
Suppose I am in the freely falling reference frame with four small balls.
I am outside a planet of huge mass M with my four toys, and I orient
myself so that my feet are nearest the planet, and I say that the planet is in
the ez direction. Newtonian mechanics will be adequate for the mea-
surements and experiments we are about to describe. One of the balls is
placed at my feet, one at the top of my head, another on my right side,
and the last ball at my left side. They are all freely ﬂoating. If the reference
frame were perfectly inertial, the four balls would retain their initial
positions with respect to me at all times. What do I observe? The ball
on my head accelerates away to larger z, the ball at my feet accelerates
away to smaller z, and the balls at my right and left side accelerate toward
me at half the rate of the ﬁrst two balls! This surprises me. In fact, I feel
Introduction to General Relativity
209

rather poorly. I feel stretched in the z direction and squeezed in the
transverse directions.
What is happening? Apparently the size of my body exceeds that of a
local inertial frame centered at my midsection, and I feel the effects of
gravity at my extremities. To describe the motions of the four balls, set up a
Euclidean Cartesian coordinate system, xi, i ¼ 1, 2, 3, with its origin at the
center of the planet. From Newton’s perspective, the freely falling frame is
accelerating toward the mass M. Call the acceleration of gravity at my
midsection g. It points in the ez direction. Newton would describe the
motions of my body at position r(t) with the second law,
d2r
dt2 ¼ VFðrÞ
(11.12)
where
FðrÞ ¼ GM
r
is
Newton’s
gravitational
potential
and
r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
x2 þ y2 þ z2
p
. Label the location of each ball with the vector
r þ e, where jej  r. The equation of motion of each ball then reads,
d2
dt2 ðr þ eÞ ¼ VFðr þ eÞ
(11.13)
Since e is small we can expand the gravitational potential around the
point r,
Fðr þ eÞ ¼ FðrÞ þ e$VFðrÞ þ /
Finally we can take the difference of the two equations of motion
Eqs. (11.12) and (11.13) to isolate the equation of motion for each ball
to ﬁrst order in e,
d2e
dt2 ¼ Vðe$VFðrÞÞ
(11.14)
We learn that the balls accelerate with respect to me by an amount that
varies as the second derivatives of the potential. We can obtain an explicit
formula by working out the derivatives,
VF rð Þ ¼ GM
r3 r
V
GM
r3 e$r

¼ 3 GM
r4 ðe$rÞbr þ GM
r3 e$br
So, ﬁnally, in Cartesian components,
d2ei
dt2 ¼ GM
r5
X
k
ek
3xkxi  r2dki
(11.15)
210
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

We see that the right-hand side of this equation has the spatial distribution
of a “quadrupole moment,”
QðijÞ ¼

3xixj  r2dij
We shall see more quadrupole moments in other gravitational phenomena
below.
Now we can get our answers! Choose x ¼ 0, y ¼ 0, and z ¼ r. Then,
on substitution, into the equation of motion Eq. (11.15), we have,
d2e1
dt2 ¼ GM
r3 e1;
d2e2
dt2 ¼ GM
r3 e2;
d2e3
dt2 ¼ þ2GM
r3 e3
And we read off the stretching and squeezing alluded to above: there is
elongation in the z direction and squeezing in the transverse directions.
This exercise illustrates several points.
First, we have rediscovered gravitational tidal forces. Recall from your
mechanics course that the Moon creates tidal forces on the Earth, and these
forces are responsible for the daily high and low tides in a harbor such as
London or New York. As the Earth rotates on its axis under the Moon,
there are two high tides and two low tides each solar day, approximately.
This is because of the elongation we discovered in e(3) and squeezing we
discovered in the transverse directions e(1) and e(2). We visualize this effect
in Fig. 11.13. In part A. of the ﬁgure, we show the forces exerted on the
Earth by the Moon, and in part B. we subtract the force exerted on the center
of the Earth so we concentrate on the “differential” force across the Earth.
Here we see the pattern of forces derived in Eq. (11.15) that are described
Figure 11.13 In part (A) the Moon (to the right of the Earth, not shown) produces tidal
forces on the Earth. The attraction of the Moon is stronger on the right side of the
Earth than on its left due to the inverse square law. In part (B) the tidal force on the
center of the Earth has been subtracted from all the forces shown in part A. The results
are the differential forces across the Earth.
Introduction to General Relativity
211

by the quadrupole moment: there is elongation in the direction toward the
Moon and squeezing in the transverse directions. We also see that the
rotational frequency of the quadrupole moment is twice that of the Earth:
there are two high tides and two low tides in a 24 h period, approximately.
We will have more to say about this later when we develop the
equations of general relativity in Chapter 12.
11.4 GRAVITATIONAL REDSHIFT
11.4.1 A Freely Falling Inertial Frame
The gravitational redshift represents one of the simplest and decisive tests of
the equivalence principle. We are interested in how light propagates in a
gravitational ﬁeld. Suppose that light of frequency ve is emitted upward from
the surface of a planet to be observed some distance h away. What frequency
vo does the observer measure? We know that light travels at the speed limit c
in any inertial frame, and we know that a freely falling frame is inertial. So,
consider ﬁrst the propagation of the light signal from the surface of the planet
from the perspective of an inertial frame falling freely in the approximately
uniform gravitational ﬁeld g as shown in Fig. 11.14. The light pulse travels a
distance h in the time interval from t ¼ 0 to t ¼ h/c, and the falling frame has
a velocity v ¼ gh/c downward relative to the observers at rest around the
planet when the light pulse reaches its destination. The local falling frame is
inertial, and the light pulse has frequency ve when it is emitted and when it
is absorbed, as measured in the falling frame. But at t ¼ h/c, the inertial frame
is moving downward, opposite to the direction of propagation of the light
pulse, so an observer at rest on the planet detects a Doppler shift toward the
red when he observes the light pulse at t ¼ h/c. The frequency shift is
no ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
ne z
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2y=c
p
ne z ð1  gh=c2Þne;
where we used the Doppler shift formula from Chapter 3 and v ¼ gh/c, and
linearized the formula for our present application, where v/c  1.
The fractional change of the frequency is
no  ne
ne
¼ Dn
n ¼ hg
c2 .
(11.16)
So, the observer at height h above the surface of the planet observes a
slightly red-shifted wave.
212
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Another way of presenting this result, which is more fundamental, is to
say: Identically constructed clocks run slower in lower gravitational potentials.
Because frequency varies as the reciprocal of time, v ¼ 1/t, we can express
Eq. (11.16) as a fractional time difference,
Dt
t ¼ hg
c2 .
(11.17)
In other words, an observer E at height 0 could send light signals to
observer O at height h once a second. Eq. (11.16) then states that observer
O detects these signals more widely spaced in time, at a diminished or
red-shifted frequency. So, observer O concludes that the clock at height
0 is running more slowly than hers, according to Eq. (11.17).
Just as the observer at height 0 sent light signals to an observer at height
h to compare clocks, their roles could be interchanged. Then the same
argument, modiﬁed to account for the fact that now the freely falling frame
is accelerating in the same direction as the light ray, so the Doppler shift
formula applies with v replaced by v, predicts that the lower observer
Figure 11.14 Propagation of a light signal from the surface of a planet from the
perspective of an inertial frame falling freely in the approximately uniform gravita-
tional ﬁeld g. In part (A) the light signal leaves the planet’s surface and in part (B) it is
detected a height h above the surface.
Introduction to General Relativity
213

detects a blue-shifted light ray. The lower observer concludes that the clock
in the higher gravitational potential runs faster than his by a fractional
change of hg/c2.
11.4.2 An Accelerating Spaceship
Another way to use the equivalence principle to analyze the gravitational
redshift is to replace the problem in a gravitational ﬁeld with one in an
accelerating reference frame (e.g., a spaceship), as shown in Fig. 11.15. The
spaceship of height h is in a background inertial frame, so light travels at
velocity c there regardless of its origins. Light leaves the base of the ship (E),
travels up during a time t ¼ h/c, and is received at the tip of the ship (O).
But O is receding at velocity v ¼ at ¼ gh/c, so it detects the frequency of
light
no ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
ne z
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2y=c
p
ne z ð1  gh=c2Þne
in agreement with our earlier argument.
Figure 11.15 Gravitational redshift from the perspective of an accelerating frame of
reference. Part (A) shows the physical situation on the surface of a planet and part
(B) shows the equivalent environment in an accelerating spaceship.
214
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

11.4.3 Gravitational Redshift and the Relativity of
Simultaneity
The gravitational redshift is certainly more fundamental than the Doppler
shift formulas, so let us derive the result directly from more basic features of
relativity. Observer O wants to compare the amount of time that passes at
her height h in the gravitational ﬁeld to the amount that passes at height
0 where observer E resides. Suppose that O has a clock; call it clock 2.
Observer E also has a clock with him, call it clock 1, but suppose that light
beams cannot be sent between the two observers. How can the observers
compare the operation of clocks 1 and 2? Well, observer O could drop
clock 2 to observer E, and the clocks could be compared at height 0. This is
a good idea because when the observer O drops her clock 2, clock 2 is
freely falling in gravity, and it is in an inertial frame of reference where space
and time follow the rules of special relativity that we know so well. (In fact,
suppose as usual that there is a synchronized gridwork of clocks in this
inertial, freely falling frame. We will need to consult them later in this
argument.) It is important that all the clocks involved be constructed
identically, as usual. Observer E at height 0 can then note the hands on
clock 2 when it reaches him at time t. The time t is determined by the fact
that the falling clock accelerates at a rate g through a distance h, so gt2/
2 ¼ h. So, t ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2h=g
p
and the velocity of clock 2 when it passes observer E
at height 0 is v ¼ gt ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2hg
p
. But observer E is not really interested in the
time on clock 2; he wants to know how much time has passed at height h.
Observer O at height h can look at a freely falling clock at height h that was
synchronized with clock 2 in that freely falling inertial frame and read off
the amount of time that has passed. Now for the crux of the matter!
Observer E, being a good student of relativity, knows that a freely falling
clock at height h is not synchronized with clock 2 when measured from his
perspective because of the relative motion between the frame where he is at
rest, the surface of the planet, and the freely falling framedthe relativity of
simultaneity states that E measures such a clock to be ahead of clock 2 by a
time interval xv/c2, where x is just the height h. But x ¼ vt/2 because the
acceleration is approximately constant, so the time difference is xv/c2 ¼ v2t/
2c2. Therefore, observer E states that a time t þ v2t/2c2 has passed at height
h while a time interval t has passed at h ¼ 0. The total time interval T
detected by observer E is, then,
T ¼ t þ y2t
2c2 ¼

1 þ y2
2c2

t ¼

1 þ 1
2$2hg
c2

t ¼

1 þ hg
c2

t.
Introduction to General Relativity
215

So, observer E concludes that a clock at height h runs more quicklydmore
time has passed theredwith a fractional difference of Dt/t ¼ hg/c2. In other
words, observer E concludes that clocks at higher gravitational potential run
faster. This result is in agreement with our previous conclusion. The rela-
tivity of simultaneity, the fact that clocks that are synchronized in one
inertial frame are measured to be out of synchronization when measured
by an observer in relative motion, is the fundamental idea behind the grav-
itational redshift, correctly concludes observer E.
Now that our two observers E and O can compare time measurements
at different gravitational potentials, they can turn to length measurements.
Observer E can measure observer O’s meter sticks similarly to how she
measured O’s clock readings. We suppose again that observer O is at height
z ¼ h above observer E who is at height z ¼ 0. Observer O aligns her
meter stick vertically and drops it. After a time t ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2h=g
p
it is at height
z ¼ 0 and observer E measures its length. Since it is traveling at velocity
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2hg
p
relative to observer E, observer E measures its length contracted
by a factor of
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2hg=c2
p
z 1  hg=c2. Similarly, if the
dropped meter stick were aligned in the transverse direction, observer E
would measure its length unaffected by the gravitational ﬁeld.
These considerations suggest that in a radially symmetric, weak gravi-
tational potential V(r), the invariant interval would read,
ds2 ¼

1 þ 2VðrÞ
c2

c2dt2 

1  2VðrÞ
c2

dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
þ O
1
c4

This metric will be derived from the Einstein ﬁeld equations of general
relativity in the next chapter where strong gravity solutions will also be
presented. It is useful in calculating the bending of light as it passes by stars,
the precession of planets and satellites in elliptical orbits around the stars,
etc.
11.4.4 A Rotating Reference Frame
Our exercise in rotating reference frames affords yet another example of the
gravitational redshift. The proper time interval ds was related to the time
interval that passes in the ﬁxed inertial frame as ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  u2r2=c2
p
dt. A
mass at rest in the rotating frame experiences a centripetal acceleration u2r,
216
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which is generated from a potential V(r) ¼ u2r2/2, because u2r ¼ (d/dr)
(u2r2/2). So, we can write ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2VðrÞ=c2
p
dt and the proper time
intervals at different radii r1 and r2 are related,
ds1
ds2
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2Vðr1Þ=c2
1 þ 2Vðr2Þ=c2
s
:
Therefore, the frequency v1 of an oscillator at r1 is related to that at r2 by
n1
n2
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2Vðr2Þ=c2
1 þ 2Vðr1Þ=c2:
s
If both V(r1)/c2 and V(r2)/c2 are much less than unity, we can linearize this
expression and ﬁnd
n1
n2
z

1 þ Vðr2Þ  Vðr1Þ
c2
	
or
n1  n2
n2
z Vðr2Þ  Vðr1Þ
c2
.
(11.18)
In the case of the rotating reference frame, V(r) ¼ u2r2/2. So, if a pulse of
light is emitted radially from r1 and is observed in the rotating frame at
r2 s r1, the observer at r2 detects a frequency-shifted pulse. Clearly, this
is just an example of the transverse Doppler shift of special relativity because
vt ¼ ur is the transverse velocity of the rotating reference frame at radius r.
Collecting our various examples, a general discussion of the gravitational
redshift in a nonuniform gravitational ﬁeld V predicts
Dn
n z  DV
c2 ;
(11.19)
where Dv is the frequency difference and DV is the potential difference
between the point of detection and emission of the light wave. We can
write this result in differential form,
dn
n ¼ dV
c2
and integrate it between point A where the frequency is nA and the poten-
tial is VA and point B where the frequency is nB and the potential is VB,
nB
nA
¼ eVB=c2
eVA=c2 ¼ eðVBVAÞ=c2
This result will prove useful in applications.
Introduction to General Relativity
217

We can further summarize these exercises by incorporating the gravi-
tational potential into the spaceetime metric. In a weak gravitational ﬁeld
V(r)/c2  1, the invariant interval becomes,
ds2 ¼ ð1 þ 2VðrÞ=c2Þc2dt2 þ /
to ﬁrst order in V(r)/c2. The Minkowski metric of special relativity had
g00 ¼ 1 but weak gravitational effects alter it to read,
g00 ¼ 1 þ 2VðrÞ=c2 þ /
And in strong gravitational ﬁelds,
ds2 ¼ e2V=c2c2dt2 þ /;
g00 ¼ e2V=c2
Chapter 12 will expand on these ideas.
11.4.5 A Famous Experimental Test of Gravitational
Redshift
It is interesting that the best experimental determination of gravitational
redshift comes from terrestrial, controlled experiments that rely on the
Mössbauer effect to measure tiny frequency shifts rather than from obser-
vations of distant stars. Recall the Mössbauer effect discussed in Section 6.6.
The experiment involved an emitting atom within a regular crystal array.
The emitting atom shares its recoil energy and momentum with its entire
crystal environment, so its recoil velocity is reduced to essentially zero, and
all the energy between the quantum energy levels in the atom shows up as
the energy of the emitted light wave. If the light emitted from such a crystal
is incident on another identical crystal, absorption is possible because the
energy of the light exactly matches an energy difference in the spectrum of
the receiving atom, which can absorb the light without recoiling. If either
the absorbing crystal or emitting crystal has a small relative velocity, the
attendant Doppler shift shifts the energy of the light enough to make
resonant absorption impossible. (Recall that in quantum physics, the
frequency of light is related to its energy by the Planck relation E ¼ hv,
where h is Planck’s constant, h ¼ 6.627$1034 J-s, so we can speak equally
well in terms of frequency v or energy when discussing emission and
absorption of photons by atoms.) In fact, the energy levels of atoms are not
inﬁnitely precisedeach energy level has a natural width that is a conse-
quence of the Heisenberg uncertainty relation. Mössbauer was then able to
study the proﬁles of spectral lines, obtaining their widths and detailed shapes
by using his crystals and the physics of the Doppler shift.
218
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

R. V. Pound, G. A. Rebka, and J. L. Snider used the Mössbauer effect
to measure the redshift of light near the surface of Earth [3]. They placed a
source of 57Co 22.6 m higher than a receiver. The equivalence principle
predicts a fractional frequency shift of Dv/ve z 2.46$1015, which is very
tiny: three orders of magnitude smaller than the intrinsic natural uncertainty
in the frequency of the emitted light DvQM, DvQM/v z 1.13$1012. To
obtain an observable effect, they gave the source a sinusoidal velocity u ¼ uo
cos ut to induce a controlled, mechanical Doppler shift, DvD/v ¼ (uo/c)
cos ut. Then the resonance absorption cross section depends on Dv þ DvD,
and. if DvD [ Dv, an exercise in quantum mechanics shows that the cross
section has a term linear in cos ut with a strength proportional to Dv, the
gravitational redshift. By isolating this characteristic external frequency u in
the cross-sectional measurements, the experimenters conﬁrmed the pre-
diction of general relativity to good precision, about 10%. It is interesting
that this terrestrial experiment is much more decisive than astronomical data
of light emitted from distant stars because of all the inherent uncertainties in
such observations (the Doppler effects of the movement of the star and the
movement of the emitting atom in the turbulent hot surface of the star
must be accounted for somehow).
11.4.6 Gravitational Redshift and Energy Conservation
We end this discussion with an illustration of the gravitational redshift that
derives it from energy conservation. We show that the gravitational redshift
is necessary for the internal consistency of relativistic dynamicsdwithout it
we could construct a perpetual motion machine!
Consider a pulley on the surface of Earth supporting two observers at
the ends of a string as shown in Fig. 11.16 [4].
Let the difference of heights of the observers be h, as usual. Let the
lower observer shine a ﬂashlight at the higher observer, who sees the light,
so it is absorbed on his retina. (Notice the similarity of this argument to our
original derivation of E ¼ mc2, except the apparatus is now vertical and in
an ordinary gravitational ﬁeld.) Let the light have energy E, so from special
relativity we know that it has a mass equivalent of E/c2. So, if the light
travels from the lower to the higher observer, then mass E/c2 has been
transferred between the observers; the upper one is now slightly heavier
than the lower one, so it sinks and does work equal to the change in the
potential energy, hg$E/c2 ¼ E$DV/c2. Our pulley system is now back to its
original conﬁguration, and we can repeat the process as many times as we
wish and have an inexhaustible source of work.
Introduction to General Relativity
219

We have done it! We have made a perpetual motion machine! Well,
except for one thingdwe forgot about the gravitational redshift! The light
detected by the higher observer in Fig. 11.16 has a smaller frequency, given
by our gravitational redshift formula, Dv/v ¼ DV/c2. How can this get us
out of our conundrum? If we return to Eq. (6.20), it is easy to see (as we
verify later) that the energy that light carries transforms between frames
exactly as its frequency. If that is the case, then the energy the light deposits
on the retina of the higher observer is diminished by E$DV/c2, which is
exactly the work we were hoping to get out of our machine! So, in reality,
when the light from the lower observer reaches the higher one, its energy is
diminished by the gravitational redshift by just the amount we wanted to
generate. So, yet another perpetual motion machine design bites the dust!
Let us check that light’s frequency and energy transform identically in
special relativity. Recall from Eq. (6.20) that if we know the energy E and x
component of the relativistic momentum p1 in frame S, then the energy in
frame S0 is E0 ¼ g(E  vp1). But for light propagating in the x direction,
p1 ¼ E/c, so the transformation law becomes
E0 ¼ g

E  yE
c

¼ g

1  y
c

E ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
E;
Figure 11.16 The conjectured operation of a perpetual motion machine which is, in
fact, undone by the gravitational redshift.
220
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which we recognize as the Doppler shift formula for the light’s frequency.
And so the proposed perpetual motion machine fails miserably.
The fact that light’s frequency v and energy E transform identically
under boosts is important in the quantum theory of light we have touched
on in our discussion of relativistic collisions and quantum energy levels.
Planck’s equation, E ¼ hv (where h is Planck’s constant), is consistent with
special relativity because E and v share the same transformation law.
This observation suggests yet another way of viewing the gravitational
redshiftdit is just a consequence of energy conservation! When a photon, a
quantum of light energy, travels from the observer on the surface of a planet
where its frequency is ve and its height is 0, to an observer where its
frequency is vo and its height is h, the total energy, accounting for the
gravitational potential, must be conserved:
Ee ¼ Eo þ hg Eo
c2 .
The change in potential energy has been written as hg(Eo/c2), which is the
change in the potential hg in the uniform gravitational ﬁeld times the mass
equivalent of the energy Eo there. Solving for Eo,
Eo
Ee
¼
1
1 þ hg=c2 z 1  hg
c2 ;
which we can write as a fractional change in energy, which is also the frac-
tional change in frequency,
Eo  Ee
Ee
¼ no  ne
ne
z  hg
c2 ;
and we have derived Eq. (11.16) again from a different perspective!
This result gives us a nice alternative view of gravitational redshift. Why
does the frequency of light change as it propagates away from the surface of
a celestial body? Because it propagates to a new location where its gravi-
tational potential is larger, so its relativistic energy, and hence its frequency,
must be diminished accordingly!
11.5 THE TWINS AGAIN
When we last left our twins, Mary and Maria, they were coping with the
fact that Mary is 4 years older than Maria after her space trip. In that dis-
cussion, we found that from Maria’s perspective Mary ages an unexpectedly
large amount when Maria jumps from the outgoing to the incoming rocket
Introduction to General Relativity
221

at the midpoint of her trip. Recall from that discussion that the lines of
constant time in the frame of the outgoing rocket are at widely different
angles from the lines of constant time in the frame of the incoming rocket,
as shown in the Minkowski diagram, Fig. 3.19. In fact, we saw that Maria
measures that 6.4 years passes on Mary’s clock during Maria’s turnaround!
By using the device of two rockets, we have been able to analyze the
twin paradox without explicitly considering space and time measurements
in an accelerated reference frame. Now that we know that accelerated
reference frames are equivalent to environments in a gravitational ﬁeld, we
can face the problem head on. Our only limitation is that our discussion of
general relativity so far is good only for weak gravitational ﬁelds, or,
equivalently, small values of v/c. We will do better when we present the full
apparatus of general relativity, Einstein’s ﬁeld equations in Chapter 12. That
work will justify this application where large gravitational effects occur.
View the trip from Maria’s frame. From Maria’s perspective, Mary goes
out and back. By the equivalence principle, then, Maria’s acceleration can
be replaced by a gravitational ﬁeld. We already know that the important
portion of the trip is the period during which Maria detects Mary’s reversal.
Call the distance between the sisters vT at this point, where T is the time
they have been traveling apart at velocity v, according to Mary. At this
point, the turnaround, Maria actually turns on her rocket motors and
experiences an acceleration a for a time t. However, invoking the equiv-
alence principle, we can replace the rocket environment by one in which
there is a gravitational ﬁeld in Maria’s frame that produces an acceleration a,
as shown in Fig. 11.17. The gravitational potential difference between the
sisters is distance times acceleration, avT, which causes Mary’s clock
(her heartbeat) to gain the total amount (avT/c2)t, according to our formulas
developed for the gravitational redshift in Section 11.4.3. Finally, t must be
long enough to accommodate the reversal from the outgoing speed v to the
incoming speed v, so at ¼ 2v. Therefore, the total time gained by Mary’s
clock is 2Tv2/c2.
Does this result agree with our previous analysis of the twin paradox?
Return to Fig. 3.19 and compute the time that Maria states passes on
Mary’s clock during the turnaround. We pull out our trusty relativity of
simultaneity formula, which reminds us that Maria measures clocks at rest in
Mary’s frame that are separated by a distance x to be out of synchronization
by an amount xv/c2. So, if we change from the outgoing to the incoming
rocket, causing v, to change by Dv, the time that passes on Mary’s clock is
222
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

xDv/c2. But x is the distance between the sisters in Mary’s frame, which is
vT in our discussion here. And ﬁnally, because the velocity v reverses,
Dv ¼ 2v. So, our earlier relativity of simultaneity discussion predicted that
Mary’s clock, as measured by Maria, gains a time of 2Tv2/c2, in complete
agreement with the general relativity result obtained here! Using the
numbers of our previous discussion in Section 3.4, Fig. 3.19, T ¼ 5 and v/
c ¼ 0.8, so Mary’s time gain is 2$5$0.82, which is 6.4 years, as we found
earlier.
11.6 AN AGING ASTRONAUT
When an astronaut circles the globe on the space shuttle, does she age faster
or slower than we who stay at home on Earth?
There are two effects to consider. First, she is moving in an Earth orbit,
circling Earth every 90 min or so. Therefore, special relativity, time dilation
in particular, predicts that we measure her clocks as running slowly. Second,
she resides at a higher altitude where the gravitational potential,
V(r) ¼ GM/r, is higher, so general relativity predicts that her clocks run
faster than ours. These two effects compete. Which wins out?
First, her velocity in a low Earth orbit is rather modest on the scale of
the speed of light c. The orbit is almost circular with a radius r, and
Figure 11.17 General relativistic analysis of the twin paradox. From Maria’s perspec-
tive Mary ages 6.4 years during Maria’s turnaround.
Introduction to General Relativity
223

Newtonian kinematics and dynamics apply quite accurately. The centrif-
ugal acceleration outward balances the gravitational acceleration inward, so
y2
r ¼ GM
r2 ;
where y is the astronaut’s velocity and M is the mass of Earth. It is more
convenient to write this in terms of the acceleration of gravity g,
9.8 m/s2, observed on the surface of Earth,
ghGM
r2
o
;
where ro is the radius of Earth. So,
y2 ¼ gr2
o
r .
Substituting
in
numbers
for
the
low
Earth
orbit,
we
ﬁnd
that
y z 7700 m/s, so y2/c2 z 6.6$1010 and all relativistic effects will be
very tinydbut measurable by modern techniques. Comparing the astro-
naut’s proper time s to the time that passes on Earth t, taking just the
relative velocity into account, gives
t ¼ gs ¼
s
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
z

1 þ y2
2c2

s.
So,
Dt
s z y2
2c2 ¼ gr2
o
c2r
(11.20a)
is the extra time that passes on clocks on the surface of Earth when a time s
passes on the astronaut’s wristwatch.
Now we need the contribution to Dt/s due to the gravitational
potential difference between the astronaut and we, who stay at home. This
is given by our red-shift formula, Eq. (11.18),
Dt
s z VðroÞ  VðrÞ
c2
¼ ð  GM=ro þ GM=rÞ
c2
.
So,
Dt
s z gr2
o
c2 ð1=r  1=roÞ.
(11.20b)
224
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Because r is always greater than ro, Dt is negative, as expecteddgeneral
relativity causes clocks at lower potentials to run slower, so the clock on
Earth falls behind.
Finally, adding Eq. (11.20a) and Eq. (11.20b), we get our full answer,
Dt
s z gr2
o
c2
3ro
2r  1

z 7$1010
3ro
2r  1

.
(11.21)
What a funny result! We can enhance or reverse the relative aging
processes by adjusting the height of the astronaut’s orbitdif the orbit is high
(r > 3ro/2), the gravitational effects win and a person on the surface ages
more slowly than the astronaut, but if the orbit is low (r < 3ro/2), the
velocity effects win and a person on the surface ages faster than the astro-
naut. Of course, these effects are truly tiny for earthly conditions. But they
are observable using atomic clocks, which have accuracies greater than one
part in 1010.
11.7 BENDING OF LIGHT IN A GRAVITATIONAL FIELD
As we discussed earlier, the equivalence principle implies that all physical
phenomena experience the acceleration of gravity. This point applies to
wave phenomena, as well as to particles with rest masses. The original
quantitative “calculation” of the gravitational bending of light was done in a
nonrelativistic setting in 1801 by Johann Georg von Soldner, a German
mathematician, following Newton’s “corpuscular” theory of light. It is
interesting that the relativistic calculation gives twice as large a deﬂection and
is in agreement with modern high-tech experiments.
Before we review the relativistic calculation that uses the weak ﬁeld
metric discussed in Section 11.4.3, let us consider the nonrelativistic
calculation. Imagine a particle of rest mass m that glances by a star of mass M
and radius R as shown in Fig. 11.18. For a star similar to the Sun, the
deﬂection angle c proves to be very small. The particle feels the radial force
of gravity and, as is clear from the symmetry in the picture, the star imparts a
net transverse momentum to the particle, which bends its trajectory as
shown. The calculation is successful only if m, the mass of the particle,
cancels out of the calculation: the effect must be universal and independent
of m. This occurs because, if we use Newton’s theory of gravity, the particle
experiences a force f proportional to its mass m, which produces an
acceleration given by f ¼ ma, predicting an acceleration a independent of m.
Introduction to General Relativity
225

Following the original Newtonian calculation, the gravitational force F
produces a change in the particle’s transverse momentum PT,
dPT ¼ F cos q dt.
(11.22)
We read from Fig. 11.18 that x ¼ R tan q, so we can trade the linear po-
sition of the particle for the angle q. The angle q varies from  p/2 to p/2
during the process. In addition, because the deﬂection is small we have to
good approximation dx ¼ cdt, where we are also supposing that the parti-
cle’s speed is essentially c. Now, dx ¼ R sec2 q dq, so Eq. (11.22) becomes
using R ¼ r cos q,
PT ¼
Z p=2
p=2
GMm
cR cos q dq ¼ 2GMm
cR
.
(11.23)
The deﬂection angle is approximately
c ¼ PT
P ¼ 2GMm=cR
mc
.
(11.24)
We see that m cancels out and the ﬁnal answer is
c ¼ 2GM
c2R
radians.
(11.25)
Substituting in the parameters for the Sun, we predict c ¼ 0.87 s of arc, a
tiny but measurable effect. Note that the effect is suppressed by two powers
of the speed of light.
This curious calculation leaves several points unanswered. Treating light
as a particle obeying Newtonian kinematics, on the one hand, and traveling
at the relativistic speed limit, on the other, is peculiar and ad hoc. In
addition, in this classical physics setting, light is a wave phenomenon so the
applicability of this calculation is not really clear. The calculation is his-
torically signiﬁcant, however, because it illustrates Newton’s corpuscular
theory of light. It misses the real answer of general relativity by a factor of 2.
Let us calculate the deﬂection of light by the gravitational attraction of
the Sun by modeling light as a wave and treating spaceetime through
Figure 11.18 Kinematic set up for a Newtonian calculation of the bending of light
(“corpuscular” light for Newton). The closest approach of the light beam to the center
of the planet is R and it bends through an angle c.
226
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

general relativity [5]. Consider a light front propagating through a gravi-
tational ﬁeld described to O
1
c4

by the weak ﬁeld metric motivated in
Section 11.4.3,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt 

1 þ 2GM
c2r

dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 q d42
.
(11.26)
Our calculation will be accurate just to ﬁrst order in 1/c2. In an inertial
reference frame, light travels on straight lines at the speed limit c. Along the
world line, the invariant interval ds2 vanishes. But because ds2 is an
invariant, ds2 ¼ 0 holds in the rest frame of the Sun as well as in a freely
falling inertial frame. So, inspecting Eq. (11.26) with ds2 ¼ 0, we see that
the velocity of light, as measured on the axes ct, x, y, and z, will be r
dependent. So, when a wave front passes the Sun, different parts of it
propagate at different speeds, and the wave front changes direction. The
situation is shown in Fig. 11.19. The deﬂection Dc is, reading from the
ﬁgure,
Dc z yðy þ DyÞDt  yðyÞDt
Dy
¼ vy
vyDt.
So,
dc
dx z vy
vy
dt
dx ¼ 1
y
vy
vy .
Figure 11.19 The bending of a light wave as it passes near a mass M in general
relativity.
Introduction to General Relativity
227

The rate of change of vv/vy is very small, of order 1/c2, so the deﬂection
will also be very small. To calculate the deﬂection, we need the speed v
to ﬁrst order in 1/c2. To obtain this, write ds2 in terms of dt and dx because
the light rays are propagating in the x direction, and deﬂection occurs only
because vv/vy is nonzero:
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GM
c2r
dr
dx
2
dx2  r2
dq
dx
2
dx2.
Call the closest approach of the light ray to the Sun R as shown in
Fig. 11.20.
r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
x2 þ y2
p
cos q ¼ y
r .
The derivatives we need in the metric, to effectively rewrite it in Cartesian
coordinates, starting from polar coordinates, are
dr
dx ¼ x
r
dq
dx ¼ y
r2 .
Substituting into the expression for the invariant interval,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GM
c2r
 x2
r2 dx2  r2 y2
r4 dx2.
So,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GMx2
c2r3

dx2.
Setting ds2 ¼ 0 we obtain v ¼ dx/dt, to ﬁrst order in 1/c2,
y ¼

1  GM
c2r

1 þ x2
r2
	
c.
Figure 11.20 Kinematic set up for the calculation of the bending of light as it passes
near a mass M centered at the origin O.
228
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

To calculate the deﬂection, we need (1/v) (vv/vy) to ﬁrst order in 1/c2,
1
y
vy
vy z GM
c2
3x2y
r5
þ y
r3

.
Integrating from N to þ N gives the full deﬂection,
c z GM
c2
Z N
N
3x2y
r5
þ y
r3

dx.
Integrate by using the variable q, which varies from p/2 to p/2. From
Fig. 11.20, this gives
x ¼ R tanq;
R ¼ r cosq;
y z R.
So,
c z GM
c2R
Z
ð3 sin2 q þ 1Þcosq dq
c ¼ 4GM
c2R
which is twice the Newtonian result, as promised!
This result played a very important role in the historical development
and acceptance of general relativity. Better and better measurements of c
are actively being pursued.
11.8 SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES OF
ELECTROMAGNETISM AND GRAVITY
It is interesting to consider the similarities between the two ﬁeld theories
considered in this book, electromagnetism and general relativity. We will
also return to this subject after we have developed general relativity for
strong gravity in the next chapter.
Our investigations in electromagnetism started with Coulomb’s law, the
force between two charges q1 and q2 a distance r apart,
FðrÞ ¼ k q1q2
r2 br
(11.27)
and our investigations in gravity started with Newton’s law of the gravita-
tional force between two masses m1 and m2 a distance r apart,
FgðrÞ ¼ G m1m2
r2
br
(11.28)
Introduction to General Relativity
229

We rewrote Coulomb’s law as a local differential equation on our way
to developing the ﬁeld theory of electromagnetism,
V$EðrÞ ¼ V2VðrÞ ¼ 4pkrðrÞ
(11.29)
where r is the charge per unit volume, charge density, at the position r and
V(r) is the electrostatic potential, E ¼ VV(r).
In the case of gravity we introduce the potential Vg(r) due to the
presence of particle m2 at the origin and write Fg(r) ¼ m1VVg(r). Then the
same steps that led from Eqs. (11.27)e(11.29) produce the differential
equation,
V2VgðrÞ ¼ 4pGrgðrÞ
(11.30)
where the source of the gravitational ﬁeld is the mass density rg(r).
Both forces F(r) and Fg(r) are long range, falling off as r2. In the case of
electromagnetism, we found that the long-range character of the electro-
static force led to the fact that the dynamical electromagnetic ﬁeld satisﬁes
the wave equation,

V2  v2
c2vt2

Eðr; tÞ ¼

V2  v2
c2vt2

Bðr; tÞ ¼ 0
in free space. This predicted that electromagnetic radiation exists, that
electromagnetic waves travel at the speed limit and that the photon has a
vanishing rest mass. This development suggests that the gravitational poten-
tial will be replaced by the gravitational ﬁeld when we pass from Newton’s
to general relativistic spaceetime. We have already seen that Newton’s
gravitational potential enters general relativity through deviations in the
spaceetime metric gmn from the ﬂat Minkowski metric of special relativity.
So, we expect that ﬂuctuations in the gravitational ﬁeld will manifest
themselves in general relativity as ﬂuctuations in the metric, and they will
propagate at the speed limit and will satisfy the wave equation in Minkow-
ski spaceetime if they are small. The associated quantum, the “graviton,”
will be massless just like the photon. These educated “guesses” are, in
fact, true, but their veriﬁcation requires investigations into general relativity,
the subject of Chapter 12.
The electrodynamic force law states that like charges repel and unlike
charges attract. For example, electrons attract their antiparticle relative, the
positron, but repel each other. This is a characteristic of the spin-1 nature of
the photon, as you will learn in ﬁeld theory. However, Newton’s law of
gravity states that masses attract one another and only positive masses are
230
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

known to exist. The universal attraction of masses, actually energies in the
relativistic version of Newton’s law, the Einstein ﬁeld equations, is an
essential element of the equivalence principle. The equality of inertial and
gravitational masses is the basis of interpreting gravity as an aspect of
geometry. These ideas generalize to ﬁeld theories because ﬁeld theory
predicts that the masses of particles and their associated antiparticles are
identical: particle and antiparticles must have opposite charges, but they
must have identical positive inertias. We have seen in our studies of
magnetism that the screening characteristic of electrodynamics is essential to
its phenomenology. For example, the discovery and relevance of magne-
tism in practical situations relies on the fact that in most situations matter is
effectively neutral and static electric forces are absent, leaving us able to ﬁnd
magnetic effects even though they are typically much smaller effects,
suppressed by several powers of v/c. In these cases, the positive charges of
nuclei are screened by the negative charges of mobile electrons. There is no
such screening in gravity, so its various velocity-dependent forces are
overwhelmed by static gravitational attractions between slowly moving
objects.
At the quantum level, the spin-1 nature of the photon explains why like
charges repel and unlike charges attract. What does the universal nature of
gravity’s attraction tell us at the quantum level? In electrodynamics the
carrier of the force is the spin-1 photon and in gravitation the carrier of the
force is the graviton, the quantum description of gravitational radiation that
we will study in Chapter 12. The graviton is described by a traveling wave
in the metric gmn analogous to the photon, which is a traveling wave in the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds. The graviton carries spin 2, and its spin-2
nature predicts the universal attraction of the theory. If the graviton is
traveling through empty Minkowski space, it travels at the speed limit, as
will be discussed further in Chapter 12. Since both the photon and the
graviton travel at the speed limit, they have some additional features in
common: they both have but two degrees of freedom! In the case of
electromagnetic radiation, we have already seen that there are two polar-
ization states, which describe it: right-handed or left-handed polarized
waves. Contrast this to the spin-1 state of a massive particle described by
quantum mechanics: it has three spin states, which are described by its spin
projection in some direction, say the z axis, of 1, 0, or þ1. This gives
three degrees of freedom. Why does radiation only have two such
states, 1 and þ1? The special feature of radiation is, of course, that it
travels at the speed limit, which is a Lorentz invariant notion. So, its spin
Introduction to General Relativity
231

state must also be a Lorentz invariant. This will be true if the spin points
either in the same direction as the propagation of the wave k or in the
opposite direction, k. We saw this in our discussion of electromagnetic
waves in Chapter 9, Section 2 where we found that right- and left-handed
circularly polarized electromagnetic waves were the only possibilities
because of the transversality conditions. The same argument applies to the
graviton: it will propagate with its spin 2 aligned with its direction of
motion or antialigned. In both cases, the radiated ﬁeld has two degrees of
freedom, even though they have different spin values! We will check this
point when we discuss gravitational radiation and the LIGO experiment in
Chapter 12.
Now let us discuss the differences between Eqs. (11.27) and (11.28) and
between Eqs. (11.29) and (11.30). First, the charges q1 and q2 in Eq. (11.27)
are Lorentz invariants; they are the same in all frames. The masses, m1 and
m2 in Eq. (11.28), are the rest masses of the two particles at ﬁxed positions
in the static force law. We need to ask how they transform if we boost
Eq. (11.28) or Eq. (11.30) to a frame with velocity v. In the case of elec-
tromagnetism, the charge density r(r) was identiﬁed as the zeroth
component of a four-vector Jm ¼ r0vm ¼ (gr0c, gr0v) where r0 is the rest
frame charge density and g ¼ g(v). The fact that the source of the electric
ﬁeld E was the zeroth component of a four-vector, the charge current, was
critical in the derivation of Maxwell’s equations from Gauss’ law and special
relativity.
In the case of gravity, Eqs. (11.28) and (11.30), we have the energy
density acting as the source of the gravitational ﬁeld. What are the prop-
erties of energy-per-volume under boosts? It is here that gravity and
electromagnetism diverge. Energy is the zeroth component of the
energyemomentum
four-vector
pm ¼ (E/c,p).
Under
a
boost,
vol-
ume1,1/V, transforms as g, which matches the behavior of the zeroth
component of a four-vector such as the four-velocity vm ¼ (gc, gv). So, the
right-hand side of the equation for the gravitational ﬁeld, Eq. (11.30), is
proportional to the product of the zeroth components of two four-vectors. In
a general inertial frame the right-hand side will be proportional to the
product pmvn. If we have an extended source of gravity, perhaps many
particles i, then the right-hand side of Eq. (11.30) would be proportional to
P
i
mi
0c2vi
mvi
y where mi
0 is the rest mass of particle i. Mathematical objects that
are labeled by several four-vector indices and transform under boosts
accordingly are called tensors as we discussed in Chapter 8e10. They will
play central roles in differential geometry and general relativity. We are
232
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

familiar with the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor, Fsr, for example, from
Chapter 8. The tensor uncovered here is Tmn, the energyemomentum
tensor. The energyemass relation of special relativity implies that all forms
of energyemomentum should contribute to Tmn in addition to the masses
that contribute to Newton’s law of gravity. For example, the energye
momentum carried by the electromagnetic ﬁeld contributes to Tmn. We
will pursue these ideas for gravity in Chapter 12.
The fact that gravity couples to energyemomentum while electro-
magnetism couples to charge, a conserved quantity that is only carried by
massive matter ﬁelds produces more differences between these theories. In
the case of electromagnetism, this property gave rise to the linear super-
position principle, which helped us solve electrodynamics problems.
Gravity does not enjoy the linear superposition principle, and this fact
makes it much more challenging. For example, the gravity ﬁeld itself carries
energyemomentum, so it couples to itself! The theory is intrinsically
nonlinear! The Newtonian limit of the theory is, in fact, linear, but this is an
exception to the rule. We will see this explicitly when we solve for the
gravitational ﬁeld outside a spherically symmetric, static mass and discover a
black hole. A dramatic implication of the nonlinearity of gravity is the
following: let us say you are inside a black hole and try to escape by ﬂailing
about or turning on a rocket motor. Do you succeed in evading being
sucked in? On the contrary, the extra energy you expend increases your
attraction to the black hole and as a consequence you are sucked in more
forcefully and your proper lifetime is diminished! In the language of the
fundamentals of general relativity, the gravitons that generate the attraction
between bodies attract any object that carries energyemomentum and thus
attract one another and generate an apparently very singular theory. This
avalanche of interactions is one reason why physicists have yet to under-
stand the quantized version of the theory!
Let us return to our task of comparing and contrasting classical elec-
tromagnetism and classical gravity. We begin with static problems and
consider the electrostatic potential far from a collection of charges and the
analogous problem in gravity, the gravitational potential far from a
collection of masses. Suppose there are charges ea at points ra near the origin
of a convenient coordinate system. Then the electrostatic potential is given
by a linear superposition of Coulomb potentials,
VðRÞ ¼ k
X
a
ea
jR  raj
(11.31)
Introduction to General Relativity
233

We use the uppercase notation R to indicate the point where the potential
is measured and to emphasize that R ¼ jRj is much larger than the largest
jraj. In this case it is useful to Taylor expand
1
jRraj around the origin,
1
jR  rj ¼ 1
R 
X
j
xj
v
vxj
1
R þ 1
2
X
jk
xjxk
v2
vxjvxk
1
R þ /
(11.32)
where R ¼ (x1, x2, x3). Taking the derivatives and doing some straight-
forward algebra,
1
jR  rj ¼ 1
R þ
 X
j
xjnj
!
1
R2 þ
 
1
2
X
jk
ð3xjxk  r2djkÞnjnk
!
1
R3 þ /
(11.33)
where n is the unit vector pointing in the R direction, ni ¼ (x, y, z)/R. If
we apply this expansion to Eq. (11.31) we ﬁnd,
VðRÞ ¼ k

Q 1
R þ D 1
R2 þ Qð2Þ 1
R3 þ /

(11.34)
where Q ¼ P
a
ea is the total charge of the source, D ¼ P
i
dini, di ¼ P
a
eaxðaÞ
i
is the dipole moment of the source, and Qð2Þ ¼ 1
2
P
jk
Djknjnk
and
Djk ¼ P
a
ea

3xðaÞ
j xðaÞ
k  rðaÞ2djk

is the quadrupole moment of the charge
distribution.
Eq. (11.34) is particularly useful because it organizes the potential as
increasing moments of the charge distribution and correlates these moments
to inverse powers of R, indicating how signiﬁcant they are far from the
source. For example, if the source is net neutral, Q ¼ P
a
ea ¼ 0, then the
“monopole” term in Eq. (11.34) is absent and the next term, the dipole
moment of the distribution dominates the ﬁeld’s behavior at large R. Since
D is a relatively simple aspect of the charge distribution, it is easy to estimate
V(R) for large R without knowing every detail of the source. The dipole
and the quadrupole moments have particular properties, which lead to
particular sensitivities in V(R) to the orientation of the source. For example,
D ¼ d$n, so V(R) varies as the cosine of the angle between the source’s
dipole moment d and the orientation n of the observation position R.
Textbooks in electromagnetism develop these points in detail. If the source
is neutral, then it is easy to show that d is an intrinsic property of the charge
distribution, i.e., it is independent of the origin of the coordinate system in
which it is deﬁned. If the charge distribution consists of two equal and
234
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

opposite charges, then d is the product of the positive charge times the
vector from the negative to the positive charge.
How does this compare with the same exercise in Newtonian gravity
Vg(R)? Clearly the arithmetic details are the same with the replacement
ea / ma. This replacement leads to two important, and perhaps surprising,
differences. First, the strength of the R1 term in the expansion of Vg(R) is
the total mass of the distribution, M ¼ P
a
ma. Unlike electrostatics where
bulk matter is often neutral Q ¼ P
a
ea ¼ 0 and the R1 term is absent, in
gravity the R1 term is always present. Since each ma is positive, there is no
“screening” in gravity. Furthermore, we can always choose the origin of the
coordinate system at the center of mass of the distribution, so the dipole
term vanishes identically, rcm ¼ P
a
marðaÞ ¼ 0. If there were no external
forces on the collection of masses, then if the center of mass were initially at
rest at rcm ¼ P
a
marðaÞ ¼ 0; it stays at rest at rcm ¼ 0 forever. This means
that the dipole term vanishes, and the ﬁrst correction to the M
R term in the
potential is the quadrupole term Qð2Þ
R3 . It is the quadrupole moments of mass
distributions that determine tidal forces in planetary systems and the
gravitational radiation emitted from binary neutron star systems, as we shall
soon see.
The differences between electromagnetism and gravity do not end here.
Now let us think about how one might observe a traveling electromagnetic
wave and contrast that to how one could detect a traveling gravity wave. In
the electromagnetic case, we have the Lorentz force law F ¼ dp/dt ¼
e(E þ u  B). If the charged particle is at rest in frame S, one could observe
a traveling E and B wave by observing the resulting force, a change in the
particle’s momentum. No subtlety here. Traveling electromagnetic waves
induce electric currents in circuits, etc.
Now consider the same situation in the case of gravity in a curved space.
How could we use the kinematic state of an isolated point particle to detect
a passing gravity wave? A gravity wave cannot be detected locally! Such a
possibility would violate the equivalence principle! To understand this,
recall that in a local region all the effects of gravity can be transformed
awaydwe can jump into a local inertial reference frame, and the effects of
gravity disappear. Therefore, the gravity wave cannot be detected by
observing what is happening in a strictly local region, in particular, by
observing one isolated particle. This means that a single isolated particle
does not change its position relative to the free-falling coordinate labels
(t, x, y, z). Subtle! We shall see this principle expressed in the equations
Introduction to General Relativity
235

of motion of point masses in general relativity in Chapter 12, and especially
in Appendix G, Section 3.
So, we can only detect gravity waves by recording their inﬂuence on two
or more separated test particles! We have already seen in Section 3 above
that tidal forces are caused by the spatial variations in gravitational poten-
tials. In Chapter 12, we will see that oscillating quadrupole moments of
mass distributions produce gravity waves. The gravity waves inﬂuence
matter through tidal forcesdthe characteristic stretching and squeezing
illustrated earlier. A gravity wave detector must consist of freely falling
masses over extended regions of spaceetime.
In Chapter 12, we will learn that there are two characteristic quadrupole
moments of a mass distribution whose oscillations can produce propagating
gravitational waves. One is the þ polarization, which is a “breathing” mode
in which “stretching” in one direction is coordinated with “compression”
in the perpendicular direction as shown in Fig. 11.21. The second polari-
zation, the  polarization, has the same characteristics but is rotated by 45
degrees. We have seen these patterns in our discussions of tidal forces and
will see them again when we study gravitational waves in Chapter 12.
Compare this to the dominant radiation patterns in electromagnetism.
Oscillating dipole moments of charge distributions produce the strongest
radiation: linearly polarized traveling electric and magnetic waves. The two
Figure 11.21 The þ polarization of a quadrupole moment. This is a “breathing” mode
as shown at two times, one on the left side and the second on the right side of the
ﬁgure. There is “stretching” in one direction, which is coordinated with “compression”
in the perpendicular direction.
236
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

independent linear polarization states are oriented at 90 degrees. Such
waves carry considerable energy, which we have calculated in problem sets
using the Larmor formula. Although a pointlike local energy density of
gravity is inconsistent with the equivalence principle, gravity waves carry
energy and momentum that can be expressed using the spaceetime
derivatives of the traveling gravitational wave. In fact, when black holes
collide and merge, a great deal of mass is converted to energy and that
energy is radiated away. The ﬁrst such astronomical event observed in 2015
by the gravity wave detector “Advanced LIGO” converted three solar
masses into gravitational wave energy. In the vicinity of the Earth, the
gravity wave, which originated more than 1 billion light years away, had a
tiny amplitude, which could be treated as a slight perturbation on the local
Minkowski metric.
These remarks remind us of another important difference between
electromagnetism and gravity. How are the detectors of electromagnetic
and gravitational radiation different? Typical detectors of light respond to
light’s intensity, which is proportional to the square of its amplitude. The
intensity of light typically decreases as the square of the distance from the
source of the radiation. However, the situation in gravity is different.
Detectors of gravity waves measure the amplitude of the wave, which
typically decreases as the inverse of the distance to the source. We will see
this explicitly in the sections of Chapter 12, which focus on LIGO. This fact
is critical in the observational science of gravitational waves since events that
produce copious gravitational waves are rare and gravitational effects are so
intrinsically weak.
All these ideas will be expanded on in Chapter 12 where these and other
aspects of gravity and gravitational waves will be derived and discussed.
11.9 MAKING THE MOST OUT OF TIME
Let us take a brief interlude from our serious studies and illustrate some
features of general relativity and the gravitational redshift in an unusual
setting. The gravitational redshift means that clocks run quickly in high
gravitational potentials, and they run slowly in low gravitational potentials.
Suppose there is a colony of tough but gentle space creatures, called
Scruffs, who live in a region of the universe where the gravitational
potential varies rapidly in space. The Scruffs, who live in nuclear family
units, are able to arrange their environment to their needs. In fact, they use
the gravitational potential to control time for their day-to-day convenience.
Introduction to General Relativity
237

For example, each family of Scruffs has a room in its house where the
gravitational potential is very negative. Scruffs call this room “time out,”
and whenever their baby boy is naughty, they give him a “time out” by
putting him unceremoniously into this dreaded place. When the baby is put
into “time out,” all his actions slow down and are much more tolerable.
Even the baby’s whining is now heard at a lower, more tolerable frequency.
This is a parent’s dream come true!
The tricks do not end here. In the attic, each family has a “play room”
where the gravitational potential is very high. Scruff teenage daughter, who
is always behind on her homework, jumps into this “play room” when she
needs extra time to ﬁnish her physics homework before its due date. Her
father uses the room when he needs extra time to complete a project for his
pushy boss.
Actually, life in a Scruff house can be quite stressful. Because there are
regions where the gravitational potential varies rapidly in space, Scruffs
experience strong forces as they move about. For example, as they put their
noisy son into “time out,” the gravitational potential varies rapidly across his
body, pulling one side much more than the other. (These effects are called
tidal forces and are similar to, but highly magniﬁed compared with, the
forces the Moon exerts on Earth. These tidal forcesdthe fact that the
Moon pulls the side of Earth nearest to it more than the side further from
itdﬂatten Earth slightly and cause high and low tides, a familiar effect that
was ﬁrst calculated by Isaac Newton.) Luckily, the Scruffs have evolved into
tough little beings who can withstand these stretching and compressing
forces. Even their pets take advantage of their environment. The family Jat,
a long and lazy creature, naps with its head in the “play room,” so it can
have a relatively long snooze, while its belly is in “time out” so it can savor
its lunch. The only problem with the Jat is that no one can tell how old it is,
because from the Scruffs’ perspective, its various parts are aging at alarm-
ingly different rates!
PROBLEMS
11-1. A sodium lamp emits light in its rest frame with a wavelength of
5890 Å. If the lamp is placed on a turntable and is rotating at a speed
of 0.2c, what wavelength would an observer ﬁxed at the center of
the turntable measure?
11-2. Calculate the gravitational redshift for a spectral line emitted at rest
on the surface of the Sun and subsequently detected on Earth.
238
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

11-3. Identical atomic clocks are placed on two Boeing 747s that circle the
globe at the equator, one traveling west and the other traveling east.
The planes ﬂy at an altitude of 10 km and at a speed of 0.24 km/s.
After their trips around the world, the clocks are compared with one
another as well as with a clock that remained behind at the airport.
(The rotational speed of the surface of Earth is approximately
0.5 km/s.)
a. What are the differences in the readings of the three clocks
predicted by special relativity?
b. What are the differences in the readings of the three clocks
predicted by the gravitational redshift?
c. Combine the results of parts (a) and (b) to ﬁnd the actual
differences in the clocks’ readings.
11-4. Let us compare the strength of static gravitational forces to electro-
static forces.
Suppose we have an electron and a proton at rest in the lab.
Calculate the ratio of the electrostatic and the gravitational forces
between them. Evaluate the ratio numerically and comment on it.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Rindler, Essential Relativity, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
[2] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1962.
[3] R.V. Pound, G.A. Rebka Jr., Apparent weight of photons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 (1960)
337. R.V. Pound, J.L. Snider, Effect of gravity on gamma radiation, Physics Rev. B140,
788(1965).
[4] O.R. Frisch, Time and relativity, Contemp. Phys. 3 (1961) 16, 3, 194(1962).
[5] R. Adler, M. Bazin, M. Schiffer, Introduction to General Relativity, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1965.
Introduction to General Relativity
239

CHAPTER 12
Curvature, Strong Gravity,
and Gravitational Waves
Contents
12.1 A Look at Curved Surfaces: A First Step to the Mathematics of General
Relativity
241
12.2 The Equation of Motion of Particles in Curved SpaceeTime
262
12.3 Covariant Derivatives and Covariant Vector Fields
270
12.4 The Equivalence Principle, Metric Compatibility, and Christoffel Symbols
271
12.5 The Curvature of SpaceeTime
273
12.6 From Newton’s Gravity to Relativistic Weak Gravity to Strong Gravity
277
12.7 The Schwarzschild Metric and Black Hole
285
12.8 The Schwarzschild Black Hole
289
12.9 Circular Orbital Motion in the Schwarzschild Metric
296
12.10 The Speed of Light in a Gravitational Field
300
12.11 Relativistic Tidal Forces
303
12.12 The Discovery of Gravitational Waves
306
12.13 Gravitational Radiation
308
12.14 Contrasting Special and General Relativity: The Cosmological Constant and
Dark Energy
315
Problems
320
References
341
12.1 A LOOK AT CURVED SURFACES: A FIRST STEP
TO THE MATHEMATICS OF GENERAL RELATIVITY
The language of general relativity is differential geometry, Riemannian
geometry, in fact. Geodesic paths in spaceetimes with intrinsic curvature
are the central concepts. Let us begin by considering these ideas for surfaces
embedded in three-dimensional Euclidean space and later turn to their roles
in general relativity and modern theoretical physics.
Everyone knows how to set up Cartesian coordinates in a ﬂat three-
dimensional Euclidean space, as shown in Fig. 12.1.
Now consider two points, P1 and P2, which are very close: one at
(x, y, z) and the second at (x þ dx, y þ dy, z þ dz). The vector between
the points is written as dr ¼ i dx þ j dy þ k dz. The length squared of this
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity
ISBN 978-0-12-813720-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813720-8.00012-X
© 2018 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
241

inﬁnitesimal vector is given by the dot product of the vector with itself,
and using the fact that the unit vectors i, j, and k are mutually orthogonal
we have
dr2 ¼ dx2 þ dy2 þ dz2;
which reproduces the Pythagorean theorem. This sort of space, called a
metric space because it has a notion of distance, is Euclidean because the
Pythagorean theorem holds. It is also called ﬂat.
We can write the metric dr2 in any convenient coordinate system. For
example, in the cylindrical coordinates discussed and illustrated in Section
11.2, the metric reads
dr2 ¼ dr2 þ r2d42 þ dz2.
This expression is more complicated than the expression for the metric in
Cartesian coordinates, but the underlying geometry is the same old
three-dimensional, ﬂat Euclidean space. The point is that in differential
geometry you must look beyond the appearances of the formulas to
uncover intrinsic aspects of the space or surface you are studying. Do not
be fooled by how expressions are parameterized. The emphasis in modern
differential geometry is on intrinsic aspects of spaces and the relations
between them. Modern notation, which we do not use here, avoids
coordinates much more than classical approaches and just manipulates
mathematical objects with intrinsic geometric signiﬁcance.
One such quantity in three-dimensional space is the length dr2 between
two points. In the context of relativity, the invariant interval that establishes
Figure 12.1 Cartesian coordinates and basis vectors for a three-dimensional Euclidean
space.
242
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the metric is such a quantity in our spaceetime world of four-dimensional
Minkowski diagrams. For special relativity, the invariant interval reads
ds2 ¼ c2dt2  dx2  dy2  dz2
(12.1)
It is important because of its invariance propertiesdit is the same in all
inertial frames. As we have seen, we can use the metric to derive time dila-
tion, Lorentz contraction, and the Lorentz transformation laws. So, the
invariance of ds2 characterizes relativity in a very crisp fashion. Because
most of us are particularly familiar with the Euclidean metric, which is
always positive, it takes some care to call ds2 a metric as well. For example,
two spaceetime events that are connected by a light ray have ds2 ¼ 0, as we
have discussed and illustrated before in Minkowski diagrams. If events are
simultaneous but spatially separated in one frame, then their interval is
negative and can be interpreted as the negative of a proper length. If, how-
ever, the two events are separated in time but occur at the same spatial
point, their interval is positive and can be interpreted as a proper time.
It is instructive to consider curved surfaces embedded in three-
dimensional Euclidean space. Consider the surface shown in Fig. 12.2,
the two-dimensional coordinate mesh on the surface (u1, u2), and the
tangent vectors (e1, e2). The vector between two nearby points on the
surface can be written dr ¼ du1e1 þ du2e2, where du1 and du2 represent
the coordinate mesh differences along the coordinate directions (e1, e2) on
the surface (the superscripts on du1 and du2 denote directions, not algebraic
Figure 12.2 A coordinate mesh on a two-dimensional surface. e1 points along the
lines of constant u2 and e2 points along the lines of constant u1.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
243

powers) and e1 ¼ vr/vu1 and e2 ¼ vr/vu2. The distance between the
points is
dr2 ¼
X
ij
ei$ej duiduj;
where the sum over the indices runs over i ¼ 1, 2 and j ¼ 1, 2. It is
conventional to call the collection of dot products of the tangent vectors,
e1 and e2, the metric tensor, gij ¼ ei$ej. Note that because dr is conﬁned
to a curved surface where the tangent vectors e1 and e2 may not be orthog-
onal, the expression for dr2 has a cross term 2e1$e2 du1 du2. The angle
between the tangent vectors and their lengths will change as we move
around the surface. dr2 has physical signiﬁcance while (u1, u2) is just a
convenient coordinate mesh.
It is clear that there is enormous freedom in choosing coordinate patches
on a smooth surface. How do we distinguish between the intrinsic prop-
erties of the surface and the properties of the coordinate mesh? This was the
question posed by Carl Fredrich Gauss, the great mathematician who was
one of the pioneers of the ﬁeld. He asked the question: Is it possible to tell if
a space or surface is Euclidean or is curved just from measurements within
it, intrinsic measurements? Gauss answered the question yes and gave a
deﬁnition of curvature that produces the same result no matter what local
coordinates we use on the surface. We shall focus on Gaussian curvature
below.
Take a familiar exampleda sphere. This surface has constant positive
curvature. What do we mean by that? Instead of giving a formal answer
here, let us contrast the features of the sphere to a ﬂat two-dimensional
space such as a plane (e.g., a piece of paper). If we have two points on a
plane, the curve of shortest distance between them is a straight line. On the
sphere, a curve of shortest distance is a great circle, called a geodesic, familiar
from air travel around Earth. Using these geodesics, we can then form
closed paths and compare their properties to familiar constructions on the
plane. For example, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle drawn on a
plane is 180 degrees. If we make the same construction on the sphere using
its geodesics, great circles, we ﬁnd that the “deﬁcit angle,” the difference of
the sum of the interior angles and 180 degrees, is positive. The deﬁcit angle
can be used as a deﬁnition of intrinsic curvature, as we will learn below
when the GausseBonnet theorem is introduced. Gauss liked this idea so
much that he applied it to the space in which we live. He assumed that light
travels on geodesics in our world (good!), and he used three mountains near
244
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

him as vertices of his geodesic triangle. He found that the sum of the
interior angles was 180 degrees to good accuracy, so he concluded that
space in the vicinity of Earth is well approximated by Euclidean space.
A quantitative way of deﬁning curvature is to consider a circle on the
surface of interest and make it small, with a geodesic radius of distance a.
Now measure the circumference, C. If a and C are related by a factor of 2p,
then the surface is ﬂat. If the circumference is less than that, the surface has a
positive curvature. And if the circumference is greater than that, the surface
has a negative curvature. Let us do this exercise using the sphere shown in
Fig. 12.3.
The circumference of the circle shown is C ¼ 2pR sin(a/R), where R is
the radius of the sphere. Now deﬁne the Gaussian curvature to be
proportional to the difference between 2pa and C,
K ¼ 3
p lim
a/0
2pa  C
a3

.
(12.2)
Using the formula for the circumference and letting a be small so one can
expand the sine, sin x ¼ x  x3/6 . when x  1, one computes K ¼ 1/R2,
which further motivates this deﬁnition. The result K ¼ 1/R2 shows that
small spheres have more curvature than large ones (very reasonable). Clearly
in the case of the sphere, the curvature does not change as we move around
the surface, but other surfaces can have a nontrivial function K(u1, u2). The
student should check that a surface in the shape of a saddle has a negative
Figure 12.3 Coordinates labeling the surface of a sphere of radius R.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
245

curvature and that a cylinder, which can be cut in the direction along its
axis and laid ﬂat on a plane, has a vanishing curvature.
Another procedure to measure the intrinsic curvature of a surface is to
calculate the rate at which its geodesics converge or diverge. In ﬂat
Euclidean space, geodesics are straight lines which, if they are initially
parallel, remain parallel forever, and straight lines that intersect diverge at a
linear rate. On the surface of a sphere, geodesics are great circles. In
Fig. 12.4 we show two great circles. Notice that they are parallel at the
equator but intersect at the North and South Poles. The rate at which they
converge can be computed using the geometry shown in the ﬁgure. The
distance between the geodesics at polar angle q is,
ε ¼ 4R sin s
R
where 4 is the opening angle between the two great circles at the North
Pole and the arc length s parameterizes the curves. Note that ε satisﬁes
the “equation of motion,”
d2ε
ds2 ¼ Kε
(12.3)
where K is the Gaussian curvature, K ¼ 1/R2. At the equator, q ¼ p/2, the
tangents to the great circles are parallel. Nonetheless, the “acceleration”
d2ε=ds2 < 0 there and the geodesics head toward one another and intersect
at the South Pole.
Figure 12.4 Two great circles on a sphere of radius R.
246
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

If we made the same construction in ﬂat space and considered two
straight lines that intersected at point P with an opening angle 4, then
d2ε=ds2 ¼ 0, and we infer that K ¼ 0, as shown in part a. of Fig. 12.5.
Similarly, if we considered two intersecting geodesics on a saddle we would
compute d2ε=ds2 > 0 corresponding to K < 0 and the curves would
diverge as shown in part B. of Fig. 12.5.
We will discuss much more about all this below. Eq. (12.3) will be
derived in more generality after ideas such as geodesic coordinate meshes
have been introduced in a discussion of curves and surfaces in three
dimensions. The general relativistic analogue of ε will appear when we
discuss the equation of motion of the “geodesic deviation,” tidal forces, and
gravitational waves. In a higher dimensional curved space where the
curvature varies from point to point, K will be replaced by the Riemann
curvature tensor.
Now let us present some elements of classical differential geometry. We
will consider curves and surfaces embedded in three-dimensional Euclidean
space. Our objectives include the development of an intuition into the
major concepts of classical differential geometry such as metrics, tangent
spaces, and intrinsic properties of curves and surfaces such as tangential
curvature and Gaussian curvature. We will see that tangent spaces (planes in
our illustrations) play the role of freely falling, locally inertial reference
frames of general relativity. Our later discussions of general relativity will
not use embedding spaces but the discussion here will help us visualize
surfaces and tangent spaces and help us gain a perspective on the more
abstract concepts in four-dimensional curved spaceetime.
Figure 12.5 Distance between geodesics, ε; on a surface of vanishing curvature, part
(A), and a surface of negative curvature, part (B).
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
247

Consider a curve in three-dimensional Euclidean space [1]. We label
points along the curve by their arc length, a scalar parameter s, x ¼ x(s).
The curve has a tangent vector at any point along it, t ¼ dx/ds h x0, where
the “prime” indicates differentiation with respect to s. The tangent vectors
have unit length, t$t ¼ 1. If we differentiate this constraint with respect to
the arc length, we ﬁnd t$t0 ¼ 0 where t0 ¼ dt/ds ¼ d2x/ds2. So, t0 is
perpendicular to the curve, t, point by point along the curve. If we
introduce a unit vector bn in the direction of t0, we can deﬁne the curve’s
curvature kC,
d2x=ds2 ¼ t0 ¼ kCbn
(12.4)
so k2
C ¼ t0$t0. One deﬁnes R ¼ k1
C and refers to R as the radius of curvature
of the curve at P. Further analysis shows that the magnitude of R is the radius
of the circle passing through three consecutive points along the curve. It is
instructive to illustrate these concepts for a spiral winding around the z-
axis, for example. See the problem set and later discussions for additional ex-
amples. The simplest illustration is a circle of radius R in the x-y plane. Let s be
the arc length as shown in Fig. 12.6. Then the position of a point on the circle
is x ¼ ðx; yÞ ¼

R sin s
R; R cos s
R

and d2x=ds2 ¼ 1
R

 sin s
R; cos s
R

¼ 1
R bn
and we identify kC ¼ 1/R.
Now consider a surface embedded in a three-dimensional Euclidean
space. We put a coordinate mesh (u, v) on the surface and locate a point on
Figure 12.6 A circle in two dimensions illustrating the curvature kC ¼ 1/R.
248
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the surface with Cartesian coordinates, xi ¼ xi(u, v). The surface of a sphere
of radius R parameterized by spherical coordinates (q, 4) is a familiar
example,
x ¼ x1 ¼ R sin q cos 4;
y ¼ x2 ¼ R sin q sin 4;
z ¼ x3 ¼ R cos q
as shown in Fig. 12.7.
Now return to our general discussion and consider a coordinate mesh as
shown in Fig. 12.8. Note that at the point P the vector vx/vu h xu is
tangent to the curve v ¼ constant, and vx/vv h xv is tangent to the curve
Figure 12.7 Spherical coordinates parameterizing the surface of a sphere of radius R.
Figure 12.8 A coordinate mesh on a two-dimensional surface showing the vectors
vx/vu h xu and vx/vv h xv that span the tangent space at point P and the normal N to
the surface.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
249

u ¼ constant. The mesh is an adequate parametrization of the surface if
xu and xv do not vanish and have different directions. As shown in the
ﬁgure, the cross product xu  xv is a natural normal vector to the surface at P.
We will want to transform this description of the surface to another
curvilinear coordinate system,
u ¼ uðu; vÞ
v ¼ vðu; vÞ
so x ¼ xðu; vÞ. The new tangent vectors, xu and xv, can be calculated in
terms of the original tangent vectors xu and xv using the chain rule,
xu ¼ xu
vu
vu þ xv
vv
vu;
xv ¼ xu
vu
vv þ xv
vv
vv
One can also calculate the normal vector xu  xv, and ﬁnd,
xu  xv ¼ vðu; vÞ
vðu; vÞ xu  xv
So, the new normal vector points in the same direction as the original, as
must be the case, but its relative normalization is changed by a factor of,
vðu; vÞ
vðu; vÞ h det

vu
vu
vv
vu
vu
vv
vv
vv

s0
which is the Jacobian of the transformation. This determinant must be
nonzero for an adequate parametrization of the surface.
The metric on the surface will be the source of the intrinsic properties of
the surface that we are most interested in. We start by considering a curve
on the surface written in parametric form,
C:
u ¼ uðtÞ;
v ¼ vðtÞ
Then dx/dt is tangent to the curve and, therefore, to the surface. It can be
written in terms of the coordinate mesh,
dx
dt ¼ xu
du
dt þ xv
dv
dt
or in a form independent of the parameter t,
dx ¼ xudu þ xvdv
The distance element is then,
ds2 ¼ dx$dx ¼
X
i
dxidxi ¼ guudu2 þ 2guvdudv þ gvvdv2
(12.5a)
250
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

where
guu ¼ xu$xu;
guv ¼ xu$xv;
gvv ¼ xv$xv
(12.5b)
provides the metric in the notation of classic differential geometry. ds2 is
called the “ﬁrst fundamental form.” The metric satisﬁes positivity in the
form,
detðgÞ ¼ det

guu
guv
guv
gvv
 > 0
which follows from the positivity of,
ðxu  xvÞ$ðxu  xvÞ ¼ ðxu$xuÞðxv$xvÞ  ðxu$xvÞ2 ¼ detðgÞ > 0
where we applied the vector identity, (a  b)$(c  d) ¼ (a$c) (b$d)  (a$d)
(b$c). Vector identities and properties of cross products are reviewed in
Appendix D.
The tangent plane at the point x is given by,
X ¼ x þ lxu þ hxv
where l and h are scalar parameters. The unit normal to the surface at x is,
bN ¼ xu  xv
jxu  xvj ¼ xu  xv
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
detðgÞ
p
(12.6)
as shown in Fig. 12.8.
The determinant of the metric also ﬁgures in the area of a surface patch,
A ¼
ZZ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
detðgÞ
p
dudv
(12.7)
This formula follows from the observation that the area patch dA on the
surface is given by the area of the parallelogram bounded by the vectors
xudu and xvdv, so dA ¼ jxudu  xvdvj ¼ jxu  xvjdudv ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
detðgÞ
p
dudv.
The second fundamental form of differential geometry focuses on the
surface’s curvature. It is obtained by considering the curvature of a curve C
constrained to the surface and passing through the point P on the surface.
Following our earlier discussion of curves is three dimensions, we
decompose the curve’s curvature vector dt/ds into a component normal to
the surface and a component lying in the tangent plane,
dt=ds ¼ kn þ kg ¼ k bN þ kg
(12.8)
where we introduced a curvature parameter k. The curve inherits this
component of curvature from its embedding on the surface. The vector
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
251

kg is called the tangential curvature vector. It can be written as a coefﬁcient,
the tangential curvature kg, times a unit vector bu in the tangent plane.
kg ¼ kgbu is also perpendicular to the curve’s tangent t, in light of the dis-
cussion preceding Eq. (12.4). The direction of bu is chosen by convention
so that the sense t/bu is the same as xu / xv.
Since bN$t ¼ 0, we have by differentiation along the curve parame-
terized by its arc length s that d
ds

bN$t
	
¼ 0; so,
dt
ds$ bN ¼ k ¼ t$d bN
ds ¼ dx
ds$d bN
ds ¼ dx$d bN
dx$dx
(12.9)
The numerator,
dx$d bN ¼ ðxudu þ xvdvÞ$

bN udu þ bN vdv
	
¼ buudu2 þ 2buvdudv þ bvvdv2
(12.10a)
where,
buu ¼ xu$ bN u;
2buv ¼ 

xu$ bN v þ xv$ bN u
	
;
bvv ¼ xv$ bN v
(12.10b)
is the “second fundamental form” of the surface. So, the curvature k can be
written as the ratio of the two fundamental forms,
k ¼ dx$d bN
dx$dx ¼ buudu2 þ 2buvdudv þ bvvdv2
guudu2 þ 2guvdudv þ gvvdv2
(12.11)
The curvature k depends on the direction the curve C(t) takes through
the point P. To calculate k as a function of this direction, it is advantageous
to cast k as the solution of a generalized eigenvalue problem: In Eq. (12.11)
multiply through by the ﬁrst fundamental form and use index notation of
ui, i ¼ 1, 2 instead of u and v,
X
ij
ðbij  kgijÞduiduj ¼ 0
where,
bij ¼
 buu
buv
buv
bvv

;
gij ¼
 guu
guv
guv
gvv

252
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

We can recast this problem as a conventional eigenvalue problem by multi-
plying through by the inverse of gij, (g1)ij h gij,
X
j
gijgjk ¼ di
k
Recall from Appendix C that it is easy to ﬁnd the inverse of a 2  2
symmetric matrix,
gij ¼
1
detðgÞ
 gvv
guv
guv
guu

Note also that det(gij) ¼ 1/det(gij) as the reader can check from this formula
for gij.
Next, call ka and vi
ðaÞ the eigenvalue and associated eigenvector
(direction) for a ¼ 1, 2,
X
j
ðbij  kagijÞv j
ðaÞ ¼ 0
Multiply through by gki,
X
ij
gkiðbij  kagijÞv j
ðaÞ ¼ 0
X
j

bk
j  kadk
j
	
v j
ðaÞ ¼ 0
where we have been careful with raising indices using gki and have distin-
guished between covariant and contravariant indices, as introduced in
Section 6.5. We learn from this last equation that ka for a ¼ 1, 2 are the
eigenvalues of the matrix bk
j . In the basis v j
ðaÞ, the matrix bk
j is diagonalized,
bk
j ¼
 k1
0
0
k2

So, det

bk
j
	
¼ k1k2. The eigenvectors v j
ðaÞ are called the “directions of
principal curvature” and ka are called the “principal curvatures,” and the
two eigenvectors v j
ðaÞ comprise an orthogonal basis. The product k1k2
deﬁnes the Gaussian curvature of the surface,
K ¼ k1k2 ¼ det

bk
j
	
¼ det

gkibij

¼ det

gki
detðbijÞ ¼ detðbÞ
detðgÞ
¼ buubvv  b2
uv
guugvv  g2
uv
(12.12)
which will prove to be a useful formula.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
253

Additional analysis shows that K can actually be written just in terms of
the ﬁrst fundamental form and its derivatives with respect to u and v. The
proof uses the fact that the second fundamental form is dx$d bN and bN
can be written in terms of vectors lying in the tangent plane,
bN ¼ ðxu  xvÞ=detðgÞ. Problem (12.3) leads one through the algebra and
culminates with a very useful and famous formula for the curvature K in
terms of the components of the metric and its derivatives. We will see that
this is a very important conceptual point in the ﬁeld!
Gauss was led to the curvature K because he was interested in ﬁnding
intrinsic properties of surfaces. Gauss’ pioneering research was guided by a
deep and intuitive understanding of geometry. Gauss showed that K was a
“bending invariant”: it is unchanged by deformations of the surface that do
not involve stretching, shrinking, or tearing. Bending leaves the distance
between points on the surface unchanged and also leaves the direction
between two tangent directions at a point unchanged. One can show that
another bending invariant is the tangential curvature kg [1]. Gauss’ proof was,
in fact, very similar in spirit to the modern approaches we usually associate
with later mathematicians such as Riemann, one of Gauss’ doctoral students.
All the concepts of geodesics, Christoffel symbols, and curvature tensors
appear in Gauss’ work, hidden somewhat by outdated notation. All these
topics will reappear when we develop Einstein’s ﬁeld equation for general
relativity because intrinsic curvature of spaceetime is the central concept of
the theory: masseenergy creates intrinsic curvature in spaceetime!
Let us continue our discussion of classical differential geometry by
introducing the ideas of geodesic curves, derive Eq. (12.2), which provides
the geometric interpretation of curvature and ﬁnally present the Gausse
Bonnet theorem.
By deﬁnition geodesic curves on the surface are those that have kg ¼ 0.
This means that the geodesic’s curvature vector is everywhere normal to the
surface. In this sense, a geodesic on the surface is “as straight” as possible.
There is a geodesic pointing in every tangent direction at any point of a
surface, a fact which will follow from the differential equation for geodesic
curves that we will derive in the next section of this chapter. Consider the
example of “great circles” on a sphere. Starting from the North Pole, it is
clear that there is a great circle heading in every direction. These are the
lines of constant longitude on a spherical globe of the world. Using this
property we can set up geodesic coordinates. They prove to be very
convenient in theory and applications. Consider a curve C0 and the family
of geodesics that are perpendicular to C0 as shown in Fig. 12.9. Denote
254
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

geodesics as the curves v ¼ constant. Then the curves u ¼ constant and
v ¼ constant are chosen mutually orthogonal so the metric is diagonal,
ds2 ¼ guudu2 þ gvvdv2
This expression can be simpliﬁed further by deﬁning w ¼ R w
0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
guu
p
du, so
ds2 ¼ dw2 þ gvvdv2
So, if a point moves along a geodesic the distance, arc length, along it is just
w, s ¼
R w2
w1 dw ¼ w2  w1, which means that the segments on all the geode-
sics v ¼ constant included between two orthogonal trajectories are equal.
The converse is also true. This leads to the term “geodesic parallels.”
This
metric
is
a
generalization
of
plane
polar
coordinates
in
two-dimensional Euclidean space, ds2 ¼ dr2 þ r2d42. In our case r2 / g44
and v / 4, so we write on the curved surface ds2 ¼ dr2 þ g44d42.
Let us get a better understanding of the curvature of the surface by
concentrating on a small patch around a point P which we label with r ¼ 0.
The Gaussian curvature for this simple metric ds2 ¼ dr2 þ g44d42 is just (see
the Problem 12.3),
K ¼  1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
v2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
vr2
(12.13)
Let us expand
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
around point P labeled r ¼ 0,
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
¼ r þ a2r2 þ a3r3 þ .
(12.14)
Figure 12.9 Geodesic coordinate mesh on a two-dimensional surface. The curves
u ¼ constant and v ¼ constant are chosen mutually orthogonal.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
255

where we are ﬁtting our curved surface to ﬂat space ds2 ¼ dr2 þ r2d42 with
curvature corrections parameterized by the coefﬁcients a2, a3, etc. Substitut-
ing Eq. (12.14) into Eq. (12.13),
v2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
vr2
¼ K
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
2a2 þ 6a3r þ . ¼ Kðr þ .Þ
Matching coefﬁcients of r, we learn that a2 ¼ 0 and a3 ¼ 1
6 K,
ds2 ¼ dr2 þ r2

1  1
3 Kr2

d42
(12.15)
where we squared
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
and found g44 ¼ r2  1
3 Kr4 þ .. Eq. (12.15)
shows the inﬂuence of the curvature on length measurements near r ¼ 0.
Consider a circumference curve C having constant r by letting 4 range
from 0 to 2p. Then C ¼ length of the circumference, shown in
Fig. 12.10, is given by,
C ¼
Z 2p
0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
d4 ¼
Z 2p
0

r  1
6 Kr3

d4 ¼ 2pr  p
3 Kr3
and we see that the presence of K in this formula corrects the
circumferenceeradius relation, C ¼ 2pr, of Euclidean geometry,
K ¼ 3
p lim
r/0
2pr  C
r3

which reproduces Eq. (12.2).
Figure 12.10 The circumference C of a curve at geodesic distance r from a point O on
a two-dimensional surface.
256
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

We can also do this exercise for small patches of areas near r ¼ 0, using
Eq. (12.7),
A ¼
Z r
0
Z 2p
0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g44
p
drd4
and ﬁnd,
K ¼ 12
p lim
r/0
pr2  A
r4

Historians of mathematics believe that these expressions were the
guiding lights behind Gauss’ great inventions that established the ﬁeld of
differential geometry.
We end this discussion with an integral relation between the curvature
kg of curves and the curvature K of surfaces. It is the GausseBonnet the-
orem [1]. In its simplest form we consider a smooth, simply connected
region R on the surface, which is bounded by a smooth curve C as shown
in Fig. 12.11. Then the GausseBonnet theorem reads,
I
kgds þ

ZZ
KdA ¼ 2p
(12.16)
This wonderful result indicates that we can measure the surface curvature
inside a region by integrating the curvature of the curve C that bounds
it. We will see that it also relates local properties of a surface to its global
topological character.
Consider a simple illustration of the GausseBonnet theorem. Imagine a
spherical cap S as show in Fig. 12.12. The circular curve C on the sphere is at
Figure 12.11 A smooth simply connected region R on a surface that is bounded by a
smooth curve C.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
257

an azimuthal angle q. The “cap” of the sphere is labeled “S” in the ﬁguredit
is the surface of the sphere north of the curve C. Note that the area of the cap
S
is A ¼
R q
0
R 2p
0 R dq R sin qdf ¼ 2pR2 R q
0 sin q dq ¼ 2pR2ð1  cos qÞ.
So,
the
surface
curvature
term
in
the
GausseBonnet
theorem
is
%KdA ¼ 1
R2 %dA ¼ 2pð1  cos qÞ. The line integral of the tangential cur-
vature can be computed by ﬁrst noting that the curvature kC of C is the
reciprocal of its radius, 1/(R sin q). To calculate kg we must project
the curvature vector of magnitude kC onto the tangent plane. Noting the
orientation of the tangent plane in the ﬁgure and that the curvature vector of
C lies along the radius R sin q, we ﬁnd kg ¼ cos q/(R sin q). So, the line
integral
is
H kg ds ¼
cos q
R sin q ð2pR sin qÞ ¼ 2p cos q.
Collecting
terms,
%K dA þ
H
kg ds ¼ 2pð1  cos qÞ þ 2p cos q ¼ 2p,
which
reproduces
Eq. (12.16) perfectly! If we had chosen C to be the equator, which is a great
circle with kg ¼ 0, then %KdA ¼ 1
R2 %dA ¼ 1
R2
1
2$4pR2
¼ 2p, which is a
particularly simple case.
It is useful to consider generalizations of this theorem to curves that are
only piecewise differentiable: let C consist of M arcs of smooth curves
making exterior angles 41, 42, . , 4M at the vertices A1, A2, . , AM
Figure 12.12 The “cap” of the sphere is labeled “S”dit is the surface of the sphere
north of the curve C, which has radius R sin q.
258
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

where the arcs meet as shown in Fig. 12.13. In this case the GausseBonnet
theorem reads,
I
kg ds þ

ZZ
K dA ¼ 2p 
X
M
1
4i
Some special cases of this general result are quite informative. Suppose
that the boundary curve C consists of M geodesic lines so kg ¼ 0. We can
express the answer in terms of interior angles ai instead of the exterior
angles 4i, ai ¼ p  4i, as shown in Fig. 12.13,

ZZ
KdA ¼ 2p 
X
M
1
ðp  aiÞ ¼ 2p  Mp þ
X
M
1
ai
¼
X
M
1
ai  ðM  2Þp
For the case M ¼ 3 we have a geodesic triangle, and the right-hand side of
the GausseBonnet theorem is the excess of the sum of its interior angles
over p radians. For a surface with positive (negative) curvature, we learn
that the sum of the triangle’s interior angles is greater (less) than the sum
of the interior angles in a triangle drawn in ﬂat space. If we apply this the-
orem to a sphere of radius R, we ﬁnd that the area of a spherical triangle
equals the product of its interior angular excess times R2.
Finally, if we apply the GausseBonnet theorem Eq. (12.16) to a surface,
which is topologically equivalent to a sphere, we ﬁnd %KdA ¼ 4p. The
proof is the result of adding the GausseBonnet theorem applied to the
Figure 12.13 Generalization of the GausseBonnet theorem to a curve C, which is only
piecewise differentiable: C consist of M arcs of smooth curves making exterior angles
41, 42, . , 4M.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
259

closed surface cut into two parts as shown in Fig. 12.14. The result shows
that the integral of the Gaussian curvature over the entire surface is both a
bending invariant and a topological invariant as well. The generalization of
this result to a smooth orientable, compact surface having N handles, is that
the right hand side, 4p, is replaced by 4p(1  N ). This connection be-
tween local geometry and global topology was very inﬂuential in the
development of the subject.
The integral curvature %KdA has an appealing intuitive interpretation,
introduced by Gauss. Suppose that the integration region is R and it is
bounded by a curve C. Imagine the surface normals emanating from the
surface within the region R. Translate them to a common origin O pre-
serving their angles, and suppose that they pierce a unit sphere in a region
R1, which is bounded by a curve C1. Then the claim is that the curvature is,
K ¼ lim
DA/0
DAs
DA
(12.17)
where DAs is the area on the unit sphere, which is the image of the area DA
on the original surface. The proof of this relation is interesting. Introduce
coordinates (u, v) on the unit sphere such that a point on the original surface
and its spherical image have the same (u, v). The equation of C1 is
bN ¼ bNðsÞ, where s is the arc length of C. The element of the arc length
of C1 is ds2
1 ¼ d bN$d bN, and the element of area dAS of R1 is, as discussed
after Eq. (12.7),
dAs ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðNu  NvÞ$ðNu  NvÞ
p
dudv
But Nu  Nv ¼ Kxu  xv (see Problem 12.4), so
dAs ¼ jKj
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðxu  xvÞ$ðxu  xvÞ
p
dudv ¼ jKjdA
so the integral (absolute) curvature of a region on the surface equals the area
of is spherical image (Gauss) and Eq. (12.17) follows.
Figure 12.14 Application of the GausseBonnet Theorem to a surface that is topo-
logically equivalent to a sphere.
260
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

It will be interesting to see these concepts again in the context of general
relativity, curved spaceetime in four dimensions. We will see that general
relativity is founded on Riemann’s approach to differential geometry, which
will be introduced along our journey. This is because Riemann’s formulation
only deals with intrinsic properties of the spaces it studies. In this sense its
foundation begins with Gauss’ ﬁnest result in classical differential geometry,
that the Gaussian curvature is an intrinsic feature of two-dimensional surfaces.
The discussion of differential geometry above is meant to provide an intuitive,
visual background to the more abstract but powerful and economical version
pioneered by Riemann, under Gauss’ guidance, and to provide some moti-
vationfor some ofthe constructions underpinningthe more modern approach.
In Riemannian geometry in four-dimensional spaceetime, the math-
ematical constructions will produce four-vectors and tensors. Following our
discussion of special relativity in tensor notation, this will allow us to write
down equations that are truly covariant, i.e., true in every coordinate
system. In special relativity, we constructed laws that were true in all inertial
reference frames, which were related by Lorentz transformations (boosts).
In general relativity, we encompass all frames, both inertial and noninertial.
The Lorentz transformation of special relativity, x
0m ¼ P
s
Lm
sxs; will be
generalized to local coordinate transformations.
There are several reasons for making this ambitious step. First, physical laws
should be independent of the coordinates used to parameterize spaceetime.
This parametrization can vary as we move through spaceetime, so the global
transformations of Lorentz transformations (“global” indicates that the co-
efﬁcients Lm
s are constants, they have no dependence on xs) must be replaced
by local transformations. Another reason is that general relativity is primarily a
theory of gravity, and gravity, as we have already seen in Chapter 11, is
incorporated into the structure of spaceetime. Lying at the center of general
relativity is Einstein’s ﬁeld equation, which states that energyemomentum
density creates local curvature in four-dimensional spaceetime.
The language of general relativity will be that of Riemannian geometry.
Geodesic curves and spaceetime curvature will be central concepts, but we
need to express them in equations that are free of speciﬁc choices of
coordinate systems. This requirement brings four-vectors and tensors to the
foreground. We shall ﬁnd generalizations of geodesic curves, surfaces with
Gaussian curvature and tangent spaces, and the equations will be tensor
generalizations of the illustrations discussed above. Hopefully, those illus-
trations will motivate the intricate tensor equations to come!
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
261

This book sketches the conceptual growth of Newton’s ideas into
Einstein’s ideas of physical laws. These developments were paralleled by
earlier developments in mathematics taking that ﬁeld from classical differ-
ential geometry, whose pinnacle was achieved by Gauss, to the formulation
of modern differential geometry developed by his student, Riemann. Once
Gauss proved his Theorema Egregium, that K is an intrinsic property of a
surface, the challenge was to formulate differential geometry using intrinsic
concepts from the start. This was the theme of Riemann’s thesis. This
mathematical development provided the language needed to formulate
Einstein’s ideas in general relativity and establish general covariance in the
theory step-by-step.
12.2 THE EQUATION OF MOTION OF PARTICLES
IN CURVED SPACEeTIME
Consider a curved space, such as the surface of a sphere or a saddle, etc. The
physics in such a space will involve local differential equations and will be
based on quantities and relationships, which are intrinsic, i.e., independent
of the particular coordinate system used. The coordinate system is, of course,
chosen to be convenient for writing down physical quantities and
relationships. But to ﬁnd and express intrinsic relationships, it helps enor-
mously to use quantities that have simple transformation properties. We
have seen this philosophy at work in special relativity, and it becomes even
more important in general relativity where we want the theory to be
invariant under general coordinate transformations, not just Lorentz trans-
formations that are linear transformations with speciﬁc constant coefﬁcients.
For example, four-vectors were particularly useful in special relativity
because relationships between four-vectors retained their form under
transformations to different frames of reference and invariant quantities
could be constructed by general procedures. For example, we expressed
conservation laws using four-vectors when we considered collisions and
were guaranteed that these relationships were true in all frames of reference
if they were true in one. We could also develop invariants by taking the
“inner” products of four-vectors and derive frame-independent results.
We need to generalize these ideas to curved spaces and will face several
challenges. Some of the procedures done in “ﬂat” Minkowski space where
the invariant interval reads ds2 ¼ dt2  dx2  dy2  dz2 in Cartesian
coordinates will not work in curved space. Others can be generalized to
curved space, but that goal will require new constructions.
262
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

When we transform from one coordinate system designated by (t, x, y, z)
to another (t0, x0, y0, z0), the transformation will depend on the location
involved. We will use more four-vector notation for clarity and generality.
Say that xm transforms into x0m. Suppose we have a scalar function f(x),
where x is short hand for the four-vector xm. Since x and x0 represent the
same point in spaceetime, f(x) ¼ f0(x0). We can differentiate this relation
using the chain rule, which is reviewed in Appendix C,
vfðxÞ
vxi
¼ vf0ðx0ðxÞÞ
vxi
¼
X
k
vf0
vx
0k
vx
0k
vxi
(12.18a)
If we denote Ai ¼ vf
vxi, then Eq. (12.18a) reads,
Ai ¼
X
k
vx
0k
vxi A
0
k
(12.18b)
and a quantity with this transformation law is called a “covariant” vector. In
special relativity the matrix of coefﬁcients vx
0k
vxi were constants, as pointed out
in Chapter 6, but in curved spaces this is not true. This means that if we
take differentials of Eq. (12.18b) we ﬁnd a complicated expression,
dAi ¼
X
k
vx
0k
vxi dA
0
k þ
X
k
A
0
kd
vx
0k
vxi

dAi ¼
X
k
vx
0k
vxi dA
0
k þ
X
k;l
A
0
k
v2x
0k
vxivxl dxl
(12.19)
So, even though Ai(x) is a covariant vector, dAi(x) is not. This is true
because the matrix of coefﬁcients vx
0k
vxi are in general not constants. We learn
that dAi(x) is not a covariant vector because it compares Ai at x with Ai at
x þ dx, and these quantities have different transformation laws.
How do we deal with this problem? We know the answer from our
earlier discussion of locality in ﬁeld theorydit is necessary that the two
vectors to be compared be located at the same point in spaceetime. In other
words, we must “transport” one of the vectors to the point where the
second one is located before we compare them. Let us consider contra-
variant, upper index, vectors ﬁrst. If we used Cartesian coordinates in ﬂat
space, the “transport” will not contribute to dAi. In other words, it will
move the vector parallel to itself. For this reason, the “transport” process is
called “parallel translation.” So, to compare two inﬁnitesimally separated
vectors, one of them must be subjected to parallel transport to the point
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
263

where the second one is located. Consider a vector Ai at x. Then at x þ dx
it is equal to Ai þ dAi. Imagine parallel transporting Ai to x þ dx. Call dAi
the change in the components of Ai. Then the difference DAi between the
two vectors now located at the same point x þ dx is [2],
DAi ¼ dAi  dAi
(12.20)
The form of dAi is easy to write down in general. This inﬁnitesimal differ-
ence will be a sum of terms each one containing a factor of dxk and Ai. We
will call the coefﬁcients Gi
kl and write,
dAi ¼ 
X
k;l
Gi
klAkdxl
(12.21)
The G factors are called Christoffel symbols, famous in classical differential
geometry. We will learn how to calculate them later in this and following
sections. They help us construct a “covariant” derivative D which, when it
acts on a contravariant vector, produces a contravariant vector,
DAi ¼
X
l
 
vAi
vxl þ
X
k
Gi
klAk
!
dxl
(12.22a)
DlAi ¼ vlAi þ
X
k
Gi
klAk
(12.22b)
Eq. (12.22b) will play a critical role as we write expressions in curvilinear
coordinates.
This exercise in differential geometry guides us to the equation of
motion of massive point particles in curvilinear coordinates. Begin with the
observation that we can obtain the equation from that of special relativity
because at each point in our curved spaceetime we can choose a coordinate
system which is freely falling and is described by special relativity with a ﬂat,
constant Minkowski metric. In special relativity in force-free spaceetime, a
particle moves along a straight line at constant velocity, so dum/ds ¼ 0 or
dum ¼ 0 where um ¼ dxm/ds, as discussed in Chapter 8. The differential of
the velocity vanishes. Now express this equation in a general curvilinear
coordinate system. The geometric idea is that the velocity does not change
as the particle moves: so the ordinary differential in the ﬂat coordinate
system becomes the covariant differential in the curvilinear system,
Dum ¼ 0
(12.23)
which reads in explicit terms,
dum þ
X
n;s
Gm
ns undxs ¼ 0
(12.24)
264
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Dividing through by ds,
d2xm
ds2 þ
X
n;s
Gm
ns
dxn
ds
dxs
ds ¼ 0
(12.25)
Since this equation corresponds to a straight line in the locally inertial refer-
ence frame, it is called a “geodesic” line in the curvilinear reference frame.
If we look back at the previous chapter, we see that it resembles Newton’s
second law written in a noninertial frame where the velocity-dependent
centripetal and Coriolis forces appear as “apparent” forces: the term
P
n;s
Gm
ns
dxn
ds
dxs
ds expresses “apparent” forces in four-dimensional curved spacee
time as we shall see in considerable detail below in general arguments, illus-
trations and problems.
Now it is an easy and interesting exercise to write Newton’s second law
and the Lorentz force law of electrodynamics in curvilinear coordinates,
suitable for applications in general relativity. Newton’s second law was
written in four-vector form in Chapter 8. In Minkowski spaceetime,
f m ¼ m d2xm
ds2 ¼ d
ds pm
(12.26)
where s is the proper time, pm is the energyemomentum four-vector,
pm ¼ mum ¼ mdxm/ds and f m is the four-vector force. To write Eq. (12.26)
in curvilinear coordinates, the ordinary differentials become covariant dif-
ferentials, which we write out in terms of Christoffel symbols,
1
m f m ¼ Dum
Ds ¼ dum
ds þ
X
n;s
Gm
nsunus ¼ d2xm
ds2 þ
X
n;s
Gm
nsunus
(12.27a)
The Lorentz force law is a special case of this expression where
f m ¼ qP
l
ulFlm,
as
we
learned
in
Chapter
10,
where
we
wrote
f ¼ q(E þ u  B) ¼ dp/dt in Minkowski covariant form,
q
m
X
l
ulFlm ¼ d2xm
ds2 þ
X
n;s
Gm
nsunus
(12.27b)
Once we learn to calculate the Christoffel symbols, we shall be able to write
the Lorentz force law in curved spaceetime. The four-vector character of
the covariant derivative, Dl, Eq. (12.22b), makes all of this easy.
Let us return to our general discussion of curvilinear coordinates.
Parallel transport and the meaning of covariant differentiation are
particularly easy to understand and visualize if we consider a curved space
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
265

embedded in a ﬂat Euclidean space. Imagine a sphere or a torus sitting in
the lab. In the ordinary, ﬂat Euclidean space we set up Cartesian coordinates
and unit vectors along each coordinate direction in the usual fashion. A
vector can be written in this coordinate system with mutually orthogonal
constant unit vectors (aa, a ¼ 1, . , N) as,
V ¼
X
a
V aaa
(12.28)
For example, in three dimensions, r ¼ xbi þ ybj þ zbk , in standard notation.
If V is the four-velocity of a particle, which experiences no forces, then its
equation of motion reads,
A ¼ dV
ds ¼ 0
(12.29)
As the particle moves it sweeps out a straight line, which we parameterize
with s.
The curved space embedded in the Euclidean space has basis vectors
(bb, b ¼ 1, . , M), which generally depend on their position and have
variable orientations. Think of the surface of a sphere of unit radius. Any
point on it is located with the angles (q, f) of ordinary spherical
coordinates. There is a tangent plane at the point (q, f), which swivels
about as (q, f) changes. The tangent plane is spanned by the vectors
b1 ¼ bq ¼ vr/vq and b2 ¼ bf ¼ vr/vf. The normal to the sphere also
depends on (q, f) and is given by a unit vector bn ¼ vr=vr.
Now return to the general case. There is a vector V within the curved
space, and we can write it in terms of the basis (bb, b ¼ 1, . , M),
V ¼
X
b
V bbb
(12.30)
Now suppose that V sweeps out a curve parameterized by s. The rate of
change of V along the curve is,
dV
ds ¼
X
b
dV b
ds bb þ
X
b
V bdbb
ds
(12.31)
where the second term shows that the curvilinear coordinates have s
dependence, i.e., the basis vectors vary as the point of interest moves along
the curve. Recall that when one solves geometry or physics problems in
three dimensions using curvilinear coordinates such as spherical or cylindri-
cal coordinates, terms of this sort contribute. They are in fact the extra
ingredients in expressions for the gradient, divergence, or Laplacian in
such coordinate systems.
266
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Next we can use the chain rule to write dbb
ds in terms of the orientation of
the basis in curved space and its movement along the curve,
dbb
ds ¼
X
a
vbb
vxa
dxa
ds
(12.32)
The changing orientation of the basis can be expanded in the basis
(bb, b ¼ 1, . , M),
vbb
vxa ¼
X
g
Gg
babg
(12.33)
where we have introduced the Christoffel symbols again. We will show
below that they are the same quantities introduced earlier. Eq. (12.33) gives
a more concrete deﬁnition of the Christoffel symbols than the previous
more abstract but general Eq. (12.21). We see that the Christoffel symbols
record the fact that the basis vectors of a curvilinear coordinate system
change their orientation as a point moves along a curve, and this affects
the rate of change of the components of the vector of interest.
Now we can substitute into Eq. (12.31) and relabel the summation
indices to our advantage,
dV
ds ¼
X
b
dV b
ds bb þ
X
abg
V bGg
ba
dxa
ds bg
dV
ds ¼
X
b
 
dV b
ds þ
X
ag
Gb
ga
dxa
ds V g
!
bb
(12.34)
The quantity in parenthesis is the covariant derivative introduced earlier,
DV b
Ds ¼ dV b
ds þ
X
ag
Gb
ga
dxa
ds V g
(12.35)
Since dV b
ds ¼ P
a
vV b
vxa vxa
vs ¼ P
a
vV b
vxa ua, we can write Eq. (12.35),
DV b
Ds ¼
X
a
uaDaV b
(12.36)
and identify the covariant derivative introduced in Eq. (12.22),
DaV b ¼ vaV b þ
X
g
Gb
gaV g
(12.37)
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
267

If we apply Eq. (12.35) to the four-velocity of the particle V ¼ u ¼ dx/
ds then the vanishing of its acceleration d2x/ds2 ¼ 0 becomes,
Dub
Ds ¼ 0 ¼ d2xb
d2s þ
X
ag
Gb
ga
dxa
ds
dxg
ds
(12.38)
which we recognize as the equation for a geodesic derived earlier.
In our applications to relativity, we begin with the absence of accel-
eration in a local inertial frame, dV
ds ¼ 0: This maps onto the equation of
motion, Eq. (12.38), in the curvilinear coordinate system that describes the
same physics in a noninertial frame of reference where the gravitational
effects are experienced as the curvature of spaceetime. Eq. (12.38) describes
the motion of massive particles in a gravitational ﬁeld. That ﬁeld is repre-
sented by a nontrivial metric and connections, the Christoffel symbols that
enter here. We will see how all this works out as we develop the physics of
general relativity.
Note that only the symmetric piece of Gb
ga contributes to Eq. (12.38),
so we treat the Christoffel symbols in our applications to relativity as
explicitly symmetric in the lower indices, Gb
ga ¼ Gb
ag.
Let us illustrate some of the ideas here by considering a familiar
example: Newtonian mechanics in two-dimensional polar coordinates. We
want to calculate the Christoffel symbols and use them to write Newton’s
second law in plane polar coordinates. The problem set also explores these
examples in greater detail and from several different perspectives. In this
problem the force of gravity is inserted explicitly into the equation of
motion. We will contrast this later with similar problems in general rela-
tivity where the “force” emerges from the curvature of spaceetime
through the Christoffel symbols.
Consider a nonrelativistic particle in a gravitational potential generated
by a mass M at the origin,
d2r
dt2 ¼ GM
r2 br
This is a problem with a central potential so the motion of the particle in
the potential will be planar. The particle’s velocity in plane polar coordi-
nates is ui ¼
dr
dt; dq
dt

, and the equation of motion reads,
dui
dt þ
X
kl
Gi
klukul ¼ GM
r2 di
1
(12.39)
268
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

We need the Christoffel symbols. Let us calculate them for plane polar
coordinates using the geometric approach,
vbea ¼
X
g
Gg
abeg
(12.33)
In Cartesian coordinates r ¼ r cos q i þ r sin q j and the coordinate vectors
of plane polar coordinates are,
vr
vr ¼ er ¼ cos q i þ sin q j
vr
vq ¼ eq ¼ r sin q i þ r cos q j
Then one can calculate, following Problem 12.9,
ver
vr ¼ 0;
ver
vq ¼ 1
r eq;
veq
vr ¼ 1
r eq;
veq
vq ¼ rer
We can read off the Christoffel symbols from these results using Eq. (12.33),
Gq
rq ¼ Gq
qr ¼ 1
r;
Gr
qq ¼ r
with the other Christoffel symbols vanishing. The equations of motion
Eq. (12.39) become,
d2r
dt2  r
dq
dt
2
¼ GM
r2
d2q
dt2 þ 2
r
dr
dt
dq
dt ¼ 0
These are the results we wanted. The radial equation shows how the
Christoffel symbols for the curvilinear coordinate system, plane polar
coordinates, brings in the expected centripetal “apparent” force, discussed
in Chapter 11. Similarly, the Christoffel symbols bring in the Coriolis
“apparent” force into the equation of motion for the angular variable. The
reader should recognize this equation as the conservation law for the orbital
angular momentum per mass, r2dq
dt ¼ L.
Let us end this introduction to parallel transport and geodesics with
some observations, which will be useful in applications. Note that if a
vector is parallel transported along a geodesic, the angle between the
transported vector and the tangent to the geodesic remains constant.
Similarly, if two vectors V a and U b are parallel transported along a curve
C, then P
abgabUaV b; their inner product, remains constant along C.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
269

12.3 COVARIANT DERIVATIVES AND COVARIANT VECTOR
FIELDS
In the text above, we considered covariant derivatives acting on contra-
variant vectors. We also need to differentiate covariant vectors. The general
form of the relation must be,
DmWs ¼ vmWs þ
X
g
eG
g
msWg
where we have borrowed the general structure of the equation from the
discussion above for contravariant vectors, but the coefﬁcients in the parallel
transport of covariant vectors, eG, must be determined.
To relate eG to G, let us exploit the fact that P
gVgW g is a scalar
function if Vg and W g are four-vectors. For scalar functions Dm reduces to
ordinary vm,
Dm
 X
g
VgW g
!
¼ vm
 X
g
VgW g
!
¼
X
g
ðvmVgÞW g þ
X
g
VgðvmW gÞ
(12.40)
But the covariant derivative satisﬁes,
Dm
 X
g
VgW g
!
¼
X
g
ðDmVgÞW g þ
X
g
VgðDmW gÞ
just like ordinary differentiation, so,
Dm
 X
g
VgW g
!
¼
X
g
 
vmVg þ
X
a
eG
a
mgVa
!
W g
þ
X
g
Vg
 
vmW g þ
X
a
Gg
maW a
!
(12.41)
Comparing Eqs. (12.40) and (12.41), we learn that,
0 ¼
X
ag

eG
a
mgVaW g þ Gg
maVgW a	
Since this expression must be true for all Va and W b, we learn that the
coefﬁcients must satisfy,
eG
a
mg ¼ Ga
mg
270
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

In summary, for each upper index,
DmV s ¼ vmV s þ
X
g
Gs
mgV g
and for each lower index we have now,
DmWs ¼ vmWs 
X
g
Gg
msWg
Further manipulations show that these rules generalize to tensors with
upper and lower indices.
For example, one can show that,
DmT r
s ¼ vmT r
s 
X
g
Gg
msT r
g þ
X
g
Gr
mgT g
s
There are other properties of the covariant derivative we need throughout
the text and some we have already anticipated.
1. When the covariant derivative acts on a scalar function, it reduces to the
ordinary gradient,
Drf ðxÞ ¼ vrf ðxÞ
2. The covariant derivative satisﬁes the “Leibniz rule” of ordinary differen-
tiation. For example, the ordinary gradient satisﬁes,
vmðTabVrgÞ ¼ ðvmTabÞVrg þ TabðvmVrgÞ
and the covariant derivative does also,
DmðTabVrgÞ ¼ ðDmTabÞVrg þ TabðDmVrgÞ
(12.42)
The proof of Eq. (12.42) notes that it is true in the tangent space where the
Christoffel symbols vanish in Cartesian coordinates and the covariant deriv-
atives reduce to ordinary derivatives. But Eq. (12.42) is an expression
involving four-vectors when it is written in terms of Dm, so if it is true
in one coordinate system it is true in all. Note that the four-vector character
of the covariant derivative is essential in this slick line of argument.
12.4 THE EQUIVALENCE PRINCIPLE, METRIC
COMPATIBILITY, AND CHRISTOFFEL SYMBOLS
We introduced tangent spaces when we reviewed classical differential
geometry. The tangent space is the best linear approximation to the curved
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
271

space at and near a point P. For a surface embedded in Euclidean space a
local coordinate mesh can be chosen so that its metric satisﬁes,
gjk ¼ djk þ O
jDxj2
R2

where jDxj2 is the distance from P on the surface and R is a measure of the
curvature of the surface at P, such as a principle radius of curvature there.
One says that the surface is “locally ﬂat.”
In the case of relativity we have,
gabðPÞ ¼ gð0Þ
abðPÞ;
vggabðPÞ ¼ 0;
vgvmgabðPÞs0
(12.43)
where gð0Þ
ab is the Minkowski metric. The equation gabðPÞ ¼ gð0Þ
ab ðPÞ is the
ﬁrst part of an expression of the equivalence principle: the freely falling
frame at P is described locally by an inertial reference frame of special
relativity. The second part of the statement is vggab(P) ¼ 0 in the freely
falling frame. This means that there are no net forces in this frame at P:
freely falling frames are locally inertial. This is the essence of the equiva-
lence principle, and it allows gravity to be interpreted as an aspect of geom-
etry. The last expression, vgvmgab(P) s 0, means that the curvature of
spaceetime is a frame-independent physical effect, which cannot be trans-
formed away by a choice of coordinates. More about this will be discussed
later when we develop the Riemann tensor.
Eq. (12.43) leads to a formula for the Christoffel symbols in terms of the
metric and its derivatives. We learned above that statements involving
ordinary derivatives of tensors in the freely falling frame become statements
about the covariant derivative of those tensors in a general coordinate
frame. So the second equality in Eq. (12.43) becomes,
DggabðPÞ ¼ 0
This relation holds for any arrangement of the tensor indices. Using the
results of the previous section on the covariant derivative, we can write
this expression out explicitly,
vrgab 
X
m
Gm
ragmb 
X
m
Gm
brgam ¼ 0
vagbr 
X
m
Gm
abgmr 
X
m
Gm
bagrm ¼ 0
vbgra 
X
m
Gm
brgma 
X
m
Gm
argbm ¼ 0
272
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

We can isolate a Christoffel symbol by subtracting the second and third
equations from the ﬁrst one and use the fact that the Christoffel symbol
and the metric tensor are symmetric in their two lower indices to ﬁnd,
2
X
m
Gm
rbgam þ vagrb  vrgba  vbgar ¼ 0
Finally we multiply through by the inverse of gam, i.e., ggm, and obtain the
result,
Gm
rb ¼ 1
2
X
a
gma
vrgba þ vbgar  vagrb

(12.44)
So, the Christoffel symbols can be computed in terms of the metric and
its derivatives. The presence of gma, the inverse of the metric, in Eq. (12.44)
indicates the formula is also nonlinear in the metric itself.
The equation Dggab(P) ¼ 0, which is called “metric compatibility,” is
particularly useful when manipulating equations. It means that raising and
lowering indices pass through the covariant derivative. For example,
X
b
gabDrV b ¼
X
b
Dr

gabV b
¼ DrVa
Later in this chapter we will introduce the Einstein ﬁeld equations,
which express the idea that energyemomentum distributions warp
spaceetime and produce its curvature. This curvature means that there is a
metric tensor gmn, which depends on x. From gmn one can calculate the
Christoffel symbols and compute the motion of massive particles using
Eq. (12.25). As the massive particles move, the energyemomentum tensor
varies and the gravitational ﬁeld changes, which alter the motion of the
massive particles, etc. Einstein’s equation for the gravitational ﬁeld and the
equation of motion Eq. (12.25) are a coupled system of differential equa-
tions which in principle solve the problem of the cosmos.
12.5 THE CURVATURE OF SPACEeTIME
Now let us return to parallel transport and relate it to the curvature of
spaceetime. In a ﬂat Minkowski spaceetime dum ¼ 0 in a force-free
environment. We learned that this implies that Dum ¼ 0 in curved spacee
time. This means that um ¼ dxm/ds parallel transports along its trajectory
from x to x þ dx. We already observed that under parallel displacement of
two vectors, the angle between them remains constant. Therefore, the angle
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
273

between a general vector which undergoes parallel displacement along a
geodesic and the tangent to the geodesic remains unchanged, i.e., the
components of the vector along the geodesic remain unchanged all along
the path.
It is also clear that parallel displacement of a vector along a curve
between two points will depend on the path chosen [2]. In particular, if a
vector is parallel displaced along a closed path, on returning to its initial
point it will not coincide with its initial orientation. It is easy to demonstrate
this by visualizing parallel transportation of vectors around the surface of a
sphere of radius R, as shown in Fig. 12.15. The path in the ﬁgure starts at
the North Pole with a vector tangent to a great circle, then transports the
vector along the equator and then returns to the North Pole along another
great circle. The initial and ﬁnal vectors at the North Pole have an opening
angle 4 between them and the GausseBonnet theorem implies that 4 is
proportional to the curvature of the surface, 4 ¼ %KdA, and on a sphere
this relation reduces to the statement that the area of the geodesic triangle
shown in the ﬁgure is 4R2.
One can generalize this observation by considering an inﬁnitesimal
closed path along which we parallel transport a vector Am [2],
DAm ¼
I
Gm
ab Aadxb
Figure 12.15 Parallel transportation of a vector around a geodesic triangle on the
surface of a sphere of radius R.
274
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Since DAm is the difference of two vectors at one point, it is a contravariant
vector. Clearly DAm is nonzero only because spaceetime is curved. Another
way to view this construction is to focus on the path dependence of parallel
translation. In general, if we parallel transport a vector Am along two sepa-
rate paths from point 1 to point 2, the results will be different. This obser-
vation produces a useful relation for the intrinsic curvature. Let Dm
represent covariant differentiation in the direction m and let Dn represent
covariant differentiation in the direction n. Then consider two points p
and q, which are separated by two differentials, dxm in the m direction
and another, dxn in the n direction. One can travel from p to q in two
ways: ﬁrst, move inﬁnitesimally in the m direction and then in the n direc-
tion, or, second, move inﬁnitesimally in the n direction and then in the m
direction. The difference in the results of doing the translations from p to q
along the two paths is a measure of the local curvature. One can write,
DmDnAr  DnDmAr ¼ 
X
s
Rr
smnAs
which can be written as a “commutator,”
ðDmDn  DnDmÞAr ¼ 
X
s
Rr
smnAs
(12.45)
This equation, which deﬁnes the Riemann curvature tensor, Rr
smn, is
visualized in Fig. 12.16.
Since the left-hand side of Eq. (12.45) is the difference of two four-
vectors, the relation is a valid tensor equation, which holds in any curvi-
linear coordinate system. In addition, the fourth(!) rank tensor in Eq. (12.45)
Rs
smn; the Riemann curvature tensor, is independent of the vector Ar used
in the construction.
Figure 12.16 A closed path used in the construction of the Riemann curvature tensor.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
275

We will carry through the calculation in Eq. (12.45) and obtain an
explicit formula for the Riemann curvature tensor, in terms of the Chris-
toffel symbols and their ﬁrst derivatives. The result is,
Rr
smn ¼ vmGr
ns  vnGr
ms þ
X
a
Gr
maGa
ns 
X
a
Gr
naGa
ms
(12.46)
To derive this result, write out the commutator using Eq. (12.37),
DaDbV r  DbDaV r ¼ vaðDbV rÞ 
X
g
Gg
abDgV r þ
X
g
Gr
agDbV g  ða4bÞ
¼ vavbV r þ
X
g

vaGr
bg
	
V g þ
X
g
Gr
bgvaV g 
X
g
Gg
abvgV r

X
gs
Gg
abGr
gsV s þ
X
g
Gr
agvbV g þ
X
gs
Gr
asGs
bgV g  ða4bÞ
¼
X
s
 
vaGr
bs  vbGr
as þ
X
g
Gr
agGg
bs 
X
g
Gr
bgGg
as
!
V s
where the symmetry of the Christoffel symbol, Gr
ab ¼ Gr
ba, and the
“(a 4 b)” terms led to considerable cancellation. Using Eq. (12.44)
which expresses the Christoffel symbols in terms of the metric and its de-
rivatives, the Riemann curvature tensor can be written in terms of the
metric and its derivatives through second order. The problem set explores
these relations, and several problems and Appendix G relates these exercises
to the classical differential geometry presented in Section 12.1 above.
The
Riemann
tensor
is
very
imposing
since
it
has
4  4 
4  4 ¼ 256(!) components. However, it is highly constrained by sym-
metries. The Riemann tensor symmetry properties can be derived from
Eq. (12.46). (Some are clear by inspection, but others require work. They
are derived in the problem set.) First, lower the index on the tensor,
Rrsab ¼
X
g
grgRg
sab
(12.47)
Then the symmetry properties read,
1. Rrsab ¼ Rsrab
2. Rrsab ¼ Rrsba
3. Rrsab ¼ Rabrs
4. Rrsab þ Rrabs þ Rrbsa ¼ 0
5. DgRrsab þ DrRsgab þ DsRgrab ¼ 0 (Bianchi identity)
Other important curvature tensors of lower rank can be constructed
from the Riemann tensor. The second-rank Ricci tensor is
276
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Rab ¼
X
g
Rg
agbh
X
gs
ggsRsagb
(12.48)
Properties 1 and 2 imply that it is symmetric, Rab ¼ Rba. Note that the
other
possible
contractions
such
as
P
g
Rg
gab ¼ P
gs
ggsRsgab
or
P
g
Rg
abg ¼ P
gs
ggsRabgs vanish identically because of properties 1 and 3.
This observation implies that the Ricci tensor Rab is the only second-
rank tensor that can be constructed from the Riemann tensor.
The Ricci scalar is the fully contracted version,
R ¼
X
g
Rg
g ¼
X
ab
gabRab
(12.49)
In the case of two-dimensional surfaces in three-dimensional Euclidean
space, the Ricci scalar is just twice the Gaussian curvature K. This point
is demonstrated in the problem set.
In four dimensions the full Riemann tensor Rsagb is generally required
to specify the curvature(s) of spaceetime.
12.6 FROM NEWTON’S GRAVITY TO RELATIVISTIC
WEAK GRAVITY TO STRONG GRAVITY
Now that differential geometry and curvature have been introduced, we
can turn back to physics and consider the differential equation for the
gravitational potential in Newton’s world,
V2VðrÞ ¼ 4pGrðrÞ
(12.50)
where the source of the potential is the mass density r(r) and the force on a
particle of mass m is F(r) ¼ mVV(r). We want to recast this equation in the
language of general relativity, if possible.
We have seen in several examples discussed in Chapter 11 that the
Newtonian gravitational potential modiﬁes the timeetime component of
the metric: g00 becomes 1 þ 2VðrÞ
c2
in the case of weak gravitational poten-
tials, 2V(r)/c2  1. If there is a particle of mass M at the origin,
VðrÞ ¼ GM
r
is the Newtonian gravitational potential. Then the timee
time component of the metric becomes,
g00 ¼ gð0Þ
00 þeg00 ¼ gð0Þ
00 þ 2VðrÞ
c2
¼ 1  2GM
c2r
(12.51)
where we have introduced eg00 to indicate the required modiﬁcation of the
metric of special relativity, gð0Þ
mn .
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
277

Now turn back to Eq. (12.50). We want to write this equation in
relativistic notation. We have already argued in Section 11.8 that the right-
hand side is proportional to the “0-0” component of the energye
momentum tensor: the energy density transforms as the (outer) product of
two four-vectors. This was cited in Chapter 11 as one of several critical
differences between electromagnetism and gravity. Therefore, the left-hand
side should also be a second-rank tensor, and gmn is a natural candidate.
Newton’s law of gravitation can be written,
V2eg00 ¼ þ 8p
c2 GT00
(12.52)
A plausible extension of this static equation to time-dependent special rela-
tivity applications would be,
V2  1
c2
v2
vt2


egmn ¼ þ 8p
c2 GTmn
ðtentative guessÞ
(12.53)
We have replaced the Laplacian of the static problem with the invariant
wave operator of special relativity. It is convenient to deﬁne the wave
operator,
, ¼

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

(12.54)
Eq. (12.53) incorporates the idea that the metric gmn becomes a
dynamical variable, and the idea that signals should travel at the speed limit,
as discussed in Chapters 9 and 11. However, this extension of Newton’s law
of gravity is only plausible if the deviations egmn from the Minkowski metric
gð0Þ
mn are numerically small. This is because Eq. (12.53) was built on Lorentz
boosts,
which
are
exact
symmetries
of
the
Minkowski
metric
ds2 ¼ c2dt2  dr2 and not general coordinate transformations, which are the
symmetries of general relativity. In particular, the wave operator is an
invariant operator in special relativity and is not invariant under general
coordinate transformations.
In later sections of this chapter, we will apply Eq. (12.53) to the creation
and propagation of gravitational waves. Let us consider it more critically in
this context.
Sufﬁciently distant from the source, Tmn, the gravity waves predicted byEq.
(12.53) would be tiny ﬂuctuations in an otherwise ﬂat Minkowski space. This
element of the problem belongs to special relativity. The decomposition,
gmn ¼ gð0Þ
mn þegmn
with
egmn
  1 is critical.
278
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Now consider the left-hand side of Eq. (12.53) again. The “tentative
guess” considered there is not unique: there are additional terms that could
appear which are consistent with covariance. Those terms should satisfy the
three criteria,
1. It must be a second-rank, symmetric tensor,
2. It must be second order in derivatives of egmn, and
3. It must reduce to Newton’s law of gravity in the nonrelativistic limit.
To write its general form consider the four-vectors and tensors that we
can use for its construction: vm, vn; gð0Þ
mn , and egmn. With these ingredients we
can construct second-rank tensor candidates:
1. ,egmn, which we identiﬁed above,
2. P
s
vmvsegsn þ P
s
vnvsegsm,
3. vmvneg tr;
4. gð0Þ
mn ,eg tr,
5. gð0Þ
mn
P
sr
vsvregsr

where we used the short hand eg tr ¼ P
m
egm
m. So, we really should consider an
equation of the form,
a

,egmn
	
þ b
X
s
vmvsegsn þ
X
s
vnvsegsm

þ cðvmvneg trÞ þ d

gð0Þ
mn ,eg tr	
þ e

gð0Þ
mn
X
sr
vsvregsr

¼ þ8p
c4 GTmn
(12.55)
where a, b, c, d, and e are numerical coefﬁcients. The “extra” terms b and c
involve time derivatives and do not contribute to the static, nonrelativistic
limit, Eq. (12.52), so we have no constraints on them yet.
To make progress, let us consider the decomposition gmn ¼ gð0Þ
mn þegmn
with
egmn
  1 more critically. This decomposition picks out just certain
frames: we could make a large boost and violate the strong inequality. In
other words, our description of the phenomenon does not have full Lorentz
invariance. However, there is a large family of frames that respect the
decomposition. Suppose we begin in a frame where the decomposition is
true and we make only small x-dependent coordinate transformations,
x
0m ¼ xm þ εmðxÞ
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
279

and suppose that both εmðxÞ and its derivatives vnεmðxÞ are very small
compared to unity. The metric transforms under coordinate transforma-
tions as,
g0
mn ¼
X
sr
vxs
vx
0m
vxr
vx
0n gsr
and in this case we calculate,
eg 0
mn ¼ egmnðxÞ  vmεn  vnεm þ Oðε2Þ
Let us use this freedom to our advantage. We copy the strategy of using the
Lorenz gauge in electrodynamics as discussed in Appendix F. To motivate
this, recall that the energyemomentum tensor is conserved in special rela-
tivity, P
m
vmTmn ¼ 0. If we could choose the coordinate system εmðxÞ so that
P
m
vmegmn ¼ 0, then the wave equation Eq. (12.55) would be simpliﬁed. In
addition, if the energyemomentum tensors were traceless, P
m
T m
m ¼ 0, then
it would also be advantageous to choose εmðxÞ so that the metric ﬂuctua-
tions were also traceless, P
m
egm
m ¼ 0. We will see below that these conditions
are fulﬁlled in our application to gravitational waves. Then we choose
vnεmðxÞ so that egmn satisﬁes two subsidiary conditions,
1. P
m
vmegmn ¼ 0, and
2. P
m
egm
m ¼ 0,
so that egmn is both conserved and traceless. Problem 12.15 shows how this
choice can be made. Now the extra terms bee in the differential equation,
Eq. (12.55), for egmn vanish and the wave equation, Eq. (12.54), remains true!
When we solve the wave equation for a given source of gravitational waves,
we will check that the two conditions, P
m
vmegmn ¼ 0 and P
m
egm
m ¼ 0, are
valid, so we have not cheated and simpliﬁed the real problem at all.
“Linearized gravity” is discussed more in the problem set where the student
will begin with the full Einstein ﬁeld equations, to be introduced below,
and specialize to weak gravitational effects in a given static Minkowski
spaceetime and prove these assertions. In Problem 12.16 we also consider
linearized gravity and the Newtonian limit for static sources of energye
momentum Tmn. In this case the energyemomentum tensor is not traceless,
280
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

and it is not appropriate to enforce subsidiary condition 2. In that case the
wave equation Eq. (12.53) is replaced with [2],
,hmn ¼ 16pG
c4
Tmn
(12.56)
where
hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h
h ¼
X
a
ega
a
and hmn satisﬁes the ﬁrst subsidiary condition, the Lorenz condition,
X
n
vnhmn ¼ 0
So we still have an elegant and simple wave equation, which is useful in
other applications. We will see in discussions below that this formulation
of linearized gravity is particularly useful, especially for weak gravitational
effects outside static sources of masseenergy, as illustrated in the problem set.
Before considering strong gravity, let us conﬁrm that we can retrieve
Newtonian physics from this new perspective. Consider the weak ﬁeld,
nonrelativistic case (Newtonian limit) where T 00 / rc2 and the wave
equations Eqs. (12.53) and (12.56) reduce to Newton’s law of gravity,
V2F ¼ 4pGr,
if
we
identify
h
00 ¼ 4F=c2.
Note
that
all
other
components of hab and Tab are negligible here. Then, if we use the
deﬁnition hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h, some algebra (Problem 12.17) reveals that,
h ¼ 4F=c2
and,
eg 00 ¼ eg 11 ¼ eg 22 ¼ eg 33 ¼ 2F=c2
So the metric in the weak ﬁeld case reads,
ds2 ¼

1 þ 2F
c2

c2dt2 

1  2F
c2

ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
(12.57)
This result is accurate to order 1/c4. This coordinate system, which is
discussed further in the problem set, is called “isotropic” because of its man-
ifest rotational symmetry in the spatial coordinates. It is generally very
handy in weak ﬁeld applications.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
281

Now let us retrieve Newton’s second law in weak, linear gravity. It will
follow from the geodesic equation, which predicts how a mass m travels in a
force-free spaceetime described by curvilinear coordinates,
d2xb
d2s þ
X
ag
Gb
ga
dxa
ds
dxg
ds ¼ 0
(12.58)
We need the Christoffel symbols for the metric Eq. (12.57). These are easily
calculated using Eq. (12.44). The algebra is minimized if we note that the
formulas in linearized, weak ﬁeld gravity are only accurate to ﬁrst order in
2F/c2, so we can raise and lower indices using the Minkowski metric of the
background spaceetime in Eq. (12.44). Then it is easy to verify (Problem
12.19),
G0
00 ¼ vF
c2vcs;
Gi
00 ¼ vF
c2vxi
We simplify Eq. (12.58) for nonrelativistic kinematics, p0 [ pi, and
choose the b ¼ 0 component. The zeroth component of Eq. (12.58)
then reduces to,
d
dt ðE þ mFÞ ¼ 0
which is just Newtonian energy conservation to leading order! Similarly,
for b ¼ i, (i ¼ 1, 2, 3), Eq. (12.58) becomes Newton’s second law for a
particle of mass m in a gravitational ﬁeld,
d
dt p ¼ mVF
to leading order. These are the expected results but obtained from the
perspective of general relativity.
This example illustrates that in Einstein’s world, gravitation is curvature,
expressed through nonzero Gb
ga, and in Newton’s world, gravitation is a
universal force, proportional to every body’s inertial mass. In the weak ﬁeld,
nonrelativistic regime, these two approaches give identical predictions.
Now we will pass to strong gravity where the theories will diverge and the
fact that general relativity predicts that energyemomentum warps spacee
time will generate unique and fascinating predictions.
Our ﬁrst task is to motivate and present the Einstein ﬁeld equation to
deal with strong gravitational ﬁelds where spaceetime is highly distorted
from the Minkowski metric, and we need the full machinery of differential
282
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

geometry. What are the constructive principles to guide us toward the
fundamental differential equations of general relativity? They read as
follows:
1. The equation should be invariant to general coordinate transformations:
it should be true in all frames of reference.
2. It should express the idea that the energyemomentum density is the
source of the curvature of spaceetime.
3. It should be a second-order differential equation for the spaceetime
metric gsr.
4. It should embody conservation of energyemomentum locally in
spaceetime.
5. It should reduce to special relativity far from any source of
energyemomentum.
6. It should reproduce Newton’s theory of gravity in the nonrelativistic,
weak ﬁeld limit.
We have already discussed these principles but have not emphasized
item 4 earlier. We have illustrated the energyemomentum tensor for free
massive particles, and in a problem set on electrodynamics we constructed
the energyemomentum tensor from the electrodynamic ﬁeld Fmn. We
want Tmn to express local energyemomentum conservation through a local
differential equation so that it will be a true tensor relation in all frames of
reference and will be consistent with causality. Recall our discussion of
charge conservation that led us to the continuity equation P
m
vmJm ¼ 0 for
the current density Jm. The equation had a simple physical and geometric
interpretation: the local charge density r in a box changes only when
currents J ﬂow into or out of that box. Now we express the conservation of
energyemomentum in a similar fashion. In ﬂat Minkowski spaceetime we
have,
X
m
vmTmn ¼ 0
(12.59)
and T00 is the energy density and T0i is the ith component of momentum
density. Tmn is constructed to be symmetric, as was clear from our free par-
ticle example and electrodynamics. In a curved spaceetime Eq. (12.59)
becomes
X
m
DmTmn ¼ 0
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
283

Now we need the left-hand side of the equation, ? ¼ 8p
c4 GTmn. It should
satisfy several criteria,
1. It should be a local, conserved second-rank tensor.
2. It should be constructed out of gsr, gsr and their ﬁrst and second deriv-
atives in spaceetime.
3. It should represent the local intrinsic curvature of spaceetime.
The only candidate tensor with most of these properties is the Ricci
tensor Rsr. However, we have not checked whether it is conserved. To
begin, we know something about the covariant derivatives of the Riemann
tensor Rsrnm: it satisﬁes the Bianchi identities of differential geometry,
symmetry property 5 discussed in the previous section and derived in
Problem 12.11,
DgRrsab þ DrRsgab þ DsRgrab ¼ 0
This allows us to calculate the covariant four-divergence of the Ricci
tensor,
0 ¼
X
sg
gbsgagðDgRrsab þ DrRsgab þ DsRgrabÞ
¼
X
g
DgRrg  DrR þ
X
g
DgRrg
So,
X
g
DgRrg ¼ 1
2DrR
(12.60)
So, the Ricci tensor is not quite right. However, we can make a conserved,
local, second-rank tensor out of Rsr and R, the Ricci scalar, R ¼ P
m
Rm
m.
The result is the Einstein tensor,
Gsr ¼ Rsr  1
2 Rgsr
(12.61)
Eqs. (12.60) and (12.61) imply the desired conservation law,
X
g
DgGrg ¼ 0
Finally, the Einstein ﬁeld equation reads,
Gab ¼ 8pG
c4 Tab
(12.62)
This is what we have been seeking. It is the centerpiece of the theory. We
will investigate its content in the following sections of this chapter.
284
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

The Einstein ﬁeld equation is often written in terms of Rab and R. Take
the Einstein ﬁeld equation Eq. (12.62); write it in terms of the Ricci tensor
and Ricci scalar and then fully contract the indices,
X
ab
gabRab  1
2
X
ab
Rgabgab ¼ 8pG
c4
X
ab
gabTab
Deﬁne R ¼ P
g
Rgg, T ¼ P
g
T gg and note that da
b ¼ P
g
gagggb and
4 ¼ P
g
dg
g. We learn that,
R ¼ 8pG
c4
T
so the Einstein ﬁeld equation can be written as,
Rab ¼ 8pG

Tab  1
2 Tgab

(12.63)
We should reﬂect on Eqs. (12.62) and (12.63). These equations are the
heart of general relativity and represent one of the supreme achievements of
science. The discussion here is very efﬁcient, tidy, prim, and proper. This is
not at all how science works! The creation of general relativity took years of
blood sweat and tears, false starts, dead ends and, yes, mistakes. The
synthesis of the principles of physics with Riemann’s formulation of
differential geometry was something utterly new. It represented the ﬁrst
step in the development of modern ﬁeld theory.
Feynman stated,
Einstein arrived at his ﬁeld equations without the help of a developed ﬁeld theory,
and I must admit that I have no idea how he ever guessed at the ﬁnal result...I
feel as though he had done it while swimming underwater, blindfolded, and with
his hands tied behind his back! [3].
12.7 THE SCHWARZSCHILD METRIC AND BLACK HOLE
To begin to understand general relativity we need to understand its simplest
problem: the spaceetime outside a spherical, static mass M. This is the ﬁrst
problem one solves in Newton’s theory of gravity, and everyone knows the
solution for the gravitational potential,
FðrÞ ¼ GM
r
(12.64)
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
285

as we discussed in our introductory remarks. The force felt by a particle of
mass m in the potential Eq. (12.64) is F ¼ mVFðrÞ ¼ GMm
r2 br: it is a
static, radially symmetric force, which obeys the inverse square law.
Can we ﬁnd the metric in general relativity that supplants this result?
The metric should be static and spherically symmetric,
ds2 ¼ UðrÞc2dt2  VðrÞdr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
(12.65)
in spherical coordinates. The Einstein ﬁeld equations should determine the
functions U and V, which only depend on the radial coordinate r. This
metric should apply outside the mass M. If M consists of a mass distribution,
its spherical symmetry and static nature in the coordinate system chosen in
Eq. (12.65) is required. Finally, the metric must solve the Einstein ﬁeld
equations outside M,
Rab ¼ 8pG

Tab  1
2 gabT

¼ 0
(12.66)
and in the nonrelativistic limit we should retrieve Eq. (12.64) and
Newton’s equation for the motion of a mass m in this environment,
F ¼ mVF rð Þ ¼ md2r

dt2 ¼ GMm
r2
br.
Eq. (12.66) is deceptively simple. It hides a set of coupled, second-order,
nonlinear differential equations for the components of the metric U(r) and
V(r). Why second order? The Einstein ﬁeld equations were constructed
with this attribute in mind because we know from experience with
Newton’s equations of motion and the equations of electrodynamics that
second-order differential equations have physical solutions if they are
supplemented with sensible initial conditions. Higher-order differential
equations are full of pathologies, including run-away solutions, noncausal
effects, etc. Why nonlinear? General relativity is inherently nonlinear. No
linear superposition principle here! This fact makes analytic problem solving
in general relativity much harder than in electrodynamics. The differential
equation will be nonlinear because of the universal character of gravity: any
bit of energyemomentum attracts any other, so any patch of curvature
attracts any other patch of curvature. In ﬁeld theory one says that the theory
has “intrinsic self-interactions.” We discuss these effects further in later
sections of this chapter, but we will see them in play immediately.
Let us begin [4]. No tricks, just hard labor. We will illustrate some of the
algebra and manipulations involved but will not display all (!) of it. The
student should commit themselves to work along here and the problem set
will encourage that.
286
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

The metric reads,
g00 ¼ U;
g11 ¼ V;
g22 ¼ r2;
g33 ¼ r2 sin2 q
We will need its inverse,
g00 ¼ 1
U;
g11 ¼  1
V;
g22 ¼ 1
r2;
g33 ¼ 
1
r2 sin2 q
From these we can calculate the Christoffel symbols,
Gm
ns ¼ 1
2
X
l
gmlðvsgln þ vngls  vlgnsÞ
Many components of Gm
ns are zero because of the static, spherical character
of this problem: time derivatives v0 vanish identically and derivatives v4 do
also and vq is nonzero only if it applies to g33 or g33.
We calculate for i, j ¼ 1, 2, 3,
G0
00 ¼ 1
2 g00ðv0g00 þ v0g00  v0g00Þ ¼ 0
G0
01 ¼ 1
2 g00ðv1g00 þ v0g01  v0g01Þ ¼ 1
2 g00v1g00 ¼ vrU
2U
G0
ij ¼ 1
2 g00ðvjg0i þ vig0j  v0gijÞ ¼ 0
The full set of nonvanishing Christoffel symbols reads, using a convenient
short hand that “primes” indicate differentiation with respect to r,
U 0 h vrU, V 0 h vrV,
G0
01 ¼ U0
2U
G1
00 ¼ U0
2V;
G1
11 ¼ V 0
2V;
G1
22 ¼  r
V;
G1
33 ¼ r sin2 q
V
G2
12 ¼ 1
r;
G2
33 ¼ sin q cos q
G3
13 ¼ 1
r ;
G3
23 ¼ cot q
The “real” work begins with the Ricci tensor,
Rmn ¼
X
b
Rb
mnb ¼
X
b
vnGb
mb 
X
b
vbGb
mn þ
X
ab
Ga
mbGb
an 
X
ab
Ga
mnGb
ab
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
287

Writing this expression out reveals that Rmn ¼ 0 identically if m s n. This
preliminary saves us a lot of extra labor, although its veriﬁcation, while
straight-forward, is tedious.
The nontrivial contributions to R00 are,
R00 ¼ v1G1
00 þ G0
01G1
00  G1
00G1
11  G1
00G2
12  G1
00G3
13
¼ U00
2V þ U0
4V
U0
U þ V 0
V

 U0
rV
Similarly,
R11 ¼ U00
2U  U0
4U
U0
U þ V 0
V

 V 0
rV
R22 ¼ rU0
2UV þ 1
V  rV 0
2V 2  1
R33 ¼ sin2 qR22
These are coupled, nonlinear, second-order differential equations. Howev-
er, notice that if we multiply R00 by V/U and add the result to R11, most
terms cancel leaving,
U0
rU þ V 0
rV ¼ 0
Or more simply,
U0V þ V 0U ¼ 0
which implies that the product UV is a constant! To determine the
constant, imagine that r becomes large. Then the metric should reduce to
the Minkowski metric, so the constant is unity,
UðrÞVðrÞ ¼ 1
Finally, substitute this relation into R22 ¼ 0 and ﬁnd,
U þ rU0 ¼ 1
which can be written as,
dðrUÞ=dr ¼ 1
which integrates to,
rU ¼ r þ k or U ¼ 1 þ k=r
where k is a constant. Since UV ¼ 1, we learn that V ¼ (1 þ k/r)1.
288
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

To determine the constant k, imagine the limit of large r. We should
obtain the weak gravitational ﬁeld case that we already analyzed using the
equivalence principle,
g00/1  2GM
c2r
So, we read off k ¼ 2GM
c2
and we have the Schwarzschild metric,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1  2GM
c2r
1
dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
(12.67)
The physics in this formula will be the subject of several sections of this
chapter. What makes it so exciting? It contains a black hole!
12.8 THE SCHWARZSCHILD BLACK HOLE
The exact Schwarzschild metric reads,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 
dr2
ð1  2GM=c2rÞ  r2
dq2 þ sin2 q d42
.
(12.68)
There is an ominous singularity in this expression, for 2GM/rc2 ¼ 1, the
proper time, ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM=rc2
p
dt; vanishes, and the proper distance,
dl ¼ dr
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM=rc2
p
; diverges. The critical distance,
rSch ¼ 2GM
c2
;
is called the Schwarzschild radius. For a typical celestial body such as the
Sun, rSch is much smaller than the body’s actual radius, and these singularities
are not physicaldthe expression for ds2, Eq. (12.68), is only true outside the
massive body, just like Newton’s gravitational potential, V(r) ¼ GM/r, is
only true outside the mass M (rSch is about 2900 m for the Sun whose
physical radius is about 7  105 km. For the Earth rSch is about 0.88 cm!).
However, there are astrophysical bodies that have collapsed under their
own enormous weight and whose radii are less than their Schwarzschild
radii. They are called black holes, and they provide a physical realization
of the peculiar, extreme conditions described by the Schwarzschild metric
for strong ﬁelds.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
289

Consider a Schwarzschild black hole, and suppose that we place a clock,
an emitter of light with frequency ve, at radius r > rSch. If we reduce r closer
and closer toward rSch, the clock, as measured by an observer who is far
away where the gravitational ﬁeld is negligible, runs slower and slower, as
we can read off Eq. (12.68). The redshift becomes inﬁnite in the limit that r
coincides with rSch. In effect, the gravitational ﬁeld becomes so strong at rSch
that light cannot escape the black hole!
The Schwarzschild metric has singularities at r ¼ 0 and r ¼ 2GM/c2. Are
either of these singularities properties of the coordinate mesh or are they
intrinsic physical properties of the black hole? The Schwarzschild radius is
certainly physically signiﬁcant, but we will learn that it is not a true singular
point. One way to see this is to calculate some components of the Riemann
tensor, Rabgd, and some curvature invariants and see that they are free of
singularities at the Schwarzschild radius. For example, one can calculate the
fully contracted “square” of the Riemann tensor,
X
abgd
RabgdRabgd ¼ 48G2M 2
c4r6
Only the origin is a true singularity. We will ﬁnd other results below that
clarify this ﬁnding.
Consider the radial motion of light outside the mass M. It follows the
null interval,
ds2 ¼ 0 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1  2GM
c2r
1
dr2
So,
dt
dr ¼ 

1  2GM
c2r
1
(12.69)
To visualize this equation, plot t against r in a spaceetime diagram as shown
in Fig. 12.17. At large r the slope of the light cone dt/dr approaches 1 as in
ﬂat Minkowski spaceetime. However, as the light ray approaches the
Schwarzschild radius, a distant observer concludes that the light ray takes
longer and longer to make ﬁxed incremental progress toward smaller r.
Imagine a spaceship heading toward rSch. The captain of the ship signals a
distant observer by sending light rays every second according to his watch.
The distant observer, however, detects these signals more and more slowly.
Since dt/dr becomes unbounded at rSch, the distant observer never detects
the spaceship passing through rSch. This is a frame-dependent result. What
290
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

happens from the perspective of the captain of the spaceship? To answer this
question, let us study the path of the spaceship. If the spaceship is without
power it follows a geodesic,
dus
ds 
X
mr
Gr
msumur ¼ 0
Here we have written the geodesic equation for the covariant vector us and
the Christoffel symbols appear here with the “wrong” sign as discussed in
Section 12.3. The second term can be simpliﬁed,
X
mr
Gr
msumur ¼
X
mra
1
2 gra
vmgas þ vsgma  vagms

umur
¼
X
mra
1
2

vmgas þ vsgma  vagms

uaum ¼ 1
2
X
ma
vsgmaumua
where we observed cancellation between the ﬁrst and third terms in the
parentheses when the contraction with the symmetric combination uaum
was taken.
This form of the geodesic is convenient for ﬁnding conserved quantities,
which help to solve for the trajectory taken by the spaceship. If there is a
direction for which vsgma ¼ 0, then us is conserved. Note that if s ¼ 0,
then v0gma ¼ 0 because the Schwarzschild metric is time independent. In
addition, v4gma ¼ 0 because the metric has no 4 dependence, it is
unchanged by rotations around the z axis. Call the ﬁrst constant E ¼ u0 and
the second one, which we will identify as the angular momentum per mass
about the z axis, L ¼ u4. What about motion in the q direction? If we
Figure 12.17 Light cones outside but approaching the Schwarzschild radius of a black
hole.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
291

orient the coordinate system so that q ¼ p/2, then uq ¼ dq/ds ¼ 0 because
duq

ds  1
2 vqg44u4u4 ¼ 0, g44 ¼ r2 sin2 q, and vqg44 ¼ 2r2 sin q cos q,
which vanishes at q ¼ p/2. So, if we orient the coordinate system so that
initially q ¼ p/2, then q remains there. So, as expected, from the symmetry
of the problem, orbits in the Schwarzschild metric are planar.
We will need the components of the four-velocity with upper indices,
u0 ¼ g00u0 ¼

1  2GM
c2r
1
E;
ur ¼ dr
cds;
uq ¼ 0;
u4 ¼ g44u4 ¼ 1
r2 L
Now we can get the “ﬁrst integral” of the equations of motion by consid-
ering the invariant length of um ¼ dxm/ds. This length is conserved along
the geodesic, u$u ¼ P
m
umum ¼ c2 for the spaceship. Why is u$u ¼ c2?
This is a scalar quantity, which can be evaluated in any convenient frame.
Choose a free-falling frame where the rules of special relativity apply. In the
rest frame of the spaceship the result is immediate. Writing this expression
out in terms of the components we have computed,
E2

1  2GM
c2r
1


1  2GM
c2r
1 dr
cds
2
 L2
r2 ¼ c2
which we can manipulate into a more standardized form,
1
2
 dr
cds
2
þ 1
2

1  2GM
c2r
L2
r2 þ c2

¼ 1
2E2
(12.70)
This expression is useful to solve for orbits in the vicinity of the mass M.
Recognize that this is the general relativity version of the Kepler problem
of Newtonian mechanics. We will study Eq. (12.70) further in the next sec-
tion of this chapter, but here we want to specialize to purely radial motion,
L ¼ 0 with the spaceship starting at rest at some initial radius, r ¼ R.
Applying these initial conditions to Eq. (12.70), we ﬁnd E in terms of R,
E2
c2 ¼

1  2GM
c2R

. Now Eq. (12.70) becomes,
1
2
 dr
cds
2
þ 1
2
2GM
c2R  2GM
c2r

¼ 0
292
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

which predicts the proper time it takes the spaceship to fall into the origin,
s ¼
Z R
0
dr
2GM
r
 2GM
R
1=2 ¼ p
2 R
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R
2GM
r
(12.71)
where we used integral tables in the last step.
We learn two things from these considerations. First, according to the
captain of the spaceship a ﬁnite amount of time passes on her wristwatch
before she reaches the origin. The Schwarzschild radius does not play any
special role in the operation of her wristwatch. This is in marked contrast
with the measurements made by a distant observer who watches the
spaceship begin its free fall at R > rSch and must wait forever for the
spaceship to reach the Schwarzschild radius. And second, the result,
Eq. (12.71), and the energy equation, Eq. (12.70), bear an uncanny
resemblance to the same problem in Newtonian mechanics. In Newton’s
world, energy conservation reads,
E ¼ 1
2 mv2  GMm
r
(12.72)
where m is the mass of the spaceship. If the spaceship begins at rest at r ¼ R,
then E ¼ GMm
R , the motion is purely radial, v ¼ dr/dt, and the energy
conservation equation becomes,
dr
dt ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2GM
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
r  1
R
r
which can be ﬂipped over and integrated,
t ¼
Z R
0
dr
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2GM
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
r  1
R
r
¼ p
2 R
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R
2GM
r
So we have the same answer as general relativity with the understanding
that Newton’s time t is universal, and in relativity the time that was calcu-
lated was the proper time of the captain of the spaceship.
Now we face a puzzle! In Newton’s world, Eq. (12.72), the velocity v is
unrestricted by the speed of light: for ﬁxed E, v becomes as large as you like
as r approaches zero. Looking back at our general relativity discussion, we
see that dr/ds follows the same systematics! Does this mean that the
spaceship can travel faster than the speed of light inside a black hole? But
notice something special about dr/ds: it is a “mixed” quantity: r is a
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
293

coordinate marker, and s is a proper time. It is not the velocity of an object
as measured by an observer in an inertial frame. So we do not have a
“manifest” contradiction here, but the matter deserves more thought. That
can be found in reference [5].
Now let us return to the Schwarzschild metric and try to understand
spaceetime within the Schwarzschild radius. The coordinates t and r are not
suitable for this. First note that gtt and grr switch signs at rSch! So, space (radial)
becomes timelike and time becomes spacelike (radial) inside the black hole!
This suggests that any body, including light rays, inside a black hole
inexorably approaches r ¼ 0 as a matter of the spaceetime geometry of the
black hole.
Let us follow the historical developments in this ﬁeld and establish this
point. First, the problem with the t  r coordinate system is that progress in
the r direction becomes slower and slower with respect to the time t
coordinate as rSch is approached. Let us replace t with a coordinate that
moves more slowly in r by solving Eq. (12.69),
t ¼ 
Z
dr
1  2GM
c2r
¼ 
Z
0
B
B
@1 þ
1
1 
c2r
2GM
1
C
C
Adr
¼ 

r þ 2GM
c2
ln
 c2r
2GM  1

Deﬁne a new space-like variable, called a “tortoise” coordinate,
er ¼ r þ 2GM
c2
ln
 c2r
2GM  1

and rewrite the Schwarzschild metric in terms of der2 instead of dr,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

ðdt2  der2Þ  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
Now t ander are on equal footing, and the only singularity in the metric is at
the origin. However, both gtt and ger er do vanish at rSch, and the Schwarzs-
child radius itself occurs ater/  N. We can do better. Let us borrow from
high-energy physics the idea that light-like propagation is best parameter-
ized in light-like coordinates,
tþ ¼ t þer;
t ¼ t er
294
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

In this language the “infalling” ray is tþ ¼ 0, and the “outgoing” one is
t ¼ 0. More algebra gives the invariant interval in terms of tþ and r,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

dt2
þ  2dtþdr  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
which is named after its discoverers, the “EddingtoneFinkelstein” repre-
sentation [6]. Again there are no false singularities here and light rays,
ds2 ¼ 0, that travel in the r direction satisfy, for “infalling” rays,
dtþ
dr ¼ 0
And for “outgoing” rays,
dtþ
dr ¼ 2

1  2GM
c2r
1
What do we learn? The light cones vary smoothly at rSch, and one can plot
the paths of light rays and massive particles for all r. Note in addition, that if
r < rSch, then dtþ/dr < 0, so all propagation into the future occurs in the di-
rection of decreasing r: so the light cone has “tilted” over. The reader may
want to consult references [5,7] for additional graphics. We learn that the
surface given by the Schwarzschild radius is a one-way membranedonce
a light ray or massive particle passes through it from the outside, it can never
return. Such a surface is called an “event horizon.” A distant observer
cannot perceive anything within rSch. Note that an event horizon is a global
structure, not local: the spaceship passed from r > rSch to r < rSch without
trauma, but he or she can never retrace his or her steps. Since this behavior
is a matter of spaceetime geometry, it has no compelling analogue in New-
ton’s world. Once the spaceship passes through the event horizon, then
dtþ/dr < 0, and the spaceship relentlessly falls to the origin even if it is un-
der its own rocket power. In fact, for a “typical” black hole, the spaceship
and the astronauts inside it will be ripped apart by gravitational tidal
“forces” before it reaches the surface of the black hole. Those forces will
stretch and squeeze it mercilessly. We know how to estimate these forces
from our discussion of tidal forces in Section 11.3. Recall that if an astro-
naut is falling into a black hole feet ﬁrst, that unfortunate person feels a tidal
acceleration across his length of,
a ¼ 2GMd
R3
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
295

where R is his distance to the center of the mass M, d is his height, and G is
Newton’s constant, 6.67  108cm3/gm s2. Let us suppose that the black
hole has a mass of the Sun (1.9  1033 g), the astronaut is 2 m tall and R
is 100,000 m. Then the acceleration difference across his length is,
2  ð6:67  108Þ  ð1:9  1033Þ  ð200Þ

ð1:0  107Þ
3 z 51  106 cm=s2.
Compare this number with the acceleration of gravity at Earth’s surface,
980 cm/s2. Clearly the tidal forces would stretch and squeeze the astronaut
out of existence long before reaching the black hole’s surface.
There are more than 100 conﬁrmed black holes among the celestial bodies
presently under observation. Astrophysicists predict that they are created bythe
gravitational collapse of very massive stars that run out of fuel late in their life
cycles. Binary blackholes havealsobeenobserved. In 2015, gravitational waves
were ﬁrst observed, and their source proved to be a binary pair of black holes in
the process of colliding and merging, as we will discuss in Section 12.13.
An interested student can learn more about black holes in a book [5]
written at the same level as this chapter. The book also has a full bibliog-
raphy and looks at recent astrophysical observations and data as well.
The modern study of black holes, their relation to quantum physics, and
uniﬁcation, a ﬁeld pioneered by Stephen Hawking, is very stimulating
because it places all of our physical laws in an extreme environment and
challenges their self-consistency and our understanding of them. When you
learn the elements of quantum mechanics and reconsider the properties of
black holes, you will learn about Hawking radiation, the fact that black holes
are, in fact, hot and radiate electromagnetic waves. They are not really black
at all! The uniﬁcation of gravity and quantum mechanics is an active ﬁeld of
research to which the researchers of the high-energy physics community
contribute through their investigations in superstrings, a framework for a
theory of everythingdelectricity and magnetism, radioactivity (weak
interactions), nuclear physics (strong interactions), and gravity.
12.9 CIRCULAR ORBITAL MOTION IN THE
SCHWARZSCHILD METRIC
There are some striking differences between the Newtonian Kepler problem
and orbital motion in the Schwarzschild metric that we should appreciate [5].
We derived in the previous section the crucial orbital equation,
1
2
 dr
cds
2
þ 1
2

1  2GM
c2r
L2
r2 þ c2

¼ 1
2 E2
(12.73)
We can write this expression in the form of a one-dimensional equation of
motion in the radial coordinate,
296
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

1
2
dr
ds
2
þ Veff ðrÞ ¼ 1
2 E2
(12.74a)
where,
Veff ðrÞ ¼ c2
2  GM
r
þ L2
2r2  GML2
c2r3
(12.74b)
Compare this equation to the corresponding equation in Newtonian
mechanics,
1
2
dr
dt
2
þ V N
eff ðrÞ ¼ E
(12.75a)
where,
V N
eff ðrÞ ¼ GM
r
þ L2
2r2
(12.75b)
Special effects in general relativity come from the last term in Eq. (12.74b)
which is a relativistic effect, varying as 1/c2, that makes the origin more
attractive than the centrifugal barrier, L2/2r2, makes it repulsive! In
Fig. 12.18 we compare V N
eff ðrÞ for Newtonian mechanics with Veff(r) of
general relativity. The striking difference is that for L2 s 0, Veff(r) diverges
as r3 near the origin! This term makes it impossible to have stable circular
orbits for small r. We can search for stable circular orbits in Veff(r) by looking
for solutions to the two conditions,
dVeff
dr
¼ 0;
d2Veff
dr2
> 0
The ﬁrst requirement gives,
dVeff
dr
¼ 0 ¼ GMr2=c2  L2r þ 3GML2=c2
r4
which states how L2 depends on the radius of the orbit,
L2 ¼ GMr

1  3GM
c2r
1
(12.76)
So, we can have circular orbits only for r > 3GM/c2. In addition, since
dr/ds ¼ 0 at a circular orbit, E2 ¼ 2Veff (r) there and,
E2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r
2
1  3GM
c2r
1
(12.77)
there as well. Finally, we can solve the expression Eq. (12.76) for r,
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
297

r ¼ L2 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
L4  12G2L2M 2=c4
p
2GM=c2
(12.78)
We learn that if L2 < 12G2M2/c4 then there are no circular orbits. In addi-
tion, one can check that d2Veff
dr2 > 0 for rþ and d2Veff
dr2 < 0 for r. But since L2
must be greater than 12G2M2/c4 for stable orbits to exist, it follows from
Eq. (12.78) that rþ>6GM/c2.
We must understand the term GML2
c2r3 in Veff. It changes the Newtonian
effective potential qualitatively near the origin, and the extra attraction
overwhelms the centrifugal barrier term, which is so important in many
physics problems ranging from planetary motion to quantum mechanics.
The modiﬁcations to the NewtoneKepler predictions of planetary motion
are dramatic even for our solar system where there are no exotic objects
such as black holes, and the new term is very, very small compared with the
other terms in Veff. One can check that for planetary problems the radial
coordinate is always much, much larger than rSch so we are always working
in the “weak” gravity regime where we expect Newtonian predictions to
Figure 12.18 Comparison of the general relativistic effective potential and the
Newtonian effective potential for the radial coordinate around a black hole. The
parameter choice is given in the ﬁgure.
298
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

be very accurate. In fact the new term is a tiny perturbation, but it makes
distinct and measureable modiﬁcations to the predictions of Newtonian
mechanics. The reason is interesting. Recall that Newtonian mechanics
predicts that the orbits of masses in a 1/r potential are perfect ellipses, closed
periodic orbits. This is a special feature, a “dynamical symmetry,” of the 1/r
potential of Newton’s law of gravity. The only other potential that pro-
duces closed, periodic orbits is the harmonic oscillator, a potential that grows
as r2 and is not relevant here. The point is that if there are any perturbations
to the 1/r potential of Newton’s law of gravity, then the planetary equa-
tions lose their special symmetry and would not produce closed, periodic
ellipses. Instead, the orbits would precess slightly year to year. Since the
very slow precession of an orbit accumulates over time, the effect proves to
be measurable using data obtained from observations employing conven-
tional telescopes! The new term in Veff did, in fact, address a long-standing
discrepancy in planetary science: the other planets that orbit the Sun per-
turb the orbit of Mercury and also cause it to precess. However, when these
Newtonian effects were calculated, only 93% of the observed precession of
Mercury was accounted for. The last 7%, 43 s of arc per century, remained
a mystery for over 200 years. In fact, the general relativity prediction for
the precession rate of Mercury is almost exactly 43 s of arc per century! This
was a great success for general relativity in its early days!
But why does general relativity predict the new term, GML2
c2r3 ? We can
motivate it by writing it in a more suggestive form,

GM
r
L2=r2
c2

(12.79)
Here L2/r2 is the energy due to the angular motion of the object and
dividing by c2 gives its mass equivalent. (A word about units here: L was
deﬁned as angular momentum per mass. So L2/r2 behaves as transverse ve-
locity squared. Multiplying Eq. (12.74) by the particle’s mass restores energy
units.) The ﬁrst factor in Eq. (12.79) is the gravitational potential generated
by the mass M, so the equation records the fact that all energies attract one
another in a universal fashion. Newtonian mechanics misses this term
because in Newton’s world only masses attract one another, not other
forms of energy. In Einstein’s world, energy and mass and momentum
are all uniﬁed into a single four-vector, so the principle of covariance insists
that they all contribute equally to gravitational attraction. Since the new
term is a long-range force, it falls off as the third power of the distance,
it is important in planetary physics where gravitational effects are all
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
299

weak. But it is also highly singular as r / 0, so in the vicinity of black holes
it can dominate over the more familiar centrifugal repulsion potential and
produce new effects.
The new term illustrates that in general relativity all forms of energy
attract one another. For example, the energy carried by the gravitational
ﬁeld itself attracts all other forms of energy. This makes the theory highly
nonlinear, as we have already seen in several applications, most explicitly in
the Schwarzschild metric. This fact also shows up in attempts to make a
quantum theory of gravity where gravitons, the analogue to photons of
electrodynamics, must interact with themselves. These interactions appear
to generate new interactions, which are very singular at short distances and
lead to pathologies. Although classical general relativity is a theory that is
full of triumphs, the search for a quantum version continues unrewarded.
Now let us return to the problem at hand and consider the radial
“infalling” of the particle with angular momentum. Consider Eq. (12.73).
We want to calculate the proper time for the free radial motion by solving
that equation for ds, generalizing the discussion in Eq. (12.71),
Z
cds ¼
Z r1
r0
dr

E2 

1  2GM
c2r

c2 þ L2
r2
1=2
The new term, GML2
c2r3 , enters the denominator with a positive sign indicating
that it tends to decrease the proper time needed to fall between r1 and r0. The
centrifugal barrier, L2
r2, enters with a minus sign and works in the other
direction, as expected. However, if r < rSch, then the new term dominates
and increasing the angular momentum decreases the proper time, the lifetime
of the “infalling” object!
12.10 THE SPEED OF LIGHT IN A GRAVITATIONAL FIELD
Although light propagates at the speed limit c in an inertial frame, it need
not do so in the space near a mass M. There is a set of experiments that have
investigated this point, called radar echoes. The experimenters shot light
from Earth to a nearby planet near the Sun and measured the distance to the
planet as well as the time of transit of the light pulse. They then compared
the total transit time of the light ray to the distance divided by the speed
limit c to investigate whether gravity speeds up or slows down the light ray.
Let us work out the prediction of general relativity for these experi-
ments [4]. Suppose the Earth resides at the position (re, q, 4) and a beam of
light is transmitted to a planet at (rp, q, 4) and back, as shown in Fig. 12.19.
300
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

The nearby huge mass of the Sun creates a gravitational ﬁeld that affects the
trajectory of light. The gravitational ﬁelds produced by the planets are small
and negligible by comparison.
First we need to calculate the physical, proper distance between Earth
and the reﬂecting planet. This distance is not re  rp, the radial coordinate
difference because of the gravitational ﬁeld itself. In fact, from the
Schwarzschild metric, the proper distance dl is related to the coordinate
difference by, dl ¼ dr
.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM=rc2
p
. So, if the coordinate difference is
re  rp, then the physical, proper distance is
Z re
rp
dr
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM=rc2
p
¼

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rðr  2GM=c2Þ
p
þ2GM
c2
ln

ﬃﬃr
p þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
r  2GM=c2
p
	re
rp
.
Expanding the right-hand side of this result in powers of the small quantity
2GM/rc2, we ﬁnd
Z re
rp
dr
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM=rc2
p
z re  rp þ GM
c2 ln
re
rp

.
(12.80)
We see that the physical distance is slightly larger than the coordinate
difference re e rp.
Finally, when the light propagates along a spoke of the spherical
coordinate system, variable r but ﬁxed q and 4, we set ds2 ¼ 0 in the
Schwarzschild metric and ﬁnd the relation between dr and dt,

1  2GM
rc2

c2dt2 ¼

1  2GM
rc2
1
dr2;
which gives
Figure 12.19 Earth resides at the position (re, q, 4), and a beam of light is transmitted
to a planet at (rp, q, 4) and back. The Sun is to the left of the planet.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
301

dr
dt ¼ c

1  2GM
rc2

.
So, the coordinate time needed for the whole trip, to and fro, is
Dt ¼ 1
c
Z rp
re

1  2GM
rc2
1
dr þ 1
c
Z re
rp

1  2GM
rc2
1
dr
Dt ¼ 2
c
Z re
rp

1  2GM
rc2
1
dr.
The proper time Ds that passes at re where the measurements are made is
related to Dt, referring to the Schwarzschild metric,
Ds ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM
rec2
r
Dt
Ds ¼ 2
c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM
rec2
r
Z re
rp

1  2GM
rc2
1
dr
Ds ¼ 2
c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2GM
rec2
r

re  rp þ 2GM
c2
ln
re  2GM=c2
rp  2GM=c2

Ds z 2
c

re  rp  GM
c2
ðre  rpÞ
re
þ 2GM
c2
ln
re
rp

.
(12.81)
The difference between Eq. (12.80) multiplied by 2/c, and Eq. (12.81)
tells us how much the gravitational ﬁeld inﬂuences the time of ﬂight of the
light in physical units:
D z 2GM
c3

ln
re
rp

 ðre  rpÞ
re

.
So, if re [ rp, then D is a positive quantity, and the gravitational ﬁeld has
slowed down the light ray compared with naive expectations. The effect,
however, is tiny and is very difﬁcult to measure.
Clever experimentalists, however, applied similar calculational methods
to the case where the planet lies on the other side of the Sun, as shown in
Fig. 12.20. This conﬁguration produces a much larger effect because the
light ray must graze by the Sun, where the gravitational ﬁeld is relatively
large. The prediction of general relativity was conﬁrmed to several percent
in this case.
302
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

12.11 RELATIVISTIC TIDAL FORCES
It is interesting to generalize the discussion of tidal forces from Newtonian
mechanics to general relativity. We will see that the Riemann tensor
replaces the second derivatives of the gravitational potential in the
equation of motion for the difference of the positions of two nearby free-
falling objects. This shows us that the curvature of spaceetime is the
general relativistic version of tidal forces. Tidal forces are more funda-
mental than one might have thought! Let us understand them in general
relativity.
Consider the position of a freely falling object xa(s). Its trajectory is
given by the geodesic,
d2xa
ds2 þ
X
mn
Ga
mnðxÞumun ¼ 0
(12.82a)
where um ¼ dxm/ds. A nearby freely falling object follows the trajectory
exaðsÞ,
d2exa
ds2 þ
X
mn
Ga
mnðexÞeumeun ¼ 0
(12.82b)
where we choose the same proper time variable to parameterize this
nearby trajectory. Following the discussion of Newtonian tidal forces,
the two trajectories are inﬁnitesimally close together at s ¼ 0 and are
parallel as well. We are interested in the time evolution of the differ-
ence εaðsÞ ¼ exaðsÞ  xaðsÞ. First, consider Eq. (12.82b) and Taylor
expand the Christoffel symbol about the position of the ﬁrst particle
xa(s),
Ga
mnðxa þ εaÞ ¼ Ga
mnðxaÞ þ
X
a
εavaGa
mn þ Oðε2Þ
Figure 12.20 A variation of the experiment shown in Fig. 12.19, but now the planet
lies on the other side of the Sun, and the light ray grazes the Sun where the gravi-
tational ﬁeld is relatively large.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
303

Substituting into Eq. (12.82b) and keeping terms of ﬁrst order in εa,
d2ðxa þ εaÞ
ds2
þ
X
mn
(
Ga
mnðxaÞ þ
X
a
εavaGa
mn þ Oðε2Þ
)
dðxa þ εaÞ
ds
dðxa þ εaÞ
ds
¼ 0
d2xa
ds2 þ d2εa
ds2 þ
X
mn
Ga
mnumun þ
X
mn
εavaGa
mnumun þ 2
X
mn
Ga
mnumdεn
ds z 0
Subtracting Eq. (12.82a) we have,
d2εa
ds2 þ
X
mns
εsvsGa
mnumun þ 2
X
mn
Ga
mnumdεn
ds z 0
(12.83)
Next we need the evolution of the four-vector εaðsÞ itself. From
Section 12.2,
Dεa
Ds ¼ dεa
ds þ
X
mn
Ga
mnumεn
ð12:35Þ
And,
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ d
ds
 
dεa
ds þ
X
bg
Ga
bgubεg
!
þ
X
dh
Ga
dhud
 
dεh
ds þ
X
bg
Gh
bgubεg
!
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ d2εa
ds2 þ 2
X
bg
Ga
bgubdεg
ds þ
X
bgd
vdGa
bgudubεg þ
X
bg
Ga
bg
dub
ds εg
þ
X
bgdh
Ga
dhGh
bgubudεg
where we used,
dGa
bg
ds ¼
X
d
vGa
bg
vxd
dxd
ds ¼
X
d
vGa
bg
vxd ud
Finally we eliminate d2εa
ds2 from the expression for D2εa
Ds2 by using Eq. (12.83),
and we use Eq. (12.82a) to eliminate dub
ds ¼ d2xb
ds2 . Now we have, noting that
the terms involving dεa=ds cancel,
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ 
X
bgd
vdGa
bgubugεd þ
X
bgd
vdGa
bgubudεg 
X
bgdh
Ga
bgGb
dhuduhεg
þ
X
bgdh
Ga
dhGh
bgubudεg
304
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Relabeling indices,
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ 
 X
bgd
vgGa
bd 
X
bgd
vdGa
bg þ
X
bgdh
Ga
ghGh
bd 
X
bgdh
Ga
dhGh
bg
!
ubudεg
Recognize the Riemann tensor here,
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ 
X
bgd
Ra
bgdubudεg þ Oðε2Þ
(12.84)
So, we learn that to ﬁrst order in the small four-vector difference εaðsÞ, its
evolution is determined by the curvature of spaceetime. This result applies
to strong gravity, which tests the limits of general relativity. Excellent result,
Eq. (12.84)! Compare it with Eq. (12.3) and the associated discussion for
the analogous result in classical differential geometry, which shows that
intrinsic curvature determines the equation of motion of the geodesic
deviation.
In Appendix G, we use Eq. (12.84) to analyze the detection of gravi-
tational waves.
Let us compare this result, Eq. (12.84), to Newtonian tidal forces. We
should have agreement between general relativity and Newton’s theory if
we limit our attention to: (1) weak gravitational ﬁelds and (2) nonrela-
tivistic motion so um¼(cdt/ds, dx/ds, dy/ds, dz/ds) z c(1, 0, 0, 0).
Then,
D2εi
Ds2 z d2εi
dt2 z c2X
k
Ri
0k0εk
(12.85)
where we used the fact that Ri
000 vanishes identically, and the sum over k is
from 1 to 3. But the Newtonian prediction was,
d2ε
dt2 ¼ Vðε$VFðrÞÞ
Comparing with Eq. (12.85) we have,
V2F ¼ c2X
k
Rk
0k0 ¼ c2R00 ¼ c28pG
c4
T00  1
2 g00T


where we identiﬁed the Ricci tensor, Rab ¼ P
g
Rg
agb and used the Einstein
ﬁeld equation, Rab ¼ 8pG
c4

Tab  1
2 gabT

. For a static mass density r, we
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
305

saw in Section 11.8 that T00 ¼ rc2. Then T ¼ P
g
T gg ¼ T 00 ¼ rc2, so
T00  1
2 g00T ¼ rc2  1
2 ð1Þðrc2Þ ¼ 1
2 rc2. Collecting everything,
V2F ¼ 1
2 8pGr ¼ 4pGr
which is the differential form of Newton’s law of gravity. All is well.
12.12 THE DISCOVERY OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVES
Gravitational radiation was predicted by Einstein in 1916. It is a crucial
consequence of general relativity because its existence does for gravity what
electromagnetic radiation did for electromagnetism: it establishes the
dynamical ﬁeld theoretic character of the gravitational force. As you are
discovering in the problem sets, gravity is a much weaker force than the
electromagnetic force. This caused the experimental discovery of gravita-
tional waves to take a century of hard work!
However, on February 11, 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced
the ﬁrst observation of gravitational waves in a very exciting Webcast. The
critical observation occurred 5 months earlier on September 14, 2015, and
several months of data analysis were required to understand the result in
sufﬁcient detail to justify publication. The data matched the predictions of
general relativity if the source of the waves was the inward spiral and
merger of a pair of black holes and subsequent “ringdown” of the resulting
single black hole. The observation demonstrated the existence of binary
stellar-mass black hole systems and constituted the ﬁrst observation of a
binary black hole merger. The data could be ﬁt extraordinarily well by the
hypothesis that two black holes of masses 29 and 36 solar masses merged
into one black hole at a distance of about 1.3 billion light years from Earth.
During the ﬁnal fraction of a second of the merger, it released more than 50
times the power of all the stars in the observable universe combined. The
signal increased in frequency from 35 to 250 Hz (cycles per second) over 10
cycles (5 orbits of the pair of black holes) as it rose in strength for a period of
0.2 s. The mass of the new black hole was 62 solar masses, so the energy
equivalent of three solar masses was emitted as gravitational waves in this
catastrophic event. The signal was detected at both sites of the LIGO
experiment, one in Hanford, WA and another in Livingston, LA, with a
time difference of 7 ms between them. It was inferred that the source, the
merging binary black hole system, was 1.3 billion light years away in the
general direction of the Magellanic Clouds in the Southern Celestial
Hemisphere. What a historic moment!
306
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This achievement was the result of decades of work by the LIGO
collaboration, which dated back to 1984, 31 years before fruition. LIGO
stands for “ Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory,” and
the generation of the detectors that were successful in 2015 constitute the
“advanced LIGO” version of the upgraded experiment. In fact, the
upgraded detectors (laser interferometers) had been operating for just 2 days
before the discovery occurred. Each LIGO detector, which are 1865 miles
apart, are L-shaped detectors that have two arms at right angles to each other
and are 2.5 miles in length from a central laboratory building. Lasers are
beamed down each arm and are bounced back by free-standing suspended
mirrors many times to act as extraordinarily precise measuring devices. In
fact the lasers allow the length of the arms to be measured to a precision of
104 the width of a single proton. This accuracy is required to measure the
small scale of the effects imparted by a passing gravitational wave. The two
LIGO detectors act as a check on one another. It is an amazing engineering
feat to detect such tiny signals in an otherwise noisy world!
The basis of each LIGO detector is two perpendicular interferometers,
as shown in Fig. 12.21. These devices merge two light rays, which creates
an interference pattern. If the peaks of the two light rays overlap, they
combine to form a larger peak but when a valley of one light ray overlaps
Figure 12.21 A Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) detector
sketch showing the two perpendicular interferometers.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
307

with the peak of the other ray, the two rays cancel out. The laser beams can
be arranged to cancel each other out in ordinary operations. Then when a
gravitational wave passes through the facility, it would stretch one arm and
compress the perpendicular one (we will derive this crucial property of
gravity waves later), the exact cancellation would be destroyed and some
light would reach a sensitive photodetector. The responses of the photo-
detector then measure the character of the gravity wave, its amplitude, and
frequency. As mentioned above, the upgraded detector of advanced LIGO
is sensitive to amplitudes as small as 104 the width of a single proton (this
requires lasers with sufﬁcient power and accuracy to make coherent beams
of light, which can travel more than 100 times up and down an arm of the
facility before combining with the laser beam traveling down the other
arm) and to be sensitive to gravity waves with frequencies ranging from 75
to 500 Hz. We shall see that this frequency range matches the frequencies
of the expected sources. It is amusing to note that these are common
acoustic frequencies, the middle A tuning frequency provided by the oboe
in symphony orchestras is 440 Hz, so the LIGO detectors act as super-
sensitive human ears!
12.13 GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION
Now let us discuss gravitational waves [2] in more detail with an eye to-
ward LIGO applications. We will need to model the sources of the gravity
waves and the radiation itself. The sources will consist of two masses under
the inﬂuence of their gravitational attraction. We will treat this problem
with Newtonian mechanics because it is adequate up until the last fraction
of a second before the merger of the two black holes. In addition, we will
treat the observed gravity wave as a tiny distortion in the Minkowski
metric, so Eq. (12.53) will serve us well. These approximations will give us
a semiquantitative grasp of the real phenomenon. Of course the experts do
better! They treat the merging black holes with full, nonlinear general
relativity. Supercomputing is essential here. The subject of numerical
general relativity where the ﬁeld equations are simulated in regions of
strong gravitational effects is a mature subject. It is interesting that the
simple approximations and idealizations that we will sketch here match
the realistic calculations rather well in most cases. Far from the source the
experts also use linearized gravity, essentially Eq. (12.56), because the
deviation from the Minkowski metric in the vicinity of the LIGO detectors
is extraordinarily small.
308
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Before we consider the LIGO experiment in more detail, let us consider
the different frames of reference used in our subsequent discussions and
analyses. First, there is the frame ﬁxed to the Earth. Since the mechanical
structures of LIGO’s arms are bound together by electromagnetic forces
which are many, many orders of magnitude greater than gravitational
forces, the gravity waves detected by the apparatus do not have any effect
here. In particular the speed of light relative to the Earth frame, the massive
arms of the structure, is the speed limit c because the gravitational ﬁelds in
the vicinity of the LIGO apparatus are weak. In addition, the gravitational
potential due to the Earth’s mass is essentially constant over the apparatus
and does not play a role in LIGO’s analysis. Gravity waves do effect proper
lengths and times, such as the proper length between the freely suspended
mirrors at the end of each arm of the detector. These are the lengths and
times the analysis focuses on.
To begin, suppose that the LIGO detector lies in the x-y plane, and the
source is far away in the z direction as shown in Fig. 12.22. Then we
Figure 12.22 An ideal geometric conﬁguration for the detection of gravitation waves
emitted from a source on the z axis. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory (LIGO) detector lies in the x-y plane and the source, two orbiting massive
objects, is far away in the z direction as shown.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
309

parameterize the traveling gravitational wave ε(xm) and write the metric in
either of two forms,
ds2 ¼ dt2  ð1  εÞdx2  ð1 þ εÞdy2  dz2
ðε  1; þpolarizationÞ
(12.86a)
or,
ds2 ¼ dt2  dx2  2εdxdy  dy2  dz2
ðε  1; polarizationÞ (12.86b)
Let us concentrate of the þ polarization case expressed in the metric Eq.
(12.86a). We are anticipating here that the source of the gravity wave will be
an oscillating quadrupole moment of a mass distribution, so if there is a
“stretch” in one direction transverse to the propagation direction of the
wave, the z axis, then there is a “compression” in the perpendicular direc-
tion. The length of an arm of the LIGO detector is about 4  103 m, and the
wavelength of the gravity wave is l ¼ c/n z 3  108/102 ¼ 3  106 m.
Therefore, ε(xm) can be treated as a constant across the apparatus. Since ε(xm)
satisﬁes the free-ﬁeld wave equation in the vicinity of the detector and the
gravity wave from the merging black holes is traveling along the z axis, ε is a
function of t  z/c. When this wave passes and ε is positive, then the physical
length of the x-arm of the detector increases and the physical length of the
y-arm of the detector decreases according to Eq. (12.86),
Dxarm ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ ε
p
Dx z

1 þ ε
2

Dx;
Dyarm ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  ε
p
Dy z

1  ε
2

Dy
(12.87)
Therefore, the time difference between light traveling to and fro along the
two arms is,
Dtarm ¼
1
2 ε þ 1
2 ε

2L=c ¼ 2εL=c
(12.88)
For N trips of each laser beam, down and back, along each arm,
Dtarm ¼ 2NεL=c
(12.89)
The problems discuss these predictions and LIGO’s parameters in more
detail.
Now let us consider the source of the gravity waves, the right-hand side
of Eq. (12.53).
Let us model the source as two masses M1 and M2 orbiting one another
at a distance r. They move nonrelativistically so Newtonian mechanics
310
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

applies. An exercise in Newtonian mechanics that is reviewed in the
problem set reminds us that the binding energy of the pair is,
EB ¼ GM1M2
2r
(12.90)
Since the masses are in a constant accelerated state, the system can
radiate gravity waves and gradually lose energy. When this happens, the
distance r between them will monotonically decrease and they will even-
tually collide and merge in the case of two black holes. This system
becomes a model for realistic systems that could radiate gravity waves and
be detected by advanced LIGO. The rate of energy loss to gravity waves
requires a detailed analysis of Eq. (12.53) that will be discussed below. The
result is that the rate of energy loss to gravity waves is,
dEB
dt ¼ 32G4
5c5r5 ðM1M2Þ2ðM1 þ M2Þ
(12.91)
By combining Eqs. (12.90) and (12.91), one derives the rate at which r
decreases due to the energy loss,
dr
dt ¼ 64G3
5c5r3 M1M2ðM1 þ M2Þ
(12.92)
These expressions have excellent experimental support from the
detection of binary neutron stars.
These results are pursued in more detail in the problem sets.
Finally we quote the result for the gravitational wave radiated from this
system,
εðt; zÞ ¼ 4G2M1M2
rzc4
cosð2pnðt  z=cÞÞ
(12.93)
where n is twice the frequency of the orbiting binary, norbit. We will show
below that the quadrupole moment of the mass distribution is responsible
for the radiation and the relation n ¼ 2norbit follows just as it does for quad-
rupole radiation in electromagnetism. The Newtonian prediction for norbit
follows from Kepler’s law,
norbit ¼ 1
2p
GðM1 þ M2Þ
r3
1=2
(12.94)
These relations are important because LIGO is sensitive to the range of
frequencies 50e500 Hz, and this matches binaries that are the candidates
for LIGO sources. This will be discussed further below.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
311

Now let us return to the wave equation Eq. (12.53) and derive some of
the features of gravity waves emitted by a binary system. We will be
satisﬁed with a semiquantitative discussion. If the reader worked through
Appendix F, she knows the form of the solution to Eq. (12.53). It has the
same form as the four-vector potential radiated by a general charge distri-
bution. In this case the gravity wave piece of the metric, the solution to
Eq. (12.53), reads,
egmnðt; x; y; zÞ ¼ 4G
c4
ZZZ
Tmnðx0; y0; z0; t  R=cÞ dx0dy0dz0
R
(12.95)
where R2 ¼ ðx  x0Þ2 þ ðy  y0Þ2 þ ðz  z0Þ2 ¼ cðt  t0Þ. The temporal
offset, tt0 accounts for the fact that the bits of the energyemomentum
tensor that effect the gravity wave at time t originated a time earlier that
accounts for the time needed for the signal to a travel a distance R at the
speed limit c. This result was discussed further in Appendix F. In our appli-
cation the observation point is very(!) far from the source, so we can pull
the factor of R1 outside the integral,
egmnðt; x; y; zÞ ¼ 4G
c4R0
ZZZ
Tmnðx0; y0; z0; t  R=cÞdx0dy0dz0
(12.96)
where R0 is the distance from the observation point to the origin of the
coordinate system, which is chosen at the center of mass of the radiating
system. We model the radiating system as two masses M1and M2 orbiting
one another in the x-y plane, as shown in Fig. 12.23. We treat the two-
body system with Newtonian mechanics, which proves to be adequate until
the last fraction of a second when the two black holes merge. Furthermore,
if we model the system with a circular orbit, then the two bodies simply
rotate around their common center of mass with a frequency norbit ¼ u/2p,
which is given by Kepler’s law, as reviewed in the problem set. The orbits
of the two masses are given by,
xð1Þ
1 ðtÞ ¼ r1 cos ut;
xð1Þ
2 ðtÞ ¼ r1 sin ut;
xð1Þ
3 ðtÞ ¼ 0
(12.97a)
and similarly, for the second particle,
x 2
ð Þ
1
tð Þ ¼ r2 cos ut;
x 2
ð Þ
2
tð Þ ¼ r2 sin ut;
x 2
ð Þ
3
tð Þ ¼ 0
(12.97b)
The energyemomentum density Eq. (12.96) is proportional to the
sum of two terms, one for each of the two particles, one proportional
to
d

x0  xð1Þ
1 ðtÞ
	
d

y0  xð1Þ
2 ðtÞ
	
dðz0Þ
and
one
proportional
to
312
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

d

x0  xð2Þ
1 ðtÞ
	
d

y0  xð2Þ
2 ðtÞ
	
dðz0Þ. The source of the gravity waves is the
energyemomentum tensor Tmn, discussed in Section 11.8, whose Cartesian
coordinates behave as,
Tij ¼

m1vð1Þ
i vð1Þ
j
þ m2vð2Þ
i vð2Þ
j
	
(12.98)
where vð1Þ
i
¼ dxð1Þ
i

dt for mass 1 and vð2Þ
j
¼ dxð2Þ
j

dt for mass 2. So, differ-
entiating Eq. (12.97) to make the velocities vð1Þ
i
and vð2Þ
j ; the nonzero
spatial components of Tmn are,
T11 ¼ Iu2 cos2 ut ¼ 1
2 Iu2ð1 þ cos 2 utÞ
T12 ¼ T21 ¼ Iu2 cos ut sin ut ¼ 1
2 Iu2 sin 2 ut
T22 ¼ Iu2 sin2 ut ¼ 1
2 Iu2ð1  cos 2 utÞ
Figure 12.23 The binary system of masses M1and M2 orbiting one another and
radiating gravitational waves.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
313

where I ¼ M1r2
1 þ M2r2
2 is the moment of inertia of the two-body system.
LIGO is only sensitive to the time-dependent pieces of Tmn which read,
T11 ¼ þ 1
2 Iu2 cos 2 ut
T12 ¼ T21 ¼ Iu2 sin 2 ut
T22 ¼  1
2 Iu2 cos 2 ut
(12.99)
Since egijðtÞ is proportional to Tij(t  z/c) where z, as shown in Fig. 12.22, is
the distance to the source,
egijðtÞ ¼ 2G
c4zTijðt  z=cÞ
(12.100)
We see that (1) eg11ðtÞ ¼ eg22ðtÞ, as anticipated in Eq. (12.86a), and (2)
ugravity ¼ 2uorbit, the frequency of the gravity wave is determined by that of
the quadrupole moment, which is twice that of the orbiting masses. Note
also that egij falls as the inverse of the distance to the source.
The reader is encouraged to follow the operation of advanced LIGO
and see what additional progress it makes in observational astronomy. A
space-based version of LIGO called “LISA” (Laser Interferometer Space
Antenna) is also in the planning and prototyping stage. It should be sensitive
to much lower frequency waves and should observe the merging of su-
perheavy black holes that astronomers believe exist at the centers of
galaxies.
The discussion here is only qualitative because we have applied the
wave equation Eq. (12.53) near the merging black holes where spaceetime
is actually strongly curved. The full Einstein ﬁeld equations must be used to
make quantitative predictions.
Appendix G.3 contains a discussion of gravity wave detection using the
geodesic deviation (“tidal forces”) equations applied to LIGO’s mirrors. It
uses the mathematics of linearized gravity developed in the problem set.
After observing four sources of gravitational waves (colliding black
holes) over a 2-year period, on August 17, 2017, LIGO detected the in-
spiraling and collision of two neutron stars. The neutron stars, each
approximately 12 miles in diameter and consisting of neutrons packed
together at a density two to three times that of ordinary nuclear matter and
each weighing 20%e30% more than the Sun, emitted gravitational waves
as they orbited around each other and then collided and exploded, emitting
314
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

a burst of gamma rays perpendicular to their orbital plane. LIGO detectors,
one in Washington state, another in Louisiana, and a third in Italy, detected
the gravitational waves and directed optical telescopes toward the galaxy
NGC 4993 in the Constellation Hydra, located 130 million light years
away from earth. NASA’s Fermi-GLAST satellite independently detected
the burst of gamma rays within 2 s of the detection of the gravitational
waves. Subsequent observations by land-based telescopes detected light at
optical and radio frequencies from the exploding neutron stars, called a
“kilonova.” A kilonova is similar but much smaller than a “supernova”
explosion, which produced each neutron star in the ﬁrst place, but 1000
times as powerful as a “nova” event, a star showing a sudden large increase
in brightness and then slowly returning to its original state over a few
months.
This observation has been hailed as a watershed event in the history of
astrophysics. For the ﬁrst time we have observed a catastrophic natural
event where both light and gravitational waves were copiously produced.
The almost-simultaneous production (the explosion lags the burst of
gravitational waves by a few seconds) of these waves and the huge distance
the waves travel to us allow astronomers to infer, with great accuracy, that
both waves travel at the speed limit! Studies of the emitted light, whose
frequencies range from gamma rays to radio waves, will lead to a better
understanding of the dynamics of neutron stars. Early indications are that
the hypothesis that kilonovas are the source of heavy elements in the
universe, gold and platinum, for example, has been veriﬁed. Earthly ob-
servations of more kilonovas should produce better estimates of the Hubble
constant, the rate of expansion of the universe, and may shed light on the
nature of dark energy, which is thought to be responsible for the acceler-
ating expansion of the universe. Dark energy will be introduced in the next
and ﬁnal section of this book.
12.14 CONTRASTING SPECIAL AND GENERAL RELATIVITY:
THE COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT AND DARK
ENERGY
Let us continue our discussion started in Chapter 11 where we considered
some of the major differences between electromagnetism and relativity, and
now contrast special relativity with general relativity.
Special relativity is characterized by having global symmetries. There are
10 in all
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
315

1. translations in four spaceetime dimensions,
2. rotations about the three spatial axes, and
3. boosts (Lorentz transformations) along any of the three spatial axes.
This collection of 10 symmetries constitute the “Poincare group.”
General relativity takes these global symmetries and makes them local, i.e.,
spaceetime dependent. In special relativity the 10 symmetry operations
have the same action over all of spaceetime. In general relativity the degree
of symmetry is much higher. One requires that the theory be invariant to
spaceetime-dependent coordinate transformations. The theory must be
invariant to coordinate transformations, which might be appreciable only in
the vicinity of some spaceetime event and negligible elsewhere. This was
the guiding principle in the construction of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations.
In special relativity we took great care to set up a coordinate system of
meter sticks and clocks over all of spaceetime so that measurements could
be compared between frames in a local fashion. We found that clocks that
were synchronized in one frame were not synchronized in moving frames,
and we discovered time dilation, Lorentz contraction, and the relativity of
simultaneity. We never embarked on an analogous activity in general
relativity because, as we found out when considering parallel translation,
comparing measurements at nonzero distances in general relativity is not
generally possible. The curvature of spaceetime makes any attempt in this
direction path dependent and hence nonuniversal. In the context of
differential geometry, this is a consequence of the fact that tangent planes at
different points on a curved surface, or freely falling frames in general
relativity, do not coincide and do not give the basis of global comparisons of
time and spatial measurements.
We have seen that the implementation of the equivalence principle can be
quite subtle. The equivalence principle means that in small enough regions of
spaceetime, the laws of physics reduce to those of special relativity. In a freely
falling coordinate system it becomes impossible to detect the gravitational ﬁeld
by strictly local experiments. In a local inertial reference frame the metric at a
pointP isgivenbytheMinkowskimetricgð0Þ
sr ðPÞ,andtheﬁrstderivativesofthe
metric must vanish, vagsr(P) ¼ 0 in the falling frame. This condition,
vagsr(P) ¼ 0,means thatthere are noforces in the freely falling frame at P. This
is the essence of the equivalence principle. One must consider second
derivatives of the metric to ﬁnd nonzero elements in the freely falling frame.
These quantities produce the curvature of spaceetime.
316
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

The equivalence principle also makes general relativity intrinsically
nonlinear. The idea is that gravity couples universally to energyemomentum.
But the gravitational ﬁeld itself carries energyemomentum, so it must couple
to itself. We saw the nonlinearity in the Einstein ﬁeld equations and the
Schwarzschild metric. Even simpler, the expression for the Riemann tensor
has terms that are linear as well as quadratic in the Christoffel symbols. The
Christoffel symbols themselves involve the products of the inverse of the
metric, the metric and its ﬁrst derivatives. It is the intrinsic nonlinearity of these
equations, which makes it so challenging to ﬁnd exact solutions to general
relativity. The theory does not enjoy the principle of linear superposition that
plays such an important role in classical electrodynamics.
Modern quantum ﬁeld theories of elementary particles are also based on
local symmetry principles and universality. These theories are formulated in
Minkowski spaceetime, but they have “internal” symmetry operations that
are local symmetries, and these symmetries dictate interactions and con-
servation laws. The theory of strong interactions “quantum chromody-
namics” is based on the premise that the three colors of quarks become a
local symmetry principle. The theory contains quark ﬁelds as well as gluon
ﬁelds, which also carry color. The gluons are analogous to the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld of electrodynamics, but they carry the color quantum
number themselves in contrast to the electromagnetic ﬁelds and its quan-
tum, the photon, which are neutral. The fact that the gluons in quantum
chromodynamics carry color implies that they interact among themselves,
which makes the theory intrinsically nonlinear. This property of quantum
chromodynamics is believed to underlie its attribute of quark conﬁnement.
Certainly the gauge theories of elementary particles and general relativity
have more in common than appear at ﬁrst. We saw in our introduction of
the Riemann tensor, which underlies the Einstein curvature tensor that
enters the ﬁeld equation for general relativity, that closed loops are the
essential geometric objects used to formulate the theory. Closed loops are
also the basic geometric object underlying the construction of gauge the-
ories of elementary particle physics. In all cases we are formulating theories
with local symmetry groups and products of operators around closed loops
capture the character of the theories precisely. In general relativity the local
symmetry group is that of Poincare, in quantum chromodynamics it is
rotations in local color space of quarks and gluons. Covariant derivatives
must be constructed and used in each theory to express coordinate-free
physical differences. Of course the language of quantum ﬁeld theory is
needed for elementary particle physics. Unfortunately, a quantum formu-
lation of gravity eludes physics, and it is not even known if the two
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
317

foundations of modern physics are mutually compatible. Perhaps string
theory will shed light here.
Another particularly signiﬁcant difference between ﬁeld theories based
on a ﬂat Minkowski metric and general relativity concerns the nature of the
scale of energy. In all these theories except general relativity, the absolute
scale of energy is not signiﬁcantdonly differences of energy matter. For
example, in Newton’s world, forces are given by the gradient of potentials
so the zero point of the potential energy is irrelevant. All of this changes in
general relativity because the source of the Einstein tensor is the energy-
momentum tensor, not its derivatives! The zero point of energy is estab-
lished by the energy density of the vacuum. In a quantum ﬁeld theory, this
is very perplexing. In quantum ﬁeld theory, quantum ﬂuctuations in the
vacuum contribute to the vacuum energy. These contributions occur over
all length scales from zero to inﬁnity. It appears that to understand and
calculate the vacuum energy one must understand physics at arbitrarily high
energies! Without some unknown principle or symmetry, this knowledge is
utterly beyond our reach. Given these obstacles, the only way forward
appears to be phenomenology.
This brings us to an introductory discussion of the “cosmological
constant.” If the vacuum energy must be included in the Einstein ﬁeld
equations then it should have the form,
T ðVacÞ
ms
¼ rVac gms
(12.101)
And Einstein’s equation becomes,
Gms ¼ 8pG
c4

T ðMÞ
ms þ rVac gms
	
where T ðMÞ
ms
is the matter ﬁeld contribution to the energyemomentum
tensor that we have discussed and illustrated earlier. This equation is usually
written,
Gms  Lgms ¼ 8pG
c4 T ðMÞ
ms
(12.102)
where L is the “cosmological constant” and L ¼ 8pGrVac. Eq. (12.101)
has been coined “dark energy.”
We shall see that the cosmological constant produces an acceleration of
the expansion of the universe. The observation of the spectra of light
emitted by certain supernova indicates that,
robs
Vac
 z ð1012 GeVÞw108erg=cm3
(12.103)
318
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

This is a tiny energy density that is numerically negligible on the scale of
galaxies, etc. but has large cosmological effects. It is interesting to ask if
quantum ﬁeld theory can provide a prediction for L. In some future quan-
tum ﬁeld theory of gravity, one might use dimensional analysis to make an
“estimate.” The dimensional numbers in the theory are the Planck constant
Z, the speed of light c, and Newton’s gravitational constant G. These
constants can be combined to produce a “Planck energy,”
EP ¼
Zc5
G
1=2
z 1:22  1019 GeV z 1:95  1016 erg
If this “natural” energy scale sets the scale for the energy density of the
vacuum, we would “predict,”
rVacwð1019 GeVÞ
4 z 10112 erg=cm3
So, our “back of the envelop” estimate of rVac is wrong by 120 orders of
magnitude! A cosmological constant of this order would overwhelm the
right-hand side of Einstein’s equation and vitiate all of its great successes.
Something is terribly(!) wrong with these estimates. Many suggestions
have been made to circumvent this disaster, but none of them are truly
satisfactory and a resolution is an open challenge! Perhaps a full-ﬂedged
quantum ﬁeld theory of gravity would provide a solution. Breakthroughs
in string theory might be required as well. For the time being, we proceed
phenomenologically and include the nonzero estimate Eq. (12.103) in
cosmological calculations of the expansion of the universe.
Without reviewing modern developments in applications of general
relativity to cosmology, the large-scale structure of the universe, we can
argue in elementary terms that L leads to an accelerating expansion of the
universe. Consider the Newtonian limit of Eq. (12.102). Retracing our
steps in Section 12.6, we easily ﬁnd that L modiﬁes Newton’s law of
gravity,
V2V ¼ 4pGr  Lc2
(12.104)
We again see that L had better be very small on terrestrial scales to have
escaped observation! Using Eq. (12.104) we calculate the gravitational
acceleration a distance r outside a mass M,
g ¼ VVðrÞ ¼ GM
r2 br þ c2L r br
We ﬁnd a universal acceleration outward that grows(!) with distance.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
319

The reader is encouraged to consult the literature on this timely subject
and develop a more sophisticated understanding of the theoretical and
experimental issues in this challenging ﬁeld.
PROBLEMS
12.1 Consider a circle of radius R drawn in the x-z plane with its center
at x ¼ 0, z ¼ R.
a. Show that in the vicinity of the origin z ¼ 1
2Rx2 þ corrections,
where “corrections” are of order x4/R3.
b. Consider a curve z ¼ f(x), which is tangent to the x axis at
x ¼ z ¼ 0. Show that f ðxÞ ¼ 1
2 kx2 þ corrections, near the
origin and k is its curvature.
12.2 Consider a surface in three dimensions parameterized as z ¼ f(x, y).
Orient the coordinate system so that the x-y plane is the surface’s
tangent plane at x ¼ y ¼ z ¼ 0 and choose the x and y axes to coin-
cide with the principal directions.
a. Show that z ¼ 1
2 ðk1x2 þ k2y2Þ þ higher orders, for inﬁnitesimal
x and y.
b. Consider a hyperbolic paraboloid, z ¼ x2  2 y2. Plot it and
recognize it as a “saddle.” Note that k1 ¼ 2, k2 ¼ 4, K ¼ 8
at the origin.
c. Consider an elliptic paraboloid z ¼ x2þ2y2. Plot it. Note that
k1 ¼ 2, k2 ¼ 4, K ¼ 8 at the origin.
d. Consider a sphere (z  R)2 þ x2 þ y2 ¼ R2. Plot it. Note that
k1 ¼ R1, k2 ¼ R1, K ¼ R2 everywhere on the surface.
12.3 Let us get an explicit formula for the Gaussian curvature K in terms
of the metric and its derivatives. To avoid a wealth of subscripts let
us use “old-fashioned” notation for the ﬁrst and second fundamental
forms,
ds2 ¼ dx$dx ¼ Edu2 þ 2Fdudv þ Gdv2
dx$dN ¼ edu2 þ 2fdudv þ gdv2
We will use subscripts to denote derivatives with respect to the
coordinate mesh (u, v). So, the tangent plane at a point P is spanned
by the vectors xu ¼ vx/vu and xv ¼ vx/vv. An inﬁnitesimal change
in the normal vector at P is,
dN ¼ Nudu þ Nvdv
320
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

a. Show that
e ¼ xu$Nu;
2f ¼ ðxu$Nv þ xv$NuÞ;
g ¼ xv$Nv
b. Since xu$N ¼ xv$N ¼ 0, show that xu$Nv ¼ xv$Nu, so
f ¼ xu$Nv ¼ xv$Nu
And,
e ¼ xuu$N;
f ¼ xuv$N;
g ¼ xvv$N
c. Use N ¼ ðxuxvÞ
jxuxvj ¼ ðxuxvÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
EGF2
p
to show that,
e ¼ ðEG  F2Þ
1=2det

xuu
yuu
zuu
xu
yu
zu
xv
yv
zv

and corresponding expressions for f and g.
d. Recall that the Gaussian curvature is the ratio of the determi-
nants of the second and ﬁrst fundamental forms,
K ¼ eg  f 2
EG  F2
On a large sheet of paper, write out this expression in terms of
the three determinants in the numerator obtained in part c.
Use the identities det(AB) ¼ det A det B and det A ¼ det AT,
where “T” means transpose, to write the expression for K as
the difference of two determinants,
K ¼
1
ðEG  F2Þ2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
det

xuu$xvv
xuu$xu
xuu$xv
xu$xvv
xu$xu
xu$xv
xv$xvv
xv$xu
xv$xv

det

xuv$xuv
xuv$xu
xuv$xv
xu$xuv
xu$xu
xu$xv
xv$xuv
xv$xu
xv$xv

9
>
>
=
>
>
;
e. Recognize that all the entries in these determinants are compo-
nents of the metric, E, G, and F, and their derivatives except
xuu$xvv and xuv$xuv. Use the deﬁnitions,
E ¼ xu$xu;
F ¼ xu$xv;
G ¼ xv$xv
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
321

to show that,
 1
2Evv þ Fuv  1
2Guu ¼ xuu$xvv  xuv$xuv
Why is this useful? Imagine expanding the determinants in part
d: xuu$xvv multiplies EG  F2 in the ﬁrst one and xuv$xuv multi-
plies EG  F2 in the second one, so K only depends on the
difference, xuu$xvv  xuv$xuv.
f. Identify the entries in the determinant in part d. and use the
observation in part e. to obtain,
K ¼
1
ðEG  F2Þ2
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
det

1
2Evv þ Fuv  1
2Guu
1
2Eu
1
2Ev
Fv  1
2Gu
E
F
1
2Gv
F
G

det

0
1
2Ev
1
2Gu
1
2Ev
E
F
1
2Gu
F
G

9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
g. Choose to parameterize the surface with an orthogonal mesh
(u, v) so that xu$xv ¼ F ¼ 0 everywhere. Then the expression
in part f. simpliﬁes. Show that,
K ¼ 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
EG
p
"
v
vu
 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
p
v
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
G
p
vu
!
þ v
vv
 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
G
p
v
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
p
vv
!#
You have derive by brute force(!) Gauss’ Theorema Egregium:
the Gaussian curvature is an intrinsic property of the surface; it
only depends on the metric and its derivatives, quantities that
do not rely on the existence of an embedding space.
322
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

12.4 Now let us prove the relation Nu  Nv ¼ Kxu  xv, which was used
in the text to derive the geometric interpretation of the Gaussian
curvature K, Eq. (12.17).
a. Show that Nu and Nv are linearly independent and lie in the
tangent plane at P. (Hint: To show that the vectors Nu and Nv
lie in the tangent plane differentiate bN$ bN ¼ 1 with respect to
u and/or v.)
b. Argue that at any point P on the surface Nu  Nv points in the
direction bN ¼ ðxu  xvÞ

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
detðgÞ
p
, so there is a scalar c such that
Nu  Nv ¼ cxu  xv.
c. To determine c, ﬁrst show that,
ðxu  xvÞ$ðNu  NvÞ ¼ eg  f 2 ¼ detðbÞ
and we have used the notation of the previous problem, parts a
and b. Hint: Apply the vector identity used in the text and
appendices, ða  bÞ$ðc  dÞ ¼ ða$cÞðb$dÞ  ða$dÞðb$cÞ
d. Combine the result of part c with Nu  Nv ¼ cxu  xv, and the
result established in the text, (xu  xv)$(xu  xv) ¼ det (g), to
establish that,
c ¼ detðbÞ
detðgÞ
which is the Gaussian curvature K!
12.5 In the weak gravitational Newtonian limit, we saw that the gravita-
tional potential V(r) contributed to the zero-zero component of the
metric, g00 z 1 þ 2V
c2 . Let us check that 2V
c2 is actually small in many
applications:
a. Show that 2V
c2 z 109 on the surface of the Earth.
b. Show that 2V
c2 z 106 on the surface of the Sun.
c. Show that 2V
c2 z 104 on the surface of a white dwarf star.
12.6 Let us provide some of the steps summarized in Appendix G, which
derives the equation of motion of a particle in curvilinear coordi-
nates and obtains an explicit formula for the Christoffel symbols.
a. In Appendix G, show that Eq. (G.5) follows from Eq. (G.4).
b. In Appendix G, verify the validity of Eq. (G.9) and (G.10). Show
that the Christoffel symbol is given by,
Gk
ij ¼ 1
2
X
l
gkl
vgil
vxj
þ vglj
vxi
 vgij
vxl

as claimed there.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
323

12.7 Consider an ordinary sphere of radius R. Recall that the invariant
interval on the surface of the sphere is ds2 ¼ R2dq2 þ R2sin2 qd42
where q and 4 are the polar and azimuthal angles of the usual polar
coordinate system.
a. In matrix notation, show that the metric and its inverse are,
gij ¼
 R2
0
0
R2 sin2 q

and,
gij ¼
0
B
B
@
1
R2
0
0
1
R2 sin2 q
1
C
C
A
b. The Christoffel symbols with all lower indices are given by, as
found in Appendix G,
Gmjk ¼ 1
2 ðvkgmj þ vjgmk  vmgikÞ
Show that the only nonzero Christoffel symbols for the surface
of a sphere are,
G44q ¼ R2 sin q cos q;
Gq44 ¼ R2 sin q cos q
G4
4q ¼ g44G44q ¼ cos q
sin q;
Gq
44 ¼ gqqGq44 ¼ sin q cos q
c. The Riemann curvature tensor is,
Ri
jkm ¼ vkGi
jm  vmGi
jk þ
X
n
Gi
nkGn
jm 
X
n
Gi
nmGn
jk
Show that,
Rq
4q4 ¼ sin2 q
and all the nonzero components of the tensor can be obtained
from this one.
d. Show that the Ricci tensor for the surface of the sphere is,
Rjm ¼
X
i
Ri
jim ¼ 1
R2 gjm
324
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

e. Show that the Ricci scalar, the trace of Rjm, is,
X
i
Ri
i ¼ 2
R2
so the “curvature” grows larger as the sphere becomes smaller.
f. The geodesic equation on the sphere is,
d2xm
dt2 þ
X
ij
Gm
ij
dxi
dt
dxj
dt ¼ 0
Show that,
d2q
dt2  sin q cos q
d4
dt
2
¼ 0
d24
dt2 þ 2 cot q dq
dt
d4
dt ¼ 0
Identify the Coriolis and centripetal “forces” in these equations
12.8 Christoffel symbols, plane polar coordinates, and Newtonian
mechanics.
Consider a nonrelativistic particle in a gravitational potential
generated by a mass M at the origin,
d2r
dt2 ¼ GM
r2 br
This is a problem with a central potential so the motion of the
particle in the potential will be planar. Let us use plane polar coor-
dinates so,
dx2 þ dy2 ¼ dr2 þ r2dq2
In plane polar coordinates dr
dthui ¼
dr
dt; dq
dt

, g11 ¼ g11 ¼ 1, g22 ¼ r2,
g22 ¼ 1/r2 and the equation of motion written in (r, q) coordinates
reads,
dui
dt þ
X
kl
Gi
klukul ¼ GM
r2
di
1
a. Calculate the Christoffel symbols from the metric in plane polar
coordinates, and verify that G1
22 ¼ r and G2
12 ¼ G2
21 ¼ 1

r
with all others vanishing.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
325

b. Show that the equations of motion read,
d2r
dt2  r
dq
dt
2
¼ GM
r2
d2q
dt2 þ 2
r
dr
dt
dq
dt ¼ 0
c. Show that the second equation gives the conservation law for the
orbital angular momentum, r2dq
dt ¼ L. Substitute this into the ﬁrst
equation to convert it to a one-dimensional differential equation
for the radial coordinate.
d. Argue that the terms coming from the Christoffel symbols are
the centripetal and Coriolis forces discussed in Section 11.1.
12.9 Calculating Christoffel symbols from spatial dependence of coordi-
nate system.
Let us calculate the Christoffel symbols for plane polar coordi-
nates using the deﬁnition in the text,
vbea ¼
X
g
Gg
abeg
In Cartesian coordinates r ¼ r cos q i þ r sin qj and the coordinate
vectors of plane polar coordinates are,
vr
vr ¼ er ¼ cos q i þ sin q j
vr
vq ¼ eq ¼ r sin q i þ r cos q j
a. Show that
ver
vr ¼ 0;
ver
vq ¼ 1
r eq;
veq
vr ¼ 1
r eq;
veq
vq ¼ rer
b. Show that the results in part a give the Christoffel symbols,
Gq
rq ¼ Gq
qr ¼ 1
r;
Gr
qq ¼ r
and the other Christoffel symbols vanish.
12.10 Plane polar coordinates, and the covariant derivative.
Let us do one more exercise with plane polar coordinates. We
want to illustrate that Dm, the covariant derivative, measures the
real variation in vector ﬁelds. For example, the Cartesian unit vectors
bi and bj are constant vectors in the plane. However, when written in
terms of er and eq, a basis that varies in magnitude and direction over
326
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

the plane, this obvious fact is obscured. Let us check that the
formalism is smart by doing a “really stupid” calculation: calculate
the components Dbi and Dbj in plane polar coordinates and verify
that, indeed, bi and bj are constant vectors, Dbi ¼ Dbj ¼ 0!
a. In Problem 12.9 you calculated er and eq in terms of bi and bj.
Invert these expressions and ﬁnd,
bi ¼ cos q er  1
r sin q eq;
bj ¼ sin q er þ 1
r cos q eq
b. Verify Dqir ¼ Dqiq ¼ Drir ¼ Driq ¼ 0 and Dqjr ¼ Dqjq ¼ Dr jr ¼
Dr jq ¼ 0. First note that ir ¼ cos q and iq ¼ 1
r sin q from part a.
Then
using
the
Christoffel
symbols
from
Problem
12.8,
Gq
rq ¼ Gq
qr ¼ 1
r and Gg
qq ¼ r, verify,
Dqiq ¼ vqiq þ Gq
rqir ¼ 1
r cos q þ 1
r cos q ¼ 0
Check the seven other cases.
The Christoffel term in the covariant derivative expression
removes the variation of the curvilinear coordinates so the covar-
iant derivative produces the real rate of change of the vector it
acts on.
12.11 Symmetries of the Riemann tensor.
An elegant approach to deriving the symmetries of the Riemann
tensor is to begin in a locally inertial frame at a point P. If we can
prove tensor relations there, they will be generally true, in any
coordinate system.
a. Recall that Ga
gd ¼ 0 at P and use Eq. (12.44) to ﬁnd the deriv-
ative of Ga
gd at P,
vsGa
mn ¼ 1
2
X
b
gab
vnvsgbm þ vsvmgbn  vbvsgmn

b. Use Eq. (12.46) to write the Riemann tensor at P in terms of the
metric and its second derivatives,
Ra
bmn ¼ 1
2
X
s
gas
vbvmgsn  vbvngsm þ vsvngbm  vsvmgbn

Rabmn ¼
X
l
galRl
bmn ¼ 1
2

vbvmgan  vbvngam þ vavngbm  vavmgbn

Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
327

c. Use the result in part b to verify the symmetry properties listed in
the text,
Rabmn ¼ Rbamn ¼ Rabnm ¼ Rmnab
Rabmn þ Ranbm þ Ramnb ¼ 0
Since these relations are tensor equations, if they are true in one
coordinate system, they are true in all coordinate systems! We
used a locally inertial frame to minimize our labors.
d. Use the symmetries to argue that the number of independent
components of the Riemann tensor is “only” 20. (Without these
symmetries the tensor would have had 4  4  4  4 ¼ 256
independent components.)
e. Starting from Eq. (12.46), show that in a locally inertial frame at
point P,
vlRabmn ¼ 1
2

vbvmvl gan  vbvnvl gam þ vavnvl gbm  vavmvl gbn

f. Use the result of part e to show that,
vlRabmn þ vnRablm þ vmRabnl ¼ 0
This expression can be written in terms of the covariant deriva-
tive since the covariant derivative and the partial derivatives
coincide in a locally inertial frame,
DlRabmn þ DnRablm þ DmRabnl ¼ 0
But this is a tensor relation, so it is true in all coordinate systems.
It is the Bianchi identity referenced and used in the text.
g. Recall the deﬁnition of the Ricci tensor,
Rab ¼
X
l
Rl
alb
Note that the Ricci tensor is symmetric, Rab ¼ Rba. Use the
symmetry properties of Rabmn to argue that other contractions,
such as P
l
Rl
abl, either vanish identically or reduce to Rab.
So, the Ricci tensor is the unique second-rank tensor that can
be made from the Riemann tensor.
12.12 The symmetry properties of the Riemann tensor can be found from
another method, which does not depend on using an inertial frame.
328
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

a. Show from Eq. (12.46) for the Riemann tensor and Eq. (12.44)
for the Christoffel symbol that a general expression for Rabgd
reads,
Rabgd ¼ 1
2

vdva gbg  vdvbgag þ vgvbgad  vgva gbd


X
rs
grsðGragGsbd  GradGsbgÞ
b. Prove the symmetry properties 1e3 listed in the text after
Eq. (12.47) using the result of part a.
12.13 The Poincare Disc and Non-Euclidean Geometry
We have seen that the surface of a sphere has a constant positive
Gaussian curvature. The plane has vanishing Gaussian curvature (a
cylinder does also since it is obtained from a plane by bending).
What about a surface of constant negative curvature? There is a
famous theorem (D. Hilbert) that states that a regular complete
two-dimensional surface of constant negative curvature cannot be
embedded in three dimensions.
However, Poincarè pointed out that one could invent a two-
dimensional space with a metric so that K ¼ 1 everywhere! It is
the Poincarè disc.
Consider plane polar coordinates (r, q) with r < 1 and a metric,
ds2 ¼ 4

dr2 þ r2dq2
ð1  r2Þ2
a. Calculate the Gaussian curvature K, using the formula from
Problem 12.3 or Appendix G.2, and verify that it is a constant
1 over the entire Poincarè disc.
b. Let us compare the radius of a circle to its circumference in such
a space. Calculate the radius R of a line segment from (0, 0) to
(r, 0),
R ¼
Z r
0
2dr
0
1  r
02 ¼ ln
1 þ r
1  r

So r ¼ (eR  1)/(eR + 1). We learn that R / N as r / 1
and the physical space is inﬁnite!
c. Calculate the circumference of a circle of physical radius R and
centered at the origin,
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
329

C ¼
Z 2p
0
2rdq
1  r2 ¼ 2p
2r
1  r2 ¼ 2p
eR  eR
2

¼ 2p sinh R
d. Use the geometric deﬁnition of Gaussian curvature, Eq. (12.2),
and verify that K ¼ 1 at the origin.
e. To develop a deeper perspective on this problem, read about
Escher tilings, non-Euclidean geometry of Bolyai and Lobachev-
sky, and its formulation in the complex plane and the unit disc.
12.14 The Schwarzschild metric in isotropic coordinates.
We want to write the Schwarzschild metric in a coordinate
system where the spatial part of the ds2 is ﬂat, Euclidean three-space,
ds2 ¼ AðrÞdt2  BðrÞðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
We write this expression in spherical coordinates to compare with
the results in Section 12.7,
ds2 ¼ AðrÞdt2  l2ðrÞ

dr2 þ r2dq2 þ r2 sin2 qd42
Comparing with the Schwarzschild metric obtained and studied in
the text,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1  2GM
c2r
1
dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
ð12:67Þ
we see that,
AðrÞ ¼

1  2GM
c2r

;
r2 ¼ l2r2;

1  2GM
c2r
1
dr2 ¼ l2dr2
a. Integrate the expression

1  2GM
c2r
	1
dr2 ¼ l2dr2 and require
that r w r as either variable becomes large, and ﬁnd
r ¼ r

1 þ GM
2c2r
2
so that
l2 ¼

1 þ GM
2c2r
4
330
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

b. Show
that
the
Schwarzschild
metric
reads
in
isotropic
coordinates,
ds2 ¼

1  GM
2c2r
2

1 þ GM
2c2r
2 c2dt2 

1 þ GM
2c2r
4
dr2 þ r2dq2 þ r2 sin2 qd42
where we have relabeled r as r in the last step. This metric can be
written,
ds2 ¼

1  GM
2c2r
2

1 þ GM
2c2r
2 c2dt2 

1 þ GM
2c2r
4
ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
as promised, where r2 ¼ x2 þ y2 þ z2.
Note that in the weak gravity case, we can write this result to
linear accuracy in the “small” parameter GM
2c2r  1;
ds2 z

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GM
c2r

ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
We have obtained this result, accurate to O(c4), in several
different ways in Chapters 11 and 12 and the problem sets. It
is important in cosmology.
12.15 Linearized gravity, the divergenceless, traceless “gauge.”
In the text, we obtained the transformation property for small
ﬂuctuations about a ﬂat Minkowski metric,
eg 0
mn ¼ egmnðxÞ  vmεn  vnεm þ Oðε2Þ
In the general relativity literature it is conventional to deﬁne,
hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 g 0
ð Þ
mn h;
h ¼
X
aeg a
a
a. Show that the transformation law for hmn is,
h
0
mn ¼ hmn  vmεn  vnεm þ gð0Þ
mn
X
a
εa
a
and show that,
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
331

X
n
vnh
0mn ¼
X
n
vnhmn 
X
n
vnvnεm
So if we choose εm
to solve the differential equation,
P
n
vnhmn  P
n
vnvnεm ¼ 0,
then
h
0mn
is
divergenceless,
P
n
vnh
0mn ¼ 0:
b. There is still some freedom in our choose of εm: we can always
add a solution to the wave equation, P
n
vnvnum ¼ 0. Now,
eg 00
mn ¼ eg 0
mn  vmun  vnum
Show that
X
m
egm
00m ¼
X
m
egm
0m  2
X
m
vmum
So if um solves the differential equation P
m
vmum ¼ 1
2
P
m
egm
0m, then
P
m
egm
00m ¼ 0.
We learn that we can always choose a divergenceless, traceless
“gauge” where,
X
n
vnegmn ¼ 0;
X
m
egm
m ¼ 0
In this gauge
h ¼ 0;
hmn ¼ egmn
12.16 Linearized gravity near a source.
Consider small ﬂuctuations around the Minkowski metric,
gmn ¼ gð0Þ
mn þegmn
a. Show that the Riemann tensor is, to ﬁrst order in egmn,
Rabgd ¼ 1
2

vbvgegad þ vavdegbg  vbvdegag  vavgegbd
	
b. Show that Rabgd is “gauge” invariant, i.e., under a transforma-
tion eg
0
mn ¼ egmnðxÞ  vmεn  vnεm, Rabgd is unchanged. Note
that this is another proof that the physics is invariant to small
coordinate transformations in the case of linearized gravity.
c. Introduce the ﬁeld,
332
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h
h ¼
X
a
ega
a
as in Problem 12.15. Show that this equation can be written in
the form,
egmn ¼ hmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h
h ¼
X
a
ha
a ¼ h
d. Show that to ﬁrst order in egmn the Einstein tensor reads,
Gab ¼ 1
2
 X
m
vmvmhab þ g0
ab
X
mn
vmvnhmn 
X
m
vmvbham 
X
m
vmvahbm
!
e. If we impose the Lorenz gauge to hmn, P
n
vnh
mn ¼ 0; show that,
Rab ¼ Gab ¼ 1
2
X
g
vgvghab
So, the linearized Einstein ﬁeld equation reduces to the wave
equation for the metric ﬂuctuation hmn in a ﬂat background
Minkowski metric,

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

hmn ¼ 16pG
c4
Tmn
Note that the Lorenz gauge choice here makes the equation
compatible
with
energyemomentum
conservation,
P
n
vnT mn ¼ 0:
12.17 Linearized gravity, the Newtonian limit, and isotropic coordinates.
Let us apply what we learned in Problem 12.14 to the Newtonian
limit of general relativity.
Consider
the
weak
ﬁeld
case
(Newtonian
limit)
where
T 00 / rc2 and the wave equation of part e of Problem 12.16
reduces to Newton’s law of gravity, V2F ¼ 4pGr, if we identify
h
00 ¼ 4F

c2,
with
all
other
components
of
hab
and
Tab
negligible. Show that in this limit,
h ¼ 4F=c2
and use the deﬁnition, hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h, to ﬁnd,
eg00 ¼ eg11 ¼ eg22 ¼ eg33 ¼ 2F=c2
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
333

So the metric in the static, weak ﬁeld case reads,
ds2 ¼

1 þ 2F
c2

c2dt2 

1  2F
c2

ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
This result is accurate to order 1/c4. This coordinate system, intro-
duced in Problem 12.14, is called “isotropic” because of its manifest
rotational symmetry in the spatial coordinates.
12.18 Weak gravity and isotropic coordinates.
In Chapter 11 we argued, on the basis of the equivalence prin-
ciple, that the metric in a weak 2GM/c2r  1 gravitational ﬁeld
was approximately,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GM
c2r

dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
þ O
1
c4

We can write this in isotropic form if we make a small transforma-
tion to the radial coordinate,
r ¼ r þ GM
c2
Show that the metric becomes,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GM
c2r

dr2 þ r2dq2 þ r2 sin2 qd42
þ O
1
c4

If
we
deﬁne
r2 ¼ r02 ¼ x02þy02þz02,
x0 ¼ r sin q cos 4,
y0 ¼ r sin q cos 4, and z0 ¼ r cos q,
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1 þ 2GM
c2r

ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ þ O
1
c4

where we dropped the primes for clarity.
12.19 Newtonian mechanics in a weakly curved isotropic metric.
Consider the metric of Problem 12.17,
ds2 ¼

1 þ 2F
c2

c2dt2 

1  2F
c2

ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
where 2F/c2  1.
a. Calculate the nonvanishing Christoffel symbols for this metric
and verify,
334
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

G0
00 ¼ vF
c2vcs;
Gi
00 ¼ vF
c2vxi
b. Consider a particle of mass m. Its equation of motion is given by
the geodesic,
d2xb
d2s þ
X
ag
Gb
ga
dxa
ds
dxg
ds ¼ 0
Simplify this expression for nonrelativistic kinematics, p0 [ pi,
and show that for the index b ¼ 0; it becomes Newtonian
energy conservation to leading order,
d
dt ðE þ mFÞ ¼ 0
And for b ¼ i, (i ¼ 1, 2, 3), it becomes Newton’s second law for
a particle in a gravitational ﬁeld,
d
dt p ¼ mVF
to leading order.
This example illustrates that in Einstein’s world, gravitation is
curvature, expressed through nonzero Gb
ga, and in Newton’s world,
gravitation is a universal force, proportional to every body’s inertial
mass.
12.20 Newtonian mechanics and circular orbits.
In our illustrations of sources of gravity waves, we will use
Newtonian nonrelativistic mechanics to model the system and
make estimates. This naïve approach works surprisingly well up until
the last fraction of a second when the constituent stars collide.
Consider a two-body system in their center of mass frame as
shown in Fig. 12.23. The system rotates with an angular velocity
u with a ﬁxed distance between the stars. Newton’s second law
reads,
m1
v2
1
r1
¼ m2
v2
2
r2
¼ G
m1m2
ðr1 þ r2Þ2
and the condition for the center of mass reads m1r1 ¼ m2r2 and
u ¼ v1/r1 ¼ v2/r2.
a. Derive Kepler’s law for circular orbits,
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
335

u ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Gðm1 þ m2Þ
r3
r
where r ¼ r1 þ r2.
b. Show that the total energy of the system in the center of mass
frame, 1
2m1v2
1 þ 1
2m2v2
2  Gm1m2
r
is,
EB ¼ Gm1m2
2r
where the subscript “B” indicates “binding” energy.
c. Use this expression for the binding energy and the formula for
the power loss due to the radiation of gravity waves,
dEB
dt ¼ 32G4
5c5r5 m2
1m2
2ðm1 þ m2Þ
to derive the rate at which the distance between the pair
decreases,
dr
dt ¼ 64G3
5c5r3 m1m2ðm1 þ m2Þ
12.21 Indirect evidence for gravitational waves (“HulseeTaylor” binary).
On July 2, 1974, R.A. Hulse and J.H. Taylor detected signals
from a pulsar using the Arecibo radio telescope. After many obser-
vations and data analyses, they inferred that they were observing a
binary system consisting of a pulsar and another neutron star, which
were orbiting one another with a period of 7.75 h. The pulsar
period was measured to be 59 ms, 17 times per second, which
allowed the observers to infer precise results for the characteristics
of the binary.
a. The mass of the pulsar was 1.44 solar masses, and the mass of its
companion was 1.39 solar masses.
b. The
semimajor
axis
of
the
pair
is,
a ¼ 2.3418 light
seconds (702,053 km).
c. The semiminor axis of the pair is, b ¼ 1.8426 lightseconds.
d. The rate of decrease of the orbital period was 76.5 ms per Earth
year.
Let us model this system with a simpler one we can easily
analyze, a circular orbit where the distance between the stars is
r ¼ a þ b ¼ 4.185 lightseconds.
Let
us
apply
Newtonian
mechanics to this binary as in the problems above and use those
formulas to learn more about it,
336
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

a. What is the power radiated in gravity waves by this idealized
model of the binary? (A more realistic estimate predicts approx-
imately 7.35  1024 W, which is 1.9% of the power radiated as
light by the Sun.)
b. For one orbit, calculate the approximate change in r. (Hint: The
fractional change in r is small so there is no need to do an inte-
gration. A more realistic calculation predicts a rate of decrease of
the semimajor axis of 3.5 m per Earth year.)
c. What is the orbital velocity of the stars relative to the center of
mass? (A more realistic calculation predicts an orbital velocity of
the stars at the point of closest approach of w450 km/s and at
the point of greatest separation, w110 km/s)
d. Could advanced LIGO detect the gravity waves from this
system? Evaluate Eq. (12.93) assuming the present best estimate
of the distance to the binary of 20,000 light-years. Evaluate
the frequency of the gravity waves.
12.22 Comparison of radiation rates for electromagnetism and gravity.
Consider a hydrogen atom in its ground state. According to clas-
sical physics, it should radiate electromagnetic waves and lose energy
at the rate (Larmor formula),
dE
dt ¼ 2kq2a2
3c3
where q is the charge of the electron and a is its acceleration. This
formula applies as long as v/c  1.
a. Look up the size of the ﬁrst Bohr radius, and estimate the accel-
eration a classically. You may assume Newtonian mechanics, the
Coulomb force law, and a circular orbit so Problem 12.20
applies.
b. Evaluate dE
dt from the Larmor formula and calculate the rate at
which classical physics predicts the size of the Bohr orbit should
decrease.
c. Derive the classical prediction for the lifetime of the Bohr orbit.
d. Repeat this exercise for gravitational radiation from the
hydrogen atom. Compare the rate of electromagnetic radiation
with that of gravitational radiation numerically.
12.23 More on radiation: electromagnetic and gravitational.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
337

a. Suppose an electron decelerates at a constant rate a from an initial
velocity v0 to zero. Assume that v0/c  1 so that nonrelativistic
kinematics applies. What fraction of its initial kinetic energy is
radiated away? Use the Larmor formula given in Problem 12.22.
b. Repeat part a. for gravitational radiation. Replace the charged
particle with a particle of mass m but no charge. (Hint. You
can view the particle from a freely falling frame in a constant
gravitational ﬁeld. Keep the equivalence principle in mind. Be
careful!)
c. In light of part b. reconsider part a. Consider a charged particle at
rest on the surface of the Earth. It experiences a constant accel-
eration of 9.8 m/s2 but it remains at rest in this noninertial frame.
Does it radiate? Next, view the electron from the perspective of a
freely falling observer. The observer’s local frame is inertial so
special relativity should apply. Does the charged particle radiate
in his frame? (This “simple” problem is actually very challenging,
and very famous. See Ref. [8] for a discussion and a list of
references.)
12.24 Schwarzschild radius in Newtonian mechanics.
a. Show that the Newtonian escape velocity from a mass M at
distance r is vescape ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2GM=r
p
¼ c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rSch=r
p
.
If we impose the speed limit of special relativity here, we see
that the particle ejected in this fashion could not escape to inﬁn-
ity if initially r < rSch.
b. Calculate
numerically
the
acceleration
of
gravity
at
the
Schwarzschild radius. Compare with g on the Earth.
c. Continuing the line of thinking in part a, note that a particle
could escape by simply accelerating from r < rSch to r > rSchin
Newton’s world. How much energy is required to move a
mass m from just below the Schwarzschild radius to inﬁnity in
Newton’s world? Is quantum physics and/or relativistic me-
chanics required in a proper description of particle dynamics in
the vicinity of the Schwarzschild radius?
12.25 Newton’s turntable.
Let us return to our ﬁrst discussion in Chapter 11 where we
discussed “apparent” forces on a turntable in Newton’s world. Let
us unleash the formalism of general relativity and get those results
systematically. Talk about cracking a nut with a sledgehammer!
338
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

Anyway, we start with Cartesian coordinates xa ¼ (t, x1, x2) and
want to transform to general coordinates εa ¼ (t, ε1, ε2). Note that
the ﬁrst variable in both coordinate systems is Newton’s universal
time, t. In the Cartesian coordinate system we have Newton’s
second law,
d2xi
dt2 ¼ Fi
where the index i ranges over 1 and 2.
The metric in Newton’s world is purely spatial,
ds2 ¼
X
i

dxi2 ¼
X
imn
vxi
vεm
vxi
vεn dεmdεn ¼
X
mn
g mndεmdεn
And,
gmn ¼
X
i
vxi
vεm
vxi
vεn
Here the indices m and n run over 1 and 2.
a. Repeat the derivation for geodesics in the text or, better, in
Appendix G, and ﬁnd Newton’s second law in the general coor-
dinate system,
d2εi
dt2 þ
X
jkab
gijvxk
vεj
v2xk
vεavεb
dεa
dt
dεb
dt ¼ f i
where a and b run over 0, 1, and 2, and the indices i and j run
over 1 and 2 only. (We could have identiﬁed a Christoffel
symbol here, following earlier discussions.)
Here f I is the force in the second coordinate system,
f i ¼
X
j
vεi
vxjF j
Now let us apply this to the turntable of Chapter 11,
x ¼ r cosðq þ utÞ
y ¼ r sinðq þ utÞ
b. Find the metric in the second coordinate system, (t, r, q),
gij ¼
 1
0
0
r2

gij ¼
 1
0
0
r2

c. Now for some algebra! We need all the partial derivatives of x
and y with respect to t, r, and q.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
339

Let us use some abbreviations: c ¼ cos (q þ ut) and s ¼ sin
(q þ ut).
Verify,
vx
vt ¼ urs
vx
vr ¼ c
vx
vq ¼ rs
and the analogous expressions for y, following from the substitu-
tion, x / y, s / c, and c / s,
vy
vt ¼ urc
vy
vr ¼ s
vy
vq ¼ rc
Similarly,
v2x
vt2 ¼ u2rc
v2x
vrvt ¼ us
v2x
vqvt ¼ urc
v2x
vtvr ¼ us
v2x
vr2 ¼ 0
v2x
vqvr ¼ s
v2x
vtvq ¼ urc
v2x
vrvq ¼ s
v2x
vq2 ¼ rc
and the analogous expressions for y following from the substitu-
tion, x / y, s / c, and c / s,
v2y
vt2 ¼ u2rs
v2y
vrvt ¼ uc
v2y
vqvt ¼ urs
v2y
vtvr ¼ uc
v2y
vr2 ¼ 0
v2y
vqvr ¼ c
v2y
vtvq ¼ urs
v2y
vrvq ¼ c
v2y
vq2 ¼ rs
d. Since r2 ¼ x2 þ y2, show that,
vr
vx ¼ x
r ¼ c
vr
vy ¼ y
r ¼ s
and since x ¼ r cos (q þ ut), and y ¼ r sin (q þ ut), show that,
vq
vx ¼ s
r
vq
vy ¼ c
r
So the transformation law for the external force is,
340
Special Relativity, Electrodynamics, and General Relativity

f 1 ¼ cF1 þ sF2
f 2 ¼ s
rF1 þ c
rF2
e. Finally, using these bits we can write out the equation of motion
in part a. Verify,
d2r
dt2  u2r  2ur dq
dt  r
dq
dt
2
¼ d2r
dt2  r

u þ dq
dt
2
¼ f 1
d2q
dt2 þ 2u
r
dr
dt þ 2
r
dr
dt
dq
dt ¼ d2q
dt2 þ 2
r
dr
dt

u þ dq
dt

¼ f 2
where we see the centripetal and Coriolis forces yet again.
12.26 Show that if a particle contributes T ab ¼ r0uaub to the energye
momentum tensor, then the conservation condition, P
a
DaT ab ¼ 0
implies that the particle travels on a geodesic.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Kreyszig, Differential Geometry, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1991.
[2] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Pergamon Press, Oxford,
1962.
[3] R.P. Feynman, F.B. Morinigo, W.G. Wagner, Feynman Lectures on Gravitation,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 1995.
[4] J. Foster, J.D. Nightingale, L Short Course in General Relativity, Springer-Verlag,
New York, 1995.
[5] E.F. Taylor, J.A. Wheeler, Exploring Black Holes, Addison Wesley Longman, New
York, 2000.
[6] W. Rindler, Essential Relativity, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
[7] E.F. Taylor, J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics, W. H. Freeman, New York, 1992.
[8] C. de Almeida, A. Saa, The radiation of a uniformly accelerated charge is beyond the
horizon: a simple derivation, Am. J. Phys (December 2, 2005) arXiv:physics/
0506049v5.
Curvature, Strong Gravity, and Gravitational Waves
341

APPENDIX A
Physical Constants, Data, and
Conversion Factors
1. Speed of light in empty space: c ¼ 2.9979.$108 m/s
2. Gravitational constant: G ¼ 6.673$1011 m3/kg-s2
3. Planck’s constant: h ¼ 6.626$1031 kg-m2/s
4. Electron’s charge: e ¼ 1.602$1019 coulombs
5. Electron’s rest mass: m ¼ 9.109$1031 kg ¼ 0.511 MeV/c2
6. Proton’s rest mass: m ¼ 1.673$1027 kg ¼ 938 MeV/c2
7. Mass of Earth: M ¼ 5.9742$1024 kg
8. Radius of Earth: R ¼ 6.371$106 m
9. Mass of the Sun: M ¼ 1.989$1030 kg
10. Radius of the Sun: R ¼ 6.960$108 m
11. Distance of Earth to the Sun: D ¼ 1.50$1011 m
12. Orbital speed of Earth around the Sun: y ¼ 2.98$104 m/s
13. Electronvolt conversion: 1 eV ¼ 1.602$1019 J
14. Kilometer conversion: 1 km ¼ 0.6214 miles
15. Length of a year: 1 year ¼ 3.156$107 s
343

APPENDIX B
Solutions to Selected Problems
B.1 CHAPTER 2 PROBLEMS
Problem 2-1
a. In the spaceship frame, events 1 and 2 do not occur at the same space
point; that is, event 2 occurs on Earth. However, both events 1 and
2 occur at the same place in the Earth frame, so it is a proper time in-
terval in the Earth frame.
b. Following the same reasoning as in part (a), the time interval between
events 2 and 3 is not a proper time interval in either frame.
c. The time interval between events 1 and 3 is a proper time interval in the
spaceship frame, but not in the Earth frame.
d. Because the time between events 1 and 2 is a proper time interval in the
Earth frame, all that the spaceship sees is a dilated time value,
t0
2 ¼ g te ¼
10
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
min ¼ 12:5 min.
e. The velocity of Earth according to the spaceship is 0.6c. Additionally,
the time between events 2 and 1, according to the spaceship, is
12.5 min, as found in part (d). So the distance of Earth at event 2, ac-
cording to the spaceship, is
l0
2 ¼ 12:5$60$0:6c ¼ 1:35$1011m.
f. The time between events 3 and 2 is (according to the spaceship)
t0
3  t0
2 ¼ l0
2
c ¼ 7:5 min.
And we know the time of event 2 according to the spaceship. So the time
of event 3 is
t0
3 ¼ 7:5 þ 12:5 ¼ 20 min.
g. From Earth’s perspective, when Earth emits the pulse (event 2), the
spaceship is at a distance
345

l2 ¼ 10 min$0:6c ¼ 1:08$1011m.
When the pulse reaches the spaceship, the spaceship has moved an
additional distance. Let the time for the pulse to travel to the spaceship
be called Dt, where
Dt ¼ t3  t2
and
cDt ¼ 1:08$1011 þ yDt
Dt ¼
1:08$1011
2:9979$108$0:4 ¼ 900 s ¼ 15 min.
So the time of event 3 according to Earth is
t3 ¼ t2 þ Dt ¼ 25 min.
h. We know that the time interval between events 3 and 1 is a proper time
in the spaceship frame (part c). So the time interval between events 3
and 1 in the Earth frame should just be the dilated value of the time in-
terval in the rocket frame:
t3  t1 ¼ g

t0
3  t0
1

:
Now t1 ¼ t0
1 ¼ 0, so we should have
t3 ¼ g t0
3.
Let us see if this is true: t3 ¼ 25 min, while t0
3 ¼ 20 min.
t3 ¼ g t0
3 ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
20 ¼ 5
4$20 ¼ 25 min.
Hence our results are consistent.
Problem 2-2
a. The relative velocity yr is the velocity of rocket B measured by A. The
distance traveled in A’s frame is 100 m (the length of rocket A in its own
frame), and the time taken, as measured by A’s clocks, is 1.5$106 s. So,
346
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

yr ¼
100
1:5$106 ¼ 6:67$107 m=s.
b. The time measurement depends only on the relative velocity, and we
know that the relative velocity of B with respect to A equals the relative
velocity of A with respect to B. Hence the time (shown by the clocks
on B) for the front end of A to pass the entire length of B is also
1.5$106 s.
c. An observer sitting in the front end of B sees a contracted length of
rocket A. This length contraction is given by
l0 ¼ 1
g l ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  ðyr=cÞ2
q
l ¼ 0:9749:100 ¼ 97:49 m.
The time taken is therefore
t ¼ l0
yr
¼ l
yrg ¼ 1:5$106
g
¼ 0:9749$1:5$106 ¼ 1:46$106 s.
This time is not expected to agree with the time in part (b) because the
events occur at two different points in A’s frame, namely the front and
back ends. In part (b) only the front end is being timed.
Problem 2-3
a. Given
NðtÞ ¼ N02t=T;
the time for one-third of the pions to decay (in the rest frame of the pions)
is given by
2
3 ¼ 2t0
T
t0 ¼ T lnð3=2Þ
lnð2Þ ¼ 1:05$108 s.
The length traveled by the pions in the lab frame is 35 m. So the pions see a
contracted length in their own rest frame. This is given by
l0 ¼ 1
g ¼ 35
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
m.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
347

Additionally, we have
y ¼ l0
t0 ¼
1
1:05$108 35
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
.
We solve the equation by squaring both sides
y2 ¼
1016
1:1025 1225

1  y2
c2

y2

1 þ 1111:11$1016
9:1016

¼ 1111:11$1016
y2 ¼ 8:93$1016;
which gives us
y ¼ 2:985$108m=s;
which is just slightly less than the speed of light.
b. l0 ¼ l
g ¼ 35
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
m ¼ 2:27 m.
Problem 2-5
a. According to the rocket frame, the signal travels from the nose of the
rocket to the tail. This is just the length of the rocket in its own frame.
Moreover, the speed of light is invariant, so the time taken in the rocket
frame is given by
t0 ¼ l0
c .
b. At time t ¼ 0, an observer in frame S measures the tail of the spaceship
to be a distance l0/g to the left of A, according to Lorentz contraction.
The tail of the spaceship is moving at velocity y to the right, so the time
t when light reaches the tail is given by
ct ¼ l0=g  yt.
Solving for t, we ﬁnd
t ¼ l0=½cgð1 þ y=cÞ ¼ l0
c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
.
348
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

c. An observer in frame S sees a contracted length of the spaceship. So the
time for the whole ship to pass point A is given by
t2 ¼ 1
y
l0
g .
B.2 CHAPTER 3 PROBLEMS
Problem 3-1
The events are illustrated in Figs. B.1eB.4.
The ﬁgures can be used to read off the values:
1. x0 ¼ 0.58, ct0 ¼ 0.58
2. x0 ¼ 1.15, ct0 ¼ 2.3
3. x ¼ 1.7, ct ¼ 1.7
4. x ¼ 1.15, ct ¼ 2.3
Figure B.1 Minkowski diagram for the event in Problem 3.1 part b.i. x ¼ 1, ct ¼ 1.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
349

Figure B.2 Minkowski diagram for the event in Problem 3.1 part b.ii. x ¼ 0, ct ¼ 2.
Figure B.3 Minkowski diagram for the event in Problem 3.1 part b.iii. x0 ¼ 1, ct0 ¼ 1.
350
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Problem 3-7
The Minkowski diagram for the events is shown in Fig. B.5.
Figure B.4 Minkowski diagram for the event in Problem 3.1 part b.iv. x0 ¼ 0, ct0 ¼ 2.
Figure B.5 Minkowski diagram for Problem 2.1.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
351

From the graph, we can see that (a) the time interval between events 1
and 2 is a proper time in the Earth frame, (b) the time interval between
events 2 and 3 is not a proper time interval in either frame, while (c) the
time interval between events 1 and 3 is a proper time in the spaceship
frame. (For an interval to be a proper time, both events should lie on the
time axis of some frame.)
We also get (d) t0
2 ¼ 12.5 min, while (e) the distance of Earth from the
spaceship (as measured by the spaceship) at event 2 is 1.35$1011 m.
Additionally, (f) the time of event 3, as seen by the spaceship, is 20 min,
while (g) the time of the same event seen by Earth is 25 min.
Thus (h) our results from the diagram match with those of Chapter 2.
B.3 CHAPTER 4 PROBLEMS
Problem 4-1
Let us use invariant intervals to solve this problem. In frame S, the square of
the interval is
ðDxÞ2  ðcDtÞ2 ¼ 02  ð5cÞ2 ¼ 25c2;
where Dx ¼ 0 because the events occur at the same place in S.
The value of the invariant interval is the same when measured in any
inertial frame, so an observer in S0 has
25c2 ¼ ðDx0Þ
2  ðcDt0Þ
2
¼ ðDx0Þ2  ð7cÞ2
ðDx0Þ2 ¼ 24c2
ðDx0Þ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
24c
p
m;
which is the answer we need.
Problem 4-2
In frame S,
ðDxÞ2  ðcDtÞ2 ¼ ð2000Þ2  02 ¼ 4$106.
352
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

In S0,
4$106 ¼ ðDx0Þ
2  ðcDt0Þ
2
¼ ð4000Þ2  ðcDt0Þ
2
ðcDt0Þ2 ¼ 12$106
Dt0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
12
9 $1010
r
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4
3$105
r
s.
Problem 4-3
Use the deﬁnition b h y/c ¼ 4/5 to make the notation efﬁcient. The
Lorentz transformations give
x ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  b2
p
x0 þ
b
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  b2
p
ct0
¼ 1
0:6$100 þ 0:8
0:6$3$108$9$108
¼ 202:67 m
and
t ¼
b
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  b2
p
x0
c þ
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  b2
p
t0
¼ 0:8
0:6$ 100
3$108 þ 1
0:6$9$108
¼ 59:44$108 s.
Problem 4-4
Use the Lorentz transformation,
t0 ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
ðt  yx=c2Þ.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
353

a. Equating the t0 for the two events, we get
t1  yx1
c2 ¼ t2  yx2
c2
y
c2 ð2L  LÞ ¼ L
2c  L
c
y ¼ c
2 .
b.
t0 ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3=4
p
L
c þ L
2c

¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
L
c
.
Problem 4-5
g ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  0:82
p
¼ 5
3 .
a.
t0 ¼ g

t  yx
c2
	
¼ 5
3

5$107  400
5c

¼ 5
3$107

5  8
3

¼ 1:48$107 s.
x0 ¼ 5
3

100  4c
5 $5$107

¼ 100
3
m.
354
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

b.
t0
2 ¼ 5
3

7$107  200
5c

¼ 11:67$107 s
and the time difference is
Dt0 ¼ t0
2  t0 ¼ 10:19$107 s.
Problem 4-7
a. To ﬁnd the velocity of the particle in frame S, we use the relativistic
addition formula,
u ¼ 0:6c  c=3
1  0:6=3 ¼ c
3 .
b. Use the invariance of the spaceetime interval,
ðDxÞ2  c2ðDtÞ2 ¼ ðDx0Þ2  c2ðDt0Þ2.
We know Dt0 ¼ 3$107  107 s, and
Dx0 ¼ u0Dt0 ¼ c
3 $2$107.
Additionally, we know that Dt ¼ Dx/u, which gives us
ðDxÞ2

1  c2
u2

¼ 4:1014
c2
9  c2

;
which gives, using u from part (a),
ðDxÞ ¼ 2c
3 $107 ¼ 20 m.
We could have also done the problem equally easily using Lorentz
transformations.
Problem 4-9
Let vS be the velocity of light in the frame S. This is given by the relativistic
addition formula
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
355

yS ¼ ym þ y
1 þ ymy
c2
.
We expand the denominator in a Taylor series,
yS ¼ ðym þ yÞ

1 þ ymy
c2
	1
¼ ðym þ yÞ

1  ymy
c2 þ /
	
;
where we have expanded only to leading order in y/c. We expand the
bracket, again dropping the term with y2/c2:
yS ¼ ym þ y

1  y2
m
c2

.
Problem 4-11
a. Let Earth be at the origin and the star be somewhere in the ﬁrst quad-
rant (i.e., it has positive x and positive y coordinates). Then the light
signal that is emitted from the star toward Earth has negative compo-
nents. If Earth and the star did not have a relative velocity, these com-
ponents would be
yx ¼ c cos q
yy ¼ c sin q.
Now suppose that the star (frame S) is moving away from Earth (frame S0)
with velocity y in the x direction. We therefore know the x component of
velocity in S, and we know the x component of velocity of S0 with respect
to S. So, to ﬁnd the x component of velocity in S0, we use the relativistic
addition formula. Additionally, we note that because the speed of light is
invariant, the only way the x component can change is if the angle q
changes. In S0, the x component of light is therefore given by
y0
x ¼ c cos q0.
So,
c cos q0 ¼
c cos q  y
1  ðyÞðc cos qÞ
c2
.
356
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Dividing through by c, we get the desired result:
cos q0 ¼
cos q þ y
c
1 þ y cos q
c
.
b. As in Problem 4.9, we expand the denominator to ﬁrst order in y/c,
cos q0 z

cos q þ y
c
	
1  y cos q
c

cos q0 z cos q þ y
c  y
ccos2 q
z cos q þ y
csin2 q.
c. We now have q z q0. We have from part (b)
cos q0  cos q ¼ y
csin2 q.
We use a trigonometric identity
cos q0  cos q ¼ 2

sin q  q0
2

sin q þ q0
2

.
We substitute a ¼ q0  q, and use the approximation sin b z b for
jbj  1. We also use the approximate equality of q and q0 in the second
sine term in the product to get
2 a
2

sin 2q
2

z y
c sin2 q
a z  y
c sin q.
Problem 4-14
a. We just use the relativistic addition formulae
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
357

yx ¼
y0
x þ y
1 þ
y0
xy
c2

yy ¼
y0
y
g

1 þ

y0
xy

c2
 ¼
y0
y
g .
b. yy and y0
y are different, even though the y coordinates remain un-
changed, because time dilates.
Problem 4-17
a. An observer at rest in frame S0 measures the position of the meter stick
at a particular time t0 in his frame. But, by the relativity of simultaneity, a
clock at 0.5 m lags the time on a clock at þ0.5 m when viewed from
S0. Therefore an observer in S0 states that the right end of the rod rea-
ches y ¼ 0 before the left end of the rod. The rod is, therefore, seen to
tilt up to the right, as shown in Fig. B.6. Curious!
b. First ﬁnd the time and position in frame S0 when the right end of the
meter stick crosses the x axis. This event occurs in the S frame at
t1 ¼ 0 and x1 ¼ 0.5 m, y1 ¼ 0. Using Lorentz transformations gives
x0
1 ¼ gðx1  yt1Þ ¼ 0:5g
t0
1 ¼ g

t1  yx1
c2
	
¼ 0:5gy
c2
y0
1 ¼ 0:
Figure B.6 Visualization of the events 1 and 2 in frames S and S0 for Problem 4.18, part b.
358
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Now we look at another event, that of the midpoint of the meter
stick crossing the x axis. In the S frame, this happens at x2 ¼ y2 ¼ 0,
t2 ¼ 0. In the S0 frame, we have
x0
2 ¼ y0
2 ¼ t0
2 ¼ 0:
Denote the right-end coordinates at time t2 to be ðx0; y0Þ.
From Problem 4.14, we compute the velocities in the x and y direc-
tions in the S0 frame, y0
x ¼ y and y0
y ¼ yy/g,
x0 ¼ x0
1 þ y0
x

t0
2  t0
1

¼ 0:5g  y 0:5gy
c2
¼ 0:5gð1  y2=c2Þ ¼ 0:5
g
y0 ¼ y0 1 þ y0
y

t0
2  t0
1

¼ 0 þ yy
g
0:5gy
c2
¼ yyy
c2 0:5:
And we have
tan f0 ¼ y0
x0 ¼ yyyg
c2 .
B.4 CHAPTER 5 PROBLEMS
Problem 5-2
a. Let the distance of the observer from point 2 be x. The ﬁrst pulse, there-
fore, has to travel a distance of
l1 ¼ d þ x ¼ yt þ x
and the second pulse has to travel a distance of x meters. The observer,
therefore, receives the second pulse at a time
t2 ¼ x
c þ t
and we have
t1 ¼ l1
c ¼ x
c þ t y
c .
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
359

So the interval between the pulses is
T ¼ t2  t1 ¼ t

1  y
c
	
.
b.
d
T ¼
y
1  y=c
follows from part (a). This is the apparent speed the observer sees.
c. If an observer is a distance y to the left of point 1, the two pulses will be
received at times
t1 ¼ y
c
and
t2 ¼ y þ yt
c
þ t.
The time interval is, therefore,
T 0 ¼ t

1 þ y
c
	
and the apparent speed is
d
T 0 ¼
y
1 þ ðy=cÞ .
As y approaches c, d/T 0 approaches c/2.
B.5 CHAPTER 6 PROBLEMS
Problem 6-1
The rest mass energy of the proton is 938 MeV. We use the formula for
relativistic energy to get
E ¼
mc2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
1019eV ¼ 938$106eV
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2=c2
p
.
360
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Solving for y, we get
g ¼
1019
938$106 ¼ 1:067$1010
y
c ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  ð938$1013Þ
2
q
z 1  ð938$1013Þ
2
2
.
So, the proton is traveling very close to the speed limit. The fractional dif-
ference is only 4.40$1021.
a. The time it takes to traverse the galaxy in the galaxy frame is given by
tgal ¼ 105c year
y
¼
105 year
1  ð938$1013Þ2
2
z 105 year
b. The event of the proton traversing the galaxy is a proper time interval in
the proton’s frame because the two events, the proton starting off and
the proton reaching the edge of the galaxy, occur at the same space
point in the proton’s frame. Therefore the time seen by the galaxy be-
tween these two events is just the dilated proton time for the same
events. But we know the galaxy time from part (a), so we have
tgal ¼ gtproton
tproton ¼ tgal
g
¼
105 year
1  ð938$1013Þ
2
2
1
1:067$1010
z 9:38$106years z 4.93 min.
Problem 6-2
The rest mass energy of an electron is 0.51 MeV. The energy acquired in
the potential drop is 105 eV. So, the relativistic energy, gmc2, is
105 þ 0:51$106 ¼ 0:51$106
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
s
¼ 5:1
6:1
y
c ¼ 0:55:
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
361

a. The time to travel 10 m in the lab frame is
tlab ¼ 10
y ¼
10
0:55$3$108 ¼ 6:06$108 s.
b. Following the same reasoning as in Problem 6.1, we have Lorentz
contraction,
del ¼ dlab
g ¼ 5:1
6:1$10 m ¼ 8:36 m.
Problem 6-4
The equations are:
a. Newtonian kinematics,
E ¼ p2
2m þ mc2;
where we included the rest mass energy, mc2, for easy comparison to the
relativistic formulas.
b. Relativistic kinematics for a particle with rest mass m,
E ¼ þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p2c2 þ m2c4
p
.
c. Relativistic kinematics for a massless particle (i.e., photon),
E ¼ jpjc.
The graphs are shown in Fig. B.7. Curves 1 and 2 agree near
E ¼ mc2, whereas curves 2 and 3 agree at large momentum values.
Figure B.7 Energyemomentum plots for the three relations described in parts 1, 2,
and 3 of Problem 6.4.
362
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Problem 6-5
From the Lorentz transformation, we have
E0 ¼ gðE  yp1Þ.
If we specialize to the case of the photon, then p1 ¼ E/c, and we get
E0 ¼ g

E  y E
c

¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
E

1  y
c
	
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
E.
Problem 6-10
The electrostatic potential energy is given by
U ¼ 3kQ2
5r
.
Here Q is the total charge, which is
Q ¼ 1:6$1019$n;
where n is the number of electrons in 1 g of electrons:
n ¼
1$103
9:1$1031 ¼ 1:1$1027.
So, Q ¼ 1.76$108 C and
U ¼ 3$9$109$3:10$1016
5$:1
¼ 1:67$1027:
Equating this to the relativistic rest mass energy, we get
mc2 ¼ U.
So,
m ¼ 1:86$1010 kg;
which is amazingly large!
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
363

Problem 6-11
Consider the equation requiring that the position of the center of mass of
the system does not change. In view of the approximations stated in this
problem, this is
Dx ¼ 0 ¼ mL þ MDx;
where m is the mass equivalent of light, M the mass of the box (neglecting
the loss of mass during light transit), and Dx is the amount moved by the
box. Now, if we include the fact that the box loses mass during light transit,
the second term becomes (M  m)Dx, and if we include the fact that the
box has moved (and hence the light travels less distance before being
absorbed), the ﬁrst term becomes m(L þ Dx). The signs have been taken
according to the conventions in the book. So our equation now reads
0 ¼ mðL þ DxÞ þ ðM  mÞDx;
which gives us exactly the same equation as the one that was derived using
the approximations.
Problem 6-12
The relativistic kinetic energy is given by E  mc2, where E is the total
energy
E  mc2 ¼ 2mc2
E ¼ 3mc2.
Using the formula for relativistic energy, we get
E ¼
mc2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
3mc2 ¼
mc2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
s
¼ 1
3
y ¼ 0:94c:
364
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

The momentum is given by
p ¼
my
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
¼ 3my ¼ 2:82mc.
If the relativistic kinetic energy is ﬁve times the rest mass then,
E ¼ 6mc2, and we have
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
s
¼ 1
6
y ¼ 0:986c
p ¼ 6my ¼ 5:916mc.
Problem 6-13
Since v/c ¼ 0.99, the particle’s g ¼ 1

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  ð0:99Þ2
q
¼ 7:09: For a po-
tential drop of X:
X eV ¼
mc2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
 mc2 ¼ 6:09$0:51$106eV
X ¼ 3:11$106 V.
The proton’s rest mass is 938 MeV, so the value of X becomes
X ¼ 6:09$938$106 ¼ 5712$106 V:
Problem 6-15
Let the incident photon energy be E0 and the reﬂected energy be Ef. Let the
ﬁnal velocity of the rocket be v. Energyemomentum conservation reads,
E0
c ¼ gm0y  Ef
c
E0 þ m0c2 ¼ Ef þ gm0c2.
These give
E0 þ Ef ¼ gm0yc
E0  Ef ¼ gm0c2  m0c2.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
365

Thus
2E0 ¼ gm0yc þ gm0c2  m0c2
E0 ¼ 1
2 m0c2h
g

1 þ y
c
	
 1
i
.
The mass equivalent is
E0
c2 ¼ 1
2 m0
h
g

1 þ y
c
	
 1
i
.
Problem 6-17
Let the photons have a total energy E in the initial rest frame of the rocket.
Energy and momentum conservation read
Mic2 ¼ E þ gMf c2
0 ¼ gMf y  E
c .
This gives
gMf y ¼ E
c
Mic ¼ E
c þ gMf c.
Putting the ﬁrst equation into the second, we get
Mic ¼ gMf ðc þ yÞ
Mi
Mf
¼
1 þ y
c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
¼
0
B
@
1 þ y
c
1  y
c
1
C
A
1=2
.
366
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Problem 6.18
The energy of each lump prior to the collision is
mc2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  ð3=5Þ2
q
¼ 5
4 mc2
Relativistic energy conservation then reads,
5
4 mc2 þ 5
4 mc2 ¼ Mc2
So,
M ¼ 5
2 m
Since M > 2m, the kinetic energy has been converted to mass.
Problem 6.19
Relativistic energy and momentum are conserved in the decay,
pn ¼ pm
Em þ En ¼ mpc2
Since En ¼ jpnjc, we have from momentum conservation En ¼
pm
c. But
p2
mc2 ¼ E2
m  m2
mc2, so from energy conservation,
Em þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E2
m  m2
mc2
q
¼ mpc2
Solve the quadratic equation,
Em ¼

m2
p þ m2
m
	
c2.
mp
Next, the magnitude of the velocity of the muon is,
vm ¼
pm
c2
Em ¼ c

1  m2
mc4.
E2
m
	1=2
¼ c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 
4m2
pm2
m

m2
p þ m2
m
	2
v
u
u
t
after some algebra.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
367

Problem 6-21
In the rest frame of the Ko meson, the two p mesons are emitted in
opposite directions, so that momentum is conserved. We are observing
from the lab frame, in which the Ko meson is moving, so the problem is one
of relativistic velocity addition. The speed of the meson that is moving in
the same direction as the K meson in the lab frame is
ymax ¼
y1 þ yr
1 þ y1yr=c2
¼ 0:9c þ 0:85c
1 þ 0:765
¼ 0:992c
and the minimum speed is that of the other pion,
ymin ¼
y2 þ yr
1 þ y2yr=c2
¼ 0:9c þ 0:85c
1  0:765
¼ 0:212c.
Problem 6-22
The velocity of B observed by A is, using relativistic addition of velocities,
yr ¼
2y
1 þ y2=c2 .
The energy is given by
E ¼
M0c2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
r

c2
q
1  y2
r
c2 ¼ 1 
4y2
c2
1 þ y2=c22
¼

1 þ y2=c22c2  4y2

1 þ y2=c22c2
¼ c2
1  y2=c22
c2
1 þ y2=c22 .
368
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

So we get
E ¼ M0c21 þ y2=c2
1  y2=c2 .
Problem 6-23
a. We know that for a relativistic system, energies add, momenta add (vec-
torially), but rest masses do not add. So the total energy of the two pho-
tons is Etotal ¼ 200 þ 400 ¼ 600 MeV. The momentum of a photon is
given by p ¼ E/c, and the total momentum of the system is
ptotal ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð400=cÞ2 þ ð200=cÞ2
q
¼ 200
ﬃﬃﬃ
5
p
MeV=c
at an angle q ¼ 63.43 degrees above the x axis.
b. If a single particle had the total energy and total momentum of the sys-
tem, it would have a rest mass m given by
E2
total  p2
totalc2 ¼ m2c4
6002  5$2002 ¼ m2c4;
which gives
m ¼ 400 Mev=c2.
The single particle would travel along the direction making an angle
q ¼ 63.43 degrees above the x axis.
To ﬁnd the speed, we have
y
c2 ¼ ptotal
Etotal
y
c ¼ ptotalc
Etotal
y ¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
5
p
3 c.
Problem 6-25
The total energy is
E ¼ moc2 þ 3moc2 þ 2moc2 ¼ 6moc2.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
369

The total momentum is carried solely by the ﬁrst particle, and this is
p2c2 ¼ E2
1  m2
oc4;
where E1 ¼ moc2 þ 3moc2 ¼ 4moc2.
p2 ¼ 15m2
oc2.
Now we consider the composite particle.
E2  p2c2 ¼ M 2
o c4.
This gives
M 2
o ¼ 36m2
o  15m2
o ¼ 21m2
o.
So, Mo ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
21mo
p
.
Problem 6-26
a. Using momentum and energy conservation relations,
E
c ¼ gmy
E þ moc2 ¼ gmc2.
Performing the algebra, we get the velocity,
y
c ¼
E
gmc2 ¼
E
E þ moc2 .
Next, we calculate 1/g in terms of mo and E:
1
g ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
¼

2Emoc2 þ m2
oc41=2
E þ moc2
.
Now we get m, the mass of the composite particle:
m ¼ 1
g

mo þ E
c2

¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2
o þ 2Emo
c2
r
.
b. The incident particle has a velocity of vi ¼ 4c/5 m/s, and a gi given by
gi ¼

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  16=25
p
	1
¼ 5=3:
370
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Employing the conservation relations, we have
5
3$4
5 moc ¼ 4
3 moc ¼ gmy
5
3 moc2 þ moc2 ¼ gmc2.
Algebra gives
4
3 moc ¼ gmy
8
3 mo ¼ gm.
So,
y ¼ c
2
g ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  1=4
p
¼ 2ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p ;
which gives
8
3 mo ¼ 2ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p m
m ¼ 4ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p mo.
Problem 6-28
a. We have the kinetic energy,
K ¼ ðg  1Þmoc2.
The values given are mo ¼ 135 MeV/c2, K ¼ 1 GeV, so
109 ¼ ðg  1Þ$135$106
g  1 ¼ 1000=135
g ¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
¼ 8:4074
y ¼ 2:977:108 m=s.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
371

Let E1 and E2 be the energies of the photons, where the photon with E2
travels in the direction of the incident p meson. We have
gmoy ¼ E2
c  E1
c
gmoc2 ¼ E1 þ E2.
We get
E2 þ E1 ¼ gmoc2
E2  E1 ¼ gmocy;
which gives
E2 ¼ 1
2 gmocðc þ yÞ ¼ 1:131 GeV
E1 ¼ 1
2 gmocðc  yÞ ¼ 3:973 MeV.
b. Let q be the angle between one photon and the incident direction.
Then the angle included between the two photons is 2q. We have
gmoc2 ¼ 2E
gmoy ¼ 2E
c cos q.
So,
gmoy ¼ gmoc cos q
cos q ¼ y
c
q ¼ 6:769 degrees
and the included angle is 2q ¼ 13.539 degrees.
Problem 6-29
a. We have one photon going forward and one backward. The conserva-
tion relations read
372
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Ep þ Ep ¼ E1 þ E2
1000 þ 2$938 ¼ E1 þ E2
and
pp ¼ 1
c ðE1  E2Þ;
where pp can be found simply:
p2
pc2 ¼ E2
p  m2c4
p2
pc2 ¼ 19382  9382
ppc ¼ 1695:9 MeV.
The two equations give
E1 ¼ 2286 MeV
E2 ¼ 590 MeV.
b. We now ﬁnd the velocity of the antiproton,
1938 MeV ¼ 938 Mev
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
c2
r
;
which gives
y ¼ 0:875c.
So the energy of the photons measured in this frame are
E0
1 ¼ gðE1  yp1Þ ¼ g

E1  y
cE1
	
E0
1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y=c
1 þ y=c
s
E1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  0:875
1 þ 0:875
r
2286 ¼ 590 MeV
E0
2 ¼ gðE2  yp2Þ ¼ g

E2 þ y
c E2
	
E0
2 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ y=c
1  y=c
s
E1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 0:875
1  0:875
r
590 ¼ 2286 MeV.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
373

So, in this frame the energies of the photons switchdwhich we could have
anticipated without calculation!
Problem 6-31
If Q is the energy of the photon, we have
Q þ gomoc2 ¼ Q þ gf moc2
Q
c  gomyo ¼ Q
c þ gf moyf ;
where yf and gf refer to the electron after the collision. The ﬁrst equation
gives go ¼ gf, which implies yo ¼ yf. So,
2Q
c
¼ 2gomoyo
Q
c ¼
myo
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  y2
o

c2
q
y2
o ¼ Q2
m2c2

1  y2
o
c2

y2
o

1 þ Q2
m2
oc4

¼ Q2
m2
oc2
yo ¼
Qc
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Q2 þ m2
oc4
q
;
which is the required answer.
Problem 6-33
Let the momentum of the K meson be p. Because one of the created pions
is at rest, the second pion’s momentum must be p. The conservation re-
lations read
EK ¼ 137 þ Ep
pK ¼ pp;
374
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

where the subscript p refers to the moving pion. Squaring the momentum
relation equation, multiplying by c2, and subtracting from the square of the
energy conservation equation, we get
E2
K  p2
Kc2 ¼ 1372 þ 2$137$Ep þ E2
p  p2
pc2.
The left-hand side and the last two terms of the right-hand side are clearly
the expressions for rest mass energies m2
Kc4 and m2
pc4; which we know, so
we get
4942 ¼ 1372 þ 274Ep þ 1372 ¼ 37538 þ 274Ep
Ep ¼ 753:6 MeV.
The energy of the original K meson is given by
EK ¼ 137 þ Ep ¼ 890:6 MeV.
Problem 6-34
The conﬁguration that has the minimum ﬁnal energy is that in which all
the three created particles move in the same direction with equal velocities.
(Viewed from the center of momentum frame, this means that all the
particles in the ﬁnal state are created at rest there.) In such a case, the
conservation relations read in the lab frame (where E is the gamma-ray
energy),
E þ 0:51 Mev ¼ 3Ee;
where Ee is the energy of each of the created particles.
pe ¼ E
3c
because momenta are shared equally. Combining these equations,
E2
e ¼ 0:512 þ p2
ec2 ¼ 0:512 þ E2
9 ¼
E þ 0:51
5
2
.
We can solve for E:
9$

0:512 þ E2
9

¼ E2 þ 0:512 þ 1:02E
E ¼ 8$0:512
1:02
¼ 2:04 MeV.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
375

Problem 6-35
Let us use invariant methods to solve this problem. Let p be the energye
momentum four-vector p ¼

E

c; p!
. The invariant length of p is
p2 ¼ E2
c2  p!2 ¼ m2
oc2; where we identiﬁed the rest mass mo in the
special case that p refers to a single particle. Note that p2 is the same
in all frames, so we could evaluate it in any frame to solve a practical
problem.
In this problem, energyemomentum conservation written as a four-
vector relation is p1 þ p2 ¼ p3 þ p4 þ pX in an obvious notation. Because
the four vectors p1 þ p2 and p3 þ p4 þ pX are equal, so are their invariant
lengths,
ðp1 þ p2Þ2 ¼ ðp3 þ p4 þ pXÞ2.
Evaluate the left-hand side of this equation in the lab frame and the
right-hand side in the center of momentum frame. To obtain the
maximum rest mass mX, all three ﬁnal-state particles should be produced at
rest in the center of momentum frame. So,
c2ðp3 þ p4 þ pXÞ2 ¼ ðmoc2 þ moc2 þ mXc2Þ
2.
The left-hand side is easily evaluated in terms of lab quantities,
c2ðp1 þ p2Þ2 ¼ ðE1 þ moc2Þ
2  c2 p!2 ¼ m2
oc4 þ 2moc2E1 þ E2
1  p!2
1c2.
But E2
1  p!2
1c2 ¼ m2
oc4; so;
c2ðp1 þ p2Þ2 ¼ 2m2
oc4 þ 2moc2E1.
Combining these two results,
2m2
oc4 þ 2moc2E1 ¼

2moc2 þ mXc22;
which gives,
mXc2 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2moc2ðmoc2 þ E1Þ
p
 2moc2 ¼ 219 GeV
after
substituting
in
moc2 ¼ 0.938 GeV/c2,
and
E1 ¼ 300 GeV þ
0.938 GeV.
A nice aspect of this method of solution is that we did not have to
calculate any velocities in intermediate steps on the way to determining mX.
376
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Problem 6-36
a. One photon emerges with energy E1 at right angles to the incident line
of motion. Let the other photon emerge with energy E2 at an angle q
from the incident line of motion. The total initial energy (in MeV) is
0.511 (rest mass of positron) þ 0.511 (kinetic energy of positron) þ
0.511 (rest mass of electron). So we get
3$0:511 ¼ E1 þ E2.
The initial momentum is due to the positron and is in the incident direc-
tion. Its value is
pc ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E2  m2c4
p
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð0:511$2Þ2  0:5112
q
¼ 0:511
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
MeV.
The momentum conservation in the right-angle direction to the
incident line of motion is
E1
c ¼ E2
c sin q
and in the incident direction
E2
c cos q ¼ 0:511
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
c
.
Squaring and adding the last two relations (sin2 q þ cos2 q ¼ 1), we get
E2
2 ¼ 0:5112$3 þ E2
1.
Squaring the energy conservation equation, we get
E2
2 ¼ 9$0:5112  6$0:511$E1 þ E2
1.
Equating the last two equations, we get
E1 ¼ 0:511 MeV.
Energy conservation gives
E2 ¼ 3$0:511  E1 ¼ 1:022 MeV.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
377

b. The angle is found from the momentum conservation relation,
E1 ¼ E2 sin q
sin q ¼ E1
E2
;
which gives q ¼ 30 degrees.
Problem 6-38
a. The binding energy is found from the deﬁnition given in the problem:
1
c2 DE ¼ mBe  4mp  3mn
¼ 6536  4$938:28  3$939:57 ¼ 35:83 MeV=c2.
b. The initial energy is EBe þ En ¼ 6536 þ 939.57 ¼ 7475.57 MeV. The
energy is split up equally between the alpha particles, so
7475:57 ¼ 2ðK þ mc2Þ ¼ 2ðK þ 3728Þ;
which gives
Problem 6.39
a. In the center of momentum, all the ﬁnal-state particles are produced at
rest at the threshold energy, so 2Ebeam ¼ 4mpc2 which gives Ebeam ¼
2mpc2 ¼ 1876 MeV.
b. Boost the solution to part a. from the center of momentum frame to the
lab frame. Consider the invariant,
ðp1 þ p2Þ2 ¼ ðp3 þ p4 þ p5 þ p6Þ2
Evaluate the left-hand side in the lab frame and the right-hand side in the
center of momentum,

E1 þ mpc22  p2
1c2 ¼

4mpc22
E2
1 þ 2mpc2E1 þ m2
pc4  p2
1c2 ¼ 16m2
pc4
But E2
1  p2
1c2 ¼ m2
pc4, so E1 ¼ 7mpc2 ¼ 6566 MeV.
378
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

So, much less beam energy is required to produce antiprotons using a
collider as compared to a ﬁxed target accelerator.
B.6 CHAPTER 8 PROBLEMS
Problem 8.1
The derivation follows the steps in Section 8.1 except now,
x0 ¼ gðx  vtÞ
It is convenient to introduce the vector between the charge at time t and
the observation point r where E is measured, R ¼ rvt. It makes an angle
q with the velocity v, as shown in Fig. B.8.
Then, the desired electric ﬁeld reads,
Eðr; tÞ ¼ kq
1  v2=c2
ð1  v2 sin2 q=c2Þ3=2
bR
R2
And the magnetic ﬁeld is which points out of the page as shown in Fig. B.8,
B ¼ 1
c2 ðv  EÞ
Figure B.8 Coordinate set-up for the calculation of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
generated by a moving charge in Problem 8.1.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
379

Problem 8.4
b. You showed in part a, using Gauss’s law, that Ey w s. Under a boost,
the x extension of the capacitor contracts by a factor of g, so
E0
yws0 ¼ gs, so E0
y ¼ gEy.
c. In this case, the area is transverse to the direction of the boost so, s0 ¼ s
and E0
x ¼ Ex.
e. The boosted solenoid is contracted by a factor of g in the x direction.
Since l0 ¼ l/g and n is the turns per length, n0 ¼ gn. But by time dila-
tion, the number of charges passing a point on the wire is dilated by a
factor of g by the boost, so I0 ¼ I/g. Since Ampere’s law gave Bx w nI
in part d, B0
x ¼ Bx.
B.7 CHAPTER 9 PROBLEMS
Problem 9.3
a.
H
E$dl ¼ d
dt %B$da
The rate of change of the enclosed area is vl. So,
V ¼
I
E$dl ¼ RI ¼ Bvl
which gives,
IðtÞ ¼ Bl
R vðtÞ
b. Force ¼ BlI, by the Lorentz force law, and it points to the left.
c. Equation of motion of the rod,
m dv
dt ¼ BlI ¼ B2l2
R v
So,
vðtÞ ¼ v0 expð B2l2t=mRÞ.
380
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

d. Power loss ¼ RI2ðtÞ ¼ B2l2v2
0
R
expð 2B2l2t=mRÞ.
Energy loss
¼
Z N
0
RI2dt ¼ B2l2v2
0
R
Z
expð 2B2l2t=mRÞdt ¼ B2l2v2
0
R
$ mR
2B2l2 ¼ 1
2 mv2
0
Problem 9.5
There is an electric ﬁeld at the rim according to Faraday’s law,
I
E$dl ¼ d
dt

ZZ
B$da ¼ pa2dB
dt
A charge element ldl on the rim experiences a force E(ldl) which produces
a torque (torque ¼ lever arm  force, which is the rate of change of the
angular momentum, dL/dt),
dL
dt ¼ b
I
Eldl

¼ blpa2dB
dt
So, the total angular momentum is
L ¼
Z dL
dt dt ¼ blpa2
Z N
0
dB
dt dt ¼ blpa2B0
where the magnetic ﬁeld started at B0 at t ¼ 0 and fell to zero. The angular
momentum is lever arm  momentum and velocity is lever arm  angular
velocity u, so L ¼ bMv ¼ bMub ¼ Mb2u, so the ﬁnal angular velocity is,
u ¼ lpa2B0
Mb
and we have assumed that the mass M is concentrated at the rim, a distance
b from the axis of rotation.
B.8 CHAPTER 12 PROBLEMS
Problem 12.8
a. We will use Eq. (12.44) to calculate the Christoffel symbols from the
metric,
Gm
rb ¼ 1
2
X
a
gma
vrgba þ vbgar  vagrb

Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
381

Label the variables 1 ¼ r and 2 ¼ q and compute,
G1
22 ¼ 1
2 g11ðv2g21 þ v2g12  v1g22Þ ¼ 1
2
v
vrr2 ¼ r
G2
12 ¼ 1
2 g22ðv2g21 þ v1g22  v2g12Þ ¼ 1
2r2
v
vrr2 ¼ 1
r
Similar algebra shows that the other components of the Christoffel symbol
vanish.
b. Substituting G1
22 ¼ r and u1 ¼ dr/dt and u2 ¼ dq/dt into the ﬁrst
geodesic equation gives,
d2r
dt2  r
dq
dt
2
¼ GM
r2
c. The angular momentum is L ¼ r2dq
dt and its conservation law reads,
d
dt

r2dq
dt

¼ 2r dr
dt
dq
dt þ r2d2q
dt2 ¼ 0
which, upon dividing through by r2, is the second geodesic equation.
Problem 12.9
a. Given the tangent vectors er ¼ cos qi þ sin qj and eq ¼ r sin qi þ
r cos qj, calculate the derivatives,
ver
vr ¼ 0
ver
vq ¼ sin q i þ cos q j ¼ 1
r eq
veq
vr ¼ sin qi þ cos qj ¼ 1
req
veq
vq ¼ r cos qi  r sin qj ¼ rer
b. Write out vbea ¼ P
gGg
abeg;
ver
vr ¼ 0 ¼ Gr
rrer þ Gq
rreq; so
Gr
rr ¼ 0;
Gq
rr ¼ 0
382
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

ver
vq ¼ 1
req ¼ Gr
qrer þ Gq
qreq; so
Gr
qr ¼ 0;
Gq
qr ¼ 1
r
veq
vr ¼ 1
req ¼ Gr
rqer þ Gq
rqeq; so
Gr
rq ¼ 0;
Gq
rq ¼ 1
r
veq
vq ¼ rer ¼ Gr
qqer þ Gq
qqeq; so
Gr
qq ¼ r;
Gq
qq ¼ 0
Problem 12.11
Ga
mn ¼ 1
2
X
b
gab
vmgnb þ vngbm  vbgmn

a. Differentiate Ga
mn, then set vsgabðPÞ ¼ 0 and ﬁnd,
vsGa
mn ¼ 1
2
X
b
gab
vsvmgnb þ vsvngbm  vsvbgmn

b. Since Ga
mnðPÞ ¼ 0, the expression for the Riemann tensor reduces to
Ra
bmn ¼ vmGa
nb  vnGa
mb. Substituting the result of part a and noting
two cancelling terms, ﬁnd,
Ra
bmn ¼ 1
2
X
s
gas
vbvmgsn  vbvngsm þ vsvngbm  vsvmgbn

Rabmn ¼
X
l
galRl
bmn ¼ 1
2

vbvmgan  vbvngam þ vavngbm  vavmgbn

Problem 12.14
a.

1  2GM
c2r
1
dr2 ¼ l2dr2 ¼ r2
r2 dr2. Set k ¼ 2GM
c2
and integrate,
Z
dr
ﬃﬃr
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
r  k
p
¼
Z dr
r
2 log


ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
r  k
p
þ
ﬃﬃr
p 	.
2
 ¼ log r
where the constant of integration was chosen so that r / r for large r. So,
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
383


ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
r  k
p
þ
ﬃﬃr
p 
2
¼
ﬃﬃﬃr
p
Solving for r,
r ¼ r

1 þ k
4r
2
¼ r

1 þ GM
2c2r
2
Problem 12.15
a. We have the transformation law eg0
mn ¼ egmnðxÞ  vmεn  vnεm þ Oðε2Þ
and want to compute the transformation law for hmn ¼ egmn  1
2gð0Þ
mn h
where h ¼ P
aega
a.
Compute,
h
0
mn ¼ eg0
mn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h0 ¼ egmnðxÞ  vmεn  vnεm  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h0
We need,
h0 ¼
X
a
eg0a
a ¼
X
am
gð0Þameg0
ma
¼
X
am
gð0Þam
egma  vmεa  vaεm
	
¼
X
a

ega
a  vaεa  vaεa

¼ h  2
X
a
vaεa
Collecting these two results,
h
0
mn ¼ hmn  vmεn  vnεm þ gð0Þ
mn
 X
a
vaεa
!
Now we can compute the transformation law of the divergence of hmn,
X
n
vnh
0
mn ¼
X
n
vnhmn 
X
n
vnvmεn 
X
n
vnvnεm þ
X
n
gð0Þ
mn vn
 X
a
vaεa
!
But vm ¼ P
n gð0Þ
mn vn, so the second and fourth terms on the right-hand side
cancel, leaving,
X
n
vnh
0mn ¼
X
n
vnh
mn 
X
n
vnvnεm
384
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Problem 12.16
a. The same analysis required here has already been done in Problem
12.11 part b and 12.12 part a. The terms in the Riemann tensor which
are quadratic in the Christoffel symbols do not contribute here because
they are second order in egmn. Since the Minkowski metric in Cartesian
coordinates are constants, they drop out as well leaving only terms
which vary as the second derivatives of egmn. These were written out
explicitly in Problem 12.12 part a.
b. Begin with the transformed Riemann tensor,
R0
abgd ¼ 1
2
 
vbvgeg0
ad þ vavdeg0
bg  vbvdeg0
ag  vavgeg0
bd
!
where eg0
mn ¼ egmnðxÞ  vmεn  vnεm. Substituting into the expression for
R0
abgd, inspect the terms that depend on vmεn and note that they all cancel(!)
leaving,
R0
abgd ¼ Rabgd
c. hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h,
so
P
mh
m
m ¼ P
megm
m  1
2
P
m gð0Þm
m
h
which
reads
h ¼ h  1
2 ð4Þh ¼ h since P
m gð0Þm
m
¼ 1 þ 1 þ 1 þ 1 ¼ 4:
So, egmn ¼ hmn þ 1
2 gð0Þ
mn h ¼ hmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h.
d. To calculate the Einstein tensor to ﬁrst order in egmn, we need the Ricci
tensor and the Ricci scalar to ﬁrst order. Using the result of Problem
12.11 part b or 12.12 part a,
Rbd ¼ 1
2
X
g

vbvgegg
d þ vgvdegbg  vbvdegg
g  vgvgegbd
	
R ¼
X
b
Rb
b ¼ 1
2
X
b

vbvgegg
b þ vgvbegb
g  vbvbegg
g  vgvgegb
b
	
¼
X
bg

vbvgegg
b  vbvbegg
g
	
To ﬁrst order the Einstein tensor is,
Gbd ¼ Rbd  1
2 Rgð0Þ
bd
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
385

Our ﬁnal chore is to substitute in egmn ¼ hmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h, and collect terms and
ﬁnd,
Gab ¼ 1
2
 X
m
vmvmhab þ g0
ab
X
mn
vmvnhmn 
X
m
vmvbham 
X
m
vmvahbm
!
Problem 12.17
We found in the text that in the Newtonian limit, h
00 ¼ 4F
.
c2 and the
other components of h
ab are negligible, h
ab z 0.
Recall that hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h and h ¼ P
aega
a.
So, h11 ¼ eg11  1
2 gð0Þ
11 h z 0 and similarly for 22 and 33. Since gð0Þ
11 ¼ 1;
we learn that h ¼ 2eg11 ¼ 2eg22 ¼ 2eg33. In addition,
h h eg0
0 þeg1
1 þeg2
2 þeg3
3 ¼ eg00 eg11 eg22 eg33 ¼ eg00  3eg11
Since h ¼ 2eg11, we have eg00 ¼ eg11.
Finally, h00 ¼ 4F
c2 ¼ eg00  1
2 gð0Þ
00 h ¼ 1
2 h  1
2 h ¼ h. So,
h ¼ 4F/c2, eg00 ¼ eg11 ¼ eg22 ¼ eg33 ¼ 2F

c2
Problem 12.19
a. g00 ¼ 1 þ 2F/c2 and gii ¼ 1 þ 2F/c2 and
Ga
mn ¼ 1
2
P
b gab
vmgnb þ vngbm  vbgmn

. So, the Christoffel symbols
that dominate the geodesic equation in the Newtonian limit are,
G0
00 ¼ 1
2 g00ðv0g00 þ v0g00  v0g00Þ ¼ 1
2 v0g00 ¼ 1
2
v
vct
2F
c2

¼ vF
c2vct
Gi
00 ¼ 1
2 giiðv0g0i þ v0gi0  vig00Þ ¼ 1
2
v
vxi
2F
c2

¼ vF
c2vxi
b. For nonrelativistic motion, dx0/cds z 1 and dxi/cds  1, so the
geodesic equation becomes,
d2x0
c2ds2 þ G0
00 z 1
c2
d
dt
dx0
ds þ F

z 0
386
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

Multiply through by the mass of the particle and identify the particle’s total
energy, d
dt ðE þ FÞ z 0, which expresses energy conservation in a gravita-
tional potential.
The geodesic equation for the spatial components of the particle’s
position reads
d2xi
c2ds2 þ Gi
00 z 1
c2
d
dt
dxi
ds þ vF
vxi

z 0
Again, multiply through by m,
d
dt p þ mVF z 0
and we have Newton’s second law.
Problem 12.20
a. The centripetal force on particle 2 is provided by its attraction to particle 1,
v2
2
r2
¼ Gm1
r2
But,
v2
2
r2
¼ r2u2 ¼
m1
m1 þ m2
ru2
where we used the center of mass condition, m1r1 ¼ m2r2, to calculate r2 in
terms of r and the particle masses,
r ¼ r2 þ r1 ¼ r2 þ m2
m1
r2 ¼ r2
m1 þ m2
m1
Now,
m1
m1 þ m2
ru2 ¼ Gm1
r2
which can be solved for u,
u ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Gðm1 þ m2Þ
r3
r
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
387

b. Using the kinematics of part a, simplify the total energy of the system,
E ¼ 1
2 m1v2
1 þ 1
2 m2v2
2  Gm1m2
r
¼ 1
2 m1
Gm2
r2 r1 þ 1
2 m2
Gm1
r2 r2  Gm1m2
r
So,
E ¼ 1
2
Gm1m2
r2
ðr1 þ r2Þ  Gm1m2
r
¼ Gm1m2
2r
c. Differentiate the result of part b,
dE
dt ¼ Gm1m2
2r2
dr
dt ¼ 32G4
5c5r5 m2
1m2
2ðm1 þ m2Þ
So,
dr
dt ¼ 64G3m1m2
5c5r3
ðm1 þ m2Þ
Problem 12.24
a. Write down energy conservation when the particle is at distance r with
velocity v and when it is at distance r / N where v / 0,
1
2 mv2  GmM
r
¼ 0
Solving for the velocity,
v ¼
2GM
r
1=2
¼
2GM
c2
c2
r
1=2
¼ c
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rSch
r
r
b. The acceleration of gravity is g ¼ GM
r2 . The Schwarzschild radius is
rSch ¼ 2GM
c2 . So, according to Newtonian mechanics, the acceleration
of gravity at the Schwarzschild radius of a body of mass M is
g ¼
GM
4G2M 2=c4 ¼
c4
4GM
For a black hole having Earth’s mass, substitute the parameters from Appen-
dix A, giving g z 0.5  1045 m/s2, which should be compared to the ac-
celeration of gravity at the earth’s surface, 9.8 m/s2
388
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems

c. The Newtonian potential energy of a particle of mass m at the
Schwarzschild radius of a black hole of mass M is,
GMm
rSch
¼ GMm
c2
2GM ¼ 1
2 mc2
So, an amount of work (energy) 1
2 mc2 is required to move the particle to
large r.
Appendix B: Solutions to Selected Problems
389

APPENDIX C
Mathematics Background
C.1 HANDY APPROXIMATIONS AND EXPANSIONS
There is one approximation we use again and again in this book. In its
simplest form it reads,
1
1  x z 1 þ x þ Oðx2Þ
(C.1)
This equation is useful when x  1 so that the second-order correction,
denoted O(x2) in Eq. (C.1), is numerically much smaller than x itself.
The simplest proof of Eq. (C.1) consists in just multiplying through by
1  x, noting that the product (1 þ x) (1  x) is 1  x2, which differs from
1 by terms of second order. Although Eq. (C.1) can be derived using
differential calculus by invoking Taylor’s theorem, all that power is not
needed. Simple algebra is enough.
For example, let x ¼ 0.01. Then Eq. (C.1) reads that 1/0.99 is well
approximated by 1.01, with an error of order 0.0001. Clearly the linear
approximation that Eq. (C.1) gives makes it very handy.
The exact equality, an inﬁnite expansion, behind Eq. (C.1) is
1
1  x ¼ 1 þ x þ x2 þ x3 þ x4 þ /
(C.2)
where jxj < 1 to guarantee convergence.
Another expansion we use in this book, especially when we face boosts
with v/c  1, is
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  x
p
z 1  x
2 þ Oðx2Þ
(C.3)
To prove this one, just square both sides.
Using these bits of algebra, the approximations used in the book for g
when v/c  1 follow. For example,
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  v2=c2
p
z 1 þ v2
2c2 þ O
v4
c4

391

The general result here is the binomial expansion,
ð1 þ xÞn ¼ 1 þ nx þ nðn  1Þ
2
x2 þ nðn  1Þðn  2Þ
3$2
x3 þ /
C.2 CHAIN RULE OF DIFFERENTIATION AND COORDINATE
TRANSFORMATIONS: APPLICATIONS TO COVARIANT
AND CONTRAVARIANT VECTORS
Suppose y(x) ¼ f(g(x)) and we want the slope of y on the x axis. We do this
through the “chain rule,” which reads,
dy
dx ¼ df
dg
dg
dx
(C.4)
The extension of the chain rule to functions of several variables is also used
in the text. Suppose F(s, t) ¼ F(x(s, t), y(s, t)). Then,
vF
vs ¼ vF
vx
vx
vs þ vF
vy
vy
vs
vF
vt ¼ vF
vx
vx
vt þ vF
vy
vy
vt
(C.5)
Throughout the text we consider coordinate transformations and need to
transform derivatives and differentials between frames. Suppose,
y1 ¼ g1ðx1; x2; .; xmÞ
y2 ¼ g2ðx1; x2; .; xmÞ
yn ¼ gnðx1; x2; .; xmÞ
(C.6)
Then,
v
vxi ¼
X
n
j¼1
vyj
vxi
v
vyj
(C.7)
where i ranges between 1 and m.
For differentials,
dy j ¼
X
m
i¼1
vg j
vxi dxi
(C.8)
392
Appendix C: Mathematics Background

Suppose there is one coordinate mesh xa in spaceetime and a mapping
to the second one x0b ¼ x0bðxaÞ. Both meshes cover the spaceetime
without singularities and the mapping is one-to-one and invertible. If the
mapping is a linear transformation like a boost in special relativity then,
x0a ¼
X
b
La
bxb and vx0a
vxb ¼ La
b
as discussed in the text.
In the general case, imagine transforming from xa to x0b and back to xa.
We can express this sequence of mappings using the chain rule,
X
b
vxa
vx0b
vx0b
vxc ¼ vxa
vxc ¼ da
c
where da
c is the kronecker symbol, da
a ¼ 1 and da
b ¼ 0 if a s b.
These partial derivatives determine the mappings of vectors and tensors
between the two coordinate systems x0bðxaÞ and xa. For example, consider
a curve C(s) in spaceetime and its tangent ﬁeld ua ¼ dxa/ds. We can also
calculate the tangent ﬁeld using the second coordinate system x0b(xa),
u0b ¼ dx0b/ds. Using the chain rule,
dx0a
ds ¼
X
b
vx0a
vxb
dxb
vs
the transformation rule for the vector ﬁeld becomes,
u0a ¼
X
b
vx0a
vxbub
(C.9)
Fields with upper indices are called “contravariant” and Eq. (C.9) gives
their transformation law. See the text for further discussion and examples.
Another example comes from the gradient of a scalar function,
Fa ¼ vaf ¼ vf
vxa
The chain rule gives,
vf
vxa ¼
X
b
vf
vx0b
vx0b
vxa
Appendix C: Mathematics Background
393

or,
Fa ¼
X
b
vx0b
vxaF0
b
(C.10a)
which can be inverted,
F0
b ¼
X
a
vxa
vx0bFa
(C.10b)
Fields with lower indices are called “covariant” and Eq. (C.10) gives their
transformation law.
The inner product of contravariant and covariant vector ﬁelds are
invariant under coordinate transformations. We have illustrated this point
throughout the text. This follows from Eqs. (C.9) and (C.10),
X
a
F0
aT 0a ¼
X
a
 X
b
vxb
vx0aFb
! X
c
vx0a
vxc T c
!
¼
X
abc
vxb
vx0a
vx0a
vxc FbT c
¼
X
bc
db
cFbT c ¼
X
c
FcT c
We showed in the text that second-rank covariant tensors such as the
spaceetime metric transform as,
g0
cd ¼
X
ab
vxa
vx0c
vxb
vx0d gab
and second-rank contravariant tensors transform as,
T 0ab ¼
X
cd
vx0a
vxc
vx0b
vxdT cd
Tensors that have one contravariant index and one covariant index trans-
form as,
M 0a
b ¼
X
cd
vx0a
vxc
vxd
vx0bM c
d
The trace of such a tensor is a scalar,
X
a
M 0a
a ¼
X
acd
vx0a
vxc
vxd
vx0aM c
d ¼
X
cd
dd
c M c
d ¼
X
c
M c
c
394
Appendix C: Mathematics Background

We can invert the mapping in Eq. (C.9) by multiplying with vxc
vx0a and
summing over the index a,
X
a
vxc
vx0au0a ¼
X
ab
vxc
vx0a
vx0a
vxbub ¼
X
b
dc
bub ¼ uc
So,
uc ¼
X
a
vxc
vx0au0a
which we recognize as just a relabeling of Eq. (C.9).
C.3 MATRICES
Let us recall some features of linear systems and illustrate the general case
with 2  2 matrices.
This is just a refresher of material you have studied before with an
emphasis on indices in preparation for the mathematics of relativity in
various coordinate systems.
We start with a linear transformation,
v1 ¼ a11w1 þ a12w2
v2 ¼ a21w1 þ a22w2
which we write in matrix notation,
 v1
v2

¼
 a11
a12
a21
a22
 w1
w2

¼
 a11w1 þ a12w2
a21w1 þ a22w2

or writing out the indices,
vi ¼
X
j
aijwj
Note that the ﬁrst index labels the row of the matrix and the second index
labels the column.
We refer to
 v1
v2

as vectors and
 a11
a12
a21
a22

as matrices.
Recall the rule for successive transformations: if vi ¼ P
jaijwj and
wj ¼ P
kbjkyk, then a short calculation gives vi ¼ P
kcikyk where cik is given
Appendix C: Mathematics Background
395

by matrix multiplication cij ¼ P
kaikbkj. We write simply, c ¼ ab and must
keep the order of the matrices since matrix multiplication is not
commutative.
Some useful deﬁnitions:
a. A matrix a is symmetric if aij ¼ aji.
b. A matrix a is antisymmetric if aij ¼ aji.
c. The transpose of a matrix interchanges rows and columns.
d. The identity matrix is Iij ¼ dij, where dij is the “kronecker” symbol,
dij ¼ 1 if i ¼ j and zero otherwise.
e. If we multiply a matrix by a constant c, then every element in the
matrix is multiplied by c.
f. The determinant of a matrix is,
detðaÞ ¼ det
 a11
a12
a21
a22

¼ a11a22  a12a12
g. The inverse of a matrix a is denoted a1 and is given by
a1 ¼
1
detðaÞ
 a22
a12
a21
a11

Then a1a ¼ aa1 ¼ I. Also, det

a1
¼ 1=det ðaÞ
h. If a and b are two matrices, then det (ab) ¼ det (a) det (b)
Let us illustrate some matrix manipulations that we will need in the text.
Consider a Lorentz transformation, which is introduced in matrix form in
Chapter 8,
Lm
n ¼
0
B
B
@
g
v
c g
v
c g
g
1
C
C
A ¼ g
0
B
B
@
1
v
c
v
c
1
1
C
C
A
Calculate,
det

Lm
n

¼ g2

1  v2
c2

¼ 1
The inverse of Lm
n is,
ðL1Þ
m
n ¼ g
0
B
B
@
1
v
c
v
c
1
1
C
C
A
396
Appendix C: Mathematics Background

This is clearly correct: the inverse is a boost by v along the x axis, so it
“undoes” the original boost by þ v along the x axis. We can check this
by matrix multiplication,
g2
0
B
B
@
1
v
c
v
c
1
1
C
C
A
0
B
B
@
1
v
c
v
c
1
1
C
C
A ¼ g2
0
B
B
B
@
1  v2
c2
0
0
1  v2
c2
1
C
C
C
A ¼
 1
0
0
1

C.4 COVARIANT AND CONTRAVARIANT FOUR-VECTORS
AND DUALITY
Covariant and contravariant vectors were introduced in the text. The
reader may ﬁnd the material of this appendix useful to motivate the dis-
cussion in Chapter 6, Section 5, for example. Let us discuss the geometry
underlying covariant and contravariant vectors.
Consider a two-dimensional surface parametrized by a two-dimensional
mesh, ui¼(u1, u2) ¼ (u,v). The surface lies in a three-dimensional Euclidean
space. A point on the surface can be labeled with either the Cartesian
coordinates r or the coordinates (u1, u2) on the mesh. For a point P on the
surface, r is a function of (u1, u2). The tangent plane at the point P can be
spanned by the basis ei ¼ vr/vui. The basis vector e1 ¼ vr/vu is tangent to a
curve of constant v and e2 ¼ vr/vv is tangent to a curve of constant u. These
basis vectors need not be orthogonal at P and, in fact, their magnitudes and
the angle between them can vary as P moves throughout the mesh on the
surface.
There is another natural basis tangent to the surface at point P: instead of
considering vectors along curves of constant u and v, we could choose
vectors in the directions where u and v change at their maximal rates, Vu
and Vv. Call this basis ei ¼ Vui, with upper or contravariant indices.
Let us check that the bases are “dual” and establish an inner product,
ei$ej ¼ di
j
So, we should calculate,
ei$ej ¼ Vui$vr

vu j ¼
X
m
vui
vrm
vrm
vu j ¼ vui
vu j ¼ di
j
where we used the chain rule from Section C.2 in the last step. Success!
Appendix C: Mathematics Background
397

This property gives the inner product. Consider vectors A and B in the
tangent plane at point P. Write A ¼ A1e1 þ A2e2 using the {ei} basis and
B ¼ B1e1þ B2e2 in the {ei} basis. Then,
A$B ¼ ðA1e1 þ A2e2Þ$ðB1e1 þ B2e2Þ ¼ A1B1 þ A2B2
where we used. ei$ej ¼ di
j.
Next let us check that the covariant metric tensor gij is the inverse of the
contravariant metric tensor gij,
gij ¼ ei$ej ¼ vr
vui$ vr
vu j;
gij ¼ ei$e j ¼ Vui$Vu j
Let us compute the product of the matrices,
X
l
gilglj ¼
X
l
Vui$Vul vr
vul$ vr
vu j ¼
X
lmn
vui
vrn
vul
vrn
vrm
vul
vrm
vuk
¼
X
mn
vui
vrn
 X
l
vul
vrn
vrm
vul
!
vrm
vuk ¼
X
mn
vui
vrndm
n
vrm
vuk
¼
X
n
vui
vrn
vrn
vuk ¼ vui
vuk ¼ di
k
Perfect! Note that the sums over i, l and k run from 1 to 2, while those over
n and m run over 1, 2, and 3 because r has three components. The crucial
step here used the chain rule, P
l
vul
vrn vrm
vul ¼ dm
n .
Finally let us check that gij “raises” indices, in particular,
ei ¼
X
j
gijej
or in this case,
Vui ¼
X
j
gij vr
vu j ¼
X
j
Vui$Vu j vr
vu j ¼
X
mj
vui
vrm
vu j
vrm
vr
vu j ¼
X
m
vui
vrm
 X
j
vr
vu j
vu j
vrm
!
¼
X
m
vui
vrm
vr
vrm ¼ vui
vr1 ð1; 0; 0Þ þ vui
vr2 ð0; 1; 0Þ þ vui
vr3 ð0; 0; 1Þ
¼
vui
vr1; vui
vr2; vui
vr3

¼ Vui
which checks out.
398
Appendix C: Mathematics Background

Let us ﬁnish this appendix with a simple example: Consider a vector A
in a two-dimensional ﬂat space, which is spanned by nonorthogonal basis
vectors e1 and e2, which have a ﬁxed angle q between them. We write A in
terms of contravariant components A1 and A2,
A ¼ A1e1 þ A2e2
The length of an inﬁnitesimal vector, dx ¼ due1 þ dve2, is,
dx$dx ¼ ðdue1 þ dve2Þ$ðdue1 þ dve2Þ ¼ g11du2 þ 2g12dudv þ g22dv2
where we identify the metric,
g11 ¼ e1$e1 ¼ 1
g12 ¼ g21 ¼ e1$e2 ¼ cos q
g22 ¼ e2$e2 ¼ 1
and q is the angle between the two axes e1 and e2.
The metric can be expressed as a 2  2 matrix,
gij ¼
 g11
g12
g12
g22

¼

1
cos q
cos q
1

The inverse of the metric is written with upper (contravariant) indices,
gij ¼
 g11
g12
g12
g22

¼
1
sin2 q

1
cos q
cos q
1

One can easily check that they are inverses, P
j gijgjk ¼ di
k.
The metric gij and gij is used to map between covariant and contravariant
indices,
A ¼ A1e1 þ A2e2 ¼ A1e1 þ A2e2
Ai ¼
X
j
gijAj
ei ¼
X
j
gijej
So, in the case at hand,
A1 ¼ A1 þ cos qA2
A2 ¼ A2 þ cos qA1
and
e1 ¼
1
sin2 q ðe1  cos q e2Þ
e2 ¼
1
sin2 q ðe2  cos q e1Þ
Appendix C: Mathematics Background
399

The basis vectors (e1, e2) and their duals

e1; e2
are plotted in Fig. C.1.
Note that
ei$ej ¼
 X
k
gikek
!
$ej ¼
X
k
gikgkj ¼ di
j
This example demonstrates the utility of upper and lower indices in the
case of nonorthogonal coordinates, which are natural to special relativity.
Upper and lower indices are even more useful when using curvilinear
coordinates which occur in general relativity.
Figure C.1 The basis vectors (e1, e2) and their duals (e1, e2).
400
Appendix C: Mathematics Background

APPENDIX D
Theorems and Concepts of
Vector Calculus
D.1 CARTESIAN AND SPHERICAL COORDINATES
We gather here some relations that are relevant to the discussions in the
text. This presentation is just a summary and reference. The student should
consult textbooks or the Web for more details.
In Cartesian coordinates a vector A can be written in terms of the unit
triad,
A ¼ Axbx þ Ayby þ Azbz
where the unit triad bx; by; bz is shown in Fig. D.1.
In spherical coordinates,
A ¼ Arbr þ Aqbq þ A4b4
where the unit triad br; bq; b4 is shown in Fig. D.2.
The relationships between the coordinate systems and their unit vectors
read,
x ¼ r sin q cos 4;
y ¼ r sin q sin 4;
z ¼ r cos q
br ¼ sin q cos 4bx þ sin q sin 4by þ cos qbz
Figure D.1 Mutually orthonormal basis vectors in three dimensional Euclidean space.
401

bq ¼ cos q cos 4bx þ cos q sin 4by  sin qbz
b4 ¼ sin 4bx þ cos 4by
D.2 CROSS PRODUCT OF TWO VECTORS
The cross product of two vectors A and B is,
A  B ¼

bx
by
bz
Ax
Ay
Az
Bx
By
Bz

¼ bxðAyBz  AzByÞ  byðAxBz  AzBxÞ þ bzðAxBy  AyBxÞ
The direction of A  B is given by the “right-hand rule”: orient your right
hand with the ﬁngers in the direction of A curling toward B. Then your
thumb points in the direction of A  B. One can show that the magnitude
of the cross product is the product of the magnitudes of A and B times the
sin of the angle between them.
Figure D.2 Spherical coordinates and their orthonormal basis vectors in three
dimensional Euclidean space.
402
Appendix D: Theorems and Concepts of Vector Calculus

D.3 GRADIENTS, CURLS, DIVERGENCES, AND LAPLACIANS
The gradient operator is the generalization of differentiation to three di-
mensions. In Cartesian coordinates,
V ¼
 v
vx; v
vy; v
vz

The gradient of a scalar function f(x, y, z) is a vector ﬁeld,
Vf ¼
vf
vx; vf
vy; vf
vz

which points in the direction of the most rapid change in f.
The fundamental theorem of gradients reads,
Z b
a
Vf $dl ¼ f ðbÞ  f ðaÞ
where the line integral is taken on any path between points a and b.
The divergence of a vector ﬁeld V(r) reads,
V$V ¼ vVx
vx þ vVy
vy þ vVz
vz
The curl of V(r) reads,
V  V ¼

bx
by
bz
v
vx
v
vy
v
vz
Vx
Vy
Vz

¼ bx
vVz
vy  vVy
vz

 by
vVz
vx  vVx
vz

þ bz
vVy
vx  vVx
vy

The Laplacian operator is V$V ¼ V2,
V2f ¼
 v2
vx2 þ v2
vy2 þ v2
vz2

f
Appendix D: Theorems and Concepts of Vector Calculus
403

In applications, we need these operations in spherical coordinates,
Gradient : Vf ¼ vf
vr br þ 1
r
vf
vq
bq þ
1
rsinq
vf
v4 b4
Divergence : V$V ¼ 1
r2
v
vr ðr2VrÞ þ
1
r sin q
v
vq ðsin qVqÞ þ
1
r sin q
v
v4 ðV4Þ
Laplacian : V2f ¼ 1
r2
v
vr

r2vf
vr

þ
1
r2 sin q
v
vq

sin q vf
vq

þ
1
r2 sin2 q
v2f
v42
D.4 HELMHOLTZ THEOREMS FOR VECTOR FIELDS
1. It is easy to check (use Cartesian coordinates) that the curl of a vector
ﬁeld V, which itself is a gradient, V ¼ Vf, vanishes identically. In fact,
if V  V ¼ 0, then V can always be expressed as the gradient of some
ﬁeld, V ¼ Vf.
2. It is easy to check (use Cartesian coordinates) that the divergence of a
curl of a vector ﬁeld A vanishes identically, V$ðV  AÞ ¼ 0. In fact,
if V$V ¼ 0, then there is an A so that V ¼ V  A.
D.5 INTEGRAL THEOREMS FOR VECTOR FIELDS
Gauss’ theorem states that the ﬂux of a vector ﬁeld out of a closed surface is
the volume integral of the divergence of the ﬁeld inside the surface,
&V$V d3r ¼ %V$da
where da is an inﬁnitesimal surface element pointing outward on the
boundary surface.
Stoke’s theorem states that the line integral of a vector ﬁeld V around a
closed curve equals the ﬂux of the curl of V through any surface bounded
by the closed curve,
%ðV  VÞ$da ¼
I
V$ dl
The vector elements da and dl must be oriented similarly, (the right-hand
rule, as illustrated in Fig. D.3.)
404
Appendix D: Theorems and Concepts of Vector Calculus

D.6 LOCALITY AND THE DIRAC DELTA FUNCTION
We spoke about isolated point charges in the text. To incorporate these
singularities (“distributions”) into the mathematics, one introduces the
Dirac “delta function”. In one dimension, one writes d(x  a). This
function is nonzero only at x ¼ a, and it has “unit weight”, R dðx  aÞdx ¼
1 if the range of the integral includes the point a and zero otherwise. The
Dirac delta function can be thought of as the limit of continuous, differ-
entiable functions that isolate the point a with unit weight. If f(x) is a
continuous function then,
Z
f ðxÞdðx  aÞdx ¼ f ðaÞ
if the range of the integral includes the point a and zero otherwise.
The delta function can be generalized to three dimensions. One writes
d(r  a), which has the properties,
ZZZ
dðr  aÞd3r ¼ 1
Figure D.3 The line element and surface element in Stoke’s theorem.
Appendix D: Theorems and Concepts of Vector Calculus
405

if the volume includes the point a and is zero otherwise. In addition,
ZZZ
f ðrÞdðr  aÞd3r ¼ f ðaÞ
if the volume includes the point a, and zero otherwise.
Our discussion of Gauss’ law for point particles in Chapter 9.1 can be
summarized in the equation,
V$
br
r2

¼ 4pdðrÞ
Using the fact that 1
r is the potential for the force ^r
r2, V
1
r

¼ ^r
r2, one
derives,
V2
1
r

¼ 4pdðrÞ
which is important in electrostatics and wave equations. Taking the integral
of this equation over any volume containing the origin and then applying
Gauss’ theorem we ﬁnd,
%qbr
r2$da ¼ 4pq
which states that one can detect the presence of a point charge inside a sur-
face by measuring the total ﬂux of the electric ﬁeld through any closed sur-
face enclosing the charge.
406
Appendix D: Theorems and Concepts of Vector Calculus

APPENDIX E
Summary of Formulas
E.1 SPECIAL RELATIVITY
It is convenient to collect some of the most useful results and formulas of
special relativity. All of these results were derived and discussed in the text.
E.1.1 Lorentz Transformations (“Boosts”)
Consider an inertial frame S and another frame S0 moving in the þx
direction with velocity v. We suppose that their origins coincided at t ¼ 0.
The spaceetime measurements in S and S0 are related by “Lorentz
transformations,”
t0 ¼ gðt  vx=c2Þ;
x0 ¼ gðx  vtÞ;
y0 ¼ y;
z0 ¼ z
where,
g ¼ ð1  v2=c2Þ
1=2
If a clock is at rest in S and a (proper) time Dt passes on it, a dilated time
Dt0 ¼ gDt passes on clocks at rest in S0.
If a rod is at rest on the x axis in S and has a (proper) length Dl, its length
when measured in S0 is contracted Dl0 ¼ Dl=g.
Clocks that are synchronized in frame S and displaced along the x axis
are not synchronized in S0. At an instant t0 in S0, the clocks at rest in S
register times, which are x dependent, tðxÞ ¼ tc þ v
c2 x.
E.1.2 Addition of Velocities
If a particle has velocity u in S, then its velocity in S0 is u0,
u0
x ¼
ux  v
1  vux=c2;
u0
y ¼
uy
gð1  vux=c2Þ;
u0
z ¼
uz
gð1  vux=c2Þ
407

The relativistic law of the addition of velocities leaves the speed limit c
invariant (the same in all inertial frames.)
E.1.3 Four-Vectors
A “four-vector” is a set of four quantities, which transform between
reference frames in the same fashion as xm ¼ (ct, x, y, z), i.e., by Lorentz
transformations.
The length of a four-vector bm ¼ (b0, b) is deﬁned to be b$b ¼ b2
0  b2.
It is invariant under Lorentz transformations.
The inner product of two four-vectors am ¼ (a0, a) and bm ¼ (b0, b) is
deﬁned to be a$b ¼ a0b0  a$b. It is invariant under Lorentz transformations.
E.1.4 EnergyeMomentum
The relativistic energy of a particle moving with velocity u in frame S is
E ¼ g(u)mc2 where m is its rest mass. The relativistic momentum of the
particle is p ¼ g(u)mu. The four quantities (E/c, p) form a four-vector pm so
it transforms between frames S and S0 in the same fashion as xm ¼ (ct, x), by
a Lorentz transformation,
E0 ¼ gðE  vpxÞ;
p0
x ¼ g

px  v
c2 E

;
p0
y ¼ py;
p0
z ¼ pz
The length of the four-vector pm ¼ (E/c, p) is E2/c2  p2 ¼ m2c2, so the
energyemomentum relation of a freely propagating particle is,
E2 ¼ p2c2 þ m2c4
E.1.5 Force
Newton’s second law generalizes to relativity as “force equals the time rate
of change of the relativistic momentum,”
F ¼ d
dt p
in the frame S where p ¼ g(u)mu.
The force transforms between frames S and S0 as,
F0
x ¼ Fx  ðv=c2ÞF$u
1  vux=c2
;
F0
y ¼
Fy
gð1  vux=c2Þ;
F0
z ¼
Fz
gð1  vux=c2Þ
408
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas

And the power transforms as,
F0$u0 ¼ F$u  vFx
ð1  vux=c2Þ
where u (u0) is the velocity of the particle in frame S (S0).
The Lorentz force applies to a particle of charge q moving with velocity
u in frame S where there is an electric ﬁeld E and a magnetic ﬁeld B,
F ¼ qðE þ u  BÞ
E.1.6 Electric and Magnetic Fields
The electric and magnetic ﬁelds mix when transformed from S to S0,
E0
x ¼ Ex;
E0
y ¼ gðEy  vBzÞ;
E0
z ¼ gðEz þ vByÞ
B0
x ¼ Bx;
B0
y ¼ g

By þ v
c2Ez

;
B0
z ¼ g

Bz  v
c2Ey

E.1.7 Electric Current and Current Conservation
The electric charge density r and current density J are the sources of electric
and magnetic ﬁelds, respectively. They form a four-vector Jm ¼ (cr, J ) and
therefore transform under boosts such as xm. Jm satisﬁes the “continuity
equation”
V$J þ vr
vt ¼ 0
which is a statement of current conservation.
E.1.8 Maxwell’s Equations
The electric and magnetic ﬁelds satisfy Maxwell’s equations,
V$E ¼ 4pkr
ðGauss' LawÞ
V  B ¼ 4pk
c2 J þ 1
c2
vE
vt
ðAmpere  Maxwell LawÞ
V$B ¼ 0
ðNo Magnetic MonoplesÞ
V  E ¼ vB=vt
ðFaraday's LawÞ
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas
409

E.1.9 Wave Equations Without Sources
In free space the ﬁelds satisfy the wave equation,

V2  v2
c2vt2

E ¼

V2  v2
c2vt2

B ¼ 0
which establishes that electromagnetic ﬁelds propagate at the speed limit c
of special relativity.
E.1.10 Wave Equations With Sources
As discussed in Problem 10.4 and Appendix F, E and B can be derived from
a four-vector potential, Am ¼ (V/c, A),
B ¼ V  A
E ¼ vA
vt  VV
Maxwell’s equations are equivalent to the four-vector wave equations with
sources,

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

V ¼ 4pkr

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

A ¼ 4pk
c2 J
where the four-vector potential satisﬁes the Lorenz gauge condition,
V$A þ 1
c2
vV
vt ¼ 0
As discussed in Appendix F, the solutions for V and A read,
Vðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ 4pk
ZZZ 1
R r

x0; y0; z0; t  R
c

d3r0 þ V0
Aðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ 4pk
c2
ZZZ 1
R J

x0; y0; z0; t  R
c

d3r0
where R2 ¼ ðx  x0Þ2 þ ðy  y0Þ2 þ ðz  z0Þ2. tr ¼ t  R
c
is called the
“retarded time” because it accounts for the ﬁnite speed of light c.
410
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas

E.1.11 The Electromagnetic Field Strength Tensor and the
Lorentz Force Law
The electromagnetic ﬁeld strength tensor Fmn reads,
Fmn ¼
0
B
B
B
@
0
Ex=c
Ey=c
Ez=c
Ex=c
0
Bz
By
Ey=c
Bz
0
Bx
Ez=c
By
Bx
0
1
C
C
C
A
And its dual eF
mn reads,
eF
mn ¼
0
B
B
B
@
0
Bx
By
Bz
Bx
0
Ez=c
Ey=c
By
Ez=c
0
Ex=c
Bz
Ey=c
Ex=c
0
1
C
C
C
A
In this language, Maxwell’s equations can be written in explicitly covariant
form,
X
n
vnFmn ¼ 4pk
c2 Jm
X
n
vneF
mn ¼ 0
The Lorentz force law becomes,
dpm=ds ¼ q
X
n
unFnm
We can express the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength tensor using the four-
vector potential,
Am ¼ ðV=c; AÞ
Then,
Fmn ¼ vmAn  vnAm
The two homogeneous Maxwell equations, P
nvneF
mn ¼ 0, are automati-
cally satisﬁed in this parametrization.
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas
411

The Lorenz gauge condition reads,
X
m
vmAm ¼ 0
Then Maxwell’s equations become the wave equations,
X
n
vnvnAm ¼
1
c2
v2
vt2  V$V

Am ¼ 4pk
c2 Jm
E.1.12 The Electromagnetic Stress Tensor Tmn
T mn ¼
X
s
FmsFn
s  1
4 gmn
 X
ls
FlsFls
!
represents the local energyemomentum density of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld.
Tmn is symmetric, Tmn ¼ Tnm, traceless, P
mT m
m ¼ 0 and conserved
P
mvmT mn ¼ 0 in a source-free region of spaceetime.
Local energyemomentum conservation in a region of spaceetime
where there are charged particles reads,
vmðT mn þ T mn
M Þ ¼ 0
where the energyemomentum carried by charged matter ﬁelds is T mn
M . This
is the statement of energyemomentum conservation
that replaces
Newton’s third law in relativity.
This material is introduced in Problem 10.5.
E.2 GENERAL RELATIVITY
E.2.1 Gravitational Redshift
Dn
n z  DV
c2
where Dv is the frequency difference and DV is the potential difference
between the point of detection and emission of the light wave.
412
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas

E.2.2 Coordinate Transformations: Covariant Vectors and
Tensors
Under the transformation of general curvilinear coordinates, xm/x0m ,
v
vx0s ¼
X
m
vxm
vx0s
v
vxm
u0
s ¼
X
m
vxm
vx0sum
E.2.3 Coordinate Transformations: Contravariant Vectors
and Tensors
Under the transformation of general curvilinear coordinates, xm / x0m,
dx0s ¼
X
m
vx0s
vxm dxm
V 0s ¼
X
m
vx0s
vxmV m
E.2.4 Metric Tensor
Under the transformation of general curvilinear coordinates, xm / x0m
g0
mn ¼
X
sr
vxs
vx0m
vxr
vx0n gsr
gsr is a symmetric second-rank tensor. Its inverse is gmn
X
n
gmngns ¼ dm
s
The invariant volume element is
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jdetðgÞj
p
d4x and the determinant of the
metric transforms as, detðg0Þ ¼ det
vx0m
vxn

detðgÞ.
E.2.5 Christoffel Symbol
Gm
rb ¼ 1
2
X
a
gma
vrgba þ vbgar  vagrb

E.2.6 Covariant Derivatives
Applied to contravariant vectors,
DmV s ¼ vmV s þ
X
g
Gs
mgV g
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas
413

Applied to covariant vectors,
DmWs ¼ vmWs 
X
g
Gg
msWg
E.2.7 Geodesic Curves
d2xb
d2s þ
X
ag
Gb
ga
dxa
ds
dxg
ds ¼ 0
E.2.8 Curvature and the Riemann Tensor
ðDmDn  DnDmÞAr ¼ 
X
s
Rr
smnAs
Rr
smn ¼ vmGr
ns  vnGr
ms þ
X
a
Gr
maGa
ns 
X
a
Gr
naGa
ms
E.2.9 Curvature, Tidal Forces, and the Geodesic Deviation
In Newtonian mechanics, the vector between two freely falling masses
satisﬁes the equation of motion,
d2ε
dt2 ¼ Vðε$VFðrÞÞ
For a 1/r potential in Cartesian coordinates,
d2εi
dt2 ¼ GM
r5
X
k
εk
3xkxi  r2dki
The relativistic generalization reads,
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ 
X
bgd
Ra
bgdubudεg þ Oðε2Þ
E.2.10 Symmetries of the Riemann Tensor
1. Rrsab ¼ Rsrab
2. Rrsab ¼ Rrsba
3. Rrsab ¼ Rabrs
4. Rrsab þ Rrabs þ Rrbsa ¼ 0
5. DgRrsab þ DrRsgab þ DsRgrab ¼ 0 (Bianchi identity)
414
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas

E.2.11 The Einstein and Ricci Tensors
The second-rank Ricci tensor is
Rab ¼
X
g
Rg
agb
Rab ¼ Rba
The Ricci scalar is the fully contracted version,
R ¼
X
g
Rg
g ¼
X
ab
gabRab
The Einstein tensor is deﬁned as,
Gsr ¼ Rsr  1
2 Rgsr
It satisﬁes the conservation law,
X
g
DgGrg ¼ 0
The Einstein ﬁeld equation reads,
Gab ¼ 8pG
c4 Tab
where Tab is the conserved and symmetric energyemomentum tensor,
P
mDmTmn ¼ 0.
The Einstein ﬁeld equation can be written,
Rab ¼ 8pG

Tab  1
2 Tgab

where T is the trace of the energyemomentum tensor.
E.2.12 Linearized Gravity
Suppose the metric deviates slightly from the Minkowski metric of special
relativity, gmn ¼ gð0Þ
mn þegmn with
		egmn
		  1. Deﬁne,
hmn ¼ egmn  1
2 gð0Þ
mn h
h ¼
X
a
eg a
a
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas
415

and impose the Lorenz gauge condition,
X
n
vnh
mn ¼ 0
Then the Einstein ﬁeld equation becomes a wave equation in a background
Minkowski metric,
,hmn ¼ 16pG
c4
Tmn
,h

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

to ﬁrst order in hmn.
E.2.13 Schwarzschild Metric
ds2 ¼

1  2GM
c2r

c2dt2 

1  2GM
c2r
1
dr2  r2
dq2 þ sin2 qd42
E.2.14 Slightly Curved SpaceeTime, Isotropic Coordinates,
the Newtonian Limit
The spaceetime metric, when the gravitational potential F satisﬁes the
weak ﬁeld condition, 2F/c2  1, can be written in the form,
ds2 ¼

1 þ 2F
c2

c2dt2 

1  2F
c2

ðdx2 þ dy2 þ dz2Þ
with corrections O(c4).
416
Appendix E: Summary of Formulas

APPENDIX F
The Wave Equation With
Sources: The Four-Vector
Potential and the Lorenz Gauge
F.1 THE WAVE EQUATION AND RADIATION
There are several objectives for this appendix. First, we want to derive the
wave equations with sources from Maxwell’s equations. This completes the
discussion of the wave equation in Chapter 9. Second, we want to analyze
these equations and see how they incorporate causality, the fact that in-
formation propagates at the speed of light. This produces the generalization
of Coulomb’s law for time-dependent charge densities and currents, and
this completes a logical issue central to the developments in the text. And
third, the resulting equations are the starting point of quantitative discus-
sions of radiation that are best discussed in a course dedicated to applications
of electromagnetism, perhaps using Landau and Lifshitz [1], which was the
source for this appendix.
Our ﬁrst task is to simplify Maxwell’s equations so they are easier to
apply to concrete situations. Recall that this is a good strategy in Newtonian
mechanics where in many cases forces can be derived from potentials
(F ¼ VV ), and this substitution leads to simpler mathematics and physical
insights (potentials provide a path to energy and work).
Let us try this strategy for E and B.
One of Maxwell’s equations reads V$B ¼ 0. Invoking a Helmholtz
theorem from vector calculus (see Appendix D), this means that B can be
expressed as the curl of a vector ﬁeld, B ¼ V  A. Now we can use the
same analysis on Faraday’s law to conclude that there exists a scalar potential
V so that,
E ¼ vA
vt  VV
Next, realize that although the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are physical
quantities, the potentials are introduced for mathematical convenience.
417

What freedom exists in choosing them? If we choose another pair of A0and
V0, they must generate the same E and B, but can be otherwise free. It is
easy to show that A0 and V0 can differ from A and V,
A0 ¼ A þ VG;
V 0 ¼ V  vG
vt
This is called a “gauge” transformation. G is the gauge function. Gauge
transformations leave the physical ﬁelds E and B unchanged, as the reader
should verify!
Let us take stock. The introduction of the potentials solves two of
Maxwell’s equations explicitly (the divergence free nature of the magnetic
ﬁeld and Faraday’s equation.). Good! And there is “gauge” freedom in
choosing the potentials V and A. But are the other two Maxwell’s equa-
tions simpliﬁed in this new language?
Let us write Gauss’ law and the AmpereeMaxwell equation in terms of
the potentials,
V2V þ v
vt ðV$AÞ ¼ 4pkr

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

A  V

V$A þ 1
c2
vV
vt

¼ 4pk
c2 J
where we obtained the last equation by using an identity from vector cal-
culus, V  (V  C) ¼ V(V$C)  V2C, which is true for any vector ﬁeld C.
These are complicated, coupled differential equations! If we could
choose A and V so that V$A þ 1
c2 vV
vt ¼ 0, then they would decouple into
two wave equations,

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

V ¼ 4pkr

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

A ¼ 4pk
c2 J
This would be great! We recognize the invariant wave operator here so that
the speed limit of relativity and causality are built in! Furthermore, we read
off that A and V form a four-vector because J and r do! In this language,
boosting problems from one frame to another will be as simple as possible!
The “gauge condition” V$A þ 1
c2 vV
vt ¼ 0 was invented by Lorenz (not
418
Appendix F: The Wave Equation With Sources

Lorentz!) and bares his name. It is very useful. Note that it is a covariant
expression because A and V form a four-vector.
Back to the problem at hand. Can we always ﬁnd a gauge trans-
formation G so that V$A þ 1
c2 vV
vt ¼ 0 is true?
It is easy to use the gauge transformation to obtain,

V$A0 þ 1
c2
vV 0
vt

¼

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

G þ

V$A þ 1
c2
vV
vt

We learn that if G satisﬁes the wave equation,

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

G ¼

V$A0 þ 1
c2
vV 0
vt

then A and V will be in the Lorentz gauge. Luckily for most applications
we only need to know that such a G exists. We seldom need it. This argu-
ment just guarantees that we can choose the Lorenz gauge even if we
started our considerations with potentials that did not satisfy it.
Now let us derive expressions for the general solutions of our wave
equations with sources,

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

V ¼ 4pkr

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

A ¼ 4pk
c2 J
Let us concentrate on the equation for the scalar potential V. If we can
solve it for a point particle at the origin then the general solution will follow
by linear superposition. This problem has spherical symmetry so we should
write it in spherical polar coordinates. The Laplacian V2 is written in Ap-
pendix D in spherical coordinates. For a point charge at the origin, V
will depend on r, the distance from the origin where the source is, but it
will not have any angular dependence. So, the wave equation for r s 0
becomes,
1
r2
v
vr

r2vV
vr

 1
c2
v2V
vt2 ¼ 0
Appendix F: The Wave Equation With Sources
419

If we parametrize V in the form,
Vðr; tÞ ¼ 4ðr; tÞ
r
then by substitution into the equation above we derive that 4 satisﬁes a
one-dimensional wave equation in r and t,
 v2
vr2  1
c2
v2
vt2

4 ¼ 0
From our discussion in Section 9.2, we know that this equation is solved by
running waves moving to the left or the right,
4ðr; tÞ ¼ 41

t  r
c

þ 42

t þ r
c

Only 41 will be physically relevant to the problem at hand, so we have for
r s 0,
Vðr; tÞ ¼
41

t  r
c

r
Next, 41 must be determined by the source at the origin. We choose a
point charge with a time-varying inﬁnitesimal charge, 4pke(t)d(r). Here
d(r) is the three-dimensional Dirac delta function, which is discussed further
in Appendix D. It has unit weight and is nonzero only at the origin, so it
models a point charge. e(t) is the inﬁnitesimal time-dependent charge at the
origin. Now let r / 0 in the wave equation,

V2  1
c2
v2
vt2

V ¼ 4pkr
In this limit V / N and its derivatives with respect to r overwhelm its time
derivatives. So as the origin is approached the wave equation reduces to,
V2V ¼ 4pkqðtÞdðrÞ
which is Coulomb’s law with a time-dependent charge q(t) at the origin.
So, V behaves as 1
r near the origin, and in general is,
Vðr; tÞ ¼ 4pk
q

t  r
c

r
420
Appendix F: The Wave Equation With Sources

to match on to the functional form
41

t  r
c

r
away from the origin. The
argument of the charge, q

t  r
c

; incorporates the fact that information
ﬂows at the speed of light so V at time t at position r is determined by
the source at the earlier “retarded” time t  r
c!
Now we can use linear superposition to write down the solution for a
general time-dependent charge density,
Vðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ 4pk
ZZZ 1
R r

x0; y0; z0; t  R
c

d3r0 þ V0
where R2 ¼ ðx  x0Þ2 þ ðy  y0Þ2 þ ðz  z0Þ2. Note that the amount of
time delay varies across r as the integral is done.
A completely analogous result holds for A in terms of J.
These are formulas one needs to calculate radiation from antennas and
radiation due to the collision of charged particles. Such problems have their
own special challenges!
See Landau and Lifshitz.
F.2 THE FOUR-VECTOR POTENTIAL AND MAXWELL’S
EQUATIONS
In the discussion above, we made some discoveries in passing that we should
discuss more. We introduced the potentials V and A to write Maxwell’s
equations as four-wave equations with sources. We discovered that the
potentials formed a “four-vector potential” for the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
Am ¼ ðV=c; AÞ
which could be used to generate the electric and magnetic ﬁelds,
E ¼ VV  vA
vt ;
B ¼ V  A
(F.1)
It is interesting to write these expressions in the language of the electromag-
netic ﬁeld strength tensor, Fmn, to obtain explicitly covariant expressions. The
challenge is to write the ﬁeld tensor Fmn in terms of vn and Am and obtain the
covariant form of the expressions for E and B in terms of V and A.
Since Fmn is antisymmetric, a candidate formula that has the correct
transformation laws is,
Fmn ¼ vmAn  vnAm
(F.2)
Appendix F: The Wave Equation With Sources
421

In the problem set, you will show that Eq. (F.2) produces Eq. (F.1) when
you write out the Cartesian coordinates. Note that this is a conceptually
satisfying discovery because it shows us that you can make the tensor Fmn
out of two four-vectors!
In the discussion in Section F.1 we chose the Lorenz gauge to ﬁnd the
wave equation for Am. The Lorenz gauge condition was,
V$A ¼ 1
c2
vV
vt
This can be written in a manifestly covariant form,
X
m
vmAm ¼ 0
which shows that it is fully relativistic, i.e., if it is chosen in one frame, it is
true in all frames.
We were able to introduce V and A above because they made two of
Maxwell’s equations, the sourceless ones, tautologies: setting B ¼ V  A
solved V$B ¼ 0, and setting E ¼ VV  vA/vt solved V  E ¼ vB/vt
(Faraday’s law). In the covariant language where the four-vector Am gen-
erates the ﬁeld strength tensor, Fmn ¼ vmAn  vnAm, it is easy to show that
this parametrization of Fmn, automatically solves the two homogeneous
Maxwell equations, P
n
vneF
mn ¼ 0. See the problem set for Chapter 10.
Finally, if one writes out the remaining Maxwell equations P
n
vnFmn ¼
4pk
c2 Jm in terms of Am using Fmn ¼ vmAn  vnAm and one works in the
Lorenz gauge P
m
vmAm ¼ 0, the four Maxwell’s equations with sources
become the four wave equations,
X
n
vnvnAm ¼
1
c2
v2
vt2  V$V

Am ¼ 4pk
c2 Jm
Note from this wave equation that the Lorenz gauge choice implies current
conservation, P
m
vmJm ¼ 0:
REFERENCE
[1] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Pergamon Press, Oxford,
1962.
422
Appendix F: The Wave Equation With Sources

APPENDIX G
Equation of Motion in Curved
Space and Christoffel Symbols,
Two-Dimensional Surfaces, and
the Geodesic Deviation and
Gravity Waves
G.1 FREE FALL AND CHRISTOFFEL SYMBOLS
Let us consider an example of a particle’s equation of motion in curved
space and along the way obtain the expression for the Christoffel symbols in
terms of the metric and its ﬁrst derivatives.
Start in N-dimensional Euclidean space with Cartesian coordinates yk,
k ¼ 1, 2, . , N. The distance between yk and yk þ dyk is given by the
Pythagorean theorem in N dimensions,
ds2 ¼
X
k
dykdyk
(G.1)
There is no distinction between covariant and contravariant indices here, so
we will use ordinary lower indices most everywhere.
Now let us suppose that we parametrize the space with curvilinear
coordinates, or we have a curved surface embedded in this space. Call the
coordinates we use for this purpose xi, i ¼ 1, 2, . , M. Each of the original
differentials dyk can be expressed in terms of the dxi using the chain rule,
dyk ¼
X
i
vyk
vxi
dxi
(G.2)
We can visualize the quantities vyk/vxi. Denote a vector in the N-dimen-
sional Euclidean space r. It has components yk, r ¼ (y1, y2, . , yN). Suppose
that r denotes a point on an M-dimensional surface parametrized by the co-
ordinates (x1, x2, . , xM). Then the derivatives vr/vxi at point x span the
tangent space to the surface there. We shall see an example of this in the
423

case of a sphere in the problem sets. Now substitute Eq. (G.2) into
Eq. (G.1),
ds2 ¼
X
ij
 X
k
vyk
vxi
vyk
vxj
!
dxidxj
where we identify the metric on the surface gij(x),
gijðxÞ ¼
X
k
vyk
vxi
vyk
vxj
(G.3)
To gain familiarity with this formalism, Problem (12.7) asks you to work
out these formulas for metrics and tangent spaces in the case of a two-
dimensional sphere.
Next, consider the derivatives of the metric,
vgij
vxl
¼
X
k
v2yk
vxivxl
vyk
vxj
þ
X
k
vyk
vxi
v2yk
vxjvxl
(G.4)
In preparation for the calculation of Christoffel symbols, we can consider
Eq. (G.4) for three arrangements of the indices i, j, and l and verify the
identity,
vgij
vxl
þ vgjl
vxi
 vgli
vxj
¼ 2
X
k
v2yk
vxivxl
vyk
vxj
(G.5)
Now consider a curve C(s) on the surface which is parametrized by a
scalar quantity s, which varies from 0 to 1 as the curve moves from its
beginning to its end,
CkðsÞ ¼ ykðxðsÞÞ
Think of Ck(s) as the curve swept out by a particle as time s proceeds from
0 to 1. Then the velocity of the particle is, using the chain rule,
dCk
ds ¼
X
i
vyk
vxi
dxi
ds
(G.6)
and the acceleration is,
d2Ck
ds2 ¼
X
ij
v2yk
vxivxj
dxi
ds
dxj
ds þ
X
i
vyk
vxi
d2xi
ds2
(G.7)
424
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols

The particle is constrained to the M-dimensional subspace, so there is a
force of constraint which acts normal to the subspace. This means that
the projection of the particle’s acceleration onto the tangent space of the
M-dimensional subspace must vanish in a force-free spaceetime. We
learned above that the tangent space at the point of the particle is spanned
by the M vectors, vyk/vxi, i ¼ 1, 2,., M. So, the inner product of d2Ck
ds2 and
vyk/vxi must vanish for each i, i ¼ 1, 2,., M,
X
k
d2Ck
ds2
vyk
vxi
¼ 0;
i ¼ 1; 2; .; M
(G.8)
Next, substitute Eq. (G.7) into (G.8) and ﬁnd,
X
ki
vyk
vxi
vyk
vxl
d2xi
ds2 þ
X
kij
v2yk
vxivxj
vyk
vxl
dxi
ds
dxj
ds ¼ 0
(G.9)
We can identify the metric gil in the ﬁrst term. Then we use Eq. (G.5) to
simplify the second term and write it in terms of derivatives of the metric.
Finally, we can eliminate gil in the ﬁrst term by multiplying through with
gkl, summing over l, and use the fact that gkl is the inverse of gil,
P
l
gklgli ¼ dk
i . Eq. (G.9) then becomes,
d2xk
ds2 þ
X
ij
Gk
ij
dxi
ds
dxj
ds ¼ 0
(G.10)
where we have an explicit formula for the Christoffel symbols,
Gk
ij ¼ 1
2
X
l
gkl
vgil
vxj
þ vgjl
vxi
 vgij
vxl

Compare Eq. (G.10) with the discussion in Chapter 12 and we see the
geodesic equation with explicit equations for the Christoffel symbols
expressed in terms of the metric and its derivatives. We also learn from
this derivation that the velocity-dependent “forces” P
ij
Gk
ij
dxi
ds
dxj
ds appear
because of the use of curvilinear coordinates. In the case of general relativ-
ity, the curvilinear coordinates are a necessity because spaceetime is warped
(curved) by sources of energyemomentum. However, sometimes we use
curvilinear
coordinates
in
ordinary
problems
in
three-dimensional
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols
425

Euclidean space if the symmetries of the problem suggest it. For example,
centripetal and Coriolis forces experienced on a rotating earth are of
this sort. These points are pursued further in the problem set for
Chapter 12.
G.2 RIEMANN TENSOR AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL
SURFACES
It is natural to ask how the Riemann tensor analysis approach to curved
spaces is related to traditional differential geometry introduced in Section
12.1 of Chapter 12.
If we specialize to two-dimensional surfaces so that the indices on the
Riemann tensor are each either 1 or 2, we can enumerate the 16 Rijkl and
use the symmetries discussed in the text to conclude that only
one component is independent. Choose that nonzero component to be
R1212.
We learned that two-dimensional surfaces are characterized by one
scalar curvature quantity, the intrinsic Gaussian curvature K. So, the Ricci
scalar and K must be identical, up to a numerical factor in two dimensions.
The Ricci scalar is the fully contracted Riemann tensor,
R ¼
X
iklm
gilgkmRiklm
If we collect all the nonzero terms on the right-hand side of this equation
and use the symmetry properties of Riklm, we ﬁnd,
R ¼ g11g22R1212 þ g22g11R2121 þ g21g12R2112 þ g12g21R1221
¼ 2ðg11g22  g12g12ÞR1212
On the right-hand side, we recognize the determinant of gij, which is the
inverse of the metric gij, det( gij) ¼ 1/det( gij) h 1/det( g). We learn that,
R ¼ 2 R1212
detðgÞ
But we had in Section 12.1 of Chapter 12,
K ¼ detðbÞ
detðgÞ
426
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols

So, R1212 is essentially the determinant of the second fundamental form. If
we work an example, the surface of a sphere as done in the problem
sets, we clarify the conventions and establish,
R ¼ 2K
So,
R1212 ¼ detðbÞ
Note that this observation provides an alternative proof to Gauss’s
Theorema Egregium sketched in Problem 12.3 because it establishes that
the Gaussian curvature can be computed just from the metric and its de-
rivatives: K ¼ R1212/det (g) and the deﬁnition and formulas for the Rie-
mann tensor only involve intrinsic properties of the surface, the metric, and
its derivatives.
If we consider an orthogonal mesh ðu$vÞ on the surface, then g12 ¼ 0
and ds2 ¼ g11du2 þ g22dv2hEdu2 þ Gdv2, in the notation of Section 12.1.
For such a “simple” metric it is easy to calculate the Christoffel symbols in
terms of the derivatives of E and G from Eq. (12.44) and the non-vanishing
component of the Riemann tensor, R1212 from Eq. (12.46). Then straight-
forward algebra produces an explicit formula for the Gaussian curvature
K ¼ R1212=detðgÞ, in terms of the metric E and G and their derivatives,
K ¼ 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
EG
p
"
v
vu
 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
p
v
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
G
p
vu
!
þ v
vv
 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
G
p
v
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
p
vv
!#
in agreement with the result of Problem 12.3, but obtained with much,
much less work!
G.3 TIDAL FORCES AND GRAVITY WAVES
In the text we argued that gravity waves effect the LIGO detector by
squeezing space in one direction and elongating it in the perpendicular
direction. This typically tiny effect is measured using interferometry be-
tween freely ﬂoating mirrors. The pattern of squeezing and elongation
originated in the oscillating quadrupole moment of the radiating source, the
merging of two black holes in the 2015 historic event. We have also seen
the squeezing and elongation of space in tidal forces. Let us relate the two.
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols
427

We had the equation for the deviation between two freely falling test
masses in terms of the Riemann tensor, Eq. (12.84),
D2εa
Ds2 ¼ 
X
bgd
Ra
bgdubudεg þ Oðε2Þ
(12.84)
In the LIGO application, the spaceetime metric ﬂuctuates slightly by the
amount egmn from the Minkowski metric gð0Þ
mn . Let us show that the deviation
between the mirrors of the LIGO detector εa is proportional to the ﬂuctu-
ation in the metric itself egmn, so εa provides a measure of the amplitude,
direction, and frequency of the passing gravitational wave. The mirrors of
the LIGO detector move slightly from rest in the frame of the device.
So, in Eq. (12.84) we put ua z (c, 0, 0, 0). In addition, the four vector
εa between the mirrors at the ends of each arm of the detector is transverse
to the z axis, the propagation direction of the wave, εa ¼ ð0; ε; 0; 0Þ or
ð0; 0; ε; 0Þ. Then Eq. (12.84) becomes,
v2εa
c2vt2 ¼ εRa
0x0
(G.11)
We know the Riemann tensor for linearized gravity from Problem 12.16,
part a,
Rabgd ¼ 1
2

vbvgegad þ vavdegbg  vbvdegag  vavgegbd

So, we need Rx0x0 and Ry0x0 in this application,
Rx0x0 ¼ 1
2

v0vxegx0 þ vxv0eg0x  v0v0egxx  vxvxeg00

¼ 1
2
v2
c2vt2 egxx (G.12a)
And,
Ry0x0 ¼ 1
2

v0vxegy0 þ vyv0eg0x  v0v0egxy  vyvxeg00

¼ 1
2
v2
c2vt2 egxy (G.12b)
Collecting we have,
v2εx
vt2 ¼ 1
2εx
0
v2
vt2 egxx;
v2εy
vt2 ¼ 1
2εx
0
v2
vt2 egxy
(G.13a)
where εx
0 is the initial value of εx.
428
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols

Similarly, if the mirrors were initially displaced in the y-direction,
v2εx
vt2 ¼ 1
2εy
0
v2
vt2 egxy;
v2εy
vt2 ¼ 1
2εy
0
v2
vt2 egxx
(G.13b)
where εy
0 is the initial value of εy. We can write Eq. (G.13) in matrix form,
v2
vt2
 εx
εy

¼ 1
2
v2
vt2
 
egxx
egxy
egxy
egxx
! εx
0
εy
0

(G.14)
Since egij has sinusoidal dependence,
v2
vt2 egij ¼ u2egij, Eq. (G.14) can be
solved,
 εxðtÞ
εyðtÞ

¼
0
B
B
@
1 þ 1
2 egxxðtÞ
1
2 egxyðtÞ
1
2 egxy
1  1
2 egxxðtÞ
1
C
C
A
 εx
0
εy
0

(G.15)
where we incorporated the initial values εxð0Þ ¼ εx
0 and εyð0Þ ¼ εy
0.
In Eq. (G.15) we see the tidal forces at work as discussed and illustrated
in the text. This equation gives an alternative but identical description of
the LIGO experiment as presented in the text.
Let us contrast this result to the gravitational wave’s effect on a single,
isolated particle described through the geodesic equation of motion,
d2xm
ds2 þ
X
n;s
Gm
ns
dxn
ds
dxs
ds ¼ 0
(12.25)
We are interested in the x coordinate (m ¼ 1) of one of LIGO’s mirrors and
are searching for linear effects OðegÞ. Since Gm
ns and dxi/ds (i ¼ 1, 2, 3) are
each at most OðegÞ, only the indices r ¼ s ¼ 0 can contribute to the
geodesic Eq. (12.25) at this order of accuracy. But G1
00 (and G2
00) vanishes
to ﬁrst order,
G1
00 ¼ 1
2g11
v0eg10 þ v0eg10  v1eg00

¼ 0
So, d2x1/ds2 z 0 and the mirror does not accelerate relative to the freely
falling coordinate mesh. This agrees with our earlier argument in the text
based on the equivalence principle. In this class of reference frames, the
mirror and a bit of “dust” labeling the coordinate mesh at the position of
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols
429

the mirror are affected identically by the gravitational wave and there is no
relative acceleration. On the other hand, the geodesic deviation εa provides
an excellent method of detecting gravitational waves. This result relied on
the fact that the geodesic deviation equation is proportional to the curva-
ture tensor Rabgd. In that case we saw that εa tracks egrs precisely.
How can it be that εa is successful here while xm is not? The point is that
εa depends on the positions of two separate masses and thus is sensitive to
the curvature of spaceetime. Perhaps an analogy is in order. Imagine a
single buoy ﬂoating in the Boston Harbor. In many situations, the buoy
does not travel at all with respect to the wave it is ﬂoating on. Now
consider a second buoy some distance away and attached to the ﬁrst buoy
with a very, very light bungee cord. It also ﬂoats on the water and does not
move with respect to the water locally. Now a long wavelength, gradual
wave passes through the harbor. As more water enters or recedes from the
harbor, the distance between the buoys change as can be measured using
the bungee cord, but the buoys themselves do not move relative to the
water they are locally ﬂoating on. The distance between the buoys changes
because the amount of water between them, carried in or out by the wave,
changes.
We have already noted that electromagnetic waves can be observed by
their effect on isolated point charges. The Lorentz force law in curved
spaceetime reads,
d2xm
ds2 þ
X
n;s
Gm
nsunus ¼
q
m
X
l
ulFlm
(12.27b)
The force appears explicitly on the right-hand side of the equation of mo-
tion. The charge q is accelerated relative to the charge-neutral coordinate
mesh by the electromagnetic ﬁeld Flm, which might be describing a passing
electromagnetic wave. No subtlety here.
Finally, when we discussed the Newtonian limit of the geodesic
equation in the vicinity of a static mass M we again found Newton’s second
law for gravity, which predicts acceleration relative to the coordinate mesh.
This works out because the presence of the static mass M at a certain
spaceetime point breaks translation symmetry and the motion of a small
test mass m can have a nonzero acceleration relative to the ﬁxed source M of
spaceetime’s curvature. Again, no subtlety here.
430
Appendix G: Equation of Motion in Curved Space and Christoffel Symbols

INDEX
‘Note: Page numbers followed by “f” indicate ﬁgures.’
A
Absolute space, 3e4, 11
Absolute time, 3e4, 11
Acceleration
forces, transformation properties of,
125e127
in relativity, 123e125
static forces, 127e130
Addition of velocities, 4e5
AmpereeMaxwell equation, 418
AmpereeMaxwell law, 154e157, 180,
183
Ampere’s law, 10, 176
Angular momentum, 381
Apparent forces, 189e200
B
Binary black holes, 296
Black hole, 285e289
C
Cartesian coordinates, 401e402,
421e422
Centripetal acceleration, 193, 216e217
Christoffel symbols, 263e264, 271e273,
381e382, 413, 423e426
Circular orbital motion, in Schwarzschild
metric, 296e300
Compton formula, 110e112
Conservation laws, 6e7, 104e112
Contravariant vectors and tensors,
413
Conversion factors, 341
Conversion
energy to mass, 104e112
mass to energy, 104e112
Coordinate transformations
applications to covariant, 392e395
and contravariant vectors, 392e395
Coriolis accelerations, 192e193
Coriolis force, 193, 194f, 195
Cosmological constant, 318
Coulomb’s law, 8e10, 131e134, 136,
177, 183, 229
for time-dependent charge densities and
currents, 417
Covariant derivatives, 270e271
Covariant differentiation, 265e266
Covariant four-vectors, 99e100, 263
Covariant vector ﬁelds, 270e271
Current conservation, 155, 157, 409
Curved spacesetime, 273e277, 316
equation of motion of particles in,
262e269
Curved surfaces, 241e262
D
Deﬁcit angle, 244e245
Deﬂection angle, 225e226
Differential equation, 149e150
constructive principles, 282e283
Differential geometry
ﬁrst fundamental form, 250e251
second fundamental form, 252
Dirac delta function, 405e406,
419e421
Dirac equation, 208e209
Doppler effect, 42e44, 219
Doppler formula, 78
Doppler shift, 212
E
EartheSun system, 190f
EddingtoneFinkelstein representation,
294e296
Einstein and Ricci tensors, 415
Einstein ﬁeld equations, 216, 230e231,
284e285, 318
Einstein’s special relativity, 12
Einstein tensor, 284, 385e386
431

Elastic scattering, 110f
Electric current, 156, 158e159, 409
Electric ﬁelds, 409
constraint equation for, 155e156
force between two moving charges,
133e137
invariants and four-vectors, 140e142
moving point charge, 131e133
transforming E and B between frames,
137e139
Electrodynamic force law, 230e231
Electrodynamics, 133e134, 162
formulated in covariant notation,
178e183
quantum formulation of,
184e185
Electromagnetic duality, 180
Electromagnetic ﬁeld, 181
four-vector potential for, 421
strength tensor, 411e412
Electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor, 232e233
Electromagnetic radiation, 231e232
Electromagnetic stress tensor, 412
Electromagnetic waves, 9e10, 163,
184e185
Electromagnetism, 125, 229e237
with Coulomb’s law, 229
ﬁeld theory of, 230
Lorentz force of, 195e196
Electromotive forces, 156e157
Electrostatic force, 127e128
Electrostatic potential energy, 363
Energy conservation, 293
Energyemomentum conservation,
136e137, 365e366,
376
Energyemomentum relation, 94e95,
408
Energyemomentum tensors, 279e281,
312e314
Equation of motion, of particles in
curved spacesetime, 262e269
Equivalence principle, 271e273
Euclidean Cartesian coordinate system,
210e211
Euclidean space, 423e424
Event horizon, 294e296
F
Faraday’s law, 158, 161, 183, 381,
417e418
Field theory, 162
Force-free motion, 201e202
Forces
electrostatic/gravitational, 127e128
equals mass times acceleration, 123
Newton’s second law, 408e409
static, 127e130
transformation properties of, 125e127
Four-dimensional Minkowski diagrams,
242e243
Four-dimensional spaceetime, 261
Four-vectors, 262, 408
covariant and contravariant, 397e400
potential, 421e422
Free fall, 272, 423e426
G
Galilean invariants, 1e2, 7e8, 81e82
Galilean transformations, 4e5, 15, 55,
81
Galileo’s law of addition, 20e21
Gauge transformation, 417e418
GausseBonnet theorem, 257e260, 259f,
274
Gaussian curvature, 206, 244e246, 253
Gauss’ law, 149e159, 174e175,
181e183, 418
General relativity, 315e320
aging astronaut, 223e225
bending of light, 225e229
Christoffel symbol, 413
contravariant vectors and tensors, 413
covariant derivatives, 413e414
covariant vectors and tensors, 413
curvature and Riemann tensor, 414
curvature, tidal forces, and the geodesic
deviation, 414
curved spaceetime, isotropic coordi-
nates, 416
Einstein and Ricci tensors, 415
electromagnetism and gravity, 229e237
equivalence principle, gravity, and
apparent forces, 189e200
geodesic curves, 414
432
Index

gravitational redshift, 212e221, 412
linearized gravity, 415e416
local inertial reference frame,
209e212
metric tensor, 413
non-euclidean geometry, 209e212
out of time, 237e238
Riemann tensor, symmetries of,
414
Schwarzschild metric, 416
spatial curvature, 200e209
and Thomas precession, 200e209
tidal forces, 209e212
twins again, 221e223
Geodesic deviation, 421e428
Geodesic parallels, 254e255
Geodesics, 244e246, 247f, 254e255,
264e265
Gravitational force, 127e128,
189e190
Gravitational radiation, 308e315
Gravitational redshift
accelerating spaceship, 214
energy conservation, 219e221
experimental test, 218e219
freely falling inertial frame, 212e214
relativity of simultaneity, 215e216
rotating reference frame, 216e218
Gravitational waves, 421e428
discovery of, 306e308
H
Handy approximations and expansions,
391e392
Hawking radiation, 296
Heisenberg uncertainty relation,
218
Helmholtz theorems, 404
I
Inelastic collision, 90f
Inertial frame of, reference, 197
Integral theorems, 404
Intertial frames, 1e2, 3f
Invariant interval, 63, 74e76, 352
Inverse square law, gravity, 191
Isotropy of space, 1e2, 281
J
Jacobian transformation, 250
K
Kepler’s law, 311
L
Laplacians, 403e404
Larmor formula, 236e237
Leibniz rule, 271
Length between two points, 242e243
Lenz’s law, 159
Light cones, 61e64
Light pulse, propagation of, 212
LIGO, 306e307, 309
LISA, 314
Local inertial reference frame, 209e212
Lorentz contraction, 17e19, 24e26,
57e58, 206, 348
factor, 178
Minkowski diagrams, 37e41
of special relativity, 241e242
Lorentz force, 131, 135e137, 152,
178e179, 181e182, 235,
411e412
of electromagnetism, 195e196
Lorentz invariant, 62, 99
conservation law, 152e153
wave equation, 163
Lorentz transformation, 353e354, 363
boosts, 55e59, 407
causality, light cones, and proper time,
61e64
coefﬁcients of, 179e180
formulas, 63
law, 123
relativistic velocity addition, 59e61
relativity of simultaneity, 58e59
time dilation, 57
M
Magnetic effects, 179, 183
Magnetic ﬁelds, 137e138, 154e155,
176e177, 409
Magnetic forces, 8e10
electrodynamics formulated in covariant
notation, 178e183
Index
433

Magnetic forces (Continued)
next steps, 183e185
relativistic effects, 171e178
Maxwell’s equations, 9e10, 123, 130,
137, 149e159, 181, 409,
421e422
derivative of, 154
from Gauss’ law, 232
Metric compatibility, 271e273
Metric space, 241e242
Minkowski metric, 99e100, 242e243,
265, 278, 349fe351f
spaceetime measurements, 73, 73f
Momentum conservation, 127e128
Momentum of a photon, 345
Mössbauer effect, 218
Mössbauer experiment, 108f
N
Newtonian dynamics, 82
relativistic momentum and energy,
84e92
Newtonian inelastic collision, 85
Newtonian kinematics, 362
Newtonian mechanics, 3e4, 81
rules of, 14
Newtonian notion of momentum, 82
Newtonian tidal forces, 305e306
NewtoneKepler predictions of planetary
motion, 298e299
Newton’s concept of relativity, 2
Newton’s corpuscular theory of light,
226
Newton’s gravity, 277
Newton’s law of gravitation, 278
Newton’s laws of motion, 1e8, 81
ﬁrst law, 1e2
for magnetism, 8e10
second law, 6e7, 15, 81e82, 93
third law, 6, 81e82, 127e130
Newton’s theory of gravity, 225e226
Non-euclidean geometry, 209e212
P
Parallel translation, 263e266
Planck energy, 318e319
Planck’s constant, 110e112, 218
Poincare group, 316
Principal curvatures, 253
directions of, 253
Propagation
light pulse of, 212
of light signal, 213f
Protoneproton collision, 108f
Pythagorean theorem, 241e242
Q
Quantum chromodynamics, 317e318
R
Radar echoes, 300
Radial “infalling”, 300
Radio pulse
emission, 72f
in Minkowski diagram, 73f
Red-shift formula, 224e225
Relative velocity, 346e347
Relativistic addition formula, 355e358
Relativistic dynamics
collisions and conservation laws,
104e112
energy and momentum conservation,
96e99
and energy conservation, 92e95
energy, light, and E¼MC2, 81e84
force, 92e95
four-vectors, 96e99
four-vectors, focusing on, 99e104
momentum and energy, 84e92
tensors, and notation, 99e104
Relativistic energy, 360e362
Relativistic force, 92e95
Relativistic kinematics, 362
Relativistic kinetic energy, 364e365
Relativistic tidal forces, 303e306
RelativityeMinkowski diagrams
Doppler effect, 42e44
Lorentz contraction, 37e41
speed limit, 50e51
speed of light, 31e37
time dilation, 37e41
twin paradox, 44e49
Ricci scalar, 285
Ricci tensor, 276e277, 284
434
Index

Riemann curvature, 206e207
Riemann curvature tensor, 274e276,
275f
Riemann’s formulation, 261
Riemann tensor, 414
symmetries of, 414
and two-dimensional surfaces, 426e427
Rotating reference frame, 216e218
S
Schwarzschild black hole, 289e296
Schwarzschild metric, 285e289, 416
circular orbital motion in, 296e300
Schwarzschild radius, 290, 291f,
388e389
Second-rank Ricci tensor, 276e277
Simultaneity
gravitational redshift, 215e216
Lorentz transformation, 19e22
Space station, 71
Spaceetime curvature, 261
Spaceetime measurements
clock with mirrors and light, 13e17
ice hole, 73e76
Lorentz contraction, 17e19, 24e26
Minkowski diagram, 73, 73f
relativity of simultaneity, 19e22
spaceship, 71e73
speed limit, 11e12
time dilation revisited, 22e24
velocity greater than speed limit, 76e78
Spatial curvature, 200e209
Special relativity, 315e320
Speed of light, 11, 15, 59e61, 76e77,
110e112
in a gravitational ﬁeld, 300e302
Minkowski diagrams, 31e37
scale of, 223e224
Sphere, 244e245, 245f
Spherical coordinates, 401e402
Static forces, 127e130
Stoke’s theorem, 158e159, 404
T
Tangential curvature, 251e252
Taylor’s theorem, 391
Theorema Egregium, 262
Thomas precession, 200e209
Three-dimensional Euclidean space, 241,
242f, 248e249
Tidal forces, 209e212, 427e430
relativistic version of, 303e306
Time dilation, 15, 22e24
Minkowski diagrams, 37e41
Tortoise coordinate, 294e296
Transversality condition, 160e161
Transverse velocity, 85, 88f
Twin paradox, 44e49
Two-dimensional surface, 243e244,
243f
Two vectors, cross product of, 402
U
Uniformity of space, 1e2
V
Vector calculus, 401e406
Velocity-dependent forces, 133e134,
183, 424e426
W
Wave equations
for light, 159e164
Lorentz invariant, 163
and radiation, 417e421
with sources, 410
without sources, 410
Wave operator, 278
Index
435


