VII
SPECIAL PROBLEMS
SIMULTANEOUSLY with the gradual evolution of the Elements,
the Greeks were occupying themselves with problems in
higher geometry, three problems in particular, the squaring
of the circle, the doubling of the cube, and the trisection of
any given angle, were rallying-points for mathematicians
during three centuries at least, and the whole course of Greek
geometry was profoundly influenced by the character of the
specialized investigations which had their origin in the attempts
to solve these problems. In illustration we need only refer
to the subject of conic sections which began with the use
made of two of the curves for the finding of two mean pro-
portionals.
The Greeks classified problems according to the means by
which they were solved. The ancients, says Pappus, divided
them into three classes, which they called plane, solid, and
linear respectively. Problems were plane if they could be
solved by means of the straight line and circle only, solid
if they could be solved by means of one or more conic sections,
and linear if their solution required the use of other curves
still more complicated and difficult to construct, such as spirals,
quadratrices, cochloids (conchoids) and cissoids, or again the
various curves included in the class of ' loci on surfaces' (TOTTOI
Trpoy kirMfxiveiais), as they were called.1 There was a corre-
sponding distinction between loci: plane loci are straight
lines or circles; solid loci are, according to the most strict
classification, conies only, which arise from the sections of
certain solids, namely cones; while linear loci include all
1 Pappus, iii, pp. 54-6, iv, pp. 270-2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CLASSIFICATION OF PROBLEMS 
219
higher curves.1 Another classification of loci divides them
into loci on lines (TOTTOL npbs ypctfifia??) and loci on surfaces
(TOTTOL 7rpoy kirupaveiais)? 
The former term is found in
Proclus, and seems to be used in the sense both of loci which
are lines (including of course curves) and of loci which are
spaces bounded by lines, e.g. Proclus speaks of 'the whole
space between the parallels' in Eucl. I. 35 as being the locus
of the (equal) parallelograms 'on the same base and in the
same parallels'.3 
Similarly loci on surfaces in Proclus may
be loci which are surfaces; but Pappus, who gives lemmas
to the two books of Euclid under that title, seems to imply
that they were curves drawn on surfaces, e.g. the cylindrical
helix.4
It is evident that the Greek geometers came very early
to the conclusion that the three problems in question were not
plane, but required for their solution either higher curves
than circles or constructions more mechanical in character
than the mere use of the ruler and compasses in the sense of
Euclid's Postulates 1-3. It was probably about 420 B.C. that
Hippias of Elis invented the curve known as the quadratrix
for the purpose of trisecting any angle, and it was in the first
half of the fourth century that Archytas used for the dupli-
cation of the cube a solid construction involving the revolution
of plane figures in space, one of which made a tore or anchor-
ring with internal diameter nil. 
There are very few records
of illusory attempts to do the impossible in these cases. It is
practically only in the case of the squaring of the circle that
we read of abortive efforts made by ' plane' methods, and none
of these (with the possible exception of Bryson's, if the
accounts of his argument are correct) involved any real
fallacy. 
On the other hand, the bold pronouncement of
Antiphon the Sophist that by inscribing in a circle a series
of regular polygons each of which has twice as many sides
as the preceding one, we shall use up or exhaust the area of
the circle, though it was in advance of his time and was
condemned as a fallacy on the technical ground that a straight
line cannot coincide with an arc of a circle however short
its length, contained an idea destined to be fruitful in the
1 Cf. Pappus, vii, p. 662, 10-15. 
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 394. 19.
3 J6M p. 395. 5. 
4 Pappus, iv, p. 258 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

220 
SPECIAL PROBLEMS
hands of later and abler geometers, since it gives a method
of approximating, with any desired degree of accuracy, to the
area of a circle, and lies at the root of the method of exhaustion
as established by Eudoxus. As regards Hippocrates's quadra-
ture of lunes, we must, notwithstanding the criticism of
Aristotle charging him with a paralogism, decline to believe
that he was under any illusion as to the limits of what his
method could accomplish, or thought that he had actually
squared the circle.
The squaring of the circle.
There is presumably no problem which has exercised such
a fascination throughout the ages as that of rectifying or
squaring the circle; and it is a curious fact that its attraction
has been no less (perhaps even greater) for the non-mathe-
matician than for the mathematician. It was naturally the
kind of problem which the Greeks, of all people, would take
up with zest the moment that its difficulty was realized. The
first name connected with the problem is Anaxagoras, who
is said to have occupied himself with it when in prison.1
The Pythagoreans claimed that it was solved in their school,
c as is clear from the demonstrations of Sextus the Pythagorean,
who got his method of demonstration from early tradition'2,
but Sextus, or rather Sextius, lived in the reign of Augustus
or Tiberius, and, for the usual reasons, no value can be
attached to the statement.
The first serious attempts to solve the problem belong to
the second half of the fifth century B.C. 
A passage of
Aristophanes's Birds is quoted as evidence of the popularity
of the problem at the time (414 B.C.) of its first representation.
Aristophanes introduces Meton, the astronomer and discoverer
of the Metonic cycle of 19 years, who brings with him a ruler
and compasses, and makes a certain construction ' in order that
your circle may become square \3 This is a play upon words,
because what Meton really does is to divide a circle into four
quadrants by two diameters at right angles to one another;
the idea is of streets radiating from the agora in the centre
1 Plutarch, Be exit. 17, p. 607 F.
2 Iambi ap. Simpl. in Categ., p. 192, 16-19 K., 64 b 11 Brandis.
3 Aristophanes, Birds 1005.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE
221
of a town; the word Terpdycovo? then really means ' with four
(right) angles' (at the centre), and not' square', but the word
conveys a laughing allusion to the problem of squaring all
the same.
We have already given an account of Hippocrates's quadra-
tures of lunes. These formed a sort of prolusio, and clearly
did not purport to be a solution of the problem ; Hippocrates
was aware that 'plane' methods would not solve it, but, as
a matter of interest, he wished to show that, if circles could
not be squared by these methods, they could be employed
to find the area of some figures bounded by arcs of circles,
namely certain lunes, and even of the sum of a certain circle
and a certain lune.
ANTIPHON of Athens, the Sophist and a contemporary of
Socrates, is the next person to claim attention. 
We owe
to Aristotle and his commentators our knowledge of Anti-
phon's method. Aristotle observes that a geometer is only
concerned to refute any fallacious arguments that may be
propounded in his subject if they are based upon the admitted
principles of geometry; if they are not so based, he is not
concerned to refute them:
' thus it is the geometer's business to refute the quadrature by
means of segments, but it is not his business to refute that
of Antiphon '}
by means of segments' is
As we have seen, the quadrature
probably 
Hippocrates's 
quad-
rature of 
lunes. 
Antiphojn's
method is indicated by Themis-
tius2 and Simplicius.3 Suppose
there is any regular polygon
inscribed in a circle, e.g. a square
or an equilateral triangle. (Ac-
cording to Themistius, Antiphon
began with an equilateral triangle,
and this seems to be the authentic
version; Simplicius says he in-
scribed some one of the regular polygons which can be inscribed
1 Arist. Phys. i. 2, 185 a 14-17.
2 Them, in Phys., p. 4. 2 sq., Schenkl.
3 Simp], in Phijs., p. 54. 20-55. 24, Diels.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

222 
THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE
in a circle, ' suppose, if it so happen, that the inscribed polygon
is a square \) On each side of the inscribed triangle or square
as base describe an isosceles triangle with its vertex on the
arc of the smaller segment of the circle subtended by the side.
This gives a regular inscribed polygon with double the number
of sides. Repeat the construction with the new polygon, and
we have an inscribed polygon with four times as many sides as
the original polygon had. Continuing the process,
c Antiphon thought that in this way the area (of the circle)
would be used up, and we should some time have a polygon
inscribed in the circle the sides of which would, owing to their
smallness, coincide with the circumference of the circle. And,
as we can make a square equal to any polygon . . . we shall
be in a position to make a square equal to a circle.'
Simplicius tells us that, while according to Alexander the
geometrical principle hereby infringed is the truth that a circle
touches a straight line in one point (only), Eudemus more
correctly said it was the principle that magnitudes are divisible
without limit; for, if the area of the circle is divisible without
limit, the process described by Antiphon will never result in
using up the whole area, or in making the sides of the polygon
take the position of the actual circumference of the circle.
But the objection to Antiphon's statement is really no more than
verbal; Euclid uses exactly the same construction in XII. 2,
only he expresses the conclusion in a different way, saying
that, if the process be continued far enough, the small seg-
ments left over will be together less than any assigned area.
Antiphon in effect said the same thing, which again we express
by saying that the circle is the limit of such an inscribed
polygon when the number of its sides is indefinitely increased.
Antiphon therefore deserves an honourable place in the history
of geometry as having originated the idea of exhausting an
area by means of inscribed regular polygons with an ever
increasing number of sides, an idea upon which, as we said,
Eudoxus founded his epoch-making method of exhaustion.
The practical value of Antiphon's construction is illustrated
by ArchimedesJs treatise on the Measurement of a Circle,
where, by constructing inscribed and circumscribed regular
polygons with 96 sides, Archimedes proves that 3f > n > 3^f,
the lower limit, IT > 3^f, being obtained by calculating the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANTIPHON AND BRYSON 
223
perimeter of the inscribed polygon of 96 sides, which is
constructed in Antiphon's manner from an inscribed equilateral
triangle. The same construction starting from a square was
likewise the basis of Vieta's expression for 2fir, namely
2 
7T 
IT 
TV
- = cos -. cos - . cos — ...
IT 
4 
8 
16
BRYSON, who came a generation later than Antiphon, being
a pupil of Socrates or of Euclid of Megara, was the author
of another attempted quadrature which is criticized by
Aristotle as 'sophistic' and 'eristic' on the ground that it
was based on principles not special to geometry but applicable
equally to other subjects.1 The commentators give accounts
of Bryson's argument which are substantially the same, except
that Alexander speaks of squares inscribed and circumscribed
to a circle 2, while Themistius and Philoponus speak of any
polygons.3 According to Alexander, Bryson inscribed a square
in a circle and circumscribed another about it, while he also
took a square intermediate between them (Alexander does not
say how constructed); then he argued that, as the intermediate
square is less than the outer and greater than the inner, while
the circle is also less than the outer square and greater than
the inner, and as things which are greater and less than the
same things respectively are equal, it follows that the circle is
equal to the intermediate square: upon which Alexander
remarks that not only is the thing assumed applicable to
other things besides geometrical magnitudes, e.g. to numbers,
times, depths of colour, degrees of heat or cold, &c, but it
is also false because (for instance) 8 and 9 are both less than
10 and greater than 7 and yet they are not equal. As regards
the intermediate square (or polygon), some have assumed that
it was the arithmetic mean between the inscribed and circum-
scribed figures, and others that it was the geometric mean.
Both assumptions seem to be due to misunderstanding4; for
1 Arist. An. Post i. 9, 75 b 40.
2 Alexander on Soph. EL, p. 90. 10-21, Wallies, 306 b 24 sq., Brandis.
8 Them, on An. Post, p. 19. 11-20, Wallies, 211 b 19, Brandis; Philop.
on An. Post, p. 111. 20-114. 17 W., 211 b 30, Brandis.
4 Psellus (11th cent, A.D.) says, 'there are different opinions as to the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

224 
THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE
the ancient commentators do not attribute to Bryson any such
statement, and indeed, to judge by their discussions of different
interpretations, it would seem that tradition was by no means
clear as to what Bryson actually did say. 
But it seems
important to note that Themistius states (1) that Bryson
declared the circle to be greater than all inscribed, and less
than all circumscribed, polygons, while he also says (2) that
the assumed axiom is true, though not peculiar to geometry.
This suggests a possible explanation of what otherwise seems
to be an absurd argument. Bryson may have multiplied the
number of the sides of both the inscribed and circumscribed
regular polygons as Antiphon did with inscribed polygons;
he may then have argued that, if we continue this process
long enough, we shall have an inscribed and a circumscribed
polygon differing so little in area that, if we can describe
a polygon intermediate between them in area, the circle, which
is also intermediate in area between the inscribed and circum-
scribed polygons, must be equal to the intermediate polygon.1
If this is the right explanation, Bryson's name by no means
deserves to be banished from histories of Greek mathematics;
on the contrary, in so far as he suggested the necessity of
considering circumscribed as well as inscribed polygons, he
went a step further than Antiphon; and the importance of
the idea is attested by the fact that, in the regular method
of exhaustion as practised by Archimedes, use is made of both
inscribed and circumscribed figures, and this compression, as it
were, of a circumscribed and an inscribed figure into one so
that they ultimately coincide with one another, and with the
proper method of finding the area of a circle, but that which has found
the most favour is to take the geometric mean between the inscribed and
circumscribed squares'. I am not aware that he quotes Bryson as the
authority for this method, and it gives the inaccurate value IT = ^/S or
2-8284272 .... Isaac Argyrus (14th cent.) adds to his account of Bryson
the following sentence: ' For the circumscribed square seems to exceed
the circle by the same amount as the inscribed square is exceeded by the
circle'
1 It is true that, according to Philoponus, Proclus had before him an
explanation of this kind, but rejected it on the ground that it would
mean that the circle must actually be the intermediate polygon and not
only be equal to it, in which case Bryson's contention would be tanta-
mount to Antiphon's, whereas according to Aristotle it was based on
a quite different principle. But it is sufficient that the circle should
be taken to be equal to any polygon that can be drawn intermediate
between the two ultimate polygons, and this gets over Proclus's difficulty.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE 
225
curvilinear figure to be measured, is particularly characteristic
of Archimedes.
We come now to the real rectifications or quadratures of
circles effected by means of higher curves, the construction
of which is more {mechanical' than that of the circle. Some
of these curves were applied to solve more than one of the
three classical problems, and it is not always easy to determine
for which purpose they were originally destined by their
inventors, because the accounts of the different authorities
do not quite agree. Iamblichus, speaking of the quadrature
of the circle, said that
' Archimedes effected it by means of the spiral-shaped curve,
Nicomedes by means of the curve known by the special name
quadratrix (rerpaycoi/L^ova-a), Apollonius by means of a certain
curve which he himself calls "sister of the cochloid" but
which is the same as Nieomedes's curve, and finally Carpus
by means of a certain curve which he simply calls (the curve
arising) "from a double motion".'1
Pappus says that
' for the squaring of the circle Dinostratus, Nicomedes and
certain other and later geometers used a certain curve which
took its name from its property; for those geometers called it
quadratrix.7 2
Lastly, Proclus, speaking of the trisection of any angle,
says that
{Nicomedes trisected any rectilineal angle by means of the
conchoidal curves, the construction, order and properties of
which he handed down, being himself the discoverer of their
peculiar character. Others have done the same thing by
means of the quadratrices of Hippias and Nicomedes. . . .
Others again, starting from the spirals of Archimedes, divided
any given rectilineal angle in any given ratio/ 3
All these passages refer to the quadratrix invented by
Hippias of Elis. The first two seem to imply that it was not
used by Hippias himself for squaring the circle, but that it
was Dinostratus (a brother of Menaechmus) and other later
geometers who first applied it to that purpose; Iamblichus
and Pappus do not even mention the name of Hippias. We
might conclude that Hippias originally intended his curve to
1 Iambi, ap. Simpl. in Categ., p. 192.19-24 K., 64 b 13-18 Br.
2 Pappus, iv, pp. 250. 33-252. 3. 
8 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 272. 1-12.
1523 
Q
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

226
THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE
be used for trisecting an angle. But this becomes more doubt-
ful when the passages of Proclus are considered. Pappus's
authority seems to be Sporus, who was only slightly older
than Pappus himself (towards the end of the third century A.D.),
and who was the author of a compilation called Krjpfa con-
taining, among other things, mathematical extracts on the
quadrature of the circle and the duplication of the cube.
Proclus's authority, on the other hand, is doubtless Geminus,
who was much earlier (first century B.C.) Now not only
does the above passage of Proclus make it possible that the
name quadratrix may have been used by Hippias himself,
but in another place Proclus (i.e. Geminus) says that different
mathematicians have explained the properties of particular
kinds of curves:
' thus Apollonius shows in the case of each of the conic curves
what is its property, and similarly Nicomedes with the
conchoids, Hippias with the quadratrices, and Perseus with
the spiric curves/1
This suggests that Geminus had before him a regular treatise
by Hippias on the properties of the quadratrix (which may
have disappeared by the time of Sporus), and that Nicomedes
did not write any such general work on that curve; and,
if this is so, it seems not impossible that Hippias himself
discovered that it would serve to rectify, and therefore to
square, the circle.
(a) The Quadratrix of Hippias.
The method of constructing the curve is described by
Pappus.2 
Suppose that A BOD is
a square, and BED a quadrant of a
circle with centre A.
Suppose (1) that a radius of the
circle moves uniformly about? A from
the position AB to the position AD}
and (2) that in the same time the
line BC moves uniformly, always
A 
H 
MG 
'o 
parallel to itself and with its ex-
tremity B moving along BA, from the position BG to the
position AD.
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 356. 6-12. 
2 Pappus, iv, pp. 252 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE QUADRATRIX OF HIPPIAS 
227
Then, in their ultimate positions, the moving straight line
and the moving radius will both coincide with A D; and at
any previous instant during the motion the moving line and
the moving radius will by their intersection determine a point,
as F or L.
The locus of these points is the quadratrix.
The property of the curve is that
ABAD.lEAD 
= (arcBED): (arcED) = AB.FH.
In other words, if <f> is the angle FAD made by any radius
vector AF with AD, p the length of AF, and a the length
of the side of the square,
p sin <f) (f>
a 
~~ JTT
Now clearly, when the curve is once constructed, it enables
us not only to trisect the angle EAD but also to divide it in
any given ratio.
For let FH be divided at F' in the given ratio. Draw F'L
parallel to AD to meet the curve in L: join AL, and produce
it to meet the circle in N.
Then the angles EAN, NAD are in the ratio of FF' to F'H,
as is easily proved.
Thus the quadratrix lends itself quite readily to the division
of any angle in a given ratio.
The application of the quadratrix to the rectification of the
circle is a more difficult matter, because it requires us to
know the position of G, the point where the quadratrix
intersects AD. This difficulty was fully appreciated in ancient
times, as we shall see.
Meantime, assuming that the quadratrix intersects AD
in G, we have to prove the proposition which gives the length
of the arc of the quadrant BED and therefore of the circum-
ference of the circle. This proposition is to the effect that
(arc of quadrant BED) :AB = AB:AG.
This is proved by reductio ad absurdum.
If the former ratio is not equal to AB:AG, 
it must be
equal to AB: AK, where AK is either (I) greater or (2) less
than^lG.
(1) Let i Z be greater than AG; and with A as centre
Q 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

228
THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE
and AK as radius, draw the quadrant KFL cutting the quad-
ratrix in F and A B in L.
Join AF, and produce it to meet the circumference BED
in E; draw FH perpendicular to AD.
Now, by hypothesis,
(arc BED) :AB = AB:AK
= (arc BED): (arc LFK);
therefore 
A B = (arc LFK).
But, by the property of the quadra-
trix,
AB:FH= 
(arc BED) : (arc ED)
and it was proved that AB — (arc LFK),
therefore 
FH = (arc FK):
which is absurd. Therefore AK is not greater than AG.
(2) Let AK be less than AG.
With centre A and radius AK draw the quadrant KML.
Draw KF at right angles to AD meeting the quadratrix
in F] join AF, and let it meet the
quadrants in M, E respectively.
Then, as before, we prove that
AB = (arc LMK).
And, by the property of the quad-
ratrix,
AB-.FK = (arc BED): (arc DE)
= (arcLMK): (ateMK).
AB = (arc LMK),
FK = (arc KM):
which is absurd. Therefore AK is not less than AG.
Since then AK is neither less nor greater than AG, it is
equal to it, and
(arc BED) :AB = AB:AG.
[The above proof is presumably due to Dinostratus (if not
to Hippias himself), and, as Dinostratus was a brother of
Menaechmus, a pupil of Eudoxus, and therefore probably
Therefore, since
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE QUADRATRIX OF HIPPIAS 
229
nourished about 350 B.C., that is to say, some time before
Euclid, it is worth while to note certain propositions which
are assumed as known. These are, in addition to the theorem
of Eucl. VI. 33, the following: (1) the circumferences of
circles are as their respective radii; (2) any arc of a circle
is greater than the chord subtending it; (3) any arc of a
circle less than a quadrant is less than the portion of the
tangent at one extremity of the arc cut off by the radius
passing through the other extremity. 
(2) and (3) are of
course equivalent to the facts that, if a be the circular measure
of an angle less than a right angle, sin a < oc < tan a.]
Even now we have only rectified the circle. To square it
we have to use the proposition (1) in Archimedes's Measure-
ment of a Circle, to the effect that the area of a circle is equal
to that of a right-angled triangle in which the perpendicular
is equal to the radius, and the base to the circumference,
of the circle. This proposition is proved by the method of
exhaustion and may have been known to Dinostratus, who
was later than Eudoxus, if not to Hippias.
The criticisms of Sporus,1 in which Pappus concurs, are
worth quoting:
(1) 'The very thing for which the construction is thought
to serve is actually assumed in the hypothesis. For how is it
possible, with two points starting from B, to make one of
them move along a straight line to A and the other along
a circumference to D in an equal time, unless you first know
the ratio of the straight line AB to the circumference BED 1
In fact this ratio must also be that of the speeds of motion.
For, if you employ speeds not definitely adjusted (to this
ratio), how can you make the motions end at the same
moment, unless this should sometime happen by pure chance ?
Is not the thing thus shown to be absurd ?
(2) ' Again, the extremity of the curve which they employ
for squaring the circle, I mean the point in which the curve
cuts the straight line AD, is not found at all. For if, in the
figure, the straight lines GB, BA are made to end their motion
together, they will then coincide with AD itself and will not
cut one another any more. In fact they cease to intersect
before they coincide with AD, and yet it was the intersection
of these lines which was supposed to give the extremity of the
1 Pappus, iv, pp. 252. 26-254. 22.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

230 
THE SQUAEING OF THE CIRCLE
curve, where it met the straight line AD. Unless indeed any
one should assert that the curve is conceived to be produced
further, in the same way as we suppose straight lines to be
produced, as far as AD. 
But this does not follow from the
assumptions made; the point G can only be found by first
assuming (as known) the ratio of the circumference to the
straight line.'
The second of these objections is undoubtedly sound. The
point G can in fact only be found by applying the method
of exhaustion in the orthodox Greek manner; e.g. we may
first bisect the angle of the quadrant, then the half towards
AD, then the half of that and so on, drawing each time
from the points F in which the bisectors cut the quadratrix
perpendiculars FH on AD and describing circles with AF
as radius cutting AD in K. Then, if we continue this process
long enough, UK will get smaller and smaller and, as G lies
between H and K, we can approximate to the position of G as
nearly as we please. But this process is the equivalent of
approximating to n, which is the very object of the whole
construction.
As regards objection (1) Hultsch has argued that it is not
valid because, with our modern facilities for making instru-
ments of precision, there is no difficulty in making the two
uniform motions take the same time. Thus an accurate clock
will show the minute hand describing an exact quadrant in
a definite time, and it is quite practicable now to contrive a
uniform rectilinear motion taking exactly the same time.
I suspect, however, that the rectilinear motion would be the
result of converting some one or more circular motions into
rectilinear motions; if so, they would involve the use of an
approximate value of 7r, in which case the solution would depend
on the assumption of the very thing to be found. I am inclined,
therefore, to think that both Sporus's objections are valid.
(/3) The Spiral of Archimedes.
We are assured that Archimedes actually used the spiral
for squaring the circle. He does in fact show how to rectify
a circle by means of a polar subtangent to the spiral. The
spiral is thus generated: suppose that a straight line with
one extremity fixed starts from a fixed position (the initial
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SPIRAL OF ARCHIMEDES 
231
line) and revolves uniformly about the fixed extremity, while
a point also moves uniformly along the moving straight line
starting from the fixed extremity (the origin) at the com-
mencement of the straight line's motion; the curve described
is a spiral.
The polar equation of the curve is obviously p = ad.
Suppose that the tangent at any point P of the spiral is
met at T by a straight line drawn from 0, the origin or pole,
perpendicular to the radius vector OP; then OT is the polar
sub tangent.
Now in the book On Spirals Archimedes proves generally
the equivalent of the fact that, if p be the radius vector to
the point P,
OT = p2/a.
If P is on the nth. turn of the spiral, the moving straight
line will have moved through an angle 2(n — \)TT + 6, say.
Hence 
p = a{2(n—l)7r + 6},
and 
0T= P
2/a = p{2(n-l)7r+6}.
Archimedes's way of expressing this is to say (Prop. 20)
that, if p be the circumference of the circle with radius
0P( = p)} and if this circle cut the initial line in the point K,
OT = (n—l)p + arc KP measured * forward' from K to P.
If P is the end of the nth turn, this reduces to
OT = n (circumf. of circle with radius OP),
and, if P is the end of the first turn in particular,
OT = (circumf. of circle with radius OP). (Prop, 19.)
The spiral can thus be used for the rectification of any
circle. And the quadrature follows directly from Measure-
ment of a Circle, Prop. 1.
(y) Solutions by Apollonius and Carpus.
Iamblichus says that Apollonius himself called the curve by
means of which he squared the circle ' sister of the cochloid \
What this curve was is uncertain. As the passage goes on to
say that it was really ' the same as the (curve) of Nicomedes',
and the quadratrix has just been mentioned as the curve used
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

232 
THE SQUAKING OF THE CIRCLE
by Nicomedes, some have supposed the ' sister of the cochloid '
(or conchoid) to be the quadratrix, but this seems highly im-
probable. There is, however, another possibility. Apollonius
is known to have written a regular treatise on the Cochlias,
which was the cylindrical helix.1 It is conceivable that he
might call the cochlias the 'sister of the cochloid9 on the
ground of the similarity of the names, if not of the curves.
And, as a matter of fact, the drawing of a tangent to the
helix enables the circular section of the cylinder to be squared.
For, if a plane be drawn at right angles to the axis of the
cylinder through the initial position of the moving radius
which describes the helix, and if we project on,* this plane
the portion of the tangent at any point of the helix intercepted
between the point and the plane, the projection is equal to
an arc of the circular section of the cylinder subtended by an
angle at the centre equal to the angle through which the
plane through the axis and the moving radius has turned
from its original position. And this squaring by means of
what we may call the ' subtangent' is sufficiently parallel to
the use by Archimedes of the polar subtangent to the spiral
for the same purpose to make the hypothesis attractive.
Nothing whatever is known of Carpus's curve ' of double
motion \ 
Tannery thought it was the cycloid; but there is no
evidence for this.
(S) Approximations to the value of w.
As we have seen, Archimedes, by inscribing and cir-
cumscribing regular polygons of 96 sides, and calculating
their perimeters respectively, obtained the approximation
3^>7T>3^Y (Measurement of a Circle, Prop. 3). But we
now learn2 that, in a work on Plinthides and Cylinders, he
made a nearer approximation still. Unfortunately the figures
as they stand in the Greek text are incorrect, the lower limit
<T
being given as the ratio of fi^cooe to /i^v/xa, or 211875:67441
to
(= 3141635), and the higher limit as the ratio of fL^cMrrj to
fi 
or 197888:62351 (= 3-17377), so that the lower limit
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1110. 20; Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 105. 5.
2 Heron, Metrica, i. 26, p. 66. 13-17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPROXIMATIONS TO THE VALUE OF II 233
as given is greater than the true value, and the higher limit is
greater than the earlier upper limit 3^. Slight corrections by
Tannery (/^awojS for ji^aoaoe and ii^oDirfi for fiXconr}) give
better figures, namely
195882 
211872
62351 > ir> 
"67441
or 
31416016 > TT > 3-1415904....
Another suggestion1 is to correct fjLXvfxa
«.0 
id
fJL/£
C07ril 
i
195888 
211875
62351 > ^ > 67444
or 
3-141697... > ir > 3-141495 ....
If either suggestion represents the true reading, the mean
between the two limits gives the same remarkably close
approximation 3-141596.
Ptolemy2 gives a value for the ratio of the circumference
of a circle to its diameter expressed thus in sexagesimal
fractions, y rj A, i.e. 3 + — +' —^ or 3-1416. He observes
that this is almost exactly the mean between the Archimedean
limits 3^ and 3-i^y. It is, however, more exact than this mean,
and Ptolemy no doubt obtained his value independently. 
He
had the basis of the calculation ready to hand in his Table
of Chords. This Table gives the lengths of the chords of
a circle subtended by arcs of \°, 1°, 1^°, and so on by half
degrees. The chords are expressed in terms of 120th parts
of the length of the diameter. If one such part be denoted
by lp, the chord subtended by an arc of 1° is given by the
Table in terms of this unit and sexagesimal fractions of it
thus, lp 2' 50". Since an angle of 1° at the centre subtends
a side of the regular polygon of 360 sides inscribed in the
circle, the perimeter of this polygon is 360 times 1* 2' 50"
or, since lp = 1/120th of the diameter, the perimeter of the
polygon expressed in terms of the diameter is 3 times 1 2' 50",
that is 3 8r 30", which is Ptolemy's figure for TT,
1 J. L. Heiben in Xordisk TidssJcrift for Filologi, 3e Ser. xx. Fasc. 1-2.
2 Ptolemy, Suntaxis, vi. 7, p. 513. 1-5, Heib.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

234 
THE SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE
There is evidence of a still closer calculation than Ptolemy's
due to some Greek whose name we do not know. The Indian
mathematician Aryabhatta (born A.r>. 476) says in his Lessons
in Calculation:
'To 100 add 4; multiply the sum by 8; add 02000 more
and thus (we have), for a diameter of 2 myriads, the approxi-
mate length of the (Circumference of the circle ';
that is, he gives §§§o§ o r 3-1416 as the value of 7r. But the
way in which he expresses it points indubitably to a Greek
source, ' for the Greeks alone of all peoples made the myriad
the unit of the second order' (Rbdet).
This brings us to the notice at the end of Euiocius's com-
mentary on the Measurement of a Circle of Archimedes, which
recordsx that other mathematicians made similar approxima-
tions, though it does not give their results.
'It is to be observed that Apollonius of Perga solved the
same problem in his 'HKVTOKLOI/ (" means of quick delivery "),
using other numbers and making the approximation closer
[than that of Archimedes]. While Apollonius's figures seem
to be more accurate,. they do not serve the purpose which
Archimedes had in view: for, as we said, his object in this
book was to find an approximate figure suitable for use in
daily life. Hence we cannot'regard as appropriate the censure
of Sporus of Nicaea, who seems to charge Archimedes with
having failed to determine with accuracy (the length of) the
straight line which is equal to the circumference of the circle,
to judge by the passage in his Keria where Sporus observes
that his own teacher, meaning Phil on of Gadara, reduced (the
matter) to more exact numerical expression than Archimedes
did, I mean in his ^ and ^f \ *n ^ac^ people seem, one after the
other, to have failed to appreciate Archimedes's object. They
have also used multiplications and divisions of myriads, a
method not easy to follow for any one who has not gone
through a course of Magnus's Logistical
It is possible that, as Apollonius used myriads, c second
myriads', ' third myriads', &c, as orders of integral numbers,
he may have worked with the fractions 
5 
> &c.;
1 Archimedes, ed. Heib., vol. iii, pp. 258-9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPROXIMATIONS TO THE VALUE OF H 235
in any case Magnus (apparently later than Sporus, and therefore
perhaps belonging to the fourth or fifth century A. D.) would
seem to have written an exposition of such a method, which,
as Eutocius indicates, must have been very much more
troublesome than the method of sexagesimal fractions used
by Ptolemy.
The Trisection of any Angle.
This problem presumably arose from attempts to continue
the construction of regular polygons after that of the pentagon
had been discovered. The trisection of an angle would be
necessary in order to construct a regular polygon the sides
of which are nine, or any multiple of nine, in number.
A regular polygon of seven sides, on the other hand, would
no doubt be constructed with the help of the first discovered
method of dividing any angle in a given ratio, i.e. by means
of the quadratrix. 
This method covered the case of trisection,
but other more practicable ways of effecting this particular
construction were in due time evolved.
We are told that the ancients attempted, and failed, to
solve the problem by ' plane' methods, i.e. by means of the
straight line and circle; they failed because the problem is
not ' plane' but' solid '. Moreover, they were not yet familiar
with conic sections, and so were at a loss; afterwards,
however, they succeeded in trisecting an angle by means of
conic sections, a method to which they were led by the
reduction of the problem to another, of the kind known as
vevcreis (inclinationes, or vergings).1
(a) Reduction to a certain vedais, solved by conies.
The reduction is arrived at by the following analysis. It is
only necessary to deal with the case where the given angle to
be trisected is acute, since a right* angle can be trisected
by drawing an equilateral triangle.
Let ABC be the given angle, and let AC be drawn perpen-
dicular% to BO. 
Complete the parallelogram ACBF, and
produce the side FA to E.
1 Pappus, iv, p. 272. 7-14.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

236
THE TRISECTION OF ANY ANGLE
Suppose E to be such a point thaty if BE be joined meeting
AC in D, the intercept BE between AC and AE is equal
to 2AB.
A /
Bisect DE at (?, and join A G.
Then 
DG = GE = AG = ^ 5 .
Therefore 
Z A££ = Z A GJ5 = 2 Z .A#G
= 2 Z DBC, since jPfi', 5C are parallel.
Hence
and the angle ABC is trisected by BE.
Thus the problem is reduced to drawing BE from B to cut
AC and AE in such a way that the intercept DE = 2AB.
In the phraseology of the problems called i/evaec? the
problem is to insert a straight line ED of given length
2AB between AE and AC in such a way that ED verges
towards B.
Pappus shows how to solve this problem in a more general
form. Given a parallelogram A BCD (which need not be
rectangular, as Pappus makes it), to draw AEF to meet CD
and BC produced in points E and F such that EF has a given
length.
Suppose the problem solved, EF being of the given length.
Complete 
the 
parallelogram
EDGF.
Then, EF being given in length,
DG is given in Jength.
Therefore G lies on a circle with
centre D and radius equal to the
given length.
Again, by the help of Eucl. I. 43 relating to the complements
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EEDUCTION TO A NETSIS 
237
of the parallelograms about the diagonal of the complete
parallelogram, we see that
BC.CD = BF.ED
= BF.FG.
Consequently G lies on a hyperbola with BF, BA as
asymptotes and passing through D.
Thus, in order to effect the construction, we have only to
draw this hyperbola as well as the circle with centre D and
radius equal to the given length. Their intersection gives the
point G, and E, F&re then determined by drawing GFparallel
to DC to meet BC produced in F and joining AF.
(/3) The vevais equivalent to a cubic equation.
It is easily seen that the solution of the vevais is equivalent
to the solution of a cubic equation. For in the first figure on
p. 236, if FA be the axis of x, FB the axis of y, FA = a,
FB = b, the solution of the problem by means of conies as
Pappus gives it is the equivalent of finding a certain point
as the intersection of the conies
xy = ab,
The second equation gives
(x + a)(x-3a) = {y + b)(3b-y).
From the first equation it is easily seen that
and that 
(x—3a)y — a(b—3y);
therefore, eliminating x, we have
a2(b-3y) = 
y2(3b-y),
or 
yz-3by2-3a2y 
+ a2b = 0.
Now suppose that LABG— 6, so that tan0 = b/a\
and suppose that 
t — tan DBG,
so that 
y = at.
We have then
aH3-3baH2-3a3 
t + a2b = 0,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

238 
THE TRISECTION OF ANY ANGLE
or 
at*-3bt2-3at + b = 0,
whence 
b (1 - 312) = a (31 - P),
x 
A 
b 
3t-t*
or 
tan 6 = - = - — r ^
a 
1 —3r
so that, by the well-known trigonometrical formula,
that is, BD trisects the angle ABC,
(y) The Conchoids of Nicomedes.
Nicomedes invented a curve for the specific purpose of
solving such veixreis as the above. His date can be fixed with
sufficient accuracy by the facts (1) that he seems to have
criticized unfavourably Eratosthenes's solution of the problem
of the two mean proportionals or the duplication of the cube,
and (2) that Apollonius called a certain curve the 'sister of
the cochloid', evidently out of compliment to Nicomedes.
Nicomedes must therefore have been about intermediate
between Eratosthenes (a little younger than Archimedes, and
therefore born about 280 B c.) and Apollonius (born probably
about 264 B.C.).
The curve is called by Pappus the cochloid (xo)(\o€i8tj$
ypa/jL/jirj), and this was evidently the original 'name for it;
later, e.g. by Proclus, it was called the conchoid (KoyxoeiSrjs
ypajijiri) 
There were varieties of the cochloidal curves,
Pappus speaks of the 'first', 'second', 'third' and'fourth5,
observing that the l first' was used for trisecting an angle and
duplicating the cube, while the others were useful for other
investigations.1 It is the * first "which concerns us here.
Nicomedes constructed it by means of a mechanical device
which may be described thus.2 AB is a ruler with a slot
in it parallel to its length, FE a second ruler fixed at right
angles to the first, with a peg C fixed in it. A third ruler
PC pointed at P has a slot in it parallel to its length which
fits the peg C. D is a fixed peg on PC in a straight line
with the slot, and D can move freely along the slot in AB.
If then the ruler PC moves so that the peg D describes the
1 Pappus, iv, p. 244. 18-20. 
2 Ib., pp. 242-4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONCHOIDS OF NICOMEDES
239
length of the slot in AB on each side of F, the extremity P of
the ruler describes the curve which is called a conchoid or
cochloid. Nicomedes called the straight line AB the ruler
) , the fixed point G the pole (TTOXOS), and the constant
length PD the distance (SLaa-rrjfjLcc).
The fundamental property of the curve, which in polar
coordinates would now be denoted by the equation
r = a -f b sec 0,
is that, if any radius vector be drawn from C to the curve, as
CP, the length intercepted on the radius vector between the
curve and the straight line AB is constant. Thus any vzv<ris
in which one of the two given lines (between which the
straight line of given length is to be placed) is a straight line
can be solved by means of the intersection of the other line
with a certain conchoid having as its pole the fixed point
to which the inserted straight line must verge {veveiv). Pappus
tells us that in practice the conchoid was not always actually
drawn but that' some', for greater convenience, moved a ruler
about the fixed point until by trial the intercept was found to
be equal to the given length.1
In the figure above (p. 236) showing the reduction of the
trisection of an angle to a vedais the conchoid to be used
would have B for its pole, AC for the ' ruler' or base, a length
equal to 2AB for its distance; and E would be found as the
intersection of the conchoid with FA produced.
Proclus says that Nicomedes gave the construction, the
order, and the properties of the conchoidal lines 2; but nothing
1 Pappus, iv, p. 246. 15. 
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 272. 3-7.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

240
THE TRISECTION OF ANY ANGLE
of his treatise has come down to us except the construction
of the c first' conchoid, its fundamental property, and the fact
that the curve has the ruler or base as an asymptote in
each direction. The distinction, however, drawn by Pappus
between the 'first', 'second7, ' third' and 'fourth' conchoids
may well have been taken from the original treatise, directly
or indirectly. We are not told the nature of the conchoids
other than the ' first', but it is probable that they were three
other curves produced by varying the conditions in the figure.
Let a be the distance or fixed intercept between the curve and
the base, b the distance of the pole from the base. Then
clearly, if along each radius vector drawn through the pole
we measure a backwards from the base towards the pole,
we get a conchoidal figure on the side of the base towards
the pole. This curve takes three forms according as a is
greater than, equal to, or less than b. Each of them has
the base for asymptote, but in the first of the three cases
the curve has a loop as shown in the figure, in the second
case it has a cusp at the pole, in the third it has no double
point. The most probable hypothesis seems to be that the
other three cochloidal curves mentioned by Pappus are these
three varieties.
(S) Another reduction to a vevais (Archimedes).
A proposition leading to the reduction of the trisection
of an angle to another vevcris is included in the collection of
Lemmas (Liber Asswmptorum) which has come to us under
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARCHIMEDES'S SOLUTION (BY NETZI2) 
241
the name of Archimedes through the Arabic 
Though the
Lemmas cannot have been written by Archimedes in their
present form, because his name is quoted in them more than
once, it is probable that some of them are of Archimedean
origin, and especially is this the case with Prop. 8, since the
vtvcris suggested by it is of very much the same kind as those
the solution of which is assumed in the treatise On Spirals,
Props. 5-8. The proposition is as follows.
If AB be any chord of a circle with centre 0, and AB be
produced to G so that BG is
equal to the radius, and if CO
meet the circle in Z), E, then the
arc AE will be equal to three
times the arc BD.
Draw the chord EF parallel
to AB, and join OB, OF.
Since BO = BG,
£B0C= LBGO.
Now 
AG0F=2£0EF,
= 2 Z BGO, by parallels,
= 2 Z BOG.
Therefore 
Z BOF = 3 Z BOD,
and 
(arc BF) = (arc AE) = 3 (arc BD).
By means of this proposition we can reduce the trisection of
the arc AE to a vevo-i$. For, in order to find an arc which is
one-third of the arc AE, we have only to draw through A
a straight line ABC meeting the circle again in B and E0
produced in C, and such that BG is equal to the radius of the
circle.
(e) Direct solutions by means of conies.
Pappus gives two solutions of the trisection problem in
which conies are applied directly without any preliminary
reduction of the problem to a vev<ri$}
1. The analysis leading to the first method is as follows.
Let 4 0 be a straight line, and B a point without it such
that, if BA, BG be joined, the angle B0A> is double of the
angle BAG.
1 Pappus, iv, pp. 282-4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

242
THE TRISECTION OF ANY ANGLE
Draw BD perpendicular to AC, and cut off DE along DA
equal to DC. Join BE.
Then, since BE = BCy
£BEC = BCE.
But 
£BEC=£BAE+£EBA,
and, by hypothesis,
Z5(L4 = 2Z.BAE.
Therefore 
ABAE+A EBA = 2 Z SA #;
therefore 
LBAE-
or 
A.E' = 5 ^ .
Divide AC at G so that AG = 2 GC, or CG =
Also let .Fi? be made equal to ED, so that CD — \ GF.
It follows that 
GD = i(AC- CF) = £AP.
Now 
BD2 = 
BE2-ED2
= BE2—EF2.
Also 
DA . A F = AE2 - EF2 
(Eucl II. 6)
Therefore 
BD2 = DA.AF
= 3 A D. DG, from above,
so that 
BD2:AD.DG= 
3:1
= 3A(?2:AG2.
Hence D lies on a hyperbola with AG as transverse axis
and with conjugate axis equal to A/3 . AG.
Now suppose we are required
to trisect an arc AB of a circle
with centre 0.
Draw the chord AB} divide it
at C so that AC = 2 C£, and
construct the hyperbola which
has AC for transverse axis and
a straight line equal to \/3 . AC for conjugate axis.
Let the hyperbola meet the circular arc in P. Join PA,
P0, PB.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SOLUTIONS BY MEANS OF CONICS 
243
Then, by the above proposition,
Therefore their doubles are equal,
or 
LPOA = 2 IPOB,
and OP accordingly trisects the arc APB and the angle AOB.
2. 'Some', says Pappus, set out another solution not in-
volving recourse to a vev&is, as follows.
Let EPS be an arc of a circle which it is required to
trisect.
Suppose it done, and let the arc SP be one-third of the
arc 8PR.
Join RP, SP.
Then the angle RSP is equal
to twice the angle SRP.
Let SE bisect the angle RSP, 
R 
x 
N 
s
meeting RP in E} and draw EX, PN perpendicular to RS.
Then 
Z ERS = L ESR, so that RE = ES.
Therefore 
RX = XS, and X is given.
Again 
RS:SP = RE:EP = RX : XN;
therefore 
RS :RX = SP: NX.
But 
RS=2RX;
therefore 
SP = 2 NX.
It follows that P lies on a hyperbola with S as focus and XE
as directrix, and with eccentricity 2.
Hence, in order to trisect the arc, we have only to bisect RS
at X, draw XE at right angles to RS, and then draw a hyper-
bola with S as focus, XE as directrix, and 2 as the eccentricity.
The hyperbola is the same as that used in the first solution.
The passage of Pappus from which this solution is taken is
remarkable as being one of three passages in Greek mathe-
matical works still extant (two being in Pappus and one in
a fragment of Anthemius on burning mirrors) which refer to
the focus-and-directrix property of conies. The second passage
in Pappus comes under the heading of Lemmas to the Surface-
Loci of Euclid.1 Pappus there gives a complete proof of the
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 1004-1114.
R 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

244 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
theorem that, if the distance of a point from a fixed point is
in a given ratio to its distance from a fixed line, the locus of
the point is a conic sectwn which is an ellipse, a parabola,
or a hyperbola according as the given ratio is less than, equal
to, or greater than, unity. 
The importance of these passages
lies in the fact that the Lemma was required for the
understanding of Euclid's treatise. We can hardly avoid
the conclusion that the property was used by Euclid in his
Surface-Loci, but was assumed as well known. It was, there-
fore, probably taken from some treatise current in Euclid's
time, perhaps from Aristaeus's work on Solid Loci.
The Duplication of the Cube, or the problem
of the two mean proportionals.
(a) History of the problem.
In his commentary on Archimedes, On the Sphere and
Cylinder, II. 1, Eutocius has preserved for us a precious
collection of solutions of this famous problem.1 One of the
solutions is that of Eratosthenes, a younger contemporary of
Archimedes, and it is introduced by what purports to be
a letter from Eratosthenes to Ptolemy. This was Ptolemy
Euergetes, who at the beginning of his reign (245 B.C.) per-
suaded Eratosthenes to come from Athens to Alexandria to be
tutor to his son (Philopator). The supposed letter gives the
tradition regarding the origin oi the problem and the history of
its solution up to the time of Eratosthenes. Then, after some
remarks on its usefulness for practical purposes, the author
describes the construction by which Eratosthenes himself solved
it, giving the proof of it at some length and adding directions
for making the instrument by which the construction could
be effected in practice. Next he says that the mechanical
contrivance represented by Eratosthenes was, ' in the votive
monument', actually of bronze, and was fastened on with lead
close under the cntfyavr] of the pillar. There was, further,
on the pillar the proof in a condensed form, with one figure,
and, at the end, an epigram. The supposed letter of Eratos-
thenes is a forgery, but the author rendered a real service
1 Archimedes, ed. Heib., vol. iii, pp. 54. 26-106. 24.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HISTORY OF THE PROBLEM 
245
by Actually quoting the proof and the epigram, which are the
genuine work of Eratosthenes.
Our document begins with the story that an ancient tragic
poet had represented Minos as putting up a tomb to Glaucus
but being dissatisfied with its being only 100 feet each way;
Minos was then represented as saying that it must be made
double the size, by increasing each of the dimensions in that
ratio. Naturally the poet ' was thought to have made a mis-
take'. Von Wilamowitz has shown that the verses which
Minos is made to say cannot have been from any play by
Aeschylus, Sophocles, or Euripides. They are the work of
some obscure poet, and the ignorance of mathematics shown
by him is the only reason why they became notorious and so
survived. The letter goes on to say that
'Geometers took up the question and sought to find out
how one could double a given solid while keeping the same
shape; the problem took the name of " the duplication of the
cube " because they started from a cube and sought to double
it. For a long time all their efforts were vain; then Hippo-
crates of Chios discovered for the first time that, if we can
devise a way of finding two mean proportionals in continued
proportion between two straight lines the greater of which
is double of the less, the cube will be doubled; that is, one
puzzle (a7r6pr}fia) was turned by him into another not less
difficult. 
After a time, so goes the story, certain Delians, who
were commanded by the oracle to double a certain altar, fell
into the same quandary as before.5
At this point the versions of the story diverge somewhat.
The pseudo-Eratosthenes continues as follows:
' They therefore sent over to beg the geometers who were
with Plato in the Academy to find them the solution. The
latter applying themselves diligently to the problem of finding
two mean proportionals between two given straight lines,
Archytas of Taras is said to have found them by means of
a half cylinder, and Eudoxus by means of the so-called curved
lines; but, as it turned out, all their solutions were theoretical,
and no one of them was able to give a practical construction
for ordinary use, save to a certain small extent Menaechmus,
and that with difficulty.'
Fortunately we have Eratosthenes's own version in a quota-
tion by Theon of Smyrna:
' Eratosthenes in his work entitled Platonicus relates that,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

245 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
when the god proclaimed to the Delians by the oracle that, if
they would get rid of a plague, they should construct an altar
double of the existing one, their craftsmen fell into great
perplexity in their efforts to discover how a solid could be made
double of a (similar) solid; they therefore went to ask Plato
about it, and he replied that the oracle meant, not that the god
wanted an altar of double the size, but that he wished, in
setting them the task, to shame the Greeks for their neglect
of mathematics and their contempt for geometry/ x
Eratosthenes's version may well be true; and there is no
doubt that the question was studied in the Academy, solutions
being attributed to Eudoxus, Menaechmus, and even (though
erroneously) to Plato himself. The description by the pseudo-
Eratosthenes of the three solutions by Archytas, Eudoxus and
Menaechmus is little more than a paraphrase of the lines about
them in the genuine epigram of Eratosthenes,
' Do not seek to do the difficult business of the cylinders of
Archytas, or to cut the cones in the triads of Menaechmus, or
to draw such a curved form of lines as is described by the
god-fearing Eudoxus'
The different versions are reflected in Plutarch, who in one
place gives Plato's answer to the Delians in almost the same
words as Eratosthenes,2 and in another place tells us that
Plato referred the Delians to Eudoxus and Helicon of Cyzicus
for a solution of the problem.3
After Hippocrates had discovered that the duplication of
the cube was equivalent to finding two mean proportionals in
continued proportion between two given straight lines, the
problem seems to have been attacked in the latter form
exclusively. The various solutions will now be reproduced
in chronological order.
(/3) Archytas,
The solution of Archytas is the most remarkable of all,
especially when his date is considered (first half of fourth cen-
tury B. c), because it is not a construction in a plane but a bold
1 Theon of Smyrna, p. 2. 3-12.
2 Plutarch, Be E apud Delphos, c 6, 386 E.
3 De genio Socratis, c. 7, 579 c, D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARCHYTAS 
247
construction in three dimensions, determining a certain point
as the intersection of three surfaces of revolution, (1) a right
cone, (2) a cylinder, (3) a tore or anchor-ring with inner
diameter nil. 
The intersection of the two latter surfaces
gives (says Archytas) a certain curve (which is in fact a curve
of double curvature), and the point required is found as the
point in which the cone meets this curve.
Suppose that AC, AB are the two straight lines between
which two mean proportionals are to be found, and let AC be
made the diameter of a circle and AB a chord in it.
Draw a semicircle with AC as diameter, but in a plane at
right angles to the plane of the circle ABC, and imagine this
semicircle to revolve about a straight line through A per-
pendicular to the plane of ABC (thus describing half a tore
with inner diameter nil).
Next draw a right half-cylinder on the semicircle ABC as
base; this will cut the surface of the half-fore in a certain
curve.
Lastly let CD, the tangent to the circle ABC at the point C,
meet AB produced in D\ and suppose the triangle ADC to
revolve about i C as axis. This will generate the surface
of a right circular cone; the point B will describe a semicircle
BQE at right angles to the plane of ABC and having its
diameter BE at right angles to AC; and the surface of the
cone will meet in some point P the curve which is the inter-
section of the half-cylinder and the half-fore.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

248 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Let APC be the corresponding position of the revolving
semicircle, and let AC meet the circumference ABC in M.
Drawing PM perpendicular to the plane of ABC, we see
that it must meet the circumference of the circle ABC because
P is on the cylinder which stands on ABC as base.
Let AP meet the circumference of the semicircle BQE in Q,
and let AC' meet its diameter in JV. Join PC, QM9 QK
Then, since both semicircles are perpendicular to the plane
ABC, so is their line of intersection QJST [Eucl. XL 19].
Therefore QN is perpendicular to BE.
Therefore 
QN2 = BN.NE = AN.KM, 
[Eucl. III. 35]
so that the angle AQM is a right angle.
But the angle APC is also right;
therefore MQ is parallel to CP.
It follows, by similar triangles, that
CA:AP=AP:AM=AM:AQ;
that is, 
AC: AP = AP: AM = AM: AB,
and AB, AM, AP, AC are in continued proportion, so that
AM, AP are the two mean proportionals required.
In the language of analytical geometry, if AC is the axis
of x, a line through A perpendicular to AC in the plane of
ABC the axis of y, and a line through A parallel to PM the
axis of z, then P is determined as the intersection of the
surfaces
(1) 
x2 + y2 + z2 = p x2, 
(the cone)
(2) 
x2 + y2 = ax, 
(the cylinder]
(3) 
x2 + y2 + z2 = a / ( a 2 + 2/2), (the tore)
where 
AC = a, AB = b.
From the first two equations we obtain
x2 + y2 + z2 = (x2 + y2)2 / 62,
and from this and (3) we have
a 
_ V(x2 + y2 + z2) _ V(x2 + y2)
«/{xl + y2 + z2)~~ 
V(x2 + y2) " 
b
or 
AC-.AP = AP:AM=AM:AB.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARCHYTAS. EUDOXUS 
249
Compounding the ratios, we have
AC:AB = (AM:ABf;
therefore the cube of side AM is to the cube of side AB as AC
is to AB.
In the particular case where AC = 2AB, AMS = 2AB3,
and the cube is doubled.
(y) Eudoxus.
Eutocius had evidently seen some document purporting to
give Eudoxus's solution, but it is clear that it must have
been an erroneous version. The epigram of Eratosthenes
says that Eudoxus solved the problem by means of lines
of a 'curved or bent form' (KafmiXov ethos kv ypa/ifiais).
According to Eutocius, while Eudoxus said in his preface
that he had discovered a solution by means of ' curved lines \
yet, when he came to the proof, he made no use of such
lines, and further he committed an obvious error in that he
treated a certain discrete proportion as if it were continuous.1
It may be that, while Eudoxus made use of what was really
a curvilinear locus, he did not actually draw the whole curve
but only indicated a point or two upon it sufficient for his
purpose. This may explain the first part of Eutocius's remark,
but in any case we cannot believe the second part; Eudoxus
was too accomplished a mathematician to make any confusion
between a discrete and a continuous proportion. 
Presumably
the mistake which Eutocius found was made by some one
who wrongly transcribed the original; but it cannot be too
much regretted, because it caused Eutocius to omit the solution
altogether from his account.
Tannery2 made an ingenious suggestion to the effect that
Eudoxus's construction was really adapted from that of
Archytas by what is practically projection on the plane
of the circle ABC in Archytas's construction. It is not difficult
to represent the projection on that plane of the curve of
intersection between the cone and the tore, and, when this
curve is drawn in the plane ABC, its intersection with the
circle ABC itself gives the point M in Archytas's figure.
1 Archimedes, ed. Heib., vol. iii, p. 56. 4-8.
2 Tannery, Memoires scientifiques, vol. i, pp. 53-61.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

250
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
The projection on the plane ABC of the intersection between
the cone and the tore is seen, by means of their equations
(1) and (3) above, to be
a
or, in polar coordinates referred to A as origin and AC as axis,
b2
P = acos20'
It is easy to find any number of points on the curve. Take
the circle ABG, and let AC the diameter and AB a chord
be the two given straight lines between which two mean
proportionals have to be found.
With the above notation-
and, if BF be drawn perpendicular to AC,
or 
AF=b*/a.
Take any point G on BF and join AG.
Then, if 
Z GAF =6, 
AG = AFsec 6.
With A as centre and AG as radius draw a circle meeting
AC in H, and draw HL at right angles to AC, meeting AG
produced in L.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUDOXUS. MENAECHMUS 
251
Then 
AL = AH sec 6 = AG sec 6 = AFsec2 6.
That is, if p = AL, 
p = — sec20,
Qj
and L is a point on the curve.
Similarly any number of other points on the curve may be
found. If the curve meets the circle ABC in M9 the length
AM is the same as that of AM in the figure of Archytas's
solution.
And A 31 is the first of the two mean proportionals between
AB and AC. 
The second (= AP in the figure of Archytas's
solution) is easily found from the relation AM2 = AB . AP,
and the problem is solved.
It must be admitted that Tannery's suggestion as to
Eudoxus's method is attractive; but of course it is only a con-
jecture. To my mind the objection to it is that it is too close
an adaptation of Archytas's ideas. Eudoxus was, it is true,
a pupil of Archytas, and there is a good deal of similarity
of character between Archytas's construction of the curve of
double curvature and Eudoxus's construction of the spherical
lemniscate by means of revolving concentric spheres; but
Eudoxus was, I think, too original a mathematician to con-
tent himself with a mere adaptation of Archytas's method
of solution.
(8) Menaechmus.
Two solutions by Menaechmus of the problem of finding
two mean proportionals are described by Eutocius; both find
a certain point as the intersection between two conies, in
the one case two parabolas, in the other a parabola and
a rectangular hyperbola. The solutions are referred to in
Eratosthenes's epigram: ' do not', says Eratosthenes, ' cut the
cone in -the triads of Menaechmus/ 
From the solutions
coupled with this remark it is inferred that Menaechmus
was the discoverer of the conic sections.
Menaechmus, brother of Dinostratus, who used the quadra-
trix to square the circle, was a pupil of Eudoxus and flourished
about the middle of the fourth century B. c. The most attrac-
tive form of the story about the geometer and "the king who
wanted a short cut to geometry is told of Menaechmus and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

252 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Alexander: ' 0 king/ said Menaechmus, ' for travelling over
the country there are royal roads and roads for common
citizens, but in geometry there is one road for all/* A similar
story is indeed told of Euclid and Ptolemy; but there would
be a temptation to transfer such a story at a later date to
the more famous mathematician. 
Menaechmus was evidently
a considerable mathematician; he is associated by Proclus with
Amyclas of Heraclea, a friend of Plato, and with Dinostratus
as having 'made the whole of geometry more perfect'.2
Beyond, however, the fact that the discovery of the conic
sections is attributed to him, we have very few notices relating
to his work. He is mentioned along with Aristotle and
Callippus as a supporter of the theory of concentric spheres
invented by Eudoxus, but as postulating a larger number of
spheres.3 We gather from Proclus that he wrote on the
technology of mathematics; he discussed for instance the
difference between the broader meaning of the word element
(in which any proposition leading to another may be said
to be an element of it) and the stricter meaning of something
simple and fundamental standing to consequences drawn from
it in the relation of a principle, which is capable of being
universally applied and enters into the proof of all manner
of propositions.4 Again, he did not agree in the distinction
between theorems and problems, but would have it that they
were all problems, though directed to two different objects6;
he also discussed the important question of the convertibility
of theorems and the conditions necessary to it.6
If x, y are two mean proportionals between straight
lines a, b,
that is, if 
a:x = x:y = y:b,
then clearly 
x2 = ay, y2 = bx, and xy = ab.
It is easy for us to recognize here the Cartesian equations
of two parabolas referred to a diameter and the tangent at its
extremity, and of a hyperbola referred to its asymptotes.
But Menaechmus appears to have had not only to recognize,
1 Stobaeus, Eclogae, ii. 31, 115 (vol. ii, p. 228. 30, Wachsmuth).
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 67. 9.
3 Theon of Smyrna, pp 201. 22-202. 2.
4 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 72. 23-73. 14. 
6 Ib., p. 78. 8-13.
6 Ib., p. 254. 4-5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENAEOHMUS AND CONICS 
253
but to discover, the existence of curves having the properties
corresponding to the Cartesian equations. He discovered
them in plane sections of right circular cones, and it would
doubtless be the properties of the principal ordinates in
relation to the abscissae on the axes which he would arrive
at first. Though only the parabola and the hyperbola are
wanted for the particular problem, he would certainly not
fail to find the ellipse and its property as well. But in the
case of the hyperbola he needed the property of the curve
with reference to the asymptotes, represented by the equation
xy = ab; he must therefore have discovered the existence of
the asymptotes, and must have proved the property, at all
events for the rectangular hyperbola. The original method
of discovery of the conies will occupy us later. In the mean-
time it is obvious that the use of any two of the curves
x2 = ay, y2 = bx, xy — ab gives the solution of our problem,
and it was in fact the intersection of the second and third
which Menaechmus used in his first solution, while for his
second solution he used the first two. Eutocius gives the
analysis and synthesis of each solution in full. I shall repro-
duce them as shortly as possible, only suppressing the use of
four separate lines representing the two given straight lines
and the two required means in the figure of the first solution.
First solution.
Suppose that AO, OB are two given straight lines of which
AO > OB, and let them form a right angle at 0.
Suppose the problem solved, and let the two mean propor-
tionals be OM measured along BO produced and ON measured
along AO produced. Complete the rectangle OMPN.
Then, since AO : OM = OM: ON = ON: OB,
we have (1) 
0B.0M=0N2 = PM\
so that P lies on a parabola which has 0 for vertex, OM for
axis, and OB for latus rectum;
and (2) 
AO .OB = OM .ON = PN .PM,
so that P lies on a hyperbola with 0 as centre and OM,
asymptotes.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

254
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Accordingly, to find the point P, we have to construct
(1) a parabola with 0 as vertex, OM as axis, and latus rectum
equal to OB,
(2) a hyperbola with asymptotes OM, ON and such that
the rectangle contained by straight lines PM, PN drawn
from any point P on the curve parallel to one asymptote and
meeting the other is equal to the rectangle AO . OB.
The intersection of the parabola and hyperbola gives the
point P which solves the problem, for
AO : PN = PN.PM = PM: OB.
Second solution.
Supposing the problem solved, as in the first case, we have,
since 
AO:OM = OM: ON = ON: OB,
(1) the relation OB.OM= ON2 = PM2,
y
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENAECHMUS AND CONICS 
255
so that P lies on a parabola which has 0 for vertex, OM for
axis, and OB for latus rectum,
(2) the similar relation AO.ON = OM2 = PN2,
so that P lies on a parabola which has 0 for vertex, ON for
axis, and 0A for latus rectum.
In order therefore to find P, we have only to construct the
two parabolas with OM, ON for axes and OB, OA for latera
recta respectively ; the intersection of the two parabolas gives
a point P such that
AO:PN=PN:PM=PM:OB,
and the problem is solved.
(We shall see later on that Menaechmus did not use the
names parabola and hyperbola to describe the curves, those
names being due to Apollonius.)
(e) The solution attributed to Plato.
This is the first in Eutocius's arrangement of the various
solutions reproduced by him. But there is almost conclusive
reason for thinking that it is wrongly attributed to Plato.
No one but Eutocius mentions it, and there is no reference to
it in Eratosthenes's epigram, whereas, if a solution by Plato
had then been known, it could hardly fail to have been
mentioned along with those of Archytas, Menaechmus, and
Eudoxus. Again, Plutarch says that Plato told the Delians
that the problem of the two mean proportionals was no easy
one, but that Eudoxus or Helicon of Cyzicus would solve it
for them; he did not apparently propose to attack it himself.
And, lastly, the solution attributed to him is mechanical,
whereas we are twice told that Plato objected to mechanical
solutions as destroying the good of geometry.1 Attempts
have been made to reconcile the contrary traditions. It is
argued that, while Plato objected to mechanical solutions on
principle, he wished to show how easy it was to discover
such solutions and put forward that attributed to him as an
illustration of the fact. I prefer to treat the silence of
Eratosthenes as conclusive on the point, and to suppose that
the solution was invented in the Academy by some one con-
temporary with or later than Menaechmus.
1 Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. 8. 2. 1, p. 718 E, F ; Vita Marcelli, c. 14. 5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

256
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
For, if we look at the figure of Menaechmus's second solu-
tion, we shall see that the given straight lines and the two
means between them are shown in cyclic order (clockwise)
as straight lines radiating from 0 and separated by right
angles. This is exactly the arrangement of the lines in
* Plato's3 solution. Hence it seems probable that some one
who had Menaechmus's second solution before him wished
to show how the same representation of the four straight
lines could be got by a mechanical construction as an alterna-
tive to the use of conies.
Drawing the two given straight lines with the means, that
is to say, OA, OM, ON, OB, in cyclic clockwise order, as in
Menaechmus's second solution, we have
AO :0M= OM:ON= ON: OB,
and it is clear that, if AM, MN, NB are joined, the angles
AMN, MNB are both right angles. The problem then is,
given 0A, OB at right angles to qpe another, to contrive the
rest of the figure so that the angles at M, N are right.
The instrument used is somewhat like that which a shoe-
maker uses to measure the length of the foot. FGH is a rigid
right angle made, say, of wood. KL is a strut which, fastened,
say, to a stick KF which slides along GF, can move while
remaining always parallel to GH or at right angles to GF.
Now place the rigid right angle FGH so that the leg GH
passes through S, and turn it until the angle Q lies on AO
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SOLUTION ATTRIBUTED TO PLATO 257
produced. Then slide the movable strut KL, which remains
always parallel to GH, until its edge (towards GH) passes
through A. 
If now the inner angular point between the
strut KL and the leg FG does not lie on BO produced,
the machine has to be turned again and the strut moved
until the said point does lie on BO produced, as M, care being
taken that during the whole of the motion the inner edges
of KL and HG pass through A, B respectively and the inner
angular point at G moves along AO produced.
That it is possible for the machine to take up the desired
position is clear from the figure of Menaechmus, in which
MO, NO are the means between AO and BO and the angles
AMN, MNB are right angles, although to get it into the
required position is perhaps not quite easy.
The matter may be looked at analytically thus. Let us
take any other position of the machine in which the strut and
the leg GH pass through A, B respectively, while G lies on AO
produced, but P, the angular point between the strut KL and
M
the leg FG, does not lie on OM produced. Take ON, OM as
the axes of x, y respectively. Draw PR perpendicular to OG,
and produce GP to meet OM produced in S.
Let 
AO = a, BO = b, OG = r.
1523 
S
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

258 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Then 
AR.RG = PR2,
or 
(a + x)(r-x) 
-f: 
(1)
Also, by similar triangles,
PR:RG = SO:OG
= OG:OB;
r—x 
b
From the equation (l) we obtain
and, by multiplying (1) and (2), we have
whence, substituting the value of r, we obtain, as the locus of
P, a curve of the third degree,
b(a -f x)2 = y(x2 + y2 + ax).
The intersection (M) of this curve with the axis of y gives
OM* = a26.
As a theoretical solution, therefore, 'Plato's' solution is
more difficult than that of Menaechmus.
(0 Eratosthenes.
This is also a mechanical solution effected by means of
three plane figures (equal right-angled triangles or rectangles)
which can move parallel to one another and to their original
positions between two parallel rulers forming a sort of frame
and fitted with grooves so arranged that the figures can
move over one another. Pappus's account makes the figures
triangles,1 Eutocius has parallelograms with diagonals drawn;
triangles seem preferable. I shall use the lettering of Eutocius
for the second figure so far as it goes, but I shall use triangles
instead of rectangles.
1 Pappus, iii, pp. 56-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ERATOSTHENES 
259
Suppose the frame bounded by the parallels AX, EY. The
initial position of the triangles is that shown in the first figure,
where the triangles are AMF, MNG, NQH.
In the second figure the straight lines AE, DH which are
M1 M N' N
parallel to one another are those between which two mean
proportionals have to be found.
In the second figure the triangles (except AMF, which
remains fixed) are moved parallel to their original positions
towards AMF so that they overlap (as AMF, M'NG, N'QH),
NQH taking the position N'QH in which QH passes through D,
and MNG a position M'NG such that the points B, C where
MF, M'G and NG, N'H respectively intersect are in a straight
line with A, D.
Let AD, EH meet in K.
Then 
EK:KF=AK:KB
and 
EK:KF= AE: BF, while FK: KG = BF:GG;
therefore 
AE:BF= BF.CG.
Similarly 
BF:CG = CG: DH,
so that AE, BF, CG, DH are in continued proportion, and
BF, CG are the required mean proportionals.
This is substantially the short proof given in Eratosthenes's
s 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

260 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
inscription on. the column; the construction was left to be
inferred from the single figure which corresponded to the
second above.
The epigram added by Eratosthenes was as follows:
' If, good friend, thou mindest to obtain from a small (cube)
a cube double of it, and duly to change any solid figure into
another, this is in thy power; thou canst find the measure of
a fold, a pit, or the broad basin of a hollow well, by this
method, that is, if thou (thus) catch between two rulers (two)
means with their extreme ends converging.1 Do not thou seek
to do the difficult business of Archytas's cylinders, or to cut the
cone in the triads of Menaechmus, or to compass such a curved
form oiVlines as is described by the god-fearing Eudoxus.
Nay thou couldst, on these tablets, easily find a myriad of
means, beginning from a small base. 
Happy art thou,
Ptolemy, in that, as a father the equal of his son in youthful
vigour, thou hast thyself given him all that is dear to Muses
and Kings, and may he in the future,2 O Zeus, god of heaven,
also receive the sceptre at thy hands. Thus may it be, and
let any one who sees this offering say "This is the gift of
Eratosthenes of Cyrene'V
(77) Nicomedes.
The solution by Nicomedes was contained in his book on
conchoids, and, according to Eutocius, he was inordinately
proud of it, claiming for it much superiority over the method
of Eratosthenes, which he derided as .being impracticable as
well as ungeometrical.
Nicomedes reduced the problem to a vedais which he solved
by means of the conchoid. Both Pappus and Eutocius explain
the method (the former twice over 3) with little variation.
Let AB, BG be the two straight lines between which two
means are to be found. Complete the parallelogram ABGL.
Bisect AB, BG in D and E.
Join LD, and produce it to meet GB produced in Gf.
Draw EF at right angles to BG and of such length that
GF = AD.
Join GF} and draw GH parallel to it.
1 Lit. 'converging with their extreme ends' (repfxaaiv ciKpots avv8po-
)
2 Reading with v. Wilamowitz 0 d* is varepov.
3 Pappus, iii, pp. 58. 23^62. 13; iv, pp. 246. 20-250. 25.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NICOMEDES
261
Then from the point F draw FHK cutting GH and EG
produced in H and K in such a way that the intercept
HK = GF = AD.
(This is done by means of a conchoid constructed with F as
pole, GH as ' ruler', and ' distance' equal to AD or CF. This
conchoid meets EG produced in a point K. We then join FK
and, by the property of the conchoid, HK — the ' distance \)
Join KL, and produce it to meet BA produced in M.
Then shall GK, MA be the required mean proportionals.
For, since BG is bisected at E and produced to K,
(i)
Add EF2 to each;
therefore 
BK.KG+CF3 = KF\
Now, by parallels, M.A : AB = ML: LK
= BC:GK.
But AB = 2AD, and 
BC=^GG;
therefore 
MA : AD = GC: GK
= FH: HK,
and, componendo, 
MD: DA = FK: HK.
But, by construction, DA = HK;
therefore MD = FK, and MD* = FK\
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

262 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Now 
MD2 = BM.MA + DA2,
while, by (1), 
FK* = BK.KC+ CF*;
therefore 
BM.MA + DA2 = BK.KC+ CFK
But DA = CF; therefore BM. MA = BK. KG.
Therefore 
CK:MA = BM: BK
while, at the same time, BM: BK = MA : AL.
Therefore 
LG: GK=GK:MA 
= MA : A L,
or 
AB:GK = CK:MA = MAiBG.
(6) A<pollonivus, Heron, Philon of Byzantium.
I give these solutions together because they really amount
to the same thing.1
Let AB} AC, placed at right angles, be the two given straight
lines. Complete the rectangle ABDC, and let E be the point
at which the diagonals bisect one another.
Then a circle with centre E and radius EB will circumscribe
the rectangle ABDC.
Now (Apollonius) draw with centre E a circle cutting
AB, AC produced in Fy G but such that F, Dy G are in one
straight line.
Or (Heron) place a ruler so that its edge passes through D,
1 Heron's solution is given in his Mechanics (i. 11) and Belopoeica, and is
reproduced by Pappus (iii, pp. 62-4) as well as by Eutocius (loc. cit.).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APOLLONIUS, HERON, PHILON OF BYZANTIUM 263
and move it about D until the edge intersects AB, AG pro-
duced in points (F, G) which are equidistant from E.
Or (Philon) place a ruler so that it passes through D and
turn it round D until it cuts AB, AG produced and the circle
about ABDG in points F, G, E such that the intercepts FD,
HG are equal.
Clearly all three constructions give the same points F, G.
For in Philon's construction, since FD = EG, the perpendicular
from E on DE, which bisects DE, must also bisect FG, so
that EF = EG.
We have first to prove that AF.FB = AG. GC.
(a) With Apollonius's and Heron's constructions we have, if
K be the middle point of AB,
Add KE2 to both sides;
therefore 
AF.FB + BE2 = EF2.
Similarly 
AG. GG+GE2 = EG2.
But BE=CE, 
and 
EF=EG;
therefore 
AF.FB = AG.GG.
(b) With Philon's construction, since GE = FD,
EF.FD = DG.GE.
But, since the circle BDEG passes through A,
EF.FD = AF.FB, and DG.GE = AQ.GC;
therefore 
AF.FB = AG.GC.
Therefore 
FA\AG = CG: FB.
But, by similar triangles,
FA:AG = DG:CGy and also 
=FB:BD,
therefore 
DG.GG = GG:FB = FB: BD,
or 
AB:CG = 
GG:FB=:FB:AG.
The connexion between this solution and that of Menaech-
mus can be seen thus* 
We saw that, if a\x — x\y — y\b,
x2 = ay, 
y2 — bx, xy = ab,
which equations represent, in Cartesian coordinates, two
parabolas and a hyperbola. Menaechmus in effect solved the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

264 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
problem of the two mean proportionals by means of the points
of intersection of any two of these conies.
But, if we add the first two equations, we have
x2 + y2 — bx—ay = 0,
which is a circle passing through the points common to the
two parabolas x2 — ay, y2 = bx.
Therefore we can equally obtain a solution by means of
the intersections of the circle x2 + y2 — bx--ay = 0 and the
rectangular hyperbola xy = a 6.
This is in effect what Philon does, for, if AFt AG are the
coordinate axes, the circle x2 + y2 — bx — ay = 0 is the circle
BDHG, and xy = ab is the rectangular hyperbola with
AF, AG as asymptotes and passing through 2), which
hyperbola intersects the circle again in H, a point such
that FD = HG.
(L) Diodes and the cissoid.
We gather from allusions to the cissoid in Proclus's com-
mentary on Eucl. I that the curve which Geminus called by
that name was none other than the curve invented by Diodes
and used by him for doubling the cube or finding two mean
proportionals. Hence Diocles must have preceded Geminus
(fl. 70 B.C.). Again, we conclude from the two fragments
preserved by Eutocius of a work by him, irepl Trvpeicov, On
burning-mirrors, that he was later than Archimedes and
Apollonius. He may therefore have flourished towards the
end of the second century or at the beginning of the first
century B.C. Of the two fragments given by Eutocius one
contains a solution by means of conies of the problem of
dividing a sphere by a plane in such a way that the volumes
of the resulting segments shall be in a given ratio—a problem
equivalent to the solution of a certain cubic equation—while
the other gives the solution of the problem of the two mean
proportionals by means of the cissoid.
Suppose that AB, DG are diameters of a circle at right
angles to one another. Let E, F be points on the quadrants
BD, BG respectively such that the arcs BE, BF are equal.
Draw EG, FH perpendicular to DG. Join GE, and let P be
the point in which GE, FH intersect.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIOCLES AND THE CISSOID
265
The cissoid is the locus of all the points P corresponding to
different positions of E on the quadrant BD and of F at an
equal distance from B on the quadrant BC.
If P is any point found by the above construction, it is
/B 
L
required to prove that FH, HC are two mean proportionals in
continued proportion between DH and HP, or that
DH:HF = HF:HG = HC:HP.
Now it is clear from the construction that EG = FB,
DG = HC, so that CG:GE = DH:HF.
And, since FH is a mean proportional between DH, HC,
DH:HF=HF:CH.
But, by similar triangles,
CG:GE=CH:HP.
It follows that
DH:HF= 
HF:CH=CH:HP,
or FH, HC are the two mean proportionals between DH, HP.
[Since DH. HP = HF. CH, we have, if a is the radius of
the circle and if OH = xy HP = y, or (in other words) if we
use OC, OB as axes of coordinates,
or 
y2(a + x) = (a-xf,
which is the Cartesian equation of the curve. It has a cusp
at C, and the tangent to the circle at D is an asymptote to it.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

266 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Suppose now that the cissoid has been drawn as shown by
the dotted line in the figure, and that we are required to find
two mean proportionals between two straight lines a, b.
Take the point K on OB such that DO:OK=a: 
b.
Join DK, and produce it to meet the cissoid in Q.
Through Q draw the ordinate LM perpendicular to DC.
Then, by the property of the cissoid, LM, MO are the two
mean proportionals between DM, MQ. And
In order, then, to obtain the two mean proportionals between
a and b, we have only to take straight lines which bear respec-
tively the same ratio to DM, LM, MC, MQ as a bears to DM.
The extremes are then a, b, and the two mean proportionals
are found.
(K) Sporus and Pappus.
The solutions of Sporus and Pappus are really the same as
that of Diodes, the only difference being that, instead of using
the cissoid, they use a ruler which they turn about a certain
point until certain intercepts which it cuts off between two
pairs of lines are equal.
In order to show the identity of the solutions, I shall draw
Sporus's figure with the same lettering as above for corre-
sponding points, and I shall add dotted lines to show the
additional auxiliary lines used by Pappus.1 (Compared with
my figure, Sporus's is the other way up, and so is Pappus's
where it occurs in his own Synagoge, though not in Eutocius.)
Sporus was known to Pappus, as we have gathered from
Pappus's reference to his criticisms on the quadratrix, and
it is not unlikely that Sporus was either Pappus's master or
a fellow-student of his. But when Pappus gives (though in
better form, if we may judge by Eutocius's reproduction of
Sporus) the same solution as that of Sporus, and calls it
a solution KCCO' 77/zay, he clearly means 'according to my
method', not ' our method', and it appears therefore that he
claimed the credit of it for himself.
Sporus makes DO, OK (at right angles to one another) the
actual given straight lines; Pappus, like Diodes, only takes
1 Pappus, iii, pp. 64-8 ; viii, pp. 1070-2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SPORUS AND PAPPUS
267
them in the same proportion as the given straight lines.
Otherwise the construction is the same.
A circle being drawn with centre 0 and radius DO, we join
DK and produce it to meet the circle in I.
Now conceive a ruler to pass through C and to be turned
about C until it cuts DI, OB and the circumference of the
circle in points Q, 1\ R such that QT = TR. Draw QM,
perpendicular to DC.
Then, since QT = TR, MO = OF, and MQ, NR are equi-
distant from OB. Therefore in reality Q lies on the cissoid of
Diodes, and, as in the first part of Diocles's proof, we prove
(since RN is equal to the ordinate through Q, the foot of
which is M) that
DM: RN=RN: 
MG = MC-.MQ,
and we have the two means between DM, MQ, so that we can
easily construct the two means between DO, OK.
But Sporus actually proves that the first of the two means
between DO and OK is OT. This is obvious from the above
relations, because
Sporus has an ah initio proof of the fact, but it is rather
confused, and Pappus's proof is better worth giving, especially
as it includes the actual duplication of the cube.
It is required to prove that DO:OK = D0s: OT3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

268 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Join RO, and produce it to meet the circle at 8. Join
DS, 80.
Then, since RO = OS and RT = TQ, 8Q is parallel to AB
and meets 00 in M.
Now
DM:MC= 8M2:MC2 = OM2: MQ* (since ZRC8 is right).
Multiply by the ratio OM:MQ-,
therefore (DM: MO). (OM: MQ) = (OM2: MQP). (OM: MQ)
or 
DM:MQ = CM3:MQ\
But 
DM:MQ = DO:OK,
and 
CM:MQ = CO:OT.
Therefore DO :0K = CO*:OTS = DOS:OT\
Therefore 02* is the first of the two mean proportionals to
DO, OK; the second is found by taking a third proportional
to DO, OT.
And a cube has been increased in any given ratio.
(A) Approximation to a solution by plane methods only.
There remains the procedure described by Pappus and
criticized by him at length at the beginning of Book III of
his Collection.1 It was suggested by some one 'who was
thought to be a great geometer', but whose name is not given.
Pappus maintains that the author did not understand wnat
he was about, 'for he claimed that he was in possession of
a method of finding two mean proportionals between two
straight lines by means of plane considerations only'; he
gave his construction to Pappus to examine and pronounce
upon, while Hierius the philosopher and other friends of his
supported his request for Pappus's opinion. The construction
is as follows.
Let the given straight lines be AB, AD placed at right
angles to one another, AB being the greater.
Draw BO parallel to AD and equal to AB. Join OD meeting
BA produced in E. 
Produce BO to L, and draw EL' through
E parallel to BL. Along OL cut off lengths OF, FG, GK, KL,
1 Pappus, iii, pp. 30-48.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPROXIMATION BY PLANE METHODS 
269
each of which is equal to BO. Draw CO', FF', GG', KK', LV
parallel to BA.
On LL', KK' take LM, KB equal to BA, and bisect LM
in JV.
Take P, Q on LL' such that L'L, L'F, L'P, L'Q are in con-
A
X1
C'
F'
K'
\D
\ -
z \
A
Y 
w
X
V
,- 
—
N
0
o
T
\
tinued proportion; join QR, RL, and through N draw NS
parallel to QR meeting RL in 8.
Draw ST parallel to BL meeting GG' in T.
To G'G, G'T take continued proportionals G'O, G'U, as before-
Take W on FF' such that FW = BA, join UW, WG, and
through T draw TI parallel to UW meeting WG in I.
Through / draw IV parallel to BO meeting CO' in V.
Take continued proportionals C'C, C'V, C'X, C'Y, and draw
XZ, VZ' parallel to YD meeting EG in Z, Z'. 
Lastly draw
ZX\ Z'Y' parallel to BC.
Then, says the author, it is required to proye that ZX\ Z'Y'
are two mean proportionals in continued proportion between
AD, BC.
Now, as Pappus noticed, the supposed conclusion is clearly
not true unless DY is parallel to BC, which in general it is not.
But what Pappus failed to observe is that, if the operation of
taking the continued proportionals as described is repeated,
not three times, but an infinite number of times, the length of
the line C'Y tends continually towards equality with EA.
Although, therefore, by continuing the construction we can
never exactly determine the required means, the method gives
an endless series of approximations tending towards the true
lengths of the means.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

270 
THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE
Let LL'=BE 
= ay AB = b, L'N=<x (for there is no
necessity to take N at the middle point of LM).
Then 
L'Q = a*/a2,
therefore 
LQ = (a3-a3)/a2.
TG _ SL 
NL_ 
(a-(x)a2
RK~ 
RL~ 
QL~ 
a6-QL6 '
therefore 
TG = -—-.——.—>
A 
A- 
i 
n'rn 
(a — <x)a2b
and accordingly 
G 1 = a— v—5——^-- •
Now let ocn be the length corresponding to G'T after ^
operations; then it is clear that
aw must approach some finite limit when TI = oo. Taking £
as this limit, we have
and, ^ = a not being a root of this equation, we get at once
ga = a3-a2l 
= a2(a-b).
Therefore, ultimately C'V is one of the mean proportionals
between EA and Z£B, whence YfZ' will be one of the mean
proportionals between AD, BGy that is, between AD and AB.
The above was pointed out for the first time by R. Pendle-
bury,1 and I have followed his way of stating the matter.
*~ Messenger of Mathematics, ser. 2, vol. ii (1873), pp. 166-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

