

 
Begin Reading
Table of Contents
About the Author
Copyright Page
 
Thank you for buying this Farrar, Straus and Giroux ebook.
 
To receive special offers, bonus content, and info on new releases and other great
reads, sign up for our newsletters.
 

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
 
For email updates on the author, click here.

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal use
only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in any way. Copyright
infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this e-book you
are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify the publisher
at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.

For Talia and Eliana

Introduction: Einstein’s Castle in the
Air
When I first learned about nonlocality as a graduate student in the early 1990s, it
wasn’t from my quantum-mechanics professor: he didn’t see fit to so much as
mention it. Browsing a local bookshop, I picked up a newly published book, The
Conscious Universe, which startled me with its claim that “no previous
discovery has posed more challenges to our sense of everyday reality” than
nonlocality. The phenomenon had the taste of forbidden fruit.
In everyday speech, “locality” is a slightly pretentious word for a
neighborhood, town, or other place. But its original meaning, dating to the
seventeenth century, is about the very concept of “place.” It means that
everything has a place. You can always point to an object and say, “Here it is.” If
you can’t, that thing must not really exist. If your teacher asks where your
homework is and you say it isn’t anywhere, you have some explaining to do.
The world we experience possesses all the qualities of locality. We have a
strong sense of place and of the relations among places. We feel the pain of
separation from those we love and the impotence of being too far away from
something we want to affect. And yet quantum mechanics and other branches of
physics now suggest that, at a deeper level, there may be no such thing as place
and no such thing as distance. Physics experiments can bind the fate of two
particles together, so that they behave like a pair of magic coins: if you flip them,
each will land on heads or tails—but always on the same side as its partner. They
act in a coordinated way even though no force passes through the space between

them. Those particles might zip off to opposite sides of the universe, and still
they act in unison. These particles violate locality. They transcend space.
Evidently nature has struck a peculiar and delicate balance: under most
circumstances it obeys locality, and it must obey locality if we are to exist, yet it
drops hints of being nonlocal at its foundations. That tension is what I’ll explore
in this book. For those who study it, nonlocality is the mother of all physics
riddles, implicated in a broad cross section of the mysteries that physicists
confront these days: not just the weirdness of quantum particles, but also the fate
of black holes, the origin of the cosmos, and the essential unity of nature.
For Albert Einstein, locality was one aspect of a broader philosophical
puzzle: Why are we humans able to do science at all? Why is the world such that
we can make sense of it? In a famous essay in 1936, Einstein wrote that the most
incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it is comprehensible. At first
glance, this statement itself seems incomprehensible. The universe is not a
conspicuously rational place. It is wild and capricious, full of misdirection and
arbitrariness, injustice and misfortune. Much of what happens defies reason
(especially when romance or driving is involved). Yet against this backdrop of
inexplicable happenings, the world’s rules glow with reassuring regularity. The
sun rises in the east. Things fall when you drop them. After the rain comes a
rainbow. People go into physics out of a conviction that these are not just
gratifying exceptions to the anarchy of life, but glimpses of an underlying order.
Einstein’s point was that physicists really had no right to expect that. The
world needn’t have been orderly at all. It didn’t have to abide by laws; under
other circumstances, it might have been anarchic all the way down. When a
friend wrote to ask Einstein what he’d meant by the comprehensibility remark,
he wrote back, “A priori one should expect a chaotic world which cannot be
grasped by the mind in any way.”
Although Einstein said comprehensibility was a “miracle” we shall never
understand, that didn’t stop him from trying. He spent his entire professional life
articulating exactly what it is about the universe that makes it make sense, and
his thinking set the course of modern physics. He recognized, for example, that
the inner workings of nature are highly symmetrical, looking the same if you
view the world from a different angle. Symmetry brings order to the bewildering
zoo of particles that physicists have found; entire species of particles are, in a

sense, mirror images of one another. But among all the properties of the world
that give us hope for understanding it, Einstein kept coming back to locality as
the most important.
Locality is a subtle concept that can mean different things to different people.
For Einstein, it had two aspects. The first he called “separability,” which says
that you can separate any two objects or parts of an object and consider each on
its own, at least in principle. You can take your dining chairs and put each one in
a different corner of the room. They will not cease to exist or lose any of their
features—size, style, cushiness. The entire dining-room set derives its properties
from the chairs that make it up; if each chair can seat one person, a set of four
chairs can seat four people. The whole is the sum of its parts. The second aspect
that Einstein identified is known as “local action,” which says that objects
interact only by banging into one another or recruiting some middleman to
bridge the gap between them. Whenever a distance separates us from someone,
we know we cannot have any effect on that person unless we cross the distance
and touch, talk to, punch—somehow, make direct contact with—that person, or
send someone or something to do it for us. Modern technology does not evade
this principle; it merely recruits new intermediaries. A phone translates sound
waves into electrical signals or radio waves that travel through wires or open
space and then get translated back into sound on the other end. At every step of
the way, something has to make direct contact with something else. If there is
even a hairline crack in the wire, the message gets as far as a scream on an
airless moon. Simply put, separability defines what objects are, and local action
dictates what they do.
Einstein captured these principles in his theory of relativity. Specifically,
relativity theory says that no material thing can move faster than light. Without
such an ultimate speed limit, objects might move infinitely fast and distance
would lose its meaning. All the forces of nature must wend their way laboriously
through space, rather than leap across it in a single bound, as physicists used to
suppose. Relativity theory thereby provides a measure of isolation among
separated objects and ensures their mutual distinctness.
Depending on your frame of mind, relativity theory and the other laws of
physics are either a satisfying deep order to the universe or a series of killjoy
rules, like an authoritarian parent trying to take all the fun out of life. How great

it would be to flap our arms and fly—but sorry, no can do. We could solve the
world’s problems by creating energy—oh, physics won’t allow that, either; we
can only convert one form of energy into another. And now comes locality, yet
another draconian diktat, to spoil our dreams of faster-than-light starships and
psychic powers. Locality dashes sports fans’ eternal hope that, by crossing their
fingers or bellowing some insightful comment from their armchairs, they might
give their team an edge on the playing field. Unfortunately, if your team is losing
and you’re serious about wanting to help, you’ll have to get up and go to the
stadium.
Yet locality is for our own good. It grounds our sense of self, our confidence
that our thoughts and feelings are our own. With all due respect to John Donne,
every man is an island, entire of himself. We are insulated from one another by
seas of space, and we should be grateful for it. Were it not for locality, the world
would be magical—and not in a happy, Disneyesque way. As much as sports
fans may wish they could sway the game from their living rooms, they should be
careful what they wish for, because supporters of the opposing team would
presumably have this power, too. Millions of couch potatoes across the land
would strain to give their side some advantage, making the game itself
meaningless—a contest of fans’ wills rather than of talent on the field. Not just
sports games, but the entire world would become hostile to us. In a world
without locality, objects outside your body could reach inside without having to
pass through your skin, and your body would lose its ability to control its
internal condition. You would blend into your environment. And that is the very
definition of death.
      *
By focusing on locality as a crucial prerequisite to comprehending nature,
Einstein crystallized two thousand years of philosophical and scientific thought.
For ancient Greek thinkers such as Aristotle and Democritus, locality made
rational explanation possible. When objects can affect one another only by
making direct contact, you can explain any event by giving a blow-by-blow
account of “this hit that, which in turn knocked into that, which in turn bounced
off some other thing.” Every effect has a cause linked to it by a chain of events
unbroken in space and time. There’s no point at which you have to wave your

hands and mumble, “Then a miracle occurs.” It wasn’t the miracle the Greek
philosophers objected to—they weren’t atheists—so much as the mumbling.
Even gods, they felt, should exert their power by clear and explicable rules.
Locality is essential not just to the types of explanations that philosophers and
scientists seek, but to the methods they use. They can isolate objects from one
another, grasp them one at a time, and build up a picture of the world step by
step. They are not faced with the impossible task of taking it all in at once.
In 1948, toward the end of his life, Einstein summarized the importance of
locality in a short essay: “The concepts of physics refer to a real external
world … things that claim a ‘real existence’ independent of the perceiving
subject … These things claim an existence independent of one another, insofar
as these things ‘lie in different parts of space.’ Without such an assumption of the
mutually independent existence … of spatially distant things, an assumption that
originates in everyday thought, physical thought in the sense familiar to us
would not be possible. Nor does one see how physical laws could be formulated
and tested without such a clean separation.”
Locality has such a pervasive importance because it is the essence of what
space is. By “space” I don’t just mean “outer space,” the realm of astronauts and
asteroids, but the space between us and all around us, the space that our bodies
and everything else occupy, the space through which we swing a baseball bat or
stretch a measuring tape. Whether you point your telescope at the planets or at
the next-door neighbors, you are peering across space. For me, the beauty of a
landscape comes from the giddy sense of spanning space, a sort of horizontal
vertigo when you realize the little dots on the other side of a valley really are
there and that you could touch them if only your arm were long enough.
As painters have long recognized, space is not mere absence, but a thing in its
own right. What comes between objects on a canvas is as important to a
composition as the objects themselves. For a physicist, space is the canvas of
physical reality. Almost every attribute of our physical selves is spatial. We
occupy a place. We have a shape. We move. Our bodies are intricate
choreographies of cells and fluids dancing in space. Our thoughts are impulses
zapping along pathways in space. Every interaction we have with the rest of the
world passes through space. Living things are things, and what is a thing but a
part of the universe that acquires an individual identity by virtue of occupying a

certain volume of space?
Physics is rooted in the study of how things move through space, and space
defines practically every quantity that physics deals in: distance, size, shape,
position, speed, direction. Other qualities of the world may not appear spatial,
but are; color, for example, corresponds to the size of a light wave. Only a very
few properties of matter have no known spatial explanation, such as electric
charge, and even these betray themselves by deflecting motion through space.
When we look at an object, everything about it is ultimately spatial, arising from
how its particles are arranged; the particles themselves are the barest flecks.
Function follows form. Even nonspatial concepts become spatial in physicists’
minds; time becomes an axis on a graph, and the laws of nature operate within
abstract spaces of possibility. No less an authority than Immanuel Kant, whose
ideas were a major influence on Einstein, thought it impossible to conceive of
the world without space.
      *
What a twist of fate that the greatest champion of locality was also its undoer.
Though best known to the wider world for relativity theory, Einstein actually
won his Nobel for cofounding quantum mechanics, the theory that describes how
atoms and subatomic particles behave. Actually, physicists think quantum
mechanics describes how everything behaves, although its distinctive effects are
strongest on tiny scales. The theory grew out of Einstein’s and his
contemporaries’ epiphany that atoms and particles can’t just be littler versions of
the things we see around us. If they were—if they acted according to the
classical laws of physics developed by Isaac Newton and others—the world
would self-destruct. Atoms would implode; particles would explode; lightbulbs
would fry you with deadly radiation. The fact we’re still alive means that matter
must be governed by some new set of laws. Einstein welcomed the strangeness;
in fact, despite the (unfair) reputation he later acquired as a rearguard defender
of classical physics, he was consistently ahead of everyone else in appreciating
the alien features of the quantum world.
Among those features was nonlocality. Quantum mechanics predicts that two
particles can become blood brothers. For want of a mechanism to couple them,
the particles should be completely autonomous, yet to touch one is to touch the

other, as if distance meant nothing to them. The scientific method of divide and
conquer fails for them. The particles have joint properties that escape you if you
view them one at a time; you must measure the particles together. Our world is
crisscrossed by a web of these seemingly mystical relationships. Atoms in your
body retain a bond with every person you have loved—which sounds romantic
until you realize that you’re also linked to every weirdo who brushed against you
while walking down the street.
Particles on opposite sides of the universe can’t really be connected, can
they? The idea struck Einstein as silly, a regression to prescientific notions of
sorcery. Any theory that implied such “spooky actions at a distance,” he
reasoned, had to be missing something. He figured that the world was in fact
local and merely gave the impression of being nonlocal, and he sought a deeper
theory that would lay bare the hidden mechanism whereby two particles can act
in unison. Try as he might, though, Einstein could never find such a theory, and
he recognized that he might be the one who was missing something. There might
be no concealed clockwork. The principle of locality—and with it, our
conception of space—might not hold. A few months before he died, Einstein
reflected on what the dissolution of space might mean for our understanding of
the world: “Then nothing will remain of my whole castle in the air including the
theory of gravitation, but also nothing of the rest of contemporary physics.”
What was really spooky was how sanguine most of his contemporaries were.
To them, nonlocality was a nonissue. The reasons for their dismissive attitude
were complicated and are still debated by historians, but perhaps the most
charitable explanation is pragmatism. The questions that vexed Einstein just
didn’t seem relevant to the practical applications of quantum theory. Only in the
1960s did a new generation of physicists and philosophers give Einstein’s
worries a real hearing. The experiments they did suggested that nonlocality was
not a theoretical curiosity, but a fact of life. And even then, most of their
colleagues gave it little thought—which is why I practically had to stumble on
the topic as a grad student.
In the past twenty years, though, I’ve witnessed a remarkable evolution in
attitudes. Nonlocality has surged into the currents of mainstream physics and
swept far past the phenomenon that Einstein discovered. In my career as a
science writer and editor, I have had the privilege of talking to scientists from a

wide range of communities—people who study everything from subatomic
particles to black holes to the grand structure of the cosmos. Over and over, I
heard some variant of: “Well, it’s weird, and I wouldn’t have believed it if I
hadn’t seen it for myself, but it looks like the world has just got to be nonlocal.”
Researchers were like those matching particles on opposite sides of the universe,
often not even knowing of one another, yet reaching the same conclusions.
If Einstein thought nonlocality smacked of sorcery, does the new research
lend credence to paranormal claims? Some have thought so. In past decades, a
number of scientists speculated that nonlocal links between particles could
endow you with psychic powers. For instance, if particles in your brain were
entangled with particles in your friend’s, perhaps the two of you could
communicate telepathically. At the other extreme, the supernatural intimations of
nonlocality have been cause for many physicists to dismiss the whole area of
research as hooey. In fact, there’s no connection. None of the evidence for ESP
has ever stood up, and the types of nonlocal phenomena under discussion are too
subtle to meld minds or sway distant baseball games.
Some people are disappointed by that. They shouldn’t be. The real magic of
the world is that it isn’t magical. For the reasons I discussed earlier, locality is a
precondition for our existence. Any nonlocality must remain safely tucked away,
emerging only under certain conditions, or else our universe would be inimical
to life. What nonlocality gives us is much more impressive than any paranormal
phenomenon: a window into the true nature of physical reality. If influences can
leap across space as though it weren’t really there, the natural conclusion is:
space isn’t really there. The Columbia University string theorist Brian Greene
wrote in his 2003 book, The Fabric of the Cosmos, that nonlocal connections
“show us, fundamentally, that space is not what we once thought it was.” Well,
what is it, then? Investigating nonlocality may clue us in. Many physicists now
think that space and time are doomed—not fundamental elements of nature, but
products of some primeval condition of spacelessness. Space is like a rug with
ragged edges and worn spots. Just as we can look at those frayed areas to see
how the rug is woven, we can study nonlocal phenomena to glimpse how space
is assembled from spaceless components.
“I always thought, and still do, that the discovery and proof of the nonlocality
is the single most astonishing discovery of twentieth-century physics,” says Tim

Maudlin, a professor at New York University and one of the world’s leading
philosophers of physics. In a paper in the late 1990s, he summed up the
implications: “The world is not just a set of separately existing localized objects,
externally related only by space and time. Something deeper, and more
mysterious, knits together the fabric of the world. We have only just come to the
moment in the development of physics that we can begin to contemplate what
that might be.”
At the same time, precisely because so much is at stake, other scientists tell
me nonlocality can’t be real—that one or another of the nonlocal phenomena
will turn out to be a misinterpretation, and that it is a mistake to lump them
together. Physicists have had enormous success with spatial reasoning and won’t
give it up lightly. One skeptic, Bill Unruh, who is a physics professor at the
University of British Columbia, feels much as Einstein did: “If I have to know
everything about the universe to know anything, if we take nonlocality seriously,
if what happens here depends on what the stars are doing, it makes physics
virtually impossible. What makes physics possible is that the world is
partitionable. If we really do have to look to the stars to see our future, then I
don’t see how we can do physics anymore.”
Apart from its inherent fascination, nonlocality is an ideal case study for
scientific disputes. The disagreements between people such as Maudlin and
Unruh are intellectually pure. No economic interests make you suspect ulterior
motives. No lobbyists from Exxon-Mobil roam the halls. The adversaries have
no overt personal animosity; many are friends. The mathematics is fairly simple;
the experimental findings, undisputed. And still the debates drag on for
generations. Today’s scholars rehearse arguments that go back to Einstein and
those he sparred with in the 1920s and ’30s. Why is that? And what are the rest
of us to do when the experts can’t agree?
Consider the highest-profile scientific debate of recent times: climate change.
Most climate scientists think human activity is warming the planet, some
holdouts still disagree—and to someone reading a newspaper or surfing the web,
the arguments can be baffling. Most people don’t have time to become experts in
general circulation models or measurements of longwave radiation. But one
thing we will see is that a debate can be resolved in a practical sense regardless
of whether the experts go on arguing. In the case of climate change, the public

already knows what it needs to. There’s a good chance of climate disaster and
it’s only prudent to manage the risk, just as you don’t need a Ph.D. in
combustion theory to know you should buy fire insurance for your home.
Likewise, in the case of nonlocality, even the most die-hard skeptic now accepts
that something very weird is going on, something that forces us to go beyond our
deepest-held notions of space and time, something that we need to grasp if we
are to know how the universe was born and how the natural world fits together
in perfect unity.
The social stories are not just a sideline to the science. They are directly
pertinent, because in a fluid area of research, where ideas jostle and nothing is
entirely clear, the conventional ways that people outside science assume it
operates—through the application of fact, logic, equations, experiments—aren’t
enough to bring closure. Scientists have to reach into gut feelings, metaphorical
connections, and judgment calls about the adequacy of their basic principles. In
deciding to explore nonlocality, I set off down what looked like a leisurely
nature walk, but soon found myself entangled in an exotic rain forest, filled with
glistening leaves, labyrinthine byways, and tempting handholds swarming with
fire ants. Some physicists thrill to the rebelliousness of questioning one of the
oldest and deepest concepts in science. Others shudder at the madness. If locality
fails, does it mean our universe is ultimately incomprehensible, as Einstein
feared, or can physicists find some other way for it to make sense?

1
The Many Varieties of Nonlocality
Enrique Galvez’s lab at Colgate University is about the size of a two-car garage
and, like most people’s garages, jammed with stuff. Along the walls are
workbenches loaded with toolboxes, electronic gear in various stages of
disrepair, and, on the left side as you enter, the most frequently used piece of
equipment: the coffee pot. In the middle of the room are a pair of optical
benches: industrial-strength steel platforms, each the size of a dining-room table,
covered with a pegboard-like grid of holes for attaching mirrors, prisms, lenses,
and filters. “It’s like playing with Erector sets all over again,” says Galvez, a
mellow Peruvian who looks remarkably like Al Franken.
If anyone has taken it on himself to show the world what quantum
entanglement looks like, it’s Galvez. Entanglement is the best known of several
types of nonlocality that modern physicists have observed, and the one that
spooked Einstein. The word “entanglement” has connotations similar to a
romantic entanglement: a special and potentially troublesome relationship. Two
particles that are entangled with each other are not literally intertwined, like balls
of yarn; rather, they have a peculiar bond that transcends space. You can see this
effect by creating, deflecting, and measuring beams of light—not ordinary
flashlight beams, but beams of entangled photons. The earliest versions of the
experiment, done in the 1970s at Berkeley and Harvard, involved mad-scientist
contraptions of broiling-hot ovens, stacks of glass panes, and clattering
teletypewriters. Galvez has taken advantage of Blu-ray lasers and optical fibers

to miniaturize the setup, so that it now fits on a classroom desk.
Most experimental physicists I’ve met are tinkerers at heart, as fascinated by
cool stuff as by the mysteries of the universe. An experimentalist at the Centre
for Quantum Technologies in Singapore told me that, in his lab, incoming
students have to pass a test. There’s not a single physics question on it. Instead,
they have to tell the story of how they took apart some household appliance and
managed to get it back together, hopefully before their family found out.
Apparently, clothes washers are a popular choice. Galvez, for his part, says his
childhood passion was chemistry—of the blowing-up variety. Growing up in a
middle-class neighborhood in Lima, he and some friends once tried to make
gunpowder. All they got was a smoke bomb, which is perhaps just as well. “It
was much more fun than something exploding,” Galvez recalls. “It probably
wasn’t very healthy.”
Galvez says he found his calling as a nonlocality crusader almost by accident.
In common with the majority of physicists, he didn’t give much thought to the
phenomenon until the late 1990s, when a colleague stopped by his office with
some dramatic news: the Austrian physicist Anton Zeilinger and his lab mates
had used entanglement to teleport particles from one place to another. Teleport?!
No fan of Star Trek could fail to be impressed. Although Zeilinger’s team had
beamed only single photons rather than an entire starship landing party, the
coolness factor rivaled that of smoke bombs. And the procedure was
straightforward. Suppose you want to teleport a photon from the left side of your
lab to the right. First, you prime the teleporters by creating a pair of entangled
photons and positioning one on each side of the lab. Then, you take the photon
you want to beam and let it interact with the left particle. Because the entangled
particles have a special bond between them, the interaction is immediately felt
on the right, allowing the photon to be reconstituted there. (Some quibble
whether the procedure should really be called teleportation; they consider it
closer in spirit to identity theft. The experimentalists strip the left particle of its
properties and thrust those properties onto the right particle. But a particle is
nothing more than the sum of its properties, so these two characterizations
amount to the same thing.)
Galvez and his colleague already had all the gear, and before long, they were
beaming particles across their lab, too. “We were trying to figure out

teleportation just for the fun of it,” Galvez says. Another colleague suggested
they design an entanglement experiment that even a physics-for-poets class
could do. It doesn’t do teleportation, but achieves the first and most important
step in the process—namely, creating and distributing the entangled photons. As
simple as the apparatus looks now, the team sweated over it for two years.
Galvez began to run summer workshops for ALPhA, a physics-education group,
to show teachers how to do the experiment, and he posted his instruction
manuals online so that do-it-yourselfers can entangle particles in their
basements. The former president of ALPhA, David Van Baak, exclaims: “We’re
past the stage where entanglement is a research-university-only affair. It’s getting
out to the masses.”
On the day I visit Galvez’s lab, one of his optical benches is given over to the
entanglement experiment, the aim of which is not only to demonstrate
entanglement, but also to explore what might be causing it. I recognize the setup
as basically a high-tech Rube Goldberg coin flipper in which photons assume the
role of coins. They are either “heads” or “tails” depending on whether they pass
through a filter or not. The system is tuned so they have a 50-50 chance of
getting through, like flipping a fair coin. The basic plan is to create a pair of
these coins, flip both at the same time, see which sides they land on, create
another pair, flip them, and so on. Repeat thousands of times and add up the
statistics. It seems like a lot of effort for a predictable result, until you remember
that we’re talking about quantum coins. Clearly, thinking of particles as coins is
a metaphor, but as long as you don’t take it too literally, it’s completely kosher.
Physicists themselves understand phenomena in terms of metaphor.
To set the apparatus into motion, Galvez fires an ultraviolet laser through a
series of optical elements that ensure proper alignment of the light. The beam
strikes a small crystal of barium borate, a material discovered by Chinese
scientists in the early 1980s, which splits the ultraviolet beam into two red
beams. The splitting occurs particle by particle: if you could zoom in and view
the beam as a stream of photons, you would see some of the ultraviolet photons
hit the crystal and divide their energy into identical twin red photons. Voilà,
coins. Located just upstream of the crystal is an optical element known as a
waveplate, which Galvez uses to control the output of the crystal. Depending on
how he sets the waveplate, the red photons are either entangled or not.

1.1. Setup of quantum entanglement experiment. (Illustration by Jen Christensen)
Once the red beams diverge, they cease to interact. Galvez aims each beam at

a polarizing filter, much like the ones that photographers screw onto the front of
their lenses to cut down on glare. The filter lets photons through or blocks them
depending on their orientation—their polarization. Galvez can turn a dial on the
side of the filter to control which photons make it. For this experiment, he sets
both filters to the same setting, one that admits half the photons at random,
thereby simulating coin flips.
Photons that make it through the filters are sent to detectors that convert them
to electrical pulses. These detectors are the you-break-’em-you-bought-’em part
of the system. Being sensitive enough to pick up individual photons, they run
$4,000 apiece and are easily damaged by bright light. Even with the room lights
off, the detectors pulse wildly, because the minutest sliver of light will set them
off. Watching them gives me a new appreciation for how bright a supposedly
dark room can be. We have to make sure our phones and laptops are fully off; a
single glowing LED might spoil the experiment. “A while back we had to put
black tape over anything that lit in the lab,” Galvez says. “You would be
surprised how many of those lights there are.” He drapes a black velvet cloth
over the devices and draws a thick curtain around the entire bench.
Finally, the detectors are wired into a meter with three digital readouts,
located safely outside the curtain. Two show the number of photons that make it
through the left and right polarizing filters. When Galvez switches on the laser,
those numbers flash by like milliseconds on a stopwatch. The third readout
shows the “coincidences”—when both photons in a pair make it through their
respective filters. In terms of the coin metaphor, a coincidence means that both
coins have landed on heads. These coincidences are Galvez’s window into
quantum nonlocality.
Having given me the tour, Galvez is ready to take some data. To verify that
everything is working properly, he first simulates flipping ordinary coins by
setting the waveplate to produce unentangled photons. The meter reads about
twenty-five coincidences per second. For comparison, you’d get one hundred
coincidences per second if every single photon in every single pair made it
through the filters. So, the coincidence rate is about a quarter of its maximum
possible value. This is just what you’d expect from the laws of chance. If you
take two coins and flip them, each will come up heads about half the time, so
both will be heads about a quarter of the time.

Now Galvez adjusts the waveplate to generate entangled photons. The
coincidence rate jumps to about fifty per second. A change from twenty-five to
fifty on a digital readout in a basement lab might not seem like much. But that’s
physics for you. It takes effort to peer beneath the surface of the world around
us, and the clues are subtle, but they are no less dramatic for that. All those years
of waiting and preparing for this moment have paid off, because when I see that
fifty, I realize what I am seeing, and I shiver. The photons are behaving like a
pair of magic coins. Galvez flips thousands of such pairs, and both always land
on the same side: either both heads or both tails. That kind of thing doesn’t
happen by pure dumb luck.
1.2. Sample results of coins experiment. If you flip a pair of ordinary coins, they’ll land on the same side
half the time, on average. But if you flip a pair of suitably prepared quantum entangled “coins,” they will
always land on the same side.
If a friend of mine did this trick at a party—flip pairs of coins so that both
came up heads twice as often as they rightfully should—I’d assume it was a
practical joke. My friend might have gone to a magic shop and bought double-
sided coins, which look the same on both sides, making the outcome of a flip
preordained. Could an equivalent stunt explain the pattern I was seeing in
Galvez’s lab? To test for such trickery, Galvez uses a tactic proposed by the Irish
particle physicist John Stewart Bell in the 1960s. He turns one of the filters by an
angle of 90 degrees, which, like flipping a coin with your left hand rather than
your right, doesn’t alter the probability of a particle getting through; if the
outcome really is predetermined, nothing should change. But this seemingly
innocuous change does have an effect on the photons. The coincidence meter

drops nearly to zero—meaning that if one photon gets through, the other never
does. In other words, the magic coins have switched from always landing on the
same side to always landing on opposite sides. A practical jokester would need
some extra sleight of hand to pull off this trick. By making further refinements,
Galvez rules out any conceivable chicanery.
I go over and look at the optical bench again. Those filters are separated by
the width of my hand. Experiments by Zeilinger and others have stretched the
distance to one hundred miles, and researchers at the Centre for Quantum
Technologies are working on a space-based version that will go even farther. For
a tiny particle, that might as well be the other side of the universe. The photons
manage to coordinate their behavior across that gap. They are not in contact, and
no known force links them, yet they act as one. When Galvez dials the polarizer
filter on the left side of his lab bench and a photon passes through, the photon
will be polarized in the same direction as the filter. Its entangled partner follows
in lockstep: it acquires the same polarization and will respond accordingly to its
own filter. So, what happens on the left affects the photon on the right, even
when there’s no time for any kind of influence to cross the gap. Indeed, such an
influence would need to travel from left to right instantly—that is, infinitely fast,
which is plainly faster than light, in apparent defiance of the theory of relativity.
This is one of the many mysteries posed by nonlocality. Physicists have
commented that it is as close to real magic as they’ve ever seen. “Students love
it,” Galvez says. “The good students say, ‘I want to figure this out.’”

Shut Up and Calculate
Is nonlocality just a carnival freak show—fun to ooh and aah over, but having no
broader implications—or does it belong on the center stage of physics? For most
of the twentieth century, physicists treated it as a freak show, and as a student I
adopted this attitude, too. It wasn’t until years later, when I delved into Tim
Maudlin’s book Quantum Nonlocality and Relativity, that I appreciated the depth
of the mystery.
Sitting in his George Nakashima–furnished living room, Maudlin tells me
he’ll never forget the moment he learned about quantum nonlocality. One day in
the fall of 1979, while a physics major at Yale University, he opened up the latest
issue of Scientific American magazine. The cover story was about dung beetles,
but he flipped past it and landed on an article on the early entanglement
experiments. For particles to act as if by magic stunned Maudlin. “I remember
the day when I read that article,” he says. “My roommates remember that day. I
walked around and around my room. The world wasn’t what I thought it was. It
bugged the hell out of me.”
It also bugged him that his physics professors, like mine, had never once
mentioned this phenomenon. When he probed them about it, they blew him off.
Once, Maudlin recalls, he raised his hand in class and asked whether quantum
theory might not give way to a deeper theory in which the seeming
contradictions would make perfect sense. The professor dismissed the idea and
went back to scribbling Greek letters on the blackboard. “He didn’t offer any
explanation at all of why not,” Maudlin says. “So he shut down the question
without answering it.”
      *
To appreciate the mind block that Maudlin and I ran into, you have to go back to
the famous debates between Einstein and another of the founders of quantum
mechanics, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr, in the 1920s and ’30s. Einstein
worried that nonlocality would contradict his theory of relativity and argued that
it had to be a kind of illusion, reflecting our ignorance of some essential aspect
of nature. Bohr argued … well, nobody is quite sure what Bohr argued. His

reasoning gave “tangled” a whole new meaning, and his missives have been
interpreted as either championing or contesting nonlocality. To the extent that
anyone does understand what he said, he was asserting that it didn’t matter what
weirdness lay behind the scenes, as long as the theory could predict what
experiments saw.
As anyone who has watched an American presidential debate knows,
judgments about “win” or “lose” often have little to do with what the debaters
actually say. Most physicists just wanted the Bohr-Einstein debate to be over, so
they could get on with applying quantum mechanics to practical problems.
Because Bohr promised closure, they rallied around him and wrote off Einstein
as a has-been. One later wrote that Einstein’s “fame would be undiminished, if
not enhanced, had he gone fishing instead.”
Over the subsequent decades, physicists used quantum theory to do all sorts
of useful calculations. They figured out transistors, lasers, and other mainstays of
the modern world. So the collective decision to set aside questions about the
theory’s deeper meaning seemed justified. Whenever those conceptual questions
did come up, physicists deemed them “philosophical,” which wasn’t intended as
a compliment, but as a way to deny that the questions were even worth asking.
The English physicist Paul Dirac wrote, “It is only the philosopher, wanting to
have a satisfying description of nature, who is bothered.”
Because Maudlin was, in fact, bothered, he decided to go to graduate school
in philosophy rather than physics. “I want to get to the bottom of everything,”
Maudlin says. “That’s what you do as a philosopher.” Philosophy is
distinguished not just by its interests, but by its methods: philosophers are
trained in logic as opposed to mathematics or experiments. Maudlin gained a
reputation among philosophers as Dr. Takedown, able to spot the flaw in almost
any argument. Throughout his graduate studies and early years as a professor,
Maudlin says, nonlocality sizzled in the back of his mind. But no one else he
knew seemed interested, and in some ways philosophers were as much in thrall
to the principle of locality as physicists were. Other things kept getting in the
way of Maudlin’s thinking more about it—until the fall of 1990, when John
Stewart Bell died.
Bell had done more than anyone else to reopen the case of Einstein versus
Bohr. He began to doubt Bohr’s victory while a university student in the early

1950s, but realized that airing his misgivings wouldn’t do his career any favors.
By the mid-’60s, having made a name for himself by studying particles and
designing particle accelerators, including the precursors of the Large Hadron
Collider, Bell felt secure enough to revisit his youthful concerns. He showed that
nonlocality was no longer just a matter for debate; you could play with it in the
lab. Like Einstein, Bell struggled to convince his colleagues. His first paper on
the subject was not cited by a single other paper for four years and not
mentioned in textbooks until 1985. Even when Bell’s work did get attention, it
was apt to be misinterpreted. One of his obituaries was titled “The Man Who
Proved Einstein Was Wrong,” which totally missed the man’s point that
nonlocality transcended the old debate. Einstein may have been wrong to think
that nonlocality would prove to be merely apparent, but Bohr was wrong to have
ignored it altogether.
Like Einstein, Bell fretted that nonlocality defied the theory of relativity.
Physicists can’t give up quantum theory; it passes all experimental tests. For
relativity to be wrong is equally unthinkable. In a lecture in 1984, Bell
concluded, “We have an apparent incompatibility, at the deepest level, between
the two fundamental pillars of contemporary theory.” Even those who were
otherwise sympathetic to him saw no such incompatibility. In creating relativity
theory, Einstein thought about how we gather information. Signals such as light
or sound must pass from objects in the world to our senses. If those signals travel
instantaneously, they can conflict. Paradoxes ensue. Things both happen and
don’t happen. The machinery of the universe seizes up. Yet quantum magic coins
don’t pose any such risk. They are inherently incapable of signaling. They land
on either heads or tails—you can’t dictate which. You have no way to control
them in order to transmit a message or, indeed, do anything at all. So you could
never use them to bring about a paradoxical situation. Danger averted.
In other words, if entanglement is magic, it is not like a magic wand that you
can wave to make things happen. Rather, the magic happens spontaneously, and
you notice it only if you’re looking carefully. This is a very attenuated form of
magic that won’t win you any wizarding cups. Most everybody reassured
themselves that quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity live in “peaceful
coexistence.”
In Bell’s memory, several Rutgers University philosophers organized a

symposium on quantum physics and asked Maudlin to speak. Picking up where
he’d left off as a student, he proceeded to take down the lore that had grown up
around Einstein’s and Bell’s findings. The conventional vision of theoretical
harmony struck Maudlin as a trifle too harmonious. “Just pointing out that you
can’t send signals never seemed enough for me to show that there was no
fundamental conflict with relativity,” he says. Even if a pair of entangled
particles can’t convey a signal, quantum theory still says that what happens to
one instantly affects the other. The theory therefore requires that the universe
have a kind of master clock, ensuring that what is 7:30 p.m. to one particle is
7:30 p.m. to another. And relativity theory denies any such thing. The reason
they call it relativity theory is that the passage of time is relative. Two events that
are simultaneous for one person can be sequential for another.
Maudlin’s book grew out of his talk, and its publication coincided with a
surge of interest in entanglement. Experimentalists, realizing that the
phenomenon wasn’t as useless as they’d thought, were beginning to exploit it for
cryptography and computers. For instance, Artur Ekert, a physicist at the
University of Oxford and currently the director of the Centre for Quantum
Technologies, proved in 1991 that entangled particles can create a
communications channel so secure that not even the sneakiest government
surveillance program could listen in. Once physicists were clued in to the
importance of entanglement, they began to see it almost everywhere they looked.
It occurs even in living organisms. In photosynthesis, entanglement accounts for
the unexpectedly high efficiency with which molecules transfer light energy into
chemical energy, thereby helping to enable life on our planet.
By the turn of the millennium, Einstein’s paper that got it all started had
become one of the most widely cited articles in the history of physics.
Meanwhile, the old walls between physicists and philosophers were tumbling
down. Zeilinger, the pioneering experimentalist, often disagrees with Maudlin,
but exchanges ideas with him in a way that would have been unthinkable twenty
years ago. “This connection between philosophy and physics is crucial to
making real progress,” Zeilinger tells me.
Quantum nonlocality is clearly not just a dinner act in Vegas, but an essential
aspect of the world, and physicists and philosophers still don’t know what is
behind the magic. Could the clues they seek lie in other domains of science?

What can they learn from the other types of nonlocality that are out there in the
world?
The Skywatcher and the Ice Climber
For most of the twentieth century, the peculiar synchronicity of entangled
particles was the only type of nonlocality that rated any mention. But physicists
gradually realized that other phenomena are suspiciously spooky, too. Those
who study black holes think that matter in these cosmic vacuum cleaners may
jump from one place to another without crossing the intervening distance, a type
of nonlocality that is arguably even more baffling than the situation Einstein
worried about.
Black holes have long been physicists’ top choice for weirdest things in the
universe. Ramesh Narayan has seen them in action. Like Galvez, Narayan says
he came to his scientific passion late and almost by accident. As a boy, he had
zero interest in astronomy. He’s one of the few astrophysicists I’ve met who
doesn’t recall being obsessed with black holes as a child. Crystals were his thing.
But in his first job, at the prestigious Raman Research Institute in Bangalore, in
southern India, he found himself mingling with people exploring the mysteries
of the universe, and soon he was hooked. He became an expert on cosmic flows
of gas. The governing principle of these flows is simple: what goes down must
come up. Whenever gas crashes into the surface of a star, it acts to warm up the
star; the star, in turn, emits the energy back into space, typically as infrared
radiation or visible light. “All the energy falling in has to come out,” explains
Narayan, who is now a Harvard professor. But in the early 1990s astronomers
noticed a peculiar exception to this rule at the center of our galaxy.
The center of the galaxy is easy to see for yourself. The next time you go
outside to gaze at the night sky, find the constellation of Sagittarius. From my
hometown, it is easiest to see in the summer and early fall, hanging in the sky
near the south horizon. It is supposed to look like an archer, but most
astronomers think of it as a giant teapot. The spout points to the very center of
the Milky Way. To our eyes, the center is just a fuzzy patch of sky, but in the
1940s telescopes began to reveal a cauldron of swirling gas there. At the very
center, gas converges on a tiny region known as Sagittarius A*. This region is

puzzlingly dim; less than 1 percent of the energy carried by the inflowing gas
comes back out. “In front of our eyes, you see the energy going into the center
and vanishing—poof,” Narayan says.
That is the definition of a black hole. Its gravity is so powerful that what goes
down never comes up. Artist’s conceptions sometimes depict a black hole as a
giant funnel in space, but from the outside it looks more like a planet—a big,
suspiciously dark planet. Material can and usually does orbit around it. But if
you tried to touch what you thought was its surface, your hand would just pass
through; the object is empty space. The supposed surface, or “event horizon,” is
really just a hypothetical point of no return, where infalling gas or other matter
could reverse course only by exceeding the speed of light. For Sagittarius A*,
the event horizon is a sphere about 25 million kilometers across. Matter crossing
it just keeps on going, like a car entering a one-way dead-end street, hurtling
toward some uncertain and presumably unhappy fate. “It’s the one unique
feature of a black hole,” Narayan says. “The black hole has no surface, and that
makes all the difference. The gas and all the energy it’s carrying is just
swallowed.”
Well, what happens to the stuff, then? That’s the puzzle. Unfortunately, the
two main theories that physicists have—gravity theory and quantum theory—
reach diametrically opposite conclusions about the fate of swallowed material.
Simply put, gravity theory says that falling into a black hole is irreversible, while
quantum theory says nothing is irreversible. The former says stuff can’t get out;
it’s assimilated into the black hole permanently. The latter says stuff must get out
and partake in the life of the cosmos once again. What gives? This contradiction
is a red warning light that some seemingly essential principle of modern physics
must be wrong.
Narayan’s observations can’t settle the issue. Resolving the contradictions of
black holes will take a unified theory of physics, one that fuses quantum theory
and gravity theory into a quantum theory of gravity. And many of those who
have been seeking such a theory think the suspect principle will prove to be
locality. If material can travel faster than light or vault from inside to outside
without crossing the intervening space, it can slip the hole’s surly bonds.
A leading proponent of this idea is Steve Giddings. He is a professor at the
University of California, Santa Barbara, although, with his cargo shorts, fleece

jacket, and untucked plaid shirts, you might mistake him for a mountain trekking
guide. Which isn’t too far from the truth: he has appeared in both Scientific
American and Climbing magazines. Giddings is accomplished at rock and ice
climbing, downhill and cross-country skiing, mountaineering, and kayaking. He
sees his scientific and outdoors passions as complementary. “I feel that these are
two sides of intimately relating to nature,” he says. On camping trips as a boy, he
read physics books; in college, he got a National Science Foundation grant to do
research on gravitation, while on weekends he skied the backcountry. The
summer after graduating, Giddings built his own kayak and paddled the
Colorado River through the Grand Canyon. Then he hitchhiked to Denali
National Park, the first of several trips there. He remembers watching a caribou
and its calf cross his path, oddly untroubled by his presence. “Then I looked
back and I saw why they weren’t fazed by me,” he says. “They were escaping
from a big grizzly bear. At that point, the bear decided to follow me.” Recalling a
park ranger’s briefing, Giddings stood his ground and yelled at the bear until it
shuffled off in search of easier pickings.
And then he moved to New Jersey. New Jersey has many charms, but
mountains and canyons are not among them. Not that Giddings had a life
anymore. Days, nights, weekdays, weekends revolved around cramming for
exams. Princeton’s graduate physics program seemed intent on capsizing his
kayak. “There wasn’t a lot of encouragement,” he says. “It was an atmosphere
where the students felt very intimidated.” Giddings considered running, but
stood his ground, and just as he passed his exams, in 1984, the field of
theoretical physics lit up with excitement. Researchers around the world dropped
everything else they were doing and took up string theory, a proposed unified
theory of nature.
String theory gets its name from the idea that subatomic particles are tiny
rubber bands or guitar strings. What we perceive as different types of particles
are really just those strings vibrating in different ways, making the world a
symphony of unimaginable complexity. The theory had languished in obscurity
since the late 1960s, and a tipping point came when its few proponents managed
to persuade the majority of its internal consistency. “That was the thing to do—I
got swept up in the waves,” Giddings recalls. The theory’s leading figure,
Edward Witten, asked him to solve a crucial formula, and after months of

struggle, trying one mathematical technique after another, he nailed it.
Meanwhile, he met some fellow kayakers and discovered that the Garden State
wasn’t completely undeserving of the name. “I started to realize, maybe this
could work,” he says.
Resolving the contradictions of black holes was one of the main reasons to
seek a unified theory, and in 1990 Giddings decided to retrace the steps that led
to a paradox, laid out by the celebrated University of Cambridge theorist
Stephen Hawking in the mid-’70s. Hawking’s starting point was that decay is the
rule of nature. Almost everything in this world eventually dies. Black holes are
not exempt—nor could they be, if they are to form in the first place. Ruin is
creation in reverse. “If you can make a black hole out of random junk, then you
can have a black hole decay to random junk,” Giddings says.
By Hawking’s analysis, decay doesn’t mean that the black hole’s innards ooze
out. How could they? To escape the event horizon, the innards would have to
ooze faster than light. Instead, the hole rots from the outside in. The horizon
throws the electric field, magnetic field, and other force fields off balance,
causing them to shed particles like so many rust flakes. A black hole equal in
mass to our Sun releases about one particle per second, which is far too feeble
for astrophysicists such as Narayan to detect with their instruments, but enough
over trillions of years to reduce the hole to a jumbled, formless spray of
particles. The structure the infalling matter had, the information it embodied,
every last trace of its identity—all is lost. In other words, the black hole is not
just irreversible in the sense that stuff can’t get back out. That might not be so
troubling, since, from a godlike perspective, you could peer into the hole and
reconstruct how objects came to be there. But the hole is also irreversible in that
it obliterates matter with such thoroughness that not even a god could recover
the original.
As Hawking himself pointed out, his calculations were tough to do. He could
track how the black hole affects the outgoing particles, but not how the outgoing
particles affect the black hole—and this reciprocal effect could conceivably open
a back door between exterior and interior, allowing infalling matter to reemerge.
If so, falling into a black hole would be reversible after all, and the paradox
would evaporate. So Giddings and several colleagues did a new analysis, based
on string theory, to search for escape hatches and hiding spots Hawking’s

calculations might have missed. They found none. Hawking had been right. “In
these simple models, you really vindicate Hawking’s original picture,” Giddings
says.
So, there’s no easy way out of the paradox (let alone the hole). Some
assumption that goes into the argument must be wrong, and there are only really
two assumptions: reversibility and locality. At first, Hawking faulted the former.
He suggested that quantum theory is wrong and falling into the hole is
irreversible. Yet quantum mechanics seems to be an all-or-nothing package: if it
breaks down anywhere, it breaks down everywhere. If it misfires in the way
Hawking supposed, we should see parallel failings in ordinary settings, and we
don’t. Hawking eventually came to agree that black holes must be reversible. By
default, locality must be wrong. “I’m continuing to beat my head on the question
of how the information gets out—it just seems to have to be nonlocal,” Giddings
says.
A few others were coming to much the same conclusion. But the general
mood was dubious. Nonlocality in black holes is even harder to swallow than
nonlocality in particle experiments. Whereas quantum entanglement is subtle
and does not overtly contradict any other law of physics, faster-than-light motion
across an event horizon is about as unsubtle as you can get. It flouts the
Einsteinian speed limit as brazenly as driving 90 mph in front of a state trooper.
Giddings could hardly walk down the hall or get a cup of coffee without a
colleague challenging his willingness to consider nonlocality, and he ended up
dropping the subject for nearly a decade. “It seemed pretty crazy,” he says. “I
didn’t pursue it. I gave in too quickly to the skeptics.” But he was only just
slightly ahead of his time.
The Cement Mixer and the Sculptors’ Daughter
The mere possibility of a second type of nonlocality is hugely significant. It hints
that the phenomenon that Einstein identified is one tile in a larger mosaic. That
doesn’t prove that nonlocality is really operating or that the two types are linked,
but psychologically it matters. In science as in life generally, it’s usually the
second case, rather than the first, that gets people’s attention. With a third, you
have a trend.

This next type of nonlocality I’ll talk about isn’t as well established as
quantum entanglement or black holes, but if true is more dramatic still. It comes
out of observations that seem so obvious you may not even realize they’re
observations. If you go out to look at the night sky, it’s dark. This probably
doesn’t come as a revelation. Yet the darkness of the night is one of the
foundations of the big-bang theory, for it means that the universe is finite in age
or size or both. If the universe were infinitely big and old, we would see forever
in every direction and our sight line would always intersect a star. The stars
would form an unbroken wall of light. It would be like living in a forest so deep
and mature that you see a tree wherever you look. So the next time you look at
the night sky, imagine the stars as trees and the blackness between them as gaps,
revealing that the forest is either so small that you are seeing through to the other
side or so young that it hasn’t filled in yet.
Not only is the night sky dark, it looks pretty much the same everywhere. At a
conference I went to in 1996, astronomers unfurled a poster with the most
remarkable demonstration of this uniformity I’ve ever seen. They had pointed
the Hubble Space Telescope at a dark patch of sky near the Big Dipper and kept
it focused there for ten days, gathering light for the most sensitive image ever
made—the Hubble Deep Field. Three years later, they did the same on nearly the
exact opposite part of the sky, in the southern hemisphere. The images are not
splashy works of art in the way that some Hubble images are; their beauty is
understated. They show objects at nearly the outermost range of our vision, so
dim that the telescope collected just one photon of their light per minute. The
thousands of little reddish splotches in the image are entire galaxies, including
some of the very first to have formed. The northern and southern images look
statistically the same, which poses a paradox that the University of Maryland
professor Charles Misner had first realized in 1969.
Misner, a contemporary of Hawking, is another of the physicists who
revolutionized the study of black holes and the universe at large in the 1960s and
’70s. Like most physics students, I first learned his name as the M in “MTW,”
the universal abbreviation for the coauthors of the standard textbook of gravity
theory, Gravitation—with its vignettes and musings, among the few science
textbooks that is genuinely fun to read. Misner’s childhood interest, like
Galvez’s, was not physics but chemistry. He remembers how his mother once

complained about the holes he’d burned in his clothes with his chemistry set. His
response: make an experiment of it, spilling acids on various textiles to see how
they reacted. His mom might not have been entirely pleased, but a family friend
heard of his exploits and hired him to find a way to make concrete cure more
efficiently. He developed a sealer to slow the evaporation of water.
Misner entered college as a chemistry major, and suddenly all the fun drained
out of the subject. “The labs were awful,” he recalls. “You just had to follow the
cookbook instructions.” So he switched to physics and went on to grad school at
Princeton just as the legendary professor John Wheeler (W in the textbook
moniker) was sparking the study of gravity back to life. Although physicists
professed undying admiration for Einstein’s theory of gravitation, few had
actually bothered to study it, thinking the real action was in quantum physics.
Wheeler recognized gravity as the most creative of nature’s forces. Geons,
spacetime foam, wormholes, black holes—you don’t even need to know what
these terms mean to appreciate that Wheeler was talking about more than apples
falling on people’s heads. “He had a geometrical and physical intuition and had
this excitement that there might be more in the equations than people had
thought about,” Misner says. “And he was right.”
The uniformity of the night sky didn’t register as a mystery until two
observational breakthroughs in the 1960s. First, astronomers discovered quasars
—points of light that look like stars at first glance, but have colors like no star
anyone had ever seen. It dawned on them that quasars look so vivid because the
universe is growing, stretching light waves like a logo on a spandex shirt,
turning blue to red. Quasars’ light is so red that it must have been traveling for
billions of years to reach us, making them, at that time, the oldest things human
beings had ever seen. In 1966 Misner did a yearlong fellowship at Cambridge,
where he remembers astronomers plotting quasar positions on a globe-shaped
chalkboard. Misner noticed more chalk marks on one side than the other, as if
the ancient universe was lopsided. The skew turned out to be a fluke, but it got
him thinking about why the sky should or shouldn’t look the same in every
direction. A second discovery forced the issue: the cosmic microwave
background radiation.
Radio astronomers first noticed this radiation as a faint but constant hiss in
their receivers. They scraped the pigeon droppings off of their antenna, and still

the hiss persisted; wherever they pointed their antenna, there was this hiss, filling
the sky, leaving no empty spots. Researchers quickly recognized the hiss as a
form of light stretched from blue to red to infrared to the microwave part of the
spectrum, an even more dramatic transformation than quasar light underwent,
making its source even older: on current estimates, 13.8 billion years old. The
cosmic microwave background radiation gives us a snapshot of the universe at
that time, and it looks like a white cow in a snowstorm: an almost featureless
primordial soup of nearly pure hydrogen gas. The gas was even more uniformly
spread out than the galaxies and quasars that came later.
A common appearance demands a common cause. If two of your friends
show up one day wearing exactly the same outfit, you might dismiss the
coincidence as pure chance, but if you notice lots of other sartorially coordinated
people, too, you assume a connection: a dress code, a mass e-mail, a sale at the
local Gap. People can dress in so many ways that it’s improbable for them to
pick matching clothes at random. Likewise, matter in the early universe could be
arranged in so many ways that it was unlikely—breathtakingly unlikely—to
have the same density and temperature everywhere. Yet it did.
What could possibly explain this homogeneity? Gravity would act to pull
matter together, making it less uniform, if anything. Cosmologists have
speculated about other processes, but they face a very basic problem. Two
galaxies or lumps of primordial gas on opposite sides of our sky, at the
outermost range of our vision, are too far apart for any process operating within
space to have leveled them out. After all, that’s what it means to be at the
outermost range of our vision: light from each galaxy is only now reaching us
after an odyssey of billions of years. It hasn’t had time to cross to the other
galaxy yet.
Cosmologists draw an analogy to the horizon on Earth. Because of our
planet’s curvature, if you stand on a life raft in the middle of the ocean, you can
see about three miles out. If two ships approach, one from the north, the other
from the south, you first see the tips of their masts, and as they get closer, their
hulls slowly rise over your horizon. For their part, sailors on the ships first see
the top of your head, and the rest of you gradually comes into view. But at the
moment of first sighting, sailors on one ship can’t see the other ship—when you
are just on their horizon, the other ship is still over it. We are like that castaway,

and two diametrically opposite galaxies are like those sailors. We are seeing
galaxies that haven’t yet seen each other, let alone had time to exchange energy
or material that might have homogenized their appearance. The background
radiation should be a ragtag quiltwork rather than a seamless glow. “It’s
extremely difficult to explain why the sky is not extremely mottled…,” Misner
says. “Observations showed that things were coordinated that never had any
physical possibility of communicating with each other.”
There’s a certain déjà vu all over again about this situation. Far-flung parts of
the universe have coordinated their properties in apparent violation of the speed
limit set by light. That looks spookily like what Galvez sees in his lab, except
that now we’re talking about whole galaxies rather than little particles. In 1970
the Russian theorist Yakov Zel’dovich ventured that a type of quantum
nonlocality might explain the cosmic uniformity. In general, though,
cosmologists were reluctant to go that far. Most took the puzzle as a failing of
Einstein’s gravity theory and figured that the answer would have to await the
unification of physics. In other words, Misner says, “No one thought the Einstein
equations could be trusted at those extreme times.”

1.3. Cosmological horizon problem. We can see two ships on the ocean horizon even when they can’t see
each other (top). Similarly, we can see two galaxies on our cosmic horizon even when they can’t see each
other (bottom). If those galaxies have never been in contact, what could have made them look so similar?
(Illustration by Jen Christensen)
In the late 1970s Russian and American physicists hit upon a way to solve the
horizon problem without ditching either locality or Einstein’s theory. The idea is
that the two galaxies on opposite sides of our sky (or really their precursors)
actually used to be close together and were dragged apart when the universe
went through an early growth spurt. That way, some kind of process would have
been able to make them uniform. Like twins separated at birth and brought up
not even knowing of each other’s existence, the galaxies were once nestled
together, but developed independently and only now are becoming reunited
again.
For this explanation to work, the growth spurt must have pulled the galaxies
apart faster than light, so that they would lose contact with each other until the
present day. Normally, the words “faster than light” are physicists’ equivalent of

scraping your fingernails on a blackboard. But the growth of the cosmos gets
around the usual restrictions on the speed of travel, because no travel is
involved. Rather, new space is being created in the interstices between galaxies,
much as an animal or plant grows by creating new cells. Because the galaxies
are not actually moving through space, the speed limit is irrelevant to them. “If
you look at two galaxies, they’re standing still, but the distance between them is
changing,” explains Misner. “If you think of this as a relative velocity, in early
times, the relative velocity between two pieces of matter far exceeded the
velocity of light. So they couldn’t see each other.” This isn’t the only setting in
which you can break a speed limit by growing rather than traveling. Suppose
you’re at a big dance party and a conga line begins to form. If several dozen
people join the conga line every second, the two ends of the line can move apart
at faster than 55 mph, even though no one person is moving nearly that fast.
The distance between galaxies can increase faster than light even when the
universe is growing at a normal pace. Under those circumstances, though, the
expansion rate slackens over time and the galaxies eventually do come into
contact. A growth spurt is necessary to ensure that galaxies can have a common
birth and then lose contact.
Most cosmologists find this concept, known as inflation, so elegant and
compelling that they commonly present it as settled fact. In 2014 a team of
observers announced they’d discovered the telltale patterns of inflation in the
microwave radiation—ripples produced by the mechanism that drove the growth
spurt. Commentators were careful to utter the standard disclaimers (“if true”),
but clearly took the result as real; they’d expected it for so long. Yet the finding
fizzled a few months later, rekindling doubts that even some of inflation’s
originators have expressed. The main worry is that inflationary theory
presupposes the very condition it is supposed to produce: for the universe to
begin inflating, it must have already been preternaturally uniform. Consequently,
some physicists have been exploring alternatives to inflation, including not just
the appearance of nonlocality, but the real thing.
      *
One of the inflation skeptics is Fotini Markopoulou. I first met her at a
conference in honor of Wheeler, where she shared first place in a competition for

up-and-coming physicists. I was struck by her thinking about how physics
theories need to assimilate that we are part of the universe, rather than outsiders
looking in. “One thing that really interests me is the idea that you’re inside the
universe that you’re trying to understand, that you can understand it,” she tells
me. “There is an interesting interplay between being inside the system you’re
trying to study and also being able to pretend you’re not, which is kind of what
science is really about.” All areas of science feel this tension between inside and
outside view, but it is worst in cosmology, the one field that studies a system
with no outside at all.
Markopoulou says the big picture has engrossed her from an early age. “As a
kid, I would like to go into a church when it was empty and sit down and just
look at the ceiling,” she recalls. “Greek Orthodox churches basically have—it’s
like a planetarium. There is this cosmology that is painted on the ceiling. It’s
something that, for whichever reason, I’ve always found fascinating. There is
something amazing about the idea of a human trying to look at the whole thing
that we belong to.” It would be easy to draw a straight line between this
childhood wonderment and her career as a physicist, but Markopoulou resists
that convenient narrative. She also loved art—both her parents were sculptors—
and archaeology and architecture. She didn’t know what major to list on her
college application. When her high school principal suggested theoretical
physics, she put down theoretical physics. In college, a friend raved about a
lecture series on quantum mechanics, and it happened to be on her way home, so
she stopped by. “I did not read a book about Einstein and decide to continue
where Einstein left off,” she says. “I ended up, at various forks in life, deciding
that theoretical physics would be the most interesting choice.”
Likewise, she came late to her choice of subject: unifying quantum theory and
gravity theory to produce a quantum theory of gravity. As an undergraduate and
first-year grad student, she studied particle physics instead. Yet she found her
coursework dissatisfying. “It’s a funny thing when you’re educated as a physicist
—you don’t really learn quantum theory in a fundamental way,” she recalls. Her
classmates and professors dismissed unification as a pipe dream, and initially she
felt the same. After a while, though, she began thinking that maybe it was all
right to dream. Although the answers to cosmic mysteries might lie beyond
physicists’ grasp, at least quantum-gravity researchers were reaching. “When

you asked interesting questions, like, ‘Why it is so?’ … it always seemed like
you were not really supposed to ask,” she says. “The people who worked on
those interesting questions were the quantum-gravity people.” Eventually the
lure grew too strong to resist. Whereas Giddings has sought to unify physics
through string theory, Markopoulou settled into a different community of
physicists who take alternative approaches to reconcile gravity with quantum
theory. Unlike string theorists, this group does not strictly seek to unite all of
physics, with its enormous variety of particles and forces, but concentrates on
gravity.
Markopoulou made her name by studying whether various proposed quantum
theories of gravity obey the principle of locality and showing that most do not.
Conventional wisdom has it that such anomalies would be confined to tiny
scales, smaller than even an atom, but Markopoulou doubts that anything so
profound could be so narrowly contained. “From the beginning, when I started in
quantum gravity, I had this gut feeling that maybe the signature of quantum
gravity is really large, because you are changing something so fundamental,” she
says. Markopoulou suspects that the synchronicity of distant galaxies may be
that signature. The unity of the cosmos may be a third type of nonlocality writ
large. Several string theorists have been thinking along the same lines. “The
horizon problem is nonlocality staring us in the face,” Markopoulou says.

Particles in the Basement
In the instances of nonlocality I’ve talked about so far, space is failing in its most
basic function: to separate things from one another, to space them out. Entangled
particles coordinate their behavior without exchanging signals through space.
Matter falls into a black hole and manages to climb out of the abyss of space.
Galaxies look alike across an unbridgeable gulf of space. These phenomena
give, at the least, the appearance of nonlocality. But as a fourth and final
example, I’d like to turn the tables and consider a phenomenon that gives the
appearance of locality, but might ultimately be nonlocal.
Physicists usually think of the world as made up of particles: electrons,
protons, and all the other subatomic creatures of physics. Particles are the very
embodiment of locality. These little specks of matter exist at specific locations.
They interact with one another only by smacking together or by firing off a
middleman particle that shuttles between them. Quantum entanglement can
make particles match in a nonlocal way, but doesn’t alter this basic picture. Yet it
turns out that the entire concept of localized particles is awkward, even self-
contradictory.
Lest you think that particles are a remote and abstract notion, they’re
surprisingly easy to see for yourself. One evening, I went down to my basement
with a plastic party tumbler, a foil cupcake liner, a bottle of rubbing alcohol, and
one of those spray cans you use to blow crumbs off computer keyboards.
Inspired by the simplicity of the experiments I’d seen Galvez perform and one
too many episodes of MacGyver, I was determined to use these common
household items to build a particle detector. A duster can, sprayed for more than
a second or two, gets very cold—cold enough to cause alcohol vapor trapped in
an inverted cup to condense along the paths of electrically charged particles like
tiny contrails.
I worked on that kludgey contraption for a couple of weeks, trying out
various designs without success, ultimately combining several ideas to create a
device that could hardly be simpler. That’s what science is like: hours of
frustration punctuated by moments of rapture. When my little device finally
worked, I watched as short white streaks betrayed the presence of errant

subatomic particles flitting through my house. On occasion, I saw their trails
kink sharply, possibly indicating a collision of two particles. My wife was just
happy that I hadn’t taken apart the clothes washer.
My party tumbler was a miniature version of the giant particle detectors at the
Large Hadron Collider. I visited the collider in the summer of 2007 as the
machine was nearing completion. I took an elevator forty stories down and
entered an underground chamber big enough to fit a cathedral. It was packed
with equipment. What awed me the most was not the size of the apparatus, but
the sheer number of data cables. Some 1,800 miles of them flowed through the
chamber like a million tributaries of a mighty river. Right at the center was a
metal tube barely wide enough to insert a couple of fingers. When the collider is
operating, streams of protons surge through this tube like bicyclists in a peloton.
Some of them collide, spraying debris all over the underground chamber.
Ever since the late 1940s physicists have visualized particle collisions using a
system of stick figures called Feynman diagrams, after their inventor, the
renowned Nobelist Richard Feynman. His technique is extremely powerful and
extremely accurate. But it is also cruelly difficult. The diagrams look simple, but
merely put a brave face on mathematical trench warfare. Zvi Bern, a UCLA
physics professor who specializes in these calculations, says he entered grad
school enamored of the elegance of Feynman’s technique, but soon got a reality
check. “I do remember the very first time I got homework in my particle physics
class,” he says. “I was just amazed that people could actually do these Feynman
calculations without making any mistakes. It wasn’t even that complicated by
the standards of what the pros do, but after twenty pages of algebra I was
completely mystified how the pros did it without making mistakes.”
The calculations are misery-inducing for two reasons. First, a particle
collision has an enormous diversity of potential outcomes. For instance, when
two gluon particles—building blocks of the protons that circulate through the
LHC—collide, anywhere from two to an infinite number of gluons might fly
back out. Second, each of these potential outcomes can be achieved through a
huge variety of possible intermediate steps. For instance, two colliding gluons
can spawn four gluons in 220 different ways, not even counting the detours they
might take in the process. The resulting equations contain tens of thousands of
algebraic terms. And that’s an easy one. Pity those who consider eight outgoing

gluons, for they must account for 10 million possible intermediate steps. Even
computers quickly reach their limits.
No one goes into particle physics expecting it to be easy. To the contrary, lots
of students are drawn to the subject precisely because it’s hard. But if you go
through all that effort, you expect to discover something that makes it
worthwhile. And you don’t. Those tens of thousands of terms eventually reduce
to a mere four. The rest cancel one another out. Term number 2,718 might, on
examination, be the same as term number 3,142, but with a minus sign in front
of it, so you cross off both. Unfortunately, you can’t tell in advance which terms
will cancel, so you need to write them all out. The procedure seems perversely
wasteful, barely better than writing lines in after-school detention. The mismatch
between the difficulty of the calculation and the simplicity of the answer
suggests that physicists are missing something, like a police captain who rounds
up all the usual suspects and overlooks the guy standing there with a pistol in his
hand.
Bern’s classmates put the homework from hell behind them, but he never got
over it. He figured there had to be a better way to do those calculations and
threw himself into finding it. It wasn’t the smartest career move. Most physicists
saw these calculations as journeyman’s work: useful but unimaginative.
Prospective employers didn’t attend his talks; a journal rejected his first paper on
the topic as “not very interesting.” The breakthrough came when he gave a talk
at Princeton and Witten, the renowned string theorist who had brought Giddings
back from the brink of quitting physics, came up afterward to compliment him.
With this imprimatur, Bern finally got a job. Bern says the whole experience
disabused him of his youthful romantic views of science. “Science is not done
the way I thought it was,” he says. “My epiphany about science is that you have
to have luck on your side.”
Through his and his coworkers’ efforts, physicists no longer need to write out
those ten-thousand-plus algebraic terms, but can jump straight to the final four.
But why were the old techniques so mismatched, and why do these new
techniques work so well? Another theorist, Nima Arkani-Hamed at the Institute
for Advanced Study in Princeton, blames nonlocality. Theoretical physicists are
known for their strong personalities, but Arkani-Hamed is a force of nature. He
was born in Houston in 1972. Several years later, his father, a prominent Iranian

geophysicist, moved the family back to Tehran to help build a new country after
the shah fell. The family’s idealism quickly faded. They criticized the ayatollahs
once too often, went into hiding to avoid arrest and likely death, and fled over
the Turkish border on horseback.
Lots of physicists will tell you they are “excited” by such-and-such a
discovery. They tell you this in such a monotone that you can’t help wondering,
if that’s what they’re like when they’re excited, how awful it must be when
they’re bored. Arkani-Hamed, on the other hand, tells you about the simplest
things with such verve that you feel he just opened the Lost Ark of the Covenant.
Once, he got me to marvel at how the string “1, 2, 3” can be rewritten as “3, 1,
2” or “2, 3, 1,” demonstrating how so much of physics boils down to careful
counting of possible arrangements. I remember standing with him at a coffee
break—and whenever he’s around, there does seem to be a lot of coffee being
consumed—as the conversation became a rapid-fire internal dialogue, wherein
Arkani-Hamed provided his own answers while everyone else was still grasping
the questions: “I did this, I tried that, but it didn’t work, but—oh, wait, maybe
that was because of this—so, hmm, I wonder whether I should…”
“I have never been more excited about physics in my life,” he gushed when I
first asked him about the new calculation techniques. “There is something truly
spectacular going on here which I think could eventually change the way we
think about both spacetime and quantum mechanics … It is developing at a
blistering pace right now, with a group of roughly fifteen people in the world
working on it day and night.” Their effort culminated in 2013 with a
comprehensive alternative to Feynman diagrams.
Arkani-Hamed thinks the trouble with Feynman diagrams is that they are
expressly local. They show particles as interacting with one another at specific
locations in space and time. The diagrams look reassuringly like the trails
particles leave in a detector such as the party tumbler in my basement; indeed,
this is why physicists were drawn to Feynman’s approach. Yet the calculational
quagmire brings this feature of the diagrams into disrepute. Locality is directly
responsible for the algebraic bloat. “You’ve insisted that the theory be local,”
Arkani-Hamed says. “You then suffer through ten thousand terms.” By taking
every point in space as strictly independent of every other, the Feynman
technique overstates the amount of complexity in nature. Much of what appears

in the diagrams doesn’t exist in the real world, such as “virtual” particles and
“ghost” fields. Theorists must impose special rules to ensure that these unwanted
guests don’t stay for dessert.
Rather than take locality as the starting point, Arkani-Hamed, Bern, and their
colleagues assume that particles satisfy certain principles of symmetry, and the
resulting equations are much simpler. Particles still obey the principle of locality;
the only difference is that the theory derives locality from deeper considerations,
instead of presupposing it. This approach combines modesty with enormous
ambition. These theorists didn’t set out to create a grand new theory of particles,
but merely to streamline the existing one. Their equations don’t predict anything
exotic, but just make it easier to describe what we already knew.
Historically, such reformulations have been hugely significant. This brings
out a remarkable fact about theories in physics. They are not fixed structures, but
have a kind of ineffable existence that goes beyond any given set of equations
physicists use to express them, like a story that can be told and retold with vastly
different settings and characters, but is recognizably the same story, or a musical
work that can be given a new arrangement, bringing out qualities no one had
appreciated before or, conversely, dispensing with inessential flourishes. Perhaps
the most dramatic example was when Nicolaus Copernicus put the Sun rather
than Earth at the center of the universe. At the time, his model was little more
than a mathematical reformulation of the old Earth-centered system, and
astronomers adopted it as a streamlined way to draw up calendars and planet
charts. But the new conception of the cosmos invited questions that were
meaningless in the old. What causes dropped objects to fall? Do planets’ orbits
have to be circular or could they be oblong? Could space go on forever?
Copernicus’s work may not have been revolutionary, but it fomented revolution.
So you see, laziness has its benefits. People trying to get away with doing less
work are a force for innovation. Arkani-Hamed hopes the reformulated particle
theory will unstick the search for a unified theory of physics. Once you stop
assuming the world revolves around locality, the pieces begin to fall into place.
What principle should replace locality? If the world doesn’t really consist of
localized particles, what does it consist of? No one yet knows. But now
physicists have a path forward. Whereas Einstein agonized that nonlocality
would mean the collapse of contemporary physics, Arkani-Hamed thinks it

marks the rebirth. “When you’re a kid, this is what you fantasize about what it’s
like to do theoretical physics,” speaks the man who never really stopped being a
kid.
      *
We’ve seen nonlocality pop up all over the place: in experiments on the quantum
realm, in the paradoxes of black holes, in the grand structure of the universe, in
the maelstrom of particle collisions. In all these examples, physics enters a
twilight zone. Things can outrun light; cause and effect can be reversed; distance
can lose meaning; two objects may actually be one. The universe becomes
spooky.
Although these varieties of nonlocality come up in different contexts, they
have some striking commonalities that suggest physicists are feeling different
parts of the same elephant. Arkani-Hamed, for example, thinks the type of
nonlocality in his theory may subsume quantum entanglement. “It’s not
inconceivable that proper understanding of these things will lead to a new way
of talking about quantum mechanics, not just spacetime,” he tells me. “Maybe in
this new picture there might be some new picture for what entanglement means.”
It goes the other way, too. Giddings and others think quantum entanglement
might be the glue holding space together. Entangled links might even create a
kind of secret tunnel between the inside and outside of a black hole. The coming
chapters will explore these fascinating ideas.
Blown minds are an occupational hazard in physics. This is a profession
whose entire purpose is to look beneath appearances for a world that’s simpler
than it seems, yet also more remote from our experience. What’s interesting,
though, is that this isn’t the first time that physicists and philosophers have
encountered such mysteries. In many ways, the history of locality is the history
of physics itself.

2
The Origins of Nonlocality
What’s the big deal about nonlocality? Why can’t scientists just throw locality
into the same dustbin as phlogiston, vortex atoms, and all the other beautiful
hypotheses slain by ugly facts? Why does nonlocality inspire such melodramatic
putdowns: “the end of the rationality of physics,” “incompatible with the very
possibility of doing science,” “flapdoodle”? Clearly, the violation of locality is
not just a routine occurrence in the churn of ideas, something you can laugh off
over a beer after work. To see why, you need to dive into the history of physics,
for nonlocality threatens the very nature of what we assume physics to be.
Physics is not like other sciences. If you ask geologists, biologists, or
astronomers to define their subject, they can point to rocks, things that slither, or
twinkles in the night sky. Physicists, however, start pointing at everything around
them; they’re not particular. You are as apt to see them studying the origami of
biological proteins and the yo-yoing of financial markets as the collision of tiny
particles. Their discipline is defined less by its subject matter than by its goals.
In whatever they focus on, physicists seek the simplicity in complexity and the
unity in diversity. Like philosophers, their intellectual siblings, they are driven
by the conviction that the universe is within the human power to understand and
that if you look beneath its variety and intricacy, you will find comprehensible
rules.
Also like philosophers, physicists look to history for guidance for what those
rules—and, by implication, their discipline—should be. They have a reputation

as some of the most forward-looking of all scientists, so far ahead of the
technological curve that they create the curve. Physicists can rightfully claim
credit for almost every gadget you own. Yet I find that they spend as much time
looking backward as forward. They routinely cite centuries-old developments or
tell me they’re reading a biography of some illustrious figure, on the assumption
that you can’t go forward until you know how you got where you are.
And 
indeed, 
physicists’ 
general 
standards 
for 
simplicity 
and
comprehensibility have remained remarkably constant over the ages. Their
intellectual forefathers in ancient Greece sought to describe the universe as a
giant billiards game. The balls—the building blocks of the world—fly around,
smack into one another, and rebound in an endless chain reaction. These
interactions are strictly local: until balls touch, they exert no effect on one
another. Though individually simple, the balls and collisions are so numerous
that they give rise to all the rich diversity and complexity of the world. To a
degree its inventors really had no right to expect, this picture captures something
of reality. Through the coming millennia, the details changed thoroughly, but the
core values endured. Especially locality.
Sure, even the ancient Greeks were well aware of counterexamples to this
principle. They didn’t know about quantum particles or black holes yet, but they
did know about other effects that appear to act nonlocally, notably the
phenomena we now associate with the force of gravity. But they didn’t give
those counterexamples much weight. Most reckoned that the apparent instances
of nonlocality were merely a false impression, awaiting some smart person to
explain them by processes operating locally. To give up locality would have been
tantamount to giving up physics.
What’s puzzling, though, is that Isaac Newton did exactly that. To explain
those gravitational phenomena, he gave up physics, at least as it was defined at
the time. For that, he is remembered as the greatest figure of the Scientific
Revolution, the intellectual ferment in the seventeenth century out of which
science as we know it today emerged. And the reaction that Newton’s theory of
gravity originally provoked has remarkable parallels to the dismay I hear about
nonlocality today.
      *

Frans van Lunteren, a historian of science at Leiden Observatory in Holland, one
of the most storied scientific institutions in Europe, recalls how unsettled he felt
when he first learned about Newton’s law of gravity. His high school teacher
explained that apples fall and planets cling to the Sun because everything in the
universe exerts a force of attraction on everything else. As Newton conceived of
it, the force acts at a distance instantaneously. Raise a finger on Earth and all the
distant planets in the universe instantly quiver (a little). Gravity leaps from Earth
to apple, and from finger to planets, without passing through the space between
them.
This is what weirded out van Lunteren as a teenager. “I found it hard to
understand how a lump of brute matter—say, a piece of rock—could affect some
other matter deep down in space, especially when the intermediate space is
vacuous,” he says. But he figured that if he didn’t understand it, the fault must be
his. “I was quite used to missing the point of something,” he confesses. Only as
an adult did he learn that this strange feature of gravity goes by the name of
nonlocality.
At the time, van Lunteren didn’t care for history. He dropped his history
classes in order to focus on math and physics. But when he got to college, his
physics classes were a letdown. They consisted of equations and more equations,
with nary a word for what all those x’s and y’s actually meant. “Most teachers
would start with a differential equation on the upper left side of the blackboard
and then work themselves toward a cross section or some other measurable
quantity on the right down side, without having anything interesting to say about
the physics,” he recalls. He blew off his classes, read French and Russian novels
instead, worked odd jobs, hitchhiked to Istanbul. In his intellectual wanderings,
he learned about the strange quantum phenomena that so troubled Einstein.
When he recovered his passion for college life, he found himself pulled in by
history. He saw it as a way to explore grand intellectual questions his physics
professors had ignored. Like the philosopher Tim Maudlin, van Lunteren found
that to love physics, he had to leave physics.
Casting around for a Ph.D. topic, he went back to his teenage puzzlement
over the nonlocality of Newtonian gravity. He discovered he had been right to be
puzzled; those who accepted the theory uncritically had missed the point.
Nonlocality troubled Newton himself as well as his peers. It sounded

pseudoscientific, like astrology or miracle cures. One French mathematician
whined, “We are plunged back into the old darkness.” Van Lunteren says, “It
would have helped me if my high school teacher would have added that many
great contemporaries of Newton found that notion hard to swallow or even
incomprehensible.” So he wrote his dissertation on how scholars did their utmost
to explain away Newton’s action at a distance.
In the end, scholars were not plunged into darkness. They pivoted. The
generation that grew up with Newtonian gravity found the theory entirely
natural. For millennia, natural philosophers recoiled from nonlocality; in the
eighteenth century, they embraced it. Put simply, they were for locality until they
were against it. And no sooner did scholars get used to Newtonian nonlocality
when along came another U-turn and a new generation went back to thinking
that the world had to be—just had to be—local, thereby setting up our present
predicament.

The Mechanical Universe
These historical twists and turns began with one of the most famous encounters
in Western intellectual history, an event it’d be great to go back and witness if
you had a time machine. As Plato tells the story, in the year 451 or 450 B.C.,
Parmenides, the leading philosopher of the day, and his best-known student,
Zeno, traveled to Athens from their native city of Elea in southern Italy. They
stayed at the house of a leading politician just outside the city walls. One day,
who should stop by but an up-and-coming young Athenian philosopher,
Socrates.
The very concept of philosophy (in both Greece and its other birthplace,
China) was scarcely a few generations old. It was a radical new way to fathom
what happens in nature. In daily life, when we ask “Why?” what we’re usually
after is what drove a person to do what they did. Traditional mythology extended
this style of thinking to the natural world. Why did the earthquake occur?
Because Poseidon was peeved that someone had defiled his temple. Such
explanations make little distinction between locality and nonlocality. Sometimes
gods act nonlocally (they’d snap their fingers and make things happen) and
sometimes they act locally (sending an emissary to do their bidding). As far as
mythology is concerned, that’s a minor detail.
Philosophers were people who found these character-driven narratives
unsatisfying. Even if you grant the existence of Poseidon, how could he bring
about an earthquake? What rules governed what he was capable of?
Philosophers didn’t care about the motive; they wanted to know the mechanism.
The categories of locality and nonlocality assumed a new importance.
Naturalistic explanations tend to be local. In our experience, when you want
something to move, you can’t will it to do so; you need to go over and push on it
or send someone to do it for you. The first philosopher we know by name,
Thales, suggested that earthquakes occur because the land is floating on a
subterranean ocean like an unstable boat, occasionally rocking back and forth.
The cause is in direct contact with the effect.
But locality made Parmenides queasy. He wasn’t so sure we could trust our
everyday experience, or that we could divide up the world and understand it

piece by piece. Defending this thesis to Socrates in Athens, Zeno argued that
local concepts such as motion, change, and individuality lead to logical
paradoxes. History records nine such paradoxes; dozens more may have been
lost to time. The deepest and most influential was that of complete divisibility. If
an object could be cut in half, then fourths, then eighths, and so forth without
end, it would consist ultimately of geometric points, each a nothingth of an inch
across. When you went to reassemble the object, you’d run into trouble because
no number of nothingths add up to a somethingth. From this Zeno concluded that
reality could not, in fact, be divided up.
Socrates complained that it was all a bit over his head. Zeno’s arguments
“deny the most self-evident thing,” as a later Greek philosopher wrote. But that’s
what made them so vexing. To claim that nothing consists of smaller pieces
sounded crazy, yet the reasoning looked solid. In that house in Athens,
Parmenides and Zeno created an intellectual crisis. For decades after, people
would travel halfway across the Greek world to hear firsthand accounts of the
debate that ensued.
Modern mathematicians think Zeno was basically right that something gets
lost when you divide a continuous object into infinitesimal pieces. The number
of geometric points in a continuum is uncountable—literally uncountable. And if
you can’t count them out, you can’t add them up. Our usual intuition that the
whole is the sum of its parts doesn’t apply. The continuum has no innate scale;
the size of a set of points does not derive from the size of the individual points
but must be defined separately. “One reading of Zeno’s paradoxes is that you
can’t get physical scale at all from a continuum,” says the theoretical physicist
Fay Dowker of Imperial College London.
Although physicists have made their peace with the continuum, many still
find the idea unsettling. The great physicist Richard Feynman wrote: “It always
bothers me that, according to the laws as we understand them today, it takes a
computing machine an infinite number of logical operations to figure out what
goes on in no matter how tiny a region of space, and no matter how tiny a region
of time. How can all that be going on in that tiny space? Why should it take an
infinite amount of logic to figure out what one tiny piece of space/time is going
to do?”

      *
Worries of this sort led many Greek philosophers to propose that matter is not
infinitely divisible, but composed of discrete building blocks. The atomists were
prescient. When you read what has survived of their writings, you feel like
you’re reading a freshman physics textbook in verse form. Sticklers might sniff
that the atoms of antiquity were nothing like the modern variety, but the general
conception of nature developed by Democritus and others in the fifth century B.C.
was remarkably close to the one that physicists nowadays have. Everything that
happens in nature, the atomists asserted, derives from the shape, motion, and
spatial arrangement of tiny building blocks. All the sensations we enjoy—taste,
color, smell—they believed are produced by streams of atoms that objects spew
out and that impinge upon our bodies. The sight of objects literally pokes you in
the eye; a bitter taste stabs you in the tongue.
The concept of space was the atomists’ creation. They were the first
philosophers to argue that matter needs a venue in which to exist and move. One
of Democritus’s successors, Lucretius, wrote: “If there were no place or space,
that which we call Void, then particles would not have anywhere at all In which
to be or move.” Space defines the position, velocity, size, and shape of atoms. It
extends forever in every direction, populated with an innumerable variety of
worlds. This cosmological picture, radical in its time, proved decisive in
atomism’s eventual triumph.
If atoms were the athletes and space the playing field, locality was the
rulebook. Like modern physicists, the atomists distinguished two aspects of
locality. First, space separates atoms from one another and gives each an
individual identity. This is the principle of separability that Einstein considered
essential to physics and that quantum physics appears to violate. Second, space
dictates how atoms affect one another. The atomists held that atoms interact only
by making direct contact. Until atoms bang together, they glide through space in
straight lines, oblivious to one another’s presence. This is an early version of the
principle of local action, which Einstein formalized in his theory of relativity. It
lets you explain any event as the outcome of earlier events.
The atomists didn’t give any real arguments for locality. They didn’t even put
it forward as a tentative hypothesis to be confirmed by experiments; they didn’t
have the concept of empirical science yet. Rather, they took locality as a self-

evident truth. For objects to act on one another at a distance would break the
causal chain of events. It would render the universe incomprehensible.
      *
Atomism was the first “theory of everything.” A few blind spots
notwithstanding, there was hardly a phenomenon of life, the weather, or the
heavens for which the atomists did not offer an explanation. They pioneered the
mechanical view of nature, a clockwork universe. Modern terms such as
“quantum mechanics” reflect this heritage. To be sure, Democritus himself didn’t
think in terms of machines; that analogy came centuries later as machines
became more commonplace. When philosophers and scientists speak of a
mechanism, they mean simply a system of interlocking parts, as opposed to a
contraption designed for some purpose. What atoms do gives them purpose, not
the other way around. Individual atoms are lifeless, lacking in willpower and
animation. If one moves, it is only because another caused it to. This void of
purpose and meaning put off most of Democritus’s contemporaries. Plato wanted
to burn his books. To this day, physics strikes many people—even physicists—as
cold, abstract, inhuman.
Maybe it is. But it is also liberating. Atomism transcended human experience.
The old mythological explanations attributed earthquakes to emotions—one
complex phenomenon to another complex phenomenon—and what kind of an
explanation is that, really? It’s just passing the buck. Real explanation means
breaking something down into simpler pieces and showing how they interact to
produce that thing. Who would go back to the telenovela of Greek mythology, in
which cities fall or famine sweeps the land because Zeus can’t keep his pants
on? As the literary critic Stephen Greenblatt described in his Pulitzer Prize–
winning book Swerve, Democritus’s successors created an entire atheist, live-for-
today philosophy in which humans create our own meaning. Lucretius wrote:
“Nature, rid of harsh taskmasters, all at once is free. And everything she does,
does on her own, so that gods play No part.”
The most famous philosopher of the ancient world split the difference
between the atomists and their detractors. From what Aristotle could see, the
world throbs with life, and life is purposeful, so it stands to reason that inanimate
objects, too, are goal-oriented. An apple falls toward the center of the Earth

because that’s where it belongs in the grand scheme of things. Its motion is
spontaneous, requiring no external cause. Aristotle also went back to the idea
that stars and planets are governed by different laws than apples and arrows. And
he rejected the atomists’ claim that objects are made up of indivisible parts.
Zeno’s paradoxes notwithstanding, he thought that matter is continuous and
developed a sophisticated theory of the continuum that anticipated modern
mathematics. Objects’ properties cannot be reduced to the arrangement of atoms.
Aristotle abhorred a void. Objects in his scheme fit together like jigsaw pieces
without any empty gaps, and a given object’s location is defined in relation to its
neighbors, rather than by some abstract framework that exists independently of
matter. Because even “empty” space is already jam-packed with stuff, light can’t
be a stream of atoms that cross space from a bright object to our eye. Instead,
Aristotle thought of light as an impulse conveyed through a medium. A bright
light energizes the medium immediately around it, and a wave of transformation
sweeps across space in a continuous movement like a disturbance rippling across
a pond. No particles are moving; rather, each little piece of the medium passes
the impulse to the next, like kids playing a game of telephone. Aristotle’s
contemporaries in China also conceived of the world as a continuous medium,
chhi.
If anything, Aristotle’s way of thinking hewed more closely to observation
than atomism did. That said, Aristotle didn’t attempt to make specific predictions
that might corroborate or disprove his theory. Like Democritus, he was
concerned above all with making the universe comprehensible.
Despite its organic features, Aristotle’s theory adopted many of the essential
features of atomism, including locality. It treated nature as a system of objects
interacting purely by contact. For an object to deviate from its natural course,
something has to push it. Aristotle wrote: “The immediate agent of bodily
change of place must be either in contact with or continuous with the moved
object, as we always observe to be the case.” Also like the atomists, Aristotle
took pains to develop a theory of space. To him, having a location was almost
the very definition of existence; lacking one, of nonexistence. He wrote: “That
which does not exist is nowhere. Where, for example, is a goat-stag or a
sphinx?”
Although Aristotle wrote that locality was “universally” true, he mentioned

several counterexamples. These anomalies went back to Thales, who remarked
on one of our planet’s many strange rocks, lodestone, with its ability to tug on
chunks of iron. A region in northern Greece known as Magnesia had large
deposits of the stuff, giving us the name by which we know such materials
today: magnets. Thales also marveled at amber, a piece of which, after being
rubbed vigorously with a cloth, will make your hair stand on end. The Greek
word for amber is elektron, source of the word “electric.” Chinese scholars
discovered these phenomena at roughly the same time, although they were
quicker to make practical use of magnetism than their counterparts in the West
were.
It baffled the Greeks how lodestone and amber could influence objects they
were not touching. Worse, the influence they exerted was to pull. In a world of
contact action, things interact in only one way: they bang into one another and
rebound like billiard balls. They push; they do not pull. Trying to explain how
push comes to pull taxed the inventiveness of philosophers. Atomists thought
these materials released vapors that displaced the air around them, creating a
region of low density into which the surrounding air rushed, sweeping up iron or
hair with it. Aristotle dealt with the problem by the time-honored strategy of
ignoring it.
Magnetism and static electricity were not the only head-scratchers. There
were also the phenomena that today we recognize as caused by gravitational
attraction, such as falling, ocean tides, and planetary orbits. Aristotle saw them
as unconnected. To him, falling is simply objects’ wont, tides are generated by
winds stirred by solar heating, and planets ride on giant rotating crystalline
spheres. The atomists tied these phenomena together and attributed them to the
structure of the solar system. In their view, currents of particles surge and swirl
through the cosmos, creating vortices in which planets coalesce like a pile of
leaves caught in a river eddy. If an object is not keeping up with the rotary flow,
surrounding particles push it inward. To “fall” is to be swept toward the middle
of an eddy. In short, gravity is not a force of attraction, as scientists later came to
think; it’s a direct physical push, a shove from above.
      *
Aristotle’s theory carried weight, literally: in English translation, the surviving

writings fill six thousand pages. Scholars in the Greco-Roman empires and the
Islamic world built on his work, but much of it was lost or forgotten amid the
general decay of European intellectual life in the early Middle Ages. The next
major advances in the notion of locality did not come for another two millennia.
European scribes began to rediscover Aristotle in the twelfth century, by the
roundabout route of Latin translations from Arabic, and the knowledge so
outshone theirs that it must have seemed like an encyclopedia left behind on
Earth by aliens from a superior civilization. They transcribed and translated
those six thousand pages and spent centuries analyzing them, critiquing them,
and harmonizing them with Christian beliefs—a program known as
scholasticism. Whatever interested Aristotle interested them. Aristotle thought
space was important, so they thought space was important. Aristotle adhered to
the principle of locality, so they adhered to the principle of locality. They figured
that not even God could evade locality, although the principle was moot in his
case: he existed everywhere, so he was automatically in direct contact with
everything. “No action of an agent, however powerful it may be, acts at a
distance, except through a medium,” wrote the leading scholastic philosopher,
Thomas Aquinas. “But it belongs to the great power of God that He acts
immediately in all things. Hence nothing is distant from Him.”
The more scholars mulled Aristotle’s theory, however, the more they felt let
down, and they broadened their efforts from recovering Aristotle’s ideas to
improving on them. Aristotle’s non-explanations for magnetism and static
electricity were a conspicuous weak point. In the late 1500s, the English
physician William Gilbert (who later served as Queen Elizabeth I’s personal
medic) showed that a lodestone attracts an iron ingot even when you put
something in between them to block any putative vapors or medium. It seemed
unavoidable that magnets acted at a distance. Gilbert was at a loss for a natural
explanation and leaned toward a supernatural one: that a magnet is “like a living
creature” and attracts iron in an act of “coition.”
Aristotelian cosmology also struck many as suspect. How could the universe
be finite in size and bounded by a giant rotating crystalline sphere? Such a
sphere would have no external reference point to define its rotation. In the early
1500s, this inconsistency was what inspired Nicolaus Copernicus to place the
Sun rather than Earth at the center of the solar system. With his cosmic

switcheroo, the whole Aristotelian system began to unravel. Aristotle said things
fall down because that’s the direction of the center of the universe. That is no
longer true in the Sun-centered cosmology. So Copernicus created the impetus
for an alternative account of gravity. And because the center of the universe no
longer defined objects’ motion, the universe might as well have no center. It
could be infinite—a key tenet of atomism. Having also rediscovered Lucretius’s
writings, many scholars put two and two together: the structure of the cosmos
was evidence for atoms. It wouldn’t be the last time that philosophers and
physicists learned about the small by looking to the big.
Atomism came into full flower with René Descartes in the mid-seventeenth
century. Today Descartes is remembered for the proposition “I think, therefore I
am” and for the Cartesian coordinates used on graph paper. But these were just
two elements of an ambitious project: to out-Aristotle Aristotle. He wrote to a
friend, “I have decided to explain all the phenomena of nature, that is to say, the
whole of physics.” And he succeeded: his was the first new theory of everything
in two thousand years that could claim to be as comprehensive as Aristotle’s.
Descartes fully integrated Copernican cosmology with mechanical philosophy,
and his ideas served as the manifesto of the Scientific Revolution.
Descartes stressed the differences between his theory and classical atomism,
perhaps to bolster his claim to originality, but the continuities are clear. Nature
consists of particles interacting spatially. An object has no inscrutable innate
properties or tendency to seek out its rightful place in the universe, as Aristotle
had speculated. It’s a purely geometric figure. It has a size and a shape, but no
color, no texture, no mass. With just a few numbers (his Cartesian coordinates)
to specify an object’s position, you know everything there is to know about it.
Things could hardly be simpler.
Descartes’ objective was comprehensibility—to make the workings of nature
completely transparent. Locality was essential to this goal. Objects interacted
strictly locally: they moved freely in straight lines until two collided; only then
did they change course. Like Democritus and Aristotle, Descartes offered no real
evidence for this principle. “These things require no proof, because they are
obvious in themselves,” he wrote. In everyday life, we must touch objects to
make them do something, and Descartes assumed that contact action governs
everything else in the universe, too. Trouble was, it doesn’t. Descartes did such a

thorough job of applying the principle of locality that he inadvertently showed
the extent of its failure.
For instance, Descartes espoused the old atomist account of gravitation as a
shove from above. In his theory, planets lie at the centers of cosmic vortices,
whose swirling motions push particles inward. As an explanation for why
planets cohere, there was a lot of truth in his picture. It got the overall shape of
the solar system about right and inspired modern theories of planet formation.
But the theory stumbled over details. Among its many failings, it implied that
objects should fall toward Earth’s rotation axis, where the swirling motions
vanish, rather than toward its geometric center. If that were true, an apple
dropped near the North Pole would “fall” laterally rather than straight down. As
for magnetism and static electricity, Descartes attributed them to particles shaped
like tiny screws or hooks. The best you can say for this idea is that it wins points
for imagination.
Was the mechanical vision of the universe basically OK, in need of just some
bolt-tightening? Or did it have to be junked? This is a dilemma scientists wrestle
with whenever they encounter counterexamples to a theory. Reasonable people
will disagree, and the answer is obvious only in retrospect, and often not even
then. In this case, much more was at stake than one theory. To defy mechanical
theory and its central assumption of locality was to defy science itself. Would
admitting its failure mean that nature was beyond our rational understanding? In
a way, the surprising answer was yes. To fix mechanical theory, participants in
the Scientific Revolution needed to reach beyond the limits of science itself: to
the realm of magic.

Magic in the Machine
If there’s one thing you learn in school about science, it is that science is the
opposite of magic. From ancient Greece onward, philosophers and scientists
have taken on the job of disabusing people of all the crazy things they believe in:
homeopathy, horoscopes, and hoodoo, just to take the h’s. But then what do you
make of the fact that a lot of the greatest scientists in history spent a lot of time
trying to do magic? Newton set up an alchemy lab in a garden shed and
assembled one of the world’s greatest libraries on the topic.
I’ve never done a rigorous survey, but a large fraction of the scientists I know
have been engrossed by the paranormal at some point in their lives. I myself
went through a period in college when I read every book I could find on out-of-
body experiences, and I later learned that none other than Richard Feynman had
been fascinated by them, too. At a distinguished institution that shall remain
unnamed, I joined a study group on alien abductions organized by postdocs and
grad students. A number of abductees came to campus to tell us their stories. If
anything, we wanted to be persuaded, although in the end most of us weren’t.
Well, nobody’s perfect—that’s the usual way scientists interpret this interest.
But in the mid-twentieth century, historians of science came to appreciate that
magical ideas have been too pervasive to be written off as youthful flings or late-
career dementia. Some have gone so far as to say that modern science is as much
a product of magic as of mechanism. These represent the two emotional
impulses that drive researchers: to delight in the bizarre, and to cut through the
BS.
Most of us associate magic with wands and bullying potions teachers, but it’s
actually an entire mystical belief system. In Western culture, the most influential
such systems—Neoplatonism, Hermeticism, and Gnosticism—arose in the
second and third centuries A.D. as a backlash against orthodox Greco-Roman
religion, which struck many people as too much head and not enough heart.
These systems, which mingled with early Christianity and the Jewish mystical
tradition of Kabbalah, harkened back to older ideas such as Parmenides’ vision
of the oneness of nature and Plato’s revulsion against mechanical explanations.
They remain influential today.

Believers recoiled from the central tenet of mechanical philosophy: that the
universe is ultimately simple and comprehensible. They regard the cosmos not as
a clockwork made of lifeless parts, but as an organic unity beyond our power to
comprehend rationally. Beneath the reality we observe lies a hidden, or “occult,”
level that is neither simple nor comprehensible. Objects possess inscrutable
properties and powers that tap into this deeper level and can be exploited by
concocting charms and potions. In one of Renaissance Europe’s leading how-to
manuals about magic, Cornelius Agrippa explained: “They are called occult
qualities, because their causes lie hid, and man’s intellect cannot in any way
reach, and find them out.” (Agrippa’s name should sound familiar to Harry
Potter fans: he made a cameo appearance on a chocolate frog trading card.)
Nonlocality was an essential part of these beliefs. A cat’s cradle of
connections ties together things that might seem unrelated. Small things can
affect large ones; what lies here can affect what lies there. These nonlocal
influences operate somewhat like human emotions: parts of the universe literally
like or dislike one another, creating an all-pervading network of sympathies and
antipathies. One of the first anthropologists to study magical beliefs, James
Frazer, described in 1911 the two basic principles: “first, that like produces like,
or that an effect resembles its cause; and, second, that things which have once
been in contact with each other continue to act on each other at a distance after
the physical contact has been severed.” These influences sound like the very
definition of supernatural, but Agrippa, for one, saw them as entirely natural—
our fleeting glimpses of the underlying unity of the physical world. As evidence,
he and other Renaissance adherents cited those phenomena that had given
mechanical philosophers such trouble, including magnetism and ocean tides,
along with other ideas that almost everyone at the time (including mainstream
philosophers) believed in, including alchemy, astrology, and numerology.
Magical ideas sound dreamy to modern scientists, but, frankly, so do many of
the models put forward by mechanists such as Democritus and Descartes. In
both cases, what was important in the long term was the general mental
framework. Mechanical models emphasize nature’s transparency, magical ones
its mystery. Mechanical models are reductionist, magical ones holistic.
Historically, Western culture has seesawed back and forth between these
complementary points of view. The magical perspective enchants people with

the thrill of the forbidden, loses its appeal as people start to wonder what they’ve
been smoking, regains it as rationalists get cocky and claim they can purge the
world of mystery, and so it continues even today. This cycle has been a driving
force in scientific revolutions, and some historians see traces of it in the Bohr-
Einstein debates, with Einstein arguing for the rational comprehensibility of the
universe and Bohr for its ultimate incomprehensibility.
      *
One of the periodic revivals in magical thinking occurred in the fifteenth century.
Having transcribed and translated ancient philosophical writings by Aristotle,
Lucretius, and others, scholars turned to ancient Neoplatonist and Hermetic
texts. Interpreters such as Agrippa latched on to them as a refreshing break from
the fussy old scholastic ways.
Two features of magic, in particular, filled in the blind spots of mechanical
philosophy. First, it was empirical. At the time, experiment did not have a big
place in mainstream philosophy. Both the old-school scholastics and reformers
such as Descartes thought they could solve the mysteries of the universe just by
thinking hard. Believers in magic, on the other hand, thought nature defied
reason. To probe its mysteries, you had to buy some test tubes and get cracking.
Practitioners of magic sought not just to study but also to manipulate nature, so
as to make the world a better place. They were responsible for much of the
idealism of the Renaissance. In the “Oration on the Dignity of Man,” Giovanni
Pico della Mirandola, a twentysomething Hermetic and Kabbalist philosopher,
argued that humans’ status comes not from our position in the cosmic scheme of
things, but from what we decide to make of ourselves. For that noble sentiment,
the pope had him arrested. Among those he inspired was Shakespeare. The
Hamlet soliloquy “What a piece of work is a man” uses strikingly similar
language, and a utopian magician is the protagonist of The Tempest.
Would-be wizards failed utterly in the goals they set for themselves.
Alchemists could not turn lead to gold, astrologers could not divine the fate of
kings, and potion makers could not cure the spleen with green lizard urine. But
as John Lennon sang, life is what happens while you’re busy making other plans.
Alchemists and astrologers developed advanced experimental techniques
(hermetic seals, for example) and amassed reams of data, laying the foundations

of modern chemistry, medicine, and astronomy. The empirical, idealistic bent of
magic provided a model for the pioneers of modern experimental science, who,
like scientists of all eras, fancied themselves as rebels. The Englishman Francis
Bacon wrote: “The aim of magic is to recall natural philosophy from the vanity
of speculations to the importance of experiments.”
The second benefit of magic was to nudge philosophers to think outside the
mechanical box. It suggested ways for objects to interact besides crashing
together—namely, nonlocal ways. The concept of gravity descends from the
magical notion of sympathies: objects fall because they are seeking out others of
their kind. Earth coheres because stone attracts stone. These magical antecedents
are evident in the work of the astronomer Johannes Kepler in the early 1600s.
His books read like blog posts. They fess up about false leads, leaps of faith, and
crises of self-doubt. He was never one for academic formality: “Woe to me, here
I blundered” is more like it. And he was forthright about his mystical inspiration.
Kepler cast horoscopes for a living, and, though dubious that he or any other
astrologer could predict specific events, took it for granted that heavenly motions
guided earthly happenings. He argued that if the Moon were watery, as people at
the time generally thought, it would naturally tug on Earth’s oceans and raise the
tides. Magnetism, which was also taken to be a magical force, could fine-tune
planet orbits.
Mechanical purists were unsympathetic. Galileo Galilei thought Kepler had
gone over to the dark side, lending “his assent to the moon’s dominion over the
waters, to occult properties, and to such puerilities.” Kepler’s ideas orbited on
the fringes of mainstream philosophy for half a century, until Newton
appreciated how right he had been.
      *
One historian has called Newton “the great amphibian.” He was both mechanist
and magician. Like many of his contemporaries, especially in England, Newton
was broadly persuaded by Descartes’ mechanical theory, yet disillusioned by its
failings. As if its troubles explaining celestial motions weren’t enough, the
Cartesian clockwork was barely one tick away from atheism. What need was
there for God if the wonders of nature reduced to the mindless grinding of gears
and springs? Although Descartes had written a role for God into his model, it

was rather lame—plainly just a fig leaf to avoid a knock on his door from the
pope’s agents. Other prominent atomists, notably Thomas Hobbes, gave up the
pretense and came out as flaming atheists. For his English compatriots, this was
beyond the pale. They were committed to religion, both intellectually and as a
matter of self-preservation.
To bring atomism into harmony with religion, Newton and other English
philosophers in the mid-1600s fused it with ideas from alchemy, Neoplatonism,
and Kabbalah. They thought particles could be animated by “active principles”
or a “subtle spirit,” as Newton put it. In practical terms, particles could exert and
respond to forces that act nonlocally. Forces gave the universe some divine
sparkle; though not literally spirits, they bore witness to God’s design.
So, if gravity seems magical, that’s because it is magical. The theory that
Newton published in 1687 in his magnum opus, the Principia, was still mostly
mechanical: the world consists of moving particles obeying strict laws. But it
assimilated the magical idea that those particles are linked by a web of nonlocal
forces. Newton’s concept of gravitation differed from its magical precursors in
that it is universal: it isn’t limited to objects that have an obvious affinity for one
another—stone for stone, water for water—but draws together anything that has
mass. It also differed from orthodox mechanical models in that mass is not a
geometric property but something lying beyond the scope of reductionist
explanation.
For historians, this saga is a case study of how treacherous it is to draw a line
between science and not-science. Gilbert, Copernicus, Bacon, Kepler, and
Newton, like scientists of all eras, were intellectual magpies, weaving their
theories out of whatever scraps they could find. The more flamboyant the scraps,
the more original the nest. You can tell creative scholars by their eclectic views.
Or as one theorist put it to me: “All good physicists intellectually sleep around.”
Not that you would know it from reading most scientific books and papers. Like
teenagers who swear that their parents never did anything for them, scientists
have a way of co-opting ideas from other sources and then denying they had
done any such thing. Magic? What magic? Who said anything about magic? But
Newton’s contemporaries knew perfectly well where his ideas had come from—
and the followers of Descartes weren’t about to take it lying down.

The Gravity Wars
On March 7, 1693, the renowned German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz wrote a
letter to Newton congratulating him on his new theory of gravity, which neatly
explained all those phenomena that atomists had struggled to account for:
falling, tides, planetary motion. There was no knocking its empirical success.
But Leibniz wanted to know what explained gravity. Following in the tradition
of Democritus and Descartes, he thought that the nonlocality of gravity had to be
an illusion. If you looked closely enough, you should see some local mechanism
that causes dropped objects to fall and planets to trundle around the Sun. How
else could the world make sense?
Leibniz wrote letters as we write e-mails. Over his life he sent fifteen
thousand letters to eleven hundred people. To this day, they have yet to be fully
cataloged. And these weren’t tossed-off one-liners; many were extended essays
that broke open whole new areas of science and mathematics. Like today’s
frazzled e-mailers, Leibniz complained about information overload. “I cannot
tell you how extraordinarily distracted and spread out I am,” he wrote to a friend.
Leibniz never met Newton, but for several decades he and his compatriots
conducted a debate-by-post with Newton and his. It culminated in five rounds of
letters between Leibniz and the English philosopher Samuel Clarke, an exchange
that ended only when Leibniz died in 1716. By then the initial cordiality had
degenerated into a flame war. The correspondence is rich in ideas, but when I
read it I’m struck by how little Leibniz and Clarke really engaged with each
other; each kept asserting and reasserting his position, never giving his opponent
the benefit of the doubt. To be fair, disagreements over such a foundational
question as the nature of space couldn’t have been resolved with a smile and a
handshake, because people didn’t even agree on what would qualify as a
satisfying resolution.
For Leibniz and other critics of Newtonian theory, such a resolution had to
involve a mechanical explanation. By failing to give one, Newton was
suggesting that gravity was not just unexplained but unexplainable—a magic
trick we could never figure out. Leibniz wrote to Clarke: “That means of
communication (says he) is invisible, intangible, not mechanical. He might as

well have added, inexplicable, unintelligible, precarious, groundless and
unexampled…’Tis a chimerical thing, a scholastic occult quantity.”
Newton openly admitted he didn’t know how gravity worked: “I have not
been able to discover the cause of those properties of gravity from phenomena,
and I frame no hypotheses.” He basically accepted Leibniz’s jibe that gravity
was “occult”—brought about by hidden causes—but didn’t think it mattered.
You may not know what causes gravity, but if you just accept its existence,
almost every known fact about the universe falls into place, and that’s good
enough.
      *
Following Newton’s lead, modern physicists think of any theory as having two
separate functions. First, the theory should provide a mathematical description:
formulas that let you calculate how fast an apple falls, when the Moon will
eclipse the Sun, or what have you. Second, the theory should provide an
“interpretation” of the formulas: a compelling picture of what’s going on with
that apple or moon. For Leibniz and most other philosophers prior to Newton,
the second was paramount. Their prime goal was to make the universe
comprehensible. But with Newton, the first gained the upper hand. If you have to
choose between description and explanation, physicists figure it’s better to have
description. By learning to live with your ignorance, you free yourself to make
progress little by little. You can try to fill in the explanation later, and in the
meantime you’ve got some handy formulas that convince your mom you’re
doing something useful with your life.
Modern physicists call interpretation a “philosophical” issue, implying that it
requires a different frame of mind or a different academic discipline altogether.
They spend their working hours doing calculations and can be at a loss for words
when you ask them what’s actually going on out there in the real world. If
anything, they regard interpretation as suspect. An insistence on explanation had
forced the atomists to come up with some idea, any idea, just for the sake of
having a simple, comprehensible worldview. So perhaps it’s better to focus on
what we do know: observed facts. “Nothing is more requisite for a true
philosopher, than to restrain the intemperate desire of searching into causes,”
wrote a prominent proponent of this view, the eighteenth-century Scottish

philosopher David Hume.
Taken to extremes, this attitude is known as instrumentalism, which treats
theories merely as mathematical tools, or instruments, for cataloging facts. “Shut
up and calculate” is the instrumentalists’ slogan. This no-nonsense, just-the-
facts-ma’am view of science cycles in and out of fashion. Widespread in the
decades after Newton, it became popular again in the mid-nineteenth century,
and again in the early-to mid-twentieth. Not coincidentally, these were periods of
scientific revolution. When physicists introduce a controversial theory, they
often, as Newton did, reassure their colleagues (and themselves) that it’s really
just a tool for doing calculations. If you can’t fathom how the theory could be
true, no worries—you don’t need to believe it to use it. A spoonful of
instrumentalism helps the radical idea go down.
Ultimately, though, instrumentalism is just a tactical retreat. In the end most
people still crave a picture of what the universe is really like, what lies under the
surface of our perceptions. After all, how can physics theories work so well if
they don’t capture some element of the truth? Young people, in particular, get
frustrated when professors tell them not to worry their pretty little heads about
what’s really going on. A remarkable number of the most innovative scientists in
history say they learned their chosen subject on their own because no one would
teach it to them in class.
What’s more, interpretation is not just an after-the-fact gloss on the equations,
but the creative spark of science. After all, how do physicists come up with
equations to begin with? Almost always, they have some specific physical
picture in their head—in Newton’s case, magical sympathies. Once physicists
have developed equations on the basis of these mental images, they can kick
away the interpretation and let the equations stand on their own, just as Newton
distanced himself (at least in public) from magic. Any given set of equations has
multiple interpretations, so physicists need not commit themselves to the one
that got them there. They are free to come up with new interpretations, some of
which will inspire new theories and new equations, and so the cycle continues.
But they can never do without interpretation at all. There’s no sharp boundary
between philosophical issues and physical issues, merely a porous border with
lots of trade across it.

      *
Indeed, despite Newton’s vow not to frame hypotheses for the workings of
gravity, he did in fact frame a number of hypotheses—three broad categories of
them, each of which gained adherents. First, maybe gravity involved a local,
mechanical process after all. On the face of it, this option seemed like a
nonstarter. Newton’s law that the strength of gravity depends on the mass of an
object surely dealt it a knockout blow. If the only way that particles impart a
force is by colliding, their effects should depend on exterior surface area—how
big a target an object presents—rather than on mass. Yet Newton still toyed with
mechanical ideas, and one of his best friends, the Swiss mathematician Nicolas
Fatio de Duillier, came up with an ingenious solution to the mass problem. If our
planet were like a giant Wiffle Ball, riddled with tiny pores, particles from the
outside could enter and collide with matter deep in the interior, and the force
would indeed depend on the total amount of matter—that is, on mass. The theory
failed to win converts less because of its failings than because of Fatio’s: the
man eventually managed to antagonize both Newton and Leibniz and fell in with
a group of violent religious fanatics.
Second, maybe there was some way, besides collisions, for things to interact
locally and produce a gravitational force. Newton and Clarke wrote of an
“immaterial,” “incorporeal,” or “intangible” medium that would act as an
intermediary, transmitting gravity from one object to another. These words have
various connotations, such as God or spirits, but at their most basic they just
mean something that does not consist of particles and does not respect the usual
atomist rules about inhabiting space. Material particles are impenetrable; if one
occupies a volume of space, nothing else can occupy the same volume. But an
immaterial medium would not occupy a volume of space exclusively; it could
intermingle with other things. Thus it could penetrate the interior of planets,
explaining why the strength of gravity depends on mass rather than surface area.
Leibniz, for his part, developed a theory of immaterial entities called “monads”
that underlie our observed reality. Although he was never able to connect these
monads to anything that can be seen directly, later philosophers such as
Immanuel Kant picked up on the concept, and through them Leibniz’s ideas
inspired the concept of electric and magnetic fields.
Newton came tantalizingly close to identifying an immaterial medium

capable of transmitting gravity: space itself. For him, space was a manifestation
of God’s omnipresence. He saw gravitation in the same way: the force leaps
from one place to another because God already exists in both places. If gravity
and space are associated with God’s ubiquity, then gravity and space are
associated with each other. Leibniz, too, implicitly associated gravitation with
the nature of space. He thought his monads gave rise to our perceptions both of
space and of action at a distance. To be sure, neither Newton nor Leibniz ever
said that space caused gravity. Neither man thought space was capable of acting.
It was Einstein who made that leap.
The above two interpretations say that gravity acts as if it were nonlocal. The
third interpretation drops the “as if” and suggests that objects really do tug on
one another across space. An early proponent of this option was Roger Cotes, an
English mathematician who helped Newton revise the Principia for its second
edition in 1713. Some historians think nonlocality may have been Newton’s own
favored idea, too. It’s hard to tell. In one much-quoted letter, Newton appeared to
call nonlocality “inconceivable … an absurdity,” but when you read the quote in
context, it might have been referring to atheism. In other writings, he merrily
invoked nonlocal forces for lots of phenomena besides gravity, including light
reflection and refraction, vapor diffusion, gas pressure, material cohesion, and
heat. Newton never came out and declared that gravity is nonlocal, but that
might have been because he didn’t want to alienate mechanical purists even
more than he already had.
      *
Those who came of age in the decades after the Principia saw forces acting at a
distance as perfectly reasonable. With notable exceptions, eighteenth-century
scholars felt no need to conjure up some local explanation or make
instrumentalist excuses. They extended the principles of gravity to the other
examples of nonlocality that had cast a pall over physics. Benjamin Franklin, for
example, put America on the scientific map by explaining electricity as a fluid of
attracting and repelling particles, which were tacitly nonlocal. Others proposed
such fluids for magnetism, chemical reactions, and much besides.
In fact, prevailing wisdom did a backflip. It was locality that started to seem
unreasonable. Leave aside gravity, electricity, and magnetism: even the

supposedly simple collision of two billiard balls made people smack their
foreheads in dismay. Why do the balls rebound? Leading proponents of locality
such as Democritus, Descartes, and Leibniz had wondered about that
themselves. When the balls touch, are they still two balls, or have they become
one? How does the effect propagate from the impact site to the other side of each
ball? Do the balls really make an instant U-turn, which would entail an infinitely
fast change of velocity?
Kant knew a thing or two about billiards. The eighteenth-century German
überphilosopher played so well that his winnings helped pay his way through
college. Kant was a key figure in sinking pre-Newtonian notions of locality. His
overarching interest was to analyze how we know what we know, or think we
know. Locality was an example of a familiar idea that, on closer inspection, is
suspect. In daily life, we observe that we need to touch objects to get them to
move. But the truth is that we never touch anything. Rather, we exert forces on
them, and they on us. These forces account for the resistance we feel when we
squeeze a ball or try to stick our arm through a solid wall. Familiar objects are
actually mostly empty space. When we talk of “matter,” we really mean a
continuum of forces, as opposed to the constituent particles, which always
remain inaccessible to us.
The original appeal of locality had been that a single mode of interaction—
direct contact—could explain everything. When Newton added a second mode—
nonlocal forces—he seemed at first to complicate matters, but Kant and others
explained away contact and restored the earlier simplicity. If you watch in slow
motion the collision of two billiard balls, you will see not a sharp rebound but a
gradual reversal. As the balls approach, they exert a repulsive force on each
other, which slows them down, stops them, and sends them back the way they
came. They never actually come into contact. Whereas the old mechanical
philosophers had sought to explain nonlocal forces in terms of local interactions,
the new mechanical philosophers reduced local forces to nonlocal interactions.
Newtonian gravitation had come into the world struggling for acceptance, but
it became the new orthodoxy. In 1872 the Austrian physicist-philosopher Ernst
Mach described this turn of events. He argued that scientists explain phenomena
by relating the unfamiliar to the familiar, the uncommon to the common. What is
“common” might not really be any more intelligible than the uncommon, as we

realize when a five-year-old asks how a common household appliance works and
we fumble for an answer. But we’re more comfortable accepting it. After all, we
have to take something as the bottom level of reality, and it needs to be
something that we can live with. Mach wrote: “Simplest facts, to which we
reduce the more complicated ones, are always unintelligible in themselves, that
is to say, they are not further resolvable … People usually reduce uncommon
unintelligibilities to common ones.”
But what we deem “common” can shift. Prior to Newton, it meant direct
impact. After him, nonlocal forces came to seem common. “The Newtonian
theory of gravitation, on its appearance, disturbed almost all investigators of
nature because it was founded on an uncommon unintelligibility,” Mach wrote.
“People tried to reduce gravitation to pressure and impact. At the present day
gravitation no longer disturbs anybody; it has become a common
unintelligibility.” How ironic: even before Mach penned these words, the
pendulum had started to swing back, and physicists were again coming around to
the idea that the universe had to be local after all.

Questioning Sir Isaac
The renaissance of locality had begun in 1786 with some dead frogs hanging
from an iron railing. The Italian physician Luigi Galvani was doing experiments
on how static electric shocks cause animal muscles to contract. One day he saw
the frogs’ legs twitch on their own, even when he wasn’t deliberately zapping
them, and it dawned on him that animal tissue didn’t just respond to electricity,
but could also generate it. Metal and amphibian formed what we now call a
battery, and in 1800 another Italian, Alessandro Volta, built a practical one by
substituting a wet piece of cardboard for the frog. Not only did batteries give
experimenters an amazing new plaything, their very existence shocked those of a
Newtonian frame of mind, who held that chemicals and electricity involved
different types of nonlocal fluids and should not have been interconvertible.
The timing was fortuitous. Within philosophy, Kant’s questioning of what our
rational minds were able to grasp had stirred a rebellion against mechanistic
thinking—a movement known as German Romanticism and, under that general
rubric, a school of thought known as Naturphilosophie. Naturphilosophie
represented one of the periodic revivals of magical thinking. Adherents were
fascinated by Renaissance occult figures and Eastern mysticism. They
considered nature’s diverse forces, including both electricity and magnetism,
different expressions of an organic unity. Practitioners of Naturphilosophie
looked to experiment to discern this unity and make use of it for human needs.
Their ranks included some of the greatest experimental scientists of the early
nineteenth century.
Among them was the Danish experimenter Hans Christian Ørsted—not a
doctor, as so many revolutionaries in science had been, but close: a pharmacist.
He built his first battery shortly after hearing of Volta’s invention and was soon
hacking his own designs. At the time, experimental data backed up the
Newtonian view that electricity and magnetism were unconnected. Static
electricity causes no magnetic effects. But Ørsted figured that a flowing electric
current might. And he was right. In 1820 Ørsted found that a wire connected to a
battery can cause a nearby compass needle to pivot. Yet again a cozy consensus
had been upset by ideas that most scientists had dismissed as unscientific.

Not only did Ørsted show that electricity and magnetism were related after all
but that the nature of the relation was very un-Newtonian. The electric current
did not push or pull on the compass needle, but spun it. That posed a serious
challenge for nonlocal forces. Those forces are supposed to be like private
hotlines between the two affected objects, acting as though the rest of the
universe weren’t even there. It stands to reason that the force should act along
the straight line connecting the two, because it’s blind to other objects or
locations that might define an alternative direction. Ørsted’s twitching compass
violated this intuition. To spin the needle, the current had to be acting laterally
rather than directly toward or away from the wire. As a further sign that a local
rather than nonlocal process was involved, the spinning needle reminded people
of the swirling motions that Democritus and Descartes had talked about as a
mechanism for magnetism and gravitation.
While all this was going on, another branch of physics was undergoing its
own upheaval: optics. Most everyone at the time accepted Newton’s atomistic
explanation of light as a stream of particles. But another doctor, Thomas Young
in England, took his inspiration from the flow of water and other fluids. Like
Aristotle, he thought light was an impulse conveyed through a medium that
filled space. This explanation had been popular among medieval scholastics. In
1803 Young hit upon an experiment that would restore its popularity.
Imagine a sunny day, a window with a dark curtain, and a white wall opposite
the window. If you cut a slit in the curtain, a little spot appears on the wall. If
you cut a second slit in the curtain, the wall doesn’t just show a second spot, as
you might expect and as Newton’s particle theory of light predicted. Instead, the
wall is covered in a pattern like zebra stripes: alternating bright and dark bands
called fringes. In fact, even though cutting a second slit lets more light through,
the original spot typically gets dimmer. But it all makes sense if light is a wave
in an invisible medium. The waves passing through the two slits overlap and can
cancel out or mutually reinforce. In places where the peak of one wave coincides
with the peak of the other, the wave becomes extra-strong, creating a bright
band; where a peak coincides with a trough, the wave gets zeroed out, for a dark
band. The effect is known as wave interference. Young’s experiment is a physics
classic. You can do it yourself (the trick is to make the holes as small as possible
and use a laser pointer as your light source, rather than the Sun). In fact,

nonlocality experiments like those I mentioned in chapter 1 are a fancy version
of Young’s experiment.
2.1. Two-slit experiment. If you open a slit in a dark curtain, light waves will illuminate a spot on a screen.
If you open two slits, the waves will overlap and create a striped pattern, called “interference fringes.”
(Illustration by Jen Christensen)
As compelling as it was, Young’s idea languished for a decade and a half. The
breakthrough was not a specific discovery, but the fall of Napoleon. Under the
emperor, Newtonian scholars in France had shut out rival theories. Even in
England, people were apt to misinterpret Young’s work. Only when the
Newtonians’ political and intellectual authority weakened did latent interest in
the wave nature of light come into the open. General opinion swung in its favor
by the 1820s—just as Ørsted was revolutionizing the study of electricity and
magnetism.

      *
These two challenges to Newtonian theory met in the person of Michael Faraday.
Faraday is one of the most fascinating figures in the history of science, an
example of how inquiry benefits from diversity. Born into a poor London family,
Faraday barely went to school. He became a bookbinder’s apprentice and got
interested in science while reading a volume of the Encyclopedia Britannica that
a customer had left in the shop. He borrowed a shilling from his brother to attend
a science lecture and built his own battery on the mantelpiece at the back of the
shop. Before long he talked himself into a job with the most famous chemist in
Britain, Humphry Davy, who had spent time in Germany with the Romantics
there and shared their vision of unity in nature.
Faraday became a leading figure in physics just as physics was becoming
physics as opposed to a branch of philosophy. The word “physicist” was coined
in 1840. When you ask scientists today, they differentiate between physics and
philosophy based on the importance of experiments. But historically the schism
was a rebranding strategy, part of the general standardization and
professionalization of academic disciplines in the nineteenth century.
Faraday never learned math, and it’s a good thing for the rest of us that he
didn’t. The mathematical elegance of Newtonian theory meant nothing to him,
so he felt completely free to explore radical concepts. For him, the most
straightforward interpretation of Ørsted’s discovery was that nature is local after
all. Equally, though, Faraday recognized that scientists couldn’t turn the clock
back to atomist theories in which objects influence one another only by
colliding. There had to be some other way for things to interact locally.
He thought the light theorists were onto something with their notion of
influences 
sweeping 
through 
an 
all-pervading 
medium. 
Although
electromagnetism seemed like an utterly different phenomenon from light, it,
too, hinted at a medium. If you sprinkle iron filings onto a magnet, they arrange
themselves into graceful arcs called lines of force, which bear an uncanny
resemblance to the strain pattern that develops in any elastic material when you
stretch it. To Faraday, the filings were like dark soot collecting on the body of an
invisible man: they gave away the medium’s presence.
But what kind of medium could this be? Faraday originally pictured it as an
ordinary substance made of little particles, each individually obeying Newton’s

laws of motion. But it gradually dawned on him that the electromagnetic
medium could be no ordinary substance. For one thing, whereas only one
ordinary object can occupy a given space at a time, this medium coexisted with
other things. The arcs formed by iron filings don’t stop at the poles of a magnet,
but continue through the body of the magnet and close back on themselves in a
loop; the lines of force thread through matter, existing independently of it. So
Faraday and others imagined the medium as a new category of stuff—an
immaterial medium or continuum of force like the one that Newton, Leibniz,
Kant, and others once speculated about. In 1845 Faraday introduced the term by
which we know this medium today: the “field.”
The field surrounds us and infuses us; we are swimming in it and it is always
tugging on us. We never see it directly, but it makes its presence felt by
communicating forces from one place to another. The field is local in two senses.
First, an electromagnet does not magically reach across space to tug on a metal
paper clip. The paper clip is affected only by the condition of the field at its
location, just as a water bug can be placidly floating on the surface of a pond,
oblivious to children splashing in the water on the other shore. Second, the
electromagnet takes time to exert its effect. When you first turn it on, the paper
clip does not instantly feel a force. The effect must sweep through the field until
it reaches the paper clip and causes it to snap toward the magnet, just as
splashing in the water sends ripples across the pond, eventually swamping the
poor bug. The same logic applies to electric forces. If you rub a latex balloon on
your sleeve and hold it next to your head, it does not instantly tousle your hair.
Rather, it disturbs the electric field and the effects spread across the gap between
balloon and hair, eventually altering the condition of the field at your scalp.
      *
Faraday’s field concept failed to catch on at first. Skeptics insisted on seeing
formulas, and Faraday, the mathematical illiterate, had none to offer. But his
ideas electrified a younger generation of mathematical whizzes, notably the
Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell, who turned Faraday’s intuitions into
equations. To capture fields mathematically, Maxwell used a system familiar to
anyone who has watched a weather report. A weather map displays lots of
numbers and little arrows that tell you the temperature, wind speed, wind

direction, and so on at various sites. Likewise, Maxwell represented the electric
and magnetic fields by little arrows that indicate the strength and direction of the
field at points in space. Grids of numbers tell you how the field pushes on
electrically charged objects or magnetic compass needles. Maxwell’s famous
equations predict how these quantities change over time.
Today you can buy T-shirts with the equations silk-screened onto them. They
are the epitome of the elegant theory to which all physicists aspire. In addition to
the magnetic and electric fields, the universe is laced by dozens of other
intermingling fields, corresponding to the sundry forces of nature. For all
Maxwell’s success, though, the meaning of his equations was hazy. Did they
really respect the principle of locality? They seemed to, but appearances can
deceive. For one thing, although Maxwell had designed his equations to depict
forces acting locally, he admitted they could equally well portray forces acting
nonlocally. On that interpretation, space would not be filled with a tangible
medium; it would be mostly empty, with some objects scattered here and there,
pulling and pushing on one another from afar. The numbers assigned to spatial
points would describe a hypothetical: If you placed an object at such-and-such a
location, how would all the other objects in the universe act on it? Maxwell’s
theory therefore sparked the same kind of interpretational debate as Newton’s
law of gravity had done two centuries earlier.
Three features of fields affirmed they are real. First, fields have a life of their
own. They are not merely middlemen conveying impulses from one object to
another. They can rouse themselves into action, independent of matter; a space
completely devoid of particles can still be humming with wave activity. This
phenomenon is alien to the nonlocal picture. Second, electrical and magnetic
disturbances take time to exert their effects. A time lag seems odd if forces are
leaping directly from one object to another, but is perfectly natural if an impulse
must make its way through a medium. In fact, the speed at which these effects
propagate equals the speed of light. Evidently, light is an electromagnetic wave.
Finally, fields contain energy, the very essence of real things (and a fairly new
concept in physics at the time). Their ability to store energy ensures that none
goes missing in the time it takes for a disturbance to propagate through space.

2.2. Magnetic field. The magnetic field fills the space in and around a bar magnet. It exerts a force of a
certain strength and direction on magnetic objects such as iron filings. (Illustration by the author)
These three criteria—waves, time delay, energy—persuaded most of

Maxwell’s contemporaries that fields provide a local explanation for electrical
and magnetic forces. Conventional wisdom did yet another backflip: nonlocality
went from orthodoxy to “a very old but most pernicious heresy” and
“unthinkable.” In the sweep of history, these remarks have a familiar ring. Here
again was a generation of physicists making confident declarations that
contradicted the confident declarations of earlier generations. In fact, the
bravado hid some unease.

Renewed Troubles for Locality
Fin-de-siècle physicists fretted that they had two separate theories:
electromagnetism and mechanics. A big jagged crack ran down their view of the
world, which not only spoiled their dream of simplicity, but also left them at a
loss to solve various practical problems. To track baseballs and planets, they
applied Newton’s laws. To build generators and electromagnets, they applied
Maxwell’s equations. But what were they to do in situations that mix up motion
with electromagnetism? How does a moving object affect electric and magnetic
fields, and vice versa?
The two theories seemed downright incompatible. One of the central features
of Newton’s laws, gravity, had no place in Maxwell’s theory. Whereas electrical
and magnetic forces can either push or pull, gravity always pulls. Also, the
gravitational field satisfied none of the criteria that had demonstrated the reality
of electric and magnetic fields. For instance, observers saw no sign that gravity
took time to propagate. According to an influential (though, in retrospect,
wrong) estimate, gravity zipped across space instantaneously. At the beginning
of the century, gravity had been a model for the other forces; by the end, it was a
disconcerting outlier.
An even more basic problem was that Maxwell’s equations single out a
certain speed as special—the speed of light—yet Newton’s laws say there is no
such thing as “the” speed of anything. In those laws, speed is always relative.
Relative to the person who throws it, a baseball might be flying at 20 mph;
relative to someone watching from a moving train, 100 mph; relative to an
astronaut on the space station, 17,000 mph. If, instead of throwing a ball, the
person shines a flashlight, how fast are the light waves moving relative to those
onlookers? 
Years 
later, 
one 
physicist 
would 
recall 
reading 
about
electromagnetism at age sixteen and wondering: If you moved at the speed of
light, would the waves look like they’re standing still? Some theorists thought
yes, others no. Experiments were equally contradictory.
One theorist who puzzled over the incompatibility of mechanics and
electromagnetism was the Dutchman Hendrik Lorentz. His daughter Geertruida,
who grew up to be a respected physicist in her own right, reminisced that she

and her siblings teasingly called their father a polar bear, on account of how he
rhythmically paced back and forth in his basement study like a bear in a cage.
During these ursine perambulations, he came up with a way to reconcile
mechanics and electromagnetism. He argued that electromagnetism is actually
the deeper of the two theories. It could account for Newton’s laws of motion and
perhaps even of gravity. In Lorentz’s approach, there was such a thing as “the”
speed of objects, determined by the electromagnetic medium. If you’re moving
at waves’ native speed, they’ll appear motionless.
Lorentz had a ready reply to experimental results that suggested otherwise:
physicists were being fooled by the experimental design. To measure speed, they
needed a yardstick, and they needed to trust that the yardstick would provide a
reliable standard of length. This trust was misplaced. Lorentz reasoned that when
a yardstick is in motion, the electromagnetic field will resist that motion,
squeezing it lengthwise like a falling raindrop flattened by the air drag. This
effect will throw off the measurement and mislead experimenters into thinking
that the speed of light relative to the apparatus never varies. In short, although
you have some true, absolute velocity, electromagnetism foils your attempts to
measure it.
On a purely practical level, Lorentz’s theory was a huge success, and in 1902
earned him a newly minted honor: the Nobel prize. But it did seem rather sneaky
of nature to play such tricks on experimenters. And the theory created some new
problems of its own. Physicists and philosophers had been vacillating for
thousands of years between discrete particles and continuous media, but Lorentz
combined both into his theory, with awkward consequences. For instance, the
electric field should convey influences not just from each charged particle to
every other, but also from each particle to itself. This self-referential loop would
create paradoxes. A particle would begin to accelerate before you applied a force
to it, as though it were psychic. The ability of a particle to see slightly into its
own future could be used to send messages from one place to another infinitely
fast.
As if that weren’t enough, the theory predicted that particles would explode
under the pressure of their own pent-up electric field. To explain why the
particles of the universe aren’t popping off like firecrackers, physicists reckoned
that they must be true geometric points of zero size. Nothing so insubstantial

would be capable of blowing up. But as Zeno had pointed out two thousand
years earlier, a point is a paradoxical thing. Any time the number zero appears in
physics, the number infinity can’t be far behind. If the electric field is focused to
an infinitesimal point, it becomes infinitely strong. For analogous reasons, if the
wavelength of light can be any number all the way down to zero, a box filled
with light waves would have an infinite capacity to store energy. Such a box
would suck in energy like a black hole, not because of its gravitational force, but
because of its unlimited storage capacity—like people on the TV show Hoarders
who are such pack rats that things disappear into their house, never to be seen
again.
In short, whenever physicists attempted to describe particles interacting
locally, whether by colliding or by sending out ripples in fields, they kept
encountering the word “infinity.” Some physicists came to question not just
Lorentz’s theory but the concept of fields and the principle of locality. The
trouble that nineteenth-century physicists were having with the disunity of their
subject closely mirrors the situation we face today, in which theorists struggle to
reconcile gravity with the other forces of nature. Soon, that young man who had
posed the question about light waves at age sixteen would come of age and sort
this mess out.

3
Einstein’s Locality
As a college student, Einstein blew off a lot of his classes. He didn’t think much
of how physics was taught. His professors left out all the fun stuff, not least the
ferment that Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism had stirred. Einstein spent
much of his time sitting in Café Metropole in Zurich and delving into the great
works of philosophy: Hume, Kant, Mach. If not for his friends’ class notes, he
might never have graduated. For their part, his professors found him a bit too full
of himself and gave him negative job references. Laboratory directors across
Europe would later have to live down the fact they had rejected job applications
from Albert Einstein, of all people.
In the earliest years of his career, Einstein didn’t attach much importance to
locality. He was a Newtonian. For his first scientific papers, he assumed that
particles acted on one another at a distance. If Newton’s laws clashed with
Maxwell’s equations, so much the worse for Maxwell. In particular, if Newton’s
laws hold that all velocities are relative, then the velocity of light had to be
relative, whatever Maxwell’s equations might suggest. So Einstein tweaked
those equations to make the speed of light relative to its source, creating a new
version of electromagnetic theory that was nonlocal. And that’s when he had a
change of heart. The revised theory did so much violence to Maxwell’s original
version that experiments appeared to rule it out. What is more, it predicted that
some people would see electromagnetism obey Maxwell’s equations in their
native form, while others would see a distorted version—a prospect that

offended Einstein’s egalitarian instincts.
In a quintessential eureka moment, Einstein realized that velocities can be
relative and light can set an absolute velocity standard. There’s no contradiction,
as everyone had thought. You just have to be careful about what a relative
velocity is. The usual rule embodied in Newton’s laws is that you calculate
relative velocity by addition or subtraction: a 20-mph baseball thrown at an
oncoming 80-mph train is moving at 100 mph relative to a passenger. Yet this
rule contains a tacit and unwarranted assumption of instantaneous
communication or, equivalently, of nonlocality.
Einstein realized this when he thought about what is actually involved in
comparing velocities. He used—indeed, he pioneered—one of modern
physicists’ favorite styles of reasoning, called “operational” reasoning, in which
you ask how you know what you know. Often you discover you had no
justification for your beliefs and that those beliefs are in fact wrong. By the way,
this technique can make progress on all sorts of disputes. To elevate a political
debate, ask how something happens. For instance, if someone supports or
opposes single-payer health care, ask how health insurance actually works.
People who are very sure of their opinions will be forced to confront their own
ignorance or at least admit that the issue isn’t so clear-cut.
In the case of relative velocities, Einstein pointed out that, for the ball-
thrower and train passenger to measure the ball’s velocity, each needs a
stopwatch. And they can’t take for granted that their watches keep the same
time. That’s something they need to establish by comparing clock readings,
which requires them to exchange some kind of signal. If the signal zaps between
them instantly, they can confirm that an hour for one person is the same as an
hour for the other. But if the signal transmission takes time, they can’t be so sure,
because they will shift position while the signal is en route, creating a lag. Nor
do they really know that a mile for one is a mile for the other. A length
measurement is implicitly conducted at one instant in time, which assumes a
signal can travel instantaneously from one end of an object to the other. If
observers are restricted to signals moving at a limited speed, the measurement
could be thrown off by their or the object’s motion.
Einstein found an alternative to the Newtonian velocity-addition rule that
takes the signal transmission time into account while still ensuring that the ball-

thrower’s perspective and the train passenger’s perspective are perfectly
equivalent. By this rule, the combined velocity is less than the straight sum. For
the passenger, the ball is moving ever so slightly slower than 100 mph. The
faster the ball is thrown, the more its relative velocity deviates from the
Newtonian expectation. If, as nineteenth-century theorists had wondered, the
person on the ground shines a flashlight rather than throwing a ball, the light
waves will be moving at 670 million mph relative to him and 670 million mph
relative to the passenger. The passenger’s own motion ceases to matter. Thus
light moves at a velocity that all observers agree upon, even though observers’
own velocities are always relative.
Einstein’s rethinking of relative velocity accounted for all the experiments
that puzzled his contemporaries. The discrepancies evaporated; there was no
need to suspect that nature was maliciously foiling experimenters. These
successes disabused him of his earlier willingness to countenance nonlocality.
      *
By confirming that all velocities are relative, Einstein relieved the main tension
between the laws of motion and of electromagnetism. Even those college
professors who had found Einstein maddening as a student were impressed, and
one of them pointed out some repercussions the impudent young genius had
missed. When you start mucking with a basic concept like speed, you do a lot
more than solve one puzzle. Speed is defined within space and time, so
Einstein’s reinterpretation of it transformed what physicists mean by those
concepts. Because people moving at different speeds can’t keep their watches in
sync, time intervals depend on their speed; so do spatial distances, for related
reasons. But the combination of time interval and spatial distance—the
spatiotemporal “distance”—does not depend on speed; it’s an objective fact that
everyone can agree on. This is how Einstein’s theory of relativity achieves its
renowned unification of space and time into a single concept, spacetime. To
today’s physicists, this union is the real meaning of the theory, and the business
with trains and signals was just one means to discover it.
We still perceive spacetime as space and time, but no person has a monopoly
on the division of spacetime into “space” and “time.” What is purely spatial for
one observer is a combination of spatial and temporal for another. To a train

passenger, the newspaper on his or her lap is “here” (a purely spatial
designation), but to someone watching from the ground, the newspaper is a
moving target (a mix of spatial and temporal). Those two people also have
different concepts of “now” and will disagree on what events occur at the same
time. The phrase “at the same time” is a four-letter word in relativity theory—
objectively there is no such thing.
One puzzle piece still didn’t fit in: the force of gravity. Relativity theory, in its
original version, applies only in the special case of zero gravity. In 1915 Einstein
rounded out the picture with his general theory of relativity, according to which
gravity is produced by a field analogous to the electromagnetic field. The arc of
a baseball in flight isn’t caused by a force that Earth exerts on the ball at a
distance, as Newton’s theory held. Instead, the ball is responding to the
gravitational field immediately around it. When Earth’s mass shifts around—for
instance, when geologic activity or ocean currents redistribute material—the
gravitational field changes slightly. This disturbance ripples outward through the
field at the speed of light and, as it passes through the baseball field, it reshapes
the gravitational field there, so that the next time you throw a ball, it might fall
ever so slightly faster or slower.
The gravitational field is not just any field, though. It plays a special role in
nature. All other fields are selective: the electromagnetic field, for example, acts
only on electrically charged objects, and the more strongly charged an object is,
the faster it will accelerate. In contrast, the gravitational field acts equally on all
objects. Everything accelerates downward at the same rate. The field thereby
marks out the path that all objects take in the absence of other forces. But that’s
the very function space has. So the gravitational field, according to Einstein, is
not located in space, but is a property of space. If the fabric of spacetime is like a
rug and a moving object like a marble rolling across the rug, then Earth’s
gravitational field is a bump that diverts the marble in a new direction.
Just as a plot twist in a novel doesn’t change the story up to that point, but can
still cause you to reassess earlier events—a character you thought was evil might
actually be the good guy—so did general relativity prompt physicists to
reappraise Newton’s theory of gravity. His theory isn’t strictly wrong, but
incomplete. It roughly captures the effects that gravity has, but fails to account
for how the force propagates. Relativity fleshes it out. It vindicates Newton’s and

Leibniz’s foggy intuitions that gravity has something to do with the nature of
space.

Locality Keeps Physics Sane
Einstein developed relativity theory by thinking about what locality means for
our measurements of time and length. In turn, his theory contains provisions that
enforce locality. Above all, relativity theory implies that nothing can travel faster
than light. Technically, the theory doesn’t forbid faster-than-light motion per se.
It says merely that light moves at the same speed for all observers. Under most
circumstances, though, this requirement translates into a universal speed limit. If
you could catch up to light, then, as the teenage Einstein mused, light would
appear to be standing still—it would no longer be moving at the same speed
relative to you as to everyone else. No matter how fast you go, how earnestly
you try, you can’t catch up. It is as futile as seeking the end of a rainbow.
In practice, if you try to accelerate an object to light speed, a kind of governor
rides the brakes, so that you have to work harder for each additional increment
of speed. That is why modern particle accelerators have to be so ginormous. The
hairline difference between 99.9999 percent of the speed of light (the speed of
particles in the old Tevatron accelerator at Fermilab) and 99.999999 percent (the
speed in the Large Hadron Collider) is a factor of 10 in energy. Reaching light
speed would take an infinite amount of energy.
      *
The universal speed limit rules out the infinitely fast nonlocal forces that Newton
postulated. What is more, like an enlightened parent who doesn’t just make
household rules but spells out their rationale, relativity theory doesn’t just ban
faster-than-light travel but clarifies exactly why it would be so troublesome.
First and foremost, breaking the speed limit would muck up sequences of
cause and effect. Different people would disagree not only on what “now” is, but
on what is “before” and “after.” To see why, go back to Einstein’s operational
mode of reasoning and ask yourself: How do I know the order that events occur
in? You need to observe those events using light or some other probe that takes
time to pass through space. If events occur in such rapid succession that light
cannot pass between them in time, observations of those events could conflict,
and people will disagree not just on the pace of events, but on the essence of

what happened.
For instance, go back to the train scenario and, this time, imagine you throw a
ball faster than light at a train that is moving away from you. The ball overtakes
the train, punches a hole through the rear car, flies the length of the train, and
exits the front. Or at least that’s how it looks to you. A passenger on the train
might see something different. It takes time for light from the ball’s violent entry
and exit to reach the passenger’s eyes, and in the interim, the train continues
moving forward, so that light coming from the rear of the train has to cover a
longer distance, and light from the front has a shorter trip. Consequently, the
passenger could see the ball punch through the front of the train before it
punches through the rear. In fact, the whole sequence of events would be
reversed: the ball flies backward, out the rear of the train, and into your waiting
hands. Even if the passenger recognizes that appearances can deceive and makes
allowances for the light transmission time, she thinks the sequence occurs in
reverse order. And because the passenger’s perspective is on a completely equal
footing with your own, both of you are right. When things travel faster than
light, the order of events is objectively ambiguous.
Such a reversal of causal sequences is not just mind-blowing but theory-
busting. It amounts to moving backward in time. By relaying signals via
observers who are moving faster than light or communicating nonlocally, you
could send a message into your own past. Einstein realized this as early as 1907.
“Using hyperlight velocities we could telegraph into the past,” he remarked at a
conference. He seemed sanguine about this prospect, but science-fiction writers
knew better. They’d already based plots on the Pandora’s box that time travel
opens. In perhaps the earliest example, from 1881, the American writer Edward
Page Mitchell told the story of a time traveler who saves the besieged sixteenth-
century Dutch city of Leiden using his historical knowledge of what happened,
thereby creating a causal loop: the traveler was responsible for the very event he
remembers. Later stories toyed with going back in time and preventing your own
birth by killing your grandfather or another ancestor. In a case of life imitating
art, physicists and philosophers came to see time travel as an outright
impossibility. If the laws of physics do nothing else, they should at least forestall
logical contradictions. The universal speed limit does that.
In addition to maintaining the direction of causality, the speed limit ensures

that the very concept of a law of physics makes sense. If objects or forces could
move infinitely fast, the world would descend into anarchy. A dramatic example
was discovered by Paul Painlevé, a man who, as minister of war and prime
minister of France during an especially dark phase of the First World War, was
rather well acquainted with anarchy. In the halcyon days of the mid-1890s,
Painlevé had been a humble mathematician. One of his projects was to apply
Newton’s law of gravity to dense clusters of stars. Painlevé realized that the
stars, buzzing around one another like bees in a hive, could whip themselves into
such a frenzy that the laws of physics would be unable to say what happens next
—a showstopper known as a singularity.
A singularity is any place or event where quantities become infinite and the
mechanisms of nature blow a fuse. The center of a black hole is another
example, albeit for different reasons. In Painlevé’s case, one of the stars could
fly off into deep space at infinite velocity. That’s bad enough, but what’s even
worse is that the same could happen in reverse. At any moment a new star might
swoop in from infinitely far away—a space invader, as one philosopher later put
it. If so, then the laws of physics couldn’t predict for sure what would happen to
the cluster or, indeed, to anything. A space invader could zip across the universe,
steal the socks from your laundry, and return home before you knew it. This is
much worse than other instances of randomness in physics, because you can’t
even assign probabilities to the possible outcomes.
The seeming absurdity is not limited to Newton’s laws. Certain types of
fields, too, allow pulses to ripple through them at infinite speed. Whenever speed
is infinite, spatial distance loses all meaning, and nature becomes
indeterministic, governed by caprice rather than law. Everything that physicists
have been trying to build since ancient Greece would lie in ruins. By imposing a
speed limit, relativity theory restores law and order, not to mention safeguarding
your laundry basket. As Steve Giddings, the ice-climbing theorist, puts it,
“Anything that’s nonlocal has the potential to be garbage.” Relativity vindicates
the 
age-old 
intuition 
that 
nonlocality 
would 
render 
the 
universe
incomprehensible.
      *
Let’s take stock of where things stood on the eve of the quantum revolution. In

ancient times, philosophers convinced themselves that objects interact only by
smacking into one another. In Newton’s day, they persuaded themselves that
contact action actually made no sense and that things had to act on one another
at a distance. Then, beginning with Michael Faraday and culminating with
Einstein, they had another change of heart and decided that things had to interact
locally after all. Even Niels Bohr, who disagreed with Einstein about much else,
called action at a distance “irrational” and “completely incomprehensible.”
The atomists identified two aspects of locality. The principle of local action
holds that influences do not jump from one place to another, but pass through all
the intervening points. And the principle of separability says each distinct object
has an independent reality. The world has structure; things do not melt together
into some undifferentiated goop. The electromagnetic, gravitational, and other
fields embody both of these concepts, albeit in ways the ancient atomists never
imagined. Objects can interact not just by contact action, but also by continuous
action—ripples in fields. Each and every point of a field is a distinct object in its
own right, whose existence is an objective fact on which all observers will agree.
Whereas the Greeks and later mechanical philosophers held locality to be
self-evident, Einstein justified it retroactively. As essential as he deemed it, he
was careful to admit that it was a supposition and had to be judged by the
empirical success of the framework of which it is a part. And the framework was
undoubtedly successful. The satisfying way field theories clicked together
vindicated locality in both of its aspects.
So, physicists really thought they had it this time. At the very moment of its
triumph, however, the principle of locality—and, with it, the entire classical
conception of space—came under renewed assault from the emerging theory of
quantum mechanics. An idea that philosophers and physicists had fought for two
and a half millennia to keep out—that influences could operate outside the
shackles of space—forced its way in after all. Because Einstein had so deeply
embedded locality in science, its new woes shook the foundations of science
more violently than ever, and physicists are still picking up the pieces.
The Peculiar Genesis of Quantum Mechanics
“Quantum mechanics was conceived in sin,” says the historian and philosopher

Arthur Fine at the University of Washington. Whereas the physicists on a TV
show such as The Big Bang Theory are geeky figures of fun, the fathers of
quantum mechanics were epic, often tortured souls. Some of them struggled with
depression; one committed suicide. One lived with both wife and mistress under
the same roof. One joined the Nazi stormtroopers. They were not above
misrepresenting their rivals’ arguments to make a point. They admitted they
didn’t know what they were doing half the time. With beginnings like this, is it
any wonder that the disputes rumble on?
Einstein was the central figure in this crazy drama. Textbooks typically flatten
his contribution to quantum mechanics to a single discovery, known as the
photoelectric effect, for which he received his Nobel in 1921. But he can fairly
be called the theory’s father and, for a decade, practically the only one who
believed in it. His goal, at first, was to understand light. From Democritus to
Aristotle to Newton to Thomas Young, theorists had ping-ponged between
thinking of light as wave or as particle. In a series of papers beginning in 1905,
Einstein settled the issue: it’s both. That makes as much sense as a vegan
butcher. How can light be both spread out in a smooth undulation and packed
into localized wads of energy?
Leaving aside the apparent contradiction in terms, the dual nature of light
posed a specific problem: it conflicted with the principle of locality. If light were
either a particle or a wave, there’d be no trouble. Particles bounce around and
interact by direct contact or, perhaps, short-range forces; waves ripple through a
medium or field in a continuous motion. Atomists plumped for particles, field
theorists were wild about waves, but all agreed that light was local. But when
light acts as both wave and particle, nonlocality seems unavoidable. The reason
is that it takes a high degree of coordination across space for these two kinds of
behavior to dovetail. Einstein and other theorists didn’t realize this nonlocality
straight away. They took it for granted that nature was local; indeed, they
considered the restoration of locality as the greatest lesson of nineteenth-century
physics, enshrined in the theory of relativity. But nonlocality crept into their
awareness as they tried and failed to fit the dual behavior of light into one of the
old frameworks.
For instance, suppose light is ultimately a wave, but gives the impression of
being particulate because atoms absorb wave energy in discrete bites. Most of

Einstein’s contemporaries adopted this picture. But Einstein saw very early on
that it ran afoul of what the physicist John Cramer of the University of
Washington has called the “bubble paradox.” A wave would spread out from its
source like an inflating bubble. Upon reaching an atom, the bubble would pop—
the wave would collapse and concentrate all its energy in that one place, like an
ocean wave breaking in a narrow cove. By that point, the bubble could be huge;
the collapse would happen abruptly over a wide region. How would distant parts
of the bubble know that they should cease propagating outward? Some
mysterious nonlocal effect would have to be operating.
Alternatively, suppose light is ultimately a particle. If light sometimes looks
like a wave, that’s just because the particles are undulating in unison, like
spectators doing the wave in a stadium. This was Einstein’s initial instinct. But
he quickly realized this would contradict observations. Light particles acting
independently could explain the short-wavelength end of the light spectrum, but
not the long-wavelength side. At long wavelengths, the particles can’t be
independent; some external influence must be causing them to wiggle in unison.

3.1. Einstein’s bubble paradox. Einstein devised this paradox in 1909 to argue that atoms emit light as
discrete particles rather than continuous waves. A continuous wave would expand outward from an atom in
a growing sphere like an inflating soap bubble. When the wave hit another atom, it would pop—the energy
spread around the circumference would be focused in that one place. That would be a nonlocal process,
which Einstein and his contemporaries thought implausible. It makes more sense to say that the first atom
emits a particle in the direction of the second atom. Later Einstein extended the paradox from light waves to
quantum wavefunctions. (Illustration by Jen Christensen)
As a third possibility, Einstein conjectured that light has two separate
components, one a particle and one a wave, each of which behaves locally.
Particles carry the radiative energy, while a ghostly “guiding field,” with no
energy of its own, sweeps those particles along like an ocean wave carrying a
surfer. Bohr toyed with a version of this idea, too. Yet the two-part theory of
light didn’t work as intended. To keep the particles’ total energy constant, the
guiding field couldn’t shepherd each particle in isolation; if it nudged one
particle faster, it would have to slow down some other particle to compensate. So

the wave would have to act everywhere at once—which is to say, it would have
to be nonlocal.
All of the available options to explain the dual nature of light demanded
nonlocality in one way or another. It was weird enough to have a vegan butcher.
Now physicists had a vegan butcher sorcerer. Neither Einstein nor any of his
colleagues believed that nonlocality could really be operating, yet it seemed
inevitable. Bohr wrote to a colleague that something fishy was going on in the
heart of the atom, something that “presents difficulties to our ordinary spacetime
description of nature.” For a sense of how weird the behavior of light seemed to
Einstein, consider what he did to take a break from thinking about it: he invented
general relativity. That’s like taking a break from Middle East peace negotiations
to invent a cure for cancer.

Waves of Matter
In the early 1920s Einstein and younger colleagues such as Erwin Schrödinger
took a crucial leap. They proposed that all forms of energy and matter, not just
light, can behave as both particle and wave. The confusion over light now
infected matter as well. Whether you give primacy to waves or to particles, you
encounter nonlocality.
Schrödinger was a waves-firster. “Particles are nothing more than a kind of
‘foamy crest’ on wave radiation that constitutes the underlying basis of
everything,” he suggested. His thinking was that if widely separated particles are
riding the same wave, they’ll naturally stay synchronized—no nonlocal
influences needed. Running with this idea, Schrödinger came up with the
equation, now known simply as the Schrödinger equation, that is taught to
physics students as the very definition of quantum mechanics. It lets you do
everything from tracking a particle’s motion to calculating the colors of light that
an atom will emit or absorb. But, to his dismay, Schrödinger realized that his
equation does not describe a wave but a “wavefunction,” a curious mathematical
abstraction that encodes the qualities of particles and systems of particles. The
wavefunction is nonlocal. An entire swarm of particles has one wavefunction,
binding together all their fates, no matter how dispersed they may be. Even a
single particle’s wavefunction spans the entire universe.
Schrödinger’s rival, the German physicist Werner Heisenberg, a protégé of
Bohr, leaned toward a particles-first theory and came up with his own set of
equations. They proved to be mathematically equivalent to Schrödinger’s; the
two men had arrived at the same theory by two routes. But Heisenberg’s version
did little to clarify what was really going on. Heisenberg admitted he didn’t
know how his particle equations accounted for wave effects. Later, physicists
realized that particles in Heisenberg’s approach are wavy because they can react
not just to what goes on immediately around them, but also to distant regions of
space.
In short, both Schrödinger and Heisenberg had not demystified nonlocality,
but heightened it. Indeed, the theory had a scrappy feel to it. Whereas the theory
of relativity flowed organically from a single compelling principle (of

symmetry) and quickly became accepted, quantum mechanics was cobbled
together from various disconnected insights, and physicists had to reverse-
engineer the essential principles it embodied. The situation was very similar to
the puzzlement over Newton’s theory of gravity two centuries earlier. To make
sense of what they had wrought, physicists had to go beyond the equations and
reach into their intuition for how the world should work. That’s when the gloves
really came off.
Einstein and Schrödinger took a position analogous to Newton’s critics such
as Leibniz: because the theory predicted nonlocality, it had to be provisional.
The theory wasn’t wrong, but incomplete. There must be some deeper theory
that explains away the nonlocality. Bohr and Heisenberg argued that, no, the
theory was not provisional. It was the final word in physics. To be sure, Einstein
and Schrödinger were not in complete agreement, and Bohr and Heisenberg
didn’t always see eye to eye, either. But it’s still fair to talk about two sides to the
debate, if only because that’s how the scientists themselves perceived it.
Bohr’s and Heisenberg’s views evolved into the so-called Copenhagen
Interpretation. One of its central tenets is that nature is inherently random. The
rationale for this was partly empirical. Quantum processes look random; for
instance, when an atom spits out a photon, no known law determines the timing
and direction of the emission. But the Copenhagenists went further than the data
strictly demanded and argued that no such law is possible, period. The
wavefunction specifies the odds of finding a particle in a given position or
moving with a given velocity. Until someone goes to look for that particle, it
exists in a state of limbo, having no definite location or momentum, but pregnant
with possibility. In measuring its position, the experimenter causes the
wavefunction to collapse down to a narrow spike located randomly within the
range of possibilities, and the particle to pop up in the designated place. Collapse
is abrupt and inexplicable, lying beyond the scope of Schrödinger’s and
Heisenberg’s equations. As one philosopher has written, “This collapse is, quite
literally, a miracle.”
In their defense, seeking causes for the random vagaries of life is a recipe for
frustration. Some things just happen. Misfortune befalls the virtuous, while the
wicked prosper. For Copenhagenists, indeterminism was a lesson of modernity,
an antidote to a misplaced Enlightenment trust in reason, which German

intellectuals in the 1920s widely held responsible for their country’s defeat in the
First World War. A number of historians have traced this cultural mood to the
magical and Romantic belief that nature is beyond rational understanding.
Einstein and Schrödinger loathed this reading of quantum mechanics. God
does not throw dice, Einstein famously said. This highly quotable remark makes
it sound as though Einstein had a religious aversion to indeterminism. The truth,
as always, is rather more complicated and interesting. Einstein never objected to
randomness per se; he had spent much of his career studying random processes.
His concerns were more pragmatic. Other random phenomena arose from finer-
scale mechanical motions. Why should quantum randomness be any different?
Why should physicists give up the search for a deeper level of nature? As I
mentioned in an earlier chapter, Einstein was struck by the fact that the universe
is comprehensible in so many ways, and he thought it strange to suppose that
particles would prove to be an exception. Either the universe should be
intelligible or it should be inscrutable, but not half and half.
Furthermore, Einstein saw that indeterminism would entail nonlocality. The
reason is that the supposedly random events in quantum mechanics are
coordinated. Not only do we observe them to be coordinated, but they must be
coordinated or else energy or momentum will be lost or gained. For instance,
those magic coins I described in chapter 1 land randomly on heads or tails, but
do so in lockstep. How do they do that? If the outcome of the tosses is decided
on the fly, the coins must be communicating nonlocally to ensure they match.
Conversely, if they’re not communicating, the outcome must have been
preordained, and quantum theory, by failing to specify this outcome, must be
incomplete. Over the years Einstein refined this dilemma between indeterminism
with nonlocality or determinism with locality.
The 1927 Debate
The first time Einstein presented his dilemma was in October 1927 at a
conference that ranks among the greatest encounters in physics history. A
foundation established by the Belgian chemicals magnate Ernest Solvay paid for
twenty-eight dapper men and one elegant woman to spend a week at a swank
hotel and institute in Brussels giving lectures about quantum theory (which were

later published) and having informal chats (which were off-the-record to keep
everyone loose). Einstein didn’t give a talk of his own, but made his case against
the Copenhagen Interpretation during a question-and-answer period.
His argument was an updated version of the bubble paradox. A quantum
wavefunction will spread out over space like an inflating bubble, yet the particle
it represents will turn up in just one specific place when you go to look for it.
What pops the bubble? What keeps the particle from appearing in more than one
spot? Something must orchestrate the collapse to ensure that the particle
materializes in one place and one place only. Yet no force is operating in this
scenario—neither electricity nor magnetism nor gravitation. Nor could a force be
operating, because the effect occurs instantaneously over a potentially infinite
distance. The effect must be nonlocal; it must clash with the theory of relativity.
Einstein put it this way at the Solvay meeting: “The probability that this particle
is found at a given point assumes an entirely peculiar mechanism of action at a
distance, which prevents the wave continuously distributed in space from
producing an action at two places.” This action at a distance, he told his
colleagues, “implies to my mind a contradiction with the postulate of relativity.”
To Einstein, the natural conclusion was that there wasn’t any bubble that
popped and left a particle behind. Instead, the particle was already sitting,
waiting, at its observed location. No nonlocal orchestration is needed. This
possibility sometimes goes by the name of “realism,” because the particle really
had a position all along, even if quantum theory failed to tell you where it was.
The particle’s position is what physicists call a “hidden variable”—“hidden” in
the sense of not appearing in Schrödinger’s or Heisenberg’s equations. A more
complete theory would include such a variable. Einstein had been trying to
concoct such a theory based on his earlier ideas about a guiding field, and the
French physicist Louis de Broglie presented such a model at the Solvay meeting.
“I think Mr. de Broglie is right to search in this direction,” Einstein said.
Bohr implicitly accepted the nonlocal versus incomplete dilemma. He agreed
that the equations predicted nonlocality, telling Einstein: “The whole foundation
for causal spacetime description is taken away by quantum theory.” But Bohr
couched his response in terms of what we can and can’t measure, as opposed to
what physical process could coordinate particle behavior over vast distances and
what problems such a process would pose. He thought it enough that quantum

mechanics provided “some mathematical methods which are adequate for the
description of our experiments.” What more do you want, people?
The two men spent several days deep in discussion over breakfast and dinner.
We will never know for sure what they said, but all reports indicate that their
conversation veered off from nonlocality and revolved instead around
randomness—specifically, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, which quantifies
the degree of randomness inherent in particle behavior. Einstein repeatedly
attempted to evade the principle and Bohr blocked him every time, leaving the
impression that he had bested the frizzy-haired genius. One witness, the
Austrian-Dutch theorist Paul Ehrenfest, memorably wrote: “Like a game of
chess. Einstein all the time with new examples … to break the UNCERTAINTY
RELATION. Bohr from out of philosophical smoke clouds constantly searching
for the tools to crush one example after the other. Einstein like a jack-in-the-box:
jumping out fresh every morning.” Meanwhile, Bohr punted on Einstein’s
central concern about links between distant locations in space. With this missed
connection began the misunderstandings that would hinder the acceptance of
nonlocality for half a century.
The 1930 Debate
By the next Solvay meeting, three years later, Einstein had devised another
scenario to make his point. It was the first draft of the argument that all later
debates would focus on. Suppose you have a box filled with photons rattling
around like Tic-Tacs in their plastic container. One escapes through a hole and
flies off into the cosmos. The box with the rest of the photons recoils in the
opposite direction. Because the entire system of particles is described by a single
wavefunction, the fates of box and escapee remain linked. Some time later, you
measure the position of the box, from which you can calculate the photon’s
position.
This means one of two things. Either measuring the box does something to
the photon or it does nothing to the photon. The Copenhagen Interpretation
chooses the first option. It says that before you measure the box, both it and the
photon are in limbo, having no specific position. After you measure, the
wavefunction collapses and the photon pops up somewhere. Whatever

instrument you used to measure the box must be acting like a remote control.
Press the button and—boom! The particle instantly condenses from a vague haze
of potentiality into a real pulse of light. Because the photon is moving at the
speed of light, the remote-control signal would have to go faster than light to
catch up to it. “Were that kind of a physical effect from ‘B’ on the fleeing light
quantum to occur,” Einstein later wrote, “it would be an action at a distance, that
propagates with superluminal velocity. Such an assumption is of course logically
possible, but it is so very repugnant to my physical instinct.” According to the
second option—measuring the box leaves the photon untouched—the particle
already exists at the location where you find it, even if the wavefunction is blind
to this fact. The Copenhagen Interpretation is misleading you into thinking you
have a remote control when, alas, you do not.
In short, this new scenario posed the same dilemma as before: quantum
theory is either nonlocal or incomplete. Unfortunately, one feature of Einstein’s
presentation in 1930 sowed perennial confusion, even among his sympathizers.
Einstein noted that, instead of measuring the box’s position, you could measure
its momentum. It’s as if your remote control has two buttons on it, one that
causes the photon to materialize with a definite position, another that causes it to
materialize with a definite momentum. But this extra functionality is secondary.
The main issue is that you have a remote control at all.
Years later, Einstein tried to clarify this point: “That which really exists in B
should therefore not depend on what kind of measurement is carried out in part
of space A; it should also be independent of whether or not any measurement at
all is carried out in space A [my italics].” A predecessor of mine at Scientific
American who worked with Einstein on an article once told me that the great
man didn’t take too kindly to editing. But if an editor had prevailed upon him to
cut out the first clause of that last sentence and leave only the part after the
semicolon, the world would have been a wiser place.
Partly as a consequence of this confusion, the conversation between Einstein
and Bohr got sidetracked for a second Solvay meeting in a row. Bohr fixated on
the red herring of choice. He assumed Einstein was claiming that you could
ascertain both a precise position and a precise momentum for the photon at the
same time, which Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle specifically rules out. If
entangled particles violated the principle, quantum mechanics would not merely

be incomplete, but wrong. Lore has it that the great Dane stayed up half the night
to analyze the measurement procedure and, in the morning, triumphantly
declared that the uncertainty principle held and quantum mechanics was saved.
But according to others involved in the discussion, Einstein no longer had any
quarrel with the uncertainty principle. He accepted that precise position and
momentum measurements were mutually exclusive, and he considered quantum
mechanics a logically consistent theory. His target was the Copenhagen
Interpretation, whose proponents failed to own up to the nonlocality their view
implied.

The EPR Paper
There would be no more great Solvay debates. In 1933 the Nazis raided
Einstein’s lakeside house, mobs of students burned his books, and few German
physicists stood up for him. He renounced his German citizenship and left
Europe, never to return. Two years later, ensconced at the Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton, he finally committed his worries about nonlocality to print.
The paper universally known as EPR—for Einstein and his two younger
coauthors, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen—ignited a fiery debate among the
scattered physicists of the world, conducted by post, with as many as three
letters a day flying back and forth. Schrödinger, who also had fled Germany, was
so moved by the paper that he followed up with several of his own. One of his
papers coined a name for the phenomenon that Einstein had identified:
entanglement. Another put forward his famous morbid scenario of a cat that is
both alive and dead at once, an illustration of how quantum limbo wouldn’t be
restricted just to tiny particles, but would infect things of all sizes, even ones
with fur.
Einstein never liked how the EPR paper turned out and reacted like any other
academic in this situation: he blamed his coauthors. The main trouble was the
final section, added by Podolsky, which overreached Einstein’s intended point
and attempted a takedown of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, thereby
perpetuating the confusion that had derailed the 1930 Solvay debates. The
following year, Einstein published his own version, which kept the spotlight on
the dilemma between nonlocality and incompleteness.
Yet the damage was done. Bohr latched on to Podolsky’s iffy additions and
came out with a rebuttal that was widely taken as settling the case. When
physicists try to explain what Bohr’s rebuttal said in any detail, though, they
sound like contestants on Monty Python’s TV game-show parody “Summarize
Proust,” bumblingly trying to sum up Remembrance of Things Past in fifteen
seconds. One wrote: “Most physicists (including me) accept that Bohr won the
debate, although like most physicists I am hard pressed to put in words just how
it was done.”
To this day, Copenhagen remains the dominant interpretation of quantum

mechanics. Bohr’s victory had much to do with social factors. Whereas Einstein
was, by his own admission, a loner, Bohr was a father figure who inspired
intense loyalty. He and his acolytes wrote nearly all of the early accounts of the
debates. They naturally stressed Bohr’s contributions and played down
Einstein’s, which had the effect of playing down nonlocality, because that was
Einstein’s concern. In their retelling, nonlocality was elevated to importance
only through a “misunderstanding” on Einstein’s part. A member of Bohr’s
institute sneered: “I must grant him that if a student in one of their earlier
semesters had raised such objections, I would have considered him quite
intelligent and promising.” Such condescension set the tone of debate for much
of the twentieth century. Only in the past two decades have historians such as
Arthur Fine dug through correspondence from the period, showed the daring of
Einstein’s thinking, and restored his good name.
Often in the history of physics, physicists couldn’t make progress because
they lacked the technology or background knowledge. Faraday, for example,
could hardly have built motors and electromagnets before the battery had been
invented. But quantum physicists had no such excuse. They could have grasped
nonlocality just as easily in the 1930s as in the 1960s. In fact, they very nearly
did. Historians have envisioned entirely plausible counterfactual scenarios in
which, had events taken a slightly different turn, Einstein would have won over
his colleagues. A strange confluence of personality conflicts and self-reinforcing
misunderstandings got in the way, and it took a new generation of physicists, led
by John Stewart Bell, to rebel against the widespread denialism.

4
The Great Debate
Early in 2011, I was eating pasta with the philosopher Tim Maudlin when he told
me about an upcoming symposium in Dresden, Germany, that promised to be a
major debate on quantum nonlocality. Maudlin thinks the quantum realm is
nonlocal. Other people who had been invited to the event think nonlocality is a
fallacy. I got the impression that the organizers had simply intended to bring
together the luminaries of physics and only later realized that it was like asking
both Democrats and Republicans to an election night party. “There may be a
huge bloody argument,” Maudlin said. “The organizers are afraid of that.
They’re telling us to be polite.” Naturally, I hoped the participants wouldn’t be
polite, and I booked my airline ticket as soon as I got home.
It’s not that I like smackdowns, but I’d become frustrated that researchers had
failed to resolve their disagreements over the foundations of quantum theory.
They’ve debated the existence of nonlocal influences since Bohr and Einstein
first went at it in the 1920s, and by rights the matter should have been settled
already. When I started looking into the question of whether nature is truly
nonlocal or merely puts on a good show—and therefore whether our
conventional notions of space are in as much trouble as it seems—I figured I’d
attend a conference or two, have a few chats over coffee, and sort it all out. My
plan got off to a good start. The first person I talked to made total sense. The
second person I talked to made total sense. So did the third. Unfortunately, they
were all telling me completely contradictory things. Clearly the plan wasn’t

working. I wasn’t so naïve as to think that a roomful of professors would agree,
but at least I thought I should be able to pinpoint exactly where they disagreed—
to boil the dispute down to a choice between equally defensible assumptions.
Often I could. But sometimes when I tried to grasp the nub of the disagreement,
I found myself clutching at vapors.
Even the debaters told me they were perplexed. Many of them have been
friends for decades, but still feel a disconnect over this issue. When I asked them
to explain why their opponents feel the way they do, they stared off into the
distance for a few moments and threw up their hands. Sometimes their
frustration boiled over. One skeptic accused nonlocality proponents of “laziness”
and called their arguments an intellectual “morass.” Another complained: “These
people have a very high opinion of themselves.” “He’s just going like a battering
ram,” agreed a third. For their part, proponents thought the skeptics were guilty
of boneheaded mistakes. “He’s just plain utterly absolutely unassailably
appallingly wrong,” groaned one. Seeking a neutral(ish) party to guide me
through this physics road rage, I approached the philosopher and historian
Arthur Fine. The first thing he told me was: “Welcome to the Hobbesian world
of foundations—a war of all against all!”
You might think that if scientists quarrel over such a deep question as
nonlocality, they might make a point of getting together and hashing it out. Yet
the debate is remarkable for how little debating there really is. In my
conversations, I often got the impression that people were exchanging their
views through me, like estranged spouses using their kids to convey messages to
each other. The Dresden meeting, I hoped, would finally flush these exchanges
into the open. Big surprise: that didn’t happen. The conference attendees didn’t
come to any agreement. They gave their talks, we all went to a fancy restaurant
for dinner afterward, and we chitchatted about politics and other comparatively
polite topics. I hadn’t flown all that way for nothing, though. I began to realize
that the serial failure to reach consensus is fascinating in its own right, a very
human response to the depth of the mysteries posed by quantum mechanics. And
even if the protagonists never shake hands, the debate can reach closure in other
ways. As we’ll see, the opposing positions lead us to very similar conclusions
about the fundamental unreality of space.
The differing attitudes toward quantum physics reflect the conflicting

emotional impulses of science: to revel in mystery and to puncture foolishness.
“Some folks just can’t stand the thought that maybe fundamental physics—
quantum mechanics—can’t be reconciled with common sense,” Fine says. “And
other folks just can’t stand the thought that maybe quantum mechanics can be
reconciled with common sense! These are differences in temperament that are
not likely to be settled in discussions over coffee. They are sometimes made to
appear as philosophical differences … but if you look, although you certainly
find the expression of philosophical prejudices, there are hardly any serious
arguments about philosophy as such. Instead, philosophical language provides a
kind of code for emotional differences.” Scientists are never unbiased observers,
nor should they be, because who would put up with the travails of a life in
research if they weren’t driven? If poetry is emotion recollected in tranquility,
then science is tranquility recollected in emotion: a struggle to think carefully in
the swirl of passionate curiosity.

The Case for Nonlocality
By the standards of physics, the argument for quantum nonlocality is as simple
as they come. Einstein’s original paper with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen
in 1935 was just four pages long; John Bell’s follow-up thirty years later, six.
Neither involves heavy-duty math. If anything, equations tend to get in the way
—Einstein complained afterward that his point in the EPR paper was “smothered
by the formalism.” These two papers represent two distinct steps in the logic.
Einstein posed a dilemma: quantum mechanics is either nonlocal or incomplete.
Bell closed off the second possibility: he showed that not even incompleteness
could avoid nonlocality.
To see what this means, let’s go back to the quantum experiment I described
in chapter 1. In this experiment, particles act like magic coins that you can use to
perform a variety of tricks. Like ordinary coins, they turn up either heads or tails
at random when you flip them. Unlike ordinary coins, their tosses can exhibit a
peculiar pattern. In the simplest case, you have a pair of these coins and give one
to a friend. The two of you flip your respective coins and they land on the same
side every time: both heads or both tails. By Einstein’s reasoning, there are two
possible explanations for their synchrony. They might be cheat coins, with the
outcome fixed in advance; for instance, you and your friend might be flipping
identical double-sided coins. This is the incomplete fork of the dilemma
—“incomplete” in the sense that an onlooker has only partial knowledge of the
coins and thinks they’re fair when they’re really a scam. Or they might truly be
magic coins, linked by some mysterious connection (the nonlocal fork).
Einstein leaned toward the incompleteness option. He and Louis de Broglie
proposed that particles match because an invisible guiding field is herding them
like a sheepdog. The particles always exist in certain positions, and a
measurement simply reveals where they are at any given moment, just as
flipping a double-sided coin reveals a preordained outcome. This mechanism,
Einstein thought, could produce the appearance of nonlocality. But what seemed
like a good explanation in the abstract never worked when Einstein tried to
create a mathematical theory of it. At one point, Einstein wrote a paper, sent it to
a journal for publication, and belatedly realized the theory was nonlocal—but by

then, the article had already gone to the printers and Einstein had to call the
editor to stop the presses. (You can do that sort of thing when you’re Einstein.)
As Bell showed, there was a simple reason why Einstein had such trouble
avoiding nonlocality: nonlocality is unavoidable.
Bell used a tactic familiar to party poopers everywhere: challenge the self-
proclaimed magician to perform a feat that unequivocally requires magic. In one
variant of his test, you and your friend flip your respective coins with either your
right hand or your left hand, and Bell demands that the pair of coins sometimes
land on the same sides, sometimes on opposite sides. You have a total of four
permutations: both of you flip with your right hand, both with your left, you with
your right and your friend his left, and vice versa. In three of these four cases,
Bell wants the coins to land on the same side. But in the fourth, he insists that
the coins land on opposite sides. It doesn’t matter which case is the odd man out,
but for the sake of argument, suppose it happens when you use your left and
your friend his right. The pattern depends on what both of you are doing, so the
situation is inextricably nonlocal. Not even the trickiest trick coin could fix the
outcome in advance.
The best that cheaters could do is to prearrange the coins to land on the same
side every time. For instance, you and your friend could flip identical double-
sided coins, as before; that way, your outcomes will always be the same, which
satisfies Bell’s challenge 75 percent of the time. You fail to meet the challenge—
and expose yourselves as charlatans—in those cases when your coins are
supposed to land on opposite sides. My colleagues and I once created a video to
dramatize how the test might work in practice.*
Bell’s scheme isn’t arbitrary; it corresponds to specific polarizer settings in
the experimental apparatus. Quantum coins meet the challenge about 85 percent
of the time. The additional 10 percent is the benefit of nonlocality. (The fact that
the magic is imperfect—85 percent rather than 100 percent—is an interesting
clue to the nature of quantum nonlocality, more on which later.) And this
situation isn’t an outlier. Physicists have discovered dozens of coin-like quantum
systems that aren’t explicable by any conceivable sleight of hand. They comprise
two, three, four, billions—any number of particles.

4.1. Test to distinguish true nonlocality from fakery. You and a friend flip coins with either your left or right
hands, chosen at random. If the outcome has been fixed in advance—for instance, using cheat coins—the
choice of hand won’t matter. But if the coins are acting nonlocally, the choice can have an effect. In this
example, the results in boldface mark deviations that indicate nonlocality is operating.
Einstein argued that a deeper level of reality was the only hope for saving
locality. Bell dashed this hope. Having established that nature is nonlocal, Bell
wondered how the nonlocality might operate. He reasoned that spooky action
requires a spook—some immaterial entity that conveys influences from one
place to another. And there was a candidate for one: the guiding field. Although
Einstein and de Broglie had proposed the guiding field as a way to avoid
nonlocality, the American theorist David Bohm reimagined it in the early 1950s
as a mechanism to generate nonlocality. This field is roughly like the
gravitational field as conceived by Newton or the Force in Star Wars. By
banging on the field in one place, you could rattle a particle anywhere else in the
universe. In principle, such a field is capable not just of creating dainty patterns
in polarized light but of punching your enemy in the face from halfway around
the world, although in practice this would require you to track and manipulate
individual particles with impossibly high precision. (Some theorists have
imagined circumstances under which it might be possible, though, such as the
extreme conditions of the big bang.) Few physicists took to Bohm’s proposal,
and even today most shun it, complaining that the guiding field is nonlocal. But
that’s the whole point of it. If, like Einstein and Bell, you think that quantum
mechanics is nonlocal, then Bohm’s proposal has the virtue of bringing this
nonlocality into the open rather than attempting to conceal it.

Motivated to Disagree
The logic of Einstein’s and Bell’s arguments is hard to dispute. So why do so
many people dispute it? I think their misgivings spring from three sources.
First, some researchers just don’t like nonlocality. It conflicts with so many
other aspects of science that their gut tells them it’s wrong even if their brain
can’t tell them why. Skeptics pass judgment on nonlocality and then seek some
logical argument to back themselves up. Psychologists have a name for this
common human tendency: “motivated reasoning.” Such judgment calls may
seem woolly and dogmatic to those who are on the receiving end, but they are
essential to science. Sociologists have found that the most creative scientists tend
to be the most stubborn. It’s a myth that scientists are supposed to be open-
minded; if they were, every new idea that comes along would blow them around
like a weathervane. What is a scientist’s job, if not to build up a stable, coherent
view of how the world works? Accordingly, researchers judge all ideas by how
they fit into the larger framework of knowledge. They are dubious about
anything that doesn’t conform, however strong the case for it may seem at first.
They have seen plenty of supposedly airtight arguments spring a leak.
A second ground for skepticism is that quantum-coin experiments smack of
skullduggery. When you create the coins—for instance, when the laser beam
triggers the optical crystal at the heart of Galvez’s entanglement experiment to
emit a pair of photons—you create them specifically to match each other. That
sounds an awful lot like distributing a pair of cheat coins. Bell’s party-pooping
challenge appears to rule out such trickery: no conceivable cheat coins could
stay matched under the wide range of conditions that quantum coins do. But
skeptics are not entirely reassured. What about inconceivable cheat coins? Is the
metaphor of a coin misleading us? Might particles have ways to stay in sync
without communicating nonlocally?
Another suspect moment occurs when comparing the outcomes. You ask your
friend, “What side did your coin land on?” He tells you. You exclaim: “Why,
that’s just what I got. What a remarkable coincidence!” Until you have this
conversation, you can’t draw any conclusions about nonlocality. So you might
wonder whether the conversation itself is part of the act. After all, the

conversation is a quantum process, and skeptics reckon you can’t be too careful
when it comes to quantum physics. Bell’s reasoning has the qualities of an
iPhone: it looks so simple at first—just one button!—but open it up and behold
the intricacy.
Third, and perhaps most important, the putative nonlocality strikes many
people as kind of pathetic. The effect is completely imperceptible at the moment
it is supposed to occur. All you see when you flip a quantum coin is the same
random sequence of heads, tails, tails, heads, heads, tails that you see when you
flip an ordinary coin. A pattern is buried in there, but to see it, you need to
compare this sequence with the sequence your friend observed. The sequence is
like an encrypted message you can’t read until your friend sends you the code
key. And the only way he can do that is by some run-of-the-mill communications
system such as e-mail, phone, or marathon runner. This extra requirement of
performing a comparison makes entangled particles useless for transmitting a
signal.
Physicists have tried and tried to find a way to evade this requirement, but
nature has foiled their every attempt. The closest anyone has come was the
physicist Nick Herbert in the early 1980s. In effect, his plan was to conduct a
series of repeated experiments. Suppose you and your friend decide on a code:
left if by land, right if by sea. Your friend flips his coin with either his left or
right hand and leaves it lying there. You flip your coin, then flip it again, and
again, sometimes with your left hand, sometimes your right, watching for
patterns. If the outcomes of your left-handed tosses follow the laws of chance,
while the right-handed tosses are skewed toward, say, heads, you can conclude
that your friend flipped with his right hand and his coin landed on heads. Your
friend will have succeeded in sending you a message: the Redcoats are arriving
by sea.
Automate this process, add some futuristic packaging, and you’d have the
“subspace radio” or “hyperwave relay” that science-fiction writers have dreamed
of for real-time interstellar communication. A message would zip from
transmitter to receiver faster than light. Herbert gave his scheme a suitably
spacey acronym: FLASH, for “First Laser-Amplified Superluminal Hookup.” At
first even the great Richard Feynman could find no flaw in the system, but pretty
much everyone knew there had to be some flaw, if only because faster-than-light

communication would let you send a signal into the past and wreak
chronological havoc—having your grandfather killed, and all that. In short order,
theorists found it: quantum mechanics expressly forbids do-overs. Each pair of
coins is one-time-use only; once you flip the coins, they break their connection,
so you couldn’t conduct those repeated experiments after all. Quantum
mechanics gives you no sneaky backchannel for sending messages.
For skeptics, the impossibility of faster-than-light communications is very
suspicious. If you see a pool of water in the desert but, try as you might, can’t
take a drink, you must be seeing a mirage. Likewise, if you see particles linked
together, but can’t use them to send a message, perhaps the supposed link is an
illusion. Even someone you’d think would be sympathetic, Steve Giddings—he
who has done so much to convince string theorists of nonlocality in black holes
—says he doesn’t consider quantum nonlocality the real deal: “EPR is not true
nonlocality. You can’t send a signal with it.” Those who do think entanglement is
true nonlocality acknowledge that they have, at the least, a public-relations
problem. “The fact that one can’t send signals in standard quantum mechanics is
suggestive,” Maudlin admits.
Driven by these general motivations, skeptics of nonlocality have suggested
several escape clauses from Einstein’s and Bell’s reasoning. Some of these
alternatives might seem dubious, but if you’re going to question something as
basic as locality, you might as well revisit all your other beliefs, no?
Option #1: Giving Up Free Will?
One option is that entanglement experiments were rigged at the big bang. Recall
why nonlocality seems necessary: without it, the particles would have to be
preprogrammed for every eventuality that might befall them, and vanilla
quantum mechanics provides no way to do that. In the coin metaphor, for
example, the coins must be set up to respond one way if you flip with your right
and another way if you flip with your left, and what kind of coin has that
capability? If the coins can’t be prepared in advance for every eventuality, they
must have some nonlocal connection to keep them in sync.
But this conclusion doesn’t follow if particles know beforehand what you’re
going to do to them. Then they can be ready for just that one eventuality. That

would be possible if, for example, your choice of measurement is preordained.
Think about it: Why would you choose your right hand to flip the coin? Maybe
that hand was itching, or you once had a girlfriend whose name started with the
letter r, or you had chosen left a couple of times and figured it was right’s turn.
Human beings make decisions for any number of reasons, not all of them
entirely sensible. Those reasons follow from earlier events, and ultimately the
chain of causes can be traced to the origin of the universe. Like a cosmic flash
mob, the particles of the universe were put on a course to come together in just
the right way at just the right time, priming your brain cells to choose your right
hand.
Maybe the same factors that prompted you to choose your right hand also
ensured that your friend chose his right and that both coins landed on the same
side. Unbeknownst to you, the universe could be in the grip of a vast conspiracy
to harmonize your choices with the coin tosses, making you think it’s nonlocal
when it’s really local. This idea goes by the name of “superdeterminism.” What
makes it weird is the connection between phenomena that by rights should be
completely dissociated. What has the tumbling of a coin through the air got to do
with a complicated deliberative process inside your skull?
Superdeterminism is often described as taking away our free will. Actually,
it’s much worse than that. Even regular determinism—without the “super”—has
caused many people to doubt we have free will. Through the laws of physics,
you can ascribe every choice you make to the arrangement of matter at the dawn
of time. That doesn’t necessarily mean your will is unfree: freedom can be an
emergent property, one that particles do not possess, but assemblages of particles
do. As far as you’re concerned, your choices can be entirely open until you make
them. Nonetheless, philosophers, scientists, and students talking late into the
night still debate the question. Superdeterminism adds a twist of the knife. Not
only is everything you do decided in advance, the universe reaches into your
brain and stops you from doing the very experiment that would reveal its true
nature. The universe isn’t just set up in advance. It’s set up in advance to fool
you.
I wasn’t even going to include this conspiracy theory in my list—it sounds
too much like the plot of a Dan Brown novel—until I got talking to the Nobel
laureate physicist Gerard ’t Hooft, one of the fathers of the Standard Model of

particle physics. He thinks locality is so vital that physicists need to explore even
crazy-sounding ideas to preserve it. “I tend to adhere as much as possible to a
conventional picture of space and time because I attach great importance to
locality,” he tells me. “Without locality I think that basic laws of physics will be
very hard or maybe impossible to formulate.”’T Hooft points out that one man’s
conspiracy is another’s law of physics. Lots of things in the world seem
conspiratorial at first glance, but are the result of well-established principles
whereby objects coordinate their behavior. The fact that the Moon spins on its
axis at exactly the same rate it orbits Earth (thereby keeping the same face to us,
or nearly so) is the work not of a cabal, but of laws such as the conservation of
angular momentum. Likewise, some new law of physics could conceivably
harmonize particles’ properties with humans’ measurement choices. “What looks
like a conspiracy today may be due to a conservation law we don’t know about
today,” he has explained.
Arthur Fine also speaks up for superdeterminism. What makes it plausible, he
thinks, is the fact that the synchrony of entangled particles is very subtle. To
produce it, a grand cosmic conspiracy wouldn’t need to manipulate you like a
puppeteer, just nudge you gently. If in principle you have 1,000 choices of which
measurement to make, but the universe allows you to make only 950 of them,
that slight restriction on your freedom would be enough to produce the illusion
of spooky action. “Constraints are common in physics and it turns out that even
a small amount of constraint is sufficient,” Fine says.
Option #2: Particles Are Crystal Balls
A second way that particles might be ready for you is that they can see the
future. They could be like the Nazi doctor protagonist of Martin Amis’s novel
Time’s Arrow, who experiences his life in reverse, from death to birth. Particles’
past could be your future. They could be shaped by events that, to us, have yet to
occur. They could come into the world already “remembering” what is going to
happen—specifically, the settings of polarizers they will later encounter—and be
prepared to respond accordingly.
Proponents of this idea don’t deny that entanglement is magical. They just
think the magic is a type of precognition rather than a type of telekinesis.

Whether this counts as an improvement depends on your point of view. Still,
when physicists as renowned as Feynman and John Wheeler suggest that
particles are precognitive, you’ve got to take the idea seriously. Even Maudlin
accepts this as a logical possibility: “Reverse causation can, in principle, account
for the phenomena.” By merging space and time, Einstein’s theory of relativity
made it natural to think of moments of time as laid out like points in space, all
equally real, even if our puny brains perceive only one instant at a time. The
future should be able to influence the present as surely as the past does, and
indeed the real mystery is why we don’t routinely see it doing so.
You can think of reverse causation as a form of time travel. Physicists
normally flinch from time travel for fear of causal paradoxes. In this case,
though, no paradox can arise because the particles are unable to convey a signal,
let alone a human traveler. The time travel is confined to the interval between a
particle’s creation and its measurement, which is enough to give particles a
glimpse of their future, but not to open a portal into the past. You can’t use
entanglement to rewrite history or check tomorrow’s stock prices.
However solid the case for reverse causation may be, you know you’re in
trouble when people say that time travel may be the lesser of two mysteries.
With these first two alternatives to nonlocality, you can already see where things
are going. Einstein’s and Bell’s arguments may not strictly be proof of spooky
action at a distance, but they are proof that we live in a very weird world.
Option #3: Parallel Universes
A third alternative supposes that nonlocality is an illusion caused by the
existence of parallel universes that we can’t see directly. It sounds like a
breathtaking leap. How could a few glowing digits on a lab readout convince
you that we cohabit space with an infinity of other worlds?
In fact, the reasoning is straightforward. Start by rephrasing Einstein’s
argument in a slightly different way. Entanglement means that two or more
particles are set up to match each other. They are commanded to match. Thou
shalt match! says the theory. But what a hopelessly vague directive. It doesn’t
tell the particles how to match. If they’re acting as coins, they need to be told
which side to land on, and without this information, they enter a state of limbo,

both heads and tails at once. The situation is like a scene from the old military
comedy TV show F Troop. An army sergeant orders the troops: Everyone, march
in the same direction! But he neglects to say which direction. Some troops head
to the right, others to the left, and mayhem ensues. In the absence of further
instructions, the only way the coins or troops can escape their limbo in a
consistent way is to communicate with each other telepathically.
But there’s a loophole in this argument. What if quantum coins don’t ever
snap out of their limbo? What if each coin lands on both sides? In that case, no
nonlocal influences need operate. Needless to say, such a prospect conflicts with
the evidence of our senses. Whenever you flip a coin, you see it landing on
either heads or tails (or neither, if it stands on edge), but never both. But maybe
you shouldn’t trust your eyes. Maybe you perceive only one outcome even
though both occur. This could happen if you, too, have gone into a state of limbo
—an ambiguous condition of seeing the coin heads up and seeing the coin tails
up. After all, a human observer is a quantum object as surely as a particle is. If a
particle can be in limbo, then why can’t you? This situation is similar to
Schrödinger’s infamous both-alive-and-dead cat, except that we’re now
imagining what it would be like to be that cat.
The key is that you never perceive this ambiguity in yourself, but only in
others. In effect, you have multiple personalities that are oblivious to one
another. One personality sees the coin turn up heads; the other sees tails. Going
back to the F Troop metaphor, although the sergeant’s confusing command
produces mayhem, he’ll never notice if he has a brain disorder worthy of Oliver
Sacks. His left brain sees soldiers marching to the right, his right brain sees
soldiers heading off to the left, and both hemispheres are pleased that the troops
have obeyed the command.
This gives us a new way to interpret what happens when you and your friend
flip a pair of quantum coins. When you ask your friend what he saw, each of
your multiple personalities hears a different answer. The personality that saw
heads communicates with the personality in your friend’s mind that saw heads.
The personality that saw tails communicates with the personality in your friend’s
mind that saw tails. Both selves concur that the coins were coordinated.
Curiously, they reach this conclusion even though the outcome of the toss
remains ambiguous.

Proponents of this view argue that split-mindedness is the natural way to
interpret quantum mechanics. It has nothing to do with our brains per se, but is a
product of how the universe is put together. The best-known account, known as
the many-worlds interpretation, supposes that those other possible selves
represent near-duplicates of you that exist in parallel universes. In our universe,
you may see the coin land heads up. In another, “you”—that is, a creature who is
not the same collection of atoms as you, but looks exactly like you and is utterly
convinced it is you—sees it land tails up. Everything that can happen does
happen somewhere in the plurality of worlds, although we have direct access
only to the world we live in. We think that a given event has a unique outcome
because we can’t see the other worlds where the alternatives transpire.
Many worlds aren’t the only way to account for split minds. Other physicists
have proposed interpretations that amount to the same thing minus the
cosmological prolificacy. The main point is that we have access to only one
portion of reality. Different observers can reach seemingly incompatible
conclusions about reality, and that’s fine, because their conclusions apply only to
the portion of reality they see. There’s no need for nonlocal influences to enforce
consistency. However impeccable the logic may be, the conclusion still sounds
fantastical. To throw your entire sense of self (let alone the nature of the
universe) into question strikes many people as a high price to pay for explaining
some esoteric physics experiment. But such are the lengths to which physicists
think they must go to avoid spooky action at a distance.
Option #4: Don’t Be Realistic
The surreal quality of the above possibilities explains the appeal of a fourth and
final option: that it’s all just a big mistake—that Einstein’s and Bell’s arguments
have been misconstrued and, on closer inspection, don’t imply nonlocality or any
comparably momentous phenomenon. This argument was the focus of that
meeting I attended in Dresden. It was the annual conference of the German
Physical Society, the world’s largest professional society for physicists, and a
veritable physics fest. In a tent village set up on the university campus, you
could stroll around with a beer mug, shopping for power amplifiers and
cryogenic vats. Inside the lecture halls, physicists gave talks with such titles as

“Honey, I Shrunk the Laser.” There was even an “Einstein Slam,” where the
theory of relativity met open-mic night. The highlight, though, was the afternoon
devoted to the nature of quantum reality. People jammed a thousand-seat
auditorium, sitting in the aisles, standing in the doorways, probably breaking the
local fire codes, craning their necks for a view of the speakers.
Defending the fourth option was Anton Zeilinger, the Viennese experimental
physicist who has done as much as anyone to turn quantum entanglement from
theoretical curiosity to practical reality. He tells me that in the Austrian village
where he grew up, in the foothills of the Alps, he had a reputation for curiosity—
it was curious how curious he was. “To this day, the villagers say they thought I
was kind of crazy,” he says. “I was sitting in the window of my kitchen looking
out for hours.” Zeilinger and Maudlin are kindred spirits in many ways—two
rebels against the prevailing dismissal of Einstein’s probing questions. “When I
started physics in the 1960s, the attitude was, let’s not worry about the
fundamental questions,” Zeilinger recalls. He learned quantum mechanics on his
own rather than from classes, and never fell under the impression that past
generations had already answered the deep questions. “I realized these guys
didn’t know what it means,” he says. “Something was missing.” Alongside his
physics, he read widely in philosophy: Kant, Mach, Popper, Wittgenstein.
Where Zeilinger diverges from Maudlin is that he never saw the Copenhagen
Interpretation as something to revolt against. To the contrary, he rather likes it.
Being an experimentalist, Zeilinger naturally identifies with Bohr’s and
Heisenberg’s high esteem for the act of making a measurement—and, in
particular, with the Copenhagen thesis that measurements actively help to create
reality. He objects to Einstein’s realist view that measurements are passive
operations that record what is already out there.
Zeilinger sees Bell’s argument in this light: as disproof not of locality per se,
but of “local realism,” which combines Einstein’s twin intuitions that physics is
local (particles are mutually independent) and realist (particles possess specific
properties in advance of being measured). If Bell’s argument pertains to local
realism rather than just locality, then only one of these intuitions is vulnerable.
By analogy, if we’re told that someone is not a feminist bank teller, we’d need
more information to know whether the person is not a feminist, not a teller, or
neither a feminist nor a teller. And in that case, maybe we should be getting rid

of realism rather than locality. Zeilinger and his team have conducted
experiments that are damning for realism.
In one, particles remained in contact with one another, so that locality was
never in question. This was a pure test of realism, and particles flunked it. If you
try to explain the measurement results by supposing that the particles had
specific properties all along, you arrive at a contradiction. Translating to the coin
metaphor, imagine that five people are sitting around a table. Each tosses a coin
and compares the outcome to the person on her right. Because five is an odd
number, at least one person will get the same result as her neighbor’s. But that’s
true only for ordinary coins. For quantum coins, you could find that no two
people get the same result, which is impossible if the flips have definite
outcomes that precede the act of comparison.
To be sure, such experiments don’t rule out realism altogether. Some realist
theories, such as Bohm’s guiding-field concept, remain viable. But the results are
still suggestive. Only when you try to imagine what particles must have been
like before a measurement do you have to invoke nonlocal influences. Stop
trying to imagine them in that way and maybe you can preserve locality. “In my
eyes, locality is not the problem,” Zeilinger told the Dresden audience. “In my
eyes, the main culprit is the idea of realism.”

Confrontation in Dresden
When Zeilinger sat down, Maudlin stood up. “You’ll hear something different in
my account of these things,” he began. Zeilinger, he said, was missing Bell’s
point. Bell did take down local realism, but that was only the second half of his
argument for nonlocality. The first half was Einstein’s original dilemma. By his
logic, realism is the fork of the dilemma you’re forced to take if you want to
avoid nonlocality. “Einstein did not assume realism,” Maudlin said. “He derived
it.” Put simply, Einstein ruled out local antirealism, Bell ruled out local realism,
so whether or not physics is realist, it must be nonlocal.
The beauty of this reasoning, Maudlin said, is that it makes the contentious
subject of realism a red herring. As authority, Maudlin cited Bell himself, who
bemoaned a tendency to see his work as a verdict on realism and eventually felt
compelled to rederive his theorem without ever mentioning the word “realism”
or one of its synonyms. It doesn’t matter whether experiments create reality or
merely capture it, whether quantum mechanics is the final word in physics or
merely the prelude to a deeper theory, or whether reality is composed of particles
or something else entirely. Just do the experiment, note the pattern, and ask
yourself whether there’s any way to explain it locally. Under the appropriate
circumstances, there isn’t. Nonlocality is an empirical fact, full stop, Maudlin
said.
The only way to avoid the inference of nonlocality is to doubt the legitimacy
of experimentation, which is essentially what the above options do. Namely, it
might be impossible to perform a truly controlled experiment (because of
superdeterminism or reverse causation) or to record the experimental results
fully (because of our inability to see other universes). But such options are
anathema to an experimentalist such as Zeilinger.
Clearly, the fourth alternative to nonlocality falls into a different category
than the first three. Few deny that predestination, precognition, and parallel
universes are logical possibilities, but debate still swirls over whether the denial
of realism is a valid option. And even if it is, what then? How do those distant
particles stay in sync? What’s behind the magic trick? Zeilinger and others who
advocate antirealism are never very specific about what’s going on. To the

contrary, they deny any need for such an explanation. This is where a chasm of
mutual incomprehension opens up.
      *
When Maudlin ended, Zeilinger raised his hand. Here was the moment I had
flown halfway around the world for. Would Zeilinger put his finger on some
flaw in Maudlin’s reasoning? Would he concede the point? Would deep thoughts
crackle through the air like lightning bolts? In retrospect, I should hardly have
been surprised when Zeilinger merely reasserted his conclusion: “This inference
of nonlocality seems to be based on a rather realist interpretation of information.
If you don’t assume this, you don’t need nonlocality.” So much for the fearsome
clash the conference organizers had panicked about.
Later on, David Albert, a Columbia University philosopher who is a close
friend of Maudlin’s, remarked on how the debate was eluding closure yet again:
“Students should take note of an appalling fact: we’re forty-five years after the
publication of Bell’s paper, and you’re hearing today very deep disagreement
about what was proved in that paper. Tim and I hold that it was nonlocality.
Others say there’s a choice between realism or locality. I would encourage others
to take note of this disagreement and be anxious to get to the bottom of it
themselves.” Both Zeilinger and Albert individually tell me they feel dissatisfied
with their inability to connect. Zeilinger says he’s so bothered that he has hired a
team member specifically to catalog the diverse interpretations of quantum
mechanics and their presumptions. Albert has suggested that I organize an open
debate. He says the public has an interest in sorting it out. “You’re not getting
your money’s worth,” he muses. I have duly tried to get Zeilinger and Albert
together, without success.
Perhaps I shouldn’t be surprised at these repeated failures to work things out.
Einstein’s and Bell’s arguments may be compelling, but so is the principle of
locality. Another philosopher whose advice I’ve sought, Jon Jarrett of the
University of Illinois at Chicago, tells me, “Given the spectacular success of the
worldview challenged by the results of Bell-type experiments, we ought to allow
a great deal of room for reasonable and, in this case, many very brilliant people
to disagree.”

Being Pragmatic
Where does this all leave us? For the record, I think Maudlin is right about
nonlocality. Einstein’s and Bell’s logic is just too compelling. But I have also
developed a healthy respect for all the ins and outs, and I have lost my earlier
confidence that logic alone can settle the case. Making sense of disputes in
science is seldom easy, anyway. Comparing two positions is a process of
subtraction, of finding the difference, and subtraction is an operation that
amplifies errors. It’s like the accounting in David Copperfield: “Annual income
twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen pounds nineteen and six, result
happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pounds
ought and six, result misery.” A change in expenses of less than 1 percent leads
to a complete reversal of fortune. Likewise, a slight misunderstanding of one
side of a debate can completely mislead you when evaluating which is right.
This doesn’t mean we have to go around in circles, though. Zeilinger tells me
an instructive story. While a college student, he and a cousin backpacked around
France on motor scooters. One night they pulled up to a youth hostel
recommended by their guidebook, only to find it closed and abandoned. They
decided to sneak in and sleep there anyway. As they settled in for the night,
Zeilinger opened a window for air. A short while later, his cousin got up to close
it. A while later, Zeilinger reopened it. And so it went all night. “I was convinced
it was stuffy; he was convinced it was drafty,” Zeilinger remembers. Only in the
morning did they notice that the window didn’t have any glass in it. Their
nocturnal passive-aggressiveness had been pointless. For Zeilinger, the moral is
that you always need to question your own assumptions.
I wouldn’t go so far as to say that the debate over nonlocality is as empty as
that window frame, but the way it goes on and on suggests it’s time to take a step
back and gain some perspective. There are three ways to do that: one proposed
resolution might gain practical acceptance simply because it’s more useful than
the others; disputed concepts might gain credence because they’re part of a
broader pattern rather than just an isolated curiosity; and different options might
have common features that guide us forward regardless of which proves right.
Let’s go through these one by one.

Skeptics doubt nonlocality in large part because they think it’s pathetic, on
account of being unable to transmit a signal. Yet the people offering this
complaint tend to be theorists. I’ve spent a good deal of time with
experimentalists in their labs and not once have I heard them belittle nonlocality.
To the contrary, they bubble over with excitement about what it can do.
For instance, although entangled particles can’t transmit a signal on their
own, they can be combined with ordinary light or radio signals to cram extra
information into a message. In one experiment, Zeilinger and his colleagues sent
a message using a stream of photons. Ordinarily, each photon can carry one
computer bit. But by using a stockpile of entangled photons and a procedure
called “dense coding,” the physicists were able to pack two bits onto each photon
they sent. In effect, some of the information passed by way of the nonlocal link.
Entangled particles also have the power to thwart black-ops government
agencies trying to listen in on your communications. The reason is that each pair
of entangled particles is strictly one-time-use only. Using a string of these
particles, you can send your friend a code key. Once your friend reads the key,
the entanglement is broken, like the self-destructing reel-to-reel tape on Mission:
Impossible. Then your friend can send you an encrypted message in complete
assurance of its privacy. If an eavesdropper gets to the particles first, he or she
can’t help but break the entanglement, and you’ll know you’re being watched.
Of course, it does little good to shield your personal data from the
government if you willingly type it in on a website. Fortunately, entangled
particles can help with that, too. In a procedure known as “secure” or “blind”
computation, you can share data with a web server while keeping the contents
strictly private. For instance, suppose you want to open a credit line and the
server asks for your salary to make sure you qualify. You can send your salary
figure in a scrambled form and prove you earn more than the threshold without
ever disclosing the precise amount.
Every experimentalist I have talked to calls these phenomena nonlocal. Even
Zeilinger does, despite his theoretical qualms. Technically, “nonlocality” for an
experimentalist simply means whatever it is that distinguishes quantum particles
from classical atoms. It might not be true nonlocality, but an illusion produced
by, say, the existence of parallel universes. But most experimentalists still
envision spooky influences zapping across space. It’s just easier to think that

way.
In short, nonlocality is winning practical approval just as Newton’s law of
gravity once did. Newton cautioned that the nonlocality implied by his law
might be illusory, but a new generation of physicists grew up with the law, saw
how powerful it was, and felt no need to explain it away. They accepted gravity
as a force generated at a distance. As the nineteenth-century psychologist
William James remarked, “As a rule we disbelieve all facts and theories for
which we have no use.” But scientists will quickly accept even the most
outlandish fact if you show them what they can do with it. A pioneering quantum
experimentalist, Nicholas Gisin of the University of Geneva, remarks that his
students are growing up with nonlocality and take it for granted. “Young guys
find it fascinating, but are not totally amazed,” Gisin says. “The kids here say,
that’s just the way it is.”

Thinking Beyond the Quantum
Besides its usefulness, nonlocality also stands above the other proposed
explanations because it fits into a larger context. In the next chapter, I’ll talk
about instances of nonlocality elsewhere in fundamental physics, but even
sticking to quantum mechanics, consider the peculiar fact that entangled
particles can achieve a desired pattern of outcomes 85 percent of the time rather
than 100 percent. The seeming arbitrariness of the number suggests to many that
quantum mechanics is just one of a class of conceivable nonlocal theories.
Nonlocality is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon, but a spectrum of possibilities.
Some types of nonlocality are weaker than Einstein’s and Bell’s variety. In the
same paper where he coined the term “entanglement,” Schrödinger described
how an entangled particle can “steer” its partner—an extremely subtle type of
remote control that doesn’t even create a special pattern in a coin-type
experiment. Since then, physicists have found other ways that nonlocality can
remain muted. Even such an enervated nonlocality is enough to perform useful
tasks such as evading government surveillance.
At the other end of the spectrum, physicists have imagined types of
nonlocality that are extra-powerful. In an influential paper in the 1990s, Sandu
Popescu of the University of Bristol and Daniel Rohrlich of Ben Gurion
University in Israel envisioned “superquantum” coins that would achieve the
desired pattern more than 85 percent of the time. As far as anyone can tell,
superquantum particles don’t exist, but they’ve been a helpful what-if scenario.
Engineers would be able to use such particles to build devices that are otherwise
impossible. For instance, consider one of the minor irritations of daily life:
finding an available time for a meeting. It is a deceptively hard problem, and
computers (even those that harness the power of quantum particles) are reduced
to flipping through attendees’ calendars and comparing them one day at a time.
But a computer using superquantum particles could find an available time slot in
a single step.
Conference planners and speed daters would surely love to have some of
those superquantum particles. But the power would come at a price. A world in
which such particles existed could suffer from a deep logistical inconsistency or

a tendency for complex structures to dissolve. In some inscrutable way, human
life would have been impossible if it were too easy to arrange meeting dates. By
trying to pinpoint how much nonlocality is too much, Popescu and Rohrlich
think they might learn why quantum mechanics is the way it is. In these ways,
the concept of nonlocality demonstrates the intellectual fertility that physicists
value so highly.

Nonlocality by Any Other Name
Perhaps the most remarkable fact about the nonlocality debate is that the various
alternatives aren’t as distinct as their proponents make them out to be. Spooky
action. Radical predestination. Precognition. Parallel universes. Unreality. What
a list! Whichever is right, physicists have won the jackpot. All these options—
even those that supposedly preserve locality—suggest a layer of reality beyond
our everyday notions of space. All interconnect particles and observers on the
opposite side of a lab bench, of Earth, or of the known universe. The only
difference is how.
To see this, let’s go through the options again. The most straightforward is
Bohm’s guiding field. In follow-ups to his original work, Bohm proposed that
the field should be thought of as an all-pervading fluid. Waves can sweep
through it like ripples across a pond, transmitting influences from one particle to
another. In truth, this idea is little more than a placeholder for ignorance. Waves
in this field are nothing like ordinary water waves; mathematically they ripple
through a higher-dimensional abstract space, and do so at infinite speed. The
infinite speed is not an idealization, but an essential element of this model. If the
putative waves traveled at a high but still finite speed, interactions among groups
of particles would transmit signals faster than light, and nothing like that has
ever been seen.
As soon as you start uttering the words “infinite speed,” you know something
can’t be right. Motion that is infinitely fast scarcely deserves to be called motion;
the thing that is “moving” is already at its destination, so how can it be said to
move there? The guiding field is not really a medium through which waves can
propagate, but a mathematical restatement of the fact that every particle depends
on every other particle. Bohm himself came to think that the guiding field isn’t a
real thing out there in the world, but a flashing warning light that spatial
concepts have failed. Instead of thinking of space as being filled with a guiding
field or fluid, he suggested that you shouldn’t be thinking of space at all.
The next option, superdeterminism, is said to eliminate nonlocality. On closer
inspection, it does nothing of the kind. It merely displaces nonlocality from the
present day to the big bang. Some law of nature had to determine what the

universe was like at time 0. This law was like an overbearing mother at her
daughter’s wedding, insisting that everything be just so. Particle number
1,618,034 and particle number 137,035,999 were given matching properties and
set in motion so that 13.8 billion years later, after countless collisions and
interactions, they would come together in a laboratory on Earth, a place that
didn’t even exist yet. In effect, the law had the entire evolution of the universe,
including interconnections among particles, already built into it. How is that any
different from letting the universe play out and act nonlocally on the fly? Even ’t
Hooft, the leading advocate of superdeterminism, is unsure whether it really
restores locality. “That is indeed a very difficult question that I’m asking myself
all the time … I still see the EPR/Bell experiment as a problem,” he says.
The third alternative, reverse causation, interconnects particles by means of
signals passing backwards in time. This scheme has an appealing elegance. It
requires no problematic guiding field to convey the influence from one particle
to another; the particles themselves carry it along their timelines by
“remembering” what happens to them in the future. Because the influence
travels with the particles, it never goes faster than light, let alone infinitely fast.
So this setup obeys Einstein’s theory of relativity, ensuring theoretical détente.
Nor does reverse causation demand an extreme fine-tuning of matter at the big
bang.
For all these advantages, there’s an irony here. One of the main reasons
physicists dislike nonlocality is that it might permit time travel. To avoid this
problem, proponents of reverse causation propose … time travel. So what do we
gain? It might be simpler just to accept the time travel that nonlocality would
imply.
Indeed, one might argue that reverse causation isn’t really an alternative to
nonlocal interactions, but a type of nonlocal interaction. Two particles on
opposite sides of the universe still manage to affect each other. The novelty is
that they do so by surreptitiously passing a message backward in time. Einstein
wouldn’t have liked this any more than he liked spooky action at a distance. His
prime objection to nonlocality was that it threatened to make the universe
incomprehensible. He asked: How can you pinpoint the cause of an event when
the cause might lie in some galaxy too far away to see? How can you conduct a
controlled experiment when you can’t isolate the experimental system from

distant influences? And these same objections apply to reverse causation. How
can you pinpoint the cause of an event when the cause might lie in the future?
How can you conduct a controlled experiment when you can’t isolate a system
from events that are yet to happen?
The fourth alternative, parallel universes and other forms of split-mindedness,
says that the synchrony among entangled particles is a kind of illusion, an
artifact of the highly selective view of reality that we have by virtue of living in
one universe among many. To mere mortals, the universe looks nonlocal, but to a
god who is able to survey the full scene, it is strictly local. Like the other options
for explaining entanglement, though, parallel universes are effectively nonlocal.
Each universe must have internal coherence: the right personality in one
observer must talk to the right personality in another observer. And this
coherence is a breed of nonlocality. In addition, parallel universes pull the rug
out from under experimental science in just the same way that overt nonlocality
does. Experiments can never probe the full ensemble of universes where locality
supposedly holds.
Parallel universes also have some rather disturbing implications. A crucial
role of locality for Einstein was to define what it means to be an individual;
without locality, separate things would lose their distinctness. Much the same
happens in parallel-universe scenarios. In a large enough proliferation of
universes, every conceivable arrangement of matter will repeat itself. More than
one creature will answer to your name, share all your memories, and be equally
convinced that it is you. Now that is spooky. Which one of them is you? You
can’t tell. You could be here, there, over there—in any number of places. So, if
parallel universes preserve a notion of locality, it isn’t fulfilling the functions that
locality is supposed to.
The fifth and final alternative, denial of realism, is harder to pick apart. Its
detractors think it’s flat wrong, and its proponents expend more energy on
talking down the other options than on laying out their own explanation for why
entangled particles match. But let’s give this option the benefit of the doubt. In
effect, the antirealists are saying that no explanation is possible or needed.
Arthur Fine (whose own views are not neatly categorized as either realist or
antirealist) has a nice way of putting it. Lack of realism means before you look at
a quantum coin, it’s in a state of limbo, and the act of observing the coin causes

it to snap to heads or tails at random. There’s no reason that the coin snaps to
heads rather than tails, or vice versa. It just does. Fine suggests taking this
thinking a step further. Once you accept that single events have no cause, it’s
natural to suppose that pairs of events have no cause. If nothing causes a coin to
snap to one side or the other, perhaps nothing causes its entangled partner to
snap to the same side. “If the individual events are undetermined, then what,
other than belief in determinism, would lead us to think that something ‘must be’
producing the correlations among them?” asks Fine.
In other words, the correlations that troubled Einstein and Bell may be no
more mysterious than the patterns that show up in any sequence of random
events. Toss a coin repeatedly, and it’ll come up heads and tails in nearly equal
proportions per the laws of chance. Fine proposes that quantum mechanics
extends this principle. Toss a coin here and a coin there, and they could exhibit a
pattern per a broader conception of the laws of chance. Fine calls these
correlations “randomness in harmony.” I have heard a similar description from
Gisin, the Swiss experimentalist: “We have randomness, but this randomness can
manifest itself at several locations.”
      *
By eschewing a mechanism for interconnecting particles, however, Fine
implicitly makes a dramatic claim about the nature of those particles. When two
people flip quantum coins, in effect they are flipping one coin, and the outcome
appears in two places, like a light switch that turns on two lamps at once. So
those seemingly distinct particles have lost their individuality as surely as they
have in the other options for understanding entanglement. Dispensing with
realism hasn’t eliminated nonlocality, but merely put a different spin on it.
Compare Fine’s randomness in harmony with Bohm’s guiding field. Fine’s
interpretation flouts the principle of separability: two seemingly distinct events
aren’t really two events. Bohm’s skewers the principle of local action: two
particles can communicate infinitely fast. Therefore each of these possibilities
obeys one aspect of locality and violates one aspect. Einstein thought a failure of
either aspect “entirely unacceptable.” Empirically, too, these options are
deadlocked. Both forbid you from using nonlocality to transmit signals, and both
do so for the same reason: you can’t control the particles.

Throughout this book, I have followed Einstein and treated separability and
local action as a single package. One reason is that, although you might
distinguish between them in the abstract, they almost always go together in
reality. For instance, suppose Bohm is right and the principle of local action
doesn’t hold. That means objects can act on one another even if they’re not
touching. Those objects have lost their independence. So, the violation of local
action also deprives the principle of separability of any significance. Conversely,
suppose Fine is right and the principle of separability doesn’t hold. That means
there are no individual objects. But if there are no individual objects, then how
can you talk about objects making direct contact? The principle of local action
becomes an empty statement.
Space Is Toast No Matter What
All in all, we don’t need to resolve the nonlocality debate to know that space
isn’t performing the functions that people have always assumed it does. If one
particle can influence another particle instantaneously, position becomes
meaningless; to be anywhere is to be everywhere. If one event manifests in two
locations, those two locations are not interconnected so much as collapsed into
one. Space is a hall of mirrors. What’s the point of it, then?
There’s a reason Einstein called quantum nonlocality “spooky action at a
distance” rather than just “action at distance.” It’s profoundly different from the
earlier types of nonlocality I talked about in chapter 2. Newton’s force of gravity
also acts instantaneously, but at least it weakens as you get farther away from an
object, so it still has spatial qualities. Entanglement, though, not only operates
instantaneously, but also loses none of its strength with distance. It’s like the
bond between lovers: it depends only on what went on between them in the past
and loses none of its power no matter how far apart they may be. How romantic!
But particles aren’t supposed to be romantic. They’re supposed to be gears in a
spatial clockwork.
Instead of thinking of quantum nonlocality as an effect that operates within
space, I think we need to take it as a sign that space itself is a doomed concept.
“We should really be trying to understand these correlations as being due not to
laws or influences, but as emerging in an organic way from an understanding of

what the underlying degrees of freedom are,” says Jenann Ismael, a philosopher
at the University of Arizona. To adapt a saying by one of Einstein’s teachers,
individual objects by themselves fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind
of union of them preserves an independent reality. The universe can’t be cut up
into separate regions of space, but must be considered holistically.
“Holism” is a word that has to be handled with care. Not only is it a slippery
concept to begin with, it has become a banner for all sorts of discontent with
science and modern life in general, and many scientists and philosophers react
defensively by shunning the word altogether. I’ve seen researchers tie
themselves up in knots trying to avoid describing quantum phenomena as
holistic. I have no such qualms. Nonlocality does mean we live in a holistic
universe, one that isn’t reducible to its spatial parts. The world has qualities that
are hidden to us when we view it piecemeal, but that reveal themselves when we
take it all in at once. Ultimately that’s why we can’t use quantum nonlocality to
send messages. To measure the holistic properties of an entangled pair of
particles, you have to measure both particles jointly. Such properties aren’t going
to be apparent if you measure just one particle on its own. So you can’t
manipulate one particle in the expectation that someone watching the other
particle will notice any difference.
The holism we’re talking about here operates at a much deeper level than
what yoga teachers and alternative-medicine practitioners speak of. Ironically,
the sentiments that motivate these believers in holism—a feeling of
interconnectedness with the rest of the natural world, and a frustration that
modern medicine fails to attend to the whole person—depend on nonholistic
physics. You can’t feel interconnected if there is no “you.” Your individuality
and your integrity as a person require nature to consist of independent parts. So
nature may well be intrinsically holistic, but it did not become capable of
sustaining life until it partitioned itself. It is the division of the world, not its
interconnectedness, that should awaken our wonder.
“Quantum correlations just happen, somehow from outside spacetime,” Gisin
concludes. To explain these correlations, physicists and philosophers will have to
go beyond spacetime—and also beyond quantum mechanics. The theory lays out
the options, but offers no definitive resolution, and the standard battery of
experiments can tell you only so much. “It is tempting to think that the holism

indicates a fundamental failing in our very notions of space and time,” Maudlin
has written. “After all, if … particles 1 and 2 are so fundamentally
interconnected, perhaps we are mistaken to think that they are really distinct
particles, or occupy different regions of spacetime. And perhaps our notions of
space and time could do with a fundamental revision. But the failure of
reductionism in quantum mechanics does not force this option on us.”
The situation changes when researchers look laterally to other domains of
physics. The nonlocality doesn’t go away, as many people hoped it would. It
becomes even more strongly entrenched, and new types of nonlocality augment
the particle synchrony that Einstein focused on. These new phenomena don’t just
whisper a failure of spatial concepts, but sing it loud. “I’m sure there is no story
in spacetime,” Gisin says, “but I’m sure there is a story.”

5
Nonlocality and the Unification of
Physics
When Steve Giddings decided to climb Denali in 2003, he naturally chose one of
the most dramatic and demanding ascents, the Cassin Ridge route. It crosses the
Valley of Death, an avalanche and crevasse zone whose name is not merely
metaphorical. Sometimes rescue teams can’t safely recover the bodies;
sometimes they can’t even find the bodies. The Cassin is an all-around test of
mountaineering skill: technical rock and ice climbing, crevasse crossing, Arctic
camping, and, not least, patience. Giddings built up his endurance on the trails
around Santa Barbara; he’d scramble up steep ridges with a fifty-pound
backpack, return to the bottom, repeat. The Denali attempt started well. But his
climbing buddy developed blisters so deep they threatened to cut into his
Achilles tendon. Then a storm rolled in as they reached the advance base camp
at fourteen thousand feet, holding them there. Even the standard route up was
closed off. “We saw streams of climbers head up that route to a higher camp, at
about seventeen thousand feet, get beaten back by the weather, and head down
the mountain defeated,” he recalls.
Giddings’s efforts to study black holes had been the intellectual equivalent of
his Denali expedition. These mysterious cosmic objects are an all-around test of
modern physics. Because their gravity is intense, you need to analyze them using
gravity theory—namely, Einstein’s general theory of relativity. And because

quantum effects are strong in them, you also need to consider quantum theory.
So you can’t get away with shirking one theory or the other to make the job
easier. And when you do apply both theories to black holes, they don’t mesh. To
break the theoretical deadlock, Giddings proposed in the early 1990s that a
nonlocal mechanism operates in these objects.
The idea stirred up a storm. In physics, as in mountaineering, it’s hard to
know when to press on and when to turn back; the field rewards stubbornness,
but only up to a point. Giddings decided to move on to other problems. “Maybe
the community wasn’t quite ready for it,” he supposes. To most of his
colleagues, giving up locality didn’t reconcile the two theories so much as
forsake them. Einstein and the others who created these theories had done so
with the express purpose of expunging nonlocality from physics. Newton’s
gravity acted at a distance, as if by magic, and general relativity snapped the
wand in two. Likewise, quantum mechanics in its original incarnation covered
how particles react to forces, but left out how those forces were transmitted; it
implicitly assumed that forces leap across space. Physicists had to develop an
advanced version called quantum field theory to fill in the mechanism of
propagation. To this day, they present both general relativity and quantum field
theory to their students and the public as the epitome of locality.
Yet physics theories, like mountains, have an uncanny capacity to surprise. In
creating any theory, physicists cobble together various ideas gleaned from
experiment and intuition. The result invariably transcends its original context.
Heinrich Hertz, who helped to devise the theory of electromagnetism in the
nineteenth century, remarked: “It is impossible to study this wonderful theory
without feeling as if the mathematical equations had an independent life and an
intelligence of their own, as if they were wiser than ourselves, indeed wiser than
their discoverer, as if they gave forth more than he had put into them.” So it was
a century later with general relativity and quantum field theory. Whatever their
creators’ intentions may have been, the theories began to reveal a different side
as physicists put them to use. The workings of the forces of nature turned out to
be sparkling with nonlocal phenomena.
These instances of nonlocality, which are distinct from those that spooked
Einstein about quantum mechanics, are the subject of this chapter. They indicate
that the locality we observe in daily life may not be characteristic of the way

things really are. Although forces act locally—their influence spreads through
space at a limited speed—this locality doesn’t seem to be rooted in the structure
of nature. There are no separated entities that transmit and receive these forces;
the world can’t be partitioned into independent spatial pieces. And in that case
space must not be the true venue of physics.
It has taken decades for most physicists to process these peculiar features of
their theories. A tipping point came in the 1990s. At the time, theorists working
on unifying physics were split into two main camps, both of which were
reaching similar conclusions about nonlocality. Those who took the approach
known as loop quantum gravity argued that force fields are a big tangle that
binds together far-flung locations in space. Meanwhile, the competing approach
of string theory grew so far beyond its original conception—that subatomic
particles are vibrating stretches or coils of energy—that physicists came to refer
to it as “the theory formerly known as strings.” The string theorist Juan
Maldacena, then at Harvard and now at the Institute for Advanced Study,
developed a concept known as “AdS/CFT duality,” in which locations that seem
far apart can lie right on top of each other. What appears to be spatial distance is
in fact a difference in energy.
Don Marolf, a colleague of Giddings’s at UC Santa Barbara, and one of the
few people who move in both loop-theorist and string-theorist circles, recalls
how nonlocality emerged from obscurity: “The discussion increased
significantly in the late 1980s and early 1990s due to the birth and growth of
loop quantum gravity, which made the issue seem more pressing and relevant to
a growing community. Then Maldacena’s discovery of AdS/CFT in 1997 made
the issue of great interest to a much larger community.”
Consequently, when Giddings resumed arguing for nonlocality in black holes,
in 2001, he enjoyed a very different reception than he had before. Nonlocality no
longer seemed so crazy. To the contrary, it now began to strike theorists as
entirely natural. If quantum field theory and gravity theory exhibited nonlocality,
it seemed quite plausible that some nonlocal mechanism might operate in black
holes. Having achieved this professional vindication, Giddings made his Denali
climb two years later. For ten days, he and his limping buddy waited out the bad
weather in the base camp. When the skies finally cleared, Giddings set out with
another team of climbers and reached the summit. “The most sublime part of the

trip was skiing down the lower Kahiltna Glacier the following night, late at night
but still in the Alaska twilight, with shadows and colors playing across the
nearby peaks of the Alaska Range,” he says. “I’ll never forget how beautiful that
was.”

Quantum Field Theory
As I talked about in chapter 3, Einstein and others developed quantum
mechanics to resolve paradoxes in the classical conception of light. It was kind
of a letdown, then, that the first mathematical formulations of the theory couldn’t
explain light. The equations nicely described material particles moving at
modest speeds, but didn’t impose any speed limit, as relativity theory demanded.
So they couldn’t handle things moving near or at the speed of light. Considering
that light moves at the speed of light, this was a serious limitation.
Quantum field theory was the relativity-friendly, hence light-friendly, sequel
to quantum mechanics. To develop it, physicists in the 1920s and ’30s took two
approaches, depending on whether they thought light is ultimately particle or
wave. Some, such as Paul Dirac in England and, later, Richard Feynman in the
United States, were partial to particles. They adopted the atomist picture of little
billiard balls caroming around. You just had to make the picture more
sophisticated by supposing that the balls can be created and annihilated on the
fly. That way, atoms can emit light by creating a photon and absorb light by
destroying one. Classical electromagnetic waves are built up from great big
effervescent gobs of photons. Other electromagnetic phenomena, such as static
electric and magnetic forces, can be thought of as photonic billiards, too.
Although the theory originally described just photons and electrons, it was later
extended to neutrinos, quarks, Higgs particles, and the rest of the subatomic zoo.
Other theorists, such as the Austrian-born Wolfgang Pauli, gave primacy to
waves. For them, the world is like a pond in a rainstorm, trembling with ripples
that form, spread, and merge. The “pond” is the electromagnetic field that
invisibly fills the space all around us. Waves of every sort course through it:
long, short, tall, squat. Theorists apply quantum mechanics to each individual
type of wave and sum up the whole glorious mess. In this view, what we
perceive as “particles” are not motes of matter, but units of wave energy.
In a remarkable case of convergent evolution, the particle and wave
viewpoints led to the same equations. There was no need to choose between
them. You could think of light—and not just light, but all forms of energy and
matter—as either particulate or wavy, and you could call the subject either

theoretical particle physics or quantum field theory. (Even now physicists use
these terms interchangeably.)
A big part of the achievement was figuring out how relativity theory fits in.
The founders of quantum field theory didn’t incorporate all of relativity theory;
they left Einstein’s explanation of gravity for another day and concentrated on
ensuring that particles or waves wouldn’t outrun light. This was surprisingly
tricky. As Pauli pointed out, a moving particle or wave might cease to exist at
any moment and bequeath its energy to new particles or waves, confounding
your attempts to follow it, let alone check whether it’s breaking the speed limit.
Instead of attempting to impose a limit on speed per se, Pauli focused on the
consequences of speed—like a cop who writes you a speeding ticket based not
on a radar gun reading, but on the fact that you got home before you were
supposed to.
Imagine that space is chopped into two parts: one that a signal can reach
within a certain time, and one that it can’t. If you send a signal and the intended
recipient is inside the first region, he should get it; if he’s in the second region,
forget it. Physicists call this rule “microcausality.” “Causality” refers to the fact
that signaling is the paradigmatic example of a cause-effect relation.
Microcausality is agnostic as to what exactly is conveying the signal: a particle,
a wave, or something else entirely. There’s some controversy over whether
microcausality is the essential lesson to draw from relativity theory, but the
alternatives also divvy up space into zones that light can either reach or not.
All these features of quantum field theory reflected physicists’ intuitions
about locality. The two competing worldviews from which the theory emerged—
particles or waves—are both local. Particles are localized scraps of matter and
interact with one another only by making direct contact or by enlisting other
particles as middlemen. Waves in a field convey forces from one place to
another in a continuous sweep without any miraculous nonlocal jumps. Indeed,
the whole reason that Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell introduced the
electric and magnetic fields in the nineteenth century, as I discussed in chapter 2,
was to guarantee locality. Microcausality or an equivalent rule ensures that
particles or waves move at a finite speed, providing a measure of isolation
among separate regions of space.
To say that physicists “developed” quantum field theory implies that they

knew what they were doing. All along, though, they were stumbling around and
often deeply doubtful about what they’d gotten themselves into. By combining
elements of both quantum mechanics and relativity theory, physicists had
performed a shotgun marriage with unforeseeable consequences. To this day,
physicists struggle to fathom what quantum field theory is telling them about the
world. As we saw in the previous chapter, ordinary quantum mechanics isn’t a
model of transparency, either, but at least it’s fairly simple mathematically; you
don’t even need calculus to do useful calculations. Quantum field theory is
another story. It has a deserved reputation as the most mathematically badass
subject in the sciences. Even experts hang on for dear life. Joe Polchinski at the
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics in Santa Barbara tells me he retook his
first course on the theory twice over and got his Ph.D. still not feeling entirely at
ease with it.
It’s the job of philosophers to make sense of physics, but the fearsomeness of
quantum field theory has scared most of them off. One of the few who isn’t
intimidated is Hans Halvorson of Princeton University. To the contrary, he likes
nothing more than hacking his way through mathematical thickets. He’s the kind
of person who does his own taxes every year and complains it’s too easy. “When
I started doing quantum field theory as a grad student, I was so happy,” he
recalls. “There’s an endless supply of problems.” His love of burrowing into
algebraic formulae is just what the subject demands. If anything, he has the
opposite problem from other philosophers: he struggles with conceptual
thinking, the hallmark of philosophy. But the fact that philosophizing doesn’t
come naturally to Halvorson appeals to him: it is his mountain to climb. “I tend
to make things too mathematical,” he says. “A mathematician here told me,
‘Step away from the equations for a minute.’ A mathematician!… The hard part
is interpreting what the mathematics means.”

Parting with Particles
What it means, apparently, is that our world consists neither of particles nor of
fields, at least not in the way these terms are commonly understood: as structures
that embody the principle of locality. Physicists still speak of “quantum
particles” and “quantum fields,” but that’s like saying “open secret” or “paid
volunteer.” The adjective “quantum” connotes “kind of like a particle, but not”
or “has some decidedly un-field-like characteristics.”
Take the particle viewpoint first. According to the older theory of quantum
mechanics, a particle’s position and velocity are uncertain. You don’t know
where it’ll turn up or how fast it’ll be moving. But at least it does turn up
somewhere. That’s no longer true once you factor in relativity theory, as you
need to do if the velocities involved are a fair fraction of the speed of light. The
reason goes back to a key fact about quantum uncertainty. The velocity and
position of a particle are not independent quantities. If you know the spread of
possible velocities, you can calculate the spread of possible positions using the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, and vice versa. Relativity theory spoils this
conversion by requiring that the uncertainty principle be observer-independent.
Now, when you translate velocity to position, you find that different positions
are no longer mutually exclusive. You might find the same particle in two
different places at once, or the particle in one place and its energy somewhere
else. The combination of quantum mechanics with relativity violates locality in
what was, for Einstein, its most basic sense: the stipulation that all things have a
location.
For relativity to be implicated in nonlocality is a stunning reversal. Einstein’s
cosmic speed limit was supposed to have banished nonlocality, not entrenched it.
“When we see this happen, we say, ‘Oh great, we thought we had prevented this
from happening,’” Halvorson remarks. “People think relativity is contrary to
nonlocality, but here relativity gives rise to nonlocality.”
In an influential analysis in 1949, the quantum theory pioneer Eugene Wigner
and his student Ted Newton showed that a particle could have an unambiguous
location only if relativity did not apply to location measurements. In that case,
though, observers would no longer agree on what the universe looks like,

introducing a worrisome subjectivity into physics. That’s a steep price to pay,
and it wouldn’t even solve the problem. Now observers would disagree not only
on what a particle’s position is but on whether it even had a position. Some
could narrow the particle’s location to a confined region, while others could see
it materialize anywhere in the universe. Those observers who did find a particle
at some well-defined location might see it suddenly leap to the far side of the
universe—an effect that, if real, would let engineers build a faster-than-light
communications system. Okay, you might say, let’s give up trying to pinpoint
particles and simply try to count them. Even this modest ambition will fail, as
different observers will come up with differing answers.
All in all, quantum field theory says that looking for particles is like playing a
shell game. You can’t get a fix on them, you see them disappear from one spot
and reappear in another, you can’t even agree on how many there are. The
darned things are beginning to look like a scam. Most physicists and
philosophers have concluded that little billiard balls just can’t exist in our
universe. “There isn’t anything that’s truly localized,” Halvorson says.
The “particles” that appear in the equations of quantum field theory are
actually a type of wave. Such “particles” exist at no one location, but throughout
the entire field, just as a note picked on a guitar string doesn’t exist at any
particular place along the string, but spans the entire length. Their only claim to
the term “particle” is that they represent discrete chunks of energy and
momentum. And even this denuded usage of the word “particle” works only
when energy and momentum can be divided into autonomous chunks. When
fields are interacting intensely, waves are so jumbled that particles no longer
exist, even by a liberal definition.
Physicists routinely talk about particles. Almost everything written about
physics, from textbooks to bathroom graffiti, talks about particles. For many
purposes, it’s still fine to talk about particles. But there is no such word in the
language nature itself speaks. Every time you see what you think is a particle,
you need to look more closely. For instance, the most widely used formulation of
quantum field theory—the system of stick-figure diagrams devised by Feynman
that I talked about in chapter 1—shows particles as interacting at specific places
in space and time. These diagrams are commonly used to study scenarios such as
the collision of two particles. But any given scenario involves an infinity of

diagrams, although you might get by with “just” hundreds or millions. An
individual diagram doesn’t represent anything out there in the real world; only
the aggregation of diagrams is meaningful. So, the diagrams are just a useful
mathematical device, a way to break down a big problem into manageable
chunks, like saying that the average American family has 1.9 kids and 2.3 cars.
The particles that appear in these diagrams, including the “virtual particles” that
often figure into discussions of physics, are our mental constructs. “They can’t
actually be saying anything about reality,” Halvorson says.
Experimental physicists, for their part, build particle detectors like the
MacGyverish cloud chamber I duct-taped together in my basement, and it stands
to reason that particle detectors detect particles. In fact, all they are really
registering is little bursts of wave energy—transient disturbances like glints of
sunlight off the choppy surface of a pond. It’s tempting to connect the dots and
assume that flecks of matter are flying through the instrument. Resist the
temptation.

Farewell to Fields
If the world isn’t made of particles, by default it must consist of fields, right?
Maxwell visualized electric and magnetic fields as an assemblage of conveyor
belts and rolling drums, like an Industrial Revolution steel mill. As children of
the information age, we might compare fields to a flat-screen TV or computer
display: a mosaic of little pixels. To carry the analogy further, each “pixel” is a
little localized doodad, like a particle, but fixed in place. It has attributes
analogous to brightness and color. It can exert a force on objects, respond to the
forces that objects exert on it, and interact with its immediate neighbors. If, for
instance, you put a compass in a magnetic field, nearby pixels will grab hold of
the needle and twist it to align with their own direction. Conversely, if you wave
a magnet, nearby pixels will respond, their neighbors will respond in turn, and a
ripple will spread across the screen. The metaphor works well as long as you
imagine the screen as having an infinite resolution, so that its elements are not
tiny squares of light, but geometric points of zero size. They form a continuum
without any seams or gaps.
That was the idea, at any rate. Yet quantum field theory subverts the classical
notion of field as surely as it sweeps away particles. The namesake “fields” of
quantum field theory are arrays not of things, but of operations. The field can
act, and be acted upon, at specific locations. It can cause a compass needle to
spin, and it can absorb energy that you pump in. But what’s producing these
effects? The theory doesn’t say. It suffers from all the interpretive ambiguities
we have already seen for the older theory of quantum mechanics. Quantum field
theory specifies what a field does, but not what it is. And whatever the field may
be, it definitely can’t be an array of pixels. The earlier arguments against
particles also rule out pixels sitting at each point in space. Nor can the field be
any other kind of localized structure, because it has nonlocal properties. What
the field does in one part of space depends on what it does elsewhere. The
concept of the field, says Halvorson, “seems like it’s backfired in quantum field
theory. You can cut space into blocks, but the blocks are highly interconnected.
We’ve undermined our own theoretical advance.”

Entanglement on Steroids
Quantum field theory has two distinct types of nonlocality. The first is a
supercharged form of quantum entanglement. Inklings of it first appeared in the
work of Feynman, who showed that particles can break the Einsteinian speed
limit as long as they don’t get caught—that is, as long as they don’t convey
information or cause something to happen that otherwise wouldn’t. Later
physicists recognized Feynman’s faster-than-light propagation as a version of the
spooky synchrony of entangled particles. Instead of particles being entangled,
points in the field are. If you put two measuring instruments at different
locations in a field, their readings can match even though nothing passes through
the space that separates them.
The effects of relativity theory make field entanglement more than just a
warmed-over version of ordinary particle entanglement. Recall that any given
observer sees space as divided into two pieces: one that is close enough to
receive a signal in a given amount of time, and one that is too far away. To
respect this division, the waves that ripple through the field must add up in just
the right way. Their high degree of coordination implies a powerful bond
between far-flung locations. “The very fact that stuff is constrained in
momentum … means that stuff is connected in position space,” Halvorson says.
The upshot is what he and his colleagues have termed “superentanglement.”
Whereas regular entanglement connects certain aspects of two or more particles,
such as their polarization, superentanglement links every aspect of everything.
It’s not just a particle here and a particle there. Every point in space is entangled
with every other point. That even includes points lying beyond the observable
universe. And the entanglement is as firmly knotted as a kindergartner’s
shoelaces. You can sever the bonds between entangled particles, but you can’t
ever disentangle a field.
This intricate web of nonlocal connections has impressive consequences. It
lets you do the magic-coins experiment of chapter 1 without going through the
rigmarole of creating and exchanging entangled particles. Just pluck the coins
out of thin air—that is, from the fields that are already around you—and flip
them. They will land on heads or tails at random, and always in harmony with

each other. For dramatic effect, you could even do the experiment in a perfect
vacuum—not a particle in sight. Just stick a pair of instruments into the field,
they will pick up its residual random jittering, and the readings will match. “You
may have forgotten to arrange the experiment,” Halvorson says. “The universe
will have arranged one for you.”
How kind of it. But this charity has limits. The experiment is damned hard to
do and, despite various proposals, no one has tried it for real. One reason is that,
in order for the field to satisfy the microcausality rule and related conditions, the
correlations must be highly specific in location. The situation reminds me of the
spotty cell-phone service in my house: I get five bars while standing in my
kitchen, but zero when I step into the dining room. If I switched cell-phone
providers, I might get a signal in the dining room, but none in the kitchen. By
analogy, a physicist’s measuring instruments might detect spooky correlations at
first, but go blank if moved a smidge farther apart. The field will still be
entangled at the new locations, but the experimenter would have to switch to
another type of measuring instrument to continue detecting the correlations. The
field has “got this nonlocality at all distances, but any given type of nonlocality
will die off,” Halvorson says. If physicists can solve this technical problem,
though, fields may become the preferred source of entanglement for quantum
cryptography and computation.
Field entanglement enables entirely new classes of phenomena. You can
entangle an atom with a field, then entangle the field with a second atom. At that
point, the two atoms will be entangled with each other even though they never
interacted directly. Entanglement also orchestrates phases of matter besides the
usual solid, liquid, and gas. Those ordinary phases are distinguished by how
atoms and molecules are arranged, such as the neat rows of a crystal or the
helter-skelter of a gas. The new phases are more elaborately ordered, with large-
ensemble choreographies worthy of a Bollywood movie. In these situations,
nonlocal effects don’t get washed out with distance, and they endow materials
with properties that once seemed magical, such as superconductivity, a condition
in which electric current flows without resistance.
Until fairly recently, most theorists thought of these phenomena as mere
parlor tricks. “Traditionally, my colleagues and I were not so impressed with
entanglement,” recalls Nima Arkani-Hamed, the ayatollah-escaping theorist

from chapter 1. “Laypeople love it, but—big whoop! All the action is elsewhere.
The fact that paying attention to entanglement might pay off in nontrivial ways is
surprising.” In fact, he now thinks the tangling-up of fields could be the defining
feature of quantum field theory: “The right way to think about quantum field
theory may be to think of mutual entanglement among regions.”
Going back to our flat-screen TV metaphor, you might visualize field
entanglement as a nest of wires crisscrossing the back of the screen to link pixels
together. For most purposes, this isn’t a bad image, and you can still think of the
field in basically the same way that Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell
did. But deep down it fails. Entanglement doesn’t mean that the brightness and
color of one pixel can become coordinated with the brightness and color of other
pixels. It means that individual pixels don’t actually have brightness or color
values; only groups of entangled pixels do. An entangled field has holistic
qualities that do not exist in any one place, but span the entirety of space.

Gauge Crossing
The second category of nonlocality in quantum field theory isn’t a quantum
effect but a structure that is latent in the nature of electric, magnetic, and other
force fields. In fact, you can catch a glimpse of it by looking outside your
window to a high-voltage power line and marveling at the birds perching on it in
complete safety. The birds don’t fry because high voltage, per se, has no effect.
Birds, sadly, do get electrocuted, but only when they touch two wires at once,
creating a path for current to flow through their little bodies. What gives them
the shock is the difference in voltage—or, to be more careful with terminology,
the difference in the electric potential.
This feature of electricity is known as gauge invariance, so called because
electrical effects don’t vary if you raise or lower the potential, as long as you
keep potential differences the same. Two wires could be at 0 volts and 120 volts,
or 120 volts and 240 volts, or 1,000,000 volts and 1,000,120 volts, and you could
never tell which. The most riveting demonstration of this principle is an
experiment Faraday first performed in 1836 and which never fails to get a crowd
oohing and aahing at science museums today. He built a twelve-foot wooden
box, draped it in copper wire and tinfoil, and climbed in. His assistants
electrified the outside using a giant electrostatic generator, giving the cube and
all within it a high voltage relative to the rest of the room. Lightning bolts began
to crackle all around as if the Gates of Hell had opened. On the inside, though,
Faraday conducted electrical experiments as if he were in the quietest seaside
cottage. The high voltage had no effect on him. He wrote: “I went into the cube
and lived in it, and using lighted candles, electrometers, and all other tests of
electrical states, I could not find the least influence upon them, or indication of
anything particular given by them, though all the time the outside of the cube
was powerfully charged, and large sparks and brushes were darting off from
every part of its outer surface.”
An analogous, if less stageworthy, situation also occurs for magnetism. There
is a magnetic potential as well as an electric potential, and in fact you can trade
off raising and lowering the two potentials, making the definition of voltage even
more fluid. Forces other than electromagnetism are gauge-invariant, too. In fact,

“gauge” is probably theoretical physicists’ second favorite word after “coffee.”
Gauge invariance is central to their conception of how forces operate. But what
does it mean? Why exactly does only the potential difference matter?
Theorists commonly take gauge invariance to be self-justifying—a symmetry,
or pleasing harmoniousness, like that of a circle. Just as you can spin a circle
without changing its appearance, you can raise or lower the potential without
changing anything measurable. By this way of thinking, gauge invariance is an
expression of the elegance of nature, and physicists are softies for elegance. But
a growing number of theorists find this explanation unsatisfying. Raising or
lowering the potential is not a physical manipulation of the world like spinning a
circle; only the potential difference is ever under our control. It also seems rather
suspicious that the supposed elegance leads to so many mathematical
complications. “Textbooks rhapsodize about gauge symmetry,” Arkani-Hamed
has said. “Gauge symmetry is a complete fiction. It’s all in our heads.” He thinks
gauge invariance is instead a sign of nonlocality: “You could take the existence
of gauge fields as the first of many, many hints that we need to abandon
locality.”
Locality holds that each point in space has properties independent of other
points, which suggests that the wire should have a potential defined in some
absolute sense. Maybe it’s 1,000,000 volts. If a bird standing on this wire plants
its other claw on a wire at a potential of 1,000,120 volts, the potential difference
will be 120 volts. This sounds very sensible. If you have a difference, surely you
must have two numbers that you’re subtracting. But if you ask an electrician to
tell you the potential of a single wire—not the difference between it and another
wire, but the potential of the wire on its own—he or she will give you a puzzled
look (and then charge you $140 for his or her time). A theorist will be struck
equally dumb if you ask how the potential varies from moment to moment.
Although Maxwell’s equations make a prediction for the value of the potential,
they also let you add whatever fudge factor you want to that value. Locality has
led us to assume the existence of something that’s impossible to measure or to
predict definitively, and that’s no good.
Maxwell thought the particulars of a given situation—the setup of batteries,
coils, and magnets that you wire together—would fix the value of the potential at
every point in space. But he found himself predicting that disturbances in the

potential would zap from one side of the universe to the other instantaneously.
Recoiling from this blatant nonlocality, his immediate successors, such as
Heinrich Hertz, deemed the very concept of the potential an “inanity” and
vowed, somewhat melodramatically, to “murder” it. They rewrote Maxwell’s
equations to do away with the electric potential as a fundamental ingredient of
nature. The equations we now call “Maxwell’s equations” aren’t really
Maxwell’s.
Whatever these equations should really be called, they say that all
electromagnetic phenomena are produced by electric and magnetic force fields,
which have a definite (and measurable) strength everywhere in space, in
accordance with locality. The potential is derivative: it represents how much
energy a force field can impart to charged particles. Mathematically, the
potential is a useful but optional concept. If you really wanted to freak out that
electrician, you could talk about electricity without ever uttering the word “volt.”
And if the potential doesn’t really exist, it doesn’t matter that you can’t measure
or predict it. The fact that you can raise or lower its value with impunity has no
deeper significance, and the disturbances that propagate instantaneously are
purely fictional.
      *
So, Victorian-era physicists figured that their act of theoretical homicide had
reconciled gauge invariance with locality. By the mid-twentieth century, though,
theorists such as Paul Dirac realized that giving primacy to the force field didn’t
eliminate the mystery. The force field may look local, but on closer inspection it
has some nonlocal properties of its own. The strength of the field at a given
location is not free to take on any old value, but only a limited menu dictated by
values elsewhere in space. The values are interdependent, or, in the argot,
mutually “constrained.” If the field is like a flat-screen TV, it is a broken flat-
screen TV, whose pixels are short-circuited together so that one pixel can be
turned on only if a certain combination of other pixels is also turned on. Such a
screen can display only a limited range of images—like a TV that can show the
Super Bowl, but not Downton Abbey.
An example of these constraints involves the orientation, or polarization, of
light waves. Light can be polarized in two distinct directions. That’s why modern

3-D movies use polarized light: the movie projector shines two images on the
screen, one in each polarization, and the 3-D glasses ensure that each eye sees
the polarization intended for it. But there’s something a bit weird about this.
Why aren’t there three polarizations? After all, space has three dimensions—that
is, three possible directions of motion. Some types of waves, such as seismic
waves in the Earth, oscillate in all three. Why not light waves? Because of the
constraint. It shackles together different points in the field, thereby restricting
their range of motion like a line of can-can dancers locked arm in arm, kicking
out in front, but never to the side. Mathematically, the constraint is defined in
terms of the properties of individual points in space, yet it deprives those points
of their autonomy. Part of what locality means is freedom from such constraints.
Different locations in the field are supposed to be independent—able to affect
one another by sending out ripples through space, but not rigidly locked together
as a matter of logical necessity.
To deepen the challenge to the old sanguine view of gauge invariance, in
1959 the theorist David Bohm and his then-student Yakir Aharonov proposed a
quantum version of Faraday’s cage experiment. Electrons, rather than lighted
candles, function as the test probes. This experiment is tricky to do and
physicists didn’t pull it off until 1985, but the analogous test for magnetism is
easier and was done within a year of Bohm and Aharonov’s proposal. Result:
particles do behave differently inside a high-voltage cage. The wave pattern they
create is shifted. It is shifted even though the electric force field inside the cage
is zero and, by the standard rules of electromagnetism, not a thing should
happen.
For most physicists, this came as a shock, and few believed it at first. But
they came to accept that localized structures are mismatched to the reality of
electromagnetism. The electric potential is too much: a given potential difference
could arise from an infinite variety of absolute potential levels, creating a richer
set of possibilities than nature ever realizes. The electric force field is too little: it
isn’t rich enough to capture the shifting of electron wave patterns, just as a
computer screen can’t do justice to the saturated colors of a Chagall painting.
Theorists needed some structure that is just right. And with the local possibilities
exhausted, this third bowl of porridge presumably has to be nonlocal.

      *
It took even longer for philosophers to catch up to these developments. One of
the first was Richard Healey of the University of Arizona. Whereas many people
trace their love of science to some early influence—a parent or teacher who
opened their eyes to the wonders of the universe—Healey says he was drawn by
the lack of any such influence. “I was surrounded by people who knew all sorts
of stuff, but they didn’t know about science,” he recalls. “That was my corner on
the market.” School reaffirmed his contrarian passions. “I suffered through high
school physics,” he says. “I hated it. I knew what these guys were hiding from
me. I wanted to know more—I certainly wasn’t learning that in high school.” His
career, too, has been built on watching what other people were doing and then
doing something else. Because philosophers in the 1990s largely neglected
gauge invariance, he naturally gravitated to it. “Back then, I felt very lonely,” he
once admitted to his colleagues.
What fascinates Healey is that gauge invariance could reveal a whole new
type of nonlocality, completely distinct from the entanglement phenomena that
Einstein and John Bell agonized over. The electrons in the Aharonov-Bohm
experiment need not be entangled or otherwise specially prepared. They are
serving more as spectators than as actors. By virtue of their wave nature, they are
sensitive to features of the world that ordinary objects are oblivious to, and they
bring out a kind of sleeper nonlocality within force fields.
Though different from entanglement, the nonlocality of gauge invariance does
have comparable effects. “People draw distinctions between the Aharonov-
Bohm effect and Bell inequalities, but they have an awful lot in common,”
Healey says. Entanglement binds particles together into an integral whole, with
collective properties that individual particles lack. Gauge invariance likewise
endows fields with features that exist in no particular place, but span a wide
region of space. In both cases, the system is not merely the sum of its spatial
parts—contrary to the aspect of locality that Einstein called the principle of
separability. A field is separable almost by definition, so the failure of this
principle is bad news for the concept of fields. At the same time, both
entanglement and gauge invariance do respect the other aspect of locality that
Einstein identified, the principle of local action, since neither phenomenon will
let you transmit a signal, remote-pilot a drone, or beam happy thoughts to your

loved ones far away.
So, if forces aren’t conveyed by fields and aren’t conveyed by particles, what
are they conveyed by? Healey advocates an idea that goes back to Dirac and
gained traction among physicists in the years after Aharonov and Bohm’s
experiment. It’s based on a crucial clue: the potential at a single point may be
ambiguous, but if you add up the potential at multiple points forming a closed
loop, that quantity is unambiguous. For instance, you might begin at the back
door of your house, walk in a big circle around your yard, and return to your
starting point, measuring the electromagnetic potential along the way. Individual
readings will depend on your arbitrary choice about what to define as zero volts,
yet the sum of all your readings will be independent of this choice. Somehow
this series of readings feels out a structure in nature that individual readings fail
to pick up. Whatever causes electricity to flow and magnets to stick to a fridge,
then, might not be a neat array like a computer screen, but an intricate lacework
like a crocheted scarf. “Loops, not points, are the natural home of
electromagnetism,” Healey says.
The loops are spread out (violating separability), but transmit electric and
magnetic forces by jiggling one another (satisfying local action). Under ordinary
circumstances, you can’t tell the difference between loops and classical fields. In
effect, the loops are pulled so tight that they look like points in a regular grid.
But the true nature of the fabric becomes unmistakable when one of the stitches
gets caught on a nail and yanked out. In the Aharonov-Bohm experiment, the
electrified cage acts like that nail, distending one of the loops and creating
effects that Maxwell never dreamed of. When you try to capture these effects
using a local structure such as the potential, you are left with some ambiguity.
The moral of the story is that quantum field theory is messing with our
notions of space. It’s not a theory of localized building blocks such as particles
or pixels; in fact, such things seem to be impossible. Instead, it’s a theory of
delocalized structures, whether loops or something else. Technically, this fact
doesn’t demand that we give up our notions of space. We can still imagine those
loops, or whatever they are, as existing within space. “We’re not losing the
points,” Healey says. “It’s the structure that’s defined on them that’s nonlocal.”
But situating loops within space is like holding a rock concert in a symphony
hall. You can do it, but everything seems off. Physicists and philosophers have

always inferred the nature of space from the behavior of matter. The ancient
Greek atomists invented the concept of space in order to give particles a place to
play. For modern theorists, space is the substrate of fields. If particles and fields
don’t really exist, space loses its raison d’être.
Einstein’s Theory of Gravitation
Quantum field theory really pulled a practical joke on physicists. It is local in
some ways, but nonlocal in others, and it makes us wonder whether space is all
it’s cracked up to be. A similar saga has played out for the other pillar of modern
physics, general relativity. Arguably, the failure of space is even more striking in
that theory.
One day in autumn, Don Marolf and I were talking about gravity while sitting
in the student center of the UC Santa Barbara campus, eating salads and looking
out over the lagoon. But hang on. How did I really know I was sitting in the
UCSB student center on a certain day in autumn? The principle of locality says
that I had a position, the student center had a position, and when these two
positions coincided, I was there. The GPS coordinates on my phone matched
those of the center, and the date matched the calendar on the wall. But this
seemingly straightforward procedure doesn’t stand up on examination. “To ask a
question about here, we should know what we mean by ‘here,’ and that’s not so
easy to do,” Marolf says.
One obvious complication is that California is tectonically active. The crustal
plate on which Santa Barbara sits is moving northwest by a couple of inches per
year relative to the rest of North America and to the national latitude and
longitude grid. So the student center has no fixed position. If I come back some
years from now and go to the same coordinates, I’ll find myself sitting in that
lagoon. Mapping companies must periodically resurvey tectonic zones to
account for this motion.
You might suppose that the student center still has a position defined in an
absolute sense by space itself. Yet space is no more stable than a tectonic plate. It
can slide, heave, and buckle. When a massive body shifts, it sends tremors
through the spacetime continuum, resculpting it. The position of the cafeteria
might change as a result. This process, rather than Newton’s mysterious action at

a distance, is how gravity is communicated from one place to another according
to Einstein’s theory. Like geologic tremors, gravitational ripples propagate at a
certain finite speed—namely, that of light.
To grasp the reshaping of spacetime, our minds have to overcome a hurdle of
abstraction. Spacetime is not as tangible as a geologic landscape. We can’t see it,
let alone discern its shape. Yet we catch indirect glimpses. Objects that are
moving freely through space, unhindered by other objects, are like raindrops
streaking across a car windshield, revealing the curve of the glass: they trace out
the shape of space. For instance, astronomers routinely observe rays of starlight
that start off as parallel, pass near a giant lump of mass such as the Sun, and
afterward intersect. Textbooks and articles describing this effect often say that
the Sun’s gravity has bent the light rays, but that’s not quite right. The rays are as
straight as straight can be. What the Sun has really done is to alter the rules of
geometry—that is, to warp space—such that parallel lines can meet.
The morphing of space and time is not just the stuff of exotic physics. It
governs the motion of any falling object. Baseballs, wineglasses, expensive
smartphones: things that slip out of your hand accelerate toward the floor
because Earth’s mass warps time. (The warping of space plays only a minor role
in these cases.) “Down” is defined by the direction in which time passes more
slowly. Clocks at sea level tick more slowly than clocks on the summit of
Denali; a watch strapped to your ankle will fall behind one on your wrist. In
human terms, the deviations are small—parts in a trillion at most—but enough to
account for the rate at which falling objects pick up speed. When you see an
apple fall from a tree, you are watching it roll across the contours of time.
      *
Although the shape-shiftiness of spacetime explains away the kind of nonlocality
that Newton talked about, it creates several new varieties. For starters, general
relativity allows spacetime to bend back on itself to create a tunnel, or
wormhole, connecting two otherwise distant parts of the universe. The entrance
of one would look like a doorway that leads you not to the next room, but
anywhere else in the universe. You could step through to, say, Alpha Centauri, a
journey that would take at least four years the long way. Astronomers have yet to
discover any wormholes, and the type of matter needed to pry them open may

not exist, but general relativity permits them, and any prediction of Einstein’s
has to be taken as a live possibility.
Strictly speaking, wormholes would fully respect the principle of locality. If
you ducked through one, you’d follow a continuous path through spacetime,
with no mysterious jumps, and at every point in your journey, you’d travel
slower than light. All that would change is the length of your journey. But notice
my weasel words “strictly speaking.” Unstrictly speaking, wormholes tick off
every box on our nonlocality checklist. To begin with, a wormhole is an
inherently nonlocal structure. By definition, it spans multiple locations; it is not
localized to one place. To say that spacetime has a wormhole is like saying that a
pretzel has a knot: a statement about the overall shape, as opposed to any one
part of it. Two universes—one with a wormhole, one without—could look
identical at every place, and you’d notice that one had a wormhole only when
you compared separated locations to see whether they were interconnected by
multiple paths.
A wormhole’s effects, too, are nonlocal. By means of the wormhole, two
things that appear to be distant could in fact be adjacent or perhaps even the
same thing seen from two different angles. Many theorists have speculated that a
mini-wormhole could join entangled particles and explain why those particles
give matching results when measured (an idea I will return to in the next
chapter). To be sure, a wormhole’s effects may not be obvious to you as
nonlocal. If, for example, something passes through the wormhole, knocks into
one of the particles in your body, and causes that particle to veer off its original
course, all you’ll notice is that something weird happened. You won’t be able to
tell the difference from any of the other random and unaccountable things that
befall you every day. Some theorists have suggested this would explain why
quantum processes have unpredictable outcomes and why the basic parameters
of nature, such as the strength of forces, have such inexplicable values.
A wormhole also restricts the behavior of matter in the universe by creating a
loop. A wave might ripple through space, enter a wormhole, return to its starting
point, and overlap with itself like a snake eating its own tail. Consequently, the
wormhole would alter wave undulations over a vast region and possibly prevent
stable waves from ever forming. The weirdness quotient goes way up if the
wormhole connects points separated not just in space but also in time—in other

words, if the wormhole is a time portal. Now the wormhole creates a time loop,
with all the potential for the logical paradoxes that science-fiction fans love to
think about. To foil such paradoxes, time travelers must lack the freedom of
action that people ordinarily have. For instance, suppose you go back in time and
try to shoot Grandpa. Something will stop you. You know something has to, or
you couldn’t have made the trip to begin with. You might fumble the gun, the
gun could misfire, a meteor could fall from the sky and knock the gun out of
your hands, and so forth. No matter how often and how hard you try, the
universe will conspire to spare your target. To you, it’ll look like a very peculiar
set of coincidences.
To explain those coincidences, it wouldn’t be enough to scrutinize your
immediate environs; you’d have to look to the overall structure of the universe.
The requirement of logical consistency places a constraint on matter that passes
through the wormhole (and, in some cases, on matter in other parts of the
universe, too), and such a constraint is a form of nonlocality. What happens in
one place depends on what happens elsewhere.
      *
A second type of nonlocality in general relativity is even more elemental. It
comes out of the theory’s core innovation: that there’s no such thing as a place
outside spacetime, no external or absolute standard to judge it by. This
seemingly self-evident proposition has remarkable consequences. It means that
spacetime not only warps, but also loses many of the qualities we associate with
it, including the ability to define locations.
Disavowing a god’s-eye perspective, Don Marolf says, “is very subtle, and,
honestly, Einstein didn’t understand it for a long time.” Previous conceptions of
space, including Newton’s and even Einstein’s own earlier thinking, supposed
that space had a fixed geometry, which would let you imagine rising above space
and looking down on it. In fact, at one point, Einstein argued there had to be an
absolute reference point or else the shape of space would become ambiguous.
For a sense of why the ambiguity arises, consider how we experience geography
in everyday life. We might suppose there is a unique “real” shape to the
landscape—what Google Earth shows—but in practice the shape is defined by
the experience of being embedded within that landscape, and that experience can

vary. A student running late to his exam, an athlete hobbling on a sprained ankle,
a professor walking with a colleague deep in conversation, and a cyclist yelling
at all those pedestrians to get out of the way will perceive very different
campuses. A short distance for one may seem an interminable crossing to
another. When we eschew the view from on high, we can no longer make
definitive statements about what is where.
In an epiphany in 1915, Einstein realized that the ambiguity is not a bug, but a
feature. He noted that we never observe places to have absolute locations,
anyway. Instead we assign positions based on how objects are arranged relative
to one another, and—crucially—those relative locations are objective. Everyone
wandering around the college campus will recognize the basic ordering of
places. They’ll juxtapose the UC student center with the lagoon rather than put
them on opposite sides of campus. If the landscape buckled or flowed while
preserving these relations, the denizens would never know. So it is for spacetime.
Different observers may ascribe different locations to a place, but will agree on
the relations that places bear to one another. These relations are what determine
the events that occur. “If George and Don met in a certain café at noon in the
first spacetime,” Marolf tells me, “they would also do so in the reshuffled
spacetime. It’s just that in the first case this would have occurred at point ‘B’ and
in the reshuffled case it occurs at point ‘A.’”
The cafeteria, then, is situated at either A or B or C, D, E—an infinity of
possible positions. When we say it’s located at such-and-such a place, we’re
really using a shorthand for its relations to other landmarks. Lacking definitive
coordinates, the cafeteria must be situated by the things within and around it. To
locate it, you’d need to search the world over for a place where the tables, chairs,
and salad bar are arranged just so and where a patio overlooks a lagoon bathed in
the golden sunlight of Southern California. The position of the student center is a
property not of the center, but of the entire system to which it belongs. “The
question you asked in principle refers to the whole spacetime,” Marolf says.
      *
This ambiguity of position bears more than a passing resemblance to what we
saw earlier with electromagnetism. It’s gravity’s version of gauge invariance.
Not being able to tell the difference between points A, B, and C is like not being

able to tell whether the electric potential is 0 volts, 120 volts, or 1,000,120 volts.
For gravitation as for electromagnetism, the ambiguity of localized
measurements is a form of nonlocality. And here it is happening not because of
the properties of particles and fields, but because space itself is unable to support
any 
localized 
structure. 
Points 
in 
space 
are 
indistinguishable 
and
interchangeable. Because they lack any differentiating attributes, whatever the
world consists of must not reside at points. Quantities such as energy can’t be
situated in any specific place, for the simple reason that there’s no such thing as
a specific place. You can no sooner pin down a position than you can plant a flag
on the sea. Those quantities must be holistic—properties of spacetime in its
entirety.
Furthermore, the multiple equivalent shapes of space are described by
different configurations of the gravitational field. In one configuration, the field
might exert a stronger force in one place than it would in another configuration,
with compensating changes elsewhere to maintain the relative arrangement of
objects. Points in the gravitational field must be interlinked with one another, so
that they can flop around while collectively still producing the same internal
arrangement of objects. These linkages violate the principle that individual
locations in space have an autonomous existence. Marolf has put it this way:
“Any theory of gravity is not a local field theory. Even classically there are
important constraint equations. The field at this point in spacetime and the field
at this point in spacetime are not independent.”
None of this means space is a mere fiction. It still does have some
independent reality—it can expand or contract, waves can propagate through it,
and it can exist even when devoid of material objects—so it can’t be entirely
reduced to a set of relations among objects. Under most circumstances, you’re
entitled to think of spatial locations. You can designate some available chunk of
matter as a reference point and use it to anchor a coordinate grid. You can, to the
chagrin of Santa Barbarans, take L.A. as the center of the universe and define
every other place with respect to it. In this framework, you can go about your
business in blissful ignorance of space’s fundamental inability to demarcate
locations. “Once you’ve done that, the physics looks like it’s local,” Don Marolf
says. “The dynamics of gravity is completely local. Things move in a continuous
way, limited by the speed of light.” But the properties of gravity are still only

“pseudo-local.” The nonlocality is always there, lurking beneath the surface,
waiting for its moment to emerge.
In short, Einstein’s theory is nonlocal in a more subtle and insidious way than
Newton’s theory of gravity was. Newtonian gravity acted at a distance, but at
least it operated within a framework of absolute space. Einsteinian gravity has
no such element of wizardry; its effects ripple through the universe at the speed
of light. Yet it demolishes the framework, confounding our intuitive picture of
space as a kind of container in which material objects reside. General relativity
forces us to search for an entirely new conception of space.
      *
Black holes are the prime example of a place where the nonlocality of gravity
comes out of hiding. I say “place,” but when it comes to black holes, that word
becomes problematic. A black hole is not a solid object; its perimeter or
“horizon” is just a hypothetical line in space that marks the point of no return for
infalling objects. And where is that line? It’s very hard to tell. Suppose, God
forbid, our Sun collapses to form a black hole and a group of space tourists goes
to take a closer look. The tour company assures them they’re safe as long as they
stay at least three kilometers from the center of the hole, which is the calculated
radius of a black hole with the Sun’s mass. But that is false advertising. If the
black hole sucks in more matter, it will enlarge and the tourists could find
themselves on the inside, unable ever to return home. The location of the horizon
depends not only on how strong the hole’s gravity is now, but how strong it will
be. The black hole has time on its side; freedom is never assured.
I once went to a lecture by Gary Gibbons, a colleague of Stephen Hawking’s
at the University of Cambridge, in which he discussed this strange feature of
black holes. “In order to define this horizon, you need to know what happens for
all of time,” he said. That, in turn, means you need to know what happens for all
of space. Horizons “are highly nonlocal,” Gibbons continued. “They’re tricky in
that respect. You can’t put your finger on this horizon; we may ourselves be
inside one at this moment and we would never know.” A black hole could be
opening up around our planet like a sinkhole beneath a mining town, slowly and
invisibly.
To deepen the puzzle, all the stuff that falls into the black hole piles up at the

very center, its so-called singularity. General relativity theory says that matter
reaches infinite density and spacetime rips open like an overloaded grocery bag.
Where is the singularity located, then? The spacetime against which its position
would be defined has ceased to exist. There is literally no there there. In a
strange sense, a singularity exists nowhere and everywhere. It is not a localized
object, but a holistic feature of spacetime.
      *
Another vivid demonstration of gravitational nonlocality occurs if space has a
boundary. For space to have a boundary sounds like a throwback to Aristotle,
who thought the cosmos was encased in a crystal sphere like a ginormous snow
globe. That idea went out with lace ruffs. As far as modern astronomers can tell,
space stretches forever in every direction, with no end of galaxies. But this is a
contingent fact rather than a hard-and-fast requirement. There’s no law of
physics that forbids the universe from having an edge. Physicists have toyed
with hypothetical models in which one or more dimensions of space are finite in
size.
Even an infinite universe can still have a boundary—one that is located at
infinity, which, to a theoretical physicist, is as real a place as any. To see why,
consider what it means not to have a boundary. Earth’s surface is an example:
you can buy an around-the-world airplane ticket, set off to the west, and return to
your starting point without ever doubling back on your route. The universe
could, in principle, have a spherical shape, so that you could venture out into
space and circumnavigate the whole thing. By default, if you can’t do a full loop,
the universe must have a boundary. Even if you never encounter a solid wall or a
dragon-filled abyss, the endless wastes of infinity act as an insurmountable
obstacle. Infinity can have exactly the same structure as any other region of
space. Objects can reside at infinity. Events transpire there. An infinitely distant
boundary clearly poses practical difficulties for space travelers; only the starship
of the imagination could ever reach it. Conceptually, though, it’s just like the
snow globe.
Whether finite or infinite, the boundary is the final frontier’s final frontier,
and like all frontiers, it is a place apart. Gravity may be king through the bulk of
the universe, but its writ does not run to the edge of space. Out there, the

gravitational field is immobilized because the boundary fixes the shape of space
like a mold dictating the form of a clay pot. “Spacetime at the boundary does not
fluctuate,” Marolf says. “It is effectively nailed to the boundary, so there is no
dynamical gravity.” Because gravity doesn’t operate along the boundary, neither
does nonlocality (at least not of the gravitational sort). The boundary provides an
absolute reference point, so any cafeterias and student centers that happen to
exist there have objectively defined locations. Quantities such as energy are
completely unambiguous. You could set up your measuring instruments on the
boundary and take readings with surety.
Although spacetime is nailed down at the border, elsewhere it’s as floppy as
ever. So the universe has a peculiar dual character: part behaves locally (the
boundary) and part (the bulk) nonlocally. Consequently, the holism of the
universe, a notion that sounds almost mystical, becomes very tangible. Locality
on the boundary enables you to make measurements there, and nonlocality in the
bulk connects those measurements to the rest of space. “Quantities that one
might a priori think are independent are in fact locked together,” Marolf
explains. “Thus one can have boundary observables that are identically equal to
bulk observables.” Because the boundary tracks what is happening throughout
the cosmos, it’s an image of the entire universe—a perfect image, with no loss of
fidelity. An observer watching it would know everything you’re doing.
This revelation reinforces the earlier lesson that things are never truly
localized. Slapping a boundary onto space has flushed this ambiguity into the
open. You can have two identical things, one in the bulk and the other on
boundary, and by all measures they’re a single thing manifested in two locations,
as if you saw a tail fin and a spout poke up above the sea and realized they were
one whale. The boundary mirrors the bulk even though it spans fewer spatial
dimensions. If dimensionality is so fungible—if spatial dimensions can come
and go with no ill effect—then space can’t be as fundamental as people used to
think.

5.1. Boundary versus bulk. The universe may have a boundary, and if it does, physical processes occurring
on the boundary can reproduce everything that is happening within the full volume of space. (Illustration by Jen
Christensen)
These peculiar implications are all the more astonishing when you consider
their humble origins. Physicists took the simple observation that birds can safely
perch on wires, extended it to gravity, and followed the logic where it led them.
Gauge invariance, both in electromagnetism and gravitation, indicates a
redundancy in our description of nature: multiple values of the electric potential
are equivalent ways to describe a given situation; multiple values of the
gravitational field correspond to the same relative arrangement of objects. Now
we find that an entire dimension of space can be redundant. When space has a
boundary, the entire universe can be collapsed onto that boundary, as though the
full volume were superfluous. Space is unraveling before our eyes.

Quantum Gravity
Let’s take stock. Physicists designed both quantum field theory and general
relativity to explain the forces of nature as processes playing out within space,
but the forces have proved to be too mischievous for that playground. The
argument can be framed as what logicians call a reductio ad absurdum: make an
assumption, work out its implications, show they’re wrong, and conclude that
the original assumption must be erroneous. When physicists try to think of
forces spatially—when they assume that the universe satisfies Einstein’s
principle of separability, so that individual locations in space have an
autonomous existence—they find themselves ascribing structure to the world
that it doesn’t actually have. Particles, pixels, absolute voltage, objective
position: these are things that separability would imply, but that don’t exist in
reality. The mismatch between theory and reality suggests that the assumption of
separability is incorrect and that physicists need to think beyond space.
These intimations of nonlocality are muted in most situations of practical
importance, but can’t be ignored when it comes to creating a unified theory—a
quantum theory of gravity. Physicists realized early in the twentieth century that
such a theory would almost certainly entail the dissolution of space. Crudely
speaking, when you mash up a theory of atoms (quantum mechanics) with a
theory of space (general relativity), you expect a theory of atoms of space. An
“atom” in this context means the littlest possible chunk of space, which theorists
initially visualized as a chessboard square. More than ordinary atoms of matter,
these spatial cells fulfill the original meaning of the word “atom.” They are truly
indivisible. There’s no such thing as smaller than such an atom, and position
can’t be defined within one, just as it doesn’t matter exactly where in a
chessboard square you place a chess piece; it might be located on square 9 or
square 10, but never on square 9 3/4. Spatial atoms mark the logical limit of the
reductionist program that has guided physics since ancient Greece.
The first proposals for such atoms had nothing to do with gravity per se but
grew out of the millennia-old tension between the discrete and the continuum.
As Zeno recognized long ago, a continuum has a lot—a lot—of room in it. If
you tried to fill it with point-like particles, counting them out one by one, you

could go on forever, adding an infinite number of particles, and still the
continuum would be absolutely empty. Such a structure seems like overkill. It
allows for more possible arrangements of matter than could ever be realized.
“The continuum is more ample than the things to be described,” Einstein wrote
to a friend in 1916. This incongruity was bad enough in classical field theory
and, as I mentioned in chapter 2, was one reason that physicists turned to
quantum mechanics. Ironically, quantum field theory made it even worse. The
theory predicted that fields vibrate spontaneously on all scales, filling up the
continuum with an infinity of waves and causing forces to go completely out of
control.
To restore order, many physicists proposed in the 1930s that fields don’t
vibrate below some threshold scale. Werner Heisenberg, in particular, had felt
since the earliest days of quantum mechanics that the continuum must crumble
on subatomic scales. He proposed a chessboard-like space that he called the
Gitterwelt, or “lattice world.” Yet this notion itself crumbled. The grid lines
would privilege some directions over others, so that space would look different
to a moving observer than to a stationary one, breaking the symmetry of
relativity theory. In the late ’40s, physicists reembraced the continuum. Infinite
quantities, they reasoned, signaled merely that hitherto unnoticed fields come
into play on small scales. By rounding out their selection of fields, they could
create an internally consistent picture of electric, magnetic, and nuclear forces.
But gravity was another matter. It goes haywire on tiny scales, and in the
early 1970s, theorists realized that no amount of rounding-out will wrestle it
under control. So the continuum falls to pieces after all. The usual estimate for
where this happens is known as the Planck scale, which is not just tiny but
you’ve-got-to-be-kidding-me tiny—about as small in relation to an ordinary
atom of matter as your body to the known universe. No microscope or particle
accelerator built by human hands will ever see the Planckian filigree work.
Nevertheless, it is implicit in things we do see, in the sense that empirically
verified theories would collapse in a heap of inconsistency were it not for the
breakdown of space at this level.
What exactly happens down there is still somewhat mysterious. Instead of a
chessboard, space might be more like a watercolor painting whose brushstrokes
bleed together, fuzzing out objects without creating the sharp divisions of a grid.

Such a structure violates locality in the literal sense that you can’t ever localize
objects precisely. More important, this is an in for a penny, in for a pound
situation. You can’t change just one aspect of space—chop it into tiny morsels—
without changing much else in order to keep everything behaving consistently.
Would-be unifiers of physics picture a subatomic wonderland barely within the
human capacity to comprehend.
In proposed quantum gravity theories, every weird thing you’ve ever heard
about quantum particles becomes true of space. Just as particles can exist in
more than one place at once, like Schrödinger’s both-alive-and-dead cat, space
can have multiple shapes at once. It was hard enough to demarcate position
when space could change shape. Now space has no shape at all, just a blur of
possibility, and position becomes undefinable. The web of cause and effect
threatens to disintegrate. String theorists, who infer the properties of
submicroscopic space from the behavior of the loops of energy that inhabit it,
think that notions such as size and dimension become fluid. As you shrink a
string down, it reaches some minimum size and then starts to grow again—like a
balloon that, when squeezed in one place, inflates somewhere else, except that
the somewhere else is an entirely new dimension of space. “Ordinary notions of
spacetime are simply no longer valid in string theory,” Joe Polchinski says.
In short, locality fails in every sense of the word. Still, these shenanigans are
occurring way down on the Planck scale, or close to it. When you take the big-
picture view, space should be just fine. Trillions upon trillions of spatial atoms
blur together into a single unbroken expanse. Those atoms are mutually
independent, so locality should hold; each part of space should have an
independent existence. Or at least that has been the conventional wisdom.
Theorists who came of age in the 1990s, such as Fotini Markopoulou, found
this line of reasoning unpersuasive. Could the grandest enterprise in all of
theoretical science—unifying physics—really have such piddling consequences
for the world at large? She and others got to thinking that our traditional notions
of space dissolve not just deep inside particles, but also in the macroverse, across
millions of kilometers of open space and perhaps even on the scale of the
observable universe. “If quantum gravity is as fundamental as we think it is, if
it’s something that’s about the very structure of spacetime, it’s just not obvious to
me that the signature of that thing has to be something very small,”

Markopoulou says.
She has a point. Atoms of matter are pretty small, too, but we are always
being confronted with their existence. For instance, materials made of atoms can
metamorphose: graphite can turn to diamond, not to mention combine with other
species to create chemically distinct substances. By analogy, if space consists of
atoms, it stands to reason that those atoms might rearrange themselves into
something other than space. Such a transformation would be extremely
unpiddling.
Although physicists often describe quantum mechanics as a theory of the
microworld, they admit this is a white lie. That may be how their predecessors
originally conceived of the theory, but it doesn’t reflect their present
understanding. As far as people nowadays can tell, quantum mechanics is a
theory of the world, period. Experimentalists have yet to see any range of sizes
where nature ceases to behave quantum-mechanically. The human body is every
bit as quantum as an electron. You don’t notice people around you pulling
quantum stunts such as existing and not existing at the same time, but that’s not
because they’re big, per se. It’s because the human body is an open system that
vigorously interacts with its environment, dispersing the distinctively quantum
effects like dandelion fluff in the breeze. Under the right conditions, you can see
such effects with the unaided eye. (Experimenters can’t yet manage this for a
whole human but have witnessed, for example, miniature tuning forks both
vibrating and not vibrating.) And the same should be true for spacetime.

Back to Black
Because black holes are roiled both by quantum effects and by intense gravity,
they’re the poster children for quantum gravity. And we’re not talking piddling
atoms anymore. These are monsters that could swallow a solar system. The most
obvious place where quantum gravitational effects operate is at the center of
these objects, where matter becomes so tightly packed that it pushes up against
the density limit imposed by the atomized structure of space. But the perimeter
of the hole presents its own problems, such as the paradoxical behavior
discovered by Hawking, which is a red flag that locality is breaking down on
large scales as well as small. “It’s been the story in gravity that the singularity is
really something to worry about,” Giddings says. “But now, with the information
paradox, something funny has to happen all the way out at the horizon. Focus on
the singularity and short-distance issues has been a little misplaced. There are
long-distance issues.”
The various types of nonlocality I’ve been talking about converge in black
holes. For instance, Hawking’s paradox has connections to quantum
entanglement that physicists have only lately begun to explore. General relativity
says a black hole is not a material object like a star or planet. It’s mostly vacuum
—a pit of nothingness. An unfortunate soul falling into one sees only empty
space. Yet the bleak façade conceals a frenzy of activity. Quantum field theory
says a vacuum may be devoid of particles, but not of everything; the fields are
still there, merely becalmed. Superentanglement among all the regions of space
ensures that vibrations in the fields negate one another precisely, leaving only an
uneasy silence, like the quiet you hear with noise-canceling headphones—not so
much the absence of sound as the active repression of it.
If anything throws off this balance, the latent activity of the vacuum erupts
into the open. And indeed that’s what happens for the wise person who resists
falling into the hole. Relative to the person falling in, the outside observer must
keep accelerating outward—for instance, by throttling up his rocket engines to
fight the hole’s gravitational suction. By the logic of relativity theory, the rocket
man experiences the passage of time differently than the infalling victim does,
and he will also experience the field’s vibrations differently, because vibration is

a process that occurs within time. He does not, in fact, think they cancel out. The
fields aren’t becalmed; particles are flying off in every direction. Some escape
into deep space, draining the hole of its energy until it winks out of existence.
That observer has taken off the noise-canceling headphones and heard the roar
that lies on the other side of silence.
This isn’t the paradox yet, just a new incarnation of Hawking’s argument that
black holes decay. The real question is: What becomes of objects that fell into
the black hole? The hole’s demise should liberate them, but how? Perhaps they
make their getaway under cover of those outgoing particles. If you collected the
particles and pieced them together, you might be able to reconstitute all the
objects that the hole devoured. For that to work, the particles would have to be
entangled with one another, so that collectively they retain all the qualities of
whatever fell in. And there’s the rub. We’ve insisted that entanglement do double
duty: preserve the emptiness of the vacuum as perceived by the infalling
observer while keeping alive the memory of the hole’s victims. That may be
asking too much of it. Entanglement is a limited resource in much the same way
energy is, and there doesn’t seem to be enough to perform both tasks. Either the
hole is not a vacuum after all (in which case general relativity theory is badly
wrong) or falling into the hole is irreversible (in which case quantum field theory
is toast). Theorists have sought ways to wriggle out of this dilemma; for
instance, perhaps entanglement can be structured in a way that balances both
needs. But if not, the impasse demands new physics—some nonlocal effect that
makes the hole a two-way street or erases the distinction between inside and
outside. “It means a violent breakdown of locality,” Polchinski says.
Another conundrum arises when you ask how the hole stores infalling objects
(or the pieces into which it rips them) until their eventual release. The hole must
grow to accommodate those objects, and it doesn’t grow by the amount locality
would lead you to expect. Black holes should be like suitcases. Imagine you
have an old suitcase with 10 compartments, each holding one pair of socks, and
then you buy a new bag with twice the linear dimensions, for eight times the
volume. You’d expect the new bag to have 80 compartments and hold 80 pairs of
socks. What locality means in this context is that individual compartments have
the same size, and the new bag just gives you more of them. The advantage isn’t
just that you can pack more clothes, but that you can pack a greater variety of

clothes. Physicists say that the larger bag has a greater entropy. Entropy is
commonly described as disorder, but it can also be thought of as the potential for
variety—in this case, the multiplicity of ways you could pack the bag without
causing it to weigh more, bulge out, or otherwise change its external appearance.
By this reasoning, doubling the radius of a black hole should increase its
volume eightfold, and its storage capacity should scale up proportionately. But
that’s not what happens. When a black hole doubles in radius, its mass only
doubles, while its entropy increases fourfold. The hole has less storage capacity
than theories based on locality predict. It’s like opening your big new suitcase to
find only forty compartments, each holding a single sock rather than a pair, for a
total of twenty pairs rather than the eighty they promised you at the shop. You’d
feel cheated.
The fourfold increase in entropy means that the internal complexity of the
hole is growing not with its volume, as locality would predict, but with the area
of its horizon. In effect, increasing the width and length of the hole adds to its
storage capacity, but extra height has no effect, as though the height dimension
were illusory. The thing looks 3-D, but acts as though it were 2-D. And what is
true for black holes is true for everything else, because anything can be turned
into a black hole by squeezing hard enough. Space is pulling a kind of bait and
switch on us. It offers so much room to hold stuff—indeed, isn’t holding stuff
supposed to be what space is all about? But when you try to fill it up, you find
yourself strangely unable to do so. You begin to wonder whether the space is
really there or something is tricking you, like a wall of mirrors that makes a
cramped Manhattan studio look like a penthouse suite.
      *
The chicanery of black holes is a smaller-scale version of what happens in
universes with a boundary. Again, a volume of space can be collapsed onto its
exterior surface. This insight doesn’t just take down our conception of space, but
tells us what might replace it.
Technically, the boundary and volume are equivalent, neither having
precedence over the other. But many physicists believe the two aren’t truly
identical—that the boundary is the fundamental reality and the volume is derived
from it. This proposition is known as the “holographic principle” because the

boundary is acting like a flat sheet of film able to evoke a 3-D scene, analogous
to that little silvery image on the back of your credit card. A hologram works
because it’s an elaborately patterned photograph that captures the depth cues in a
scene. Likewise, fields on the boundary of space are so elaborately patterned that
they can reproduce the entire universe.
If they were giving out prizes for the most confusing physics metaphor ever,
the holographic principle would be a strong contender. To be fair, it captures the
way that a dimension of space seems to go poof. Also, holograms have a
mystique. They make you go “Whoa!” and that’s exactly the reaction physicists
want you to have when dimensions of space go missing. On the downside, what
the heck does the holographic principle actually mean? How could the universe
around us be a holographic projection? What’s the projector? The key, I think, is
not to get caught up in the minutiae of the metaphor. The point is just that the
space we observe could be a product of some underlying structure. When we
walk across a room, we are not gliding passively through a preexisting expanse.
Something is happening. There is machinery at work, a grinding of gears deep
within nature, to produce the experience of being “here” and being “there.”
When you stretch an arm to grasp a pencil and it’s just outside your reach,
something is acting to thwart you, creating what you perceive as distance. And
when we ask what that machinery could be, we have arrived at the outermost
frontier of modern physics. “At first sight, it’s pretty obscure how that happens,”
says Daniel Kabat, a theorist at Lehman College in New York. “Even at second
sight, it’s still very obscure … Physics is local. It means something to say we’re
in this room talking, or objects are at different but well-defined positions.
Understanding how that emerges from this framework is pretty obscure.”
Physicists, like the rest of us, grasp abstract concepts by applying them to
concrete examples, and the holographic principle rose above the level of
curiosity only when Juan Maldacena fleshed out his idea of AdS/CFT duality.
“AdS” stands for the interior of a higher-dimensional ball, a simple type of
bounded universe. “CFT” stands for the surface of the ball. “Duality” means that
these two realms are equivalent. By making measurements on the boundary, you
can work out what’s going on in the bulk.
Consider what this means. A realm governed by gravity (described by
Einstein’s general relativity and its quantum elaboration) is equivalent to a realm

governed only by nongravitational forces (described by quantum field theory
with gauge invariance). Maldacena’s analysis therefore achieves the long-sought
unification of these two branches of physics, at least for this idealized ball-
shaped universe. Historically, physicists have sought unity by zooming in to look
for smaller-scale building blocks such as atoms and particles. In Maldacena’s
approach, they don’t look for things that are smaller, but things that don’t even
exist in the same space.
I have met few theorists who aren’t in awe of Maldacena and what he
accomplished (although they may disagree on whether the theoretical structure
has anything to do the real world). One tells me he once gave Maldacena a lift in
his car and was utterly terrified. If he crashed, he worried, nothing else he had
done in his life would ever be remembered. He would go down in history as the
man who killed Juan Maldacena.
Using the holographic principle, theorists can investigate what kinds of
processes might give rise to space that wasn’t already there. Notwithstanding the
usual prudent scientific disclaimers—more research is needed and so forth—a
solution to the mysteries of nonlocality is beginning to present itself. Through
the haze, we can see the outlines of the mountain.

6
Spacetime Is Doomed
When the philosopher Jenann Ismael was ten years old, her father, an Iraqi-born
professor at the University of Calgary, bought a big wooden cabinet at an
auction. Rummaging through it, she came across an old kaleidoscope, and she
was entranced. For hours she experimented with it and figured out how it
worked. “I didn’t tell my sister when I found it, because I was scared she’d want
it,” she recalls. As you peer into a kaleidoscope and turn the tube, multicolored
shapes begin to blossom, spin, and merge, shifting unpredictably in seeming
defiance of rational explanation, almost as if they were exerting spooky action at
a distance on one another. But the more you marvel at them, the more regularity
you notice in their motion. Shapes on opposite sides of your visual field change
in unison, and their symmetry clues you in to what’s really going on: those
shapes aren’t physical objects, but images of objects—of shards of glass that are
jiggling around inside a mirrored tube. “There’s a single bead of glass that’s
being redundantly represented in different parts of the space,” Ismael says. “If
you focus in on the larger embedding space, the physical description of the
three-dimensional kaleidoscope, you’ve got a straightforward causal story.
There’s a piece of glass, the piece of glass is being reflected along the mirrors,
and so on.” Seen for what it really is, the kaleidoscope is no longer mysterious,
though still pretty awesome.
Decades later, while preparing a talk on quantum physics, Ismael thought
back to the kaleidoscope and went out to buy a fancy new one, a shiny copper

tube in a velvet case. It was, she realized, a metaphor for nonlocality in physics.
Maybe particles in an entanglement experiment or galaxies on the farthest
reaches of known space act strangely because they’re really projections—or, in
some other way, secondary creations—of objects existing in a very different
realm. “In the kaleidoscope case, we know what we have to do: we have to see
the whole system; we have to see how the image space is created,” Ismael says.
“How do we construct an analogue of that for quantum effects? That means
seeing space as we know it—everyday space in which we view measurement
events located at different parts of space—as an emergent structure. Maybe when
we’re looking at two parts, we’re seeing the same event. We’re interacting with
the same bit of reality from different parts of space.”
She and others question the assumption, made by nearly every physicist and
philosopher from Democritus onward, that space is the deepest level of physical
reality. Just as the script of a play describes what actors do on stage, but
presupposes the stage, the laws of physics have traditionally taken the existence
of space as a given. Today we know that the universe has more to it than things
situated within space. Nonlocal phenomena leap out of space; they have no place
in its confines. They hint at a level of reality deeper than space, where the
concept of distance ceases to apply, where things that appear to lie far apart are
actually nearby or perhaps are the same thing manifested in more than one place,
like multiple images of a single shard of kaleidoscopic glass. When we think in
terms of such a level, the connections between subatomic particles across a lab
bench, between the inside and the outside of a black hole, and between opposite
sides of the universe don’t seem so spooky anymore. Michael Heller, a physicist,
philosopher, and priest at the Pontifical Academy of Theology in Krakow,
Poland, says: “If you agree that the fundamental level of physics is not local,
everything is natural, because these two particles which are far apart from each
other explore the same fundamental nonlocal level. For them, time and space
don’t matter.” Only when you try to visualize these phenomena in terms of space
—which is forgivable, because it’s hard for us to think in any other way—do
they defy comprehension.
The idea of a deeper level seems natural because, after all, it is what
physicists have always sought. Whenever they can’t fathom some aspect of our
world, they assume they must not yet have gotten to the bottom of it all. They

zoom in and look for the building blocks. How mysterious it is, for example, that
liquid water can boil to steam or freeze to ice. Yet these transformations make
perfect sense if liquid, vapor, and solid are not elemental substances, but distinct
forms of a single fundamental substance. Aristotle took the states of water to be
diverse incarnations of so-called prime matter, and the atomists—presciently—
thought they were rearrangements of atoms into tighter or looser structures. En
masse, the building blocks of matter acquire properties that, individually, they
lack. A molecule of water is not wet, and an atom of carbon is not alive, but lots
of them, coming together in the right way, can be. Likewise, space might be built
of pieces that are not themselves spatial. Those pieces might also be
disassembled and reassembled into nonspatial structures such as the ones that
black holes and the big bang are hinting at. “Spacetime can’t be fundamental,”
says the theorist Nima Arkani-Hamed. “It has to come out of something more
basic.”
This thinking completely inverts physics. Nonlocality is no longer the
mystery; it’s the way things really are, and locality becomes the puzzle. When
we can no longer take space for granted, we have to explain what it is and how it
arises, either on its own or in union with time. Clearly, constructing space isn’t
going to be as straightforward as melding molecules into a fluid. What could its
building blocks possibly be? Normally we assume that building blocks must be
smaller than the things you build out of them. A friend of mine and his daughter
once erected a detailed model of the Eiffel Tower out of popsicle sticks; they
hardly needed to explain that the sticks were smaller than the tower. When it
comes to space, though, there can be no “smaller,” because size itself is a spatial
concept. The building blocks cannot presume space if they are to explain it.
They must have neither size nor location; they are everywhere, spanning the
entire universe, and nowhere, impossible to point to. What would it mean for
things not to have positions? Where would they be? “When we talk about
emergent spacetime, it must come out of some framework that is very far from
what we’re familiar with,” Arkani-Hamed says.
Within Western philosophy, the realm beyond space has traditionally been
considered a realm beyond physics—the plane of God’s existence in Christian
theology. In the early eighteenth century, Gottfried Leibniz’s “monads”—which
he imagined to be the primitive elements of the universe—existed, like God,

outside space and time. His theory was a step toward emergent spacetime, but it
was still metaphysical, with only a vague connection to the world of concrete
things. If physicists are to succeed in explaining space as emergent, they must
claim the concept of spacelessness as their own.
Einstein foresaw these difficulties. “Perhaps … we must also give up, by
principle, the spacetime continuum,” he wrote. “It is not unimaginable that
human ingenuity will some day find methods which will make it possible to
proceed along such a path. At the present time, however, such a program looks
like an attempt to breathe in empty space.” John Wheeler, the renowned gravity
theorist, speculated that spacetime is built out of “pregeometry,” but admitted
this was nothing more than “an idea for an idea.” Even someone as irrepressible
as Arkani-Hamed has had his doubts: “These problems are very hard. They’re
outside our usual language for talking about them.”
What keeps Arkani-Hamed going is that he and his colleagues have found
just the sort of methods Einstein said they’d have to—ways to describe physics
in the absence of space, to breathe in the vacuum. He has put these efforts into
historical perspective: “For 2,000-plus years, people asked about the deep nature
of space and time, but they were premature. We’ve finally arrived at the epoch
where you can pose the questions and hope for some meaningful answer.”

The Glue of Reality
Rather than take space for granted, let’s rethink what we really mean by it and
how we might do without it. According to the classical laws of physics
developed by Newton and taught today in high school, the positions and
velocities of objects characterize the world fully. Those quantities at one instant
reflect how everything got to where it is and determine what it’ll do in the future.
You can think of the world as one of those giant Rube Goldberg contraptions that
people build in an abandoned warehouse and post to YouTube: once everything
is in place, you set it in motion and all else follows. If you arrange atoms in the
shape of a frog and flick them with the right velocity, the frog will live; it needs
no additional galvanic spark.
Classical physics says things will slow down, speed up, or veer off their
original courses because they’re exerting forces on one another, such as
electrical and gravitational forces. The force strength depends on the things’
relative positions—in particular, how far apart they are. It makes no difference
what may or may not have gone on between those things in the past. They may
once have rubbed up against each other, but once they parted company, the
attraction or repulsion between them was no stronger and no weaker than that of
anything else the same distance apart. Space is brutally egalitarian. When you
become separated from your lover, the two of you retain no tighter a physical
connection than do two lumps of coal.
In this way, space serves as the organizing principle of the natural world—the
glue that binds the universe together, as the English physicist Julian Barbour has
put it. Physical objects do not interact willy-nilly; their behavior is dictated by
how they are related to one another, which depends on where they lie in space at
a given time. This structuring role is easiest to see in the classical laws of
mechanical motion, but also occurs in field theories. The value and rate of
change of a field at different points in space fully determine what the field does,
and points in the field interact only with their immediate neighbors.
I don’t want to leave the impression that theories formulated within space are
always able to capture the world, when clearly they don’t. I’ve mentioned some
of their limitations in previous chapters. For instance, inconsistencies arise when

discrete objects and continuous fields intermix, and both Newton’s and
Einstein’s laws of motion go kaput at so-called singularities, where physical
quantities such as speed or density become infinite. Despite these exceptions,
though, physicists have always situated the elements of their theories within
space. Even in quantum mechanics, if you put aside the mysteries of
entanglement, the interactions within a system are limited by the spatial
arrangement.
But we can invert this reasoning. Physicists and philosophers can define space
as the fact that the natural world has a very specific structure to it. Instead of
saying that space brings order to the world, you can say that the world is ordered
and space is a convenient notion for describing that order. We perceive that
things affect one another in a certain way and, from that, we assign them
locations in space. This structure has two important aspects. First, the influences
that act on us are hierarchical. Some things affect us more than other things do,
and from this variation we infer their distance. A weak effect means far apart; a
strong effect implies proximity. The philosopher David Albert calls this
definition of distance “interactive distance.” “What it means that the lion is close
to me is that it might hurt me,” he says. This is the opposite of our usual mode of
thinking. Rather than cry, “Watch out, the lion is close, it might pounce!” we
exclaim, “Uh-oh, the lion might pounce on me; I guess it must be close.”
The second aspect of the spatial structure is that diverse influences are
mutually consistent. If a rhinoceros is also able to hurt me, it must be close, too.
And if both a lion and a rhino are able to hurt me, then the lion and rhino should
also be able to hurt each other. (Indeed, my survival depends on it.) From this
patterning of influences, we extract space. If the threat posed by predators
couldn’t be expressed in terms of spatial distance, space would cease to be
meaningful. A less morbid example is triangulation. The signal bars on your
mobile phone indicate the strength of the phone’s connection to a cell tower and
therefore your distance from that tower. In an emergency, the phone company
can locate your phone by measuring your signal at several towers and using
triangulation or the related technique of trilateration. The fact that the
measurements converge on a single location is what it means for you to have a
location.

      *
The nice thing about defining space in terms of structure is that it sidesteps some
of the long-running disputes over the nature of space. The ancient atomists
conceived of space as a thing in its own right, whereas Aristotle deemed it an
abstraction that describes how the contents of the universe are packed together.
Either way, though, space reflects a structure that the natural world possesses. If
the atomists were right and space has an independent existence, it must be highly
ordered, like a neatly woven fabric, so that it can serve the functions that physics
demands of it. If space is merely an abstraction, then the contents of the universe
must fit together in just the right way to give meaning to the abstraction.
On the face of it, we haven’t gained anything by giving primacy to order;
we’ve merely traded one mystery for another, because now we’ve got to explain
the order. The theoretical physicist Lee Smolin of the Perimeter Institute calls
this the “inverse problem.” But one person’s problem is another’s opportunity,
because now we can imagine what the universe would be like if it weren’t
ordered in the requisite way. Then it might not be spatial anymore. Instead of
thinking of space as an absolute necessity, we can regard it as one of the possible
states of the universe, just as ice is one of the possible states of water. The ice
analogy isn’t bad, actually. Water is solid over a narrower range of conditions
than it is gaseous. Likewise, space may be the exception, not the rule; most
proposed unified theories of physics suggest that the vast majority of the
universe’s possible states are nonspatial. “Where spacetime exists is very
nongeneric,” says Moshe Rozali, a string theorist at the University of British
Columbia. “It requires some special conditions.” In the twilight between order
and disorder, space and spacelessness, perhaps we can find a comprehensible
explanation for the nonlocal phenomena that physicists have puzzled over.
Much the same applies to time, too. I’ve been focusing on space because most
researchers do so; the lessons of nonlocality for time are much less clear. Smolin
and the philosopher Tim Maudlin have recently written books to argue that time
isn’t emergent, a prospect I will return to later. Whatever its foundational status,
time plays a powerful organizing role in the universe, and as with space, this
structure has two aspects. First, it is hierarchical. Events can be closely related,
distantly related, or unrelated. They happen in a logical sequence, one event
leading to the next, according to the laws of physics. For example, in a classic

psychological test, you’re shown a series of pictures and have to arrange them to
tell a story. The dog shakes itself dry; the dog runs into a puddle; the dog slips its
leash. Out of order, these scenes make for a surreal story; sorted correctly, they
become an episode that any dog owner will recognize. Even a nonlinear
narrative such as Slaughterhouse-Five or the film version of Cloud Atlas has a
chronological logic.
In one of the last essays he wrote before his death, Leibniz turned this
thinking upside down. Time isn’t the reason that events are structured, he argued.
It’s the consequence of the fact that they’re structured. You can derive time from
the sequence of cause and effect. One event that leads to another must precede it
in time, and the number of intermediate steps determines how much time passes
between them. Einstein’s theory of relativity suggests that Leibniz was onto
something, because it gives cause-effect relations a central function in physics.
One event can trigger another only if light has enough time to travel between
them. Reversing the logic, if one event can trigger another, the two must occur
within such-and-such a distance of each other. In fact, you could map out the
entire world from its web of cause-effect relations—you could put everything in
the right place just by knowing what has to give rise to what.
A number of physicists have developed this idea into a model of spacetime as
a “causal set.” Technically, the web of relations does leave some ambiguity: its
tells you that one event occurs earlier than another, but not how much earlier; it
provides no scale. But causal-set theorists argue that space and time already have
a natural scale if they are built up out of discrete units—“atoms” of space—as I
talked about in the previous chapter. Distance is then determined by counting the
number of such atoms.
For our purposes, what’s important is that the web of cause-effect relations
must be highly ordered if it is to re-create space and time. “Almost all the causal
sets look nothing like spacetime,” says Fay Dowker, a causal-set pioneer. By
analogy, the makers of that psychological test can’t just throw any scenes at you
and expect you to make sense of them; they must be scenes that dovetail
together. When the scenes do have an order, time is a label for where each one
comes in the sequence.
In addition to creating a sequence or hierarchy of events, the temporal
structure ensures the mutual consistency of different processes. To be more

specific, forget that you ever heard of time, and think about clocks. Looking
around, you see these very useful things called clocks. They come in handy for
baking and exercise regimens. If you synchronize the clocks in your house, you
can count on them to stay in sync, at least approximately. Because all the clocks
display the same numbers, you call those numbers “the time.” We seldom stop to
think what a remarkable fact this regularity is. Why should a kitchen timer tell
you when bread will rise? Why should Big Ben spin in sync with the Earth?
These are utterly different systems: electronic oscillator, fermenting yeast;
swinging pendulum, giant rotating ball. Yet they march to the same drummer.
Julian Barbour argues that these systems track one another’s motion because
they are all interlocked, as if they were gears in a larger clockwork. By this
reasoning, time does not precede the universe, enforcing its internal consistency,
but comes from within. Ernst Mach, who was a proponent of Leibniz’s views,
wrote: “All things in the world are connected with one another and depend on
one another … Time is an abstraction, at which we arrive by means of the
changes of things; made because we are not restricted to any one definite
measure, all being interconnected … We reach our ideas of time in and through
the interdependence of things on one another. In these ideas the profoundest and
most universal connection of things is expressed.” Time, like space, draws its
meaning from a special type of harmony in nature.
When Space Is Not the Place
You don’t need a complex system of moving, interacting parts to appreciate the
organizing power of space. Consider the geography of a country. You can think
of the cities as laid out on a map or you can express their mutual spatial relations
with a mileage chart, like those found in paper road maps and atlases—one of
those rectangular or triangular grids giving the distances between pairs of cities.
What’s interesting is that the chart contains hidden patterns within it, just as
jigsaw puzzle pieces look unrelated when you dump them out of the box but
show their affinity as you fit them together.
Suppose you have twenty cities. The chart contains four hundred numbers. To
fill in the data, a map company such as AAA hires drivers to travel from city to
city and jot down the odometer mileage or take GPS readings. In terms of real

information content, the chart is highly redundant. The distances obey very
specific rules that mathematicians call “distance axioms.” To begin with, the
twenty numbers running along the diagonal are zero—the distance from each
city to itself. Of the remaining numbers, half are repeats, since distances are
symmetrical: a car driving from Dallas to Salt Lake City covers basically the
same ground as a car going the other way. Indeed, most map companies leave off
this redundant information and show only the remaining triangle of numbers.
6.1. Intercity mileage and travel time chart. (© AAA, used by permission)
Even the 190 quantities in that triangle are not fully independent of one
another, because you can boil them down to 60 values representing each city’s
coordinates—latitude, longitude, and altitude—as well as an additional value for

Earth’s radius when cities are far enough apart that the planet’s curvature
becomes a factor. Finally, you can lose several more numbers because the
conventions used for the coordinate system (such as taking the prime meridian to
be 0 degrees longitude) don’t matter for the purposes of driving distances. That
knocks out another six quantities. So now you’re down to fifty-five. The four
hundred numbers you started with are just various arithmetic combinations of
fifty-five numbers. That may not be obvious from looking at the chart, but you
know it has to be true because you could reverse the process. You could start
with the cities’ coordinates, mark their locations on a map, and use trigonometry
to calculate the intercity distances.
So the chart is highly ordered. This is what it means for the cities to be
situated within space. Spatial coordinates are a highly economical way of
capturing the possible mutual relations among things. In the above example, we
had twenty cities and four hundred intercity distances that reduce to fifty-five
unique numbers. The more things you have, the more impressive the savings are.
For one hundred cities, the chart contains ten thousand intercity distances,
reducing to 295 numbers. For all the world’s cities, or all its towns, or all its
geographical features of any type, the raw distance data would consume a hard
drive even though the positions of those features can be concisely expressed on a
single map. “That’s what space is,” Barbour says. “It’s data compression on a
massive scale.”
The reason the compression is so powerful is locality. Locality means that the
whole is the sum of its spatial parts, and in this context, that means every
journey is a series of smaller steps. You can build up long distances from shorter
intermediate ones, so you don’t need to specify each and every pair of directions.
For instance, the chart might tell you it’s 900 miles from Dallas to Denver and
500 miles from Denver to Salt Lake City, so you don’t need to be told it’s at
most 1,400 miles from Dallas to Salt Lake.
Suppose this weren’t the case—suppose the data in the chart weren’t so
highly ordered. If I fill in a chart with four hundred random numbers and ask you
to mark their locations on a map, you’ll almost certainly fail. For instance, the
chart might tell you it’s nine hundred miles from Dallas to Denver, five hundred
miles from Denver to Salt Lake City, and eight thousand miles from Dallas to
Salt Lake. Now, that doesn’t make much sense, does it? These data put Salt Lake

City in two different places, depending on whether you drive straight from
Dallas or stop off in Denver. The situation is like an April Fool’s joke in which
your friend mixes together pieces from different jigsaw puzzles and gives them
to you to assemble. You’ll struggle to fit the pieces together until it dawns on
you that your supposed friend is a cruel prankster.

6.2. U.S. intercity mileage map from 1939. (© AAA, used by permission)
Under such circumstances, position becomes meaningless. Space becomes

meaningless. It’s not a useful way to describe the relations among places
anymore. But that doesn’t mean the relative arrangement of cities is
incomprehensible. Even if you can’t place the cities on a map, you can fall back
on the full mileage chart. In other words, you can use what philosophers call the
“unmediated” distances, the ones that directly link pairs of cities and can’t be
reduced to a series of shorter hops. This isn’t an entirely hypothetical situation.
When I first drove in Boston, I had to learn to distrust my spatial awareness,
because it kept getting me lost. In that maze of one-way streets and amoeba-
shaped “squares,” you routinely have to go west to go east, or get in the left lane
to turn right. It does you no good to know where places are located from a
bird’s-eye view; instead, you need to robotically follow directions for where and
how to turn. To a driver, Boston is a nonspatial city.
      *
It’s really not so strange that networks of relations can burst out of space. This is
the case, after all, for human relationships. Our social lives are too tangled to be
laid out on a spatial map. Not that people don’t try. Family trees translate genetic
and conjugal closeness into spatial closeness, and online social networks have
spawned similar attempts. The Wolfram Alpha website, for example, will map
out your Facebook friends network, using dots to symbolize your friends and
lines to connect those who have friended each other. Spatial distance on the map
represents social proximity as judged by the number of friends people have in
common. Typically, your friends cluster into distinct social circles: family,
classmates, workmates, ultimate Frisbee teammates, fellow Radiohead groupies,
and so on. If these people go to the same party, they might congregate in
different corners of the room, and the figurative distance between them translates
into literal distance.

6.3. Facebook friends network. (Wolfram Alpha LLC, 2014, used by permission)
When I first generated a Facebook graph, I noticed a stray link between my
physics colleagues and my music friends, revealing that a theorist I’d worked
with shared my passion for Cuban dance music. Finding unexpected connections
is half the fun of these graphs, but does expose the limitations of the spatial
metaphor. There’s no consistent way to assign that theorist a location on my
graph. Like Salt Lake City in the above example, he occupies two different
places, corresponding to two social circles. And the failure deepens when you
consider everything these graphs leave off. Two Facebook “friends” may have
never met or spoken, yet the diagram links them as if they were BFFs. One
person might have an unrequited crush on the other, and still a line connects
them. To capture these other dimensions of human relationships, you can festoon
family trees with symbols: thick line for a close bond, zigzags for hostility, and
so on. Such diagrams, known as genograms, are popular among psychologists,

social workers, and people struggling to follow Game of Thrones. The symbols
compensate for the failure of the spatial metaphor.
In some cases, people organize themselves so that their social network
becomes radically streamlined, and these situations let us see how space might
emerge from spacelessness. A structure can form where none existed before.
That can happen in two ways: build up or cut back. People might start as
atomized individuals who begin interacting, like your grandmother who finally
got on Facebook and signs up all her friends. Or they might start with a mess of
existing relations and prune them, like a social butterfly who friended everyone
he met, realizes he doesn’t know who half of them are, and does a friends purge.
The army, for example, restricts socializing across ranks, on the assumption
that familiarity might breed contempt. Consequently, difference in rank is
analogous to spatial separation: a private is distant from a colonel in much the
same way that Dallas is distant from Salt Lake City. Information flows up and
down the chain of command just as a person driving from Dallas to Salt Lake
City must pass through intermediate points. Because of this structure, a military
hierarchical chart is a fair representation of social relations in the military.
The army’s structure is imposed by military discipline, but in other cases the
order develops spontaneously from within. A classic example is the market
economy. We routinely speak of “the economy” as though it were a conscious
being rather than millions of people making rash decisions with their money.
And in a sense it is, because collective arrangements transcend the people who
create them. In isolation, individuals don’t put price tags on goods, because they
have no one to buy from or sell to. Price becomes important when people come
together and trade. Depending on their haggling skills, the price varies from
person to person and place to place. Some plucky entrepreneur takes advantage
of these variations to buy low and sell high; in so doing, that person helps to
even out the supply and therefore harmonize the prices.
This kind of self-organizing happens all the time in physics. For instance, a
single water molecule has no temperature. Temperature becomes meaningful
when molecules collide and exchange energy. If you mix cold and hot water, the
cold warms up, the hot cools off, until they equalize. Before equilibrium, the
water is characterized by two temperatures; afterward, by a single value. From
complexity comes simplicity. The complexity remains latent, though. You can

tell it’s there whenever the temperature fluctuates or water undergoes a
transformation such as boiling in a teakettle. Physicists commonly use these
deviations from standard behavior as windows into the microscopic composition
of materials.
The same might go for space, too. The basic building blocks of nature might
be capable of a tangle of relationships that would fill a celebrity gossip rag.
Through some organizing mechanism or simply the play of averages, those
relationships become regimented, so that they can be laid out on a spatial grid
and interact only in strictly prescribed ways. A mind-bogglingly complex
network of interactions reduces to a few numbers that we call “the position” and
“the time.” The underlying complexity never goes away, though. In situations
such as black holes, the system can become disordered and events can cease to
have a position or a time. And even when the system is spatial, it contains a vast
amount of latent complexity. The universe we see playing out in space may be
just the surface level, where we float like little boats while leviathans stir in the
deep.

Networking Space
The concept of space as a network goes back to the 1960s and the brainstorms of
such innovative (and iconoclastic) theorists as John Wheeler, David Bohm,
Roger Penrose, and David Finkelstein. Wheeler, for one, imagined taking a
bucket of “dust” or “rings”—primitive grains of matter that do not exist within
space, but simply exist—and stringing them together to form space. Physicists
have been trying to make the idea work for decades. Today one of its strongest
champions is Fotini Markopoulou, who pictures the stringing-together process as
a graph akin to those Facebook diagrams. She and her colleagues call their
approach “quantum graphity”—cutesy, but any effort to inject a sense of humor
into physics jargon has got to be a good thing.
Quantum graphity doesn’t specify what the Wheelerian grains actually are—
that’s a job for a full-up theory of quantum gravity such as loop quantum gravity
or string theory. Quantum graphity is a theory-in-miniature that focuses narrowly
on what you might build with those grains. Indeed, Markopoulou and her
colleagues’ philosophy is that the detailed composition shouldn’t matter; the
principles of organization should be universal. After all, physicists have found
that similar rules govern a huge diversity of complex systems, from earthquakes
to ecosystems to economies. On the downside, quantum graphity is so bare-
bones that it faces the problem of meshing with known physics. “Fotini tries to
jump straight in, but it’s very ambitious and dangerous, because you have no
connection to existing theories,” says Claus Kiefer of the University of Cologne.
The links between the elementary grains are as simple as can be. Two grains
are either connected to each other or not, like Facebook users who can either be
friends or not—just an on-or-off relationship. The resulting network looks like a
string-art craft project in which you hammer nails (representing the grains) into a
sheet of wood and stretch threads (the links) among some of them. Despite the
simplicity of its construction, the network can take on a huge variety of shapes,
ranging from skeletal outlines to elaborate mandalas.
To breathe life into the network—to give it the capacity to transform and
evolve—Markopoulou and her colleagues suppose that the links switch on or off
depending on the amount of available energy. This process is ad hoc, but again

the goal is not to create a bulletproof theory, but to reconnoiter possibilities for
how to construct space. Each link represents a certain amount of energy. Chains
of links contain less energy than an equivalent number of isolated links, so the
total energy of a network depends not only on the sheer number of links, but also
on how they’re put together. The more intricate the pattern is, the more energy it
embodies.
The energy maxes out in a fully interconnected network, where every grain is
linked to every other grain. In such a network, the principle of locality doesn’t
hold; you can go from any grain to any other grain in one hop, without passing
through any intermediate points. The network lacks the hierarchy of relations—
near versus far, small versus big—which is characteristic of space. You can’t
subdivide it into separate chunks; it’s an indivisible whole. “This thing has no
notion of locality…,” Markopoulou has explained. “If you just put out your
hand, you reach everybody in the whole universe.”
6.4. Quantum graphity model of space. In a high-energy network (left), every point is connected to every
other point. In a low-energy network (right), every point is connected only to a few others, which become
its nearest neighbors in the structure of space. (Courtesy of Fotini Markopoulou)
To see why the high-energy network is not spatial, try assigning locations to
the grains. Every grain has to be equidistant (a single hop) from every other. For
the first three grains, that’s no problem: arrange them in an equilateral triangle.
Four can be stacked in a pyramid. But where does a fifth go? There’s nowhere
equidistant to the first four points, at least not within ordinary, three-dimensional
space. You need a four-dimensional pyramid. In fact, each additional grain
requires a whole new dimension of space. Before long, you enter an ultra-higher-
dimensional realm beyond our capacity to visualize. And most of that vast venue
is wasted: the network is only one hop wide in any direction and does a good
impression of a balled-up spider’s web. So although you might still talk of the

network as existing within space, it’s not the kind of space we want: three
dimensions that extend as far as we can see in every direction and provide an
economical description of the relations among objects.
Lower-energy patterns are a different story. They’re just what we want. Each
grain connects to just a few others, forming a regular grid like a honeycomb or
woven fabric. The notion of distance regains meaning: some grains are close
together, the rest far apart. The network is nice and roomy. The principle of
locality holds: for an influence to go from one place to another, it can’t hop
straight there, but must work its way through the network. The passage of the
signal takes time, which would explain why the speed of objects through space is
limited (by the speed of light).
In short, spacelessness and space are just two different phases of the same
network of grains. One can metamorphose into the other; a crumpled wad can
unfurl into a flat expanse. Theorists have proposed a couple of ways this might
happen. The reshaping could be a process that occurs in time. The network starts
off as sizzlingly hot—a highly interconnected pattern containing an enormous
amount of energy. Then it cools off and crystallizes like a tray of water freezing
to ice, as links dissolve and reorganize to create a tidy arrangement. The trick is
to explain the cooling. Things don’t just cool down on their own; something
must drain them of heat. “Where did the energy go?” wonders Markopoulou.
“You need a freezer. You need to cool the universe.” She and her colleagues
speculate that the energy could go into the creation of matter. The primordial
grains could coalesce into elementary particles, so that matter emerges hand in
hand with space.
Alternatively, the transition may not be a process that unfolds in time, but a
structuring that arises at the quantum level. The network can exist in multiple
conditions at once, a limbo known as superposition. Although most of those
conditions are nonspatial, they can fuse together into something that is spatial.
The best-developed account of superposition of space goes by the somewhat
unwieldy name of “causal dynamical triangulations.” Its inventors have shown
that nonspatial geometries neutralize one another, as long as events are highly
ordered, with a distinction between cause and effect built in from the outset. The
effect is analogous to the wisdom of crowds, those remarkable cases in which
you pose a question to a group and no one person has the right answer, yet

pooling everyone’s guesses does give the right answer. The classic example is
the jelly-bean experiment: if you ask a group of people how many jelly beans
there are in a jar, the average of their estimates will be better than any single
person’s estimate. The group has a collective intelligence beyond that of its
members.
      *
To delve into how the superposition might work, let’s revisit Schrödinger’s
infamous cat scenario and take it a step further. In the original scenario, an
experimenter puts a furry kitten into a limbo of being both alive and dead at
once. A fusion of familiar conditions (life and death) leads to an unfamiliar one
(the cat’s existential ambiguity). For most people, that’s weird enough, but it gets
better, because the converse is also true. A fusion of unfamiliar conditions can
lead to a familiar one. That means an indubitably alive cat is in a superposition,
too—a superposition that fuses exotic conditions such as being “somewhat alive
and somewhat dead.” The “somewhat dead” parts cancel out, leaving an entirely
alive mammal—much as, in the jelly-bean experiment, individual people’s errors
offset one another. Even an ordinary cat, in other words, is a bundle of
contradictions (not that this will come as any surprise to cat owners).
Weird though this sounds, it’s where the true power of quantum mechanics
lies. Much of the everyday world is the result of bizarre processes whose bizarre
aspects negate one another. For instance, why does light travel in straight lines?
If you look at the quantum level, light actually moves on every possible path at
once, but the twisty paths negate one another, leaving only a straight one. Space
might be like that. The ordinary space we inhabit could be a superposition of
nonspatial networks, the nonspatiality of one negating the nonspatiality of
another.

Inside the Matrix
String theorists have explored ideas similar to Markopoulou’s quantum graphity.
In the 1990s they pioneered “matrix models,” so called because the equations are
based on grids, or matrices, of numbers much like the mileage charts. A matrix
in the mathematical sense has nothing to do with the virtual-reality “matrix” of
the movie The Matrix, yet the premise is eerily similar: the world we experience
is a kind of simulation generated by a deeper level of reality. The best-known
matrix model was developed by a quartet of theorists, Tom Banks, Willy
Fischler, Steve Shenker, and Leonard Susskind. Their model, like quantum
graphity, supposes that the universe is a cat’s cradle of interconnections among
grains of primitive matter. Under the right conditions, extraneous connections
rupture and the grains snap into a regular spatial grid. “You start with a bunch of
Tinkertoy parts with no particular structure to them,” says Susskind, who is a
physics professor at Stanford University. “You shake it up and it emerges into a
lattice or structure of some sort.”
String theory outgrew its name long ago. It postulates not just one-
dimensional strings, but also two-dimensional membranes and higher-
dimensional analogues—as theorists call them, 1-branes, 2-branes, 3-branes, 4-
branes, and so on. Some branes, designated by D, can act as the endpoints of
strings. At the bottom of this pecking order is the humble D0-brane, a type of
particle. Being a true geometric point lacking size or any other spatial attribute,
the D0-brane is the perfect building block for space. Confirming this intuition,
theorists calculate that the D0-brane has the right properties to serve as the
graviton, the particle that has been hypothesized for decades to convey the force
of gravity.
Matrix models take this particle as fundamental and construct the universe
entirely from lots of them. Every particle can interact with every particle, and
their interactions are not simply on or off, but can vary in strength and in quality.
The more energy you inject into a pair of particles, the tighter their bond will
become. The namesake matrix of numbers quantifies this web of interactions.
For example, if you read down to the eighth row and then across to the twelfth
column, the number there will tell you how strongly particle number eight

interacts with particle number twelve. To express not just the raw strength but
also the quality of the connection, you need several such matrices.
Each matrix is a square, and running diagonally from the top left corner to the
bottom right is a special set of numbers—where the eighth row meets the eighth
column, the twelfth row meets the twelfth column, and so on. These tell you how
much each particle interacts with itself. Self-interactions are a core feature of
matrix models. The particles are subatomic narcissists, the physics equivalent of
Facebook users who always “Like” their own posts. Their self-interactions have
a carefree, unrestrained quality; you can dial their strength up or down without
having to pump in energy.
Whereas the workings of quantum graphity are somewhat ad hoc, the laws
governing D0-branes are dictated by considerations of symmetry. The
mathematical balance of the equations is the organizing principle of this model.
Symmetry ensures that the off-diagonal values in the matrix are yoked to the
diagonal values—in other words, that the branes’ mutual interactions depend on
their self-interactions. Particles that self-interact by comparable amounts forge a
bond, whereas particles with differing levels of self-interaction remain aloof. Put
simply, like attracts like. Consequently, the branes agglomerate into separate
clusters like the social circles in your Facebook network. These clusters
constitute the ordinary subatomic particles of physics. Each cluster can be
compactly described by a few numbers—namely, the strength and quality of its
constituents’ self-interactions.
That’s how space arises in matrix models. The D0-branes don’t live or move
within space. Mathematically they all sit on top of one another at a single point.
But because they’re so selective about their interactions, they produce our
experience of living within space. What we call “position” is simply the set of
numbers that uniquely identifies a given cluster. It’s like pigeonholing your
friends as “physics lovers,” “Radiohead groupies,” or “Cuban-style dancers.”
That’s just the start. You can take all our familiar spatial notions—movement,
size, locality—and explain them in terms of brane dynamics. Movement: things
shift their position because the D0-branes’ self-interactions are varying. It’s like
saying the Cuban dancers suddenly all get interested in Dominican music. They
“move” as a group to a new passion. Such movement may sound metaphorical,
but in matrix models it’s the origin of physical movement. Size: the self-

interactions of the branes in an object are not exactly equal, but have a slight
spread, so that the object spans a range of positions. Locality: clusters at separate
locations are independent because their self-interactions differ, which suppresses
their mutual interactions according to the logic of symmetry. This is like saying
that Cuban dancers and Radiohead groupies never have much to say to each
other. “Things that are ‘separated’ are not really separated,” Susskind explains.
“There’s just a cancellation of the things that are connecting them.”
If all the branes did was reproduce space, that’d be gratifying, but boring. Our
goal is to go beyond space. Branes can do that. They can behave in ways that are
too complicated to represent with a handful of spatial coordinates. For instance,
the mutual interactions among clusters are never fully suppressed, because
quantum effects keep tickling them back to life. Therefore, spatially separated
clusters are not fully independent; they feel the gentle tug of other clusters. This
is how matrix models explain the force of gravity. In a sense, the models evoke
Newton’s picture of gravity as a nonlocal force that leaps from one thing to
another. The interactions that produce it aren’t transmitted through space, but are
direct, unmediated, nonlocal links.
Another departure from spatiality occurs inside clusters. The internal group
dynamics are intense and every brane is interacting with every other. The branes
scramble one another’s self-interactions, and the matrix values representing
those interactions lose the qualities of spatial coordinates. Ordinarily, coordinates
are independent numbers: you can measure the latitude of a city separately from
its longitude. But you can’t do that for branes within a cluster. If you measure the
latitude of a brane first, then its longitude, you might get a different result than if
you measured the longitude, then the latitude. This kind of ordering effect is
known mathematically as “noncommutativity.” In effect, the particle seems to be
located in two different places, like Salt Lake City in my cities example. “The
position in, say, the ‘x’ direction and the position in the ‘y’ direction can’t
simultaneously be measured,” says Emil Martinec, a string theorist at the
University of Chicago. “This is certainly not the behavior we expect for a
collection of discrete particles—we expect to be able to localize them precisely
in all spatial dimensions.” The degree of ambiguity is a measure of just how
nonlocal and nonspatial the system is.
Indeed, the cluster doesn’t really have an “inside”—there is no volume of

space where the D0-branes bustle around. Arguably there aren’t even any D0-
branes anymore, either, because they surrender their individuality and become
assimilated into the collective. If you look at a cluster from the outside, what you
see isn’t the outer surface of a material thing, but the end of space; and if you
poke your hand into the cluster, you will not reach into its interior, for the cluster
has no interior. Instead, your hand will become assimilated, too (which can’t be
good for it). If you wisely refrain from touching the cluster and instead throw
particles into it, you will notice that the cluster’s storage capacity depends on its
area rather than on its interior volume—again, for the simple reason that it
doesn’t actually have an interior volume. Space has no meaning at this level.

Holographic Reality
Matrix models do have some peculiarities, but they establish a remarkable
principle: a bunch of particles obeying quantum physics can organize themselves
so that you’d swear they live and move within space, even if space wasn’t in the
original specification of the system. And it turns out that this principle is very
general. Not just a swarm of D0-branes but almost any quantum system contains
spatial dimensions folded inside it like a figure in a pop-up book. Most such
systems don’t bootstrap space from utter spacelessness, as matrix models do, but
prime the pump with a low-dimensional space in order to generate a higher-
dimensional one.
The AdS/CFT duality that I mentioned in the previous chapter is such a
system. It starts with a three-dimensional space and generates a nine-
dimensional one. One reason string theorists like this scenario so much is that it
neatly explains the holographic principle, the idea that the universe can sustain
much less complexity than the principle of locality would lead you to expect.
The complexity is reduced by just the amount you’d expect if one of the
dimensions of space were illusory. In the AdS/CFT scenario, that’s because the
dimension in question is illusory. It can be collapsed down like an accordion
because it was never really there. (“Illusory” is perhaps the wrong word.
“Derived” or “constructed” would be better, if less poetic. The dimension may
not exist at the lowest level, but it is still very real to anything larger than a
brane.)
The disposable dimension reflects a particular aspect of order in the
underlying quantum system. In fact, the requisite order is familiar to us from
everyday life—specifically, the fact that big things and small things live as if in
worlds apart. Our planet trundles around its orbit oblivious to human affairs, just
as we spare little thought for the bacteria that lodge in our skin. Conversely, we
have only a vague awareness of riding on a giant ball of rock, and bacteria know
nothing of our daily struggles. Nature is stratified by scale.
Sound waves are an especially simple example of this stratification. Sounds
of long and short wavelengths are oblivious to each other; if you sound a deep
bass note and a high treble pitch simultaneously, each ripples through the room

as though it were the only sound in the world. Their mutual independence is
analogous to the autonomy of spatially separated objects. Suppose you play two
piano keys, middle C and the adjoining D key. The C key creates a sound wave
with a wavelength of 1 meter 32 centimeters, and D produces one with a
wavelength 14 centimeters shorter. These waves overlap in the three dimensions
of space through which they propagate, yet they’re independent of each other, as
if they were located in different places. In a sense, you can think of the sound
waves as residing 14 centimeters apart within a fourth spatial dimension.
The farther apart the keys are on a piano keyboard, the farther apart they are
within this imaginary dimension; a given distance along the keyboard translates
into a given distance within the dimension. You don’t see this dimension as such;
to you, it’s an abstraction that captures the acoustical independence of sound
waves. But it’s a remarkably fitting abstraction. Musicians call the difference
between pitches a musical “interval,” which has connotations of distance, as if
our brains really do think of the differences between pitches as spatial
separation. AdS/CFT duality takes this abstraction literally and suggests that one
of the dimensions of the space we occupy represents the energy or, equivalently,
the size of waves within the underlying system.
Raman Sundrum, a string theorist at the University of Maryland, has a
dramatic way of putting it. Suppose you’re an artist painting the National Mall,
with an ice-cream stand in the foreground and the Washington Monument in the
background. To evoke a sense of distance on the flat canvas, you draw these two
objects at different scales. Something like that is happening for real in the
AdS/CFT scenario. The universe looks three-dimensional, but could really be a
two-dimensional canvas, and what we perceive as distance along the third
dimension is ultimately a difference in scale. “The depth dimension could be re-
created in the way that artists have to do it: by just drawing the Washington
Monument really small and drawing something in the foreground really big,”
Sundrum says. A faraway object is actually sitting right next to you; it looks
small because it really is small. You can’t touch it not because it’s distant but
because it’s so tiny that your fingers lack the finesse to manipulate it. When
things grow or shrink, we perceive that as movement toward or away from us.
Things of different sizes aren’t strictly independent; they interact with things
of comparable size, and the effects can cascade from one scale to the next.

Consider the proverb of the nail: for want of a nail, the shoe was lost; for want of
a shoe, the horse was lost; then the knight, the battle, and the kingdom. A nail
shortage in a single blacksmith shop didn’t immediately cause the monarch’s
downfall; it exerted its influence indirectly, via systems of intermediate scales.
Sound waves of different pitches can also behave like this. A Chinese gong
begins rumbling at a low pitch and gradually vibrates at successively higher
pitches. The necessity of propagating through scale explains why spatial locality
holds in the emergent dimension. What happens in one place doesn’t jump to
another without passing through the points in between.
It’s not automatic that the underlying quantum system would possess this kind
of hierarchical order. Just as a painting must be composed in just the right way to
produce the sense of depth, so must the system have a certain degree of internal
coherence to give rise to space. What ensures this cohesion is entanglement
among the system’s particles or fields. To produce space as we know it, those
particles or fields must be entangled by scale: each particle with its neighbor,
each pair of particles with another pair, each group with another group. Other
patterns lead to different geometries or systems that can’t be thought of as spatial
at all. If the system is less than fully entangled, then the emergent space is
disjointed, and an inhabitant of the universe would be trapped inside one region,
unable to venture elsewhere. “Quantum entanglement is the thing that is
responsible for connecting up the spacetime into one piece,” says Mark Van
Raamsdonk, a theorist at the University of British Columbia. When we first
encountered entanglement, it seemed to transcend space. Today, physicists think
it might be what creates space.

6.5. Connectivity of space. As two parts of the universe become increasingly entangled with each other,
they draw closer together. (Courtesy of Mark Van Raamsdonk)

Glitches in the Matrix
To recap, we’ve seen several ways that space might emerge from spacelessness,
all variants on the idea that a knotted network of primitive building blocks could
straighten itself out into a tidy crystalline lattice. Now let’s apply these tentative
ideas to the nonlocal phenomena that I introduced in chapter 1, including the
correlations between entangled particles, the grand-scale uniformity of the
cosmos, and the fate of matter that falls into black holes. These phenomena may
be glitches in the matrix: irregularities that betray the deep nature of reality.
The emergent spatial lattice isn’t perfect—nothing in nature ever is. It has
slight defects, like sewing mistakes that leave straggly threads running from your
shirt collar to the cuff. Adjacency within the network need not imply adjacency
within space; one small step in the network could be one giant leap in space.
Markopoulou and Smolin call this phenomenon “disordered locality,” while the
string theorist Brian Swingle of Stanford University uses the term “long links.”
These links are essentially tiny wormholes, like the spacetime tunnels that
general relativity theory permits. Science-fiction shows such as the Star Trek
franchise or the movie Interstellar depict wormholes as portals for spaceships,
but the concept of wormholes actually originated in Einstein’s efforts to explain
particles. Such a link might join entangled particles. If two quantum coins are
the two mouths of a wormhole, there’d be no mystery why they land on the same
side when you flip them. “The correlations are due to closeness in space—
closeness through the wormhole,” suggests Juan Maldacena.
Compelling though it is, this idea has potential defects of its own. For one
thing, there is a danger of circular reasoning. In creating their models of
emergent spacetime, theorists presupposed quantum mechanics, so how can they
now use emergent spacetime to explain quantum mechanics? Also, wormholes
seem like overkill. Anything that happens to enter a wormhole should come out
the other side. Yet entangled particles are incapable of conveying a signal, let
alone a spaceship. Any tunnel between them would have to be a collapsed
mineshaft, providing just enough of a connection to make the particles give
matching results in laboratory experiments, but not enough to open up a general-
purpose passageway. Proponents offer several ways to strike this balance.

Maldacena argues that gravity pinches off the wormhole before a signal could
make it through. Swingle suggests that experimenters would find it so
inordinately difficult to stuff a signal through such a narrow link, requiring an
implausibly powerful computer to encode and decode, that they could never do it
in practice. And Markopoulou imagines that the wormhole can convey a signal,
but the signal is meaningless because the particles are moving randomly—just as
a cat walking on your computer keyboard might send an e-mail, but a gibberish
one.
Others think entanglement demands more radical ideas. Michael Heller
advocates a concept called noncommutative geometry, which is a slightly ironic
name: the aim is actually to do away with geometry and describe the universe as
a big algebraic equation. The equation is formulated in terms of matrices, like
those of matrix models, but given a new interpretation. The matrices are no
longer arrays of numbers describing the connections among building blocks such
as D0-branes, but individual entities in their own right, the primary ingredients
from which everything else is made.
In concrete terms, Heller and others pursuing this approach take a top-down
view of physics, in which global structures—ones that span the entire universe—
are fundamental, and local geometric concepts such as “points” and “things”
derive from those global structures, rather than the usual bottom-up view in
which the universe is built from zillions of localized things. “There are no
points, no time instants,” Heller says. “Everything is global. So locality has been
engulfed by globality.” By analogy, imagine that instead of defining society as
millions of individuals who assemble into sundry groups, we define it as
millions of groups and identify each individual as a bundle of group
memberships. (This isn’t so far-fetched: philosophers and sociologists such as
Hegel have argued that individual identity is constructed largely from social
identity.) You could draw a big Venn diagram of groups and every person would
be the unique intersection of some set of circles. For this top-down definition to
work, groups must overlap in just the right way. If they don’t, individuals lose
their distinct identity; you’d get more than one person with the same set of group
identities and be unable to tell them apart.
Something like this could happen with the global structures of
noncommutative geometry. Under the right conditions, these structures interlock

to produce a spatial universe governed by the usual laws of physics. Under other
conditions, they don’t—and their imperfect meshing would produce nonlocal
phenomena such as entangled particles. If two distinct objects are merely
different mixes of the same global entities, it stands to reason that they can retain
a connection that transcends space. What happens in one place will be sensitive
to what happens elsewhere, even without any communication in an ordinary
sense.
      *
Emergent-spacetime models also give us a new way to understand the big bang.
The genesis of the universe has always presented something of a paradox.
Nothing is supposed to precede it, yet something must precede it to set the
cosmos in motion. But the paradox dissipates when we think of the big bang not
as an abrupt moment of creation, but as a transitional process. If space emerges
from spaceless building blocks just as life emerges from lifeless atoms, then the
birth of the universe is no more inscrutable than the birth of a living creature.
The primeval world, formless and void, gradually shaped itself into a spatial
structure. The story recalls ancient creation myths in which primordial chaos
becomes steadily more differentiated: earth from sky, night from day, sea from
land.
Theorists toying with this idea have suggested several possible primordial
states. According to quantum graphity, on the one hand, the universe was a
network buzzing with energy. In effect, wormholes linked every point in space to
every other. As the system cooled, the wormholes pinched off, different parts of
the universe gained some autonomy, and space took on the form we recognize.
Matrix models, on the other hand, suggest an alternative scenario. The D0-
branes that constitute the universe at its deepest level were all interconnected,
but that didn’t translate directly to a linkage of points in space. In fact, space was
splintered into countless disjointed pieces, an archipelago of little universes.
Physicists call this condition “ultralocality.” It is “ultra” in that the islands
weren’t just autonomous, but utterly isolated. Then, some of the D0-branes
became entangled and started to behave as a single unit—a little patch of space.
The newly formed unit, in turn, became entangled with other such units, creating
a slightly larger patch of space. As regions became entangled on progressively

larger scales, space rolled out like a carpet. From the point of view of someone
living within space, it looked as though wormholes popped into existence and
bridged the gap between islands.
Both scenarios would explain why the universe now appears so uniform.
During the prebangian epoch, matter and energy would have sloshed around the
network and spread out evenly before space germinated and grew. Two galaxies
on opposite sides of the sky, at the far reaches of your vision, separated by a gulf
of space, are unable to communicate with each other now. But at the dawn of
time, there was no space and no gulf between them. Because those galaxies were
directly linked back then, their close resemblance is no coincidence. Only as
space emerged did they sever their connection. “The idea came as a completely
obvious consideration when I first played with a completely connected graph as
a possible early phase of the universe,” Markopoulou recalls. “You just look at it
and go, duh, there would be no horizon problem here.”
The emergence process might explain other general features of the universe,
too. For instance, astronomers observe that the primordial universe wasn’t
exactly uniform, but slightly splotchy. These subtle deviations from perfect
uniformity were the seeds around which galaxies and other cosmic structures
coalesced later on. Intriguingly, the splotches look the same no matter what their
size is. Such scale-independence is a common property of certain kinds of phase
transitions—for instance, when high-pressure steam turns into liquid water;
finely balanced between two states of matter, conditions fluctuate in a
coordinated way on all scales. A phase transition from spacelessness to space
could well produce the same pattern.
      *
Black holes are like the big bang in reverse: the reversion of space to
spacelessness. In the emergent-spacetime picture, they’re puddles of water on
the tundra: isolated spots in the universe where space literally melts, its orderly,
crystalline structure degenerating into a fluid turmoil. We can scarcely even
imagine what such a fluid is really like. “Whatever that is, it does not have a
geometric interpretation,” Martinec says. “The conventional geometric notion of
spacetime has ended.”
To the extent we can visualize the fluid at all, it is a highly interconnected

network—not a gravitational vacuum cleaner so much as a cosmic labyrinth. It is
effectively infinite-dimensional. Things falling in are unable to get back out not
because gravity grips them firmly but because they have a hard time finding the
exit. They might succeed someday, but in the short term they’re goners. They
suffer the fate of people who call their insurance company and spend all night
navigating a Kafkaesque phone menu. “This highly connected area acts as a
trap,” Markopoulou says.
According to quantum graphity, the maze is literally a complex of passages,
but in matrix models, it is more abstract—a labyrinth of complexity. The D0-
branes that make up the hole are constantly in motion, always reshuffling
themselves, as if wandering through a warren of possible arrangements.
Occasionally a brane gets lucky: its connections to its partners momentarily
slacken, so it flies off. Particle by particle, the black hole disperses, as Stephen
Hawking predicted it should. “Getting trapped by the strong gravitational field
for a long time before reemerging as Hawking radiation,” Martinec says, “is
largely related to the particle getting lost in this huge space of states.”
6.6. Quantum graphity model of a black hole. The black hole is a cosmic maze—anything that falls in can

emerge only with difficulty. (Courtesy of Alioscia Hamma)
Not only can the emergence of space account for nonlocal phenomena that
physicists have observed or inferred, it predicts phenomena they’ve yet to see.
One goes by the rather existentialist name of “bubble of nothing.” Like a black
hole, a bubble of nothing is a phase transition, but closer in spirit to boiling than
to melting. A pot of water on your stove boils when bubbles of vapor nucleate,
expand, and begin to interconnect, until the liquid is all gone. Likewise, a little
pocket of spacelessness might nucleate and begin to grow. “At some point in
time, quantum-mechanically a hole develops in spacetime,” Rozali says. “The
boundary of that hole propagates out at the speed of light. It’s sort of eating up
spacetime.” Happily, a bubble of nothing wouldn’t suck you to your doom like a
black hole; in fact, you could never see it directly, because it is outside space.
Despite the name, the bubble is not strictly nothing. The quantum system hasn’t
gone away—just as water doesn’t go away when it boils—but simply becomes
too disordered to be thought of as spatial anymore.
      *
The theories remain unproved, but at least the concept of emergent spacetime
has demonstrated its practical value. Certain types of real-world systems behave
as if extra dimensions of space are latent within them. For instance, materials
near absolute zero can flow or conduct an electric current in unexpected ways,
indicating that they’ve achieved an extra degree of organization. Their
constituent particles live and move through three spatial dimensions but arrange
themselves as if they’re living and moving in four dimensions. If you look at
these materials, you won’t directly see the higher dimension. It exists at a
different level of description in which clusters of particles, rather than particles
themselves, are the primitive objects. The mathematics of the AdS/CFT duality
eases the analysis of these systems.
A similar thing happens at the other end of the temperature scale. In the past
decade, atom smashers such as the Large Hadron Collider have melted atomic
nuclei to create obscenely hot states of matter. These boiling, roiling plasmas are
an ungodly mess; the quarks and gluons in them interact so intensely that even
the greatest math whizzes on the planet struggle to predict what they’ll do. Yet

the plasma turns out to have an inner simplicity that becomes evident when you
make the mental leap and think of it as existing in four dimensions. For instance,
friction in the plasma can be reimagined as gravitational waves caroming off a
black hole in higher-dimensional space—which, even for a physicist, is not an
analogy that springs to mind. In a sense, the Large Hadron Collider doesn’t just
create new forms of matter. It creates space.
      *
It’s astounding to think that space, thought for so long to be the rock-bottom
foundation of physical reality, could perch atop an even deeper layer. Nonlocal
phenomena are clues to this foundational structure, on the principle that you
learn about how something is put together by noticing where it falls apart.
Ironically, the main criticism I hear of quantum graphity, matrix models, and
AdS/CFT isn’t that they’re too weird, but that they’re not weird enough. All
these models still work within the basic framework of quantum physics and
general relativity, and much of the structure that is supposed to arise
spontaneously is actually preprogrammed into the rules.
Notably, these models presuppose time; they don’t incorporate Leibniz’s and
Mach’s suggestion that time should emerge as surely as space does. Some
researchers don’t see this as a failing, but as a profound truth about nature—that
time must be fundamental even if space isn’t. After all, physics does need to
have some foundational structure, something that everything else is built on, and
time is as good a candidate as any. Indeed, how could you even talk about
emergence as a temporal process if you don’t presume time? “As soon as you
say time is emergent, you run off the rails,” Martinec says. “What are the rules?
What do I do?” The Caltech cosmologist Sean Carroll has put it succinctly:
“Space is totally overrated, whereas time is underappreciated … I think that time
is going to last … Space, on the other hand—totally bogus. Space is just an
approximation that we find useful in certain circumstances.”
Yet this separation of time and space runs counter to Einstein’s great insight
that the two are fundamentally inseparable. If one is emergent, surely the other
must be. Many physicists do think that time emerges and have been looking for
ways to think of emergence without presupposing time. A clue comes from the
holographic principle. So far, I’ve described the holographic principle as a way

to generate space, but it can also generate time. The key in both cases is the
existence of a boundary. If the universe has a boundary located out in deep
space, the emergent dimension is spatial, but if it has a boundary in the past or
future, the emergent dimension is temporal. In fact, as far as astronomers can
tell, our universe has temporal rather than spatial boundaries. In the past, there’s
the big bang; in the future, eternally accelerating expansion, which also serves as
a type of boundary. An observer sitting on that boundary in the distant past or far
future would know all there is to know about the intervening moments.
Yesterday, today, and tomorrow would collapse into one.
By this logic, theories that presume time are still incomplete, merely stepping
stones to a complete account of how space and time emerge from deeper
physics. Theorists will need an even more radical approach to explain
nonlocality than those they’ve tried so far. And indeed they’ve been stumbling
toward one.

Conclusion: The Amplituhedron
Toward the beginning of the Second World War, Werner Heisenberg made a
famous and historically controversial visit to Copenhagen, during which he and
Niels Bohr discussed Heisenberg’s efforts to build an atom bomb for the Nazis.
Heisenberg took a lesser-known but equally dramatic trip toward the end of the
war. In December 1944, he crossed from Germany into Switzerland to give a
talk at the University of Zurich. Sitting in the audience, along with some of his
old physicist friends, was a man he didn’t recognize—from what he could tell, a
local physics aficionado or perhaps an SS agent sent to make sure he wasn’t bad-
mouthing Hitler. In fact, it was Moe Berg: ex–baseball player, Princeton-
educated linguist, and American spy. Berg had been sent to find out whether
Heisenberg was close to finishing the bomb and, if so, to kill him. When
Heisenberg stayed mum about his bomb work and lectured instead about a side
interest, a new quantum concept called the S-matrix, Berg let him live.
The S-matrix was a revolutionary approach to doing physics without space
and time, one that was even further removed from ordinary notions of space than
the graphs and matrices that I talked about in the previous chapter. Heisenberg,
who had always had it in for space, felt vindicated by the troubles quantum field
theory was having in explaining electric and magnetic forces—specifically, its
prediction that these forces should act with infinite strength. To sidestep the
question of whether the theory was right and what might replace it, he devised a
mathematical version of the principle that what you don’t know can’t hurt you.
He proposed to treat messy particle collisions as a black box. You know what
goes in, you know what comes out, but no one ever sees the confused jumble in

between. The S-matrix tabulates the probabilities of the sundry possible
outcomes. To calculate its entries, Heisenberg argued, theorists don’t need to
know what goes on inside the box. They can neglect where particles are, how
they move, and even whether they really are particles, as opposed to ripples in a
field or some weird thing that physicists have yet to imagine. In short, theorists
can banish any mention of the concept of space from their description of physics.
Instead, they can deduce what they’ll observe based on broad rules. It’s like
rolling dice. You could use a supercomputer to solve the equations of motion for
small dimpled cubes that are tumbling through roiling air currents. Or you could
take a shortcut: because of symmetry, a die has an equal chance of landing on
any of its six sides.
Fortunately for us all, Heisenberg’s mathematical contraption worked rather
better than his bomb ever did. The S-matrix became a part of every theorist’s
toolkit. But not for the reasons Heisenberg originally thought: it was considered
a handy accounting system rather than a way to do without space and time. Not
long after the war ended, physicists figured out how to use quantum field theory
to do full-up calculations—to open up the box and look inside—and put aside
the question of whether space and time ultimately disintegrate. Yet the black box
slammed shut once again in the 1950s and ’60s as physicists plumbed the depths
of atomic nuclei. Quantum field theory didn’t seem up to the task of describing
nuclear forces, and the S-matrix regained its appeal. This time, the theorist
Geoffrey Chew of the University of California, Berkeley, took an extra step.
Whereas Heisenberg had assumed there were some underlying laws of physics—
a mechanism operating within the box—Chew suggested there weren’t. Maybe
the S-matrix is all there is.
This was radical, and radicalism went over well in ’60s-era Berkeley. Part of
Chew’s goal was to get rid of space and time, which he held responsible for the
failings of quantum field theory. “To make major progress we must stop thinking
and talking about such an unobservable continuum,” he told his colleagues in a
lecture in 1963. Instead of a step-by-step narrative of particles or waves
propagating through space, the laws of physics, Chew proposed, were a set of
principles for how things or processes relate to one another. The innards of the
box aren’t a clockwork of moving parts, but a puzzle that fits together in a
certain way. Not only are the parts not moving, they aren’t really “parts.” Within

the atomic nucleus, nothing is more fundamental than anything else; everything
has its place in the structure. The S-matrix describes this structure
mathematically, and physicists could approach it like sudoku: fill in the grid of
numbers based on simple rules. The space and time we perceive on macroscopic
scales derive from the subatomic order.
Yet the program floundered. It predicted that basic principles would fully
determine the S-matrix. Chew wrote: “Nature is as it is because this is the only
possible nature consistent with itself.” But in fact there’s no unique S-matrix for
the particles Chew was studying. General rules don’t tell you where to put all the
numbers, just as a poorly crafted sudoku doesn’t give you enough information to
complete it. By the early 1970s, quantum field theory proved able to explain the
nuclear forces the old-fashioned spatiotemporal way, and for a second time most
physicists left the S-matrix for dead.
      *
As S-matrix theory was riding its roller coaster of fortune, the Oxford
mathematician Roger Penrose was working on his own way to think of
spacetime as emergent. He initially tried to conceive of space as a network, as I
talked about in the previous chapter, but he found he could account for only
some aspects of space, so in the 1960s he expanded the framework into
something he called “twistor” theory. Inspired by quantum nonlocality, Penrose
reasoned that nonlocal structures had to be more fundamental than local ones. So
he built his new theory not on particles or other localized building blocks, but on
light rays. Penrose wasn’t interested in light per se—as a means of illumination
—but in the causal links that light rays represent. Light rays stretch infinitely far
across space, so they’re about as nonlocal as you can get. Out of them you can
construct all the conventional structures of physics. The intersection of light rays
gives you a point. A swirling pattern of rays—the origin of the word “twistor”—
reproduces a spinning particle. “Local structures in spacetime are encoded
nonlocally,” says Lionel Mason, one of Penrose’s former students and now a
colleague of his at Oxford.
As strange as it might seem to take a light ray as a basic unit, it hews closely
to how we perceive the world. We never observe spacetime points and distances
as such; what we do observe are light rays. Another of Penrose’s colleagues,

Andrew Hodges, says: “The twistor picture is much closer to the way we
think … Line-of-sight ideas are a very fundamental thing. We don’t have a direct
intuition of spacetime events.” The next time you go out to look at the night sky,
consider that you are connected by light rays to all those stars. In a sense, you’re
closer to those stars than to someone sitting right next to you at the same instant,
because light is reaching you now from the stars, whereas there’s a slight lag
between you and that person. As Rafael Sorkin, who has worked on similar
ideas, puts it, “A star is closer than yesterday.”
Alas, the approach, like so many others, faded out. A major difficulty was
what Penrose called the “googly” problem (adopting a term from cricket) or
what a Buffy the Vampire Slayer fan might call the vampire problem: the
particles of the theory did not cast an image in a mirror. “He’s very dogged, but
somehow it just wasn’t working,” Mason says. Most physicists thought Penrose
was wasting his time. “Twistor theory was the ugly duckling of theoretical
physics,” Nima Arkani-Hamed has recalled. Penrose didn’t help his cause with
his outspoken skepticism of competing approaches, notably string theory, which
has gone through its own cycles of boom and bust. Valid though his critiques
might have been, they weren’t calculated to endear him to his colleagues.
Over and over, you see the same pattern: a brilliant idea about space has a
meteoric rise and fall. Some people have concluded that the time just isn’t ripe
for getting answers, and they have to weigh the fascination of the topic against
its frustrations. Hans Halvorson, for instance, gave up thinking about nonlocality
to delve into other areas of philosophy. “Anyone who has thought about this
goes through phases of excitement and depression,” he says. “I’m feeling a bit
depressed now.” Fotini Markopoulou has oscillated between exhilaration and
exasperation for years. “I’m discouraged more than I’m encouraged,” she told
me over brunch in 2011. “I wonder whether I should spend my life doing this.
It’s not like you see a lot of results.” When I caught up with her again a year
later, she had left science to study industrial design. “I do absolutely think that
the questions of quantum gravity need to be answered, but you can’t really pull
an answer out of thin air … It’s the rest of my life. I’d really like to have some
time to experiment a little bit.”
      *

In the fall of 2003 Penrose visited Princeton University and gave a series of
lectures in which he deemed string theory a “fashion.” He recalls feeling
apprehensive about meeting Edward Witten, the leading string theorist, as well
he might. But Witten hadn’t even gone to the lectures, and he was much more
interested in picking Penrose’s brain about some new ideas. “He started
explaining something to me,” Penrose remembers. “It looked awfully like it had
to do with twistors.” Witten asked Penrose to look at a short article he was
writing about Penrose’s old brainchild. The “short” article turned out to be a
seventy-page monster that tied strings and twistors together in a single theory. “I
found it very fascinating and exciting,” Penrose says.
Witten has long been a crossover figure—not just a leader of string theory,
but a point of contact with other fields of research, notably pure mathematics. He
had even written a paper on twistors in their heyday twenty-five years earlier. “I
had been extremely interested in twistor theory ever since I first heard of it,” he
says. “I made many tries to do something useful with twistor theory without
really getting what I wanted. I feel that I was basically thinking off and on about
possible directions to use twistor theory for all those years.”
Witten’s paper became a case study in how physics continually reinvents
itself, often by reaching across old boundaries. It provoked some soul-searching.
Twistorians were astounded that string theorists, of all people, had answers to the
googly problem and other issues that had vexed them. Mason began to realize
how often they’d missed a chance to exchange ideas. For example, while visiting
Syracuse University in 1987, he and Penrose blew off a talk by the particle
theorist Parameswaran Nair of the City College of New York, whose work
presaged Witten’s and, in hindsight, would have filled in the gaps in twistor
theory. “We never met up,” Mason says. “So this beautiful idea lay there for
sixteen or seventeen years.”
String theorists, too, were jolted to action. Witten’s paper reconciled them not
only to twistors, but also to an overlooked question within their own area of
study: Why are the outcomes of particle collisions so darned hard to calculate,
and is there an easier way? As I mentioned in chapter 1, most physicists saw
such calculations as homework from hell they’d just as soon forget about. Only a
few people such as Zvi Bern were doing much about it, and even they were
stalling out by 2003. Following up Witten’s paper, Freddy Cachazo of the

Perimeter Institute and several colleagues proposed a way to do those
calculations without spacetime coordinates—putting aside the mechanism of
particle collisions and focusing on their inputs and outputs. The idea sounded
eerily like the old S-matrix program, which now seemed to be rising from the
dead all over again. “This history might be termed the ‘Revenge of the Analytic
S-Matrix,’” says Lance Dixon of the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory,
one of Bern’s closest collaborators.
By the time Witten brought the string and twistor communities together,
they’d worked in mutual isolation for so long that they barely spoke each other’s
language. Arkani-Hamed describes a peculiar exchange at a meeting in Oxford
in 2005. Cachazo gave a talk about the new calculation techniques, and during
the question-and-answer period, Hodges made a remark that nobody could really
follow—something to the effect that Cachazo’s S-matrix diagrams looked
uncannily like twistor diagrams. “I just didn’t get anything about this, zero,
zilch,” Arkani-Hamed recalls. “I thought this guy was either a complete crackpot
or a total genius.” Still, Arkani-Hamed was intrigued enough to do his own
calculations and express them graphically. “The pictures started vaguely looking
like Andrew’s pictures,” he says. He had no idea what the pictures actually
meant, but they matched, and that had to be significant.
What Hodges had seen was a way to visualize the S-matrix calculations
geometrically using twistors. In 2013 Arkani-Hamed and his graduate student
Jaroslav Trnka, now at Caltech, unveiled a geometric technique for calculating
probabilities, known in the jargon as “amplitudes,” for particle processes. They
gave their technique a suitably funky name: the “amplituhedron.” Based on the
particles involved in a given process, you draw a polyhedron with one vertex for
each particle. For instance, if you have two incoming particles that create four
outgoing particles, you need a total of six vertices—a hexagon or one of its
higher-dimensional counterparts. The momentum of a particle sets the size of its
corresponding polyhedral face. Having formed this shape, you then calculate its
interior volume, and that quantity, by the rules of the procedure, equals the
desired amplitude.
The polyhedron isn’t a real object sitting in ordinary space but an abstract
mathematical shape that captures the structure of particles’ interactions. It
subsumes all the previous calculation techniques that physicists have used to

compute amplitudes, including Richard Feynman’s baroque diagrams and Bern
and his colleagues’ minimalist alternative. These different techniques correspond
to different ways to carve up the polyhedron for purposes of calculating its
volume. The polyhedron also exhibits symmetries that nature possesses, but
which theorists had never glimpsed before.
This procedure doesn’t presume that the process plays out in spacetime.
“There are no fields, no particles, no interactions,” Trnka says. The locality we
observe in daily life is a consequence of the way the faces fit together—
specifically, that they form a closed shape, as opposed to disconnected planes.
Those six vertices link into a hexagon rather than, say, an asterisk. In general, the
faces won’t fit together; locality is therefore a special case. “Simple geometric
properties of the amplituhedron encode locality,” Arkani-Hamed explains.
7.1. A portion of the amplituhedron that corresponds to the interaction of seven particles. (Courtesy of Jaroslav
Trnka)
The main lesson, as with the other approaches to emergent spacetime, is that
space represents a type of order in the world, one that you might not expect a
priori. To be sure, the technique so far works only for highly idealized theories

of nuclear forces, and the researchers still have to extend it to the messier reality
we live in. Moreover, they and philosophers still need to fill in the physical
interpretation of the structure. For now, they’re better at describing what nature
isn’t than what it is. “The building blocks don’t have a spacetime interpretation,”
Arkani-Hamed says. “These building blocks come from a very different world
than we think about in particle physics.” What they actually are is another
question. The histories of the future will probably straighten out all the kinks in
the story and just present whatever the answer happens to be. Those of us who
are living through this era know how much more interesting the search has really
been.

Like Teenagers
So now we’ve seen two contemporary disputes over nonlocality. The twistor-
string wrangle has unwound, while the entanglement debate I discussed in
chapter 4 still rages (though, as I argued there, becoming moot, because all the
positions suggest our notions of space have to give way). In neither case has the
disagreement been resolved by the outright victory of one side over the other.
Such clarity is rare in science.
If science is like a tree, most nonscientists focus on the trunk—the towering
accumulation of knowledge. But that’s the dead part of the tree. For scientists,
the real tree is the thin layer of living tissue under the bark where the organism
grows. We look to science for answers, but scientists are driven by questions,
and to them an answer is merely a prelude to another question. We expect
scientists to speak as one, but the very idea of speaking as one is alien to science.
Scientists tend not to discuss this aspect of their profession. They often
describe their disputes as dirty laundry best not aired in public (and complain
when journalists do so). But if you don’t air disputes, what’s left to air? Science
is dispute. Once scientists reach consensus, they move on to some new
argument. It’s like having a dinner party with New Yorkers: if they manage to
agree on anything, the moment of peace lasts just long enough to take another
sip of craft beer. The field takes the kind of personality that values the process as
much as the end result. “When you yourself discover something, you have a
more intimate relationship with the ideas,” Arkani-Hamed tells me. “There are
all the blind alleys. You’ve seen it from all its unflattering angles. It’s easier to
love it; it’s easier to know when to hate it.”
Like scholars in general, scientists are judged on their originality, not their
diplomacy. Their professional life is not unlike the social life of teenagers. It’s
insecure. They’re always having to come up with ideas and maneuver to get
them a hearing. The surest route to approbation is to show that their elders are
doing something wrong and they can do it better. They make a name for
themselves by taking a stand on a topic their peers consider important and, when
challenged, doubling down rather than folding. In-group–out-group differences
are strong; people establish a comfort level within their group that lets them

share crazy ideas or ask potentially stupid questions, at the price of making
disagreements with other groups loom larger than they probably are.
As frustrating as it can be for individual researchers to cope with stubborn
colleagues, science as a whole is served by avoiding premature consensus. Every
new idea deserves a forceful advocate. Sometimes a theory prevails despite what
the evidence initially suggests, and sometimes it is fruitful even if utterly wrong.
Plenty of the greatest advances have their origins in wrong ideas. There’s an
irony here. Scientists who are actively involved in a debate need to be convinced
that they’re right and anyone who disagrees must be missing something. Those
of us watching from the sidelines know better, but we still want all the
protagonists to think they’re right, so that no one will give up too soon. We need
to be tolerant of intolerance.
What breathes life into ideas, at least in the short term, is not whether they are
right or wrong, but whether they get other people thinking. The success of any
scientific or artistic creation is decided less by what it is than by what it
provokes. Truth is the judgment of posterity; until then, fertility matters more.
“Good ideas have a kind of Darwinian survival value that bad ideas don’t,”
Leonard Susskind has written. “Good ideas tend to produce more good ideas—
bad ones tend to lead nowhere.” And an idea is more likely to propagate when it
helps other people advance their ideas. It is a running joke among scholars that
when they give a lecture and a hand shoots up, the questioner will ask some
variant of: “That’s very interesting, but how does it relate to my work?” A big
reason why novel ideas take time to be accepted is that, by their very nature,
they don’t relate to other people’s work.
Consensus emerges as the old questions lose the fertility that Susskind spoke
of and new ones take over the ecosystem. Yesterday’s drag-out fights are today’s
homework problems. But that takes time. On occasion, scientists do try to hurry
up the process, but usually only in response to a request from the outside.
Funding agencies ask advice on which projects to pay for; Congress seeks expert
opinion on issues of the day; a science writer asks quantum physicists about
nonlocality. These requests are like collapsing the quantum wavefunction. When
a particle exists in some ambiguous state, the act of observing it can force the
outcome, at the price of creating paradoxes. Likewise, insisting on consensus
from scientists can have unwanted consequences. Consider all the fluctuating

advice we get about what foods to eat or cancer screening to perform. That’s
what happens when we ask scientists for definite results before their time.
      *
As ethereal as physics can be, its concepts have a funny way of entering into
everyday life and, in turn, being influenced by broader cultural trends. “Our
civilization forms an organic whole,” Erwin Schrödinger said in a lecture in
1932. “Those fortunate individuals who can devote their lives to the profession
of scientific research are not merely botanists or physicists or chemists, as the
case may be. They are men and they are children of their age.”
Although physicists often anticipate social trends, they have, in a way, fallen
behind when it comes to concepts of space. It may seem radical to them that
spatial distance could be a kind of illusion, but we’re already living through “the
death of distance,” as the Economist writer Frances Cairncross has put it.
Modern communications technology may not technically be nonlocal, but it sure
feels that it is. The telegraph and telephone struck people in the nineteenth
century as almost magical and made them rethink the boundaries of the self; we
now hear much the same rhetoric about any new Apple product. And the
information age is just the latest leg of a longer historical journey that began
with the printing press and the oceangoing ship. A poignant example of how our
concepts of distances have been utterly transformed came during Hurricane
Katrina, when many evacuees said it was the first time they had ever left New
Orleans. This immobility would hardly have been commented on a century ago,
when people on average lived within a few tens of miles of their birthplaces.
Today college-educated people, at least, typically live in several different places
over the course of their lives. Commercial transport can take you to almost any
human settlement on the planet within twenty-four hours.
Geography is no longer destiny. Our identities are still shaped by the old
geography-based pigeonholes of nationality, ethnicity, and race, but we now
have the option of constructing group identities for ourselves. We draw our
circles of friends and colleagues based on shared interests and emotional
intimacy, rather than on having been born in the same village. These webs of
relations create their own notion of social distance that is distinct from spatial
distance.

I’ve noticed that modern life has transformed even our direct sensory
perception of actual physical distance. Eight hours a day of staring at a screen
and accepting its illusory depth makes it harder to apprehend depth when we see
it for real. When I was an astronomy teaching assistant in graduate school,
students would look through the telescope eyepiece at Saturn, pull back as if
they did not know what to make of it, look again, and ask: That’s really Saturn?
It’s not a picture? A projection? Some students insisted on looking down the
telescope tube from the other end to convince themselves they really were
peering across 900 million miles of open space.
Ironically, though, as distance comes to matter less, it also seems to matter
more. People complain that there is more daylight between us than ever before,
that we have trouble connecting with one another as people, that the most we can
say about our neighbors is that they seem so nice. We feel closer to those who
are distant and farther from those who are close. Yet as much as we bemoan this
trend, keeping one another at arm’s length is the essential tradeoff of modern
life. Love is meaningful because we remain individuals; if lovers’ wish to meld
into one were fulfilled, what would be left? On a grander scale, the greatest evils
arise when distance closes up and we meld into a mob.
This ambivalence is now a defining element of physics. On the one hand,
distance may not matter at a fundamental level. When two people are far apart,
they might actually be right next to each other, considered in some deeper sense.
On the other hand, our existence nonetheless requires the emergence of a
concept of distance. For Einstein it was common sense that you must touch
something to affect it, but we have come to realize how remarkable and fragile a
fact this really is. “Space and time are the great uniters and dividers,” wrote the
early twentieth-century German philosopher Moritz Schlick. They make us
individuals and relate us to one another. We can’t have one without the other.
And if it does turn out that space and time are the products of some deeper
level of reality, who knows what new phenomena await our discovery? Could
cosmic mysteries such as dark matter and dark energy signify the breakdown of
space? Might there be conditions under which we could travel faster than light
(presumably in a way that forestalls paradoxes)? To me, these heady
speculations pale beside a simple realization. If the ultimate constituents of the
universe aren’t spatial, they have no size, and they can’t be probed by cracking

matter into ever-smaller bits. They exist everywhere. They may well be right in
front of our eyes and have gone unnoticed all this time. We may find the most
exotic phenomena in the most prosaic places.

Notes
The page numbers for the notes that appear in the print version of this title are
not in your e-book. Please use the search function on your e-reading device to
search for the relevant passages documented or discussed.
INTRODUCTION: EINSTEIN’S CASTLE IN THE AIR
“no previous discovery”: Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe: Part and Whole in Modern
Physical Theory, 1.
dating to the seventeenth century: locality, n., (1) The fact or quality of having a place, that is, of having
position in space. 1628 Bp. J. Hall Olde Relig. vii. iii. 69 ‘It destroyes the truth of Christs humane bodie, in
that it ascribes quantitie to it, without extension, without localitie.’” Oxford English Dictionary Online,
accessed November 30, 2012, www.oed.com.
famous essay in 1936: Einstein, “Physics and Reality.”
“expect a chaotic world”: Einstein, Letters to Solovine: 1906–1955, 117.
mean different things: Earman, “Locality, Nonlocality, and Action at a Distance: A Skeptical Review of
Some Philosophical Dogmas.”
it had two aspects: Howard, “Einstein on Locality and Separability.”
“a clean separation”: Ibid., 187–88.
the world without space: Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 50.
he was consistently ahead: Fine, The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism, and the Quantum Theory, 16–25.
Atoms in your body: Smolin, Life of the Cosmos, 252.
“spooky actions at a distance”: Born and Einstein, The Born-Einstein Letters 1916–1955: Friendship,
Politics and Physics in Uncertain Times, 155.
sought a deeper theory: Belousek, “Einstein’s 1927 Unpublished Hidden-Variable Theory: Its Background,
Context and Significance.”

“castle in the air”: Stachel, Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z,’ 151.
endow you with psychic powers: Collins and Pinch, Frames of Meaning: The Social Construction of
Extraordinary Science, chap. 4; Kaiser, How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture, and the
Quantum Revival, chaps. 4, 10.
not what we once thought: Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time, and the Texture of Reality, 123.
space and time are doomed: Gross, “Einstein and the Search for Unification,” 2039.
“single most astonishing discovery”: Tim Maudlin, e-mail to author, October 17, 2012.
“deeper, and more mysterious”: Maudlin, “Part and Whole in Quantum Mechanics,” 60.
“What makes physics possible”: William Unruh, interview by author, November 15, 2010, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
1. THE MANY VARIETIES OF
NONLOCALITY
“playing with Erector sets”: Enrique Galvez, e-mail to author, July 4, 2012.
mad-scientist contraptions: Gilder, The Age of Entanglement, chaps. 30–31.
Apparently, clothes washers: Markus Baden, interview by author, November 15, 2011, Singapore.
“more fun than something exploding”: Galvez, telephone interview by author, May 31, 2012.used
entanglement to teleport: Bouwmeester et al., “Experimental Quantum Teleportation.”
“just for the fun of it”: Galvez, telephone interview by author.
sweated over it for two years: Holbrow, Galvez, and Parks, “Photon Quantum Mechanics and Beam
Splitters.”
entangle particles in their basements: Galvez, Correlated-Photon Experiments for Undergraduate Labs;
Prutchi and Prutchi, Exploring Quantum Physics Through Hands-On Projects; Musser, “How to Build Your
Own Quantum Entanglement Experiment, Part 2 (of 2).”
“getting out to the masses”: David Van Baak, interview by author, March 17, 2011, Dresden, Germany.
in terms of metaphor: Lightman, “Magic on the Mind: Physicists’ Use of Metaphor.”
into two red beams: Nikogosyan, “Beta Barium Borate (BBO).”
“You would be surprised”: Galvez, e-mail to author, October 8, 2012.
stretched the distance: Ursin et al., “Entanglement-Based Quantum Communication Over 144 Km.”
space-based version: Morong, Ling, and Oi, “Quantum Optics for Space Platforms.”
close to real magic: Mermin, “Is the Moon There When Nobody Looks? Reality and the Quantum Theory,”
47.
“Students love it”: Galvez, interview by author, August 5, 2011, Hamilton, NY.
article on the early entanglement experiments: d’Espagnat, “The Quantum Theory and Reality.”
“My roommates remember”: Maudlin, interview by author, January 19, 2011, Princeton, NJ.
“he shut down the question”: Maudlin, e-mail to author, October 17, 2012.

championing or contesting: Beller and Fine, “Bohr’s Response to EPR,” 23–27; Howard, “Revisiting the
Einstein-Bohr Dialogue,” 59, 81–82.
“fame would be undiminished”: Pais, Einstein Lived Here, 43.
deemed them “philosophical”: Kaiser, How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture, and the
Quantum Revival, chap. 1.
“satisfying description of nature”: Dirac, “The Evolution of the Physicist’s Picture of Nature,” 48.
“get to the bottom”: Maudlin, interview by author.
airing his misgivings: Whitaker, “John Bell in Belfast: Early Years and Education,” 14–17.
was not cited: Kaiser, How the Hippies Saved Physics, 319n41.
One of his obituaries: Gribbin, “The Man Who Proved Einstein Was Wrong”; Bell, Speakable and
Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, 150.
“an apparent incompatibility”: Ibid., 172.
“peaceful coexistence”: Shimony, “Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,” 388.
“no fundamental conflict”: Maudlin, e-mail to author, October 18, 2012.
not even the sneakiest government surveillance program: Ekert, “Quantum Cryptography Based on Bell’s
Theorem.”
In photosynthesis, entanglement: Vedral, “High-Temperature Macroscopic Entanglement”; Sarovar et al.,
“Quantum Entanglement in Photosynthetic Light-Harvesting Complexes.”
one of the most widely cited articles: Redner, “Citation Statistics from More Than a Century of Physical
Review.”
“between philosophy and physics”: Anton Zeilinger, interview by author, April 1, 2011, New York.
“energy falling in”: Ramesh Narayan, telephone interview by author, July 19, 2012.
cauldron of swirling gas: Goss and McGee, “The Discovery of the Radio Source Sagittarius A (Sgr A).”
region is puzzlingly dim: Broderick, Loeb, and Narayan, “The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*.”
“and vanishing—poof”: Narayan, telephone interview by author.
“black hole has no surface”: Ibid.
Climbing magazine: Johnson, “A Passion for Physical Realms, Minute and Massive.”
“intimately relating to nature”: Steven B. Giddings, e-mail to author, October 27, 2012.
“a big grizzly bear”: Giddings, interview by author, May 9, 2012. Bits, Branes, Black Holes, Santa
Barbara, CA.
“students felt very intimidated”: Ibid.
just those strings vibrating: Musser, The Complete Idiot’s Guide to String Theory.
“swept up in the waves”: Giddings, interview by author, May 9, 2012.
“maybe this could work”: Ibid.
“decay to random junk”: Giddings, e-mail to author, March 30, 2007.
all is lost: Hawking, “Black Holes and Thermodynamics.”
search for escape hatches: Callan et al., “Evanescent Black Holes.”

“Hawking’s original picture”: Giddings, interview by author, May 9, 2012.
we should see parallel failings: Banks, Susskind, and Peskin, “Difficulties for the Evolution of Pure States
into Mixed States.”
must be reversible: Hawking, “Information Loss in Black Holes.”
“continuing to beat my head”: Giddings, interview by author, May 14, 2012. Bits, Branes, Black Holes,
Santa Barbara, CA.
much the same conclusion: Lowe et al., “Black Hole Complementarity Versus Locality.”
“I didn’t pursue it”: Giddings, interview by author, May 9, 2012.
that gets people’s attention: Sivers, “How to Start a Movement.”
the Hubble Deep Field: Macchetto and Dickinson, “Galaxies in the Young Universe.”
just one photon of their light per minute: Mario Livio, e-mail to author, November 13, 2012.
first realized in 1969: Misner, “Mixmaster Universe.”
standard textbook of gravity: Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler, Gravitation.
spilling acids on various textiles: Lightman and Brawer, Origins: The Lives and Worlds of Modern
Cosmologists, 233.
“The labs were awful”: Charles W. Misner, telephone interview by author, July 5, 2012.
“a geometrical and physical intuition”: Ibid.
stretching light waves: Schmidt, “3C 273: A Star-Like Object with Large Red-Shift.”
the hiss persisted: Wilson, “The Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation,” 475.
13.8 billion years old: Planck Collaboration, “Planck 2013 Results. XVI. Cosmological Parameters.”
breathtakingly unlikely: Carroll, “In What Sense Is the Early Universe Fine-Tuned?”
“sky is not extremely mottled”: Misner, telephone interview by author.
Russian theorist Yakov Zel’dovich: Zel’dovich, “Particle Production in Cosmology.”
“at those extreme times”: Misner, telephone interview by author.
a way to solve the horizon problem: Guth and Steinhardt, “The Inflationary Universe.”
galaxies are not actually moving through space: Davis and Lineweaver, “Expanding Confusion: Common
Misconceptions of Cosmological Horizons and the Superluminal Expansion of the Universe,” 5–6.
“a relative velocity”: Misner, telephone interview by author.
telltale patterns of inflation: Ade et al., “BICEP2 I: Detection of B-Mode Polarization at Degree Angular
Scales.”
the finding fizzled: Planck Collaboration, “Planck Intermediate Results. XXX. The Angular Power
Spectrum of Polarized Dust Emission at Intermediate and High Galactic Latitudes.”
preternaturally uniform: Vachaspati and Trodden, “Causality and Cosmic Inflation”; Penrose, The Road to
Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe, 755–57; Steinhardt, “The Inflation Debate.”
shared first place: Kaplan, “Winners of the Young Researchers Competition in Physics Announced.”
“an interesting interplay”: Fotini Markopoulou, telephone interview by author, November 23, 2012.
“like a planetarium”: Ibid.

“where Einstein left off”: Ibid.
“It’s a funny thing”: Markopoulou, interview by author, June 4, 2011, New York.
“the quantum-gravity people”: Markopoulou, telephone interview by author.
Markopoulou made her name: Markopoulou and Smolin, “Causal Evolution of Spin Networks”;
Markopoulou and Smolin, “Disordered Locality in Loop Quantum Gravity States.”
“I had this gut feeling”: Markopoulou, telephone interview by author.
Several string theorists: Easther et al., “Constraining Holographic Inflation with WMAP.”
“staring us in the face”: Markopoulou, e-mail to author, May 17, 2012.
most basic function: Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos, 122.
sheer number of data cables: Perkins and Malyukov, “Cables: The ‘Blood Vessels’ of ATLAS.”
1,800 miles: Musser, “How to Build the World’s Simplest Particle Detector.”
“these Feynman calculations”: Zvi Bern, e-mail to author, May 16, 2012.
220 different ways: Mangano and Parke, “Multi-Parton Amplitudes in Gauge Theories,” 304.
reduce to a mere four: Ibid., 326.
“My epiphany about science”: Bern, interview by author, April 24, 2012, Los Angeles.
jump straight to the final four: Bern et al., “Fusing Gauge Theory Tree Amplitudes into Loop Amplitudes.”
criticized the ayatollahs: Nima Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, February 23, 2011, Princeton, NJ.
“at a blistering pace”: Arkani-Hamed, e-mail to author, January 8, 2010.
a comprehensive alternative: Arkani-Hamed and Trnka, “The Amplituhedron.”
the trouble with Feynman diagrams: Arkani-Hamed, Cachazo, and Kaplan, “What Is the Simplest Quantum
Field Theory?”
drawn to Feynman’s approach: Kaiser, Drawing Theories Apart: The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in
Postwar Physics, 368–73.
“You then suffer”: Arkani-Hamed, telephone interview by author, February 5, 2010.
Particles still obey: Arkani-Hamed et al., “Local Spacetime Physics from the Grassmannian.”
but it fomented revolution: Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of
Western Thought, chap. 5.
“When you’re a kid”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, July 11, 2011, Princeton, NJ.
parts of the same elephant: Heller, “Where Physics Meets Metaphysics,” 261.
“what entanglement means”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, July 11, 2011.
the glue holding space together: Giddings, “Black Holes, Quantum Information, and Unitary Evolution”;
Van Raamsdonk, “Building Up Spacetime with Quantum Entanglement.”
a kind of secret tunnel: Maldacena and Susskind, “Cool Horizons for Entangled Black Holes.”
2. THE ORIGINS OF NONLOCALITY

“end of the rationality”: Popper, “Bell’s Theorem: A Note on Locality,” 417.
“incompatible with the very possibility”: Bohm and Hiley, The Undivided Universe: An Ontological
Interpretation of Quantum Theory, 157.
“flapdoodle”: Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex, 172.
the unity in diversity: Salmon, Causality and Explanation, 69–71, 76–78, 85–90.
parallels to the dismay: McMullin, “The Explanation of Distant Action: Historical Notes,” 272.
“a lump of brute matter”: Frans H. van Lunteren, e-mail to author, August 20, 2012.
“used to missing the point”: van Lunteren, e-mail to author, August 19, 2012.
“start with a differential equation”: van Lunteren, e-mail to author, August 18, 2012.
“into the old darkness”: Hesse, Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a Distance in the History of
Physics, 157.
“hard to swallow”: van Lunteren, e-mail to author, August 18.
scholars did their utmost: van Lunteren, “Framing Hypotheses: Conceptions of Gravity in the 18th and 19th
Centuries.”
recoiled … embraced: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 166, 187; Jammer, Concepts of Force, 145–46.
twists and turns began: Cushing, Quantum Mechanics: Historical Contingency and the Copenhagen
Hegemony, 18.
Plato tells the story: Taylor, “Parmenides, Zeno, and Socrates.”
what drove a person: Salmon, Causality, 6–7.
Poseidon was peeved: Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 83.
explanations make little distinction: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 34–35.
What rules governed: Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 1, The Earlier Presocratics and the
Pythagoreans, 37–45.
floating on a subterranean ocean: Lloyd, Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle, 9.
He wasn’t so sure: Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, The Presocratic Tradition from
Parmenides to Democritus, 31–33; Lloyd, Early Greek Science, 36–39.
nine such paradoxes: Huggett, “Zeno’s Paradoxes.”
“the most self-evident thing”: Simplicius, On Aristotle’s Physics 6, 114.
has no innate scale: Riemann, “On the Hypotheses Which Lie at the Bases of Geometry”; Grünbaum,
Modern Science and Zeno’s Paradoxes, chap. 3.
“One reading of”: Fay Dowker, interview by author, April 4, 2012. Bits, Branes, Black Holes, Santa
Barbara, CA.
“one tiny piece of space/time”: Feynman, The Character of Physical Law, 57.
discrete building blocks: Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, 389–92, 455–56; Leucippus and
Democritus, The Atomists: Leucippus and Democritus, 73–74, 164–71.
sensations we enjoy: Ibid., 119, 208–209.
the atomists’ creation: Cornford, “The Invention of Space”; Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 1,
279; Casey, The Fate of Place, 79–84.

“no place or space”: Lucretius, The Nature of Things, 15.
innumerable variety of worlds: Guthrie, History, vol. 2, 404–407.
space separates atoms: Leucippus and Democritus, The Atomists, 184–88.
by making direct contact: Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, 418–19, 498; Leucippus and
Democritus, The Atomists 73, 74, 88.
hardly a phenomenon: Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, 388; Leucippus and Democritus, The
Atomists, 159, 195.
that analogy came centuries later: Berryman, The Mechanical Hypothesis in Ancient Greek Natural
Philosophy, 33–39.
Individual atoms are lifeless: Dijksterhuis, The Mechanization of the World Picture: Pythagoras to Newton,
11–12, 495–98.
void of purpose and meaning: Ibid., 77–78.
to burn his books: Leucippus and Democritus, The Atomists, 56–57.
Pulitzer Prize–winning: Greenblatt, “The Answer Man.”
“rid of harsh taskmasters”: Lucretius, The Nature of Things, 68.
world throbs with life: Kearney, Science and Change, 1500–1700, 23–24, 26–33.
a sophisticated theory: Newstead, “Aristotle and Modern Mathematical Theories of the Continuum.”
the arrangement of atoms: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 62.
Aristotle abhorred a void: Aristotle, Physics, book 4, parts 7–9.
in relation to its neighbors: Barbour, Absolute or Relative Motion? The Discovery of Dynamics, 84–91.
passes the impulse: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 79–80.
Aristotle’s contemporaries in China: Needham and Wang, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 4, part 1,
6–8.
Aristotle’s way of thinking: Lloyd, Early Greek Science, 103–9; Rovelli, “Aristotle’s Physics: A Physicist’s
Look.”
corroborate or disprove: Lloyd, Early Greek Science, 139–42.
making the universe comprehensible: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 72.
purely by contact: Ibid., 67–73.
“bodily change of place”: Aristotle, Physics, book 7, part 1, 242b59.
Aristotle took pains: Jammer, Concepts of Space: The History of Theories of Space in Physics, 17–22.
“a goat-stag or a sphinx”: Aristotle, Physics, book 4, part 1, 208a27.
many strange rocks: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 57–58.
known as Magnesia: Melfos, Helly, and Voudouris, “The Ancient Greek Names ‘Magnesia’ and ‘Magnetes’
and Their Origin from the Magnetite Occurrences at the Mavrovouni Mountain of Thessaly, Central Greece.
A Mineralogical–Geochemical Approach.”
Thales also marveled at amber: Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 1, 66.
Greek word for amber: Gilbert, On the Magnet, 46–47.

Chinese scholars discovered: Needham and Wang, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 4, part 1, 230,
232.
vapors that displaced the air: Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, 426.
ignoring it: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 57.
rotating crystalline spheres: Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 79–80; Jammer, Concepts of Force, 41–42.
swept toward the middle: Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, 400–413; Leucippus and
Democritus, The Atomists, 94–95, 179–84.
“nothing is distant”: Saint Thomas Aquinas, The Summa Theologica of Saint Thomas Aquinas, book 1,
query 8, article 1, reply to objection 3.
The more scholars mulled: Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 101–104, 115–17.
a lodestone attracts: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 87–90.
an act of “coition”: Gilbert, On the Magnet, 1, 208.
evidence for atoms: Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 89–90, 231–37.
“all the phenomena of nature”: Descartes, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 3, The
Correspondence, 7.
as comprehensive as Aristotle’s: Dijksterhuis, The Mechanization of the World Picture, 408.
served as the manifesto: Kearney, Science and Change, 151–60.
continuities are clear: Dijksterhuis, The Mechanization of the World Picture, 417; Garber, Descartes’
Metaphysical Physics, 119.
purely geometric figure: Descartes, Principles of Philosophy, 40–41.
freely in straight lines: Suppes, “Descartes and the Problem of Action at a Distance,” 149–50.
“require no proof”: Descartes, Principles of Philosophy, 69.
inspired modern theories: Westfall, The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanisms and Mechanics, 34–
36.
tiny screws or hooks: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 106–107.
alchemy lab in a garden shed: Westfall, “Newton and Alchemy,” 318–19.
Feynman had been fascinated: Feynman, “Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!”: Adventures of a Curious
Character, 332–36.
a product of magic: Kearney, Science and Change, 22–25, 48; Westfall, “Newton and the Hermetic
Tradition,” 195; Henry, The Scientific Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science, 55.
not enough heart: Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions: A Historical Introduction, chap. 1.
the oneness of nature: Stamatellos, Plotinus and the Presocratics: A Philosophical Study of Presocratic
Influences in Plotinus’ Enneads, 26–29, 150–54.
They remain influential: Hanegraaff, “The New Age Movement and the Esoteric Tradition.”
charms and potions: Copenhaver, “Natural Magic, Hermetism, and Occultism in Early Modern Science,”
270–81; Hesse, Forces and Fields, 31–32; Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 8, 56.
“their causes lie hid”: Agrippa von Nettesheim, Three Books of Occult Philosophy, 32.
chocolate frog trading card: Rowling, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone, 102.

an essential part: Sack, “Magic and Space.”
sympathies and antipathies: Jammer, Concepts of Force, 42–47.
“like produces like”: Frazer, The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion; Part 1: The Magic Art
and and the Evolution of Kings, vol. 1, 52.
alchemy, astrology, and numerology: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 74–77, 93–97.
Western culture has seesawed: Brush, “The Chimerical Cat: Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics in
Historical Perspective,” 403–10.
traces of it in the Bohr-Einstein debates: Forman, “Weimar Culture, Causality, and Quantum Theory, 1918–
1927: Adaptation by German Physicists and Mathematicians to a Hostile Intellectual Environment,” 111–
12; Brush, “The Chimerical Cat,” 410–18.
Agrippa latched on to them: Kearney, Science and Change, 40–41.
To probe its mysteries: Henry, The Scientific Revolution, chap. 4.
to manipulate nature: Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition, 155–56.
Pico della Mirandola: Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 45.
For that noble sentiment: Yates, Giordano Bruno, 112.
Hamlet soliloquy: Caldiero, “The Source of Hamlet’s ‘What a Piece of Work Is a Man!’”
green lizard urine: Agrippa von Nettesheim, Three Books of Occult Philosophy, 150.
laying the foundations: Kearney, Science and Change, 116–18, 130–32.
“The aim of magic”: Rossi, Francis Bacon: From Magic to Science, 22.
magical notion of sympathies: Jammer, Concepts of Force, 72.
crises of self-doubt: Koestler, The Watershed: A Biography of Johannes Kepler, 123–24.
“here I blundered”: Ibid., 62.
his mystical inspiration: Kearney, Science and Change, 138.
Kepler cast horoscopes: Koestler, The Watershed, 39–42.
if the moon were watery: Kepler, New Astronomy, 56–57; McMullin, “The Origins of the Field Concept in
Physics,” 18–19.
fine-tune planet orbits: Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 246.
purists were unsympathetic: McMullin, “Origins of the Field Concept,” 20.
“the moon’s dominion”: Galilei, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Ptolemaic and
Copernican, 462.
fringes of mainstream philosophy: Koestler, The Watershed, 163–65.
“the great amphibian”: Kearney, Science and Change, 196.
as flaming atheists: Henry, “Occult Qualities and the Experimental Philosophy: Active Principles in Pre-
Newtonian Matter Theory,” 352–53.
alchemy, Neoplatonism, and Kabbalah: Ibid., 352–53, 357–58; Westfall, The Life of Isaac Newton, 117–19.
bore witness: Dobbs, “Newton’s Alchemy and His Theory of Matter,” 526–27.
“intellectually sleep around”: Albion Lawrence, interview by author, April 12, 2012. Bits, Branes, Black

Holes, Santa Barbara, CA.
knew perfectly well: Kearney, Science and Change, 194–96.
congratulating him: Newton, Isaac Newton: Philosophical Writings, 106–107.
fifteen thousand letters: Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters, vol. 1, 549n21.
“how extraordinarily distracted”: Mates, Philosophy of Leibniz, 27.
five rounds of letters: Westfall, Life of Isaac Newton, 294; Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters, vol.
2, 675.
what would qualify as a satisfying resolution: Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 109.
a mechanical explanation: Mischel, “Pragmatic Aspects of Explanation.”
unexplainable: Hutchison, “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?,” 253.
“a chimerical thing”: Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters, vol. 2, 716.
“I frame no hypotheses”: Newton, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, vol. 1, 314.
that’s good enough: Henry, “Occult Qualities and the Experimental Philosophy,” 358–59, 362–63.
two separate functions: Janiak, Newton as Philosopher, 15–25, 53–65.
a compelling picture: Jammer, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics: The Interpretations of Quantum
Mechanics in Historical Perspective, 10–11.
An insistence on explanation: Hutchison, “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific
Revolution?,” 251.
“restrain the intemperate desire”: Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, book 1, Of the Understanding, 13.
known as instrumentalism: Popper, “Three Views Concerning Human Knowledge.”
reassure their colleagues: Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 229–30; Beller, Quantum Dialogue: The
Making of a Revolution, 176–77.
the creative spark of science: Lightman, “Magic on the Mind.”
no sharp boundary: Lange, An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics: Locality, Fields, Energy, and
Mass, 249–50.
three broad categories: Newton, Mathematical Principles, vol. 1, 174; Hesse, Forces and Fields, 148–53;
McMullin, “The Explanation of Distant Action,” 293–301.
particles impart a force: Newton, Mathematical Principles, vol. 2, 313.
violent religious fanatics: van Lunteren, “Nicolas Fatio de Duillier on the Mechanical Cause of Universal
Gravitation.”
“immaterial”: Newton, Philosophical Writings, 102.
“incorporeal”: Newton, Mathematical Principles, vol. 1, 174.
“intangible”: Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters: A Selection, vol. 2, 696.
penetrate the interior of planets: Janiak, Newton as Philosopher, 76–79; Kochiras, “Gravity and Newton’s
Substance Counting Problem.”
inspired the concept: Gale, “Leibniz and Some Aspects of Field Dynamics”; Friedman, Introduction to
Kant’s Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, ix–x.
God’s omnipresence: Newton, Philosophical Writings, 22, 25–27.

God already exists: Kochiras, “Gravity and Newton’s Substance Counting Problem,” 270–72; Janiak,
Newton as Philosopher, 37–40.
monads gave rise: Gale, “Leibniz and Some Aspects of Field Dynamics,” 39–40; Slowik, “The ‘Properties’
of Leibnizian Space: Whither Relationism?,” 123–24, 128–29.
Neither man thought: Newton, Philosophical Writings, 21–22; Leibniz, Leibniz: New Essays on Human
Understanding, book 2, chap. 13, paragraph 17.
helped Newton revise: Janiak, Newton as Philosopher, 90–94, 168–72.
referring to atheism: Newton, Philosophical Writings, 102; Henry, “‘Pray Do Not Ascribe That Notion to
Me’: God and Newton’s Gravity.”
invoked nonlocal forces: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 153–56, 180–88; Henry, “Gravity and De Gravitatione:
The Development of Newton’s Ideas on Action at a Distance,” 20–23.
alienate mechanical purists: Westfall, Life of Isaac Newton, 187–88.
perfectly reasonable: van Lunteren, “Framing Hypotheses,” 68–90; Hesse, Forces and Fields, 155–56, 166,
187.
fluids for magnetism: Williams, The Origins of Field Theory, 17–27; Hesse, Forces and Fields, 182–83.
did a backflip: Ibid., 166.
supposedly simple collision: Jammer, Concepts of Force, 211.
proponents of locality: Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters, vol. 2, 446; Leucippus and Democritus,
The Atomists, 84, 186–87, 192–93.
an instant U-turn: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 163–66.
German überphilosopher played: Kuehn, Kant: A Biography, 64.
a continuum of forces: Friedman, “Introduction” pp. xvi–xix; Kant, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural
Science, 34, 50–55; Williams, Origins of Field Theory, 37–43.
never actually come into contact: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 163–66.
reduced local forces: van Lunteren, “Framing Hypotheses,” 126.
“reduce uncommon unintelligibilities”: Mach, History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of
Energy, 55–56.
“gravitation no longer disturbs”: Mach, History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of Energy,
56.
frogs’ legs twitch: Kipnis, “Luigi Galvani and the Debate on Animal Electricity, 1791–1800,” 114.
a wet piece of cardboard: Ibid., 135.
an amazing new plaything: Berkson, Fields of Force: The Development of a World View from Faraday to
Einstein, 30.
rebellion against mechanistic thinking: Williams, Origins of Field Theory, 31, 43.
revivals of magical thinking: Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 180.
Adherents were fascinated: Safranski and Osers, Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy, 200–201.
nature’s diverse forces: Morus, When Physics Became King, 54–63.
built his first battery: Stauffer, “Speculation and Experiment in the Background of Oersted’s Discovery of
Electromagnetism,” 40.

no magnetic effects: Ibid., 43.
a wire connected to a battery: Ibid., 46.
blind to other objects: Berkson, Fields of Force, 21–22.
the swirling motions: Maxwell, The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, vol. 2, 317.
accepted Newton’s atomistic explanation: Cantor, Optics After Newton: Theories of Light in Britain and
Ireland, 1704–1840, 29–31, 86–90, 204.
inspiration from the flow: Ibid., 129–30.
among medieval scholastics: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 81.use a laser pointer: Prutchi and Prutchi,
Exploring Quantum Physics Through Hands-On Projects, 4–6.
Under the emperor: Morus, When Physics Became King, 23, 26–32.
apt to misinterpret: Cantor, Optics After Newton: Theories of Light in Britain and Ireland, 1704–1840, 142–
44.
a bookbinder’s apprentice: Williams, Michael Faraday: A Biography, 8, 14.
borrowed a shilling: Ibid., 15, 22.
their vision of unity: Williams, Origins of Field Theory, 68–69; Morus, When Physics Became King, 91–97.
The word “physicist”: Morus, 6–7, 53.
a rebranding strategy: Ibid.
never learned math: Williams, Origins of Field Theory, 67.
nature is local: Berkson, Fields of Force, 39–49.
the lines of force: Williams, Origins of Field Theory, 76.
ordinary substance made of: Doran, “Origins and Consolidation of Field Theory in Nineteenth-Century
Britain: From the Mechanical to the Electromagnetic View of Nature,” 164–65; Hesse, Forces and Fields,
199–200.
an immaterial medium: Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity, vol. 2, 284–93, vol. 3, 447–52;
Doran, “Origins and Consolidation of Field Theory,” 166–78.
introduced the term: Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity, vol. 3, 30.
failed to catch on: Williams, Origins of Field Theory, 112–13, 117.
at points in space: Maxwell, Scientific Papers, vol. 1, 160, 205.
could equally well: Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, vol. 1, x.
describe a hypothetical: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 196–98.
disturbances take time: Berkson, Fields of Force, 231–40.
A time lag seems odd: Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity, vol. 3, 409, 412.
an electromagnetic wave: Maxwell, Scientific Papers, vol. 1, 535, 579–80.
essence of real things: Ibid., 564; Lange, Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics, 120–36.
none goes missing: Faraday, Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics, 443–63.
“most pernicious heresy”: Tait, Properties of Matter, 6; Lodge, Modern Views of Electricity, 331.
no place in Maxwell’s theory: van Lunteren, “Gravitational and Nineteenth-Century Physical Worldviews.”

gravity always pulls: Maxwell, Scientific Papers, vol. 1, 570–71.
zipped across space: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 195, 225.
single out a certain speed: Lange, Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics, 210–12.
like they’re standing still: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” in Schilpp, Albert Einstein, Philosopher-
Scientist, 53.
were equally contradictory: Berkson, Fields of Force, 261–67.
like a bear in a cage: de Haas-Lorentz, H. A. Lorentz: Impressions of His Life and Work, 41.
perhaps even of gravity: McCormmach, “H. A. Lorentz and the Electromagnetic View of Nature.”
relative to the apparatus: Berkson, Fields of Force, 274–75, 313–15.
awkward consequences: Einstein, “Physics and Reality,” 364–65; Berkson, Fields of Force, 271; Frisch,
“Inconsistency in Classical Electrodynamics.”
as though it were psychic: Dirac, “Classical Theory of Radiating Electrons,” 159–60; Jackson, Classical
Electrodynamics, 786–98.used to send messages: Frisch, “NonLocality in Classical Electrodynamics,” 4–7.
popping off like firecrackers: Dirac, “Classical Theory of Radiating Electrons,” 149.
an infinite capacity: Rayleigh, “The Dynamical Theory of Gases and of Radiation.”
physicists came to question: Ritz, “Recherches critiques sur l’électrodynamique générale”; Wheeler and
Feynman, “Classical Electrodynamics in Terms of Direct Interparticle Action.”
3. EINSTEIN’S LOCALITY
all the fun stuff: Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 32–37.
great works of philosophy: Howard, “Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Science.”
rejected job applications: Isaacson, Einstein, 54–61.
his first scientific papers: McCormmach, “Einstein, Lorentz, and the Electron Theory,” 43–44.
tweaked those equations: Norton, “Einstein’s Investigations of Galilean Covariant Electrodynamics Prior to
1905.”
Einstein’s egalitarian instincts: Zahar, “Why Did Einstein’s Programme Supersede Lorentz’s? (II),” 232–33.
quintessential eureka moment: Abiko, “Einstein’s Kyoto Address: ‘How I Created the Theory of
Relativity,’” 14.
addition or subtraction: Newton, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, vol. 1, 21–22.
assumption of instantaneous communication: Ehlers, “The Nature and Structure of Spacetime,” 73–74.
confront their own ignorance: Fernbach et al., “Political Extremism Is Supported by an Illusion of
Understanding.”
exchange some kind of signal: Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” 126–27.
alternative to the Newtonian velocity-addition rule: Einstein and Penrose, Einstein’s Miraculous Year: Five
Papers That Changed the Face of Physics, 142.
to countenance nonlocality: McCormmach, “Einstein, Lorentz, and the Electron Theory,” 67.
pointed out some repercussions: Minkowski, “Raum Und Zeit.”
an objective fact: Nozick, Invariances: The Structure of the Objective World, 76–77.

a property of space: Carroll, Spacetime and Geometry: An Introduction to General Relativity, 2, 48–50,
178–79.
theory doesn’t forbid: Liberati, Sonego, and Visser, “Faster-Than-C Signals, Special Relativity, and
Causality”; Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity: Metaphysical Intimations of Modern Physics;
Hesse, Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a Distance in the History of Physics.
the end of a rainbow: Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity, 70.
a factor of 10: Lincoln, “Proving Special Relativity: Episode 2.”
Reaching light speed: Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” 158.
muck up sequences: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 236, 283–88, 305.
as early as 1907: Einstein, “Über die vom Relativitätsprinzip geforderte Trägheit der Energie,” 381–82;
Schwartz, “Einstein’s Comprehensive 1907 Essay on Relativity, Part 1,” 516; Bell, Speakable and
Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, 235–36.
“telegraph into the past”: Langevin, “L’évolution de l’espace et du temps,” 44; Miller, Albert Einstein’s
Special Theory of Relativity: Emergence (1905) and Early Interpretation (1905–1911), 223.
creating a causal loop: Mitchell, “The Clock That Went Backward.”
preventing your own birth: Schachner, “Ancestral Voices.”
life imitating art: Gödel, “A Remark About the Relationship Between Relativity Theory and Idealistic
Philosophy,” 560–61; Black, “Why Cannot an Effect Precede Its Cause?,” 54–55.
acquainted with anarchy: Borisov and Kudryashov, “Paul Painlevé and His Contribution to Science.”
at infinite velocity: Saari and Xia, “Off to Infinity in Finite Time.”
a space invader: Earman, A Primer on Determinism, 46–47.
allow pulses to ripple: Ibid., 40–42.
your laundry basket: Ibid., 55–61.
“the potential to be garbage”: Giddings, interview by author, October 11, 2010, Santa Barbara, CA.
Even Niels Bohr: Bohr, “Space and Time in Nuclear Physics,” 212, 218.
every point of a field: Einstein, “Quanten-Mechanik Und Wirklichkeit,” 321–22; Howard, “Holism,
Separability and the Metaphysical Implications of the Bell Experiments,” 232–40.
it was a supposition: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 13; Fine, The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism,
and the Quantum Theory, chap. 6.
“conceived in sin”: Arthur Fine, e-mail to author, June 24, 2011.
admitted they didn’t know: Stachel, Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z,’ 378–79.
the theory’s father: Stone, “Einstein and the Quantum: The Quest of the Valiant Swabian,” 281–82.
practically the only one: Stuewer, “The Experimental Challenge of Light Quanta,” 146–47.
Einstein settled the issue: Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production and
Transformation of Light”; Einstein, “Über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die
Konstitution der Strahlung.”
nonlocality seems unavoidable: Hesse, Forces and Fields, 265.
atoms absorb wave energy in discrete bites: Stuewer, “The Experimental Challenge of Light Quanta,” 147–
48.

saw very early on: Bacciagaluppi and Valentini, Quantum Theory at the Crossroads: Reconsidering the
1927 Solvay Conference, 178–81.
the “bubble paradox”: Cramer, “The Quantum Handshake.”
Einstein’s initial instinct: McCormmach, “Einstein, Lorentz, and the Electron Theory,” 56–57.
particles acting independently: Howard, “‘Nicht Sein Kann Was Nicht Sein Darf,’ or the Prehistory of EPR,
1909–1935: Einstein’s Early Worries About the Quantum Mechanics of Composite Systems,” 69–78.
“guiding field”: Ibid., 72–73, 75–76.
Bohr toyed with a version: Howard, “Revisiting the Einstein-Bohr Dialogue,” 67–69.
“ordinary spacetime description”: Bohr, The Emergence of Quantum Mechanics (Mainly 1924–1926), vol.
5, 79.
to take a break: Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 157.
“a kind of ‘foamy crest’”: Schrödinger, “On Einstein’s Gas Theory.”
a curious mathematical abstraction: Schrödinger, “Quantisation as a Problem of Proper Values (Part IV),”
120.
admitted he didn’t know: Tollaksen et al., “Quantum Interference Experiments, Modular Variables and Weak
Measurements,” 5n6.
distant regions of space: Aharonov and Rohrlich, Quantum Paradoxes, 61–75.
two sides to the debate: Beller, Quantum Dialogue: The Making of a Revolution, 143, 187–89.
spits out a photon: Einstein, “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” 76.
“literally, a miracle”: Earman, “Locality, Nonlocality, and Action at a Distance: A Skeptical Review of
Some Philosophical Dogmas,” 475.
traced this cultural mood: Forman, “Weimar Culture, Causality, and Quantum Theory, 1918–1927:
Adaptation by German Physicists and Mathematicians to a Hostile Intellectual Environment,” 111–12;
Brush, “The Chimerical Cat: Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics in Historical Perspective,” 410–18.
God does not throw dice: Born and Einstein, The Born-Einstein Letters 1916–1955: Friendship, Politics
and Physics in Uncertain Times, x, 88, 146.
never objected to randomness: von Plato, Creating Modern Probability: Its Mathematics, Physics and
Philosophy in Historical Perspective, 114–23.
give up the search: Popper, Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics, xvii, 7–10.
not half and half: Stachel, Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z,’ 410–14.
would entail nonlocality: Howard, “The Shaky Game,” 130–35; Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in
Quantum Mechanics, 143.
this dilemma: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 682; Redhead, Incompleteness, Nonlocality, and
Realism: A Prolegomenon to the Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics, 76.
Belgian chemicals magnate: Bacciagaluppi and Valentini, Quantum Theory at the Crossroads, 3, 18–19.
twenty-eight dapper men and one elegant woman: Ibid., 257.
orchestrate the collapse: Ibid., 440–42.
“to my mind a contradiction”: Ibid., 441.
name of “realism”: Laudisa, “NonLocal Realistic Theories and the Scope of the Bell Theorem.”

a “hidden variable”: Bohm, “A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of ‘Hidden’
Variables, I,” 168.
Einstein had been trying: Belousek, “Einstein’s 1927 Unpublished Hidden-Variable Theory: Its
Background, Context and Significance.”
de Broglie presented: Bacciagaluppi and Valentini, Quantum Theory at the Crossroads, 67–76, 341–71.
“Mr. de Broglie is right”: Ibid., 441.
Bohr implicitly accepted: Howard, “Revisiting the Einstein-Bohr Dialogue,” 59; Landsman, “When
Champions Meet: Rethinking the Bohr-Einstein Debate,” 233–34.
“some mathematical methods”: Bacciagaluppi and Valentini, Quantum Theory at the Crossroads, 442.
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle: Bohr, “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in
Atomic Physics,” 213–18; Howard, “‘Nicht Sein Kann Was Nicht Sein Darf,’” 93–97.
“like a jack-in-the-box”: Bohr, Foundations of Quantum Physics I (1926–1932), 38.
“so very repugnant”: Einstein, Letter to Paul Epstein (EA 10-583); Howard, “‘Nicht Sein Kann Was Nicht
Sein Darf,’” 102.
either nonlocal or incomplete: Howard, “‘Nicht Sein Kann Was Nicht Sein Darf,’” 98–105.
this extra functionality is secondary: Fine, The Shaky Game, 37–38; Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and
Relativity, 139–40.
“That which really exists”: Born and Einstein, The Born-Einstein Letters, 162–63.
A predecessor of mine: Musser, “Forces of the World, Unite!”
stayed up half the night: Bohr, “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics,”
224–28; Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 347–49.
never to return: Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 405–409.
three letters a day: Gilder, The Age of Entanglement, chap. 16.
coined a name: Schrödinger, “Discussion of Probability Relations Between Separated Systems.”
famous morbid scenario: Trimmer, “The Present Situation in Quantum Mechanics: A Translation of
Schrödinger’s ‘Cat Paradox’ Paper.”
blamed his coauthors: Einstein, Letter to Erwin Schrödinger (EA 22-47).
attempted a takedown: Howard, “Einstein on Locality and Separability.”
his own version: Einstein, “Physics and Reality,” 376.
came out with a rebuttal: Fine, The Shaky Game, 191–92; Beller, Quantum Dialogue, 153, 277.
“Bohr won the debate”: Milburn, The Feynman Processor: Quantum Entanglement and the Computing
Revolution, 47.
the dominant interpretation: Schlosshauer, Kofler, and Zeilinger, “A Snapshot of Foundational Attitudes
Toward Quantum Mechanics.”
a loner: Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 273–75.
Bohr was a father figure: Beller, Quantum Dialogue, 177, 244, 270.
He and his acolytes: Ibid., 10–11.
played down Einstein’s: Klein, “Einstein and the Wave-Particle Duality,” 3–4.

“misunderstanding”: Rosenfeld, “Niels Bohr in the Thirties: Consolidation and Extension of the
Conception of Complementarity,” 128.
“intelligent and promising”: Bohr, Foundations of Quantum Physics II (1933–1958), 251.
counterfactual scenarios: Cushing, Quantum Mechanics, chap. 10.
4. THE GREAT DEBATE
“a huge bloody argument”: Maudlin, interview by author.
an intellectual “morass”: Name withheld, interview by author, November 15, 2010, Utrecht, Netherlands.
“high opinion of themselves”: Name withheld, interview by author, December 7, 2011, Singapore.
“like a battering ram”: Name withheld, interview by author, June 7, 2011, New York.
“unassailably appallingly wrong”: Name withheld, e-mail to author, May 15, 2008.
“war of all against all”: Fine, e-mail to author, June 24, 2011.
“code for emotional differences”: Ibid.
Einstein’s original paper: Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?”
John Bell’s follow-up: Bell, “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox.”
“smothered by the formalism”: Einstein, Letter to Erwin Schrödinger (EA 22–47); Fine, The Shaky Game:
Einstein, Realism, and the Quantum Theory, 35.
two distinct steps: Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity: Metaphysical Intimations of Modern
Physics, 144; Laudisa, “NonLocal Realistic Theories and the Scope of the Bell Theorem,” 1122.
stop the presses: Belousek, “Einstein’s 1927 Unpublished Hidden-Variable Theory: Its Background,
Context and Significance.”
created a video: Musser, “George and John’s Excellent Adventures in Quantum Entanglement.”
about 85 percent of the time: Gisin, “Can Relativity Be Considered Complete? From Newtonian
Nonlocality to Quantum Nonlocality and Beyond.”
any number of particles: Greenberger et al., “Bell’s Theorem Without Inequalities.”
Bohm reimagined it: Bohm, “A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of ‘Hidden’
Variables. II,” 186–87.
not just of creating dainty patterns: Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity, 119.
it might be possible: Valentini, “Beyond the Quantum.”
rather than attempting to conceal it: Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity, 120–21.
the most stubborn: Mitroff, “Norms and Counter-Norms in a Select Group of the Apollo Moon Scientists: A
Case Study of the Ambivalence of Scientists.”
supposedly airtight arguments: Bauer, Scientific Literacy and the Myth of the Scientific Method, 73–78.
ways to stay in sync: Griffiths, “Quantum Locality”; Unruh, “Minkowski SpaceTime and Quantum
Mechanics”; Weatherall, “The Scope and Generality of Bell’s Theorem.”

can’t draw any conclusions: Smerlak and Rovelli, “Relational EPR.”
the physicist Nick Herbert: Kaiser, How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture, and the
Quantum Revival, chap. 9.
the supposed link: de Muynck, “Can We Escape from Bell’s Conclusion That Quantum Mechanics
Describes a NonLocal Reality?” 316–17.
“can’t send a signal”: Giddings, interview by author, October 11, 2010.
“in standard quantum mechanics”: Maudlin, e-mail to author, October 18, 2012.
the name of “superdeterminism”: Davies and Brown, The Ghost in the Atom: A Discussion of the Mysteries
of Quantum Physics, 47.
choices can be entirely open: Ismael, “Decision and the Open Future”; List, “Free Will, Determinism, and
the Possibility of Doing Otherwise.”
debate the question: Grim, “Free Will in Context: A Contemporary Philosophical Perspective.”
set up in advance: Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point: New Directions for the Physics of Time,
234–40; Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, 100–104, 154.
crazy-sounding ideas: ’t Hooft, “Discreteness and Determinism in Superstrings,” 14, 21–22.
“impossible to formulate”: Gerard ’t Hooft, e-mail to author, December 31, 2009.
“looks like a conspiracy”: ’t Hooft, “The Future of Quantum Mechanics.”
that slight restriction: Barrett and Gisin, “How Much Measurement Independence Is Needed to
Demonstrate Nonlocality?”; Hall, “Relaxed Bell Inequalities and Kochen-Specker Theorems.”
“Constraints are common”: Fine, e-mail to author, June 24, 2011.
have yet to occur: Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point, chaps. 5, 8.
particles are precognitive: Wheeler and Feynman, “Classical Electrodynamics in Terms of Direct
Interparticle Action.”
“Reverse causation can”: Maudlin, e-mail to author, March 31, 2011.
we don’t routinely see: Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point, chap. 7.
not to open a portal into the past: Ibid., 128–29, 173–74, 243–44, 247–48, 250.
sees the coin turn up heads: Wallace, The Emergent Multiverse: Quantum Theory According to the Everett
Interpretation, 36–38.
near-duplicates of you: DeWitt, “Quantum Mechanics and Reality.”
the cosmological prolificacy: Gell-Mann and Hartle, “Quantum Mechanics in the Light of Quantum
Cosmology,” 340; Smerlak and Rovelli, “Relational EPR”; Griffiths, “EPR, Bell, and Quantum Locality”;
Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity, 216–20.
no need for nonlocal influences: Bacciagaluppi, “Remarks on SpaceTime and Locality in Everett’s
Interpretation.”
“looking out for hours”: Zeilinger, interview by author.
“the fundamental questions”: Ibid.
“Something was missing”: Ibid.
he rather likes it: Zeilinger, “On the Interpretation and Philosophical Foundation of Quantum Mechanics.”

not a feminist bank teller: Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 157–59.
arrive at a contradiction: Lapkiewicz et al., “Experimental Non-Classicality of an Indivisible Quantum
System.”
“the main culprit”: Zeilinger, “Testing Concepts of Reality with Entangled Photons in the Laboratory and
Outside.”
“something different”: Maudlin, “Special Relativity and Quantum Entanglement: How Compatible Are
They?”
“He derived it”: Ibid.
rederive his theorem: Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, 150, 157n10.
they deny any need: Zeilinger, “On the Interpretation and Philosophical Foundation of Quantum
Mechanics.”
“you don’t need nonlocality”: Zeilinger, “Testing Concepts of Reality with Entangled Photons.”
“get to the bottom of it”: Albert, “Physics and Narrative.”
“your money’s worth”: David Z. Albert, interview by author, March 16, 2011, Dresden, Germany.
“very brilliant people”: Jon P. Jarrett, e-mail to author, July 11, 2011.
“Annual income twenty pounds”: Dickens, The Personal History of David Copperfield, 231.
“it was stuffy”: Zeilinger, interview by author.
combined with ordinary light or radio signals: Brassard, “Quantum Communication Complexity (A
Survey).”
the nonlocal link: Mattle et al., “Dense Coding in Experimental Quantum Communication.”
break the entanglement: Jennewein et al., “Quantum Cryptography with Entangled Photons.”
“secure” or “blind” computation: Barz et al., “Demonstration of Blind Quantum Computing.”
in a scrambled form: He, “Simple Quantum Protocols for the Millionaire Problem with a Semi-Honest
Third Party.”
“disbelieve all facts and theories”: James, The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy, 10.
“not totally amazed”: Nicolas Gisin, interview by author, November 8, 2010, Geneva.
“steer” its partner: Schrödinger, “Discussion of Probability Relations Between Separated Systems”;
Wiseman, Jones, and Doherty, “Steering, Entanglement, Nonlocality, and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
Paradox.”
can remain muted: Popescu, “Bell’s Inequalities and Density Matrices: Revealing ‘Hidden’ Nonlocality.”
evading government surveillance: Branciard et al., “One-Sided Device-Independent Quantum Key
Distribution: Security, Feasibility, and the Connection with Steering.”
envisioned “superquantum” coins: Rohrlich and Popescu, “Nonlocality as an Axiom for Quantum Theory.”
an available time slot: Brassard et al., “A Limit on Nonlocality in Any World in Which Communication
Complexity Is Not Trivial.”
an all-pervading fluid: Bohm and Vigier, “Model of the Causal Interpretation of Quantum Theory in Terms
of a Fluid with Irregular Fluctuations.”
high but still finite speed: Bancal et al., “Quantum NonLocality Based on Finite-Speed Causal Influences
Leads to Superluminal Signalling.”

already at its destination: Van Fraassen, Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View, 351.
flashing warning light: Bohm and Hiley, The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of
Quantum Theory, 42, 350, 374–78.
“I’m asking myself”: ’t Hooft, interview by author, June 4, 2011, New York.
effectively nonlocal: Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point, 223–24.
a breed of nonlocality: Allori et al., “Many Worlds and Schrödinger’s First Quantum Theory,” 13–15;
Wallace, The Emergent Multiverse, 303–10.
to be an individual: Howard, “A Peek Behind the Veil of Maya.”
share all your memories: Tegmark, “Parallel Universes.”
Which one of them is you?: Wallace, The Emergent Multiverse, 275–76.
no explanation is possible: Van Fraassen, Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View, 372–74.
perhaps nothing causes: Fine, “Do Correlations Need to Be Explained?”
“belief in determinism”: Fine, e-mail to author, April 27, 2011.
“We have randomness”: Gisin, interview by author.
a failure of either aspect: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 85.
go together in reality: Jones and Clifton, “Against Experimental Metaphysics”; Cushing,
“Locality/Separability: Is This Necessarily a Useful Distinction?” 111; Spekkens, “The Paradigm of
Kinematics and Dynamics Must Yield to Causal Structure,” 4.
an empty statement: Shimony, “Aspects of Nonlocality in Quantum Mechanics,” 119; Ismael, “What
Entanglement Might Be Telling Us,” 14.
loses none of its power: Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity, 22–24; Lange, An Introduction to
the Philosophy of Physics: Locality, Fields, Energy, and Mass, 281.
“emerging in an organic way”: Jenann Ismael, Skype interview by author, April 9, 2014.
a kind of union: Minkowski, “Raum Und Zeit.”
handled with care: Healey, “Holism and Nonseparability.”
alternative-medicine practitioners: Maudlin, “Part and Whole in Quantum Mechanics,” 55.
“from outside spacetime”: Gisin, interview by author.
“a fundamental failing”: Maudlin, “Part and Whole,” 55–56.
“no story in spacetime”: Gisin, interview by author.
5. NONLOCALITY AND THE
UNIFICATION OF PHYSICS
“streams of climbers”: Giddings, e-mail to author, March 7, 2014.
“community wasn’t quite ready”: Giddings, e-mail to author, July 4, 2013.
implicitly assumed that forces leap: Strocchi, “Relativistic Quantum Mechanics and Field Theory,” 508.

“this wonderful theory”: Hertz, Miscellaneous Papers, 318.
a big tangle: Ashtekar and Rovelli, “A Loop Representation for the Quantum Maxwell Field.”
“formerly known as strings”: Duff, “The Theory Formerly Known as Strings.”
“AdS/CFT duality”: Horowitz and Polchinski, “Gauge/Gravity Duality.”
“the birth and growth”: Donald Marolf, e-mail to author, June 17, 2013.
“in the Alaska twilight”: Giddings, e-mail to author, March 7, 2014.
couldn’t explain light: Weinberg, “The Search for Unity: Notes for a History of Quantum Field Theory,” 21.
ultimately particle or wave: Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and
Tomonaga, xxvi, 1–2, 37.
created and annihilated: Teller, An Interpretive Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, 82.
big effervescent gobs: Ibid., 112–13.
not motes of matter: Ibid., 69–81.
case of convergent evolution: Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made It, 53.
As Pauli pointed out: Blum, “From the Necessary to the Possible: The Genesis of the Spin-Statistics
Theorem,” 553–54.
chopped into two parts: Pauli, “The Connection Between Spin and Statistics,” 721; Teller, An Interpretive
Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, 83–84.
alternatives also divvy up space: Wright, “Quantum Field Theory: Motivating the Axiom of
Microcausality.”
often deeply doubtful: Weinberg, “The Search for Unity,” 24–26; Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made
It, 83–85.
retook his first course: Joseph Polchinski, e-mail to author, July 8, 2013.
scared most of them off: Teller, Interpretive Introduction, vii.
“what the mathematics means”: Hans P. Halvorson, interview by author, July 5, 2013, Princeton, NJ.
two different places at once: Teller, Interpretive Introduction, 86–87, 109; Halvorson and Clifton, “No Place
for Particles in Relativistic Quantum Theories?”; Duncan, The Conceptual Framework of Quantum Field
Theory, 160–63.
banished nonlocality, not entrenched it: Halvorson, “Locality, Localization, and the Particle Concept:
Topics in the Foundations of Quantum Field Theory,” 169–70.
“gives rise to nonlocality”: Halvorson, interview by author.
only if relativity did not fully apply: Newton and Wigner, “Localized States for Elementary Systems”; Teller,
Interpretive Introduction, 56, 85–89.
see it suddenly leap: Ruijsenaars, “On Newton-Wigner Localization and Superluminal Propagation
Speeds”; Hegerfeldt, “Violation of Causality in Relativistic Quantum Theory?”; Malament, “In Defense of
Dogma: Why There Cannot Be a Relativistic Quantum Mechanics of (Localizable) Particles.”
differing answers: Halvorson, “Locality, Localization, and the Particle Concept,” 64; Kuhlmann, “What Is
Real?”
“There isn’t anything”: Halvorson, interview by author.
on a guitar string: Auyang, How Is Quantum Field Theory Possible?, 51–53, 157–60.

waves are so jumbled: Fraser, “The Fate of ‘Particles’ in Quantum Field Theories with Interactions.”
break down a big problem: Teller, Interpretive Introduction, 139–42.
“anything about reality”: Halvorson, interview by author.
conveyor belts and rolling drums: Morus, When Physics Became King, 81–84.
can’t be an array of pixels: Teller, Interpretive Introduction, 80–81, 98–99.
also rule out pixels: Halvorson, “Algebraic Quantum Field Theory,” 778–79; Baker, “Against Field
Interpretations of Quantum Field Theory.”
“seems like it’s backfired”: Halvorson, interview by author.
don’t convey information: Peskin and Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, 27–29.
version of the spooky synchrony: Wald, “Correlations and Causality in Quantum Field Theory,” 300;
Reznik, “Distillation of Vacuum Entanglement to EPR Pairs”; Franson, “Generation of Entanglement
Outside of the Light Cone.”
points in the field are: Summers and Werner, “The Vacuum Violates Bell’s Inequalities”; Clifton et al.,
“Superentangled States.”
“constrained in momentum”: Halvorson, interview by author.
“superentanglement”: Clifton et al., “Superentangled States.”
points lying beyond: Wald, “Correlations and Causality in Quantum Field Theory,” 301.
sever the bonds: Clifton and Halvorson, “Entanglement and Open Systems in Algebraic Quantum Field
Theory.”
residual random jittering: Summers and Werner, “The Vacuum Violates Bell’s Inequalities”; Redhead,
“More Ado About Nothing.”
“You may have forgotten”: Halvorson, interview by author.
despite various proposals: Retzker, Cirac, and Reznik, “Detecting Vacuum Entanglement in a Linear Ion
Trap”; Sabín et al., “Dynamics of Entanglement via Propagating Microwave Photons.”
a smidge farther apart: Summers and Werner, “The Vacuum Violates Bell’s Inequalities,” 258–59;
Halvorson, “Locality, Localization, and the Particle Concept,” 18.
“nonlocality at all distances”: Halvorson, interview by author.
fields may become: Reznik, “Distillation of Vacuum Entanglement to EPR Pairs.”
entangled with each other: Haroche and Raimond, Exploring the Quantum: Atoms, Cavities, and Photons,
285.
a Bollywood movie: Wen, “Topological Order: From Long-Range Entangled Quantum Matter to a Unified
Origin of Light and Electrons.”
that once seemed magical: Sachdev, “Strange and Stringy.”
“Laypeople love it”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, September 24, 2013, Princeton, NJ.
“think of mutual entanglement”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, March 29, 2012, Pasadena, CA.
Faraday conducted electrical experiments: Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity, vol. 1, 83–84,
364–66; Healey, Gauging What’s Real: The Conceptual Foundations of Contemporary Gauge Theories, 4,
155–57.
“lighted candles, electrometers”: Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity, vol. 1, 366.

mathematical complications: Hatfield, Quantum Field Theory of Point Particles and Strings, 77–81.
“a complete fiction”: Arkani-Hamed, “SpaceTime, Quantum Mechanics and Scattering Amplitudes.”
“the first of many, many hints”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, September 24, 2013.
fudge factor: Belot, “Understanding Electromagnetism,” 541–42; Healey, Gauging What’s Real, 25–26, 49.
fix the value: Bork, “Maxwell and the Vector Potential.”
disturbances in the potential: Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 222–23.
to “murder” it: Hunt, The Maxwellians, 115–18, 165–66.
in the argot: Castellani, “Dirac on Gauges and Constraints.”
Because of the constraint: Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 271.
the constraint is defined: Strocchi, “Gauss’ Law in Local Quantum Field Theory,” 229–31; Ashtekar and
Rovelli, “A Loop Representation for the Quantum Maxwell Field,” 1149.
freedom from such constraints: Earman, “Locality, Nonlocality, and Action at a Distance: A Skeptical
Review of Some Philosophical Dogmas,” 457, 458.
Electrons, rather than lighted candles: Aharonov and Bohm, “Significance of Electromagnetic Potentials in
the Quantum Theory.”
tricky to do: Matteucci and Pozzi, “New Diffraction Experiment on the Electrostatic Aharonov-Bohm
Effect.”
analogous test for magnetism: Ibid.; Chambers, “Shift of an Electron Interference Pattern by Enclosed
Magnetic Flux.”
this came as a shock: Ramsey, Spectroscopy with Coherent Radiation: Selected Papers of Norman F.
Ramsey, 399.
localized structures are mismatched: Wu and Yang, “Concept of Nonintegrable Phase Factors and Global
Formulation of Gauge Fields.”
“high school physics”: Richard A. Healey, interview by author, March 22, 2014, Irvine, CA.
“I felt very lonely”: Healey, “New Thoughts on Yang-Mills Theories.”
more as spectators: Healey, Gauging What’s Real, 31, 53, 127; Wallace, The Emergent Multiverse, 294n7.
“People draw distinctions”: Healey, interview by author.
separable almost by definition: Howard, “Holism, Separability and the Metaphysical Implications of the
Bell Experiments,” 232–40.
goes back to Dirac: Dirac, “Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field”; Mandelstam, “Quantum
Electrodynamics Without Potentials”; Wu and Yang, “Concept of Nonintegrable Phase Factors.”
“Loops, not points”: Healey, e-mail to author, July 24, 2013.
satisfying local action: Lyre, “Holism and Structuralism in U(1) Gauge Theory,” 657–60.
left with some ambiguity: Rozali, “Comments on Background Independence and Gauge Redundancies.”
“not losing the points”: Healey, interview by author.
“a question about here”: Marolf, interview by author, October 12, 2010, Santa Barbara, CA.
resurvey tectonic zones: Musser, “What Happens to Google Maps When Tectonic Plates Move?”
Earth’s mass warps time: Unruh, “Time, Gravity, and Quantum Mechanics”; Schutz, Gravity from the

Ground Up: An Introductory Guide to Gravity and General Relativity, 229–32.
the warping of space: Schutz, Gravity from the Ground Up, 234–36.
a mini-wormhole: Howard, “Holism, Separability, and the Metaphysical Implications of the Bell
Experiments,” 251–52; Maldacena and Susskind, “Cool Horizons for Entangled Black Holes.”
random and unaccountable things: Coleman, “Why There Is Nothing Rather Than Something: A Theory of
the Cosmological Constant”; Markopoulou and Smolin, “Quantum Theory from Quantum Gravity.”
overlap with itself: Misner and Wheeler, “Classical Physics as Geometry,” 552.
To foil such paradoxes: Horwich, Asymmetries in Time: Problems in the Philosophy of Science, 124–25;
Friedman et al., “Cauchy Problem in Spacetimes with Closed Timelike Curves.”
constraint is a form of nonlocality: Earman, “Recent Work on Time Travel”; Arntzenius and Maudlin,
“Time Travel and Modern Physics.”
no external or absolute standard: Misner, “Feynman Quantization of General Relativity,” 499; Misner,
Thorne, and Wheeler, Gravitation, 429–31; Rovelli, Quantum Gravity, 65–75.
“honestly, Einstein didn’t understand”: Marolf, interview by author, October 12, 2010.
shape of space would become ambiguous: Stachel, Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z,’ 323–25.
“in the reshuffled spacetime”: Marolf, e-mail to author, June 26, 2013.
“to the whole spacetime”: Marolf, interview by author, March 26, 2012, Santa Barbara, CA.
version of gauge invariance: Kuchař, “Time and Interpretations of Quantum Gravity,” 2–3.
lack any differentiating attributes: Stachel, Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z,’ 312–18.
Those quantities must be holistic: Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler, Gravitation, 466–68; Rickles, Symmetry,
Structure, and Spacetime, 129–31.
“Any theory of gravity”: Marolf, “Discussion: Holography and Unitarity in Black Hole Evaporation.”
some independent reality: Earman, World Enough and SpaceTime: Absolute Versus Rational Theories of
Space and Time, 96–108, Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos, 73–75.
anchor a coordinate grid: Rovelli, Quantum Gravity, 88–96.
“in a continuous way”: Marolf, interview by author, March 26, 2012.
still only “pseudo-local”: Giddings, Marolf, and Hartle, “Observables in Effective Gravity.”
how strong it will be: Penrose, The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe, 841.
“we would never know”: Gibbons, “Black Holes and Information.”
holistic feature of spacetime: Lam, “Structural Aspects of SpaceTime Singularities.”
having an edge: Harrison, Cosmology: The Science of the Universe, 149–53.
toyed with hypothetical models: Randall and Sundrum, “A Large Mass Hierarchy from a Small Extra
Dimension.”
fixes the shape of space: Marolf, “Holographic Thought Experiments,” 2.
“nailed to the boundary”: Marolf, e-mail to author, February 24, 2014.
Locality on the boundary: Marolf, “Unitarity and Holography in Gravitational Physics”; Marolf,
“Holography Without Strings?”
“equal to bulk observables”: Marolf, e-mail to author, October 17, 2013.

can’t be as fundamental: Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos, 477.
the dissolution of space: Gorelik, “Matvei Bronstein and Quantum Gravity: 70th Anniversary of the
Unsolved Problem.”
limit of the reductionist program: Seiberg, “Emergent Spacetime,” 176.
Einstein wrote to a friend: Stachel, Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z,’ 149.
spontaneously on all scales: Wilczek, “Quantum Field Theory,” S87–S88.
the continuum must crumble: Beller, Quantum Dialogue: The Making of a Revolution, 19–22.
“lattice world”: Carazza and Kragh, “Heisenberg’s Lattice World: The 1930 Theory Sketch.”
come into play on small scales: Zee, Quantum Field Theory in a Nutshell, chap. 8.3.
no amount of rounding out: Rovelli, Quantum Gravity, 404.
threatens to disintegrate: Markopoulou, “Space Does Not Exist, So Time Can,” 4.
like a balloon: Witten, “Reflections on the Fate of Spacetime”; Martinec, “Evolving Notions of Geometry
in String Theory.”
“simply no longer valid”: Polchinski, interview by author, October 13, 2010, Santa Barbara, CA.
also in the macroverse: Markopoulou and Smolin, “Disordered Locality in Loop Quantum Gravity States.”
“something very small”: Markopoulou, telephone interview by author.
miniature tuning forks: O’Connell et al., “Quantum Ground State and Single-Phonon Control of a
Mechanical Resonator.”
“long-distance issues”: Giddings, interview by author, May 14, 2012.
an uneasy silence: Redhead, “More Ado About Nothing.”
does not, in fact, think they cancel out: Teller, An Interpretive Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, 110–
11.
draining the hole: Jacobson, “Introduction to Quantum Fields in Curved Spacetime and the Hawking
Effect,” 23–27.
not a vacuum: Mathur, “The Information Paradox: A Pedagogical Introduction”; Almheiri et al., “Black
Holes: Complementarity or Firewalls?”
“a violent breakdown”: Polchinski, interview by author.
doubling the radius: ’t Hooft, “Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity,” 288.
entropy increases fourfold: Bekenstein, “Black Holes and Entropy.”
squeezing hard enough: Ibid., 2339.
boundary and volume are equivalent: Rickles, “AdS/CFT Duality and the Emergence of Spacetime.”
the boundary is the fundamental reality: Bousso, “The Holographic Principle,” 859–60.
“it’s still very obscure”: Daniel Kabat, interview by author, April 13, 2012. Bits, Branes, Black Holes,
Santa Barbara, CA.
In Maldacena’s approach: Seiberg, “Emergent Spacetime,” 171–72; Horowitz and Polchinski,
“Gauge/Gravity Duality.”
gave Maldacena a lift: Alex Maloney, interview by author, March 23, 2012. Bits, Branes, Black Holes,
Santa Barbara, CA.

6. SPACETIME IS DOOMED
“didn’t tell my sister”: Ismael, e-mail to author, May 20, 2015.
“a piece of glass”: Ismael, Skype interview by author.
metaphor for nonlocality: Ismael, “What Entanglement Might Be Telling Us,” 1–2.
“different parts of space”: Ibid.
“the fundamental level”: Michael Heller, interview by author, March 13, 2008, New York.
prime matter: Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 2, The Presocratic Tradition from Parmenides to
Democritus, 143.
rearrangements of atoms: Leucippus and Democritus, The Atomists, Leucippus and Democritus, 85n78;
Lucretius, The Nature of Things, 7–11, 25–27.
“something more basic”: Arkani-Hamed, telephone interview by author.
“talk about emergent spacetime”: Arkani-Hamed, telephone interview by author.
the realm beyond space: Stump and Kretzmann, “Eternity”; Heller, “Where Physics Meets Metaphysics,”
263–64.
step toward emergent spacetime: Slowik, “The Deep Metaphysics of Quantum Gravity: The Seventeenth
Century Legacy and an Alternative Ontology Beyond Substantivalism and Relationism.”
“to breathe in empty space”: Einstein, “Physics and Reality,” 378.
built out of “pregeometry”: Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler, Gravitation, 1212.
“outside our usual language”: Arkani-Hamed, telephone interview by author.
“For 2,000-plus years”: Arkani-Hamed, “SpaceTime, Quantum Mechanics, and the Large Hadron
Collider.”
what it’ll do in the future: Earman, A Primer on Determinism, 4–7, 30–31.
Rube Goldberg contraptions: OK Go, “This Too Shall Pass.”
glue that binds the universe: Barbour, The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics, 18.
limited by the spatial arrangement: Lieb and Robinson, “The Finite Group Velocity of Quantum Spin
Systems.”
“interactive distance”: Albert, “Elementary Quantum Metaphysics.”
“the lion is close”: Albert, interview by author, April 18, 2011, New York.
one mystery for another: Maudlin, “Buckets of Water and Waves of Space: Why Spacetime Is Probably a
Substance,” 192–94, 196.
the “inverse problem”: Smolin, Time Reborn: From the Crisis in Physics to the Future of the Universe,
184–86.
“Where spacetime exists”: Moshe Rozali, telephone interview by author, July 13, 2011.
time isn’t emergent: Smolin, Time Reborn; Maudlin, New Foundations for Physical Geometry.
a powerful organizing role: Musser, “Could Time End?”
turned this thinking upside down: Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters: A Selection, vol. 2, 666–74;

Mehlberg, Time, Causality, and the Quantum Theory, vol. 1, 42–50.
map out the entire world: Bombelli et al., “SpaceTime as a Causal Set.”
the number of such atoms: Riemann, “On the Hypotheses Which Lie at the Bases of Geometry,” 37.
relations must be highly ordered: Dowker, “Causal Sets and the Deep Structure of Spacetime,” 454;
Henson, “The Causal Set Approach to Quantum Gravity,” 405.
“nothing like spacetime”: Dowker, interview by author.
they are all interlocked: Barbour, “The Nature of Time.”
“the interdependence of things”: Mach, The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Account of Its
Development, 223, 224.
the odometer mileage: Michael Mouser, telephone interview by author, June 3, 2014.
The distances obey: Lefschetz, Introduction to Topology, 28.
lose several more numbers: Einstein, The Meaning of Relativity, 8; Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology:
Principles and Applications of the General Theory of Relativity, 6–8; Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler,
Gravitation, 306–308.
“It’s data compression”: Julian B. Barbour, interview by author, May 22, 2010, at Laws of Nature: Their
Nature and Knowability, conference, Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Ontario,
Canada, May 20–22, 2010.
“unmediated” distances: Nerlich, The Shape of Space, 18–23.
struggling to follow Game of Thrones: McGoldrick, Gerson, and Petry, Genograms: Assessment and
Intervention.
This kind of self-organizing: Smith and Foley, “Classical Thermodynamics and Economic General
Equilibrium Theory.”
relationships become regimented: Markopoulou, “Space Does Not Exist, So Time Can,” 7–8.
mind-bogglingly complex: Rovelli, “‘Forget Time.’”
space as a network: Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler, Gravitation, 1203–12; Bohm and Hiley, The Undivided
Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of Quantum Theory, 374–78; Penrose, The Road to Reality: A
Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe, 946–50; Finkelstein, “SpaceTime Code.”
trying to make the idea work: Kaplunovsky and Weinstein, “SpaceTime: Arena or Illusion?”; Meschini,
Lehto, and Piilonen, “Geometry, Pregeometry and Beyond.”
inject a sense of humor: Konopka, Markopoulou, and Severini, “Quantum Graphity: A Model of Emergent
Locality.”
from earthquakes to ecosystems: Stanley et al., “Scale Invariance and Universality: Organizing Principles in
Complex Systems.”
“very ambitious and dangerous”: Claus Kiefer, interview by author, August 31, 2011, Copenhagen.
“just put out your hand”: Markopoulou and Kuhn, “Why Is the Universe So Breathtaking?”
passage of the signal: Hamma and Markopoulou, “Background-Independent Condensed Matter Models for
Quantum Gravity.”
“cool the universe”: Markopoulou, interview by author.
the primordial grains: Hamma and Markopoulou, “Background-Independent Condensed Matter Models,”
13–16.

“causal dynamical triangulations”: Loll, Ambjørn, and Jurkiewicz, “The Universe from Scratch.”
jelly-bean experiment: Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and
How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations, 5.
errors offset one another: Ibid., 10–11, 27–30.
but the twisty paths: Feynman, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, 53–54.
best-known matrix model: Banks et al., “M Theory as a Matrix Model: A Conjecture.”
“bunch of Tinkertoy parts”: Leonard Susskind, interview by author, February 18, 2011, Palo Alto, CA.
the endpoints of strings: Musser, The Complete Idiot’s Guide to String Theory, 155.
its constituents’ self-interactions: Banks, “The State of Matrix Theory,” 342–43; Martinec, “Evolving
Notions of Geometry in String Theory,” 167–68.
“just a cancellation”: Susskind, interview by author.
“not the behavior we expect”: Emil J. Martinec, e-mail to author, May 10, 2014.
the scale of waves: Susskind and Witten, “The Holographic Bound in Anti–de Sitter Space”;
Balasubramanian and Kraus, “Spacetime and the Holographic Renormalization Group.”
a dramatic way of putting it: Sundrum, “From Fixed Points to the Fifth Dimension.”
“drawing the Washington Monument”: Raman Sundrum, Skype interview by author, October 3, 2014.
A Chinese gong: Fletcher, “Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos in Musical Instruments.”
propagating through scale: Balasubramanian et al., “Holographic Probes of Anti–de Sitter Spacetimes”;
Heemskerk et al., “Holography from Conformal Field Theory.”
stitching space together: Mark Van Raamsdonk, interview by author, September 30, 2010, Vancouver, B.C.
creates space: Nishioka, Ryu, and Takayanagi, “Holographic Entanglement Entropy: An Overview”; Van
Raamsdonk, “Building Up Spacetime with Quantum Entanglement”; Swingle, “Constructing Holographic
Spacetimes Using Entanglement Renormalization.”
“disordered locality”: Markopoulou and Smolin, “Disordered Locality in Loop Quantum Gravity States.”
the term “long links”: Brian Swingle, e-mail to author, August 22, 2014.
to explain particles: Einstein and Rosen, “The Particle Problem in the General Theory of Relativity.”
join entangled particles: Jensen and Karch, “Holographic Dual of an Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Pair Has a
Wormhole”; Baez and Vicary, “Wormholes and Entanglement.”
“closeness through the wormhole”: Juan Maldacena, interview by author, September 17, 2013, Princeton,
NJ.
like overkill: Maudlin, Quantum NonLocality and Relativity: Metaphysical Intimations of Modern Physics,
238.
pinches off the wormhole: Maldacena and Susskind, “Cool Horizons for Entangled Black Holes,” 782.
so inordinately difficult: Swingle, Skype interview by author, August 21, 2014.
a gibberish one: Markopoulou and Smolin, “Disordered Locality,” 3822; Valentini, “Beyond the Quantum,”
36.
“engulfed by globality”: Heller, interview by author.
philosophers and sociologists: Pettit, The Common Mind: An Essay on Psychology, Society, and Politics,

166–73.
sensitive to what happens: Heller and Sasin, “Einstein-Podolski-Rosen Experiment from Noncommutative
Quantum Gravity”; Heller and Sasin, “Nonlocal Phenomena from Noncommutative Pre-Planckian
Regime.”
set the cosmos in motion: Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler, Gravitation, 1196–97.
shaped itself: Craps, Sethi, and Verlinde, “A Matrix Big Bang”; Martinec, Robbins, and Sethi, “Toward the
End of Time.”
ancient creation myths: Casey, The Fate of Place: A Philosophical History, 9–16.
“ultralocality”: Carlip, “Spontaneous Dimensional Reduction?”; Mielczarek, “Asymptotic Silence in Loop
Quantum Cosmology.”
would have sloshed around: Hamma and Markopoulou, “Background-Independent Condensed Matter
Models,” 12; McFadden and Skenderis, “Observational Signatures of Holographic Models of Inflation.”
“a completely connected graph”: Markopoulou, e-mail to author.
A phase transition: Easther et al., “Constraining Holographic Inflation with WMAP”; Dreyer, “The World
Is Discrete.”
a fluid turmoil: Witten, “Anti–de Sitter Space, Thermal Phase Transition, and Confinement in Gauge
Theories.”
“conventional geometric notion”: Martinec, e-mail to author, April 23, 2010.
effectively infinite-dimensional: Sekino and Susskind, “Fast Scramblers.”
finding the exit: Hamma and Markopoulou, “Background-Independent Condensed Matter Models for
Quantum Gravity,” 16–17.
“acts as a trap”: Markopoulou, interview by author.
the black hole disperses: Banks et al., “Schwarzschild Black Holes from Matrix Theory,” 229; Horowitz,
Lawrence, and Silverstein, “Insightful D-Branes,” 18–20.
“this huge space of states”: Martinec, e-mail to author, August 12, 2014.
“eating up spacetime”: Rozali, telephone interview by author.
becomes too disordered: Balasubramanian, “What We Don’t Know About Time,” 109–111.
in four dimensions: Sachdev, “Strange and Stringy.”
an inner simplicity: Nastase, “The RHIC Fireball as a Dual Black Hole”; Horowitz and Polchinski,
“Gauge/Gravity Duality,” 181.
preprogrammed into the rules: Nerlich, The Shape of Space, chap. 1; Meschini, Lehto, and Piilonen,
“Geometry, Pregeometry and Beyond.”
“What are the rules?” Martinec, interview by author, June 18, 2014, Chicago.
“Space is totally overrated”: Carroll, “Setting Time Aright.”
emergence without presupposing time: Heller and Sasin, “Emergence of Time”; Balasubramanian, “What
We Don’t Know About Time”; Aoki et al., “SpaceTime Structures from IIB Matrix Model.”
the emergent dimension is temporal: Strominger, “Inflation and the dS/CFT Correspondence.”
CONCLUSION: THE AMPLITUHEDRON

controversial visit to Copenhagen: Powers, Heisenberg’s War: The Secret History of the German Bomb,
120–28.
American spy: Ibid., 294–97.
Berg let him live: Ibid., 394–401.
S-matrix tabulates: Cushing, Theory Construction and Selection in Modern Physics: The S Matrix, 32–34;
Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga, 154–55.
do full-up calculations: Weinberg, “The Search for Unity: Notes for a History of Quantum Field Theory,”
26–30.
the S-matrix regained its appeal: Cushing, Theory Construction and Selection, 115–18.
all there is: Ibid., 142–45.
“such an unobservable continuum”: Chew, “The Dubious Role of the SpaceTime Continuum in Subatomic
Physics,” 529.
nothing is more fundamental: Capra, The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels Between Modern
Physics and Eastern Mysticism, 286–87.
like sudoku: Chew, “‘Bootstrap’: A Scientific Idea?” 763–64.
on macroscopic scales: Stapp, “Space and Time in S-Matrix Theory”; Capra, The Tao of Physics, 318.
“nature consistent with itself”: Ibid., 762.
no unique S-matrix: Gross, “Twenty Five Years of Asymptotic Freedom,” 429.
expanded the framework: Penrose, The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe,
962–66.
more fundamental than local ones: Ibid., 963, 991.
the word “twistor”: Ibid., 980–82.
“are encoded nonlocally”: Lionel Mason, interview by author, March 14, 2010, Oxford.
“Line-of-sight ideas”: Andrew Hodges, interview by author, March 16, 2010, Oxford.
to all those stars: Penrose, The Road to Reality, 1049.
“closer than yesterday”: Rafael D. Sorkin, e-mail to author, November 16, 2007.
“googly” problem: Penrose, The Road to Reality, 1000.
“He’s very dogged”: Mason, interview by author, March 14, 2010.
“the ugly duckling”: Arkani-Hamed, “SpaceTime, Quantum Mechanics and Scattering Amplitudes.”
“excitement and depression”: Halvorson, interview by author.
“I’m discouraged more”: Markopoulou, interview by author.
“It’s the rest of my life”: Markopoulou, telephone interview by author.
seventy-page monster: Witten, “Perturbative Gauge Theory as a String Theory in Twistor Space.”
“fascinating and exciting”: Roger Penrose, interview by author, March 15, 2010, Oxford.
twistors in their heyday: Witten, “An Interpretation of Classical Yang-Mills Theory.”
“basically thinking off and on”: Edward Witten, e-mail to author, January 6, 2015.
“this beautiful idea”: Mason, interview by author, March 14, 2010.

inputs and outputs: Britto et al., “Direct Proof of the Tree-Level Scattering Amplitude Recursion Relation
in Yang-Mills Theory.”
“‘Revenge of the Analytic S-Matrix’”: Lance J. Dixon, e-mail to author, February 16, 2010.
“like Andrew’s pictures”: Arkani-Hamed, telephone interview by author.
geometrically using twistors: Arkani-Hamed et al., “A Note on Polytopes for Scattering Amplitudes.”
a suitably funky name: Arkani-Hamed and Trnka, “The Amplituhedron.”
“There are no fields”: Jaroslav Trnka, e-mail to author, September 16, 2014.
“Simple geometric properties”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, September 24, 2013.
“These building blocks”: Ibid.
Science is dispute: Beller, Quantum Dialogue, 310; Freire, The Quantum Dissidents, 2–4.
“all the blind alleys”: Arkani-Hamed, interview by author, September 24, 2013.
when challenged, doubling down: Mitroff, “Norms and Counter-Norms in a Select Group of the Apollo
Moon Scientists: A Case Study of the Ambivalence of Scientists,” 588–89.
a comfort level: Traweek, Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of High Energy Physicists, 113–23.
origins in wrong ideas: Johnson, Where Good Ideas Come From: The Natural History of Innovation, 134–
39.
“Darwinian survival value”: Susskind, The Cosmic Landscape: String Theory and the Illusion of Intelligent
Design, 271.
“children of their age”: Schrödinger, Science and the Human Temperament, 80.
“death of distance”: Cairncross, The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution Will Change
Our Lives.
the boundaries of the self: Thurschwell, Literature, Technology and Magical Thinking, 1880–1920, 12–14.
during Hurricane Katrina: Baum, “Deluged.”
within a few tens of miles: Wijsman and Cavalli-Sforza, “Migration and Genetic Population Structure with
Special Reference to Humans.”
college-educated people: Taylor et al., “American Mobility: Who Moves? Who Stays Put? Where’s
Home?”
meld into a mob: Zimbardo, The Lucifer Effect, chap. 13.
“the great uniters and dividers”: Schlick, General Theory of Knowledge, 53.
dark matter and dark energy: Seiberg, “Emergent Spacetime,” 167; Henson, “The Causal Set Approach to
Quantum Gravity,” 13; Prescod-Weinstein and Smolin, “Disordered Locality as an Explanation for the Dark
Energy”; Verlinde, “The Dark Phase Space of de Sitter.”
faster than light: Hashimoto and Itzhaki, “Traveling Faster Than the Speed of Light in Noncommutative
Geometry”; Valentini, “Beyond the Quantum.”

Bibliography
Abiko, Seiya. “Einstein’s Kyoto Address: ‘How I Created the Theory of Relativity.’” Historical Studies in
the Physical and Biological Sciences 31, no. 1 (2000): 1–35.
Ade, P.A.R., R. W. Aikin, D. Barkats, S. J. Benton, C. A. Bischoff, J. J. Bock, J. A. Brevik, et al. “Detection
of B-Mode Polarization at Degree Angular Scales by BICEP2.” Physical Review Letters 112 (June 20,
2014).
Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius. Three Books of Occult Philosophy. Edited by Donald Tyson.
Translated by James Freake. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Worldwide, 1993.
Aharonov, Yakir, and David Bohm. “Significance of Electromagnetic Potentials in the Quantum Theory.”
Physical Review 115, no. 3 (August 1, 1959): 485–91.
Aharonov, Yakir, and Daniel Rohrlich. Quantum Paradoxes. Berlin: Wiley-VCH, 2005.
Albert, David Z. “Elementary Quantum Metaphysics.” In Bohmian Mechanics and Quantum Theory: An
Appraisal, edited by James T. Cushing, Arthur Fine, and Sheldon Goldstein, 277–84. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1996.
______. “Physics and Narrative.” Intersectional Symposium: The Concept of Reality in Physics, Dresden,
Germany, March 16, 2011.
Allori, Valia, Sheldon Goldstein, Roderich Tumulka, and Nino Zanghì. “Many Worlds and Schrödinger’s
First Quantum Theory.” The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 62, no. 1 (March 2011): 1–27.
Almheiri, Ahmed, Donald Marolf, Joseph Polchinski, and James Sully. “Black Holes: Complementarity or
Firewalls?” Journal of High Energy Physics, no. 2 (February 11, 2013): 1–20.
Aoki, Hajime, Satoshi Iso, Hikaru Kawai, Yoshihisa Kitazawa, and Tsukasa Tada. “Space-Time Structures
from IIB Matrix Model.” Progress of Theoretical Physics 99, no. 5 (May 1998): 713–45.
Aristotle. Physics. Edited by David Bostock. Translated by Robin Waterfield. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1996.
Arkani-Hamed, Nima. “Space-Time, Quantum Mechanics and Scattering Amplitudes.” Columbia
University Department of Physics Colloquium, New York, March 28, 2011.
______. “Space-Time, Quantum Mechanics, and the Large Hadron Collider.” Institute for Advanced Study
Public Lecture, Princeton, NJ, February 23, 2011.
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, Jacob Bourjaily, Freddy Cachazo, and Jaroslav Trnka. “Local Spacetime Physics
from the Grassmannian.” Journal of High Energy Physics, no. 1 (January 24, 2011).
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, Jacob Bourjaily, Freddy Cachazo, Andrew Hodges, and Jaroslav Trnka. “A Note on

Polytopes for Scattering Amplitudes.” Journal of High Energy Physics, no. 4 (April 16, 2012).
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, Freddy Cachazo, and Jared Kaplan. “What Is the Simplest Quantum Field Theory?”
Journal of High Energy Physics, no. 9 (September 6, 2010).
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, and Jaroslav Trnka. “The Amplituhedron.” Journal of High Energy Physics, no. 10
(October 6, 2014).
Arntzenius, Frank, and Tim Maudlin. “Time Travel and Modern Physics.” In Time, Reality and Experience,
edited by Craig Callender, 169–200. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplements. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.
Ashtekar, Abhay, and Carlo Rovelli. “A Loop Representation for the Quantum Maxwell Field.” Classical
and Quantum Gravity 9, no. 5 (May 1992): 1121–50.
Auyang, Sunny Y. How Is Quantum Field Theory Possible? New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Bacciagaluppi, Guido. “Remarks on Space-Time and Locality in Everett’s Interpretation.” In Non-Locality
and Modality, edited by Tomasz Placek and Jeremy Butterfield, 105–22. New York: Springer, 2002.
Bacciagaluppi, Guido, and Antony Valentini. Quantum Theory at the Crossroads: Reconsidering the 1927
Solvay Conference. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Baez, John C., and Jamie Vicary. “Wormholes and Entanglement.” arXiv.org, January 14, 2014.
Baker, David John. “Against Field Interpretations of Quantum Field Theory.” The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 60, no. 3 (August 11, 2009): 585–609.
Balasubramanian, Vijay. “What We Don’t Know About Time.” Foundations of Physics 43, no. 1 (January
2013): 101–14.
Balasubramanian, Vijay, and Per Kraus. “Spacetime and the Holographic Renormalization Group.” Physical
Review Letters 83, no. 18 (November 1, 1999).
Balasubramanian, Vijay, Per Kraus, Albion Lawrence, and Sandip P. Trivedi. “Holographic Probes of Anti–
de Sitter Spacetimes.” Physical Review D 59, no. 10 (April 26, 1999).
Bancal, Jean-Daniel, Stefano Pironio, Antonio Acin, Yeong-Cherng Liang, Valerio Scarani, and Nicolas
Gisin. “Quantum Non-Locality Based on Finite-Speed Causal Influences Leads to Superluminal
Signalling.” Nature Physics 8, no. 12 (December 2012): 867–70.
Banks, Tom. “The State of Matrix Theory.” Nuclear Physics B—Proceedings Supplements 62, nos. 1–3
(March 1998): 341–47.
Banks, Tom, Willy Fischler, Igor R. Klebanov, and Leonard Susskind. “Schwarzschild Black Holes from
Matrix Theory.” Physical Review Letters 80, no. 2 (January 12, 1998): 226–29.
Banks, Tom, Willy Fischler, Stephen H. Shenker, and Leonard Susskind. “M Theory as a Matrix Model: A
Conjecture.” Physical Review D 55, no. 8 (April 15, 1997): 5112–28.
Banks, Tom, Leonard Susskind, and Michael E. Peskin. “Difficulties for the Evolution of Pure States into
Mixed States.” Nuclear Physics B 244, no. 1 (September 24, 1984): 125–34.
Barbour, Julian B. Absolute or Relative Motion? Vol. 1, The Discovery of Dynamics. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1989.
______. The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Reprint, 2001.
______. “The Nature of Time.” Essay written for the Foundational Questions Institute Essay Contest, The
Nature of Time, December 1, 2008.
Barrett, Jonathan, and Nicolas Gisin. “How Much Measurement Independence Is Needed to Demonstrate
Nonlocality?” Physical Review Letters 106, no. 10 (March 10, 2011).
Barz, Stefanie, Elham Kashefi, Anne Broadbent, Joseph F. Fitzsimons, Anton Zeilinger, and Philip Walther.
“Demonstration of Blind Quantum Computing.” Science 335, no. 6066 (January 20, 2012): 303–308.
Bauer, Henry H. Scientific Literacy and the Myth of the Scientific Method. Champaign, IL: University of
Illinois Press, 1994.
Baum, Dan. “Deluged.” The New Yorker, January 9, 2006.
Bekenstein, Jacob D. “Black Holes and Entropy.” Physical Review D 7, no. 8 (April 15, 1973): 2333–46.

Bell, John S. “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox.” Physics 1, no. 3 (1964): 195–200.
______. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
Beller, Mara. Quantum Dialogue: The Making of a Revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Beller, Mara, and Arthur Fine. “Bohr’s Response to EPR.” In Niels Bohr and Contemporary Philosophy,
edited by Jan Faye and Henry J. Folse, 1–31. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 153.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1994.
Belot, Gordon. “Understanding Electromagnetism.” The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 49,
no. 4 (December 1998): 531–55.
Belousek, Darrin W. “Einstein’s 1927 Unpublished Hidden-Variable Theory: Its Background, Context and
Significance.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B 27, no. 4 (December 1996): 437–61.
Berkson, William. Fields of Force: The Development of a World View from Faraday to Einstein. New York:
Halsted Press/John Wiley and Sons, 1974.
Bern, Zvi, Lance J. Dixon, David C. Dunbar, and David A. Kosower. “Fusing Gauge Theory Tree
Amplitudes into Loop Amplitudes.” Nuclear Physics B 435, nos. 1–2 (February 6, 1995): 59–101.
Berryman, Sylvia. The Mechanical Hypothesis in Ancient Greek Natural Philosophy. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Black, Max. “Why Cannot an Effect Precede Its Cause?” Analysis 16, no. 3 (January 1956): 49–58.
Blum, Alexander. “From the Necessary to the Possible: The Genesis of the Spin-Statistics Theorem.” The
European Physical Journal H 39, no. 5 (December 2014): 543–74.
Bohm, David. “A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of ‘Hidden’ Variables. I.”
Physical Review 85, no. 2 (January 1952): 166–79.
______. “A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of ‘Hidden’ Variables. II.” Physical
Review 85, no. 2 (January 1952): 180–93.
Bohm, David, and Basil J. Hiley. The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of Quantum
Theory. London: Routledge, 1993.
Bohm, David, and J. P. Vigier. “Model of the Causal Interpretation of Quantum Theory in Terms of a Fluid
with Irregular Fluctuations.” Physical Review 96, no. 1 (October 1954): 208–16.
Bohr, Niels. “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics.” In Albert
Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 199–241. Chicago: Northwestern
University Press, 1949.
______. The Emergence of Quantum Mechanics (Mainly 1924–1926). Edited by Klaus Stolzenburg. Vol. 5.
New York: Elsevier, 1984.
______. Foundations of Quantum Physics I (1926–1932). Edited by Jørgen Kalckar. Vol. 6 of Niels Bohr:
Collected Works, edited by Erik Rüdinger. New York: Elsevier, 1985.
______. Foundations of Quantum Physics II (1933–1958). Edited by Jørgen Kalckar. Vol. 7 of Niels Bohr:
Collected Works, edited by Erik Rüdinger. New York: Elsevier, 1996.
______. “Space and Time in Nuclear Physics.” In Niels Bohr: Essays and Papers, edited by John T.
Sanders, translated by Else Mogensen. 1:205–20. Rochester, NY: Self-published, 1987.
Bombelli, Luca, Joohan Lee, David Meyer, and Rafael D. Sorkin. “Space-Time as a Causal Set.” Physical
Review Letters 59, no. 5 (August 3, 1987): 521–24.
Borisov, Alexey V., and Nikolay A. Kudryashov. “Paul Painlevé and His Contribution to Science.” Regular
and Chaotic Dynamics 19, no. 1 (February 9, 2014): 1–19.
Bork, Alfred M. “Maxwell and the Vector Potential.” Isis 58, no. 2 (Summer 1967): 210–22.
Born, Max, and Albert Einstein. The Born-Einstein Letters 1916–1955: Friendship, Politics and Physics in
Uncertain Times. Translated by Irene Born. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Bousso, Raphael. “The Holographic Principle.” Reviews of Modern Physics 74, no. 3 (July–September
2002): 825–74.

Bouwmeester, Dik, Jian-Wei Pan, Klaus Mattle, Manfred Eibl, Harald Weinfurter, and Anton Zeilinger.
“Experimental Quantum Teleportation.” Nature 390 (December 11, 1997): 575–79.
Branciard, Cyril, Eric G. Cavalcanti, Stephen P. Walborn, Valerio Scarani, and Howard M. Wiseman. “One-
Sided Device-Independent Quantum Key Distribution: Security, Feasibility, and the Connection with
Steering.” Physical Review A 85, no. 1 (January 3, 2012).
Brassard, Gilles. “Quantum Communication Complexity (A Survey).” arXiv.org, January 1, 2001.
Brassard, Gilles, Harry Buhrman, Noah Linden, André Allan Méthot, Alain Tapp, and Falk Unger. “Limit
on Nonlocality in Any World in Which Communication Complexity Is Not Trivial.” Physical Review
Letters 96, no. 25 (June 27, 2006).
Britto, Ruth, Freddy Cachazo, Bo Feng, and Edward Witten. “Direct Proof of the Tree-Level Scattering
Amplitude Recursion Relation in Yang-Mills Theory.” Physical Review Letters 94, no. 18 (May 10,
2005).
Broderick, Avery E., Abraham Loeb, and Ramesh Narayan. “The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*.” The
Astrophysical Journal 701, no. 2 (July 31, 2009): 1357–66.
Brush, Stephen G. “The Chimerical Cat: Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics in Historical Perspective.”
Social Studies of Science 10, no. 4 (November 1980): 393–447.
Cairncross, Frances. The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution Will Change Our Lives.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
Caldiero, Frank M. “The Source of Hamlet’s ‘What a Piece of Work Is a Man!’” Notes and Queries 196
(September 29, 1951): 421–24.
Callan, Curtis G., Jr., Steven B. Giddings, Jeffrey A. Harvey, and Andrew Strominger. “Evanescent Black
Holes.” Physical Review D 45, no. 4 (February 15, 1992): 1005–1009.
Cantor, Geoffrey N. Optics After Newton: Theories of Light in Britain and Ireland, 1704–1840. Dover, NH:
Manchester University Press, 1983.
Capra, Fritjof. The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels Between Modern Physics and Eastern
Mysticism. 3rd ed. Boston: Shambhala, 1991.
Carazza, Bruno, and Helge Kragh. “Heisenberg’s Lattice World: The 1930 Theory Sketch.” American
Journal of Physics 63, no. 7 (July 1995): 595–605.
Carlip, Steven. “Spontaneous Dimensional Reduction?” In The Sixth International School on Field Theory
and Gravitation, edited by Waldyr Alves Rodrigues Jr., Richard Kerner, Gentil O. Pires, and Carlos
Pinheiro, 63–72. AIP Conference Proceedings 1483. Melville, NY: American Institute of Physics, 2012.
Carroll, Sean M. “In What Sense Is the Early Universe Fine-Tuned?” arXiv.org, June 11, 2014.
______. Opening talk at Setting Time Aright, conference of the Foundational Questions Institute, Bergen,
Norway, and Copenhagen, Denmark, August 27–September 1, 2011.
______. Spacetime and Geometry: An Introduction to General Relativity. San Francisco: Addison-Wesley,
2004.
Casey, Edward S. The Fate of Place: A Philosophical History. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1997.
Castellani, Elena. “Dirac on Gauges and Constraints.” International Journal of Theoretical Physics 43, no.
6 (June 2004): 1503–14.
Chambers, R. G. “Shift of an Electron Interference Pattern by Enclosed Magnetic Flux.” Physical Review
Letters 5, no. 1 (July 1, 1960): 3–5.
Chew, Geoffrey F. “The Dubious Role of the Space-Time Continuum in Subatomic Physics.” Science
Progress 51, no. 204 (October 1963): 529–39.
______. “‘Bootstrap’: A Scientific Idea?” Science 161, no. 3843 (August 23, 1968): 762–65.
Clifton, Robert K., and Hans P. Halvorson. “Entanglement and Open Systems in Algebraic Quantum Field
Theory.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B 32, no. 1 (March 2001): 1–31.
Clifton, Robert K., D. V. Feldman, Hans P. Halvorson, Michael Redhead, and Alexander Wilce.
“Superentangled States.” Physical Review A 58, no. 1 (July 1, 1998): 135–45.

Coleman, Sidney. “Why There Is Nothing Rather Than Something: A Theory of the Cosmological
Constant.” Nuclear Physics B 310, nos. 3–4 (December 12, 1988): 643–68.
Collins, Harry M., and Trevor J. Pinch. Frames of Meaning: The Social Construction of Extraordinary
Science. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1982.
Copenhaver, Brian P. “Natural Magic, Hermetism, and Occultism in Early Modern Science.” In
Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution, edited by David C. Lindberg and Robert S. Westman, 261–
301. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Cornford, F. M. “The Invention of Space.” In The Concepts of Space and Time: Their Structure and Their
Development, edited by Milič Čapek, 3–16. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 22. New York:
Springer, 1976.
Cramer, John G. “The Quantum Handshake.” The Alternate View, Analog Science Fiction and Fact,
November 1986.
Craps, Ben, Savdeep Sethi, and Erik P. Verlinde. “A Matrix Big Bang.” Journal of High Energy Physics 10,
no. 1 (October 2005).
Cushing, James T. “Locality/Separability: Is This Necessarily a Useful Distinction?” PSA: Proceedings of
the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association 1994. Vol. 1, Contributed Papers, 107–
16. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
______. Quantum Mechanics: Historical Contingency and the Copenhagen Hegemony. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994.
______. Theory Construction and Selection in Modern Physics: The S Matrix. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
Cushing, James T., and Ernan McMullin, eds. Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reflections
on Bell’s Theorem. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1989.
Davies, Paul C. W., and J. R. Brown. The Ghost in the Atom: A Discussion of the Mysteries of Quantum
Physics. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986. Reprint, 1993.
Davis, Tamara M., and Charles H. Lineweaver. “Expanding Confusion: Common Misconceptions of
Cosmological Horizons and the Superluminal Expansion of the Universe.” Publications of the
Astronomical Society of Australia 21, no. 1 (2004): 97–109.
de Haas-Lorentz, Geertruida Luberta. H. A. Lorentz: Impressions of His Life and Work. Amsterdam: North
Holland Publishing, 1957.
de Muynck, Willem M. “Can We Escape From Bell’s Conclusion That Quantum Mechanics Describes a
Non-Local Reality?” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B 27, no. 3 (September 1996):
315–30.
Descartes, René. Principles of Philosophy. Translated by Valentine Rodger Miller and Reese P. Miller. New
York: Springer, 1984.
______. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Vol. 3, The Correspondence. Translated by John
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
d’Espagnat, Bernard. “The Quantum Theory and Reality.” Scientific American, November 1979.
DeWitt, Bryce S. “Quantum Mechanics and Reality.” Physics Today 23, no. 9 (September 1970): 155–65.
Dickens, Charles. The Personal History of David Copperfield. Edited by Trevor Blount, New York: Penguin
Classics, 1966.
Dickson, Michael. Quantum Chance and Non-Locality: Probability and Non-Locality in the Interpretations
of Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Dijksterhuis, E. J. The Mechanization of the World Picture: Pythagoras to Newton. Translated by C.
Dikshoorn. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986.
Dirac, Paul Adrien Maurice. “Classical Theory of Radiating Electrons.” Proceedings of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical and Physical Sciences 167, no. 929 (August 5, 1938): 148–69.
______. “Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field.” Proceedings of the Royal Society A:

Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 133, no. 821 (September 1, 1931): 60–72.
______. “The Evolution of the Physicist’s Picture of Nature.” Scientific American, May 1963, 45–53.
Dobbs, B.J.T. “Newton’s Alchemy and His Theory of Matter.” Isis 73, no. 4 (December 1982): 511–28.
Doran, Barbara Giusti. “Origins and Consolidation of Field Theory in Nineteenth-Century Britain: From the
Mechanical to the Electromagnetic View of Nature.” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 6
(1975): 133–260.
Dowker, Fay. “Causal Sets and the Deep Structure of Spacetime.” In One Hundred Years of Relativity:
Space-Time Structure; Einstein and Beyond, edited by Abhay Ashtekar, 445–64. Hackensack, NJ: World
Scientific, 2005.
Dreyer, Olaf. “The World Is Discrete.” arXiv.org, July 23, 2013.
Duff, Michael J. “The Theory Formerly Known as Strings.” Scientific American, February 1998.
Duncan, Anthony. The Conceptual Framework of Quantum Field Theory. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2012.
Earman, John. “Locality, Nonlocality, and Action at a Distance: A Skeptical Review of Some Philosophical
Dogmas.” In Kelvin’s Baltimore Lectures and Modern Theoretical Physics: Historical and Philosophical
Perspectives, edited by Robert Kargon and Peter Achinstein, 449–90. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
1987.
______. A Primer on Determinism. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1986.
______. “Recent Work on Time Travel.” In Time’s Arrows Today: Recent Physical and Philosophical Work
on the Direction of Time, edited by Steven F. Savitt, 268–310. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1995.
______. World Enough and Space-Time: Absolute Versus Rational Theories of Space and Time. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press, 1989.
Easther, Richard, Raphael Flauger, Paul McFadden, and Kostas Skenderis. “Constraining Holographic
Inflation with WMAP.” Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, no. 9 (September 2011).
Ehlers, Jürgen. “The Nature and Structure of Spacetime.” In The Physicist’s Conception of Nature, edited by
Jagdish Mehra, 71–91. Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1973.
Einstein, Albert. “Autobiographical Notes.” In Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, edited by Paul Arthur
Schilpp. New York: MJF Books, 1949.
______. Einstein’s Miraculous Year: Five Papers That Changed the Face of Physics. Edited by John
Stachel. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.
______. Letter to Erwin Schrödinger, June 19, 1935, Old Lyme, CT. Einstein Archives Online, EA 22-47.
______. Letter to Paul Epstein, November 10, 1945, Princeton, NJ, EA 10-583.
______. Letters to Solovine: 1906–1955. New York: Philosophical Library, 1987. Reprint, New York: Open
Road, 2011.
______. The Meaning of Relativity. Translated by Edwin Plimpton Adams. 5th ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2005. First published 1922.
______. “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light.” In
Stachel, Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 177–98.
______. “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies.” In Stachel, Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 121–60.
______. “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation.” In Sources of Quantum Mechanics, edited by B. L. van
der Waerden, 63–77. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2007. First published 1967.
______. “Physics and Reality.” Journal of the Franklin Institute 221, no. 3 (March 1936): 349–82.
______. “Quanten-Mechanik Und Wirklichkeit.” Dialectica 2, nos. 3–4 (November 1948): 320–24.
______. “Über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution der

Strahlung.” Physikalische Zeitschrift 10, no. 22 (1909): 817–25.
______. “Über die vom Relativitätsprinzip geforderte Trägheit der Energie.” Annalen Der Physik 328, no. 7
(1907): 371–84.
Einstein, Albert, and Nathan Rosen. “The Particle Problem in the General Theory of Relativity.” Physical
Review 48, no. 1 (July 1935): 73–77.
Einstein, Albert, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen. “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical
Reality Be Considered Complete?” Physical Review 47, no. 10 (May 15, 1935): 777–80.
Ekert, Artur K. “Quantum Cryptography Based on Bell’s Theorem.” Physical Review Letters 67, no. 6
(August 5, 1991): 661–63.
Erler, Theodore G., and David J. Gross. “Locality, Causality, and an Initial Value Formulation for Open
String Field Theory.” arXiv.org, June 22, 2004.
Faraday, Michael. Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics. London, 1859.
______. Experimental Researches in Electricity. Vol. 1. London, 1839.
______. Experimental Researches in Electricity. Vol. 2. London, 1844.
______. Experimental Researches in Electricity. Vol. 3. London, 1855.
Fernbach, Philip M., Todd Rogers, Craig R. Fox, and Steven A. Sloman. “Political Extremism Is Supported
by an Illusion of Understanding.” Psychological Science 24, no. 6 (June 7, 2013): 939–46.
Feynman, Richard P. QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1986.
______. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1967.
______. “Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!”: Adventures of a Curious Character. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1985. Reprint, 1997.
Fine, Arthur. “Do Correlations Need to Be Explained?” In Cushing and McMullin, Philosophical
Consequences of Quantum Theory, 175–94.
______. The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism, and the Quantum Theory. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996.
Finkelstein, David Ritz. “Space-Time Code.” Physical Review 184, no. 5 (August 25, 1969): 1261–71.
Fletcher, Neville H. “Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos in Musical Instruments.” In Complex Systems: From
Biology to Computation, edited by David G. Green and Terry Bossomaier, 106–17. Amsterdam: IOS
Press, 1993.
Forman, Paul. “Weimar Culture, Causality, and Quantum Theory, 1918–1927: Adaptation by German
Physicists and Mathematicians to a Hostile Intellectual Environment.” Historical Studies in the Physical
Sciences 3 (1971): 1–115.
Franson, J. D. “Generation of Entanglement Outside of the Light Cone.” Journal of Modern Optics 55, no.
13 (July 20, 2008): 2117–40.
Fraser, Doreen. “The Fate of ‘Particles’ in Quantum Field Theories with Interactions.” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part B 39, no. 4 (November 2008): 841–59.
Frazer, James George. The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion. Part I: The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings. 3rd ed. Vol. 1. New York: Macmillan, 1913.
Freire, Olival, Jr. The Quantum Dissidents: Rebuilding the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (1950–
1990). New York: Springer, 2015.
Friedman, John, Michael S. Morris, Igor Dmitrievich Novikov, Fernando Echeverria, Gunnar Klinkhammer,
Kip S. Thorne, and Ulvi Yurtsever. “Cauchy Problem in Spacetimes with Closed Timelike Curves.”
Physical Review D 42, no. 6 (September 15, 1990): 1915–30.
Friedman, Michael. Introduction to Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, by Immanuel Kant, vii–
xxx. Translated by Michael Friedman. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Frisch, Mathias. “Inconsistency in Classical Electrodynamics.” Philosophy of Science 71, no. 4 (October

2004): 525–49.
______. “Non-Locality in Classical Electrodynamics.” The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53
(2002): 1–19.
Gale, George. “Leibniz and Some Aspects of Field Dynamics.” Studia Leibnitiana 6, no. 1 (1974): 28–48.
Galilei, Galileo. Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Ptolemaic and Copernican. Translated
by Stillman Drake. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1953. Reprint, New York: Modern Library,
2001.
Galvez, Enrique. Correlated-Photon Experiments for Undergraduate Labs. Unpublished handbook, Colgate
University, March 31, 2010.
Garber, Daniel. Descartes’ Metaphysical Physics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Gell-Mann, Murray. The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex. New York: W.
H. Freeman and Company, 1994. Reprint, New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1995.
Gell-Mann, Murray, and James B. Hartle. “Quantum Mechanics in the Light of Quantum Cosmology.” In
Proceedings of the Third International Symposium Foundations of Quantum Mechanics in the Light of
New Technology, Tokyo, August 28–31, 1989, edited by Shun’ichi Kobayashi and Nihon Butsuri Gakkai,
321–43. Tokyo: Physical Society of Japan, 1990.
Gibbons, Gary W. “Black Holes and Information.” Bits, Branes, Black Holes, Santa Barbara, CA, March
26, 2012.
Giddings, Steven B. “Black Holes, Quantum Information, and Unitary Evolution.” Physical Review D 85,
no. 12 (June 27, 2012).
Giddings, Steven B., Donald Marolf, and James B. Hartle. “Observables in Effective Gravity.” Physical
Review D 74, no. 6 (September 18, 2006).
Gilbert, William. On the Magnet. Translated by Silvanus P. Thompson. London: Chiswick Press, 1900.
Gilder, Louisa. The Age of Entanglement: When Quantum Physics Was Reborn. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2008.
Gisin, Nicolas. “Can Relativity Be Considered Complete? From Newtonian Nonlocality to Quantum
Nonlocality and Beyond.” arXiv.org, December 20, 2005.
Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas. The Western Esoteric Traditions: A Historical Introduction. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2008.
Gorelik, Gennadiĭ E. “Matvei Bronstein and Quantum Gravity: 70th Anniversary of the Unsolved
Problem.” Physics-Uspekhi 48, no. 10 (2005): 1039–53.
Goss, W. M., and R. X. McGee. “The Discovery of the Radio Source Sagittarius A (Sgr A).” In The
Galactic Center, edited by Roland Gredel, 369–79. Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference
Series 102. San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 1996.
Gödel, Kurt. “A Remark About the Relationship Between Relativity Theory and Idealistic Philosophy.” In
Schilpp, Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, 555–62.
Greenberger, Daniel M., Michael A. Horne, Abner Shimony, and Anton Zeilinger. “Bell’s Theorem Without
Inequalities.” American Journal of Physics 58, no. 12 (December 1990): 1131–43.
Greenblatt, Stephen. “The Answer Man.” The New Yorker, August 11, 2011.
Greene, Brian. The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time, and the Texture of Reality. New York: Vintage
Books, 2005.
Gribbin, John. “The Man Who Proved Einstein Was Wrong.” New Scientist, no. 1744, November 24, 1990.
Griffiths, Robert B. “EPR, Bell, and Quantum Locality.” American Journal of Physics 79, no. 9 (September
2011): 954–65.
______. “Quantum Locality.” Foundations of Physics 41, no. 4 (April 2011): 705–33.
Grim, Patrick. “Free Will in Context: A Contemporary Philosophical Perspective.” Behavioral Sciences and
the Law 25, no. 2 (March/April 2007): 183–201.
Gross, David J. “Einstein and the Search for Unification.” Current Science 89, no. 12 (December 25, 2005):
2035–40.

______. “Twenty Five Years of Asymptotic Freedom.” Nuclear Physics B—Proceedings Supplements 74,
no. 1 (March 1999): 426–46.
Grünbaum, Adolf. Modern Science and Zeno’s Paradoxes. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press,
1967.
Guth, Alan H., and Paul J. Steinhardt. “The Inflationary Universe.” Scientific American, May 1984.
Guthrie, W.K.C. A History of Greek Philosophy. Vol. 1, The Earlier Presocratics and the Pythagoreans.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962. Reprint, 1979.
______. A History of Greek Philosophy. Vol. 2, The Presocratic Tradition From Parmenides to Democritus.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965. Reprint, 1979.
Hall, Michael J. W. “Relaxed Bell Inequalities and Kochen-Specker Theorems.” Physical Review A 84
(August 2, 2011).
Halvorson, Hans P. “Algebraic Quantum Field Theory.” In Philosophy of Physics, edited by Jeremy
Butterfield and John Earman, Part A, 731–864. Amsterdam: North Holland, 2007.
______. “Locality, Localization, and the Particle Concept: Topics in the Foundations of Quantum Field
Theory,” PhD diss., University of Pittsburgh, 2001.
Halvorson, Hans P., and Robert K. Clifton. “No Place for Particles in Relativistic Quantum Theories?”
Philosophy of Science 69, no. 1 (March 2002): 1–28.
Hamma, Alioscia, and Fotini Markopoulou. “Background-Independent Condensed Matter Models for
Quantum Gravity.” New Journal of Physics 13, no. 9 (September 2011).
Hanegraaff, Wouter J. “The New Age Movement and the Esoteric Tradition.” In Gnosis and Hermeticism
from Antiquity to Modern Times, edited by Roelof van den Broek and Wouter J. Hanegraaff, 359–82.
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998.
Haroche, Serge, and Jean-Michel Raimond. Exploring the Quantum: Atoms, Cavities, and Photons. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Harrison, Edward. Cosmology: The Science of the Universe. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2000.
Hashimoto, Akikazu, and N. Itzhaki. “Traveling Faster Than the Speed of Light in Noncommutative
Geometry.” Physical Review D 63, no. 12 (May 21, 2001).
Hatfield, Brian. Quantum Field Theory of Point Particles and Strings. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1992.
Hawking, Stephen W. “Black Holes and Thermodynamics.” Physical Review D 13, no. 2 (January 15,
1976): 191–97.
______. “Information Loss in Black Holes.” Physical Review D 72, no. 8 (October 18, 2005).
He, Guang Ping. “Simple Quantum Protocols for the Millionaire Problem with a Semi-Honest Third Party.”
International Journal of Quantum Information 11, no. 2 (March 2013).
Healey, Richard A. Gauging What’s Real: The Conceptual Foundations of Contemporary Gauge Theories.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
______. “Holism and Nonseparability.” The Journal of Philosophy 88, no. 8 (August 1991): 393–421.
______. “New Thoughts on Yang-Mills Theories.” Workshop on the Foundations of Gauge Theories,
University of California, Irvine, March 21–23, 2014.
Heemskerk, Idse, Joao Penedones, Joseph Polchinski, and James Sully. “Holography from Conformal Field
Theory.” Journal of High Energy Physics 2009, no. 10 (October 2009).
Hegerfeldt, Gerard C. “Violation of Causality in Relativistic Quantum Theory?” Physical Review Letters
54, no. 22 (June 3, 1985): 2395–98.
Heller, Michael. “Where Physics Meets Metaphysics.” In On Space and Time, edited by Shahn Majid, 238–
77. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Heller, Michael, and Wiesław Sasin. “Einstein-Podolski-Rosen Experiment from Noncommutative
Quantum Gravity.” In Particles, Fields, and Gravitation, edited by Jakub Remblienski, 234–41. AIP
Conference Proceedings 453. Woodbury, NY: American Institute of Physics, 1998.

______. “Emergence of Time.” Physics Letters A 250, no. 1 (1998): 48–54.
______. “Nonlocal Phenomena From Noncommutative Pre-Planckian Regime.” arXiv.org, June 17, 1999.
Henry, John. “Gravity and De Gravitatione: The Development of Newton’s Ideas on Action at a Distance.”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 42, no. 1 (2011): 11–27.
______. “Occult Qualities and the Experimental Philosophy: Active Principles in Pre-Newtonian Matter
Theory.” History of Science 24 (1986): 335–81.
______. “‘Pray Do Not Ascribe That Notion to Me’: God and Newton’s Gravity.” In The Books of Nature
and Scripture: Recent Essays on Natural Philosophy, Theology, and Biblical Criticism in the
Netherlands of Spinoza’s Time and the British Isles of Newton’s Time, edited by James E. Force and
Richard Henry Popkin, 123–47. International Archives of the History of Ideas 139. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1994.
______. The Scientific Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science. 2nd ed. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2002.
Henson, Joe. “The Causal Set Approach to Quantum Gravity.” In Oriti, Approaches to Quantum Gravity,
393–413.
Hertz, Heinrich. Miscellaneous Papers. Edited by Philipp Lenard. Translated by Daniel Evan Jones and G.
A. Schott. New York: Macmillan, 1896.
Hesse, Mary B. Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a Distance in the History of Physics. New
York: Thomas Nelson, 1961. Reprint, Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2005.
Holbrow, C. H., Enrique Galvez, and M. E. Parks. “Photon Quantum Mechanics and Beam Splitters.”
American Journal of Physics 70, no. 3 (March 2002): 260–65.
Horowitz, Gary T., and Joseph Polchinski. “Gauge/Gravity Duality.” In Oriti, Approaches to Quantum
Gravity, 169–86.
Horowitz, Gary T., Albion Lawrence, and Eva Silverstein. “Insightful D-Branes.” Journal of High Energy
Physics, no. 7 (July 2009).
Horwich, Paul. Asymmetries in Time: Problems in the Philosophy of Science. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press, 1987.
Howard, Don. “Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Science.” Physics Today 58, no. 12 (December 2005):
34–40.
______. “Einstein on Locality and Separability.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 16,
no. 3 (September 1985): 171–201.
______. “Holism, Separability, and the Metaphysical Implications of the Bell Experiments.” In Cushing and
McMullin, Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory, 224–53.
______. “‘Nicht Sein Kann Was Nicht Sein Darf,’ or the Prehistory of EPR, 1909–1935: Einstein’s Early
Worries About the Quantum Mechanics of Composite Systems.” In Sixty-Two Years of Uncertainty:
Historical, Philosophical, and Physical Inquiries Into the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, edited by
Arthur I. Miller, 61–111. New York: Plenum Press, 1990.
______. “A Peek Behind the Veil of Maya.” In The Cosmos of Science: Essays of Exploration, edited by
John Earman and John D. Norton, 87–150. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1997.
______. “Revisiting the Einstein-Bohr Dialogue.” Iyyun: The Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly 56
(January 2007): 57–90.
______. “The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism, and the Quantum Theory by Arthur Fine.” Synthese 86, no. 1
(January 1991): 123–41.
Huggett, Nick. “Zeno’s Paradoxes.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, October 15, 2010.
Hume, David. Of the Understanding. Book 1 of A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888.

Hunt, Bruce J. The Maxwellians. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991. Reprint, 2005.
Hutchison, Keith. “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?” Isis 73, no. 2 (June 1,
1982): 233–53.
Isaacson, Walter. Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007.
Ismael, Jenann. “Decision and the Open Future.” In The Future of the Philosophy of Time, edited by Adrian
Bardon, 149–68. London: Routledge, 2011.
______. “What Entanglement Might Be Telling Us.” Paper presented at the 46th Chapel Hill Colloquium in
Philosophy, Chapel Hill, NC, November 2–4, 2012.
Jackson, John David. Classical Electrodynamics. 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1975.
Jacobson, Ted. “Introduction to Quantum Fields in Curved Spacetime and the Hawking Effect.” In Lectures
on Quantum Gravity, edited by Andrés Gomberoff and Donald Marolf, 39–89. Series of the Centro De
Estudios Científicos. New York: Springer, 2005.
James, William. The Will to Believe: And Other Essays in Popular Philosophy. New York, 1897.
Jammer, Max. Concepts of Force: A Study in the Foundations of Dynamics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1957. Reprint, Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 1999.
______. Concepts of Space: The History of Theories of Space in Physics. Foreword by Albert Einstein. 3rd,
enlarged ed. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 1993. First published 1954.
______. The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics: The Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics in Historical
Perspective. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1974.
Janiak, Andrew. Newton as Philosopher. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Jennewein, Thomas, Christoph Simon, Gregor Weihs, Harald Weinfurter, and Anton Zeilinger. “Quantum
Cryptography with Entangled Photons.” Physical Review Letters 84, no. 20 (May 15, 2000).
Jensen, Kristan, and Andreas Karch. “Holographic Dual of an Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Pair Has a
Wormhole.” Physical Review Letters 111, no. 21 (November 21, 2013).
Johnson, George. “A Passion for Physical Realms, Minute and Massive.” The New York Times, February 20,
2001.
Johnson, Steven. Where Good Ideas Come From: The Natural History of Innovation. New York: Riverhead
Books, 2010.
Jones, Martin R., and Robert K. Clifton. “Against Experimental Metaphysics.” Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 18, no. 1 (September 1993): 295–316.
Kafatos, Menas, and Robert Nadeau. The Conscious Universe: Part and Whole in Modern Physical Theory.
New York: Springer, 1990.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.
Kaiser, David. Drawing Theories Apart: The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar Physics.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
______. How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture, and the Quantum Revival. New York: W.
W. Norton, 2011.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Edited by Vasilis Politis. London: J.M. Dent, 1993.
______. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. Translated by Michael Friedman. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Kaplan, Marc. “Winners of the Young Researchers Competition in Physics Announced.” Press release,
Science and Ultimate Reality, meeting in honor of John Wheeler, Princeton, NJ, March 21, 2002.
Kaplunovsky, Vadim, and Marvin Weinstein. “Space-Time: Arena or Illusion?” Physical Review D 31, no. 8
(April 15, 1985): 1879–98.
Kavli Institute of Theoretical Physics. Bits, Branes, Black Holes, program, Santa Barbara, CA, March 19–
May 25, 2012.
Kearney, Hugh. Science and Change, 1500–1700. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971.
Kepler, Johannes. New Astronomy. Translated by William H. Donahue. New York: Cambridge University

Press, 1992.
Kipnis, Naum. “Luigi Galvani and the Debate on Animal Electricity, 1791–1800.” Annals of Science 44, no.
2 (March 1987): 107–42.
Klein, Martin J. “Einstein and the Wave-Particle Duality.” The Natural Philosopher 3 (1964): 3–49.
Kochiras, Hylarie. “Gravity and Newton’s Substance Counting Problem.” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part A 40 (September 2009): 267–80.
Koestler, Arthur. The Watershed: A Biography of Johannes Kepler. New York: Anchor Books, 1960.
Konopka, Tomasz, Fotini Markopoulou, and Simone Severini. “Quantum Graphity: A Model of Emergent
Locality.” Physical Review D 77, no. 10 (May 27, 2008).
Kuchař, Karel V. “Time and Interpretations of Quantum Gravity.” In General Relativity and Relativistic
Astrophysics: The 4th Canadian Conference, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, 16–18 May 1991, edited by
Gabor Kunstatter, Dwight E. Vincent, and Jeff G. Williams. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 1992.
Kuehn, Manfred. Kant: A Biography. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Kuhlmann, Meinard. “What Is Real?” Scientific American, August 2013, 40–47.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of Western
Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1957.
______. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.
Lam, Vincent. “Structural Aspects of Space-Time Singularities.” In The Ontology of Spacetime II, edited by
Dennis Dieks, 111–31. Philosophy and Foundations of Physics 4. New York: Elsevier, 2008.
Landsman, N. P. “When Champions Meet: Rethinking the Bohr-Einstein Debate.” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B 37, no. 1 (March 2006): 212–42.
Lange, Marc. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics: Locality, Fields, Energy, and Mass. Malden,
MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2002.
Langevin, Paul. “L’évolution de l’espace et du temps.” Scientia 10 (1911): 31–54.
Lapkiewicz, Radek, Peizhe Li, Christoph Schaeff, Nathan K. Langford, Sven Ramelow, Marcin Wieśniak,
and Anton Zeilinger. “Experimental Non-Classicality of an Indivisible Quantum System.” Nature 474,
no. 7352 (June 23, 2011): 490–93.
Laudisa, Federico. “Non-Local Realistic Theories and the Scope of the Bell Theorem.” Foundations of
Physics 38, no. 12 (December 2008): 1110–32.
Lefschetz, Solomon. Introduction to Topology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1949.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. New Essays on Human Understanding. Abridged ed. Translated and edited by
Peter Remnant and Jonathan Bennett. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
______. Philosophical Papers and Letters: A Selection. Edited and translated by Leroy E. Loemker. Vol. 1.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956.
______. Philosophical Papers and Letters: A Selection. Edited and translated by Leroy E. Loemker. 2nd ed.
Vol. 2. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989.
Leucippus and Democritus. The Atomists: Leucippus and Democritus; Fragments. Translated by
Christopher C. W. Taylor. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999.
Liberati, Stefano, Sebastiano Sonego, and Matt Visser. “Faster-Than-C Signals, Special Relativity, and
Causality.” Annals of Physics 298, no. 1 (May 25, 2002): 167–85.
Lieb, Elliott H., and Derek W. Robinson. “The Finite Group Velocity of Quantum Spin Systems.”
Communications in Mathematical Physics 28, no. 3 (September 1972): 251–57.
Lightman, Alan P. “Magic on the Mind: Physicists’ Use of Metaphor.” The American Scholar 58, no. 1
(Winter 1989): 97–101.
Lightman, Alan P., and Roberta Brawer. Origins: The Lives and Worlds of Modern Cosmologists.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
Lincoln, Don. “Proving Special Relativity: Episode 2.” Physics in a Nutshell, Fermilab Today, April 4,
2014.
List, Christian. “Free Will, Determinism, and the Possibility of Doing Otherwise.” Noûs 48, no. 1 (March

2014): 156–78.
Lloyd, Geoffrey Ernest Richard. Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle. London: Chatto and Windus,
1970. Reprint, New York: W. W. Norton, 1974.
Lodge, Oliver. Modern Views of Electricity. London, 1889.
Loll, Renate, Jan Ambjørn, and Jerzy Jurkiewicz. “The Universe from Scratch.” Contemporary Physics 47,
no. 2 (March 2006): 103–17.
Lowe, David A., Joseph Polchinski, Leonard Susskind, Lárus Thorlacius, and John Uglum. “Black Hole
Complementarity Versus Locality.” Physical Review D 52, no. 12 (December 15, 1995): 6997–7012.
Lucretius. The Nature of Things. Translated by A. E. Stallings, New York: Penguin Classics, 2007.
Lyre, Holger. “Holism and Structuralism in U(1) Gauge Theory.” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B 35, no. 4 (December 2004): 643–70.
Macchetto, F. Duccio, and Mark Dickinson. “Galaxies in the Young Universe.” Scientific American (May
1997): 92–99.
Mach, Ernst. History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of Energy. Translated by Philip E. B.
Jourdain. Chicago: Open Court Publishing, 1911.
______. The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Account of Its Development. Translated by
Thomas J. McCormack. 4th ed. Chicago: Open Court Publishing, 1919. First published 1893.
Malament, David B. “In Defense of Dogma: Why There Cannot Be a Relativistic Quantum Mechanics of
(Localizable) Particles.” In Perspectives on Quantum Reality: Non-Relativistic, Relativistic, and Field-
Theoretic, edited by Rob Clifton, 1–10. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996.
Maldacena, Juan, and Leonard Susskind. “Cool Horizons for Entangled Black Holes.” Fortschritte Der
Physik 61, no. 9 (September 2013): 781–811.
Mandelstam, Stanley. “Quantum Electrodynamics Without Potentials.” Annals of Physics 19, no. 1 (July
1962): 1–24.
Mangano, Michelangelo L., and Stephen J. Parke. “Multi-Parton Amplitudes in Gauge Theories.” Physics
Reports 200, no. 6 (February 1991): 301–67.
Markopoulou, Fotini. “Space Does Not Exist, So Time Can.” arXiv.org, September 10, 2009.
Markopoulou, Fotini, and Robert Lawrence Kuhn. “Why Is the Universe So Breathtaking?” Webcast,
Closer to Truth, produced by the Kuhn Foundation, August 15, 2013.
Markopoulou, Fotini, and Lee Smolin. “Causal Evolution of Spin Networks.” Nuclear Physics B 508, nos.
1–2 (December 22, 1997): 409–30.
______. “Disordered Locality in Loop Quantum Gravity States.” Classical and Quantum Gravity 24, no. 15
(August 7, 2007): 3813–23.
______. “Quantum Theory from Quantum Gravity.” Physical Review D 70, no. 12 (December 23, 2004):
124029.
Marolf, Donald. “Discussion: Holography and Unitarity in Black Hole Evaporation,” Bits, Branes, Black
Holes, Santa Barbara, CA, April 27, 2012.
______. “Holographic Thought Experiments.” Physical Review D 79, no. 2 (January 29, 2009).
______. “Holography Without Strings?” Classical and Quantum Gravity 31, no. 1 (January 2014).
______. “Unitarity and Holography in Gravitational Physics.” Physical Review D 79, no. 4 (February 9,
2009).
Martinec, Emil J. “Evolving Notions of Geometry in String Theory.” Foundations of Physics 43, no. 1
(January 2013): 156–73.
Martinec, Emil J., Daniel Robbins, and Savdeep Sethi. “Toward the End of Time.” Journal of High Energy
Physics, no. 8 (August 1, 2006).
Mates, Benson. The Philosophy of Leibniz: Metaphysics and Language. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986.
Mathur, Samir D. “The Information Paradox: A Pedagogical Introduction.” Classical and Quantum Gravity

26, no. 22 (November 21, 2009).
Matteucci, Giorgio, and Giulio Pozzi. “New Diffraction Experiment on the Electrostatic Aharonov-Bohm
Effect.” Physical Review Letters 54, no. 23 (June 10, 1985): 2469–72.
Mattle, Klaus, Harald Weinfurter, Paul G. Kwiat, and Anton Zeilinger. “Dense Coding in Experimental
Quantum Communication.” Physical Review Letters 76, no. 25 (June 17, 1996): 4656–59.
Maudlin, Tim. “Buckets of Water and Waves of Space: Why Spacetime Is Probably a Substance.”
Philosophy of Science 60, no. 2 (June 1993): 183–203.
______. New Foundations for Physical Geometry: The Theory of Linear Structures. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2014.
______. “Part and Whole in Quantum Mechanics.” In Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects
in Modern Physics, edited by Elena Castellani, 46–60. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.
______. Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity: Metaphysical Intimations of Modern Physics. 2nd ed.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 2002.
______. “Special Relativity and Quantum Entanglement: How Compatible Are They?” Intersectional
Symposium: The Concept of Reality in Physics, Dresden, Germany, March 16, 2011.
Maxwell, James Clerk. A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. Vol. 1. Oxford, 1873.
______. The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell. Edited by W. D. Niven. Vol. 1. New York: Dover
Publications, 1965.
______. The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell. Edited by W. D. Niven. Vol. 2. New York: Dover
Publications, 1965.
McCormmach, Russell. “Einstein, Lorentz, and the Electron Theory.” Historical Studies in the Physical
Sciences 2 (1970): 41–87.
______. “H. A. Lorentz and the Electromagnetic View of Nature.” Isis 61, no. 4 (Winter 1970): 459–97.
McFadden, Paul, and Kostas Skenderis. “Observational Signatures of Holographic Models of Inflation.” In
The Twelfth Marcel Grossmann Meeting on Recent Developments in Theoretical and Experimental
General Relativity, Astrophysics and Relativistic Field Theories, edited by Thibault Damour, Robert T.
Jantzen, and Remo Ruffini, 2315–23. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 2012.
McGoldrick, Monica, Randy Gerson, and Sueli S. Petry. Genograms: Assessment and Intervention. New
York: W. W. Norton, 2008.
McMullin, Ernan. “The Explanation of Distant Action: Historical Notes.” In Cushing and McMullin,
Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory, 272–302.
______. “The Origins of the Field Concept in Physics.” Physics in Perspective 4, no. 1 (February 2002):
13–39.
Mehlberg, Henry. Time, Causality, and the Quantum Theory. Vol. 1, Essay on the Causal Theory of Time.
Vol. 2, Time in a Quantized Universe. Edited by Robert Sonné Cohen. Studies in the Philosophy of
Science 19. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1980.
Melfos, Vasilios, Bruno Helly, and Panagiotis Voudouris. “The Ancient Greek Names ‘Magnesia’ and
‘Magnetes’ and Their Origin from the Magnetite Occurrences at the Mavrovouni Mountain of Thessaly,
Central Greece. A Mineralogical–Geochemical Approach.” Archaeological and Anthropological
Sciences 3 (2011): 165–72.
Mermin, N. David. “Is the Moon There When Nobody Looks? Reality and the Quantum Theory.” Physics
Today 38, no. 4 (April 1985): 38–47.
Meschini, Diego, Markku Lehto, and Johanna Piilonen. “Geometry, Pregeometry and Beyond.” Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part B 36, no. 3 (September 2005): 435–64.
Mielczarek, Jakub. “Asymptotic Silence in Loop Quantum Cosmology.” In Multiverse and Fundamental
Cosmology, edited by Mariusz P. Dąbrowski, Adam Balcerzak, and Tomasz Denkiewicz, 81–84. AIP
Conference Proceedings 1514. Melville, NY: American Institute of Physics, 2013.

Milburn, Gerard J. The Feynman Processor: Quantum Entanglement and the Computing Revolution. New
York: Basic Books, 1998.
Miller, Arthur I. Albert Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity: Emergence (1905) and Early Interpretation
(1905–1911). New York: Springer, 1997. First published 1981 by Addison-Wesley.
Minkowski, Hermann, with notes by Arnold Sommerfeld. “Raum Und Zeit.” In Das Relativitätsprinzip:
Eine Sammlung von Abhandlungen, edited by H. A. Lorentz, Albert Einstein, and Hermann Minkowski,
54–71. Fortschritte Der Mathematischen Wissenschaften in Monographien. Leipzig: Vieweg+Teubner
Verlag, 1923.
Mischel, Theodore. “Pragmatic Aspects of Explanation.” Philosophy of Science 33, nos. 1–2 (January
1966): 40–80.
Misner, Charles W. “Feynman Quantization of General Relativity.” Reviews of Modern Physics 29, no. 3
(July 1957): 497–509.
______. “Mixmaster Universe.” Physical Review Letters 22, no. 20 (May 19, 1969): 1071–74.
Misner, Charles W., and John Archibald Wheeler. “Classical Physics as Geometry.” Annals of Physics 2, no.
6 (December 1957): 525–603.
Misner, Charles W., Kip S. Thorne, and John Archibald Wheeler. Gravitation. San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman, 1973.
Mitchell, Edward Page. “The Clock That Went Backward.” In The Time Traveler’s Almanac, edited by Ann
VanderMeer and Jeff VanderMeer, 450–59. New York: Tor, 2014.
Mitroff, Ian I. “Norms and Counter-Norms in a Select Group of the Apollo Moon Scientists: A Case Study
of the Ambivalence of Scientists.” American Sociological Review 39, no. 4 (August 1973): 579–95.
Morong, William, Alexander Ling, and Daniel Oi. “Quantum Optics for Space Platforms.” Optics and
Photonics News 23, no. 10 (2012): 42–49.
Morus, Iwan Rhys. When Physics Became King. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Musser, George. The Complete Idiot’s Guide to String Theory. New York: Alpha Books, 2008.
______. “Could Time End?” Scientific American, September 2010.
______. “Forces of the World, Unite!” Scientific American, September 2004.
______. “George and John’s Excellent Adventures in Quantum Entanglement.” Observations, Scientific
American blog, January 30, 2012.
______. “How to Build the World’s Simplest Particle Detector.” Critical Opalescence, Scientific American
blog, October 15, 2012.
______. “How to Build Your Own Quantum Entanglement Experiment, Part 2 (of 2).” Critical
Opalescence, February 14, 2013.
______. “What Happens to Google Maps When Tectonic Plates Move?” Critical Opalescence, November
11, 2013.
Nastase, Horatiu. “The RHIC Fireball as a Dual Black Hole.” arXiv.org, January 10, 2005.
Needham, Joseph, and Wang Ling. Science and Civilisation in China. Vol. 4, Part 1. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1962.
Nerlich, Graham. The Shape of Space. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Newstead, Anne G. J. “Aristotle and Modern Mathematical Theories of the Continuum.” In Aristotle and
Contemporary Science, edited by Demetra Sfendoni-Mentzou, J. Hattiangadi, and David M. Johnson,
2:113–29. Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2001.
Newton, Isaac. Isaac Newton: Philosophical Writings. Edited by Andrew Janiak. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2004.
______. The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. 2 vols. Translated by Andrew Motte. London,
1803.
Newton, T. D., and Eugene Paul Wigner. “Localized States for Elementary Systems.” Reviews of Modern

Physics 21, no. 3 (1949): 400–406.
Nikogosyan, D. N. “Beta Barium Borate (BBO).” Applied Physics A: Solids and Surfaces 52, no. 6 (1991):
359–68.
Nishioka, Tatsuma, Shinsei Ryu, and Tadashi Takayanagi. “Holographic Entanglement Entropy: An
Overview.” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 42, no. 50 (December 2, 2009).
Norton, John D. “Einstein’s Investigations of Galilean Covariant Electrodynamics Prior to 1905.” Archive
for History of Exact Sciences 59, no. 1 (November 2004): 45–105.
Nozick, Robert. Invariances: The Structure of the Objective World. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2001.
O’Connell, A. D., M. Hofheinz, M. Ansmann, Radoslaw C. Bialczak, M. Lenander, Erik Lucero, M.
Neeley, D. Sank. H. Wang, M. Weides, J. Wenner, John M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland. “Quantum
Ground State and Single-Phonon Control of a Mechanical Resonator.” Nature 464, no. 7289 (March 17,
2010): 697–703.
OK Go. “This Too Shall Pass.” YouTube, March 1, 2010.
Oriti, Daniele, ed. Approaches to Quantum Gravity: Toward a New Understanding of Space, Time and
Matter. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Pais, Abraham. Einstein Lived Here. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Pauli, Wolfgang. “The Connection Between Spin and Statistics.” Physical Review 58, no. 8 (October 15,
1940): 716–22.
Penrose, Roger. The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2005.
Perkins, Ceri, and Sergei Malyukov. “Cables: The ‘Blood Vessels’ of ATLAS.” ATLAS Experiment,
“ATLAS News,” January 2008.
Peskin, Michael E., and Daniel V. Schroeder. An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1995.
Pettit, Philip. The Common Mind: An Essay on Psychology, Society, and Politics. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1993.
Planck Collaboration. “Planck 2013 Results. XVI. Cosmological Parameters.” Astronomy and Astrophysics
571 (October 29, 2014).
______. “Planck Intermediate Results. XXX. The Angular Power Spectrum of Polarized Dust Emission at
Intermediate and High Galactic Latitudes.” Astronomy and Astrophysics (forthcoming). Published
electronically September 22, 2014.
Popescu, Sandu. “Bell’s Inequalities and Density Matrices: Revealing ‘Hidden’ Nonlocality.” Physical
Review Letters 74, no. 14 (April 3, 1995): 2619–22.
Popper, Karl R. “Bell’s Theorem: A Note on Locality.” In Vol. 1 of Microphysical Reality and Quantum
Formalism, edited by Alwyn van der Merwe, Franco Selleri, and Gino Tarozzi, 413–17. Proceedings of
the Eponymous Conference, Urbino, Italy, September 25–October 3, 1985. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1988.
______. Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics. Vol. 3 of The Postscript to the Logic of Scientific
Discovery, edited by W. W. Bartley III. London: Routledge, 1992.
______. “Three Views Concerning Human Knowledge.” Chap. 3 in Conjectures and Refutations: The
Growth of Scientific Knowledge, 97–119. London: Routledge, 1965.
Powers, Thomas. Heisenberg’s War: The Secret History of the German Bomb. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1993.
Prescod-Weinstein, Chanda, and Lee Smolin. “Disordered Locality as an Explanation for the Dark Energy.”
Physical Review D 80, no. 6 (September 3, 2009).
Price, Huw. Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point: New Directions for the Physics of Time. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996.
Prutchi, David, and Shanni R. Prutchi. Exploring Quantum Physics Through Hands-On Projects. Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2012.

Ramsey, Norman F. Spectroscopy with Coherent Radiation: Selected Papers of Norman F. Ramsey.
Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 1998.
Randall, Lisa, and Raman Sundrum. “A Large Mass Hierarchy from a Small Extra Dimension.” arXiv.org,
May 4, 1999.
Rayleigh, Lord. “The Dynamical Theory of Gases and of Radiation.” Nature 72, no. 1855 (May 18, 1905):
54–55.
Redhead, Michael. Incompleteness, Nonlocality, and Realism: A Prolegomenon to the Philosophy of
Quantum Mechanics. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
______. “More Ado About Nothing.” Foundations of Physics 25, no. 1 (January 1995): 123–37.
Redner, S. “Citation Statistics from More Than a Century of Physical Review.” arXiv.org, July 27, 2004.
Retzker, Alex, J. I. Cirac, and Benni Reznik. “Detecting Vacuum Entanglement in a Linear Ion Trap.”
Physical Review Letters 94, no. 5 (February 2005).
Reznik, Benni. “Distillation of Vacuum Entanglement to EPR Pairs.” arXiv.org, August 1, 2000.
Rickles, Dean. “AdS/CFT Duality and the Emergence of Spacetime.” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B 44, no. 3 (2013): 312–20.
______. Symmetry, Structure, and Spacetime. New York: Elsevier, 2008.
Riemann, Bernhard Georg. “On the Hypotheses Which Lie at the Bases of Geometry.” Nature 8, nos. 183–
84 (May 8, 1873): 14–17, 36–37.
Ritz, Walther. “Recherches critiques sur l’électrodynamique générale.” Annales de chimie et de physique 13
(1908): 145–275.
Rohrlich, Daniel, and Sandu Popescu. “Nonlocality as an Axiom for Quantum Theory.” arXiv.org, August
9, 1995.
Rosenfeld, Léon. “Niels Bohr in the Thirties: Consolidation and Extension of the Conception of
Complementarity.” In Niels Bohr: His Life and Work as Seen by His Friends and Colleagues, edited by
Stefan Rozental, 114–36. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1967.
Rossi, Paolo. Francis Bacon: From Magic to Science. Translated by Sacha Rabinovitch. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1978.
Rovelli, Carlo. “‘Forget Time.’” Essay written for the Foundational Questions Institute Essay Contest, The
Nature of Time, August 24, 2008.
______. “Aristotle’s Physics: A Physicist’s Look.” arXiv.org, December 14, 2013.
______. Quantum Gravity. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone. New York: Scholastic, 1998.
Rozali, Moshe. “Comments on Background Independence and Gauge Redundancies.” arXiv.org, September
23, 2008.
Ruijsenaars, S.N.M. “On Newton-Wigner Localization and Superluminal Propagation Speeds.” Annals of
Physics 137, no. 1 (November 1981): 33–43.
Saari, Donald G., and Zhihong Xia. “Off to Infinity in Finite Time.” Notices of the AMS 42, no. 5 (May
1995): 538–46.
Sabín, C., J. J. García-Ripoll, E. Solano, and J. León. “Dynamics of Entanglement via Propagating
Microwave Photons.” Physical Review B 81, no. 18 (May 2010).
Sachdev, Subir. “Strange and Stringy.” Scientific American, January 2013, 44–51.
Sack, Robert David. “Magic and Space.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 66, no. 2
(1976): 309–21.
Safranski, Rüdiger. Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy. Translated by Ewald Osers. London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989. Reprint, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Saint Thomas Aquinas. The Summa Theologica of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Vol. 1. Translated by Fathers of
the English Dominican Province. Revised by Daniel J. Sullivan. Great Books of the Western World 19.
Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.

Salmon, Wesley C. Causality and Explanation. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Sarovar, Mohan, Akihito Ishizaki, Graham R. Fleming, and K. Birgitta Whaley. “Quantum Entanglement in
Photosynthetic Light-Harvesting Complexes.” Nature Physics 6 (April 25, 2010): 462–67.
Schachner, Nat. “Ancestral Voices.” Astounding Stories, December 1933.
Schilpp, Paul Arthur, ed. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist. The Library of Living Philosophers, Vol. 7.
Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1949. Reprint, New York: MJF Books, 2001.
Schlick, Moritz. General Theory of Knowledge. Edited by Herbert Feigl. Translated by Albert E. Blumberg.
Chicago: Open Court Publishing Company, 2002.
Schlosshauer, Maximilian, Johannes Kofler, and Anton Zeilinger. “A Snapshot of Foundational Attitudes
Toward Quantum Mechanics.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B 44, no. 3 (August
2013): 222–30.
Schmidt, Maarten. “3C 273: A Star-Like Object with Large Red-Shift.” Nature 197, no. 4872 (March 16,
1963): 1040.
Schrödinger, Erwin. “Discussion of Probability Relations Between Separated Systems.” Mathematical
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 31, no. 4 (October 1935): 555–63.
______. “On Einstein’s Gas Theory.” Physikalische Zeitschrift 27 (1926): 95–101.
______. “Quantisation as a Problem of Proper Values (Part IV).” In Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics,
3rd (augmented) ed., 102–23. AMS Chelsea Publishing. Providence, RI: American Mathematical
Society, 2003.
______. Science and the Human Temperament. Translated by James Murphy. London: George Allen and
Unwin, 1935.
Schutz, Bernard. Gravity from the Ground Up: An Introductory Guide to Gravity and General Relativity.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Schwartz, H. M. “Einstein’s Comprehensive 1907 Essay on Relativity, Part 1.” American Journal of Physics
45, no. 6 (June 1977): 512–17.
Schweber, Silvan S. QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.
Seiberg, Nathan. “Emergent Spacetime.” In The Quantum Structure of Space and Time: Proceedings of the
23rd Solvay Conference on Physics, Brussels, Belgium, 1–3 December, 2005, edited by David J. Gross,
Marc Henneaux, and Alexander Sevrin, 163–78. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 2007.
Sekino, Yasuhiro, and Leonard Susskind. “Fast Scramblers.” Journal of High Energy Physics 2008, no. 10
(October 15, 2008).
Shimony, Abner. “Aspects of Nonlocality in Quantum Mechanics.” In Quantum Mechanics at the
Crossroads: New Perspectives from History, Philosophy and Physics, edited by James Evans and Alan S.
Thorndike, 107–23. New York: Springer, 2007.
______. “Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.” In The New Physics, edited by Paul Davies,
373–95. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989. Reprint, 1992.
Simplicius. On Aristotle’s Physics 6. Ancient Commentators on Aristotle, edited by David Konstan. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1989.
Sivers, Derek. “How to Start a Movement.” TED Conference, Long Beach, CA, February 2010.
Slowik, Edward. “The Deep Metaphysics of Quantum Gravity: The Seventeenth Century Legacy and an
Alternative Ontology Beyond Substantivalism and Relationism.” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B 44, no. 4 (November 2013): 490–99.
______. “The ‘Properties’ of Leibnizian Space: Whither Relationism?” Intellectual History Review 22, no. 1
(March 2012): 107–29.
Smerlak, Matteo, and Carlo Rovelli. “Relational EPR.” Foundations of Physics 37, no. 3 (March 2007):
427–45.
Smith, D. Eric, and Duncan K. Foley. “Classical Thermodynamics and Economic General Equilibrium

Theory.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, no. 1 (January 2008): 7–65.
Smolin, Lee. The Life of the Cosmos. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
______. “The Case for Background Independence.” In The Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity,
edited by Dean Rickles, Steven French, and Juha T. Saatsi, 196–239. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2006.
______. Time Reborn: From the Crisis in Physics to the Future of the Universe. New York: Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2013.
Sorkin, Rafael D. “Does Locality Fail at Intermediate Length-Scales?” In Oriti, Approaches to Quantum
Gravity, 26–43.
Spekkens, Robert W. “The Paradigm of Kinematics and Dynamics Must Yield to Causal Structure.”
arXiv.org, August 31, 2012.
Stachel, John. Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z.’ Einstein Studies 9. The Center for Einstein Studies, Boston
University. Boston: Birkhäuser, 2002.
Stamatellos, Giannis. Plotinus and the Presocratics: A Philosophical Study of Presocratic Influences in
Plotinus’ Enneads. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2007.
Stanley, H. E., L.A.N. Amaral, P. Gopikrishnan, P. Ch. Ivanov, T. H. Keitt, and V. Plerou. “Scale Invariance
and Universality: Organizing Principles in Complex Systems.” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its
Applications 281, nos. 1–4 (June 15, 2000): 60–68.
Stapp, Henry. “Space and Time in S-Matrix Theory.” Physical Review 139, no. 1 (July 12, 1965): B257–70.
Stauffer, Robert C. “Speculation and Experiment in the Background of Oersted’s Discovery of
Electromagnetism.” Isis 48, no. 1 (March 1957): 33–50.
Steinhardt, Paul J. “The Inflation Debate.” Scientific American, April 2011.
Stone, A. Douglas. Einstein and the Quantum: The Quest of the Valiant Swabian. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2013.
Strocchi, F. “Gauss’ Law in Local Quantum Field Theory.” In Field Theory, Quantization and Statistical
Physics: In Memory of Bernard Jouvet, edited by E. Tirapegui, 227–36. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1981.
______. “Relativistic Quantum Mechanics and Field Theory.” Foundations of Physics 34, no. 3 (March
2004): 501–27.
Strominger, Andrew. “Inflation and the dS/CFT Correspondence.” Journal of High Energy Physics 2001,
no. 11 (November 2001).
Stuewer, Roger H. “The Experimental Challenge of Light Quanta.” In The Cambridge Companion to
Einstein, edited by Michel Janssen and Christoph Lehner, 143–66. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2014.
Stump, Eleonore, and Norman Kretzmann. “Eternity.” The Journal of Philosophy 78, no. 8 (August 1981):
429–58.
Summers, Stephen J., and Reinhard Werner. “The Vacuum Violates Bell’s Inequalities.” Physics Letters A
110, no. 5 (July 29, 1985): 257–59.
Sundrum, Raman. “From Fixed Points to the Fifth Dimension.” Physical Review D 86, no. 8 (October
2012).
Suppes, Patrick. “Descartes and the Problem of Action at a Distance.” Journal of the History of Ideas 15,
no. 1 (January 1954): 146–52.
Surowiecki, James. The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Collective
Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations. New York: Doubleday, 2004.
Susskind, Leonard. The Cosmic Landscape: String Theory and the Illusion of Intelligent Design. New York:
Little, Brown, 2005.
Susskind, Leonard, and Edward Witten. “The Holographic Bound in Anti–de Sitter Space.” arXiv.org, May
19, 1998.
Swingle, Brian. “Constructing Holographic Spacetimes Using Entanglement Renormalization.” arXiv.org,

September 14, 2012.
Tait, Peter Guthrie. Properties of Matter. Edinburgh, 1885.
Taylor, A. E. “Parmenides, Zeno, and Socrates.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 16 (1915): 234–89.
Taylor, Paul, Rich Morin, D’Vera Cohn, and Wendy Wang. “American Mobility: Who Moves? Who Stays
Put? Where’s Home?” Pew Research Center, December 29, 2008.
Tegmark, Max. “Parallel Universes.” Scientific American, May 2003.
Teller, Paul. An Interpretive Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1994.
’t Hooft, Gerard. “Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity.” In Salamfestschrift: A Collection of Talks
From the Conference on Highlights of Particle and Condensed Matter Physics, ICTP, Trieste, Italy, 8–12
March 1993, edited by Ahmed Ali, John Ellis, and S. Randjbar-Daemi, 284–96. Hackensack, NJ: World
Scientific, 1994.
______. “Discreteness and Determinism in Superstrings.” arXiv.org, July 16, 2012.
______. “The Future of Quantum Mechanics.” Opening event, Emergent Quantum Mechanics 2013, 2nd
International Symposium About Quantum Mechanics Based on a “Deeper Level Theory,” Vienna,
Austria, October 3–6, 2013.
Thucydides. History of the Peloponnesian War. Translated by Rex Warner. London: Penguin Books, 1954.
Thurschwell, Pamela. Literature, Technology and Magical Thinking, 1880–1920. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
Tollaksen, Jeff, Yakir Aharonov, Aharon Casher, Tirzah Kaufherr, and Shmuel Nussinov. “Quantum
Interference Experiments, Modular Variables and Weak Measurements.” New Journal of Physics 12, no.
1 (January 2010).
Traweek, Sharon. Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of High Energy Physicists. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1988. Reprint, 1992.
Trimmer, John D. “The Present Situation in Quantum Mechanics: A Translation of Schrödinger’s ‘Cat
Paradox’ Paper.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 124, no. 5 (October 10, 1980):
323–38.
Unruh, William G. “Minkowski Space-Time and Quantum Mechanics.” In Minkowski Spacetime: A
Hundred Years Later, edited by Vesselin Petkov, 133–48. New York: Springer, 2010.
______. “Time, Gravity, and Quantum Mechanics.” In Savitt, Time’s Arrows Today, 23–65.
Ursin, Rupert, F. Tiefenbacher, T. Schmitt-Manderbach, H. Weier, Thomas Scheidl, M. Lindenthal, B.
Blauensteiner, et al. “Entanglement-Based Quantum Communication Over 144 Km.” Nature Physics 3
(July 2007): 481–86.
Vachaspati, Tanmay, and Mark Trodden. “Causality and Cosmic Inflation.” Physical Review D 61, no. 2
(December 16, 1999).
Valentini, Antony. “Beyond the Quantum.” Physics World 22, no. 11 (November 2009): 32–37.
van Fraassen, Bas C. Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
van Lunteren, Frans H. “Framing Hypotheses: Conceptions of Gravity in the 18th and 19th Centuries.” PhD
diss., Utrecht University, 1991.
______. “Gravitational and Nineteenth-Century Physical Worldviews.” In Newton’s Scientific and
Philosophical Legacy, edited by Paul B. Scheurer and G. Debrock. New York: Springer, 1988.
______. “Nicolas Fatio de Duillier on the Mechanical Cause of Universal Gravitation.” In Pushing Gravity:
New Perspectives on Le Sage’s Theory of Gravitation, edited by Matthew R. Edwards, 41–59. Montréal:
Apeiron, 2002.
Van Raamsdonk, Mark. “Building Up Spacetime with Quantum Entanglement.” General Relativity and
Gravitation 42, no. 10 (June 19, 2010): 2323–29.
Vedral, Vlatko. “High-Temperature Macroscopic Entanglement.” New Journal of Physics 6 (August 9,
2004).

Verlinde, Erik P. “The Dark Phase Space of de Sitter,” Bits, Branes, Black Holes, Santa Barbara, CA, April
3, 2012.
Von Plato, Jan. Creating Modern Probability: Its Mathematics, Physics and Philosophy in Historical
Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Wald, Robert M. “Correlations and Causality in Quantum Field Theory.” In Quantum Concepts in Space
and Time, edited by Roger Penrose and C. J. Isham, 293–301. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Wallace, David. The Emergent Multiverse: Quantum Theory According to the Everett Interpretation. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Weatherall, James Owen. “The Scope and Generality of Bell’s Theorem.” Foundations of Physics 43, no. 9
(September 2013): 1153–69.
Weinberg, Steven. Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of the General Theory of
Relativity. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1972.
______. “The Search for Unity: Notes for a History of Quantum Field Theory.” Daedalus 106, no. 4
(Autumn 1977): 17–35.
Wen, Xiao-Gang. “Topological Order: From Long-Range Entangled Quantum Matter to a Unified Origin of
Light and Electrons.” ISRN Condensed Matter Physics 2013 (2013).
Westfall, Richard Samuel. “Newton and Alchemy.” In Occult and Scientific Mentalities in the Renaissance,
edited by Brian Vickers, 315–35. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
______. “Newton and the Hermetic Tradition.” In Science, Medicine, and Society in the Renaissance:
Essays to Honor Walter Pagel, edited by Allen G. Debus, 2:183–98. New York: Science History
Publications, 1972.
______. The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanisms and Mechanics. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1971.
______. The Life of Isaac Newton. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Wheeler, John Archibald, and Richard P. Feynman. “Classical Electrodynamics in Terms of Direct
Interparticle Action.” Reviews of Modern Physics 21, no. 3 (July–September 1949): 425–33.
Whitaker, Andrew. “John Bell in Belfast: Early Years and Education.” In Quantum (Un)Speakables: From
Bell to Quantum Information, edited by R. A. Bertlmann and A. Zeilinger, 7–20. New York: Springer,
2002.
Wijsman, Ellen M., and Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza. “Migration and Genetic Population Structure with
Special Reference to Humans.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 15 (November 1984): 279–
301.
Wilczek, Frank. “Quantum Field Theory.” Reviews of Modern Physics 71, no. 2 (March 1999): S85–S95.
Williams, Leslie Pearce. Michael Faraday: A Biography. New York: Da Capo Press, 1971.
______. The Origins of Field Theory. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1980.
Wilson, Robert Woodrow. “The Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation.” Nobel Lecture, Stockholm,
December 8, 1978.
Wiseman, Howard M., S. J. Jones, and A. C. Doherty. “Steering, Entanglement, Nonlocality, and the
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox.” Physical Review Letters 98, no. 14 (April 6, 2007).
Witten, Edward. “Anti–de Sitter Space, Thermal Phase Transition, and Confinement in Gauge Theories.”
Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical Physics 2, no. 3 (1998): 505–32.
______. “An Interpretation of Classical Yang-Mills Theory.” Physics Letters B 77, nos. 4–5 (August 28,
1978): 394–98.
______. “Perturbative Gauge Theory as a String Theory in Twistor Space.” Communications in
Mathematical Physics 252, nos. 1–3 (December 2004): 189–258.
______. “Reflections on the Fate of Spacetime.” Physics Today 49, no. 4 (April 1996): 24–30.
Wright, Jessey. “Quantum Field Theory: Motivating the Axiom of Microcausality.” Master’s thesis,

University of Waterloo, 2012.
Wu, Tai Tsun, and Chen Ning Yang. “Concept of Nonintegrable Phase Factors and Global Formulation of
Gauge Fields.” Physical Review D 12, no. 12 (December 15, 1975): 3845–57.
Yates, Frances A. Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1964. Reprint, 1991.
Zahar, Elie. “Why did Einstein’s Programme Supersede Lorentz’s? (II).” British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 24, no. 3 (September 1973): 223–62.
Zee, Anthony. Quantum Field Theory in a Nutshell. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010.
Zeilinger, Anton. “On the Interpretation and Philosophical Foundation of Quantum Mechanics.” In
Vastakohtien Todellisuus: Festschrift for Professor K. V. Laurikainen, edited by Urho Ketvel et al., 167–
78. Helsinski: Helsinki University Press, 1996.
______. “Testing Concepts of Reality with Entangled Photons in the Laboratory and Outside.”
Intersectional Symposium: The Concept of Reality in Physics, Dresden, Germany, March 16, 2011.
Zel’dovich, Yakov B. “Particle Production in Cosmology.” Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Physics Letters 12, no. 9 (November 10, 1970): 307–11.
Zimbardo, Philip. The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How Good People Turn Evil. New York: Random
House, 2008.

Acknowledgments
One of the reasons I love writing about physics is that physicists and
philosophers of physics are so generous with their time and so tolerant of endless
questions. I have many of them to thank for reading sections of my manuscript:
Nima Arkani-Hamed, John Baez, Julian Barbour, Raphael Bousso, Sean Carroll,
Artur Ekert, Enrique Galvez, Alan Guth, Hans Halvorson, Alioscia Hamma,
John Henry, Sabine Hossenfelder, Don Howard, Nick Huggett, Jenann Ismael,
David Kaiser, Meinard Kuhlmann, Fotini Markopoulou, Donald Marolf, Emil
Martinec, Lionel Mason, Tim Maudlin, Chad Orzel, Joe Polchinski, Huw Price,
Dean Rickles, Carlo Rovelli, Moshe Rozali, Kostas Skenderis, Brian Swingle,
Jeff Tollaksen, David Tong, Jaroslav Trnka, Mark Van Raamsdonk, and David
Wallace.
I had the great fortune of spending fall 2011 at the Centre for Quantum
Technologies at the National University of Singapore, courtesy of the director,
Artur Ekert, and the outreach manager, Jenny Hogan. The Foundational
Questions Institute provided a mini-grant to help pay my expenses there, for
which Theiss Research handled the mini-logistics. The Kavli Institute for
Theoretical Physics hosted me in spring 2012, a visit made possible by then
director David Gross. I’m eternally grateful to my bosses at Scientific American,
Mariette Di Christina, Fred Guterl, and Ricki Rusting, for not throwing a brick at
me when I asked to go on these mini-sabbaticals. To the contrary, they were
enthusiastic on my behalf, even though my time out of the office couldn’t have

made their jobs any easier.
I’m also thankful to several other organizations for travel support: the Nordic
Institute for Theoretical Physics and the Foundational Questions Institute, for
travel to the “Nonlocality: Aspects and Consequences” workshop in Stockholm
in June 2012; the Fetzer Franklin Fund, for travel to the “Emergent Quantum
Mechanics” symposium in Vienna in October 2013; and the Department of
Logic and Philosophy of Science at UC Irvine, for travel to the “Foundations of
Gauge Theories” conference there in March 2014.
I’d never have powered through the trying middle stages of the project were it
not for pep talks from David Biello, Lee Billings, Steve Colyer, Amanda Gefter,
David Grinspoon, Leslie Mullen, and Luba Ostashevsky. Not only were they
supportive, their own writings have never ceased to inspire me.
Jen Christiansen, a Scientific American colleague and friend, prepared many
of the diagrams, and did so with characteristic flair and efficiency. Adrianne
Mathiowetz shot the jacket photo after much exploration of the MIT campus for
the best site.
Amanda Moon is the book editor that every writer hopes for: attentive and
supportive, enthusiastic about the project, and full of ideas to make it better. Her
assistants, Laird Gallagher and Scott Borchert, the production team, Elizabeth
Gordon and Nina Frieman, and Debra Helfand kept the logistics humming as
smoothly as a clockwork universe. And whoa, what a cover—I have the cover
designer Jennifer Carrow to thank for that. Annie Gottlieb must have some kind
of x-ray vision, to judge from her penetrating copyediting. Brian Gittis has been
great at setting up a book tour, and thanks also to the book designer, Jonathan
Lippincott. I’m also fortunate that the big bang was set up in such a way as to
propel me into my agent Susan Rabiner’s orbit.
Special thanks to Le Petit Parisien and Trend Coffee and Tea House, the two
cafes in Montclair, New Jersey, where I spent many a day metabolizing caffeine
and almond-chocolate croissants into physics.
By being a good sport when I had to stay in and write rather than go rock
climbing or ice-skating, my daughter, Eliana, made the project possible. And
when I was feeling down, she knew exactly what zombie-apocalypse allusion
would restore my confidence. And no one has given me as visceral a feeling of
space and time as my wife, Talia. I feel every mile between us and every

moment apart. Oh, and she’s the world’s greatest human thesaurus. I dedicate
this book to her and Eliana.

Index
The index that appears in the print version of this title does not match the pages
in your e-book. Please use the search function on your e-reading device to search
for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the print index
are listed below.
AdS/CFT duality
Agrippa, Cornelius
Aharonov, Yakir
Albert, David
alchemy
alien abductions
ALPhA
Alpha Centauri
Amis, Martin
amplituhedron
antirealism
Apple
Aquinas, Thomas
Aristotle
Arizona, University of
Arkani-Hamed, Nima
astrology
astronomy; magical antecedents of atomism; ancient Greek; of Newton background radiation
Bacon, Francis
Banks, Tom
Barbour, Julian
barium borate
batteries
Bell, John Stewart; argument for nonlocality of; death of Ben Gurion University

Berg, Moe
Bern, Zvi
big bang
Big Bang Theory, The (television series) Big Dipper
black holes; energy in; entanglements of inside and outside of; gravity of; information paradox of; matter in;
quantum graphity model of; singularity of Bohm, David
Bohr, Niels
boundary of universe; bulk vs.
Bristol, University of
British Columbia, University of Broglie, Louis de
bubbles of nothing
Buffy the Vampire Slayer (movie and television series) Cachazo, Freddy
Cairncross, Frances
Calgary, University of
California, University of; Berkeley; Los Angeles; Santa Barbara California Institute of Technology
(Caltech) Cambridge, University of
Carroll, Sean
Cartesian coordinates
causal dynamical triangulations causality; see also microcausality causal set
Centre for Quantum Technologies chance, laws of
Chew, Geoffrey
Chicago, University of
China, ancient
Christianity
Clarke, Samuel
classical physics; see also Newton, Isaac climate change
Climbing magazine Cloud Atlas (movie) coincidence
Colgate University
Cologne, University of
Columbia University
comprehensibility
Congress, U.S.
Conscious Universe, The (Radin) conspiracy theories
continuum; spacetime
coordinates; Cartesian; GPS; spacetime Copenhagen Interpretation
Copernicus, Nicolaus
correlations
cosmic microwave background radiation cosmology
Cotes, Roger
Cramer, John
dark energy
dark matter
Darwinism
David Copperfield (Dickens) Davy, Humphry
Democritus; atomism of; mechanism of Denali
dense coding
Descartes, René
determinism

Dirac, Paul
disordered locality
Dixon, Lance
Donne, John
Dowker, Fay
D0-branes
dynamical triangulations, causal Earth; curvature of; gravitation on; Moon’s orbit around; time warped by
mass of Economist Einstein, Albert; bubble paradox of; and EPR paper; gravitation theory of; nonlocality as
concern of; relativity theory of, see relativity theory; role in genesis of quantum mechanics of; on spacetime
concept; speed limit principle of, see speed of light, as universal speed limit; wave-particle duality
conceived by Ekert, Artur
electricity; static
electromagnetism; ambiguity of localized measurements of; fields of; gauge invariance in; see also
electricity; magnetism electrons
Elizabeth I, Queen of England Encyclopedia Britannica energy; in black holes; conversion of forms of;
dark; exchanges of; in fields; of light; loops of; of networks; in string theory Enlightenment
entanglement; in black holes; experiments with; field; holistic qualities of; magic of; quantum;
synchronicity of; uncertainty principle and; wormholes and entropy
EPR paper
everything, theories of
extrasensory perception (ESP) Fabric of the Cosmos, The (Greene) Facebook
Faraday, Michael
Fatio de Duillier, Nicolas
Fermilab
Feynman, Richard; on precognitive nature of particles Feynman diagrams
field theory; see also quantum field theory Fine, Arthur
Finkelstein, David
First World War
Fischler, Willy
FLASH (First Laser-Amplified Superluminal Hookup) force fields
Franklin, Benjamin
Frazer, James
free will
F Troop (television series) galaxies
Galileo Galilei
Galvani, Luigi
Galvez, Enrique
Game of Thrones (television series) gauge invariance
general relativity, see relativity theory Geneva, University of
geometry, noncommutative
German Physical Society
German Romanticism
Gibbons, Gary
Giddings, Steve; mountain climbing by; string theory research of Gilbert, William
Gisin, Nicholas

Gittervelt gluons
Gnosticism
Google Earth
“googly” problem
GPS (global positioning system) Gravitation (Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler) graviton
gravity/gravitation; of black holes; Einstein’s theory of; magical antecedents of concept of; in matrix model;
Newton’s theory of; quantum; singularity in Greco-Roman empires
Greek Orthodox Church
Greeks, ancient
Greenblatt, Stephen
Greene, Brian
guiding field
Halvorson, Hans
Hamlet (Shakespeare) harmony; randomness in
Harvard University
Hawking, Stephen; black-hole information paradox discovered by Healey, Richard
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Heisenberg, Werner; uncertainty principle of Heller, Michael
Herbert, Nick
Hermeticism
Hertz, Heinrich
hidden variables
Higgs particles
Hitler, Adolf
Hoarders (television series) Hobbes, Thomas
Hodges, Andrew
holism
holographic principle
horizon problem
Hubble Deep Field
Hubble Space Telescope
Hume, David
Hurricane Katrina
Illinois, University of, at Chicago Imperial College, London
incompleteness
indeterminism
Industrial Revolution
infrared radiation
Institute for Advanced Study
instrumentalism
interference fringes
Interstellar (movie) inverse problem of quantum gravity Islamic world
Ismael, Jenann
James, William
Jarrett, Jon
Judaism, mystical tradition in Kabat, Daniel

Kabbalah
kaleidoscope
Kant, Immanuel
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics Kepler, Johannes
Kiefer, Claus
Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
lattice world
Lehman College
Leibniz, Gottfried; and Newton’s theory of gravity Leiden Observatory
Lennon, John
light; experiments on; particles of (see also photons); rays of; speed of (see also speed of light, as universal
speed limit); wave-particle duality of; waves of local action, principle of
longwave radiation
loops; electromagnetic
Lorentz, Geertruida
Lorentz, Hendrik
Lucretius
Lunteren, Frans van
Mach, Ernst
magic; entanglement and
magnetism; see also electromagnetism Maldacena, Juan
many-worlds interpretation
Markopoulou, Fotini; quantum graphity model of; on wormholes Marolf, Don
Martinec, Emil
Maryland, University of
Mason, Lionel
mass; of black holes
Matrix, The (movie) matrix models; see also S-matrix matter; atoms of; in black holes; continuum of; dark;
in early universe; fields and; in parallel universes; passing through wormholes; primordial grains of; states
of; total amount of, see mass; wave-particle duality of Maudlin, Tim; as philosopher; Zeilinger’s
disagreements with Maxwell, James Clerk
Maxwell’s equations
mechanical philosophy
mechanics; see also quantum mechanics microcausality
microwave background radiation Middle Ages
Milky Way
Misner, Charles
Mission Impossible (television series) Mitchell, Edward Page
monads
Monty Python
Moon
motion; atomist views on; classical laws of; of falling objects (see also gravity/gravitation); faster-than-
light; symmetrical; tectonic motivated reasoning
Nair, Parameswaran
Napoleon, emperor of France

Narayan, Ramesh
National Science Foundation
natural philosophy
Naturphilosophie Nazis
Neoplatonism
neutrinos
Newton, Isaac; alchemy practiced by; Faraday’s challenge to theories of; gravity theory of; laws of motion
of; nonlocality implied by Newton, Ted
New York, City College of
New York University
Nobel Prize
noncommutative geometry
noncommutativity
nothing, bubbles of
numerology
occult quantities
“Oration on the Dignity of Man” (Pico della Mirandola) Ørsted, Hans Christian
out-of-body experiences
Oxford, University of
Painlevé, Paul
paradoxes; of big bang; of black holes; bubble; causal; Zeno’s parallel universes
paranormal phenomena
Parmenides
particle physics; theoretical, see quantum field theory Pauli, Wolfgang
Penrose, Roger
Perimeter Institute
phase transition
philosophy; connection between physics and; mechanical; physics distinguished from; see also specific
philosophies and names of philosophers phlogiston theory
photoelectric effect
photons
photosynthesis
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni pixels
Planck scale
plate tectonics
Plato
Podolsky, Boris
polarization
Polchinski, Joe
polyhedrons
Pontifical Academy of Theology Popescu, Sandu
Popper, Karl
precognition
predestination
Princeton University
Principia (Newton) protons
Pulitzer Prize

quantum field theory
quantum graphity
quantum gravity; loop
quantum mechanics; coin flipping metaphor in; entanglement in, see entanglement; field theory and, see
quantum field theory; founding of; genesis of; Hawking on; interpretations of (see also Copenhagen
Interpretation); matrix models and; ongoing debates over; practical applications of; randomness in; realism
versus; relativity and; spacetime and Quantum Nonlocality and Relativity (Maudlin) quantum particles
quarks
quasars
radiation
Raman Research Institute
randomness; of coin flips; worm holes and realism
reasoning, motivated
reductionism
relativity theory; black holes in; dual nature of light and; gravity in; nonlocality and; quantum field theory
and; speed limit principle in, see speed of light, as universal speed limit; symmetry of; unification of space
and time in Renaissance
Rohrlich, Daniel
Romanticism
Rosen, Nathan
Rozali, Moshe
Rutgers University
Sacks, Oliver
Sagittarius A
Saturn
Schlick, Moritz
scholasticism
Schrödinger, Erwin; infamous cat scenario of Scientific American Scientific Revolution
Second World War
separability
Shakespeare, William
Shenker, Steve
singularity
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory Slaughterhouse Five (Vonnegut) S-matrix
Smolin, Lee
Socrates
Solvay conferences
Sorkin, Rafael
space invader
spacetime; continuum of; emergent; holistic properties of; quantum gravity and structure of; in relativity
theory; in string theory speed of light, as universal speed limit; violations of split-mindedness
SS
Standard Model of particle physics Stanford University
Star Trek (television and movie series) static electricity
string theory; AdS/CFT duality in; notions of spacetime in; quantum gravity in; twistor theory versus; as
unified theory subatomic particles; see also specific types of subatomic particles Sun
Sundrum, Raman

superdeterminism
superposition
superquantum particles
Susskind, Leonard
Swerve (Greenblatt) Swingle, Brian
symmetry; of D0-branes; gauge; of polyhedron; of relativity theory synchronicity
Syracuse University
tectonic plates
telekinesis
teleportation
Tempest, The (Shakespeare) Tevatron accelerator
Thales
theories of everything
’t Hooft, Gerard
time delay
Time’s Arrow (Amis) time travel
triangulations, causal dynamical Trnka, Jaroslav
twistor theory
two-slit experiment
ultralocality
uncertainty principle
universe, boundary of; bulk vs.
Unruh, Bill
Van Baak, David
Van Raamsdonk, Mark
velocity; of light, see speed of light, as universal speed limit Victorian era
Volta, Alessandro
vortex atoms theory
Washington, University of
wavefunctions; collapse of
wave-particle duality
wave radiation
waves; electromagnetic; in fields; light; sound Wheeler, John
Wigner, Eugene
Witten, Edward
Wittgenstein, Ludwig
Wolfram Alpha
wormholes
Yale University
Young, Thomas
Zeilinger, Anton

Zel’dovich, Yakov
Zeno
Zurich, University of

A NOTE ABOUT THE AUTHOR
George Musser is an award-winning journalist, a contributing editor for Scientific American,
and the author of The Complete Idiot’s Guide to String Theory. He is the recipient of a Jonathan
Eberhart Planetary Sciences Journalism Award from the American Astronomical Society and
the 2011 American Institute of Physics Science Communication Award for Science Writing. He
was a Knight Science Journalism fellow at MIT from 2014 to 2015. He has appeared on Today,
CNN, NPR, the BBC, Al Jazeera, and other outlets. He lives in Glen Ridge, New Jersey, with
his wife and daughter. Follow him on Twitter at @gmusser and visit his website at
www.georgemusser.com. Or sign up for email updates here.
    

ALSO BY GEORGE MUSSER
The Complete Idiot’s Guide to String Theory

 
Thank you for buying this
Farrar, Straus and Giroux ebook.
 
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
 
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
 
For email updates on the author, click here.

Contents
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Dedication
Introduction: Einstein’s Castle in the Air
1. The Many Varieties of Nonlocality
2. The Origins of Nonlocality
3. Einstein’s Locality
4. The Great Debate
5. Nonlocality and the Unification of Physics
6. Spacetime Is Doomed
Conclusion: The Amplituhedron
Notes
Bibliography
Acknowledgments
Index
A Note About the Author
Also by George Musser
Copyright

Scientific American / Farrar, Straus and Giroux
18 West 18th Street, New York 10011
Copyright © 2015 by George Musser All rights reserved
First edition, 2015
An excerpt from Spooky Action at a Distance originally appeared, in slightly different form, in Scientific
American.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Musser, George.
    Spooky action at a distance: the phenomenon that reimagines space and time: and what it means for
black holes, the big bang, and theories of everything / George Musser. — First edition.
        pages   cm
    Includes bibliographical references and index.
    ISBN 978-0-374-29851-7 (hardcover) — ISBN 978-0-374-71355-3 (e-book) 1.  Space and time—
Philosophy.   2.  Relativity (Physics)   I.  Title.
QC173.59.S65 M88 2015
530.11—dc23
2015010155
Our e-books may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the
Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by e-mail at
MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
www.fsgbooks.com • books.scientificamerican.com
www.twitter.com/fsgbooks • www.facebook.com/fsgbooks
Scientific American is a registered trademark of Nature America, Inc.

* The video is posted on the book’s website, spookyactionbook.com.

