New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
Do stages belong at the center of developmental
theory? A commentary on Piaget’s stages
Theo L. Dawson-Tunika,, Kurt W. Fischerb, Zachary Steinc
aCognitive Science, Hampshire College, Amherst, MA 01002, USA
bHarvard Graduate School of Education, USA
cDevelopmental Testing Service, USA
Available online 17 January 2005
It is my conviction y that I have drawn a quite clear general skeleton, but one
still full of gaps of such a kind that, in ﬁlling them, one will be lead to differentiate
its connections, in various ways, without at the same time altering the main line of
the system y. My secret ambition is that the hypotheses one could oppose to my
own will ﬁnally be seen not to contradict them but to result from a normal process
of differentiation (Piaget in Bringuier, 1980, p. 144).
Feldman seeks to align his theoretical project with Piaget’s ‘‘secret ambition’’ as
expressed in this quotation. He sensibly suggests that Piaget’s four broad stages of
psychological development should be re-articulated in light of ‘‘our best current
understanding of how cognitive development proceeds from birth through early
adulthood’’ (p. 4). He wants to ensure that these stages remain at the core of the
psychological
analysis
of
development,
seeking
to
amend
Piaget’s
original
formulation by bringing about some needed theoretical repair work. We applaud
Feldman’s efforts to take Piaget’s deep analysis seriously and improve upon it and
note that many other scholars share this broad goal.
We agree that the theoretical issues Feldman highlights are central to an
understanding of cognitive development in general and developmental stages in
particular—including reﬂective abstraction, ﬁgurative and operative knowledge,
taking of consciousness, stage transitions and emergence, structure d’ensemble,
variability, and within-stage sequences. However, we ﬁnd Feldman’s formulation of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
www.elsevier.com/locate/newideapsych
0732-118X/$ - see front matter r 2004 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.newideapsych.2004.11.004
Corresponding authors. Tel.: +1 413 222 0633.
E-mail address: tdawson@hampshire.edu (T.L. Dawson-Tunik).

stages in terms of these issues to be neither coherent nor consistent. We address two
reasons for this conclusion.
First, Feldman places Piaget’s stages ‘‘at the heart’’ of his psychological theory,
ignoring Piaget’s protests to the contrary.
Why does everyone speak of stages? y One tries to construct stages because this
is an indispensable instrument for the analysis of formative processes. Genetic
psychology attempts to envisage the construction of mental functions, and stages
are a necessary instrument for the analysis of these formative processes. But I
must vigorously insist on the fact that stages do not constitute an aim in their own
right. I would compare them to zoological or botanical classiﬁcation in biology,
which is an instrument that must precede analysis (Piaget, 1977, p. 817).
We argue that placing stages at the center of Piaget’s developmental theory
undermines its coherence by displacing the central theoretical constructs that give
rise to a concept of stages. Stages should be a vehicle for analysis, not a core process
at the heart of the theory of development.
Second, Feldman constructs a theory of stages that has virtually no empirical basis
and ignores a vast body of neo-Piagetian research on stages and stage-like
development. By overlooking the large body of neo- and post-Piagetian research
that has accumulated during the last 50 years, Feldman provides an account that is
inconsistent with current knowledge.
Obviously, improving upon Piagetian stage theory is an ambitious undertaking,
one that has occupied the careers of numerous scholars. We argue that the large
bodies of research produced by these scholars are part of the ‘‘normal process of
differentiation’’ that Piaget hoped would generate competing hypotheses to
ultimately provide support for his general framework, including reﬁnement of his
analysis of stages. Oddly, Feldman essentially ignores this work despite its
fundamental relation to Piaget’s secret desire. Instead of building on the
contributions of these many scholars, including Piaget himself in his later years,
Feldman disregards them and distances himself from research and data. In this way,
he loses the methodological and empirical grounding that Piaget saw as essential to
his theory and that make Piaget’s theoretical work so compelling and valuable.
Feldman thus loses the nuanced relation between theoretical breadth and empirical
rigor that lay at the core of Piaget’s efforts in both psychology and epistemology.
We need to ask whether great innovators have not been great precisely because
they have based themselves on results y and not only on ideas, however,
necessary the latter may be (Piaget, 1971a, p. 46)
1. The central constructs of piagetian theory: equilibration, reﬂective abstraction,
ﬁgurative and operative knowledge
Feldman ﬁrmly places Piaget’s four-stage model of cognitive development at the
center
of
the
theory.
As
investigators
of
stage-like
processes
in cognitive
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
256

development, we certainly value Piaget’s stage theory. However, we strongly
question whether his stages can justiﬁably be placed at the center of his theory. In
fact, Feldman himself brieﬂy acknowledges that some Piagetian scholars consider
stages of cognitive development to be ancillary to Piaget’s central theoretical claims.
However, he fails to adequately consider their justiﬁcations for taking this position,
neglecting even Piaget’s own claim that his stages were a heuristic device rather than
a central component of his theory. At the center of his theory Piaget clearly placed
the process of equilibration, which he saw as the ‘‘central problem of intellectual
development’’ (Piaget, 1985), and at the center of his theoretical model he placed
reﬂective abstraction,1 a component of equilibration in which a person reﬂects and
builds on earlier structures to create new, qualitatively distinct, structures (Piaget,
1970a, 2000) at the center of his theoretical model. The concept of stage emerges
from these deeper generative theoretical principles, which supply the basis for
Piaget’s several different articulations of the stage model for different purposes
(Piaget, 1971b; Piaget, 1977; Piaget & Garcia, 1989).
Reﬂective abstraction is the process by which a person reprocesses the knowledge
produced through the coordinations in an existing (or less complex) structure by
using it within the coordinations of a new (or more complex) structure (Piaget,
1970b). The output of one structure becomes the input for the subsequent structure,
‘‘reﬂecting’’ upon the former. This deceptively simple idea not only conceptualizes
the relations between structures in a nested hierarchy of increasingly powerful
intellectual capabilities,
but also reveals the generative process behind the
construction of unprecedented structures (i.e., emergence). Piaget held that the
development of knowledge takes the ‘‘form of an uninterrupted sequence of reﬂective
abstractions’’ and thus a developmental sequence (Piaget, 1972). He understood
reﬂective abstraction as central in the cognitive process that generates the structures
of intelligence (Campbell, 2001).
The concepts that Feldman emphasizes of taking of consciousness and ﬁgurative
and operative knowing are central to Piaget’s description of the process of reﬂective
abstraction. Taking of consciousness is part of reﬂected abstraction—that moment in
the process of reﬂective abstraction when the knower becomes conscious2 of or sees
the necessity of newly formed structures (Piaget, 2000). We are unclear why Feldman
chooses to divorce the taking of consciousness from the process of reﬂective
abstraction and to deﬁne the latter as the midpoint of each developmental stage.
There are two problems that arise from this separation and deﬁnition. The ﬁrst is the
assumption that all acts of reﬂected abstraction occur during a period when the
structures of a stage are being consolidated. Piaget speciﬁed that these acts occur at a
number of levels (Piaget, 1985), and he reported many relevant observations
supporting this claim (Piaget, 1976). Studies of microdevelopmental processes,
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1We employ this term to indicate the process of abstraction Piaget refers to as ‘‘an uninterrupted
alternation of projections-reﬂections-projections, and or contents-forms-re-elaborated contents-
new forms, and so forth, in ever-broadening domains, without end’’ (Piaget, 2000, pp. 305–306).
2This consciousness can take many forms. At the sensorimotor level it may manifest simply as evidence
of recognition or anticipation (Piaget, 2000).
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
257

particularly their fractal properties, also support it (Fischer & Granott, 1995;
Granott & Parziale, 2002).The second problem is especially mysterious: Feldman
employs the concept of taking of consciousness to support sweeping generalizations
about children’s social behavior that appear unconnected to Piaget’s original
meaning for the term. For example, claims connecting taking of consciousness with
moral attitude (p. 43) require justiﬁcation, including empirical support. How exactly
does an attitude of moral superiority connect with reﬂected abstraction?
Feldman describes ﬁgurative and operative knowing as ‘‘two basic forms of
motivation [which] arise from two equally powerful desires to know; one which is
driven primarily by the desire to know the world exactly as it is (ﬁgurative
knowledge); the other to make sense of, to interpret the world using existing mental-
structures of analysis (operative knowledge).’’ He goes on to explain that neither of
these two forms function independently and that they interact constantly, although
one may be more important in a given situation. He cites mediation and action as
examples of ﬁgurative knowledge, and pure mathematics and logic as examples of
operative understanding.
In contrast, Piaget explicated the ﬁgurative and operative functions less in terms of
domains and more in terms of process: Figurative aspects involve unreﬂective states
of knowing that are simply taken to be real, as in perceiving, mental imaging, and
imitating. Operative aspects involve the dynamic transformation of what is given and
the construction and coordination of knowledge, as in actions and the internalized
coordination of actions. For example, in mathematics—which Feldman identiﬁes as
an example of purely operative knowing—numbers would be given as ﬁgurative to
the pre-operational child, while arithmetic operations such as adding, subtracting,
and multiplying would be operative. Figurative aspects of cognition focus on a given
set of entities apprehended in the world, while operative aspects apprehend the world
by coordinating these entities (which often results in the disclosing of new entities).
The dialectic between the ﬁgurative and operative knowledge is described in
Piaget’s (2000) explication of reﬂective abstraction, a process that derives knowledge
not from entities, but from the coordination of entities. The construction of more
encompassing and powerful cognitive abilities requires the interplay of ﬁgurative and
operative engagements with the world, resulting in the hierarchical emergence of new
knowledge via reﬂective abstraction.
Figurative and operative also contrast content and form, a distinction Piaget
maintained in his descriptions of the stages, which are deﬁned primarily in terms of
actions or operations (as logical structures). Feldman’s stage deﬁnitions blur this
distinction, while other current theories of cognitive development pursue an ever clearer
distinction between content and form (Case, 1991; Commons, Trudeau, Stein, Richards,
& Krause, 1998; Dawson, Xie, & Wilson, 2003; Fischer, 1980; Fischer & Bidell, 1998).
2. Transitions/emergence
Feldman seeks to preserve Piaget’s major tenet of equilibration by making it
responsible for the emergence of the qualitatively distinct stages of cognitive
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
258

development. He aims to silence critics of Piaget who claim that his ideas of emergence
posit some ‘‘miraculous’’ creativity as responsible for the genesis of new structures.
The ideas Feldman brings to the table in order to deal with the concept of emergence
are promising—notions from the sciences of complexity, artiﬁcial intelligence, artiﬁcial
life, evolutionary robotics, and philosophy. The exposition of these concepts, however,
is fundamentally confused—a verbal ﬂourish of complex jargon that is supposed to de-
mystify emergence but that actually mystiﬁed us despite our sympathy with the
concepts. Make no mistake: There are valuable insights that can be gleaned from these
ﬁelds and applied to the study of cognitive development (Fischer & Bidell, 1998;
Schultz, 2003; van der Maas & Molenaar, 1992; van Geert, 1998), but the analysis
presented here makes no progress in this direction.
For example, Feldman explicates two different kinds of emergent phenomena as
vaguely metaphorical explanations without clarifying the important differences
between them or the connection with cognitive development. Without such
explication, we can conclude only that both kinds of emergence are different from
the kind in cognitive development. How is it helpful to compare cognitive emergence
with wetness as an emergent property of H2O? The analogy with an emerging stage is
at best obscure. The second metaphor is with the emergent properties of a whirlpool
in comparison to the properties of the water molecules that give rise to it under
certain complex conditions. This metaphor seems more promising, but still we ﬁnd it
too distant from biological adaptation and therefore unconvincing. The two
metaphors exemplify two meanings that can justiﬁably be given to the word
emergence: The ﬁrst speciﬁes emergence as involving a kind of paralleling, irreducible
property that accompanies certain material states. The second deﬁnes it as qualitative
restructuring that takes place when certain material systems reach critical degrees of
complexity under certain kinds of conditions. However, neither of these deﬁnitions
can be simply transferred to explain cognitive developmental stage transitions.
Stage transitions in cognitive development are more comparable to the type of
qualitative emergence seen in biological evolution, in which activity leads to a new
relatively stable state. In this kind of emergence—which Piaget invoked—the agency of
an organism, coupled with the contingencies of the environment, pushes the biological
system toward transcending one self-state to create a new state with new adaptive
capacities (often more complex). According to Piaget (2000), cognitive novelties arise in
this way out of ‘‘the necessity of an equilibration between assimilation [existing internal
structures] and accommodation [restructuring in response to input].’’
Piaget himself explicitly stated the general mechanism of emergence, but Feldman
does not clarify or elaborate that position. His attempt to enlist the help of diverse
perspectives involving complexity and computers to de-mystify stage transitions ends
up as a vague reference rather than a grounded explanation.
3. Structure d’ensemble and variability
Feldman considers that a stage is ‘‘an overall general operating system functioning
at a deep level’’ (p. 5). This deﬁnition does capture one aspect of Piaget’s conception
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
259

of structure d’ensemble. Each of Piaget’s (1971b) major stages is deﬁned by a set of
formal properties that constitute a structure d’ensemble, deﬁned in terms of speciﬁc
mathematically deﬁned groups or groupings. However, as a scientist grounded in
observations, Piaget recognized that these structures do not manifest homogeneously
in a psychological subject (a person). ‘‘I have nowhere seen structural unity, at any
stage of development of the child’’ (Piaget, 1977). Indeed, Piaget (1985) hypothesized
that the de´ calage caused by different development in cognitive subsystems is
precisely what makes equilibration necessary.
Considerable research has been done on this question, ﬁnding repeatedly that in
different domains the logical structures of a given stage typically do not develop in
close parallel and sometimes differ widely (Biggs & Collis, 1982; Case, 1985;
Demetriou & Efklides, 1994; Fischer, 1980; Fischer & Bidell, 1998; Flavell, 1982;
Keil, 1981). For example, Feldman references accounts of four- to six-year-olds’
adherence to illogical explanations rather than the large body of research showing
that four-year-olds can respond logically in many situations—such as coordinating
perspectives to evidence a theory of mind (Bartsch & Wellman, 1995; Bretherton &
Beeghly, 1982; Lewis, 1994; Watson & Fischer, 1980) or to tell a coherent story
about social roles in human interactions (Fischer, Hand, Watson, van Parys, &
Tucker, 1984). In light of these ﬁndings, it is unclear why Feldman would posit a
global structure d’ensemble to emphasize consistency in stage of behavior, whether
referring to the beginning or end of a stage.
4. Within-stage sequences
Feldman divides each of his stages into two phases—ﬁrst the acquisition of new
structures and second the taking of consciousness and consolidation of those
structures. While there are probably developmental changes that can justiﬁably be
divided in this coarse way, the proposed division ignores the extensive research that
demarcates detailed orderings of developing activities in diverse domains, with
rigorous methods and careful scaling. Once again, the concepts proposed in
Feldman’s model of developmental stages are not grounded in the research ﬁndings
of developmental science.
The study of cognitive development is better served by methods and concepts that
make it possible to observe developmental events at a ﬁne grain. Research employing
diverse methods for assessing such sequences (of which Feldman seems unaware)
suggests that a consensus may be emerging regarding the developmental levels of
childhood, adolescence, and adulthood, of which Feldman seems unaware. Although
he brieﬂy mentions the work of Case, Commons, Fischer, and their colleagues, he
dismisses their models, treating the recursively deﬁned levels of these theorists as
though they have emerged from a process of armchair theorizing. In fact, they have
been developed and reﬁned though years of careful empirical research and have
provided the basis for developmental assessment systems that make it possible
accurately and reliably to order behaviors by developmental level (Case, 1985;
Commons et al., 1998; Dawson, 2004b; Fischer, 1980; Fischer & Bidell, 1998),
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
260

opening many new avenues of research. In dismissing these theorists, he also
fails to acknowledge empirically veriﬁed correspondences between their deve-
lopmental sequences and those of other developmental researchers (Dawson,
2002, 2004a; Dawson & Gabrielian, 2003; Fischer & Bidell, 1998; Kitchener &
Fischer, 1990).
5. An alternative view of stages
If equilibration and reﬂective abstraction are the central constructs of Piagetian
theory, what of the stages? We agree with Piaget—that stages are an excellent
heuristic or tool for the study of cognitive developmental processes. Along with
several other neo- and post-Piagetian scholars, we have operationalized stages as a
series of hierarchical integrations (Armon, 1984; Case, 1985; Commons et al., 1998;
Cook-Greuter, 1990; Dawson, in press; Demetriou & Efklides, 1994; Fischer, 1980;
Kitchener & King, 1990; Kohlberg, 1994). Hierarchical integration, which results
from the process of reﬂective abstraction, refers to the integration of previously
existing intellectual activities into new forms (Piaget, 1985). Whereas reﬂective
abstraction is a hypothesized psychological process posited to be responsible for the
development of knowledge, hierarchical integration is a construct used to aid in the
description and understanding of behavior. Because at least some of the products of
hierarchical integration are observable in behavior, this concept has become central
to much neo- and post-Piagetian research on cognitive development. The concept of
hierarchical integration has permitted researchers to operationalize one of Piaget’s
most fundamental theoretical constructs, making it possible to explore a wide variety
of developmental questions, including those taken on by Feldman in his attempt to
resurrect Piagetian stages.
We do not think that developmental stages should be the centerpiece of a
developmental theory. At the center of such a theory, we seek fundamental principles
that can explain and predict developmental phenomena, not simply describe them.
Stages are descriptions of phenomena. Even when stage deﬁnitions are highly
abstract, they must point to observables. That is their value. They allow researchers
to make structured observations of behavior, and in doing so, provide the possibility
of deeper insights into the functioning of the mind. Feldman’s loosely structured and
un-operationalized account of stages is not a step forward for Piagetian theory. In
fact, it is distinctly un-Piagetian.
References
Armon, C. (1984). Ideals of the good life: a longitudinal/cross-sectional study of evaluative reasoning in
children and adults. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard Graduate School of Education,
Cambridge, MA.
Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1995). Children talk about the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Biggs, J., & Collis, K. (1982). Evaluating the quality of learning: the SOLO taxonomy (structure of the
observed learning outcome). New York: Academic Press.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
261

Bretherton, I., & Beeghly, M. (1982). Talking about internal states: the acquisition of an explicit theory of
mind. Developmental Psychology, 18(6), 906–921.
Bringuier, J. C. (1980). Conversations with Jean Piaget. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, R. L. (2001). Introduction: reﬂecting abstraction in context. In J. Piaget (Ed.), Studies in
reﬂecting abstraction (R.L.Campbell, Trans., pp. 1–27). Philadelphia, PA.
Case, R. (1985). Intellectual development: birth to adulthood. New York: Academic Press.
Case, R. (1991). The mind’s staircase: exploring the conceptual underpinnings of children’s thought and
knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Commons, M. L., Trudeau, E. J., Stein, S. A., Richards, S. A., & Krause, S. R. (1998). Hierarchical
complexity of tasks shows the existence of developmental stages. Developmental Review, 18,
237–278.
Cook-Greuter, S. R. (1990). Maps for living: ego-development stages from symbiosis to concious universal
embeddedness. In M. L. Commons, C. Armon, L. Kohlberg, F. A. Richards, T. A. Grotzer, & J. D.
Sinnott (Eds.), Adult development, Vol. 2 (pp. 77–104). New York: Praeger.
Dawson, T. L. (2002). A comparison of three developmental stage scoring systems. Journal of Applied
Measurement, 3, 146–189.
Dawson, T. L. (2004a). Assessing intellectual development: three approaches, one sequence. Journal of
Adult Development, 11, 71–85.
Dawson, T. L. (2004b, 7/1/04). The LecticalTM Assessment Manual. Retrieved July, 2004, from http://
gseacademic.harvard.edu/hcs/.
Dawson-Tunik, T. L. (in press). ‘‘A good education is y’’ The development of evaluative thought across
the life-span. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 130, 4–112.
Dawson, T. L., & Gabrielian, S. (2003). Developing conceptions of authority and contract across the life-
span: two perspectives. Developmental Review, 23, 162–218.
Dawson, T. L., Xie, Y., & Wilson, M. (2003). Domain-general and domain-speciﬁc developmental
assessments: do they measure the same thing? Cognitive Development, 18, 61–78.
Demetriou, A., & Efklides, A. (1994). Structure, development, and dynamics of mind: a meta-Piagetian
theory. In A. Demetriou, & A. Efklides (Eds.), Intelligence, mind, and reasoning: structure and
development. Advances in psychology (pp. 75–109). Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland/Elsevier
Science.
Fischer, K. W. (1980). A theory of cognitive development: the control and construction of hierarchies of
skills. Psychological Review, 87, 477–531.
Fischer, K. W., & Bidell, T. R. (1998). Dynamic development of psychological structures in action and
thought. In W. Damon, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: theoretical models of
human development, (5th ed.) (pp. 467–561). New York: Wiley.
Fischer, K. W., & Granott, N. (1995). Beyond one-dimensional change: parallel, concurrent, socially
distributed processes in learning and development. Human Development, 38, 302–314.
Fischer, K. W., Hand, H. H., Watson, M. W., van Parys, M., & Tucker, J. (1984). Putting the child into
socialization: the development of social categories in preschool children. In L. Katz (Ed.), Current
topics in early childhood education, Vol. 5 (pp. 27–72). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Flavell, J. H. (1982). On cognitive development. Child Development, 53(1), 1–10.
Granott, N., & Parziale, J. (Eds.). (2002). Microdevelopment: transition processes in development and
learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1981). Constraints on knowledge and cognitive development. Psychological Review, 21,
197–227.
Kitchener, K. S., & Fischer, K. W. (1990). A skill approach to the development of reﬂective thinking.
Contributions to Human Development, 21, 48–62.
Kitchener, K. S., & King, P. M. (1990). The reﬂective judgment model: ten years of research. In M. L.
Commons, C. Armon, L. Kohlberg, F. A. Richards, T. A. Grotzer, & J. D. Sinnott (Eds.), Adult
development, Vol. 2 (pp. 62–78). New York: Praeger.
Kohlberg, L. (1994). Stage and sequence: the cognitive-developmental approach to socialization. In Puka.
Bill (Ed.), Deﬁning perspectives in moral development, Vol. 1 (pp. 1–134). New York: Garland
Publishing.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
262

Lewis, C. (1994). Episodes, events, and narratives in the child’s understanding of mind. In C. Lewis, & P.
Mitchell (Eds.), Children’s early understanding of mind: origins and development (pp. 457–480). Hove,
UK: Erlbaum.
Piaget, J. (1970a). Genetic epistemology (E. Duckworth, Trans). New York, NY: Columbia University
Press.
Piaget, J. (1970b). Structuralism (C. Maschler, Trans). New York: Harper & Row.
Piaget, J. (1971a). The insights and illusions of philosophy. New York: The World Publishing Company.
Piaget, J. (1971b). The theory of stages in cognitive development. In D. R. Green (Ed.), Measurement and
Piaget (pp. 1–11). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Piaget, J. (1972). The principles of genetic epistemology (W. Mays Trans). London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Piaget, J. (1976). The grasp of consciousness: action and concept in the young child (S. Wedgwood, Trans).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard U Press.
Piaget, J. (1977). The stages of intellectual development in childhood and adolescence. In H. E. Gruber, &
J. J. Vone´ che (Eds.), The essential Piaget (pp. 814–819). New York: Basic Books.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibration of cognitive structures: the central problem of intellectual development (T.
Brown & K. J. Thampy, Trans). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Piaget, J. (2000). Studies in reﬂecting abstraction (R. L. Campbell, Trans). Hove: Psychology Press.
Piaget, J., & Garcia, R. (1989). Psychogenesis and the history of science (H. Feider, Trans). New York:
Columbia University Press.
Schultz, T. R. (2003). Computational developmental psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
van der Maas, H., & Molenaar, P. (1992). A catastrophe theoretical approach to cognitive development.
Psychological Review, 99, 395–417.
van Geert, P. (1998). A dynamic systems model of basic developmental mechanisms: Piaget, Vygotsky,
and beyond. Psychological Review, 105, 634–677.
Watson, M. W., & Fischer, K. W. (1980). Development of social roles in elicited and spontaneous
behavior during the preschool years. Developmental Psychology, 16, 483–494.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
T.L. Dawson-Tunik et al. / New Ideas in Psychology 22 (2004) 255–263
263

