
i
Starting Electronics

This page intentionally left blank 

iii
Starting  
Electronics
Keith Brindley

Preface
iv
Newnes
An imprint of Elsevier
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP
200 Wheeler Road, Burlington, MA 01803
 
First published 1994
Second edition 1999
Third edition 2005
Copyright © Keith Brindley 1994, 1999, 2005. All rights reserved.
The right of Keith Brindley to be identified as the author of this work  
has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and  
Patents Act 1988. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any material form 
(including photocopying or storing in any medium by electronic means 
and whether or not transiently or incidentally to some other use of this 
publication) without the written permission of the copyright holders 
except in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Design and 
Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright 
Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London, England W1P 
4LP. Applications for the copyright holders’ written permission to  
reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed to the 
publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British 
Library
ISBN 07506 63863
 Typeset and produced by Co-publications, Loughborough

v
Contents
Preface 
vi
1. 
The very first steps 
1
2. 
On the boards 
23
3. 
Measuring current and voltage 
51
4. 
Capacitors 
77
5. 
ICs oscillators and filters 
99
6. 
Diodes I 
123
7. 
Diodes II 
145
8. 
Transistors 
167
9. 
Analogue integrated circuits 
185
10. 
Digital integrated circuits I 
207
11. 
Digital integrated circuits II 
241
Glossary 
267
Quiz answers 
280
Index  
281
Contents

Preface
vi
This book originated as a collection of feature articles, 
previously published as magazine articles. They were 
chosen for publication in book form not only because they 
were so popular with readers in their original magazine 
appearances but also because they are so relevant in the 
field of introductory electronics — a subject area in which 
it is evermore difficult to find information of a technical, 
knowledgeable, yet understandable nature. This book is 
exactly that. Since its original publication, I have added 
significant new material to make sure it is all still highly 
relevant and up-to-date.
I hope you will agree that the practical nature of the book lends 
itself to a self-learning experience that readers can follow in 
a logical, and easily manageable manner.

The very first steps
1
1 The very first steps
Most people look at an electronic circuit diagram, or a printed 
circuit board, and have no idea what they are. One component 
on the board, and one little squiggle on the diagram, looks 
much as another. For them, electronics is a black art, prac-
tised by weird techies, spouting untranslatable jargon and 
abbreviations which make absolutely no sense whatsoever 
to the rest of us in the real world.
But this needn’t be! Electronics is not a black art — it’s just a 
science. And like any other science — chemistry, physics or 
whatever — you only need to know the rules to know what’s 
happening. What’s more, if you know the rules you’re set to 
gain an awful lot of enjoyment from it because, unlike many 

Starting electronics
2
sciences, electronics is a practical one; more so than just 
about any other science. The scientific rules which electronics 
is built on are few and far between, and many of them don’t 
even have to be considered when we deal in components 
and circuits. Most of the things you need to know about com-
ponents and the ways they can be connected together are 
simply mechanical and don’t involve complicated formulae 
or theories at all.
That’s why electronics is a hobby which can be immensely 
rewarding. Knowing just a few things, you can set about 
building your own circuits. You can understand how many 
modern electronic appliances work, and you can even design 
you own. I’m not saying you’ll be an electronics whizz-kid, 
of course — it really does take a lot of studying, probably a 
university degree, and at least several years’ experience, to 
be that — but what I am saying is that there’s lots you can do 
with just a little practical knowledge. That’s what this book is 
all about — starting electronics. The rest is up to you.
What you need
Obviously, you’ll need some basic tools and equipment. Just 
exactly what these are and how much they cost depends 
primarily on quality. But some of these tools, as you’ll see 
in the next few pages, are pretty reasonably priced, and well 
worth having. Other expensive tools and equipment which 
the professionals often have can usually be substituted with 
tools or equipment costing only a fraction of the price. So, as 
you’ll see, electronics is not an expensive hobby. Indeed, its 

The very first steps
3
potential reward in terms of enjoyment and satisfaction can 
often be significantly greater than its cost.
In this first chapter I’ll give you a rundown of all the important 
tools and equipment: the ones you really do need. There’s also 
some rough guidelines to their cost, so you’ll know what you’ll 
have to pay. Tools and equipment we describe here, however, 
are the most useful ones you’ll ever need and chances are 
you’ll be using them as long as you’re interested in electronics. 
For example, I’m still using the side-cutters I got over twenty 
years ago. That’s got to be good value for money.
Tools of the trade
Talking of cutters, that’s the first tool you need. There are 
many types of cutters but the most useful sorts are side-
cutters. Generally speaking, buy a small pair — the larger 
Photo 1.1 
Side-cutters like these are essential tools — buy the best you can 
afford

Starting electronics
4
ones are OK for cutting thick wires but not for much else. In 
electronics most wires you want to cut are thin so, for most 
things, the smaller the cutters the better.
You can expect to pay from £4 up to about £50 or so for a 
good quality pair, so look around and decide how much you 
want to spend. 
Hint:
If you buy a small pair of side-cutters (as recommended) don’t use 
them for cutting thick wires, or you’ll find they won’t last very long, 
and you’ll have wasted your money.
You can use side-cutters for stripping insulation from wires, 
too, if you’re careful. But a proper wire stripping tool makes 
the job much easier, and you won’t cut through the wires 
underneath the insulation (which side-cutters are prone to 
do) either. There are many different types of wire strippers 
ranging in price from around £3 to (wait for it!) over £100. Of 
course, if you don’t mind paying large dentist’s bills you can 
always use your teeth — but certainly don’t say I said so. You 
didn’t hear that from me, did you?
A small pair of pliers is useful for lightly gripping components 
and the like. Flat-nosed or, better still, snipe-nosed varieties 
are preferable, costing between about £4 to £50 or so. Like 

The very first steps
5
side-cutters, however, these are not meant for heavy-duty en-
gineering work. Look after them and they’ll look after you.
The last essential tool we’re going to look at now is a solder-
ing iron. Soldering is the process used to connect electronic 
Photo 1.2 
Snipe-nosed pliers — ideal for electronics work and another essential 
tool
Photo 1.3 
Low wattage soldering iron intended for electronics

Starting electronics
6
components together, in a good permanent joint. Although 
we don’t actually look at soldering at all here, a good solder-
ing iron is still a useful tool to have. Soldering irons range in 
price from about £4 to (gulp!) about £150, but — fortunately 
— the price doesn’t necessarily reflect how useful they are in 
electronics. This is because irons used in electronics gener-
ally should be of pretty low power rating, because too much 
heat doesn’t make any better a joint where tiny electronic 
components are concerned, and you run the risk of damaging 
the components, too. Power rating will usually be specified 
on the iron or its packing and a useful iron will be around 15 
watts (which may be marked 15 W).
It’s possible to get soldering irons rated up to and over 100 
watts, but these are of no use to you — stick with an iron with 
a power rating of no more than 25 watts. Because of this low 
power need, you should be able to pick up a good iron for 
around a tenner.
These are all the tools we are going to look at in this chapter 
(I’ve already spent lots of your money — you’Il need a breather 
to recover), but later on I’Il be giving details of other tools 
and equipment which will be extremely useful to you.
Ideas about electricity
Electricity is a funny thing. Even though we know how to 
use it, how to make it do work for us, to amplify, to switch, 
to control, to create light or heat (you’ll find out about all of 
these aspects of electricity over the coming chapters) we can 
still only guess at what it is. It’s actually impossible to see 
electricity: we only see what it does! Sure, everyone knows 

The very first steps
7
that electricity is a flow of electrons, but what are electrons? 
Have you ever seen one? Do you know what they look like?
The truth of the matter is that we can only hypothesise about 
electricity. Fortunately, the hypothesis can be seen to stand 
in all of the aspects of electricity and electronics we are likely 
to look at, so to all intents and purposes the hypothesis we 
have is absolute. This means we can build up ideas about 
electricity and be fairly sure they are correct.
Right then, let’s move on to the first idea: that electricity is a 
flow of electrons. To put it another way, any flow of electrons 
is electricity. If we can measure the electricity, we must there-
fore be able to say how many electrons were in the flow. Think 
of an analogy, say, the flow of water through a pipe (Figure 
1.1). The water has an evenly distributed number of foreign 
bodies in it. Let’s say there are ten foreign bodies (all right 
then, ten specks of dust) in every cm3 of water.
Figure 1.1 
Water flowing in a pipe is like electricity in a wire

Starting electronics
8
Now, if 1 litre of water pours out of the end of the pipe into the 
bucket shown in Figure 1.1, we can calculate the number of 
specks of dust which have flowed through the pipe. There’s, 
as near as dammit, 1000 cm3 of water in a litre, so:
 
water-borne specks of dust must have flowed through the 
pipe.
Alternatively, by knowing the number of specks of dust which 
have flowed through the pipe, we can calculate the volume 
of water. If, for example, 25,000 specks of dust have flowed, 
then 2.5 litres of water will be in the bucket.
Charge
It’s the same with electricity, except that we measure an 
amount of electricity not as a volume in litres, but as a charge 
in coulombs (pronounced koo-looms). The foreign bodies 
which make up the charge are, of course, electrons.
There’s a definite relationship between electrons and charge: 
in fact, there are about 6,250,000,000,000,000,000 electrons in 
one coulomb. But don’t worry, it’s not a number you have to 
remember — you don’t even have to think about electrons 
and coulombs because the concept of electricity, as far as 
we’re concerned, is not about electron flow, or volumes of 
electrons, but about flow rate and flow pressure. And as 
you’ll now see, electricity flow rate and pressure are given 
their own names which — thankfully — don’t even refer to 
electrons or coulombs.

The very first steps
9
Going back to the water and pipe analogy, flow rate would be 
measured as a volume of water which flowed through the pipe 
during a defined period of time, say 10 litres in one minute, 
1,000 litres in one hour or one litre in one second.
With electricity, flow rate is measured in a similar way, as a 
volume which flows past a point, during a defined period of 
time, except that volume is, of course, in coulombs. So, we 
could say that a flow rate of electricity is 10 coulombs in one 
minute, 1,000 coulombs in one hour or one coulomb in one 
second.
We could say that, but we don’t! Instead, in electricity, flow 
rate is called current (and given the symbol I, when drawn 
in a diagram). 
Electric current is measured in amperes (shortened to amps, 
or even further shortened to the unit: A), where one amp is 
defined as a quantity of one coulomb passing a point in one 
second. 
Instead of saying 10 coulombs in one minute we would there-
fore say:
 
Similarly, instead of a flow rate of 1,000 coulombs in one 
hour, we say:
 

Starting electronics
10
Figure 1.2 
A header tank’s potential energy forces the water with a higher 
pressure
The other important thing we need to know about electricity is 
flow pressure. Back to our analogy with water and pipe, Figure 
1.2 shows a header tank of water at a height, h, above the pipe. 
Water pressure is often classed as a head of water, where the 
height, h, in metres, is the head. The effect of gravity pushes 
down the water in the header tank, forming a flow pressure, 
forcing the water out of the pipe. It’s the energy contained in 
the water in the header tank due to its higher position — its 
potential energy — which defines the water pressure.
With electricity the flow pressure is defined by the difference 
in numbers of electrons between two points. We say that this is 
a potential difference, partly because the difference depends 
on the positions of the points and how many electrons poten-

The very first steps
11
tially exist. Another reason for the name potential difference 
comes from the early days in the pioneering of electricity, 
when the scientists of the day were making the first batteries. 
Figure 1.3 shows the basic operating principle of a battery, 
which simply generates electrons at one terminal and takes 
in electrons at the other terminal. Figure 1.3 also shows how 
the electrons from the battery flow around the circuit, light-
ing the bulb on their way round.
Under the conditions of Figure 1.4 (over), on the other hand, 
nothing actually happens. This is because the two terminals 
aren’t joined and so electrons can’t flow. (If you think about 
it, they are joined by air, but air is an example of a material 
which doesn’t allow electrons to flow through it under normal 
conditions. Air is an insulator or a non-conductor.) Never-
theless the battery has the potential to light the bulb and so 
Figure 1.3 
A battery forces electrons around a circuit, only when the circuit is 
complete. If it’s not connected (see Figure 1.4 over), no electrons flow — but it still 
has the potential to make them flow

Starting electronics
12
the difference in numbers of electrons between two points 
(terminals in the case of a battery) is known as the poten-
tial difference. A more usual name for potential difference, 
though, is voltage, shortened to volts, or even the symbol V. 
Individual cells are rated in volts and so a cell having a volt-
age of 3 V has a greater potential difference than a cell having 
a voltage of 2 V. The higher the voltage, the harder a cell can 
force electrons around a circuit. Voltage is simply a way of 
expressing electrical pushing power.
Relationships
You’d be right in thinking that there must be some form of 
relationship between this pushing power in volts and the rate 
of electron flow in amps. After all, the higher the voltage, the 
more pushing power the electrons have behind them so the 
faster they should flow. The relationship was first discovered 
Figure 1.4 
Even when the battery is disconnected and electrons do not flow, the 
battery still has a potential difference

The very first steps
13
by a scientist called Ohm, and so is commonly known as Ohm’s 
law. It may be summarised by the expression:
 
where the constant depends on the substance through which 
the current flows and the voltage is applied across. Figure 1.5 
gives an example of a substance which is connected to a cell. 
The cell has a voltage of 2 V, so the voltage applied across 
the substance is also 2 V. The current through the substance 
is, in this case, 0.4 A. This means, from Ohm’s law, that the 
constant for the substance is: 
 
The constant is commonly called the substance’s resistance 
(because it is, in fact a measure of the amount the substance 
resists the flow of current through it) and is given the unit: 
Ω (pronounced ohm — not omega — after the scientist, not 
the Greek letter its symbol is borrowed from). So, in our 
example of Figure 1.5, the resistance of the substance is 5 Ω. 
In some literature the letter R is used instead of Ω. Different 
substances may have different resistances and may therefore 
change the current flowing.
Figure 1.5 
Cell’s voltage is 2 V, and a current of 0.4 A flows

Starting electronics
14
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
This is a vitally important concept — probably the 
most important one in the whole world of electronics 
— and yet it is often misunderstood. Even if it is not 
misunderstood, it is often misinterpreted. 
Indeed, this is so important, let’s recap it and see what it all 
means:
If a voltage (V — measured in volts) is applied across a re-
sistance (R — measured in ohms), a current (I — measured 
in amps) will flow. The voltage, current and resistance are 
related by the expression (1):
 
 
(1)
The importance of this is that the current which flows depends 
entirely on the values of the resistance and the voltage. The 
value of the current may be determined simply by rearranging 
expression 1, so that it gives (2):
 
 
(2)
So, a voltage of say 10 V, applied across a resistance of 20 Ω, 
produces a current of:
 
Similarly, if we have a resistance, and a current is made to 

The very first steps
15
Hint:
Ohm’s  law 
 
 
A simple method to help you remember Ohm’s law: remember a trian-
gle, divided into three parts. Voltage (V) is at the top. Current (I) and 
resistance (R) are at the bottom: it doesn’t matter which way round 
I and R are – the important thing to remember is V at the top.  
 
Then, if you have any two of the constants, cover up the miss-
ing one with your finger and the formula for calculating the 
missing one will appear. Say you know the voltage across a 
resistor and the current through it, but you need to know the re-
sistance itself. Simply cover the letter R with your finger: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the formula to calculate the resistance is then given as:
 
V
flow through it, then a voltage is produced across it. The 
value of the voltage may be determined by again rearranging 
expression 1, so that it now gives (3):
 
 
(3)
V
I
R
 
_
 
I

Starting electronics
16
Thus, a current of, say, 1 A flowing through a resistance of 
5 Ω, produces a voltage of:
 
across the resistance.
These three expressions which combine to make Ohm’s law 
are the most common ones you’ll ever meet in electronics, 
so look at ’em, read ’em, use ’em, learn ’em, inwardly digest 
’em — just don’t forget ’em. Right? Right.
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
And another thing. See the way we’ve said through-
out, that a voltage is applied or produced across 
a resistance. Similarly a current flows through a 
resistance. Well let’s keep it like that! Huh? Just 
remember that a voltage is across: a voltage does not 
flow through. Likewise, a current flows through: it 
is not across.
There is no such thing as a flow of voltage through a 
resistance, and there’s no such thing as a current 
across a resistance.

The very first steps
17
Electronic components
The fact that different resistances produce different currents 
if a voltage is applied across them, or produce different volt-
ages if a current is applied through them, is one of the most 
useful facts in electronics.
In electronics, an amp of current is very large — usually we 
only use much smaller currents, say, a thousandth or so of 
an amp. Sometimes we even use currents smaller than this, 
say, a millionth of an amp! Similarly, we sometimes need only 
small voltages, too.
Resistances are extremely useful in these cases, because 
they can be used to reduce the current flow or the voltage 
produced across them, due to the effects of Ohm’s law. We’ll 
look at ways and means of doing this in the next chapter. 
All we need to know for now is that resistances are used in 
electronics to control current and voltage.
Table 1.1 shows how amps are related to the smaller values 
of current. A thousandth of an amp is known as a milliamp 
(unit: mA). A millionth of an amp is a microamp (unit: µA). 
Current name 
Meaning 
Value 
Symbol
amp 
— 
100 A 
A
milliamp 
one thousandth of an amp 
10-3 A 
mA
microamp 
one millionth of an amp 
10-6 A 
µA
nanoamp 
one thousand millionth of an amp 
10-9 A 
nA
picoamp 
one million millionth of an amp 
10-12 A 
pA
femtoamp 
one thousand million millionth of an amp 
10-15 A 
fA
Table 1.1 
Comparing amps with smaller values of current

Starting electronics
18
Even smaller values of current are possible: a thousand mil-
lionth of an amp is a nanoamp (unit: nA); a million millionth 
is a picoamp (unit: pA). Chances are, you will never use or 
even specify a current value smaller than these, and you will 
rarely even use picoamp. Milliamps and microamps are quite 
commonly used, though.
It’s easy to move from one current value range to another, 
simply by moving the decimal point one way or the other by 
the correct multiple of three decimal places. In this way, a 
current of 0.01 mA is the same as a current of 10 µA which is 
the same as a current of 10,000 nA and so on.
Table 1.2 shows, similarly, how volts are related to smaller 
values of voltage. Sometimes, however, large voltages exist 
(not so much in electronics, but in power electricity) and so 
these have been included in the table. The smaller values cor-
respond to those of current, that is, a thousandth of a volt is 
a millivolt (unit: mV), a millionth of a volt is a microvolt (unit: 
µV) and so on — although anything smaller than a millivolt 
is, again, only rarely used.
Voltage name 
Meaning 
Value 
Symbol
megavolt 
one million volts 
106 V 
MV
kilovolt 
one thousand volts 
103 V 
kV
volt 
— 
100 V 
V
millivolt 
one thousandth of a volt 
10-3 V 
mV
microvolt 
one millionth of a volt 
10-6 V 
µV
nanovolt 
one thousand millionth of a volt 
10-9 V 
nV
Table 1.2 
Comparing volts with smaller and larger voltages

The very first steps
19
Larger values of voltage are the kilovolt, that is, one thousand 
volts (unit: kV) and the megavolt, that is, one million volts 
(unit: MV). In electronics, however, these are never used.
Resistors
The components which are used as resistances are called, 
naturally enough, resistors. So that we can control current 
and voltage in specified ways, resistors are available in a 
number of values. Obviously, it would be impractical to have 
resistors of every possible value (for example, 1 Ω , 2 Ω , 3 Ω, 
4 Ω) because literally hundreds of thousands — if not millions 
— of values would have to exist.
Instead, agreed ranges of values exist: and manufacturers 
make their resistors to have those values, within a certain 
tolerance. Table 1.3 (over) shows a typical range of resistor 
values, for example. This range is the most common. You 
can see from it that large values of resistors are available, 
measured in kilohms, that is, thousands of ohms (unit: kΩ) 
and even megohms, that is, millions of ohms (unit: MΩ). Some-
times the unit Ω (or the letter R if used) is omitted, leaving 
the units as just k or M.
Resistor tolerance is specified as a plus or minus percentage. 
A 10 Ω ±10% resistor, say, may have an actual resistance 
within the range 10 Ω –10% to 10 Ω +10%, that is, between 
9 Ω and 11 Ω .
As well as being rated in value and tolerance, resistors are 
also rated by the amount of power they can safely dissipate 

Starting electronics
20
1 Ω 
10 Ω 
100 Ω 
1 k 
10 k 
100 k 
1 M 
10 M
1.2 Ω 
12 Ω 
120 Ω 
1k2 
12 k 
120 k 
1M2 
—
1.5 Ω 
15 Ω 
150 Ω 
1k5 
15 k 
150 k 
1M5 
—
1.8 Ω 
18 Ω 
180 Ω 
1k8 
18 k 
180 k 
1M8 
—
2.2 Ω 
22 Ω 
220 Ω 
2k2 
22 k 
220 k 
2M2 
—
2.7 Ω 
27 Ω 
270 Ω 
2k7 
27 k 
270 k 
2M7 
—
3.3 Ω 
33 Ω 
330 Ω 
3k3 
33 k 
330 k 
3M3 
—
3.9 Ω 
39 Ω 
390 Ω 
3k9 
39 k 
390 k 
3M9 
—
4.7 Ω 
47 Ω 
470 Ω 
4k7 
47 k 
470 k 
4M7 
—
5.6 Ω 
56 Ω 
560 Ω 
5k6 
56 k 
560 k 
5M6 
—
6.8 Ω 
68 Ω 
680 Ω 
6k8 
68 k 
680 k 
6M8 
—
8.2 Ω 
82 Ω 
820 Ω 
8k2 
82 k 
820 k 
8M2 
—
Table 1.3 
Typical resistor value range
as heat, without being damaged. As you’ll remember from 
our discussion on soldering irons earlier, power rating is ex-
pressed in watts (unit: W), and this is true of resistor power 
ratings, too.
As the currents and voltages we use in electronics are nor-
mally pretty small, the resistors we use also have small power 
ratings. Typical everyday resistors have ratings of 1/4 W, 1/3 W, 
1/2 W, 1 W and so on. At the other end of the scale, for use in 
power electrical work, resistors are available with power 
ratings up to and over 100 W or so. 
Choice of resistor power rating you need depends on the 
resistor’s use, but a reasonable value for electronics use is 
1/4 W. In fact, 1/4 W is such a common power rating for a resis-
tor that you can assume it for all the circuits in this book. If 
I give you a circuit to build which uses resistors of different 
power ratings, I’ll tell you.

The very first steps
21
Time out
That’s all we’re going to say about resistors here — in this 
chapter at least. In the next chapter, though, we’ll be taking 
a look at some simple circuits you can build with resistors. 
We’Il also explain how to measure electricity, with the aid 
of a meter, another useful tool which is so often used in 
electronics. But that’s enough for now, you’ve learned a lot 
in only a little time.
 If, on the other hand, you feel you want to test your brain a 
bit more, try the quiz over the page.

Starting electronics
22
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1. 100 coulombs of electricity flow 
past a point in an electrical cir-
cuit, in 20 seconds. The current 
flowing is? 
a 10 A  
b 2 A 
c 5 V  
d 5 A  
e none of these.
2. A resistor of value 1 kΩ is 
placed in a simple circuit with 
a battery of 15 V potential dif-
ference. What is the value of 
current which flows? 
 
a 15 mA 
 
 
b 150 mA 
 
c 1.5 mA 
 
d 66.7 mA 
 
e none of these
3. A voltage of 20 V is applied 
across a resistor of 100 Ω. What 
happens? 
 
a a current of 0.2 A is generated 
across a resistor. 
b a current of 5 A is generated 
across the resistor. 
 
c a current of 5 A flows through 
the resistor. 
 
d one coulomb of electricity 
flows through the resistor. 
e none of these.
4. A current of 1 A flows through a 
resistor of 10 Ω. What voltage is 
produced through the resistor? 
 
a 10 V  
b 1 V  
c 100 V  
d 10 C  
e none of these.
5. A nanoamp is?  
a 1 x 10-6 A  
b 1 x 10-8 A  
c 1,000 x 10-12 A  
d 1,000 x 10-6 A  
e none of these.
6. A voltage of 10 MV is applied 
across a resistor of 1 MΩ. What is 
the current which flows?  
a 10 µA 
 
b 10 mA  
c 10 A  
d 10 MA  
e none of these

On the boards
23
2 On the boards
In this chapter we give you details of some easy-to-do experi-
ments, designed to give you valuable practical experience. 
To perform these experiments you’ll need some simple 
components and a couple of new tools.
The components you need are:
● 
2 x 10 k resistors
● 
2 x 1k5 resistors
● 
2 x 150 Ω resistors
Power ratings and tolerances of these resistors are not 
important; just get the cheapest you can find.

Starting electronics
24
The tools, on the other hand:
● 
a breadboard (such as the one we use)
● 
a multi-meter (such as the multi-meter we use)
are important. They are, unfortunately, quite expensive but, 
looked after will last you a long, long time. They’re worth 
the expense, because you’ll be able to use them for all your 
experiments and projects that you do and build.
Last chapter we looked at some of the essential tools you’ll 
need if you intend to progress very far in electronics. Bread-
boards and multi-meters are two more, which are also very 
much essential if you’re at all serious in your intent to learn 
about electronics. 
Fortunately, all the tools we show you in this book will last 
for years if properly treated, so even though it may seem like 
a lot of weeks’ pension money now, it’s money well spent as 
it’s well worth getting the best you can afford!
All aboard
A breadboard is extremely useful. With a breadboard you can 
construct circuits in a temporary form, changing components 
if required, before committing them to a permanent circuit 
board. This is of most benefit if you are designing the circuit 
from scratch and have to change components often.

On the boards
25
If you are following a book like Starting Electronics, however, 
a breadboard is even more useful. This is because the many 
circuits given in the book can be built up experimentally, 
tested, then dismantled, so that the components may be used 
again and again. I’ll be giving you many such experimental 
circuits and, although I’ll also give you good descriptions of 
the circuits, there’s nothing like building-it-yourself to find out 
how a circuit works. So, I recommend you get the best kind of 
breadboard you can find — it’s worth it in the long run.
There are many varieties of breadboard. All of the better 
ones consist basically of a moulded plastic body which has a 
number of holes in the top surface, through which component 
leads may be easily pushed. Underneath each hole is a clip 
mechanism, which holds the component lead tight enough so 
that it can’t fall out. Figure 2.1 gives the idea. The clip forms 
a good electrical contact, yet allows the lead to be pulled out 
without damage.
Generally, the clips are interconnected in groups, so that by 
pushing leads of two different components into two holes 
Figure 2.1 
The interior of a breadboard, showing the contacts

Starting electronics
26
of one group you have made an electrical contact between 
the two leads. In this way the component leads don’t have 
to physically touch above the surface of the breadboard to 
make electrical contact.
Differences lie between breadboards in the spacings and 
positionings of the holes, and the number of holes in each 
group. The majority of breadboards have hole spacings of 
about 2.5 mm (actually 0.1 in — which is the exact hole spac-
ing required by a particular type of electronic component: 
the dual-in-line integrated circuit — I’ll talk about this soon) 
which is fine for general-purpose use, so the only things you 
have to choose between are the numbers of holes in groups, 
the size of the breadboard and the layout (that is, where the 
groups are) on the breadboard.
Because there are so many different types of breadboard 
available, we don’t specify a standard type to use in this 
book. So the choice of what to buy is up to you. We do, 
however, show circuits on a basic breadboard which is a 
fairly common layout. So, any circuits we show you to build 
on this breadboard can also be built on any similar quality 
breadboard, but you may have to adjust the actual practical 
circuit layout to suit.
Photo 2.1 shows a photograph of the breadboard we 
use throughout this book, in which you can see the 
top surface with all the component holes. Photo 2.2 
shows the inside of the breadboard, with component 
lead clips interconnected into groups. The groups of 
clips are organised as two rows, the closest holes being  
7.5 mm — (not just by coincidence the distance between 

On the boards
27
Hint:
The theoretical breadboard used for artwork layout purposes in this 
book is specified with a total of 550 contacts arranged in a main 
matrix of two blocks of 47 rows of five interconnected sockets, and 
a row of 40 interconnected sockets down each side of the main 
matrix. Such a theoretical block will hold upto six 14-pin or nine 
8-pin dual-in-line integrated circuit packages, together with their 
ancillary components. 
Remember though, that you may need to adapt the theoretical circuit 
layout to suit whichever particular breadboard you buy.
the rows of pins of a dual-in-line integrated circuit package) 
apart.
ICs
Hey, wait a minute — I’ve mentioned a few times already this 
mysterious component called a dual-in-line integrated circuit, 
but what is it? Well, Photo 2.3 shows one in close-up while 
Photo 2.4 shows it, in situ, in a professional plugblock. The 
pins (which provide connections to the circuits integrated 
inside the body — integrated circuit — geddit?) are in two 

Starting electronics
28
rows 7.5 mm apart (actually, they’re exactly 0.3 in apart), 
so it pushes neatly into the breadboard. Because there are 
two rows and they are parallel — that is, in line — we call it 
dual-in-line (often shortened to DIL. And while we’re on the 
subject of abbreviations, the term dual-in-line package is 
often shortened to DIP, and integrated circuit also is often 
shortened to IC).
Many types of lC exist. Most — at least as far as the hobbyist 
is concerned — are in this DIL form, but other shapes do 
exist. Often DIL ICs have different numbers of pins, e.g. 8, 14, 
16, 18, 28, but the pins are always in two rows. Some of the 
DIL ICs with large numbers of pins have rows spaced 15 mm 
apart (actually, exactly 0.6 in), though.
Photo 2.1 
A typical breadboard

On the boards
29
Photo 2.3 
A DIL (dual-in-line) IC package
Photo 2.2 
Inside breadboard, showing component clips interconnected in groups

Starting electronics
30
The circuits integrated inside the body of the ICs are not 
always the same, and so one IC can’t automatically do the 
job of another. They need to be exactly the same type to 
be able to do that. This is why I always give a type number 
if I use an IC in an experiment. Make sure you buy the right 
one if you want to build an experiment, or for that matter if 
you ever build a project such as those you see in electronics 
magazines.
Once the IC is in the breadboard — in fact, once any com-
ponent is in the breadboard — it’s a simple matter to make 
connections to it by pushing in wires or other component 
leads to the holes and clips of the same groups. 
Photo 2.4 
An IC mounted on a breadboard. The breadboard is designed so that 
an IC can be mounted without shorting the pins 

On the boards
31
Down the edges of the breadboard are other groups of holes 
connected underneath, too. These are useful to carry power 
supply voltages from, say, a battery, which may need to be 
connected into circuit at a number of points.
We can show all the various groups of holes in the bread-
board block by means of the diagram in Figure 2.2, where 
the connected holes are shown joined by lines. This type of 
diagram, incidentally, will be used throughout this book to 
Figure 2.2 
A breadboard pattern showing graphically the internal contacts

Starting electronics
32
show how the experimental circuits we look at are built using 
breadboard block. Obviously, any circuit may be built in a lot 
of different ways and so you don’t have to follow my diagrams, 
or use the same breadboard as used here, but doing so will 
mean that your circuit is the same as mine and so easier to 
compare. The choice is yours. And — remember — the big 
advantage about using breadboard is that the components 
can be pulled out when the circuit is finished and you can 
use them again (provided you’ve been careful and haven’t 
damaged them).
The first circuit
We’ve done a lot of talking up to now, and not much doing, 
but now it’s time to use your breadboard to build your first 
circuit. Well, to be truthful it’s not really a circuit — it’s just 
a single resistor stuck into the breadboard so that we can 
experiment with it.
The experiments in this chapter are all pretty simple ones, 
measuring the resistances of various resistors and their 
associated circuits. But to measure the resistances we need 
the other essential tool I mentioned earlier — the multi-me-
ter. Strictly speaking a multi-meter isn’t just a tool used in 
electronics, it’s a complete piece of equipment. It can be used 
not only to measure resistance of resistors, but also voltage 
and current in a circuit. Indeed, some expensive multi-meters 
may be used to measure other things, too. However, you don’t 
need an expensive one to measure only the essentials (and 
some non-essentials, too). 

On the boards
33
Hint:
The multi-meter you buy and use is not important – as long as it 
meets a certain specification it will do the job nicely. This specifica-
tion is below. 
Note that any modern multi-meter should meet this specification. The 
specification represents just the absolute minimum you should check 
for, and was originally drawn up for use when buying an analogue 
multi-meter (ie, one with a pointer). Most modern multi-meters 
are of a digital nature (ie, with a digital readout) and so will usually 
greatly exceed the minimum specification.
While it’s impossible for me to comment on how you intend 
using your multi-meter, so it’s impossible for me to tell you 
which one to buy. On the other hand, it is possible for me 
to recommend a few specifications which you should try to 
match or better, when you buy your multi-meter. This is sim-
ply to ensure that your multi-meter will be as general-purpose 
as possible, and will perform measurements for you long after 
you progress from being a beginner in electronics to being an 
expert. The important points to remember are:
● 
it must have a sensitivity of at least 20 kΩ V-1 on d.c. 
ranges. (d.c. stands for direct current).
● 
it must have an accuracy of no worse than ±5%.
● 
its smallest d.c. voltage range should be no greater than 
1 V.

Starting electronics
34
● 
its smallest current range should be no greater than 
500 µA.
● 
it should measure resistance in at least three ranges.
In practice, just about any modern multi-meter will meet 
and exceed this specification. Only older style analogue 
multi-meters may fall below it — digital multi-meters almost 
always exceed it.
Using, a multi-meter is fairly simple. It will probably have a 
switch on the front, which turns so that you may select which 
range of measurement you want. When you have connected 
the multi-meter up to the circuit you wish to measure (a pair 
Photo 2.5 
A multi-meter — the one used throughout this book — although any 
multi-meter with at least the specification given will do

On the boards
35
of leads should be supplied with the multi-meter) the read-
out will display the measurement or (on an older analogue 
multi-meter), the pointer of the multi-meter moves and you 
can read-off the measured value on the scale underneath 
the pointer. At the ends of the multi-meter leads are probes 
which allow you to connect the multi-meter to the circuit in 
question.
Experiment
Using the multi-meter in our first experiment — to measure a 
resistor’s resistance — we will now go through the procedure 
step-by-step, so that you get the hang of it.
The circuit built on breadboard is shown in Figure 2.3. Being 
only one resistor it’s an extremely simple circuit. So simple 
that we are sure you would be able to do-it-yourself without 
our aid, but we might as well start off on a good footing and 
do the job properly — some of the circuits we’ll be looking 
at in following chapters will not be so simple.
If you have an analogue multi-meter, you have to adjust it so 
that the reading is accurate. Step-by-step, this is as follows:
1) 
Turn the switch to point to a resistance range (usually 
marker OHM ×1K, or similar).
2) 
Touch the multi-meter probes together — the pointer 
should swing around to the right.
3) 
Read the resistance scale of the multi-meter — the top 
one on our multi-meter marked OHMS, where the pointer 
crosses it — it should cross exactly on the number 0.

Starting electronics
36
4) 
If it doesn’t cross at 0, adjust the multi-meter using the 
zero adjust knob (usuallu marked 0ΩADJ).
What you’ve just done is the process of zeroing the multi-
meter. You have to zero the multi-meter every time you use 
it to measure resistance. You also have to do it if you change 
resistance ranges. On the other hand, you never have to do 
it if you use your multi-meter to measure current or voltage, 
only resistance, or if you have a digital multi-meter.
You see, measurement of resistance relies on the voltages 
of cells or a battery inside the multi-meter. If a new cell is in 
operation, the voltage it produces may be, say, 1.6 V. But as 
Figure 2.3 
About the simplest circuit you could have: a single resistor and a 
multi-meter. The multi-meter takes the place of a power supply, and the circuit’s 
job is to test the resistor! 

On the boards
37
it gets older and starts to run down, the voltage may fall to, 
say, 1.4 V or even lower. The zero adjustment allows you to 
take this change in cell or battery voltage into account and 
therefore make sure your resistance measurement is correct. 
Clever, eh?
Measurement of ordinary current and voltage, on the other 
hand, doesn’t rely on an internal cell or battery at all, so zero 
adjustment is not necessary.
Now let’s get back to our experiment. Following the diagram 
of Figure 2.3:
1)  
Put a 10 k resistor (brown, black, orange bands) into 
the breadboard.
2) 
Touch the multi-meter leads against the leads of the 
resistor (it doesn’t matter which way round the multi-meter 
leads are).
3) 
Read-off the scale at the point where the pointer crosses 
it. What does it read? It should be 10.
But how can that be? It’s a 10 k resistor, isn’t it? Well, the an-
swer’s simple. If you remember, you turned the multi-meter’s 
range switch to OHM ×1K, didn’t you? Officially, this should be 
OHM ×1k, that is, a lower case k. This tells you that whatever 
reading you get on the resistance scale you multiply by 1 k, 
that is 1000. So the multi-meter reading is actually 10,000. And 
what is the value of the resistor in the breadboard — 10 k (or 
10,000 Ω), right!

Starting electronics
38
Hint:
Resistor colour-code
Resistance values are indicated on the bodies of resistors in one 
of two ways: in actual figures, or more usually by a colour code. 
Resistors using figures are usually high precision or high wattage 
types that have sufficient space on their bodies to print characters 
on. Colour coding, on the other hand, is the method used on the 
vast majority of resistors — for two reasons. First, it is easier to read 
when components are in place on a printed circuit board. Second, 
some resistors are so small it would be impossible to print numbers 
on them — let alone read them afterwards.
Depending on the type of resistor, the colour code can be made up 
of four or five bands printed around the resistor’s body (as shown 
below). The five-band code is typically used on more accurate resis-
tors as it provides a more precise representation of value. Usually, 
the four-band code is adequate for most general purposes and it’s 
the one you’ll nearly always use — but you still need to be aware 
of both! Table 2.1 shows both resistors and lists the colours and 
values associated with each band of both four-band and five-band 
colour codes. 

On the boards
39
Hint:
The bands grouped together indicate the resistor’s resistance value, 
while the single band indicates its tolerance.
The first band of the group indicates the resistor’s first figure of its 
value. The second band is the second figure. Then, for a four-band 
coded resistor the third band is the multiplier. For a five-band coded 
resistor the third band is simply the resistor’s third figure, while the 
fourth band is the multiplier. For both, the multiplier is simply the 
factor by which the first figure should be multiplied by (or simply the 
number of noughts to add) to obtain the actual resistance.
As an example, take a resistor coded red, violet, orange, silver. 
Looking at Table 2.1, we can see that it’s obviously a four-band 
colour coded resistor, and its first figure is 2, second is 7, multiplier is 
x1000, and tolerance is ±10%. In other words, its value is 27,000 Ω, 
or 27 k.

Starting electronics
40
Table 2.1 
Resistor colour code
 
Band 1 
Band 2 
Band 3 
Band 4 
Colour 
1st Figure 
2nd Figure 
Multiplier 
Tolerance
Black 
0 
0 
x1 
-
Brown 
1 
1 
x10 
1%
Red 
2 
2 
x100 
2%
Orange 
3 
3 
x1000 
-
Yellow 
4 
4 
x10,000 
-
Green 
5 
5 
x100,000 
-
Blue 
6 
6 
x1,000,000 
-
Violet 
7 
7 
- 
-
Grey 
8 
8 
- 
-
White 
9 
9 
- 
-
Gold 
- 
- 
x0.1 
5%
Silver 
- 
- 
x0.01 
10%
None 
- 
- 
- 
20%
 
Band 1 
Band 2 
Band 3 
Band 4 
Band 5 
 
Colour 
1st Figure 
2nd Figure 
3rd Figure 
Multiplier 
Tolerance
Black 
0 
0 
0 
x1 
-
Brown 
1 
1 
1 
x10 
1%
Red 
2 
2 
2 
x100 
2%
Orange 
3 
3 
3 
x1000 
-
Yellow 
4 
4 
4 
x10,000 
-
Green 
5 
5 
5 
x100,000 
0.5%
Blue 
6 
6 
6 
x1,000,000 
0.25%
Violet 
7 
7 
7 
x10,000,000 
0.1%
Grey 
8 
8 
8 
- 
0.01%
White 
9 
9 
9 
- 
-
Gold 
- 
- 
- 
x0.1 
5%
Silver 
- 
- 
- 
x0.01 
10%

On the boards
41
In practice, you might find that your resistor’s measurement isn’t 
exactly 10 k. It may be, say, 9.5 k or 10.5 k. This is due, of course, to 
tolerance. Both the resistor and the multi-meter have a tolerance: 
indicated on the resistor by the last coloured band: the multi- 
meter’s is probably around ± 5%. Chances are, though, you’ll 
find the multi-meter reading is as close to 10 k as makes no 
difference.
Now you’ve seen how your multi-meter works, you can use it 
to measure any other resistors you have, if you wish. You’ll 
find that lower value resistors need to be measured with the 
range switch on lower ranges, say Ω x 100. Remember — if 
you have an analogue multi-meter — every time you intend 
to make a measurement you must first zero the multi-meter. 
The process may seem a bit long-winded for the first two or 
three measurements, but after that you’ll get the hang of it.
The second circuit
Figure 2.4 shows the next circuit we’re going to look at 
and how to build it on breadboard. It’s really just another 
simple circuit, this time consisting of two resistors in a line 
— we say they’re in series. The aim of this experiment is to 
measure the overall resistance of the series resistors and 
see if we can devise a formula which allows us to calculate 
other series resistors’ overall resistances without the need 
of measurement.
Figure 2.5 shows the more usual way of representing a circuit 
in a drawing — the circuit diagram. What we have done is 

Starting electronics
42
Figure 2.4 
Two resistors mounted on the breadboard in series
Figure 2.5 
A circuit diagram of two resistors in series. The meter is represented 
by a round symbol
replace the actual resistor shapes with symbols. Resistor 
symbols are zig-zag lines usually, although sometimes small 
oblong boxes are used in circuit diagrams. The resistors in 
the circuit diagram are numbered R1 and R2, and their values 
are shown, too.
Meters in circuit diagrams are shown as a circular symbol, 
with an arrow to indicate the pointer. To show it’s a resistance 
multi-meter (that is, an ohm-multi-meter, more commonly 

On the boards
43
called just ohmmeter) the letter R is shown inside it. While 
we’re on the topic of circuit diagram symbols, Figure 2.6 shows 
a few very common ones (including resistor and meter) which 
we’ll use in this book. Look out for them later!
You should have noticed that there is no indication of the 
breadboard in the circuit diagram of Figure 2.5. There is 
no need. The circuit diagram is merely a way of showing 
components and their electrical connections. The physical 
connection details are in the breadboard layout diagram of 
Figure 2.4. From now on, we’ll be using two such diagrams 
with every new circuit. If you’re feeling particularly adventur-
ous you might care to build your own circuit on breadboard, 
following only the circuit diagram — not the associated 
breadboard layout. It doesn’t matter if your circuit has a 
different layout to ours, it will still work as long as all the 
electrical connections are there.
Figure 2.6 
Commonly used symbols

Starting electronics
44
Back to the circuit: it’s now time to measure the overall resist-
ance of the series resistors. Following the same instructions 
we gave you before, do it!
If your measurement is correct you should have a reading of 
20 k. But what does this prove? Well, it suggests that there is 
a relationship between the separate resistors (each of value 
10 k) and the overall resistance. It looks very much as though 
the overall resistance (which we call, say, ROV) equals R1 + 
R2. Or put mathematically:
 
 
But how can we test this? The easiest way is to change the 
resistors. Try doing the experiment with two different resis-
tors. You’ll find the same is true: the overall resistance always 
equals the sum of the two separate resistances.
By experiment, we’ve just proved the law of series resistors. 
And it doesn’t just stop at two resistors in series. Three, four, 
five, in fact, any number of resistors may be in series — the 
overall resistance is the sum of the individual ones. This can 
be summarised mathematically as:
 
Try it yourself!
The next circuit
There is another way two or more resistors may be joined. Not 
end-to-end as series joined resistors are, but joined at both 

On the boards
45
ends. We say resistors joined together at both ends are in 
parallel. Figure 2.7 shows the circuit diagram of two resistors 
joined in parallel, and Figure 2.8 shows a breadboard layout. 
Both these resistors are, again, 10 k resistors. What do you 
think the overall resistance will be? It’s certainly not 20 k!
Measure it yourself using your multi-meter and bread-
board.
You should find that the overall resistance is 5 k. Odd, eh? 
Replace the two 10 k resistors with resistors of different value 
say, two 150 Ω resistors (brown, green, brown). The overall 
resistance is 75 Ω.
So, we can see that if two equal value resistors are in parallel, 
the overall resistance is half the value of one of them. This is 
a quite useful fact to remember when two parallel resistors 
are equal in value, but what happens when they’re not?
Figure 2.7 
The circuit diagram for two resistors in parallel, with the meter 
symbol

Starting electronics
46
Try the same circuit, but with unequal resistors this 
time, say, one of 10 k and the other of 1k5 (brown, green, 
red — shouldn’t you be learning the resistor colour code?). 
What is the overall resistance? You should find it’s about 1k3 
— neither one thing nor the other! So, what’s the relation-
ship?
Well, a clue to the relationship between parallel resistors 
comes from the fact that, in a funny sort of way, parallel is 
the inverse of series. So if we inverted the formula for series 
resistors we saw earlier:
 
 
Figure 2.8 
The two parallel resistors shown in the breadboard, with the meter in 
place to test their combined resistance

On the boards
47
we would get:
 
and this is the formula for parallel resistors. Let’s try it out 
on the resistors of this last experiment. Putting in the values, 
10 k and 1k5 we get:
 
             
 
         
 
         
           
which is about 1k3, the measured value.
This is the law of parallel resistors, every bit as important as 
that of series resistors. Remember it!
If there are only two resistors in parallel, you don’t have to 
calculate it the way we’ve just done here — there is a simpler 
way, given by the expression:
 
But if there are three or more resistors in parallel you have 
to use the long method, I’m afraid.

Starting electronics
48
Hint:
More and more complex circuits
Circuits we’ve looked at so far have been very simple, really. 
Much more complex ones await us over the coming chapters. 
We’ll also be introduced to several new components, such 
as capacitors, diodes, transistors, and ICs. Fortunately, most 
of the new circuits and components follow these basic laws 
we’ve studied, so you’ll be able to understand their operation 
without much ado.
The aim of these basic laws is to simplify complex circuits so 
that we may understand them and how they work, with refer-
ence to the circuits we have already seen. For example, the 
circuit in Figure 2.9 is quite complex. It consists of many resis-
tors in a network. But by grouping the resistors into smaller 
circuits of only series and parallel resistors, it’s possible to 
simplify the whole circuit into one overall resistance.
In fact, I’m going to leave you with that problem now. What 
you have to do, is to calculate the current, I, which flows from 
the battery. You can only do that by first finding the circuit’s 
The laws we’ve seen in this and the previous chapter of Starting 
Electronics (Ohm’s law and the laws of series and parallel resistors) 
are the basic laws we need to understand all of the future things 
we’ll look at.

On the boards
49
overall resistance. If you can’t do it by calculation you can 
always do it by building the circuit up on breadboard and 
measuring it. Resistor and multi-meter tolerances, of course, 
will mean the measured result may not give exactly the same 
result as the calculated one.
Meanwhile, there’s always the quiz over the page to keep 
you occupied!
Figure 2.9 
A comparatively complex circuit showing a number of resistors 
in parallel and in series. By breaking the circuit down into groups, the overall 
resistance can be calculated

Starting electronics
50
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 Five 10 kΩ resistors are in 
series. One 50 kΩ resistor is 
placed in parallel across them 
all. The overall resistance is:  
a 100 kΩ 
b 52 kΩ  
c 25 kΩ  
d 50 kΩ  
e None of these.
2 Three 30 kΩ resistors are in 
parallel. The overall resistance 
is:  
a 10 kΩ  
b 90 kΩ  
c 27 kΩ  
d 33 kΩΩ  
e 7k5  
f None of these.
3 When must you zero a multi-
meter?  
a Whenever a new measure-
ment is to be taken.  
b Whenever you turn the range 
switch.  
c Whenever you alter the zero 
adjust knob. 
 
d Whenever a resistance mea-
surement is to be made.  
e All of these.  
f None of these.
4 The law of series resistors says 
that the overall resistance of a 
number of resistors in series is 
the sum of the individual resist-
ances.
 
True or false?
5 The overall resistance of two 
parallel resistors is 1 kΩ. The 
individual resistance of these 
resistors could be:  
a 2 kΩ and 2 kΩ  
b 3 kΩ and 1k5  
c 6 kΩ and 1k2  
d 9 kΩ and 1125 Ω 
 
e a and b  
f All of these.  
g None of these.

Measuring current and voltage
51
3 Measuring current and 
voltage
There’s not too much to buy for this chapter of Starting Elec-
tronics. As usual there’s a small number of resistors:
● 
2 x lk5
● 
1 x 4k7
● 
2 x 100 k
As before, power ratings and tolerance of these resistors are 
not important.
We’re looking at current and voltage in our experiments in this 
chapter, so you’ll need to have a voltage and current source. 
The easiest and cheapest method is a simple battery. PP3, 
PP6, or PP9 sizes are best — as we need a 9 V source.

Starting electronics
52
Whichever battery you buy, you’ll also need its correspond-
ing battery connectors. These normally come as a pair of 
push-on connectors and coloured connecting leads. The red 
lead connects to the positive battery terminal; the black lead 
connects to the negative terminal.
The ends of the connecting leads furthest from the battery 
are normally stripped of insulation for about the last few mil-
limetres or so, and tinned. Tinning is the process whereby 
the loose ends of the lead are soldered together. If the leads 
are tinned you’ll be able to push them straight into your 
breadboard. If the leads aren’t tinned, on the other hand, 
don’t just push them in because the individual strands of 
wire may break off and jam up the breadboard. Instead, tin 
them yourself using your soldering iron and some multicored 
solder. The following steps should be adhered to:
1) 
twist the strands of the leads between your thumb 
and first finger, so that they are tightly wound, with no loose 
strands,
2) 
switch on the soldering iron. When it has heated up, 
tin the iron’s tip with multicore solder until the end is bright 
and shiny with molten solder. If necessary, wipe off excess 
solder or dirt from the tip, on a piece of damp sponge; keep 
a small piece of sponge just for this purpose,
3) 
apply the tip of the iron to the lead end, and when the 
wires are hot enough apply the multicore solder. The solder 
should flow over the wires smoothly. Quickly remove the 
tip and the multicore solder, allowing the lead to cool natu-
rally (don’t blow on it as the solder may crack if it cools too 
quickly). The lead end should be covered in solder, but no 
excess solder should be present. If a small blob of solder has 

Measuring current and voltage
53
formed on the very end of the lead, preventing the lead from 
being pushed into your breadboard, just cut it off using your 
side cutters.
We’ll start our study, this chapter, with a brief recap of the 
ideas we covered in the last chapter. We saw then that re-
sistors in series may be considered as a single equivalent 
resistor, whose resistance is found by adding together the 
resistance of each resistor. This is called the law of series 
resistors, which is given mathematically by:
 
Similarly, there is a law of parallel resistors, by which the sin-
gle equivalent resistance of a number of resistors connected 
in parallel is given by:
 
Using these two laws many involved circuits may be broken 
down, step by step, into an equivalent circuit consisting of 
only one equivalent resistor. The circuit in Figure 2.9 last 
chapter was one such example and, if you remember, your 
homework was to calculate the current I from the battery. 
To do this you first have to find the single equivalent resist-
ance of the whole network, then use Ohm’s law to calculate 
the current.
Figure 3.1 shows the first stage in tackling the problem, by 
dividing the network up into a number of smaller networks. 
Using the two expressions above, associated with resistors 
in series and parallel, we can start to calculate the equivalent 
resistances of each small network as follows:

Starting electronics
54
Figure 3.1 
A resistor network in which the total resistance can only be calculated 
by breaking it down into blocks
Network A
Network A consists of two resistors in parallel. The equivalent 
resistance, RA, may therefore be calculated from the above 
expression for parallel resistors. However, we saw in the last 
chapter that the resistance of only two parallel resistors is 
given by the much simpler expression:
 
 
which gives:
 

Measuring current and voltage
55
Network B
Three equal, parallel resistors form this network. Using the 
expression for parallel resistors we can calculate the equiva-
lent resistance to be:
  
which gives:
 
Hint:
This is an interesting result, as it shows that the equivalent resistance 
of a number of equal, parallel resistors may be easily found by dividing 
the resistance of one resistor, by the total number of resistors. In this 
case we had three, 15 k resistors, so we could simply divide 15 k by 
three to obtain the equivalent resistance. If a network has two equal 
resistors in parallel, the equivalent resistance is one half the resistance 
of one resistor (that is, divide by 2). If four parallel resistors form a 
network, the equivalent resistance is a quarter (that is, divide by 4) 
the resistance of one resistance of one resistor. Hmm, very useful. 
Must remember that — right?
Network C
Using the simple expression for two, unequal parallel resis-
tors:

Starting electronics
56
 
Network D
The overall resistance of two series resistors is found by 
adding their individual resistances. Resistance RD is there-
fore 10 k.
We can now redraw the whole network using their equivalent 
resistances, as in Figure 3.2, and further simplify the result-
ant networks.
Figure 3.2 
The same network, broken down into smaller networks using 
equivalent resistances (networks E, F and G)
Network E
This equivalent resistance is found by adding resistances RA 
and RB. It is therefore 12k5.

Measuring current and voltage
57
Network F
Same as network E. Resistance RF = 16 k.
Network G
Two equal parallel resistors, each of 10 k. Resistance RG is 
therefore 5 k. Figure 3.3 shows further simplification.
Figure 3.3 
The network further simplified (network H) into two unequal parallel 
resistances
Network H
Two unequal, parallel resistors. Resistance RH is therefore 
given by:
 
 

Starting electronics
58
Figure 3.4  shows a further simplification.
Network I
Resistance RI is found by adding resistances of resistors R1, 
RH and RG. Resistance RI is therefore 22k02.
Figure 3.5  shows the next stage of simplification with two 
unequal parallel resistors. The whole network’s equivalent 
resistance is therefore given by:
  
Now, from Ohm’s law we may calculate the current I, flowing 
from the battery, using the expression:
Figure 3.4 
The network simplified into a string of series resistances (network I)

Measuring current and voltage
59
 
Did you get the same answer?
Figure 3.5 
The final simplification, into two parallel resistances. From this the 
current can be calculated
One man’s meter ....
Of course, there is another way the current I may be found. 
Instead of calculating the equivalent resistance of the net-
work you could measure it using your multi-meter. But first 
you would need to obtain resistors of all the values in the 
network. Then you must build the network up on breadboard, 
with those resistors. 

Starting electronics
60
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
The measured result may not, unfortunately, be 
exactly the same as the calculated result — due to 
resistor tolerances and multi-meter tolerance. 
Finally, from this measured result and Ohm’s law, the current 
I may be calculated.
Hint:
Your multi-meter can be used directly to measure current (it’s a multi-
meter, remember) so after building up your network of resistors you 
can simply read off the current flowing. Figure 3.6 illustrates how a 
multi-meter should be connected in a circuit to allow it to indicate the 
current through the circuit. Note the use of the words in and through. 
In chapter 1 we looked closely at current and saw that it is a flow of 
electrons around a circuit. To measure the current we must position 
the multi-meter in the circuit — in other words the current going 
around the circuit must also go through the multi-meter. This is an 
important point when measuring current. Remember it!

Measuring current and voltage
61
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
If you are using an analogue multi-meter, make sure 
you have your leads the correct way round. When the 
current through the multi-meter flows in the right 
direction the movement and pointer turn clockwise. 
In the wrong direction on the other hand, the move-
ment and pointer attempts to turn anti-clockwise. 
At best you won’t get a valid measurement of current 
if the multi-meter is the wrong way round — at worst 
you’ll damage the movement. 
A digital multi-meter, however, will merely give a 
negative reading.
Figure 3.6 
A diagram showing a meter connected in circuit, with the red lead at 
the point of higher potential

Starting electronics
62
But what is the right way round? And how do you tell the 
difference? The answers are quite simple really; both given 
by the fact that your multi-meter has two leads, one red, one 
black. The colour coding is used to signify which lead to 
connect to which point in a circuit. By convention, black is 
taken to be the colour signifying a lower potential. Red, also 
by convention, signifies a higher potential. So, the multi-meter 
should be connected into the circuit with its red lead touching 
the point of higher potential and the black lead touching the 
point of lower potential. This is illustrated in Figure 3.6 with 
symbols close to the multi-meter (+ for the red lead, – for the 
black). In the circuit shown, the point of higher potential is 
the side of the circuit to the positive terminal of the battery 
(also marked +).
It doesn’t matter where in the circuit the multi-meter is placed, 
the red lead must always connect to the point of higher po-
tential. Figure 3.7, for example, shows the multi-meter at a 
different position, but the measurement is the same and the 
multi-meter won’t be damaged as long as the red lead is con-
nected to the point of higher potential.
Negative vibes
Figures 3.1 to 3.7 all show current flowing from the positive 
terminal of the battery to the negative terminal. Now we know 
that current is made up of a flow of electrons so we might 
assume that electrons also flow from positive to negative 
battery terminals. We might — but we’d be wrong, because 
electrons are actually negatively charged and therefore flow 
from negative to positive battery terminals. But a negative 
flow in one direction is exactly the same as a positive flow 

Measuring current and voltage
63
Figure 3.7 
The meter connected to a different part of the circuit. The effect is 
the same as long as the red lead is correctly connected
in the opposite direction (think about it!) so the two things 
mean the same. However, it does mean that we must define 
which sort of current we are talking about when we use the 
term. Figure 3.8 defines it graphically: conventional current 
(usually called simply current) flows from positive to negative; 
electron current flows from negative to positive. Whenever we 
talk about current from now on, you should take it to mean 
conventional current.
A meter with potential
Of course, your multi-meter can measure voltage, too. But 
how should it be connected into the circuit to do it? Well, the 
answer is that you don’t connect it into the circuit — because 

Starting electronics
64
Figure 3.9 
Meter connections to find the voltage across a single resistor
Figure 3.8 
Conventional current travels from positive to negative; electron 
current travels in the opposite direction
voltage you remember, is across  a component, not through 
it. So, to measure the voltage across a component you must 
connect the multi-meter across the component, too. Figure 
3.9 shows a simple example of a circuit comprising two 
resistors and a battery. To find the voltage across, say, the 
lower resistor, the multi-meter is just connected across that 
resistor. Like the measurement of current, the red (+) lead of 
the multi-meter is connected to the more positive side of the 
circuit and, the black (–) lead to the more negative side.

Measuring current and voltage
65
Practically there
Now that we’ve looked at the theory behind current and volt-
age measurement, let’s go on and build a few circuits to put it 
into practice. Figure 3.10 shows the breadboard layout of the 
circuit of Figure 3.6, where a single resistor is connected in 
series with a multi-meter and a battery. With this circuit we 
can actually prove Ohm’s law. The procedure is as follows:
1) 
 set the meter’s range switch to a current range — the 
highest one, say, 10 A,
2) 
 insert a resistor (of say 1k5) into the breadboard, and 
connect the battery leads,
3) 
 touch the multi-meter leads to the points indicated.
You will probably see the pointer of the multi-meter move 
(but only just) as you complete step 3. The range you have 
set the multi-meter to is too high — the current is obviously 
a lot smaller than this range, so turn down the range switch 
(to, say, the range nearest to 250 mA) and do step 3 again.
This time the pointer should move just a bit further, but still 
not enough to allow an accurate reading. Turn down the range 
switch again, this time to, say, the 25 mA range and repeat step 
3. Now you should get an adequate reading, which should be 
6 mA give or take small experimental errors.
Is this right? Let’s compare it to the expression of Ohm’s 
law:
 

Starting electronics
66
Figure 3.10 
A breadboard layout for the circuit of Figure 3.6: the meter is in 
series with the resistor; only the meter itself makes the circuit complete
If we insert known values of voltage and resistance into this 
we obtain: 
 
Not bad, eh? We’ve proved Ohm’s law!
You can try this again using different values of resistor if 
you wish, but don’t use any resistors lower than about 500 Ω 
as you won’t get an accurate reading, because the battery 
can’t supply currents of more than just a few mA. Even if it 
could the resistor would overheat due to the current flowing 
through it.
In all cases where the battery is able to supply the current 
demanded by the resistor, the expression for Ohm’s law will 
hold true. 

Measuring current and voltage
67
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
Make sure that you start a new measurement with 
the range switch set to the highest range and 
step down. This is a good practice to get into, 
because it may prevent damage to the multi- 
meter by excessive currents. Even though circuits 
we look at in Starting Electronics will rarely have 
such high currents through them, there may be a time 
when you want to measure an unknown current or voltage 
in another circuit; if you don’t start at the highest 
range — zap — your multi-meter could be irreparably 
damaged.
Hint:
The scale you must use to read any measurement from, depends 
on the range indicated by the meter’s range switch. When the range 
switch points, say, to the 10 A range, the scale with the highest value 
of 10 should be used and any reading taken represents the current 
value. When the range switch points to, say, the 250 mA range, 
on the other hand, (and also the other two ranges 2.5 mA and 
25 mA), the scale with the highest value of 25 should be used. It all 
sounds tricky doesn’t it? Well, don’t worry, once you’ve seen how 
to do it, you’ll be taking measurements easily and quickly, just like 
a professional.

Starting electronics
68
Note that current (and voltage) scales read in the opposite 
direction to the resistance scale we used in the last chapter, 
and they are linear. This makes them considerably easier to 
use than resistance scales and they are also more accurate as 
you can more easily judge a value if the pointer falls between 
actual marks on the scale.
Voltages
When you measure voltages with your multi-meter the same 
procedure should be followed, using the highest voltage 
ranges first and stepping down as required. The voltages 
you are measuring here are all direct voltages as they are 
taken from a 9 V d.c. battery. So you needn’t bother using the 
three highest d.c. voltage ranges on the multi-meter, as your 
9 V battery can’t generate a high enough voltage to damage 
the meter anyway. Also, don’t bother using the a.c. voltage 
ranges as they’re — pretty obviously — for measuring only 
alternating (that is, a.c.) voltages.
As an example you can build the circuit of Figure 3.9 up on 
your breadboard, shown in Figure 3.11. What is the measured 
voltage? It should be about 4.5 V.
Now measure the voltage across the other resistor — it’s 
also about 4.5 V. Well, that figures, doesn’t it? There’s about 
4.5 V across each resistor, so there is a total of 2 x 4.5 V that 
is, 9 V across them both: the voltage of the battery. This has 
demonstrated that resistors in series act as a voltage divider 
or a potential divider, dividing up the total voltage applied 

Measuring current and voltage
69
across them. It’s understandable that the voltage across each 
resistor is the same and half the total voltage, because the 
two resistors are equal. But what happens if the two resis-
tors aren’t equal?
Build up the circuit of Figure 3.12. What is the measured 
voltage across resistor R2 now? You should find it’s about 
2.1 V. The relationship between this result, the values of the 
two resistors and the applied battery voltage is given by the 
voltage divider rule:
Figure 3.11 
A breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 3.9: measuring the 
voltage across R2. This will be the same as R1, and each will be around 4.5 V 
— half the battery voltage

Starting electronics
70
Figure 3.12 
A circuit with two unequal, series resistors. This is used in the text to 
illustrate the voltage divider rule, one of the most fundamental rules of electronics
 
where Vin is the battery voltage and Vout is the voltage meas-
ured across resistor R2.
We can check this by inserting the values used in the circuit 
of Figure 3.12:
 
In other words, close enough to our measured 2.1 V to make 
no difference. The voltage divider rule, like Ohm’s law and the 
laws of series and parallel resistors, is one of the fundamental 
laws which we must know. So, remember it! ok?

Measuring current and voltage
71
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
By changing resistance values in a voltage divider, 
the voltage we obtain at the output is correspond-
ingly changed. You can think of a voltage divider 
almost as a circuit itself, which allows an input 
voltage to be converted to a lower output voltage, 
simply by changing resistance values.
Pot-heads
Certain types of components exist, ready-built for this voltage 
dividing job, known as potentiometers (commonly shortened 
to just pots). They consist of some form of resistance track, 
across which a voltage is applied, and a wiper which can be 
moved along the track forming a variable voltage divider. 
The total resistance value of the potentiometer track doesn’t 
change, only the ratio of the two resistances formed either 
side of the wiper. The basic symbol of a potentiometer is 
shown in Figure 3.13(a).
A potentiometer may be used as a variable resistor by con-
necting the wiper to one of the track ends, as shown in Figure 
3.13(b). Varying the position of the wiper varies the effective 
resistance from zero to the maximum track resistance. This 
is useful if we wish to, say, control the current in a particular 
part of the circuit; increasing the resistance decreases the 
current and vice versa.

Starting electronics
72
These two types of potentiometer are typically used when 
some function of an appliance e.g., the volume control of 
a television, must be easily adjustable. Other types of po-
tentiometer are available which are set at the factory upon 
manufacture and not generally touched afterwards e.g., a TV’s 
height adjustment. Such potentiometers are called preset po-
tentiometers. The only difference as far as a circuit diagram is 
concerned is that their symbols are slightly changed. Figures 
3.13(c) and (d) show preset potentiometers in the same con-
figurations as the potentiometers of Figures 3.13(a) and (b). 
Mechanically, however, they are much different. 
Meters made
The actual internal resistance of a multi-meter must be borne 
in mind when measuring voltages as it can affect measure-
ments taken. We can build a circuit (Figure 3.14)  which shows 
exactly what the effect of multi-meter resistance is. As both 
resistors in the circuit are equal, we can see that the measured 
voltage should be half the battery voltage that is, 4.5 V (use 
the voltage divider rule, if you don’t believe it!). But when 
Figure 3.13 
A variety of symbols used for variable resistors, or potentiometers

Measuring current and voltage
73
Figure 3.14 
A circuit which is used to show the effect of the meter’s own 
resistance in a circuit
you apply your multi-meter across resistor R2 you find that 
the voltage indicated is only about 3 V.
The fact is that when the multi-meter is not connected to the 
circuit the voltage is 4.5 V, but as soon as the multi-meter is 
applied, the voltage across resistor R2 falls to 3 V. Also, the 
voltage across resistor R1 rises to 6 V (both voltages must 
add up to the battery voltage, remember). Applying the 
multi-meter affects the operation of the circuit, because the 
multi-meter resistance is in parallel with resistor R2.
Ohms per volt
A meter’s internal resistance is stated as a number of ohms per 
volt. For example, the resistance of the meter we use in this 
book is 20,000 ohms per volt (written 20 kΩV-1) on d.c. voltage 
scales so when it’s to read 4.5 V, it’s resistance is 90 k. This 

Starting electronics
74
resistance, in parallel with resistor R2 forms an equivalent 
resistance, given by the law of parallel resistors, of:
 
This resistance is now the new value of R2 in the circuit so, 
applying the voltage divider rule, the measured voltage will 
be:
 
which is roughly what you measured (hopefully).
Any difference between the actual measurement and this 
calculated value may be accounted for because this lower 
voltage causes a lower multi-meter resistance which, in turn, 
affects the voltage which, in turn, affects the resistance, and 
so on until a balance is reached. All of this occurs instantly, 
as soon as the multi-meter is connected to the circuit.
What this tells us is that you must be careful when 
using your multi-meter to measure voltage. If the circuit- 
under-test’s resistance is high, the multi-meter resistance will 
affect the circuit operation, causing an incorrect reading.
Any multi-meter will affect operation of any circuit to 
a greater or lesser extent — but the higher the multi- 
meter resistance compared with the circuit resistance, the 
more accurate the reading. 

Measuring current and voltage
75
Hint:
A good rule-of-thumb to ensure reasonably accurate results is to 
make sure that the multi-meter resistance is at least ten times the 
circuit’s resistance.
Fortunately, because of their very nature, digital multi-meters 
usually have an internal resistance in the order of millions of 
ohms; a fact which allows it to accurately measure voltages 
in circuits with even high resistances. 
Well. We’ve reached the end of this chapter, so how about 
giving the quiz over the page a go to see if you’ve really learned 
what you’ve been reading about.

Starting electronics
76
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 The voltage produced by a bat-
tery is:  
a 9 V  
b alternating 
c 1.5 V  
d direct  
e none of these 
2 The voltage across the two 
resistors of a simple voltage 
divider:  
a is always 4.5 V  
b is always equal  
c always adds up to 9 V  
d all of these  
e none of these 
3 The voltage divider rule gives:  
a the current from the battery  
b the voltage across a resistor 
in a voltage divider  
c the applied voltage  
d b and c  
e all of these  
f none of these
4 Conventional current flows from 
a point of higher electrical po-
tential to one of lower electrical 
potential.
 
True or false?
5 Applying a multi-meter to a 
circuit, to measure one of the 
circuit’s parameters, will always 
affect the circuit’s operation to a 
greater or lesser extent.
 
True or false?
6 Twenty-five, 100 kΩ resistors are 
in parallel. What is the equivalent 
resistance of the network?  
a 4 kΩ  
b 2 kΩ  
c 2k0108  
d 5 kΩ  
e none of these

Capacitors
77
4 Capacitors
You need a number of components to build the circuits in 
this chapter:
● 
1 x 15 k resistor
● 
1 x 22 µF electrolytic capacitor
● 
1 x 220 µF electrolytic capacitor
● 
1 x 470 µF electrolytic capacitor
● 
1 x switch
As usual, the resistor power rating and tolerance are of no 
importance. The capacitor must, however, have a voltage 
rating of 10 V or more. The switch can be of any type, even 
an old light switch will do if you have one. A slide switch is 
ideal, however, both common and cheap.

Starting electronics
78
To make the connections between the switch and your 
breadboard, you can use common multi-strand wire if you 
like, and tin the ends which push into the breadboard — see 
last chapter for instructions — but a better idea is to use 22 
SWG single-strand tinned copper wire. This is quite rigid and 
pushes easily into the breadboard connectors without break-
ing up. It’s available in reels, and a reel will last you quite a 
while, so it’s worth buying for this and future purposes.
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
If short strands break off from multi-strand wire 
and get stuck in the breadboard connectors you might 
get short circuits occurring. Make sure — if you use 
multi-strand wire — you tin wire ends properly. Even 
better — don’t use multi-strand wire, instead use 
single-strand wire.
Solder a couple of short lengths of the wire to switch connec-
tions and push on a couple of bits of insulating covering (you 
can buy this in reels also, but if you have a few inches of spare 
mains cable you’ll find you can strip the few centimetres you 
need from this) to protect against short circuits.

Capacitors
79
Capacitors
We’re going to take a close look at a new type of component 
this chapter: the capacitor. We shall see how capacitors 
function, firstly in practical experiments which you can do 
for yourself and then, secondly with a bit of theory (boring, 
boring, boring! — Who said that?) which will show you a few 
things that can’t easily be demonstrated in experiments.
So, let’s get started. What exactly makes up a capacitor? 
Well, there’s an easy answer: a capacitor is made up from 
two electrically conductive plates, separated from each other 
by a sandwiched layer of insulating material. Figure 4.1 gives 
you a rough idea.
However, this is an oversimplification really; there are many, 
many different types of capacitor and, although their basic 
make-up is of two insulated plates they are not always made 
in quite this simple form. Nevertheless, the concept is one 
to be going along with. 
Figure 4.1 
A simple diagrammatic representation of a capacitor

Starting electronics
80
Down to business
Figure 4.2(a) shows the circuit symbol of an ordinary capaci-
tor. As you’ll appreciate, this illustrates the basic capacitor 
make-up we’ve just seen. Figure 4.2(b), on the other hand, 
shows the circuit symbol of a specific although very common 
type of capacitor: the electrolytic capacitor.
Hint:
The electrolytic capacitor gets its name from the fact that its basic 
capacitor action is derived through the process of electrolysis when 
the capacitor is connected into circuit. This electrolytic action means 
that an electrolytic capacitor must be inserted into circuit the right 
way round, unlike most other capacitors. We say that electrolytic 
capacitors are polarised and to show this the circuit symbol has 
positive (white) and negative (black) plates. Sometimes as we’ve 
shown, a small positive symbol (+) is drawn beside the electrolytic 
capacitor’s positive plate, to reinforce this.
Figure 4.2 
Circuit symbols for (a) an ordinary and (b) an electrolytic capacitor

Capacitors
81
In our experiments in this chapter, we’re going to use elec-
trolytic capacitors, not because we like to be awkward, but 
because the values of capacitance we want are quite high. And 
electrolytic capacitors are generally the only ones capable of 
having these values, while keeping to a reasonable size and 
without being too expensive. Anyway, not to worry, all you 
have to do is remember to put the capacitors into circuit the 
right way round.
You can make sure of this, as all electrolytic capacitors have 
some kind of marking on them which identifies positive and 
negative plates. Figure 4.3 shows two types of fairly typical 
electrolytic capacitors. One, on the left, has what is called an 
axial body, where the connecting leads come out from each 
end. One end, the positive plate end, generally has a ridge 
around it and sometimes is marked with positive symbols (as 
mine is). Sometimes, the negative plate end has a black band 
around it, or negative symbols.
The capacitor on the right has a radial body, where both leads 
come out from one end. Again, however, one or sometimes 
both of the leads will be identified by polarity markings on 
the body.
Whatever type of electrolytic capacitor we actually use in 
circuits, we shall show the capacitor in a breadboard layout 
diagram as an axial type. This is purely to make it obvious 
(due to the ridged positive plate end) which lead is which. 
Both types are, in fact, interchangeable as long as the correct 
polarity is observed, and voltage rating (that is, the maximum 
voltage which can be safely applied across its leads — usually 
written on an electrolytic capacitor’s body) isn’t exceeded.

Starting electronics
82
Measuring up
Capacitance values are measured in a unit called the farad 
(named after the scientist: Faraday) and given the symbol: 
F. We’ll define exactly what the farad is later, suffice to say 
here that it is a very large unit. Typical capacitors have val-
ues much, much smaller. Fractions such as a millionth of a 
farad (that is, one microfarad: 1 µF), a thousand millionth 
of a farad (that is, one nanofarad: 1 nF), or one million mil-
lionth of a farad (that is, one picofarad: 1 pF) are common.
Sometimes, like the Ω or R of resistances, the unit F is omitted 
— 15 n, instead of 15 nF, say. 
The circuit for our first experiment is shown in Figure 4.4. You 
should see that it bears a striking resemblance to the voltage 
divider resistor circuits we looked at last chapter, except that 
a capacitor has taken the place of one of the resistors. Also 
included in the circuit of Figure 4.4 is a switch. In the last 
chapter’s circuits, no switch was used as we were only inter-
ested in static conditions after the circuits were connected. 
Figure 4.3 
(Left) an axial capacitor and (right) a radial capacitor

Capacitors
83
The circuits this chapter, on the other hand, have a number 
of dynamic properties which occur for only a while after the 
circuit is connected. We can use the switch to make sure that 
we see all of these dynamic properties, from the moment 
electric current is allowed to flow into the circuit.
A breadboard layout for the circuit is shown in Figure 4.5. 
Make sure the switch is off before you connect your battery 
up to the rest of the circuit.
As the switch is off, no current should flow so the meter read-
ing should be 0 V. If you’ve accidentally had the switch on and 
current has already flowed, you’ll have a voltage reading other 
than zero, even after the switch is consequently turned off. 
In such a case, get a short length of wire and touch it to both 
leads of the capacitor simultaneously, for a few seconds, so 
that a short circuit is formed. The voltage displayed by the 
meter should rapidly fall to 0 V and stay there. 
Now you’re ready to start, but before you switch on, read 
the next section!
Figure 4.4 
A simple resistor and capacitor circuit

Starting electronics
84
Figure 4.5 
A breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 4.4
Getting results
As well as watching what happens when the circuit is switched 
on, you should make a record of the voltages displayed by 
the meter, every few seconds. To help you do this a blank 
table of results is given in Table 4.1. All you have to do is fill 
in the voltages you have measured, at the times given, into 
the table at successive measurement points. You’ll find that 
the voltage increases from zero as you switch the circuit on, 
rapidly at first but slowing down to a snail’s pace at the end. 
Don’t worry if your measurements of time and voltage aren’t 
too accurate — we’re only trying to prove the principle of the 
experiment, not the exact details. Besides, if you switch off 

Capacitors
85
Time (seconds) 
Voltage (V)
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
30 
 
40 
 
50 
 
60
Figure 4.6 
A blank graph to plot your measurements. Use Table 4.1 above with 
it to record your measurements
Table 4.1 
Results of your measurements
and then short circuit the capacitor, as already described, 
you can repeat the measurements as often as required.
When you’ve got your results, transfer them as points onto 
the blank graph of Figure 4.6 and sketch in a curve which goes 
approximately through all the points. Table 4.2 and Figure 4.7 
show results obtained when the experiment was performed 
in preparing this book.

Starting electronics
86
Time (seconds) 
Voltage (V)
 
5 
4 
 
10 
6 
 
15 
7 
 
20 
8 
 
30 
8.5 
 
40 
8.7 
 
50 
8.9 
 
60 
9
Table 4.2 
Our results while preparing this book
Figure 4.7 
The results of our experiments
What you should note in your experiment is that the volt-
age across the capacitor (any capacitor, in fact) rises, not 
instantaneously as with the voltage across a resistor, but 
gradually, following a curve. Is the curve the same, do you 
think, for all capacitors? Change the capacitor for one with a 
value of 220 µF (about half the previous one). Using the blank 
table of Table 4.3 and blank graph in Figure 4.8, perform the 
experiment again, to find out.

Capacitors
87
Time (seconds) 
Voltage (V)
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
40
Table 4.3 
The results of your measurements
Figure 4.8 
A blank graph to plot your measurements. Use Table 4.3 shown 
above as well
Table 4.4 and Figure 4.9 show the results of our second experi-
ment (yours should be similar) which shows that although 
the curves of the two circuits aren’t exactly the same as far as 
the time axis is concerned, they are exactly the same shape. 
Interesting, huh?
This proves that the rising voltage across a capacitor follows 
some sort of law. It is an exponential law, and the curves you 

Starting electronics
88
Time (seconds) 
Voltage (V)
 
5 
6 
 
10 
7.2 
 
15 
8 
 
20 
8.3 
 
25 
8.5 
 
30 
8.7 
 
40 
9
obtained are known as exponential curves. These exponential 
curves are related by their time constants. We can calculate 
any rising exponential curve’s time constant, as shown in 
Figure 4.10, where a value of 0.63 times the total voltage 
change cuts the time axis at a time equalling the curve’s time 
constant, τ (the Greek letter tau).
Figure 4.9 
A graph showing our results of the second experiment
Table 4.4 
The results of our second experiment

Capacitors
89
In a capacitor circuit like that of Figure 4.4, the exponential 
curve’s time constant is given simply by the product of the 
capacitor and resistor value. So, in the case of the first experi-
ment, the time constant is:
 
and, in the case of the second experiment:
 
You can check this, if you like, against your curves, or those 
in Figures 4.7 and 4.9, where you will find that the times when 
the capacitor voltage is about 5V7 (that is, 0.63 times the total 
voltage change of 9 V) are about 8 seconds and 4 seconds. 
Not bad when you consider possible experimental errors: the 
biggest of which is the existence of the meter resistance.
Figure 4.10 
A graph showing an exponential curve, related to the time constant

Starting electronics
90
Hint:
One final point of interest about exponential curves, before we move 
on, is that the measurement denoted by the curve can be taken to 
be within about 1% of its final value after a time corresponding to 
five time constants. Because of this, it’s taken as a rule-of-thumb by 
electronics engineers that the changing voltage across a capacitor is 
complete after 5τ.
The other way
During these experiments you should have noticed how the 
voltage across the capacitor appeared to stay for a while, even 
after the switch had been turned off. How could this be so?
Figure 4.11 shows the circuit of an experiment you should now 
do, which will help you to understand this unusual capability 
of capacitors to apparently store voltage. Build the circuit up 
as in the breadboard layout of Figure 4.12, with the switch 
in its on position.
Now, measure the voltages at selected time intervals, and 
fill in the results into Table 4.5, then transfer them to form a 
curve in Figure 4.13, after switching the switch off.

Capacitors
91
Figure 4.12 
The breadboard layout for the experiment shown in  
Figure 4.11 
Figure 4.11 
An experimental circuit to demonstrate how a capacitor stores 
voltage (or charge)

Starting electronics
92
Time (seconds) 
Voltage (V)
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
30 
 
40 
 
50 
 
60
Table 4.5 
The results of your measurements
The results we obtained in preparing this book are tabulated 
in Table 4.6 and plotted in Figure 4.14. You can see that the 
curve obtained is similar to the curves we got earlier, but are 
falling not rising. Like the earlier curves, this is an exponential 
curve, too.
Figure 4.13 
A blank graph to plot your measurements. Use 
Table 4.5 shown above

Capacitors
93
Time (seconds) 
Voltage (V)
 
5 
7.5 
 
10 
6 
 
15 
5 
 
20 
4 
 
30 
2.5 
 
40 
1.5 
 
50 
1 
 
60 
0.7
Table 4.6 
The results of our experiments while preparing this book
If you wish, you can calculate the time constant here, in the 
same way, but remember that it must now be the time at 
which the voltage falls to 0.63 of the total voltage drop, that 
is, when:
 
Figure 4.14 The graph showing our own results

Starting electronics
94
Theoretical aspects
So what is it about a capacitor which causes this delay in 
voltage between switching on or off the electricity supply and 
obtaining the final voltage across it? It’s almost as if there’s 
some mystical time delay inside the capacitor. To find the 
answer we’ll have to consider a capacitor’s innards again.
Figure 4.15 shows the capacitor we first saw in Figure 4.1, 
but this time it is shown connected to a battery which, as 
we know, is capable of supplying electrons from its negative 
terminal. A number of electrons gather on the capacitor plate 
connected to the battery’s negative terminal, which in turn 
repel any electrons on the other plate towards the battery’s 
positive terminal. A deficiency in electrons causes molecules 
of this capacitor plate to have a positive charge, so the two 
Figure 4.15 
This is the capacitor shown in Figure 4.1, but this time connected to 
a battery with opposite charges built up on each plate

Capacitors
95
plates of the capacitor now have equal, but opposite, electric 
charges on them.
Current only flows during the time when the charges are build-
ing up on the capacitor plates — not before and not after. It’s 
also important to remember that current cannot flow through 
the capacitor — a layer of insulator (known correctly as the 
dielectric) lies between the plates, remember — current only 
flows in the circuit around the capacitor.
If we now completely disconnect the charged capacitor from 
the battery, the equal and opposite charges remain — in 
theory — indefinitely. In practice, on the other hand, charge 
is always lost due to leakage current between the plates. 
You can try this for yourself, if you like: put a capacitor into 
the breadboard then charge it up by connecting the battery 
directly across it. Now disconnect the battery and leave the 
capacitor in the breadboard for a time (overnight, say). Then 
connect your meter across it to measure the voltage. You 
should still get a reading, but remember that the resistance 
of the meter itself will always drain the charge stored.
The size of the charge  stored in a capacitor depends on two 
factors; the capacitor’s capacitance (in farads) and the ap-
plied voltage. The relationship is given by:
 
where Q is the charge measured in coulombs, C is the capaci-
tance and V is the voltage. From this we can see that a charge 
of one coulomb is stored by a capacitor of one farad, when a 
voltage of one volt is applied.

Starting electronics
96
Alternatively, we may define the farad (as we promised we 
would, earlier in the chapter) as being the capacitance which 
will store a charge of one coulomb when a voltage of one volt 
is applied.
We can now understand why it is that changing the capaci-
tor value changes the time constant, and hence changes the 
associated time delay in the changing voltage across the ca-
pacitor. Increasing the capacitance, say, increases the charge 
stored. As the current flowing is determined by the resistance 
in the circuit, and is thus fixed at any particular voltage, this 
increased charge takes longer to build up or longer to decay 
away. Reducing the capacitance reduces the charge, which is 
therefore more quickly stored or more quickly discharged.
Similarly, as the resistor in the circuit defines the current 
flowing to charge or discharge the capacitor, increasing or 
decreasing its value must decrease or increase the current, 
therefore increasing or decreasing the time taken to charge or 
discharge the capacitor. This is why the circuit’s time constant 
is a product of both capacitance and resistance values.
Capacitance values
Finally, we can look at how the size and construction of 
capacitors affects their capacitance. The capacitance of a 
basic capacitor for example, consisting of two parallel, flat 
plates separated by a dielectric may be calculated from the 
formula:

Capacitors
97
 
where ε is the permittivity of the dielectric, A is the area 
of overlap of the plates, and d is the distance between the 
plates.
Different insulating materials have different permit-
tivities, so different capacitor values may be made, 
simply by using different dielectrics. Air, say, has a per-
mittivity of about 9 x 10-12 farads per metre (that is, 
9 x 10-12 Fm-1). Permittivities of other materials are usually ex-
pressed as a relative permittivity, where a material’s relative 
permittivity is the number of times its permittivity is greater 
than air. So, for example, mica (a typical capacitor dielectric), 
which has a relative permittivity of 6, has an actual permit-
tivity of 54 x 10-12 Fm-1 (that is, 6 x 9 x 10-12 Fm-1).
So, a possible capacitor, consisting of two parallel metal 
plates of overlapping area 20 cm2, 10 mm apart, with a mica 
dielectric, has a capacitance of:
 
Er, I think that’s enough theory to be grappling with for now, 
don’t you? Try your understanding of capacitors and how 
they work with the chapter’s quiz.

Starting electronics
98
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 The value of a capacitor with 
two plates of overlapping area 
40 cm2, separated by a 5 mm 
layer of air is:  
a 7.2 pF  
b 7.2 x 10-12 pF.  
c 72 pF  
d 100 µF  
e a and b  
f none of these
2 A capacitor of 1 nF has a volt-
age of 10 V applied across it, 
The maximum charge stored is:  
a 1 x 10-10 C  
b 1 x 108 C  
c 10 x 10-8 C  
d 1 x 10-8 F  
e a and c  
f none of these
3 A capacitor of 10 µF and a resis-
tor of 1 MΩ are combined in 
a capacitor/resistor charging 
circuit. The time constant is:  
a 1 second  
b 10 x 106 second  
c 10 seconds  
d not possible to calculate 
from  these figures  
e none of these
4 A capacitor is fully charged 
by an applied voltage of 100 V, 
then discharged. After a time not 
less than 40 seconds the voltage 
across the capacitor has fallen to 
1 V. At what time was the voltage 
across the capacitor 37 V? 
a 10 seconds  
b 37 seconds 
c 8 seconds 
d it is impossible to say from the 
figures given  
e none of these 
5 In question 4, the capacitor has a 
value of 100 µF. What is the charg-
ing resistance value?  
a 80,000 µF  
b 80,000 C 
c 80 kΩ 
d 8 kΩ  
e a slap in the face with a wet fish  
f none of these

ICs oscillators and filters
99
5 ICs, oscillators and filters
You’ll need a number of different components to build the 
circuits this chapter, some of them you’ll already have, but 
there are a few new ones, too. First, the resistors required 
are:
● 
1 x 1k5
● 
1 x 4k7
● 
1 x 10 k
Second, capacitors:
● 
1 x 1 nF
● 
2 x 10 nF
● 
2 x 100 nF

Starting electronics
100
● 
1 x 1 µF electrolytic
● 
1 x 10 µF electrolytic 
Power ratings, tolerances and so on, of all these components 
are not critical, but the electrolytic capacitors should have a 
voltage rating of 9 V or more.
Some other components you already have: a switch, battery, 
battery connector, breadboard, multi-meter, should all be 
close at hand, as well as some single-strand tinned copper 
wire. You are going to use the single-strand wire to make 
connections from point-to-point on the breadboard, and 
as it’s uninsulated this has to be done carefully, to prevent 
short circuits. Photo 5.1 shows the best method. Cut a short 
length of wire and hold it in the jaws of your snipe-nosed or 
long-nosed pliers. Bend the wire round the jaws to form a 
sharp right-angle in the wire. The tricky bit is next — judg-
ing the length of the connection you require, move the pliers 
along the wire and then bend the other end of the wire also 
at right angles round the other side of the jaws (Photo 5.2). 
Photo 5.1 
Take a short piece of wire between the jaws of your pliers…

ICs oscillators and filters
101
If you remember that the grid of holes in the breadboard 
are equidistantly spaced at 2.5 mm (or a tenth of an inch if 
you’re old-fashioned like me — what’s an inch, Grandad?) 
then it becomes easier. A connection over two holes is 5 mm 
long, over four holes is 10 mm long and so on — you’ll soon 
get the hang of it.
Now, holding the wire at the top, in the pliers, push it into 
the breadboard as shown in Photo 5.3, until it lies flush on 
the surface of the breadboard as in Photo 5.4. No bother, eh? 
Even with a number of components in the breadboard it is 
difficult to short circuit connections made this way.
Two other components you  need are: 
● 
1 x 555 integrated circuit
● 
1 x light emitting diode (any colour).
Photo 5.2 
…and bend it carefully into two right angles, judging the length

Starting electronics
102
Photo 5.4 
If the link is a good fit. It can be used over and over again in different 
positions
Photo 5.3 
The wire link you have made should drop neatly into the breadboard

ICs oscillators and filters
103
We’ve seen an integrated circuit (IC) before and we know 
what it looks like, but we’ve never used one before, so we’ll 
take a closer look at the 555 now. It is an 8-pin dual-in-line 
(DIL) device and one is shown in Photo 5.5. Somewhere on 
its body is a notch or dot, which indicates the whereabouts 
of pin 1 of the IC as shown in Figure 5.1. The remainder of the 
pins are numbered in sequence in an anti-clockwise direction 
around the IC.
Figure 5.1 
A diagram of the normal configuration of any IC: the dot marks pin 1 
and the remaining pins run anti-clockwise
Photo 5.5 
The 555, an 8 pin DIL timer IC, beside a UK one penny piece

Starting electronics
104
ICs should be inserted into a breadboard across the bread-
board’s central bridged portion. Isn’t it amazing that this 
portion is 7.5 mm across  and, hey presto, the rows of pins of 
the IC are about 7.5 mm apart? It’s as if the IC was made for 
the breadboard! So the IC fits into the breadboard something 
like that in Photo 5.6.
Photo 5.6 
The IC mounted across the central divide in the breadboard, which is 
designed to be the exact size
We’ll look at the light emitting diode later.
If you remember, last chapter we took a close look at capaci-
tors, how they charge and discharge, storing and releasing 
electrical energy. The first thing we shall do this chapter, 
however, is use this principle to build a useful circuit called 

ICs oscillators and filters
105
an oscillator. Then, in turn, we shall use the oscillator to show 
some more principles of capacitors. So, we’ve got a two-fold 
job to do now and there’s an awful lot of work to get through 
— let’s get started.
Figure 5.2 shows the circuit of the oscillator we’re going to 
build. It’s a common type of oscillator known as an astable 
multi-vibrator. The name arises because the output signal 
appears to oscillate (or vibrate) between two voltages, never 
resting at one voltage for more than just a short period of time 
(it is therefore unstable, more commonly known as astable). 
An astable multi-vibrator built from discrete that is, individual 
components, can be tricky to construct so we’ve opted to use 
an integrated circuit (the 555) as the oscillator’s heart.
Inside the 555 is an electronic switch  which turns on when 
the voltage across it is approximately two-thirds the power 
supply voltage (about 6 V in the circuit of Figure 5.2), and 
off when the voltage is less than one-third the power supply 
Figure 5.2 
The circuit of the astable multi-vibrator circuit using the 555

Starting electronics
106
voltage (about 3 V). Figure 5.3(a) shows an equivalent circuit 
to that of Figure 5.2 for the times during which the electronic 
switch of the 555 is off.
You should be able to work out that the capacitor C1 of the 
circuit is connected through resistors R1 and R2 to the posi-
tive power supply rail. The time constant τ1 of this part of the 
circuit is therefore given by:
 
When the voltage across the switch rises to about 6 V, how-
ever, the switch turns on (as shown in Figure 5.3(b), forming 
a short circuit across the capacitor and resistor, R2. The 
capacitor now discharges with a time constant given by:
 
Of course, when the discharging voltage across the switch 
falls to about 3 V, the switch turns off again, and the capaci-
tor charges up once more. The process repeats indefinitely, 
with the switch turning on and off at a rate determined by the 
two time constants. Because of this up and down effect such 
oscillators are often known as relaxation oscillators.
As you might expect the circuit integrated within the 555 is 
not just that simple and there are many other parts to it (one 
part, for example, converts the charging and discharging expo-
nential voltages into only two definite voltages — 9 V and 0 V 
— so that the 555’s output signal is a square wave, as shown 
in Figure 5.3(c). But the basic idea of the astable multi-vibra-
tor formed by a 555 is just as we’ve described here.

ICs oscillators and filters
107
Figure 5.3 
(a) shows a circuit equivalent to Figure 5.2 when the 555’s switch is 
off; (b) shows the circuit when the switch is on; (c) shows the square wave output 
signal
Throwing light on it
The 555 IC is one of only two new types of electronic compo-
nent this circuit introduces you to. The other is a light emitting 
diode (LED) which is a type of indicator. One is shown in 
Photo 5.7. LEDs are polarised and so must be inserted into 
circuit the right way round. All LEDs have an anode (which 
goes to the more positive side of the circuit) and cathode 
(which goes to the more negative side). 
Generally, but not always, the anode and cathode of an LED 
are identified by the lengths of the component leads — the 
cathode is the shorter of the two. There’s often a flat side to 
an LED too — usually, but again not always, on the cathode 
side — to help identify leads.
(a)
(b)
(c)

Starting electronics
108
Figure 5.4 
The breadboard layout for the multi-vibrator circuit as shown in 
Figure 5.2 
Photo 5.7 
One of the most popular electronic components, the LED
The complete circuit’s breadboard layout is shown in Figure 
5.4. Build it and see what happens.
When you turn on, you should find that the LED flashes on 
and off, quite rapidly (about five or six times a second, actu-
ally). This means your circuit is working correctly. If it doesn’t 
work check polarity of all polarised components: the battery, 
IC, LED and capacitor.

ICs oscillators and filters
109
Ouch, that hertz 
We can calculate the rate at which the LED flashes, more 
accurately, from formulae relating to the 555. A quick study 
of the square wave output shows that it consists of a higher 
voltage for a time (which we can call T1) and a lower voltage 
for a time (which we will call T2). 
Now, T1 is given by: 
 
and T2 is given by: 
 
So, the time for the whole period of the square wave is: 
 
and as the frequency of a waveform is the inverse of its period 
we may calculate the waveform’s frequency as: 
 
Earlier, we defined the two time constants, τ1 and τ2, as 
functions of the capacitor and the two resistors, and so by 
substituting them into the above formula, we can calculate 
the frequency as:
 
 
(1)

Starting electronics
110
So, the frequency of the output signal of the circuit of Figure 
5.2 is: 
 
or, more correctly speaking:
 
Equation 1 is quite important really, because it shows that 
the frequency of the signal is inversely proportional to the 
capacitance. If we decrease the value of the capacitor we will 
increase the frequency. We can test this by taking out the 
10 µF capacitor and putting in a 1 µF capacitor. Now, the LED 
flashes so quickly (about 58 times a second) that your eye 
can’t even detect it is flashing and it appears to be always on. 
If you replace the capacitor with one of a value of say 100 µF 
the LED will flash only very slowly.
Now, let’s stop and think about what we’ve just done. Basi-
cally we’ve used a capacitor in precisely the ways we looked 
at last chapter — to charge and discharge with electrical 
energy so that the voltage across the capacitor goes up and 
down at the same time. True, in the experiments last chapter 
you were the switch, whereas this chapter an IC has taken 
your place. But the principle — charging and discharging a 
capacitor — is the same.
The current which enters the capacitor to charge it, then 
leaves the capacitor to discharge it, is direct current because 
it comes from a 9 V d.c. battery. However, if we look at the 

ICs oscillators and filters
111
output signal (Figure 5.3(c)) we can see that the signal alter-
nates between two levels. Looked at in this way, the astable 
multi-vibrator is a d.c.-to-a.c.converter. And that is going to 
be useful in our next experiment, where we look at the way 
capacitors are affected by a.c. The circuit we shall look at is 
shown in Figure 5.5 and is very simple, but it’ll do nicely, thank 
you. It should remind you of a similar circuit we have already 
looked at; the voltage divider, only one of the two resistors 
of the voltage divider has been replaced by a capacitor. Like 
an ordinary voltage divider the circuit has an input and an 
output. What we’re going to attempt to do in the experiment 
is to measure the output signal when the input signal is sup-
plied from our astable multivibrator.
Figure 5.5 
A voltage divider — but with a capacitor
Figure 5.6 shows the whole circuit of the experiment while 
Figure 5.7 shows the breadboard layout. The procedure for 
the experiment is pretty straightforward: measure the output 
voltage of the a.c. voltage divider when a number of differ-
ent frequencies are generated by the astable multi-vibrator, 
then tabulate and plot these results on a graph. Things re-
ally couldn’t be easier. Table 5.1 is the table to fill in as you 
obtain your results and Figure 5.8 is marked out in a suitable 
grid to plot your graph. To change the astable multivibra-
tor’s frequency, it is only necessary to change capacitor Cl. 
Increasing it ten-fold decreases the frequency by a factor of 

Starting electronics
112
Figure 5.7 
The breadboard layout of the circuit in Figure 5.6. It is the same as 
that in Figure 5.4, with a capacitor in place of the LED
Figure 5.6 
A circuit combining the astable multi-vibrator and the circuit in 
Figure 5.5

ICs oscillators and filters
113
Value of C1 
Calculated frequency 
Measured voltage
10 µF 
5.8 Hz 
1 µF 
58 Hz 
100 nF 
580 Hz 
10 nF 
5.8 kHz 
1 nF 
58 kHz
Table 5.1 
Results when capacitor C2 is 100 nF
ten; decreasing the capacitor value by ten increases the fre-
quency ten-fold. Five different values of capacitor therefore 
give an adequate range of frequencies.
As you do the experiment you’ll find that only quite low volt-
ages are measured (up to about 4 V a.c.) so depending on your 
Figure 5.8 
A blank graph on which you can plot your experimental results. Use 
Table 5.1 above as well

Starting electronics
114
multi-meter’s lowest a.c. range you may not achieve the level 
of accuracy you would normally desire, but the results will 
be OK, nevertheless.
Table 5.2 and Figure 5.9 show my results which should be simi-
lar to yours (if not, you’re wrong — I can’t be wrong, can I?). 
The graph shows that the size of the output signal of the a.c. 
Figure 5.9 
Graphed results of Table 5.2
Value of C1 
Calculated Frequency 
Measured voltage
10 µF 
5.8Hz 
0 V 
1 µF 
58Hz 
0 V 
100 nF 
580Hz 
1.5 V 
10 nF 
5.8 kHz 
4 V 
1 nF 
58 kHz 
4.2 V 
Table 5.2 
My tabled results

ICs oscillators and filters
115
voltage divider is dependent on the frequency of the applied 
input signal. In particular, there are three clearly distinguish-
able sections to this graph, each relating to frequency. 
First, above a certain frequency, known as the corner fre-
quency, the output signal is constant and at its maximum. 
Second, at low frequencies (close to 0 Hz) the output is 
zero.
Third, between these two sections the output signal varies in 
size depending on the applied input signal frequency. 
Is this the same for all a.c. voltage dividers of the type shown 
in Figure 5.5? Well, let’s repeat the experiment using a differ-
ent capacitor for C2, to find out. 
Try a 10 nF capacitor and repeat the whole procedure, putting 
your results in Table 5.3 and Figure 5.10. Table 5.4 and Figure 
5.11 show our results. 
Table 5.3 
Results when capacitor C2 is 10 nF
Value of C1 
Calculated frequency 
Measured voltage
10 µF 
5.8 Hz 
1 µF 
58 Hz 
100 nF 
580 Hz 
10 nF 
5.8 kHz 
1 nF 
58 kHz

Starting electronics
116
Figure 5.10 
A graph for use with your results from the experiment with the 
10 nF capacitor in Table 5.3
And yes, the graph is the same shape but is moved along the 
horizontal axis by an amount equivalent to a ten-fold increase 
in frequency (the capacitor was decreased in value by ten-
fold, remember). A similar inverse relationship is caused by 
changing the resistor value, too. 
Frequency, capacitance and resistance are related in the a.c. 
voltage divider by the expression: 
 
where f is the corner frequency. For the first voltage divider, 
with a capacitance of 10 nF and a resistance of 1.5 kΩ, the 
corner frequency is: 
 

ICs oscillators and filters
117
Value of C1 
Calculated frequency 
Measured voltage
10 µF 
5.8 Hz 
0 V 
1 µF 
58 Hz 
0 V 
100 nF 
580 Hz 
0 V 
10 nF 
5.8 kHz 
1.5 V 
1 nF 
58 kHz 
4 V 
Table 5.4 
My results (C2 = 10 nF)
Figure 5.11 
Graph of my results from Table 5.4 in the same experiment
which is more or less what we found in the experiment. In 
the second voltage divider, with a 10 nF capacitor, the corner 
frequency increases by ten to 66,666 Hz.
Remembering what we learned last chapter about resistors 
and capacitors in charging/discharging circuits, we can sim-
plify the expression for corner frequency to:

Starting electronics
118
 
because the product RC is the time constant, τ. This may be 
easier for you to remember.
An a.c. voltage divider can be constructed in a different way, 
as shown in Figure 5.12. Here the resistor and capacitor are 
transposed. What do you think the result will be? Well, the 
output signal size now decreases with increasing frequency 
— exactly the opposite effect of the a.c. voltage divider of 
Figure 5.5! All other aspects are the same, however: there is 
a constant section below a corner frequency, and a section 
where the output signal is zero, as shown in Figure 5.13. Once 
again the corner frequency is given by the expression:
 
Figure 5.12 
An a.c. voltage divider with the resistor and capacitor transposed

ICs oscillators and filters
119
Filter Tips
The a.c. voltage dividers of Figures 5.5 and 5.12 are normally 
shown in a slightly different way, as in Figures 5.14(a) and 
(b). Due to the fact they allow signals of some frequencies 
to pass through, while filtering out other signal frequencies, 
they are more commonly called filters.
The filter of Figure 5.14(a) is known as a high-pass filter 
— because it allows signal frequencies higher than its corner 
frequency to pass while filtering out signal frequencies lower 
than its corner frequency.
Figure 5.13 
This graph shows the similarities and differences between this 
circuit and that in Figure 5.5

Starting electronics
120
The filter of Figure 5.14(b) is a low-pass filter — yes, you’ve 
guessed it — because it passes signals with frequencies be-
low its corner frequency, while filtering out higher frequency 
signals.
Filters are quite useful in a number of areas of electronics. 
The most obvious example of a low-pass filter is probably the 
scratch filter sometimes seen on stereo systems. Scratches 
and surface noise when a record is played, or tape hiss when 
a cassette tape is played, consist of quite high frequencies; 
the scratch filter merely filters out these frequencies, leaving 
the music relatively noise free.
Bass and treble controls of an amplifier are also examples 
of high- and low-pass filters: a bit more complex than the 
Figure 5.14 
The a.c. divider sections of the circuits in Fiqure 5.5 and Figure 
5.12  

ICs oscillators and filters
121
simple ones we’ve looked at here but following the same 
general principles.
And that’s about it for this chapter. You can try a few experi-
ments of your own with filters if you want. Just remember that 
whenever you use your meter to measure voltage across a 
resistor in a filter, the meter resistance affects the actual value 
of resistance and can thus drastically affect the reading.
Now try the quiz over the page to check and see if you’ve 
been able to understand what we’ve been looking at this 
chapter.

Starting electronics
122
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 A signal of frequency 1 kHz is 
applied to a low-pass filter with 
a corner frequency of 10 kHz. 
What happens? 
 
a The output signal is one-
tenth of the input signal   
b The output signal is larger 
than the input signal 
 
c There is no output signal  
d The output signal is identical 
to the input signal  
 
e All of these 
2 A high-pass filter consisting 
of a 10 kΩ resistor and an un-
known capacitor has a corner 
frequency of 100 Hz. What is the 
value of the capacitor? 
 
a 1 nF  
 
b 10 nF  
 
c 100 nF  
 
d 1000 nF  
 
e 1µF
3 A low-pass filter consisting of a 
1 µF capacitor and a unknown 
resistor has a corner frequency 
of 100 Hz. What is the value of the 
resistor?
 
a 10 kΩ 
 
b 1 kΩ  
 
c 100 kΩ 
 
d All of these   
e It makes no difference  
f d and e 
 
g None of these 
4 In a circuit similar to that in Figure 
5.2, resistor R1 is 10 kΩ, resistor 
R2 is 100 kΩ, and capacitor C1 is 
10 nF. The output frequency of the 
astable multi-vibrator is: 
 
a a square wave  
 
b about 680 Hz   
c too fast to see the LED  
flashing  
 
d a and b  
 
e c and d  
 
f None of these

Diodes I
123
6 Diodes I
We’re going to take a close look at a new type of component 
this chapter — the diode. Diodes are the simplest component 
in the range of devices known as semiconductors. Actually, 
we’ve briefly looked at a form of diode before: the light-emit-
ting diode, or LED, and we’ve seen another semiconductor 
too: the 555 integrated circuit. But now we’ll start to consider 
semiconductors in depth.
Naturally, you’ll need some new components for the circuits 
you’re going to build here. These are:
● 
1 x 150 Ω, 0.5 W resistor
● 
1 x 1N4001 diode
● 
1 x OA47 diode
● 
1 x 3V0 zener diode (type BZY88)
● 
1 x 1k0 miniature horizontal preset

Starting electronics
124
Diodes get their name from the basic fact that they have 
two electrodes (di — ode, geddit?). One of these electrodes 
is known as the anode: the other is the cathode. Figure 6.1 
shows the symbol for a diode, where the anode and cathode 
are marked. Figure 6.2 shows some typical diode body shapes, 
again with anode and cathode marked.
Photo 6.1  is a photograph of a miniature horizontal preset 
resistor. We’re going to use it in the following circuits as 
a variable voltage divider. To adjust it you’ll need a small 
screwdriver or tool to fit in the adjusting slot — turning it one 
way and another alters position of the preset’s wiper over 
the resistance track.
Figure 6.2 
Some typical diode body shapes
Figure 6.1 
The circuit symbol for an ordinary diode

Diodes I
125
Figure 6.3  shows the circuit we’re going to build first this 
chapter. It’s very simple, using two components we’re already 
familiar with (a resistor and an LED) together with the new 
component we want to look at: a diode. Before you build it, 
note which way round the diode is and also make sure you 
get the LED polarised correctly, too. In effect, the anodes of 
each diode (a LED is a diode, too, remember — a light emit-
Photo 6.1 
A horizontal preset resistor
Figure 6.3 
Our first simple circuit using a diode

Starting electronics
126
ting diode) connect to the more positive side in the circuit. 
A breadboard layout is shown in Figure 6.4, though by this 
stage you should perhaps be confidently planning your own 
breadboard layouts.
Figure 6.4 
A breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 6.3
Which way round?
If you’ve connected the circuit up correctly, the LED should 
now be on. This proves that current is flowing. To calculate 
exactly what current we can use Ohm’s law. Let’s assume 
that the total battery voltage of 9 V is dropped across the 
resistor and that no voltage occurs across the two diodes. In 
fact, there is voltage across the diodes, but we needn’t worry 
about it yet, as it is only a small amount. We’ll measure it, 
however, soon.

Diodes I
127
Now, with a resistance of 1k5, and a voltage of 9 V, we can 
calculate the current flowing, as:
 
The next thing to do is to turn around the diode, so that its 
cathode is more positive, as in the circuit of Figure 6.5. The 
breadboard layout is the same with anode and cathode re-
versed, so we needn’t redraw it.
Figure 6.5 
The circuit again, but with the diode reversed
What happens? You should find that absolutely nothing 
happens. The LED does not light up, so no current must be 
flowing. The action of reversing the diode has resulted in the 
stopping of current. We can summarise this quite simply in 
Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6(a) shows a diode whose anode is positive with 
respect to its cathode.  Although we’ve shown the anode as 
positive with a + symbol, and the cathode as negative with 

Starting electronics
128
a – symbol, they don’t necessarily have to be positive and 
negative. The cathode could for example be at a voltage of 
+1000 V if the anode was at a greater positive voltage of, say 
+1001 V. All that needs to occur is that the anode is positive 
with respect to the cathode.
Under such a condition, the diode is said to be forward biased 
and current will flow, from anode to cathode.
When a diode is reverse biased i.e., its cathode is positive 
with respect to the anode, no current flows, as shown in Fig-
ure 6.6(b). Obviously, something happens within the diode 
which we can’t see, depending on the polarity of the applied 
voltage to define whether current can flow or not. Just ex-
actly what this something is, isn’t necessary to understand 
Figure 6.6 
Circuit diagrams for forward and reverse biased diodes

Diodes I
129
here. We needn’t know any more about it here because we’re 
only concerned with the practical aspects at the moment; 
and all we need to remember is that a forward biased diode 
conducts, allowing current to flow, while a reverse biased 
diode doesn’t.
What we do need to consider in more detail; however, is the 
value of the current flowing, and the small, but nevertheless 
apparent, voltage which occurs across the diode, when a di-
ode is forward biased (the voltage we said earlier we needn’t 
then worry about). The following experiment will show how 
the current and the voltage are related.
Figure 6.7 shows the circuit you have to build. You’ll see that 
two basic measurements need to be taken with your meter. 
The first measurement is the voltage across the forward bi-
ased diode, the second measurement is the current through 
it. Each measurement needs to be taken a number of times 
as the preset is varied in an organised way. Table 6.1, which 
is half complete, is for you to record your results, and Figure 
6.8  is a blank graph for you to plot the results into a curve. 
Do the experiment the following way:
Figure 6.7 
A circuit to test the operation of a forward biased diode

Starting electronics
130
Current (mA) 
Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
 
0.4 
 
 
0.6 
 
2 
 
5 
 
10 
 
20
Table 6.1 
This is half complete, add the results of your experiment 
1) 
set up the components on the breadboard to measure 
only the voltage across the diode. The breadboard layout is 
given in Figure 6.9. Before you connect your battery to the 
circuit, make sure the wiper of the preset is turned fully anti-
clockwise,
Figure 6.8 
A blank graph for you to plot the results of your experiment

Diodes I
131
Figure 6.9 
The breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 6.7
2) 
adjust the preset wiper clockwise, until the first voltage 
in Table 6.1 is reached,
3) 
now set up the breadboard layout of Figure 6.10,  to 
measure the current through the diode — the breadboard 
layout is designed so that all you have to do is take out a 
short length of single-strand connecting wire and change the 
position of the meter and its range. Record the value of the 
current at the voltage of step 2,
4) 
change the position of the meter and its range, and 
replace the link in the breadboard so that voltage across the 
diode is measured again,
5) 
repeat steps 2, 3 and 4 with the next voltage in the 
table,

Starting electronics
132
Figure 6.10 
The same circuit, set up to measure the current through the diode
6) 
repeat step 5 until the table shows a given current 
reading. Now set the current through the diode to this given 
value and measure and record the voltage,
7) 
set the current to each value given in the table and 
record the corresponding voltage,  until the table is com-
plete.
Tricky
In this way, first measuring voltage then measuring current, 
or first measuring current then voltage, changing the posi-
tion and range of the meter, as well as removing or inserting 
the link depending on whether you’re measuring current or 
voltage, the experiment can be undertaken. Yes, it’s tricky, 

Diodes I
133
but we never said it was a doddle, did we? You’ll soon get the 
hang of it and get some good results.
Now plot your results on the graph of Figure 6.8. My results 
(correct naturally!) are shown in Table 6.2 and Figure 6.11.
Figure 6.11 
My own results from the experiment
Current (mA) 
Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
0 
0.4 
 
1 
0.6 
 
2 
0.65 
 
5 
0.65 
 
10 
0.7 
 
20 
0.75
Table 6.2 
The results of my own experiment

Starting electronics
134
Repeat the whole experiment again, using the 0A47 diode, this 
time. You can put your results in Table 6.3 and plot your graph 
in Figure 6.12. Our results are in Table 6.4 and Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.12 
Use this graph to plot your results from the second experiment
Table 6.3 
The results of your experiment
Current (mA) 
Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
 
0.1 
 
 
0.2 
 
 
0.25 
 
 
0.3 
 
3 
 
5 
 
10 
 
20

Diodes I
135
Current (mA) 
Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
0 
0.1 
 
0.5 
0.2 
 
1 
0.25 
 
2 
0.3 
 
3 
0.32 
 
5 
0.35 
 
10 
0.4 
 
20 
0.45
Table 6.4 
My results from the second experiment
As you might expect, these two plotted curves are the same 
basic shape. The only real difference between them is that 
they change from a level to an extremely steep line at differ-
Figure 6.13 
A graph plotting my results from the second  experiment

Starting electronics
136
ent positions. The OA47 curve, for example, changes at about 
0V3, while the 1N4001 curve changes at about 0V65.
The sharp changes in the curves correspond to what are 
sometimes called transition voltages — the transition volt-
age for the OA47 is about 0V3, the transition voltage for the 
1N4001 is about 0V65. It’s important to remember, though, 
that the transition voltages in these curves are only for the 
particular current range under consideration — 0 to 20 mA 
in this case. If similar curves are plotted for different current 
ranges then slightly different transition voltages will be ob-
tained. In any current range, however, the transition voltages 
won’t be more than about 0.V1 different to the transition volt-
ages we’ve seen here. The two curves — of the OA47 and the 
1N4001 diodes — show that a different transition voltage is 
obtained (0V3 for the OA47, 0V65 for the 1N4001) depending 
on which semiconductor material a diode is made from. The 
OA47 diode is made from germanium while the 1N4001 is of 
silicon construction. All germanium diodes have a transition 
voltage of about 0V2 to 0V3; similarly all silicon diodes have 
a transition voltage of about 0V6 to 0V7.
These two curves are exponential curves — in the same way 
that capacitor charge/discharge curves (see Chapter 4) are ex-
ponential, just in a different direction, that’s all — and form part 
of what are called diode characteristic curves or sometimes 
simply diode characteristics. But the characteristics we have 
determined here are really only half the story as far as diodes 
are concerned. All we have plotted are the forward voltages 
and resultant forward currents when the diodes are forward 
biased. If diodes were perfect this would be all the information 
we need. But, yes you’ve guessed it, diodes are not per- 
fect — when they are reverse biased so that they have reverse 

Diodes I
137
voltages, reverse currents flow. So, to get a true picture of 
diode operation we have to extend the characteristic curves 
to include reverse biased conditions.
Reverse biasing a diode means that its anode is more nega-
tive with respect to its cathode. So by interpolating the x- 
and y-axes of the graph, we can provide a grid from the diode 
characteristic which allows it to be drawn in both forward 
and reverse biased conditions.
It wouldn’t be possible for you to plot the reverse biased con-
ditions, for an ordinary diode, the way you did the forward 
biased experiment (we will, however, do it for a special type 
of diode soon), so instead we’ll make it easy for you and give 
you the whole characteristic curve. Whatever type of diode, 
it will follow a similar curve to that of Figure 6.14, where the 
important points are marked.
Figure 6.14 
Plotting the reverse bias characteristics for an ordinary diode is not 
practical, so we give you the characteristic curve here

Starting electronics
138
Reverse bias
From the curve you can see that there are two distinct parts 
which occur when a diode is reverse biased. First, at quite 
low reverse voltages, from about –0.V1 to the breakdown 
voltage there is a more or less constant but small reverse 
current. The actual value of this reverse current (known as 
the saturation reverse current, or just the saturation current) 
depends on the individual diode, but is generally in the order 
of microamps.
The second distinct part of the reverse biased characteristic 
occurs when the reverse voltage is above the breakdown 
voltage. The reverse current increases sharply with only 
comparatively small increases in reverse voltage. The reason 
for this is because of electronics breakdown of the diode 
when electrons gain so much energy due to the voltage that 
they push into one another just like rocks and boulders roll-
ing down a steep mountainside push into other rocks and 
boulders which, in turn, start to roll down the mountainside 
pushing into more rocks and boulders, forming an avalanche. 
This analogy turns out to be an apt one, and in fact the 
electronic diode breakdown voltage is sometimes referred 
to as avalanche breakdown and the breakdown voltage is 
sometimes called the avalanche voltage. Similarly the sharp 
knee in the curve at the breakdown voltage is often called 
the avalanche point.
In most ordinary diodes the breakdown voltage is quite high 
(in the 1N4001 it is well over –50 V), so this is one reason why 
you couldn’t plot the whole characteristic curve, including 
reverse biased conditions, in the same experiment — our 

Diodes I
139
battery voltage of 9 V simply isn’t high enough to cause 
breakdown.
Some special diodes, on the other hand, are purposefully 
manufactured to have a low breakdown voltage, and you can 
use one of them to study and plot your own complete diode 
characteristic. Such diodes are named after the American 
scientist, Zener, who was one of the first people to study 
electronic breakdown. The zener diode you are going to use 
is rated at 3V0 which of course means that its breakdown oc-
curs at 3 V which is below the battery voltage and is therefore 
plottable in the same sort of experiment as the last one. The 
symbol for a zener diode, incidentally, is shown in Figure 
6.15.
Hint:
The way to remember the zener diode circuit symbol is to note that 
the bent line representing its cathode corresponds to the electronics 
breakdown.
Procedure is more or less the same as before. The circuit is 
shown in Figure 6.16 where the zener diode is shown forward 
biased. Complete Table 6.5 with the circuit as shown, then turn 
Figure 6.15 
The circuit symbol for a zener diode 

Starting electronics
140
Figure 6.16 
A circuit with the zener diode forward biased
the zener diode round as shown in the circuit of Figure 6.17 
(this is the way zener diodes are normally used) so that it is 
reverse biased, then perform the experiment again complet-
ing Table 6.6 as you go along. Although all the results will in 
theory be negative, you don’t need to turn the meter round 
or anything — the diode has been turned around remember, 
and so is already reverse biased.
Table 6.5 
Show the results of your experiment
Current (mA) 
Voltage (V)
 
 
0 
 
 
0.4 
 
 
0.6 
 
1 
 
2 
 
9 
 
5 
 
10 
 
20

Diodes I
141
Next, plot your complete characteristic on the graph of Figure 
6.18. My results and characteristics are in Table 6.7 and 6.8, 
and Figure 6.19. Yours should be similar.
From the zener diode characteristic you will see that it acts 
like any ordinary diode. When forward biased it has an expo-
nential curve with a transition voltage of about 0V7 for the 
current range observed. When reverse biased, on the other 
hand, you can see the breakdown voltage of about –3 V which 
Figure 6.17 
The circuit, with the zener diode reverse biased
Table 6.6 
To show the results of your further experiments
-Current (mA) 
-Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
2.5 
 
 
3 
 
10 
 
20 

Starting electronics
142
Figure 6.18 
Plot your results from the zener diode experiment on this graph. 
Also use Table 6.6 shown on previous page 
Table 6.8 
More results from my experiments
Current (mA) 
Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
0 
0.4 
 
0 
0.6 
 
1 
0.7 
 
2 
0.75 
 
5 
0.75 
 
10 
0.8 
 
20 
0.8
Table 6.7 
The results of my experiments
-Current (mA) 
-Voltage (V)
 
0 
0 
 
0 
1 
 
0.5 
2 
 
2 
2.5 
 
5 
3 
 
10 
3.2 
 
20 
3.5

Diodes I
143
Figure 6.19 
My results from the zener diode experiment are given in this graph 
and in Tables 6.7 and 6.8
occurs when the reverse current appears to be zero, but in 
fact, a small saturation current does exist — it was simply 
too small to measure on the meter.
Voila — a complete diode characteristic curve.
Finally, it stands to reason that any diode must have maxi-
mum ratings above which the heat generated by the voltage 
and current is too much for the diode to withstand. Under 
such circumstances the diode body may melt (if it is a glass 
diode such as the OA47), or, more likely, it will crack and fall 
apart. To make sure their diodes don’t encounter such rough 
treatment manufacturers supply maximum ratings which 
should not be exceeded. Typical maximum ratings of the two 
ordinary diodes we have looked at; the 1N4001 and the 0A47 
are listed in Table 6.9.

Starting electronics
144
Maximum ratings 
1N4001 
OA47
Maximum mean forward current 
1 A 
110 mA 
Maximum repetitive forward current 
10 A 
150 mA 
Maximum reverse voltage 
–50 V 
–25 V 
Maximum operating temperature 
170°C 
60°C
Table 6.9 
Typical maximum ratings of the two diodes we have been looking at
Next chapter we shall be considering diodes again, and how we 
can use them, practically, in circuits; what their main uses are, 
and how to choose the best one for any specific purpose.

Diodes II
145
7 Diodes I
In the last chapter, we took a detailed look at diodes and their 
characteristic curves. This chapter we’re going to take this 
one stage further and consider how we use the characteristic 
curve to define how the diode will operate in any particular 
circuit. Finally, we’ll look at a number of circuits which show 
some of the many uses of ordinary diodes.
The components you’ll need for the circuits this chapter 
are:
 
1 x 10 k resistor
 
2 x 15 k resistors
 
2 x 100 k resistors
 
1 x 10 µF 10 V electrolytic capacitor
I

Starting electronics
146
 
1 x 220 µF 10 V electrolytic capacitor
 
1 x 1N4001 diode
 
1 x LED
 
1 x 555 integrated circuit
Figure 7.1  shows the forward biased section of a typical di-
ode characteristic curve. It has a transition voltage of about 
0V7, so you should know that it’s the characteristic curve of 
a silicon diode.
Diodes aren’t the only electronic components for which char-
acteristic curves may be drawn — most components can be 
studied in this way. After all, the curve is merely a graph of 
the voltage across the component compared to the current 
through it. So, it’s equally possible that we draw a charac-
teristic curve of, say, a resistor. To do this we could perform 
Figure 7.1 
The forward biased section of the characteristic curve of a silicon 
diode 

Diodes II
147
the same experiment we did last chapter with the diodes: 
measuring the voltage and current at a number of points, 
then sketching the curve as being the line which connects 
the points marked on the graph.
But there’s no need to do this in the case of a resistor, because 
we know that resistors follow Ohm’s law. We know that:
 
where R is the resistance, V is the voltage across the resistor, 
and I is the current through it. So, for any value of resistor, we 
can choose a value for, say, the voltage across it, and hence 
calculate the current through it. Figure 7.2 is a blank graph. 
Calculate and then draw on the graph characteristic curves 
for two resistors: of values 100 Ω and 200 Ω. The procedure 
is simple: just calculate the current at each voltage point for 
each resistor.
Figure 7.2 
A blank graph for you to fill in — see the text above for instructions

Starting electronics
148
Your resultant characteristic curves should look like those 
in Figure 7.3 — two straight lines. 
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
Resistor characteristic curves are straight 
lines because resistors follow Ohm’s law (we 
say they are ohmic) and Ohm’s law is a linear  
relationship. So resistor characteris-
tic curves are linear, too. And because they 
are linear there’s really no point in drawing 
them, and you’ll never see them in this form any-
where else — we drew them simply to emphasise the  
principle.
Figure 7.3 
Your efforts with Figure 7.2 should produce a graph something like 
this

Diodes II
149
We need to draw diode characteristic curves, on the other 
hand, because they’re non-ohmic and hence, non-linear. So 
to see what current passes through the device with any par-
ticular voltage across it, it’s useful to see its characteristic 
curve. This is generally true of any semiconductor device, as 
we’ll see in later chapters.
Maths
Although diodes are non-ohmic, this doesn’t mean that their 
operation can’t be explained mathematically (just as Ohm’s 
law or, V = IR, say is a mathematical formula). Diodes, in fact, 
follow a relationship every bit as mathematical as Ohm’s law. 
The relationship is:
 
   
where I is the current through the diode, Is is the saturation 
reverse current, q is the magnitude of an electron’s charge, k 
is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the absolute temperature in 
degrees Kelvin. As q and k are both constant and at room tem-
perature the absolute temperature is more or less constant, 
the part of the equation q/kT is also more or less constant at 
about 40 (work it out yourself if you want: q is 1.6 x 10-19 C; k 
is 1.38 x 10-23 JK-1 and room temperature, say, 17°C is 290 K.
The equation is thus simplified to be approximately:
 

Starting electronics
150
The exponential factor (e40V), of course confirms what we al-
ready knew to be true — that the diode characteristic curve 
is an exponential curve. From this characteristic equation 
we may calculate the current flowing through a diode for any 
given voltage across it, just as the formulae associated with 
Ohm’s law do the same for resistors.
Hint:
But even with this simplified approximation of the characteristic 
equation you can appreciate the value of having a characteristic curve 
in front of you to look at. If I had the option between having to use 
the equation or a diode characteristic curve to calculate the current 
through a diode, I know which I’d choose!
Load lines
It’s important to remember that although a diode charac-
teristic curve is non-linear and non-ohmic, so that it doesn’t 
abide by Ohm’s law throughout its entire length, it does follow 
Ohm’s law at any particular point on the curve. So, say, if the 
voltage across the diode whose characteristic curve is shown 
in Figure 7.1 is 0V8, so the current through it is about 80 mA 
(check it yourself) then the diode resistance is:
 
as defined by Ohm’s law. Any change in voltage and current, 
however, results in a different resistance.

Diodes II
151
Generally, diodes don’t exist in a circuit merely by themselves. 
Other components e.g. resistors, capacitors, and other com-
ponents in the semiconductor family, are combined with 
them. It is when designing such circuits and calculating the 
operating voltages and currents in the circuits that the use of 
diode characteristic curves really come in handy. Figure 7.4 
shows as an example a simple circuit consisting of a diode, 
a resistor and a battery. By looking at the circuit we can see 
that a current will flow. But what is this current? If we knew 
the voltage across the resistor we could calculate (from Ohm’s 
law) the current through it, which is of course the circuit cur-
rent. Similarly, if we knew the voltage across the diode we 
could determine (from the characteristic curve) the circuit 
current. Unfortunately we know neither voltage!
We do know, however, that the voltages across both the 
components must add up to the battery voltage. In other 
words:
 
(it’s a straightforward voltage divider). This means that we 
Figure 7.4 
A simple diode circuit — but what is the current flow?

Starting electronics
152
can calculate each voltage as being a function of the battery 
voltage, given by:
 
and
 
Now, we know that the voltage across the diode can only 
vary between about 0 V and 0V8 (given by the characteristic 
curve), but there’s nothing to stop us hypothesising about 
larger voltages than this, and drawing up a table of voltages 
which would thus occur across the resistor. Table 7.1 is such 
a table, but it takes the process one stage further by calcu-
lating the hypothetical current through the resistor at these 
hypothetical voltages.
From Table 7.1 we can now plot a second curve on the diode 
characteristic curve, of diode voltage against resistor current. 
Figure 7.6 shows the completed characteristic curve (labelled 
Load line R=60R). The curve is actually a straight line — fairly 
obvious, if you think about it, because all we’ve done is plot a 
voltage and a current for a resistor, and resistors are ohmic 
and linear. Because in such a circuit as that of Figure 7.4 the 
resistor is known as a load i.e. it absorbs electrical power, the 
line on the characteristic curve representing diode voltage 
and resistor current is called the load line.
Where the load line and the characteristic curve cross is 
the operating point. As its name implies, this is the point 
representing the current through and voltage across the 
components in the circuit. In this example the diode voltage 
is thus 1 V and the diode current is 33 mA at the operating 
point.

Diodes II
153
Diode voltage (VD) 
Resistor voltage (VB – VD) 
Resistor current (I)
 
3 
0 
0 
 
2.5 
0.5 
8.3 mA 
 
2.0 
1.0 
16.7 mA 
 
1.5 
1.5 
25 mA 
 
1.0 
2.0 
33.3 mA 
 
0.5 
2.5 
41.7 mA 
 
0 
3.0 
50 mA
Table 7.1 
Diode characteristics
If you think carefully about what we’ve just seen, you should 
see that the load line is a sort of resistor characteristic curve. 
It doesn’t look quite like those of Figure 7.3, however, because 
the load line does not correspond to resistor voltage and 
resistor current, but diode voltage and resistor current — so 
it’s a sort of inverse resistor characteristic curve — shown 
in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5 
Load line from Table 1 results

Starting electronics
154
The slope of the load line (and thus the exact position of the 
circuit operating point) depends on the value of the resis-
tor. Let’s change the value of the resistor in Figure 7.4 to say 
200 Ω. What is the new operating point? Draw the new load 
line corresponding to a resistor of value 200 Ω on Figure 7.5 
to find out. You don’t need to draw up a new table as in Table 
7.1 — we know it’s a straight line so we can draw it if we have 
only two points on the line. These two points can be when 
the diode voltage is 0 V (thus the resistor voltage:
 
equals the battery voltage), and when the diode voltage equals 
the battery voltage and so the resistor current is zero. Figure 
7.6 shows how your results should appear. The new operating 
point corresponds to a diode voltage of 0V8 and current of 
about 11 mA.We’ll be looking at other examples of the uses 
of load lines when we look at other semiconductor devices 
in later chapters.
Figure 7.6 
This shows the new load line for a resistor of 200 Ω

Diodes II
155
Diode circuits
We’re now going to look at some ways that diodes may be 
used in circuits for practical purposes. We already know that 
diodes may be used in circuits for practical purposes. We 
already know that diodes allow current flow in only one direc-
tion (ignoring saturation reverse current and zener current 
for the time being) and this is one of their main uses — to 
rectify alternating current (a.c.) voltages into direct current 
(d.c.) voltages. The most typical source of a.c. voltage we 
can think of is the 230 V mains supply to every home. Most 
electronic circuits require d.c. power so we can understand 
that rectification is one of the most important uses of diodes. 
The part of any electronic equipment — TVs, radios, hi-fis, 
computers — which rectifies a.c. mains voltages into low d.c. 
voltages is known as the power supply (sometimes abbrevi-
ated to PSU — for power supply unit).
Generally, we wouldn’t want to tamper with voltages as high 
as mains, so we would use a transformer to reduce the 230 V 
a.c. mains supply voltage to about 12 V a.c. We’ll be looking 
at transformers in detail in a later part, but suffice it to know 
now, that a transformer consists essentially of two coils of 
wire which are not in electrical contact. The circuit symbol 
of a transformer (Figure 7.7) shows this.
The simplest way of rectifying the a.c. output of a transformer 
is shown in Figure 7.8. Here a diode simply allows current to 
flow in one direction (to the load resistor, RL but not in the 
other direction (from the load resistor). The a.c. voltage from 
the transformer and the resultant voltage across the load re-
sistor are shown in Figure 7.9. The resistor voltage, although 
in only one direction, is hardly the fixed voltage we would like, 

Starting electronics
156
Figure 7.7 
The circuit symbol for a transformer
Figure 7.8 
A simple output rectifier circuit using a diode
but nevertheless is technically a d.c. voltage. You’ll see that 
of each wave or cycle of a.c. voltage from the transformer, 
only the positive half gets through the diode to the resistor. 
For this reason, the type of rectification shown by the circuit 
Figure 7.8 is known as half-wave rectification.
It would obviously give a much steadier d.c. voltage if both 
half waves of the a.c. voltage could pass to the load. We can 
do this in two ways. First by using a modified transformer, 
with a centre-tap to the output or secondary coil and two 
diodes as in Figure 7.10. The centre-tap of the transformer 

Diodes II
157
gives a reference voltage to the load, about which one of the 
two ends of the coil must always have a positive voltage (i.e. 
if one end is positive the other is negative, if one end is nega-
tive the other must be positive) so each half-wave of the a.c. 
voltage is rectified and passed to the load. The resultant d.c. 
voltage across the load is shown.
Second, an ordinary transformer may be used with four 
diodes as shown in Figure 7.11. The group of four diodes is 
often called a bridge rectifier and may consist of four discrete 
diodes or can be a single device which contains four diodes 
in its body.
Figure 7.9 
Waveforms showing the output from the transformers, and the 
rectified d.c. voltage across the load resistor

Starting electronics
158
Figure 7.11 
A familiar rectifier arrangement: four diodes as a bridge rectifier
Figure 7.10 
A more sophisticated rectifier arrangement using two diodes and a 
transformer centre tap
Both of these methods give a load voltage where each half 
wave of the a.c. voltage is present and so they are known as 
full-wave rectification.

Diodes II
159
Filter tips
Although we’ve managed to obtain a full-wave rectified d.c. 
load voltage we still have the problem that this voltage is not 
too steady (ideally we would like a fixed d.c. voltage which 
doesn’t vary at all). We can reduce the up-and-down variability 
of the waves by adding a capacitor to the circuit output. If 
you remember, a capacitor stores charges — so we can use 
it to average out the variation in level of the full-wave recti-
fied d.c. voltage. Figure 7.12 shows the idea and a possible 
resultant waveform. This process is referred to as smoothing 
and a capacitor used to this effect is a smoothing capacitor. 
Sometimes the process is also called filtering.
Figure 7.12 
Levelling the rectifier d.c. with the help of a capacitor: the process 
is known as smoothing

Starting electronics
160
You should remember that the rate at which a capacitor 
discharges is dependent on the value of the capacitor. So, to 
make sure the stored voltage doesn’t fall too far in the time 
between the peaks of the half cycles, the capacitor should 
be large enough (typically of the value of thousands of mi-
crofarads) to store enough charge to prevent this happening. 
Nevertheless a variation in voltage will always occur, and the 
extent of this variation is known as the ripple voltage, shown 
in Figure 7.13. Ripple voltages of the order of a volt or so are 
common, superimposed on the required d.c. voltage, for this 
type of circuit.
Figure 7.13 
The extent to which the d.c. is not exactly linear is known as the 
ripple voltage
Stability built in
The power supplies we’ve seen so far are simple but they do 
have the drawback that output voltage is never exact — ripple 
voltage and to a large extent, load current requirements mean 
that a variation in voltage will always occur. In many practical 
applications such supplies are adequate, but some applica-
tions require a much more stable power supply voltage.

Diodes II
161
We’ve already seen a device capable of stabilising or regulat-
ing power supplies — the zener diode. Figure 7.14 shows the 
simple zener circuit we first saw last chapter. You’ll remember 
that the zener diode is reverse biased and maintains a more 
or less constant voltage across it, even as the input voltage 
Vin changes. If such a zener circuit is used at the output of 
a smoothed power supply (say, that of Figure 7.12) then the 
resultant stabilised power supply will have an output volt-
age which is much more stable, with a much reduced ripple 
voltage.
Zener stabilising circuits are suitable when currents of no 
more than about 50 mA or so are required from the power 
supply. Above this it’s more usual to build power supplies us-
ing stabilising integrated circuits (ICs), specially made for the 
purpose. Such ICs, commonly called voltage regulators, have 
diodes and other semiconductors within their bodies which 
provide the stabilising stage of the power supply. Voltage 
regulators give an accurate and constant output voltage with 
extremely small ripple voltages, even with large variations in 
load current and input voltage. ICs are produced which can 
provide load current up to about 5 A.
Figure 7.14 
A simple zener circuit which can be used with a smoothing circuit to 
give a greatly reduced ripple voltage

Starting electronics
162
In summary, the power supply principle is summarised in 
Figure 7.15 in block diagram form. From a 230 V a.c. input 
voltage, a stabilised d.c. output voltage is produced. This is 
efficiently done only with the use of diodes in the rectification 
and stabilisation stages.
Figure 7.15 
A block diagram of a power supply using the circuit stages we have 
described
Figure 7.16 
An astable multi-vibrator circuit. This can be used to demonstrate 
some of the principles under discussion
Practically there
Figure 7.16 shows a circuit we’ve already seen and built before: 
a 555-based astable multi-vibrator. We’re going to use it to 
demonstrate the actions of some of the principles we’ve seen 
so far. Although the output of the astable multi-vibrator is a 
squarewave, we’re going to imagine that it is a sinewave such 

Diodes II
163
as that from a 230 V a.c. mains powered transformer. Figure 
7.17(a)  shows the squarewave output, and if you stretch 
your imagination a bit (careful, now!), rounding off the tops 
and bottoms of the waveform, you can approximate it to an 
alternating sinewave.
Build the circuit, as shown in the breadboard layout of Fig-
ure 7.18, and measure the output voltage. It should switch 
between 0 V and about 8 V.
Now let’s add a smoothing capacitor Cs and load resistor RL 
to the output of our imaginary rectified power supply, as in 
Figure 7.19. The output voltage of the smoothing stage is 
Figure 7.17(a) 
The squarewave output from the circuit in Figure 7.16 
experimentally modified by a 100 kΩ resistor (b) and a 10 kΩ resistor (c)

Starting electronics
164
now fairly steady at about 6V5 indicating that smoothing has 
occurred. Although you can’t see it, the voltage waveform 
would look something like that in Figure 7.17(b), with a ripple 
voltage of about 1 V. The breadboard layout for the circuit is 
shown in Figure 7.20.
We can show what happens when load current increases 
by putting a lower value load resistor in circuit — take out 
the 100 kΩ resistor and put a 10 kΩ resistor in its place. The 
ripple voltage now increases causing greater changes in the 
d.c. output level, and the whole waveform is shown as Figure 
7.17(c).
Figure 7.18 
The breadboard layout of the circuit in Figure 7.16

Diodes II
165
Figure 7.19 
The same circuit with a smoothing capacitor added
That’s all for this chapter. Next chapter we’ll move onto 
another semiconductor — possibly the most important semi-
conductor ever — the transistor. Try the quiz over the page 
to see what you’ve learned here.
Figure 7.20 
The breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 7.19

Starting electronics
166
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 Resistor characteristic curves 
are:
 
a nearly always linear 
b always exponential 
c nearly always exponential 
d rarely drawn 
e b and d 
f all of these
2 Diodes are:
 
a ohmic 
b non-ohmic 
c linear 
d non-linear 
e a and c 
f b and d 
g none of these
3 The voltage across the diode 
whose characteristic curve 
is shown in Figure 7.1 is 0V7. 
What is the current through it?
 
a 60 mA 
b about 700 mV 
c about 6 mA 
d it is impossible to say, be-
cause diodes are non-ohmic 
e none of these
4  Mains voltages are dangerous 
because:
 
a they are a.c. 
b they are d.c. 
c they are high 
d they are not stabilised 
e none of these
5 A single diode cannot be used to 
full-wave rectify an a.c. voltage:
 
True or false?
6 For full-wave rectification of an 
a.c. voltage:
 
a a bridge rectifier is always 
needed 
b as few as two diodes can be 
used 
c an IC voltage regulator is essen-
tial 
d a and c 
e all of these 
f none of these

Transistors
167
8 Transistors
In previous chapters we’ve looked at semiconductors, spend-
ing some time on diodes (the simplest semiconductor device) 
and taking brief glimpses of integrated circuits. It’s the turn 
of the transistor now to come under the magnifying glass 
— perhaps the most important semiconductor of all.
You don’t need many components this chapter, just a hand-
ful of resistors:
● 
1 x 100 kΩ
● 
1 x 220 kΩ
● 
1 x 47 kΩ miniature horizontal preset 
and, of course, one transistor.

Starting electronics
168
The type of transistor you need is shown in Photo 8.1  and is 
identified as a 2N3053.
You’ll see that the transistor has three terminals called, inci-
dentally, base, collector and emitter (often shortened to B, C 
and E). When you use transistors in electronic circuits it is 
essential that these three terminals go the right way round. 
The 2N3053 transistor terminals are identified by holding 
the transistor with its terminals pointing towards you from 
the body and comparing the transistor’s underneath with 
the diagram in Figure 8.1. The terminal closest to the tab on 
the body is the emitter, then in a clockwise direction are the 
base and the collector.
Other transistor varieties may have different body types so 
it’s important to check with reference books or manufacturer’s 
data regarding the transistor terminals before use. All 2N3053 
transistors, however, are in the same body type — known as 
a TO-5 body — and follow the diagram in Figure 8.1.
Photo 8.1 
A transistor next to a UK fifty pence piece

Transistors
169
Figure 8.1 
How to recognise the location of the base, emitter and collector 
connections on a common transistor body
For the previous two chapters, we’ve looked closely at diodes 
— the simplest of the group of components known as semi-
conductors. The many different types of diodes are all formed 
by combining doped layers of semiconductor material at a 
junction. The PN junction (as one layer is N-type semiconduc-
tor material and the other layer is P-type) forms the basis of 
all other semiconductor-based electronic components. The 
transistor — the component we’re going to look at now — is, 
in fact, made of two PN junctions, back to back. Figure 8.2 
shows how we may simply consider a transistor as being two 
back-to-back diodes, and we can verify this using our multi-
meter to check resistances between the three terminals of a 
transistor: the base, emitter and collector.
To do the experiment, put a transistor into your breadboard, 
then use the meter to test the resistance between transistor 
terminals. Using our brains here (I know it’s hard) we can 
work out that if there are three terminals there must be six 
different ways the meter leads can connect to pairs of the 
terminals. Table 8.1 lists all six ways, but the results column 
is left blank for you to fill in as you perform the experiment. 

Starting electronics
170
It’s not necessary for you to measure the exact resistance 
obtained between terminals, it’s sufficient just to find out if 
the resistance is high or low.
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
One final point before you start — the casing of the 
transistor body (sometimes called the can) is metal 
and therefore conducts. When you touch the meter 
test probes to the transistor terminals make sure, 
therefore, they don’t touch the can. It’s all too easy 
to do without realising you’ve got a short circuit 
which, of course, gives an incorrect result. The 
can of a TO-5 bodied transistor such as the 2N3053 
is also electrically connected to the transistor’s 
collector, so be careful!
Figure 8.2 
A symbol for a transistor considered as two diodes, back to back

Transistors
171
Black meter lead 
Red meter lead 
Result
 
Base 
Emitter 
 
Emitter 
Base 
 
Base 
Collector 
 
Collector 
Base 
 
Emitter 
Collector 
 
Collector 
Emitter
Table 8.1 
Six different ways to connect the meter leads
Your results should show that low resistances occur in only 
two cases, indicating forward current flow between base 
and emitter, and base and collector. This corresponds as we 
should expect to the diagram of Figure 8.2.
Very close
Unfortunately things aren’t quite as simple as that in electron-
ic circuits, where individual resistances are rarely considered 
alone. The real life transistor deals with currents in more 
than one direction and this confuses the issue. However, all 
we need know here (thankfully) is that the two PN junctions 
are very close together. So close that, in fact, they affect one 
another. It’s almost as if they’re Siamese twins — and what-
ever happens to one affects the other.
Figure 8.3 illustrates how a transistor can be built up, from 
two PN junctions situated very close together. It’s really only 
a thin layer of P-type semiconductor material (only a few hun-
dred or so atoms thick) between two thicker layers of N-type 

Starting electronics
172
From what we know so far, nothing can happen and no cur-
rent can flow from collector to emitter because between these 
two terminals two back-to-back PN junctions lie. One of these 
junctions is reverse biased and so, like a reverse biased diode, 
cannot conduct. So, what’s the point of it all?
Figure 8.3 
A narrow P-area gives two PN junctions very close together
semiconductor material. Now let’s connect this transistor 
arrangement between a voltage supply, so that collector is 
positive and emitter is zero, as in Figure 8.4.
Figure 8.4 
Connected up, the emitter is at 0V and the collector is positive

Transistors
173
Well, as mentioned earlier, what happens in one of the two 
PN junctions of the transistor affects the other. Let’s say for 
example that we start the lower PN junction (between base 
and emitter) conducting by raising the base voltage so that 
the base-to-emitter voltage is above the transition voltage of 
the junction (say, 0V6 if the transistor is a silicon variety). 
Figure 8.5 shows this situation. Now, the lower junction is 
flooded with charge carriers and because both junctions are 
very close together, these charge carriers allow current flow 
from collector to emitter also, as shown in Figure 8.6.
Figure 8.6 
Charge carriers accumulating around the lower junction allow 
current to flow from the collector to the emitter
Figure 8.5 
If the voltage at the base is raised, current flows from base to emitter

Starting electronics
174
So, to summarise, a current will flow from collector to 
emitter of the transistor when the lower junction is for-
ward biased by a small base-to-emitter voltage. When 
the base-to-emitter voltage is removed the collector-to- 
emitter current will stop.
We can build a circuit to see if this is true, as shown in 
Figure 8.7. Note the transistor circuit symbol. Figure 8.8 
shows the breadboard layout. From the circuit you’ll 
see that we’re measuring the transistor’s collector-to- 
emitter current (commonly shortened to just collector cur-
rent) when the base-to-emitter junction is first connected to 
zero volts and to all intents and purposes is reverse biased, 
then when the base is connected to positive and the base-
emitter junction is forward biased.
Now do the experiment and see what happens. You 
should find that when the base is connected to zero via 
the 100 kΩ resistor nothing is measured by the multi- 
meter. But when the base resistor is connected to positive, the 
multi-meter shows a collector current flow. In our experiment 
Figure 8.7 
An experimental circuit to test what we have described so far

Transistors
175
Figure 8.8 
A breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 8.7
a collector current of about 12 mA was measured — yours 
may be a little different. Finally, when the base resistor is 
returned to zero volts (or simply when it’s disconnected!) 
the collector current again does not flow.
So what? What use is this? Not a lot as it stands, but it becomes 
very important when we calculate the currents involved. We 
already know the collector current (about 12 mA in our case) 
but what about the base-to-emitter current (shortened to base 
current)? The best way to find this is not by measurement (the 
meter itself would affect the transistor’s operation!) but by 
calculation. We know the transistor’s base-to-emitter voltage 
(shortened to base voltage) and we know the supply voltage. 

Starting electronics
176
From these we can calculate the voltage across the resistor, 
and from Ohm’s law we can therefore calculate the current 
through the resistor. And the current through the resistor 
must be the base current.
The resistor voltage is:
 
So, from Ohm’s law the current is:
 
Not a lot!
Now we can begin to see the importance of the transistor. 
A tiny base current can turn on or off a quite large collector 
current. This is illustrated in Figure 8.9 and is of vital impor-
tance — so remember it!
Figure 8.9 
Important: a very small base current can control a large collector 
current

Transistors
177
In effect, the transistor is a current amplifier. No matter how 
small the base current is, the collector current will be much 
larger. The collector current is, in fact, directly proportional 
to the base current. Double the base current and you double 
the collector current. Halve the base current and the collector 
current is likewise halved. It’s this fact that the transistor may 
be used as a controlling element (the base current control-
ling the collector current) which makes it the most important 
component in the electronics world.
The ratio:
 
gives a constant of proportionality for the transistor, which 
can have many names depending on which way you butter 
your bread. Officially it’s called the forward current transfer 
ratio, common emitter, but as that’s quite a mouthful it’s often 
just called the transistor’s current gain (seems sensible!). You 
can sometimes shorten this even further if you wish, to the 
symbols: hfe, or ß. In manufacturer’s data sheets for transistors 
the current gain is normally just given the symbol hfe (which 
if you’re interested stands for Hybrid parameter, Forward, 
common Emitter. Are you any wiser?). However, we’ll just 
stick to the term current gain, generally.
We can work out the current gain of a transistor by measuring 
the collector current, and calculating the base current as we 
did earlier, and dividing one by the other. For example the 
current gain of the transistor we used is:
 

Starting electronics
178
Yours may be a bit different. Manufacturers will quote typi-
cal values of current gain in their data sheets — individual 
transistors’ current gains will be somewhere around this 
value, and may not be exact at all. It really doesn’t matter, 
too much. The transistor we use here, the 2N3053, is a fairly 
common general-purpose transistor. High power transistors 
may have current gains more in the region of about 10, while 
some modern transistors for use in high frequency circuits 
such as radio may have current gains around 1000 or so.
NPN
The 2N3053 transistor is known as an NPN transistor because 
of the fact that a thin layer of P-type semiconductor material 
is sandwiched between two layers of N-type semiconduc-
tor material. The construction and circuit symbol of an 
NPN transistor are shown in Figure 8.10(a). You may have 
worked out that there is another way to sandwich one type of 
semiconductor material between two others — and if so you 
would also have worked out that such a transistor would be 
called a PNP transistor. Figure 8.10(b) shows a PNP transis-
tor construction and its circuit symbol. The only difference 
in the circuit symbols of both types is that the arrow on an 
NPN transistor’s emitter points out and the arrow on a PNP 
transistor’s emitter points in.
The emitter arrow of either symbol indicates direction of 
base current and collector current flow. So from the circuit 
symbols we can work out that base current in the NPN tran-

Transistors
179
Figure 8.10 
The internal construction and circuit symbols for NPN and PNP 
transistors
sistor flows from base-to-emitter, while in the PNP transistor 
it flows from emitter-to-base. Likewise collector current flow 
in the NPN transistor is from collector-to-emitter and from 
emitter-to-collector in the PNP transistor.
Knowing this and comparing the PNP construction to that of 
the NPN transistor we can further work out that a tiny emitter-
to-base current (still called the base current, incidentally) will 
cause a much larger emitter-to-collector current (still called 
the collector current). This is illustrated in Figure 8.11. The 
ratio of collector current to base current of a PNP transis-
tor is still the current gain. In fact, apart from the different 
directions of currents, a PNP transistor functions identically 
to an NPN transistor. As we’ve started our look at transistors 
with the use of an NPN transistor, however, we’ll finish it the 
same way.

Starting electronics
180
Figure 8.11 
An NPN has the same effect as a PNP transistor, but in the opposite 
direction
Using transistors
We’ve seen how transistors work but we don’t yet know how 
they can be used. After all, there are millions and millions of 
transistors around in the world today — you’d be forgiven 
for thinking that there must be hundreds, if not thousands 
of ways that a transistor may be used. 
Well, you’d be forgiven, but you’d still be wrong! 
In fact, to prove the point we’re now going to go through every 
possible way a transistor can be made to operate, and as this 
chapter isn’t five miles thick you’ve probably realised that 
there aren’t many ways a transistor may be used at all. Incred-
ibly, at the last count, the number of ways a transistor may be 
used is — dah, da, dah, dah, dah, da, dah, dah — two!

Transistors
181
Hint:
Yes, that’s right, only two basic uses of a transistor exist, and every 
transistorised circuit, every piece of electronic equipment, every 
television, every radio, every computer, every digital watch and so 
on, contains transistors in one form or another which do only one 
of two things. 
We’ve already seen the first of these two uses — an electronic 
switch, where a tiny base current turns on a comparatively 
large collector current. This may appear insignificant in itself, 
but if you consider that the collector current of one transistor 
may be used as the base current of a following transistor or 
transistors, then you should be able to imagine an enormous 
number of transistors inside one appliance, all switching and 
hence controlling the appliance’s operation.
Incredible? Science Fiction? Well, let me tell you that the 
appliance described here in extremely simple terms already 
exists, in millions. We call the appliance a computer. And 
every computer contains thousands if not millions of transis-
tor electronic switches.
We can see the second use of a transistor in the circuit of 
Figure 8.12. From this you should be able to see that we’re 
going to use a variable resistor to provide a variable base 
current for the transistor in the circuit. The breadboard 
layout of the circuit is in Figure 8.13. Before you connect the 
battery, make sure the preset variable resistor is turned fully 
anticlockwise.

Starting electronics
182
Now, connect the battery and slowly (with a small screw-
driver) turn the preset clockwise. Gradually, as you turn the 
preset, the LED should light up: dim at first, then brighter, 
then fully bright. What you’ve built is a very simple lamp 
dimmer.
So, the other use of a transistor is as a variable control ele-
ment. By controlling the transistor’s tiny base current we 
can control the much larger collector current, which can 
be the driving current of, say, a LED, an ordinary lamp, a 
motor, a loudspeaker — in fact just about anything which is 
variable.
Figure 8.13 
A breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 8.12. The preset 
should be turned slowly with a fine screwdriver
Figure 8.12 
A circuit to test a transistor with a varible base current

Transistors
183
These two operational modes of transistors have been given 
names. The first, as it switches between two states, one where 
the collector current is on or high, the other where it is off or 
low, is called digital. Any circuit which uses transistors oper-
ating in digital mode is therefore called a digital circuit.
The other mode, where transistors control, is known as the 
analogue mode, because the collector current of the transistor 
is simply an analogue of the base current. Any circuit which 
uses transistors operating in the analogue mode is known as 
an analogue circuit.
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
Sometimes analogue circuits are mistakenly called 
linear circuits, However, this is wrong, because 
although it might appear that a linear law is fol-
lowed, this is not so. If transistors were properly 
linear they would follow Ohm’s law, but (like diodes) 
— remember, they do not follow Ohm’s law and so are 
non-linear devices. In an analogue circuit, how-
ever, transistors are operated over a part of their 
characteristic curve (remember what a characteris-
tic curve is from Chapters 6 & 7?) which approximates 
a straight line — hence the mistaken name linear. Of 
course, you won’t ever make the mistake of calling 
an analogue circuit linear, will you?
Yes, like diodes, transistors have characteristic curves too, 
but as they have three terminals they have correspondingly 
more curves.

Starting electronics
184
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 In the circuit symbol for an 
NPN transistor:
 
a the arrow points out of the 
base  
b the arrow points into the 
base  
c the arrow points out of the 
collector 
 
d the arrow points into the col-
lector  
e b and c 
 
f all of these 
 
g none of these.
2 In an NPN transistor:
 
a a small base current causes a 
large collector current to flow 
 
b a small collector current 
causes a large base current to 
flow 
 
c a small emitter current 
causes nothing to flow 
 
d nothing happens 
 
e none of these  
f all of these.
3 If an NPN transistor has a 
current gain of 100, and a base 
current of 1 mA, its collector 
current will be:
 
a 1 mA 
 
b 1 µA  
c 10 µA 
 
d 100µA.  
e bigger 
 
f none of these.
4 The current gain of a transistor:
 
a is equal to the collector current 
divided by the emitter current 
 
b is equal to the collector current 
divided by the base current 
 
c is equal to the base current 
divided by the collector current 
 
d a and c 
 
e all of these 
 
f none of these.
5 The current gain of a transistor 
has units of:
 
a amps 
 
b milliamps 
 
c volts 
 
d this is a trick question, it has no 
units  
e none of these.

Analogue integrated circuits
185
9 Analogue integrated 
circuits
Well, the last chapter was pretty well jam-packed with in-
formation about transistors. If you remember, we saw that 
transistors are very important electronic components. They 
may be used in one of only two ways: in digital circuits, or 
in analogue circuits — although many, many types of digital 
and analogue circuits exist.
In terms of importance, transistors are the tops. They’re far 
more important than, say, resistors or capacitors, although 
in most circuits they rely on the other components to help 
them perform the desired functions. They’re the first elec-
tronic components we’ve come across which are active: they 
actually control the flow of electrons through themselves, to 
perform their function — resistors and capacitors haven’t 
got this facility, they are passive and current merely flows 
or doesn’t flow through them.

Starting electronics
186
Transistors, being active, can control current so that they 
can be turned into amplifiers or switches depending on the 
circuit. There’s nothing magical about this, mind you, we’re 
not gaining something for nothing! In order that, say, a tran-
sistor can amplify a small signal into a large one, energy has 
to be added in the form of electricity from a power supply. 
The transistor merely controls the energy available from this 
power supply, creating the amplification effect.
They’re important for another reason, however. They are 
small! They can be made by mass-production techniques, 
almost as small as you can imagine, and certainly many times 
smaller than you could see with your bare eyes. This in itself 
is no big deal — imagine trying to solder a transistor into a 
circuit which was so small you couldn’t even see it! Transis-
tors of the types we’ve seen so far are purposefully made as 
large as they are, just so we can handle them.
Integrated circuits
But the big advantage of transistors, especially tiny transistors, 
is that many of them may be integrated into a single circuit, 
which is itself still very small. To give you an idea of what we’re 
talking about, modern integrated circuits (well, what else 
would you call them?) have been made with over a quarter of 
a million transistors, all fitting onto one small silicon chip only 
about forty square millimetres or so! Now this sort of integration 
represents the ultimate in human achievement, remember, but 
processes are being improved every year and integrated 

Analogue integrated circuits
187
circuits with only hundreds of thousands of integrated tran-
sistors are now commonplace. Because of this it stands to 
reason that we have to come to grips with integrated circuits, 
they’re here to stay and there’s no point in being shy. So the 
final chapters of this epic saga are devoted to integrated 
circuits.
The integrated circuit which we are going to play with this 
chapter is an analogue integrated circuit (let’s cut all these 
long words out and call them by their abbreviation — IC). 
Just as there are analogue and digital circuits which transis-
tors are used in, so there are analogue and digital ICs. This 
IC just happens to be analogue, but there are digital ones too 
— the 555 (which we’ve already seen) is actually an example. 
In IC terms the IC in this chapter is a comparatively simple 
IC, having only around twenty transistors in all; nevertheless 
it is an extremely versatile IC and is probably the most com-
monly used IC of all time.
Generally it’s called the 741, referring to the numbers 
which are printed on the top of the IC body — see 
Photo 9.1. If you look at your IC you’ll see that it also has some 
letters associated with the number 741. These letters e.g., 
LM, SN, µ, MC, refer to the manufacturer of the device and 
bear no relevance to the internal circuit, which is the same 
in all cases. An SN741 is identical in performance to a µ741. 
Other letters printed on the top of the IC refer to other things 
such as batch number, date of manufacture etc. Whatever 
is printed on the top of the IC, as long as it is a 741 there’s 
normally no problem and it’ll work in all the circuits we’re 
going to look at now.

Starting electronics
188
Photo 9.1 
Our subject: a 741 op-amp
You’ll notice that the 741 is identical in physical appearance 
to the other IC we’ve already looked at, the 555. Like the 555, 
the 741 is housed in an 8-pin DIL (dual-in-line) body. But al-
though the shape’s the same, the internal circuit isn’t. Other 
versions of the 741 exist, in different body styles, but the 8-pin 
DIL version is by far the most popular.
The 741’s internal circuit is shown in Figure 9.1. Its circuit 
symbol is shown in Figure 9.2. From this you can see that the 
circuit has two inputs, marked + and –. Technically speaking 
these are called the non-inverting and inverting inputs. The 
circuit has one output and two inputs for power supply con-
nection. There are also two other connectors to the circuit, 
known as offset null connections; controlling the voltages of 
these inputs, controls the voltage level of the output — you’ll 
find out how these connections work soon. They are not used 
in every circuit which the 741 is used in.

Analogue integrated circuits
189
Figure 9.1 
The internal circuit of the 741: a mere 22 transistors
Figure 9.2 
The circuit symbol for a 741
The internal layout of the 8-pin DIL version of the 741 is shown 
in Figure 9.3. Now, each input and output of the op-amp is 
associated with a particular pin of the DlL body. This means 
that we can redraw the circuit symbol of the 741, as in Figure 
9.4, with the corresponding pin numbers at each connection. 

Starting electronics
190
Figure 9.3 
The internal layout of an 8-pin DIL-packed 741
Figure 9.4 
The symbol in Figure 9.2, with the pin numbers included
Apart from the 741, there are a small number of other compo-
nents you’ll also need for the circuits in this chapter. These 
are:
● 
2 x 10 kΩ resistors
● 
3 x 47 kΩ resistors
● 
1 x 22 kΩ resistor
● 
1 x 47 kΩ miniature horizontal preset
Note that these pin numbers are only correct when we deal 
with the 8-pin DIL version, however, and any other versions 
would have different pin numbers. We’ll show the 8-pin DIL 
pin numbers with any circuit diagram we show here, though, 
as we assume that you will use this version.

Analogue integrated circuits
191
Building on blocs
The first circuit is shown in Figure 9.5, and from this you will 
see two 9 V batteries are used as a power supply. This is be-
cause the 741 needs what’s called a three-rail power supply 
i.e., one with a positive rail, a negative rail, and a ground rail 
0 V. Now you may ask how two batteries can be used to provide 
this. Well the answer’s simple, join them in series. This gives 
a +18 V supply, a 0 V supply, and at the mid-point between the 
batteries, a +9 V supply. As voltages are only relative anyway, 
we can now consider the +9V supply to be the middle ground 
rail of our three-rail power supply and refer to it as 0 V. The 
+18 V supply then becomes the positive rail (+9 V) and the 0 V 
supply becomes the negative rail (–9 V).
Hint:
The 741 is commonly referred to as an operational amplifier — short-
ened to op-amp. The term comes from the earlier days in electronics 
when discrete components were built into circuits and used as com-
plete general-purpose units. An op-amp, as its name suggests, is a 
general-purpose amplifier which is more-or-less ready-to-use. Years 
ago it might have been a large metal box full of valves and wiring. 
Later it would have been a circuit board on which the circuit was built 
with transistors. But nowadays nobody uses op-amps made with 
discrete components, because modern technology has produced IC 
op-amps such as the 741. Given the choice, would you use discrete 
components to build an op-amp of the complexity of that in Figure 
9.1, or would you use a 741?

Starting electronics
192
Besides the ease of use inherent with ICs, they are also 
cheaper than discrete counterparts — the 741 is priced at 
around 40 pence. Building the circuit using transistors would 
cost many times this.
As the 741 is an operational amplifier, it makes sense that 
the first circuit we look at is an amplifying circuit. But what 
sort of amplifier does it form? Well the easiest way to find 
out is to build the circuit, following the breadboard layout 
of Figure 9.6, and then use your multi-meter to measure the 
voltage at the circuit’s input (pin 3) and compare it with the 
voltage at the circuit’s output (pin 6). The voltages should 
be measured for a range of values, adjusted by the preset 
variable resistor RVl, and should be written into Table 9.1 as 
you measure them.
Figure 9.5 
Our first experimental circuit: a non-inverting amplifier with a three-
rail power supply

Analogue integrated circuits
193
Figure 9.6 
The breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 9.5. Note that in this 
diagram the input voltage is being measured
Note that in Table 9.1 there are measurement points at nega-
tive as well as positive voltages: the best way of taking the 
readings is to first take the positive readings then turn the 
Table 9.1 
To show the results of your measurements
Input voltage 
Output voltage
 
-2 
 
-1 
 
0 
 
1 
 
2

Starting electronics
194
meter round i.e., swap the meter leads over so that the black 
lead measures the voltage at pin 6 and the red lead connects 
to 0 V, to measure the negative readings.
The results which were taken in my circuit are given in Table 
9.2, and your results should be something like this, although 
differences may occur. From these results you should see that 
the circuit amplifies whatever voltage is present at the input 
by about two, so that the output voltage is about twice that 
of the input. This is true whatever the input voltage. Don’t 
worry if your results aren’t that close to the ideal ones, it’s 
only an experiment.
This particular circuit is a fairly basic amplifier which simply 
amplifies the input voltage. For one reason or another, which 
you’ll appreciate soon, it’s called a non-inverting amplifier. 
Its gain is given by the expression:
 
and if you insert the values of resistors R1 and R2 into this 
expression you will see why the circuit gives an experimental 
gain of about two.
Table 9.2 
The results of my measurements
Input voltage 
Output voltage
 
-2 
-4.4 
 
-1 
-2.1 
 
0 
0 
 
1 
2.1 
 
2 
4.4

Analogue integrated circuits
195
As the circuit has a gain which is dependent on the values 
of resistors R1 and R2, it is a simple matter to adjust the cir-
cuit’s gain, by changing one or both resistors. Try changing 
resistor R1 to say 22 k and see what the gain is (it should be 
about three).
Take note — Take note — Take note — Take note
Theoretically, of course, the circuit could have any 
gain we desire, just by inserting the right values of 
resistances. But in practice there are limits. If, 
say, the circuit’s gain was set to be 20, and an input 
voltage of 1 V was applied, the circuit would attempt 
to produce an output voltage of 20 V. But that’s not 
possible — the output voltage can’t be greater than 
the power supply voltage (fairly obvious), which 
in this case is ±9 V. The answer, you may think, is to 
wind up the power supply voltage to + and –20 V, and, 
yes, you can do this to a certain extent, but again 
there are practical limitations. The 741, for exam-
ple, allows a maximum power supply voltage of about 
±15 V, above which it may be damaged.
Turning things upside-down
Earlier, we saw how the op-amp has two inputs, which 
we called non-inverting and inverting inputs. Now if we 
used the non-inverting input of the op-amp to make a 

Starting electronics
196
non-inverting amplifier (Figure 9.5) then it makes sense that 
the inverting input of the op-amp may be used to make an 
inverting amplifier, as shown in Figure 9.7.
Build the circuit up on your breadboard, as shown in the 
breadboard layout of Figure 9.8. In a similar way to the last 
circuit; now take a number of voltage measurements of input 
and output voltages, to confirm that this really is an inverting 
amplifier. Remember that whatever polarity the input voltage 
is, the output voltage should be the opposite, so you’ll have 
to change round the meter leads to suit. 
Hint:
One final point — the input to the op-amp circuit is classed as the 
connection between resistor R1 and the preset resistor, not the invert-
ing input terminal at pin 2 — you’ll get some peculiar results if you 
try to measure the input voltage at pin 2! 
Figure 9.7 
Our next experimental circuit: an inverting amplifier

Analogue integrated circuits
197
Figure 9.8 
The breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 9.7
Table 9.3 
To show the results of your measurements
Input voltage 
Output voltage
 
-2 
 
-1 
 
0 
 
1 
 
2
Tabulate your results in Table 9.3. The results from my cir-
cuit are given in Table 9.4, for reference. You’ll see that the 
circuit does invert the voltage, but also amplifies it by two 
at the same time.

Starting electronics
198
Like the non-inverting amplifier, the inverting amplifier’s 
gain is determined by resistance values, given this time by 
the expression:
 
so that the gain may once again be altered to suit a required 
application, just by changing a resistor.
Input voltage 
Output voltage
 
-2 
4.2 
 
-1 
2.1 
 
0 
0 
 
1 
-2.1 
 
2 
-4.2
Table 9.4 
Shows the results of my measurements
Follow me
These two op-amp formats; inverting and non-inverting 
amplifiers, are the basic building blocks from which most 
op-amp circuits are designed. They can be adapted merely 
by altering the values of the circuit resistances, or even by 
replacing the resistances with other components (such as 
capacitors) so that the circuits perform a vast number of 
possible functions.
As an example we’ll look at a couple of circuits, con-
sidering how they are designed, compared with the 
two basic formats. First, we’ll consider the circuit in 
Figure 9.9. At first sight we can see that it is a non-inverting 

Analogue integrated circuits
199
circuit of some description — the input voltage (derived 
from the wiper of the preset resistor) is applied to the non-
inverting input of the op-amp. But in comparison with our 
non-inverting amplifier of Figure 9.6, there are no resistors 
around the amplifier; instead the output voltage is simply 
looped back to the inverting input. So how does it work and 
what does it do?
Figure 9.9 
A voltage follower circuit: the output is equal to the input. This is 
basically a non-inverting circuit
Let’s first consider the non-inverting amplifier gain expres-
sion:
 
and look to see how we can apply it here. Although no resist-
ances are in this circuit that doesn’t mean that we don’t need 
to consider them! Resistor R1 in the circuit of Figure 9.5 can 
be seen to be between pin 6 of the op-amp (the output) and 
pin 2 (the inverting input). In the circuit of Figure 9.9, on the 
other hand, there is a direct connection between pin 6 and 
pin 2 — in other words we can imagine that resistor R1 of 
this circuit is zero.

Starting electronics
200
Similarly, resistor R2 of the circuit in Figure 9.5 lies between 
pin 2 and 0 V. Between pin 2 and 0 V of the circuit in Figure 
9.9 there is no resistor — in other words we can imagine the 
resistance to be infinitely high.
We can put these values of resistances into the expression 
for gain, which gives us:
 
so the circuit has a gain of one i.e., whatever voltage is ap-
plied at the input is produced at the output. The circuit has a 
number of common names, one of which is voltage follower, 
which quite accurately describes its operation. Build the 
circuit as shown in the breadboard layout of Figure 9.10, to 
see for yourself that this is indeed what happens. All you 
need do to confirm the results is to measure the input and 
output voltages at a few different settings, making sure they 
are the same.
It may seem a bit odd that we have built a circuit, however 
simple, which appears to do the same job which an ordinary 
length of wire could perform — that is, the output voltage is 
the same as the input voltage. But the situation is not quite 
as simple as that. The circuit we have constructed, although 
having a gain of only one, has a very high input resistance. 
This means that very little current is drawn from the preced-
ing circuit (in this case the preset resistor/voltage divider 
chain). On the other hand, the circuit has a very low output 
resistance, which means that it is capable of supplying a 
substantial current to any following circuits. This property 
gives rise to another of the circuit’s common names — resist-
ance converter. 

Analogue integrated circuits
201
Figure 9.10 
The breadboard layout of the circuit in Figure 9.9
Hint:
In practice the voltage follower is often used when the output of a 
circuit which is only capable of producing a small, weak current is 
required to be amplified. The voltage follower is used in the input 
stage of the amplifier to buffer the current before amplification takes 
place, thus preventing loading of the preceding circuit. In fact the term 
buffer is just another name for the voltage follower.

Starting electronics
202
Offset nulling
Earlier on it was mentioned that there are two connections 
to the 741 which are called offset null connections. In most 
op-amp applications these would not be used, but in certain 
instances, where the level of the output voltage is of critical 
importance they are.
When the op-amp has no input voltage applied to it — or, 
more correctly speaking, the input voltage is 0 V — the 
output voltage should be the same i.e., 0 V. Under ideal 
conditions of manufacture this would be so, but as the 741 
is a mass-produced device there are inevitable differences 
in circuit operation and so the output is rarely exactly 0 V.  
Temperature differences can also create changes in this output 
voltage level. The difference in the output from 0 V is known 
as the offset voltage and is usually in the order of just a few  
millivolts.
Hint:
In the majority of applications this level of offset voltage is no problem 
and so no action is taken to eliminate it. But the offset null terminals 
of the 741 may be used to control the level of offset voltage to reduce 
it to zero. 
Figure 9.11 shows a circuit which you can build to see the 
effects of the process of offset nulling, where a potentiometer 
has been connected between the two offset null terminals 

Analogue integrated circuits
203
with its wiper connected to the negative supply. Adjusting the 
wiper controls the offset voltage. You’ll see that the circuit 
is basically a buffer amplifier, like that of Figure 9.9, in which 
the input voltage to the non-inverting terminal is 0 V.
Figure 9.12 shows the breadboard layout of this offset nulling 
circuit. The multi-meter should be set to its lowest voltage 
setting e.g., 0.1 V, and even at this setting you won’t notice 
much difference in the output voltage. In fact, you probably 
won’t be able to detect any more than a change of about ±10 
millivolts as you adjust the preset resistor.
Get back
So far, we’ve used the 741 op-amp in a variety of circuits, 
all of which form the basis for us to build many, many more 
circuits. And that’s fine if you only want to be given circuits 
Figure 9.11 
An experimental circuit to demonstrate the process of offset nulling

Starting electronics
204
Figure 9.12 
The breadboard layout of the circuit in Figure 9.11 on the previous 
page
which you can build yourself. But the more inquisitive reader 
may have been wondering how the device can do all of this: 
after all, it’s only through knowledge that greater things can 
be achieved — to design your own circuits using op-amps, 
you need to know what makes them tick.
An op-amp can be considered to be a general-purpose am-
plifier with an extremely high gain. By itself (that is, with no 
components connected to it) it will have a gain of many thou-
sands. Typical figures for the 741, for example, give a gain of 
200,000 at zero frequency, although this varies considerably 
from device to device. Now, nobody’s suggesting that this 
sort of gain is particularly useful in itself — can you think of 

Analogue integrated circuits
205
an application in which a gain like this is required? — and 
besides, as each device has a different gain it would be well 
nigh impossible to build two circuits with identical proper-
ties, let alone the mass-produced thousands of radios, TVs, 
record players and so on which use amplifiers. So we need 
some way of taming this high gain, at the same time as defin-
ing its value precisely, so that useful and accurate amplifiers 
may be designed.
The process used in this taming of op-amps is known as feed-
back i.e., part of the output signal from the op-amp is fed back 
to the input. Look closely again at the circuits we have built so 
far this chapter and you’ll see that in all cases there is some 
connection or other from the output back to the input. These 
connections form the necessary feedback paths which reduce 
the amplifier’s gain to a determined, precise level. 

Starting electronics
206
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 A typical operational amplifier 
such as a 741 has:
 
a two inputs and one output 
b two outputs and one input 
c three inputs 
d one input and one output 
e c and d 
f none of these 
2 A voltage follower is:
 
a an op-amp circuit with a gain 
of 100 but which is non-invert-
ing 
b a unity gain inverting op-amp 
amplifier 
c an inverting amplifier, built 
with an op-amp 
d b and c 
e all of these 
f none of these
3 An integrated circuit has:
 
a many transistors 
b an internal chip of silicon 
c pins which allow connection 
to and from it 
d all of these 
e none of these 
4 In the non-inverting amplifier of 
Figure 9.5, the gain of the circuit 
when resistor R1 is 100 k, is:
 
a 1.1 
b 0.9 
c 12 
d 21 
e none of these
5 The gain of an op-amp inverting 
amplifier can be 0.1:
 
True or false
6 The gain of an op-amp non invert-
ing amplifier can be 0.1:
 
True or false

Digital integrated circuits I
207
10 Digital integrated circuits I
If you take a close look at an electronic process — any elec-
tronic process — you will always find some part of it which 
is automatic. By this, I mean that some mechanism is estab-
lished which controls the process to some extent without 
human involvement.
Electronic control can be based on either of the two electron-
ics principles we’ve already mentioned: analogue circuits, 
or digital circuits. In the last chapter we saw how analogue 
circuits can be built into integrated circuits. This chapter 
concentrates on the use of integrated circuits which contain 
digital circuits — which we call digital integrated circuits. 

Starting electronics
208
As we’ve already seen, integrated circuits (whether analogue 
or digital) are comprised of transistors — lots of ’em. So it’s 
to the transistor that we first turn to in this chapter’s look at 
digital integrated circuits.
When we first considered transistors, we saw that they can 
operate in only one of two modes: analogue (sometimes, 
mistakenly called linear) where the transistor operates over 
a restricted portion of its characteristic curve, and digital 
(where the transistor merely acts as a electronic switch 
— which can be either on or off).
It should be no surprise to learn that analogue ICs contain tran-
sistors operating in analogue mode, while digital ICs contain 
transistors operating in switching mode. Just occasionally, 
ICs contain both analogue and digital circuits, but these are 
usually labelled digital anyway.
Figure 10.1 shows a transistor switch which shows the gen-
eral operating principles. It’s a single device, with an input at 
point A, and a resultant output at point B. How does it work? 
Well, we need to mull over a few terms first, before we can 
show this.
Figure 10.1 
A simple transistor used as a switch, to form a simple digital circuit

Digital integrated circuits I
209
Logically speaking
In the electronic sense, digital signifies that a device has fixed 
states. Its input is either on or off, its output is also either 
on or off. As such there are only really two states, which 
incidentally gives rise to another term that is often used to 
describe such electronic circuits — binary digital. Also, it’s 
common to know the states by more simple names, such as 
on and off, or sometimes logic 0 and logic 1.
Hint:
States in an electronic digital circuit are generally indicated by different 
voltages, with a particular voltage implying one state, and another 
voltage implying the other state. The actual voltages are irrelevant, 
as long as it’s known which voltage implies which state, although 
by convention typical voltages might be 0 V when the state is off or 
logic 0, and 5 V when the state is on or logic 1. As long as there is a 
defined voltage for a defined state, it doesn’t matter. Further, and 
as a general rule, just the numbers 0 and 1 can be used to distinguish 
between the two logic states — whatever the voltages used.
In terms of electronic logic, the circuit of Figure 10.1 is quite 
simple in operation, and we can work out what it does by 
considering the transistor’s operation. We know from the 
experiment on page 174 that the presence of a small base cur-
rent initiates a large collector current through the transistor. 
We can use this knowledge to calculate what happens in the 
circuit of Figure 10.1.

Starting electronics
210
If the input at point A is logic 0 (we shall assume that logic 0 is 
represented by the voltage 0 V, and that logic 1 is represented 
by the voltage 10 V) then no base current flows, so no collec-
tor current flows — the transistor is switched off. This lack 
of collector current makes the transistor the equivalent of an 
extremely high resistance. An equivalent circuit representing 
this condition is shown in Figure 10.2, where the transistor 
resistance Rtr is 20 M (a typical value for a transistor in the 
off mode). 
Figure 10.2 
Equivalent diagram of a single transistor switch, with the transistor 
base (point A in Figure 10.1) connected to logic 0
Resistors Rtr and R1 effectively form a voltage divider, the 
output voltage of which follows the formula:
 
which is close enough to being 10 V (that is logic 1) to make 
no difference.
The effect is that output B is connected to logic 1 — in other 
words, the output at point B is the opposite of that at point 
A.

Digital integrated circuits I
211
If we now consider the transistor with a base current (that is, 
we connect point A to logic 1, at 10 V), the transistor turns 
on and passes a large collector current, with the effect that 
it become a low resistance. The equivalent circuit is shown 
in Figure 10.3. 
Figure 10.3 
Equivalent diagram of a single transistor switch, with point A 
connected to logic 1
The output voltage at point B is now:
 
which is as close to 0 V (logic 0) as we’ll ever get. 
So in this circuit the transistor output state is always the 
opposite of the input state. Put another way, whatever the 
input state, the output is always the inverse. 
We call this simple digital circuit — you guessed it — an 
inverter.

Starting electronics
212
Every picture tells a story
Interestingly, digital circuits of all types (and we’ll cover a few 
over the next few pages) are made up using just this simple 
and basic configuration. Even whole computers use this basic 
inverter as the heart of all their complex circuits.
To make it easy and convenient to design complex digital 
circuits using such transistor switches, we use symbols in-
stead of having to draw the complete transistor circuit. The 
symbol for an inverter is shown in Figure 10.4, and is fairly 
self-explanatory. The triangle represents the fact that the 
circuit acts as what is called a buffer — that is, connecting 
the input to the output of a preceding stage does not affect 
or dampen the preceding stage in any way. The dot on the 
output tells us that an inverting action has taken place, and 
so the output state is the opposite of the input state in terms 
of logic level.
Figure 10.4 
The symbol of an inverter — the simplest form of digital logic gate
To aid our understanding of digital logic circuits, input and 
output states are often drawn up in a table — known as a 
truth table, which maps the circuit’s output states as its in-
put states change. The truth table for an inverter is shown in 
Figure 10.5. As you’ll see, when its input state is 1 its output 
state is 0. When its input is 0, its output is 1 — exactly as 
we’ve already hypothesised. 

Digital integrated circuits I
213
Figure 10.5 Truth table of an inverter — the circuit of Figure 10.1, and the 
symbol of Figure 10.4
It’s important to remember that, in both a logic symbol and 
in a truth table, we no longer need to know or care about 
voltages. All that concerns us is logic states — 0 or 1. 
We can build up a simple circuit on breadboard to investi-
gate the inverter and prove what we’ve just seen in theory. 
Figure 10.6 shows the circuit, while Figure 10.7 shows the 
circuit’s breadboard layout. The digital integrated circuit 
used in Figure 10.6 and Figure 10.7 is actually a collection of 
six inverters, all accessible via the integrated circuit’s pin 
connections — such an integrated circuit is commonly called 
a hex inverter, to signify this. We’ve simply used one of the 
integrated inverters in our circuit.
Figure 10.6 Circuit of an experiment to discover how an inverter works

Starting electronics
214
Figure 10.7 
Possible breadboard layout  of the circuit in Figure 10.6
The integrated circuit used is a type of integrated circuit 
called a CMOS device, and it’s in what’s known as the 4000 
series of integrated circuits — it’s actually known as a 4049. 
Don’t worry about this for now, as we’ll look at more devices 
in the series (and another series, for that matter) later in the 
chapter. All you need to know for now is that it’s a standard 
dual-in-line (DIL) device, so you must be careful that you 
position it correctly in the breadboard.
Making sure that the actual integrated inverter used in our 
circuit has the correct input (that is, either logic 1 or logic 
0) is easy. Logic 1 is effectively the same as a connection to 
the positive battery supply — in practice though, you should 
never connect an input ‘directly’ to the positive battery sup-
ply; instead always connect it using a resistor. On the other 
hand, logic 0 is just as effectively the same as a connection to 
the negative battery supply (this time though, it’s perfectly 
allowable to connect an input directly). In other words, when 
the inverter’s input is connected to positive it’s at logic 1: 
when connected to negative it’s at logic 0. 

Digital integrated circuits I
215
It’s not a good idea to leave an input unconnected (what is 
called ‘floating’), as it may not be at the logic level you expect 
it to be, so we’ve added a fairly high-valued resistor to the 
input of the inverter to connect it directly to the positive bat-
tery supply. This means that, under normal circumstances 
— that is, with no other input connected — we know that the 
inverter’s input is held constantly at logic 1. To connect the 
inverter input to logic 0, it’s a simple matter of connecting a 
short link between the input and the negative battery supply. 
This isn’t shown in the breadboard layout, but all you need to 
do is add it when you are ready to perform the experiment.
Measuring the output of the inverter is just as easy, and we 
take advantage of the fact that the output can be used to 
light up a light-emitting diode (LED). So, when the inverter’s 
output is at logic 1, the LED is lit: when the inverter’s output 
is at logic 0, the LED is unlit.
Once the circuit’s built, it’s a simple matter of carrying out 
the experiment to note the output as its input changes, and 
completing its truth table. Figure 10.8 is a blank truth table 
for you to fill in. Just note down the circuit’s output, whatever 
its input state is. Of course, your results should tally exactly 
with the truth table in Figure 10.5 — if it doesn’t, you’ve gone 
wrong, because as I’ve said before in this book — I can’t be 
wrong, can I?
Figure 10.8 
Empty truth table for your results of the experiment in Figure 10.6

Starting electronics
216
Other logic circuits
The inverter is the first example of a type of digital circuit 
that’s normally called a gate. Other logic gates are, in fact, 
based on the inverter and are made up from adaptations of it. 
There are a handful of logic gates that make up all digital cir-
cuits, from simple switches through to complex computers. 
Other logic gates we need to know about are covered over 
the next few pages. They are all based on the principles of 
digital logic we’ve already looked at, though. However, before 
we discuss them, it’s important for us to see that they’re 
all based on a particular form of logic, which is essentially 
mathematical, known as Boolean algebra.
Boolean algebra
Inputs to and outputs from digital circuits are denoted by 
letters of the alphabet A, B C and so on. Each input or output, 
as we have seen, can be in one of two states: 0 or 1. So, for 
example, we can say A = 1, B = 0, C = 1 and so on.
Now, of course, in any digital system, the output will be de-
pendent on the input (or inputs). Let’s take as an example 
the simplest logic gate — the inverter — we’ve already seen 
in operation. Figure 10.9 shows it again, along with its truth 
table, only this time the truth table uses standard Boolean 
algebra letters A and B. If A = 1, then we can see that B = 0. 
Conversely, if A = logic 0, then B = 1.

Digital integrated circuits I
217
Figure 10.9  (a) the symbol for an inverter or NOT gate; (b) its truth table
In Boolean algebra we write this fact much more succinctly, 
as:
 
where the bar above the letter B indicates what is called a 
NOT function — that is, the logic state of A is NOT the logic 
state of B. Alternatively, we could equally well say that B is 
NOT A, that is:
 
Both Boolean statements are true with respect to an inverter, 
and are actually synonymous. Incidentally, inverters are often 
called NOT gates for this very reason.
You should be able to see that the Boolean statements for a 
gate simply allow us a convenient method of writing down 
the way a gate operates — without the necessity of drawing 
a gate symbol or forming the gate’s truth table. No matter 
how complex a gate circuit is, if we reduce it to a Boolean 
statement, it becomes simple to understand.

Starting electronics
218
Other logic gates
The other logic gates we need to know about are every bit as 
simple as the NOT gate or the inverter. They all have a symbol, 
they all have a truth table, but most important, they all have 
a Boolean statement we can associate with them.
OR gate
The symbol of an OR gate is shown in Figure 10.10. To see 
how an OR gate works, however, we’ll conduct an experi-
ment to complete a truth table. The circuit of the experiment 
is shown in Figure 10.11, while the breadboard layout is in 
Figure 10.12. 
Figure 10.10 The circuit symbol for a 2-input OR gate
Figure 10.11 Experimental circuit to find out how an OR gate works

Digital integrated circuits I
219
Figure 10.12 Possible breadboard layout for the experimental circuit showing OR 
gate operation in Figure 10.11
Build up the circuit, and fill in the blank truth table given in 
Figure 10.13 according to the results of the experiment as you 
change the circuit’s inputs. You should see that the output 
of the circuit is logic 1 whenever one or other of the circuit’s 
inputs are logic 1. Let’s say that again — whenever one ‘or’ 
the other — which is why it’s called an OR gate. 
The results you should have got for your truth table are shown 
in the truth table of Figure 10.14.
Figure 10.13 A truth table to put the results of your experiment into

Starting electronics
220
Figure 10.14 The results you should have got in your experiment
An OR gate is not quite as simple as an inverter — an inverter, 
after all, has only one input. An OR gate has more than one 
input — in theory it can have any number of inputs but, obvi-
ously, as the number of inputs increases, the resultant truth 
table gets more complicated. 
Figure 10.15, shows a three input OR gate symbol and truth 
table. Being a three input gate, its truth table has eight vari-
ations. We can calculate this because, being binary digital, 
the circuit can have 23 = 8 variations of inputs.
Figure 10.15  (a) the symbol for an OR gate; (b) its truth table

Digital integrated circuits I
221
The truth table of the OR gate shows that output Z of the gate 
is 1 when either A OR B OR C is 1. In Boolean terms, this is 
represented by the statement:
 
where ‘+’ indicates the OR function and has nothing whatso-
ever to do with the more usual arithmetical ‘plus’ sign. Don’t 
be confused: just remember that every time you see the ‘+’ 
sign in Boolean algebra it means OR.
AND gate
As you might expect, an AND gate follows the Boolean AND 
statement. Figure 10.16 shows an AND gate circuit, while its 
breadboard layout is shown in Figure 10.17, and Figure 10.18 
is a blank truth table ready for you to record the experiment’s 
results. As you might already expect, an AND gate is so called 
because its output is at logic 1 when input 1 AND input 2 are 
at logic 1. As a result, your experimental truth table should 
look like the complete truth table shown in Figure 10.19.
Figure 10.16 Circuit to investigate AND gate Boolean operation

Starting electronics
222
Figure 10.17 Possible breadboard layout to investigate the circuit of Figure 10.16
Figure 10.18 Truth table for you to record your results of your experiment
Figure 10.19 How your results should look

Digital integrated circuits I
223
Figure 10.20  (a) a three input AND gate; (b) its truth table
NOR gate
The NOR gate’s function can be calculated from its name 
‘NOR’. Effectively, we can think of this as meaning ‘NOT OR’. 
In other words, it’s an OR gate and a NOT gate (that is, an 
inverter) in series. 
The circuit of our experiment to look  at NOR gates is shown 
in Figure 10.21, while a possible breadboard layout for the 
circuit is given in Figure 10.22. A blank truth table for you to 
fill in is shown in Figure 10.23. 
Translating this into a Boolean statement for a three input 
AND gate with inputs A, B, and C (shown as a symbol and as 
a truth table in Figure 10.20), we can see that its output Z is 
1, only when inputs A AND B AND C are 1. The Boolean state-
ment is therefore:
 
where ‘.’ indicates the Boolean AND expression.

Starting electronics
224
Figure 10.21 Circuit to find out the function of a NOR gate
Figure 10.22 Possible breadboard layout to build the circuit of Figure 10.21
Figure 10.23 Blank truth table to complete with the results of your experiment

Digital integrated circuits I
225
Figure 10.24 A completed truth table for the experiment in Figure 10.21
In Boolean terms, the output of a NOR gate is the exact 
inverse of the OR gate’s output. When applied to the three 
input NOR gate and its truth table shown in Figure 10.25, we 
can see that the NOR gate’s output is 1 when neither A NOR 
B NOR C is 1 — in other words, the exact inverse of the OR 
gate’s output.
Figure 10.25  (a) a NOR gate; (b) its truth table
As a Boolean statement this is written:
 

Starting electronics
226
NAND gate
You should be able to work out for yourself what the NAND 
in NAND gate stands for: NOT AND. So, if you’ve followed the 
last bit about NOR gates, you might also be able to work out 
its Boolean statement. Nevertheless, it’s best to see things 
for ourselves, and the circuit shown in Figure 10.26 is the 
experiment we need to carry out to understand what’s hap-
pening. Figure 10.27 is a possible breadboard layout for the 
circuit in Figure 10.26.
Figure 10.26 Circuit to investigate a NAND gate
Figure 10.27 Breadboard layout to build the circuit of Figure 10.26
Meanwhile Figure 10.28 is a blank truth table for you to fill in 
with your results.

Digital integrated circuits I
227
Figure 10.28 Blank truth table, ready for the results of your experiment
Figure 10.29 is the completed truth table for a NAND gate, and 
yours should be the same (if not, why not, eh?).
Figure 10.29 Completed truth table for a NAND gate
And, for the sake of completeness, Figure 10.30 shows a three 
input NAND gate and its truth table.
Figure 10.30 A three input NAND gate (a) symbol, (b) truth table

Starting electronics
228
Actually, it’s quite difficult to express a NAND gate’s operation 
in words, but here goes: it’s a gate whose output Z is 1 when 
NOT A AND NOT B AND NOT C is 1. Err… yeah, right!
A better way is to express it as the Boolean statement:
 
which, no doubt you have already worked out! 
Haven’t you?
Simple, eh?
Earlier on I mentioned that all digital circuits can be made up 
from the simplest of digital circuits — the inverter. I’m going 
to prove that now; theoretically at first, then we can do some 
experiments which show the fact practically.
By expanding the inverter circuit we first looked at back in 
Figure 10.1 and the following circuits, we can easily create 
other circuits. Figure 10.31, for example, is merely a transistor 
operating in the same way that the inverter transistor circuit 
of Figure 10.1 works. 
It is, effectively, an inverter with three inputs to its base, 
rather than just one.

Digital integrated circuits I
229
Figure 10.31  A transistor switch, with three inputs A, B and C
If you look at it carefully, you should be able to figure out 
how it works. When all three of the three inputs, A, B, or C 
are connected to logic 0, the transistor is off, hence the tran-
sistor is a very high resistance, which means that the output 
is at logic 1. However, when any one of the three inputs is 
connected to logic 1 the transistor turns on, hence becoming 
a low resistance, and the output becomes logic 0. The truth 
table of Figure 10.32 shows this, and if you compare this to 
the truth table in Figure 10.25 you’ll see they are the same. 
Yes, the three input transistor switch of Figure 10.31 (which 
is merely an adapted inverter) is a NOR gate!
Figure 10.32  Truth table for the transistor switch circuit of Figure 10.31

Starting electronics
230
That ol’ black magic!
To show that the inverter is the heart of all other logic gates, 
we have to consider how other gates are made. We’ve just 
seen that we can make a NOR gate from an inverter, but what 
about the other logic gates?
NOR and NOT gates combined
Figure 10.33 is a circuit that combines two logic gates we’ve 
already experimented on. They’re linked so that the output 
of one (a NOR gate) can be used as the input of the next (an 
inverter or NOT gate) to produce a single device.
Figure 10.33 A simple circuit to create one type of gate (OR) from two other 
types (NOR and NOT)
A possible breadboard layout is shown in Figure 10.34, while 
an incomplete truth table is shown in Figure 10.35. Note that, 
as  there are two stages to the circuit — that is, two separate 
logic gates — we can measure the middle section of the circuit 
by including another LED to more fully understand what’s 

Digital integrated circuits I
231
going on inside the whole thing. Because of this, of course, 
the truth table needs to have an extra column to allow us to 
record the actions of the circuit as we carry out the experi-
ment. Figure 10.36 shows a complete truth table for the circuit, 
which your results should mirror.
Figure 10.34 A breadboard layout for the experiment shown in Figure 10.33
Figure 10.35 A truth table for you to record the results of your experiment

Starting electronics
232
Figure 10.36 A completed truth table for the experiment of Figure 10.33
If we compare the truth tables (in either Figure 10.35 or Figure 
10.36) with the truth table in Figure 10.14 we should see that 
the outputs are the same for the same inputs. (OK, yes, the 
inputs and output are presented in a different order — but 
the results are identical.) 
In other words, we have used an inverter along with a NOR 
gate (by merely inverting the output of the NOR gate) to cre-
ate an OR gate. 
For completeness, Figure 10.37 shows a three input device 
based on this circuit, together with its truth table.
Figure 10.37  (a) using an inverter and a NOR gate to create an OR gate;  
(b) its truth table to prove this

Digital integrated circuits I
233
OR and NOT gates combined
In the same vein as the last circuit, Figure 10.38 shows a cir-
cuit combining different types of logic gates — this time an 
OR gate whose inputs have been inverted by NOT gates. The 
outputs of both NOT gates (hence, also, the inputs of the OR 
gate) are measured with two LEDs, while the OR gate output 
is measured with the third LED.
Figure 10.38 A circuit to investigate OR and NOT gates
Figure 10.39 shows a breadboard for the circuit for you to 
follow. Figure 10.40 shows an incomplete truth table for you 
to record your results of the experiment, while Figure 10.41 
is a complete truth table, which — if everything goes as it 
should — your results will be identical to.
If you’ve already been thinking about this, you’ll no doubt 
already have been flicking back through this book’s pages to 
locate which truth table Figure 10.40 and 10.41 are identical 
to. If not, or if you simply haven’t found it, it’s the truth table 
in Figure 10.29 — which is that of a NAND gate.

Starting electronics
234
Figure 10.39 A possible breadboard layout for the circuit of Figure 10.38
Figure 10.40 An incomplete truth table to record your experimental results
Figure 10.41 Complete truth table for the circuit of Figure 10.38

Digital integrated circuits I
235
For the sake of completeness, Figure 10.42a shows a three 
input variant of this, and the accompanying truth table in 
Figure 10.42b shows the various logic levels in the circuit.
Figure 10.42   (a) a NAND gate, made from OR and NOT gates; (b) its truth 
table, to prove this
The Boolean Way — It’s Logical!
Now we already know that the Boolean statement for a NAND 
gate is:
 
But we can also derive another Boolean statement from the 
above circuit, by the very fact that the inputs to the OR gate 
in Figure 10.42 are inverted before they reach the OR gate, 
such that the final output Z is equal to logic 1 when NOT A 
OR NOT B OR NOT C are logic 1. 

Starting electronics
236
So, the Boolean statement:
 
also expresses the NAND gate. 
In other words:
 
Interesting!
NOR from AND and NOT
And, just for the sake of completion, we can also work out 
that a NOR gate can be created by inverting the inputs of an 
AND gate. 
As we’ve done so far in this book, we’ll do this first experi-
mentally, building up the circuit and checking results. Then 
we’ll do it mathematically.
Figure 10.43 shows a circuit we can use to do this. It’s basi-
cally a two input AND gate, the inputs of which have been 
inverted by NOT gates.
Figure 10.44 shows a possible breadboard layout you can fol-
low to build the experimental circuit on, while Figure 10.45 
is an uncompleted truth table for you to complete with your 
results, and Figure 10.46 is the complete truth table whose 
results should match yours.

Digital integrated circuits I
237
Figure 10.43 The experimental circuit to prove that a NOR gate can be created 
from an AND gate whose inputs are inverted first
Figure 10.44 A breadboard layout for the circuit in Figure 10.43

Starting electronics
238
Figure 10.45 An incomplete truth table for you to record your results
Figure 10.46 A completed truth table for the circuit in Figure 10.43 — showing 
how we have made a NOR gate from an AND gate with NOT gates at its inputs
And, for the sake of completeness, Figure 10.47 shows a three 
input AND gate with NOT gates at its inputs, and the circuit’s 
truth table, to show that we can make a NOR gate of any 
number if inputs from an AND gate of that number of inputs 
together with the requisite number of inverters.
On the other hand, of course, and even better than this, by 
the same means of deduction we used for other circuits com-
bining logic gates, we can calculate that the standard NOR 
Boolean statement:
 
is also the same as another Boolean statement:
 

Digital integrated circuits I
239
Figure 10.47 A three input AND gate converted to a NOR gate with NOT gates
In other words:
 
And — there — we have just proved mathematically that you 
can make a NOR gate from AND and NOT gates.
So, there’s no doubt about it, all digital electronic logic gates 
can be created from a number of other digital electronic logic 
gates. 
What’s more, it’s not beyond the realms of possibility to work 
out for ourselves that these very logic gates, that can make 
any other logic gates, can be combined, and combined again, 
to make up ever more complex circuits. And, indeed they are 
— as we’ll see in the next chapter! For now, have a go at the 
quiz over the page, to see if you’ve been taking notice…
 
…which I’m sure you have. Just prove it!

Starting electronics
240
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 In the circuit symbol for an 
NOT gate:
 
a the input is applied to the 
side with a circle 
 
b the output comes from the 
side with a circle 
 
c the circle implies that the 
signal is turned upside down 
d the triangle represents the 
three signals that must be  
applied 
 
e b and c 
 
f all of these 
 
g none of these.
2 All logic gates can be made up 
from transistors:
 
True or false.
3 The output of a NOT gate is:
 
a always logic 0  
b always 5 volts 
 
c never logic 1  
d the logical opposite of the 
power supply 
e the logical opposite of its 
input  
f none of these.
4 The output of an OR gate is 
logic 1 when:
 
a all of its inputs are logic 1 
b any of its inputs are logic 1 
c none of its inputs are logic 1 
d a and b. 
5 The output of a NOR gate is logic 1 
when:
 
a all of its inputs are logic 1 
b 10 milliamps  
c any of its inputs are logic 1 
d this is a trick question, the 
output is always logic 1 
e none of these.
6 When the output of a gate is used 
as the input of a NOT gate, the 
final output is:
 
a always the inverse of the output 
of the first gate 
b always the same as the output 
of the first gate 
c can only be calculated math-
ematically by binary logic 
d all of these 
e none of these 
f in the lap of the gods.
7 If the inputs to an OR gate are in-
verted with NOT gates, the overall 
gate is that of a:
 
a NOT gate 
b NOR gate 
c NAND gate 
d a and b 
e b and c 
f none of these.
8 Any logic gate can be created from 
other logic gates:
 
True or false.

Digital integrated circuits II
241
11 Digital integrated circuits II
In the last chapter we saw how electronic logic gates can be 
constructed from other electronic logic gates, however, as 
far as the hobbyist or the person starting out in electronics 
is concerned, knowing that logic gates can be created this 
way is one thing. No-one in their right mind would actually 
go about creating anything other than the simplest of logic 
gates like that, because it’s just too time-consuming and too 
expensive. ICs represent the only sensible option.
Now we’re going to take a look at some IC logic gates, in 
the form of the same sort of ICs we’ve already studied and 
experimented with. The ICs shown over the next few pages 
represent only the tip of the digital IC iceberg though, as I’ve 
only shown some of the most common and simplest. The dig-
ital circuits we’ll look at later in this chapter are all available 
in one IC form or another as well, so the list of available ICs 
is very long indeed — not just the few shown here.

Starting electronics
242
IC series
For most people, there are two families of ICs that are used in 
digital electronics. The first is a very easy-to-handle variety 
(in other words, they can’t be easily damaged). On the other 
hand, they require a stable operating voltage of 5 V, which 
isn’t all that easy to generate, without a power supply. 
The second family of digital ICs will operate over a range of 
voltages (typically, a 9 V battery does the job exceedingly 
well), but are a little more easily damaged. Nevertheless, 
handled carefully and correctly, both families work well.
7400 series
The 7400 series of digital ICs is the variety that requires a 
fixed 5 V power supply. While there are many, many devices 
in the family only a few are of interest here. Before I explain 
about the ICs in detail though, a brief word about the 7400 
series numbering.
The first two digits of any device in the family (that is, 74--) 
indicate that the device is a member of the family. The 7400 
series is a family of digital ICs known as transistor–transistor 
logic (TTL) devices. The last two (or sometimes three) digits 
(--00) indicate which IC this is in the family. In other words a 
7400 (which happens to be an IC with four, two input NAND 
gates) is different to a 7402 (which has four, two-input NOR 
gates).

Digital integrated circuits II
243
A selection of ICs in the 7400 series is shown in Figure 11.1. 
Note that those shown — as I’ve already said —  represent 
only a small fraction of the complete family.
Figure 11.1̃ 
Some integrated circuits from the 74 series of transistor–transistor 
logic (TTL) digital devices
4000 series
Like the 7400 series, the devices in the 4000 series are rep-
resented by their numbers. Note, though that the numbers 
between the two families do not correspond — in other words, 
a 4001 does not contain the same logic gates as a 7401.

Starting electronics
244
A small part of the 4000 series is shown in Figure 11.2.
Figure 11.2  
Some common devices from the 4000 series of digital integrated 
circuits — note that these cannot be directly interchanged with devices from the 74 
series of TTL digital integrated circuits
Once we have a family (well, two families actually) of digital 
integrated circuits that contain logic gates, it’s fairly obvious 
that building more complex digital circuits becomes easier. It 
is merely a matter of using the gates within these integrated 
circuits to build more complex circuits. On the other hand, 
further devices in both ranges of integrated circuits are 
themselves more complex, containing circuits built from the 
gates themselves.

Digital integrated circuits II
245
Shutting the ’stable gate
All the digital electronic circuits we’ve looked at so far func-
tion more-or-less instantly. If certain inputs are present, a 
circuit will produce an output which is defined by the Boolean 
statement for the circuit — it doesn’t matter how complex 
the circuit is, a combination of inputs will produce a certain 
output.
For this reason, such circuits are known as combinational. 
While they may be used in quite complex digital circuits they 
are really no more than electronic switches — the output of 
which depends on the correct combination of inputs.
Put another way, they display no intelligence of any kind, 
simply doing what is demanded of them — instantly.
One of the first aspects of intelligence — whether in the 
animal world (including humans) or in the electronics world 
— is memory (that is, the ability to decide a course of action 
dependent not only on applied inputs but also on a knowledge 
of what has previously taken place).
Digital circuits can easily be made that remember logic states. 
We say they can store binary information. The family of de-
vices that do that in digital electronics are known as bistable 
circuits (called this, because they remain stable in either of 
two states), sometimes also known as latches. It’s this ability 
to remain stable in either of the two binary states that allows 
them to form the basis of digital memory.

Starting electronics
246
SR-type NOR bistable
The simplest bistable or latch is the SR-type (sometimes 
called RS-type) bistable, the operation of which acts like two 
gates connected together as in Figure 11.3. The circuit is con-
structed so that the two gates are cross-coupled — the output 
of the first is connected to the input of the second, and the 
output of the second is connected to the input of the first. 
Figure 11.3 
 An SR-type bistable circuit, comprising two cross-coupled NOR 
gates
There are two inputs to the circuit, and also two outputs. The 
inputs are labelled S and R (hence, the reason why the circuits 
are called SR-type…), which stand for ‘Set’ and ‘Reset’. Now, it 
so happens that one output is, in most instances, the inverse 
of the other, so for convenience one output (by convention) 
is labelled Q and the other output (also by convention) is 
labelled  (called bar-Q), to show this.
Both inputs to the SR-type NOR gate bistable should normally 
be at logic 0. As one input (either S or R) changes to logic 1, 
the output of that gate goes to logic 0. As the gates are cross-
coupled, this is fed back to the second input of the other 

Digital integrated circuits II
247
gate, which makes the output of the other gate go to logic 1. 
This, in turn, is fed back to the second input of the first gate, 
forcing its output to remain at logic 0 — even (and this is the 
important point) after the original input is removed. This is 
an important point!
Applying another logic 1 input to the first gate has no further 
effect on the circuit — it remains stable, or latched, in this 
state.
On the other hand, a logic 1 input applied to the other gate’s 
input causes the same set of circumstances to occur but in 
the other direction, causing the circuit to become stable, or 
latch, in the other way.
This sort of switching backwards and forwards in two alter-
nate but stable states accounts for yet another term that is 
often applied to bistable circuits — they are commonly called 
‘flip-flops’.
The SR-type NOR bistable operation can be summarised in 
a truth table, in a similar way that non-bistable or combina-
tional logic gates can be summarised. However, because we 
are trying to tabulate inputs and outputs that change with 
time, then strictly speaking we should call this a ‘function 
table’, and such a function table for the SR-type NOR bistable 
is shown in Figure 11.4. 
Account has been taken in the function table for changing 
from one logic state to the other, by the symbol 
, which 

Starting electronics
248
indicates that the input state changes from a logic 0 to logic 
1. Also, we no longer write the logic states as 1 and 0, but H 
(meaning high) and L (meaning low).
Figure 11.4 
The function table of the  SR-type NOR bistable circuit shown in 
Figure 11.3
The outputs indicate what happens as the input states change 
on these occasions. You can see that if input S goes high (that 
is, from 0 to 1) while input R is low, then the output Q will be 
high. If, however, input S then returns low, the output will be Q0 
— which simply means that it remains at what it was. If input 
R then goes high while S remains low, the output changes to 
low and remains in that state even if R goes low again.
The last line of the function table is shaded to indicate that 
this condition is best avoided — simply because both outputs 
are the same. Designers of digital circuits would normally take 
steps to ensure that this condition did not occur in their logic 
circuits because confusion in the form of uncertain outcomes 
can obviously arise.

Digital integrated circuits II
249
In other words (and, yes, I know that it was an awful lot of 
words), we have constructed a form of electronic memory, 
one of the outputs of which can be set to a high logic state by 
application of a positive-going pulse to one of its inputs. It’s a 
small, but, very significant advance — changing combinational 
logic gates into bistable circuits that can be used together 
to create sequences of logic level variations. In effect, what 
we have now done is to cross over from combinational logic 
circuits to a new type of logic circuits known as sequential 
logic circuits, with this simple but highly significant and very 
important addition of memory. Whatever we want to call them: 
bistables; latches; or flip-flops, they are sequential, and they 
can be used to create even more complex logic circuits.
SR-type NAND bistable
In Figure 11.3 the gates are both NOR gates, but they can be 
just as simply NAND gates, as shown in Figure 11.4. This gives 
us an SR-type bistable made from NAND gates. Easy enough 
— but there are some important considerations.
Figure 11.5 
An SR-type bistable circuit comprising two cross-coupled NAND 
gates — note the inverted inputs when compared with Figure 11.3 

Starting electronics
250
The most important consideration is that both inputs of the 
SR-type NAND bistable should normally be at logic 1 — this 
is in direct contrast with the SR-type NOR bistable, where the 
inputs needed to be normally at logic 0. Because of this, the 
inputs are considered to be inverted in the circuit, shown as 
such in Figure 11.5.
With both inputs of the circuit of Figure 11.5 at logic 1, the 
circuit is stable, with both NAND gate outputs at logic 0. When 
one input goes to logic 1, the output of that NAND gate goes 
to logic 1. This is applied to the other NAND gate’s second 
input, so the output of the second NAND gate will go to logic 
0. This output is in turn fed to the first NAND gate’s second 
input and thus its output is forced to remain at logic 1.
Applying a further logic 0 to the first NAND gate has no further 
effect on the circuit — it remains stable. However, when a 
logic 0 is applied to the second NAND gate’s input causes the 
same reaction in the other direction. So the circuit has two 
stable states, hence is a bistable.
Figure 11.6 shows the function table for this SR-type NAND 
bistable.
Just as in the SR-type NOR bistable, there is a possibility 
that both outputs can be forced to be the same level which 
produces an indeterminate outcome. In the SR-type NAND 
bistable, this is when both inputs are at logic 0. So, circuit 
designers must ensure this situation does not occur in their 
logic circuits.

Digital integrated circuits II
251
Figure 11.6 
A function table for an SR-type NAND bistable circuit, such as that 
in Figure 11.5
While these simple gate circuits are really all that’s required 
to build bistables in theory, practical concerns require that 
something is added to them before they work properly and 
as expected. The problem is that the very act of applying 
changing logic levels to its inputs suffers from the mechanical 
limitations of the connecting method. Any mechanical switch 
(even one you might use in your home to turn on the lights) 
has ‘contact bounce’ — a phenomenon where the contacts in 
a switch flex while the switchover takes place, causing them 
to make and break the connection several times before they 
settle down. 
Now, in the home, this is unnoticeable, because it happens so 
quickly you couldn’t see the light flickering due to it, even if 
the light itself could react that quickly. But digital circuits are 
quick enough to notice contact bounce, and as each bounce 
is counted as a pulse the circuit could have reacted many, 
many times to just one flick of the switch. While we were 
merely changing input states and watching output states of 

Starting electronics
252
combinational logic circuits in the last chapter, this really 
didn’t matter. All we were wanting was a fixed output for a 
set of fixed inputs. In sequential circuits like bistables — and 
the other sequential circuits we’ll be looking at in this chap-
ter, as well as others — contact bounce is a real problem, as 
we are wanting a sequence of inputs. The wrong sequence 
— given by contact bounces — will give us the wrong results. 
Simple as that!
The likes of simple bistables like the SR-type NAND bistable 
give us an ideal and effective solution to the problems created 
by contact bounce. We’ve just discussed how once one of the 
NAND gates in the circuit is switched by application of one 
logic 0 pulse at either it’s S or R input, it then doesn’t matter 
if any further pulses are applied to the input. So, a switch that 
provides the pulse could make as many contact bounces as 
it likes, the circuit will not be affected further.
Figure 11.7 shows the simple addition of a switch and two 
resistors to the SR-type NAND bistable, to give a circuit that 
can be used in other circuits to provide specific logic pulses 
that have absolutely no contact bounce.
Figure 11.7 
Simple circuit to prevent contact bounce

Digital integrated circuits II
253
Switch SW1 in the circuit of Figure 11.7 is a simple single-pole, 
double-throw (SPDT) switch, and should have break-before-
make contacts (in other words, when switching from one 
connection to the other, its switch contacts will disconnect 
from one connection before it connects to the other — so 
there is a point in the switch motion when all three contacts 
are disconnected from each other). The switch can be either 
a push-button switch, or a conventional flick-type switch.
Operation is fairly simple. At rest, one of the NAND gate inputs 
connects through the switch to logic 0, while the other NAND 
gate’s input is connected through a resistor to logic 1. As the 
switch is switched, the second NAND gate’s input is connected 
to logic 0 though the switch, and the circuit operates as pre-
viously described like a standard SR-type NAND bistable. It 
doesn’t matter whether there is contact bounce or not at this 
time, as repeated pulses do not affect the bistable.
When the switch is operated again, so the first NAND gate’s 
input is connected to logic 0 and the bistable jumps to its 
other stable state. Again, contact bounce will make no dif-
ference to it.
One or both of the outputs of the simple de-bouncing circuit 
can be applied to the inputs of following circuitry, safe in 
the knowledge that contact bounce will have no effect. The 
requirement for no contact bounce is true for any sequential 
circuit, actually. So this very simple solution can be used not 
just in the simple circuits we see here in this chapter, but for 
all sequential circuits. Whenever a sequential logic circuit 
requires a manually pulsed input, this circuit can be used.

Starting electronics
254
Other bistables
There is more than one type of bistable — the SR-type is in 
reality only the simplest. They all derive from the SR-type 
bistable however, and so it’s the SR-type bistable that we’ll 
use as the basic building block when making them.
The clocked SR-type bistable
Figure 11.8 shows the clocked SR-type bistable. It is a simple 
adaptation of the basic SR-type NAND bistable, in that it fea-
tures an extra pair of NAND gates, which not only allows inputs 
which do not require inverting, but also allows a clocked input 
to be part of the circuit’s controlling mechanism. 
Now, a clock circuit can be made from something like a 555 
astable multivibrator (as we saw in Chapter 5), and how it is 
made is unimportant to us here. What is important, on the 
other hand, is that a clock means that several bistables can 
be synchronised, all in time with the clock.
Figure 11.8 
A clocked SR-type NAND bistable

Digital integrated circuits II
255
The clocked SR-type NAND bistable circuit here functions 
basically as before, except that the outputs can only change 
states while the clock input CLK is at logic 1. When the clock 
input CLK is at logic 0, it doesn’t matter what logic levels are 
applied to the S and R inputs, there will be no effect on the 
bistable.
Thus, with this simple addition, we have created a bistable 
with a controlling input. Unless the controlling input is at logic 
1, nothing else can happen. This can be a very useful thing in 
electronics where, say, a number of things need to be counted 
over a period of time. For example, by clocking the circuit 
for, say, 1 hour, the number of cars passing a checkpoint in 
that time could be counted electronically.
The D-type bistable
A variation on the basic clocked SR-type bistable is the ‘data’ 
bistable, or D-type bistable. A circuit is shown in Figure 
11.9.
Figure 11.9 
A D-type bistable

Starting electronics
256
Effectively, the output of the first NAND gate (which would 
be the inverted S input) is used as the input to the second 
(which would be the R input). The single remaining input is 
given the label D.
In operation, the Q output of the D-type bistable will always 
follow the logic level at D while the clock signal CLK is at 
logic 1. When the clock falls to logic 0, however, the output 
Q remains at the last state of the D input prior to the clock 
changing.
This is quite a useful circuit, and is relatively simple in terms 
of both circuitry and operation. Like the simple SR-type bist-
able, it can be used to measure input signal variations over 
a defined period of time.
The edge-triggered SR-type bistable
However, often it’s necessary that things are registered at 
a precise instant of time, not over a period. So the circuits 
of Figures 11.8  and 11.9 can’t be used. A moderately simple 
adaptation to ensure a circuit only registers input changes 
at an instant is all that’s required — it’s basically a combina-
tion of two identical clocked SR-type NAND bistables, each 
operating on opposite halves of the clock signal — and the 
resultant circuit is shown in Figure 11.10. 
Such a combination of two bistables is often called a  
‘master–slave’ bistable, because the input bistable operates 
as the master section, while the output bistable is slaved to 
the master during half of each clock cycle. 

Digital integrated circuits II
257
Figure 11.10 An edge-triggered SR-type NAND bistable
An important component is the the inverter which connects 
the two bistables in the circuit. This ensures that the bistables 
are enabled during opposite half cycles of the clock signal. 
Assuming that the clock input CLK is at logic 0 initially, the 
S and R inputs cannot yet affect the master bistable’s opera-
tion. However, when the clock input CLK goes to logic 1 the 
S and R inputs are now able to control the master bistable 
in the same way they do in Figure 11.8. As the inverter has 
inverted the clock signal though, the slave bistable’s inputs 
(which are formed by the outputs of the master bistable) now 
have no effect on the slave’s outputs. In short, although the 
outputs of the master bistable may have changed, they do 
not yet have any effect on the slave bistable.
When the clock input CLK falls back to logic 0 the master 
bistable once again is no longer controlled by its S and R 
inputs. At the same time, however, the inverted clock signal 
now allows the slave bistable’s inputs to control the slave 
bistable. In other words, the final outputs of the circuits can 

Starting electronics
258
only change state as the clock signal CLK falls from logic 1 to 
logic 0. This change of state from logic 1 to logic 0 is commonly 
called the ‘falling edge’, and the overall circuit is generically 
known as an ‘edge-triggered’ bistable.
This is an extremely important point in electronic terms. By 
creating this master–slave bistable arrangement to make the 
bistable edge-triggered, we are able to control precisely when 
the bistable changes state. As a benefit, this also makes sure 
that there is plenty of time for the master and slave bistables 
comprising the overall bistable to respond to the input sig-
nals — although things in logic circuits change and respond 
quickly, they do not happen instantly and still do take a finite 
time. The master–slave arrangement takes account of and 
caters for this small but finite time.
The JK-type bistable
One other problem which we’ve already encountered with 
our basic bistables isn’t yet catered for though — the inde-
terminate output which can occur in a bistable if both S and 
R inputs are logic 1 at the moment when the clock signal falls 
from logic 1 to logic 0.
So, to prevent this happening, it’s a matter of preventing both 
S and R inputs from being at logic 1 at the same time as the 
clock signal falls from logic 1 to logic 0. We do this by adding 
some feedback from the slave bistable to the master bistable, 
and creating new inputs (labelled J and K).
The circuit of such a JK-type bistable to perform this function 
is shown in Figure 11.11.

Digital integrated circuits II
259
Figure 11.11 
A JK-type bistable
As with the edge-triggered master–slave SR-type bistable, 
the outputs only change on the falling edge of the clock CLK 
signal, so the inputs (J and K now, not S and R) control the 
output states at that time. However, the feedback from the 
final output stage back to the input stage ensures that one of 
the two inputs is always disabled — so the master bistable 
cannot change state back and forth while the clock input is 
at logic 1. Instead, the enabled input can only change the 
master bistable state once, after which no further change of 
states can occur.
Because the JK-type bistable is completely predictable in this 
manner, under all circuit conditions, the JK-type bistable is the 
preferred minimum bistable device for logic circuit designers. 
That’s not to say that SR-type bistables can’t be used, and in 
fact they do have their purposes, but the important point is 
that circuit designers have to be aware of their limitations, 
ensuring that unpredictable outcomes are not allowed and 
so are designed out of the circuit.

Starting electronics
260
T-type bistable
One particular mode of operation of the JK-type bistable is 
of importance here. If both J and K inputs are held at logic 1, 
the outputs of the master bistable will change state with each 
rising edge of the clock signal and the final outputs will change 
state for each falling edge. Such a fact is used as the basis of 
the T-type bistable (where T stands for ‘toggle’), shown in 
Figure 11.12. The lone T input of this circuit is really just the 
CLK inputs of other bistables.
Figure 11.12 
A T-type bistable
And that concludes our look at how logic bistable circuits are 
made up from basic logic gates. The important point about 
all of this though, is that by taking basic combinational logic 
gates and joining them in what are fairly basic circuits, we 
have created sequential circuits — that is, logic circuits that 
have an element of memory!

Digital integrated circuits II
261
Open the black box
Just as we found earlier that we could create logic gates with 
collections of transistors, but decided we could draw logic 
gates with their own symbols (rather than actually drawing 
all the internal transistors involved), so there are symbols 
for the various types of bistable — that don’t show the actual 
logic gates (or, indeed, the individual transistors) involved. 
Figure 11.13, for example, shows the symbol for a clocked, 
edge-triggered, SR-type bistable, such as the circuit of Figure 
11.10. It’s just a box, with the bistable’s main inputs shown 
on the box. Note though, that it doesn’t show whether the 
SR-type bistable is created from NAND gates or NOR gates 
(or whatever gates, or indeed whatever transistors, actually 
— that’s all very irrelevant!). All you need to remember is that 
it’s just a box showing inputs and outputs — and that it acts 
as a clocked, edge-triggered,  SR-type bistable.
Figure 11.13 
A clocked, edge-triggered, SR-type bistable symbol
Of note is the symbol used for the clock input, , which merely 
represents the fact that it is edge-triggered. Its function table 
is shown in Figure 11.14.

Starting electronics
262
Figure 11.14 
The function table of the clocked, edge-triggered, SR-type bistable 
of Figure 11.13
Such an approach of simplifying circuits is very common in 
electronics, and we’ve come across it before — the black-box 
approach. The approach relies on the fact that we don’t need 
to know how a complex circuit is constructed — we only need 
to know its function.
Every single one of the other logic gate types we’ve seen 
in this chapter can also be represented in black box block 
form by symbols, and to prove it, we’ll consider them all 
now. All you have to do is remember that if necessary they 
can — and sometimes are — built using logic gates, but you 
don’t need to know how to construct them that way because 
— yes, you’ve guessed it — they can be bought ready-built 
in IC form, in the same series (7400 and 4000) we’ve already 
used and are familar with. 
First is the D-type bistable. Its circuit symbol is shown in 
Figure 11.15, while its corresponding function table is in 
Figure 11.16.

Digital integrated circuits II
263
Figure 11.15  A D-type bistable symbol
Figure 11.16  The function table of a D-type bistable, such as the one shown in 
Figure 11.15
Note that the inputs 
 (preset) and 
 (clear), are included 
in this D-type bistable (unlike the D-type bistable shown in 
Figure 11.9). These perform similar functions to the S and R 
inputs of the SR-type bistable. You should now be able to un-
derstand the function table. The first three rows indicate that 
the 
 and 
 inputs override all other inputs (that’s why the 
clock and D inputs are shown as X: because X = don’t care). 
Thus the outputs Q and  are dependent primarily upon the 
logic states of the 
 and 
 inputs.

Diodes I
143
Figure 6.19 
My results from the zener diode experiment are given in this graph 
and in Tables 6.7 and 6.8
occurs when the reverse current appears to be zero, but in 
fact, a small saturation current does exist — it was simply 
too small to measure on the meter.
Voila — a complete diode characteristic curve.
Finally, it stands to reason that any diode must have maxi-
mum ratings above which the heat generated by the voltage 
and current is too much for the diode to withstand. Under 
such circumstances the diode body may melt (if it is a glass 
diode such as the OA47), or, more likely, it will crack and fall 
apart. To make sure their diodes don’t encounter such rough 
treatment manufacturers supply maximum ratings which 
should not be exceeded. Typical maximum ratings of the two 
ordinary diodes we have looked at; the 1N4001 and the 0A47 
are listed in Table 6.9.

Digital integrated circuits II
265
There’s a couple of points to note about this JK-type bistable 
symbol:
• operations take place on the falling edge of the ap-
plied clock pulse;
• the last row of the function table shows a bistable 
operation known as toggling — in which the output 
state changes from whatever state it is, to the other 
state. This, you will of course remember — is how the 
T-type bistable of Figure 11.12 is created.
And now the time has come...
So with this (fairly detailed) look at digital integrated circuits 
and the electronic logic that they comprise, thus ends our 
foray into the enjoyable world of electronics. You may feel 
as though you’ve learned a lot in the pages of this book and 
I trust you’ve had a good time in the process, but hopefully 
this is just the beginning of enjoyable times ahead. 
Electronics is a much larger area than you’ve seen here, and 
there’s much more to discover and much more to do. Indeed, 
you could spend literally years reading about electronics, and 
designing or building projects, and you still mightn’t know 
it all but at least you are on the right track now —  you’re 
starting electronics…
… though just in case you think you already know it all 
— check out the quiz over the page!

Starting electronics
266
Quiz
Answers at end of book
1 A bistable can be made from:
 
a two NOR gates 
 
b two NAND gates 
 
c an IC 
 
e a and b 
 
f b and c 
 
g all of these 
h none of these.
2 All bistables can be made up 
from transistors:
 
True or false.
3 A function table:
 
a shows contact bounce in a 
circuit  
b is like a truth table for se-
quential circuits 
 
c never applies to bistables 
made from logic gates 
 
d only applies to IC bistables 
e a and b 
 
f none of these.
4 Contact bounce:
 
a is a myth 
b is impossible to eliminate 
practically 
c always occurs on Saturday 
d is none of these. 
5 All clocked bistables are edge-
triggered:
 
True or false.
6 One way of making an edge-trig-
gered bistable:
 
a is to combine two bistables in a 
master–slave arrangement 
b is to adjust the clock signal so 
that it only has edges 
c is to disconnect the battery 
d all of these 
e none of these
7 The T in T-type bistable stands 
for:
 
a Total 
b Typical 
c Transient 
d Toggle 
e Two sugars and milk 
f none of these.
8 The JK-type bistable is useful as:
 
a it needs no power supply 
b all possible outputs can be 
predetermined logically 
c a doorstop 
d it allows fewer inputs than an 
SR-type bistable 
e a and c 
f b and c 
g none of these.

Glossary
267
Glossary
180° out-of-phase when two identical sinewaves are upside-
down with respect to each other.
active a device which controls current is said to be  
active.
ampere standard unit to measure electrical current. Ab-
breviated to amp. Symbolised by A.
amplitude the amplitude of an a.c. signal is the difference 
in voltage between its middle or common point and the peak 
voltage.
analogue one of the two operating modes of a transistor, in 
which a variable tiny base current is used to control a large 
collector current.

Starting electronics
268
astable multivibrator an oscillator whose output is a 
squarewave.
avalanche point the point on a diode’s characteristic curve 
when the curve rapidly changes from a low reverse current 
to a high one.
avalanche breakdown the electronic breakdown of a diode 
when reverse biased to its breakdown voltage.
avalanche voltage breakdown voltage.
axial component body shape in which connecting leads 
come from each of the two ends of a tubular body.
base current shortened form for base-to-emitter current of 
a transistor.
base, emitter, collector the three terminals of a standard 
transistor.
bias to apply a fixed d.c. base current to a transistor, which 
forces the transistor to operate partially, even when no input 
signal is applied.
bias current the d.c. current applied to a transistor to force 
the transistor into partial operation at all times.
bias resistor in a common emitter circuit, the resistor which 
is connected to the base of the transistor, through which the 
bias current flows.
block to prevent d.c. signals passing through while allowing 
a.c. signal to pass — normally done with a capacitor.

Glossary
269
bode plots method of showing a circuit’s frequency re-
sponse, where straight lines are used to approximate the 
actual response.
breadboard block tool which allows you to build circuits 
temporarily, and test them. When you have completed your 
tests and are sure the circuit is working, you can remove the 
components and re-use them.
breakdown effect in a diode, when reverse biased, where 
the reverse voltage remains more or less constant with dif-
ferent reverse currents.
breakdown voltage the reverse voltage which causes a 
diode to electronically break down.
bridge rectifier a collection of four diodes, either discrete 
or within an IC, which is used to provide full-wave rectifica-
tion of an a.c. voltage input.
buffer (1) a device with high resistance input and low 
resistance output, which does not therefore load a preceding 
circuit, and is not loaded by a following circuit; (2) another 
term for voltage follower.
can nickname for the metal body of a transistor.
capacitor an electronic component consisting of two plates 
separated by an insulating layer, capable of storing electric 
charge.
characterisitic equation the mathematical equation which 
defines the characteristic curve of an electronic compo-
nent.

Starting electronics
270
circuit diagram method of illustrating a circuit using sym-
bols, so that all electrical connections are shown but not 
physical ones.
closed-loop gain the gain of an operational amplifier with 
feedback.
collector current shortened form for collector-to-emitter 
current of a transistor.
conventional current current which is assumed to flow from 
a positive potential to a more negative potential. Conventional 
current is, in fact, made up of a flow of electrons (which are 
negative) from a negative to more positive potential.
corner frequency the frequency at which a signal size 
changes from one slope to another, when viewed as a graph 
of size against frequency. In the simple filter circuits in this 
article, the corner frequency, f, is given by the expression: 
 
coulomb standard unit to measure quantity of 
electricity.
current flow rate of electricity. Current is measured in 
amps.
current gain hfe, shortened forms for forward current trans-
fer ratio, common emitter, which is the ratio:
 
of a transistor.

Glossary
271
decibels logarithmic units of gain ratio.
dielectric correct term for the layer of insulating material 
between the two plates of a capacitor.
digital one of the two operating modes of a transistor, in 
which presence or lack of base current to the transistor is 
used to turn on or off the transistor’s collector current.
diode a semiconductor electronic component with two 
electrodes: an anode and a cathode, which in essence allows 
current flow in only one direction (apart from when break-
down has occurred).
diode characteristic curve a graph of voltage across the 
current through a diode.
discrete term implying a circuit built up from individual 
components.
electrolytic capacitor a capacitor whose function is due to 
an electrolytic process. It is therefore polarised and must be 
inserted into circuit the correct way round.
exponential curve capacitor charging and discharging 
curves are examples of exponential curves. An exponential 
curve rises/falls to about 0.63/0.37 of the total value in one 
time constant, and is within 1% of the final value after five 
time constants.
farad (F) the unit of capacitance.
feedback when all or part of an op-amp’s output is fed back 
to its input, to control the gain of the circuit.

Starting electronics
272
filter a circuit which allows signal of certain frequencies to 
pass through unaltered, while preventing passage of other 
signal frequencies.
forward biased a diode is forward biased when its anode is 
at a more positive potential than its cathode.
frequency the number of cycles of a periodic signal in a given 
time. Usually frequency is measured in cycles per second, or 
Hertz (shortened to Hz).
frequency response curves graphs of a circuit’s gain against 
the frequency of the applied a.c. signal.
full-wave rectification rectification of an a.c. voltage to d.c., 
where both half-waves of the a.c. wave are rectified.
half-wave rectification rectification of an a.c. voltage to d.c., 
where only one half of the a.c. wave is rectified.
hertz the usual term for cycles per second.
high-pass filter a circuit which allows signals of frequencies 
higher than the corner frequency to pass through unaltered, 
while preventing signals of frequencies lower than this from 
passing.
hybrid transfer characteristic a graph of collector current 
against base-to-emitter voltage (for a transistor in common 
emitter mode).
input characteristic a graph of base current against base-to-
emitter voltage (for a transistor in common emitter mode).

Glossary
273
integrated circuit a semiconductor device which contains a 
chip, comprising many transistors in a complex circuit.
inverting amplifier an op-amp with feedback, connected so 
that its input voltage is inverted and amplified.
law of parallel resistors 
law of series-resistors  
load a circuit which has a relatively low resistance input  
is said to load a preceding circuit, by drawing too much  
current.
load line a line drawn on the same graph as a semicon-
ductor’s characteristic curve, representing the load’s 
characteristic curve.
low-pass filter a circuit which allows the passage of signals 
with frequencies lower than the corner frequency, but pre-
vents the passage of signals with frequencies higher than 
this.
multi-meter a test meter which enables measurement of 
many things e.g., voltage, current, resistance.
non-inverting amplifier an op-amp with feedback, con-
nected so that its input voltage is amplified.
offset null terminals terminals on an op-amp which may be 
used to reduce or eliminate the offset voltage present at the 
op-amp’s output.
offset voltage the voltage present at an op-amp’s output 
preventing it from equalling 0 V when the input is 0 V.

Starting electronics
274
ohmic term used to refer to a component whose character-
istic curve follows Ohm’s law.
Ohm’s law law which defines the relationship between volt-
age, current and resistance. 
oscillator a circuit which produces an output signal of a 
repetitive form.
op-amp abbreviation for operational amplifier.
open-loop gain an op-amp’s gain without feedback.
operating point the point of intersection of a semiconduc-
tor’s characteristic curve and the load line, representing the 
conditions within the circuit when operating.
operational amplifier a general-purpose amplifier (usually 
in integrated circuit form) which can be adapted and used 
in many circuits.
output characteristic a graph of collector current against 
collector-to-emitter voltage (for a transistor in common emit-
ter mode).
parallel joined at both ends.
passive a device through which current flows or doesn’t 
flow, but which cannot control the size of the current, is said 
to be passive.
peak-to-peak voltage the difference in voltage between the 
opposite peaks of an a.c. signal. Commonly shortened to p–p 
voltage, or pk–pk voltage.

Glossary
275
peak voltage the voltage measured at the peak of an a.c. 
signal.
periodic any a.c. signal which repeats itself regularly over 
a period of time is said to be periodic.
permittivity (e) a ratio of capacitance against material thick-
ness, of a capacitor dielectric.
phase shifted two similar a.c. signals which are out-of-phase 
i.e., start their respective cycles at different times are said 
to be phase shifted.
pointer the indicator on a multi-meter.
potentiometer a variable voltage divider used in electronic 
circuits. Many types exist.
preset a potentiometer which is set on manufacture and not 
normally readjusted.
quiescent current the standing current through a transistor 
due to the applied bias current.
radial a component body shape in which both connecting 
leads come out of one end of a tubular body.
range measurement which a multi-meter is set to read.
reactance a physical property of a capacitor which may be 
likened to a.c. resistance.
relative permittivity the ratio of how many times greater a 
material’s permittivity is than that of air.
relaxation oscillator an oscillator relying on the principle 
of a charging and discharging capacitor.

Starting electronics
276
resistance property of a substance to resist the flow of cur-
rent. Measured in ohms. 
resistance converter another term for voltage follower.
resistor electronic component used to control electricity. A 
large number of different types and values are available. 
reverse biased a diode is reverse biased when its cathode 
is at a more positive potential than its anode.
ripple voltage the small a.c. voltage superimposed on the 
large d.c. voltage supplied by a power supply.
saturation reverse current the small reverse current 
which occurs when a diode is reverse biased but not broken 
down.
scale the numbers marked on a multi-meter which the 
pointer points to.
self-bias a form of biasing a common emitter transistor which 
regulates any variance in the transistor’s current gain.
series joined end-to-end, in line.
sinewave a constantly varying a.c. signal. Sinewaves are 
generally used to test electronic circuits as they comprise a 
periodic signal of one signal frequency.
smoothing the process of averaging out a rectified d.c. wave, 
so that the resultant waveform is more nearly steady.

Glossary
277
squarewave a signal which oscillates between two fixed 
voltages.
stabilise to produce a fixed d.c. voltage from a smoothed 
one.
three-rail power supply a power supply which has a positive 
supply rail, a negative supply rail, and a 0 V supply rail.
time constant (t) the product of the capacitance and the 
resistance in a capacitor/ resistor charging or discharging 
circuit.
track the fixed resistive part of a potentiometer.
transfer characteristic a graph of collector current against 
base current (for a transistor in common emitter mode).
transistor a three layer semiconductor device, which may 
consist of a thin P-type layer sandwiched between two lay-
ers of N-type (as in the NPN transistor), or a thin layer of 
N-type material between two layers of P-type (as in the PNP 
transistor).
transition voltage the knee or sharp corner of a diode char-
acteristic when forward biased.
volt standard unit to measure electrical potential difference. 
Symbolised by V.
voltage potential difference — the flow pressure of  
electricity.

Starting electronics
278
voltage divider, potential divider a number of electronic 
components in a network (usually two series resistors) which 
allows a reduction in voltage according to the voltage divider 
rule.
voltage divider rule
 
voltage follower an op-amp circuit, in which the op-amp is 
connected as a unity gain, non-inverting amplifier.
voltage regulator an integrated circuit which contains a 
stabilising circuit.
wavelength the distance between two identical and consecu-
tive points of a periodic waveform.
wiper that part of a potentiometer which is adjustable along 
the resistive track.
zener diode a special type of diode which exploits the 
breakdown effect of a diode when reverse biased.
zero adjust knob the control on an ohmmeter which allows 
the user to zero the multi-meter.
zeroing a multi-meter the adjustment made to an ohmme-
ter to take into account differences in voltage of the internal 
cell.

Glossary
279
Components used
Resistors
2 x 150Ω
2 x 1k5
1 x 4k7
3 x 10 kΩ
2 x 15 kΩ
1 x 22 kΩ
3 x 47 kΩ
2 x 100 kΩ
1 x 220 kΩ
1 x 1k0 miniature horizontal preset
1 x 47 kΩ miniature horizontal preset
Capacitors
1 x 1 nF
2 x 10 nF
2 x 100 nF
1 x 1 µF electrolytic
1 x 10 µF electrolytic
1 x 22 µF electrolytic
1 x 220 µF electrolytic
1 x 470 µF electrolytic
Semiconductors
1 x 1N4001 diode
1 x OA47 diode
1 x 3V0 zener diode
3 x LED (any colour or type)
1 x 2N3053 transistor
1 x 555 integrated circuit timer
1 x 741 op-amp
1 x 4001 quad, 2-input NOR gate
1 x 4011 quad, 2-input NAND gate
1 x 4049 hex inverter
1 x 4071 quad, 2-input OR gate
1 x 4081 quad, 2-input AND gate
Miscellaneous
battery (9 V — PP3-sized, or similar)
breadboard
multi-meter
single-pole single-throw switch (any 
type)
single-strand tinned copper wire (for 
use with breadboard)

Starting electronics
280
Quiz answers
Chapter 1: 
1 d: 2 a; 3 e; 4 e; 5 c; 6 c
Chapter 2: 
1 c; 2 a; 3 d; 4 true; 5 e
Chapter 3: 
1 d; 2 e; 3 b; 4 true; 5 true; 6 a
Chapter 4: 
1 a; 2 f; 3 c; 4 c; 5 c
Chapter 5: 
1 a; 2 e; 3 c; 4 c
Chapter 6: 
no quiz
Chapter 7: 
1 d; 2 f; 3 c; 4 c; 5 true; 6 b
Chapter 8: 
1 g; 2 a; 3 e; 4 b; 5 d
Chapter 9: 
1 a; 2 f; 3 d; 4 e; 5 true; 6 false
Chapter 10: 
1 b; 2 True; 3 e; 4 d; 5 e; 6 a; 7 c; 8  True
Chapter 11: 
1 g; 2 True; 3 b; 4 d; 5 False; 6 a; 7 d; 8 b

Glossary
281
Index
A
ampere, 9
AND gate, 221
B
bistable, 245
 J-K master–slave, 258
 D-type, 255
 SR-type, 246
Boolean algebra, 216
breadboard, 24
C
capacitors, 77
 dielectric, 95
charge, 8
colour code (resistors), 38
corner frequency, 115
current, 9
D
dielectric, 95
digital integrated circuits, 207
diodes, 123
 characteristic curves, 137, 
146
 forward bias, 146
 load lines, 150
 reverse bias, 138
 zener, 139
E
electricity, 6
F
farad, 82
filters, 99
 high-pass, 119
 low-pass, 120
H
Hertz, 109
high-pass filter, 119

Starting electronics
282
I
IC see integrated circuits
insulator, 11
integrated circuits, 27, 99, 185, 
207
 4000 series, 243
 7400 series, 242
inverter, 212
L
LED, 107
load lines, 150
logic 209
low-pass filter, 120
M
multi-meter, 32
 zeroing, 36
N
NAND gate, 226
non-conductor, 11
NOR gate, 223
NOT gate (or inverter), 212
O
operational amplifier, 191
 inverting amplifier, 196
 non-inverting amplifier, 192
 offset null, 202
 voltage follower, 200
OR gate, 218
oscillators, 99
Ohm’s law, 13, 15
P
pliers, 4
potential difference, 10
potentiometers, 71
power supply circuits, 155
R
rectifiers, 155
resistance, 13
resistors, 19
 colour code, 38
S
side-cutters, 3
soldering iron, 5
T
tools, 2, 3, 4, 5
transistors, 167, 208
truth tables, 212
TTL (transistor–transistor logic), 
242
V
voltage, 12
W
wire-strippers, 4
Z
zener diode, 139
 circuit, 161

