
WO R K M A N  P U B L I S H I N G  C O M PA N Y  •  N E W  YO R K

Copyright © 2012 by Austin Kleon 
Illustrations copyright © 2012 by Austin Kleon 
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced—
mechanically, electronically, or by any other means, including 
photocopying—without written permission of the publisher. 
Published simultaneously in Canada by Thomas Allen & Son Limited.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN 978-0-7611-6925-3
Design by Lidija Tomas
Cover by Austin Kleon 
Workman books are available at special discounts when purchased in 
bulk for premiums and sales promotions as well as for fund-raising or 
educational use. Special editions or book excerpts also can be created to 
specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Director at the address 
below, or send an e-mail to specialmarkets@workman.com.
Workman Publishing Company, Inc.
225 Varick Street
New York, NY 10014-4381
www.workman.com
Printed in the United States of America
First printing March 2012
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Boom—
whenever Boom gets here

iv

v

vi
“Art is theft.”
—Pablo Picasso

vii
“Immature poets imitate; 
mature poets steal; bad 
poets deface what they take, 
and good poets make it into 
something better, or at least 
something different. The 
good poet welds his theft into 
a whole of feeling which is 
unique, utterly different from 
that from which it was torn.”
—T. S. Eliot

viii

It’s one of my theories that when people give you advice, they’re 
really just talking to themselves in the past.
This book is me talking to a previous version of myself.
These are things I’ve learned over almost a decade of trying to 
figure out how to make art, but a funny thing happened when I 
started sharing them with others—I realized that they aren’t just 
for artists. They’re for everyone.
These ideas apply to anyone who’s trying to inject some creativity 
into their life and their work. (That should describe all of us.)
In other words: This book is for you. 
Whoever you are, whatever you make.
Let’s get started.

2

3

4

5
Every artist gets asked the question, 
“Where do you get your ideas?”
The honest artist answers, 
“I steal them.”
How does an artist look at the world?
First, you figure out what’s worth stealing, then you move 
on to the next thing.

6
That’s about all there is to it.
When you look at the world this way, you stop worrying 
about what’s “good” and what’s “bad”—there’s only stuff 
worth stealing, and stuff that’s not worth stealing.
Everything is up for grabs. If you don’t find something 
worth stealing today, you might find it worth stealing 
tomorrow or a month or a year from now.
“The only art I’ll ever study is 
stuff that I can steal from.”
—David Bowie

7
The writer Jonathan Lethem has said that when people call 
something “original,” nine out of ten times they just don’t 
know the references or the original sources involved.
What a good artist understands is that nothing comes from 
nowhere. All creative work builds on what came before. 
Nothing is completely original.
It’s right there in the Bible: “There is nothing new under 
the sun.” (Ecclesiastes 1:9)

8
Some people find this idea depressing, but it fills me with 
hope. As the French writer André Gide put it, “Everything 
that needs to be said has already been said. But, since no 
one was listening, everything must be said again.”
If we’re free from the burden of trying to be completely 
original, we can stop trying to make something out of 
nothing, and we can embrace influence instead of running 
away from it.
“What is originality? 
Undetected plagiarism.”
—William Ralph Inge

9
Every new idea is just a mashup or a remix of one or more 
previous ideas.
Here’s a trick they teach you in art school. Draw two 
parallel lines on a piece of paper:
How many lines are there?
There’s the first line, the second line, but then there’s a line 
of negative space that runs between them.
See it? 1 + 1 = 3.

10

11
A good example is genetics. You have a mother and you 
have a father. You possess features from both of them, but 
the sum of you is bigger than their parts. You’re a remix of 
your mom and dad and all of your ancestors.
Just as you have a familial genealogy, you also have a 
genealogy of ideas. You don’t get to pick your family, but 
you can pick your teachers and you can pick your friends 
and you can pick the music you listen to and you can pick 
the books you read and you can pick the movies you see.
You are, in fact, a mashup 
of what you choose 
to let into your life. 
You are the sum of 
your influences. The 
German writer Goethe 
said, “We are shaped 
and fashioned by what 
we love.”
“We were kids without fathers . . . so 
we found our fathers on wax and on 
the streets and in history. We got to 
pick and choose the ancestors who 
would inspire the world we were 
going to make for ourselves.”
—Jay-Z

12

13
The artist is a collector. Not a hoarder, mind you, there’s a 
difference: Hoarders collect indiscriminately, artists collect 
selectively. They only collect things that they really love.
There’s an economic theory out there that if you take the 
incomes of your five closest friends and average them, the 
resulting number will be pretty close to your own income.
I think the same thing is true of our idea incomes. You’re 
only going to be as good as the stuff you surround yourself 
with. My mom used to say to me, “Garbage in, garbage out.” 
It used to drive me nuts. But now I know what she meant.

14
Your job is to collect good ideas. The more good ideas you 
collect, the more you can choose from to be influenced by.
“Steal from anywhere that resonates 
with inspiration or fuels your 
imagination. Devour old films, new 
films, music, books, paintings, 
photographs, poems, dreams, random 
conversations, architecture, bridges, 
street signs, trees, clouds, bodies of 
water, light and shadows. Select only 
things to steal from that speak directly 
to your soul. If you do this, your work 
(and theft) will be authentic.”
—Jim Jarmusch

15
Marcel Duchamp said, “I don’t believe in art. I believe in 
artists.” This is actually a pretty good method for studying—
if you try to devour the history of your discipline all at once, 
you’ll choke.
Instead, chew on one thinker—writer, artist, activist, role 
model—you really love. Study everything there is to know 
about that thinker. Then find three people that thinker 
loved, and find out everything about them. Repeat this 
as many times as you can. Climb up the tree as far as you 
can go. Once you build your tree, it’s time to start your 
own branch.

16

17
Seeing yourself as part of a creative lineage will help you 
feel less alone as you start making your own stuff. I hang 
pictures of my favorite artists in my studio. They’re like 
friendly ghosts. I can almost feel them pushing me forward 
as I’m hunched over my desk.
The great thing about dead or remote masters is that they 
can’t refuse you as an apprentice. You can learn whatever you 
want from them. They left their lesson plans in their work.

18

19
School is one thing. Education is another. The two don’t 
always overlap. Whether you’re in school or not, it’s always 
your job to get yourself an education.
You have to be curious about the world in which you live. 
Look things up. Chase down every reference. Go deeper 
than anybody else—that’s how you’ll get ahead.
Google everything. I mean 
everything. Google your 
dreams, Google your problems. 
Don’t ask a question before you 
Google it. You’ll either find 
the answer or you’ll come up 
with a better question.
“Whether I went to 
school or not, I 
would always study.”
—RZA

20
Always be reading. Go to the library. There’s magic in 
being surrounded by books. Get lost in the stacks. Read 
bibliographies. It’s not the book you start with, it’s the book 
that book leads you to.
Collect books, even if you don’t plan on reading them right 
away. Filmmaker John Waters has said, “Nothing is more 
important than an unread library.”
Don’t worry about doing research. Just search.

21
Carry a notebook and a pen with you wherever you go. Get 
used to pulling it out and jotting down your thoughts and 
observations. Copy your favorite passages out of books. 
Record overheard conversations. Doodle when you’re on 
the phone.

22
Go to whatever lengths necessary to make sure you always 
have paper on you. Artist David Hockney had all the inside 
pockets of his suit jackets tailored to fit a sketchbook. The 
musician Arthur Russell liked to wear shirts with two front 
pockets so he could fill them with scraps of score sheets.
Keep a swipe file. It’s just what it sounds like—a file to 
keep track of the stuff you’ve swiped from others. It can 
be digital or analog—it doesn’t matter what form it takes, 
as long as it works. You can keep a scrapbook and cut and 
paste things into it, or you can just take pictures of things 
with your camera phone.
See something worth stealing? Put it in the swipe file. Need 
a little inspiration? Open up the swipe file.
Newspaper reporters call this a “morgue file”—I like that 
name even better. Your morgue file is where you keep the 
dead things that you’ll later reanimate in your work.

23
“It is better to take what does 
not belong to you than to let 
it lie around neglected.”
—Mark Twain

24

25

26

27
If I’d waited to know who I was or what I was about before 
I started “being creative,” well, I’d still be sitting around 
trying to figure myself out instead of making things. In my 
experience, it’s in the act of making things and doing our 
work that we figure out who we are. 
You’re ready. Start making stuff.
You might be scared to start. That’s natural. There’s this very 
real thing that runs rampant in educated people. It’s called 
“impostor syndrome.” 

28
The clinical definition is a “psychological phenomenon 
in which people are unable to internalize their 
accomplishments.” It means that you feel like a phony, like 
you’re just winging it, that you really don’t have any idea 
what you’re doing. 
Guess what: None of us do. Ask anybody doing truly 
creative work, and they’ll tell you the truth: They don’t 
know where the good stuff comes from. They just show up 
to do their thing. Every day.

29
Have you ever heard of dramaturgy? It’s a fancy term for 
something William Shakespeare spelled out in his play 
As You Like It about 400 years ago:
All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts.

30
Another way to say this? Fake it ’til you make it. 
I love this phrase. There are two ways to read it: 
	 1. Pretend to be something you’re not until you are—
fake it until you’re successful, until everybody sees 
you the way you want them to; or
	 2. Pretend to be making something until you actually 
make something. 
I love both readings—you have to dress for the job you 
want, not the job you have, and you have to start doing the 
work you want to be doing.
I also love the book Just Kids 
by the musician Patti Smith. 
It’s a story about how two 
friends who wanted to be artists 
moved to New York. You know 
how they learned to be artists? 
“You start out 
as a phony and 
become real.”
—Glenn O’Brien

31

32
They pretended to be artists. In my favorite scene, from 
which the book gets its title, Patti Smith and her friend, the 
photographer Robert Mapplethorpe, dress up in all their 
bohemian gypsy gear and go to Washington Square Park, 
where everybody’s hanging out. This old touristy couple 
is gawking at them. The wife says to her husband, “Oh, 
take their picture. I think they’re artists.” “Oh, go on,” the 
husband disagrees. “They’re just kids.”
The point is: All the world’s a stage. Creative work is a 
kind of theater. The stage is your studio, your desk, or your 
workstation. The costume is your outfit—your painting 
pants, your business suit, or that funny hat that helps you 
think. The props are your materials, your tools, and your 
medium. The script is just plain old time. An hour here, or 
an hour there—just time measured out for things to happen. 
Fake it ’til you make it.

33
Nobody is born with a style or a voice. We don’t come out 
of the womb knowing who we are. In the beginning, we 
learn by pretending to be our heroes. We learn by copying. 
We’re talking about practice here, 
not plagiarism—plagiarism is 
trying to pass someone else’s work 
off as your own. Copying is about 
reverse-engineering. It’s like a 
mechanic taking apart a car to 
see how it works. 
“Start copying what 
you love. Copy copy 
copy copy. At the end 
of the copy you will 
find your self.”
—Yohji Yamamoto

34

35
We learn to write by copying down the alphabet. Musicians 
learn to play by practicing scales. Painters learn to paint by 
reproducing masterpieces.
Remember: Even The Beatles started as a cover band. Paul 
McCartney has said, “I emulated Buddy Holly, Little Richard, 
Jerry Lee Lewis, Elvis. We all did.” McCartney and his 
partner John Lennon became one of the greatest songwriting 
teams in history, but as McCartney recalls, they only started 
writing their own songs “as a way to avoid other bands being 
able to play our set.” As Salvador Dalí said, “Those who do 
not want to imitate anything, produce nothing.”
First, you have to figure out who to copy. Second, you have 
to figure out what to copy. 
Who to copy is easy. You copy your heroes—the people 
you love, the people you’re inspired by, the people you 
want to be. The songwriter Nick Lowe says, “You start out 
by rewriting your hero’s catalog.” And you don’t just steal 

36
from one of your heroes, you steal from all of them. The 
writer Wilson Mizner said if you copy from one author, 
it’s plagiarism, but if you copy from many, it’s research. I 
once heard the cartoonist Gary Panter say, “If you have one 
person you’re influenced by, everyone will say you’re the next 
whoever. But if you rip off a hundred people, everyone will 
say you’re so original!”
What to copy is a little bit trickier. Don’t just steal the style, 
steal the thinking behind the style. You don’t want to look 
like your heroes, you want to see like your heroes. 
The reason to copy your heroes and their style is so that you 
might somehow get a glimpse into their minds. That’s what 
you really want—to internalize their way of looking at the 
world. If you just mimic the surface of somebody’s work 
without understanding where they are coming from, your 
work will never be anything more than a knockoff. 

37
“We want you to take from us. We want 
you, at first, to steal from us, because you 
can’t steal. You will take what we give 
you and you will put it in your own voice 
and that’s how you will find your voice. 
And that’s how you begin. And then one 
day someone will steal from you.”
—Francis Ford Coppola

38
At some point, you’ll have to move from imitating your 
heroes to emulating them. Imitation is about copying. 
Emulation is when imitation goes one step further, breaking 
through into your own thing. 
“There isn’t a move that’s a new move.” The basketball star 
Kobe Bryant has admitted that all of his moves on the 
court were stolen from watching tapes of his heroes. But 
initially, when Bryant stole a lot of those moves, he realized 
he couldn’t completely pull them off because he didn’t have 
the same body type as the guys he was thieving from. He 
had to adapt the moves to make them his own. 
Conan O’Brien has talked about how comedians try to 
emulate their heroes, fall short, and end up doing their own 
thing. Johnny Carson tried to be Jack Benny but ended 
up Johnny Carson. David Letterman tried to copy Johnny 
Carson but ended up David Letterman. And Conan 
O’Brien tried to be David Letterman but ended up Conan 
O’Brien. In O’Brien’s words, “It is our failure to become 

39

40
“I have stolen all of these moves from 
all these great players. I just try to 
do them proud, the guys who came 
before, because I learned so much 
from them. It’s all in the name of the 
game. It’s a lot bigger than me.”
—Kobe Bryant

41
our perceived ideal that ultimately defines us and makes us 
unique.” Thank goodness. 
A wonderful flaw about human beings is that we’re 
incapable of making perfect copies. Our failure to copy our 
heroes is where we discover where our own thing lives. That 
is how we evolve. 
So: Copy your heroes. Examine where you fall short. 
What’s in there that makes you different? That’s what you 
should amplify and transform into your own work. 
In the end, merely imitating your heroes is not flattering 
them. Transforming their work into something of your own 
is how you flatter them. Adding something to the world 
that only you can add. 

42

43

44

45
The movie Jurassic Park came out on my tenth birthday. 
I loved it. The minute I left the theater, I was dying for a 
sequel, so I sat down the next day at our old PC and typed 
one out. In my treatment, the son of the game warden 
eaten by Velociraptors goes back to the island with the 
granddaughter of the guy who built the park. One of them 
wants to destroy the rest of the park, the other wants to save 
it. Of course, they fall in love and adventures ensue.
I didn’t know it at the time, but I was writing what we now 
call fan fiction—fictional stories based on characters that 
already exist.

46
Ten-year-old me saved the story to the hard drive. A few 
years later, Jurassic Park II finally came out. And it sucked. The 
sequel always sucks compared to the sequel in our heads.
The question every young writer at some point asks is: 
“What should I write?” And the standard answer is, “Write 
what you know.” This advice always leads to terrible stories 
in which nothing interesting happens. 
“My interest in making music has been to 
create something that does not exist that 
I would like to listen to. I wanted to hear 
music that had not yet happened, by 
putting together things that suggested a 
new thing which did not yet exist.” 
—Brian Eno

47
We make art because we like art. We’re drawn to certain 
kinds of work because we’re inspired by people doing that 
work. All fiction, in fact, is fan fiction.
The best advice is not to write what you know, it’s to write 
what you like. Write the kind of story you like best—write 
the story you want to read. The same principle applies to 
your life and your career: Whenever you’re at a loss for what 
move to make next, just ask yourself, “What would make a 
better story?”
Bradford Cox, a member of the band Deerhunter, says that 
when he was a kid he didn’t have the Internet, so he had to 
wait until the official release day to hear his favorite band’s 
new album. He had a game he would play: He would sit 
down and record a “fake” version of what he wanted the 
new album to sound like. Then, when the album came out, 
he would compare the songs he’d written with the songs on 
the real album. And what do you know, many of these songs 
eventually became Deerhunter songs. 

48
When we love a piece of work, we’re desperate for more. 
We crave sequels. Why not channel that desire into 
something productive?
Think about your favorite work and your creative heroes. 
What did they miss? What didn’t they make? What 
could’ve been made better? If they were still alive, what 
would they be making today? If all your favorite makers got 
together and collaborated, what would they make with you 
leading the crew?
Go make that stuff.
The manifesto is this: Draw the art you want to see, start 
the business you want to run, play the music you want to 
hear, write the books you want to read, build the products 
you want to use—do the work you want to see done.

49

50

51

52
“We don’t know where we 
get our ideas from. What we 
do know is that we do not 
get them from our laptops.”
—John Cleese

53
My favorite cartoonist, Lynda Barry, has this saying: “In the 
digital age, don’t forget to use your digits!” Your hands are 
the original digital devices. Use them.
While I love my computer, I think computers have robbed 
us of the feeling that we’re actually making things. Instead, 
we’re just typing keys and clicking mouse buttons. This 
is why so-called knowledge work seems so abstract. The 
artist Stanley Donwood, who’s made all the album artwork 
for the band Radiohead, says computers are alienating 
because they put a sheet of glass between you and whatever 
is happening. “You never really get to touch anything that 
you’re doing unless you print it out,” Donwood says.

54
Just watch someone at their computer. They’re so still, so 
immobile. You don’t need a scientific study (of which there 
are a few) to tell you that sitting in front of a computer all 
day is killing you, and killing your work. We need to move, 
to feel like we’re making something with our bodies, not 
just our heads.
Work that only comes from the head isn’t any good. Watch 
a great musician play a show. Watch a great leader give a 
speech. You’ll see what I mean. 
You need to find a way to bring your body into your work. 
Our nerves aren’t a one-way street—our bodies can tell 
our brains as much as our brains tell our bodies. You know 
that phrase, “going through the motions”? That’s what’s so 
great about creative work: If we just start going through the 
motions, if we strum a guitar, or shuffle sticky notes around 
a conference table, or start kneading clay, the motion 
kickstarts our brain into thinking. 

55

56
“I have stared long 
enough at the glowing flat 
rectangles of computer 
screens. Let us give more 
time for doing things in the 
real world . . . plant a plant, 
walk the dogs, read a real 
book, go to the opera.”
—Edward Tufte

57
When I was in creative writing workshops in college, 
everything we did had to be double-spaced and in Times 
New Roman font. And my stuff was just terrible. Writing 
ceased to be any fun for me. The poet Kay Ryan says, “In 
the old days before creative writing programs, a workshop 
was a place, often a basement, where you sawed or 
hammered, drilled or planed something.” The writer Brian 
Kiteley says he tries to make his workshops true to the 
original sense of the word: “a light, airy room full of tools 
and raw materials where most of the work is hands-on.”
It wasn’t until I started bringing analog tools back into my 
process that making things became fun again and my work 
started to improve. For my first book, Newspaper Blackout, 
I tried to make the process as hands-on as possible. Every 
poem in that book was made with a newspaper article and a 
permanent marker. The process engaged most of my senses: 
the feel of newsprint in my hands, the sight of words 
disappearing under my lines, the faint squeak of the marker 

58
tip, the smell of the marker fumes—there was a kind of 
magic happening. When I was making the poems, it didn’t 
feel like work. It felt like play. 
The computer is really good for editing your ideas, and it’s 
really good for getting your ideas ready for publishing out 
into the world, but it’s not really good for generating ideas. 
There are too many opportunities to hit the delete key. The 
computer brings out the uptight perfectionist in us—we start 
editing ideas before we have them. The cartoonist Tom Gauld 
says he stays away from the computer until he’s done most 
of the thinking for his strips, because once the computer is 
involved, “things are on an inevitable path to being finished. 
Whereas in my sketchbook the possibilities are endless.”
When it came time to sequence Newspaper Blackout, I 
scanned all the pieces into a computer and printed them 
out on little quarter sheets of paper. Then I pushed the 
sheets of paper all over my office, rearranging them into 
piles, and then a stack, the order of which I copied back 

59

60
onto the computer. That’s how the book was made—hands 
first, then computer, then hands, then computer. A kind of 
analog-to-digital loop. 
That’s how I try to do all my work now. I have two desks in 
my office—one is “analog” and one is “digital.” The analog 
desk has nothing but markers, pens, pencils, paper, index 
cards, and newspaper. Nothing electronic is allowed on 
that desk. This is where most of my work is born, and all 
over the desk are physical traces, scraps, and residue from 
my process. (Unlike a hard drive, paper doesn’t crash.) The 
digital desk has my laptop, my monitor, my scanner, and my 
drawing tablet. This is where I edit and publish my work. 
Try it: If you have the space, set up two workstations, one 
analog and one digital. For your analog station, keep out 
anything electronic. Take $10, go to the school supply aisle 
of your local store, and pick up some paper, pens, and sticky 
notes. When you get back to your analog station, pretend 
it’s craft time. Scribble on paper, cut it up, and tape the 

61
pieces back together. Stand up while you’re working. Pin 
things on the walls and look for patterns. Spread things 
around your space and sort through them. 
Once you start getting your ideas, then you can move over 
to your digital station and use the computer to help you 
execute and publish them. When you start to lose steam, 
head back to the analog station and play. 

62

63

64
“The work you do while 
you procrastinate is 
probably the work you 
should be doing for the 
rest of your life.”
—Jessica Hische

65
One thing I’ve learned in my brief career: It’s the side 
projects that really take off. By side projects I mean the 
stuff that you thought was just messing around. Stuff that’s 
just play. That’s actually the good stuff. That’s when the 
magic happens. 
I think it’s good to have a lot of projects going at once so 
you can bounce between them. When you get sick of one 
project, move over to another, and when you’re sick of that 
one, move back to the project you left. Practice productive 
procrastination. 

66

67
Take time to be bored. One time I heard a coworker 
say, “When I get busy, I get stupid.” Ain’t that the truth. 
Creative people need time to just sit around and do 
nothing. I get some of my best ideas when I’m bored, which 
is why I never take my shirts to the cleaners. I love ironing 
my shirts—it’s so boring, I almost always get good ideas. 
If you’re out of ideas, wash the dishes. Take a really long 
walk. Stare at a spot on the wall for as long as you can. As 
the artist Maira Kalman says, “Avoiding work is the way to 
focus my mind.” 
Take time to mess around. Get lost. Wander. You never 
know where it’s going to lead you.

68
If you have two or three 
real passions, don’t feel like 
you have to pick and choose 
between them. Don’t discard. 
Keep all your passions in 
your life. This is something I 
learned from the playwright 
Steven Tomlinson. 
“You can’t connect 
the dots looking 
forward, you can 
only connect them 
looking backwards.”
—Steve Jobs

69

70

71
Tomlinson suggests that if you love different things, you 
just keep spending time with them. “Let them talk to each 
other. Something will begin to happen.” 
The thing is, you can cut off a couple passions and only 
focus on one, but after a while, you’ll start to feel phantom 
limb pain. 
I spent my teenage years obsessed with songwriting and 
playing in bands, but then I decided I needed to focus on 
just writing, so I spent half a decade hardly playing any 
music at all. The phantom limb pain got worse and worse. 
About a year ago I started playing in a band again. Now, I’m 
starting to feel whole. And the crazy thing is, rather than 
the music taking away from my writing, I find it interacting 
with my writing and making it better—I can tell that 
new synapses in my brain are firing, and new connections 
are being made. About half the people I work with are 
musicians (this is not uncommon in Austin, Texas), and 

72
they’re not all “creatives,” either—a lot of them are account 
executives, developers, and the like. However, they’ll all tell 
you the same thing: Music feeds into their work. 
It’s so important to have a hobby. A hobby is something 
creative that’s just for you. You don’t try to make money or 
get famous off it, you just do it because it makes you happy. A 
hobby is something that gives but doesn’t take. While my art 
is for the world to see, music is only for me and my friends. 
We get together every Sunday and make noise for a couple of 
hours. No pressure, no plans. It’s regenerative. It’s like church. 
Don’t throw any of yourself away. Don’t worry about a 
grand scheme or unified vision for your work. Don’t worry 
about unity—what unifies your work is the fact that you 
made it. One day, you’ll look back and it will all make sense. 

73

74

75

76

77
I get a lot of e-mails from young people who ask, “How do 
I get discovered?” 
I sympathize with them. There is a kind of fallout that 
happens when you leave college. The classroom is a 
wonderful, if artificial, place: Your professor gets paid to pay 
attention to your ideas, and your classmates are paying to 
pay attention to your ideas. Never again in your life will you 
have such a captive audience.

78
Soon after, you learn that most of the world doesn’t 
necessarily care about what you think. It sounds harsh, but 
it’s true. As the writer Steven Pressfield says, “It’s not that 
people are mean or cruel, they’re just busy.”
This is actually a good thing, because you want attention 
only after you’re doing really good work. There’s no 
pressure when you’re unknown. You can do what you want. 
Experiment. Do things just for the fun of it. When you’re 
unknown, there’s nothing to distract you from getting 
better. No public image to manage. No huge paycheck on 
the line. No stockholders. No e-mails from your agent. No 
hangers-on.
You’ll never get that freedom back again once people start 
paying you attention, and especially not once they start 
paying you money.
Enjoy your obscurity while it lasts. Use it. 

79
If there was a secret formula for becoming known, I would 
give it to you. But there’s only one not-so-secret formula 
that I know: Do good work and share it with people.
It’s a two-step process. Step one, “do good work,” is 
incredibly hard. There are no shortcuts. Make stuff every 
day. Know you’re going to suck for a while. Fail. Get better. 
Step two, “share it with people,” was really hard up until 
about ten years ago or so. Now, it’s very simple: “Put your 
stuff on the Internet.”
I tell people this, and then they ask me, “What’s the secret 
of the Internet?”

80

81
Step 1: Wonder at something. Step 2: Invite others to 
wonder with you. You should wonder at the things nobody 
else is wondering about. If everybody’s wondering about 
apples, go wonder about oranges. The more open you are 
about sharing your passions, the closer people will feel to 
your work. Artists aren’t magicians. There’s no penalty for 
revealing your secrets.
Believe it or not, I get a lot of inspiration from people like 
Bob Ross and Martha Stewart. Remember Bob Ross? The 
painter on PBS with the ’fro and the happy little trees? Bob 
Ross taught people how to paint. He gave his secrets away. 
Martha Stewart teaches you how to make your house and 
your life awesome. She gives her secrets away. People love 
it when you give your secrets away, and sometimes, if you’re 
smart about it, they’ll reward you by buying the things 
you’re selling.
When you open up your process and invite people in, you 
learn. I’ve learned so much from the folks who submit 

82
poems to my Newspaper Blackout site. I find a lot of things 
to steal, too. It benefits me as much as it does them.
You don’t put yourself online only because you have 
something to say—you can put yourself online to find 
something to say. The Internet can be more than just a 
resting place to publish your finished ideas—it can also be 
an incubator for ideas that aren’t fully formed, a birthing 
center for developing work that you haven’t started yet. 
A lot of artists worry that being online will cause them 
to make less work, but I’ve found that having a presence 
online is a kick in the pants. Most websites and blogs are 
set up to show posts in reverse-chronological order—the 
latest post is the first post that visitors see, so you’re only 
as good as your last post. This keeps you on your toes, 
keeps you thinking about what you can post next. Having 
a container can inspire us to fill it. Whenever I’ve become 
lost over the years, I just look at my website and ask myself, 
“What can I fill this with?” 

83

84

85
Learn to code. Figure out how to make a website. Figure out 
blogging. Figure out Twitter and social media and all that 
other stuff. Find people on the Internet who love the same 
things as you and connect with them. Share things with them.
You don’t have to share everything—in fact, sometimes 
it’s much better if you don’t. Show just a little bit of what 
you’re working on. Share a sketch or a doodle or a snippet. 
Share a little glimpse of your process. Think about what you 
have to share that could be of some value to people. Share a 
handy tip you’ve discovered while working. Or a link to an 
interesting article. Mention a good book you’re reading. 
If you’re worried about giving 
your secrets away, you can share 
your dots without connecting 
them. It’s your finger that has to 
hit the publish button. You have 
control over what you share and 
how much you reveal. 
“Don’t worry about 
people stealing your 
ideas. If your ideas are 
any good, you’ll have 
to ram them down 
people’s throats.”
—Howard Aiken

86

87

88

89
I grew up in the middle of a cornfield in southern Ohio. 
When I was a kid, all I wanted to do was get someplace 
where something was happening.
Now I live in Austin, Texas. A pretty hip place. Tons of artists 
and creative types everywhere. And you know what? I’d say 
that 90 percent of my mentors and peers don’t live in Austin, 
Texas. They live everywhere. I know them from the Internet.
Which is to say, most of my thinking and conversation and 
art-related fellowship is online. Instead of a geographical 
art scene, I have Twitter buddies and Google Reader.

90
You don’t have to live anywhere other than the place you 
are to start connecting with the world you want to be in. 
If you feel stuck somewhere, if you’re too young or too old 
or too broke, or if you’re somehow tied down to a place, 
take heart. There’s a community of people out there you 
can connect with. 
In the meantime, if you’re not into the world you live in, 
you can build your own world around you. (Now would 
be a good time to put on your headphones and cue up the 
Beach Boys song “In My Room.”) Surround yourself with 
books and objects that you love. Tape things up on the wall. 
Create your own world. 
Franz Kafka wrote, “It isn’t necessary that you leave home. 
Sit at your desk and listen. Don’t even listen, just wait. Don’t 
wait, be still and alone. The whole world will offer itself to 
you.” And Kafka was born a century before the Internet! 

91

92
All you need is a little space and a little time—a place to 
work, and some time to do it; a little self-imposed solitude 
and temporary captivity. If your living situation doesn’t allow 
for that, sometimes you can find solitude and captivity in 
the wild. When I was a kid, my mom used to drag me to 
the mall. Before she did any shopping, she took me to the 
bookstore and bought me any book I wanted. We’d go into 
stores and I would sit in a chair and read my book while she 
shopped. This went on for years. I read a lot of books.
Now I have a car and a mobile phone. I’m always 
connected, never alone or captive. So, I ride the bus to and 
from work, even though it’s 20 minutes faster to drive. I go 
to a barbershop that’s first-come, first-served, without Wi-
Fi, and always busy with a wait of a few hours. I keep my 
laptop shut down at the airport. I hang out in the library.
I always carry a book, a pen, and a notepad, and I always 
enjoy my solitude and temporary captivity.

93
“Distance and difference are 
the secret tonic of creativity. 
When we get home, home is 
still the same. But something 
in our mind has been changed, 
and that changes everything.”
—Jonah Lehrer

94
To say that geography is no longer our master isn’t to say 
that place isn’t important. Where we choose to live still has 
a huge impact on the work we do. 
At some point, when you can do it, you have to leave 
home. You can always come back, but you have to leave at 
least once. 
Your brain gets too comfortable in your everyday 
surroundings. You need to make it uncomfortable. You need 
to spend some time in another land, among people that do 
things differently than you. Travel makes the world look 
new, and when the world looks new, our brains work harder. 
The time I was lucky enough to spend living in Italy and 
England when I was 19 and 20 certainly changed my life, 
but I would note that a foreign culture isn’t necessarily across 
the sea or in another country—for most folks who grew up 
where I grew up, Texas might as well be Mars. (I’ve lived here 
a while. Sometimes it still feels like Mars.)

95

96
If we know we need to leave home, where should we 
go? Where should we choose to live? There’s a bunch of 
different factors to consider, all of them depend on your 
own tastes. Personally, I think bad weather leads to better 
art. You don’t want to go outside, so you stay inside and 
work. When I lived in Cleveland, I got a lot of work done 
in the brutal months of winter. Down here in Texas, I get all 
my work done in the wicked hot summers. (The Cleveland 
winter and the Texas summer last about the same length of 
time—half the year.) 
It helps to live around interesting people, and not 
necessarily people who do what you do. I feel a little 
incestuous when I hang out with only writers and artists, 
so I enjoy the many filmmakers, musicians, and tech geeks 
who live in Austin. Oh, and food. The food should be good. 
You have to find a place that feeds you—creatively, socially, 
spiritually, and literally.

97
Even if you set up a new home, you need to leave it now 
and then. And at some point, you might need to just move 
on. The good news is that nowadays, a lot of your peers are 
right where you left them—on the Internet. 

98

99

100

101
There’s only one reason I’m here: 
I’m here to make friends.
The golden rule is even more golden in our hyperconnected 
world. An important lesson to learn: If you talk about 
someone on the Internet, they will 
find out. Everybody has a Google 
alert on their name. The best way 
to vanquish your enemies on the 
Internet? Ignore them. The best way 
to make friends on the Internet? 
Say nice things about them.
“There’s only 
one rule I know 
of: You’ve got 
to be kind.” 
—Kurt Vonnegut

102
Remember “garbage in, garbage out”? You’re only going to 
be as good as the people you surround yourself with. In the 
digital space, that means following the best people online—
the people who are way smarter and better than you, the 
“The only mofos in my 
circle are people that I 
can learn from.”
—Questlove

103

104
people who are doing the really interesting work. Pay 
attention to what they’re talking about, what they’re doing, 
what they’re linking to.
Harold Ramis, the actor and director most famous to 
people of my generation for his role as Egon in the movie 
Ghostbusters, once laid out his rule for success: “Find the 
most talented person in the room, and if it’s not you, go 
stand next to him. Hang out with him. Try to be helpful.” 
Ramis was lucky: The most talented person in the room was 
his friend Bill Murray.
If you ever find that you’re the most talented person in the 
room, you need to find another room. 

105
You’re going to see a lot of stupid stuff out there and you’re 
going to feel like you need to correct it. One time I was up 
late on my laptop and my wife yelled at me, “Quit picking 
fights on Twitter and go make something!”
She was right. But anger is one of my favorite creative 
resources. Henry Rollins has said he is both angry 
and curious, and that’s what keeps him moving. 
Some mornings, when I can’t wake up, I lie in bed 

106

107
and read e-mail and Twitter until my blood starts boiling 
and I get fired up enough to spring out of bed. But instead 
of wasting my anger on complaining or lashing out at 
people, I try to channel it into my writing and my drawing.
So go on, get angry. But keep your mouth shut and go do 
your work.
“Complain about the 
way other people 
make software by 
making software.”
—Andre Torrez

108
When I was younger, I wrote a lot of fan letters and had the 
good fortune to hear back from several of my heroes. But 
I’ve realized that the trouble with fan letters is that there’s 
built-in pressure for the recipient to respond. A lot of times 
when we write fan letters we’re looking for a blessing or an 
affirmation. As my friend Hugh MacLeod says, “The best 
way to get approval is to not need it.” 
If you truly love somebody’s work, you shouldn’t need a 
response from them. (And if the person you want to write 

109
to has been dead for a hundred years, you’re really out of 
luck.) So, I recommend public fan letters. The Internet is 
really good for this. Write a blog post about someone’s work 
that you admire and link to their site. Make something and 
dedicate it to your hero. Answer a question they’ve asked, 
solve a problem for them, or improve on their work and 
share it online. 
Maybe your hero will see your work, maybe he or she won’t. 
Maybe they’ll respond to you, maybe not. The important 
thing is that you show your appreciation without expecting 
anything in return, and that you get new work out of the 
appreciation. 

110

111
“Modern art = I could do 
that + Yeah, but you didn’t.” 
—Craig Damrauer

112
The trouble with creative work: Sometimes by the time 
people catch on to what’s valuable about what you do, 
you’re either a) bored to death with it, or b) dead. You can’t 
go looking for validation from external sources. Once you 
put your work into the world, you have no control over the 
way people will react to it. 
Ironically, really good work often appears to be effortless. 
People will say, “Why didn’t I think of that?” They won’t see 
the years of toil and sweat that went into it. 
Not everybody will get it. People will misinterpret you 
and what you do. They might even call you names. So get 
comfortable with being misunderstood, disparaged, or 
ignored—the trick is to be too busy doing your work to care. 

113
Life is a lonely business, often filled with discouragement 
and rejection. Yes, validation is for parking, but it’s still a 
tremendous boost when people say nice things about our work. 
Occasionally, I have the good fortune to have something 
take off online, and for a week or two, I’ll be swimming in 
Tweets and nice e-mails from people discovering my work. 
It’s pretty wonderful. And disorienting. And a major high. 
But I always know that high will taper off, and a few weeks 

114

115
down the road I will have a dark day when I want to quit, 
when I wonder why the heck I even bother with this stuff.
That’s why I put every really nice e-mail I get in a special 
folder. (Nasty e-mails get deleted immediately.) When 
those dark days roll around and I need a boost, I open that 
folder and read through a couple e-mails. Then I get back to 
work. Try it: Instead of keeping a rejection file, keep a praise 
file. Use it sparingly—don’t get lost in past glory—but keep 
it around for when you need the lift.

116

117

118
“Be regular and orderly 
in your life, so that you 
may be violent and 
original in your work.”
—Gustave Flaubert

119
I’m a boring guy with a nine-to-five job who lives in a 
quiet neighborhood with his wife and his dog. That whole 
romantic image of the creative genius doing drugs and 
running around and sleeping with everyone is played out. 
It’s for the superhuman and the people who want to die 
young. The thing is: It takes a lot of energy to be creative. 
You don’t have that energy if you waste it on other stuff.
It’s best to assume that you’ll be alive for a while. (It’s for 
this reason that Patti Smith tells young artists to go to the 

120
dentist.) Eat breakfast. Do some push-ups. Go for long 
walks. Get plenty of sleep.
Neil Young sang, “It’s better to burn out than to fade away.” 
I say it’s better to burn slow and see your grandkids.

121
Most people I know hate to think about money. Do 
yourself a favor: Learn about money as soon as you can. 
My grandpa used to tell my dad, “Son, it’s not the money 
you make, it’s the money you hold on to.” Make yourself 
a budget. Live within your means. Pack your lunch. Pinch 
pennies. Save as much as you can. Get the education you 
need for as cheap as you can get it. The art of holding on to 
money is all about saying no to consumer culture. Saying no 
to takeout, $4 lattes, and that shiny new computer when the 
old one still works fine.

122

123
The truth is that even if you’re lucky enough to make a 
living off doing what you truly love, it will probably take 
you a while to get to that point. Until then, you’ll need a 
day job.
A day job gives you money, a connection to the world, and a 
routine. Freedom from financial stress also means freedom 
in your art. As photographer Bill Cunningham says, “If you 
don’t take money, they can’t tell you what to do.” 

124
A day job puts you in the path of other human beings. 
Learn from them, steal from them. I’ve tried to take 
jobs where I can learn things that I can use in my work 
later—my library job taught me how to do research, my 
Web design job taught me how to build websites, and my 
copywriting job taught me how to sell things with words. 
The worst thing a day job does is take time away from you, 
but it makes up for that by giving you a daily routine in 
which you can schedule a regular time for your creative 
pursuits. Establishing and keeping a routine can be even more 
important than having a lot of time. Inertia is the death of 
creativity. You have to stay in the groove. When you get 
out of the groove, you start to dread the work, because you 
know it’s going to suck for a while—it’s going to suck until 
you get back into the flow.
The solution is really simple: Figure out what time you can 
carve out, what time you can steal, and stick to your routine. 
Do the work every day, no matter what. No holidays, no 

125
sick days. Don’t stop. What you’ll probably find is that the 
corollary to Parkinson’s Law is usually true: Work gets done 
in the time available. 
Nobody’s saying it’s going to be fun. A lot of times it will 
feel as if you’re living a double life. The poet Philip Larkin 
said the best thing to do is “try to be utterly schizoid about 
it all—using each personality as a refuge from the other.”
The trick is to find a day job that pays decently, doesn’t 
make you want to vomit, and leaves you with enough 
energy to make things in your spare time. Good day jobs 
aren’t necessarily easy to find, but they’re out there. 

126

127
Amassing a body of work or building a career is a lot about 
the slow accumulation of little bits of effort over time. 
Writing a page each day doesn’t seem like much, but do 
it for 365 days and you have enough to fill a novel. One 
successful client pitch is a small victory, but a few dozen of 
them can get you a promotion. 
A calendar helps you plan work, gives you concrete goals, 
and keeps you on track. The comedian Jerry Seinfeld has 
a calendar method that helps him stick to his daily joke 
writing. He suggests that you get a wall calendar that shows 

128
you the whole year. Then, you break your work into daily 
chunks. Each day, when you’re finished with your work, 
make a big fat X in the day’s box. Every day, instead of just 
getting work done, your goal is to just fill a box. “After a few 
days you’ll have a chain,” Seinfeld says. “Just keep at it and 
the chain will grow longer every day. You’ll like seeing that 
chain, especially when you get a few weeks under your belt. 
Your only job next is to not break the chain.”
Get a calendar. Fill the boxes. 
Don’t break the chain. 

129
Just as you need a chart of future events, you also need a 
chart of past events. A logbook isn’t necessarily a diary or a 
journal, it’s just a little book in which you list the things you 
do every day. What project you worked on, where you went 
to lunch, what movie you saw. It’s much easier than keeping 
a detailed diary, and you’d be amazed at how helpful having 
a daily record like this can be, especially over several years. 
The small details will help you remember the big details.

130
In the old days, a logbook was a place for sailors to keep 
track of how far they’d traveled, and that’s exactly what 
you’re doing—keeping track of how far your ship has sailed.
“If you ask yourself ‘What’s the best thing that 
happened today?’ it actually forces a certain 
kind of cheerful retrospection that pulls up 
from the recent past things to write about that 
you wouldn’t otherwise think about. If you ask 
yourself ‘What happened today?’ it’s very likely 
that you’re going to remember the worst thing, 
because you’ve had to deal with it—you’ve had 
to rush somewhere or somebody said something 
mean to you—that’s what you’re going to 
remember. But if you ask what the best thing is, 
it’s going to be some particular slant of light, or 
some wonderful expression somebody had, or 
some particularly delicious salad.”
—Nicholson Baker

131

132
“She rescued me. I’d be playing 
in a steak house right now if it 
wasn’t for her. I wouldn’t even 
be playing in a steak house. 
I’d be cooking in a steak house.”
—Tom Waits, on his wife and 
collaborator, Kathleen Brennan

133
Who you marry is the most important decision you’ll 
ever make. And “marry well” doesn’t just mean your life 
partner—it also means who you do business with, who you 
befriend, who you choose to be around. Relationships are 
hard enough, but it takes a real champion of a person to be 
married to someone who’s obsessed with a creative pursuit. 
Lots of times you have to be a maid, a cook, a motivational 
speaker, a mother, and an editor—all at once.
A good partner keeps you grounded. A friend once 
remarked that living with an artist must make our house 
very inspiring. My wife joked, “Oh yeah, it’s like living with 
da Vinci.” She’s the best. 

134

135

136

137
In this age of information abundance and overload, those 
who get ahead will be the folks who figure out what 
to leave out, so they can concentrate on what’s really 
important to them. Nothing is more paralyzing than the 
idea of limitless possibilities. The idea that you can do 
anything is absolutely terrifying. 
The way to get over creative block is to simply place some 
constraints on yourself. It seems contradictory, but when it 
comes to creative work, limitations mean freedom. Write a 
song on your lunch break. Paint a painting with only one 

138
color. Start a business without any start-up capital. Shoot 
a movie with your iPhone and a few of your friends. Build 
a machine out of spare parts. Don’t make excuses for not 
working—make things with the time, space, and materials 
you have, right now. 
The right constraints can lead to your very best work. My 
favorite example? Dr. Seuss wrote The Cat in the Hat with 
only 236 different words, so his editor bet him he couldn’t 
write a book with only 50 different words. Dr. Seuss came 
back and won the bet with Green Eggs and Ham, one of the 
bestselling children’s books of all time. 
“Telling yourself you have all the time 
in the world, all the money in the world, 
all the colors in the palette, anything 
you want—that just kills creativity.”
—Jack White

139

140
The artist Saul Steinberg said, “What we respond to in 
any work of art is the artist’s struggle against his or her 
limitations.” It’s often what an artist chooses to leave out 
that makes the art interesting. What isn’t shown versus 
what is. It’s the same for people: What makes us interesting 
isn’t just what we’ve experienced, but also what we haven’t 
experienced. The same is true when you do your work: You 
must embrace your limitations and keep moving.
In the end, creativity isn’t just the things we choose to put 
in, it’s the things we choose to leave out.
Choose wisely. 
And have fun.

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

THANK YOU
To my wife, Meghan—my first reader, first everything. 
• • • • • • • • • •
To my agent, Ted Weinstein, my editor, Bruce Tracy, my 
book designer, Lidija Tomas, and all the fabulous people on 
the team at Workman. Y’all impress the heck out of me.
• • • • • • • • • •
To all the people I’ve stolen from, including but not at all 
limited to: Lynda Barry, Ed Emberley, Hugh MacLeod, 
John T. Unger, Jessica Hagy, Kirby Ferguson, Maureen 
McHugh, Richard Nash, David Shields, Jonathan Lethem, 
and Chris Glass and the folks at wireandtwine.com, 
who let me use their “Here to Make Friends” T-shirt. 
• • • • • • • • • •

To my parents, Sally and Scott Kleon.
• • • • • • • • • •
To Amy Gash, for her keen eye. 
• • • • • • • • • •
To all my lovely friends and family online and offline, who 
spread the original blog post around the Internet and sent 
me numerous sources and quotes for inspiration. 
• • • • • • • • • •
Finally, thank you very much to Broome Community 
College—without your invitation to speak, I might’ve never 
come up with the list. 
• • • • • • • • • •


