
Steels: Metallurgy and 
Applications 
Third Edition 
D.T. LleweUyn and R.C. Hudd 
~E 
! N 
E 
M 
A 
N 
N 
OXFORD AUCKLAND BOSTON 
JOHANNESBURG MELBOURNE NEW DELHI 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Butterworth-Heinemann 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP 
225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, MA 01801-204 l 
A division of Reed Educational and Professional Publishing Ltd 
.~A 
member of the Reed Elsevier plc group 
First published 1992 
Second edition 1994 
Reprinted 1995 
Third edition 1998 
Reprinted 2000 
Transferred to digital printing 2004 
9 Reed Educational and Professional Publishing Ltd 1998 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced in any material form (including 
photocopying or storing in any medium by electronic 
means and whether or not transiently or incidentally 
to some other use of this publication) without the 
written permission of the copyright holder except in 
accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a 
licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 
90 Tottenham Court Road, London, England W 1P 0LE 
Applications for the copyright holder's written permission 
to reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed 
to the publishers 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 0 7506 3757 9 
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
Every effort has been made to trace holders of 
copyright material. However, if any omissions 
have been made, the authors will be pleased 
to rectify them in future editions of the book. 
Typeset by Laser Words, Madras, India 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Contents 
Preface 
1 Low-carbon strip steels 
Overview 
General processing considerations 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Cold-forming behaviour 
Work-hardening coefficients and normal anisotropy 
True stress and true strain 
The strain ratio r or Lankford value 
The work-hardening coefficient n 
Forming limit diagrams 
Other forming effects 
Surface roughness 
Use of laser-welded tailored blanks 
Hydroforming 
Roll forming 
Finite element modelling 
Strip steel manufacture 
Mild or low-strength steels 
Continuously annealed, aluminium-killed steel 
High-strength steels 
Zinc-coated steels 
Production methods 
Corrosion resistance 
Cold-forming behaviour 
Other hot dip coatings 
Organic-coated steels 
Steel prices 
Tinplate 
Method of manufacture 
Canmaking processes 
Joining methods 
Welding 
Mechanical joining 
Joining using fasteners 
Use of adhesives in weldbonding, clinchbonding and rivbonding 
xi 
19 
20 
20 
21 
25 
28 
29 
33 
33 
34 
34 
35 
36 
37 
46 
56 
85 
85 
88 
89 
91 
93 
95 
96 
96 
98 
100 
101 
106 
108 
109 

vi Contents 
Strip steel in use 
Fatigue 
Cold work embrittlement 
Strip steel in automotive applications 
Weight reduction and the use of high-strength steels 
Improved corrosion resistance 
Strip steels in buildings 
Steel-framed houses 
Steel cladding 
Steel lintels 
Other applications for strip steels 
Domestic appliances 
Steel drums 
Sound deadened steel 
Vitreous enamelled products 
References 
2 Low-carbon structural steels 
Overview 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Strengthening mechanisms in structural steels 
Ferrite grain refinement 
Solid solution strengthening 
Precipitation strengthening 
Transformation strengthening 
Structure-property relationships in ferrite-pearlite steels 
Controlled rolling/thermomechanical processing 
Outline of process 
Slab reheating 
Rolling 
Transformation to ferrite 
Standard specifications 
Steel prices. 
Weathering steels 
Corrosion resistance 
Steel specifications 
Clean steels and inclusion shape control 
109 
109 
113 
115 
116 
121 
123 
123 
124 
125 
125 
125 
125 
126 
127 
128 
137 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
144 
145 
147 
148 
148 
150 
151 
152 
153 
153 
158 
163 
163 

Contents vii 
Ships 
Standard-strength steels 
Higher-strength steels 
Design considerations 
Offshore structures 
Design considerations 
Steel selection 
Cast steel nodes 
Reinforcing bars 
Standard specifications 
Traditional reinforcing steels 
Controlled-cooled bars 
Steel bridges 
Design against brittle fracture 
Steel in multi-storey buildings 
Building code requirements 
Steels for pipelines 
Specifications and property requirements 
Linepipe manufacturing processes 
Steel compositions for linepipe 
Pipeline fittings 
Steels for sour gas service 
References 
3 Engineering steels 
Overview 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Heat treatment aspects 
Isothermal transformation diagrams 
Continuous-cooling transformation (CCT) diagrams 
Hardenability testing 
Factors affecting hardenability 
Tempering resistance 
Surface-hardening treatments 
Distortion in case-carburized components 
Standard specifications 
Steel prices 
167 
167 
170 
171 
175 
176 
177 
178 
179 
179 
180 
180 
182 
182 
184 
185 
187 
187 
189 
189 
190 
195 
196 
199 
199 
200 
203 
203 
205 
207 
209 
217 
219 
223 
227 
232 

viii Contents 
Machinable steels 
Machinability testing 
Role of free cutting additives 
Low-carbon free cutting steels 
Medium-carbon free cutting steels 
Machinable low-alloy steels 
Machinable stainless steels 
Steels for gas containers 
Steel compositions 
Design and manufacture 
Hydrogen gas containers 
Higher-strength steels 
Bearing steels 
Bearing fatigue testing 
Factors affecting fatigue performance 
Modem steelmaking methods 
High-speed steels 
Role of alloying elements 
Heat treatment 
Standard specifications and uses 
Maraging steels 
Metallurgy 
Commercial grades 
Corrosion behaviour 
Applications 
Steels for steam power turbines 
Turbine casings 
HP and IP rotors 
LP rotors 
Turbine generator end tings 
Turbine bolts 
Turbine blades 
Medium-high-carbon pearlitic steels 
Rail steels 
Rail steel specifications 
Wear resistance of rails 
Austenitic 14% Mn rails 
Micro-alloy forging steels 
Metallurgical considerations 
Commercial exploitation 
232 
236 
237 
240 
241 
242 
242 
243 
243 
245 
246 
249 
249 
250 
251 
252 
254 
254 
256 
258 
260 
260 
261 
263 
263 
264 
265 
265 
266 
268 
268 
271 
272 
274 
275 
277 
278 
279 
280 
281 

Contents ix 
Controlled processed bars 
Normalized steels 
Quenched and tempered steels 
High-carbon wire rod 
Rod rolling and conditioning 
Wire drawing 
Micro-alloy, high-carbon rod 
References 
4 Stainless steels 
Overview 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Composition-structure relationships 
Iron-chromium alloys 
Iron-chromium-nickel alloys 
Other alloy additions 
Commercial grades of stainless steels 
Martensitic stainless steels 
Ferritic stainless steels 
Austenitic stainless steels 
Controlled transformation stainless steels 
Steel prices 
Corrosion resistance 
Intergranular corrosion 
Pitting corrosion 
Stress corrosion cracking 
High-alloy stainless steels 
High-alloy austenitic/duplex grades 
High-alloy ferritic grades 
Welding of stainless steels 
Martensitic stainless steels 
Austenitic stainless steels 
Ferritic stainless steels 
Variable weld penetration 
Cold working of stainless steels 
Role of alloying elements 
Work hardening of commercial grades 
Optimization of cold-forming properties 
284 
284 
285 
286 
286 
287 
287 
289 
291 
291 
293 
295 
295 
297 
299 
301 
302 
314 
315 
316 
320 
321 
322 
326 
328 
330 
330 
332 
334 
336 
337 
338 
338 
341 
341 
343 
345 

x 
Contents 
Mechanical properties at elevated and sub-zero temperatures 
Tensile properties 
Impact properties 
Steels for boilers and pressure vessels 
Steel specifications 
Pressure vessel codes 
Steels for elevated-temperature applications 
Steels for low-temperature applications 
Steels in fossil-fired power plants 
Boiler layout and operation 
Steel selection 
Co-extruded tubing 
Hue gas desulphurization equipment 
Nuclear fuel reprocessing plant 
Corrosion/abrasion-resistant grades 
Automotive exhausts/catalytic converters 
Architectural applications 
References 
348 
348 
351 
351 
351 
353 
353 
357 
361 
361 
363 
365 
365 
368 
370 
372 
374 
378 
Index 
381 

Preface 
The third edition of this book represents a significant change from the previous 
editions in that the chapter on Low carbon strip steels has been completely 
rewritten and expanded very considerably. This has been achieved through the 
input of Roger Hudd, who has had a long and distinguished career with British 
Steel in the strip steels sector, and I am delighted that he has agreed to be a 
co-author for this latest edition. Previous editions also contained a brief chapter 
entitled Technological trends in the steelmaking industry which dealt with steel 
production aspects. This chapter has been eliminated in the third edition because 
the authors are essentially product-orientated and their knowledge of process 
aspects is superficial. However, the remaining chapters on Low carbon structural 
steels, Engineering steels and Stainless steels are essentially unchanged and the 
text overall deals with the metallurgy of the mainstream commercial grades and 
the service requirements that govern their applications. As such, the text is again 
directed primarily towards the needs of undergraduates and steel users who have 
a basic knowledge of ferrous metallurgy. However, a minor innovation is the 
inclusion of brief sections, at the beginning of each chapter, on the Underlying 
metallurgical principles of the various steel types which may serve as a useful 
introduction to the basic concepts. 
Since the second edition in 1994, major changes have taken place in the move 
from British to European specifications. These changes have been recorded to 
reflect the situation in spring 1997. However, this process is still incomplete and, 
in some instances, it has been necessary to refer to both British and European 
standards. 
As far as possible, the data on steel prices have also been updated to reflect 
the current situation, but again with the proviso that such information can soon 
be out of date and should only be used as a guide to the relative costs of steel 
grades. 
David T. Llewellyn 
Department of Materials Engineering 
University of Wales Swansea 
May 1997 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

1 Low-carbon strip steels 
Overview 
Sheet iron was first rolled during the seventeeth century. It was hot rolled by 
hand as separate sheets and coated with tin to form tinplate. Cold rolling was 
later introduced initially to give an improved surface, but cold-rolled and annealed 
steel strip is now used for a number of reasons. It may be produced with good 
shape and flatness and with close control of gauge and width, and it may be made 
with a clean surface with a roughness that makes it very suitable for painting. 
It has been found that formed components made of sheet steel may be easily 
welded to form complete structures such as motor cars. These structures may 
have a high degree of rigidity, partly as a result of good design, and partly also 
as a result of the high elastic modulus of the steel itself. Sheet steel may be 
coated with other metals, including zinc and aluminium, separately or together, 
to provide enhanced corrosion and oxidation resistance. Alloy coatings have 
also been developed to give enhanced properties. It is the ability of sheet steel, 
however, to be economically and satisfactorily formed into a wide range of 
complicated shapes without splitting, necking or wrinkling, as well as all its 
other advantages such as low cost, which is ensuring its continued use as a 
major engineering material. 
The low cost of steel arises partly as a result of the nature of the extraction 
process and the abundance and cheapness of the raw materials, and also as a 
result of the continued development of the steelmaking process itself. The first 
continuous mill to produce steel strip in coil form was commissioned in the 
United States in 1923 and this was clearly cheaper than rolling individual sheets 
by hand. The first mill outside the United States was commissioned at Ebbw 
Vale in 1938. The introduction of oxygen steelmaking mainly in the 1960s also 
enabled the refinement of impure iron into steel to be achieved much more rapidly 
and cheaply. 
The introduction of the continuous casting of slabs enabled the stage of hot- 
rolling ingots to slabs to be eliminated, and this combined with vacuum degassing 
enabled new and more consistent steel chemistries to be obtained. Close control 
of the continuous casting process itself has led to a reduction in the number 
of inclusions by several orders of magnitude. The result has been that steel 
may be used for many, very thin, tinplate applications that could not have been 
considered for ingot route-processed steel available previously. Other changes 
that have reduced costs have been the linking of pickle lines with tandem cold 
mills and the linking of cold mills to continuous annealing lines, both of which 
eliminate the between-process handling costs. 
A further means of reducing costs has been the introduction of thin slab casting, 
which in one of its forms enables the roughing stage to be eliminated. Finally, 
the development of strip casting will enable the finish hot-rolling sequence to be 

2 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
removed. At the time of writing, this process has not yet reached the stage of 
routine production. 
The motor industry, among others, has provided an important stimulus to 
the steel industry to further improve the mechanical attributes of strip steel, 
including gauge control, flatness, surface cleanliness and roughness. The motor 
industry, however, has also helped to stimulate the development of mild steel 
with improved formability and of some of the wide range of high-strength and 
coated strip steels that are now available. The building industry has also played 
its part and there has been a spectacular growth in the use of profiled, organic- 
coated, galvanized steel sheet for architectural roofing and cladding, particularly 
for industrial buildings. The galvanized steel lintel has also now substantially 
replaced the reinforced concrete lintel in domestic housing. 
General processing considerations 
Developments in steelmaking, the use of vacuum degassing and other secondary 
steel making techniques enable the steel to contain much more controlled levels 
of the important elements carbon, nitrogen, sulphur, aluminium and manganese 
than were available previously. Very low levels of the first three of these elements, 
down to below 0.003%, are now also easily obtained if required. In many cases, 
however, higher levels must be used to give the properties needed. 
The most common of the existing process routes for the conversion of liquid 
steel into a usable sheet form are summarized in Figure 1.1. Prior to about 1970, 
Electric arc 
steelmaking 
I 
Thin slab casting 
Basic oxygen steelmaking 
I 
Secondary steelmaking 
I 
Continuous casting 
I 
Slab reheating 
I 
Hot rolling 
I 
Hot coiling 
I 
Pickling 
I 
Cold rolling 
Thin strip casting 
/ 
Future? 
I 
Batch annealing 
Continuous annealing 
Hot dip coating 
Temper rolling 
Temper rolling 
~ 
~ 
/ 
1 
Tin coating 
Electrolytic coating 
Organic coating 
Figure 1.1 
Process route- low-carbon steel strip 

Low-carbon strip steels 3 
all strip steel was cast into ingots about 500 mm thick. After cooling and removal 
from the moulds the ingots were reheated to about 1250"C and rolled to slabs 
about 200-250 mm thick and allowed to cool. The surface was then scarfed to 
remove surface defects. 
With the development of continuous casting, mainly in the 1970s, the ingot- 
rolling process was eliminated and the slabs were cast directly to a thickness of 
200-250 mm as a continuous process and allowed to cool. The first hot-rolling 
stage then consisted of reheating to temperatures up to about 12500C and rolling 
in two linked stages. The first stage, called roughing, reduced the thickness to an 
intermediate gauge, usually in the range 30-45 mm, and the second stage, called 
finishing, reduced the thickness to the final hot-rolled gauge required, often in 
the range 1-2 mm up to 5-12 mm, depending on details of the mill employed. 
The roughing section may consist of a single reversing stand through which 
the steel passes backwards and forwards, usually five or seven times, or it may 
consist of several non-reversing stands through which the steel passes once. It 
may, however, consist of a combination of both reversing and non-reversing 
stands. Whichever combination is used, the steel completely leaves one stand 
before it enters the next one. Critical matching of rolling speeds is not, therefore, 
required. 
A finishing train usually contains seven stands which are positioned close 
together. The front end of the strip exits the last stand well before the back end 
of the strip enters the first stand. Exact matching of the speeds of each stand 
is required, therefore, depending on the reductions in gauge in each stand. The 
steel usually exits the last stand at a finishing temperature up to and above 900~ 
depending on grade, which ensures that all the deformation takes place in the 
single-phase austenite region of the phase diagram. It is then cooled with water 
on a run-out table before coiling at a coiling temperature that is usually close to 
600~ 
but almost always in the range 200-7500C, depending on the metallur- 
gical needs of the grade. Not all hot mills would, however, have the capability 
of covering this entire range. The finishing temperature may be controlled by 
using a suitable slab reheat temperature, usually in the range 1100-12500C, by 
adjusting the speed of rolling through the mill and, if necessary, by introducing 
delays between roughing and finishing to increase temperature loss or by inter- 
stand cooling using water sprays. The temperature drop between roughing and 
finishing may, however, on certain mills be reduced by the use of radiation shields 
or by forming the steel into a coil to reduce the surface area for heat loss. 
Some of the hot-rolled coil, coveting the complete gauge range, is sold for 
direct use and some, usually in the gauge range up to about 5 mm, is cold rolled 
to thinner gauges. 
An oxide-free surface is required for cold reduction and this is achieved by 
passing the steel through a pickle line. Traditionally, the acid used was sulphuric 
acid, but most pickle lines now use hydrochloric acid. 
The cold rolling is usually carried out using a tandem mill containing five 
stands, with controlled front and back tension. Each stand usually contains four 
rolls consisting of two work rolls and two back-up rolls, but six high stands, 
each containing four back-up rolls, may be used in one or more positions if a 
particularly high cold reduction is required. 

4 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Cold-rolled gauges are usually in the range 0.4-3.0 mm and generally involve 
the use of 50-80% cold reduction, though tinplate mills provide up to 90% 
cold reduction to give thinner gauges. Clearly the thinner cold-rolled gauges are 
usually rolled from the thinner hot band gauges in order to limit the amount of 
work required from the cold-rolling mill. When the application requires a gauge 
that is common to both hot- and cold-rolled gauges, a cold-rolled and annealed 
material would only be used if a good surface and a high degree of formability 
were required. Otherwise, a hot-rolled material would be used for cost reasons. 
Tinplate and certain other packaging applications require gauges down to less 
than 0.2 mm and are rolled from the thinner hot-rolled gauges. Certain grades of 
tinplate, however, involve two stages of cold reduction. 
Cold rolling causes the steel to become hard and strong and with very little 
ductility. For almost all applications, therefore, an annealing treatment is required 
to reduce the strength and to give the formability that is needed for the final 
application. Various metallurgical changes take place during annealing including 
recovery, recrystallization and grain growth, and the formation, growth or disso- 
lution of precipitates or transformation products. It is the complex controlled 
interaction of these changes which provides the steel with its final properties. 
Both batch or continuous annealing may be used for many types of steel, but 
certain steels may only be processed by continuous annealing. The traditional 
method was, however, batch annealing and this method in still in common use. 
With this method, several tightly wound coils are stacked on top of each other 
with their axes vertical. They are enclosed by a furnace cover which contains a 
protective atmosphere which is recirculated to promote heat transfer between the 
cover and the steel during both heating and cooling. Traditionally, ther protec- 
tive atmosphere has been HNX gas, which is nitrogen with up to 5% hydrogen, 
but furnaces designed for the use of 100% hydrogen were introduced during 
the 1980s and now provide an appreciable proportion of the batch-annealing 
capacity world-wide. Rapidly recirculated hydrogen has a higher heat transfer 
coefficient than the HNX gas and this enables faster heating and cooling rates 
to be achieved. The complete cycle may still, however, take up to several 
days. Hydrogen annealing gives improved control over mechanical properties 
and improved surface cleanliness. I 
Continuous annealing for formable strip was first developed in Japan during 
the late 1960s and early 1970s, though continuous annealing for higher-strength 
steels for tinplate had been commonly used world-wide since the 1960s. The 
original cooling method for continuous annealing was by recirculated HNX gas, 
but other methods have now been developed. These include gas jet cooling with 
HNX gas, cold-water quenching, hot-water quenching (called HOWAQ), roll 
cooling, gas-assisted roll cooling, water-mist cooling and gas-jet cooling with 
high concentrations of hydrogen in nitrogen. A review of heating and cooling 
methods for continuous annealing has been given by Imose 2 and the importance 
of fast cooling rates for continuous annealing will become clear later. Continuous 
annealing cycles usually last for a few minutes depending on the type of steel 
being processed. A typical continuous annealing cycle, consisting of heating, 
holding, slow cooling, rapid cooling, very slow cooling or holding, slow cooling 

Low-carbon strip steels 5 
Temperature 
Temperature 
Batch annealing time (days) 
Continuous annealing time (minutes) 
Figure 1.2 Schematic annealing cycles for batch and continuous annealing 
and rapid cooling is illustrated in Figure 1.2. Clearly, as will be seen below, the 
details of the cycles to be used depend on the type of steel to be processed. 
It is useful to note that top batch-annealing temperatures are rarely much above 
700~ 
whereas continuous annealing temperatures are usually above 700~ for 
strip grades and often above 800~ 
These latter temperatures compensate for the 
large differences in time between batch and continuous annealing. Most contin- 
uously annealed steels for tinplate applications, however, are annealed below 
700~ 
It is usual but not essential to produce hot dip coatings on lines which 
also provide continuous annealing. 
The last stage in the sequence for processing uncoated steel, prior to surface 
inspection, is called temper rolling or skin passing, which usually provides a 
cold reduction of 0.5-1.5%. This process is usually needed to remove the yield 
point in the tensile curve to ensure that stretcher-strain markings are not formed 
on pressing, but it also imprints a surface roughness that makes the steel surface 
suitable for its application and may improve the steel flatness. 
Annealed and temper-rolled steel may be coated with a metallic coating using 
an electrolytic process on a separate coating line, but as indicated earlier, it 
is usual to combine a hot dip process with continuous annealing on a single 
combined line. Organic coatings may also be applied on top of either hot dip or 
electrolytic metallic coatings. 
It is useful to note that when initially introduced, all the rolling stages in the 
processing of strip steel were intended merely to change the thickness of the steel 
and hot processing was used because it was easier to reduce the thickness of a 
thick material when it was hot and soft than when it was cold and hard. Each 
stage is now regarded, however, as a metallurgical process with closely controlled 
reductions, temperatures, cooling rates and times. The controlled processing 
sequence now enables desirable metallurgical structures and hence properties 
to be obtained at each stage that make the material either suitable for direct use 
or for proceeding to the next stage in the process. 
As mentioned previously, an important recent development in steel processing 
has been the introduction of thin slab casting. Two main processes are involved, 
but in each case, the casting process is linked directly to a hot mill. With the 
CSP (compact strip production) process as practised at Nucor, 3 the slab is cast 

6 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
to a thickness of 50 mm, passes through a tunnel furnace to make the tempera- 
ture uniform and then passes through a five-stand finishing train. With the ISP 
Online strip production) process as practised at Arvedi, 4 the slab is squeezed 
while the core is liquid to a thickness of 43 mm. It passes through a three-stand 
roughing sequence to reduce the thickness to 15-20 mm and then passes through 
a four-stand finishing mill. An advantage of thin slab casting is the reduction in 
cost compared with the more conventional process, but at present, the surface 
quality of the product does not match that of the conventional process. So far, 
however, only a relatively small number of steel works have been equipped with 
the thin slab casting process and these are fed with steel from electric arc furnaces 
produced mainly by melting steel scrap. The steel may, therefore, contain rela- 
tively high residual elements which tend to limit quality. 
Further developments are under way to enable the usual hot-rolled strip gauges 
to be cast directly. These processes are known as thin strip casting processes. So 
far, no steel works has been equipped with thin snip casting, but the expectation 
is that the elimination of the finish hot-rolling sequence will lead to a further 
reduction in cost. It is likely, however, that the material will not be suitable 
for direct use, but will require subsequent cold rolling and annealing for usable 
properties to be obtained. 
Other means of reducing steel costs have been developed, including ferritic 
rolling, the combining of pickling and cold rolling into a single process, the 
combining of continuous annealing, temper rolling and inspection into a single 
process and the combining of cold rolling and continuous annealing. Only ferritic 
hot rolling, however, has a major impact on the metallurgy of the complete 
process. 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Low-carbon strip steels are based primarily on ferrite microstructures and are 
almost invariably subjected to cold-forming operations in order to achieve 
specific shapes, e.g. automotive body panels. They are produced in the hot-rolled 
condition in thicknesses down to about 2 mm but they are used primarily in the 
cold-reduced and annealed state where the gauges can extend down to 0.16 mm 
for tinplate grades, e.g. for packaging applications. The basic consideration in 
the development of microstructure in strip and low-alloy steels is the Fe-C 
phase diagram, a portion of which is shown in Figure 1.3. At temperatures 
above about 900"C, a steel containing about 0.05% C will consist of a single 
phase called austenite or y iron which has a face-centred cubic crystal structure, 
as illustrated in Figure 1.4(a), and all the carbon will be in solid solution. On 
cooling slowly, the material reaches a phase boundary at which a separate iron 
phase, called ferrite or ot iron, begins to form. This phase contains a low carbon 
content and has a body-centred cubic structure, as illustrated in Figure 1.4(b). As 
cooling continues, the formation of further low-carbon ferrite leads to a carbon 
enrichment of the untransformed austenite. This process continues on cooling 
down to a temperature of 723~ 
the eutectoid temperature, at which stage the 
remaining austenite will have been enriched in carbon to a level of about 0.8%. 

1600 
0.11 - 
8 
1400 
~" 1200 
o.. 
E 
499 ~ 
Graphite 
+ 
Liquid 
800 
! 
0.020% 
9100C 
738~ 
Liquid 
Liquid 
2.01% 
11152 ~ 
1146 ~ 
4.27% 
(stable phase) 
I 
p (metastable [ 
(a + C/mentite) 
0.021% 
J 
[ 
6000 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Carbon (wt%) 
Figure 1.3 The iron-carbon equilibrium diagram, for carbon contents up to 5 per cent 5 
Low-carbon strip steels 7 
(a) fcc (y iron) 
(b) bcc (a iron) 
Figure 1.4 Atomic arrangement in (a) face-centred cubic structure (austenite) and 
(b) body-centred cubic structure (ferrite) 
A little below 723~ 
the remaining austenite may transform to pearlite which 
consists of a lamelar structure of alternate laths of ferrite and cementite (Fe3C). 
Below the eutectoid temperature, the solubility of carbon in ferrite decreases 
rapidly and is approximately given by the following equation 6' 
Csoln = 9.65. exp- 12 IO0/RT wt% 

8 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
where T is the absolute temperature and the gas constant R = 1.987 cal. 
degree -1 .mole -l. 
As the carbon content of a steel is increased, the y to 7' + ct transformation 
temperature is depressed and the ratio of pearlite to ferrite in the microstructure is 
progressively increased, reaching 100% pearlite at about 0.8% carbon, the eutectic 
composition. Whereas the above sequence of events relates to slow cooling and an 
approach to equilibrium, faster cooling rates usually produce ferrite with globular 
carbides within the grains. Lower-temperature transformation products such as 
bainite or martensite may, however, be produced particularly when a suitable 
alloy addition has been made. These will be discussed later. 
The ferrite grain size has a very important effect on the properties of low- 
carbon strip steels, as indicated by the Hall-Petch equation7'8: 
Cry = tri + kyd -1/2 
where try = yield stress 
cri = the friction stress opposing dislocation movement 
ky = a constant (dislocation locking term) and 
d = the ferrite grain size 
Thus the yield stress increases with decreasing ferrite grain size. Pickering 9 has 
indicated that the value of ky often lies in the range 15-18 MPa mm 1/2. 
The strength is also influenced by other factors such as solid solution and 
precipitation strengthening. In the former, the strengthening is often related to 
the square root of the atomic concentration of the solute atoms, but at low 
concentrations, the strengthening effect may be regarded as linearly dependent. 
The magnitude of the effect depends on the atomic size difference between the 
iron and the solute element, the largest effects being produced by small elements 
such as carbon and nitrogen which go into interstitial solid solution. Elements 
such as phosphorus, manganese and silicon are often added to low-carbon strip 
to provide solid solution strengthening. 
Both strip and structural grades of steel may be precipitation strengthened 
by the addition of elements such as titanium, niobium and vanadium and these 
elements may have an additional effect on strength by leading to a finer grain size. 
These elements are strong carbide and nitride formers which may be partially or 
completely dissolved at the slab reheating stage prior to hot rolling and which may 
then be reprecipitated into a fine form on subsequent cooling and transformation 
to ferrite. The degree of strengthening is dependent on both the volume fraction 
and size of the precipitates, finer precipitates producing the greater effect. Coarse 
precipitates which are not dissolved at the slab reheating stage are ineffective 
as strengthening agents. The solubility product for the precipitate is important, 
therefore, since it determines the amount of precipitate that can be taken into 
solution at any temperature and, consequently, the volume fraction that may be 
subsequently reprecipitated in a fine form. The temperature dependence of the 
solubility product is generally represented by an equation of the form: 
log[X][Y] = -A/T 
q- B 

Low-carbon strip steels 9 
Table 1.1 
Temperature dependence of solubility products (Wt%) for carbides, 
nitrides, carbonitrides, 1~ sulphides and carbosulphides I I 
Solubility product 
l og lok 
Solubility product 
l og lok 
[B][N] 
- 13970/T + 5.24 
[VI[N] 
[Nbl[NI 
-10150/T + 3.79 
[V][C] ~ 
[Nb][C] ~ 
-7020/T + 2.81 
[Ti][S] 
[Nb][C]~ 
~ 
-9450/T + 4.12 
[Ti][C]I/2[S] 
~ 
[TiI[N] 
-15790/T + 5.40 
[Mn][S] 
[Ti][C] 
-7000/T + 2.75 
- 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
-7700/T + 2.86 
-6500/T + 4.45 
- 16550/T + 6.92 
-15350/T + 6.32 
-9020/T + 2.93 
where IX] and [Y] are the weight percentages of elements in solution, such 
as titanium and carbon, T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin and A and B 
are constants. Table 1.1, prepared mainly by Turkdogan, 1~ gives the solubility 
products for a number of compounds in austenite, but additional data for the 
sulphides have been added from a separate source. II 
It is useful to note that a number of the precipitates are solid soluble in each 
other and that the precise composition of such a precipitate depends on the 
composition of the austenite matrix with which it is in equilibrium, as well as on 
the temperature. Niobium carbonitride, for example, has a wide range of solid 
solubility and an early theory 12 showed how the ratio of carbon to nitrogen in the 
precipitate in equilibrium at a given temperature could be calculated for different 
amounts of carbon, nitrogen and niobium in the steel. 
In this model, a precipitate with formula NbC~N(l_x) was assumed to be in 
equilibrium with a matrix according to the reaction: 
Nbsot + x. Csol + (l - x). N = NbCxNtl_x)ppt 
The solubility product K for this reaction was, therefore, written as 
[Nb]. [C] x. [N](l-x)/[NbCxN(l_x)] = K 
where [NbCxN~l_x)] was the activity of the carbonitride which was taken as unity. 
It was assumed, however, that the effective activity of NbC in the precipitate 
was x and the effective activity of NbN in the precipitate was (1 -x) and that 
separate solubility product equations for the matrix would apply for NbC and 
NbN as follows: 
[Nb]. [C]/x = r l 
and 
[Nb]. [N]/(1 - x) = K2 
where K l and K2 are the solubility products for the pure carbide and nitride 
respectively at the desired temperature. For a given steel composition and 
temperature, these equations could be solved to give a value of x. The predictions 
from the model were in good agreement with the compositions of the niobium 
carbonitride precipitates that had been reported in the literature. 
The model was later developed further to involve more than one precipitate 13 
and a number of computer programs able to predict the equilibrium conditions for 

10 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
a series of multicomponent systems have now been developed. These programs 
can be used to predict the amounts of titanium, niobium, carbon, nitrogen and 
sulphur, ctc, retained in solution in equilibrium at any temperature as well as the 
amounts and compositions of the precipitates. 
In addition to producing precipitation reactions on transformation to ferrite, 
elements such as titanium or niobium also play an important part in controlling the 
recrystallization kinetics during the hot-rolling stage. Elements in solid solution 
may retard recrystallization through the process of solute drag but the strain- 
induced precipitation of niobium carbonitride is also very effective in retarding or 
stopping recrystallization. The final effect depends on the initial austenite grain 
size, the temperature, the amount of deformation given after the last previous 
recrystallization and the level of alloy addition. 14 As an example, Figure 1.5 
shows how the critical strain for austenite recrystaUization varies with prior 
austenite grain size and rolling temperature for a steel containing 0.03% niobium. 
On cooling of a recrystallized austenitc structure, ferrite grains may nucleate at 
the austenite grain boundaries. With an unrecrystallized austenite, the austcnite 
grain boundary area per unit volume is increased due to grain elongation. The 
nucleation frequency per unit grain boundary area is higher and nucleation may 
also occur on deformation bands. 15 The overall effect is that a finer ferritc 
grain size is produced from a deformed unrecrystallized austcnite than from 
a recrystallized austenite. Figure 1.6 shows that for a given grain boundary area 
per unit volume Sv, the ferritc grain size also decreases with increasing cooling 
rate. 16 These effects arc utilized in the processing of micro-alloyed steels and arc 
discussed further in the section on high-strength steels. 
There is a limit to the strengthening that can be achieved by a combination 
of grain refinement, solid solution and precipitation effects. Transformation 
strengthening is, therefore, employed to obtain values of tensile strength above 
Strain 
0 
0.2 0.4 
0.6 0.8 
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 
--1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
! 
! 
' 
1200 1150 100 
1050 ~ 
"~ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
rolling 
" / 
/ 
/ 
~ 
o13 
,... 
C 
~ 
! 
7 / I  
I 
I._ 
1 
. 
I 
. . . . .  
I 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Critical reduction for 
recrystallizatlon (%) 
Figure 1.5 
Effect of initial grain size on the critical rolling reduction needed for austenite 
recrystallization of a 0.03 wt% Nb steel reheated to 1250" C for 20 min (Kozasu et al. 15) 
(The initial grain size was varied by rolling at high temperatures.) 

Low-carbon strip steels 11 
0 
t " 
'" 
I 
! 
. . . . . .  
0.04 wt% Nb. 0.09 wt% V 
~12.'~ 
Sv ('f, mm'/mms 
~ 
8 
0-- 
170 
~. 6 m~x......._m ~ 
i 
s controlled rolled 
....... 
i 
. 
. 
| 
.... 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
1'0 
12 
Cooling rote (~ 
Figure 1.6 The change in the transformed microstructure with increasing cooling rate 
after controlled rolling, for different austenite grain boundary surface area Sv per unit 
volume for a 0.10 wt% C. 1.50 wt% Mn, 0.04 wt% Nb. 0.09 wt% V steel (Ouchi ~6) 
about 500 MPa, depending on whether the steel is in the hot-rolled condition or 
whether it has also been cold rolled and annealed. Thus, if a steel containing 
about 1% manganese is cooled rapidly from an austenite state to a temperature 
close to 450~ 
the ferrite and pearlite reactions are suppressed and the austenitr 
will transform to a lower temperature transformation product called bainite. 
Bainite consists of small packets of lath-like ferrite grains with low 
misorientation between the grains and high-angle boundaries between the 
packets. 9 Carbides are present at the lath and packet boundaries and there is 
a variable dislocation density within the laths. Upper bainite formed at higher 
temperatures in the bainitic range has a coarser structure than lower bainite 
formed at lower temperatures and the finer lower bainite may also contain 
carbides within the laths. 9 Acicular ferrite may be formed at temperatures between 
the pearlitic and bainitic regions and may be considered to be a form of very 
low-carbon upper bainite. The formation of both pearlite and bainite involve 
the diffusion of carbon to form separate ferrite and carbide phases. Bainite may 
form over a range of temperatures starting with the bainite start temperature (Bs) 
and ending at the bainite finish temperature (BF). These temperatures are given 
approximately by the following equations, 17 where the symbols in brackets refer 
to weight percentages. 
Bs(C ~ = 830- 270[C] - 90[Mn] - 37[Ni1 - 70[Or] - 83[Mo] 
and 
BF(C ~ = Bs - 120[C] 
High-alloy contents and rapid cooling to below the bainite finish temperature 
may lead to the formation of a separate structure called martensite by a 
diffusionless transformation. In this transformation, a large number of atoms shear 
cooperatively to form a fine plate-like structure with the carbon held substantially 
in solution. Is Carbon, however, may be precipitated as carbide by tempering. 
The crystal structure of martensite is tetragonal and the ratio of the c-axis of the 

12 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
unit cell to the a-axis depends on the carbon content. Martensite is the hardest 
structure that can be produced in steel, the strength increasing with the carbon 
content. The temperature at which martensite can start to form is called the 
martensite start temperature (Ms) and depends on the carbon content and other 
alloy additions made to the steel. The following equation gives an estimate of 
the Ms temperature for certain steels where the symbols in brackets again refer 
to weight percentages. 19 
Ms(*C) = 539- 423[C]- 30.3[Mn] - 12.1[Cr] - 17.7[Ni] - 7.5[Mo] 
In steels, the martensite finish temperature M f is usually about 200~ below the 
Ms temperature. 
Further details on the effects of alloying elements and cooling rate on the 
formation of martensite are given in the chapter on Engineering steels. 
Whereas each of the strengthening reactions described above is employed 
singly or together to produce high-strength grades, they will also decrease the 
ductility. However, a very important consideration in the production of cold- 
rolled and annealed steels is the development of the preferred crystallographic 
orientation texture. If grains of every possible orientation are present in a steel 
with equal volume fraction, the steel is said to possess a random orientation 
texture. Such a texture is difficult to achieve completely and it is usual to find that 
certain orientations are present to a greater extent than others. The steel is then 
said to possess a preferred orientation texture. The strength of any component in 
a texture is often given in 'times random' units which is the ratio of the strength 
of the component in the texture divided by the strength that would exist in a 
similar steel with a random texture. 
Orientation textures may be studied using X-ray diffraction and may be 
expressed in several ways. The first, called a pole figure, gives a plot, on a 
stereographic projection, of the strength of a particular crystallographic plane in 
each direction. Pole figures may be plotted for each relevant plane including, for 
example, (100), (110) or (11 l) planes and an example is illustrated in Figure 1.7, 
which also gives the positions of planes for several ideal orientations. Pole figures 
have the limitation that they do not give precise information concerning the 
strength of any component nor the way in which directions within each plane are 
oriented. 
The second method of expressing texture is called an inverse pole figure. 
This gives the intensity of planes parallel with the strip surface, again in times 
random units. This has the limitation that it gives no information concerning 
the orientation of directions within the rolling plane. Nevertheless, inverse pole 
figures are useful since they give the precise total intensity of planes that are 
parallel to the surface. These intensities largely determine the mean r value (see 
next section). 
A complete characterization of any texture may be given by means of an 
orientation distribution function which is calculated from several pole figures. 
An orientation distribution function gives a plot of intensity of each orientation 
in Euler space using angles that relate each orientation to the orientation of the 
strip. The method was originally described independently by Roe 21 and Bunge 22 
using different but related angles. In the Bunge notation, the Euler angles ~bl, 

Low-carbon strip steels 13 
RD 
TD 
e{111) <112> 
0{111} <110> 
"{100} <011> 
A{211} <011> 
Figure 1.7 (200) pole figure for cold-rolled steel showing important orientations 
(Hutchinson 2~ 
z(NO) 
[O~)z 1] 
~ ~,-rot 
irot 
(RO) 
,/x 
/ ~  
"YlTD) 
Figure 1.8 Diagram illustrating the relationship between the crystal coordinate system 
[1001, [010], [O01l and the rolling, transverse and normal directions by means of the 
Euler angles ~l, ~, ~z 
and ~ relate the crystal coordinate system [ 100], [010] and [001] to the physical 
reference frame RD, TD, ND (the rolling transverse and normal directions) by 
three rotations taken in order. These rotations are illustrated in Figure 1.8 and are 
further illustrated on a stereographic projection in Figure 1.9. This figure uses a 
(111)[ 121 ] orientation as a particular example. 
An outline orientation distribution function giving the positions of some 
important orientations is given in Figure 1.10. It is useful to note that any 

14 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 1.9 Stereographic projection illustrating the relationship between the crystal 
coordinate system [1001,[010],[0011 and the specimen coordinate system, the rolling, 
transverse and normal directions, by rotations through the Euler angles, qbl, cp, qb2 using a 
(111)[ 1211 orientation as an example (Hu 23 ) 
r 
54"7~ 
~ 
x (RD) J 
_ 
#,2 =45 * 
.(111) [121] 
Figure 1.10 
Diagram of orientation space showing the important section at ~2 = 45* 
containing the ct fibre orientations ((1 I O)//RD) and the y fibre orientations ((111)HND 
(Emren et al. 24) 
set of orientations represented by a straight line parallel to one of the axes in 
orientation space is known as a fibre texture. Figure 1.10 gives the position of 
the y fibre texture, which includes all orientations with a [ 1 1 1] direction normal 
to the strip surface and the t~ fibre texture, which includes all orientations with a 
[110] direction in the rolling direction. These two fibre textures are particularly 
important since, as mentioned previously, they have a dominant influence on the 
r values and hence deep drawability of a ferritic steel. 
A limitation of all the above three methods of representing texture is 
that the methods characterize the average texture in the volume of sample 
examined, but give no indication of the spatial distribution of grains with a 

Low-carbon strip steels 15 
particular orientation. The spatial distribution of texture is important because 
what happens to a particular subgrain in a material during recrystallization is 
strongly influenced by the orientation and structure of the material around it. The 
orientation of groups of neighbouring grains may be laboriously studied using 
Laue diffraction photographs, but the recently developed technique of electron 
backscatter diffraction 25 enables the orientation of neighbouring grains to be 
studied more easily. 
During cold rolling, the texture, which is often close to random in the hot band 
structure, develops progressively with increasing cold reduction, as illustrated 
by means of inverse pole figure data in Figure 1.11. An equivalent plot, by 
means of two fibre lines through an orientation distribution function, is shown 
in Figure 1.12. This figure gives the intensities along both the alpha and gamma 
fibres. Clearly both fibres become stronger with increasing cold reduction due 
to the progressive rotation of the orientation of grains from other orientations 
into these two fibre orientations. The precise intensities along the fibre groups 
of components depend on the type and details of the steel and there is also a 
marked effect of hot band grain size. 
The other important effect that occurs during rolling is the development of a 
deformation structure. As deformation proceeds, the dislocation density increases, 
but there is a tendency for dislocations to cluster together. The final result after 
sufficient deformation is that a subgrain structure is formed with a high disloca- 
tion density in the subgrain boundaries and a relatively low density within the 
subgrains. 2s The total stored energy of deformation depends on the total mean 
dislocation density. It depends, therefore, on the subgrain size and the orienta- 
tion difference between adjacent subgrains since the latter is determined by the 
dislocation density within the subgrain boundaries. 
It was indicated previously that iron may have a face-centred cubic or a body- 
centred cubic form. When either of these two crystalline structures is deformed, 
the deformation can take place by dislocation movement only on particular slip 
i 
n l 
i 
Lll 
|| 
| 
i i 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Oo 
-. 
,,d" (111) 
i 
" 
6 
Os 
9 0 
41. 
." ,o 
e 1001)1 
~- 
,o" 
9 
0 
9 
,,oo. 
I,el 
o 
le 
. 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
% Cold reduction 
Figure 1.11 Variation of the intensity of the components of the deformation texture of 
aluminium-killed steel with cold reduction (Held 26) 

16 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
10 
C: 
O4 
(a) 
1(OOl) 
(i 2) 
(1 ii 
o o) l 
[~o] 
[~o1 
[1~o1 
[1~o1,, I 
I/ 
. 
t 
! 
I 
I 
70% 
50% 
0% 
(b) 
-o') 
90% 
85% 
,50% 
I 
30% 
9 
A 
A 
A 
A
A
 
, 
HB 
I 
I 
, 
., 
i 
m 
I 
I 
600 
o o 
30 o 
9o o 60 o 
Oo o 
Figure 1.12 
Development of the roiling texture of an aluminium-killed 0.007 wt% C steel 
with cold reduction, (a) ~ fibre (b) skeleton line of y fibre (Schlippenback and Lucke. 27) 
The skeleton line is the line close to the y fibre exhibiting the maximum orientation density 
planes in particular slip directions. For a body-centred cubic structure, such as 
ferrite, slip can occur in the four [111] directions on 12 slip planes divided 
between (011), (112) and (123). This gives 48 possible slip systems. 29 For a 
face-centred cubic-structure, such as austenite, slip can occur in the three [011] 
slip directions on the four (111) slip planes giving 12 possible slip systems. 29 
In any sample containing grains with a range of orientations, grains with certain 
orientations will deform with greater difficulty than other grains because their 
possible slip systems are oriented less favourably than others to the direction of 
the applied stress. The result is that grains with certain orientations develop a 
higher stored energy of deformation than other orientations. Dillamore et al. 30 
showed that after 70% cold reduction the subgrain size decreased from (100) 
through (112) to (111) and (110) planes, as illustrated in Figure 1.13. In addition 
the subgrain misorientation increased in the same order. The result was that the 
total stored energy of deformation increased in the order (100), (112), (111) and 
(110). Other crystallite size work 31 and X-ray line broadening studies 32 have 
confirmed that the stored energy of deformation varies with orientation. 
The stored energy of deformation is important because it can lead to selective 
nucleation of new grains during reerystallization when the steel is heated. Decker 
and Harker 33 suggested that the highest energy regions would be able to nucleate 
recrystallized grains first and that they would then be able to consume regions 
with low initial energy that would not nucleate so easily. The dislocation densities 

Low-carbon strip steels 
17 
.................. 
!10 
"o""" 
s ~ 
,, .'"" 
~ 
4 
~-~0.2 
~ 
2 
~ 
o S~ 
0 
........ 
_, ............ 0 
0 
30 ~ 
60 ~ 
90 ~ 
(001)[1 ~0] 
(110)[1 TO] 
Odentatlon about [110] 
Figure 1.13 Variation of subgrain diameter (sd) and subgrain misorientation (0) with 
orientation from (001) [1-i"01 to (110) [11-0]. (Dillamore et al. 3~ 
close to the original grain boundaries are usually higher than within the grains 
because the deformation must accommodate the deformation on differently orien- 
tated slip systems on either side of the boundary. The deformed grain boundaries 
are, therefore, preferred sites for the nucleation of recrystallized grains. 29 When 
recrystallization takes place after cold rolling, the recrystallized texture is clearly 
influenced by the deformation texture that is developed as well as by oriented 
nucleation and selective growth effects 34 that arise from the deformation structure 
itself and from other effects described below. 
An example of a texture change that occurs during recrystallization, using data 
for a vacuum-degassed steel, is given in Figure 1.14. This gives the intensities 
along the oe and y fibre components as a function of time through the annealing 
process. It is seen that overall, the y fibre components increase in intensity and 
that many of the t~ fibre components decrease except those that are common to 
the y fibre components. In the y fibre, the components close to (111)[ 112] clearly 
develop more strongly than components close to (111)[011 ]. 
The percentage cold reduction has an important influence on the grain size 
developed during recrystallization as well as on the texture. Increasing cold 
reduction generally leads to a finer grain size, but both the grain size and the 
recrystallization texture are also strongly influenced by the presence of alloying 
elements in solution and by the presence of precipitates. The hot band grain 
size also has an influence on the recrystallized grain size as well as its influence 
on texture, as illustrated for an aluminium-killed steel in Figure 1.15. It is also 
useful to note that the textures in many steels may be improved as a result of 
grain growth after recrystallization is complete, but grain growth may be inhibited 
by the presence of precipitates. 
Many workers have shown that carbon and nitrogen in interstitial solid solution 
during annealing have a detrimental effect on the texture developed during recrys- 
tallization. With higher interstitial carbon contents there is a gradual decrease in 
the (111) components during recrystallization, whereas with low-solute carbon, 

18 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
i 
O 
(a) 
, 
,,, 
, 
~((X)I) 
(112) 
[,[110] 
[1t0] 
,, 
I 
10 
100s 
lO00s 
(111) 
[1to] 
z 
1000s 
(11o_) 
[1t01, 
1000s 
0 ~ 
30 ~ 
60* 
(b) 
-(111) 
-(111) 
[o11] 
[tt2] 
,ooof 
glP 
t 
_ 
90* 60 ~ 
90 ~ 
r 
Figure 1.14 Development of orientation density during the recrystallization of a 
vacuum-degassed steel annealed at 700"C (a) a fibre and (b) y fibre (skeleton line) (Emren 
et ell. 35) 
10 
E 
9 
7 
1.7 
1.6 
1.5 
1.4 
0 Slow 
heating 
9 Rapid 
heating 
e--"" 
~ 
~ 
Grain size number of hot band (ASTM) 
Figure 1.15 Effect of hot band grain size on the recrystallized grain size and rm value of 
aluminium-killed steel heated to 700"C at 100" C/h and held for I hour and at 50* C/s and 
heM for 1.5 min (Ono and Nishimoto 36) 

Low.carbon strip steels 19 
the initial decrease in the (111) components is compensated for by a subse- 
quent increase especially in the (111)[112] component during the later stages of 
recrystallization. 37 The influence of the dissolved carbon is mainly to increase the 
proportion of the minor components with a consequent decrease in the propor- 
tion of the important (111) y fibre components that lead to good drawability. 
The higher carbon content is also accompanied by a finer grain size. 37 Nitrogen 
in solution also leads to low r values a fine grain size. The effect of nitrogen in 
solution is, therefore, similar to the effect of carbon in solution. 2~ It is usually 
necessary to ensure that the solute carbon and nitrogen is reduced to a low level 
in the hot band structure and during recrystallization itself, if high r values are 
to be obtained by cold rolling and annealing. The development of high r values 
in batch-annealed, aluminium-killed steel, however, as further discussed below, 
has a different requirement. 
Cold.forming behaviour 
Cold formability and strength, as indicated above, represent the two most impor- 
tant requirements for low-carbon strip grade steels. For many applications, the 
main requirement is to be able to form the part without splitting, necking or 
wrinkling. The most suitable steel, therefore, is one with a low strength and high 
formability. For structural applications, the strength of the steel is more important 
and must be above a given minimum value. It is found, however, that there is 
a general tendency for the cold formability of any type of steel to reduce as the 
strength increases. The reduced formability of higher-strength steels tends, there- 
fore, to limit their use to those applications which do not require the very highest 
formability. Many of the developments of higher-strength steels, therefore, have 
been specifically aimed at providing higher strength while minimizing the loss 
in formability that would otherwise have taken place. 
It is now generally accepted that, for many applications, the cold formability 
of sheet steel may be resolved into two separate but related components, namely 
its drawability and its stretchability. The drawability of a steel is its ability to 
be drawn in to make a component without local necking or splitting whereas the 
stretchability of a steel is its ability to be stretched to form a component, again 
without local necking or splitting. Stretching involves major and minor strains 
in the plane of the sheet that are both positive, whereas drawing involves major 
and minor strains, one of which is positive and one of which is negative. Many 
applications, however, involve both drawing and stretching. Success in forming 
for such applications involves, therefore, the factors which influence both drawing 
and stretching. 
A simple measure of the deep drawability of a steel may be obtained by 
forming fiat-bottomed cylindrical cups from circular blanks, as illustrated in 
Figure 1.16(a). The maximum ratio between the circular blank diameter and the 
punch diameter that may be drawn in a single stage to form a cylindrical cup 
without necking or splitting is a measure of the drawability of the steel. This 
ratio is called the limiting drawing ratio and may vary up to about 2.5 for very 
good deep-drawing steels. 

20 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
1 I 
I 
7~..~,~I [ 
I- 
II 
..... I 
llJl 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.16 (a) Deep drawing; (b) stretch forming 
A simple measure of the stretchability of a steel may be obtained by using 
a hemispherical punch to form a circular dome, as indicated in Figure 1.16(b). 
The flange of the circular blank is prevented from being pulled in by the use of 
a draw bead or by using sufficient blank holder pressure. The maximum ratio of 
dome height to dome diameter at the moment of necking or splitting is a measure 
of the stretchability of the steel. A similar test, called a hydraulic bulge test, may 
be used, employing oil under pressure to form the dome. In this case, the result 
would not be influenced by friction. In these tests in which the shape of the dome 
is circular, the strain at the top of the dome is almost the same in two directions 
at fight angles. The strain, therefore, is said to be balanced biaxial strain. 
Work-hardening coefficients and normal anisotropy 
The formability of sheet steels may also be assessed using parameters that may be 
measured directly from a conventional tensile test, provided suitable length and 
width extensometers are available. The first parameter is the strain ratio which 
was originally devised by Lankford and others 38 and is usually called the r value. 
It gives a measure of the drawability of the steel but also gives a measure of the 
resistance to thinning resulting from the orientation of the slip systems that are 
active during drawing. The second parameter is the work-hardening coefficient, 
designated the n value which is closely related to the stretchability of the steel. 
The uniform and total elongation measured in a tensile test are also related 
to the stretchability of a steel, but it is necessary to introduce the concepts of 
true stress and true strain before the r value and the n value may be defined 
precisely. 
True stress and true strain 
The stress used in a conventional tensile test, often called the engineering stress, 
is defined as the load at any moment during the test divided by the original 
cross-sectional area of the test piece. During the test, the load increases up to the 
point of maximum load which defines the tensile strength of the material and then 
decreases as the specimen undergoes local necking. The true stress, however, is 
defined as the load at any moment during the test divided by the current cross- 
sectional area at the same moment. Thus, as illustrated in Figure 1.17, the true 

Low-carbon strip steels 21 
~.- True 
stress 
Engineering 
stress 
Strain 
Figure 1.17 Stress-strain diagrams 
stress continues to increase with increasing strain and represents the actual stress 
on the specimen at every moment during the test. 
The engineering strain during a test is defined as the change in length divided 
by the original length. The concept of true strain has been developed by regarding 
any overall strain as being made up of a series of small elements of strain each 
related to the length of the specimen at the start of each element. Thus if an 
overall engineering strain (L3 - L0)/L0 were to be regarded as made up of three 
elements, the true strain e would be given by the sum of the three elements. Thus: 
e = (L1 - Lo)/Lo + (L2 - LI)/LI + (L3 - L2)/L2 
In the limit as each element becomes very small and the number of elements 
becomes very large: 
L 
and 
= lnL/Lo 
Thus, the true strain is equal to the natural logarithm of the ratio of the final 
length to the original length. With this concept, any material that is extended to 
give a particular true strain would need the same numerical value of true strain 
but of opposite sign to restore it to its original length. Clearly, the engineering 
strains to achieve the same result would not have had the same numerical value. 
It is also useful to note that if, for example, any steel is given several separate 
strains to make up a complete strain, the total true strain would be equal to the 
sum of the separate true strains, whereas the total engineering strain would not 
be equal to the sum of the individual engineering strains. 
The strain ratio r or Lankford value 
The definition of the strain ratio r or Lankford value 3s depends on the observation 
that, as a tensile test proceeds, the gauge length of the sample becomes both 

22 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
thinner and narrower. The strain ratio r is defined, therefore, as the ratio of 
the true strain, ew, in the width direction to the true strain, st, in the thickness 
direction at a particular moment during the test, usually when the engineering 
strain is either 15 or 20%. Thus: 
r ~ Ew/6t 
In practice, it is usual to assume that the sample retains its original volume during 
the test which means that the sum of the true width, thickness and length strains 
would be equal to zero. Only the width wf, therefore, needs to be measured if 
the length-engineering strain is fixed at either 15 or 20%, corresponding to true 
length strains of either 0.1398 or 0.1823. The final formula then becomes, for 
20% engineering strain: 
In wf/wo 
(ln wo/w f - 0.1823) 
The strain ratio usually has different values for different directions in the plane 
of any sheet. A mean r value, rm or L may, therefore, be defined by measuring 
a value in the rolling, transverse and diagonal directions and calculating a mean 
giving the diagonal value double weight as follows: 
rm = (r0 + 2r45 + r9o)/4 
where the subscripts refer to the angle of the test direction to the rolling direction. 
The variation in r value around the rolling plane is also important and a Ar 
value is defined as: 
Ar = (r0 - 2r45 + r9o)/4 
The main structural feature influencing the r value is the crystallographic texture, 
but the relationship between r value and crystallographic texture is a complicated 
one. It is useful to note here, however, that a high proportion of grains with (111) 
planes parallel to the surface, which is the ~, fibre texture component mentioned 
in the previous section, leads to high r values. A high proportion of grains 
with (100) planes parallel to the surface, which is one component of the ct fibre 
texture, tends to lead to a low r value. Various empirical relationships between 
the strength of texture components and r value have been established. One of the 
most simple relationships is illustrated in Figure 1.18, which shows a substantially 
linear relationship between the rm value and the ratio of the strengths of the (111) 
and (100) texture components. 
The rm value is important because it affects the distribution of strain in a 
pressing by influencing the thinning tendency and gives a measure of the deep 
drawability of the steel. This is illustrated in Figure 1.19, which gives a plot 
of rm value versus limiting drawing ratio for a number of steels drawn to form 
cylindrical cups. There is a linear correlation between the rm value and the 
limiting drawing ratio of the steel. This arises partly because the flange being 
drawn in to form the wall of a cup exhibits less thickening for a high rm value 
steel than for a low rm value steel, as illustrated in Figure 1.20. The rm value also 
influences the strain distribution during stretching, as illustrated in Figure 1.21, 

Low-carbon strip steels 23 
2.4 
2.0 
1.6 
E 1.2 
0.8 
0.4 
0.1 
, 
, 
,,, ,i 
, ,, 
9 ~- T 
.
r
e
 
e 
9 
. 
9 
9 
o ~ 
o9 ~ 
ooO 
O~o ~ ~ 
9 
i*';o ~ 
.... 
i .
.
.
.
.
.
 
i 
, 
9 
1.0 
10 
1~) 
1000 
Intensity ratio (111 )/(001 ) 
Figure 1.18 
Relation between the ratio of the intensity of the (111) component to the 
intensity of the (001) component and the rm value of low.carbon steel sheets (After Held 39) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
S
S
J
S
L
 
e,L o o/ 
s 
I 
,",.'," 
, 
," 
I 
,:/ 
, 
JO 
~ 
9 p 
L,'/:.," 
If 
, 9 
116LY .- 
. ......... 
_ . . . . . . .  
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
V value 
Figure 1.19 
Effect of P on limiting blank diameter for a range of low-carbon steels for 
Swift cups drawn using polythene sheet lubrication (After Atkinson and Maclean 4~ 
"~.3 
.r 
! 
.2' 
8 
9 9 
i, 
6
a
~
~
~
t
 
~ 
$ 
9 
....... 
I 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
I 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
7" value 
Figure 1.20 
Relationship between mean fractional increase in thickness at the top rim of 
a Swift cup and'f value, for a range of low-carbon steels, Blank diameter 63.5 mm - Punch 
diameter 32 mm (After Hudd and Lyons 41) 

24 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
40 
E 
30 
-1- 
20 
.
.
.
.
 
| 
, 
I 
| 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
Polar thickness strain 
Figure 1.21 Relationship between bulge height and polar thickness strain in sheets with 
different ~ values. One 1.35 ~ material had a lower uniform elongation than the remaining 
materials (After Horta et al. 42) 
e- 
"ii3 .3 
== 
== 
r 
i~.2 
1.95 
I/55 
0.9t3 
1.35 
* 1.20 and 1.35 
I 
, 
I 
25 
50 
Distance from pole (mm) 
Figure 1.22 Radial distribution of thickness strain, measured directly, in sheets with 
different "i values bulged to give a polar thickness strain of 0.4. One 1.35 -~ material had 
a lower uniform elongation than the remaining materials (After Horta et al. 42) 
which gives a plot of the polar thickness strain developed in circular bulge tests 
of progressively increasing height using steels with different rm value. It is seen 
that for a given bulge height, the polar thickness strain is lower for a high rm 
value steel than for a low rm value steel. The reason is, as shown in Figure 1.22, 
that the strain is more uniformly distributed across the surface of the bulge for 
the high rm value steel than for the low rm value steel. This type of influence of 
rm on strain distribution is common to all pressings. 
The Ar value is important because its ratio with the rm value determines the 
height of ears that would be obtained in cups prepared using a cylindrical punch 
and a circular blank. The ear height is defined as the mean distance between the 

Low-carbon strip steels 25 
e 
25 
~" 45o 
0 
0 ~ 90 ~ 
troughs 
~? 
-15 
a 
I 
i 
~ 
~ 
! 
! 
! 
I 
I I 
J 
-0.6 
-0.2 
0.2 
0.6 
1.0 
1.4 
1.8 
Figure 1.23 The relationship between earing and Ar (After Wilson and Butler 43) 
high parts of the rim and the bottom of the troughs. The relationship between 
Ar/rm and eating is illustrated in Figure 1.23. For this figure, ears in the rolling 
and transverse directions are regarded as positive eating and ears in the diagonal 
direction are regarded as negative earing. The punch and blank diameters (P and 
B) used to make a cup also influence ear height and for a given material, the ear 
height is given with reasonable accuracy by the following equation: 44 
Ear height = M. (B 2 - P2)(B- p)l.5/p2.5 
where M is a dimensionless eating parameter related mainly to the r and Ar 
values of the steel but also influenced a little by cup drawing conditions. Ears 
are clearly more noticeable on a simple cup than on a more complicated pressing, 
but the equivalent effect on strain distribution is obtained on all pressings, unless 
the steel is specially manufactured to give a low earing tendency. 
The work-hardening coefficient n 
Any stress/strain curve may be regarded as approximately conforming to an 
equation of the type: 
cr = kt~ n 
where a and ~ are the true stresses and the true strains measured throughout a 
tensile test as defined above and n is a constant. It follows that: 
loglo a = n. log10 e + logl0 K 
The coefficient n is, therefore, defined as the slope of a true stress- true strain 
curve plotted on a logarithmic scale. It determines, therefore, how quickly the 
true stress builds up with increasing true strain and is, therefore, referred to as 
the work-hardening coefficient. In practice, it is found that the above logarithmic 
plot is not always a perfect straight line. The n value is then said to vary with 
strain and more than one value is sometimes quoted from a single tensile test, 
corresponding to different ranges of strain. 

26 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
40 
o~ 
EE 
3O 
20 
o 
UJ 
10 
Graph 919 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
O 
- 
9 
O9149 
9 
9 m 
~ D o  
09 
00 
01mlo 
i 
9 
9 
9 00 
o o  9  
9 
n 
' 
' 
n 
9 ==ee 
m 
m 
I Uniform I 
emeo 
o9 
] 
] 
9 9 oOo 9 9 
elongation 
"ooo~ o=,, 
9 9 
9 
o_OO'l 
o 
I' 
mee 
9 
oamUr 
I Total 
I 
9 
".-. 
__ 
O ___ 
.. 
1 
, 
I 
, 
I 
, 
I 
= 
I 
! 
I 
= 
I 
0.~a 
0.2 
0.22 
0.24 
0.26 
0.28 
0.a 
n value 
Figure 1.24 A plot of total and uniform elongation versus n value for several cold-rolled, 
high-strength steels continuously annealed on an experimental line using a range of 
annealing cycles (without temper rolling) 
There is a close relationship between the n value of the steel and both the 
uniform and the total elongation measured in a tensile test. This relationship is 
illustrated for several types of high-strength steel in Figure 1.24. It is useful to 
note that if the n value were to be truly constant throughout a tensile test, the n 
value would be numerically equal to the true strain at maximum load which is 
the uniform elongation. 
The most important factors that influence the n value of a steel are its strength 
and the strengthening mechanisms used to develop the strength. This is illustrated 
in Figure 1.25. It is seen that for each type of steel the n value decreases with 
increasing strength and that, for example, solid solution strengthening gives a 
lower loss in n value per unit increase in strength than strengthening by precipi- 
tation effects and grain refinement. It is clear that the highest possible n value is 
obtained when the strength of any type of steel is as low as possible and this is 
the reason why low-strength mild steels are always more formable than higher- 
strength steels. As mentioned previously, much emphasis has been given during 
the development of higher-strength steels to choosing or developing strength- 
ening mechanisms that give the highest possible n value (and hence elongation) 
for the strength needed. 
The n value is important because it is the second of the two main material 
parameters that determine the distribution of strain across any pressing. In general, 
a high n value for a steel leads to a more uniform strain distribution than a low 
n value steel. A higher n value enables the forming strains, therefore, to be 
distributed across a pressing with less likelihood of local necking and failure 
than for a low n value. 
The strain distributions obtained across a simple hemispherical bulge may be 
used to illustrate the effects of n value on strain distribution. Figure 1.26 shows 

Low-carbon strip steels 27 
0.30 
0.25 
~ 
0.20 
0.15 
0.10 
0.05 
200 
~ 
l phase 
-"~,-,,,,._...,"~.- SolU ~iutio n 
~ 
strengthened 
"grain refinement /" 
~-,= 
~ 
ansformatiov 
_ 
~
~
 
gthened 
Partially annealed "~' 
~
n
 
_- cold work 
~-,,,~ 
J 
, 
,,| 
, 
II 
,, 
_ 
~ 
400 
600 
800 
Tensile strength (MPe) 
Figure 1.25 
Goodwin 45) 
Relationship between n value and tensile strength (After Dasarathy and 
.8 - 
n=O 
0.2 
.2 
0 
.2 
.4 
.6 
.8 
Polar height / radius of diaphragm 
Figure 1.26 Variation of calculated polar thickness strain versus polar height for 
different values of n for rm -- 1 (After Wang 46) 
that the polar thickness strain for a given bulge height decreases as the n value 
increases. The implication is that the strain becomes more uniformly distributed 
as the n value increases. Figure 1.27(a) shows that the polar thickness strain at 
instability increases with increasing n value and the result is that the maximum 
bulge height at instability also increases with increasing n value (Figure 1.27(b)). 
As with rm value, equivalent effects are obtained with the more complicated 
pressings that are needed across the engineering industry. In practice, it is found 
that success with any particular pressing may be dependent on a high value of 
one or other of the parameters r or n, whereas success with another pressing 
may depend on high values of both parameters. 47 

28 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
.c_ 
~.7 
~ 
.6 
,,C 
--~.4 
o 
9 
r=0.5 
E 
.9 
t-- 
.8 
"ID 
o 
m 
.7 
o.,=. 
.6 
_>, 
o... 
t'~ 
.5 
0 
.c_ 
.E" 
.4 
t-- 
.3 
L. 
--~ 
0 
o 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.2 
Strain-hardening exponent n 
(a) 
/ l l l  
0.4 
Strain-hardening exponent n 
(b) 
Figure 1.27 Calculated (a) polar thickness strain (absolute value) and (b) polar height 
at instability versus strain-hardening exponent n for several values of r (After Wang 46) 
Forming limit diagrams 
In 1963, Backhofen and Keeler 48 introduced the concept of a forming limit 
diagram (FLD) which gives a plot of the major and minor strains that may 
be obtained by deformation. This diagram enables the strains that are obtained 
across any commercial pressing to be compared with the maximum strains that 
could be sustained by the material without necking or splitting. These maximum 
strains are defined by a line called the forming limit curve which separates the 
strains that would give an unsatisfactory pressing from those that would give a 
satisfactory pressing. The forming limit line for any material may be measured 
experimentally, as indicated below, and its position on the diagram depends on 
the properties of the steel and its thickness. It usually has the general shape 
illustrated in Figure 1.28. The fight-hand side of the diagram covers stretching 
when both the major and the minor strains are positive, whereas the left-hand side 
covers drawing for which, as mentioned previously, one of the strains is negative. 
The strains to be plotted on a forming limit diagram may be measured by first 
etching a grid pattern, consisting of an array of circles about 2 mm in diameter, 
onto the steel surface prior to forming. This is done using a stencil and an electro- 
chemical or photographic marking technique. On forming, the circles change in 
size and shape and usually become elliptical, depending on the local strain at each 
point over the pressing. The circles and ellipses plotted in Figure 1.28 indicate 
the nature of the strain produced by deformation in different areas of the diagram. 
The major component of strain plotted vertically is obtained by measuring the 
long axis of the ellipse, whereas the other component is obtained from the minor 
axis. A comparison of strains on a component may be made with those for the 
forming limit curve. It is usually considered that if the plotted strains are well 
away from the forming limit line, the pressing is likely to be made without risk 
of necking or splitting. If the strains are close to the forming limit line, however, 

Low-carbon strip steels 29 
Major 
strain 
deformation 
...... 
I 
I 
, 
.I., 
;" 
i 
Compressive 
9 ,,, 
, 
, 
| 
,|, 
,|,l 
i| 
m 
~safe 
~strain 
l interc~:)t 
-. , 
,, 
, +_, 
,Minor 
0 
Strain 
,~ 
Tensile 
Plane 
strain 
Figure 1.28 Forming limit diagram 
there would be the risk that some pressings would be unsatisfactory. It would 
then be necessary to adjust the press, modify the lubrication, modify the blank 
shape, clean or modify the tools or use a more formable steel, to ensure that the 
pressings would become consistently satisfactory. Clearly modifying the tools 
would only be an option during the development and die try-out stages of a 
pressing before the design itself has become fixed or if the overall effect does 
not change panel shape. 
The forming limit diagram itself may be established by subjecting a series 
of samples of the material to be used to a range of forming tests to give failure 
involving different ratios of major and minor strains, including negative ones. The 
strains close to the failure points are measured using the grid marking technique 
and plotted on the diagram in the normal way to establish the forming limit line 
itself. 
It is useful to note, as illustrated in Figure 1.29, that the plane strain intercept 
on the major strain axis of a forming limit diagram is a function of the sheet 
thickness and the work-hardening coefficient n. Thus higher-strength steels with 
lower n values have a lower forming limit curve than lower-strength steels. It has 
also been found that the presence of macro inclusions reduces the forming limit. 49 
In addition, fine elongated sulphide inclusions may also reduce the forming limit, 
but a chemical addition to modify the inclusion shape to make them globular may 
restore the forming limit to a higher level. 5~ 
Other forming effects 
The above remarks have concentrated primarily on the factors that influence the 
possibility of local necking or splitting during the formation of any pressing. It 
should be remembered, however, that there are other factors that may lead to 
a pressing being unsatisfactory. These include wrinkling, hole expansion effects 
and constancy of shape, sometimes known as shape fixability which is related to 
springback. 

30 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
! 
Strain hardening exponent n 
rasing shoot 
~rtess 
Figure 1.29 Relationships between the plane strain intercept on a forming limit diagram 
and the strain hardening exponent as a function of sheet thickness 
Springback 
Springback occurs on forming whenever the component is withdrawn from the 
tool set. The forces used to make the pressing are then no longer applied and the 
pressing relaxes in an elastic way to minimize its residual internal stresses. In 
general, the plastic strains introduced into many pressings are not uniform over 
the pressing. The result is that the elastic relaxation is not uniform and the shape 
of the pressing will not be exactly the same as the shape of the punch that has 
been used in its manufacture. The change in shape is known as springback and it 
clearly varies widely for different pressings. The most important material factor 
affecting springback is the yield stress, but gauge and work-hardening coefficient 
also have an influence. It is clearly important that all examples of the same 
pressing should have a uniform shape in order that they fit together easily with 
other pressings when they are assembled into complete structures. It is important, 
therefore, that each sheet of the material used should have closely the same yield 
stress, gauge and work-hardening coefficient. Press conditions may, however, be 
adjusted to minimize the effect of any property variation. 
Buckling, distortion and wrinkling 
Sometimes, when there are large strain gradients across a pressing or when there 
is some other critical condition, the transfer of stress across a pressing may cause 
buckling, or the relaxation of the elastic stresses introduced during forming may 
cause distortion. The extent of these effects is very dependent on the nature of 
the pressing. 
Wrinkling consists of corrugations produced mainly near the flanges of a 
pressing when the material is subject to in-plane compression. Wrinkling would 
make a pressing unsuitable for any exposed applications, but the existence of 
wrinkling on internal flanges makes the process of spot welding difficult. Wrin- 
kling may be controlled by adjusting press conditions but the main material 
parameters that affect the tendency are yield stress and gauge. The tendency for 
wrinlding increases with increasing yield stress and decreasing gauge. 

Low-carbon strip steels 31 
Hole expansion effects 
Many pressings are made with holes to accommodate screws for fixing and the 
forming operation often involves an increase in the size of the punched hole 
after it is made. An example would be a wheel centre for a motor vehicle which 
usually has four holes for securing the wheel in position. It is found that different 
steels have a tendency to split as the hole is expanded. They are said, therefore, to 
have different edge ductility. A hole expansion index has, therefore, been devised 
to give a measure of the quality of the steel in this respect and represents the 
percentage increase in the size of a hole at the moment that a crack forms. 
It is found that the hole expansion index is often influenced by the presence of 
elongated sulphide inclusions, but the index may easily be improved by reducing 
the sulphur content and/or by making additions to the steel to modify the sulphide 
shape. Steels with certain types of microstructure are, however, more prone to 
cracking at cut edges than steels with other types of microstructure. Thus, for 
a given strength, a ferrite- martensite structure gives a lower hole expansion 
value than a ferrite - bainite structure. 
Bending 
Many components are made by a bending operation, for example simple brackets 
or tubes and the minimum bend radius that may be produced without cracking 
on the outside of the bend are often regarded as measures of the bendability of 
the steel. Low-strength steels with high n values are clearly more bendable than 
high-strength steels. It is found, however, that for a given strength, the minimum 
bend radius is again influenced by the presence of elongated sulphide inclusions. 
Recently, new applications have required that the bendability of ultra-high- 
strength steel is optimized for tube-making processes. It was found 51 for three 
steels that the elongation as measured in a tensile test increased, as expected, with 
decreasing gauge length but that the steel with the lowest elongation, measured 
over a gauge length of 50 mm, had the highest elongation measured over a 
gauge length of 2 mm, as illustrated in Figure 1.30. The important observation 
was that the minimum bend radius correlated well with the 2 mm elongation (the 
local elongation) rather than with the 50 mm elongation. Other work showed 
that a homogeneity index, defined as the standard deviation of hardness over a 
specimen, correlated well with the local elongation (Figure 1.31) and confirmed 
that the minimum bend radius correlated with the local elongation (Figure 1.32). 
It was clear, therefore, that the best bendability is obtained from steels with the 
most homogeneous microstructure with the least variation in hardness throughout 
the steel. For the steels studied, there was no correlation between either the n 
value or the total elongation measured using a 50 mm gauge length and the 
minimum bend radius that would just avoid splitting. 
Delayed fracture 
Another phenomenon which may be important for certain applications is known 
as delayed fracture. 53 This is caused by hydrogen absorbed during corrosion 
and increases when the tensile strength is above 1170 N/mm 2. Delayed fracture 

70 
60 
10 
5O 
c: 40 
.2 
~ 3o 
e- o 
uJ 20 
100 
O 
'~e 
""~' 
' 
' 
I 
o 
e 
& 
i 
c,~l.. %~'=-1 
Z~ 
-~. 
~:t:i .*'j-- , j 
d, .:..'&" 
"&'&-m 
A. 9 .-- .a..~.~.~ E 
C 
"""'"" 
O 
9 
= 
1, 
. 
. 
9 
9 
= 
= 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 70 
Gauge length / mm 
Figure 1.30 
Variations of elongation with gauge length for three ultra-high-strength 
steels (After lwaya et al. 51) 
8~a9 
.~ 80 
~ 60 
~ 4o 
2o 
32 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
Homogeneity Index 
Figure 1.31 
Relationship between homogeneity index and local elongation for 
ultra-high-strength steel (After Yamazaki et al. s2) 
5 
E 
E 
~4 
.~_ 
~3 
C | 
E 
.E 1 
e" 
.m 
~0 
\ 
o 
- 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Local elongation/% 
Figure 1.32 
Relationship between local elongation and minimum bending radius for 
ultra-high-strength steel (After Yamazaki et al. 52) 

Low-carbon strip steels 33 
resistance may be improved by reducing the carbon content and by controlling 
the size and morphology of carbides. 54 
Stretcher strain markings 
Temper rolling serves several functions. As mentioned previously it imprints a 
surface roughness onto the steel surface and may improve the steel flatness, but 
it also removes the yield point elongation. It is found, however, that a number of 
steels exhibit a phenomenon called strain ageing, whereby the yield point returns 
on storage at room temperature due to the diffusion of carbon or nitrogen in 
solution onto free dislocations. Normally, it is considered that a visible marking 
would occur on the surface of a pressed component if the yield point elongation 
increases above about 0.3%. These markings are called stretcher strain markings 
and would lead to the rejection of the pressing if the markings are on the exposed 
surface of, for example, a motor vehicle body component. The markings are 
avoided if the strain ageing rate is sufficiently low or if the steel is not stored 
for very long periods before pressing. It will be seen below that most low- 
strength strip steel grades are guaranteed not to exhibit stretcher strain markings 
on forming for at least six months after delivery. 
Surface roughness 
The final surface roughness is imprinted onto the steel surface by the temper 
mill rolls as indicated in the previous section. The roughness is usually defined 
by the average peak height and the peak count per inch across the surface and 
typical values to use would be 1-2 Ixm and 200 peaks per inch, depending on the 
application. The surface of the temper mill rolls may be roughened using one of 
four different methods, 55 namely shot blasting, spark erosion, using a pulsed laser 
(the lasertex process) or electron beam roughening, but each method produces a 
different type of surface. 
The roughness is important because it influences the way in which forming 
lubricant is held on the surface and has, therefore, a direct influence on formability 
as a result of frictional effects. The roughness also has an influence on the 
appearance of a steel surface after painting. 
Use of laser.welded tailored blanks 
Traditionally, each body panel of a motor vehicle is press formed from a single 
sheet of steel cut to a suitable blank size and shape prior to .forming. The impli- 
cation was that each part of a pressing was made from the same grade of steel 
with the same strength and thickness. The result has been that certain parts of a 
pressing may have been stronger than is strictly necessary or additional strength- 
ening members may have been needed to provide strength in parts of a pressing 
that may otherwise have been too weak. 
This problem may now be overcome by making blanks from two or more pieces 
which have been laser welded together before forming to make what have become 
known as tailored blanks. The separate pieces may have different strength, 
formability, thickness or coating, depending on the different requirements for 

34 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Center Pillar 
A-Pillar Reinforcement 
odyslde Frame 
~ 
~.,. Rear Door Inne 
Floor Pan 
Front Door Inner 
........ 
Flgure 1.33 Typical tailored blank automotive applications (After HSS Bulletin 56) 
the different areas of the pressing. With this technique, it is possible to reduce 
the weight and cost of a complete structure since each area of a pressing may be 
designed specifically and economically in relation to the required performance 
and the need for additional reinforcement or stiffening members is reduced. A 
number of typical automotive applications are illustrated in Figure 1.33. 
Hydro forming 
This is a technique for producing elongated hollow components from a steel tube. 
A tube, which may be either straight or bent, is first placed in a forming die. 
The tube is then filled with a liquid (usually a water-based emulsion) and then 
pressurized which causes the tube to expand and conform to the internal shape 
of the die. 
The technique may be used to produce complicated hollow shapes that could 
not previously be made in one piece by a pressforming technique. Weld seams 
are, therefore, reduced in number. The method provides high precision in shape 
and may give reduced weight or higher torsional rigidity compared with a similar 
component manufactured by welding several subcomponents together. 57 
The method is starting to be used in the automotive industry for the manu- 
facture of structural components that would previously have been made as box 
sections welded together from pressformed components. Applications so far have 
included engine cradles, lower and upper longitudinal body rails and various body 
crossmembers. 5s 
The use of the hydroforming technique is now being extended to cover the 
forming of flat sheets as well as tubes. 
Roll forming 
Roll forming is a technique for continuously converting flat steel into a final 
profile by passing it through a series of suitably designed and contoured rolls 

Low-carbon stdp steels 35 
Finished shape) 
P 
| 
9 
Profiles of top, bottom and side rolls 
Roller die cold forming 
Figure 1.34 A schematic diagram showing the formation of a shape from a coil of raw 
material to finished configuration (After Ferry 59) 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
. 
. 
., 
Figure 1.35 A flower pattern showing the progressive change of shape by rolling to form 
a top hat section (After Cain ~) 
which incrementally change the shape until the final shape is obtained. Most of 
the deformation is by bending, with the result that very little change in thickness 
occurs. Narrow strips may be converted into structural sections, whereas wide 
strips may be converted into profiled sheets for cladding applications mainly for 
building applications for which the profile imparts increased rigidity and load- 
bearing capability. 
Figure 1.34 gives an example of the profiles of top bottom and side rolls that 
are required to give a particular structural section, whereas Figure 1.35 illustrates 
the progressive change in shape through each roll as a strip is roll formed to give 
a top hat section. This type of diagram is known as a flower pattern. Some of 
the profiles that are used for building applications are illustrated in Figure 1.122 
at the end of this chapter. 
Finite element modelling 
Although the FLD provides a valuable guide to forming behaviour and can assist 
in component design, the approach is still empirical. Additionally, it has limita- 
tion~b~, virtue of the fact that the strain paths in commercial pressings may be 

36 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 1.36 Computer simulation of deep-drawing operations (After Miles 61) 
significantly different from those encountered in the simple laboratory tests that 
are used to construct the FLD. There has, therefore, been a move to eliminate 
the empiricism involved in the approaches described above through the use of 
finite element modelling. It is now possible to simulate a wide variety of different 
forming processes by computer-aided engineering and Miles 61 has described the 
use of this technique in drawing operations on low-carbon steel. This is illus- 
trated in Figure 1.36 which shows the computer simulation of a deep-drawn cup. 
The purpose of this particular experiment was to predict the tool forces required 
to form the component, the hold-down pressure on the blank and the tearing 
tendency of the sheet if the friction at the blank holder stopped the material 
from drawing correctly. Using this approach, it is also possible to identify areas 
of thinning and thickening in the sheet and where excessive compression might 
lead to wrinkling. 
The computer programs that have now been generated for this type of work 
are extremely powerful and versatile and permit the analysis of a wide variety 
of three-dimensional shapes. The effects of planar and normal isotropy can also 
be accommodated. 
Strip steel manufacture 
The strip steels supplied for cold-forming applications may be divided into two 
main groups, namely those for which the main requirement is the provision of a 
defined minimum level of formability and those for which the main requirement is 
a defined minimum level of strength with a more limited level of formability. The 
former may be called mild steels whereas the latter may be called high-strength 
steels though in a few cases there may be little difference in strength between 
the two. Many of the steels available are covered by standards, including coated 
steels, but some of the most recently developed materials are not yet covered. It 
is also common, particularly with a formability requirement, for a specification 
that is tighter than the standard specification to be agreed between a customer 

Low-carbon strip steels 37 
and a supplier in order that a particularly difficult customer requirement can be 
satisfied. 
It is convenient to present information on mild steels and higher-strength steels 
in separate sections even though they may be closely related. Metallic-coated 
steels and organic-coated steels are also covered in separate sections. 
Mild or low-strength steels 
BS 
1449 was the definitive specification in the UK for carbon and 
carbon-manganese steels in the form of plate sheet and strip. The last version 
of this specification - BS 1449 Section 1.1' 1991 - is still in force and provides 
brief details of both hot-rolled (HR) and cold-reduced (CR) grades. A summary 
of this information is given in Table 1.2. It is understood, however, that BS 
1449 should only be used to specify hot-rolled grades and this specification will 
eventually be withdrawn in favour of European standards. 
The cold-rolled and annealed carbon steel flat products supplied for cold 
forming in Europe are covered by European standard EN 10130:1991 and desig- 
nated Fe P01 to Fe P06 but with Fe P02 missing. The most important feature of 
these grades is their formability, with grade Fe P06 having the highest forma- 
bility and Fe P01 the lowest formability as indicated in Table 1.3. The higher 
grades, therefore, have stringent requirements for r value and n value. The other 
main difference between the grades concerns the acceptable strain ageing limit. 
The Fe P06 grade is regarded as being completely non-ageing, whereas a small 
degree of ageing is regarded as acceptable for grades Fe P03 to 5, provided the 
steel remains suitable for use after storage for up to six months. An even higher 
degree of ageing is acceptable for grade Fe P01. 
Each grade may be obtained from either continuous or batch annealing, but 
the chemistry and prior processing needed to provide the necessary properties 
from the two methods are usually, but not always, different. 
There are two main types of mild steel. The first is the more traditional steel 
described as aluminium-killed (AK) steel in which the carbon is relatively free 
Table 1.2 
BS 1449:1991 Section 1.1 (General specification) 
Grade 
Rolled condition 
Quality 
C% max. 
Mn% max 
1 
HR 
EDDAK 
0.08 
0.45 
CR 
HR 
EDD 
0.08 
0.45 
CR 
HR 
DD 
0.1 
0.5 
CR 
HR 
D or F 
0.12 
0.6 
CR 
14 
HR 
FL 
0.15 
0.6 
15 
HR 
C 
0.2 
0.9 
Key: EDDAK, extra deep drawing, Al-killed; EDD, extra deep drawing; DD, deep 
drawing; D or F, drawing or forming; FL, flanging; C, commercial. 

Table 1.3 
BS EN 10130: 1991 Cold-rolled carbon steel f i t  products for cold forming 
Graak 
Defiition 
Lkoxiaktion 
Validityof 
Slufacc 
Absenceof 
& 
Rm 
Am 
90 
ng0 
Chemical composition 
and 
n~chmical q p a r m e  
stretcher 
N / W ~  ~ m m 2  1min.3 
mia4.5 
min.4 
(ladle analysis I 
mu.) 
ckus$cahn 
pIVprtiGS 
S n a i n  
acconiing 
ma& 
C 
P 
S
M
n
R
 
to EN 10020 
Fe POI6 Non-alloy 
Manufacturers 
- 
A 
- 
-/2808*O 
27Q1410 
28 
0.12 
0,045 
0,045 
0.60 
quality 
dimetion 
- 
B 
3 months 
FeW3 
Nondoy 
Fullykilled 
6 months 
A 
6months -& 
270/370 
34 
1 7 3  
0.10 
0,035 
0.035 
0.45 
Fe PO4 
Non-aUoy 
FuUy killed 
6 months 
A 
6months 
-Dl08 
2701350 
38 
1.6 
0,180 
0,oS 
0,030 
0,030 0,40 
FeW5 
Non-alloy 
FuUykilled 
6months 
A 
6months 
41808 
2701330 
40 
1.9 
0.200 
0.06 
0,025 0,025 0.35 
quality 
6 months 
B 
6 months 
quality 
6 months 
B 
6 months 
quality steel 
6 months 
B 
6 months 
- e . 4 , 5  
5 b . 4  
FeFQ6 
Alloyquality 
Fullykilled 
6months 
A 
nolimit 
4 1 8 0 9  
270/350 
38 
1.8 
0,220 
0.02 
0,020 
0,020 
0,2511 0.3 
steel 
6 months 
B 
no limit 
Notes: 
1 The mechanical properties apply only to 
skin-passcd products. 
2 The values of yield stress are the 0.2% 
proof stress for products which do not 
present a delinite yield point and the 
lower yield stress 
for the others. 
When the thickness is less than or equal 
value for yield stress is increased by 
20 N/mm2. For thickness less chan or 
equal to 0.5 mm the value is increased 
by 40 N/mm2. 
3 When the thickness is less than or 
equal to 0.7 mm and greater than 
0.5 mm the minimum value for 
elongation is reduced by 2 units. For 
thickness less than or equal to 
0.5 mm the minimum value is 
reduced by 4 units. 
(see annexes A and B) only apply to 
products of thickness equal to or 
greaterthan05mm. 
5 When the thickness is over 2 mm the 
value for 90 or i is reduced by 0.2. 
6 It is recommended that products in 
grade Fe PO1 should be formed 
within 6 w e b  from the time of their 
availability. 
7 Unlessotherwiseagreedatthetime 
of the enquiry and order Fe POI. 
Fe PO3, Fe Po4 and Fe W5 may be 
with boron or titanium). 
8 For design purposes the lower limit of 
& for grade Fe Pol, Fe W3, Fe FQ4 
and Fe PO5 may be assumed to be 
140 N/mm2. 
9 For design purposes the lower limit of 
Re for grade Fe PO6 may be assumed to 
be 120 N/mm2. 
10 The upper limit of & of 280 N/mm2 
for grade Fe PO1 is valid only for 
8 days from the time of the availability 
of the product 
Carbon and nitrogen shall be 
completely 
t00.7 mm and greater than 0.5 mmthe 
4 The values of rm and 90 or f a n d  ii 
supplied as alloy steels (for example 
I I a t a n i ~  
may be replaced by niobium. 
After BS EN 10130 1991. 

Low-carbon strip steels 39 
in the structure and may form iron carbides. The second is the newer type of 
steel called interstitial-free (IF) steel in which a strong carbide-forming element 
is present, such as titanium or niobium, to combine with some or all of the 
carbon usually to leave very little carbon in solid solution. The IF steels usually 
have an ultra-low-carbon content well below 0.005%, whereas the AK steels 
usually have a carbon content above 0.015%. The general chemical limits are 
given in Table 1.3. The more usual IF steels and the AK steels when batch 
annealed are almost completely non-ageing, whereas an AK steel may exhibit 
varying degrees of ageing after continuous annealing, depending on the chemistry 
and annealing conditions used. Some batch-annealed AK steels, however, will 
exhibit a small amount of room temperature strain ageing if they are intended to 
be bake-hardening steels. 
An IF steel is the only type of steel that can satisfy the formability require- 
ments of the Fe P06 grade, whereas a batch-annealed AK steel may be used to 
satisfy the formability requirements of the Fe P05 grade. A continuously annealed 
AK steel would only be expected to satisfy the formability requirements of this 
grade if very specific chemistry, hot rolling conditions and continuous annealing 
cycles are used. It would be more usual to use an AK steel only for the Fe P03 
and P01 grades. It would also be more usual to use an IF steel to satisfy the 
requirements of the Fe P05 grade, if continuous annealing is the only method 
that is available. 
Clearly, it is possible to use the chemistry and prior processing necessary for 
a higher grade to satisfy the requirements of a lower grade. This may be done 
either to reduce the number of independent steel chemistries that are needed, to 
be able to reduce the complexity of the annealing cycle, or to be sure that the 
property requirements would be easily met. Further information on the effects 
of chemistry and processing on the properties of mild steel are given in the 
following sections. 
Low-strength, interstitial-free (IF) steels 
Early work 62'63 showed that very low-carbon steels could develop high rm and 
elongation values when sufficient titanium was added to tie up all the carbon and 
nitrogen and that the rm value increased with increasing titanium content. Later 
work showed that it was also possible to obtain good r values by the addition 
of niobium, ~ and steels alloyed with titanium and niobium either separately or 
together are now in common use. Recent work has shown, however, that there 
may be some potential for IF steels containing vanadium. 65 
From the early 1970s, carbon contents close to 0.01% became readily available 
and it was then necessary to add sufficient alloying addition to be able to combine 
with all the carbon and nitrogen in the steel and to leave a small surplus in order 
that very good r values were obtained. This effect is illustrated in Figure 1.37(a) 
and (b) for both titanium and niobium additions. 
More recently, with improvements in vacuum degassing techniques, ultra-low- 
carbon (ULC) contents below 0.003% have become easily available and with 
these ultra-low-carbon contents, it has been possible to lower the alloy addition 
while still achieving high mean r values. The original sharp rise in r value, 

40 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
(a) 
2.0 
r _= 
r 
1.5 
1.0 
,,O 
. 
0 
t 
Ann. 775 ~ 
60s 
- 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
-0.01 
0 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
Ti~ 
(=TI-(4C+3.43N)) 
0.04 
(b) 
2.4 
. 
.
.
.
.
.
 
2.2 
2.0 
::3 
1.8 
~E 
1.6q 
1.41 
1.2 
O 
~ 
o9 
o'' o 
o 
o 
0~o, 
~ Uo~ 
9 
u 
! 
O 
9 AI<0.004 WT PCT. 
o A1=0.014 to 0.068 WT PCT. " 
0.036 AVG. 
0 .()2 .(~4 .(~ .0'8 .1'0 12 .14 .16 .18 .20 
Nb a wt pct. 
Figure 1.37 
Variation of rm value with excess (a) titanium content and (b) niobium 
content (After Takahashi et al. ~ and Tokunaga et al. 67) 
50 
44 
42 
2.0 
1.8 
i~. 1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
[Nb/C = 1 
', 
' 
720 *(3 (CT)! .
.
.
.
.
 
N,,D, 
[ (at. ratloj 
N: 
soo oc (CT) I 
~ 
' ~,. ,Ig'1~-,~. 
. 
.... 
: . -  
. 
9 
1 
! 
I 
f 
i 
. 
_ 
= 
.... 
L 
- 
9 - 
I 
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 
0 
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 
Nb (wt%) 
Nb (wt%) 
(a) Nb - IF 
(b) Nb- Ti-IF 
Ti -IF 
. ~2o oc (cr) 
I j..4p--w. 
9 ~ 
,~..o. 
" 
o 
| 
/ 
' 
600 C (CT),sF 
" 
"s"O'~'~ i TI/(C+N)=I 
" 
d" 
~ 
i 
i 
| 
e 
ii 
| 
0 
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 
Ti (wt%) 
(c) Ti-IF 
Figure 1.38 
Effect of alloying element on the mechanical properties of Nb-, Nb-Ti- and 
Ti-IF steels containing 20-30 ppm carbon and 26-35 ppm N. (After Tokunaga et al. 6s) 

Low-carbon strip steels 41 
just above the stoichiometric composition for titanium steels, has become more 
gradual and the highest r values in certain niobium-bearing steels may be obtained 
with niobium contents close to 0.01% which is below the stoichiometric compo- 
sition (Figure 1.38). A number of different combinations of niobium and titanium 
are also, however, in common use. Figure 1.38 also shows that the relationships 
between elongation and niobium or titanium content are similar to those relating 
r value to niobium or titanium content and that coiling temperature also has a 
marked effect on properties. There is, however, a strong relationship between hot 
band grain size and mean r value with a finer grain size leading to higher values 
(Figure 1.39). This is consistent with the effect of hot band grain size on final 
texture mentioned in a previous section. 
Slab reheat temperature has a marked influence on elongation and r value 
with higher values coming from lower slab reheat temperatures, as illustrated in 
Figure 1.40. A high cold reduction (Figure 1.41) and a high annealing tempera- 
ture (Figure 1.42) also lead to higher r values, but the properties are relatively 
insensitive to heating rate. This is the reason why ULC IF steels may be satis- 
factorily processed by both batch and continuous annealing. 
Recent work 73 has highlighted the importance of sulphur with respect to the 
properties of steels containing titanium. This is because titanium carbo-sulphide 
is more stable than titanium carbide, with the result that the former compound can 
2.1 
2.0 
1.9 
1.8 
1.7 
1.6 
1.5 
! 
9 
i 
s 
t 
/ A~k 
r451 
A J 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Al 
I 
Coiling temp.: 993 K 
Cold rolling: 80.0-80.3% 
Annealing temp.-- 1,043 K 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Grain size no. 
Figure 1.39 Effect of grain size on the r values of IF steel sheets (After gino et al. 69) 

42 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
2.2: 
2.0 
52 
9 0.002 wt%C-0.032 wt%TI 
O 0.002 wt%C-0.010 wt% Nb 
i 
O
~
~
 
1000 
1100 
12~ 
O 
Slab reheating temperature (~ 
Figure 1.40 
Effect of slab reheating temperature on the mechanical properties of 
0.002 wt% C steel containing 0.01 wt% Nb or 0.032 wt% Ti (Satoh et al. 7~ 
2.0 
1.8 
,E 1.6 
, 
, 
I 
, 
I 
50 
70 
90 
Cold reduction (%) 
Figure 1.41 
Effect of coM recuction on the rm values of titanium-stabilized steels for 
batch and continuous type annealing cycles (Goodenow and Held 71) 
2.4 
- 
,,,, 
ID 
2 
to 2.0 
> 
1.6 
~ 
e 
.f 
./ 
, I 
s 
i 
_ 
, 
_ 
700 
800 
Annealing temperature (~ 
900 
Figure 1.42 
Variation of rm value of 0.002 wt% carbon-niobium steel with annealing 
temperature after annealing for 40 seconds (Satoh et al. 72) 

Low-carbon strip steels 43 
form during the hot-rolling sequence and influence the development of the hot- 
rolled texture. 74 The work showed that at the slab reheat temperature, titanium 
sulphide (TiS) forms and may transform into titanium carbo-sulphide (Ti4C2S2) 
on cooling in the hot-rolling temperature range. This is accompanied by a much 
greater drop in the solute carbon content than would be possible in the absence 
of sulphur. It was considered 74 that the low-solute carbon content would promote 
the development of a desirable (111) texture in the hot band which would, in turn, 
lead to a more beneficial texture in the final cold-rolled and annealed product. 
Batch-annealed, aluminium-killed steel 
These steels are batch annealed using annealing temperatures close to 700~ 
The main elements which influence the properties are aluminium, nitrogen 
and carbon, with a minor influence of manganese. The optimum nitrogen and 
soluble aluminium contents are 0.005-0.01 wt% and 0.025-0.04 wt% respec- 
tively, although acceptable r values may be obtained just outside these limits, 
as illustrated in Figure 1.43. An increase in carbon content above and below 
the range causes an increase in strength. Normally with carbon contents close 
to 0.04%, the carbon that is taken into solution is reprecipitated completely 
during cooling mainly by diffusion onto the undissolved carbides. The nitrogen 
is combined as aluminium nitride and the steel becomes perfectly non-ageing 
as indicated previously. At lower carbon contents, the number of undissolved 
0.016 
/ 
l 
1.8 1.7 
1.6 1.4 
0.012 
8 o.oos 
Z 
0.004 
i 
_ 
i 
_ 
i 
... 
i 
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 
Alumlnlum content (wt%) 
Figure 1.43 Effect of finished sheet nitrogen and aluminium on the rm values of 
batch-annealed, aluminium-killed steel (Gawne ~5) 

44 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
carbides reduces and eventually becomes zero at about 0.02% carbon depending 
on the annealing temperature. Below this carbon content, the reprecipitation 
process becomes progressively more difficult since it involves a nucleation as 
well as a diffusion process and the reprecipitation process may remain incomplete. 
The result is a rise in strength and the steel ceases to be completely non-ageing. 
Such a steel exhibits bake hardening as discussed further below. 
The most important metallurgical feature of the processing of an aluminium- 
killed steel to give high rm values concerns the distribution of aluminium nitride. 
The main requirement is that the aluminium nitride is held in solution in the 
hot band structure prior to cold reduction. It can then lead to an enhancement 
of the (111) y fibre texture components and to a decrease in the deleterious 
(100) texture components during annealing. At the same time a pancake grain 
structure develops. It is generally agreed that the beneficial effect is caused 
by the precipitation of aluminium nitride or the clustering of aluminium and 
nitrogen on sub-boundary sites during slow heating to the annealing temperature. 
This enables the beneficial (111) components to be strong components in the 
recrystallized texture. The effect is associated with an inhibition of recovery 
and subgrain growth and an increase in recrystallization temperature compared 
with a similar steel treated to precipitate the aluminium nitride prior to cold 
reduction. The maximum amount of inhibition of recrystaUization does not, 
however, correlate with the optimum texture. The best texture, giving the highest 
rm value, is obtained when there is just sufficient inhibition of recrystallization 
and when the drag on grain boundary movement as a result of aluminium nitride 
particles decays slowly as a result of particle coarsening. 76 The slow coarsening 
of the aluminium nitride particles leads to the preferential development of the 
(111) components and a coarser grain size due to restricted nucleation of other 
components. 
Clearly, the optimum aluminium and nitrogen contents identified in Figure 1.43 
provide the optimum amount of inhibition of recrystallization which decays at 
the optimum rate for normal processing conditions. It is generally agreed, as 
indicated by Hutchinson, 44 that the pancake grain structure is caused by the 
preferential precipitation of aluminium nitride on the prior cold-worked grain 
boundaries which provide an anisotropic barrier to grain boundary movement. 
The aluminium nitride must be taken into solution at the slab reheat stage in 
order that it may be held in solution in the hot band structure prior to coiling 
and cold rolling. 
For practical purposes, the solubility of aluminium nitride in austenite is given 
by: 77 
log [Al][N] = -6770/T + 1.033 
where T is the absolute temperature. 
It may be shown, therefore, that relatively high slab reheat temperatures are 
required to take the aluminium and nitrogen into solution and the most commonly 
used temperature is 1250"C. 
Relatively low coiling temperatures below 600~ are used to avoid substantial 
precipitation of aluminium nitride in the hot band, otherwise a deterioration in rm 

Low-carbon strip steels 45 
ID = 
1.5 
1.0 
I 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
I . . . . . . . . .  
I 
, 
, 
_ L _ _  
550 
600 
650 
700 
Coiling temperature (~ 
Figure 1.44 Variation of rm value of batch-annealed, aluminium-killed steel with coiling 
temperature, aluminium content 0.036% (Whiteley and Wise 78) 
2.0 
~ 1.5 
~E 
1.0 
,, 
9 
I 
' 
' 
,, 
820 
860 
900 
940 
Finishing temperature (~ 
Figure 1.45 Variation of rm value with finisl i, g temperature for batch-annealed, 
aluminium-killed steel coiled at 525-565~ (Parayil and Gupta 79) 
value would be obtained (Figure 1.44). Finishing temperatures must also be in 
the single-phase austenite region to avoid a similar fall in rm value (Figure 1.45) 
Manganese has a detrimental effect on rm value, but the magnitude depends 
markedly on the carbon content (Figure 1.46). The highest rm values tend to be 
provided by about 70% cold reduction and the heating rate during annealing also 
has an effect. Figure 1.47, for example, shows that there is a general tendency 
for the rm value to decrease with increasing heating rate but that there are a series 
of optimum heating rates that provide higher rm values than the general trend, 
depending on the aluminium content. These optimum heating rates also provide 
maxima in grain size and coincide with minima in yield stress. The optimum 
heating rate was shown to depend approximately linearly on the aluminium 
content, s~ but later work showed that it depended also on the nitrogen and 
manganese contents and on the cold reduction, s2 The equation below was found 
to give the optimum heating rate in "C/hour where JAil, IN] and [Mn] represent 
the weight percentages of these elements in solid solution and CR is the cold 
reduction: 
log (optimum heating rate) = 18.3 + 2.7 log [A1][N][Mn]/CR 
It is well known that an increase in temperature and/or time of annealing leads 
to a decrease in yield stress and an increase in elongation. Over the temperature 
range up to 700~ 
the softening may be described by an apparent activation 

46 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
1.8 
1.6 
| ._= 
> 
1.0 
, ~ ~  
~ll 0.007 wt%C 
'oj2 
0'.4' 
o16 
o18 
Manganese content (wt%) 
I 
Figure 1.46 Effect of manganese content on the rm values of cold-rolled and annealed 
steels with various carbon contents, heating rate lO0*C/h, held at 700*C for 1 hour (Osawa 
et al. 8~ 
1.2" 
1.8- * ~o---'-'~ 
::=1.4 " 
~, 
.. 
, 
"E 1.8 - .-, ~.....e. ~ 
. 
2.0 ,q 
0.027 ~*~,A, 
1.6" t~ 
- 
0.032 ~%AI 
0.043 ~%AI 
1.4- 
0.068 wt'%AI 
1.8- .,l~~ 
. 
"l,,, ..,.,,.4~ .....41,.4r ~ 
1.4- 
i 
l 
l 
l 
Ill 
l 
= 
10 
50 
100 
300 
Heating rate (~ 
Figure 1.47 Variation of rm value with heating rate for batch-annealed, aluminium-killed 
steels containing different aluminium contents (Shimizu et al. al) 
energy, Q, equal to 250 KJ/mole which corresponds approximately with that for 
the self-diffusion of iron. 83 
Continuously annealed, aluminium-kiUed steel 
The developments in continuously annealed, aluminium-killed mild steels have 
been concerned primarily with matching the properties previously available from 
batch-annealed steels. It has been necessary, therefore, to compensate for the lack 

Low-carbon strip steels 47 
of time on a continuous line by changing the steel chemistry, prior processing 
and annealing temperature. 
The general problem of matching the properties was resolved into three compo- 
nents: 
1. Obtaining a suitably large grain size. 
2. Obtaining a suitable orientation texture. 
3. Minimizing the carbon and nitrogen in interstitial solid solution at the end of 
the process. 
As with batch annealing, the steel must undergo recrystaUization and grain growth 
during the annealing cycle. Carbon is inevitably taken into solution unless it is 
already combined as a stable carbide. It must, therefore, be substantially reprecip, 
itated during cooling in order that the steel undergoes only relatively slow room 
temperature strain ageing to ensure that stretcher strain markings are avoided on 
subsequent pressing. 
The grain size problem was solved by using a number of scavenging reactions 
involving mainly aluminium, nitrogen, carbon, manganese and sulphur to purify 
the ferrite matrix and by using a suitably high annealing temperature, s4 The 
texture problem was solved by the same means as the grain size problem and 
the carbon in solution problem was solved mainly by the incorporation of a 
'so-called' overageing section into the cooling part of the annealing cycle. This 
usually consists of holding the steel at temperatures in the range 350-450"C for 
up to a few minutes or allowing the steel to cool slowly from such temperatures 
as illustrated previously in Figure 1.2. 
Early work by Toda et al. s5 showed that controlling the manganese in relation 
to the sulphur content had a marked effect on grain size and hence properties. 
They defined a parameter denoted K by the equation: 
K = [Mn] - 55/32 IS] - 55/16101 
where the symbols in square brackets represent the weight percentages of these 
elements in the steel. They observed that for rimming steel, there was a peak in 
grain size, elongation and rm value when the k value was in the range 0-0.15%, 
as illustrated in Figure 1.48. In addition, there was a corresponding minimum in 
yield stress. Further work confirmed that a similar type of relationship applied to 
aluminium-ldlled steel, provided the term involving oxygen was removed since 
no oxygen would be available in such a steel to combine with manganese. 
The effect of manganese was also dependent on the carbon content, as iUus- 
trated in Figure 1.49 which also shows that the detrimental effect of manganese 
was greatly reduced when the carbon in the steel was present as coarse carbides, 
arising from the use of a high coiling temperature such as 750"C. 
The effect of carbon content is further illustrated in Figure 1.50, which shows 
that there is a minimum in yield stress at about 0.01-0.02% carbon which corre- 
sponds with a maximum in elongation. The maximum in yield stress below 
0.01% carbon coincided with a maximum in ageing index and was clearly asso- 
ciated with additional carbon being retained in interstitial solid solution. The 
reason is that the tendency for reprecipitation during overageing depends on the 

48 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
,~ 
oO 
,.~ 20 
o
~
 
C 
"~I0 
o 
o 
C9 
,, 
l 
, 
I 
i 
9 
, 
,-, 
o 700~ 
r 
0 
o. 
o='~-~ 
9 850~ 
~ 240 
N 
o% 
200 
>.. 
48 
4, 
I, 
, .... 
0 
g 4o 
,--n 
T  9  
, 
l 
,=, 
h 
, 
I 
1.8 
> 1.4 
1.0 
+ 
-0.1 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
k value 
Figure 1.48 
Variation of yield stress, elongation, rm value and grain size with K value 
for rimming steel subcritically and intercritically annealed (Toda et al. 85) 
1.6 9 
~ 
o.o4w, o+" 
= 
~ 
m 
11 
1. 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
Manganese content (wt%) 
Figure 1.49 
Variation of rm value with manganese content for steels with different carbon 
contents heated at 50*C/s (Osawa et al. 86) 

Low-carbon strip steels 
49 
54~ 
9 850~ 
s2 ~ 
o 7oooc 
~ 
__ 
- 
i 
J 
i 
220 ' P,. 
o .. ~ 
w ~ 
0 ^.. " 
0 
~" 2oo ~ o --v 
~,, 
180 
_ 
i 
t 
l 
L, 
,, 
0 
0.02 
0.04 
6O 
9 
1.6 
~s 1.4 
_ _O.Q,..~ 
9 
0 
0.24 
! 
o 
i 
eO 
.20 
! 
._ 
I 
| 
0 
0.02 
0.04 
Carbon content (wt%) 
Figure 1.50 Variation of the mechanical properties of aluminium-killed steel with carbon 
content, continuously annealed at 700 and 850~ (Ono et al. 87) 
carbon content at the start of overageing and will be discussed in more detail 
later. The lowest yield stress values and highest elongation values were obtained 
with ultra-low-carbon contents below 0.002% which also corresponded with the 
lowest ageing index. This was clearly due to the ultra-low total amount of carbon 
present in the steel, regardless of its position in the structure. 
The grain size of continuously annealed, aluminium-killed steel increases 
with the coarsening of precipitates in the hot band which are mainly carbides 
and aluminium nitride. This may be achieved using high coiling temperatures, 
depending on the carbon content. Matsudo et al. 88 and Hutchinson 2~ showed that 
higher rm values are obtained with increasing carbide size due to the slower 
dissolution rate of coarse carbides during heating. This enables recrystallization 
to occur in a matrix that is relatively free from interstitial carbon. 
The effect of nitrogen content on the properties of a rimming steel without 
an aluminium addition is illustrated in Figure 1.51, which shows an increase in 
yield stress with increasing nitrogen content. There is also a decrease in rm value 
and grain size with increasing nitrogen content in aluminium-killed steel and 
a corresponding influence on yield stress depending on the coiling temperature 
used (Figure 1.52). High coiling temperatures lead to the combining of aluminium 
and nitrogen. The combined nitrogen is then no longer able to have any further 

50 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
280 
A 
>- 
200 
48 
C 
UJ 
40 
o 
O 
o 
o_o.o.o.o.o.o 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
I 
I 
,, 
0.001 
0.002 
0.~)3 0.004 
Nitrogen content (wt%) 
Figure 1.51 Effect of nitrogen content on the yieM stress and elongation of subcriticaUy 
annealed rimming steel (Toda et aL85) 
2so 
>- 200 
Coiling temperature = 565~ 
-- 
,, 
~ 
675 ~ 
_ 
- 
o 
730 ~ 
/ 
1% Tempor rolled 
~" 
-0.04 wt%C 
o. 1 0. o3 o.o s o:o 7 o.oo9 o.oli 
Nitrogen content (wt%) 
Figure 1.52 Effect of nitrogen content on the yield stress of aluminium-killed steel contin- 
uously annealed at 760~ for different coiling temperatures (Pradhan 89) 
major deleterious influence on the annealing process. Low total nitrogen contents 
however, are still important if the highest formability is to be obtained. 
An addition of boron is often used to improve the formability of continuously 
annealed steel by using an amount that is just able to combine with the nitrogen, 
the reaction taking place during hot rolling. It is not necessary, therefore, to use 
a high coiling temperature as is the case if the nitrogen is to be combined with 
aluminium. The deleterious effects of using a high coiling temperature (higher 
yield loss and more difficult pickling) can, therefore, be avoided. The formability 
of a boron-bearing, low coiling temperature steel is, however, lower than that 
of a high coiling temperature, non-boron steel due to the presence of relatively 
fine carbides which dissolve quickly on annealing. Boron-bearing continuously 
annealed AK steels are, therefore, only suitable for use for Fe P01 applications. 
It is mentioned above that high slab reheat temperatures should be used for 
aluminium-killed steel for batch annealing in order that aluminium nitride is taken 

Low-carbon strip steels 51 
into solution and retained in solution in the hot band structure by means of a low 
coiling temperature. The ideal requirements for continuous annealing are the exact 
opposite. The use of a low slab reheat temperature leaves undissolved aluminium 
nitride particles present in the structure prior to hot rolling and these particles 
act as nucleation sites for precipitation after hot coiling. There is, therefore, a 
progressive decrease in yield stress with decreasing slab reheat temperature, as 
illustrated in Figure 1.53. 
Finishing in the single-phase austenite region is preferred for continuous 
annealing if good formability is required, since lower rm values are obtained when 
lower finishing temperatures are used. A practice has been developed, however, 
as mentioned previously, which utilizes hot rolling in the ferrite region. This will 
be discussed further at the end of this section. 
The overall effect of coiling temperature on the properties of two aluminium- 
killed steels rolled in the austenite region is illustrated in Figure 1.54. The effect 
is clearly greater for the higher carbon steel than for the lower carbon steel. 
Figure 1.55 shows that for a 0.044% carbon steel, the rm value increases 
progressively with cold reduction up to about 80%, whereas the increase 
continues to at least 90% for the 0.018% carbon steel. This behaviour is similar 
to that of an IF steel but is in contrast to the behaviour of an aluminium-ldlled 
steel, processed by batch annealing. Clearly a very high cold reduction should 
be used for continuously annealed steels if the highest formability is required. 
Each part of the annealing cycle needs to be carefully designed if the most 
favourable formability is required. A suitable grain size and texture is obtained, 
as mentioned previously by the appropriate scavenging effects, but this must 
be combined with a suitable annealing temperature. As shown in Figure 1.56, 
an annealing temperature close to 850~ gives a higher rm value and a lower 
yield stress than annealing at 700~ 
but the cooling part of the cycle is equally 
important. It is used to reprecipitate the carbon that is inevitably taken into 
solution, down to a sufficiently low level to give an adequately low level of 
room temperature strain ageing. 
200 
~. 
19o 
2 
180 
Z~ 
"o 
| 
170 
160 
.... 
z 
+ 
i 
z 
- 
i 
r 
z 
1 
o 
o 
goo 
, 
0 
OcP:O 0 O000(P 
0 O0 
: 
- 
. 
o Co~ j 
i 
+"~ 
,,, 
l,,- 
t 
,,I 
,, 
I 
.... ' 
1120 1140 1160 1180 1200 1220 1240 
Slab reheat temperature (~ 
29 
28 
27 
L26 
2s ~. 
24 
23 
Figure 1.53 Variation of YS with the reheating furnace temperature for continuously 
annealed, extra-low-carbon, aluminium-killed steel (After Prum et al. 9~ 

52 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
1.4 
= 
m > 1.2 
E 
t,,,, 
1.0 
50 
C .o_ 
~ 
48 
~ 
46 
w 
.~ 
44 
340 
.e_ ~ 320 
I..- 
260 
240 
r ~ 220 
>" 
200 
180 
0 
....o---'6 "-- 
s ~ 
0"-- OS 
, 
t 
o0 
, 
i 
,11 
..0-- ~....o 
9 
-
-
 
, 
9 
_. 
9 
, 
, 
, 
~176 
...o 
o.--,-o-., e~044 
wt% C 
0.018 wt% C~9 
~" 
0%~' 
0..._0. 
. _.0 
,~ 
~ 
= 
, I, 
j 
9 
9 
600 
680 
760 
Simulated coiling temperature (~ 
Figure 1.54 
Effect of coiling temperature on the mechanical properties of alumi- 
nium-killed steel containing 0.018 or 0.044 wt% C annealed at 700*C for 1.5 min (After 
Ono et al. 87) 
>~ 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.018 wt% C 
0.044 
wt% 
C 
50 
.
.
.
.
 
I 
,, 
70 
...... 
90 
Cold reduction (%) 
Figure 1.55 
Variation of rm value with cold reduction for aluminium-killed steel 
containing 0.018 or 0.044 wt% C annealed at 700*C for 1.5 min (After Ono et al. 87) 

Low-carbon strip steels 53 
1.6 
1.5 
._. 
1.4 
.~ so 
IJj 
48 
~~, 330 
~ ~ 320 
210 
, 200 
~ 
19o 
180 
o,., g~ 
s 
o 
o ..... 
8" -'P-o - 
o---o..... 
"~',,o,o 
044 wt% C 
0.018 wt% C "~ % 
700 
750 
800 
850 
Annealing temperature (~C) 
Figure 1.56 Variation of mechanical properties with annealing temperature for 
aluminium-killed steel annealed for 1.5 min after 71% cold reduction (After Ono et al. sT) 
When the carbon in solution at the start of overageing is low, the carbon precip- 
itates by diffusion to the ferrite grain boundaries. This is a long-range diffusion 
process and takes place, therefore, relatively slowly. With higher solute carbon 
contents at this stage, there is the possibility of the nucleation of new, fine precip- 
itates within the grains. Reprecipitation then involves short range diffusion and 
can proceed, therefore, more rapidly. The objective of the part of the annealing 
cycle immediately prior to the overageing section is, therefore, to retain a high 
level of carbon in solution in order to maximize the possibility of the nucleation 
of a fine array of closely spaced carbides. This may be done by cooling rapidly 
from a temperature close to the temperature (723~ 
of maximum solubility. In 
practice, however, it is usual to commence the rapid cooling from a tempera- 
ture well below 700~ to minimize the risk of strip distortion and to avoid the 
formation of too many fine carbides. 
It has been found that the carbides also tend to precipitate on fine manganese 
sulphide precipitates. The provision of such particles by control of the manganese 
content and the slab reheating temperature provides a means, therefore, of 
promoting the overageing process. 
The effect of cooling rate itself on final properties is illustrated in Figure 1.57. 
This figure shows that there is a tendency for the yield stress to decrease as the 
cooling rate increases to an optimum value of about 100~ 
but that higher 
cooling rates lead to higher values of yield stress. Additionally, lower over- 
ageing temperatures lead to a higher yield stress in spite of the short precipitation 
diffusion distances due to the closely spaced carbides. The reason is clear from 

54 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
,~-240 
"220 
200 
,~. 46 
r 
0 
44 
m 42 
40 
60 
~ 5C 
e.- 
"$ 30 
~176176 
~ 
oo -~ 
"', 9 550~ 
300~ 
, A 600~ 
Overageing 
,~ 650oc 
temperature Quenching temperature 
'b'=~,= b b 
9 
A 
Coolin.q rate (~ 
Figure 1.57 
Effect of cooling rate and overageing temperature on the mechanical prop- 
erties of an aluminium-killed steel annealed at 800"C (After Obara et al. 91) 
60 
A 
r Q. 
X 
| 
'10 
.-r 40 
r 
.=., 
| 
20 
250~ 
9 
~. r 
9 
..... 9 450 ~ 
""&~~ 
~--- 
400 ~ 
"s 
~ 
""~-..A.. 
- 9 
350 ~ 
% 
300o13 
100 
1000 
Time (s) 
Figure 1.58 
Variation of ageing index with time for aluminium-killed steel for different 
overageing temperatures after isothermal overageing (After Katoh et al. 92) 

Low-carbon strip steels 
55 
Figure 1.58, which shows how the carbon content, as reflected in the ageing 
index, varies with time for different overageing temperatures. The reprecipitation 
proceeds quickly to a final high level at temperatures close to 450~ due to a high 
diffusion coefficient but proceeds very slowly to a lower level at temperatures 
close to 250~ due to a low diffusion coefficient. Certain relatively short over- 
ageing processes, therefore, involve cooling to below 300~ to take advantage of 
the nucleation of closely spaced carbides and then include reheating to a higher 
temperature such as 350~ 
to take advantage of a higher diffusion rate. 92 
The early continuous annealing lines for strip gauge steels used gas cooling, 
gas jet cooling or cold water quenching to cool the strip down to the overageing 
temperature. These cooling methods did not, however, provide the optimum 
cooling rate. The methods mentioned previously of hot-water quenching, roll 
cooling, gas-roll cooling, water-mist cooling and high-hydrogen gas-jet cooling 
were, therefore, developed to give cooling rates closer to the optimum. 
Ferritic rolling 
It is clear from the above sections that the most formable properties from 
both interstitial-free and aluminium-killed steels are usually obtained when 
the finishing temperature is in the single-phase austenite region. For many 
applications, however, the best properties are not required and this gives scope 
for the use of cheaper processes. One such opportunity currently being developed 
is ferritic rolling, whereby the roughing sequence is carried out at a lower 
temperature than previously, but still usually in the single-phase austenite region, 
and the finish rolling is carried out in the single-phase ferrite region. This process 
takes advantage of the fact that the resistance to hot deformation is similar in the 
ferrite region below 800~ to the resistance in the austenite region above 900~ 
as illustrated in Figure 1.59. 
When extra-low-carbon steel was ferritically rolled in the laboratory, using 
a finishing temperature of 757~ and a high coiling temperature of 650~ 
a 
yield stress of 166 N/mm 2 was obtained for the as-hot rolled condition compared 
~= Boo , iLABORA TOm" RE~,UL'TS l--~-, 
.~1 
t 
o 
t 
' 
t' 
l 
I 
~, 
I 
I 
I 
t 
I 
I 
I 
-- 
i 
I 
I 
t 
t 
I 
I 
r,~ 
I 
~ 
' 
" 
I 
I 
9 
.~ 500".~":I'~" ,-..p-.-..IELC 
III 
I-,,---- .-P- 
~LC=-TI!_ :,j[ 
I 
~ll 
. I i 
i 
I 
i 
I 
I 
d~ 
400 ""---'---'---'----' 
.... F-" 
=.11 
tl 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
v 
~"11 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
9 
~-- 
~4 
i 
9 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
=
m
~
~
l
 
! 
o 300 .
.
.
.
 
, C 
, ~" ," .... 
-t---.1., , .... 
{-, .... 
,1"" 
o 
~ 
I 
I t  
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
i 
l 
l 
! 
200,-'F- 
"",'~--'N,'-- 
-', .... 
T .... 
1----r-- 
Q-j 
I 
I 
I 
i 
~1~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~'1~=f 
! 
~ 
I 
t~., 
,,.__I 
! 
I 
I 
~ -  
I 
I 
I 
l 
--T'. --"T-. ---~.---"~. ~
-
-
-
-
 .
~
r
 -- 
UUl 
.
.
.
.
 
/ 
I 
I 
t 
I 
I 
I 
G) 
/ 
I 
I 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
t 
I 
I 
I 
t 
! 
! 
0 500 600 700 800 
9()0 Y N0 i iO0 
Deformation temperature (~ 
Figure 1.59 Mean hot deformation resistance of ELC and ULC-H steels (After Herman 
et aL 93 ) 

56 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
with 238 N/mm 2 for conventional rolling. 93 The difference was due to a grain 
size effect. Under production conditions, ferritically hot-rolled steel developed 
similar properties and was considered to be suitable for direct application or for 
cold rolling and annealing to give an Fe P01-type product. It was also found, 
however, that a finishing temperature in the range 700-750"C, combined with 
a low coiling temperature at least below 600"C, led to a hot band structure 
that retained a deformed structure that could be directly annealed without an 
intermediate cold reduction. For this process, a yield stress in the final product of 
either 250 or 130 N/mm 2 was obtained depending on whether the steel was an 
extra-low-carbon steel or an IF steel. The rm value of the IF steel was, however, 
low at 1.1. It was considered that this low rm value was due to the formation of 
a deleterious shear texture close to the surface of the strip, but this shear texture 
could be minimized by the use of lubrication on the hot mill. (93) 
High-strength steels 
The low-strength steels considered in the previous section have been in use for 
many years, but changes mainly in the automobile market have prompted the 
development of higher-strength cold-reduced steels which have penetrated the 
market for the more traditional steels. The first higher-strength cold-rolled steels 
considered were the previous mild steels but with a higher degree of temper 
rolling to increase the yield strength. 94 The main problem, however, was the low 
formability which restricted use. Nevertheless, strengthening by cold reduction 
is an effective way of strengthening when a very low degree of formabilitY is 
acceptable. Cold-reduced steels continue to be used, therefore, for many strapping 
applications and in the zinc coated condition for corrugated roofing panels. 
Other early cold-rolled high-strength steels were obtained by cold rolling 
and annealing the hot rolled type of micro-alloyed steels already available but 
with some modification to chemistry to provide specific strength requirements 
after annealing. These steels, with yield stresses up to about 400 N/mm 2, were 
strengthened mainly by grain refinement and were more formable than the steel 
with a high degree of temper rolling, but they had low r values. 
The main emphasis subsequently was the development of steels for which the 
loss in formability with increasing strength was minimized. Substitutional solid 
solution-strengthened steels were developed and the main reason, as illustrated 
in Figure 1.60, was that the loss in elongation per unit strength increase is less 
for a solid solution-strengthened steel than for a micro-alloyed steel. These rela- 
tionships are similar to those for n value given in Figure 1.25. The equivalent 
relationships between r value and strength are given in Figure 1.61. 
The strength increase that could be obtained with a rephosphorized addition 
was, however, limited by the detrimental effect of phosphorus on welding. These 
steels were restricted, therefore, to relatively modest strength increases with 
minimum yield stresses up to but usually well below 300 N/mm 2. The steels 
were clearly, therefore, highly formable. 
Dual-phase steels, based on a ferrite matrix but containing up to about 20% 
of dispersed martensite islands, have been developed which generate tensile 

Low-carbon strip steels 57 
40 
c: 30 
.o 
C 
0 
2O 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
Tensile strength (MPa) 
Figure 1.60 Variation of tensile elongation with tensile strength for various steel types 
(After Hayami and Furukawa 95) 
2.5 
2.0 
i~ 1.5 
1.0 
I 
0 
10 
 
Future 
il~~;~ development 
Rephos-! 
! "= 
Ph~ 
I 
I 
steel 
I 
I 
I 
_ 
! 
. 
I 
1 
l 
I 
i 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Tensile strength (kgf/mm 2) 
Figure 1.61 Relationship between r value and tensile strength (After Takech~ ~) 
strengths up to and above 600 N/ram 2. These steels have relatively high n values 
for their strength but the r values are low. 
Bake-hardening steels, usually with strengthening by phosphorus, develop 
a substantial increase in yield stress during the paint stoving treatment after 
painting. These steels, with yield stresses up to about 300 N/mm 2 in the as- 
supplied condition, have the formability, therefore, of a relatively low-strength, 
solid solution-strengthened steel but the performance in use of a much higher- 
strength steel. 
The development of highly formable low-strength IF steels subsequently led to 
the generation of solid solution-strengthened versions of these steels with values 
of tensile strength up to about 440 N/mm 2. It was found, however, that some 
of these steels could be potentially affected by a phenomenon called secondary 
cold work embrittlement when subjected to fairly severe drawing strains. This 
tendency has been reduced by the addition of boron and is considered further in 
a section below. 
Steels with very high strength up to above 800 N/ram 2 have been developed 
using the 'so-called' TRIP mechanism. This refers to trahsformation-induced 

58 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
plasticity. The steels contain a ferrite matrix with islands of separate phases that 
usually contain bainite and metastable-retained austenite. Under the action of a 
forming strain, the austenite transforms to martensite and imparts a high work 
hardening coefficient and hence elongation to the steel. 
Other steels may contain a substantially complete bainitic or martensitic 
microstructure to give very high strength but these steels have low ductility. 
A steel with a completely bainitic structure has, however, been used for certain 
strapping applications for many years. A small quantity of steel is, however, 
supplied in the relatively soft condition for forming and is then heat treated 
to give a substantially martensitic structure and a tensile strength up to about 
1600 N/mm 2. Further details concerning all these steels are given in the remainder 
of this section. 
It is useful to note that most higher-strength steels have yield stresses and 
tensile strengths that are noticeably higher, by 10 or 20 N/mm 2 or more, in the 
transverse direction than in the rolling direction. It is important, therefore, that 
the direction of testing should be specified if a minimum strength requirement is 
to be satisfied. 
Micro-alloyed, high-strength, low-alloy (HSLA) Steel 
Micro-alloyed steels are essentially low-carbon manganese steels alloyed with 
additions of the strong carbide- or nitride-forming elements niobium, titanium or 
vanadium, separately or together and are often known as HSLA steels. In the 
hot-rolled condition, they usually have values of yield stress in the range from 
300 up to 500 or 600 N/ram 2, but the greater tonnage tends to lie towards the 
middle of this range. The upper limit of the potential yield stress range is usually 
lower for a cold-rolled and annealed product, depending on the processing given. 
The alloying elements have widely differing effects 97 due to the different solu- 
bilities of their carbides and nitrides in both austenite and ferrite, and due to their 
different precipitation kinetics. They increase strength by grain refinement and 
precipitation effects when sufficient carbon (and nitrogen for vanadium steels) 
is present in the steel, but the grain refinement itself may arise from several 
mechanisms. 
The addition of alloying elements may restrict austenite grain growth at the 
slab-soaking stage through the presence of undissolved particles such as niobium 
carbonitride or titanium nitride, as illustrated in Figure 1.62. It is seen that 
niobium is more effective in restricting grain growth than vanadium, but there 
can be an even more marked effect of titanium due to the formation of titanium 
nitride. 
A proportion of any precipitates present is also taken into solution during 
slab reheating and this can lead to strain-induced reprecipitation on cooling 
during hot deformation. This, in turn, as mentioned previously, retards austenite 
recrystanization. When the final rolling is at a sufficiently low temperature, 
called the recrystallization stop temperature, the inhibition of recrystallization 
is complete. Subsequent transformation to ferrite then occurs from an unrecrys- 
tallized austenite which in turn leads to a very fine-grained ferrite. Figure 1.63 
illustrates for steels with one base composition how the recrystallization stop 
temperature varies with increasing amounts of the several alloy additions. It is 

Low-carbon strip steels 59 
300 
E 
b,,, 
200 
C 9 
~ loo 
I 
I 
II 
I 
II 
I I 
I 
I Illlll 
0 
- 
- 
I 
I, 
800 
1000 
1200 
Tamp (~ 
Figure 1.62 Austenite grain-growth characteristics in steels contain various micro-alloy 
additions (After Cuddy and Roley 9a ) 
1050 
a...., 
~1ooo 
~ 950 
~ 850 
Nb 
0.250 
Initial solute content (atom per cent) 
Figure 1.63 The increase in recrystallization-stop temperature with increase in the level 
of micro-alloy solutes in a 0.07 C, 1.40 Mn, 0.25 Si steel (After Cuddy 99) 
clear that the addition of niobium has the greatest effect, but with a much smaller 
effect from titanium. Jonas l~176 
has studied the effect of all three alloy additions 
and has expressed the results in the form of the following equation: 
Tstop = 887 -k 464C + (6445Nb - 644Nb 1/2) + (732V - 230V 1/2) 
+ 890Ti + 363A1 + 357Si 
As mentioned previously, the recrystallization characteristics of any steel 
during hot rolling depend on the amount of deformation given and the strain rate, 
as well as on the composition and the deformation temperature. 1~ Thus different 
recrystallization temperatures would be obtained for the different strains, strain 
rates and interpass times than would be obtained in the successive stands of a 
hot mill. 
At temperatures above the recrystallization stop temperature, full or partial 
recrystallization may take place between each stand or before cooling, but the 

60 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
~- 40 
=,.. 
2 
g 2O 
9 
~ 10 
c 
8 
"~ 
6 
u. 
2 
~,. 
Recrystallized 
Deformed 
austenite 
0 
40 
80 
120 
160 
200 
Effective austenite grain boundary 
area per unit volume mm-1 
Figure 1.64 Variation of ferrite grain size with austenite grain boundary area per unit 
volume for deformed and recrystallized austenite. (After Kasper etal. 1~ 
af 
N 
r = 
7 
o~ 
5 
(p 
"~ =d 3 
-1 
Ferrite grain size 
ASTM no. 
8 
\9 
\10 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Rolling reduction below recrystalllzaUon temperature (%). 
Figure 1.65 Effect of recrystaUized austenite grain size and total reduction below recrys- 
taUization temperature on ferrite grain size (After Sekine et al. 1o3) 
formation of strain-induced fine precipitates may still lead to a finer recrystallized 
austenite grain size than would otherwise have been the case. This again leads to 
a finer ferrite grain size on subsequent cooling and transformation. Figure 1.64 
shows that the ferrite grain size produced on transformation depends on the 
austenite grain boundary surface area per unit volume before transformation 
and that a much finer ferrite grain size, for a given grain boundary surface 
area, is produced from an unrecrystallized austenite than from a recrystallized 
austenite. It is clear that austenite grain boundaries provide nucleation sites for 
the formation of ferrite grains. The grain boundary surface area per unit volume 
itself depends on the austenite grain size, but for the unrecrystallized structure, 
it also depends on the strain given after the last previous recrystallization since 
this largely determines the grain shape which in turn influences grain boundary 
area per unit volume. Figure 1.65 shows how the ferrite grain size varies with 

Low-carbon strip steels 61 
recrystallized austenite grain size and the amount of deformation given below 
the austenite recrystallization temperature. 
It is also useful to note, as mentioned earlier, that the final ferrite grain size 
depends on the cooling rate after the steel leaves the last finishing stand due to 
the influence of cooling rate on transformation temperature..One consequence of 
this is that richer compositions are often needed to develop a given strength from 
a relatively thick steel that cools slowly compared with a relatively thin steel that 
may be cooled more quickly. 
The formation of fine precipitates themselves may also lead to precipitation 
strengthening when the precipitation occurs during the transformation from 
austenite to ferrite or after the transformation is complete. These precipitates 
may interfere with ferrite grain growth during or after the transformation and 
may, therefore, have a further grain-refining effect. It is useful to note, however, 
as pointed out by Picketing, 1~ that precipitates formed in the austenite do not 
contribute directly to precipitation strengthening in the final hot-rolled ferrite 
structure. 
Hot-rolled, high-strength, micro-alloyed steels may be cold rolled and annealed 
using either batch or continuous annealing to give steels that also have high 
strength and it is generally found that for a given annealing method, there is a 
correlation between the strength of the hot band and the strength of the cold-rolled 
and annealed product. This is illustrated for batch-annealed niobium steels in 
Figure 1.66. Figure 1.67 shows that a fairly similar relationship applies to vana- 
dium steels and also shows that the strength of a continuously annealed vanadium 
steel is higher than that of a batch-annealed steel of the same composition. A 
similar relationship applies to niobium steels, as illustrated in Figure 1.68, and 
comparison between Figures 1.67 and 1.68 shows that a given niobium addition 
may develop greater strength than the same vanadium addition. 
Hayami and Furukawa 95 showed that the strength increase to be obtained from 
a niobium or titanium addition may be empirically related to the square root of 
the composition. Their results are in qualitative agreement with Figures 1.67 and 
Figure 1.66 Effect of niobium additions on yield strength of hot strip and cold-reduced 
strip after batch-annealing and temper rolling (After Bordignon et al. t~ 

62 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
450 
n 400 
"10 
.~ 350 
>- 
300 
/ 
jr 
/ 
f 
J 
/ 
f 
~ 
S 
II Hot rolled 
o 
Continuous annealed 760~ 
9 B tch anneale 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
Vanadium content (wt%) 
Figure 1.67 
Variation of yield stress with vanadium content of hot-rolled and batch- 
and continuously annealed steel also containing 0.06 wt% P and 0.05 wt% Si (After 
Pradhan l~ 
5O0 
:[ 
-o 
>.. 
o Continuous annealed, 760~ 
9 Batch annealed, 650~ 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
Niobium content (wt%) 
Figure 1.68 
Comparison of the effect of continuous and batch annealing on the yieM 
stress of cold-rolled niobium steels also containing 0.06 wt% P and 0.5 wt% Si (After 
Pradhan 1~ 
1.68 and imply that titanium gives more strengthening per unit addition than 
niobium. 
It is sometimes necessary to supplement the strengthening from grain refine- 
ment by strengthening from solid solution elements if a relatively high strength 
is required in a cold-rolled and annealed product. The resulting steel, however, 
has the general forming characteristics of a micro-alloyed steel rather than of a 
solid solution-strengthened steel because the presence of the precipitates leads to 
low r values. 
Cold reduction is an important variable for micro-alloyed steels because it 
influences both the temperature required for complete recrystallization and the 
strength. After continuous annealing for one minute at 760~ 
for example, an 
increase in cold reduction from 50 to 70% for a niobium steel decreases the 

Low-carbon strip steels 63 
temperature for the completion of recrystallization by about 20~ and increases 
the yield stress by about 20 N/ram 2, with a larger increase for vanadium-bearing 
steels. 1~ As expected, higher annealing temperatures lead to lower strength for 
both batch and continuous-type annealing. 1~176176 
As with mild steel, temper rolling is the last stage in the process sequence 
that substantially affects the properties. Usually, it is found that a higher temper 
rolling reduction is needed to remove the yield point of a micro-alloyed steel 
than for a mild steel. 
In summary, cold-rolled and annealed micro-alloyed steels are steels with low 
r values and moderate n values for their strength. They are used, therefore, for 
high-strength, structural applications with modest formability requirements. 
Solid solution-strengthened steels 
Each type of mild steel may be given a modest increase in strength by the addi- 
tion of elements that remain in solution in the final product. The elements most 
commonly used are phosphorus, manganese and silicon, though boron may also 
be used in IF steels. Carbon and nitrogen are the most potent solid solution- 
strengthening elements but substantial quantities of these elements in solution 
are not normally used because they lead to deleterious room temperature strain 
ageing. Very small quantities in solution, however, are used to give bake hard- 
ening (see below) but the amounts involved do not lead to a major increase in 
strength in the as-supplied condition. 
Solid solution-strengthened steels usually have a minimum yield stress in the 
range 220-300 N/ram 2, though higher strengths may be obtained depending on 
the processing (mainly annealing) facilities available. Phosphorus is the element 
most commonly used for fairly low increases in strength since it is relatively 
cheap and gives a higher increase in strength per unit addition than manganese 
or silicon. The phosphorus addition is usually restricted to well below 0.1%, 
however, to avoid problems with welding and because phosphorus may lead 
to secondary cold work embrittlement of IF steels (see below). For the higher- 
strength steels, the strengthening by phosphorus is often supplemented first by 
manganese and then by silicon. 
An advantage of solid solution-strengthened steels is that they retain the general 
characteristics of the mild steel from which they are derived. Thus, they retain 
good formability, including fairly high r values. A further advantage over micro- 
alloyed steel is that there is less loss in strength from the hot-rolled to the 
cold-rolled condition. Cold mill loads are, therefore, correspondingly lower for 
a given strength in the final batch-annealed product. 
Solid solution-strengthened AK steels 
The following equation indicates approximately how the tensile strength of a 
batch-annealed product varies with the steel composition (wt%). 95 
TSBA = 270 + 441 [C] + 64[Mn] + 98[Si] + 930[P] 
Another equation is as follows: tt~ 
TS~A = 292 + 563[C] + 678[P] + 90[Si] + 18[Mn] - 1534[S] 

64 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
An equivalent equation for a continuously annealed steel is as follows: ill 
TScA = 477 + 48[Mn] + 127[Si] + 918[P] - 0.019(AT*C) 
where AT~ is the annealing temperature. It is clear that the strengthening effect 
from each element is similar for each type of annealing but that, as expected, the 
precise effects depend on the different processing used. 
The prior processing requirements for each type of steel are the same as for the 
equivalent type of mild steel. Thus a low coiling temperature below 600*C must 
be used for the batch-annealed product to retain nitrogen in solution following 
hot rolling, in order that satisfactory r values are obtained from the final product. 
For the same reason, the continuously annealed product should be processed 
using a high coiling temperature to precipitate nitrogen as aluminium nitride. 
Low manganese and extra-low-carbon contents should also be used if high r 
values are to be obtained. 
Different workers have reported different effects of phosphorus on r value, but 
it is now generally agreed that an increase in strength is accompanied by a small 
drop in r value. 
The effects of cold reduction and annealing conditions are generally similar to 
the effects for the equivalent type of mild steel. A variation in annealing temper- 
ature over the practical range, however, has a greater effect for the continuously 
annealed product than for the batch-annealed product. High annealing tempera- 
tures up to 800"C or more should be used for the continuously annealed steel if 
high r values are to be obtained. 
Solid solution-strengthened IF steels 
These steels are usually based on titanium, niobium or titanium plus niobium 
IF ultra-low-carbon steels but with sufficient phosphorus, manganese, silicon or 
boron to give the strength required. They are usually processed by continuous 
annealing but may also be processed by batch annealing. They are used in the 
uncoated condition when higher formability is required than can be obtained 
from an aluminium-killed steel, but provide the only way of achieving a highly 
formable high-strength product from a hot dip coating line (see below). 
Figure 1.69 gives a plot of properties versus [Si] + [Mn] + 10[P] for niobium- 
bearing ULC IF steels. These curves imply that the increase in strength from 
manganese is equivalent to that from silicon and that the effect of phosphorus 
is ten times as great. The drop in r value with increasing strength is, however, 
greatest for manganese and least for phosphorus. Figure 1.70 gives an example 
of the effect of solid solution additions to a titanium steel. In this case the effect 
of silicon is greater than the effect of manganese as it is in an aluminium-killed 
steel. For the titanium steel, the decrease in elongation is greatest for a phosphorus 
addition and least for silicon (Figure 1.71). Although boron has a high affinity 
for nitrogen, it imparts solid solution strengthening to titanium-treated IF steel 
because the nitrogen present is precipitated as titanium nitride. 
An important effect of phosphorus in IF steels is the greater tendency for 
secondary cold work embrittlement. This is discussed further in a later section. 

Low-carbon strip steels 65 
1.8 
| 
1.6 
~> 
,.E 1.4 
1.2 
zo 
,e 
eP 
\ 
oSi 
','~_ 
Bin 
\ ",, "~_ 
A0.04 wt% P-Si 
"', ~ 
~H:).04 V~~ P - Mn 
9 
~r 
,, "&qP.,..-..A 
.. 
, 
.o 
g 
,,-I, 
35 
1 
500 
~. 
A 
o 
~4oo 
.qt'~t 
300 
,, 
, 
, 
, 
,, 
, 
~. 3oo 
o 
ffl 
200 
~, 
0'.5' 
ilo" 
' 
l lS 
21o 
SI + Mn + 10 P (w t%) 
Figure 1.69 
Variation of the mechanical properties of ultra-low-carbon continuously 
annealed niobium-bearing steel with [Si] + [Mn] + IO[P] (After Ohashi et al. ll2) 
,g:: 
100 
,..r 
| 
=[ 5O 
i 
o 
, 
, 
, 
,,,, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
9 
I / 
I 
...... 
l 
, 
i 
_ 
0.5 
1,0 
1.5 
Alloy content (~%) 
Figure 1.70 
Variation of tensile strength of ultra-low-carbon titanium-bearing steel with 
solid solution elements (After Katoh et al. Ill) 

66 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
~10 
c ._o 
c _o 6 
._c 
I1) 
a 
o 
o/Si 
eJ 
i 
, 
. 
.i 
, 
, 
i.._ 
i 
20 
40 
6'0 
80 
100 
Increase in tensile strength (MPa) 
Figure 1.71 Deterioration of elongation on strengthening by solid solution elements 
(After Katoh et al. l~) 
Figure 1.72 
a tensile test 
D~h~~it 
lily (BH) 
/ 
11 ........... Ageing 
(~ 
170"C- 20 min 
I 
Prestrain 
2% 
Strain 
The measurement of bake hardening (BH) and work hardening (WH) using 
Bake-hardening steels 
The essence of a bake-hardening steel is that it has the ability to increase its 
yield stress significantly during a paint-stoving process after forming by means 
of a type of strain-ageing process. In the as-delivered condition the steel has the 
formability, therefore, of a relatively low-strength steel but the performance in 
service of a steel with a much higher yield stress. Paint stoving is often carried 
out using a heat treatment at 170~ for about 20 minutes and bake hardening is 
most useful in the part of any pressing which is subject to a low degree of work 
hardening. A standard index to quantify bake hardening is used, therefore, which 
involves straining a sample by 2% in a standard tensile test, baking the sample at 
170"C for 20 minutes and then continuing the tensile test. The difference between 
the lower yield stress after baking and the 2% flow stress before baking is taken 
as the bake-hardening index, as indicated in Figure 1.72. 

Low-carbon strip steels 67 
The minimum levels of bake-hardening index that are usually considered to 
provide a useful benefit are 30 or 40 N/ram 2. An increase in yield stress of 
about 40 N/mm 2, for example, would compensate for a reduction in gauge of 
about 0.1 mm to give the same dent resistance, ll3 The maximum levels of bake 
hardening that are commonly used are 50 or 60 N/ram 2. Higher indices than 
these would lead to excessive room temperature strain ageing with the result that 
pressings would be subject to stretcher strain defects on forming. Recently, it 
has been indicated, ll4 however, that a sufficiently low and satisfactory degree 
of strain ageing is obtained for exposed parts when the bake-hardening index 
is below 50 N/mm 2. Bake-hardening indices above 50 N/mm 2 for exposed parts 
were, therefore, regarded as suitable only for just-in-time delivery before forming. 
Figure 1.73 gives an example of the return of yield point elongation for steel with 
different bake-hardening indices after an accelerated strain-ageing test for one 
hour at 100*C. A yield point elongation of just 0.2% was regarded as satisfactory 
if stretcher strain markings are to be avoided, ll3 
The earliest type of bake-hardening steel available was rimming steel which 
acquired its bake-hardening tendency as a result of free nitrogen in solution. 
These steels were, however, subject to high levels of room temperature strain 
ageing with the result that forming without stretcher strain markings could only 
be guaranteed for a short period. With the widespread use of continuous casting, 
nitrogen is usually combined as stable aluminium nitride. The bake hardening 
must, therefore, be obtained from solute carbon. Consequently, the chemistry and 
processing of the steel must be manipulated to leave sufficient carbon in solution 
after annealing. It is usually accepted that the ideal level of solute of carbon is 
in the range 5-20 ppm, but certain workers regard a figure low in this range as 
essential whereas others indicate an optimum figure high in 'the range. The ideal 
figure depends on the type of steel and, in particular, its grain size since it is 
well known that bake hardening depends on grain size as well as on the solute 
carbon or nitrogen content. ~5 
Bake-hardening steels may be processed by batch annealing or by continuous 
annealing including continuous annealing on galvanizing or aluminizing lines. 
4 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
, 
o 
o~ 
 
0 
o 
0 
._~ 2- 
., 
foO 
 
'j.o 
~ 
0 
. , 
.! 
, 
I 
.. 
, t 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
BH (kgf/mm 2) 
Figure 1.73 Relationship between bake hardenability and YP-EI caused by strain ageing 
(After Takechi, H. l l3) 

68 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
The details of the chemistry and the processing that must be used, however, 
depend on the steelmaking capability and on the annealing method, as well as 
on the strength and r value of the steel required. 
Batch-annealed, bake-hardening steels 
Most batch-annealed, bake-hardening steels are based on a conventional 
aluminium-killed steel as indicated above, using hot-rolling conditions and 
aluminium and nitrogen contents necessary to give high r values. With normal 
annealing conditions with a top annealing temperature below 723~ 
and with 
a carbon content above about 0.03%, the carbon that is taken into solution 
at the annealing temperature reprecipitates almost completely during cooling 
and the steel becomes non-strain ageing and non-bake hardening. With lower 
carbon contents, reprecipitation becomes more difficult, a small amount of carbon 
remains in solution and a useful degree of bake hardening is obtained. Figure 1.74 
shows how the bake hardening varies with total carbon content for tight coil 
annealing, but also shows that a higher bake-hardening index is obtained using 
the faster cooling rates and higher annealing temperatures that may be obtained 
from open-coil annealing. Such a method, however, is rarely used. It is common 
practice, however, to utilize the higher cooling rates that may be obtained from 
hydrogen annealing compared with the older HNX annealing to develop a higher 
degree of bake hardening. 
The yield stress of a steel prepared as above is comparable with that of 
a conventional non-bake-hardening, batch-annealed, aluminium-killed steel, but 
80 
.... 
. 
9 
i 
'r" 
w 
' 
, 
. 
, 
, ', 
. 
.'~']r 
60 
_g 
,),...,,. 
! 
20 I" 
TCA 
"""Q,, 
,~ 
0 
J 
t_ 
t 
f 
i 
I 
I 
I~ 
I 
. 
,l 
I 
0 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
0 
0.3 0 
0.04 
Mn 
P (%) 
Figure 1.74 Effect of chemical composition and batch-annealing furnace on bake-harde- 
nability (base composition: 
0.01% C-0.11% Mn-0.07% P-0.05% AI 
OCA: Open coil annealing 
soaked at 740~ 
cooled at 80~ 
TCA: Tight coil annealing 
soaked at 710"C 
cooled at 20*C/h) 
(After Mizui et al. lit) 

Low-carbon strip steels 69 
higher strength may be obtained by alloying with phosphorus, manganese or 
silicon to provide solid solution strengthening. The addition of phosphorus also 
increases the bake hardening by refining the grain size, but manganese leads to 
a reduction in the bake hardening. Silicon increases the bake hardening since 
it delays carbon precipitation, ll7 but it causes a higher yield point elongation. 
Silicon is only used, therefore, when sufficient strength cannot be obtained by 
the use of other elements. 
A batch-annealed, bake-hardening steel with a yield stress below 150 N/ram 2 
may be obtained using an ultra-low-carbon IF steel with a small titanium and 
niobium addition to combine with part of the carbon but to leave sufficient excess 
carbon to provide bake hardening. 117 
Continuously annealed, low-carbon, aluminium-killed, bake-hardening steel 
Bake-hardening, aluminium-killed steels may be produced by continuous 
annealing using the method given above for the production of formable 
aluminium-killed steel. The retention of carbon in solution to provide the bake 
hardening is a natural consequence of the fast cooling rates that must be used 
on a continuous line. The rapid cooling and overageing sections on any line are 
designed to remove as much carbon as possible, and as with a batch-annealed 
bake-hardening steel, the strength may be increased using suitable solid solution- 
strengthening elements, such as phosphorus, manganese or silicon with similar 
overall effects. 
The steels need to posses fairly high r values in order to provide formability 
suitable for the intended applications and this is achieved by the use of a low 
nitrogen content and a high coiling temperature using the same mechanisms as 
for low strength steel. An increase in annealing temperature causes a decrease 
in yield point elongation after ageing, an increase in r value and a decrease in 
strength, lls Other work ll9 has shown that the bake hardening tendency may be 
controlled at a satisfactory level by over cooling prior to overageing and reheating 
to an optimum overageing temperature. 
The use of low carbon, aluminium-killed steel provides a method for producing 
bake-hardening steel that is suitable for use on any continuous annealing line 
which incorporates a relatively long overageing section. The method is not suit- 
able for use on hot dip coating lines which do not incorporate such a section. 
Ultra-low-carbon, interstitial-free, bake-hardening steels 
Continuously annealed, bake-hardening steels, containing ultra-low-carbon 
contents, may be produced in several ways, depending on the r values required 
and on the steelmaking capability available, but most of these steels are alloyed 
with varying quantities of titanium and/or niobium. With the lower additions, 
some carbon is left uncombined and this solute carbon is available, therefore, to 
provide the bake hardening. With the higher additions, substantially all the carbon 
is combined with the titanium or niobium prior to annealing. The free carbon 
needed to provide the bake hardening is obtained, therefore, by annealing at a 
sufficiently high temperature such as 8500C to take carbon back into solution. The 
steel must then be cooled quickly to minimize the reformation of the precipitates 

70 Steals: Metallurgy and Applications 
on cooling. Detailed studies x2~ showed that a minimum cooling rate from 850~ 
greater than 30~ 
is necessary to obtain sufficient bake hardening for a niobium- 
bearing steel with an Nb/C atomic ratio of unity, as illustrated in Figure 1.75. 
Figure 1.76 illustrates the effect of annealing temperature on bake hardening 
and r value for several steels containing different amounts of either titanium or 
niobium. Figure 1.76(a) shows that the steel with an Nb/C atomic ratio of 0.3, a 
high degree of bake hardening is obtained for all annealing temperatures, whereas 
50 
850~ x 40s 
...... 
h5oc 
voc/s 
~. 4op 
-i 
L_4oooc 
K\~ 
~ 
~ 
/ 
y-2oc/s~30 
~~_~ 
/ 
Nb/c= 1.o 
.... -Y. 
I 
Ill 
.'i 
...= 2ol- 
/i 
I 
~ 
I 
/i 
! 
" 
101- 
/ 
! 
i 
ca 
O" 
~ 
~ r -  
, 
1 
,, 
i 
' 
5 
10 
30 
50 
100 
Cooling rate V (~ 
Figure 1.75 Effect of cooling rate on the bake hardenability of Nb-added extra-low-C 
steel. The Specimens were annealed at 850~ for 40 s (After Sakata et al. x~) 
2.5 
=~ 2.0 
~. 1.5 
1.0 
70 
o. 5O 
-r. 30 
en 
10 
9 Nb/C = 0.3 
0 Nb/C= 0.7 
a, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Iml 
I 
dk Ti*/C = 0.4 
Z~ Ti*/C = 1.1 
A 
Ti*/C = 4.6 
#. 
,, 
s ~ 
b 
:/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
800 
900 1000 800 
900 
1000 
Soaking temperature (~ 
Figure 1.76 
Effect of soaking temperature on bake hardenability (BH) and average r 
value in Nb- and Ti-added extra-low-C steels (After Sakata et al. 1~) 

Low-carbon strip steels 71 
the steel with an Nb/C ratio of 0.7 increases its bake-hardening effect up to an 
annealing temperature of 900"C. The r values of the 0.3 ratio steel are very much 
less than those of the 0.7 ratio steel. 
Figure 1.76(b) also shows similar relationships for titanium-bearing steels 
where Ti* is the residual titanium content after the amount that is tied up with 
nitrogen or sulphur is taken into account. The titanium steel, however, leads to 
a lower bake hardening than the niobium steel for the same atomic ratio. In 
addition, the titanium steel would require a higher annealing temperature if a 
combination of good bake hardening and the highest possible r value is required. 
Ultra-low-carbon, bake-hardening steels are often produced using a combined 
titanium and niobium addition and, in principle, with no titanium or niobium 
addition. It is found, however, that the latter steels may develop relatively large 
grains in the hot band structure which lead to high levels of planar anisotropy. 12~ 
Recent work 65 has indicated that ultra-low-carbon steels containing titanium 
and vanadium could also be made suitable for bake-hardening applications, 
Further research, however, needs to be carried out on this system. 
Transformation-strengthened steels 
Transformation-strengthened steels are steels that develop high strength by 
containing a proportion of transformation products such as martensite or bainite 
and retained austenite in their microstructure. When these relatively hard phases 
are distributed throughout a matrix of ferrite, favourable combinations of strength 
and ductility may be obtained when the proportion of the hard phases is 
up to about 20% or more. The ultra-high-strength steels, however, contain 
a high proportion of bainite, martensite or retained austenite. The dual-phase 
steels exhibit continuous yielding which is followed by a high work-hardening 
rate. They possess, therefore, a low yield stress to tensile strength ratio and 
good cold formability for their strength. Steels containing ferrite, bainite and/or 
martensite, but also containing retained austenite (TRIP steels), provide even 
higher formability than dual-phase steels, as illustrated in Figure 1.77. The 
benefits of the TRIP effect were first recognized in steels containing high levels 
of chromium, nickel and molybdenum, 121 but it is now well known that steels 
containing manganese and silicon or aluminium are also suitable. 
Both dual-phase and TRIP steels, with tensile strengths up to above 600 and 
800 N/mm 2 respectively, may be manufactured in the hot-rolled condition by 
controlling the cooling conditions in relation to the chemistry, but they may also 
be obtained by cold rolling and annealing to give higher strength. The annealing 
must, however, be continuous because the long slow cool associated with batch 
annealing makes it impossible to generate the necessary microstructures with 
this method. Ultra-high-strength steels with a tensile strength of up to 1000 or 
1200 N/mm 2 or more may only be manufactured at present in cold-rolled gauges, 
using continuous annealing. 
Dual-phase steels 
Williams and Davies 122 in 1963 were the first to reveal the beneficial effects of a 
ferrite-martensite structure, but it was not until the 1970s that practical interest 

72 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
A 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
/ 
Solid solution-hardened 
.
/
 
(IF Steel) 
" 
TRIP 
_ 
/ 
".~?S~p~r~H~SS~_..j~.... 
-~"(Transf~176 
plasticity) 
Solid 
m 
i~=,.. 
sc 
[ ~ "  ",- ,~ 
.
t
 Dual phase 
harden, 
~IP'.~ 
A~...~ "~ (+ precipitation) 
(AI-K sleuwl 
~ 
'~k,, 
~ ~ ~. ~ 
~ -~ 
precipitation hardened 
~ 
~. ~..~. 
i 
I 
I 
I,, 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
-= 
I 
,I 
I 
400 
600 
800 
1,000 
1,200 
1,400 
Tensile strength (MPa) 
Figure 1.77 Strength ductility balance of high-strength steel (After Shimada et al. TM) 
was taken in this type of steel. The steels are first annealed in the intercritical 
region of the phase diagram to produce a structure of ferrite and austenite with 
a relatively high carbon content in the austenite. On cooling through the inter- 
critical region, the austenite may become further enriched with carbon and the 
subsequent cooling rate must be sufficiently fast to avoid the formation of pearlite 
or bainite. Sufficient martensite must then form to be able to eliminate the yield 
point elongation. This critical cooling rate depends on the manganese content of 
the steel, as illustrated in Figure 1.78, but is also influenced by the chromium 
and molybdenum content. An equation was given 123 to calculate the equivalent 
manganese content to take into account the effect of molybdenum and chromium 
as follows: 
[Mn]eq = [Mn] + 1.3[Cr] + 2.67[Mo] 
This equation shows that both chromium and molybdenum are more effective in 
reducing the critical cooling rate than manganese. Other work has shown that the 
critical cooling rate may depend on the silicon and phosphorus contents and on 
the holding time at temperature. It is clear that the fairly rapid cooling should 
continue at least to the Ms temperature if the formation of higher temperature 
transformation products, such as bainite, is to be avoided. 
It is found that the tensile strength of a classical, ferrite-martensite dual- 
phase steel increases as the volume fraction of martensite increases, but that 
the yield stress first decreases and then increases, as illustrated in Figure 1.79. 
This is associated with the gradual removal of the yield point elongation at 
low martensite volume fractions. For a given volume fraction of martensite, 
Gladman j25 showed that a decrease in mean island diameter had little influence 
on tensile strength but has a marked effect in increasing the uniform elongation. 
Other workers, 126 however, observed an increase in tensile strength. The effect of 
the martensite volume fraction on the yield stress depends on the relative strengths 

Low-carbon strip steels 73 
2.0 
'1.5 
| 
,~1.0 
0.5 
,, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
,| 
,, 
, 
, 
,,, 
, 
, 
Cr ~,~ 
o 
0.4 
",.X 
4 
, 
I 
,.I 
.... 
I 
' 
' 
' 
10 
100 
1000 
Cooling rate (~ 
Figure 1.78 Relation between critical cooling rate and amount of alloying element 
present (After Irie et al. 123) 
J 
:S 
( 
40o 
>- 
9 810~ 
o 760oc 
T$ 
YS 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
Martensite (%) 
Figure 1.79 Variation of yieM and tensile strength with volume per cent of martensite 
for a dual-phase steel containing 0.063 wt% C and 1.29 wt% Mn annealed for 10 rain at 
760 or 810"C (After Lawson et al. l~) 
of the ferrite and the martensite which depends primarily on the martensite carbon 
content 127 and on any solid solution strengthening of the ferrite. The martensite 
carbon content depends on the annealing temperature and the initial cooling rate, 
but manganese and silicon additions also influence this carbon content. 12s The 
optimum combination of strength and formability is obtained by a very fine 
distribution of martensite islands and a very fine grain size. '126 

74 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
The chemical composition of the steel has a marked influence on the prop- 
erties developed by influencing the volume fraction of martensite formed, with 
increasing carbon, manganese and silicon all leading to an increase in strength. 129 
Phosphorus and vanadium 13~ also increase strength: the phosphorus by solid 
solution strengthening and the vanadium by increasing the martensite volume 
fraction and by decreasing the ferrite grain size. Silicon also provides solid solu- 
tion strengthening, increases the carbon content of the martensite, as mentioned 
previously, and suppresses pearlite formation. 131 
Variations in hot-rolling conditions may affect the strength of a cold-rolled 
and annealed dual-phase steel by influencing the hot band microstructure, 132 
but no specific microstructure was reported to give a superior strength/ductility 
balance, as illustrated in Figure 1.80. A higher coiling temperature may lead to 
a coarser grain size and a lower volume fraction of martensite. 133 In many cases, 
however, hot-rolling conditions must be selected to give a low hot band strength 
to minimize cold mill loads rather than to optimize product properties. 
Annealing temperature is important for the processing of dual-phase steel 
because it has a major influence in determining the volume fraction of marten- 
site. Figure 1.81 shows, for a range of carbon, manganese and silicon contents, 
how the yield stress and tensile strength vary with annealing temperature for gas 
jet-cooled steels. The strength increases rapidly through the intercritical range 
which leads to an increase in martensite volume fraction, but then increases 
more slowly at higher temperatures. Sufficient time is needed at the annealing 
temperature for the formation of sufficient austenite and data for a 0.06% carbon, 
1.23% manganese steel (Figure 1.82) show that the volume fraction continues to 
increase after holding for 10 minutes at 775~ 
The yield point elongation is, 
however, eliminated after 1 minute at this temperature (Figure 1.83). The effect 
of cooling rate is illustrated in Figure 1.84 for steels containing 1.2% manganese 
and up to 0.5% chromium. The tensile strength increases with increasing cooling 
rate, whereas the yield stress first decreases due to the removal of the yield point 
elongation and then increases as a proof stress. 
25 
20 
15 
' 
" 
Ann. 
Cold red. 
temp. 50% 80% 
- 
F 
750~ 
0 
O~L 
= 
800~ . 
: 
| 
, 
, 
7OO 
| 
,,, 
| 
800 
900 
Tensile strength (MPa) 
Figure 1.80 Tensile strength-elongation balance for dual-phase steels showing the 
strength developed from different hot band structures and different cold reductions (After 
Shirasawa and ThomsonZ32). F = Ferrite and carbide prior microstructure, B -- bainite 
and M = martensite prior microstructure 

Low-carbon strip steels 75 
.:_ 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
_. 
. 
, 
~ 
: .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
I 
~ 
I 
2.5wt% Mn I 
I 
/ 
/%.17wt%c i 
~ 
i 
'~~ s' I 
,ooo 
,o--o ! f,.o~ 
"~1 
r 
''0 
/ 
s 
o.oewt,/, cl 
6 .Y- 
, =,..o, ,,_ ! 
g.'.P'~..o..-o o.1 I 
/ 
-" 
~"=~, 
= = 
=0 
I 
~." 
I .OWl 
70 MII 
I 
~_;r 
lf ''~ 
I 
f 
I o'- 
I 
I 
600 
o~ 
/~~~;-I 
,-.~,:...,. 
! _.~..,-- 
i 
200 
"** 
r" 
i, .r 
700 
800 
900 
800 
900 
800 
900 
Annealing temperature (~ 
Figure 1.81 Effect of annealing temperature and chemical composition on the yield 
(closed circles) and tensile strength (open circles) of gas jet-cooled steel (After Okamoto 
et al. l~) 
0.5 
1 
3 
10 
Time (rain) 
Figure 1.82 Variation of volume per cent of second phase with time of annealing at 
775~ (After Sudo and Kokubo 135) 
0.5 
1 
3 
5 
10 
Time (rain) 
Figure 1.83 Variation of yieM point elongation with annealing time for a 0.06 wt% C, 
1.23 wt% Mn Steel for different annealing temperatures (After Sudo and Kokubo 13s) 

76 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
500 
tO 
CL 
~4o~ 
P. 
C:: 
300 
200 
9 0 wt% Cr 
~' 
m 0.1 wt% Cr 
,"~ 
// 9 
o,~l 
0.,4," 
~p 
.y~'"11' 
Vieldstress ,,~ 
10 
100 
1000 
Cooling rate (~ 
Figure 1.84 
Variation of yieM and tensile strength with cooling rate for steels containing 
1.2 wt% Mn and different chromium contents (After Irie et al. 123) 
It is useful to note that dual-phase steels tend to possess high n values for their 
strength at low degrees of strain in a tensile test, but that the n values reduce at 
higher strains. In addition, dual-phase steels usually possess poor hole expansion 
values. The hole expansion values may, however, be improved using a titanium 
addition to provide precipitation strengthening to the ferdte matrix which reduces 
the hardness difference between the two phases present. 
TRIP or multiphase steels 
These steels are based on carbon-manganese compositions, but usually also 
containing a high level of silicon or possibly aluminium to inhibit carbide precip- 
itation. The early stages of annealing are similar to those of dual-phase steels, but 
the main difference between the annealing cycles is that TRIP steels are cooled to 
a temperature reasonably close to 400~ 
called the austempering temperature, to 
develop the necessary transformation products. The details of the microstructural 
changes that occur and their effects on final properties depend critically on the 
precise chemistry and processing used. The information given in this section is, 
therefore, intended to give a broad illustration of the microstructural changes that 
may take place. 
The steels are given an intercritical anneal on a continuous annealing line 
since, as for dual-phase steels, the cooling rates possible with batch annealing 

Low-carbon strip steels 77 
would be insufficient to develop the necessary structures. At the top annealing 
temperature, the two-phase structure of ferrite and austenite is developed with 
a decreasing proportion of ferrite as the temperature is increased. 13~ The carbon 
clearly partitions between the two phases to give a much higher concentration of 
carbon in the austenite, but there may also be a smaller partitioning of manganese 
and silicon with the manganese content higher and the silicon content a little 
lower in the austenite than in the ferrite. During cooling, the volume fraction 
of the austenite may decrease and its carbon content may increase, particularly 
for slow cooling rates, as illustrated in Figure 1.85. In some cases, the carbon 
diffusing into the austenite may not reach equilibrium and may, therefore, develop 
a carbon-rich layer, just within the surface of the austenite. 
At the austempering temperature, some of the austenite may transform gradu- 
ally to bainite to leave a mixture of bainite and residual retained austenite. The 
latter could be in several positions, for example, between the laths of the bainite 
structure 137 or along ferrite grain boundaries. 1as 
When the hold time and austempering temperature are relatively low, the 
carbon in the austenite remains at its initial relatively low value formed on 
cooling. On further cooling to room temperature, therefore, much of this austenite 
transforms to martensite because the Ms temperature can be above room temper- 
ature. As the transformation to bainite proceeds, carbon rejected from the bainite 
builds up in the austenite with the result that its Ms temperature eventually 
decreases to below room temperature. The austenite is then stable at room temper- 
ature and no martensite is formed on cooling. The volume fraction of austenite 
retained at room temperature, therefore, increases. On further holding, the volume 
fraction of retained austenite at room temperature decreases because more of it 
will have transformed to bainite before final cooling. Eventually, the tendency to 
form carbide in the austenite will increase and carbide may form, but it is well 
known that this tendency is inhibited by the presence of silicon. The result is that 
a silicon addition leads to the retention of a higher volume fraction of austenite 
with a higher carbon content. 
0.6 
0.5 
A 
c: 
0.4 
c$ 
8 ~ 0.3 
~.c_ 
0.1 
3~ 
IO~ 
30~ 
0
.
0
~
 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
Temperature (~ 
Figure 1.85 Evaluation of carbon enrichment in untransformed y during cooling from 
825 ~ C. After Minote et al. 13~ 

78 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
(a) Steel B 
c 
a~ 0.30 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
m 
020 
~0.10~--0 400~ -- 
u. 
A 
375 ~ / 
9 350 ~ 
I 
0 / 
I 
1 
. 
I 
I 
I 
. 
I 
t 
1 
10 
100 
Holding time (min) 
Figure 1.86 
Change in retained austenite volume fraction with isothermal holding time 
for a steel containing 1.2% silicon for different holding temperatures (After Matsumura 139) 
.-. 1.8 
(I) 
"E 
1.6 
| 
._= 1.4 
.r 
~ 1.21 
| 
c- 
O 
o 
1.0 L 
(a) Steel B 
I 
! 
. 
.;" 
9 
% 
.
.
.
.
 
I 
" 
Z~ 425~ 
"# 
0 400~ 
~i~, q..,. ,.. 
~.=. w~" 
' 
"-lP" " 
k 
375~ 
9 350~ 
I 
...i 
I 
I 
l 
1 
10 
100 
Holding time (minutes) 
Figure 1.87 Variation of carbon content in retained austenite for different isothermal 
holding times for a steel containing 1.2% silicon for different holding temperatures (After 
Matsumura 139) 
Figure 1.86 illustrates how the volume fraction of austenite retained at room 
temperature in a steel containing 1.2% manganese and 1.2% silicon varies with 
time and temperature of austempering, and the equivalent variation of the carbon 
content of the retained austenite is given in Figure 1.87. An example of the 
effect of holding time at 400~ 
on the nature of a stress-strain curve is given 
in Figure 1.88. It is seen that for the low holding time of 1 minute, the curve is 
typical of a classical dual-phase ferrite-martensite steel with continuous yielding. 
Higher hold times lead to an increasing yield point elongation and a higher 
elongation. Figure 1.89 shows that an increasing hold time leads to a progressive 
decrease in tensile strength and an increase in yield stress, but that the elongation 
values pass through a peak for an intermediate holding time of 6 minutes. 

Low-carbon strip steels 79 
900 
r O. 
600 
c 
,=- 300 
m 
9 
r 
" 
I 
" 
9 
/ 
" 
"1 
' 
I 
- 
-1 
1 mln 
0.1 C-1.2 Si-1.5 Mn 
Transformed at 400~ 
.... 
I 
I 
, 
9 
I 
9 
I 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
Engineering strain 
Figure 1.88 
Room temperature engineering stress-strain curves of specimens of a 
0.I C-1.2 Si-l.5 Mn steel transformed at 400~ for different times. Curves plotted to 
failure (After Sakuma et al. 137) 
900 
800 
9 
~, 700 
~ 
600 
>" 500 
400 
300 
t .... , 
- ,- ;--J .... = 
-i 
[JT~0"4C 
12S, 15Mn 
"0.1 C-1.2 S1-1.6 Mn 
40 
35 
~30 
c 0 
==, 
i~ 25 
0.14 C-1.2 SI-1.5~ 
.~, 0.1 C-1.2 SI 
YS 
20 
1.5 Mn 
I 
15 
1 
2 
10 20 
0.1 C-1.2 S1-1.5 Mn 
0.1 C-1.2 S1-1.5 Mn-O,14 Mo 
14 C ,=o1~ 1.5Mn 
0.1 C-1.2 S1-1.5~n 
/ 
/ 
o~ c-12 sl 
~
.
6
 
Mn 
1 
2 
10 20 
Transformation time at 400 ~ 
Figure 1.89 
Changes in room temperature mechanical properties as a function of trans- 
formation time for isothermally transformed specimen of the three steels (After Sakuma et 
a1.~37) 

80 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
When the austenite retained at room temperature is deformed, for example 
during forming, there is a tendency for it to transform to martensite, as indicated 
previously, and this is the process that leads to the high work-hardening rate 
and consequently high values of uniform elongation. It is found that austenite 
regions with different carbon contents have different stabilities in the presence of 
the deformation. 136 Austenite with a very high carbon content may be so stable 
that most of it remains untransformed even after high levels of strain. Alterna- 
tively, austenite containing lower levels of carbon could transform completely 
to martensite under the action of relatively small amounts of strain. Neither of 
these two conditions give an optimum effect on formability. Thus the mechan- 
ical stability is critical if the best ductility is to be obtained. 136 The austenite 
should have an intermediate stability in order that it transforms gradually over 
the complete strain range needed. 14~ 
An example of the effect of holding time in the bainitic region on the build- 
up of carbon in the retained austenite is illustrated for a steel containing 0.14% 
carbon, 1.94% silicon and 1.66% manganese in Figure 1.90. It is seen that holding 
at 400"C for 10 seconds, 1 minute or 8 minutes leads to a progressive build-up 
of carbon in the retained austenite. The effect on the stability of the austenite 
during deformation is illustrated in Figure 1.91. This figure shows that much of 
the austenite retained after the shorter holds transforms in a tensile test during the 
first few per cent of strain, whereas the austenite retained after the 8-minute hold 
transforms more gradually over 30% strain. The effect on the work-hardening 
coefficient n throughout the test is illustrated in Figure 1.92, and compared with 
the effect for a ferrite-martensite dual-phase steel. It is evident that the n value 
decreases sharply at low strains for the dual-phase steel. The n values for the 
two shorter holds are generally similar to those of the dual-phase steels, but 
the reduction with increasing strain is at a lower rate. For the longest hold time, 
1.5 
n- 
.c_ 
"E 1.0 
8 
0.5 
' 
9 "'I 
9 
9 
9 
9 " 
~ 
" ' i  
.
.
.
.
 
="--1.= 
Strain = 0% 
CInYR 
.
.
.
.
 
I 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
| 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
,i 
101 
10 2 
10 3 
Bainite transformation time (s) 
Figure 1.90 Effect of bainite transformation time at 400"C on C content in retained 
austenite (After Itami et al. 141) 

Low-carbon strip steels 81 
15 
c 
10 
c 
i 
5 
i,, 
, 
, 
,, 
, 
, , 
, 
, 
I 
0 
~"~ 
t = 
480 
s 
~.~. 
~'"'-o t = 60 
s 
t=lOs 
| 
,, i 
I 
i 
i 
I 
10 
20 
30 
Nominal strain (%) 
Figure 1.91 Effect of bainite transformation time (t) on change in volume fraction of 
retained austenite with deformation (After ltami et al. 141) 
0.4 
:3 
0.3 
r 
r 
'~ 0.2 
0.1 
~Q (.-.,,. 
:,?,.,. 
Dual phase 
t = 480 S 
_ 
| 
| 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
9 
0.1 
0.2 
True strain 
Figure 1.92 Effect of bainite transformation time (t) on instantaneous n value (After 
Itami et al. 141 ) 
giving the highest carbon content in the retained austenite, the n value is retained 
at a high level up to 0.2 true strain corresponding to 22% elongation. The effect 
on properties is illustrated in Figure 1.93. This figure shows that the 8-minute 
sample with the highest carbon content in the retained austenite has the highest 
yield stress as well as the highest elongation. This is clearly a reflection of the 
gradual transformation of austenite to ferrite over the complete strain range. 

82 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
35 
30 
25 
ILl 
2o 
lOOO 
a. 
~-- 
9oo 
I-- 
800 
500 
ft. 
0. 
>" 
400 
.
.
.
.
.
 
i 
~ 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
|' 
- 
I 
9 
--~''''-'~//f 
L 
v 
= 
.
.
.
.
 
! 
= 
101 
, 
, 
.
.
.
.
 
~-I 
. 
. 
I 
10 2 
..... 
1-0 ~ 
Bainite transformation time (s) 
Figure 1.93 Relationship between bainite transformation time and tensile properties 
(After Itami et al. TM) 
Ultra-high-strength steels 
These are steels with a tensile strength above about 1000 N/mm 2, though steels 
with a tensile strength above 800 or 900 N/mm 2 may sometimes be regarded 
as ultra-high-strength steels. They are of two basic types, those in which the 
microstructure contains a high proportion of martensite and those containing a 
high proportion of bainite. Each may, however, contain smaller proportions of the 
other phase, together with significant proportions of ferrite or retained austenite. 
One approach to produce a steel with a tensile strength above 980 N/mm 2 was 
to produce a dual-phase, ferrite-martensite structure, comprising a high hardness 
martensite in a ductile ferrite containing a minimum of dissolved carbon. 142 
The method involved intercritical, continuous annealing at the lowest possible 
temperature subject to dissolving the carbides, cooling and then quenching from 
just above the bainite start temperature to give a transformation product that is 
enriched as far as possible with carbon. The highest elongation was obtained with 
the highest silicon content used (1.9%) which led to a homogeneous distribution 
of fine martensite islands. Quenching from just above the bainite start temperature 
also led to the highest proportion of retained austenite. 143 
A substantially complete martensite structure may be obtained by quenching 
from the single-phase austenite region using, for example, steels containing 
niobium and a high-carbon equivalent expressed as Ceq = C -I- Si/24 -I- Mn/6.144 
It was found that the steels in the as-quenched condition softened during a 
bake-hardening treatment at 170~ 
It was necessary, therefore, that the steel 
was tempered to precipitate most of the carbon before use. The work showed, 
as expected, that the tempering treatment reduced the strength, particularly for 
tempering temperatures above about 300~ 
but also showed that there was a 

Low-carbon strip steels 83 
7 
A 
E 
~6 
._== 
~= 4 
.O 9 
~ 3 
=i 
1000 
9 
- .... 
. 
. 
, 
; 
- 
. 
' 
,~ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
9 
. . . . . .  
, 
. 
, 
,, 
300 ~ 
Tempedng 
300 ~ 
Temp.: ~ 
4oo ~ ~ 1 7 6  
X 
X 
["O"O '15 (3 0,4 S~1 5 Mn! ""~-- 
' "" "" 
IO o 15 o--o 4 si-d Mn-O.oi5 Nbl 
]A 0.18 C-0.47 SI-2 Mn-O.03Nb ] 
112 0.2 C.0.25 S,.~2.4Mn--O.O3Nbl ' 
, 
, 
, 
, 
1100 
1200 
1300 
1400 
1500 
1600 
1700 
Tensile strength (MPa) 
Figure 1.94 Effect of tempering temperature on the balance of bendability and tensile 
strength of various steels (After Hosoya et al. l~) 
104 
10 3 
o 
I 
' ' Temp=edngtemperature ' 
'"1 ..... 
"~ 100~ 
~o 
1348 MPa -',,,,,,~o C 
D 
136~MPa ~ 
- oooc 
Tensile strength 1346 M~ 
102 
' 
" 
45 
' 
" 
' 
' ' 
' 
0.35 0.40 
O. 
0.50 
0.55 0.60 
0.65 0.70 
Ceq (%) 
Ceq = C +Si/24 + Mn/6 
Figure 1.95 Effects of carbon equivalent and tempering temperature on time to fracture 
of 4-point bent samples (After Hosoya et al. l~) 
minimum in bendability (maximum in minimum bend radius) for tempering 
temperatures close to 300~ 
Figure 1.94 shows that for the highest carbon 
equivalent studied, values of tensile strength up to above 1600 N/ram 2 could 
be obtained, but that for each chemistry, the minimum bendability occurred at 
the intermediate values of tensile strength. For a given tensile strength close to 
1350 N/mm 2, it was also found (Figure 1.95) that the time for delayed fracture 
decreased with increasing carbon equivalent and increasing temperature used. It 
was considered that controlling the carbide distribution within the grains was 

84 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
important to achieve good bendability whereas avoiding the carbides that would 
be formed at the grain boundaries at the higher temperatures was necessary to give 
good delayed fracture characteristics. Both factors were controlled by tempering 
at temperatures below 240"C. 
Ultra-high-strength steels containing a high proportion of bainite may clearly 
be obtained by rapidly cooling a steel with a suitable composition to temperatures 
close to 400"C, as has been used for the TRIP steels. As before, optimization 
of the strength/elongation balance depends on retaining a sufficient proportion 
of retained austenite. An example is illustrated in Figure 1.96, which shows 
how the strength elongation and structure vary with annealing temperature for a 
steel containing 0.4% carbon, 1.55% silicon and 0.8% manganese. The highest 
values of elongation were obtained for low annealing temperatures for which the 
carbon in the austenite would have been high which led to the highest proportion 
of retained austenite. Quenching from the single-phase austenite region was, 
Ac 
9 
m 
Retained 
100 ~ 
austenite 
8O 
6O 
OL 
40 
20 
3O 
.5 
_o 
lO 
UJ 
1200 
A 
a~ 1000 
O. 
or) 800 
1 
! 
Bainite 
i 
! 
I 
,, 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
Ferrite 
I 
I 
I ! 
- 
! 
I 
I 
! 
I 
I 
s 
I 
I 
,/ 
I 
i 
i 
| 
. 
J: 
/Yield 
', 
-! 
/ 
=r ss : 
760 
800 
840 
880 
Annealing temperature (~ 
Figure 1.96 
Variation of strength, elongation and structure with annealing temperature, 
samples quenched to 400"C and heM for 5 rain (Matsumura et al. 145) 

Low-carbon strip steels 85 
however, able to give a strength above 1200 N/mm 2 but with a lower elongation. 
Other work, 146 as a further example, confirmed that values of tensile strength up 
to above 1400 N/mm 2 could be obtained using a similar type of annealing cycle 
but with a richer chemistry. 
Zinc-coated steels 
Coating with zinc (galvanizing) is one of the most widely used and cost-effective 
means of protecting mild steel against atmosphere corrosion. Zinc itself has good 
resistance to corrosion through the formation of protective surface films of oxides 
and carbonates but zinc coatings protect steel in two ways: 
1. By forming a physical barrier between the steel substrate and the environment. 
2. By providing galvanic or sacrificial protection by virtue of the fact that zinc 
is more electronegative than iron in the electrochemical series. This effect is 
illustrated schematically in Figure 1.97. 
Production methods 
Zinc coatings are applied continuously by the hot dip galvanizing and electro- 
galvanizing processes, and in order to appreciate the difference in properties 
between the products, the two processes will be briefly described. 
Hot dip galvanizing (HDG) 
The various stages of a modem HDG line are shown schematically in Figure 1.98. 
Cold-rolled strip is first welded to the trailing end of the previous coil and enters 
ANODIC 
Magnesium 
Zinc 
-~ 
Aluminlum 
Cadmium 
Steel 
Tin 
Nickel 
Copper 
CATHODIC 
More 
active 
More 
noble 
V///JJ'v',~'~/~'/~'l/y~//i//2/t'/i~'//. 
Steel coated with zinc 
it//~J-////~1/.,,~z;,~_~/////////t/.,, 
~. 
ii 
Steel coaied With*less active metal 
Figure 1.97 
Galvanic protection of steel by zinc 

86 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
t iHeat 
Accumulator Itreatment 
fum~ ie 
~ , J  
Sh= 
cor 
Shears 
Uncoiler 
[Entry S Jon] 
PassivaUon 
)(~0 L--j 
Shape 
3ntml 
\ 
Zinc bath 
[ Process section| 
Accumulator 
Shears 
~er 
! Exit Section J 
Figure 1.98 Hot dip galvanizing line 
an accumulator or storage station. This enables the process section of the line to 
function whilst the cutting and joining operations are being carded out. 
The strip then passes into a heat treatment furnace with an inert atmosphere. 
Initially, the strip is heated to a temperature of about 680~ 
but electrolytic 
precleaning is now often used before entry and the material then enters the 
annealing section of the furnace. In this section, the strip attains a temperature 
of about 730~ 
to 850~ 
and the cold-rolled strip recrystallizes. Still under a 
protective atmosphere, the strip is cooled rapidly by means of a gas stream, 
before entering the zinc bath which is maintained at a temperature of 465~ 
Small amounts of aluminium, typically 0.15%, are added to the bath to restrict 
the thickness of the Zn-Fe layer and thus provide an adherent coating that can 
accommodate major strains in subsequent forming operations. The aluminium 
reacts preferentially with the steel as it enters the galvanizing bath, forming a 
thin layer of Fe-AI compounds (FeA13, Fe2A15), and thereby retards the reaction 
between iron and zinc. The lead content of the bath affects the zinc crystal size of 
spangle on the surface of the strip, and for applications requiring a minimum or 
spangle-free appearance, the lead level of the bath is held below 0.15%. However, 
in order to develop a spangle, additions of antimony are now preferred to high 
lead contents because they result in less intergranular corrosion. 
After the coating operation, the strip passes through a series of gas-knives 
which use air, nitrogen or steam to control the amount of zinc on the surface of 
the steel. Depending on the end application, the strip may then be temper rolled 
or stretch levelled to provide shape control or to eliminate the formation of strain 
markings (Lgiders lines) during cold forming. The final stage in the process is 
generally a passivation treatment in which the strip is sprayed with a solution of 
chromic acid. This inhibits the formation of a corrosion product known as white 
rust which will be discussed later. 

Low-carbon strip steels 87 
The HDG process is also used to produce galvanneal strip in which the 
plain zinc coating of the traditional galvanized product is converted to a Zn-Fe 
alloy with an approximate composition of 90% Zn, 10% Fe. Galvanneal strip is 
produced by reheating the strip after it has left the coating bath and giving it a 
thermal cycle to develop a suitable alloy layer of Fe-Zn intermetallic compounds. 
The reheating was formerly carried out in a gas-fired chamber but is now more 
usually achieved by induction heating. The formation of this layer is critically 
dependent on the thermal cycle if the most suitable phase distribution is to be 
formed. The coating weights produced on galvanneal steel are at the bottom of 
those produced on plain zinc coatings. 
Galvanneal coatings have a matt grey appearance of low reflectivity and have 
the following characteristics and have a major market in the motor industry: 
1. Similar corrosion resistance as plain zinc coatings. 
2. Good paint adherence. 
3. Better resistance welding performance than plain zinc coatings. 
Electro-galvanizing 
Zinc coatings. In contrast to the HDG process, electro-galvanizing is carried 
out at or near ambient temperature, the feedstock having been annealed in the 
conventional manner. Prior to the coating operation, the strip is first passed 
through a series of chemical or electrolytic cleaning baths to remove dirt or 
oil. The plating solution is made up primarily of zinc sulphate and zinc was 
previously supplied to the electrolyte by means of zinc anodes. However, zinc is 
now more usually supplied by adding zinc compounds to the electrolyte in the 
form of zinc oxide or zinc carbonate and the anodes are made of lead. Oxygen 
is, therefore, released at the anodes during the plating process. After plating, the 
strip is passed through chromate baths for passivation. 
87% Zn 13% Ni. Both forming and welding problems are .introduced with the 
application of heavy zinc coatings and therefore there is a demand for coatings 
that will provide good corrosion resistance, even when applied in thin layers. One 
approach to this problem is the incorporation of nickel into zinc-based coatings, 
and a coating containing 87% Zn 13% Ni is now being used for automotive 
applications. The coating is applied by the electroplating route and the material 
is marketed in the UK under the name Nizec. 
Fe-Zn coatings. An iron-zinc coating may also be produced by an electrolytic 
process and is used mainly in Japan and North America in the automotive 
industry. Care is needed, however, in controlling the plating conditions because 
changes in temperature and concentration of the electrolyte may cause relatively 
large changes in the composition of the coating. The usual coating weight is 
about 50 g/m 2 and the iron content of the coating is often in the range 8-20%. 
According to Denner, 147 electrolytic iron-zinc coatings are particularly good 
for chipping and corrosion resistance and also for coating and paint adhesion. 

88 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Corrosion resistance 
The life of a zinc coating on steel is roughly proportional to its thickness, and 
therefore, galvanized strip is produced in a range of coating thicknesses to satisfy 
different conditions and end uses. In the hot dip product, the amount of zinc on 
the steel is expressed in g/m 2, the figures after the letter Z (plain zinc) and 
ZF (iron-zinc alloy) in Table 1.4 indicating the minimum mass per unit area, 
including the coatings on both sides of the strip. 
In electro-galvanized strip, the coatings are significantly lighter, as shown in 
Table 1.5. In this table, it should be noted that the coating mass relates to a 
single surface rather than the combined mass for the two surfaces, which is the 
convention used for the hot dip product. Electro-galvanized material can also be 
supplied with single-sided (e.g. ZE 25/00) or differential (e.g. ZE 75/25) coatings. 
As with other steel products, the atmospheric corrosion resistance of zinc- 
coated steel is affected greatly by the nature of the environment and it is common 
to differentiate between the performance in rural, industrial and marine locations. 
The performance of hot dip galvanized steel, in terms of life to first maintenance, 
is illustrated in Table 1.6. This indicates the following features: 
1. The detrimental effect of sulphur dioxide (industrial) and chloride ions 
(marine) in the atmosphere. 
2. The beneficial effect of increasing the thickness of the zinc coatings. 
Table 1.4 
Use of hot dip coatings 
Light coating 
Z 100 
Z 200 
Medium coating 
Z 275 
Heavy-duty coating 
Z 350 
Z 450 
Z 600 
Iron- zinc coating 
ZF 100 
ZF 180 
Where corrosion conditions are mild or where 
forming requirements preclude heavier coatings 
Standard coating 
For longer life requirements 
Fe-Zn coatings for good painting and welding 
characteristics 
Table 1.5 
Coating thickness/mass for electro-galvanized coatings 
Coating 
designation 
Nominal zinc coating 
values for each surface 
Minimum zinc coating 
values for each surface 
Thickness Mass 
Thickness Mass 
~tm 
g/m 2 
~tm 
g/m 2 
ZE 25/25 
2.5 
18 
1.7 
12 
ZE 50/50 
5.0 
36 
4.1 
29 
ZE 75/75 
7.5 
54 
6.6 
47 
ZE 100/100 
10.0 
72 
9.1 
65 
After BS EN 10152: 1994. 

Low-carbon strip steels 
89 
Table 1.6 
to first maintenance 
Mass g/m 2 
Coastal 
Industrial 
including 
and Urban 
both surfaces 
275 
35O 
45O 
6OO 
After Galvatite Technical manual 
(British Steel Strip Products.) 
Hot dip galvanized steel-typical period (years) 
Suburban 
and Rural 
2-5 
2-5 
5-10 
2-5 
2-5 
5-10 
5-10 
2-5 
10-20 
10-20 
5-10 
20-50 
3. The need for paint protection in internal applications if the conditions are wet 
and polluted. 
When zinc-coated products are stored under wet conditions or where conden- 
sation can occur, white rust can form on the surface. This is due to the formation 
of zinc carbonate and detracts from the appearance of smooth zinc coatings. 
However, although it may form in large amounts, the appearance of white rust 
does not necessarily indicate severe degradation of the zinc coating and it will 
generally convert to a protective layer. As indicated earlier, the formation of white 
rust can be retarded by immersing galvanized steel in chromic acid solutions to 
passivate the surface. 
Care must be taken when fixing zinc-coated steels to other metals in order to 
avoid galvanic corrosion. In particular, copper or brass should not be coupled 
directly to galvanized steel since the coating can fail rapidly in wet and polluted 
atmospheres. 
In aqueous media, the performance of zinc-coated steels is affected by a number 
of factors: 
1. pH of solution - the corrosion rate is generally low in the pH range 6-12 but 
can be rapid outside this range. 
2. Hardness of water - hard water precipitates carbonates on zinc surfaces which 
reduce the rate of corrosion. 
3. Water temperature - whereas zinc provides sacrificial protection to the steel 
substrate at ambient temperature, the reverse situation occurs at temperatures 
above 60-70~ 
Therefore, zinc-coated steels should not be used in hot-water 
systems. 
4. Chlorides -soluble chlorides can produce rapid attack, even within the pH 
range 6-12. 
Cold.forming behaviour 
The cold-forming behaviour of zinc-coated strip is governed primarily by the 
forming characteristics of the substrate. As indicated earlier, in hot dip galva- 
nizing, cold-reduced strip is subjected to rapid heating and cooling cycles, similar 

90 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
to those employed in continuous annealing but generally without an over-ageing 
stage. Therefore, the formability of hot dip galvanized steel is poorer than that 
of uncoated, batch-annealed material. However, the formability of the hot dip 
product can be improved through the use of modified annealing cycles but the 
special IF (interstitial-free) steels can also be employed as a substrate for highly 
formable, hot dip galvanized strip. The IF steels were referred to earlier on p. 39 
and owe their good formability to the elimination of carbon and nitrogen from 
solid solution and the development of a favourable crystallographic orientation 
texture. 
As described earlier, electro-galvanizing takes place at near-ambient tempera- 
ture and therefore the coating operation has little effect on the forming behaviour. 
Standard specifications 
Hot dip galvanized products are covered by BS EN 10142:1991 Continuously 
hot-dip zinc coated miM steel strip and sheet for coM forming and the available 
grades together with the associated mechanical properties are given in Table 1.7. 
These grades are arranged in increasing suitability for cold forming, ranging 
from DX 51D (bending and profiling quality) to DX 54D (special deep-drawing 
quality). Differentiation is made between coating type, namely zinc (Z) or zinc- 
alloy (ZF) coatings. Further designations are also applied in order to denote 
coating finish, surface quality and surface treatment. As indicated in Table 1.8, 
the grades can be supplied with a range of coating mass, but it should be noted 
that the figures for coating mass (g/m 2) include both surfaces. 
A possible area of confusion in BS EN 10142:1991 is the change in designation 
of the basic grades. When this standard was first introduced, the grades were 
Table 1.7 BS EN 10142:1991 Steel grades and mechanical properties 
Designation 
Steel grade 
Symbol for the 
Steel name Steel number type of hot-dip 
coating 
Yield strength Tensile strength Elongation 
R~) 
Rm 
Aso 
N/ram 2 
N/ram 2 
% 
max. 2) 
max. 2) 
min. 3) 
DX51D 
1.0226 
+Z 
DX51D 
1.0226 
+ZF 
DX52D 
1.0350 
+Z 
DX52D 
1.0350 
+ZF 
DX53D 
1.0355 
+Z 
DX53D 
1.0355 
+ZF 
DX54D 
1.0306 
+Z 
DX54D 
1.0306 
+ZF 
500 
22 
3004) 
420 
26 
260 
380 
30 
220 
350 
36 
l) The yield strength values apply to the 0.2% proof stress if the yield point is not pronounced, 
otherwise to the lower yield strength (ReL) 
2) For all steel grades a minimum value of 140 N/mm 2 for the yield strength (Re) and of 270 N/mm 2 
for tensile strength (Rm) may be expected. 
3) For product thicknesses <0.7 mm (including zinc coating) the minimum elongation values (As0) 
shall be reduced by 2 units. 
4) This value applies to skin-passed products only (surface qualities B and C). 

Low-carbon strip steels 91 
Table 1.8 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Coating l) 
BS EN 10142:1991 Coating masses 
.
.
.
.
.
 
= 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Coating mass in g/m 2, including both Surfaces 2~ 
min 
Triple spot test 3) ....... 
Single spot test 3) 
100 
100 
85 
140 
140 
120 
200 
200 
170 
225 
225 
195 
275 
275 
235 
350 
350 
300 
450 
450 
385 
600 
600 
510 
2) The coatings available for the individual steel grades are give in tables 2 
and 3. 
2) The coating mass of 100 g/m 2 (including both surfaces) corresponds to 
a coating thickness of approximately 7.1 tt m per surface. 
3) See 7.4.4 and 7.5.3. 
l~able 1.9 
BS EN 10142:1991 List of corresponding desig- 
nations 
,, 
, 
- 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Designation according to EN 10142-,41" 1995 
Designation 
according to 
EN 10142:1990 
Steel 
Steel 
name 
number 
DX51D 
1.0226 
DX51D 
1.0226 
DX52D 
1.0350 
DX52D 
1.0350 
DX53D 
1.0355 
DX53D 
1.0355 
DX54D 
1.0306 
DX54D 
1.0306 
Symbol for the 
Steel name 
type of hot-dip 
coating 
+Z 
Fe P 02 G Z 
+ZF 
Fe P 02 G ZF 
+Z 
FeP03 GZ 
+ZF 
Fe P 03 G ZF 
+Z 
Fe P 05 G Z 
+ZF 
Fe P 05 G ZF 
+Z 
FeP06GZ 
+ZF 
Fe P 06 G ZF 
designated Fe PO1 to FE P06, i.e. those adopted in BS EN 10130:1991 (see 
Table 1.3). However, BS EN 10142:1991 was amended in 1995 and the Fe 
P0 system of designation was changed to the DX 51D/DX 54D style shown in 
Table 1.9. The corresponding designations under both systems are identified in 
Table 1.9. 
Electro-galvanized grades are specified in BS EN 10152: 1994. 
Other hot dip coatings 
Whereas galvanneal strip has a Zn-Fe coating which is produced by diffusion 
from a plain zinc layer, zinc alloy coatings are also deposited directly onto the 
steel. 

92 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
55% AI-Zn 
In 1972, the Bethlehem Steel Corporation introduced steel strip with a coating 
of 55% AI 43.5% Zn 1.5% Si under the name Galvalume. Since that time, the 
manufacture of the product has been licensed throughout the world and it is 
marketed in the UK under the name Zalutite. The 55% A1-Zn coating is applied 
by the hot dip process route in a similar manner to that used for the conventional, 
plain zinc coatings. On cooling from the coating bath, an aluminium-rich phase 
is the first to solidify and makes up about 80% of the volume of the coating. The 
remainder is made up of an interdendritic, zinc-rich phase and an AI/Fe/Zn/Si 
intermetallic compound bonds the coating to the steel substrate, providing further 
resistance to corrosion. Silicon is added to the AI-Zn alloy in order to restrict 
the growth of the brittle intermetallic layer. 
The coating was developed specifically to provide an improved corrosion 
performance compared with plain zinc coatings and benefit is derived from the 
separate effects of zinc and aluminium. In the initial stages of corrosion, attack 
takes place preferentially on the zinc-rich phase until its corrosion products stifle 
further activity in these areas. However, as well as acting as a barrier to the trans- 
port of corrodents, the zinc also provides sacrificial protection at cut edges and 
areas of damage. As the zinc-rich phase is leached away, corrosion protection 
is provided by the alurninium-rich phase which forms protective films of oxides 
and hydroxides on the surface of the material. As indicated in Table 1.10, the 
55% AI-Zn layer provides between two and four times the life of conventional 
zinc coatings, depending on the nature of the environment. 
The material is produced with standard coating masses of 150 (AZ 150) and 
185 (AZ 185)g/m 2, including both surfaces. These values equate to coating 
thicknesses of 20 and 25 ~m respectively, on each surface. The forming proper- 
ties of the material are generally similar to those of continuously annealed, hot 
dip zinc-coated steel. However, it has an increased tendency to spring back and 
lacks the self-lubricating properties of hot dip zinc coatings. The application of 
an effective lubricant is therefore essential. 
Table 1.10 
Comparative corrosion losses as a decrease in thickness (microme- 
tres) for 55% Al-Zn alloy coated and hot dip zinc-coated steel strip at Australian 
test sites 
Site 
Years exposed 
(A) Hot dip 
(B) 55% AI-Zn 
Ratio A/B 
zinc-coated 
alloy 
Otm) 
(ttm) 
Severe marine 
2.5 a 
16.8 
5.2 
3.2 
Industrial marine 
7 
10.5 
4.7 
2.2 
Industrial 
7 
9.8 
3.4 
2.9 
Marine 
4 
5.9 
1.4 
4.2 
Rural 
4 
1.4 
0.8 
1.8 
aExposure was discontinued after 2 89 years because all the coating on the groundward surface of the 
hot dip zinc-coated sample had been lost by that time. No rust on remaining 55% AI-Zn alloy-coated 
samples still on exposure after seven years. 
After galutite Technical Manual 
(British Steel Strip Products). 

Low-carbon strip steels 93 
The 55 AI-Zn coating has a smooth, silvery appearance with a very fine 
spangle and is said to be attractive in the unpainted condition. However, the 
material is also supplied in the factory-painted condition and painting is recom- 
mended for use in severe marine and very corrosive environments. The coating 
exhibits good resistance to heat and can withstand discoloration in air at temper- 
atures up to 310"C, whereas a limit of 230"C is prescribed for hot dip zinc 
coatings. 
95% Zn 5% AI 
A coating of this composition was first introduced in 1982 and is marketed world- 
wide under the name Galfan. The coating is again deposited by the hot dip process 
and, in addition to good corrosion properties, it is claimed to have particularly 
good forming characteristics. The structure of the coating is dependent on the 
rate of cooling from the bath and cooling rates greater than 20*C/s result in 
the formation of a fine eutectic of zinc-rich and aluminium-rich phases. Slower 
cooling rates result in the separation of a primary zinc-rich phase. 
Hot dip aluminium coatings 
Aluminium-coated steel may be produced using a hot dip process and therefore 
combines the strength and formability of steel with the corrosion resistance of 
aluminium. The steel base may be an aluminium-kiUed steel, but the use of an 
IF steel provides high formability and improved higher temperature oxidation 
resistance. A product with the basic coating weight may be used for applications 
such as motor car silencers, but a product with about twice the coating weight at 
250 g/m 2 may be used for building applications. The thicker coating also contains 
a silicon addition. This reduces the thickness of the alloy layer and imparts greater 
ductility than would be obtained from a pure aluminium coating. 
Aluminium-coated steels withstand temperatures up to 5000C for long periods 
while retaining their original surface appearance. Above this temperature, the 
coating gradually converts to an iron-aluminium alloy layer, but under certain 
conditions, it may still retain good heat-resisting properties. 
Organic.coated steels 
During the 1980s there was a dramatic growth in the production of pre-finished 
strip, coated with various types of paint or plastic. These coatings are available in 
a wide range of colours and textures and are used to advantage where corrosion 
resistance and a decorative appearance are of major concern. The coatings are 
applied to a range of steel substrates, but generally to zinc-coated strip, and 
are formulated specifically for various manufacturing requirements or end uses. 
Coatings are available that provide long life in external applications, good deep- 
drawing characteristics and resistance to heat or chemical attack. 
The organic coatings are applied continuously as a liquid film or as a lami- 
nate which is bonded to the substrate with an adhesive. In either case, the steel 
substrate is thoroughly cleaned in a multi-stage process to ensure uniform and 
optimum adherence of the coating. In the liquid film route, the substrate is first 

94 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
coated with a primer, which is cured, and the top coating is then applied by 
the reverse-roll method. Finally, the topcoat is cured in a finishing oven. Where 
embossing is required, typically on PVC coatings of 200 ~tm, a patterned steel 
roll is applied to the hot PVC as it emerges from the finishing oven. The mate- 
rial is then immediately quenched in water in order to 'freeze' in the embossed 
texture. Coil-coated strip is marketed in the UK under the name Colorcoat. 
In the laminate coating, an adhesive and backing coat are applied by roller- 
coating and the strip is passed through an oven to activate the adhesive and cure 
the backing coat. The coating film, generally PVC, is bonded to the steel and 
cooled immediately by water quenching. The material is marketed in the UK 
under the name Stelvetite and is intended for internal applications. 
Organic-coated strip is specified in Euronorm 169-85. The following infor- 
mation on the characteristics of the more important coatings has been derived 
from Annex A of Euronorm 169-85 and a British Steel publication: 14s 
9 PVC Plastisol (200 ~tm)-a plasticizer-bearing coating with very good 
flexibility. Can be drawn and formed easily. Suitable for embossing for 
decorative purposes and can be used in internal and external applications. 
Typical applications- roofing and cladding on buildings, curtain walling, 
furniture, vehicle fascia panels, garage doors. 
9 PVC Organosol (50 ~tm) - a coating with good flexibility and specially recom- 
mended for deep-drawn parts. Not recommended for exterior use. Typical 
applications- electric light fittings, cable trunking, deep-drawn parts. 
9 Acrylic (25 ~tm)- unplasticized coating with good flexibility. Suitable for 
continuous operation at temperatures up to 120"C. Good resistance to chemical 
attack. 
9 Epoxy (5-15 ~tm)- hard, chemical-resistant coating with good flexibility. 
Typical applications - used extensively as a primer for two-coat systems. Good 
adhesion to polyurethane foam. Not recommended for external use. 
9 Polyesters (25 am) - widely applied coatings with good flexibility and suitable 
for continuous exposure at temperatures up to 120"C. Various formulations are 
available that offer good deep-drawing properties, resistance to chemical attack 
and that are suitable for exterior use. Typical applications - consumer durables, 
deep-drawn components, building components. 
9 PVF2 (27 l~m) - a coating with good flexibility and highly resistant to chem- 
icals and solvent attack. Highly resistant to weather and particularly suitable 
for exterior use. Typical applications - building components. 
As indicated above, many of these coatings exhibit good formability and are 
amenable to forming operations such as press braking and folding, roll forming 
and deep drawing. However, the flexibility of the coatings varies with ambient 
temperature and, to minimize the risk of cracking during forming, it is recom- 
mended that the liquid film and laminate-coated materials should be allowed to 
attain minimum temperatures of 16 and 200C respectively. 149 
The resistance welding of organic-coated steel is not possible by conventional 
methods because the coating prevents the flow of current across the electrodes. On 
the other hand, resistance welding is possible if the coating is removed locally, or 

Low-carbon strip steels 95 
if special capping pieces are inserted to melt the coating. 149 However, mechan- 
ical joining techniques have been developed specifically for coated steels and 
adhesives are also available that are suitable for particular types of coating. 
Steel prices 
The basis prices of standard hot-rolled and cold-reduced strip grades are shown 
in Figure 1.99. These prices were effective in February 1997 and it must be 
borne in mind that steel prices are adjusted periodically. This figure shows that 
a substantial differentiation is made between the hot-roUed and cold-reduced 
conditions, reflecting the additional processing costs associated with the latter. 
However, the cost differential within these two conditions with respect to the 
various formability criteria is relatively small. 
Figure 1.99 also includes the basis prices for zinc-coated steels. This indicates 
that electro-galvanized strip costs about s 
more than uncoated, cold- 
reduced steel. However, the cost differential is substantially more in the case 
of hot dip galvanized strip, which has a heavier zinc coating than the electro- 
galvanized product. 
600 
550 
500 
0 
C 
450 
L_ 
400 
350 
z_. 
rolled 
uncoated 
Co'd- 
reduced 
uncoated 
- 
- 
Electro- 
zinc 
coated (1) 
r 
Hot 
dip 
galvanized (2) 
Figure 1.99 
Basic prices of strip mill products: (1)Zinc coating 2.5 pm both sides; 
(2) Zinc coating 275 g/m 2, including both sides: as of February 1997 

96 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Tinplate 
Tinplate enjoys a pre-eminent position in the packaging industry, particularly in 
relation to cans for food and beverages. Substantial amounts of tinplate are also 
used in aerosol containers and for the packaging of paints and oils. This section 
reviews briefly the manufacturing process for tinplate and the basic procedures 
employed in canmaking. These specific aspects, together with other important 
technical details relating to tinplate, are covered in a very definitive and compre- 
hensive publication by Morgan. 15~ 
Method of manufacture 
Virtually all tin mill products in the UK are produced from continuously cast 
steel to the chemical composition shown in Table 1.11. Where special corrosion 
resistance is required, a steel with 0.015% P max. and 0.06% Cu max. (type L) 
is supplied. 
The starting point in the manufacture of tinplate is hot-rolled strip with a typical 
thickness of about 2 mm. This is pickled to remove the scale formed during hot 
rolling and the material is then cold rolled to the required thickness in either a 
single-stage or a two-stage operation. For single-reduced tinplate, the cold-rolling 
reduction is of the order of 90% and the material is available in the thickness 
range 0.16-0.6 mm. After cold rolling, the strip is softened by either batch 
or continuous annealing in order to restore ductility, but the annealed material 
is then given a light cold reduction, termed temper rolling, before the tinning 
operation. Temper rolling improves the surface finish and flatness of the strip 
and also provides the required mechanical properties for particular applications. 
Thus single-reduced tinplate is available in a range of tempers with different 
strengths and this is illustrated in Table 1.12. 
In double-reduced tinplate, cold-rolled and annealed strip is subjected to a 
second cold reduction of 30-40%. No further annealing is undertaken and the 
material is substantially work hardened, exhibiting a marked directionality in 
properties. The bulk of double-reduced tinplate is produced to the thickness range 
0.16-0.18 mm but is available in the range 0.13-0.27 mm. Typical mechanical 
properties are shown in Table 1.13. By virtue of its higher strength, double- 
reduced tinplate provides the facility to reduce the cost of a can or other compo- 
nents by decreasing the thickness of the material without loss of rigidity. 
Following the cold-rolling sequences described above, the strip is coated with 
tin. A small amount of material is still coated by hot dip tinning, similar to 
that described earlier for galvanizing, but the Ferrostan process involving the 
Table 1.11 
Tinplate composition 
Weight % max. (Type MR) 
C 
Mn 
P 
S 
Si 
Cu 
Ni 
Cr 
Mo 
Al 
0.13 
0.6 
0.02 
0.05 
0.03 
0.2 
0.15 
0.1 
0.05 
0.02-0.10 

Low-carbon strip steels 97 
Table 1.12 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
~ 
, 
Temper 
Euronorm/ISO 
number 
temper 
designation 
, 
_ 
, 
T1 
T50 
Tinplate-single-reduced tempers 
,, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Typical application 
T2 
T52 
T3 
T57 
T4 
T61 
T5 
T65 
Mainly used for components which make 
the maximum demand on the formability of 
the steel base, e.g. deep-drawn containers, 
bakeware, puddings basins, oil filter bodies 
Typically used for forming operations 
which are less severe than above, e.g. 
shaUow-drawn bakeware, rectangular caps, 
cushion rings for paint cans 
Used for a wide range of applications where 
moderate formability is required, e.g. 
shaUow-drawn components, can bodies 
Typically used for ends, bodies, stampings 
where a stiffer and stronger product is 
required 
This is the strongest product available in the 
conventional temper range and is typically 
utilized for stiff ends and bodies 
After British Steel Tinplate-Product Range 
Table 1.13 
Tinplate - double-reduced tempers 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Designation 
Target proof 
stress (0.02% 
New 
Previous 
non.proportional 
elongation) longitudinal 
MPa 
Target 
~pical 
hardness 
applications 
FIR 30TM 
550 
73 
Round can bodies 
and can ends 
620 
76 
Round can bodies 
and can ends 
660 
77 
Beer and carbonated 
beverage can ends 
. . . . .  
DR550 
DR8 
DR620 
DR9 
DR660 
DR9M 
electro-deposition of tin now accounts for the bulk of tinplate production. Prior 
to plating, the strip is thoroughly cleaned in electrolytic pickling and decreasing 
units, followed by washing. The Ferrostan process uses a bath of acid stannous 
sulphate and tin with a purity of not less than 99.85%. After plating, the coating is 
flow-melted by resistance heating to a temperature above the melting point of tin 
(232~ 
e.g. 260-270~ 
followed by water quenching. This treatment produces 
a reflective surface and also results in the formation of an iron-tin compound 
(FeSn2) which plays an important role in the corrosion resistance and soldering 

98 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
characteristics of the material. The product is then passivated by immersion in a 
dichromate solution which deposits a very thin film of chromium on the surface. 
After passivation, a thin film of oil is applied in order to preserve the surface 
from attack and also to enhance the lubrication properties in subsequent handling 
operations. The oil applied, dioctyl sebacate, is a synthetic organic oil and is 
acceptable for use in food packaging. 
Electrolytic tinplate can be produced with equal or differential coatings on 
each surface, the former carrying the prefix E in the designation and the latter 
having the prefix D. The mass on each surface is expressed in g/m 2 and thus 
E 2.8/2.8 has 2.8 grams of tin per square metre on each surface, giving a total 
of 5.6 g/m 2. A tin coating of 5.6/5.6 g/m 2 is equivalent to a coating thickness 
of 0.75 ttm per surface. The normal range of equally coated products is from 
E 1.4/1.4 to E 11.2/11.2. However, low-fin coatings have been developed down to 
1.0/1.0 g/m 2. In differentially coated products, the normal range is from D 2.0/1.0 
to D 11.2/5.6. 
Tinplate manufacturers also produce other products such as uncoated and 
oiled sheet (blackplate) and material coated with metallic chromium. According 
to Morgan is~ blackplate has not achieved significant usage in canmaking 
operations due to problems in providing adequate resistance to corrosion by 
lacquering techniques. However, electrolytic chromium/chromium oxide-type 
coatings have enjoyed greater success and were developed primarily because of 
the extremely variable price of tin. The coating is duplex and consists of about 
80% metallic chromium adjacent to the steel substrate and 20% hydrated chromic 
oxide/hydroxide in a layer above. It is recommended that this type of coating is 
lacquered to provide added surface protection and to enhance fabrication. 
Canmaking processes 
Three basic procedures are employed: 
1. Three-piece can manufacture. 
2. Drawing and wall-ironing. 
3. Draw and redraw. 
Three-piece cans consist of a welded cylindrical body and two ends, one of 
which (the base) will be attached to the body of the can by the canmaker and 
the other will be applied after filling. The cylinder is rolled into shape from 
fiat, pre-lacquered, rectangular blanks and the two edges are joined by electrical 
welding. A further coat of lacquer is then applied to the weld seam. The can ends 
are pressed from circular blanks in an operation that requires a high degree of 
precision. The ends are contoured with a series of expansion tings so that they 
can support the internal pressure through tensile rather than bending stresses. The 
rims of the ends are also carefully stamped and curled so as to accept a sealing 
compound which forms an airtight seal with the body of the can. Cans of this 
type are used for most human foods and also for paints, oils and chemicals. 
The drawing and wall-ironing (DWI) process is more modem than three-piece 
canmaking and is illustrated schematically in Figure 1.100. Thus DWI eliminates 

Low-carbon strip steels 99 
oo,, 
_
_
_
 
4------ 
Wall Ironing --...--.--- 
Redrawn cup 
Phase I 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Bottom forming 
, 
.... 
- 
, 
, ....... 
,, 
, 
,, 
, 
, 
,
,
,
 
,, 
, 
,, 
- -  
_ 
I 
L~,Trlmmlng 
O,egreasln..g(~ 
.... 
l 
~ 
-...----,-- 
Necking Flanging 
Decorating .... 
Curing .... 
, . . . . . .  
 u,o0 
Inside spraying 
Palletizlng 
-
-
-
 
O 
Scrolled sheet 
Initial cup 
Figure 1.100 Drawing and wall-ironing operation sequence (After Morgan tS~ 
the need for a welding operation and relies solely on presswork. Morgan cites 
the following advantages for DWI over three-piece cans: 
1. More effective double seaming of the top end to body, because of the absence 
of the sensitive side seam junction (particularly valuable for processed foods 
and carbonated beverages). 
2. Significantly lower metal usage and cost. 
3. More attractive appearance due to the absence of a side seam. 
Following the initial drawing operation, the cup is redrawn to final can diameter. 
During wall-ironing, the can may pass through a series of dies which produce 
a substantial reduction in wall thickness and a complementary increase in body 
height. The principle of wall-ironing is shown in Figure 1.101. Following trim- 
ruing, the can is degreased prior to applying decoration to the outside and lacquer 

100 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Cu 
1. Ironing die 
2. Ironing die 
3. Ironing die 
Punch 
can 
Bottom end 
~ [ ~  
tool 
Figure 1.101 Wall-ironing with three ironing dies (After Morgan l~~ 
to the inside. DWI cans are used for beer and soft drinks, for pet foods and some 
human foods. Aluminium is a major competitor to tinplate in DWI cans for these 
products, although tinplate enjoys a larger share of the UK market at this time. 
In the draw and redraw (DRD) process, the initially drawn cup is redrawn 
to one of smaller diameter and greater height in one or two re&awing 
operations. Like the DWI process, it eliminates the side seam but the maximum 
height/diameter ratio that can be produced by multiple drawing is less than that 
achievable by DWI. However, DRD has a major advantage over DWI in that 
pre-lacquered tinplate can be used, thus eliminating the costly cleaning and spray- 
lacquering operations at the end of the process 15~ DRD cans are used for pet 
foods and some human foods, including baby foods. 
Canmaking via DWI and DRD takes place at high speed and involves severe 
plastic strain. The steel, therefore, needs to be of the highest quality and a very 
low level of non-metallic inclusions is essential to the efficient operation of these 
processes. Gauge control is also important. The DRD process requires higher 
values so that extensive drawing can take place. However, care must be taken 
to avoid an excessively large ferdte grain size which can give rise to an orange 
peel effect and a poor surface for lacquering. 
Joining methods 
One of the advantages of strip steel, as mentioned previously, is that it has the 
ability to be formed into components economically with relatively complicated 

Low-carbon strip steels 101 
shapes. A further advantage is that these components may be satisfactorily joined 
together to form complete assemblies using a wide variety of methods. Some 
of these methods involve joining at discrete points or larger areas at intervals 
along the join depending on the load-bearing requirements of the component. 
Some methods involve continuous joining along edges between components 
whereas other techniques, including the use of adhesives, involve joining over an 
area. Some of the methods involve melting of the steel (welding) or the use of 
additional materials including the use of adhesives, brazing or soldering. Some 
fastening techniques involve deformation or cutting of the steel whereas others 
involve the use of special joining components such as screws or rivets. 
Each joining method has its own particular advantages and disadvantages, 
including the ease of joining, whether fume is produced, the time required, 
whether the method may be adapted to mass-production methods and whether 
access to both sides of the strip is necessary. It is clear, however, that the 
most important consideration is that any joint must provide the rigidity, strength 
(including fatigue strength) and resilience (ability to absorb energy) necessary 
for the application. It is also essential that any joint should not downgrade too 
seriously as a result of contact with environmental conditions. Some joining 
methods may be used in combination to complement each other's characteristics 
and others may be chosen because of the need to be able to undo a join and 
reassemble it later. 
In service, a joint could in principle be subjected to a wide range of different 
modes of stress. It has been considered, 151 however, that there are three modes 
that can normally occur. These are two modes of tensile shear, parallel to or 
across the joint, and cross-tension normal to the joint. 
Welding 
A wide variety of welding processes may be used for the joining of strip steels 
which may be categorized into resistance and fusion types. Some of the more 
commonly used processes are resistance spot welding, resistance seam welding, 
projection welding, laser welding and MIG/TIG welding. 
Resistance spot welding 
In this method, heat is generated by passing an electric current through two or 
more sheets to be welded together by means of two electrodes which clamp on 
opposite sides of the sheets. 
Spot welding is generally used for joining steel strip up to 3 mm thick, though 
thicknesses up to 10 mm can be welded by this process. The size and shape 
of the welds are controlled primarily by the size and shape of the water-cooled 
electrodes. In general, the weld nugget should be oval in cross-section but should 
not extend to the outer surfaces. The electrodes exert a significant clamping force 
on the strip materials and the contacting surfaces are generally heated by the 
passage of a high current (5000-20000 A) using a low voltage (5-20 V). When 
sufficient melting is achieved, the current is switched off but the clamping force 
of the electrodes is maintained until the weld pool has completely solidified. The 

102 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
cycle is completed in a fraction of a second. Spot welding is generally carded 
out using AC current, but DC is also used. 
The integrity of a spot weld is judged by means of a peel test or a chisel 
test, which separate the sheet materials after welding. In some cases, separation 
occurs through the weld and along the original interface of the materials (interface 
failure), or else the material tears around the weld nugget (plug failure). Tensile 
tests, using tensile-shear and cross-tension configurations, are also employed for 
evaluating the static strength of spot welds. 
Weldability lobes 
The heat generated during resistance heating can be expressed by the following 
equation: 
H = 12RT 
where H = the heat in joules, 
I = the current in amps, 
R = the resistance in ohms, and 
T--- the time in seconds. 
For a fixed welding time T l, therefore, the diameter of the weld nugget will 
increase with current according to the relationship shown in Figure 1.102(a). At 
a particular level of current at, the weld diameter will reach what is regarded 
as the minimum acceptable size, namely a diameter of 3.5~/t, where t is the 
sheet thickness. As the current is increased beyond this critical level, the size of 
the nugget will increase until the stage is reached when the electrodes can no 
longer contain the molten metal, giving a condition which is termed expulsion 
or splash. This is achieved at current a2 and this is regarded as unacceptable, 
irrespective of weld diameter. For a given welding time, therefore, there exists 
a range of current that will produce acceptable welds, i.e. from that which just 
meets the minimum acceptable size criterion to that which just avoids the splash 
condition. This type of exercise can be repeated for different weld times and an 
acceptable range of current can be defined for each particular time. These combi- 
nations of current and time that produce acceptable welds are then expressed in 
the form of weldability lobes, as illustrated in Figure 1.102(b). Thus currents 
or times below the lower bound of the lobe produce welds that are below 
the minimum acceptable diameter and which generally exhibit interface failure. 
Conversely, the combination of currents and times above the lobe will lead to 
the splash condition. 
The width of the lobe can be taken as a measure of the weldability of a material, 
wider lobes indicating a greater tolerance to changes in production conditions. 
Resistance spot welding of high-strength steels 
Experience has shown that the weldability lobes of higher-strength steels are 
only slightly narrower than those of low-strength steels. 15z'153 The acceptable 
range of current (available current) can be improved by using larger electrode 
forces and the optimum results are obtained by increasing these forces by about 

Low-carbon strip steels 103 
I 
/ 
"x~176176 
I--7[,- 
acceptable 
! 
I "i 
 lz, 
i 
i 8,1 
~ 8. 2 
(a) 
(b) 
: 
i 
. . . .  
h 
Acceptable 
conditions 
Small \ 
welds \ 
,, 
Current 
Figure 1.102 Weldability lobes-resistance welding; (a) fixed time Tt; (b)for various 
times (After Jones and Williams 152) 
50% compared with comparable thicknesses of plain carbon steel. The available 
current can also be increased significantly by using larger electrode tip sizes. The 
width of the lobe, for example, can be increased by 700-2000 A by increasing 
the tip diameter from 4.8 to 6.4 mm. 
Alloying elements increase the resistivity of low-carbon ferritic steels and 
consequently less current is require to produce a weld of a given size. The 
increased electrode forces, however, reduce the contact resistance. The overall 
effect, therefore, is generally a reduction in the current required. 
The mode of failure can be different in higher-strength steels compared with 
low-strength steels. Both carbon and phosphorus can influence the fracture mode 
of spot welds and partial plug failures are the most common type of failure 
in peel tests on rephosphorized steels with a diameter of 5~/t. 100% plug fail- 
ures, however, can be obtained in rephosphorized steel of 0.67 mm thickness by 
increasing the weld size to 7.5~/t. 152 The mode of fracture is, however, influ- 
enced by steel type, weld diameter, sheet thickness, geometrical factors and test 
type. Plug failures are promoted by large weld/high heat conditions. The optimum 
balance between strength and weldability is obtained by generally limiting the 
combined carbon plus phosphorus contents to a maximum of 0.18%. 
It is useful to note that a considerable improvement to the fatigue life of welded 
joints may be obtained by increasing the weld size or by increasing the number of 
welds. 152 It was found, however, that the increase in strength was generally rather 
less than a simple multiplication of the strength of each weld by the number of 
welds due to the unequal loading of each weld during testing. It was considered 
that weld design, pitch and number need to be considered carefully if adequate 
benefit is to be derived from the use of higher-strength steel. 

104 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Resistance spot welding of zinc-coated steels 
In relation to hot dip products, a distinction must be made between plain zinc 
and galvanneal coatings. Because of its lower contact resistance, higher currents 
are required for plain zinc-coated strip such as G275, compared with equivalent 
thicknesses of uncoated mild steel. On average, the currents have to be increased 
by about 20%. On the other hand, galvanneal-coated strip has a higher surface 
resistance than G275 and requires only a slight increase in current compared 
with uncoated steel. The weld times employed for zinc-coated steels may be 
50% longer than those used for uncoated steel and the electrode pressure is 
generally increased. 
The spot welding of zinc-coated steels is characterized by an electrode life 
which is shorter than that obtained with uncoated steels. This results from 
the alloying, mushrooming and erosion between the electrode material and the 
coating. Work by Williams 154 showed, however, that electrode life is affected very 
considerably by the type of coating. Thus for both the hot dip and electrolytically 
deposited coatings, the longest lives are obtained with iron-zinc and nickel-zinc 
coatings and values in excess of 500 welds can be achieved. Under non-optimum 
shop floor conditions, however, the number of welds which can be produced can 
be considerably less. 
Resistance seam welding 
The principle of resistance seam welding is similar to that of resistance spot 
welding except that the current is supplied to the work using electrodes in the 
form of wheels and the work moves continuously between the wheels to form 
a continuous weld. With coated steels, the electrodes can become contaminated 
and poor welds are produced. This problem is overcome in the Soudronic process 
by using continuously moving copper wires between the wheels and the work 
to act as intermediate electrodes, as illustrated in Figure 1.103. At each moment 
during the weld, therefore, the work is contacted by an effectively new and clean 
electrode. 
Wire feed 
Figure 1.103 Principle of the Soudronic weMing process l~s 

Low-carbon strip steels 
105 
Adequately wide ranges of current and welding speed are available for practical 
use. With some coated steels, however, the limiting factor is the tendency for 
cracking to occur in the weld or in the heat-affected zone. Interrupted current 
programmes, for example 2 cycles on and 2 cycles off, give a lower tendency 
for cracking and consequently a wider welding range. 155 The use of interrupted 
currents also reduces the tendency for surface brassing of the weld and for wire 
breaks. 
An alternative method for coated steels is narrow seam welding, as illustrated 
in Figure I. 104, In this method, scraping devices and high pressure profile rollers 
are used continuously to clean and profile the wheel electrodes. Such machines 
are used for welding petrol tanks and exhaust systems. Welding speeds of up to 
5 metres per minute may be achieved and narrow welds in the range 1.5-3.5 mm 
may be produced. These welds are stronger than the parent steel and are suitable 
for watertight and airtight applications. 155 
Laser seam welding 
A laser provides a uniquely concentrated form of energy and is now being used 
for the manufacture of tailor-made welded blanks. Sheets of different strength, 
thickness or coating type are welded together prior to pressing the component. 
The method produces very narrow welds (~,1 mm wide), free from distortion, 
with a minimal heat-affected zone. The welded sheets may be used to form 
complex pressings and when used with metallic-coated steels, there is only 
minimal damage to the coating and galvanic protection of the weld. 
It has been found 156 that by using a 5 kW laser, satisfactory welds can be 
achieved at speeds of 10 metres per minute for 0.7 mm strip, dropping to 5 metres 
End view 
Scraper 
device 
High-pressure 
proflle roller 
Sheq 
r- 
~'z 
F.:.'-'.'-'-.: ..... -:::-'.-'.'-'.'~ 
"
~
"
 
High-pressure 
e miler 
~.= 
~,~;~ 
Scraper 
/,,~k device 
I" ........... 
i 
Figure 1.104 
Schematic detail of electrode wheel showing scraper and profiled friction 
drive wheel 155 

106 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
per minute for 2.0 mm strip. A good fit-up between the pieces to be joined and 
good joint beam alignment is, however, necessary for these rates to be employed. 
Simulative forming tests showed that cup heights of 80-100% of those of the 
parent material may be obtained with the weld before failure. The situation 
is more complicated when the sheet components have a significantly different 
thickness. 
Laser-welded blanks are used in automotive construction for components such 
as door inners, monosides and longitudinal rails, as previously illustrated in 
Figure 1.33. The benefits depend on the part and on the production volumes. 
Laser seam welding is also now used for vehicle construction to produce contin- 
uous joints and improve torsional stiffness. The number of applications is small 
at present but is likely to increase in the future. The narrow weld results in low 
distortion. Close tolerances are, however, required on joint fit-up. 
?dig and TIG welding 
These abbreviations refer to metal inert gas and tungsten inert gas respectively. 
Both processes are arc welding methods in which an inert gas is used to protect 
the weld. In the MIG process the weld is prepared using a consumable electrode 
which melts to form part of the weld metal. In the TIG process a non-consumable 
tungsten electrode is used and the weld metal comes from the pieces to be joined. 
Mechanical joining 
One of the simplest methods of joining along a straight edge is to use what 
is called lock forming or clinching, as illustrated in Figure 1.105. Modifications 
of this method are particularly suitable for the manufacture of box sections, as 
shown in Figure 1.106. Another technique involves the use of a pneumatic tool 
which cuts holes in the pieces to be joined and bends two tags through the holes 
to make a joint, as illustrated in Figure 1.107. 
Press joining provides a further technique for joining sheet materials. 157 The 
tooling for this method is illustrated in Figure 1.108 and consists of a punch, an 
,, 
,,, 
(a) Double lock seam 
(b) Pittsburgh lock seam 
Figure 1.105 Two forms of lock seaming 155 

Low-carbon strip steels 107 
Fig.re 1.106 
Types of clinched sections 15s 
. 
".., 
~. 
.. 
. 
-. 
9 ,. ~ 
..,,~.. 
9 
. 
4" 
Figure 1.107 A diagram illustrating the type of joining using a stitch folding gun 155 
Eckold press-formed joint 
Formation of eckold press-formed joint 
Anvil 
Insert~n 
and penetration Of Eckold join .... 
Joint 
~element 
.__.~'~~ ~"~Sheets 
Figure 1.108 Diagram illustrating the formation of an Eckold press-formed joint 155 

108 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
anvil and an expanding die. When the punch has penetrated the double thickness 
of steel to be joined, the displaced element of steel is compressed between the 
punch and the anvil. This causes the element of the upper sheet to spread beneath 
the lower sheet thus forming the joint. It is found that the strength of press- 
formed joints depends on the thickness and strength of the steel being joined. 
The maximum load that can be generated in a shear test is higher in the direction 
perpendicular to the two cuts, but the elongation to failure is several times greater 
in the direction parallel to the cuts than in the perpendicular direction. 
The method has been adapted by the use of multi-point tooling to make a large 
number of separate joins by means of one movement of the tool. The orientations 
of each joint may be selected to give the optimum directionality of the strength 
of the final composite joint. 
Joining using fasteners 
Fasteners include screws and rivets. Formerly, these required holes to be drilled 
prior to the insertion of the screw. Self-drilling and self-tapping screws, however, 
are now available which greatly simplify assembly since access to the reverse 
side of the steel is not needed. A similar benefit may be obtained, however, using 
compressive fasteners which have a nut which forces the legs apart to clamp two 
steel sheets together. 
A recent advance is the development of self-piercing rivets which are now 
coming into common use. The basic form of this device is semi-tubular, as 
illustrated in Figure 1.109(a). The joining process itself occurs in two stages but 
these are combined into a single continuous operation. In the first stage, the rivet 
is pressed into the two sheets to be joined and its shank cuts a hole through 
the top sheet and partially through the bottom sheet. In the later stages of travel 
through the bottom sheet, the sheet material is displaced by the die causing the 
shank of the rivet to flare out and lock itself into the steel. A typical cross-section 
of a riveted joint is illustrated in Figure 1.109(b). 
Figure 1.109 Diagrams illustrating the cross-section of a self-piercing rivet (a) before 
and (b) after riveting 158 

Low-carbon strip steels 109 
A large force (typically 40 kN) is required to make the joint and this is provided 
by means of a C-frame which is able to accommodate the rivet setter and the 
upsetting die. When used to join two sheets of unequal thickness, it is preferable 
for the thin material to be on the side that is fully pierced. It has been claimed 
that the fatigue performance and energy absorption of self-piercing rivet joints 
are equivalent to or better than spot welded joints. ~59 
Use of adhesives in weldbonding, clinchbonding and rivbonding 
Adhesives may be used to join various components and are widely used to 
join steel to dissimilar materials. Developments are still in progress, however, 
concerning joints that are required to carry a structural load which are likely to be 
subject to severe weather conditions in service. For potential applications in the 
automotive industry, for example, the adhesive is generally considered for use in 
combination with other joining methods such as spot welding, press joining or 
riveting. These hybrid methods are known as weldbonding, clinchbonding and 
rivbonding respectively. 
Detailed studies l~ have shown that each method could be used under normal 
automotive production conditions and that they could be used to join two, three 
or four thickness combinations of steel together. It has been found that for simple 
joints and arrays, each hybrid outperforms its parent method (without the adhe- 
sive), but the extent of the improvement was markedly greater for shear- than 
for peel-loading conditions. This can be attributed to the fact that adhesives are 
significantly weaker in peel than in shear because of the reduced ability of the 
steel to dissipate stress along the bond line under this mode of loading. The use of 
the hybrid methods leads to an improvement in both the collapse resistance and 
torsional stiffness of box hat structures. The extent of the benefit was, however, 
greater for the former than for the latter loading regime. This was attributed to 
the limited ability of the adhesive to withstand large deformations associated with 
impact loading. 
Strip steel in use 
Fatigue 
The load-bearing capability of any component manufactured from sheet steel 
depends on its size and shape and on the thickness and strength of the steel used 
to make the component. Most components are, however, joined together with 
other components to form complete structures and the strength of any complete 
structure clearly depends on the way the components are joined together as well 
as on the strength of the individual components. Examples of such structures 
would include the complete body shell of a motor car, the frame of a steel- 
framed building or a cylindrical steel drum with each end connected to the side 
wall in a suitable way (see below). 
Many components and structures are subject to vibration in use. The compo- 
nents and joints may, therefore, be subject to fatigue damage, whereby crack 

110 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
formation and failure could occur at a lower stress than would cause failure by 
the single application of the stress. The design of any structure must, therefore, 
take the possibility of fatigue damage into account. This is done by estimating 
fatigue life at critical positions in any structure and by modifying the design, if 
necessary, to ensure that the life is adequate for the intended application. The 
critical positions are usually at discontinuities such as holes, joints or comers 
where the local stress is high. The resulting estimate will depend on an interac- 
tion between the local stresses developed in the structure and the properties of 
the material used in its formed or welded condition. 
Total fatigue failure usually occurs in one of two stages. The first is crack 
initiation and the second is crack propagation. The total fatigue life or number of 
strain cycles to failure Nt may, therefore, be estimated by combining the crack 
initiation life Ni with the crack propagation life Np. These two contributions may 
be estimated using data obtained from different types of specimen. The motor 
industry is, however, more concerned with crack initiation. 161 
Fatigue crack initiation 
The crack initiation fatigue life may be estimated using data obtained from smooth 
specimens, often in the form of a small tensile specimen with a gauge length of 
only a few millimetres. For tests involving both tension and compression, the 
ratio of length to thickness must be small enough to enable sufficient strain 
to be given in compression without leading to buckling. Each specimen may 
be subjected to a cyclic strain of constant amplitude, alternating between fixed 
amounts of deformation in tension and compression and often using a triangular 
waveform. It is often found that the cyclic stress developed during each test varies 
gradually during the test, particularly for the higher strains, and then reaches a 
constant value. It finally falls rapidly as the first cracks are initiated at which point 
the test is terminated. For lower strains which are almost completely elastic, the 
stress developed remains substantially constant up to the stage of crack initiation. 
The number of cycles to crack initiation always increases as the applied strain 
decreases and these parameters may be plotted against each other to give what is 
called a strain-life curve. Examples of this relationship are given in Figure 1.110. 
Plastic deformation occurs at the higher values of strain and the number of cycles 
to give crack initiation becomes relatively small, depending on the strength and 
other characteristics of the steel. At very low values of applied strain, suffi- 
cient cycles to give crack initiation can never be applied. For practical purposes, 
therefore, Ni becomes infinite. 
The stresses and strains developed half way through the various tests and in 
the stable region may be plotted against each other to form what is known as 
the cyclic stress-strain curve for the steel. It may be used to calculate the local 
strain that would be developed as a result of any localized applied cyclic stress. 
In service, any component may be subjected to a fairly random sequence of 
strains and it is clearly necessary to know the expected stress history of any 
critical part of a structure before any estimate of fatigue life can be made. The 
local strain history may then be calculated using the cyclic stress-strain curve. A 
method must also be available to be able to calculate the contribution to fatigue 
damage that would arise from each of the strains in the expected strain history. 

Low-carbon strip steels 111 
0.1 
| 
.~ 
0.Ol 
c 
m 0.001 
0.0001 
Strain-life curves 
I 
l 
9 RQC-IO0 
= Man-Ten 
I 
10 
10 2 
10 3 
10 4 
10 5 
I0 e 
10 7 
Reversals to fallure, 2Nf 
Figure 1.110 Strain-life curves for two structural steels (After Landgraf 62) 
In this way the total fatigue damage and hence fatigue life Ni to crack initiation 
may be calculated. The simplest method to use is the linear damage rule put 
forward by Palmgren 163 and Miner. 164 According to this rule, if the proportions 
of the various strains m in the strain history are Pl, P2, P3... Pro, etc., and the 
numbers of cycles to crack initiation for these strains taken from the strain-life 
curve are N l, N2, N3... Nm, etc., then the cumulative damage is given by: 
Damage = plNi/Nl + p2Ni/N2 + p3Ni/N3..., etc. 
and failure is expected to occur when E pmNi/Nm -- 1. 
A difficulty with this method (or any other method) is that the calculation of 
the proportion of each active strain from a highly irregular and random sequence 
of cyclic strains is not straightforward. Several methods have been proposed of 
which the rainflow method is probably the most accurate one. Further details of 
these methods are given in a complete conference proceedings. 165 
An alternative way of carrying out a fatigue test is to use a series of constant 
cyclic stresses to develop a stress-life curve. It is said 162 that this approach is 
more suited to long-life fatigue problems but less suited to low-cycle problems 
involving relatively large plastic strains. With this method, a stress may be iden- 
tified below which the number of cycles to crack initiation is never reached. This 
stress is regarded as the fatigue strength of the steel. The relationship between 
the fatigue strength and the monotonic tensile strength depends on the yield to 
tensile strength ratio of the steel t66 since the yield or proof stress is the parameter 
which influences the onset of plastic deformation. 
Fatigue crack growth 
Fatigue crack growth rates may be measured using a standard testing method t67 
and a type of specimen, as illustrated in Figure 1.111. Before testing, a crack is 
formed at the notch tip using a suitable load cycle and a stress intensity factor 
at the crack tip is defined which depends on the crack length, the specimen 

112 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
[ 
1 
30.5 
2.5--] 
6.35 dla.J 
I--o-I 
7.0 
..... 
>----- 
_ 
_ 
7.0 
, 
, 
jo 
76 l- 
" 
t 
9 
---- W = 25.4 --'--- 
-,------- 
31.8 
All dimensions in mm 
Figure 1.111 Compact tension specimen used for crack growth test 167 
geometry and the difference between the minimum and maximum loads applied. 
During the test the crack length is monitored using a travelling microscope and 
a plot of crack length versus number of cycles enables the crack growth rate 
per cycle to be obtained. A fatigue threshold is defined as the maximum stress 
intensity factor below which an existing crack does not propagate. It represents 
a fatigue limit related to crack growth. 
The cyclic stress-strain curve 
The method of obtaining the cyclic curve mentioned above involves the use 
of several specimens. Alternative methods have been proposed for obtaining 
the cyclic curve from a single specimen. Some of these involve the waveforms 
illustrated in Figure 1.112. 
It was indicated above that the cyclic stresses developed as a result of the 
application of a constant cyclic strain may often vary during the test. The impli- 
cation is that the cyclic stress-strain curve is often different from the monotonic 
tensile curve obtained from a conventional tensile test. The monotonic curve 
would correspond with the first part of the first cycle in a fatigue test. Examples 
of cyclic softening, cyclic hardening and cyclic stability, or a mixture of all three, 
have been observed for various types of steel when plastic strain is involved in 
the test but the strength is stable when the deformation is substantially elastic. It 
is found that the effects tend to be associated with the strengthening mechanisms 
used in the steel. 168 Strengthening by solid solution effects, grain refinement and 
precipitation, for example, tend to be stable in the presence of plastic defor- 
mation whereas strengthening by temper-rolling or bake-hardening effects tend 
to be unstable. It must be remembered, however, that components made from 
bake-hardening steels are not subject to plastic deformation over their main area 
during use. The increase in dent resistance arising from the bake hardening will 
not, therefore, be affected by fatigue. Studies of the cyclic stability of steel cut 

Low-carbon strip steels 113 
i ......... 
' ..... Method" 
..... ' 
Constant 
strain amplitude 
(plastic or total strain) 
(several specimens) 
Incremental step 
(one specimen) 
Multiple step, 
Increasing strain 
(one specimen) 
Multiple step, 
decreasing strain 
(one specimen) 
' 
Strain wavefo~_ 
~ ~i 
.
.
.
.
 
, 
r 
,,, 
, , ,  
Figure 1.112 Different strain waveforms used to measure a cyclic stress-strain curve 
from pressings involving different types of forming strain 169 have also shown that 
the increase in strength from the cold work during forming may be lost during 
cyclic deformation. It is a safe procedure, therefore, to disregard the increase in 
strength due to forming strains for design calculations. 
Cold work embrittlement 
Any structure must clearly have sufficient strength to survive normal use and 
sufficient ductility to withstand any unusual impacts. It has been found, however, 
that certain IF steels may be subject to a condition known as secondary cold 
work embrittlement (SCWE). This condition may lead to brittle fracture after the 
material has previously received severe strains such as those encountered during 
deep drawing. The cracking is accompanied by very little plastic deformation 
and consequently very little energy absorption and the initial fracture surfaces 
have been reported to be mainly intergranular. 17~ 
There is little evidence that 
SCWE has caused any serious problem in service, 172 but nevertheless it has been 
the subject of extensive research to show how the condition may be avoided. 
The condition has been mainly studied using three types of laboratory test, 
but the most commonly used test involves a cylindrical cup. A circular blank 
of steel is first deep drawn to form the cup and a truncated conical plunger is 
used to open the cup end to determine whether the rim of the cup is brittle. The 
plunger may be pushed slowly into the cup as illustrated in Figure 1.113, using a 

114 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
I 
i 
 o.[I 
Plunger 
Drop weight (crushedcup) 
method 
method 
Figure 1.113 
Henning 173) 
Schematic diagrams illustrating two forms of an SCWE test (After 
tensile machine, or it may be dropped from a suitable height, usually 1 metre. In 
each case, the test is carried out at various temperatures below room temperature 
and a temperature is established at which a brittle crack is first formed. This 
temperature, known as the ductile to brittle transition temperature (DB'Iq'), is a 
measure of the brittle tendency of the steel and decreases as the tendency for 
brittle behaviour decreases. It is found, however, that the transition temperature 
is influenced by the drawing ratio used to produce the cup and increases with 
increasing drawing ratio. 172 
In a variant of the above test, a cylindrical cup is also used but the weight 
is dropped onto the side of the cup, as also illustrated in Figure 1.113. Again 
the DB'I~ is defined as that at which brittle cracks first form. The third method 
involves bending. (173) Suitable strips of steel are bent through 180" and then 
opened at various temperatures below room temperature using five samples at 
each temperature. At a sufficiently low temperature, the samples crack open in 
a brittle manner and the transition temperature is defined as the temperature at 
which all five specimens crack in this brittle manner. The three methods do not 
give the same transition temperature for the same steel but there is a correlation 
between the results. Figure 1.114 shows, for example, a correlation between the 
transition temperature from the bend test and that from the side crush test. It is 
useful to note that the transition temperature from the bend test is higher than that 
from the side impact test. This implies that the bend test is more severe. It has 
recently been suggested that the bend test could become more widely used. 174 
2244225824742460 white space 
As indicated earlier, the concern about SCWE covers IF steels and particu- 
larly those containing phosphorus. 175'176 In the absence of interstitial carbon, the 
phosphorus may segregate to the grain boundaries during annealing and promote 
intergranular fracture by causing grain boundary embrittlement. The effect is 
greater for batch-annealed steel than for continuously annealed steel 177 since 
slow cooling gives more time for segregation. Carbon in solution reduces the 
effect, 17s but the main way of controlling the condition is by the addition of 
boron. 176 A very small quantity, such as 0.0005%, is sufficient to reduce the 

Low-carbon strip steels 115 
-30 . 
, 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
-4O 
60 
70 
-80 , 
-10 
0 
Bond TT (~ 
TT = transition temperature 
II 
Curve Fk: 
Y =-64.4+0.71x 
RA2 = 0.70 
I 
ii 
i 
iii 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
' 
10 
20 
30 
Figure 1.114 Relation between brittle transition temperature measured using the crushed 
cup and the bend test methods (After Henning 173) 
tendency to SCWE, ~79 but not sufficient to have a noticeable detrimental effect 
on the r value. 
Strip steel in automotive applications 
The automotive industry is the most important single market for steel strip and 
has provided the greatest stimulus and challenge for the development of new 
products, new ways of using them and greater product consistency. In spite of the 
competition from aluminium alloys and plastics, steel has maintained its position 
as the predominant material for the car body and structural components due to 
its good formability, high modulus of elasticity, ease of welding and relatively 
low cost. Various grades of steel now comprise 50-60% of the vehicles weight. 
Since the 1970s, however, significant changes have taken place in the selection 
of strip steels for automotive construction: 
1. The need to reduce fuel consumption and fume emissions while maintaining 
structural performance. 
2. The need to improve corrosion performance to be able to provide customers 
with better warranties against structural and cosmetic deterioration. 
3. The need to improve passenger safety. 
Reduced fuel consumption may clearly be achieved by improved engine effi- 
ciency, but it has also been achieved by reducing vehicle weight. Figure 1.115 
shows, for the top 30 registered European cars, how the kilometres travelled per 
litre increases with decreasing weight, but also shows that, for a given weight, 
there was a general increase from 1982 to 1992 due to other reasons. Clearly, a 

116 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Kilometres travelled per litre 
26 [-- 
24=~ 
20 
18 
16" 
14 
12 r. 
lo~._ 
800 
1992 
I 
B 
982 
9 
"~ 
9 
9 
~ 
.= 
II 
II 
41, 
1000 
1200 
1400 1600 
1800 
2000 2200 
Weight (kgs) 
11~992 
4k 1982 
Figure 1.115 Plots illustrating the variation in kilometres travelled per litre of fuel with 
car weight for 1982 and 1992 (After Is~ 
car with a low weight and hence low fuel consumption, will be attractive from 
an economic point of view but it will also lead to a reduction in the formation 
of the 'so-called' greenhouse gas, CO2, that can lead to global warming. 17s 
Weight reduction and the use of high-strength steels 
During the early 1970s, higher-strength steels were introduced in the United 
States for safety-related or structural members such as bumper reinforcements, 
side door intrusion beams and seat belt anchors. These components were manu- 
factured mainly from hot-rolled, niobium-treated, micro-alloyed steels which 
provided a favourable cost/strength/weight ratio compared with lower-strength 
unalloyed steel or any other strip steel available at that time. In addition, their 
use necessitated only minor changes in manufacturing methods and facilities. It 
was unfortunate that since these were new components, their use inevitably led 
to an increase in vehicle weight. More recently, higher-strength thinner gauge 
steels have been used for some of these components to take out some of the 
additional weight that had been introduced. These have included the ultra-high- 
strength steels, with a tensile strength above 1000 MPa, strengthened by a high 
proportion of transformation product, and steels which develop their ultra-high 
strength by heat treatment and quenching after forming. 
The oil crises of 1973 and 1979 provided the initial stimuli for weight reduction 
itself. The car body is assembled from large body panels and constitutes about 
25-30% of the total weight of a medium-size car. It is, therefore, the heaviest 
vehicle component. It was clear, therefore, that reducing the weight of the body 
could have a significant impact on the total weight of the complete car. It was 
realized that this could be done by the substitution of steel by aluminium or plas- 
tics, but the penalty would have been increased cost as illustrated in Figure 1.116. 
It was generally accepted that the use of high-strength steel, which would enable 
component performance to be maintained at a reduced thickness, was the only 
way to achieve both weight and cost savings. 

Low-carbon strip steels 117 
Figure 1.116 Costs of different lightweight construction methods lsl 
The micro-alloyed steels mentioned earlier were suitable for use for relatively 
simple structural parts, but their reduced formability and increased springback 
compared with lower-strength mild steel prevented their use for the large body 
panels, which in general involved difficult forming operations. In addition, the 
formability of any steel decreases with decreasing thickness as indicated by 
the lower plane strain intercept on the forming limit diagram. Any decrease 
in thickness, therefore, only exacerbates the loss in formability that arises from 
the increase in strength. 
The reaction of the automobile industry world-wide was to request steels with 
a relatively small increase in strength over mild steel, with the loss in formability 
reduced to a minimum while still retaining high r values. The first of these steels 
were the rephosphorized steels which, as indicated previously, retained higher 
r values and higher elongation values than would have been obtained from any 
micro-alloyed steel of similar strength. Steels with minimum proof stresses of 
180, 220, 260 and 300 N/mm 2 have been available in Europe, though the grades 
with the lower strength are the ones which have been more commonly used. The 
early rephosphorized steels were batch annealed and based on an aluminium- 
killed composition, but a more recent trend has been to anneal different types of 
steel continuously, either on a continuous annealing line or on a hot dip galva- 
nizing line. The hot dip-coated steels, usually with a galvanneal coating for the 
motor industry, tend to be based on an IF-type composition to be more compat- 
ible with a continuous annealing cycle. These steels, as mentioned previously, 
may also be solid solution strengthened with manganese, boron or silicon as 
well as a small phosphorus addition to reduce problems that would otherwise be 
associated with high phosphorus levels. 
The solid solution-strengthened steels made by alloying either an aluminium- 
killed or an IF base composition are sufficiently formable to enable difficult body 
panels to be produced without local necking or splitting, but the pressing has still 
been subject to greater springback than lower-strength mild steel. The trend has, 
therefore, been to use bake-hardening steels. These steels usually have a minimum 
bake-hardening index of 40 N/mm 2. Very approximately, therefore, it is possible 
with a bake-hardening steel to achieve the same formability and spfingback as 

118 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
the equivalent grade of non-bake-hardening steel but with the performance in 
service of one grade higher. 
Many applications of bake-hardening steels aim to provide improved plastic 
dent resistance mainly in lightly deformed parts of panels with low curvature such 
as bonnets and boot lids. Drewes and Engl 1s3 presented a relationship between 
yield stress, sheet thickness and load required to give the same residual dent 
depth of 0.2 mm as illustrated in Figure 1.117. This may be used to calculate 
what reduction in gauge could be obtained for the same dent resistance by using 
a higher yield stress. The curves for rephosphorized, micro-alloyed and bake- 
hardening steel produce similar effects for the same sheet thickness but the 
dual-phase steel gives a different effect due to the high rate of work hardening. 
Figure 1.118 Is4 gives an example of the various types of high-strength steel 
that may typically be used for the various parts of an existing motor vehicle 
with an indication of change for the future. Figure 1.119 gives a summary of the 
historical development of the use of high-strength steel in cars from a European 
point of view. 
Hitherto, weight reduction has mainly been achieved by substitution of thinner 
steels for thicker ones without any major change in design concept. Recently, 
a major project Is5 has been initiated, with phase 1 sponsored by 32 large steel 
companies across the world, to maximize weight reduction using any existing 
manufacturing processes and steel grades that are available. The project known 
as the ULSAB (ultra light steel auto body) project, aims to design a body-in- 
white (BIW) with the same or higher-performance features as existing designs 
but with a reduced weight. Phase 1 of this project has been completed 1s5 and 
progress has been reviewed. 186,187 
A bench mark of existing designs was obtained by taking mean values over a 
number of suitable, mid-size, existing designs and normalizing the figures to take 
6OO 
500 
z~ 400 
LL o 
 '3oo 
200 
100 
,. 
,. 
Rephosphorized and / 
micro-alloyed steels/0.88 mm 
..... Dual-phase 
/ 
/~ 
steels 
/" // 0.75 mm 
// 
I 
I 
I 
200 
3so ,oo 
YS (N/ram 2) 
Figure 1.117 
Effect of yield strength and sheet thickness on dent resistance under 
quasistatic localized loading (Fo.2 = load producing 0.2 mm remaining dent depth) (After 
Drewes and Engl. ~s3) 

____ 
~ -  
_ 
~ m 
I 
J 
!, 
l 
__L 
. 
, .
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
,. 
. 
9 ..,= 
,., 
.... 
. 
- 
! 
4 
'r 

120 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
,, 
,, 
,, 
, 
Process Development 
Materials' Design [ 
- '?_ i- ~! 
I 
'~ 
.su~.',c~st.,s 
, >i 
_ 
i - 
T, Rl~'Stee~, 
~, 
I .High'Strength IFiSteols R.m > ~ 
M.Pn' ~> 
I Bake-Her(ler~ing-$teeis Re z, 180...300 MPa> 
[ 
"-Dual' F;hase-'Steels' _ 
- 
, 
.
.
.
.
.
 
, 
[. 
Rephosphodzed S!eols R, ,~ 2'20...~X) MPa' 
,, 
[Mlcroalloy~lSteels I~"~ 280':..420 MPa' ' ilsotrop,r Steels R. 
~250 MP~:~a~ 
t r.~i...~,ed Sic*,. ~, 
._., 
_ 
. 
1975 
19~10 
' 
" '- 
' 
' 
'1995 
1985 
1990 
2000 
, 
, 
, 
, 
,, 
Figure 1.119 The development of high-strength, cold-rolled steels for auto-body appli- 
cations. The time axis reflects the approximate first industrial usage, from a European 
perspective, in the automotive industry (After Bleck 94) 
Table 1.14 
Progress of the ULSAB project at the end of phase 1 
Representative 
Performance 
Achieved 
figure post-2000 
target 
figure 
Mass 
250 kg 
200 kg 
205 kg 
Static torsional rigidity 
13 000 Nm/deg. 
> 13 000 Nm/deg. 
19 056 Nm/deg. 
Static bending rigidity 
12 200 N/ram 
> 12 200 N/ram 
12 529 N/mm 
First BIW mode 
40 Hz 
>40 Hz 
51 Hz 
account of different vehicle size. The main performance features being considered 
are the static torsional rigidity, the static bending rigidity and the first B IW mode. 
The latter is the resonant frequency for vibration of the body and should be as 
high as possible for passenger comfort. Table 1.14 gives the properties expected 
to be representative of a typical mid-size body in the post-2000 time period, after 
reasonable further improvements to existing types of design have been made. It 
compares them with the targets for the ULSAB design and the figures that have 
been achieved. It is seen that the main objective was to give a 20% reduction in 
weight from 250 to 200 kg while maintaining or improving the body performance. 
It is evident that the performance objectives have been achieved comfortably but 
that the weight reduction target has not been quite achieved. 
The approach to the design has been a holistic one. Thus, parts of the body 
have been increased in weight to be able to make greater reductions elsewhere. 
Hydroforming is to be used to make the roof-rail sections, which could not 
easily be made using conventional forming techniques. Some parts are made by 
roll forming and some are made from sound deadened steel as described below. 
The torsional and bending rigidities of the structure have been improved by weld 
bonding, but a number of continuous joints have also been achieved using laser 
welding. The complexity of the structure has been reduced by the use of laser- 
welded blanks thus obviating the need for additional strengthening members. 
The estimated cost of production has been given as $154, less than for a typical 

Low-carbon strip steels 121 
mid-size BIW and representing a saving of 14%. It has been said, therefore, that 
there would be a case for manufacturing a ULSAB body even if no savings in 
weight had been predicted. 
It is useful to note that steels with a yield stress above 210 MPa have been 
specified for two-thirds of the parts in the ULSAB design and a high proportion of 
the steel used is also coated with one or other of the corrosion protective coatings 
available. It is clear, therefore, that corrosion protection, as well as mechanical 
performance, has been an important consideration of the design. Several steel 
bodies are being built to confirm and demonstrate the phase 1 design and perfor- 
mance. These are to be exhibited around the world during 1998. 
Improved corrosion resistance 
In recent years, the use of zinc-coated steels in car body construction has 
increased dramatically as manufacturers have attempted to improve their 
warranties against corrosion. Two types of corrosion have to be considered, 
namely: 
1. Perforation corrosion which takes place from the inside of the vehicle to the 
outside, causing a hole to appear. 
2. Cosmetic corrosion which takes place on the external surfaces of the vehicle. 
Most manufacturers have incorporated about 70% coated steel in the body-in- 
white and it is reported that Audi has adopted a 100% coated steel construction. 
Both hot dip and electro-galvanized steels are being used in place of uncoated, 
cold-reduced steel and their application to different parts of the car body has 
been described by Dasarathy and Goodwin. 45 This is illustrated in Figure 1.120 
which refers to the materials listed below. It is useful to note, however, that there 
is a general trend away from the use of electro-coated material towards the use 
of galvanneal and that hot dip aluminium coated steels are used for car silencers. 
9 CRIFF: uncoated steel 
, Galvatite: hot dip zinc 
e Galvanneal: hot dip iron-zinc alloy 
CR 1 FF 
Durasteel 
Figure 1.120 Typical automotive body panels fabricated from metallic-coated steels 
(After Dasarathy and Goodwin 45) 

122 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
9 Nizec: electro-deposited 87% Zn 13Ni 
9 Durasteel: Nizec + 1.0 ~tm organic coating 
Durasteel is one of a number of proprietary steels with a thin organic coating 
which is intended primarily as a lubricant for complex forming operations but 
which also provides corrosion resistance. After forming, the organic coating is 
on the inside surface of the car where it is subsequently electroprimed but not 
finished with a surfacer or topcoat. 
The substitution of uncoated steel by coated products in automobiles introduces 
a number of production implications and the experience in the Rover Group has 
been described by Thompson. lss One very important consideration is that the 
zinc surface is significantly softer than an uncoated steel surface and is therefore 
more susceptible to damage during decoiling and handling. However, these prob- 
lems have been overcome at Rover by training programmes rather than facility 
changes. The soft nature of the zinc coating can also cause zinc to be wiped off 
the steel by the tools during deep-drawing operations. However, it is reported 
that the wiping action has little effect on the corrosion behaviour as only a small 
amount of zinc is actually removed and the coating maintains sacrificial protec- 
tion. On the other hand, the pick-up of zinc on the tool necessitates more frequent 
tool cleaning and a reduction in the output of the press. 
Thompson reports that the blanking process can leave small particles of zinc 
around cropped edges which could deposit on the tools and produce surface 
imperfections during pressing. However, this problem has been overcome by the 
installation of blank-washing equipment. Although there was concern initially 
that the introduction of coated steels might require major press tool modifi- 
cations because of the different frictional characteristics of the surface, no tool 
modifications were necessary and the problems have been overcome by improved 
housekeeping and routine maintenance. In relation to the welding implications, 
the author comments on the need for changes in machine parameters to cope 
with the increased current (10-20%) requirements of coated steel and also on 
the greater frequency of weld tip dressing due to the build-up of zinc on the tip 
surface. 
Reference was made earlier to Durasteel, which has a 1 ~m organic coating 
over a zinc-rich substrate. However, duplex coatings with organic components 
of 5-7 ~tm thick are also finding application in car body construction in order 
to improve the corrosion performance and resistance to stone-chip damage. 
Bowen 189 has stated that the incidence of stone-chip damage has increased due 
to the greater use of road salt and also because of changes in vehicle design. 
The latter is related to the practice of body streamlining in order to reduce air 
resistance and the drag coefficient. Thus the paintwork on a sloping bonnet has 
become subjected to greater attack than was the case on unpainted radiator grilles. 
This problem is also exacerbated to some extent by the fact that zinc coatings are 
inferior substrates to bare steel from the point of view of achieving good paint 
adhesion and therefore stone-chip damage is more evident. Bowen states that this 
problem can be overcome by using duplex coatings and, as an example, describes 
the use of Zincal Duplex, an electro-galvanized steel coated with Bonnazine 2000, 
an epoxy-based primer, filled with metallic zinc and aluminium and containing 

Low-carbon strip steels 123 
molybdenum sulphide as a slip agent during forming. It is reported that Ford are 
applying duplex coatings to the bonnets of all Granadas/Scorpios and Fiestas, 
achieving a 20% reduction in stone-chip damage and the complete elimination 
of red-rust corrosion. 
Dasarathy and Goodwin 45 comment on the need for preprimed steel for auto- 
motive construction which would replace the electropfiming and surfacer primer 
stages of finishing at the manufacturers. Such a product would be hot dip or 
electro-deposited zinc-coated steel with a 25 t~m organic coating. However, the 
authors state that this type of material is still very much at the development stage 
and one of the major problems that must be overcome is that current organic 
coatings are not weldable. 
Before leaving automotive applications, reference should also be made to the 
use of terne-coated steel products, i.e. with tin-lead coatings. Ternex 19~ has a 
hot dip coating of 92% Pb 8% Sn, applied over a nickel flash, electrolytically 
deposited over the steel surface. Such materials are resistant to attack by auto- 
motive fuels and are used extensively for the manufacture of petrol tanks. 
Strip steels in buildings 
The construction industry is a major consumer of strip steel but still represents 
a major growth sector for this product. 
Steel.framed houses 
Following earlier problems, interest has now been revived in steel-framed housing 
since it offers many advantages over traditional construction. In particular, the 
frame can be erected very quickly and made weatherproof so as to allow internal 
work to proceed at an early date. Labour costs and construction times are also 
reduced which leads to lower interest costs and faster financial returns. Benefits 
also accrue to the householder since the steel frame does not absorb moisture 
and is not subject to shrinkage or warping. The risk of cracking in wall linings 
is therefore reduced and the steel frame is also fire resistant. 
Earlier attempts to introduce steel-framed houses were unsuccessful because 
the designs were geared to rapid construction rather than aesthetic appeal. The 
initial steel frames were also manufactured in painted mild steels which were 
prone to corrosion problems. 191 In current construction, these problems have 
been overcome by: 
1. Preserving a traditional exterior of bricks and mortar around a load-bearing 
steel frame. 
2. Employing hot dip galvanized steel in place of painted steel for corrosion 
resistance. 
An illustration of the construction of a steel-framed house with the preservation 
of a traditional exterior is shown in Figures 1.121(a) and (b). 
The structural members that make up the steel frame are roll-formed U chan- 
nels in Z28 (280 N/ram 2 rain. YS) grade steel with a zinc coating of 275 g/m 2 

124 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 1.121 Steel-framed housing (Courtesy of Precision Metal Forming Ltd) 
(including both sides). According to Haberfield, 191 modular frames, typically 
5 m x 2.4 m high, are fabricated at the factory and bolted together on site on 
traditional foundations. The internal partitioning walls are constructed and assem- 
bled in the same way, followed by the second storey and roof. Steel joists are 
used to support the floor loadings from the second floor. 
The above author states that up to 2 tonnes of hot dip galvanized steel sections 
may be used in a three-bedroomed house and the thickness of the sections ranges 
from under 1 mm to 2.5 mm or greater, depending on the function. The basic 
frame is designed to withstand all forces and no strengthening or stiffening contri- 
bution is assumed from the external brick or internal plasterboard linings. 
Steel cladding 
From the early days of 'corrugated iron', strip products have featured prominently 
as cladding materials, particularly in the construction of industrial buildings. A 
considerable amount of effort has been devoted to the development of struc- 
turally efficient profiles for steel cladding and some typical profiles are shown in 
Figure 1.122. 
Although a significant part of the market for cladding and roofing is still 
satisfied by unpainted, or zinc- or zinc-aluminium-coated strip, this area has been 
revolutionized by the introduction of pre-finished, organic-coated strip. These 
Sinusoidal 
Trapezoidal symmetrical 
Trapezoidal asymmetrical 
.... 
Stiffened 
trapezoidal 
, 
,, 
Figure 1.122 Typical profiles of organic-coated steel cladding (After Lewis et al. 192) 

Low-carbon strip steels 125 
products were described in an earlier section and involve a variety of paint 
or plastic formulations which are applied to zinc-coated steels. These coatings 
provide enhanced corrosion resistance and are available in a wide range of colours 
and surface textures. 
The types of coating that are recommended for external use include PVC 
Plastisol (200 ttm), PVF 2 (27 am), Silicone Polyester (25 ~tm) and Architectural 
Polyester (25 ttm). 14s,149 
Steel lintels 
Lightweight steel lintels have now virtually replaced reinforced concrete lintels 
in domestic housing. These components are specified in BS 5977: Part 2:1983 
Specification for prefabricated lintels, which provides guidance on the design and 
testing of all types of lintel for use in domestic buildings up to three storeys high. 
This specification deals with post-galvanized lintels with heavy zinc coatings and 
also those fabricated from pre-galvanized strip with minimum zinc coatings of 
up to 600 g/m 2 (including both sides). 
Other applications for strip steels 
Domestic appliances 
On page 94, information was provided on the production and properties of prefin- 
ished strip, coated with various types of paint or plastic. During the late 1960s, 
work was initiated on the use of pre-painted strip for the high-gloss, white 
domestic appliance market and this proved to be a major commercial success. 
Thus the majority of wrap-arounds for washing machines, refrigerators, dish 
washers, domestic boilers and freezers are now produced from pre-painted strip, 
providing the following benefits to the manufacturers: 
1. Higher productivity. 
2. Savings in floor space. 
3. Reduced capital expenditure. 
4. Elimination of the effluent problems associated with paint work. 
The organic coating used for this type of work is a high-gloss polyester, 25 ttm 
thick over a galvanized steel base, which provides a high flexibility/hardness ratio 
and good resistance to elevated temperatures and detergents. Although the degree 
of cold forming is not very severe for the majority of the components involved, 
areas such as the ports for front-loading washing machines are subjected to a 
limited drawing operation. 
Steel drums 
Steel drums, with capacities ranging from 25 to 210 litres, constitute a major 
market for cold-reduced strip but one that is now facing major competition from 

126 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
plastics. The formability requirements are not high and steel drums are normally 
made from uncoated, Fe POI strip. However, limited use is made of galvanized 
steel to provide greater corrosion resistance against particular products. 
For the future, there is the prospect of using higher strength steels in lighter 
gauges in an attempt to stem the greater penetration of the market by plastics. 
However, attention must also be given to improved designs in order to preserve 
adequate rigidity in down-gauged drums. 
Sound deadened steel 
Since 1991 there has been in Europe a regulation requiring that noise levels 
must be below certain specified values that would otherwise cause damage to 
hearing. An indication of the noise level that could damage heating is given 
in Figure 1.123. In addition, a low noise level has become an important selling 
point for cars and other products. This may be achieved by appropriate design but 
noise levels may also be reduced by the application of various sound absorbing 
materials, such as mastic, onto hidden surfaces. 
A special product is now available from at least five companies in Europe to 
provide sound absorption without the need for the application of any additional 
material. It is known as sound deadened steel and consists of two sheets of steel 
enclosing a thin layer of a viscoelastic polymer. 194 In use, vibratory shear strains 
are developed in the polymer by relative motion of the two sheets and this leads to 
the damping of the vibration and the development of a small amount of heat. The 
polymer may be formulated to give maximum damping at various temperatures 
up to 150"C as required and is stable up to 200"C. It does not, therefore, lose its 
damping capability as a result of paint baking. The degree of damping achieved 
depends on the shape of the component and the method of support. 195 It also 
varies with the frequency of the vibration, as illustrated in Figure 1.124, which 
gives an example of the effect of sound deadened steel on the airborne noise 
from a garage door. 193 It is seen that the noise is reduced by an average of about 
10% within the frequency range 200-10000 Hz. Another possible advantage is 
Figure 1.123 Noise levels expected to have an effect on hearing ability (After Mathieu 193) 

Low-carbon strip steels 127 
Figure 1.124 A comparison of the sound level from a garage door made from sheet steel 
and from sound-deadened steel. The average difference was 10 dB (After Mathieu 193) 
that the noise reduction may be accompanied by a weight reduction as a result 
of the elimination of the conventional materials that would otherwise be needed 
to reduce noise, such as felt. 
The formability of the composite depends on the formability of the steel and 
the adhesion of the polymer since the latter influences the tendency for wrinkling 
in areas of a pressing subject to in-plane compression. During forming the two 
sheets may move relative to each other to give an offset of the edge. Holes for 
fixing must, therefore, be made after forming. The polymer acts as an insulator. 
Spot welding may, therefore, be achieved by the use of shunts which lead to 
local heating and softening of the core material. This enables it to be compressed 
and allows the weld current to pass and make a satisfactory weld. 
The material already has many applications in the manufacture of cars, 
including engine enclosures, oil sumps and rocker covers and its use is spreading 
to other industries where noise control is becoming increasingly important. 
Vitreous enamelled products 
Vitreous enamelling is a long-established finishing process and one that is being 
applied to an increasing range of steel products. Cold-reduced steel is the most 
widely used substrate and the grade is selected according to the strength and 
formability required and the enamelling process that is used. After fabrication, 
the product is degreased, pickled, rinsed and dried and in the most common 
process, a ground coat enamel slip or slurry is applied to the component, either 
by dipping or spraying. After drying, the enamel is fused by firing at temperatures 
above 800~ 
A second coat, the cover coat enamel, is applied, dried and fired 
in a similar way. Some enamel is applied by means of a single-coat process 
and also by means of a two-coat one-fire process. The ability to produce a 
satisfactory product depends on the nature of the steel as well as on the nature of 

128 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
the enamel and the firing conditions. Special grades of steel specifically developed 
for enamelling are, therefore, often used. 
The main potential problem that may affect an enamelled component is called 
fish scaling, whereby small slivers of enamel split off from the surface to leave a 
fish-scale appearance. This may occur soon after enamelling or many weeks later. 
Fish scaling arises because the solubility of atomic hydrogen in steel is as much 
as 1000 times greater at the firing temperature than at room temperature. During 
cooling the solubility limit is exceeded with the result that gaseous molecular 
hydrogen is formed at high pressure. If this gaseous hydrogen forms at the enamel 
steel interface and if there is not sufficient enamel adherence and toughness, the 
pressure developed is able to crack the enamel and remove a fragment to form a 
fish scale. 
The tendency to form fish scales may be minimized by keeping the dew point 
of the furnace atmosphere low since water vapour is the main source of atomic 
hydrogen by a reaction with iron to form iron oxide. It is also beneficial to avoid 
unnecessarily high firing temperatures since such temperatures lead to even higher 
solute hydrogen contents. The most important method of avoiding fish scaling, 
however, is to use a steel which contains sites that can accommodate high- 
pressure gaseous hydrogen within the steel and which, therefore, prevent the 
build-up of gaseous hydrogen at the steel enamel interface. 
The sites that are used may be physical or chemical. Physical sites include 
voids, cracks, vacancies and dislocations. Chemical sites include precipitates such 
as TiN, TiC, AIN, Fe3C or BN and inclusions such as A1203, MnS and MnO. 
Certain steels are hot rolled with a high coiling temperature to produce coarse 
carbides that crack on cold reduction to provide physical sites. Titanium-bearing 
IF steels are commonly used since they provide chemical sites as well as good 
formability. 
The enamelling process provides a hard, durable finish in a wide range of 
attractive colours, which is resistant to heat, abrasion and chemical attack. Appli- 
cations for vitreous enamelled steels include domestic cookers, baths, hot-water 
tanks and cookware, architectural facing panels, flue pipes, silos, heat exchanger 
panels and tanks for bulk storage. 
References 
1. Hewitt, B.J., Review of Annealing Technology, IISI, Technical Exchange 
Session, p. 51 (1996). 
2. Imose, M., Trans. Iron Steel Inst. Japan, 25, 911 (1985). 
3. Lubensky, P.J., Wigman, S.L. and Johnson, D.J., Microalloying '95, Conf. 
Proc., Pittsburgh, The Iron and Steel Society, p. 225 (1995). 
4. Meyer, P. and Frommann, K., ABM Int. Congress, Sao Paulo, p. 249 (1994). 
5. The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel (Ninth Edition), Ed. 
Harold E. McGannon, United States Steel (1971). 
6. Swartz, J.C. Trans. Met. Soc. AIME, 239, 68 (1967). 
7. Hall, E.O. Proc. Phys. Soc., Series B 64, 747 (1951). 
8. Petch, N.J.J. Iron and Steel Inst. 174, 25 (1953). 

Low-carbon strip steels 129 
9. Picketing, F.B. In Materials Science and Technology VoL 7: Constitution 
and Properties of Steel, VCH, p. 41 (1992). 
10. Turkdogan, E.T. Iron and Steelmaker, 16, 61 (1989). 
11. Copreaux, J., Gaye, H., Henry, J. and Lanteri, S. ECSC Report 7210. 
EC/303 (1994). 
12. Hudd, R.C., Jones, A. and Kale. JISI, 209, 121 (1971). 
13. Liu, W.J. and Jonas, J.J. Met. Trans., 20A, 1361 (1989). 
14. Kozasu, I. In Materials Science and Technology Vol. 7: Constitution and 
Properties of Steel, VCH, p. 183 (1992). 
15. Kozasu, I., Ouchi, C., Sampei, T. and Okita, T. In Microalloying 75, Union 
Carbide Corp., p. 120 (1977). 
16. Ouchi, C. In High Strength Low Alloy Steel, Proc. of Wollongong Int. Conf., 
August 1984, p. 17 (1985). 
17. Steven and Haynes. In An Atlas of Continuous Cooling Diagrams for Engi- 
neering Steels, British Steel Corporation. 
18. Krauss, G. In Materials Science and Technology Vol. 7: Constitution and 
Properties of Steel, VCH, p. 1 (1992). 
19. Andrews, K.W.J. Iron and Steel Inst., 203, 721 (1965). 
20. Hutchinson, W.B. Int. Mat. Rev., 29, 25 (1984). 
21. Roe, K.J.J. Appl. Phys., 36, 2024 (1965). 
22. Bunge, H.J.Z. Metallkd., 56, 872 (1965). 
23. Hu, H. Textures of Crystalline Solids, 4, 13 (1980). 
24. Emren, F., Schlippenbach, U. and Lucke, K. Mat. Sci. and Tech., 5, 238 
(1989). 
25. Randle, V. Microtexture Determination and its Applications, The Institute 
of Materials, London (1992). 
26. Held, J.F. In Mech. Working and Steel Processing IV: Proc. 8th Conf., Edge- 
combe, D.A. (ed.), Warrendale: AIME, pp. 3-38 (1965). 
27. Schlippenbach, U. and Lucke, K. In Proc. 7th Riso Int. Syrup. on Met. and 
Mat. Sci., Roskilde, Riso Nat. Lab., pp. 541-546 (1986). 
28. Leslie, W.C., Michalak, J.T. and Aul, F.W. In Iron and its Dilute Solid 
Solutions, Interscience Publishers, New York, p. 119 (1961). 
29. Abe, M. In Materials Science and Technology Vol. 7: Constitution and Prop- 
erties of Steel, VCH, p. 285 (1992). 
30. Dillamore, I., Smith, C.J.E. and Watson, T.W. Met. Sci. J., 1, 49 (1967). 
31. Every, R.L. and Hatherly, M. Texture, 1, 183 (1976). 
32. Takechi, H., Kata, H. and Nagashima, S., Trans. AIME, 242, 56 (1968). 
33. Decker, B.F. and Harker, D. Z Appl. Phys, 22, 900 (1951). 
34. Ray, R.K., Jonas, J.J. and Hook, R.E. Int. Mat. Rev., 39, 129 (1994). 
35. Emren, F., Schlippenbach, U. and Lucke, K. Acta Metall., 34, 2105 (1986). 
36. Ono, S. and Nishimoto, A. Trans. Iron and Steels Inst. Japan, 26, B33 
(1986). 
37. Ushioda, K., Hutchinson, W.B., Agren, J. and Schlippenbaeh, U., Mat. Sci. 
and Tech., 2, 807 (1986). 
38. Lankford, W.T., Snyder, S.D. and Bauscher, J.A. Trans. ASM, 42, 1197 
(1950). 

130 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
39. Held, J.F. In Mechanical Working and Steel Processing IV: Proc. 8th Conf., 
Edgecombe, D.A. (ed), Warrendale, AIME, p. 3 (1965). 
40. Atkinson, M. and Maclean, I.M. Sheet Met. Ind., 42, 120 (1965). 
41. Hudd, R.C. In Proc. Low carbon Structural Steel for the Eighties, Spring 
Residential Course, Series 3, No. 6, The Institution of Metallurgists, 111A- 
1, March (1977). 
42. Horta, R.M.S.B., Roberts, W.T. and Wilson, D.V. Int. J. Mech. Sci., 12, 
231 (1970). 
43. Wilson, D.V. and Butler, R.D.J. Inst. Met., 90, 473 (1961). 
44. Hudd, R.C. and Lyons, L.K. Metals Technology, 2, 428 (1975). 
45. Dasarathy, C. and Goodwin, T.J. Metals and Materials, 21, January. (1990). 
46. Wang, N.M. and Shammamy, M.R.J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 17, 43 (1969). 
47. Pearce, R. Sheet Metal Forming, Adam Hilger (1991). 
48. Backhoven, S.P. and Keeler, W.A. Trans. ASM, 56, 25 (1963). 
49. Haberfield, A.B. and Boyles, M. The Metallurgist, 7, 453 (1975). 
50. Lee, A.P. and Hiam, J.R. ASM-AIME Metals Congress (1973). 
51. Iwaya, J., Tanaka, Y., Shirasaws, H. and Miyahara, M. Journal of the JSTP, 
35, No. 404, 1123 (1994). 
52. Yamazaki, K., Mizuyama, Y., Oka, M. and Tokunaga, Y. Journal of the 
JSTP, 36, No. 416, 1973 (1995). 
53. Gerber, W.W. Hydrogen in Metals, ASM, pp. 115-147 (1974). 
54. Hosoya, Y., Tsuyama, S., Nagataki, Y., Kanetoh, S., Izuishi, T. and 
Takada, Y. NKK Technical Review, 72, 20 (1995). 
55. Deutscher, Stahl u Eisen, 115, 39 (1995). 
56. High Strength Steel Bulletin, p. 1, Winter. (1995). 
57. Metallurgia, p. 148, April. (1992). 
58. Winter, D. Wards Auto World, p. 54, June (1993). 
59. Ferry, J.W. In 'High Production Roll Forming', Society of Manufacturing 
Engineers, Dearborn, p. 31 (1983). 
60. Cain, E. In 'High Production Roll Forming', Society of Manufacturing 
Engineers, Dearborn, p. 7 (1983). 
61. Miles, J. J. Metals and Materials, p. 398, July (1989). 
62. Comstock, G.F., Urban, S.F. and Cohen, M. Titanium in Steel, New York, 
Pitman (1949). 
63. Leslie, W.C. and Sober, R.J. ASM Trans. Quarterly, 60, 99 (1967). 
64. Elias, J.A. and Hook, R.E. In Mech. Working and Steel Processing IV, Proc. 
13th Conf. Pittsburgh, Met. Soc. AIME, p. 348 (1971). 
65. Krupic, V., Gladman T. and Mitchell P. 37th MWSP Conf. Proc., ISS, 33, 
907 (1996). 
66. Takahashi, N., Shibata, M., Furuno, Y., Hayakawa, H., Asai, T. and 
Yamashita, Y. Tetsu-to-Hagane, 68, $588 (1982). 
67. Tokunaga, Y. and Kato, H. Metallurgy of Vacuum-Degassed Steel Products, 
Pradhan, R. (ed.), The Minerals, Metals and Materials Soc., p. 91 (1990). 
68. Tokunaga, Y., Yamada, M. and Ito, K. Tetsu-to-Hagane, 73(2), 109 (1987). 

Low-carbon strip steels 131 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
Kino, N., Matsumura, Y., Tsuchiya, H., Furukawa, Y., Akagi, H. and 
Sanagi, S. CAMP-JISI, 3, 785 (1990). 
Satoh, S., Obara, T., Takasaki, J., Yasuda, A. and Nishida, M. Kawasaki 
Steel Technical Report, 12, 36 (1985). 
Goodenow, R.H. and Held, J.F. Met. Trans., 1, 2507 (1970). 
Satoh, S., Obara, T., Nishida, M., Matsuno, N., Takasaki, J., and Satoh, H. 
Kawasaki Steel Technical Report, 8, 1 (1983). 
Tither, G., Garcia, C.I., Hua, M. and DeArdo, A.J. Int. Forum, Physical 
Metallurgy of IF Steels, ISIJ, p. 293 (1994). 
Ruiz-Aparicio, L.J., Hua, M., Garcia, C.I. and DeArdo, A.J. Proc. Conf., 
Thermo-Mechanical Processing, Theory, Modelling and Practice, Stock- 
holm, September (1996). 
Gawne, D.T., Steel Research, London, British Steel Corporation (1976). 
Meyzaud, Y., Michaut, B. and Parniere, P. In Texture and the Properties of 
Materials, 4th Int. Texture Conf., Cambridge, The Metals Society, London, 
p. 255 (1975). 
Leslie, W.C., Rickett, R.L., Dotson, C.L. and Walton, C.S. Trans. ASM, 46, 
1470 (1954). 
Whiteley, R.L. and Wise, D.E. In Flat Rolled Products III, Earhart, E.W. 
(ed.), New York, Interscience, p. 47 (1962). 
Parayil, T.R. and Gupta, I. In Mechanical Working and Steel Processing 
XXVII, Proc. 31st Conf. Kuhn, L.G. and Hultgren F.A. (eds), Warrendale 
AIME, p. 314 (1989). 
Osawa, K., Matsudo, K., Kurihara, K. and Suzuki, T. Tetsu-to-Hagane, 70, 
$552 (1984). 
Shimisu, M., Matsukura, K., Takahashi, N. and Shinagawa, H. Tetsu-to- 
Hagane, 50, 2094 (1964). 
Takahashi, M. and Okamoto, A. Sumitomo Met., 27, 40 (1974). 
Henin, C. and Brun, C. Rev. de Metall., CIT, 599 (1981). 
Takahashi, N., Abe, M., Akisue, O. and Katoh, H. In Proc. Syrup. 
on Metallurgy of Continuous Annealed Sheet Steel, Bramfitt, B.L. and 
Mangonon, P.L. (eds), Dallas, AIME, p. 51 (1982). 
Toda, K., Gondoh, H., Takechi, H., Abe, M., Uehara, N. and Komita, K. 
Trans. Iron and Steel Inst. Japan, 15, 305 (1975). 
Osawa, K., Matsudo, K., Kurihara, K. and Suzuki, T. Tetsu-to-Hagane, 70, 
$552 (1984). 
Ono, S., Nozoe, O., Shimomura, T. and Matsudo, K. In Proc. Symp. 
on Metallurgy of Continuous Annealed Sheet Steel, Bramfitt, B.L. and 
Mangonon, P.L. (eds), Dallas, AIME, p. 99 (1982). 
Matsudo, K., Osawa, K. and Kurihara, K. In Proc. Syrup. on Metallurgy of 
Continuously Annealed Cold Rolled Sheet Steel, Pradhan, R. (ed.), Detroit, 
AIME, p. 3 (1984). 
Pradhan, R. In Proc. Syrup. on Metallurgy of Continuously Annealed CoM 
Rolled Sheet Steel, Pradhan, R, (ed.), Detroit, AIME, p. 185 (1984). 

132 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
Prum, N., Meers, U., Mathy, H., Messien, P. and Leroy, V. In Proc. Symp. 
on Hot and CoM Rolled Sheet Steels, Pradhan, R. and Ludkovsky, G. (eds), 
Cincinnati, The Metallurgical Society, p. 3 (1988). 
Obara, T., Sakata, K. and Irie, T. In Proc. Syrup. on Metallurgy of 
Continuous Annealed Sheet Steel, Bramfitt, B.L. and Mangonon, P.L. (eds), 
Dallas, AIME, p. 83 (1982). 
Katoh, H., Koyama, K. and Kawasaki, K. In Proc. Symp. on Metallurgy of 
Continuously Annealed Cold Rolled Sheet Steel Pradhan, R. (ed.), Detroit, 
AIME, p. 79 (1984). 
Herman, J.C. and Leroy, V. AISE, Future of Flat Rolled Steel, Prod. Conf., 
Chicago, V.2, paper 6 (1995). 
B leek, W., JOM, p. 26, July (1996). 
Hayami, S. and Furukawa, T. In Microalloying 75, Korchynsky, M. (ed.), 
New York, Union Carbide Corporation, p. 311 (1977). 
Takechi, H. In Vehicle Design and Components - Materials Innovation and 
Automotive Technology, 5th IAVD Conf., Dorgham, M.A. (ed.), Geneva, 
Interscience (1990). 
Paules, J.R. In Microalloyed Vanadium Steels, Korchynsky, M., Gorc- 
zyca, S., and Blicharski, M. (eds), Krakow, Association of Polish 
Metallurgical Engineers, p. 19 (1990). 
Cuddy, L.J. and Raley, J.C. Metall. Trans. A., 14A, 1989 (1983). 
Cuddy, L.J. Plastic Deformation of Metals, Academic Press, New York, 129 
(1975). 
Jonas, J.J. Proceedings of Conference, Mathematical Modelling of the Hot 
Rolling of Steels, Hamilton, Canada, p. 99, August (1990). 
Bai, D.Q., Yue, S., Sun, W.P. and Jonas, J.J., Met. Trans. A. 24A, 2151 
(1993). 
Kasper, R., Lotter, U. and Biegus, C. Steel Research, 65, No. 6, p. 242 
(1994). 
Sekine, H. et al., Seitetsu Kenkyu, 287, 11920 (1976). 
Picketing, F.B. In Materials Science and Technology Vol. 7: Constitution 
and Properties of Steel, VCH, p. 335 (1992). 
Bordignon, P.J.P., Hulka, K. and Jones, B.L. High Strength Steels for Auto- 
motive Applications, Niobium Technical Report Nb TR-06/84, December 
(1984). 
Pradhan, R. In Proc. Symp. on Metallurgy of Continuous Annealed Sheet 
Steel, Bramfitt, B.L. and Mangonon, P.L. (eds), Dallas, AIME, p. 203 
(1982). 
Pradhan, R., Scand. J. Met., 13, 298 (1984). 
Toda, K., Gondoh, H., Takechi, H. and Masui, H., Met. Trans. 7A, 1629 
(1976). 
Goodman, S.R. In Proc. Syrup. on Metallurgy of Continuously Annealed 
Cold Rolled Sheet Steel, Pradhan, R. (ed.), Detroit, AIME, p. 239 (1984). 
Gawne, D.T. and Lewis, G.M.H. Mat. Sci. and Tech., 1, 183 (1985). 
Katoh, H., Takechi, H., Takahashi, N. and Abe, M. In Proc. Syrup. on 
Metallurgy of Continuously Annealed Cold Rolled Sheet Steel, Pradhan, R. 
(ed.), Detroit, AIME, p. 37 (1984). 

Low-carbon strip steels 
133 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 
128. 
129. 
130. 
Ohashi, N., Irie, T., Satoh, S., Hashimoto, O. and Takahashi, I. SAE Paper 
810027, (1981). 
Takechi, H. In Proc. Syrup. Hot and Cold Rolled Sheet Steel Cincinnati, 
Pradhan, R. and Ludkovsky, G. (eds), The Metallurgical Society, p. 117 
(1988). 
Shimada, M., Nashiwa, M., Osaki, T., Furukawa, Y., Shimatani, Y., 
Fujita, Y. and Aihara, H. Review of Annealing Technology, Technical 
Exchange Session, IISI, p. 17 (1996). 
Hanai, N., Takemoto, N., Takunaga, Y., Mizuyama, Y. Trans. Iron Steel 
Institute Japan, 24, 17 (1984). 
Mizui, N., Okamoto, A., Amagasaki and Tanioku, T., Proc. Int. Conf. Steel 
in Motor Vehicle Manufacture, Wttrzburg, 24-26 September, p. 85 (1990). 
Yamazaki, K., Horita, T., Umehara, Y., Morishita, T. In Proc. Micro 
Alloying '88, Materials Park, Ohio, ASM, p. 327 (1988). 
Rana, F., Skolly, R. and Gupta, I. In Proc. Symp. High-Strength Sheet Steels 
for the Motor Industry, Baltimore, Pradhan, R. (ed.), The Iron and Steel 
Society, p. 89 (1994). 
Hayashida, T., Oda, M., Yamada, T., Matsukawa, Y. and Tanaka, J. In 
Proc. Syrup. High-Strength Sheet Steels for the Motor Industry, Baltimore, 
Pradhan, R. (ed.), The Iron and Steel Society, p. 135 (1994). 
Sakata, K., Satoh, S., Kato, T. and Hashimoto, O. Int. Forum for Physical 
Metallurgy of IF Steels, Tokyo, Iron and Steel Institute of Japan, p. 279, 
May (1994). 
Zackay, V.F., Parker, E.R., Fahr, D. and Busk, R. Trans. Am. Soc. Met., 60, 
252 (1967). 
Williams, E.W. and Davies, L.K. In Recent Developments in Annealing, ISI 
Special Report 79 (1963). 
Irie, T., Satoh, S., Hashiguchi, K., Takahashi, I. and Hashimoto, O. Trans. 
Iron and Steel Inst. Japan, 21, 793 (1981). 
Lawson, P.D., Matlock, D.K. and Krauss, G. In Proc. Conf. on Fundamen- 
tals of Dual Phase Steel, Kot, R.A. and Bramfitt, B.L. (eds), Warrendale, 
AIME, p. 347 (1981). 
Gladman, T. In Advances in the Physical Metallurgy and Applications of 
Steel, Eyre, B.L. (ed.), The Metals Society, London, p. 55 (1981). 
Maid, O., Dahl, W., Strassburger, C. and Muschenborn, W. Stahl u. Eisen, 
108, p. 355 and 365 (1988). 
Speich, G.R. and Miller, R.L. In Proc. Conf. on Fundamentals of Dual 
Phase Steel, Kot, R.A. and Bramfitt, B.L. (eds), Warrendale, AIME, p. 279 
(1981). 
Messien, P., Herman, J.C. and Greday, T. In Proc. Syrup. on Metallurgy of 
Continuous Annealed Sheet Steel, Brarnfitt, B.L. and Mangonon, P.L. (eds), 
Dallas, AIME, p. 271 (1982). 
Speich, G.R., Demarest, V.A. and Miller, R.L. Metall. Trans., 12A, 1419 
(1981). 
Bleck, W., Drewes, E.J., Engl, B., Litzke, H. and Muschenbom, W. 
Stahl u. Eisen, 106, 21 (1986). 

134 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
131. 
132. 
133. 
134. 
135. 
136. 
137. 
138. 
139. 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
151. 
152. 
153. 
154. 
Hehemann, R.F. Phase Transformations, Aaronson, H.I. (ed.), Metals Park, 
OH, Amer. Soc. Met., p. 397 (1970). 
Shirasawa, H. and Thomson, J.G. Trans. Iron Steel Inst. Japan, 27, 360 
(1987). 
Sakuma, O., Matsumura, O. and Akisue, O. ISIJ International, p. 1348, 
November (1991 ). 
Okamoto, A., Nagao, N., Takahashi, M. and Saiki, K. In Proc. Syrup. 
on Metallurgy of Continuous Annealed Sheet Steel, Bramfitt, B.L. and 
Mangonon, P.L. (eds), Dallas, AIME, p. 287 (1982). 
Sudo, M. and Kokubo, I. Scand. J. Met., 13, 329 (1984). 
Minote, T., Torizuka, S., Ogawa, A. and Niikura, M. ISIJ International, 36, 
201 (1996). 
Sakuma, Y., Matlock, D.K. and Krauss, G. Developments in the Annealing 
of Sheet Steels, Pradhan, R. (ed.), The Minerals, Metals and Materials 
Society, p. 321 (1992). 
Sugimoto, K., Usui, N., Kobayashi, M. and Hashimoto, S. ISIJ Interna- 
tional, 32, p. 1311, No. 12 (1992). 
Matsumura, O., Sakuma, Y. and Takechi, H. ISIJ International, 32, 1014 
(1992). 
Jones, A. and Evans, P.J. Int. Syrup. Low Carbon Steel for the 90's, Asfa- 
hani, R. and Tither, G. (eds), Pittsburgh, TMS, (1993). 
Itami, A., Takahashi, M. and Ushioda, K. ISIJ International, 35, 1121 
(1995). 
Tanaka, Y., Shirasawa, H. and Miyahara, M. SAE Paper 850117 (1985). 
Rigsbee, J.M. and VanderArend, P.J. In Formable HSLA and Dual-Phase 
Steel, Davenport, A.T. (ed.), Warrendale, AIME, p. 56 (1979). 
Hosoya, Y., Tsuyama, S., Nagataki, S., Kanetoh, S., Izuishi, T. and 
Takada, Y. NKK Technical Review, No. 72, p. 20 (1995). 
Matsumura, O., Sakuma, Y. and Takechi, H. Trans. Iron Steel Inst. Japan, 
27, 570 (1987). 
Evans, P.J. Report, Project 7210.MB/815, Commission of the European 
Communities (1995). 
Denner, S.G. Proc. Int. Conf. on Zinc and Zinc Alloy Coated Sheet Steel 
(GALVATECH '89), ISIJ, Tokyo, p. 101 (1989). 
British Steel, Colourcoat and Stelvetite Brochure, British Steel. 
British Steel, Colourcoat and Stelvetite Pre-finished Steels Technical 
Manual, British Steel. 
Morgan, E. Tinplate and Modern Canmaking Technology, Pergamon Press 
(1985). 
Singh, S., Kotting, G. and Schmidt, G. DVS 165, SMD 1156, 26 (1996). 
Jones, T.B. and Williams, N.T. Resistance Spot Welding of High Strength 
Steels, C287/81, I. Mech. E. (1981). 
Jones, T.B. and Williams, N.T. Resistance Spot Welding of Rephosphorised 
Steel A Review of Welding in the World, 23, No. 11/12, 248. 
Williams, N.T. In Proc. Vehicle Design and Components- Materials Inno- 
vation and Automotive Technology, 5th IAVD Conf., Dorgham, M.A. (ed.), 
Geneva, Interscience (1990). 

Low-carbon strip steels 135 
155. Galvatite Technical Manual, British Steel Strip Products, May (1993). 
156. Lallay, M. and Waddell, W. La Revue de Metallurgie, ATS-JS 94, p. 24, 
(1994). 
157. Leibig, H.P. British Engineer, Winter (1987). 
158. Bokhari, N. Welding and Metal Fabrication, p. 187, May (1995). 
159. Budde, L. and Lappe, W., Bander Bleche Rohre, May (1991). 
160. Jones, T.B. Report, Project 7210.MB/817, Commission of the European 
Communities (1996). 
161. Yan, B. 37th Mechanical Working and Steel Processing Conf. Proc., ISS- 
AIME, XXXIII 101 (1996). 
162. Landgraf, R.W. In Proceedings of the SAE Fatigue Conference, P-109, 
Dearborn, Michigan, Paper 820677, p. 11 (1982). 
163. Palmgren, A. Z. Vereins Deutscher Ingenicure, 68 (1924). 
164. Miner, M.A. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 12, p. A-159 (1945). 
165. Proceedings of the SAE Fatigue Conference, P-109, Dearborn, Michigan, 
April, (1982). 
166. Spefle, J.O. and Trogen, H. Scand. J. Met., 18, 147 (1989). 
167. Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 03.01, E647-93. 
168. Jones, A. and Hudd, R.C. Report EUR 11220 EN, Commission of the Euro- 
pean Communities (1988). 
169. Godwin, M.J. Report EUR 12749 EN, Commission of the European 
Communities (1990) 
170. Irie, T., Satoh, S., Yasuda, A. and Hashimoto, O. In Metallurgy of Contin- 
uous Annealed Sheet Steel, Bramfitt, B.L. and Mangonon, P.L. (eds), AIME, 
Dallas, PA, p. 155 (1982). 
171. Kino, N., Yamada, M., Tokunaga, T. and Tsuchiya, H. In Metallurgy of 
Vacuum Degassed Steel Products, Pradhan, R. (ed.), The Minerals, Metals 
and Materials Society, Indianapolis, p. 197 (1990). 
172. Bhat, S.P., Yan, B., Chintamani, J.S. and Bloom, T.A. In Proc. Syrup. High- 
Strength Steels for the Motor Industry, Pradhan, R. (ed.), Baltimore, p. 209 
(1994). 
173. Henning, L.A. 33rd Mechanical Working and Steel Processing Conf. Proc., 
ISS-AIME, XXIX, p. 9 (1992). 
174. Yah, B. and Gupta, I. 38th Mechanical Working and Steel Processing Conf. 
Proc., ISS-AIME, XXXIV, p. 417 (1997). 
175. Yaluhara, E., Sahata, K., Kato, T. and Hashimoto, O., ISIJ Int., 34, No. 1, 
99 (1994). 
176. Machara, Y., Misui, N. and Arai, M. In Interstitial Free Steel Sheet: 
Processing, Fabrication and Properties Conf. Proc., Collins, L.E. and 
Baragor, D.L. (eds), CIM/ICM, 19-20 August, Ottawa, Ontario, p. 135 
(1991). 
177. Pradhan, R. In Int. Forum Phys. Met. oflF Steel, ISIJ, Tokyo, p. 165 (1994). 
178. Konishi, M., Ohashi, N. and Yoshida, H. Kawasaki Steel Technical Report, 
No. 6, p. 305 (1974) 
179. Takahashi, N., Shibata, M., Furuno, Y., Hayakawa, H., Kabuta, K. and 
Yamamoto, K. In Metallurgy of Continuous Annealed Sheet Steel, 
Bramfitt, B.L. and Mangonon, P.L. (eds), AIME, Dallas, PA, p. 133 (1982). 

136 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191. 
192. 
193. 
194. 
195. 
Car 2000, A Mira Report, published by The Motor Research Association, 
October (1993). 
Takechi, H. Steel Today and Tomorrow, January-March., p. 5 (1996). 
Innovations in Steel. Steel Times, April, p. 141 (1996). 
Drewes, E.J. and Engl, B. In Proc. Coated and High Strength Steels - Auto 
Tech 89, I. Mech. E., C399/37, (1989). 
Lowe, K. Private Communication (1997). 
ULSAB Report Phase 1, September (1995). 
Hughes, R.L. IBEC '95, Body Design and Engineering, p. 59 (1995). 
Crooks, M.J. and Miner, R.E. JOM, p. 13, July (1996). 
Thompson, S.J.A. In Proc. Coated and High Strength Steels- Auto Tech 
89, I. Mech. E., C399/37 (1989). 
Bowen, M. In Proc. Coated and High Strength Steels,- Auto Tech 89, I. 
Mech. E., C399/37 (1989). 
British Steel Temex Brochure, British Steel. 
Haberfield, A.B. Steelresearch 1987-88, British Steel, p. 42 (1988). 
Lewis, K.G., Jones, D. and Godwin, M.J. Metals and Materials, 4, 357 June 
(1988). 
Mathieu, S. Conf. Trans. ECCA General Meeting, DT378, May (1996). 
Design Engineering, p. 17, March (1996). 
British Steel Distribution, Auto Update. 

2 
Low-carbo n structu ral steels 
Overview 
Although open to wide interpretation, the term structural steels is commonly used 
to identify the predominantly C-Mn steels, with ferrite-pearlite microstructures, 
which are used in large quantities in civil and chemical engineering. The steels 
are produced in plates and sections, sometimes up to several inches thick, and 
generally with yield strength values up to about 500 N/ram 2. However, structural 
steels also include low-alloy grades which are quenched and tempered in order 
to provide yield strengths up to about 700 N/mm 2. 
As illustrated in this chapter, these steels are used in a wide and diverse 
range of applications, including buildings, bridges, pressure vessels, ships and 
off-highway vehicles. More recently, structural steels have been used extensively 
in very demanding applications such as offshore oil and gas platforms and the 
associated pipelines that often operate in extremely cold and chemically aggres- 
sive environments. 
A major feature of most forms of construction in structural steels is the high 
level of welding employed and the requirement for high-integrity welds. Welding 
began to replace riveting as the principal joining process in the 1940s but, at 
that time, structural steels were characterized by high carbon contents and were 
therefore prone to cold cracking. The requirement for lower carbon grades with 
improved weldability was illustrated very dramatically in the construction of the 
first all-welded merchant ships (Liberty ships) during World War II. However, the 
break-up of these vessels on the high seas also led to the recognition of a further 
major property requirement in structural steels, namely toughness as opposed to 
ductility. 
In the early 1950s, the work of Hall and Petch revolutionized the design of 
structural steels with the concept that refinement of the ferrite grains led to an 
increase in both the yield strength and toughness of ferrite-pearlite steels. Thus 
steels with yield strength values up to about 300 N/ram 2 could be produced 
in aluminium-grain-refined compositions, with good impact properties and with 
good welding characteristics. Ferrite grain refinement remains the single most 
important metallurgical parameter in the make-up of modem structural grades but 
the demand for higher strength steels required a further strengthening mechanism, 
namely precipitation strengthening. Thus small additions of niobium, vanadium 
and titanium were added to structural steels to raise the yield strength up to a 
level of about 500 N/mm 2. Since they were added in levels of up to only 0.15%, 
these additions became known as micro-alloying elements and the compositions 
were designated High-strength Low-alloy (HSLA) steels. 
The late 1950s and 1960s represented a period of major research on the 
structure-property relationships and fracture behaviour of structural steels. 
However, it also heralded the introduction of an important new technique in 

138 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
the production of structural steels, namely controlled rolling. In essence, this 
enabled fine-grained steels to be produced in the as-rolled condition, thereby 
eliminating the need for costly normalizing heat treatments. More importantly, 
controlled rolling led to the generation of steels with properties far superior to 
those that could be obtained in the normalized condition. 
In the 1970s and 1980s, controlled rolling was augmented with controlled 
cooling and the combination is now referred to as thermomechanical processing. 
In its more severe form (direct quenching), controlled cooling is now used as 
an alternative to reheat quenching for the production of quenched and tempered 
grades. 
Structural steels have therefore undergone very significant changes, each 
change producing a substantial improvement in an important property such as 
strength, toughness or weldability. Aspects such as improved cleanness and 
inclusion shape control have also been adopted, leading to improvements in 
fabrication and service performance. These factors, coupled with very favourable 
cost comparisons, have meant that structural steels have remained virtually 
unchallenged by competitive materials, other than reinforced concrete, in most 
of their traditional applications. 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Structural steels, in the form of plates and sections, are produced in the hot-rolled 
condition and, in many respects, the underlying metallurgy is essentially similar to 
that involved in the strip grades. However, structural steels are generally used in 
thicker sizes and higher strengths, and toughness rather than ductility/formability 
is the more important requirement. The higher levels of elements such as carbon 
and manganese in structural steels also impose more detailed consideration of the 
control of microstructure and maintenance of properties in the welded condition. 
A vast amount of research has been carried out on factors affecting the strength 
and toughness of structural steels, particularly those involving ferrite-pearlite 
microstructures which account for the bulk production of these steels. However, 
the most important issue is the control of ferdte grain size since refinement of 
the ferrite grains leads to an increase in both yield strength and toughness. This 
effect contrasts sharply with other strengthening mechanisms, such as solid solu- 
tion strengthening and precipitation strengthening, which are accompanied by a 
reduction in toughness. In conventional hot rolling, structural steels would be 
reheated to a temperature of around 1250~ and rolling would be completed at 
temperatures of the order of 1000*C. This will result in a fully recrystaUized, 
coarse austenitic structure which transforms to a coarse ferrite-pearlite structure 
on cooling to ambient temperature. In turn, this will yield material with a low 
level of toughness and the additional process of normalizing is required to refine 
the microstructure and improve the impact strength. This involves reheating the 
hot-rolled product to a temperature of about 910"C and, during the heating cycle, 
A1N is precipitated from solid solution in the ferrite which restricts the growth 
of the austenite grains at the normalizing temperature and leads to the formation 

Low-carbon structural steels 139 
of fine ferrite grains on air cooling to ambient temperature. However, as indi- 
cated in the Overview, the costly process of normalizing has now been largely 
superseded by controlled rolling, whereby lower temperatures are employed in 
the finishing stages of hot rolling in order to produce a fine austenite grain size 
which transforms subsequently to a fine-grained ferrite microstructure. 
In general, alloy additions are not employed specifically in structural grades in 
order to produce solid solution strengthening. However, solid solution strength- 
ening effects will arise from the presence of carbon and nitrogen in solution 
and also from silicon and manganese, which are added primarily for deoxidation 
and sulphide control purposes. On the other hand, structural steels can contain 
manganese contents up to 1.5% which also result in substantial strengthening 
due to the depression of the austenite to ferrite transformation and the conse- 
quent refinement of the ferritic grains. 
As indicated later in this chapter, precipitation strengthening reactions are of 
major importance in the production of high-strength structural steels, particularly 
those involving the carbides or nitrides of elements such as niobium, vanadium 
and titanium. In this context, these elements are called micro-alloying elements 
and are taken into solution in the austenite phase during the reheating stage, 
but form compounds such as Nb(CN), V4C3 and TiC on transformation to 
ferrite. However, the metallurgy of these high-strength low-alloy (HSLA) steels 
is complex, requiring detailed consideration of solubility/temperature effects at 
the reheating stage and precipitate size/cooling rate effects on transformation to 
ferrite. A further consideration is that these micro-alloying elements are also 
employed to retard the recrystallization kinetics of steels which are subjected 
to controlled rolling. This involves the strain-induced precipitation of Nb(CN) 
or TiC in the austenitic condition at a temperature below 950~ which retards 
recrystallization, producing an elongated, pancake morphology. On cooling 
to ambient temperature, the deformation substructure in the austenite grains 
produces a fine ferritic structure with higher strength and toughness than that 
achieved by normalizing. 
There is obviously a limit to the strength that can be developed in 
ferrite-pearlite microstructures through grain refinement, solid solution and 
precipitation strengthening and for yield strength levels greater than about 
500 N/mm 2, transformation strengthening is employed. Thus the alloy content 
and cooling rate must be sufficient to produce a martensitic structure on quenching 
which in turn must be tempered in order to provide an adequate balance of 
strength and ductility/toughness. This invokes the concepts of hardenability and 
tempering resistance which are essentially those involved in Engineering steels 
which are discussed in Chapter 3. 
Strengthening mechanisms in structural steels 
Major research effort has been devoted to the detailed understanding of factors 
affecting the properties of low-carbon structural steels. Whereas considerable cost 
savings accrued from the use of lighter sections in higher strength steels, there was 
also the need to maintain, or indeed improve upon, other important properties 

140 Steels:MetallurgyandApplications 
such as toughness and weldability. Therefore detailed attention was given to 
identifying the strengthening mechanisms which were most cost-effective or that 
provided the best combination of properties. 
The practical options for increasing the strength of steels are: 
1. Refining the ferrite grain size. 
2. Solid solution strengthening. 
3. Precipitation strengthening. 
4. Transformation strengthening. 
5. Dislocation strengthening. 
Whereas work hardening or dislocation strengthening can result in very high 
levels of strength, these are achieved at the expense of toughness and ductility. 
For this reason, little use is made of this method of strengthening but, as illustrated 
later in this chapter, work hardening is used in the production of high-strength 
reinforcing bars. 
Ferrite grain refinement 
In the early 1950s, work published by Hall I and Petch 2 laid the foundation for the 
development of modem, high-strength structural steels. The Hall-Petch equation, 
perhaps the most celebrated in ferrous metallurgy, is as follows: 
1 
Cry -~ cr i q-. kyd-'2 
where try = yield strength 
tri = friction stress which opposes dislocation movement 
ky = a constant (often called the dislocation locking term) 
d = ferrite grain size 
Thus refinement of the ferrite grain size will result in an increase in yield strength 
and the relationship is shown in Figure 2.1. 
Whereas a strengthening effect usually leads to a decrease in toughness, it 
was shown that refinement of the ferrite grain size also produced a simultaneous 
improvement in toughness. The Petch equation linking toughness to grain size is 
given below: 
/ST = In t5 - In C - In d- 
where/5 and C are constants, T is the ductile-brittle transition temperature and 
d is the ferrite grain size. Therefore, as illustrated in Figure 2.1, the impact 
transition temperature decreases as the ferrite grain size is reduced. 
Refinement of the ferrite grain size can be achieved in a number of ways. Tradi- 
tionaUy, fine-grained steels contain about 0.03% A1 which is soluble at normal 
slab or bloom reheating temperatures of around 1250"C and which remains in 
solution during rolling and after cooling to ambient temperature. However, on 
subsequent reheating through the ferrite range to the normalizing or solution 
treatment temperature, the aluminium combines with nitrogen in the steel to 

Low-carbon structural steels 
141 
YS 
(N/mm ~') 
500 - 
27J 
ITT 
- 
100 
400 
300 
200 
100 
~~ 
ITT 
_ 
~
~
 
- 
50 
0 
-50 
-100 
I ,, 
_ 
I 
. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-150 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
Ferrlte grain size, d-l~(mm -112) 
Figure 2.1 Effect of ferrite grain size on yield strength and impact properties 
form a fine dispersion of AIN. These particles pin the austenite grain boundaries 
at the normal heat treatment temperatures just above Ac3 (typically 850-9200C, 
depending upon carbon content) and therefore result in the formation of a fine 
austenite grain size. In turn, a fine austenite grain size results in the formation of 
a fine ferrite grain size on cooling to room temperature. 
Although the austenite grain size is of major importance, other factors also play 
a part in developing a fine ferrite grain size. Thus the addition of elements such 
as carbon and manganese or an increase in the cooling rate from the austenite 
temperature range will lead to a refinement of the ferrite grains. In either case, 
this is achieved by depressing the temperature of transformation of austenite to 
ferrite. However, there is obviously a limit to the amount of strengthening that 
can be obtained by this mechanism before transformation is depressed to such an 
extent that it leads to the formation of bainite or martensite and the introduction 
of transformation strengthening. 
Solid solution strengthening 
The solid solution strengthening effects of the common alloying elements are 
illustrated in Figure 2.2 and work by Picketing and Gladman 4 has provided the 
strengthening coefficients shown in Table 2.1 for ferrite-pearlite steels containing 
up to 0.25% C and 1.5% Mn. These data illustrate the very powerful strengthening 
effects of the interstitial elements, carbon and nitrogen, but it must be borne 
in mind that these elements have only a very limited solid solubility in ferrite. 
However, both carbon and nitrogen also have a very adverse effect on toughness. 
Of the substitutional elements, phosphorus is the most potent and, as indicated 
in Chapter 1, additions of up to about 0.1% P are incorporated in the higher 
strength rephosphorized grades that are used in automotive body panels. However, 

142 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
+300 
n +225 
~+150 
"o 
._ 
+75 
.~_ 
0 
e,- 
r r 
-75 
C and N 
1 
/P 
Silicon 
Copper 
'Manganese 
9 
Molybdenum 
C_ hromlum 
Nickel an-d aluminlum 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Alloy weight (%) 
Figure 2.2 Solid solution strengthening effects in ferrite-pearlite high-strength low-alloy 
steels (After Pickering 3) 
Table 2.1 
Element 
N/mm 2 per 1 Wt % 
C and N 
5544 
P 
678 
Si 
83 
Cu 
39 
Mn 
32 
Mo 
11 
Ni 
~0 
Cr 
-31 
like carbon and nitrogen, phosphorus has a detrimental effect on toughness and 
therefore it is not used as a strengthening agent per se in structural steels. On 
the other hand, phosphorus is added to the so-called weathering grades because 
of its beneficial effect on atmospheric corrosion resistance. These steels will 
be discussed later in this chapter. Of the remaining elements, only silicon and 
manganese are cost-effective as solid solution strengtheners but silicon is added 
to steels primarily as a deoxidizing agent. 
Precipi~tion strengthening 
Precipitation strengthening can be induced by a variety of elements but, in the 
context of ferrite-pearlite steels, the systems of commercial significance are 
those involving niobium, vanadium and titanium. These elements have a strong 
affinity for carbon and nitrogen and, consequently, they have only a limited solid 
solubility in steel. Therefore they are added to steels in small amounts, e.g. up 
to about 0.06% Nb or 0.15% V, and as stated earlier are often referred to as 
micro-alloying elements. 
As illustrated in Figure 2.3(a), a substantial amount of niobium will be taken 
into solution at a slab or bloom reheating temperature of 1250~ 
On cooling, 

Low-carbon structural steels 
143 
Nb(CN) will precipitate at the austenite-ferfitr interface during transforma- 
tion (interphase precipitation) which leads to substantial strengthening. On the 
other hand, on reheating to a typical normalizing temperature of 920~ 
very 
little Nb(CN) will dissolve and therefore virtually no precipitation strengthening 
can take place. However, the undissolved particles will act as pinning agents, 
restricting austenite grain growth and leading to the formation of a fine ferfitr 
grain size. Therefor the reheating temperature controls the potential for precip- 
itation strengthening and the strength increases progressively as the temperature 
is raised from 920 to 1250~ 
As indicated in Figure 2.3(b), vanadium dissolves more easily than niobium 
and complete solution of V4C 3 would be expected to occur in commercial grades 
of structural steel at typical normalizing temperatures, e.g. 920~ 
Slightly higher 
temperatures are required for the solution of VN which can act as a grain-refining 
0.15 
(a) 
.025C 
.05C 
: 
/ 
NbC 
/ 
/ 
.IOC 
/ 
900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
ta 0.2 
=3 
Temperature (~ 
04-cb~ 
oosN/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
_ 
I 
VN 
. 
.01N/ 
; 
I 
. 
. 
i//II 
0.3 
/ 
/ 
./ 
,,, 
o.I. 
// 
./' 
/ 
.j~---.~ o 
~ 
i 
I 
I 
I 
9()0 
1000 
11 O0 
1200 
1300 
Temperature (~ 
Figure 2.3 Solubility of NbC and VN in austenite at various temperatures (After Irvine 
et al. 5) 

144 Steels:MetallurgyandApplications 
500 
200 
.~_ 10o 
t- 
1t) 
c ~ 
50 
t- 
O 
.-~- 
20 - 
10 -- 
0.0002 
Experimental 
! 
Predicted 
0.0005 
0.001 0.002 
0.005 
0.01 0.02 
Precipitate fraction, f 
Figure 2.4 The dependence of precipitation strengthening on precipitate size (~) and 
fraction according to the Ashby-Orowan Model, compared with experimental observations 
for given micro-alloying additions (After Gladman et al. 6) 
agent at a temperature of 920"C. However, in A1-V steels, aluminium is the more 
powerful nitride former, and in the presence of 0.04% AI, significant levels of 
vanadium will go into solution at 920~ and be available for the precipitation of 
V4C3 on transformation to ferrite. Vanadium steels therefore provide significant 
precipitation-strengthening effects, i.e. up to 150 N/mm 2 per 0.10% V. 
The strengthening effect of precipitated particles is dependent on both the 
volume fraction and particle size of the precipitates. This is illustrated in 
Figure 2.4, which was derived by Gladman et al. using the Ashby-Orowan 
model for precipitation strengthening. Whereas the volume fraction of precipitate 
is controlled by aspects such as solute concentration and solution treatment 
temperature, the particle size will be influenced primarily by the temperature of 
transformation, which is controlled by the alloy content and cooling rate effects. 
Transformation strengthening 
As stated earlier, both alloying elements and faster cooling rates depress the 
temperature of transformation of austenite to ferrite and, ultimately, the effect will 
be sufficient to cause transformation to bainite or martensite. The consequence 
of this progression is illustrated in Figure 2.5, which relates to steels containing 
0.05-0.20% C. Thus the strength is increased progressively with the introduction 
of lower temperature transformation products but, of course, with some sacrifice 
to toughness and ductility. However, in the context of structural steels, there is 
a demand for quenched and tempered low-alloy grades with yield strengths up 
to 700 N/mm 2. Such steels are normally alloyed with molybdenum and boron to 

Low-carbon structural steels 145 
1200 
1050 
9OO 
J~ 
e~ 
| 
750 
IR 
r 
600 
450 
9 0 0 
iFerrlte + "~,~ 
. ~eajdlte 
** ~. 
~:i 
- 
700 
800 
eop ~o 
~'. \ 
"o 
9 9 
9 
9 
- 
Martensites _ 1_.. 
Balnltes 
....... 
t 
I 
I 
I 
300 
400 
500 
600 
Transformation temperature (~ 
Figure 2.5 Relationship between 50% transformation temperature and tensile strength 
(After Pickering 3) 
promote hardenability but there may also be a need to include elements such as 
vanadium to improve tempering resistance. 
Structure-property relationships in ferrite-pearlite steels 
Following the derivation of the Hall-Petch relationship: 
1 
~y = ~ + kyd-~ 
it was proposed that this basic equation for yield strength could be extended to 
take account of the strengthening effects of alloying elements. Thus: 
1 
try = ~ + k' (% alloy) + kyd-~ 
During the late 1950s and early 1960s, Gladman and Picketing 4 pursued this line 
of development and provided the following quantitative relationship for yield 
strength, tensile strength and impact transition temperature: 
YS (N/mm 2) = 53.9 + 32.3% Mn + 83.2% Si + 354% Nf + 17.4d-~ 
t 
TS (N/mm 2) = 294 + 27.7% Mn + 83.2% Si + 3.85% pearlite + 7.7d-~ 
1 
ITT (*C) = -19 + 44% Si + 700~/(%Nf) + 2.2% pearlite - 11.5d-~ 
where d is the mean ferrite grain size in mm and Nf the free (soluble) nitrogen. 

146 Steels:MetaUurgyandApplications 
Each of these equations illustrates very clearly the beneficial effects of a fine 
ferdte grain size in increasing the yield and tensile strength and depressing the 
impact transition temperature. It is also interesting to note that the pearlite content 
has no significant effect on the yield strength of these low-carbon, predominantly 
ferdtic steels. On the other hand, pearlite increases the tensile strength and has 
a detrimental effect on toughness. The solid solution strengthening effects of 
manganese, silicon and free nitrogen are also highlighted in the above equations 
and it will be noted that free nitrogen is particularly detrimental to the impact 
properties. 
a. 
or) 
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
Manganese (%) 
Figure 2.6 
The effect of increasing manganese content on the components of the yield 
stress of steels containing 0.2% carbon, 0.2% silicon, 0.15% vanadium and 0.15% nitrogen, 
normalized from 900 ~ C (After Gladman et al. 6) 

Low-carbon structural steels 
147 
Whereas the above equations clearly identify the solid solution strengthening 
effects of an element such as manganese, it must be borne in mind that manganese 
also contributes to strength by other means. Thus by depressing the temperature of 
transformation of austenite to ferrite, manganese causes further strengthening by: 
1. Refining the ferrite grain size. 
2. Refining the size of precipitation-strengthening particles, e.g. Nb(CN) and 
V4C3. 
These effects are illustrated in Figure 2.6, which shows the effect of manganese 
on the yield strength of a V-N steel, normalized from 900~ 
This figure also 
indicates that free nitrogen contributes very little to the overall strength of this 
particular steel in spite of having a very large strengthening coefficient. This is 
due to the fact that most of the nitrogen in this particular alloy remains out of 
solution as VN at a temperature of 900~ and therefore very little free nitrogen 
is available for solid solution strengthening. Whereas the VN particles refine the 
austenite grain size and produce a fine ferrite grain size, vanadium in solution 
leads subsequently to a dispersion-strengthening effect of the order of 75 N/mm 2. 
Controlled rolling/thermomechanical processing 
As stated earlier, the traditional route to a fine grain size in ferrite-pearlite struc- 
tural steels has been to incorporate grain-refining elements, such as aluminium, 
and to normalize the materials from about 920~ after rolling. However, prior to 
the introduction of continuous casting, basic carbon steel plate was made from 
semi-killed (balanced) ingots and the additional costs associated with aluminium 
grain refinement were very considerable, as illustrated by the cost data from the 
early 1960s shown in Table 2.2. 
In the late 1950s, steel users were also gaining experience with Nb-treated, 
micro-alloy steels which provided substantially higher strengths than plain carbon 
steel in the as-rolled condition but with a significant reduction in toughness 
compared with aluminium-grain-refined steels. However, when the micro-alloy 
steels were normalized to improve their impact properties, their strength advan- 
tage was forfeited. There was therefore the need for an alternative route to a 
fine grain size in structural steel plate which would overcome both the cost 
and strength penalties associated with traditional normalizing. In fact, the first 
Table 2.2 
Requirement 
nil (mild steel) 
Si killing 
Grain refinement 
Normalizing 
Impact testing < 0~ 
Extras 
Accumulative price 
(s 
Price (s 
- 
42.62 
7.50 
50.12 
3.O0 
53.12 
3.00 
56.12 
3.50 
59.62 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 

148 Steels: MetaUurgy and Applications 
indication of a viable alternative to normalizing was published in 1958 when 
Vanderb~k 7 reported that European steel producers were adopting lower than 
normal finishing temperatures during rolling, in order to refine the structure and 
improve mechanical properties. This practice became known as controlled rolling 
but in more recent years, the term thermomechanical processing has been used 
increasingly to embrace both modified hot-rolling and in-line accelerated-cooling 
operations. 
Outline of process 
The traditional hot-rolling operation for plates is shown schematically in 
Figure 2.7(a). Typically, slabs are soaked at temperatures of about 1200-1250~ 
and these are rolled progressively to lower plate thicknesses, often finishing at 
temperatures above 10~~ 
In plain carbon steels, soaking at 1200-1250"C 
produces a coarse austenite grain size and rolling just below that range 
results in rapid recrystallization. Even at a finishing temperature of 1000*C, 
recrystallization and subsequent grain growth will be relatively rapid, resulting in 
the generation of a coarse austenite grain size. On cooling to room temperature, 
this results in the formation of a coarse ferdte grain size and the material must 
be normalized in order to refine the microstructure. 
In controlled rolling, the operation is a two-stage process and, as illustrated in 
Figure 2.7(b), a time delay is introduced between roughing and finishing. This 
allows the finishing operations to be carded out at temperatures below the recrys- 
tallization temperature, which results in the formation of fine pancaked austenite 
grains and transformation to a fine-grained ferrite structure. In the 40 or so years 
since its introduction, a considerable amount of research work has been carried 
out world-wide on controlled rolling which has led to the development of mate- 
rials with vastly improved mechanical properties compared with those obtained 
in conventional, heat-treated steels. Whereas the early experiments in controlled 
rolling were carded out on plain carbon steels, it soon became evident that the 
process was greatly facilitated by the addition of carbide-forming elements. In 
particular, it was shown that the addition of about 0.05% Nb caused a marked 
retardation in recrystallization which allowed controlled rolling to be carded out 
at significantly higher temperatures. 
Slab reheating 
The slab-reheating stage is important in that it controls the amount of micro- 
alloying elements taken into solution and also the starting grain size. The 
solubility curves for NbC and VN in steels of different carbon and nitrogen 
contents are shown in Figure 2.3 and were referred to earlier. For most 
commercial grades of steel, Sellars 8 states that complete solution of VC is 
expected at the standard normalizing temperature of 920~ 
and VN at somewhat 
higher temperatures, whereas Nb(CN), AlN and TiC require temperatures in the 
range 1150-1300~ 
TiN is the most stable compound and little dissolution is 
expected to take place at normal reheating temperatures. Whereas the presence of 
fine, undissolved carbonitride particles will serve to maintain a fine austenite grain 

Low-carbon structural steels 
149 
(b) 
Figure 2.7 Rolling schedules; (a) normal rolling and normalizing; (b) thermomechanical 
processing 
size at the reheating stage, it is equally important that micro-alloying elements 
are taken into solution so as to be available for the control of recrystaUization and 
precipitation strengthening at later stages in the process. This dual requirement is 
often achieved by making multiple micro-alloy additions, incorporating the less 
soluble elements such as niobium and titanium for grain size control during 
reheating together with vanadium, which dissolves more readily and which 
provides substantial precipitation strengthening. 

150 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Rolling 
Tamura et al. 9 recognize three distinct stages during controlled rolling: 
1. Deformation in the recrystallization temperature range just below the reheating 
temperature. 
2. Deformation in the temperature range between the recrystallization tempera- 
ture and Ar3. 
3. Deformation in the two-phase y + ct temperature range between Ar3 and Arl. 
At temperatures just below the reheating temperature, the rate of recrystallization 
is rapid, increasing with both temperature and degree of deformation. However, 
refinement of the austenite structure is produced by successive recrystallization 
between passes, provided the strain per pass exceeds a minimum critical level. 
Recrystallization is retarded to some extent by the presence of solute atoms, 
such as aluminium, niobium, vanadium and titanium, and the process is known 
as solute drag. However, the major effect of niobium and other micro-alloying 
elements in retarding recrystaUization and grain growth arises from the strain- 
induced precipitation of fine carbonitrides during the rolling process. 
As the rolling temperature decreases, recrystallization becomes more difficult 
and reaches a stage where it effectively ceases. Cuddy l~ has defined the 
recrystallization stop temperature as the temperature at which recrystallization 
is incomplete after 15 seconds, after a particular rolling sequence. Using this 
criterion, the effect of the common micro-alloying elements on recrystallization 
behaviour is shown in Figure 2.8 and this illustrates the very powerful effect of 
niobium. The retardation effects of the various elements are dependent on their 
relative solubilities in austenite, the least soluble (niobium) having the largest 
driving force for precipitation at a given temperature and creating a proportionally 
greater effect in raising the recrystallization temperature than the more soluble 
elements such as aluminium and vanadium. 
1050 9 
-~ lOOO 
:3 
ca- 950 
E 
e~_ o 900 
e-. 
o ~ 
850 
N 
~ 
~ 800 
o 
n-- 
750 9 
0 
Nb 
0.050 
O. 1 O0 
O. 150 
Initial solute content (atom per cent) 
0.200 
0.250 
Figure 2.8 Effect on recrystallization stop temperature of increase in micro-alloy content 
in 0.07% C 1.4% Mn 0.25% Si steel (After Cuddy l~ 

Low.carbon structural steels 
151 
By introducing a delay between roughing and finishing, rolling can be made to 
take place at a temperature below 950"C, where the strain-induced precipitation 
of Nb(CN) or TiC is sufficiently rapid to prevent recrystaUization before the next 
pass. According to Cohen and Hansen, 11 austenite recrystaUization and carboni- 
tride precipitation are interlinked during this process, substructural features in 
the deformed austenite providing nucleation sites for carbonitride precipitation 
which in turn pins the substructure and inhibits recrystallization. This results in 
an elongated pancake morphology in the austenite structure and the austenite is 
said to be conditioned. The deformation substructure that is introduced within 
the austenite grains has a particularly beneficial effect in developing a finer grain 
size. This arises from the fact that the substructure provides intragranular sites 
for ferrite nucleation in addition to those at the austenite grain boundaries. 
The controlled-rolling operation can be intensified by depressing the defor- 
mation process below Ar3 and into the two-phase y + c~ region. In addition to 
further grain refinement, rolling in this region also produces a significant change 
in the microstructure. Thus a mixed structure is produced, consisting of polyg- 
onal ferrite grains which have transformed from deformed austenite and deformed 
ferrite grains which were produced during the rolling operation. 
Transformation to ferrite 
Although the mean ferrite grain size is related to the thickness of the pancaked 
austenite grains, other factors also play an important part in the control of the 
finished microstructure and properties. As discussed previously, alloying elements 
depress the austenite to ferrite transformation temperature and thereby decrease 
the ferrite grain size. A further important effect is the rate of cooling from the 
austenite (or y + or) range and a combination of controlled rolling and accelerated 
cooling is now being used to produce further improvement in properties. 
The benefits of accelerated cooling can be used in two ways: 
1. To increase the strength compared with air-cooled, controlled-rolled material. 
5OO 
~.~ 450 
oa 
E 
~400 
alized 
~" 
I 
~/" 
/ 
~ 
~ 
Controlled 
3
5
0
~
 
~rolled (CR) 
t 
CR + Accelerated 
300 
cooled 
i 
I 
...... 
I 
. . . . .  
I 
0.3 
0.35 
0.4 
0.45 
0.5 
Carbon equivalent 
Figure 2.9 Exploitation of controlled rolling and accelerated cooling for improved prop- 
erties in plate steels 

152 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
2. To achieve the strength levels of controlled-rolled materials in steels of lower 
alloy content. 
The latter approach is particularly attractive in that it utilizes steels of lower 
carbon equivalent and therefore provides improved weldability. This effect is 
shown schematically in Figure 2.9. 
An extension of normal accelerated cooling after rolling is that employing 
the faster cooling rates of direct quenching. Whereas the former is concerned 
with refinement of the ferrite grains, the latter is concerned with the formation 
of lower temperature transformation products such as bainite and martensite. 
Direct quenching avoids the reheating costs associated with conventional off-line 
hardening treatments but still requires a subsequent tempering treatment. 
Standard specifications 
For many years, the relevant UK standard for structural steels was BS 4360 Weld- 
able structural steels and provided the comprehensive yield strength-toughness 
matrix shown in Figure 2.10. Thus there were four levels of strength (40, 43, 
50 and 55), the numbers referring to the minimum tensile strengths in kgffmm 2. 
Within each strength grade, there were various sub-grades which represented 
increasing levels of toughness, designated by the following nomenclature: 
Minimum Charpy V value of 27J at: 
A 
no requirement 
DD 
-30"C 
B 
20~ 
E 
-40~ 
C 
0~ 
EE 
-50~ 
D 
-20~ 
F 
-60*C 
O4 
E 
E 
Z 
500 
400 
>" 300 
.~ 
E 
i 
200 
55F 
9 
9 55EE 
9 55C 
No 
impact strength 
requirement 
50F 
50DD 
9 
9 50EE 
9 
9 50D 
9 50C 
9 50B 
9 50A 
9 43EE 
9 43D 
9 43C 
9 43B 
9 43A 
9 40EE 
9 40D 
9 40C 
9 40B 
9 40A 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~. 
-60 
-40 
-20 
0 
20 
v 
Temperature (~ 
for 27J Charpy V value 
Figure 2.10 
Yield strength-impact strength requirements in BS 4360:1986 Weldable 
structural steels (product forms-plates, strip and wide flats) 

Low.carbon structural steels 153 
However, BS 4360 has now been superseded by various European standards, of 
which the following are the more important: 
BS EN 10025:1993 
BS EN 10133:1993 
Hot rolled products of non-alloy structural steels. 
Hot rolled products in weldable fine grain 
structural steels. 
The designation and property requirements of these European specifications are 
shown in Tables 2.3 (a) and 2.3 (b) which also provide a useful comparison with 
the grades specified in the former BS 4360 standard. Thus the former BS 4360 
grades, 40, 43 and 50 A, B, C and D, are now covered by BS EN 10025:1993 
and the higher toughness grades DD, E and EE, together with the high-strength 
grades (55C and 55EE), are superseded by grades in BS EN 10113: 1993. To 
complete the puzzle, the former BS 4360 grades, 50F and 55F, have now been 
incorporated in the following, recently published European standard: 
BS EN 10137:1996 
High yield strength structural steels in the quenched 
and tempered or precipitation hardened condition. 
A European standard has also been introduced for weathering steels (BS EN 
10155: 1993) and this will be discussed later in this chapter. 
A possible source for confusion is that the current UK specifications dealing 
with the design of steel bridges and buildings have not yet been updated to 
deal with the changes from BS to European standards and they still refer to 
steels specified in BS 4360. However, this aspect will also be discussed in the 
appropriate parts of this chapter. 
Steel prices 
The basis prices of some of the plates, specified in BS EN 10025:1993 and 
BS EN 10113: 1993, are shown in Figure 2.11. It should be stressed that the 
prices shown in this figure were those in force in March 1997 and it must be 
borne in mind that steel prices are adjusted from time to time. As indicated 
in Figure 2.11, the prices increase progressively at a given strength level as 
the specified impact properties are improved and also as the minimum yield 
strength values are increased. However, as illustrated in Figure 2.12, the ratio of 
cost: yield strength (at a given level of toughness) falls very significantly as the 
strength of these steels is increased. Therefore there is a major cost incentive to 
utilize higher-strength grades in structures where design is based primarily on 
yield strength. 
Weathering steels 
The term weathering steels is given to structural grades in which the resistance 
to atmospheric corrosion has been improved by the addition of small amounts of 
elements such as copper, phosphorus, silicon and chromium. These steels rust at a 

Table 23(a) Structural steels: comparison between grades in BS EN 10025: 1993 and BS 4360: 1986 
BS EN 10025: 1993 
BS 43M): 1986 
Gmde 
Former 
Tensile 
M i a  
Max. Thk 
 imp^ Emw (J'C) 
Grodr 
Tknsik 
Min 
MarThk 
ImpactEnergy 
strength 
yield 
for 
strength 
yield 
fO! 
(J'C) 
23 mm 
strength 
specified 
Nominal thickness 
5100 mm 
strength 
specified 
grade 
- 
c100 mm a 1 6  mm 
yield 
N 1 m 2  
of 16 mm 
yield 
Nominal thickness 
Nlmm2 
N l m 2  
N / m 2  
Temp. 
5150 mm >150 mm 
NEmm2 
Nlmm2 
'C 
(1) 
5250 mm 
(2) 
Temp 
5100 mm 
(1) 
'C 
(3) 
S185 
S235 
S235JR 
S235JRG1 
S235JRG2 
S235JO 
S235J2G3 
S235J2G4 
S275 
S275JR 
S275JO 
S275J2G3 
S275J2G4 
s355 
s355JR 
S355JO 
S355J2G3 
S355J2G4 
S355K2G3 
S355K2G4 
(4) 
Fe 310-0 
(4) 
(5) Fe 360A 
(5) 
(4) 
Fe 360B 
(4) 
(4) 
Fe 360B(FU)(4) 
Fe 360B(FN) 
Fe 36oc 
Fe 360DI 
Fe 360D2 
(5) Fe 430A 
(5) 
Fe 430B 
Fe 43OC 
Fe 430D1 
Fe 430D2 
(5) Fe 510A 
(5) 
Fe 510B 
Fe 51W 
Fe 510D1 
Fe 510D2 
Fe 510DD1 
Fe 510DD2 
2W510 
340/470 
W 4 7 0  
340/470 
W 4 7 0  
W 4 7 0  
340/470 
W 4 7 0  
41W560 
4101560 
4101560 
41W560 
4101560 
4W630 
4901630 
4W630 
4901630 
4901630 
490/630 
4W630 
185 
25 
235 
250 
235 
25 
235 
25 
235 
250 
235 
250 
235 
250 
235 
250 
275 
250 
275 
250 
275 
250 
275 
250 
275 
250 
355 
250 
355 
250 
355 
250 
355 
250 
355 
250 
355 
250 
355 
250 
- - 
+20 
+20 (6) 
+20 (6) 
0 
-20 
-20 
+20 (6) 
0 
-20 
-20 
+20 (6) 
0 
-20 
-20 
-20 
-20 
- 
- 
- - 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 
40 
40 
- 
- 
- - - - 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
33 
33 
- 
- 
- 
40A - - 
40B 
4oc 
4OD 
4OD 
43A 
43B 
43c 
43D 
43D 
50A 
50B 
5W 
50D 
50D 
50DD 
50DD 
- 
340-500 
- - 
W500 
34w500 
34w500 
w 5 0 0  
43W580 
43W580 
43w580 
43w580 
43W580 
4W640 
4W640 
4W640 
4W640 
4W64a 
4901640 
4 W W  
- 
235 - - 
235 
235 
235 
235 
275 
275 
275 
275 
355 
355 
355 
355 
355 
355 
355 
275 
- 
150 
- - 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
- 
- 
+20 (6) 
27 
0 
27 
-20 
27 
-20 
27 
+20 (6) 
27 
0 
27 
-20 
27 
-20 
27 
+20 (6) 
27 
0 
21 
-20 
27 
-20 
27 
-30 
27 
-30 
27 
- 
- 
- 
- 

1 For d o n s  up to and including 100 mm only. 
2 For wide flats and scctions up to and including 63 mm and 100 mm rspeCtively. 
3 F a  wide flats up to and including 50 mm and for d o n s  no limit is StaGed 
4 Only available up to and including 25 mm thick 
5 The steel grades S235 (Fe 36OA). S275 (Fe 430A) and S355 (Fe 510A) appear only in mC English language version (BS EN 10025) as n o n e g  additions and do not appear in 
6 Verification of the specified impact value is only onied out when aped at tim of enquiry and ordcr. 
Omer Europeaa versions. 
Symbols used in BS EN I
m
 
s = S~lUIalSteel. 
E = EogintRingSteel. 
235 275 355 = min YS (Nlmm2) @ t 516 mm 
JR r L o n g i t u d i n a l C h p y V - m h w 2 7 J @ - -  
JO = Longitudinal C h p y  V-mtch impaaS 271 @ (PC 
J2 
K2 = Longitudinal m 
V - m h  
GI = Rimming steel (FW) 
G2 = Rimming steel not pnmiaed (FN) 
= L o n g m d i o a t m V - ~ ~ I ~ h  
impsasZ7J @ -2WC 
4OJ @ -2(PC 
G3 = Supply Condition N, 
ie. normahd WMXmalued 
. 
G4 = Supply coaditim at the manufacturers discretioa. 
rolled 
Examples S235JRG1. S355K2G4 
After BS EN 10025 1993. 

Table 23@) 
Structural Steels: Comparison between grades in BS EN 10113: I993 and BS 4360: I990 
BS EN 10113 
BS 4360: 1990 
Grade 
UTS MinYS 
Mar. Thk 
CkDY (low) 
Grade 
UTS MinYS 
Mar. Thk 
ckt?Y (long) 
att=16mm 
(mm) 
a r t = 1 6  mm 
(mm) 
(N/mm*) 
(1) 
(2) 
Temp. Energy 
M a r  Thk 
(N/mm2) 
(1) 
(2) 
Temp. Energy 
Mar. Thk 
(C) 
(0 
(mm) 
(a 
(J) 
(mm) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
S275N 
S275NL 
S355N 
s355NL 
S420N 
S420NL 
S46ON 
s46oNL 
S275M 
S275ML 
370 
to 
510 
470 
to 
630 
520 
to 
680 
550 
to 
720 
360 
to 
510 
-20 
40 
-50 
27 
-20 
40 
-50 
27 
-20 
40 
-50 
27 
-20 
40 
-50 
27 
-20 
40 
-50 
27 
275 
150 150 
150 
150 
355 
150 150 
150 150 
420 
150 150 
150 150 
460 
100 100 
100 100 
275 
63 
150 
63 
150 
43DD 
43EE 
50DD 
50E 
50EE 
- - - 
55C 
55EE 
430 
to 
275 
580 
490 
to 
355 
640 
- 
- 
- 
- 
550 
to 
450 
700 
- 
100 
150 (3) 
- 
150 (3) 
100 
- 
100 
150 (3) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
25 
40 
63 (4) - 
-30 
-50 
-30 
-40 
-50 - 
- 
0 
-50 
27 
27 
27 
27 
27 - 
- 
27 
27 
- 
(7) 
75 (5) 
- 
100 (5) (7) 
- 
(7) 
75 (6) 
- 
- 
- 
25 
19 
63 (4) 
- 

S355M 
450 
S355ML 
610 
S2OM 
500 
s420ML 
660 
to 
to 
S46OM 
530 
W M L  
720 
to 
-20 
-50 
-20 
-50 
355 
63 
150 
420 
63 
150 
-20 
-50 
460 
63 
150 
40 
27 
40 
27 
63 
63 
40 
27 
63 
150 
Notes: 
1 Applies to plates and wide flats. 
2 Applies to Sections. 
3 For wide flats max. thickness is 63 mm. 
4 Not available as wide flats. 
5 For wide flats max. thickness is 50 mm. 
6 For wide flats max. thickness is 30 nun 
7 For sections no limit is given. 
150 
150 
Grade 
M i a  me. energy (J) at rest temp ("C) 
Symbols used in BS EN I01 13 
s = structural Steel 
N = Normalized or normalized rolled 
+20 
0 
-10 
-20 
-30 
-40 
-50 
'275' '355' '420' '460' = min YS (N/mmz) @ t 5 16 mm. 
S-Nhi 
55 
47 
43 
40 
M = 'Ibermomechanical rolled. 
s-- 
63 
55 
51 
47 
40 
31 
27 
L = JAW temperatlrre (-50C) impaaS. 
Examples S275N. S355ML. 
After BS EN 10113: 1993. 

158 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
450 
400 
r 
350 
r 
r 
o 
300 
250 
200 
i 
! 
8 
09 
min. YS 
235 
N/mm 2 
co 
0 Ol 
_J 
z 
UD 
r,,,, 
r 
O 
-- 
o4 
min. YS 
275 
N/mm 2 
ft. 
8 
8 
o3 
eo 
O 
(xl 
u3 
o 
~j 
,n 
8 
8 
- 
mln. YS 
355 
N/mm2 
Z =fi 
- 
03 
O3 
! 
I 
I 
I 
nin. '~ 
460 
Xl/mn 
Figure 2.11 
Basis prices of steel plates as of March 1997 
lower rate than plain carbon steels and, under favourable climatic conditions, they 
can develop a relatively stable layer of hydrated iron oxide which retards further 
attack. Very often, reference is made to the brown 'patina' that develops on the 
surface of these steels and the attractive appearance that it presents in buildings 
and bridges. However, regardless of their aesthetic qualities, weathering steels can 
provide cost savings by eliminating the initial painting operation and subsequent 
maintenance work. 
These steels were first introduced in 1933 by the United States Steel Corpo- 
ration under the brand name Cot-Ten and have been licensed for manufacture 
throughout the world. However, they have not been used extensively in the UK 
because frequent rain inhibits the formation of the stable oxide layer and rusting 
continues, albeit at a relatively slow rate. Ideally, long dry summer periods are 
required to develop the adherent oxide layer. 
Corrosion resistance 
The mid-specifications of the chemical composition in the Cor-Ten series are 
given in Table 2.4. Cot-Ten A is the original high-phosphorus grade whereas 
Cor-Ten B and Cor-Ten C were introduced in the 1960s. These later steels have 
normal levels of phosphorus and are micro-alloyed with vanadium to provide 
high strength. 

Low-carbon structural steels 
159 
1.5 
E 
r 
1.0 
8 
300 
Minimum YS (N/ram2) 
0.5 
I 
200 
400 
Figure 2.12 Cost-yield strength relationships for plates (grades providing minimum 
impact energy of 27 J at -20* C 
Table 2.4 
% 
Cot-Ten A 
Cot-Ten B 
Cot-Ten C 
C 
0.08 
0.14 
0.16 
Si 
0.50 
0.20 
0.20 
Mn 
0.25 
1.10 
1.20 
P 
0.11 
0.04 max. 
0.04 max. 
Cr 
0.75 
0.50 
0.50 
Ni 
0.35 
- 
- 
Cu 
0.40 
0.35 
0.35 
V 
- 
0.06 
0.07 
The corrosion behaviour of these steels is shown in Figure 2.1312 where they 
can be compared with plain carbon steel. Very clearly, the weathering grades 
are superior to carbon steel in each of the atmospheres investigated, Cor-Ten A 
providing a better performance than Cot-Ten B. However, in keeping with the 
corrosion behaviour of other types of steel, the performance is worst in marine 

160 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
6[ (a) 
E 
E 
2 
(:: 
.r 
C ._o 0 
~8 
(D 
,~ 
4 
~2 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Carbon steel 
/
~
 
-, 
- ...... Cor-Ten B 
Cor-Ten A 
steel 
Cor-Ten A 
...... 
[ 
.... 
L .... 
I 
t 
steel 
Cor-Ten B 
Cor-Ten A 
;arbon steel 
Jn B 
I 
........ 
I 
I 
...... 
I 
2 
4 
6 
8 
Years 
Figure 2.13 Corrosion behaviour of Cor-Ten steels: (a) industrial; (b) semi-industrial; 
(c) semi-rural; (d) moderate marine 

Low-carbon structural steels 
161 
atmospheres and weathering steels are not generally recommended for use in 
such environments. 
In spite of the large amount of corrosion data that has been gathered on 
weathering steels, the mechanism of their superior performance is still relatively 
obscure. Studies by the United States Steel Corporation t3 showed that Cor-Ten 
steels rusted faster than carbon steel in the initial stages and it was only after a 
period of eight days that carbon steel showed a greater gain in weight. After that 
period, both materials had developed a continuous coveting of rust mounds but 
those on the carbon steel grew to a larger size and eventually spalled from the 
surface. With Cor-Ten A, splitting was less frequent and no spalling was observed. 
X-ray diffraction work showed that the rust on both types of steel consisted 
essentially of y- Fe203.H20 in the initial stages, but after about 30 days ~- 
Fe203.H20 was detected. However, in addition to iron oxides, iron sulphates 
(FeSO4.3H20, FeSO4.7H20 and Fe2(SO4)3) have been detected in the rust layers 
formed on steel in polluted atmospheres. It is suggested tentatively that the bene- 
ficial alloying elements render these sulphates less soluble and thereby retard the 
penetration of air and moisture through the oxide layer to the steel interface. 
Horton 14 has examined the effect of individual alloying elements on the 
corrosion resistance of Mayari R steel (Bethlehem Steel Corporation). The base 
composition used in this work was as shown in Table 2.5. 
The results are summarized in Figure 2.14(a), which shows the effect of vari- 
ations in a single alloying element in the above base. The corrosion penetration 
of the base steel was 2.9 mm and is represented as a horizontal line. Copper 
was not examined in this investigation but Horton lists the following order of 
effectiveness for other elements: 
Most beneficial 
P 
Cr 
Si 
Ni 
No effect 
Mn 
Detrimental 
S 
Horton also analysed data on Cor-Ten A steel which involved the base composi- 
tion shown in Table 2.6. These results are shown in Figure 2.14(b) and (c) which 
deal with industrial and marine (Kure Beach, North Carolina) sites respectively. 
Table 2.5 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
P% 
S% 
Cr% 
Ni% 
Cu% 
0.08 
0.28 
0.70 
0.10 
0.03 
0.60 
0.40 
0.60 
Table 2.6 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
P% 
S% 
Cr% 
Ni% 
Cu% 
<0.10 
0.22 
0.25-0.40 
O. 10 
<0.02 
0.63 
'--0.5 
0.42 

162 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
10 
(a) 
8 
6 
cr 
4 
2 
Cr 
I Pi~sbuNh, P.A. 
Si 
17 years 
o 
t 
I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
lol 
Kearny N.J. 
15.51Yearn 
, 
I 
~(b) 
~ 
U 
.o_ 
C 
el. 
,.- 
4 
._o 
ICJ 
8 
2 
~ 
0 
, 
~ 10 
Ic) 
8 
Ni 
Si 
" ~ -  
Cr 
l 
l 
I 
I 
I 
6 
4 
Cr 
P 
Si 
Ni 
2 
Kure Beach N.C. 800 foot lot 
15.5 years 
0 
,,1, 
I 
I 
I , 
I 
I 
I, 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
% Alloying element 
Figure 2.14 
Corrosion behaviour of weathering steels: (a) Bethlemen data on Mayari 
R; (b) USS Cor-Ten A in industrial atmosphere; (c) USS Cor-Ten A in marine atmosphere 
At the latter site, the order of effectiveness is as follows: 
Most beneficial 
P 
Si 
Cu 
(up to 0.3%) 
Cr 
Ni 
Cu 
(>3%) 

Low-carbon structural steels 163 
However, at the industrial site (Kearny, New Jersey), copper exerts a more 
powerful effect and would be promoted to a higher ranking than that shown 
above. 
Very similar results have also been obtained by Hudson and Stanners 15 and 
Larrabee and Coburn l~ and it is generally acknowledged that phosphorus produces 
a marked and progressive benefit up to at least 0.1%. However, phosphorus is very 
detrimental to both toughness and weldability and therefore it is not included in 
some grades of weathering steel, with some loss in corrosion resistance. Copper 
is regarded as an essential constituent in weathering steels but little benefit is 
gained by increasing the copper content above about 0.3%. Elements such as 
silicon and chromium are mildly beneficial and the greatest benefit is obtained at 
levels up to about 0.25% and 0.6% respectively. As indicated earlier, manganese 
can be regarded as being neutral in its effect on corrosion resistance, whereas 
sulphur is detrimental. 
Steel spec~cations 
Following the withdrawal of BS4360: 1990, a European standard was intro- 
duced for weathering grades, namely BS EN 10155:1993 Structural steels with 
improved atmospheric corrosion resistance. The chemical compositions of these 
grades are shown in Table 2.7 which includes two high phosphorus compositions 
and specific ranges for chromium and copper. 
The mechanical properties of these grades are shown in Table 2.8. BS EN 
10155:1993 offers a wider range of grades than the former British standard, 
extending the requirements for both tensile and impact properties. 
Clean steels and inclusion shape control 
In parallel with developments in micro-alloy steels and thermomechanical 
processing, major attention has also been given to methods of producing steels 
which are isotropic with regard to tensile ductility and impact strength. Initially, 
the need for these steels was precipitated by the incidence of lamellar tearing 
in which plate material separates along planar arrays of non-metallic inclusions 
under the forces generated in highly restrained welds. However, the need for 
higher levels of impact strength in structural steels and the requirement for better 
cold formability in strip products have also focused attention on the development 
of cleaner steels and inclusion shape control. 
The practice of adding calcium to steels for the reduction of sulphide and 
oxide inclusions is now used world-wide and has the added benefit of modi- 
fying the shape and size of these inclusions. One of the pioneers in this field 
was Thyssen Niederrhein in Germany and the practice is described by Pircher 
and Klapdar. 17 After tapping, calcium in the form of calcium silicide or calcium 
carbide is injected deep into the ladle by means of a refractory lined lance, 
using argon as a carder. The calcium vaporizes and as it bubbles through the 
molten bath it combines with sulphur and oxygen in the steel. In either case, 
the reaction products are carried into the slag. The steel is generally deoxidized 

Table 2.7 
BS EN 10155: 1993 Structural Steels with improved atmospheric corrosion resistance 
Chemical composition of the ladle analysis 
~~ 
~~~ 
Designation 
Method 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
Smar. 
Nmaz 
Addition 
Cr 
Cu 
Others 
ofdeoxi- mar. mar 
% 
% 
% 
8 
of 
% 
% 
According 
According 
dation 
% 
% 
nitrogen 
EN 10027-1 and EN 10027-2 
binding 
ECISS IC I0 
elements') 
~~ 
S235JOW 
S235J2W 
S355JOWP 
S355J2WP 
S355JOW 
S355J2Gl W 
S355J2G2W 
S355K2G1 W 
S355K2G2W 
1.8958 
1.8961 
1.8945 
1.8946 
1.8959 
1.8963 
1.8965 
1.8966 
1.8967 
FN 
0.13 0.40 
FF 
0.13 0.40 
FN 
0.12 0.75 
FF 
0.12 0.75 
FN 
0.16 0.50 
FF 
0.16 0.50 
FF 
0.16 0.50 
FF 
0.16 0.50 
FF 
0.16 0.50 
0.20-0.60 
max. 0.040 
0.20-0.60 
max. 0.040 
max. 1.0 
0.06-0.15 
max. 1.0 
0.06-0.15 
0.50- 1 S O  ma. 0.035 
0.50-1.50 
max. 0.035 
0.50-1.50 max. 0.035 
0.50-1.50 
max. 0.035 
0.50-1.50 
 ma^. 0.040 
0.040 
0.035 
0.040 
0.035 
0.040 
0.035 
0.035 
0.035 
0.035 
0.40-0.80 
0.40 - 0.80 
0,30- 1.25 
0.30- 1.25 
0.40-0.80 
0.40 - 0.80 
0.40-0.80 
0.40-0.80 
0.40 - 0.80 
0.25-0.55 
3, 
0.25-0.55 
3, 
0.25-0.55 
0.25-0.55 
0.25-0.55 
3)4) 
0.25-0.55 
0.25 -0.55 
0.25 -0.55 
0.25-0.55 
')The steels shall contain at least one of the following elements: A1 total 20.020%. Nb. 0.015 to 0.06096, V 0.02 to 0.1296, "k 0.02 to 0.10%. If these elements are 
used in combination, at least one of them shall be present with the minimum of content indicated. 
2)It is permissible to exceed the specified values provided that each increase of 0.001% N the P max. content will be reduced by 0.005%; the N content of the ladle 
analysis, however, shall not be more than 0.012%. 
')The steels may show a Ni content of max. 0.65%. 
4)The steels may contain m a .  0.30% Mo and max. 0.15% Zr. 
%'he max. value for nitrogen does not apply if the chemical composition shows a minimum total Al content of 0.020% or if sacient other N binding elements are 
present. The N binding elements shall be mentioned in the inspection document 

Table 2.8 
Mechanical properties of steels to BS EN 10155: 1993 
Mechanical properties forfit and long products') 
Designation 
Minimum yield strength R:A 
Tensile strength R: 
Nlmm2 
Nlmm2 
Position 
Minimum percentage elongation at 
of test 
fracture') 
pieces') 
% 
Nominal thickness 
Nominal thickness 
mm 
mm 
According 
According 
116 >16 >40 >63 
>SO 
23 
EN 10027-1 and EN 10027-2 
540 163 580 5100 
<3 
- 
< 100 
ECISS IC 10 
&=80 mm 
& = 5.65JSo 
Nominal thickness 
Nominal thickness 
>1.5 
>2 
~ 2 . 5  5 3  >40 >63 
- 
<2 
52.5 
t 3  540 563 5100 
mm 
mm 
S235JOW 
S235J2W 
S355JOWP 
S355J2WP 
1-8958} 
235 
225 
215 
215 
215 
360-510 
340-470 
19 
20 
21 
26 
25 
24 
1 A961 
t 
17 
18 
19 
24 
23 
22 - 
16 
17 
18 
22 
- 
1.8946 
t 
14 
15 
16 
20 
- 
- 
1.8945) 
355 
3452) - 
- 
- 
510-680 
490-630 
1 
16 
17 
18 
22 
21 
20 
355 
345 
335 
325 
315 
510-680 
490-630 
1 
S355JOW 
1.8959 
S355J2Gl W 
1.8%3 
S355J2G2W 
1.8965 
S355K2G1 W 
1.8966 
S355K2G2W 
1.8967 
t 
14 
15 
16 
20 
19 
18 
') The values in the table apply to longitudinal test pieces (1) for the tensile test. For plate, smp and wide flats with widths ~(5fXl 
applicable. 
2,  his value applies on~y in respect to s
w
,
 sectiom and bars (sec table 2). 
transverse test pieces (t) 

166 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
with aluminium prior to calcium treatment with an initial oxygen content in the 
range 20-100 ppm. After calcium treatment, the oxygen content is reduced to 
10-20 ppm. The authors report that the desulphurizing effect of calcium is deter- 
mined largely by the amount of calcium added but, as illustrated in Figure 2.15, 
the effect is influenced greatly by the type of ladle refractories employed. With 
dolomite ladles, little reaction takes place between the molten steel and refracto- 
ries and the low level of oxygen in the steel enhances the effect of calcium as a 
desulphurizing agent. With dolomite ladles, the addition of 1 kg of calcium per 
ton reduces the sulphur content from an initial level of 0.02% to a final level of 
0.003%. However, the authors state that sulphur contents less than 0.001% can 
be produced by this technique. As illustrated in Figure 2.15, magnesium is also 
very effective as a desulphurizing agent. However, calcium is generally preferred 
because it is cheaper and more controllable. 
As indicated earlier, anisotropy of toughness and ductility is caused by the 
elongation of inclusions into planar arrays and both manganese sulphides and 
stringers of oxide are damaging in this respect. However, the problem is largely 
eliminated if the inclusions are present as small, isolated, non-deformed particles. 
Therefore major attention has been devoted to inclusion shape control in addition 
to the reduction in the volume fraction of inclusions. The elements used as 
inclusion modifiers are calcium, zirconium, tellurium and the rare earth metals. 
In aluminium deoxidized steels, the inclusion population will generally include 
elongated Type II manganese sulphides, alumina and some silicates. However, 
after calcium treatment, the inclusions are restricted to calcium aluminate of the 
type CaO.AI203. The sulphur in the steel is also associated with these inclusions, 
either as calcium sulphide or as sulphur in solution. The calcium aluminate parti- 
cles are globular in nature and tend to retain their shape on hot rolling. The 
0 
Fire-clay ladle 
40 .~~ 
'~ 
rls- SA~ sE'xlO0% 
g6o-...~,,, \\ % 
- "~'~. 
= 80 
\ 
~ 
~.~/C~,c,urn 
0 
- 
\ 
o~ 
~'~ 
-r- 
= 
90 
\ 
c- 
o. 
~, 
Dol 
adle 
94 
"6 
96 
G} 
Calcfum 
o 
,Magne m 
99 
, 
, 
, 
i, 
i 
, 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 
Calcium or magnesium added (kg per ton) 
Figure 2.15 Effect of calcium and magnesium on desulphurization. The desulphurizing 
additions were blown to a depth of 2.7 m in a steel bath having a temperature of 1580" C 
(After Pircher and Klapdar 17 

Low-carbon structural steels 
167 
0 
.
.
.
.
.
 
08 
c, ~ 
0o,,o ~ 
~" 
OOOOO 
~ 
O 
oo 
"~ ~.60 ..... 
.. 
o 
~" ~ 
~ ~ 
~.- 
o 8 
~ 2 0 ....... 
C 
o 
o 
|, 
, 
I 
o Calcium-treated 
9 Not calcium-treated 
I 
~A 
0.010 
0.020 
0.030 
Sulphur content (%) 
0.040 
Figure 2.16 Relationship between the sulphur content and the mean values of reduction 
of area of tensile test specimens in the through-thickness direction of steel grade FG 36 
(After Pircher and Klapdar iT) 
beneficial effect of a reduction in sulphur content and calcium treatment on the 
reduction in area in the through-thickness direction is shown in Figure 2.16. 
Ships 
Although there has been a significant decline in the world's output of new ships 
since the mid-1970s, the production of large merchant vessels remains a major 
application for structural steels. Despite marked changes in material selection for 
other forms of transport, steel remains virtually unchallenged for hull construction 
in large tankers and carders. However, like other forms of steel construction, 
shipbuilding has witnessed the following changes since the early 1940s: 
1. The change from riveting to welding as the principal method of joining. 
2. An appreciation of the need for high levels of toughness. 
3. The adoption of higher strength steels for reduced construction costs or higher 
operating efficiency. 
Standard-strength steels 
The main specifications for shipbuilding materials are issued by organizations 
known as Classification Societies, namely: 
9 American Bureau of Shipping 
9 Bureau Veritas 
9 Det Norske Veritas 
9 Germanischer Lloyd 

168 Steels:MetallurgyandApplications 
9 Lloyd's Register of Shipping 
9 Nippon Kaiji Kyokai 
9 Registro Italiano Navale 
Whereas each of these societies publishes its own design rules and steel 
specifications, they collaborate closely through the International Association of 
Classification Societies (IACS). Therefore there is a high degree of uniformity 
in steel specifications in terms of composition, tensile properties and impact 
resistance. This collaboration stems from the mid-1950s when there was an urgent 
need to harmonize the approaches that had been taken individually in formulating 
steel specifications with improved resistance to brittle fracture. 
Until the early 1940s, shipbuilding had been based on riveted construction and 
only one grade of steel was in common use, namely 'shipbuilding quality'. The 
steel was specified very simply in terms of tensile and bend tests and no limi- 
tations were placed on chemical composition. However, during World War II, 
the emergency shipbuilding programme in the United States demanded higher 
production rates for the so-called Liberty Ships and brought about the change 
from riveted to welded construction. This necessitated consideration of steel 
composition in relation to weldability but of far greater significance was the 
emergence of the problem of brittle fracture. In some instances, brittle fracture 
led to the catastrophic break-up of cargo vessels at sea and also produced the 
spectacular failure of the SS Schenectady in January 1943, whilst lying alongside 
the outfitting berth of a shipyard. Whereas it was shown that structural perfor- 
mance could be enhanced by means of improved design in critical elements, it 
was also evident that there was an urgent need to improve the toughness char- 
acteristics of ship plate steel. 
In the years following World War II, each of the classification societies took 
independent action in formulating steel specifications, but by 1952 pressure from 
shipbuilders, owners and steelmakers brought about the initial discussions for 
the harmonization of specifications. A detailed account of these discussions was 
published by Boyd and Bushell is and at the outset, the seven classification soci- 
eties collectively had a total of 22 grades of steel. However, these steels could 
be classified into three main types: 
1. Ordinary ship steel, which was used in modest thicknesses and in lightly 
stressed areas. 
2. An intermediate grade for areas where there was a need for some control over 
notch toughness and for intermediate thicknesses. 
3. A high-grade steel with good notch ductility and for heavy plate thicknesses. 
Although the seven societies recognized these three broad categories of steel, 
they were not able to rationalize their individual grades into three commonly 
acceptable specifications. On the one hand, the American Bureau of Shipping 
(ABS) favoured specifications based on deoxidation practice, composition and 
heat treatment whereas the European societies preferred specifications based 
primarily on mechanical properties. It was agreed finally to adopt unified grades 
based on both approaches and this resulted in five specifications for the three 

Low-carbon structural steels 
169 
basic types of steel: 
9 Grade A- ordinary shipbuilding steel 
9 Grade B - intermediate grade based on the ABS approach 
9 Grade C - highest grade based on the ABS approach 
9 Grade D - intermediate grade based on specified impact strength at 0*C (Euro- 
pean approach) 
9 Grade E- highest grade based on specified impact strength at -10*C (Euro- 
pean approach) 
Since that time, further rationalization has taken place and Lloyd's 19 now 
specifies four grades of steel with increasing impact strength requirement at the 
standard minimum yield strength of 235 N/mm 2. Details of the composition and 
mechanical properties of these steels are given in Tables 2.9 and 2.10. Whereas 
normalizing was mandatory at one time for the higher toughness grades, these 
Table 2,9 
Chemical composition and deoxidation practice for Lloyd's standard 
strength shipbuilding grades 
- 
, 
.
.
.
.
.
 
, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
- 
- 
, .
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Grade 
A 
B 
D 
E 
Deoxidation 
Chemical composition % 
Carbon 
Manganese 
Silicon 
Sulphur 
Phosphorus 
Aluminium 
(acid soluble) 
Any method 
Any method 
Killed and 
Killed and 
(for rimmed 
except 
fine grain 
fine grain 
steel see 
rimmed steel 
treated with 
treated with 
Note 1) 
aluminium 
aluminium 
(see Note 2) 
0.21 max. 
(see Note 3) 
2.5  
min. 
0.50 max. 
0.040 max. 
0.040 max. 
0,21 max. 
0.21 max. 
0.18 max. 
0.80 rain. 
0.60 min. 
0.70 min. 
(see Note 4) 
0.35 max. 
0.10-0.35 
0.10-0.35 
0.040 max. 
0.040 max. 
0.040 max. 
0.040 max. 
0.040 max. 
0.040 max. 
- 
0.015 rain. 
0.015 min. 
(see Note 5) 
(see Note 5) 
Carbon + ~ of the manganese content is not to exceed 0.40% 
Notes 
1. For Grade A, rimmed steel may be accepted up to 12.5 mm thick inclusive, provided that it is 
stated on the test certificates or shipping statements to be rimmed steel and is not excluded by 
the purchaser's order. 
2. Up to 25 mm in thickness, Grade D steel may be supplied in the semi-killed condition and without 
grain refinement, in which case the requirements for minimum silicon and aluminium contents 
do not apply. 
3. The maximum carbon content for Grade A steel may be increased to 0.23% for sections. 
4. For Grade B, when the silicon content is 0.10% or more (killed steel), the minimum manganese 
content may be reduced to 0.60%. 
5. The total aluminium content may be determined instead of the acid soluble content. In such cases 
the total aluminium content is to be not less than, 0.020%. 
After Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Rules and Regulations for the Classification of Ships (1995). 19 

170 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 2.10 
grades 
Mechanical properties of Lloyd's standard strength shipbuilding 
Grade 
Yield stress 
N/mm 2 
minimum 
Tensile 
Elongation 
Charpy V-notch impact test 
strength 
on 5.65~'S'o 
(longitudinal) 
N/mm 2 
% minimum 
Test 
Thickness 
Average 
temperature 
mm 
energy 
*C 
J minimum 
A 
B 
235 
D 
E 
400-490 
22 
(see Note 2) 
0 
<50 
27 
(see Note 3) 
-20 
<50 
27 
-40 
<50 
27 
50 < 70 
34 
m 
70< 100 
41 
w 
Notes 
1. Requirements for products over 50 mm thick in Grades A, B and D and 100 mm thick in Grade 
E are subject to agreement. See 2.1.1. 
2. For full thickness tensile test specimens with a width of 25 mm and gauge length of 200 mm 
(see Fig. 2.2.4 in Chapter 2), the minimum elongation is to be: 
Thickness mm 
> 5 
> 10 
> 15 
> 20 
> 25 
> 30 
> 35 
<5 
< 1O 
< 15 
<20 
<25 
<30 
<35 
<50 
Elongation % 
14 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
3. Impact tests are generally not required for Grade B steel of 25 mm or less in thickness provided 
that satisfactory results are obtained from occasional check tests selected by the Surveyor. 
After Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Rules and Regulations for the Classification of Ships (1995). 19 
can now be supplied in the thermo-mechanically controlled processed condition, 
provided the specified mechanical properties can be achieved. 
Higher-strength steels 
By the mid-196Os, the higher-strength steels, based on micro-alloy additions, 
had become established and each of the classification societies introduced speci- 
fications with yield stress values in the range 300-400 N/mm 2. Tile mechanical 
properties of high-strength steels currently specified by Lloyd's are shown in 
Table 2.11. The higher strengths are achieved by grain refinement and precipita- 
tion strengthening and the steels can be supplied in the as-rolled, controlled-rolled 
or normalized condition. The steels are normally made to a restricted carbon 
equivalent (CE) of 0.41% max., based on the formula: 
Mn 
Cr + Mo + V 
Ni + Cu 
CE = C + --6- + 
5 
+ 1----ff --Wt% 
Lloyd's also specifies a range of quenched and tempered grades (grades 42-69) 
with minimum yield strengths in the range 420-690 N/mm 2 which are used in 
offshore construction. However, quenched and tempered grades are also used 

Low-carbon structural steels 
171 
Table 2.11 
grades 
Mechanical properties of Lloyd's higher strength shipbuilding 
Grade 
YieM 
Tensile Elongation 
Stress 
Strength on 3.65~/So 
N/ram 2 
N/ram 2 
% min. 
rain. 
(see Note 2) 
Charpy V-notch impact tests 
Thickness 
Test 
Average energy 
mm 
tempera- 
J minimum 
(see Note 1) 
ture 
*C 
Longitudinai Transverse 
AH 32 
DH 32 
EH 32 
FH 32 
AH 36 
DH 36 
EH 36 
FH 36 
AH 40 
DH 40 
EH 40 
FH 40 
<100 
0 
315 
440-590 
22 
<100 
-20 
31 
22 
._<100 
-40 
_<50 
-60 
< 100 
0 
34 
24 
355 
490-620 
21 
-< 100 
-20 
34 
24 
-<50 
-40 
34 
24 
> 50 _< 70 
-40 
41 
27 
> 70 < 100 
-40 
50 
34 
-<50 
-60 
34 
24 
0 
390 
510-650 
20 
<50 
-20 
41 
27 
-40 
-60 
Notes 
1. The requirements for products thicker than those detailed in the table are subject to agreement 
(see 3.1.4). 
2. For full thickness tensile test specimens with a width of 25 mm and a gauge length of 200 mm 
(see Fig. 2.2.4 in Chapter 2), the minimum elongation is to be: 
Thickness mm 
<5 
>5 
> 10 
> 15 
>20 
>25 
>35 
>50 
< 10 
< 15 
<20 
<25 
<35 
<50 
Strength level 
32 
14 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Elongation Strength level 
% 
36 
13 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Strength level 
40 
12 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
"lobe 
specially 
agreed 
After Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Rules and Regulations for the Classification of Ships (1995). t9 
for the construction of submarines. These can be considered as pressure vessels 
which have to withstand high hydrostatic pressures and the steels concerned have 
minimum yield strength values of 550 N/mm 2 (Navy Q 1) and 690 N/mm 2 (Navy 
Q2), coupled with high levels of toughness. 
Design considerations 
For design purposes, naval architects regard the hull of a ship as a beam or girder 
in which the deck and bottom form the flanges and the sides constitute the web. 
Lloyd's and the other classification societies specify the minimum thicknesses of 
plate or scantlings that shall be used in various parts of a ship which, when acting 

172 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
together, give the structure the required stiffness or section modulus. In general, 
the plate thicknesses are related to the length of a ship, assuming that the depth 
and breadth conform to a reasonably fixed ratio of its length. For example, the 
ratio of length to depth is not expected to exceed 16:1 and the length to breadth 
ratio is generally greater than 5:1. 
Naval architects have to legislate for the worst situation that a ship is likely to 
encounter due to wave action, namely a wave with a length equal to that of the 
ship. As illustrated in Figure 2.17, this can give rise to two extreme conditions 
of stress: 
1. Suspension at the middle position putting the deck in tension (hogging). 
2. A wave at either end putting the bottom in tension (sagging). 
Thus the area of the ship that is given greatest attention in design is the middle 
section or midships, since this is the area which is subjected to greatest stress and 
deflection. For this reason, the plate thicknesses in this region, designated 0.4L 
amidships, are heavier than those required towards the ends of the ship. Between 
the two extremes, classification societies quote a taper in terms of percentage 
decrease in thickness per metre so as to avoid abrupt changes in section. The 
longitudinal strength of an I-beam is located in the flanges and the thickness of the 
deck and bottom plating are greater than those in the sides of a ship. However, the 
longitudinal strength is not derived solely from the deck and bottom plating and 
(a) 
(b) 
0.4L 
= 
Amidships 
(c) 
L 
- 
Figure 2.17 Schematic illustration - hull deflection 

Low-carbon structural steels 
173 
stiffeners in the form of rolled sections (bulb or plain flats) are used to reinforce 
these areas and also the hull sides. Plating is also used in the longitudinal and 
transverse partitioning walls or bulkheads, which also contribute to the strength 
of a ship with respect to buckling. 
For the most part, a ship's hull is constructed from Grade A steel but Lloyd's 
Rules distinguish between the material grade requirements for different parts 
of the hull. As shown in Table 2.12(a), five classes of material are identified 
in ascending order of fracture toughness which are translated into steel grades, 
according to thickness requirements, in Table 2.12(b). A schematic illustration 
of the location of Grades A, D and E in the midship section of a large tanker is 
shown in Figure 2.18. Thus the use of the tougher Grades D and E is confined 
mainly to the more highly stressed deck and bottom regions whereas Grade A is 
adequate for the sides of a vessel. 
The use of higher-strength steels in shipbuilding is attractive from two aspects: 
1. Lower construction costs- from reduced steel weight and lower fabrication 
costs. 
2. Lower operating costs- from reduced weight/lower fuel costs or higher 
carrying capacity for the same constructed weight. 
Given the depressed state of the shipbuilding market, the former is probably the 
more important but the reduction in thickness that can be tolerated is governed 
by modulus and deflection considerations. From the analogy with a simple beam, 
the deflection of a ship is a function of the ratio of length to depth (LID) and 
also the thicknesses of the plates used in the girder construction. Caution has 
therefore had to be exercised in the use of higher-strength steels, in reduced 
sections, in order to limit the deflection to within reasonable bounds. However, 
as experience has been gained, further advantage has been taken of the higher- 
strength grades. Currently, Lloyd's rules provide KL factors for the determination 
of the hull girder section modulus in higher-strength steels and the values are 
shown in Table 2.13. For mild steel (235 N/mm 2 min. YS), the KL factor = 1.0 
and therefore significant reductions in the section modulus are now permitted 
E\~--' 
I 
D 
A 
W 
E 
1 
A 
~ D 1~ 
9 E 
Figure 2.18 Midships section showing distribution of Grades A, D and E 

174 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 2.12 
Steel selection in merchant ships 
(a) Material classes 
Structural member 
Material class 
Within 
0.4L amid- 
ships 
Between 
0.4L and 
0.6L 
amidships 
Outside 
0.6L 
amidships 
Where L > 250 m: 
Sheerstrake or rounded gunwale 
Stringer plate at strength deck 
Where L < 250 m: 
Sheerstrake or rounded gunwale 
Stringer plate at strength deck 
Bilge strake 
Deck strake in way of longitudinal bulkhead 
Strength deck plating 
Bottom plating including keel 
Continuous longitudinal members above 
strength deck 
Upper strake of longitudinal bulkhead 
Upper strake of topside tank 
Deck plating, other than above, exposed 
to weather 
Side plating 
Lower strake of longitudinal bulkhead 
External plating of rudder horn 
Sternframe 
Internal components of rudder horn 
Rudder 
Shaft bracket 
V 
IV 
III 
III 
III 
II 
III 
(b) Steel grades 
Thickness, t 
(mm) 
Class 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
MiM 
H. T. 
MiM 
H. T. 
MiM 
H. T. 
MiM 
H. T. 
Mild 
H. T. 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel 
t < 15 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
D 
DH 
15 < t < 20 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
B 
AH 
E 
DH 
20 < t < 25 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
B 
AH 
D 
DH 
E 
EH 
m 
25 < t < 30 
A 
AH 
A 
AH 
D 
DH 
E 
DH 
E 
EH 
30 < t < 35 
A 
AH 
B 
AH 
D 
DH 
E 
EH 
E 
EH 
m 
35 < t < 40 
A 
AH 
B 
AH 
D 
DH 
E 
EH 
E 
EH 
m 
40 < t < 50 
B 
AH 
D 
DH 
E 
EH 
E 
EH 
E 
EH 
t > 50 
B 
AH 
D 
DH 
E 
EH 
E 
EH 
E 
EH 
After Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Rules and Regulations for the Classification of Ships. 19 

Low-carbon structural steels 175 
Table 2.13 
KL factors for the determination of 
hull girder section modulus in higher-strength steels 
Specified minimum yieM stress-Nlmm 2 
KL 
315 
0.78 
340 
0.74 
355 
0.72 
390 
0.68 
Notes 
1. Intermediate values by interpolation 
2. For mild steel, KL = 1.0 
After Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Rules and Regulations for 
the Classification of Ships. 19 
in higher-strength steels. For local scantling (thickness) requirements, a higher- 
strength steel factor, K, is determined as follows: 
235 
K -- ~ 
or 0.66, whichever is the greater 
tro 
where tro = minimum yield stress in N/mm 2. 
For mild steel, K = 1.0. 
This would permit the use of steels with a minimum yield stress of up to 
355 N/mm 2. However, the rules state that special consideration will also be given 
to steels with minimum yield stress values greater than 355 N/mm 2. 
Offshore structures 
Since the early 1970s, the UK has exploited its natural gas and oil resources and 
offshore platforms have become symbols of achievement in terms of design, 
materials and construction. One might therefore hold the view that offshore 
structures of this type were developed specifically for operation in the North 
Sea whereas such platforms were first constructed in the Gulf of Mexico in the 
1940s. However, the conditions in the North Sea are considerably more severe 
with operating depths of 170 m compared to 7 m in the Gulf and with very 
much colder and rougher climatic conditions. Offshore platforms have now been 
constructed in large numbers and in 1981 it was reported 2~ that more than 10 000 
structures were in operation world-wide. 
Although most offshore structures have been constructed in steel, several very 
large structures were built in reinforced concrete in the 1970s. This followed 
the tradition, established in the late 1880s, for the use of concrete in port and 
harbour installations, such as piers and jetties. Such facilities rank amongst the 
largest man-made structures and, for example, the Statfjord C platform had a 
float-out weight of more than 600 000 tonnes. 21 Concrete structures rely on their 
sheer mass to maintain their position on the seabed and for this reason are called 

176 Steels:MetallurgyandApplications 
gravity structures. Therefore they require good foundations and a thorough inves- 
tigation of the seabed conditions to guard against long-term settlement and tilting. 
However, in spite of satisfactory performance, construction in reinforced concrete 
has remained relatively rare, apparently for economic reasons. 
Design considerations 
In the UK, the design and construction of offshore structures must comply with 
Guidance Notes 22 prepared by the Department of Energy. However, the Depart- 
ment of Energy has authorized the following organizations to issue Certificates 
of Fitness for offshore structures, in a similar manner to that for ships: 
9 American Bureau of Shipping 
9 Bureau Veritas 
9 Det Norske Veritas 
9 Germanischer Lloyd 
9 Offshore Certification Bureau 
9 Lloyd's Register of Shipping 
The Guidance Notes illustrate very clearly the complex loading situation in 
offshore rigs by specifying the need to take account of the following loads in the 
primary structure: 
9 Dead loads- the weight of the structure and other fixed items 
9 Imposed or variable loads - loads from drilling operations, consumable stores, 
crew members, berthing and landing loads 
9 Hydrostatic loads - acting in a direction normal to the contact surface 
9 Environmental loads - wind, wave and current which act horizontally and, in 
extreme conditions, exert large overturning and sliding forces on fixed instal- 
lations 
Structural members in the splash zone are also subjected to major impact loads 
termed slamming. Whereas hydrostatic loads can be determined to a high degree 
of accuracy, environmental loads are random and the extreme magnitudes have 
to be predicted on a probability basis. 
The most common type of steel platform is the welded tubular frame construc- 
tion which is illustrated in Figure 2.19. In such platforms, the most critical areas 
are the nodes which represent the intersection of a chord (large-diameter member) 
and a brace (small-diameter member). Nodes can be constructed in various 
geometries, including T, K and T-K configurations, and they constitute areas 
of high stress concentrations. As such, they have a very marked effect on fatigue 
behaviour and therefore very careful consideration is given to the design and 
quality of welds in these locations. The first indication that fatigue could pose a 
major problem in offshore structures occurred in December 1965 when Sea Gem, 
a jack-up barge, collapsed in the North Sea, killing 13 people. It was shown that 
this failure was due to fatigue cracking which was probably initiated from brittle 
fracture, originating in welded components. Detailed consideration has therefore 
been given to the fatigue performance of nodal joints and design S-N curves 

Low-carbon structural steels 
177 
Figure 2.19 Types of steel for North Sea structures (After Billingham 21) 
have been produced which take account of the various stress concentration factors 
induced by different node geometries and plate thicknesses. 
The Guidance Notes state that the calculated tensile stress in various members 
should not exceed 60% of yield stress under normal operating conditions and 
80% of yield stress under extreme loading conditions. 
Steel selection 
Steels for tubular frame platforms can be grouped into three classes, depending 
on their location and duty: 
1. Special structural steel. 
2. Primary steel. 
3. Secondary steel. 

178 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
As illustrated in Figure 2.19, special structural steel is used for all the main nodes 
and also in the transition area to the shafts. This requires the highest grade of 
steel, namely BS 4360 Grade 50E Hyzed. As discussed earlier in this chapter, 
such steels are made to low sulphur contents and with alloy additions which 
modify the shape of the non-metallic inclusions so as to provide high levels of 
ductility in the through-thickness direction of the plate. Primary steel is used in 
all other structural members, such as jacket legs and topside module supports, and 
the steel is BS 4360 Grade 50E Mod. Secondary steel is used in lightly stressed 
areas such as module walls, decking, walkways and ladders and the specified 
material is BS 4360 Grade 43D. 
Particular attention is paid to resistance to brittle fracture and the Guidance 
Notes lay down detailed impact and CTOD test requirements for parent plate, 
HAZ and weld materials. The background to these requirements has been 
published by Harrison and Pisarski 23 and involved a great deal of work on the 
correlation of Charpy V, wide plate and fracture toughness data. In the Guidance 
Notes, the impact test requirements are based on a minimum design temperature 
of-10*C. However, for other design temperatures, the Charpy test temperature 
is altered by 0.7~ for each Ioc that the design temperature differs from -10~ 
McLean and Oehrlein 24 have reported that the weight of steel involved in a 
typical tubular frame jacket is of the order of 13 000 tonnes and, together with the 
separately installed module support frame (2500 tonnes), supports the work area 
above sea level. The lower ends of the four external legs of the jacket each pene- 
trate through a bottle unit, weighing 770 tonnes. These units transfer the service 
loads from the jacket to the piles which maintain the platform in position on the 
seabed. The topside modules, which house the equipment, work area and accom- 
modation, weigh a total of 6600 tonnes. As indicated in a later chapter, austenitic 
stainless steels are now being used to clad the walls of the topside modules. 
Cast steel nodes 
In the early 1980s, significant effort was devoted to the development of cast 
steel nodes as alternatives to welded fabrications. The main technical incentive 
for this development was that castings could provide smooth, generous radii in 
these critical areas, compared with weld connections, and so reduce the stress 
concentration factor. 25 Typical compositions for these cast steel nodes are given 
in Table 2.14. 
According to Billingham, 21 cast steel nodes have enjoyed only limited commer- 
cial exploitation but in fact they were used at fatigue-prone locations in the Hutton 
Field. 
Table 2.14 
Composition of cast steel nodes 
C% 
Mn% 
S% 
Ni% 
Nb% 
V% 
Mo% 
Cr% 
Cu% 
Type I 
0.14 
1.30 
0.005 
0.43 
0.025 
0.05 
0.11 
0.09 
0.04 
Type II 
0.15 
0.85- 
0.01 
0.09-1.2 
1.70 
max. 

Low-carbon structural steels 179 
Reinforcing bars 
Large amounts of steel are used for the reinforcement of concrete in build- 
ings, bridges and marine structures and reinforcing bars therefore constitute a 
competitor to structural steel plates and sections. At one time, reinforcing bars 
were regarded as low-grade, undemanding steel products and were often produced 
from diverted casts that were out of specification for the originally intended order. 
However, with the trend towards higher-strength steels and the requirement for 
good fabrication characteristics, reinforcing steels are now made to high quality 
standards. Whereas some reinforcing bars are supplied in the form of plain carbon 
steel with a yield strength of 250 N/mm 2, extensive use is now made of higher- 
strength steels with yield strengths up to 500 N/mm 2. 
Standard specifications 
The UK standard for steel reinforcement is BS 4449:1988 Carbon steel bars 
for the reinforcement of concrete. It covers grades with minimum yield strength 
levels of 250 and 460 N/mm 2 in the form of plain rounds and deformed (ribbed) 
bars respectively. The chemical compositions of these grades are only broadly 
defined, as indicated in Table 2.15. 
In order to provide a reasonable level of weldability, maximum carbon equiv- 
alent values of 0.42% (Grade 250) and 0.51% (Grade 460) must be observed, 
based on the following formula: 
Mn 
Cr + Mo + V 
Ni + Cu 
CE = C + --~ + 
5 
+ 
15 
wt% 
To ensure adequate ductility, minimum elongation values of 22% (Grade 250) 
and 12% (Grade 460) are required but the materials must also be capable of 
being bent through 180* around formers of the following proportions: 
9 Grade 250- 2 x nominal bar diameter 
9 Grade 460 - 3 x nominal bar diameter 
The specification also includes a rebend test requirement which was introduced 
initially to determine the susceptibility of the materials to strain age embrittle- 
ment. This involves bending bars initially through 45* around formers of the 
following proportions. 
9 Grade 250- 2 x nominal bar diameter 
9 Grade 460- 5 x nominal bar diameter 
Table 2.15 
Grade 250 
Grade 460 
C% 
0.25 max. 
0.25 max. 
S% 
0.060 max. 
0.050 max. 
P% 
0.060 max. 
0.050 max. 
N% 
0.012 max. 
0.012 max. 
, 
, 

180 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
The bars are then immersed in boiling water for at least 30 minutes. On cooling 
to ambient temperature, the bars must be capable of being bent back towards 
their original shape through an angle of at least 23*. 
Traditional reinforcing steels 
In the UK, high-strength reinforcing steels have been produced traditionally by: 
1. The cold twisting of plain carbon steels. 
2. The use of vanadium-bearing micro-alloy steels. 
At one time, the former was specified in a separate standard (BS 4461), but 
the cold-twisted product was incorporated in BS 4449 when this standard was 
revised in 1988. Although these steels employ different strengthening mecha- 
nisms, namely work hardening as opposed to precipitation strengthening, their 
properties are sufficiently similar to be covered by a single set of requirements 
for tensile and bend-rebend properties. 
Whitely 26 reports that the cold-twisted product can be welded, with little loss of 
strength, by employing high heat inputs for short periods of time. Such practices 
restrict the area of the heat-affected zones and the quenching effect of adja- 
cent material leads to the formation of strong, low-temperature transformation 
products. Whitely also indicates that the cold-twisted product provides adequate 
elevated-temperature tensile properties which are pertinent to the fire resistance 
of reinforced concrete structures. 
Although not specified in BS 4449, the impact strength of reinforcing bars is of 
interest in relation to the potential damage that can be caused by the crashing of 
vehicles into the supporting columns and deck parapets of concrete road bridges. 
In collaboration with the Department of Transport, extensive work on this topic 
was carded out by British Steel Technical. 27 Using a large pendulum impact 
machine, with an impact velocity of 7.6 m/s, impact transition temperature curves 
were developed on full-section cold-twisted bars. It was shown that unnotched 
bars remained fully ductile at temperatures down to at least -65"C but, with 
the introduction of a sharp notch, the impact transition temperature was raised 
significantly. However, when impact tests were carded out on large reinforced 
concrete beams, the effect of notching the bars was shown to be significant only in 
the case of cold-twisted material. This is illustrated in Figure 2.20, which shows 
that very little loss of impact strength was observed in mild steel (Grade 250) 
bars and hot-rolled (micro-alloy, Grade 460) bars. 
Controlled-cooled bars 
In the mid-1970s, the CRM laboratories at Liege in Belgium published details of 
an in-line heat treatment process for the production of high-strength reinforcing 
bars. 28 Designated the Tempcore process, the application of controlled cooling 
after rolling results in the formation of an outer layer of martensite which is 
tempered subsequently by conduction of heat from the core of the bars. The 
main aim of the process is to produce weldable, high-strength reinforcement 

Low-carbon structural steels 
181 
[~] Unnotched 1 
Notched 
bars 
bars 
80 
6O 
C a) 40 
"8 
.e 
8 
20 
i 
i 
! 
I 
Cold worked Hot rolled Mild steel 
high yield 
high yield 
Figure 2.20 The effect of notching reinforcing bars on the energy absorbed in concrete 
beams (After Armstrong et al. 27) 
cheaply by eliminating the costs associated with cold twisting or micro-alloy 
additions. The Tempcore process has been very successful, both technically and 
commercially, and has been licensed throughout the world. 
The Tempcore process is illustrated schematically in Figure 2.21. On leaving 
the last finishing stand, the bar passes through a water cooling station which cools 
the outer region of the bar sufficiently quickly for the formation of martensite. 
At the end of the cooling process, the bar has an austenite core surrounded by a 
mixture of austenite and martensite, the amount of martensite increasing towards 
the surface of the bar. On leaving the cooling station, the bar is exposed to the 
atmosphere and the temperature gradient between the core and quenched surface 
begins to equalize. This leads to the tempering of the martensitic rim, providing 
an adequate balance between strength and ductility. During this second stage in 
the process, untransformed austenite in the outer layers of bars also transforms 
to bainite. The final stage of the process takes place as the bars lie on the cooling 
bed, namely the transformation of austenitic core. Depending upon factors such 
as composition, finishing temperature and cooling rate, the core can transform 
to ferrite and pearlite or to a mixed microstructure which includes some bainite. 
Thus the Tempcore process produces a variety of microstructures throughout the 
cross-section, ranging from tempered martensite in the outer layers to a region 
which is essentially ferrite and pearlite in the core, with an intermediate zone 
which may be predominantly bainitic. 
Depending on the size of the bars, water cooling may be applied before the bars 
enter the finishing stands in order to reduce the length of the cooling station. This 

182 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
900 
800 
700 
~, 600 
o 
500 
E 400 
| I.--. 
\, 
I 
~. 
Centre 
I 
\.~X 
9 
I 
"\ 
I 
I 
~ 
I 
t quenched 
\ 
I 
layer 
~ 
I 
- 
'~1 
\1 
t "%.--Surface 
I 
" 
~ 
,, 
i// 
I 
300 - 
"- 
I I 
I 
100 
[F'rst ~t~'Oo| 
, ! soc~ stago! I 
I,h0  s,,,gei 
I 
, I., 
J 
I 
Ii 
II 
II 
t 
J 
J Jl 
I llll 
1 
10-1 
100 
101 
Time reduced to its value at the end of the first stage 
CCT diagram 
J.I 
II 
Figure 2.21 
Tempcore process- thermal evolution in different parts of a 25 mm bar, 
finished rolled at 9000C (After Economopoulos et al. 28) 
applies particularly to large-diameter bars which are finished at a high temperature 
and it is claimed 28 that the length of the cooling facility can be reduced by 70% 
by reducing the finishing temperature from 1050 to 900"C. 
The Tempcore process is relatively cheap and provides the required mechanical 
properties in steels of low carbon equivalent. For these reasons, it is gradually 
superseding the cold-twisted and micro-alloyed products. 
Steel bridges 
In the UK, bridge construction is dominated currently by reinforced concrete and 
only about 15% of bridges are based on steel, compared to about 80% in Japan. 
According to Simpson, 29 one reason for this situation is that the design codes 
for steel bridges are complex and not easy to use. However, Simpson also points 
out that the failure during construction of three box girder bridges in the 1970s 
has also contributed to the lack of steel construction. In order to regain market 
share, steel suppliers and fabricators are attempting to improve the attraction of 
steel by providing cheaper and more effective forms of corrosion protection and 
by developing methods of construction that will allow faster erection schedules. 
Design against brittle fracture 
In the UK, the design and construction of bridges is covered by BS 5400: Part 3" 
1982 Steel concrete and composite bridges. This code involves the use of the 
complex limit state approach for the calculation of design stresses and therefore 

Low-carbon structural steels 183 
this discussion on the use of steel in bridges will be confined to that part of the 
code dealing with avoidance of brittle fracture. 
As a safeguard against brittle fracture, BS 5400:1982 specifies the maximum 
thickness of steel that can be used in bridge tension members, with respect to 
the various grades of steel listed in BS 4360 (Weldable structural steels) and 
the minimum operating temperature of the bridge. The various stages in the 
determination of this temperature are outlined below: 
1. The first stage is to determine the minimum shade air temperature for the 
location of the bridge from isotherm maps, based on Meteorological Office 
data. 
2. This initial value is then adjusted for height above sea level by subtracting 
0.5~ 
per 100 m. Additionally, there may be the need to take account of 
locations where the minimum temperatures diverge from published data, e.g. 
in frost pockets where the minimum may be substantially lower than the 
published value or in coastal and some urban areas where the minimum 
temperature may be higher. 
3. The minimum effective bridge temperature (MEBT) is then derived from a 
table in which the minimum shade air temperature is adjusted to take account 
of the type of bridge construction, e.g. steel or concrete decking. 
4. Finally, the U value for the bridge is determined by rounding down the MEBT 
to the next impact test temperature in BS 4360, i.e. a value of- 17~ would 
be rounded down to -20~ 
Each part of a bridge which is subjected to applied stress must be classified 
according to the following criteria: 
9 Type 1 - Any part subjected to an applied stress greater than 100 N/mm 2 and 
which has either 
(a) any weld connection 
(b) weld repair not subsequently inspected 
(c) punched holes not reamed. 
9 Type 2- All parts subjected to applied stresses which are not of Type 1. 
Stress calculations will have provided information on the combination of steel 
thickness and yield strength that will satisfy the required design strength and 
the appropriate sub-grade of steel in BS 4360 that provides the required level of 
impact strength can then be derived in two ways: 
1. From a table in BS 5400 which provides a correlation between the limiting 
thickness for various grades and the U value-the minimum effective bridge 
temperature- differentiating between Type 1 and Type 2 stress conditions. 
2. Directly from BS 4360, having calculated the required impact strength require- 
ments in the following manner: 
for Type 1 Cv > % t 
- 355 2 
for Type 2 C v > ay t 
- 355 4 

184 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
where Cv = Charpy V notch energy value in joules at the minimum 
effective temperature 
try = yield strength in N/mm 2 
t = thickness in mm 
It should be noted that the divisor of 355 in the above equations corresponds 
to the minimum yield strength in N/mm 2 of BS 4360 Grade 50 steels. 
Where severe stress concentrations occur, BS 5400 calls for more stringent tough- 
ness requirements and the impact energy value is calculated from: 
try 
Cv > :=.[0.3t(1 + 0.67k)] 
333 
where k = stress concentration factor 
As indicated earlier in this chapter, BS 5400 has not yet been updated to reflect the 
fact that BS 4360 has now been withdrawn and superseded by European standards 
for structural steels. However, it is understood that BS 5400 is currently being 
revised to accommodate the changes in steel nomenclature. In the meantime, the 
Department of Transport has issued document BD 13/90 Design of Steel Bridges: 
Use of BS 5400: Part 3: 1990, Crown Copyright 1990, which provides guidance 
on this matter. 
Steel in multi-storey buildings 
During the 1980s, there was a dramatic increase in the UK in the use of structural 
steelwork in multi-storey buildings, primarily at the expense of in situ concrete. 
The reasons cited 3~ for this situation are: 
1. The reduction in the price of structural steel relative to in situ concrete. 
2. The reduced costs and improved methods of fire protection for structural steel. 
3. The shorter site and total construction periods achieved through the use of 
steel. 
All three aspects are cost or revenue related, the last item minimizing the period 
during which the capital for the investment has to be financed and decreasing the 
time at which the owner of a building begins to receive a return on investment. 
In order to improve its share of the construction market, British Steel first 
analysed the contribution of the various items to the total cost of a steel building 
frame. This analysis is shown in Figure 2.2231 and, whilst the cost of the basic 
steel was very significant, items such as corrosion protection, fire protection and 
fabrication also contributed very considerably to the overall cost. Each of these 
items was given detailed attention and, as illustrated in Figure 2.22 the cost of 
steel building frames has decreased significantly, in real value terms, over the 
11-12-year period. Whereas the costs of corrosion protection and fire protection 
were reduced substantially, it should be noted that the reduction in the cost of 
steel played an even greater part in increasing the cost competitiveness of steel 
frames. 

Low-carbon structural steels 185 
Corrosion 
protecUon 
10.1% 
Fire 
28.9% 
protection 
Supply and 
7.1% 
erection 
Fabrication 
23.3% 
Steel 
36.8% 
Detail 
3% 
109.4% 
r
~
 
100% 
30% I 
87.8% 
~-.-.._,~~_, 
: 
27% 
,"4o/= 
,, 
L 
1976 
1981 
] 
1987/88 
Estimated cost at 
s 543/tonne 
s 985/tonne 
s 
survey date 
I 
! 19.7% 
7.5% 
28.6% 
25.6% 
2.6% 
Real cost 87/88 
s 1455/tonne 
s 1330/tonne 
s 
(Using GDP deflator) 
Figure 2.22 Cost breakdown of multi-storey building frames (at 1987/88 prices) 
Building code requirements 
In the UK, steel-framed buildings are specified in BS 5950:1985 Structural use 
of steelwork in buildings. This refers to the use of structural steels specified in 
BS 4360 (Weldable structural steels) and the selection of a minimum level of 
toughness in relation to the yield strength of the steel, its thickness and service 
conditions. 
The design strength Py may be taken as 1.0 x Ys but cannot be greater than 
0.84 x Us where Ys and Us are the minimum yield strengths and tensile strengths 
specified in BS 4360. The main types of steel used in building construction are 
Grades 43, 50 and 55 and, for convenience, BS 5950 tabulates the permissible 
design strengths for these grades, according to material thickness. This table is 
reproduced as Table 2.16. 
Brittle fracture needs to be considered in locations which are subjected to 
tensile stresses in service. In this respect, the first step is the determination of 
the appropriate k factor, according to the level of tensile stress and location of 
material. This is determined from Table 2.17. 
Having determined the thickness of material required from a consideration of 
design strength (Table 2.16), the required grade of steel can then be selected 
from a table in BS 5950, reproduced here as Table 2.18. This table includes 
the weathering grades (WR50 A, B and C) and differentiates between situations 
with k factors of 1 and 2, the limiting thickness/grade requirement being more 
severe when k = 1. This table also differentiates between the internal and external 
situations in buildings and applies providing the temperatures concerned do not 
fall below -5~ 
and -15~ 
respectively. When the steel is subjected to lower 
temperatures or where the steel grade or thickness is not covered in this table, 

186 Steels:MetallurgyandApplications 
Table 2.16 
applications 
Design strength data for BS 4360 steels in building 
BS 4360 Grade 
Thickness (<_ mm) 
Design strength (N/mm 2) 
43 A, B and C 
16 
275 
40 
265 
100 
245 
50 B and C 
16 
355 
63 
340 
100 
325 
55 C 
16 
450 
25 
430 
40 
415 
After BS 5950: Part 1: 1985. 
Table 2.17 
Tensile stress 
Welded 
Unreamed 
Non-welded 
Drilled or 
due to factored 
location 
punched 
location 
reamed 
load at the 
holes 
holes 
location 
_<100 N/mm 2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
>100 N/mm 2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
then the toughness/grade requirements are determined by calculation. Thus the 
required impact strength at the service temperature is determined from: 
Yst 
Cv > 
- 710k 
where Cv = Charpy V notch energy in joules 
Ys = the minimum yield strength of the material in N/mm 2 
t = the thickness of the material in mm 
k = the factor determined from tensile stress/location 
considerations 
Given that the design strength is based on yield strength, then substantial benefit 
is gained in building constructions from the substitution of carbon steel by higher 
strength structural steels, providing excessive deflection does not occur. 
As illustrated in Figure 2.22, substantial savings have been made in the cost of 
corrosion protection and, in essence, this is related to the fact that paint systems 
were either over-specified or, in many cases, were simply not required. 
In the previous section, it was stated that the minimum Charpy energy require- 
ment for steel bridges was based on the following expression for Type 1 stress 
situations: 
oy 
Cv>_ 

Low-carbon structural steels 187 
Apart from differences in nomenclature for yield strength and formula presenta- 
tion, this expression is identical to that shown above for the minimum Charpy 
value for steel frame buildings, namely: 
Yst 
Cv > 
- 
710k 
for situations where k = 1. 
In keeping with the situation with the bridge code BS 5400, BS 5950 has not 
yet been updated to reflect the withdrawal of BS 4360 and the introduction of 
European specifications for structural steels. However, amendments to Table 2 
of BS 5950: Part 2 and Table 4 of BS 5950: Part 1 are being prepared to reflect 
the changes in steel nomenclature. 
Steels for pipelines 
Pipelines are very efficient for the mass transportation of oil and gas and can 
extend over vast distances. For example, the Alaskan National Gas Transportation 
System involves more than 4000 miles of linepipe in diameters ranging from 
42 to 56 in. In Europe, the pipelines from northern Russia to Germany and 
Austria extend for more than 3100 miles and are predominantly in 56-in diameter 
linepipe. In either case, the operating pressures are up to 1450 lb/in. 2 Over the 
past 30 years, the trend in pipeline design has been to larger sizes and higher 
operating pressures in order to increase the efficiency of transportation. This has 
been accomplished through the provision of steels with progressive increases in 
yield strength coupled with good weldability and sufficient toughness to restrict 
crack propagation. However, other trends in the extraction of oil and gas have 
imposed further requirements on the performance of linepipe steels. These include 
the need for high-strength, heavy-waU pipe to prevent buckling during pipeline 
installation in deep water, e.g. in depths of 170 m in the North Sea. The operation 
of pipelines in arctic regions, coupled with the transportation of liquid natural 
gas (LNG), have also imposed further demands for improved levels of toughness 
at low operating temperatures. However, a particularly important trend has been 
the exploitation of sour oil and gas reserves which has required the development 
of linepipe steels with resistance to hydrogen-induced cracking (HIC). Thus in 
addition to higher strength and toughness, developing pipeline technologies have 
required improved resistance to corrosion which has been met with specific alloy 
additions and special control over non-metallic inclusions. Of major importance 
in meeting the property requirements of the oil and gas industries have been 
the developments in the thermomechanical processing of steel and the bulk of 
linepipe steels are now supplied in the controlled-rolled condition. 
Specifications and property requirements 
Most linepipe specifications in the world are based on those issued by the Amer- 
ican Petroleum Institute (API) which cover high test linepipe (5LX series) and 

188 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
spiral weld linepipe (5LS series). The API specification for high test linepipe was 
introduced in 1948 and at that time included only one grade, X42, with a yield 
strength of 42 ksi. Since that time, higher strength steels have been developed 
and the specification now includes grades up to XS0 (80 ksi = 551 N/mm2). 
Most specifications use yield strength as the design criterion, and as the yield 
strength is increased, the wall thickness can be reduced proportionately, using the 
same design safety factor. Thus the substitution of X70 by X80 grade can lead to 
a reduction in wall thickness of 12.5%, which illustrates very clearly the incentive 
for the use of higher-strength steels. However, the measurement of yield strength 
in linepipe has been an area of contention between steelmakers and linepipe 
operators for some time because of the change in strength that occurs between 
as-delivered plate and pipe material. Tensile specimens are cut from finished pipe 
and these are cold flattened prior to testing. Due to the method of preparation, the 
yield strength measured in such test specimens can be significantly lower than 
that obtained on undeformed plate. The differential is due to the well established 
Bauschinger effect which leads to a decrease in yield strength when tensile testing 
is preceded by stressing in the opposite direction, e.g. during pipe unbending 
and flattening. In X70 pipe, the Bauschinger effect can result in a reduction in 
yield strength of 69 to 83 N/mm 2 (10 to 12 ksi) and therefore plate material 
has to be supplied with extra strength so as to compensate for this apparent 
loss in yield strength. However, when the yield strength of pipe material is 
measured in a ring tension test, the value is much closer to that measured in 
plate material. The Bauschinger effect in linepipe materials is particularly marked 
in traditional ferdte-pearlite steels which exhibit discontinuous yielding in the 
tensile test. The effect is reduced in steels containing small amounts of bainite 
or martensite, and in steels containing a significant amount of lower temperature 
transformation products, the unbending and flattening operation can lead to an 
increase in yield strength (or 0.2% proof stress) compared with undeformed plate. 
These materials exhibit continuous stress-strain curves and the high rate of work 
hardening compensates for the loss in strength due to the Bauschinger effect. 
Toughness is a major requirement in linepipe materials and detailed consid- 
eration has been given to both fracture initiation and propagation. To design 
against fracture initiation, the concept of flow stress dependent critical flaw size 
is employed. This predicts the critical flaw size, relative to the Charpy toughness 
level, for specific pipe dimensions and operating pressures. Above this critical 
size of defect, the toughness level required to prevent fracture initiation becomes 
infinite and depends solely on the flow stress. The crack opening displacement 
test has also been used to determine fracture initiation in linepipe materials, 
particularly in relation to the heat-affected zone. 
When fracture occurs in an oil pipeline, fluid decompression takes place very 
rapidly and therefore the driving force for crack propagation dissipates very 
quickly in time and space. However, this is not the case in gas pipelines and 
therefore the possibility of developing a long-running crack is a major concern. 
However, the avoidance of brittle propagation is generally assured by specifying a 
minimum of 85% shear area at the minimum service temperature, in full-thickness 
specimens in the Battelle Drop Weight Tear test. Various formulae have also been 
derived to specify the minimum Charpy level which will ensure the arrest of a 

Low-carbon structural steels 
189 
propagating ductile fracture. These indicate that higher Charpy energy values are 
required for higher operating pressures and for pipes with higher strengths, larger 
diameters and heavier wall thicknesses. However, there still appears to be some 
concern about the adequacy of Charpy values for the prediction of crack arrest 
behaviour. 
The weldability of linepipe materials is important, firstly in relation to pipe 
fabrication and secondly with regard to the girth welds that are used in the field 
for pipeline construction. Obviously the latter represent the more arduous welding 
requirements, particularly in low-temperature environments, but, in general, the 
use of carbon equivalent formulae appears to be adequate in ensuring crack-free 
welds. Traditionally, the International Institute of Welding (IIW) formula has 
been used to assess the weldability of materials: 
Mn 
Cr + Mo + V 
Cu + Ni 
Carbon equivalent = C + --~ + 
5 
+ 
15 
However, there is the general feeling that the llW formula is not adequate to 
define the behaviour of modem steels with low carbon contents and the following 
relationship by Ito and Bessyo is sometimes preferred: 
Si 
Carbon equivalent -- C 4- ~-~ -t- Mn + Cu + Cr 
Ni 
Mo 
V 
+ g6 + 
+ =+(s  
20 
It) 
As indicated earlier, thermomechanical processing has permitted the development 
of high-strength steels with low carbon contents and this has contributed greatly 
to improved weldability in linepipe steels. 
Linep~pe manufacturing processes 
Japan is a leading producer of linepipe and a summary of the processes and size 
ranges available in that country in 1981 is given in Figure 2.23. This indicates that 
linepipe is produced as seamless and welded tubing, the former being restricted 
to relatively small-diameter, thick-walled tubing. Welded pipes are produced by 
electric resistance welding (ERW) and submerged arc welding (SAW), the latter 
being used for both longitudinal and spiral welded pipe. ERW pipes are produced 
in sizes up to 600 mm (24 in) in diameter and up to 19 mm (0.75 in) wall 
thickness. Longitudinal welded pipes are produced mainly by the U-O process and 
account for most of the pipes used for oil and gas transmission lines. However, 
a small amount of longitudinal welded pipe is also produced by roll bending. 
As illustrated in Figure 2.23, very large diameter pipe is produced by the spiral 
welded process in wall thickness up to 25 mm (1 in). 
Steel compositions for Unepipe 
A feature of the AP! 5LX specification is that it lays down very broad require- 
ments for chemical composition, specifying only the maximum permitted levels 
for carbon, manganese, sulphur and phosphorus. On the other hand, customer 
specifications are much more restrictive in composition so as to obtain high 
levels of toughness and weldability at a specific level of yield strength. Even 
so, steelmakers can still exercise various options in terms of composition and 

190 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
2.00 
1.75 
~- 1.50 
..,. 
~1.25 
e- 
~2 ~.oo 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
Seamless 
ERW 
16" 
42' 
Spiral-SAW 
26" 
UOE-SAW 
64" 
l 
80" 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Outside diameter (in) 
Figure 2.23 Size ranges available with main Japanese linepipe manufacturing processes 
(After Nara et al. 32) 
thermomechanical processing and therefore a wide range of compositions is used 
to satisfy the property requirements of individual grades within the API speci- 
fication. Sage 33 has produced a useful guide to the types of composition used 
for linepipe and this is shown in Figure 2.24. It will be noted that this chart 
differentiates between steels that exhibit the Bauschinger effect and those that 
experience a slight increase in yield strength during pipe making. The detailed 
chemical compositions used in various countries to satisfy API requirements 
are illustrated in Table 2.19. This includes some very low carbon, boron-treated 
steels 34 which develop a bainitic microstructure. In the production of these steels, 
the slab reheating temperature is in the range 1000-1150~ 
and the presence of 
fine particles of TiN inhibit austenite grain growth. The steels are finished at a 
temperature of about 700*C. 
In general, X60 grade is satisfied by controlled-rolled ferrite-pearlite steels 
containing about 0.03% Nb. For X65 and X70, it is usual to supplement the 
grain-refining effect of niobium with dispersion strengthening from vanadium, 
and steels 3 and 5 in Table 2.19 are typical of this practice. In order to achieve 
X80 properties, small additions of nickel or molybdenum are made to the Nb-V 
steels and the steels are also subjected to a very severe controlled-rolling practice. 
Pipeline ratings 
Pipelines use a variety of fittings, such as valves, bends and tees, which have 
the same property requirements as linepipe, namely high strength, toughness and 
weldability. However, because of their method of production, the development 
of higher strengths in fittings has tended to lag behind that in linepipe material, 
which relies heavily on thermomechanical processing for the achievement of 
properties. Fittings are produced from forgings or as fabrications from plate and, 

Low.carbon structural steels 
191 
i 
ill 
I Dlscon,nuousl 
l stress-strain 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
I 
_ 
significant loss of 
strength from 
plate to pipe 
As-rolled 
ferdto- 
pearlite 
O. 15-0.2% C 
Controlled 
rolled 
poarllte 
reduced steel 
0.08-0.12% C 
X60 
Normalized 
ferrlto- 
peadlte 
O. 15-0.2% C 
X60 
X65 
X60 
i _ 
[:::l 
X65 
X70 
I 
I 
l 
ii 
I 
i 
. . . . . . . .  
i 
Type (b): 
minimum loss of 
strength from 
plato to plpe 
. . . . . .  
i 
Controlled 
I 
rolled 
I 
pearlito 
I 
reduced steel +l 
transformation 
product 
0.08-0.12% C I 
.... ='"_ 
I 
X70 
r 
. . . . .  
I 
.i. 
Cold-worked 
ferdte 
steel 
(peadite 
reduced) 
"'' 
~1 
, 
Continuous 
stress-strain 
strength from 
plate to pipe 
ii 
1 
Controlled 
rolled 
two-phase 
steel 
0.06% C 
a. 
, 
, 
":] 
X70-80 
IMo-Nbl 
stool / 
steel 
X70 
Figure 2.24 Summary of steel pipes in production for high-strength steel pipelines in 
Europe, the Americas and Japan (After Sage 33) 
in either case, the hot-working operations are not conducive to the generation 
or preservation of the fine-grained structure, characteristic of controUed-rolled 
linepipe. Pipeline fittings are therefore supplied mainly in the normalized or 
quenched and tempered condition. However, by limiting the hot-working temper- 
ature to about 750~ 
fittings can be produced from controUed-rolled plate with 
little loss in properties. 

192 Steels: MetaUurgy and Applications 
Table 2.18 
Selection of steels for buildings 
Maximum thickness of parts subjected to 
applied tensile stress 
BS 4360 Grade 
Sections (except 
Plates, wide flats 
hollow sections) and 
and universal 
flat bars 
wide flats 
Internal 
External 
Internal 
External 
(mm) 
(mm) 
(mm) 
(mm) 
V~ues for k=l 
43A 
25 
15 
25 
15 
43B 
30 
20 
30 
20 
43C 
50 
40 
50 
40 
43D 
50 
50 
75 
75 
43E 
50 
50 
75 
75 
50A 
16 
10 
16 
10 
50B 
20 
12 
20 
12 
50C 
40 
27 
75 
55 
50D 
40 
40 
75 
75 
55C 
19 
16 
19 
16 
55E 
63 
63 
63 
63 
WR50A 
12 
12 
12 
12 
WR50B 
45 
27 
45 
27 
WR50C 
50 
50 
50 
50 
Values for k = 2 
43A 
50 
30 
50 
30 
43B 
50 
40 
50 
40 
43C 
50 
50 
50 
50 
43D 
50 
50 
75 
75 
43E 
50 
50 
75 
75 
50A 
32 
20 
32 
20 
50B 
40 
25 
40 
25 
50C 
40 
40 
75 
75 
50D 
40 
40 
75 
75 
55C 
19 
19 
19 
19 
55E 
63 
63 
63 
63 
WR50A 
12 
12 
12 
12 
WR50B 
50 
50 
50 
50 
WR50C 
50 
50 
50 
50 
After BS 5950: Part 1" 1985. 
Rogerson and Jones 39 have reviewed the topic of steels for high-pressure gas 
fittings and their summary of steel compositions is shown in Table 2.20. Thus, 
proprietary C-Mn-V steels, such as Hyplus 29 and Creuselso 42, have been 
used for these applications which produce yield strength values up to 450 N/mm 2, 
depending upon section size. Nicuage IN787 has been used successfully in the 
Alaskan oil pipelines in strength levels that satisfy X80. This Mn-Mo-Cu steel 
also has the type of composition that is resistant to sour gas/oil environments, as 
discussed in the next section. 

Table 2.19 
Chemical composition of linepipe steels 
Steelno. 
Grade 
WT 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
P% 
S% 
Ni% 
Mo% 
Cu% 
Nb% 
V% 
li% 
8% 
Re$ 
(-) 
1 
X65 
16 
0.02 
0.14 
1.59 
0.018 
0.003 
0.04 
0.017 
0.001 
34 
2 
X65 
25 
0.03 
0.16 
1.61 
0.016 
0.003 
0.17 
0.05 
0.016 
0.001 
34 
3 
X65 
25 
0.06 
1.35 
0.025 
0.005 
0.25 
0.33 
0.04 
0.07 
35 
4 
X70 
20 
0.03 
0.14 
1.91 
0.018 
0.003 
0.05 
0.018 
0.001 
34 
5 
X70 
19.6 
0.08 
1.6 
0.04 
0.07 
36 
6 
X80 
12 
0.07 
1.65 
0.002 
0.22 
0.05 
0.075 
37 
7 
X80 
20 
0.02 
0.26 
1.95 
0.022 
0.003 
0.38 
0.31 
0.04 
0.019 
0.001 
34 
8 
X80 
19 
0.08 
0.1 
1.5 
0.052 
0.076 
38 
9 
X80 
19 
0.036 
0.1 
1.6 
0.35 
0.29 
0.64 
38 

Table 2.20 Compositions of high-strength pipeline firrings 
Composition % 
Type 
C 
Si 
Mn 
S 
P 
A1 
V 
I?b 
Ti 
Ni 
Cr 
Mo 
Cu 
Co 
N 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5(i) 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Hyplus 29 
Controlled rolled 
Controlled rolled 
V-N-Ni steel 
V-N-Ni steel 
V-N-Ni steel 
Acicular femte 
Nicuage (IN787) 
Modified Nicuage 
BSC Mn-Mo-Cu 
0.19 0.37 
1.67 
0.16 0.23 
1.31 
0.16 0.29 
1.23 
0.14 0.38 
1.46 
0.19 0.4 
1.63 
0.17 0.39 
1.56 
0.06 
0.26 
1.59 
0.04 0.28 0.46 
0.05 0.26 
1.23 
0.14 0.31 
1.39 
0.008 
0.012 
0.01 1 
0.015 
0.004 
0.015 
0.009 
0.012 
0.008 
0.007 
0.018 0.021 0.121 
0.018 
0.027 
0.049 
0.011 0.024 
0.052 
0.018 
0.1 
0.008 
0.01 
0.108 
0.011 0.169 
0.022 
0.043 
0.018 
0.008 
0.044 0.038 
0.015 
0.027 
0.031 
0.01 
0.028 
0.098 
0.005 
0.028 
0.044 
0.005 
0.029 
0.052 
0.071 
0.027 
0.012 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.074 
0.089 
0.027 
0.035 
0.027 
0.029 
0.55 
0.07 
0.55 
0.166 
0.507 
0.16 
0.213 
0.005 
0.812 
0.716 
1.1 
0.018 
0.06 
0.016 
0.018 
0.008 
0.03 
0.029 
0.341 
0.205 
0.206 
0.22 
0.156 
0.056 
0.075 
0.15 
0.099 
0.008 
1.03 
1.18 
0.48 
0.017 
0.019 
0.011 
- 
- 
0.006 
0.017 
- 
0.005 
- 
0.021 
0.012 
0.013 
Tube 
Plate 
Bend 
Plate 
Bend 
Bend 
Plate 
Plate 
Plate 
Plate 
After Rodguson and J0nes.3~ 

Low-carbon structural steels 
195 
Steels for sour gas service 
In recent years, the demand has increased for linepipe with resistance to envi- 
ronmental fracture due to the exploitation of sour gas wells, i.e. those containing 
significant levels of H2S and CO2. The National Association of Corrosion Engi- 
neers (NACE) has determined that a fluid is designated sour when it contains 
greater than 0.0035 arm. partial pressure of H2S. Both H2S and CO2 become 
corrosive in the presence of moisture and the corrosivity of natural gas is deter- 
mined solely by the levels of these compounds. Although gas pipelines do not 
normally operate under corrosive conditions, a temperature drop in the gas to 
below its dewpoint or failure in dehydration plant can lead to the introduction of 
moisture. Similarly, other operational measures such as desulphurization and the 
use of inhibitors are not considered to be totally adequate and therefore there is 
a need for steels with inherent resistance to sour environments. 
Two types of fracture can be introduced by H2S, namely hydrogen-induced 
cracking (HIC) and sulphide stress corrosion cracking (SSCC). The latter 
form of attack is generally confined to steels with yield strengths greater than 
about 550 N/mm 2 and therefore does not feature prominently in linepipe steels. 
However, the fact that high hardness levels can be generated in the heat-affected 
zones of welds should not be overlooked since SSCC can result in catastrophic 
brittle fracture. On the other hand, HIC results in a form of blistering or 
delamination and can take place in the absence of stress. Atomic hydrogen is 
generated at cathodic sites under wet sour conditions and diffuses into the steel, 
forming molecular hydrogen at the interface between non-metallic inclusions 
and the matrix. When the internal pressure due to the build-up of molecular 
hydrogen exceeds a critical level, HIC is initiated. Long elongated inclusions 
such as Type II MnS are particularly favourable sites for crack initiation but 
planar arrays of globular oxides are also effective. Cracking can proceed along 
segregated bands containing lower temperature transformation products such as 
bainite and martensite. Cracking tends to be parallel to the surface but can be 
straight or stepwise. 
The susceptibility to HIC is assessed by immersion of unstressed coupons in a 
synthetic solution of seawater, saturated in H2S with a pH of 5.1-5.3 (BP test) 
or in the more aggressive solution of 0.5% CH3COOH + 5% NaC1 + H2S sat. at 
a pH of 3.5-3.8 (NACE test). In either case, the test duration is 96 h and the 
test parameters include crack length, crack width or blister formation. 
From the remarks made earlier, it could be anticipated that the control of 
non-metallic inclusions would feature prominently in the development of HIC- 
resistant steels. The sulphur content is therefore generally reduced to below 
0.01% and additions of calcium or rare earth metals are made to produce a 
globular sulphide morphology. In some Japanese practices, the sulphur contents 
are reduced to 0.001-0.003% with calcium additions of 0.0015-0.0035%. 
Segregation effects can be minimized by restricting the levels of elements such 
as carbon, manganese and phosphorus and fortunately the use of controlled rolling 
enables high strengths to be obtained at low carbon levels. On the other hand, 
manganese is beneficial in improving toughness by refining the ferrite grain size 

196 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
and therefore a minimum level of manganese must be maintained, particularly in 
linepipe for arctic service. 
Certain alloy additions are also effective in improving the resistance to HIC, 
notably copper and nickel. At pH levels above 5, these elements form protective 
films which prevent the diffusion of hydrogen into the steel. However, at pH 
levels below 5, these protective films are not formed and therefore these alloy 
additions show little advantage in the NACE test, outlined earlier. On the other 
hand, copper additions of 0.2-0.3% are extremely beneficial in preventing HIC, 
as determined by the B P test. 
In summary, linepipe steels with resistance to HIC embody the following 
features: 
1. Low levels of carbon, sulphur and phosphorus. 
2. Additions of calcium or rare earth metals to globularize the sulphide inclu- 
sions. 
3. Low levels of oxide inclusions. 
4. Freedom from segregation so as to avoid bainitic or martensitic bands. 
5. Additions of small amounts of copper or chromium. 
References 
1. Hall, E.O. Proc. Phys. Soc. Series B, 64, 747 (1951). 
2. Petch, N.J. Proc. Swampscott Conf., MIT Press, p. 54 (1955). 
3. Pickering, F.B. Physical Metallurgy and the Design of Steels, Applied 
Science Publishers. 
4. Piekering, F.B. and Gladman, T. ISI Special Report 81 (1961). 
5. Irvine, K.J., Piekering, F.B. and Gladman, T. JISI, 205, 161 (1967). 
6. Gladman, T., Dulieu, D. and Mclvor, I.D. In Proc. MicroAlloying 75, 
(Washington, 1975), Union Carbide, p. 25 (1975). 
7'. Vanderbeck, R.W. Weld J., 37 (1958). 
8. Sellars, C.M. In Proc. HSLA Steels: Metallurgy and Applications (eds 
Gray, J.M., Ko, T., Zhang Shouhua, Wu Baorong and Xie Xishan) (Beijing, 
1985) ASM. 
9. Tamura, I., Ouchi, C., Tanaka, T. and Sekine, H. Thermomechanical 
Processing of High Strength Low Alloy Steels, Butterworths (1988). 
10. Cuddy, L.J. In Proc. Thermomechanical Processing of Microalloyed 
Austenite (eds Deardo, A.J., Ratz, G.A. and Wray, P.J.) (Warrendale Pa, 
1982) Met. Soc. AIME (1982). 
11. Cohen, M. and Hansen, S.S. In Proc. HSLA Steels: Metallurgy and Applica- 
tions (eds Gray, J.M., Ko, T., Zhang Shouhua, Wu Baorong and Xie Xishan) 
(Beijing, 1985) ASM (1985). 
12. United States Steel Technical Report- Corrosion Performance of Mn-Cr- 
Cu-V Type USS Cor-Ten High Strength Low Alloy Steel in Various Atmo- 
spheres, February 1965, Project No. 47.001-001 (7) and 47.001-003 (3). 

Low-carbon structural steels 197 
13. United States Steel Technical Report- A Study of the Initial Atmospheric 
Corrosion of Carbon Steel, USS Cot-Ten A Steel and USS Cot-Ten B Steel, 
May 1966, Project No. 47.004-002 (1). 
14. Horton, J.B. The Rusting of Low Alloy Steels in the Atmosphere, Paper to 
Pittsburgh Regional Technical Meeting of AISI, November 1965. 
15. Hudson, J.C. and Stanners, J.F. JISI, July (1955). 
16. Larrabee, C.P. and Coburn, S.K. In Proc. First International Congress on 
Metallic Corrosion (London, 1961) Butterworths (1961). 
17. Pircher, H. and Klapdar, W. In Proc. MicroAlloying '75 (Washington, 1975), 
Union Carbide Corporation (1977). 
18. Boyd, G.M. and Bushell, T.W. Trans. Royal Institution of Naval Architects, 
July (1961). 
19. Lloyd's Register of Shipping Rules and Regulations for the Classification of 
Ships, 1995. 
20. Graft, W.J. Introduction to Offshore Structures, Golf Publishing (1981). 
21. Billingham, J. Metals and Materials, August, 472 (1985). 
22. Department of Energy Offshore Installations- Guidance on Design and 
Construction, HMSO, London (1984). 
23. Harrison, J.D. and Pisarski, H.G. Background to New Guidance on Struc- 
tural Steel and Steel Construction Standards in Offshore Structures, HMSO, 
London (1986). 
24. McLean, A. and Oehrlein, R. In Proc. Performance of Offshore Structures, 
Autumn Review Course Series 3, No. 7, The Institution of Metallurgists, 
p. 65 (1976). 
25. Webster, S.E. Journal of Petroleum Technology, October, p. 1999 (1981). 
26. Whitely, J.D. Concrete, December, 28 (1981) and January, 30 (1982). 
27. Armstrong, B.M., James, D.B., Latham, D.J., Taylor, V.E., Wilson, C. and 
Heighington, K. In Proc. First International Conference on Concrete for 
Hazard Protection (Edinburgh, 1987) The Concrete Society, p. 241 (1987). 
28. Economopoulos, M., Respen, Y., Lessel, G. and Steffes, G. Application 
of Tempcore Process to the Fabrication of High 
Yield Strength 
Concrete- Reinforcing Bars, CRM No. 45, December 1975. 
29. Simpson, R.J. Metals and Materials, October, 598 (1989). 
30. Constructional Steelwork Economic Development Committee Efficiency in 
the Construction of Steel Framed Multi-Storey Buildings, National Economic 
Development Office. 
31. Preston, R.R. Private communication. 
32. Nara, Y., Kyogoku, T., Yamura, T. and Takeuchi, I. In Proc. Steels for Line 
Pipe and Pipeline Fittings (London, 1981) The Metals Societyffhe Welding 
Institute, p. 201 (1981). 
33. Sage, A.M. In Proc. Steels for Line Pipe and Pipeline Fittings (London, 
1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute, p. 39 (1981). 
34. Nakasugi, H. et al. In Proc. Steels for Linepipe and Pipeline Fittings 
(London, 1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute, p. 94 (1981). 

198 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
35. Cavaghan, N.J. et al. In Proc. Steels for Linepipe and Pipeline Fittings 
(London, 1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute p. 200 (1981). 
36. Shiga, C. et al. In Proc. Steels for Linepipe and Pipeline Fittings (London, 
1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute, p. 134 (1981). 
37. Coolcn, A. et al. In Proc. Steels for Linepipe and Pipeline Fittings (London, 
1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute, p. 209 (1981). 
38. Lander, H.N. et al. In Proc. Steels for Linepipe and Pipeline Fittings 
(London, 1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute, p. 146 (1981). 
39. Rogerson, P. and Jones, C.L. In Proc. Steels for Linepipe and Pipeline 
Fittings (London, 1981) The Metals Society/The Welding Institute, p. 271 
(1981). 

3 Engineering steels 
Overview 
The term engineering steels applies to a wide range of compositions that are 
generally heat treated to produce high strength levels, i.e. tensile strengths greater 
than 750 N/mm 2. These steels are subjected to high service stresses and are 
typified by the compositions that are used in automotive engine and transmission 
components, steam turbines, bearings, rails and wire ropes. As well as carbon 
and low-alloy grades, engineering steels also embrace the maraging compositions 
that are generally based on 18% Ni and which are capable of developing tensile 
strengths greater than 2000 N/mm 2. 
Engineering steels are concerned primarily with the generation of a particular 
level of strength in a specific section size or ruling section. This introduces the 
concept of hardenability which is concerned with the ease with which a steel can 
harden in depth rather than the attainment of a specific level of hardness/strength. 
In turn, this relates to the effects of alloying elements on hardenability and the 
influence of cooling rate on a specific composition or section size. Much of the 
information that is available today on hardenability concepts and the metallurgical 
factors affecting hardenability was generated in the United States in the 1930s 
with names such as Grossman, Bain, Grange, Jominy and Lamont featuring 
prominently in the literature. This period also coincided with the introduction 
of isothermal transformation diagrams which paved the way to the detailed 
understanding of the decomposition of austenite and a qualitative indication of 
hardenability. 
Up until the late 1940s, engineering steels often contained substantial levels of 
nickel and molybdenum, the concept being that these elements were required in 
order to provide a good combination of strength and toughness. Whereas these 
alloy additions certainly fulfilled this objective, what was to change in subsequent 
years was the generation of quantitative data on the actual level of toughness that 
was required in engineering components. This paved the way to the substitution of 
nickel and molybdenum by cheaper elements such as manganese, chromium and 
boron and the more economical use of alloy additions for particular hardenability 
requirements. The theme of cost reduction was also pursued very vigorously in the 
1970s and 1980s with the introduction of medium-carbon, micro-alloy steels for 
automotive forgings. As illustrated later in the text, these steels offer the potential 
of major savings over traditional quenched and tempered alloy grades through 
lower steel costs, the elimination of heat treatment and improved machinability. 
Steel cleanness and the reduction of non-metallic inclusions have also been 
of major concern to users of engineering steels, particularly in applications with 
the potential for failure by fatigue. Bearing steels are a typical example and 
the fatigue performance of these steels has been improved progressively over 
the years with the adoption of facilities such as vacuum degassing (1950s), 

200 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
argon shrouding of the molten stream (1960s) and vacuum steelmaking (1970s). 
However, major improvements in cleanness have also been obtained in bulk 
steelmaking processes for bearing steels with the introduction of secondary steel- 
making facilities. 
The machining of automotive components can account for up to 60% of the 
total cost and therefore major effort has been devoted to the development of 
engineering steels with improved machinability. In the main, these developments 
have been focused on the traditional resulphurized grades but with the addition of 
elements such as calcium and tellurium for sulphide shape control and improved 
transverse properties. 
In summary, the author's overall perception of this sector has been one of 
continuing effort to achieve cost reduction, initially through the use of cheaper 
alloying elements but latterly via the concept of lower through costs and involving 
a reduction in the cost of heat treatment and machining. 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
Whereas strip and structural steels are based primarily on ferrite or 
ferrite-pearlite microstructures, engineering grades are generally heat treated to 
provide high strengths via the generation of lower-temperature transformation 
products, such as bainite or martensite. In order to form such products, the alloy 
content of the steels must be high enough to suppress the formation of ferrite 
and pearlite, under the cooling conditions employed from the austenitic state. 
Although water quenching would reduce the critical alloy content required to 
achieve a martensitic structure in a particular section size, this might generate 
severe internal stresses or quench cracking in a component and therefore oil 
quenching is generally employed. 
In their simplest form, engineering steels are based on C-Mn compositions 
which are only effective in producing a martensitic structure in small section 
sizes. Such steels are described as having low hardenability in the context of 
through-hardening but can develop high levels of surface hardening through 
induction heating and quenching which develops a martensitic structure in the 
outer fibres of the component. However, engineering steels are generally produced 
via the basic electric arc furnace in which the addition of large amounts of scrap 
steel introduces a substantial amount of residual elements, such as copper and 
nickel. Such elements can be present at total levels of about 0.5% and therefore 
contribute significantly to the hardenability of carbon or low-alloy engineering 
grades. 
For larger section sizes, steels with higher alloy content and hardenability 
are required in order to generate a substantially martensitic structure. However, 
whereas most of the common alloying elements will increase hardenability and 
promote the formation of martensite, due consideration must be given to the cost 
of these elements and, more particularly, to their specific cost in achieving a 
given increment in hardenability. Thus elements such as manganese, chromium 
and boron may be used in preference to nickel and molybdenum, provided that 
hardenability is the prime consideration. However, the excessive addition of one 

Engineeringsteels 
201 
particular element can lead to segregation at the casting stage which may not 
be removed completely on subsequent processing and heat treatment. Therefore 
components of large section size, which require a high level of hardenability to 
achieve through-hardening, will be based on multiple alloying additions, some 
of which may also be incorporated to confer tempering resistance. 
The carbon content of engineering steels is important in that it controls 
the strength of martensitic structures and also contributes significantly to the 
hardenability of the steels. Very broadly, the carbon content of most engineering 
steels falls into two categories, namely a level of around 0.2% in carburizing 
grades and about 0.4% in through-hardening grades. In the former, the carbon 
content in the surface regions of a component is raised to about 0.8% by 
gaseous diffusion in the austenitic state and on oil quenching, a high-carbon 
martensitic case is developed on a lower-carbon martensitic core. Such a process 
therefore develops a duplex microstructuie in which a hard, fatigue-resistant 
case is supported by a lower-strength, ductile core. Carburized steels are used 
extensively in automotive transmission components, such as gears and back 
axles, which must be produced to very accurate dimensions in order to avoid 
misalignment, overloading and premature failure. This introduces the problem 
of distortion, namely the changes in shape that accompany heat treatment and 
transformation and which are exacerbated by the large temperature gradients 
developed under fast cooling rates from the austenitic state. 
Having produced a martensitic microstructure on quenching from a temperature 
about 20~ above Ac3, engineering steels are tempered in order to provide a good 
combination of strength and ductility/toughness. The tempering temperatures may 
be around 200~ in carburized components, which introduces stress relief, and 
up to 650~ in the higher-carbon, through-hardening grades which produces a 
substantial change in structure. In turn, this invokes consideration of the effect 
of alloying elements on tempering resistance and, in particular, the benefit that 
will be obtained from adding expensive elements, such as vanadium and molyb- 
denum. These elements produce more stable carbides than iron, manganese and 
chromium, retarding the degeneration of the martensitic structure. Vanadium and 
molybdenum therefore feature prominently in ferritic creep-resisting grades for 
power generation applications and also in high-speed cutting steels, in order to 
provide high strength during elevated temperature service. 
Nickel may be regarded as a common alloying element in engineering steels 
but, in fact, it has relatively little effect on hardenability. Additionally, it has 
little affinity for carbon and therefore is ineffective in retarding the tempering 
of martensite. However, nickel is perceived to be a toughening agent and is 
incorporated in some of the higher-strength, martensitic grades, notably maraging 
steels, and these will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Engineering steels are used for the production of bearings in the carburized 
condition or from through-hardened steels of the 1% C-Cr type. In this respect, 
detailed consideration must be given to steel cleanness in order to alleviate the 
adverse effects of non-metallic inclusions on fatigue resistance. Bearing steels 
are therefore subjected to stringent deoxidation practices and may be vacuum 
degassed or vacuum melted in order to eliminate hard, angular inclusions which 
are particularly detrimental. 

202 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Although the bulk of steels for engineering applications are based on tempered 
martensitic structures, there are notable examples in which the required strength 
is developed by aircooling from the austenitic region in order to generate a 
predominantly pearlitic microstructure. These include rail steels, micro-alloy 
automotive forgings and high-carbon, wire rod. Again these materials will be 
discussed in more detail, later in the text, but in general they are based on 
high carbon contents with manganese levels up to about 1.5% which augments 
carbon in the formation of pearlite. Very clearly, such steels involve completely 
different concepts, in terms of underlying metallurgy, from those present in 
martensitic grades and the strengthening mechanisms are those involving grain 
size, volume fraction of ferrite and pearlite, and the interlamellar spacing of 
pearlite. Consideration must also be given to solid solution hardening effects due 
to manganese, silicon and free nitrogen. The structure-property relationships of 
these medium-carbon, pearlitic grades are therefore similar to those involved in 
the lower-carbon, strip and structural grades, but of course with greater emphasis 
on the contribution from the higher volume fraction of pearlite. Micro-alloy 
forging grades are also similar in concept and indeed represent an extension to 
high-strength, low alloy (HSLA) grades of strip and structural steels, albeit with 
a higher carbon content and higher volume fraction of pearlite. Medium carbon, 
micro-alloy forging grades generally incorporate an addition of 0.05-0.20% V 
which is soluble at the reheating temperature and which results in the precipitation 
of vanadium carbonitride in both the proeutectoid ferrite and the ferrite lamellae 
of the pearlite, on cooling from the forging operation. This results in tensile 
strengths in the range 800-1100 N/ram 2 over a wide range of section size, 
which are comparable to those achieved in conventional, quenched and tempered 
martensitic grades. 
Machining is a very important stage in the production of most engineering 
components and, in many automotive transmission parts, can account for up 
to 60% of total production costs. Due consideration must therefore be given to 
optimizing the machinability of engineering steels, consistent with other property 
requirements. Whereas normalizing or carbide-spheroidizing heat treatments 
may be applied in order to provide an easily machined microstructure, most 
engineering components must be machined in the fully heat-treated, high-strength 
condition. In this case, small amounts of elements such as sulphur and lead may be 
added to the steels which improve the machining performance very dramatically. 
This derives from the presence of MnS inclusions or discrete particles of lead 
which exude into the tool-chip interface, acting as a lubricant and also forming 
a protective deposit on the tool. 
High sulphur additions impair the transverse ductility of steels, particularly 
when MnS is present as long elongated inclusions. However, inclusion-modifying 
agents, such as calcium, can be added to the steel which improve the transverse 
properties. Lead is generally present as globular particles or as tails to the MnS 
inclusions. As such, it causes little detriment to the mechanical properties but 
major hygiene precautions must be taken during steelmaking to minimize lead 
fume and the associated toxicity effects. 

Engineering steels 203 
Heat treatment aspects 
Isothermal transforma~on dial,ares 
Isothermal transformation diagrams were first published by Bain and Davenport l 
in the United States in 1930 and paved the way to the detailed understanding 
of the effects of alloying elements on the heat treatment response in steels. 
A steel is first heated to a temperature in the austenitic range, typically 20"C 
above At3, and then cooled rapidly in a bath to a lower temperature, allowing 
isothermal transformation to proceed. The progress of transformation can be 
followed by dilatometry, the degree of transformation depending upon the 
holding time at temperature. As illustrated schematically in Figure 3.1, the 
start and finish of transformation to ferrite, pearlite, bainite and martensite are 
then shown on a diagram as a function of temperature and time. Isothermal 
transformation diagrams, also known as TTr (time-temperature-transformation) 
diagrams, are simple in concept but are not representative of the majority 
of commercial heat treatments which involve a continuous-cooling operation. 
However, martempering and austempering are examples of heat treatment that 
employ isothermal sequences. 
A schematic illustration of martempering is given in Figure 3.2. Following a 
conventional austenitizing treatment, a component is cooled rapidly to a temper- 
ature just above the Ms temperature and held at this temperature long enough to 
ensure that it attains a uniform temperature from surface to centre. The material is 
then air cooled through the Ms-Mf temperature range to form martensite and is 
subsequently tempered. Martempering is therefore not a tempering operation but 
a treatment that leads to low levels of residual stresses and minimizes distortion 
and cracking. 
--Ae 3 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
A 
+ 
F+C 
---M,, 
----Mr 
,,1 
,, 
,, 
, 
Log time 
Figure 3.1 Isothermal transformation diagram 

204 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
9) 
| 
o. 
F: 
4) 
I"- 
Surface 
Centre 
Temper 
Transformation 
Log time' 
Figure 3.2 Martempering treatment 
qp,/.Surface 
Centre 
ion 
i, 
M~ 
,| 
Log time 
Figure 3.3 Austempering treatment 
In austempering, Figure 3.3, a component is quenched into a salt bath, again at 
a temperature above Ms, but the material is held at this temperature long enough 
to allow complete isothermal transformation to bainite. The component is then 
quenched or air cooled to room temperature. Again no tempering is involved 
in the conventional sense but austempering represents a short, economical heat 
treatment cycle that provides a good combination of strength and toughness. 
The cooling rate must be fast enough to avoid the formation of pearlite and 
the isothermal treatment must be long enough to complete the transformation to 
bainite. 
Although they proved to be extremely useful in gaining a better understanding 
of austenite decomposition and transformation kinetics, it became apparent that 

Engineering steels 205 
isothermal transformation diagrams were only of limited value in the evalua- 
tion of continuous-cooling processes. Although attempts were made to convert 
isothermal transformation diagrams to a continuous-cooling format, these were 
only partially successful. Attention turned therefore to the direct determination 
of continuous-cooling transformation diagrams. 
Continuous-cooling transformation (CCT) diagrams 
CCT diagrams are generated from a series of temperature-length curves. A spec- 
imen is heated slowly into the austenitic range and, as illustrated in Figure 3.4, 
the heating curve provides the facility for the determination of the Acl and Ar 
temperatures. The specimen is then cooled at a prescribed rate and the start and 
finish of transformation can be determined respectively from the initial deviation 
from the cooling curve and the subsequent conformity to the heating curve. This 
exercise is repeated for a series of cooling rates, ranging from the simulation of 
water quenching in a small-diameter rod to that experienced in furnace cooling. 
CCT diagrams can be presented in two ways: 
1. Temperature-time plots in which the cooling time is plotted horizontally on 
a log scale. 
2. Temperature-bar diameter plots, the latter representing different bar sizes 
cooled at rates simulative of air, oil and water cooling. 
AC I // 
/ 
L 
e\ o 
, 
,,y 
/ / 
Start 
Temperature 
Figure 3.4 Length changes in heating and cooling 

206 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 3.5 Continuous-cooling transformation diagram for a 0.39% C 1.45% Mn 0.49% 
Mo steel (After Cias 2) 
Figure 3.6 
Continuous-cooling transformation diagram for a 0.38% C 0.6% Mn steel; 
the dotted vertical lines indicate the transformations that occur in a 10 mm bar after air 
cooling, oil quenching and water quenching respectively (After Atkins 3) 

Engineering steels 207 
Examples of both types of presentation are shown in Figures 3.5 and 3.6. A 
feature of the temperature-time presentation is the insertion of the cooling curves 
used to generate the CCT diagrams and the hardness developed after each cooling 
rate is shown in a circle at the end of the cooling curves. This type of presentation 
was favoured by Cias 2 of Climax Molybdenum who compiled a series of CCT 
diagrams for medium-carbon alloy steels. Temperature-bar diameter plots were 
used by Atkins 3 of British Steel in a major publication of CCT diagrams, coveting 
a wide range of carbon and alloy steels. 
HardenabUity testing 
The term hardenability is used in various ways to describe the heat treatment 
response of steels, employing one or other of interrelated parameters such as 
hardness and microstructure. When evaluated by hardness testing, hardenability 
is often defined as the capacity of a steel to harden in depth under a given 
set of heat treatment conditions. What must be emphasized in this definition 
is the fact that hardenability is concerned with the depth of hardening or the 
hardness profile in a component, rather than the attainment of a specific level 
of hardness. Using microstructure as the control parameter, Siebert et al. 4 have 
defined hardenability as: 
'the capacity of a steel to transform partially or completely from austenite to some percentage 
of martensite at a given depth when cooled under some given condition' 
Whereas the hardenability of a steel can be determined from continuous-cooling 
transformation 
diagrams, 
the 
construction 
of 
such 
diagrams 
is 
both 
time-consuming and expensive and therefore more economical methods were 
required for the measurement of hardenability. A number of hardenability tests 
were developed in the 1930s but the best known and most widely used is the 
Jominy end quench test. Developed in imperial units, the Jominy specimen is 
a cylinder 102 mm (4 in) long  25.4 mm (1 in) diameter with a flange at 
one end. It is usual to normalize the material to be tested prior to machining 
the specimen in order to eliminate variations in the hardening response that 
might be introduced by differences in microstructure in the as-rolled condition. 
The specimen is heated to the appropriate austenitizing temperature and then 
transferred quickly to a fixture which suspends the specimen above a tube through 
which a column of water is directed against the bottom face. The arrangement 
is shown in Figure 3.7 and it should be emphasized that the water flow is 
tightly specified and controlled in order to produce a consistent quenching effect. 
Whereas the quenched end of the specimen experiences a rapid rate of cooling, 
the effect diminishes along the length of the specimen to give a value approaching 
air cooling at the other end. When the quenching operation is complete, fiats are 
ground at diametrically opposed positions on the specimen to a depth of 0.38 mm 
to remove decarburized material and provide a suitable surface for hardness 
testing. This can involve either Vickers (HV) or Rockwell (HRC) hardness testing 
at intervals of about 1.5 mm for alloy steels or 0.75 mm for carbon steels. A 
typical Jominy hardenability curve is shown in Figure 3.8, which reflects 

208 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Water jet prior 
to placement 
of s )ecimen 
| ,., 
-- Jomlny 
specimen 
Figure 3.7 Jominy hardenability testing 
Distance from quenched end 
Figure 3.8 Schematic Jominy hardenability curve 
the martensitic hardening that can be achieved at the end quenched position in a 
steel of reasonable hardenability and transformation to bainite and ferrite-pearlite 
at the slower rates of cooling. 
Although it remains predominant, the Jominy hardenability test has been 
criticized for not being sufficiently discriminating between steels of low 
hardenability, i.e. those involving a very rapid decrease in hardness just beyond 
the quenched end. For such steels, the SAC test is deemed to be more appropriate, 
although it has been used very rarely in the UK. In this test, the specimen is again 
a cylinder but measures 140 mm long x 25.4 mm diameter. After normalizing 
and austenitizing at a suitable temperature above Ac3, the specimen is quenched 
overall in water. After quenching, a cylinder 25 mm long is cut from the test 
specimen and the end faces are ground very carefully to remove any tempering 

Engineering steels 209 
1 
r 
.I- 
C 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I ,, 
, 
,, 
, 
Diameter I In 
Figure 3.9 Schematic SAC hardenability curve 
effects that might have been introduced during cutting. Rockwell (HRC) hardness 
measurements are then made at four positions on the original cylinder face and 
the average hardness provides the surface (S) value. Rockwell testing is then 
carded out along the cross-section of the specimen from surface to centre and 
provides the type of hardness profile illustrated in Figure 3.9. The total area 
under the curve provides the area (A) value in units of Rockwell-inch (using the 
original imperial unit) and the hardness at the centre gives the C value. The SAC 
value of a steel might be reported as 65-51-39, which would indicate a surface 
hardness of 65 HRC, an area value of 51 Rockwell-inch and a centre hardness 
of 39 HRC. One interesting feature of the SAC test is that it can reveal central 
segregation in a bar as indicated by a hardness peak at the centre position. 
Factors affecting hardenability 
Grain size 
In a homogeneous austenitic structure, the nucleation of pearlite occurs almost 
exclusively at the grain boundaries and therefore the larger the grain boundary 
surface area, the greater are the nucleation sites for pearlite formation. Thus the 
hardenability of a given composition will increase with increasing austenitizing 
temperature and austenite grain size. The major effect of austenitizing temperature 
on the hardenability of a 0.55% C 1% Cr 0.2% Mo steel is shown in Figure 3.10, 
which is based on the work of Grange and presented by Grossmann. 5 
Although grain coarsening could be employed as a cheap method of achieving 
high hardenability, this approach is rarely adopted because the toughness and 
ductility are impaired. Instead, most commercial engineering steels are made to 
an aluminium-treated, fine-grain practice in order to produce microstructures that 
will provide a good combination of strength and toughness/ductility. 

210 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
7O 
6O 
rr 
1- 
50- 
r 
"2 
_ 
t~ 
"r" 
40- 
3O 
925oc 
845oc 
815oc 
790~ 
775oc 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Distance from quenched end (ram) 
Figure 3.10 Effect of austenitizing temperature on the Jominy hardenability of 0.55% C 
0.84% Mn 0.92% Cr 0.21% Mo steel (After Grange 5) 
Alloying elements 
Because of their very distinct effects on hardenability, it is convenient to consider 
alloying elements in three separate groups: 
1. Carbon. 
2. General group - Cr, Mn, Mo, Si, Ni, V, etc. 
3. Boron. 
Carbon must be placed in a special category because it is the element that controls 
the hardness of martensite and therefore defines the maximum hardness that can 
be achieved in a given steel composition. The relationship between carbon content 
and the hardness of martensite is shown in Figure 3.11. The effect is reasonably 
70- 
60 
c) 
tr 50 
"1" 
~" 40 
'2 
30 
20 
I 
0 
Formation 
of retained 
austenite 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
Carbon (%) 
Figure 3.11 
Effect of carbon on the hardness of martensite 

Engineering steels 211 
linear at carbon contents up to about 0.6% but, depending upon the alloy content 
of the steel, the hardness then reaches a plateau and declines at higher carbon 
contents. This is due to the depression of the M f temperature below room temper- 
ature, leading to incomplete transformation and the presence of retained austenite. 
However, because of the marked effect of carbon on hardness, it is important to 
bear this point in mind when attempting to compare the hardenability of steels 
of different carbon content. 
In addition to its effect on hardness, carbon also has a significant effect 
on hardenability. This is illustrated in Figures 3.12 and 3.13, which show the 
progressive effect of carbon in base steels containing 0.8% Mn and 0.5% Ni 
0.5% Cr 0.2% Mo (SAE 8600) respectively. 6 The effect of carbon on the hard- 
ness of martensite is evident in both types of steel but the effect on hardenability 
is very much more pronounced in the Ni-Cr-Mo steel. However, carbon is 
rarely used as a hardenability agent because of its adverse effect on toughness 
and its tendency to promote distortion and cracking. In addition, high-carbon 
steels are hard and difficult to cut or shear in the annealed condition. 
With the exception of cobalt, small additions of all alloying elements will retard 
the transformation of austenite to pearlite and thereby increase hardenability. 
However, the elements that are most commonly used for the promotion 
of hardenability are manganese, chromium and molybdenum but nickel and 
vanadium are frequently incorporated for additional purposes. A considerable 
amount of work has been carried out, particularly in the United States, to 
quantify the effects of the major alloying elements on hardenability and, despite 
some complex and interactive effects, the general order of potency has been 
established. The published data on this topic have been reviewed very thoroughly 
900 
800 
700 
600 
o 500 
O3 
> 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0.88% C 
0.76% C 
0.66% C 
0.59% C 
0.41% C 
O.3O% C 
0.20% C 
/ o1~% c 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Distance from quenched end (mm) 
Figure 3.12 Effect of carbon on hardenability of a 0.8% Mn steel (After Llewellyn and 
CooP) 

212 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 3.13 
CooP) 
a00 I-- 
0.a0% c 
/ 
. . . . . . .  
-- 
- o.9o% c 
r0o 1-- 
0.70,/, c 
/ 
~ 
~o.6o% C 
ooo1-  
400 
0.49*/0 C 
200 -- 
0.19"/, C 
I 
I 
t 
t 
I 
I 
t 
t 
t 
t 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
Distance from quenched end (ram) 
Effect of carbon on hardenability of SAE 8600 steels (after Llewellyn and 
by Siebert et al., 4 who include information on the effects of elements such as 
copper, tungsten and phosphorus as well as the five common alloying elements. 
Work by deRetana and Doane 7 evaluated the effects of the major alloying 
elements on the hardenability of low-carbon steels of the type used for case 
carburizing. Their information is shown in Figure 3.14, where the change in 
hardenability is expressed by means of a multiplying factor, calculated as follows: 
Multiplying factor = hardenability of (base steel + alloying element) 
hardenability of base steel 
The data shown in Figure 3.14 were derived from Jominy tests on a variety 
of commercial and experimental casts of carburizing grades in which only one 
element was varied in the initial part of the work. The multiplying factors were 
tested subsequently in multi-element steels and modified empirically to provide 
more widely applicable, averaged factors. However, the authors were unable to 
develop a single factor for molybdenum due to interactive effects and therefore 
separate factors are shown for this element for use in low- and high-nickel steels. 
Although the effects can vary significantly with the carbon content and base 
composition, a guide to the potency of elements in the general group in promoting 
hardenability is shown below: 
Vanadium 
Molybdenum 
Chromium 
Manganese 
Silicon 
Copper 
Nickel 
decreasing effect 
However, carbon could be placed at the top of this list and elements such as 
phosphorus and nitrogen, although present in small amounts, appear to produce 

Engineering steels 213 
Cr 
, 
I 
4.6 
4.2 
"1 
- " 
" 
I 
i 
3.8 
~ 
. 
i 
"4.2 
3.4 
i 
NI 
/- 
- 
'/ 
. . . . . . . . .  
4.0 
! 
J 
, _ . _ _ _ . _ _  
3.0 
I " 
" 
" 
m Mo (>0.75Ni) 
2.6 
I 
/ 
;' 
I 
" 
9 
/, .
.
.
.
 
3.6 
2.2 / 
.-/ 
' 
3.4 
1.8 
.. 
. 
~
-
-
-
-
-
-
'
 
3.2 
1, r:; 
: 
~ 
Mo 
, 
2.81'.... 1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 3~5 
Cr I 
m 
i 
- 
/ 
2.8 
9 
,2.e I. 
L 
1 
Q .  
, 
, 
.., 
E 
i 
/" 
= 
= " 4 ~ 1 '  
~ 
---- 
2.2 ~ 
2
.
0
~
 
~ 
'/ 
1.8 
-
/
~
 
'"--------7 
1.2----~ 
' 
4.4 
3.8 
1.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
Alloying element (%) 
Figure 3.14 Average multiplying factors for several elements in alloy steels containing 
0.15- 0.25% carbon (After deRetana and Doane 7) 
hardenability effects of a similar magnitude to carbon. Although vanadium has 
a powerful effect on hardenability, it has a low solubility in steels due to the 
formation of vanadium carbide. Therefore the level of addition is generally small 
and, as illustrated shortly, may be used more to retard the tempering process than 
as a hardenability agent. 
Boron 
In the context of low-alloy engineering steels, boron is a unique alloying element 
from the following standpoints: 
1. The addition of 0.002-0,003% B to a suitably protected base composition 
produces a hardenability effect comparable with that obtained from 0.5% Mo, 
0.7% Cr or 1.0% Ni. 

214 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
2. The effect of boron on hardenability is relatively constant provided a minimum 
level of soluble boron is present in the steel. 
3. The potency of boron is related to the carbon content of the steel, being very 
effective at low carbon contents but decreasing to zero at the eutectoid carbon 
level. 
Because of its high affinity for oxygen and nitrogen, boron is added to steel 
in conjunction with even stronger oxide- and nitride-forming elements in order 
to produce metallurgically active, soluble boron. In electric arc steelmaking, 
this involves additions of about 0.03% A1 and 0.03% Ti, either separately or 
in the form of proprietary compounds containing the required levels of boron, 
aluminium and titanium. Without these additions, boron would react with oxygen 
and nitrogen in the steel and form insoluble boron compounds which have no 
effect on hardenability. 
Gladman 8 has shown that the location of boron in steels is very dependent on 
the heat treatments that are applied. In low-alloy steels, boron was distributed 
uniformly throughout the microstructure of a 25.4 mm bar after water quenching 
from the austenitic range. However, in air-cooled samples, the grain bound- 
aries were enriched in boron compared with the body of the grains. Ueno and 
Inoue 9 also investigated the presence of boron in a 0.1% C 3.0% Mn steel and 
showed that boron first segregated to and then precipitated at the grain bound- 
aries, according to a typical 'C' curve pattern. They also showed that an increase 
in boron content decreased the incubation periods for segregation and precipita- 
tion, and in a steel containing 0.002% B, solution treated at 1350~ 
quenching in 
iced brine was required in order to prevent the segregation of boron to the grain 
boundaries. It would appear therefore that under normal heat treatment conditions, 
involving oil quenching from temperatures of 820-920~ 
boron segregates to 
the austenite grain boundaries and suppresses the formation of high-temperature 
transformation products. 
LleweUyn and Cook 6 carded out a detailed investigation of the metallurgy 
of boron-treated engineering steels containing a wide range of carbon contents. 
The effect of boron content on hardenability was studied in a base composition 
of 0.2% C 0.5% Ni 0.5% Cr 0.2% Mo (SAE 8620) and the following Jominy 
hardenability criteria were examined: 
1. Jominy distance to [hardness at J 1.25 mm-25 HV]. 
2. Jominy distance to 350 HV, i.e. near the inflexion in the hardenability curve. 
3. Hardness at J 9.8 mm, equivalent to the cooling rate at the centre of an oil- 
quenched, 28 mm bar. 
As illustrated in Figure 3.15, each of these criteria reaches a maximum at a 
soluble boron content of about 0.0007%. Further additions produce a reduction 
in hardenability but a reasonably steady-state condition is achieved at boron 
contents in excess of 0.0015%. A similar pattern of results was also observed by 
Kapadia et al. l~ and, in commercial practice, it is usual to aim for soluble boron 
contents of 0.002-0.003%, accepting a slight loss in hardenability in favour of 
a consistent hardenability effect. 

Engineering steels 
215 
15- 
.9o "~ I 
= e.= _ 
9 - 
~ 
o 
251-- ,*, 
,g 
20 
,o 
ci 
9 
N 
5 
500 
, 
a e  
a 
I 
I 
I_ 
I 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Soluble boron (10-3%) 
Figure 3.15 Effect of boron on hardenability (After Llewellyn and CooP) 
800 
700 
600 
400 
300 
200 
0.81% C 
0.70% C 
0.60% C 
0.21% C 
~
~
,
,
,
-
~
~
~
 
0.490/o c 
/ 
" -  
0.40% C 
/ 
0.31% C 
I., ] 
,_ I .... I 
I 
I .... 1 
I.,.I 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
Distance from quenched end (mm) 
Figure 3.16 Effect of carbon on hardenability of SALE 86B00 steels (After Llewellyn and 
CooP) 

216 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
The interaction between boron and carbon was also investigated in SAE 8600 
base steels and the Jominy hardenability curves for boron-free and boron-bearing 
versions of these steels are shown in Figures 3.13 and 3.16. These figures also 
indicate the formation of retained austenite at carbon contents in excess of 0.8%. 
However, the interaction between boron and carbon is illustrated in Figure 3.17 
where the hardenability criteria examined are the Jominy distances which coin- 
cide with decreases in hardness of 50, 100 and 125 HV below that obtained 
at the quenched end of the specimen (Hmax). This figure shows that boron 
produces a marked increase in hardenability at a carbon content of 0.2% but 
the effect is steadily reduced to zero as the carbon content is increased to a 
level of 0.53-0.54%. Above this carbon level, boron has a detrimental effect on 
hardenability. 
The above type of experiment was also carried out in base steels containing 
0.8% Mn and the results are summarized in Figure 3.18. In this case, the 
efficiency of boron as a hardenability agent is expressed by means of a 
multiplying factor B F, calculated on the basis of: 
BF= hardenability of (base steel + boron) 
hardenability of base steel 
Thus the effect of boron on hardenability is again reduced with increase in carbon 
content but, in this particular base composition (0.8% Mn), reaches a value of 
zero (BF = 1.0) at a carbon content of about 0.85%. 
From the above data, it is evident that the boron effect varies not only with 
carbon content but also with the alloy content of the base steel. Llewellyn and 
Cook have proposed that the critical carbon content may well correspond to the 
eutectoid level for the compositions concerned and that bainite might be promoted 
at the expense of martensite in boron-treated, hyper-eutectoid steels. 
50"8 f Hmax -i 25 HV 
2///~ 
38.1 
25.4 
ree~.._........~~. 
~, 12.7 l--B-f 
53 
E 
0 / 
= 
= 
= 
J l 
l 
= 
E 
"' 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
| 
50.8 I"- Hmax -100 HV 
r 
25.4 
B 
>" 12.7 
B-fr 
53 
.r 
E o 
0t. 
,'F'- 
I 
I 
I i 
I 
I 
50.8 I'- Hmax -50 HV 
38.1 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
Carbon (%) 
Figure 3.17 Effect of boron on hardenability at various carbon levels (After Llewellyn 
and Cook 6) 

Engineering steels 217 
4.0 
3.5 
3.0 
2.5 
E" 
t,,,, 
"~ 2.0 
C 
2 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
o 90% martenslte 
9 80% martenslte 
o 50% martensite 
- 
% 
g\s 
r{t 
I 
I 
_ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
,,I,, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I I 
I 
I 
0 
0.1 0.2 o.a" 0.4 o.s 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 
Carbon (%) 
Figure 3.18 Effect of carbon on boron multiplying factor (After LleweUyn and Cook s) 
A consequence of the above effect is that the case hardenability of a carburized 
boron-treated steel is lower than that of a boron-free steel of comparable core 
hardenability. However, the limiting section sizes that will provide adequate case 
depths are probably well in excess of those that present a problem with regard 
to core hardenability. 
Tempering resistance 
Although the objective of quenching a steel is generally to produce a martensitic 
structure of high strength, steels are rarely put into service in the as-quenched 
condition because this represents a state of high stress, low toughness and poor 
ductility. After quenching, components are therefore tempered at an elevated 

218 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
temperature in order to obtain a better combination of properties. In carburized 
gears, the tempering treatment might be carried out at a temperature as low as 
180~ 
the purpose being to achieve relief of internal stresses without causing 
any significant softening in either the case or core of the components. On the 
other hand, medium-carbon steels containing about 0.4% C might be tempered 
at temperatures up to 650~ which results in a significant decrease in strength 
compared with the as-quenched condition but which is necessary in order to 
produce adequate toughness and ductility. 
The mechanism of tempering involves the partial degeneration of martensite 
via the diffusion of carbon atoms out of solid solution to form fine carbides. If 
the tempering treatments are carried out at sufficiently high temperatures for long 
periods, then the breakdown of martensite can be complete, the microstructure 
consisting of spheroidized carbide in a matrix of ferrite. However, treatments that 
are carried out to achieve this type of microstructure would be termed annealing 
rather than tempering. 
Alloying elements affect the tempering process by retarding or suppressing the 
formation of Fe3C, either by stabilizing the e-carbide (Fe2.4C) which is formed 
initially in the breakdown of martensite or by forming carbides that are more 
stable and grow more slowly than Fe3C. Alloying elements therefore provide 
the opportunity of tempering at higher temperatures in order to obtain a higher 
ductility for a given strength level. Alternatively, improved tempering resistance 
might be employed to allow a component to operate at a higher temperature 
without softening. 
Smallman ~l has produced the information given in Table 3.1 on the effect 
of alloying elements on tempering. In this table, the negative value ascribed to 
carbon indicates an acceleration in the tempering process which is due presumably 
to the increased supersaturation/driving force effect. 
Work by Grange and Baughman 12 established the following rank order of 
potency in promoting tempering resistance: 
Vanadium 
Molybdenum 
Chromium 
decreasing effect 
Manganese 
Silicon 
Copper 
Nickel 
Thus there is broad agreement between the two sets of data, although Smallman 
indicates a relatively higher effect for silicon. 
Although alloying elements such as vanadium and molybdenum are effective 
in promoting both hardenability and tempering resistance, they are expensive 
and the design of composition in engineering steels is dictated as much by costs 
as property requirements. Thus hardenability is achieved most cheaply through 
additions of manganese, chromium and boron but with little contribution to 
tempering resistance. However, such a condition may be perfectly acceptable 
in a case-carburized component where the tempering treatment is carried out 
at a low temperature. On the other hand, when the property requirements or 

Engineering steels 219 
Table 3.1 
Element 
Retardation in tempering per 1% 
addition 
C 
-40 
Co 
8 
Cr 
0 
Mn 
8 
Mo 
17 
Ni 
8 
Si 
20 
V 
30 
W 
10 
operating conditions dictate the use of high tempering temperatures, resort is 
made to molybdenum and vanadium additions, but at relatively modest levels. 
At levels greater than about 1%, molybdenum induces a secondary hardening 
reaction. 
In addition to its effect on tempering resistance, molybdenum is also added 
to steels to suppress temper embrittlement. This involves the co-segregation of 
alloying elements such as manganese and silicon and impurity elements such 
as antimony, arsenic, tin and phosphorus to the prior austenite grain bound- 
aries in steels with bainitic or martensitic microstructures. Temper embrittlement 
occurs during exposure in the temperature range 325-575"C, either from oper- 
ating within this range or by slow cooling through the range from a higher 
tempering temperature. This topic will be discussed further when dealing with 
Steels for steam power turbines, later in this chapter. 
Whereas nickel is a well known alloying element in the context of engineering 
steels, it is expensive and not very effective in enhancing either hardenability or 
tempering resistance. However, it is perceived to be a ferfite strengthener and is 
used in engineering steels in order to promote toughness. 
Surface-hardening treatments 
Case carburizing 
Case carburizing involves the diffusion of carbon into the surface layers of a low- 
carbon steel by heating it in contact with a carbonaceous material. The objective 
is to produce a hard, wear-resistant case with a high resistance to both bending 
and contact fatigue, whilst still maintaining the toughness and ductility of the low- 
carbon core. Carburizing is carried out at temperatures in the range 825-925"C 
in solid, liquid or gaseous media but, in each treatment, the transport of carbon 
from the carburizing medium takes place via the gaseous state, usually CO. 
Carburizing in a solid, granular medium, such as charcoal, is termed pack 
carburizing and has been practised since ancient times. However, whereas the 
early treatments relied solely on the reaction between charcoal and atmospheric 
oxygen for the generation of CO2 and CO, energizers such as sodium or barium 
carbonate are now added to the carburizing compound. During the heating-up 

220 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
period, the energizer breaks down to form CO2 which then reacts with carbon in 
the charcoal to form CO: 
BaCO3 -, BaO + CO2 
(1) 
CO2 + C -, 2CO 
(2) 
In turn, the CO reacts at the steel surface to form atomic carbon which defuses 
rapidly into the austenitic structure: 
2CO ~ C + CO2 
(3) 
The CO2 produced in this reaction then reacts with charcoal, reproducing reac- 
tion (2), and the cycle is repeated. 
Pack carburizing is generally carded out at a temperature of 925~ 
and a 
case depth of about 1.5 nun can be obtained after carburizing for eight hours 
at this temperature. After this treatment, the component is removed from the 
carburizing compound and heat treated by various forms of quenching which 
will be described later. 
Carbudzing in liquid media generally takes place in molten salts (salt bath 
carburizing) in which the active constituent is sodium cyanide (NaCN), potassium 
cyanide (KCN) or calcium cyanide Ca(CN)2. Oxygen is available at the salt 
bath-atmosphere interface and carburizing again takes place via the generation 
of CO. However, nitrogen is also liberated from the cyanides and diffuses into 
the steel. The amount of carbon and nitrogen absorbed by the steel is related 
to the temperature and cyanide content of the bath. With a NaCN content of 
50%, the surface concentrations of carbon and nitrogen are of the order of 0.9% 
and 0.2% respectively, after treatments involving 289 hours at 900~ 
However, 
salt bath carburizing is mainly used for small parts and treatments for 89 hour 
produce a case depth of about 0.25 mm. 
Gas carburizing is carded out in hydrocarbon gases such as propane (C3H8) 
or butane (C4HI0) in sealed furnaces at temperatures of about 925~ 
Major 
strides have been made in the control technology of the process and, since the 
1950s, gas carbudzing has become the most important method of case hardening. 
During the heating-up stage, the component is surrounded by an inert or reducing 
atmosphere. This atmosphere is referred to as the carrier gas, which is commonly 
an endothermic gas but may also be nitrogen based. On reaching the carburizing 
temperature, the furnace atmosphere is enriched to the required carbon level 
(carbon potential) by the addition of hydrocarbons which generate CO and carbon 
is absorbed at the surface of the steel. The carbon potential is controlled by 
varying the ratio of hydrocarbon to carder gas but a surface carbon content of 
0.8-0.9% is generally employed. A four-hour treatment at 925~ will produce a 
case depth of about 1.25 ram. 
Following the carburizing operation, the components are subjected to hardening 
heat treatments, involving different forms of quenching: 
9 Direct quenching - quenching directly from the carbudzing temperature 
9 Single quenching- allowing the component to cool to a temperature of about 
840~ from the carburizing temperature before quenching 

Engineering steels 221 
9 Reheat quenching- cooling to room temperature and then reheating to a 
temperature of about 840"C before quenching 
9 Double reheat quenching- reheating first to about 900"C and quenching to 
produce a fine-grained core, followed by a second quenching treatment from 
a lower temperature, such as 800"C, in order to produce a fine-grained case 
region. 
In case carburizing, single quenching is generally preferred to direct quenching 
because it reduces the thermal gradients in the steel, thereby minimizing 
dimensional movement or distortion. This topic will be discussed in the next 
section. Reheat quenching is employed in pack carburizing and also in gas 
carburizing if machining operations must be carried out before the final hardening 
treatment. Double reheat quenching is now virtually obsolete since satisfactory 
grain refinement can now be obtained in the core and case of modem fine-grained 
steels in the shorter quenching practices. 
The type of quenching medium employed, e.g. oil or polymer, depends on the 
mechanical properties required but, as illustrated shortly, the quenching rate may 
have to be controlled very carefully in order to minimize dimensional move- 
ment. Following the quenching operation, carburized components are generally 
tempered in the range 150-200"C for periods of 2-10 hours in order to produce 
some stress relief in the high-carbon martensitic case. 
Carburizing is used extensively in the automotive industry for the treatment 
of shafts and gears. It is also an important process in the production of large 
bearings in which the required level of hardness and fatigue resistance cannot be 
achieved in through-hardening grades such as 1.0% C 1.5% Cr (SAE 52100). 
Nitriding 
As its name suggests, nitriding involves the introduction of nitrogen into the 
surface of a steel but, unlike carburizing, it is carried out in the ferritic state 
at temperatures of the order of 500-575"C. However, like carburizing, it can 
be performed in solid, liquid or gaseous media but the most common is that 
involving ammonia gas (gas nitriding) which dissociates to form nitrogen and 
hydrogen: 
2NH3 ~ 2N + 3H2 
Nascent, atomic nitrogen diffuses into the steel, forming nitrides in the surface 
region. 
In salt bath nitriding, mixtures of NaCN and KCN are employed and 
the holding times are rarely longer than two hours, compared to periods of 
10-100 hours in gas nitriding. A variation of salt bath nitriding is the Sulfinuz 
process which involves the addition of sodium sulphide (Na2S) to the bath. This 
results in the absorption of sulphur into the steel as well as the introduction of 
carbon and nitrogen which is characteristic of conventional salt bath nitriding. The 
presence of sulphur in the surface of the component improves the anti-frictional 
behaviour and also the corrosion resistance of the steel. 
Nitriding is carried out on steels containing strong nitride-forming elements 
such as AI, Cr and V and in BS 970 (Wrought steels for mechanical and allied 

222 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 3.2 
Grade 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
Cr% 
Mo% 
V% 
Al% 
709M40 
0.4 
0.25 
0.85 
1.05 
0.3 
722M24 
0.24 
0.25 
0.55 
3.25 
0.55 
897M39 
0.39 
0.25 
0.55 
3.25 
0.95 
905M39 
0.39 
0.25 
0.55 
1.6 
0.2 
0.2 
1.1 
purposes), the grades of steel shown in the Table 3.2 are identified specifically 
as being suitable for nitriding. 
Given the low temperature involved in the process, nitriding can be carded 
out after the conventional hardening and tempering treatments have been applied 
to through-hardened steels. 
Carbonitriding (nitro-carburizing) 
Carbonitriding can be regarded as a variant of gas carburizing in which both 
carbon and nitrogen are introduced into the steel surface. This is achieved by 
the introduction of ammonia gas into the carburizing atmosphere which cracks, 
liberating nascent nitrogen. In some respects, the term carbonitriding may be 
misleading in that it is completely different from the nitriding process that takes 
place at low temperatures in the ferritic state and the term nitro-carburizing 
might be more appropriate. However, the process is carded out at temperatures 
of the order of 870"C and the case depths are lower than those produced by gas 
carbudzing, e.g. a four-hour carbonitriding treatment at this temperature produces 
a case depth of about 0.75 mm. 
The introduction of nitrogen produces a significant increase in the hardenability 
of the case region such that high surface hardness levels can be produced in steels 
of relatively low alloy content. 
Induction hardening 
In the processes described above, the hardness of the surface is increased by 
modifying the chemical composition of this region. In induction hardening, the 
composition of the material is unchanged but the surface is hardened by selective 
heat treatment. This is achieved by induction heating but a less controlled effect 
can be produced by the direct impingement of an oxy-acetylene torch in the 
process of flame hardening. 
This process is generally applied to steels containing 0.30-0.50% C which give 
hardness values in the range 50-60 HRC. The steels may be C-Mn or low-alloy 
grades and induction hardening is carded out in the normalized or quenched and 
tempered condition, depending upon the section size or the properties required 
in the core. 
Relative merits of surface treatments 
In presenting a detailed review of gas carburizing, Parrish and Harper la examined 
the benefits of this process in relation to other surface-hardening treatments such 

Engineering steels 223 
as nitriding and induction hardening. Their main findings can be summarized as 
follows: 
9 Carburizing- capable of producing a wide range of case depths and core 
strengths and providing good resistance to bending and contact fatigue. The 
main drawback of the process is the distortion that occurs due to the thermal 
gradients induced by quenching from the austenitic range. 
9 Nitriding - produces relatively shallow hardening, e.g. a highly alloyed grade 
such as 897M39 (388 % Cr-Mo-V) has an effective case depth (at 500 HV) of 
only 0.35 mm after nitriding for 80 hours. However, nitriding is a distortion- 
free process that produces a surface which is resistant to scuffing and adhesive 
wear. 
9 Induction hardening - capable of producing a wide range of case depths using 
a range of compositions. Capable of producing similar contact fatigue and wear 
resistance to case carburizing and the process produces little distortion. 
Distortion in case-carburized components 
When transformable steels are heat treated, the volume changes that occur 
during heating and cooling (quenching) are not completely complementary and 
a component will exhibit a small change in shape compared with its original, 
pre-heat-treated condition. The term distortion is widely used to describe such 
changes in shape and represents a significant problem in the production of 
precision engineering components such as automotive gears. In such components, 
slight inaccuracies in shape lead to irregular tooth contact patterns which can 
result in problems ranging from a high level of noise in a gearbox or back axle 
to an overload situation which produces premature fatigue failure. The effect 
is therefore very important commercially but, given that dimensional change is 
inevitable under fast-cooling conditions, the approach to the problem is one of 
control and consistency of response rather than elimination. 
In the mid-1960s, Murray n4 published work on the effects of composition on 
distortion in carburizing steels, using the Navy C specimen. This consisted of 
a split ring in which the dimensional change is measured by the degree of gap 
opening after heat treatment. Whereas some interesting results were obtained in 
both the UK and United States with this specimen, it had two major limitations: 
1. The unrestrained nature of the split ring could result in gap openings of up 
to 1.2 mm which were very much larger than the dimensional changes that 
occur in automotive gears. 
2. The effective section size of the specimen was small which made it unsuitable 
for the investigation of steels with medium to high hardenability. 
Llewellyn and Cook n5 therefore designed a new specimen for the investigation 
of distortion which was washer-shaped with an outer diameter (OD) of 132 mm, 
bore diameter (BD) of 44 mm and a thickness (T) of 22 mm. These dimensions 
represented a compromise between the section size that was considered typical 
of a medium-size truck gear and the limiting size of specimen that could be 

224 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
produced from 50 kg experimental casts of steel. The specimens were carburized 
at 925"C for 589 hours at a carbon potential of 0.8%, furnace cooled to 840"C 
and then cooled at various rates to room temperature. 
It was shown that hardenability has a marked effect on dimensional change, 
as illustrated in experimental casts of steel containing 1-3% Cr. The Jominy 
hardenability curves for these steels are shown in Figure 3.19 and the dimen- 
sional changes that occurred on oil quenching are illustrated in Figure 3.20. 
As the hardenability of the steels is increased, progressive contractions occur 
in the OD and B D and these are compensated by increases in thickness. This 
pattern of results was also repeated in other series of steels of different alloy 
content. As the alloy content and hardenability are increased, the transformation 
temperatures are depressed from those involving upper bainite to lower bainite 
and, ultimately, martensite. With regard to distortion, the consequence of this 
progression is the increasing volume change on transformation. Therefore, the 
progressively greater movement that results from increasing hardenability is asso- 
ciated with the progressive increase in volume on transformation. However, such 
an explanation does not address the reason for the irregular changes in shape that 
occur in these specimens but these are obviously associated with the complex 
stress situation that arises from the differential cooling rates that take place in a 
disc or component of limited symmetry. 
One departure from the general trend between hardenability and distortion was 
observed in the case of boron-treated steels which behaved in an entirely different 
manner from boron-free steels of comparable hardenability. A satisfactory expla- 
nation for the unique behaviour of boron steels has not been proposed but they 
differ from boron-free steels in the following respects: 
1. The case hardenability of a boron steel is lower than that of a boron-free steel 
of the same core hardenability. 
2. Boron-treated steels will tend to have a higher Ms-Mf transformation range 
than boron-free steels of comparable hardenability. 
50 r'- 
3.03% Cr 
40 
2.55% Cr 
~ 
I 
\ 
n- 
2.05% Cr 
-1- 
\ 
~__ 
30 
1.03% Cr 1.50% Cr 
Figure 3.19 
20 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
---7 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Distance from quenched end (mm) 
Effect of chromium on Jominy hardenability (After Lleweilyn and Cook 15) 

Engineering steels 
225 
0.04 
0.02 
0 
~ 
, -0.02 
-0.04 
c3 -0.06 
O -O.08 
-0.10 
-0.12 
-0.14 
o Centre 
o Edge 
z Bore 
.., 
-0.02 
- 
A 
-0.04 
- 
E -0.06 
- 
c~ -0.08 - 
m -0.10 - 
<3 
-0.12 - 
-0.14 
- 
-0.16 
0.12 
0.10 
E 
0.08 
o.oe 
0.04 
0.02 
0 
0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
% Cr 
0.01 
-0.0053 
K-'"r-"- 
, 
, 
[ 
:;1 
o.o243 t / 
o.oo51 
( 
0.0114 
-0.0109 
~------- 
0.0o86 ~!o.0092 ~/~, ..... 
<b)l 
0.o174;i 
o.ooo~ i1 -~176 
~___...'_- 
~,,'0.0471"-,~0.0595 
1 
.
.
.
.
 
0.0359 
"~,, 
~ 
I 
...... 
( o o~ "~=ooeo3 
, 
,i] 
9 
S' 
9 0.062 (0.0769 
-0.04751 
~O.005i/! 
l 
! 
I 
! o13'1" 
I-o 
(e) 
-0.0699 z 
r 
" 
t 
~.055 
Figure 3.20 
Effect of chromium on dimensional change. Left top: outer diameter change. 
Left centre: bore diameter change. Left bottom: thickness change. Right: (a) 1.03% Cr; 
(b) 1.5% Cr; (c) 2.05% Cr; (d) 2.55% Cr; (e) 3.03% Cr (After Llewellyn and Cook tS) 
Llewellyn and Cook showed that carburizing reduces the amount of movement 
that occurs in low-alloy/low-hardenability steels and related the effect to the 
depression of the Ms-Mf transformation range in the case-carburized region of a 
component. It was observed that carburizing had a smaller effect on dimensional 
change in highly alloyed steels and this may be related to the fact that these 
steels have low transformation ranges. 
Cooling rate from the austenitic range was shown to have a dramatic effect 
on dimensional movement and water quenching can virtually eliminate the 
'l'hble 3.3 
Grade 
Steels used to investigate the effect of quenching rate on distortion 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
Cr 
Mo 
Ni 
Al 
B 
Ti 
637H17 (En 352) 0.18 0.28 0.81 0.011 0.037 0.92 0.1 
1.1 
- 
- 
- 
822H17 (En 355) 0.18 0.34 0.6 
0.025 0.016 1.4,7 0.2 
2 
0.056 
- 
- 
835H15 (En 39B) 0.14, 0.35 0.42 0.012 0.018 1.13 0.21 3.9 
0.03 
- 
- 
CM60 
0.14 0.26 0.98 0.008 0.049 0.31 0.12 0.15 0.014 0.003 
ND ~ 
CM80 
0.19 0.35 1.37 0.009 0.045 0.28 0.12 0.17 0.056 0.003 0.051 
aND = not determined. 

226 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
influence of other important factors such as carbudzing treatment and alloy 
content/hardenability. This was illustrated in samples of commercial steels which 
were air cooled, slow oil quenched, fast oil quenched and water quenched, 
following a carburizing treatment at 925~ and furnace cooling to 840~ 
The 
compositions of these steels are given in Table 3.3 and the hardenability curves 
are shown in Figure 3.21. The mean dimensional changes that took place after 
heat treatment are illustrated in Figure 3.22. In this figure, the various quenching 
treatments are shown in terms of the H value, an expression of the severity of 
the quenching rate. After air cooling, relatively little movement occurs in any of 
the steels, but as the quenching rate is increased to an H value of 0.8, most of 
the steels exhibit a significant decrease in OD and B D and a complementary 
increase in thickness. However, when the specimens are water quenched, a 
marked increase takes place in OD and B D and, despite the marked variation in 
hardenability, each of the steels tends to exhibit similar levels of movement. 
From the foregoing remarks, it can be appreciated that a number of measures 
can be taken to reduce or control the degree of distortion that occurs in carburized 
components: 
1. In some cases, quenching presses can be used to restrain the amount of move- 
ment that occurs. 
2. Given the marked effect of hardenability, automotive manufacturers in partic- 
ular will generally order steels to restricted hardenability bands, i.e. to only a 
half or even a third of the band width of the standard specification. This will 
minimize the variation in distortion such that the changes can be predicted 
and accommodated in the pre-heat treatment geometry. 
3. The major effect of cooling rate is widely recognized in the automotive 
industry. Special quenching oils or warm oils are sometimes used in order to 
reduce temperature gradients during quenching, thereby reducing the degree 
of irregular dimensional change. 
50 r- 
822H17 (En355) 
45 
835H15 (En39B) 
40 
fo 
30 
25 ~-- CM60 f 
"~,,ji 
~ 
637H17 (En352) 
~ = ~ , ~ _  
20 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
I 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
Distance from quenched end (mm) 
Figure 3.21 Jominy hardenability of commercial steels (After Llewellyn and Cook ns) 

Engineering steels 227 
+0.4 
E 
E +0.3 
~+0.2 
C 
0 
C 
.~_ +0.1 
c- 
O 
-0.1 
-0.2 
(a) 
,,=. 
o CM80 
& CM60 
._ o637H17 (En352) 
9 835H15 (En39B) 
9 822H17 (En355) 
.,.=,, 
-- 
13 
ted 
Water 
t ~01 t quench t quenching oll t quench 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 
(b) 
,,,,, 
Water 
cool ~ quench t quenching 011 t quench 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 
H value for quench 
C 
e,,. 
tJ 
.o 
09 
r 
| 
.E_ 
"o -0.1 
p. 
=[ 
0.2[- (c) 
0.1~ ,,/~ 
-0.2 
~b 
Air 
Slow oll Accelerated Water 
t cool ~quench tqu enching ~ lit quench I , 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 
H value for quench 
Figure 3.22 Effect of quenching rate on mean dimensional change in (a) outer diameter, 
(b) bore diameter and (c) middle thickness (After Llewellyn and Cook 15) 
Standard specifications 
The major UK standard for engineering steels is BS 970: Part 1' 1996 Wrought 
steels for mechanical and allied engineering purposes. It deals with steels of the 
following type in the form of blooms, billets, slabs, bars, rods and forgings" 

228 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
9 As-rolled, as-rolled and softened, and micro-alloyed C and CMn steels 
(Section 2). 
9 Through hardening boron steels (Section 3). 
9 Case hardening steels (Section 4). 
9 Stainless and heat resisting steels (Section 5). 
Acknowledging that the standard contains a large number of grades, this edition 
of BS 970 has continued the practice of separating the steels into two categories. 
Category 1 steels are the recommended series of steels for use in new designs and 
in established designs whenever possible and are printed throughout the standard 
in normal (upright) type. Category 2 steels make up the remainder and are shown 
in italic (sloping) type. 
The old En numbering system which became established after the Second 
World War was withdrawn some years ago and replaced by a logical, if complex, 
system which is outlined below. 
In all designations, apart from those for stainless steels, the last two digits 
indicate the mean of the specified carbon content. 
Each designation carries a letter which defines the supply requirements: 
. M- for steels to specified mechanical properties 
. H - for supply to hardenability requirements 
9 A - when supplied only to a specified analysis 
In carbon and carbon - manganese steels, the first three digits indicate the mean 
of the manganese content and examples are shown in Table 3.4. 
Free-cutting steels are now included in BS 970: Part 3:1991 Bright bars for 
general engineering purposes. In these grades, the first three digits are in the 
range 200 to 240 and the second and third digits indicate the minimum or mean 
of the sulphur content multiplied by 100 (Table 3.5). 
In the case of stainless steels, the designations reflect the well established AISI 
system. Thus the first three digits are in the 300 or 400 ranges, representing the 
Table 3.4 
Grade 
C% 
Mn% 
Supplied to 
060A62 
0.6-0.65 
0.5-0.7 
Analysis only 
080H46 
0.43-0.5 
0.6-1 
Hardenability requirements 
150M36 
0.32-0.4 
1.3-1.7 
Mechanical properties 
Table 3.5 
Grade 
C% 
Mn% 
S% 
Supplied to 
226M44 
0.4-0.48 
1.3-1.7 
0.22-0.3 
Mechanical properties 

Engineering steels 229 
Table 3.6 
Grade 
C% 
420S29 
0.14-0.2 
420S37 
0.2-0.28 
431S29 
0.12-0.2 
304S 15 
0.06 max. 
310S31 
0.15 max. 
Cr% 
Ni% 
.
.
.
.
 
11.5-13.5 
12-14 
15-18 
2-3 
17.5-19 
8-11 
24-26 
19-22 
austenitic and martensitic/ferritic grades respectively. The interventing letter S 
also signifies a stainless steel but the last two digits, chosen arbitrarily in the 
range 11 to 99, indicate variants within the main type. Examples are shown in 
Table 3.6. 
Quenched and tempered grades are no longer included in BS 970, following 
the publication of the following European standards: 
BS EN 10083-1: 1991 Quenched and tempered steels (special steels) 
BS EN 10083-2:1991 
Quenched and tempered steels (unalloyed 
quality steels) 
In the former, a useful comparison is provided of grades in the new European 
standard and equivalent grades in previous national standards. This information 
is shown in Table 3.7. 
For many years, BS 970 adopted a system whereby a single letter was used 
to specify a particular range of tensile strength in the quenched and tempered 
condition. This system is still widely used in the UK and the full range of letters 
and the associated tensile ranges are shown in Table 3.8. 
Former versions of BS 970: Part 1 contained an appendix which provided a 
guide to the selection of Category 1 through hardening steels, based on tensile 
strength and limiting ruling section. This guide was prepared for applications 
where the most important criterion was the level of mechanical properties required 
in the finished part and with the aim of assisting in the selection of the most 
cost-effective grade for a given tensile strength and section size. Although many 
of the steel designations are now obsolete with the introduction of European 
standards, it was considered worthwhile to maintain this information in the 
present text and this is shown in Table 3.9. The first column in this table (Heat 
treatment condition) lists the various ranges of tensile strength according to the 
lettering system P-Z defined above. Along each row of the table, the ruling 
section increases and the various grades of steel that will satisfy the required 
combination of tensile strength and section size are identified. Thus a simple 
C-Mn steel (080M30) is recommended for an application calling for a tensile 
strength of 625-775 N/mm 2 (Q condition) in small section sizes. On the other 
hand, a 2.5% Ni-Cr-Mo steel (826M40) is recommended when a tensile strength 
of 1075-1225 N/mm 2 (W condition) is required in section sizes greater than 
150 ram. 

Table 3.7 
Comparison of steel grades spec@ed in BS EN 10083-1: 1991, I S 0  683-1 and other steel grades previously standardized 
nationally 
~~~ 
~~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
~ 
~~ 
EN 10083-1 
IS0 683-1: 
Germuny' 
Finland 
United 
France' 
Sweden 
Spain 
1987' 
Kingdom' 
ss 
Alpha-numeric Material 
steel 
Name 
Number 
Name 
number 
2 c 22 
3 c 22 
2 c 55 
3 C 25 
2 C 30 
3 C 30 
2 c 35 
3 c 35 
2 c 4 0  
3 c 4 0  
2 c 45 
3 c 45 
2 c 50 
3 c 50 
2 c 55 
3 c 55 
2 c 6 0  
3 c 6 0  
28 Mn 6 
38 Cr 2 
38 CrS 2 
46 Cr 2 
46CrS2 
- - 
(C 25 E4) 
(C 25 M2) 
(C 30 E4) 
(C 30 M2) 
(C 35 E4) 
(C 35 M2) 
(C 40 E4) 
(C 40 M2) 
(C 45 E4) 
(C 45 M2) 
(C 50 E4) 
(C 50 M2) 
(C 55 E4) 
(C 55 M2) 
(C 60 E4) 
(C 60 M2) 
(28 Mn 6) 
- - - - 
(ck 22) 
(Cm 22) 
ck25 
Cm 25 
ck 30 
Cm 30 
ck 35 
Cm 35 
Ck 40 
Cm 40 
Ck 45 
Cm 45 
ck 50 
Cm 50 
ck 55 
Cm 55 
ck60 
Cm 60 
28 Mn 6 
38 Cr 2 
38 CrS 2 
46 Cr 2 
46 CrS 2 
(1.1 15 1) 
(1.1 149) 
1.1158 
1.1163 
1.1178 
1.1179 
1.1181 
1.1180 
1.1 186 
1.1189 
1.1191 
1.1201 
1.1206 
1.1241 
1.1203 
1.1209 
1.1221 
1.1223 
1.1170 
1.7003 
1.7023 
1.7006 
1.7025 
(070M20) 
(070M26) 
(080M30) 
(080M36) 
(080M40) 
(080M46) 
(08OMSO) 
(070M55) 
(070M60) 
(150M19) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- - - - 
[XC 181 
[XC 18 u] 
[Xc 251 
[XC 25 u] 
[XC 321 
[XC 32 u] 
[XC 38 H 11 
[XC 38 H 1 u] 
[XC 42 H 11 
[XC 42 H 1 u] 
[XC 48 H 11 
[XC 48 H 1 u] 
- - 
[XC 55 H 11 
[XC 55 H 1 u] 
- 
- 
- 
(38 C 2) 
(38 C 2 u) 
- - 
- - 
C25K 
C25K-1 - - 
C35K 
C35K-1 - - 
C45K 
C45K-1 - - 
C55K 
C55K-1 - - - - - - 
- 
- - 
F1120 
F1125(1) 
- - 
F1130 
F1135( 1) 
- - 
F1140 
F1145( 1) 
- - 
F1150 
F1155( 1) 
- - - - - - - 

34Cr4 
34 CrS 4 
37 Cr 4 
37 crs 4 
41 Cr4 
41 CrS 4 
25 CrMo 4 
25 CrMoS 4 
34 CrMo 4 
34 CrMoS 4 
42 CrMo 4 
42 CrMoS 4 
50 CrMo 4 
36 CrNiMo 4 
34 CrNiMo 6 
30 CrNiMo 8 
36 NiCrMo 16 
51 CrV 4 
34 Cr 4 
34 CrS 4 
37 Cr 3 
37 crs 4 
41 Cr4 
41 CrS 4 
25 CrMo 4 
25 CrMoS 4 
34 CrMo 4 
34 CrMoS 4 
42 CrMo 4 
42 CrMoS 4 
50 CrMo 4 
36 CrNiMo 4 
(36 CrNiMo 6) 
(31 CrNiMo 8) 
[51 CrV 41 
- 
34 Cr 4 
34 CrS 4 
37 Cr 4 
37 CIS 4 
41 Cr 4 
41 CrS 4 
25 CrMo 4 
25 CrMoS 4 
34 CrMo 4 
34 CrMoS 4 
42 CrMo 4 
42 CrMoS 4 
50 CrMo 4 
36 CrNiMo 4 
(34 CrNiMo 6) 
30 CrNiMo 8 
5OCrV4 
- 
1.7033 
1.7037 
1.7034 
1.7038 
1.7035 
1.7039 
1.7218 
1.7213 
1.7220 
I .7226 
1.7225 
1.7227 
1.7228 
1.6511 
(1.6582) 
1.6580 
1.8159 
- 
- - 
- - 
- - 
25 CrMo 4 
34 CrMo 4 
42 CrMo 4 
- 
- 
- - 
- 
34 CrNiMo 6 
- - - 
(530M32) 
(530M36) 
(530M40) 
(708M25) 
(708M32) 
(708M40) 
(708M50) 
(817M37) 
(817M40) 
[823M30] 
[835M30] 
[735A50] 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(32 C 4) 
(32 C 4 u) 
(38 C 4) 
(38 C 4 u) 
42 C 4 
4 2 C 4 u  
25CD4 
25CD4u 
(34 CD 4) 
(34CD3u) 
42 CD 4 
42CD4u 
- 
- - 
30 CND 8 
35 NCD 16 
(50 CV 4) 
- - 
38 Cr4 
38 Cr4-1 
42 Cr4 
42 Cr4-1 - - - 
- 
40 CrMd 
40 CrMo4-1 
- - - - 
- 
51 CrV4 
- - 
F1201 
F1206(1) 
F1202 
F1207( 1) 
- 
- - 
- 
F1252 
F1257(1) 
- - - - - 
F1430 
Notes: 
'If a steel grade is given in round brackets, this means that the chemical composition differs only slightly from EN 10083-1. If it is given in squarc brackets, this 
means that greater differences exist in the chemical composition compared with EN 10083-1. If there are no brackets around the steel grade, this means that there are 
practically no differences in the chemical composition compared with EN 10083-1. 
Afkt BS EN 10083-1: 1991. 

232 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 3.8 
Reference 
Tensile strength 
symbol 
(N/mm 2) 
P 
550-700 
Q 
625-775 
R 
700-850 
S 
775-925 
T 
850-1000 
U 
925-1075 
V 
1000-1150 
W 
1075 - 1225 
X 
1150-1300 
Y 
1225-1375 
Z 
1550 min. 
Steel prices 
Because of the very large number of steel grades covered by BS 970, one can only 
be very selective in attempting to provide an introduction to the cost structure of 
engineering steels. Purely on an arbitrary basis, the selection was narrowed down 
to some of the grades in the 19-29 mm ruling selection column in the Category 
1 steels tabulation (Table 3.9). However, this selection was augmented by one 
further grade, namely 826M40, which is recommended for the attainment of the 
highest strength (1075-1225 N/mm 2) in the largest ruling section (150-250 mm) 
in this table. 
The prices of the six steels concerned, in the form of large billets, are shown 
in Figure 3.23. This indicates a steady increase in price which reflects the 
progressive addition of alloying elements such as chromium, molybdenum and 
nickel. 
Machinable steels 
Machining is an important stage in the production of most engineering 
components and, in many automotive transmission parts, machining can account 
for up to 60% of the total production costs. It is not surprising therefore that 
the engineering industries have called for steels with improved and consistent 
levels of machinability, whilst still maintaining the other properties that ensure 
good service performance. The common machining processes include turning, 
milling, grinding, drilling and broaching and several of these operations might 
be carried out on an automatic lathe in the production of a single component. 
Each of these processes differs in terms of the metal cutting action and involves 
different conditions of temperature, strain rate and chip formation. Therefore 
the machining performance of a steel cannot be defined by means of a single 
parameter. 

Table 3.9 Guide to the selection of category 1 through hardening steels 
Heat 
Tensile 
HBrange 
Ruling Section 
treatment 
strength 
condition 
range 
>I3 mm 
>I9 mm 
>29 mm 
>63 mm 
>I00 mm 
>I50 mtn 
4 3  mm 
- 
<I9 mm 
- 
(29 mm 
163 mm 
5100 mm 
1150 mm 5250 mm 
mid)" 
- 
Q 
625-775 
179-229 
MOM30 
212M36' 
R 
700-850 
201-255 
080M36 
212M36' 
226M44' 
S 
775-925 
223-277 
120M36 
080M466 
216M44' 
226MMC 
osoM30 
212M36' 
OSOM40 
216M44' 
226M44' 
120M36 
OSOMSOb 
216M44' 
226M44' 
OSOM36 
212M36' 
120M36 
150M19 
OSOM@ 
216M44' 
226M44' 
135M44 
150M36 
O S O M W  
216M44' 
226M44' 
OSOM40 
150M19 
212M36' 
135M44 
150M36 
OSOM50b 
216M44' 
226M44' 
530M40 
0 7 O M w  
606M36' 
120M36 
135M44 
708M40 
150M36 
OSOM46b 
OsoMsOb 
216M44' 
216M44' 
135M44 
708M40 
708M40 
530M40 
605M36 
07oMssb 
216M44' 
606M36' 
708M40 
709M40 
709M40 
605M36 
continued overleaf 

Table 3.9 
(conrinued) 
~ 
~~ 
~~ 
~ 
Heat 
Tensile 
HB range 
Ruling Section 
treatment 
strength 
condition 
range 
>13 mm 
>19 mm 
>29 mm 
>63 mm 
>lo0 mm 
>150 mm 
(N/mm2)" 
- 
(13 mm 
519 mm 
529 mm 
163 mm 
5100 mm 
5150 mm 
1250 mm 
T 
850- 1ooO 
248-302 
135MUd 
080M50b*d 
2 1 6M44'sd 
226M44'vd 
U 
925-1075 
269-331 
135MMd 
V 
1ooO-1150 
293-352 
708M40 
W 
1075-1225 
311-375 
708M40",' 
605M36 
817MW 
135MMd 
530M40 
708M40 
709M40 
817M40 
817M40 
MOM55b*d 
605M36 
606M36' 
606M36' 
708M40 
708M40 
709M40 
817M40 
720M32 
720M32 
605M36 
605M36 
708M40 
709M40 
817M40 
720M32 
720M32 
826M40 
605M36 
709M40"*c 
817MW 
720M32' 
720M32' 
826MW 
826MW 
817MW 
'1 N / m 2  = 1 MPa 
bNo specified impact pmperties. 
'Free cutting steel. 
dFull mechanical pmperties may not always be obtained by bulk heat treatment but the properties can be achieved by the appropriate heat treatment of die forgings 
and components. 
Loften ordered in the softened condition for machining and subsequent heat treatment. 
After BS 970 Part 1: 1983 

Engineering steels 
235 
0 
r 
r~ o. 
800- 
700 
6OO 
50O 
400 
3OO 
200 
100 
e~ 
i 
I 
I 
l! 
0 
i 
0 
0 
0 
d 
~ 
Z 
7- 
I 
! 
i 
i 
I 
I,... 
.... 
I, 
0 
0 
6 
Z 
r162 
Figure 3.23 Basis prices of engineering steel billets as of 23 September 1996 
However, some of the features that are often invoked as measures of machin- 
ability are: 
s Tool life 
s Production rate (e.g. components/hour) 
s Power consumption 
9 Surface finish of component 
s Chip form 
s Ease of swarf removal 

236 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Following a brief description of machinability testing, the role of free cutting 
additives will be discussed. Attention will then be turned to the composition and 
machining characteristics of: 
1. Low-carbon free cutting steels. 
2. Medium-carbon steels. 
3. Low-alloy steels. 
4. Stainless steels. 
Machinability testing 
Many organizations have developed their own individual test methods for evalu- 
ating machinability and these can range from tests involving tool failure in only a 
few minutes of metal cutting to those simulating commercial practices and lasting 
several hours. However, reproducibility is of absolute importance and, regardless 
of the type of test employed, the cutting conditions such as speed (e.g. peripheral 
bar speed in m/rain), feed (rate of travel of cutting tool in mm/rev) and depth of 
cut (metal removed per cut in ram) must be carefully controlled. 
A widely adopted laboratory test for machinability is the Taylor Tool Life test 
in which the life of the tool is determined at various cutting speeds. As illustrated 
in Figure 3.24, plots of tool life (T) against cutting speed (V) provide a straight 
line giving the equation: 
VT n ---C 
where C and n are constants. 
One particular parameter of tool life which features prominently in machining 
evaluations is V20, the cutting speed that will provide a tool life of 20 minutes. 
However, such short-term tests may not necessarily provide an accurate guide to 
the performance in longer term industrial machining operations. 
Although simple turning tests such as those described above are useful in steel 
development or for quality control purposes, steel users often call for longer 
term tests involving multi-machining operations. Thus up to two tonnes of bright 
drawn bar stock might be consumed over a period of about seven hours in 
tests involving the production of the type of test piece shown in Figure 3.25. 
This involves turning, drilling, plunge cutting and parting operations and the 
cutting rates are adjusted so as to maintain a specific dimensional tolerance in 
the component over a simulated shift period. The machinability rating of a given 
steel sample can then be expressed in terms of components per hour or production 
time per component. 
In each of the laboratory tests for machinability, rigorous attention must be 
given to maintaining standard characteristics in the cutting tools in terms of grade, 
hardness and tool geometry. 
Role of free cutting additives 
Various elements are added to steel in order to improve the machining perfor- 
mance. The main free cutting additives and their perceived action in improving 
machinability are as follows. 

Engineering steels 237 
A 
=,., 
O 
0 
k- 
..J 
, 
, 
i 
,, 
, 
,,, 
, 
, 
10g V (cutting speed) 
Figure 3.24 Taylor tool life curve 
Figure 3.25 Machinability test piece (By permission of British Steel plc) 
Sulphur 
Sulphur is the cheapest and most widely used free cutting additive in steels. 
Whereas most specifications for engineering steels restrict the sulphur content to 
0.05% max., levels up to about 0.35% S are incorporated in free cutting steels. 
Sufficient manganese is also added to such steels to ensure that all the sulphur 
is present as MnS rather than FeS, which causes hot shortness (cracking) during 
hot working. The MnS inclusions deform plastically during chip formation into 
planes of low strength which facilitate deformation in the primary shear zone. 
The MnS inclusions also exude into the tool-chip interface, acting as a lubricant 
and also forming a protective deposit on the tool. The net effect is a reduc- 
tion in cutting forces and temperatures and a substantial reduction in the tool 
wear rate. This is illustrated in Figure 3.26, which relates to low-carbon free 
cutting steels and shows the marked decrease in flank wear rate with increase 
in the volume fraction of MnS inclusions. Although relatively little improve- 
ment in wear rate is achieved at sulphide volume fractions greater than 1.5%, 
the chip form and surface finish continue to improve with further additions of 
sulphur. 

238 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
200 
150 
A E 
50 
tD 
100 
L.- 
r 
e-- 
Ii 
I 
I 
I 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
Area MnS (%) 
Figure 3.26 Effect of sulphide content on machinability (After Wannel et al. 16) 
For many years, it has been postulated that the morphology of the MnS 
inclusions plays a major role in the machining performance of free curing steels, 
large globular inclusions being far more effective than thin elongated inclusions. 
However, sulphide morphology is influenced markedly by the state of deoxidation 
of the steel, a heavily killed steel promoting the formation of MnS inclusions that 
are easily deformed into elongated inclusions during hot working. In addition, 
killed steels tend to contain hard, abrasive oxide inclusions which have an adverse 
effect on machinability. Therefore it is extremely difficult to differentiate between 
the effects that might be due to sulphide morphology and those that are clearly 
due to the presence of hard, abrasive oxide inclusions. 
One of the disadvantages of high sulphur contents is that they impair the 
transverse ductility of steels, particularly when MnS is present as long elongated 
inclusions. As indicated later, inclusion-modifying agents can be added to high- 
sulphur steels in order to promote a more favourable sulphide morphology. 
Lead 
After sulphur, lead is the next most common additive and additions of 
0.15-0.35% Pb are incorporated in free cutting steels. Such levels are soluble in 
molten steel but are precipitated as discrete particles of lead during solidification. 

Engineering steels 239 
Due to its high density, major precautions have to be taken in the production 
of leaded steels in order to avoid segregation effects. Again lead reduces the 
frictional effects at the tool-chip interface, where it becomes molten at the 
elevated temperatures generated during cutting. Lead is also thought to have 
an embrittling effect in the primary shear zone, thereby shortening the chips and 
improving surface finish. The lead particles are often present as tails to the MnS 
inclusions. 
Lead has little effect on the mechanical properties of steel at ambient 
temperature since it is generally present as a globular constituent. 
The toxic effects of lead are well known and care has to be taken to contain 
lead fumes during the production of leaded steels. Similar measures are also 
taken during the drop forging of leaded steels but the author is not aware that 
hygiene problems arise during the machining of these steels. 
Tellurium 
Tellurium is an efficient but relatively expensive addition in free cutting steels and 
is generally restricted to a maximum level of 0.1%. In larger amounts, it leads 
to cracking during hot working. Tellurium is generally present as manganese 
telluride, which is a low melting point compound and should therefore act in 
a similar way to lead. The high surface activity of tellurium is also considered 
important in its action as a free machining additive. Small additions of tellurium, 
e.g. 0.01%, are also added to engineering steels in order to produce more globular 
MnS inclusions and promote better transverse properties. 
Like lead, tellurium presents hygiene problems during steelmaking (garlic 
breath) and requires the operation of fume extraction systems. 
Selenium 
Selenium additions of 0.05-0.1% are made to low-alloy steels, but in free 
machining stainless steels many specifications call for a minimum of 0.15% Se. 
Selenium is present as a mixed sulphide-selenide and, like tellurium, small addi- 
tions of this element are also effective in promoting more globular sulphide 
inclusions. 
Bismuth 
Bismuth is closely related chemically to lead and its free cutting properties have 
been known for many years. However, commercial interest in bismuth has only 
been significant since about 1980, as greater anxieties have been voiced about 
the use of lead. Levels of up to 0.1% Bi are typical in free cutting grades and 
bismuth is present as tails to the MnS inclusions. Its action in promoting improved 
machining characteristics appears to be similar to that of lead. 
Calcium 
As indicated earlier, oxide inclusions are hard and abrasive and detract from 
the machinability of steels. This is particularly the case with alumina inclusions 

240 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
which are formed in engineering steels due to the practice of adding aluminium as 
a deoxidant or grain-refining element. However, the adverse effects of alumina 
can be reduced with the addition of calcium, which results in the formation 
of calcium aluminate. These inclusions soften during high-speed machining and 
form protective layers on the surface of carbide tools. Calcium is also effective in 
reducing the projected length of MnS inclusions, thereby improving the transverse 
properties of resulphufized steels. 
Low.carbon free cutting steels 
For some engineering components, the mechanical property requirements are 
minimal and by far the most important requirement is a high and consistent level 
of machinability. Hose couplings and automotive spark plug bodies are examples 
of such components which are mass produced at high machining rates. Sulphur 
contents in the range 0.25-0.35% are typical but, as illustrated in Figure 3.27, 
substantial improvements in machinability are obtained by the addition of lead 
to resulphurized steels. Where extremely high rates of machining are required, 
a low-carbon free cutting steel might be treated with sulphur, lead and bismuth, 
e.g. 0.25%, S, 0.25% Pb, 0.08% Bi. 
50- 
20 
E: 
.,..,. 
E 
| 
10 
80 
.'I=: 
+0.09% 
Pb 
+0.20% 
Pb 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
J 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 200 
Cu~ing speed (m/min) 
Figure 3.27 Effect of lead on machinability (After Wannel et al. 16) 

Engineering steels 241 
160 
140 
~ 120 
IO0 
90 
1 O0 
110 
120 
130 
140 
HV30 
Figure 3.28 Effect of hardness on machinability (After Wannel et al. 16) 
The hardness of low-carbon free cutting steels is important and the effect 
appears to be associated with the achievement of an optimum embrittling effect 
for chip formation. This is illustrated in Figure 3.28, which indicates an optimum 
hardness of 105-110 HV in the normalized condition. Therefore the composition 
of these steels, including residual elements such as chromium, nickel and copper, 
needs to be controlled in order to achieve the optimum hardness. Additions of 
phosphorus and nitrogen may also be employed in achieving the desired embrit- 
tlement effects. Above the critical hardness level, embrittlement and ease of chip 
formation give way to increased abrasion and reduced tool life. 
As indicated earlier, oxide inclusions 
are particularly damaging to 
machinability and the deoxidation practices adopted for low-carbon free cutting 
steels have to be controlled very carefully in order to minimize the level of 
these inclusions. With the move from ingot production to continuous casting, this 
problem has become more acute as the steels need to be more heavily deoxidized 
in order to minimize gas evolution during solidification. 
Medium.carbon free cutting steels 
Medium-carbon steels, containing 0.35-0.5% C and up to 1.5% Mn, are often 
used in the normalized condition for engineering components requiring a tensile 
strength of up to about 1000 N/mm 2. The free cutting versions of these steels 
are generally based on sulphur contents of 0.2-0.3% but, because of their higher 
strength, they are significantly harder to machine than low-carbon free cutting 
steels. Therefore benefit can be gained in selecting a grade of steel with the 
lowest level of carbon consistent with achieving the required strength in the end 
product. 

242 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Whereas silicate inclusions impair the machinability of low-carbon free 
cutting steels, they are not particularly damaging in medium-carbon steels when 
machined with carbide tools. This is due to the fact that higher temperatures 
are generated in the cutting of these steels, leading to the softening of the 
silicate inclusions. However, alumina particles are again particularly detrimental, 
reducing the machining performance of both plain and resulphurized medium- 
carbon steels. 
Machinable low-alloy steels 
In high-strength automotive transmission components, a high level of toughness 
and ductility may be required in the transverse direction. For this reason, free 
machining versions of low-alloy engineering steels were based traditionally on the 
more cosily lead additions rather than sulphur. However, as indicated earlier, the 
addition of inclusion-modifying agents can reduce the anisotropy in mechanical 
properties and provide improved service performance in resulphurized steels. This 
is illustrated in Figure 3.29, which shows the improvement in transverse impact 
properties obtained in SAE 4140 steel 17 with calcium treatment. Bearing in mind 
that high-strength engineering steels are generally fine grained with aluminium, 
calcium treatment will also lead to an improvement in machinability with carbide 
cutting tools due to the formation of calcium aluminate rather than alumina. 
Machinable stainless steels 
Although out of context in terms of chapter heading, it was thought that benefit 
might be gained in continuity of technology by dealing with machinable stainless 
steels at this stage. 
Austenitic stainless steels have high rates of work hardening and this results in 
poor machinability. However, this problem has been exacerbated to some extent 
30- 
A 
25 - 
r 
C 
20 
" 
J~ 
03 
" 15 - 
q) 
:3 
o 10 
- 
e- 
5 
- 
p- 
o 
SAE 4140 Steels 
Ib 
~kk_ 
Q and T to 950 N/mm 2 
9 Standard 
9 ~' 
9 Calcium treated 
I 
, 
I 
l 
l 
' 
I 
0 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
0.08 
0.10 
0.12 
Sulphur (wt %) 
Figure 3.29 Effect of calcium treatment on transverse upper shelf energy of SAE 4140 
steels (After Pickett et al. 17) 

Engineering steels 243 
by modern steelmaking practices, such as arc-AOD, which produce low levels 
of sulphur, e.g. often less than 0.01%. To overcome this particular problem, the 
steels can be resulphurized to a level just below the maximum generally permitted 
in standard specifications, e.g. 0.03% max. 
Like carbon and low-alloy steels, large additions of sulphur are also made 
to stainless steels in order to provide free cutting grades. Thus AISI 303 is an 
18% Cr 9% Ni austenitic stainless steel containing 0.15% S min. However, the 
large volume fraction of MnS inclusions in this grade impairs the corrosion 
properties such that the performance is significantly worse than that of the stan- 
dard 18% Cr 9% Ni (Type 304) stainless steel. Where this presents a significant 
problem, free cutting properties coupled with improved corrosion resistance can 
be obtained in Type 303Se, the 18% Cr 9% Ni grade containing 0.15% Se rain. 
Steels for gas containers 
High-pressure gas cylinders have been in use since the 1870s when they were first 
introduced for the transportation of liquefied carbon dioxide for the aerated drinks 
industry. Since that time, their use has extended enormously to deal with the 
conveyance of a variety of permanent gases, such as air, argon, helium, hydrogen, 
nitrogen and oxygen, and other liquefiable gases, such as butane, propane, nitrous 
oxide and sulphur dioxide. Given the explosive, flammable or toxic nature of 
some of these gases, it is not surprising that the manufacture and utilization of gas 
containers are the subject of major scrutiny by the Home Office and also by inter- 
national bodies. However, whilst still maintaining very high standards of safety, 
the use of higher strength steels has been permitted which has greatly increased 
the carrying efficiency of gas cylinders in terms of their gas capacity per weight. 
In the UK, the relevant British Standard is BS 5045 Transportable gas 
containers, of which Parts 1 and 2 are the main sections for steel containers: 
9 Part 1" Specification for seamless gas containers above 0.5 litre water capacity 
9 Part 2: Steel containers up to 130 litre water capacity with welded seams 
This topic is the subject of reviews by Irani Is and Naylor. 19 
Steel compositions 
BS 5045: Part 1:1982 specifies four grades of steel for seamless cylinders, 
covering C, C-Mn, Cr-Mo and Ni-Cr-Mo compositions, and details are shown 
in Table 3.10. The most popular compositions are the C-Mn and Cr-Mo grades, 
which are hardened and tempered to provide a minimum yield strength value of 
755 N/mm 2. However, as indicated later, the yield strength is restricted to lower 
levels for certain types of hydrogen containers. 
In relation to welded containers, BS 5045: Part 2:1989 permits the use of C 
or C-Mn steels but, as illustrated in Table 3.11, these grades provide minimum 
yield strength values in the range 215-350 N/ram 2, i.e. significantly lower than 
that attained in seamless containers. 

Table 3.10 Seamless steel gas containers to BS 5045: Part I: 1982 
Material 
code 
Carbon 
steels 
C-Mn 
steels 
Cr-Mo 
Ni-Cr-Mo 
alloy steel 
alloy steel 
M 
C 
Mn 
MnH 
CM 
NCM 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
C f i  
Mo% 
Ni% 
YSO 
TF 
(N/m2) 
(N/mm2) 
min. 
0.15-0.25 
0.05-0.35 
0.4-0.9 
- 
- 
- 
250 
430-510 
570-680 
0.35-0.45 
0.05-0.35 
0.6-1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
445 
650-760 
0.4 max. 
0.1 -0.35 
1.3-1.7 
- 
755 
890- 1030 
- 
3 10 
0.37 max. 
0.1-0.35 
0.4-0.9 
0.8-1.2 
0.15-0.25 
0.5 UUX. 
755 
890- 1030 
0.27-0.35 
0.1-0.35 
0.5-0.7 
0.5-0.8 
0.4-0.7 
2.3 - 2.8 
755 
890- 1030 
='For containers for use in hydrogen trailer service, the minimum yield strength shall not exceed 680 N / m 2  and the tensile strength shall be within the range 
800-930 N/mm2. 
After BS 5045: Part I: 1982 Amendment No. 1, August 1986. 

Engineering steels 245 
Table 3.11 
Welded steel gas containers to BS 5045: Part 2:1989 
Chemical and 
physical properties 
Carbon % max. 
0.2 
Silicon % max. 
0.3 
Manganese 
% min. 
- 
0.4 
% max. 
0.6 
1.2 
Phosphorus % max. 
0.05 
0.04 
Sulphur % max. 
0.05 
0.04 
Grain-refining 
elements % max. 
- 
- 
Yield stress 
(N/ram 2) rain. 
215 
275 
Tensile strength 
(N/mm 2) min. 
340 
400 
Tensile strength 
(N/mm 2) max. 
430 
490 
Elongation % min. b 
Lo = 50 mm 
28 
24 
Lo = 5.65~/So 
33 
29 
Type a 
Type B 
Type C 
TypeD 
Type E 
Type F 
Type G 
0.18 
0.2 
0.2 
0.15 
0,18 
0.25 
- 
0.3 
0.3 
0,4 
0.25 
0.35 
0.7 
- 
- 
0.5 
0.6 
1.5 
0.6 
1.2 
1.4 
1.4 
0.05 
0.05 
0.025 
0.04 
0.03 
0.05 
0.05 
0.03 
0,04 
0.045 
_ a 
- 
0.3 a 
- 
0.7 
310 
200 
350 
285 
250 
430 
320 
430 
430 
430 
585 
420 
650 
510 
550 
21 
29 
21 
- 
21 
20 
35 
25 
20 
25 
aGrain-refining elements are limited to: niobium 0,08%, titanium 0.2%, vanadium 0.2%, niobium 
plus vanadium 0.2%. 
bWhere any other non-proportional gauge lengths are used, conversions are in accordance with BS 
3894: Part 1. 
Note 1. Lo is the original gauge length. 
So is the original cross-sectional area. 
Note 2. Type A and type C are equivalent to grades of BS 1449:1962 (withdrawn); type E is 
equivalent to grade 43135 of BS 1449: Part 1; type D is similar to Euronorm 120; type G 
is equivalent to type 151 grade 430 of BS 1501: Part 1, 
After BS 5045: Part 2: 1989. 
Design and manufacture 
The manufacture of a seamless steel cylinder is shown schematically in 
Figure 3.30, which illustrates the high degree of metal forming involved in this 
complex hot-working operation. The process is all the more remarkable when it is 
realized that the production of seamless cylinders from thick plate or billets was 
developed in the 1880s and 1890s and has changed very little to the present day. 
The cylinder wall is the thinnest region of the vessel and is therefore subjected 
to the highest stresses. However, under fatigue conditions, the higher stresses are 
generated at the junction of the relatively thin wall and the thicker concave base. 
BS 5045: Part 1 details the following formulae for the calculation of minimum 
wall thickness in seamless containers: 
0.3 (test pressure) x (internal diameter) 
t = 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(1) 
7 x fe -- (test pressure) 
0.3 (test pressure) x (external diameter) 
or t = 
(2) 
7 x fe- 
0.4 (test pressure) 

246 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 3.30 The production of seamless steel gas cylinders (After Irani 18) 
where fe is the maximum permissible equivalent stress at test pressure. 
In general, fe is equal to 0.75 x minimum yield strength. However, a value 
of 0.875 x minimum yield strength is allowed in special portable containers, 
e.g. those used in aircraft, underwater breathing apparatus and life raft inflation, 
thereby facilitating the use of lighter containers. For a Cr-Mo steel cylinder 
(230 mm OD), used for the transportation of oxygen at 200 bar (equivalent to a 
test pressure of 300 bar), equation (2) provides a minimum wall thickness t of 
18 
5.39 mm. 
BS 5045: Part 2 provides the same equations for the calculation of minimum 
thickness as those shown earlier for seamless containers (equations (1) and (2)). 
However, as indicated previously, the proof strength values of steels specified 
in Part 2 are significantly lower than those included in Part 1. Thus for a given 
test pressure, welded containers would require a greater thickness than seamless 
containers but, in effect, the former operate at lower pressures. 
Rather strangely, BS 5045 Parts 1 and 2 make no reference to impact test 
requirements although Oldfield 2~ reports that leak-before-burst philosophies are 
growing in acceptance and that fracture toughness tests are being developed for 
use with gas containers. This is particularly pertinent when handling aggressive 
gases, as illustrated in the following section. 
Hydrogen gas containers 
During the 1970s and early 1980s, almost one hundred failures occurred in Europe 
(20 in the UK) in gas containers that were used for the delivery of hydrogen by 
road trailer. Failure was due to the propagation of fatigue cracks from small 

Engineering steels 247 
manufacturing defects which were present at the inner surface of the cylinder, 
close to the highly stressed junction where the wall joins the concave base. The 
fatigue cracks propagated through to the outside wall of the cylinder, resulting 
in leakage of gas. The failed containers had been made by various manufacturers 
and conformed to the appropriate specifications at that time. Under the aegis of 
the Health and Safety Executive, a committee was established to investigate the 
failure mechanism and make appropriate recommendations. The results of this 
investigation are the subject of an interesting paper by Harris et al. 21 
10 -1 
10-2 
_r 
~ i0-3 
2 
0 
i0-4 
R=0.3, sinewave, 1 Hz 
# 
9 
# 
9 
a 4 
9 
_x 
,,,, 
,z; 
9 ""i 
9 x'r 
+ 
& 
A 
+ 
A 
r 
10-5 
I 
_ I 
10 
20 
30 
Ir 
X 
M 
X 
150 bar H 2 
+ 
o 
o 
+ 
9 o 
* oa~+ 
N 
O & + O 
a. 1 
Nltm,gen 
data 
m Old 1CrMo, HB 324 
a Old 1CrMo, HB 274 
& 34 CrMo4, HB 292 
,a New 1CrMo, HB 280 
9 Exp. 1CrMo, HB 287 
O 35CD4, HB 279 
x Exp. C Mn, HB 296 
+ 28Mn6, HB 278 
.I 
....... 
t 
t 
I 
4O 
6O 
80 
100 
AK (MNm -~) 
Figure 3.31 The influence of hydrogen on the rate of fatigue crack growth in gas 
container steels (After Harris et al. 21) 

248 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
1000 - 
100 
'E 
z 
o 
o4 
ii 
<3 
r 
o 
c- 
O 
o_.. 
r 
10 
9 High-strength 1CrMo(old) 
o 
Low-strength 1CrMo(old) 
9 34CrMo4 (1CrMo) 
" 
Current 1CrMo 
9 Experimental 1CrMo 
O 35CD4 (1CrMo) 
9 Experimental CMn 
O 28Mn6 (CMn) 
J 
J 
? 
I 
t' 
I 
"I 
I 
/ 
j, 
.I, 
J 
f 
J 
Q,f 
f 
J 
f 
f 
150 bar H2 
f 
f 
f 
f 
J 
J 
f 
Revised upper 
limit 
~ 
limit 
l 
l 
,. 
1 
I 
I 
I 
260 
270 
280 
290 
300 
310 
320 
330 
340 
Hardness, HB 
Original upper 
Figure 3.32 
The influence of hardness on the enhancement of fatigue crack growth by 
hydrogen (After Harris et al. 2]) 
The problem containers in the UK were manufactured in Cr-Mo steel, 
which had been used for many years for the manufacture of storage containers 
without any serious problems. However, the transportable hydrogen containers 
differed from the storage containers in one important respect, namely the refilling 
frequency, which was the main source of fatigue cycling, the other being due to 

Engineering steels 249 
transportational stresses. Whereas the storage containers could experience up to 
12 refills per annum, the transportable containers might be refilled twice daily. 
Harris et al. carried out fatigue crack growth tests on Cr-Mo and C-Mn steels 
in hydrogen gas at 150 bar and their results are shown in Figure 3.31. Whereas 
the bulk of the test data fell within a relatively narrow scatter band, the major 
exception was the Cr-Mo steel with the relatively high hardness of 324 HB. On 
the other hand, the fatigue crack growth of all the steels in hydrogen was very 
much greater than that induced in a nitrogen atmosphere. The acceleration factor 
by which the crack growth rate in hydrogen exceeds that in nitrogen at a stress 
intensity value of 20 MNm -3/2 is shown as a function of hardness in Figure 3.32. 
This figure demonstrates very clearly the influence of the hardness (or strength) of 
the steel on the fatigue behaviour, the acceleration factor increasing from below 
20 to above 100 as the hardness is increased from 274 to 324 HB. 
Subsequent to the above work, amendments were incorporated into the standard 
for transportable gas containers and appear as Appendix E to BS 5045: Part 1 
(Containers for use in hydrogen trailer service). This restricts the hardness range 
to 230-290 HB. In addition, the yield stress is not allowed to exceed 680 N/mm 2 
and the tensile strength must be within the range 800-930 N/ram 2. 
Higher strength steels 
As indicated earlier, the carrying capacity of gas containers has been increased 
progressively over the years and this has been achieved primarily through the use 
of steels with progressively higher yield strength. This trend is continuing and 
Naylor 19 describes development work on gas container steels with minimum yield 
strength values of 950 N/ram 2. These higher strength values are achieved with 
micro-alloying additions of vanadium and also with higher levels of molybdenum 
or silicon. Naylor reports that cylinder-manufacturing trials were being carried 
out on these experimental compositions. 
Bearing steels 
Bearings constitute vital components in most items of machinery, permitting 
accurate movement under low frictional conditions. In addition, they are also 
required to transmit high loads and provide long service lives under arduous 
fatigue conditions. Stemming mainly from the requirement of the aeroengine 
industry, major effort has been devoted to improving the level and consistency 
of bearing fatigue performance and, with the adoption of cleaner steelmaking 
techniques, it is claimed that bearing life has increased by a factor of 100 since 
the early 1940s. zz 
The grade of steel adopted internationally for through-hardened bearings is 
SAE 52100, the 1.0% C 1.5% Cr composition. This material is generally solu- 
tion treated at a temperature of about 850~ 
followed by oil quenching and 
tempering in the range 180-250~ 
This results in a microstructure of lightly 
tempered martensite, primary (undissolved) carbides and up to about 5% retained 
austenite. For larger beatings, carburizing grades such as SAE 4720 (2% Ni-Mo) 

250 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
are adopted. In the United States, M50 (0.8% C, 4.0% Cr, 4.25% Mo) is used 
extensively in main shaft gas turbine bearings, helicopter transmission bearings 
and other aerospace applications. In 1983, Bamberger 23 introduced a variant of 
M50 steel which was designated M-50 NiL. This is a 0.12% C 3.5% Ni 4.0% Cr 
4.25% Mo 1.2% V composition which is case hardened to produce bearings with 
high fracture toughness and long life. 
Bearing fatigue testing 
Whereas bearings are required to have long endurance lives, perhaps extending 
over several years, laboratory evaluation tests must be accelerated such that a 
meaningful result can be obtained in a matter of days. As such, these tests 
are undertaken at higher loads and speeds than those experienced under typical 
service conditions. Various bearing fatigue tests have been developed which are 
capable of assessing the performance of bearing steels in the form of balls, 
washers, cones and cylinders but in the UK the Unisteel washer test ~ is still in 
operation following its introduction in the early 1950s. A sectional view of the 
machine is shown in Figure 3.33. The test washer measures 76 mm o.d. x 51 mm 
i.d. x 5.5 mm thick and forms the top race of a standard thrust bearing. The cage 
of the standard bearing is operated with only nine balls instead of the normal 18 
in order to provide a maximum calculated Hertzian stress of 3725 N/mm 2 at a 
relatively low load. Both sides of the specimen are tested. 
I 
' 
! 
I 
I 
~ 
II 
Figure 3.33 Sectional view of Unisteel Bearing Fatigue Rig (a) balls; (b) test bearing; 
(c) standard thrust race (After Johnson and Sewell ~) 

Engineering steels 251 
Factors affecting fatigue performance 
Johnson and Sewell u were among the earliest investigators to establish a good 
quantitative relationship between the bearing fatigue performance of SAE 52100 
and inclusion content. The inclusions act as stress raisers, forming incipient 
cracks which then propagate under stress reversals until a fatigue pit (or spall) is 
formed on the surface of the component. As illustrated in Figure 3.34, Johnson 
and Sewell showed that oxide inclusions such as alumina and silicates have an 
adverse effect on fatigue performance, whereas sulphides appear to be benefi- 
cial. These authors showed that a better correlation between fatigue performance 
and inclusion content was obtained when titanium nitride was included in the 
inclusion count such that the inclusion parameter was based on: 
TiN 
Number of alumina 4- silicate -F -~ 
Oxides are considered to be detrimental because they are brittle and, as illustrated 
by Brooksbank and Andrews, 25 they also become surrounded by tensile stresses 
on cooling from elevated temperatures due to differences in the thermal expansion 
characteristics between the oxide particles and the matrix. The beneficial effect 
of sulphides is generally ascribed to the fact that they tend to encapsulate the 
more angular oxide inclusions, thereby reducing the detrimental tensile stresses. 
However, the beneficial effects of sulphides are often disputed and some hold 
the view that they are non-detrimental rather than positively beneficial. Other 
workers have indicated that TiN inclusions have a relatively small effect on 
bearing fatigue performance and such an effect is consistent with the tesselated 
stress calculations of Brooksbank and Andrews. 
Given the importance of inclusion content in relation to bearing fatigue perfor- 
mance, major attention has been given to the development of reliable methods of 
~" 25 
,p- 
X 
20 
~ 
15 
"- 10 
< 
(a) 
(b) 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
+ 
o 
I 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
t 
i 
..... 
I 
I, 
, 
i 
i 
, 
,i 
I 
100 
200 300 
400 
500 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 700 
Total alumina + silicates 
Total sulphldes 
Figure 3.34 
Relationship between average life and inclusion content: counts based on 
total inclusions observed (x750) in 516fields representing a total area of"9 mm 2 (After 
Johnson and Sewel124 ) 

252 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
inclusion assessment. For many years, both the steelmakers and bearing manufac- 
turers have employed the Jerkontoret (JK) method which is specified in ASTM 
Practice for Determining the Inclusion Content of Steel-E45. This rates a steel 
in terms of the worst field of the 100 fields that are examined against stan- 
dard charts. However, as stated by Hampshire and King, 26 this technique is 
capable of ignoring the fact that a steel with 100 equally bad fields would be 
ranked the same as a steel with only one bad field. Therefore a new method 
was required that took into account both inclusion severity and frequency and 
such a procedure is the SAM counting technique. This is detailed in Supplemen- 
tary Requirements $2 of ASTM A 295-84. The SAM procedure concentrates 
on the frequency of Type B aluminates and Type D globular oxides because 
these tend to be the most damaging inclusions to bearing fatigue performance. 
Type A manganese sulphides are disregarded as being insignificant to fatigue 
life and Type C silicates are ignored because they occur infrequently in bearing 
steels. 
The SAM count is regarded as a major improvement over the JK method but 
major strides have been made in introducing cleaner steels and a large number 
of fields must now be examined in order to obtain a statistically valid assessment 
of inclusion content. Attention is being given to the use of automatic image 
analysis techniques but these require very careful polishing procedures and, again, 
problems are being experienced with these techniques in the accurate assessment 
of steels with low oxygen and sulphur contents. 
Relatively little work has been carded out on the role of primary carbides in 
bearing steels. In general, it is accepted that these particles are very beneficial 
in increasing the wear resistance of the material and they are also instrumental 
in inhibiting grain growth during solution treatment. However, it is considered 
that large primary carbides, particularly when present in segregated bands, act as 
stress raisers and are detrimental to fatigue life. 
The high carbon content of through-hardening steels such as SAE 52100 
depresses the Mf temperature of the material below room temperature, resulting 
in the formation of retained austenite. A similar situation also exists in the case 
of carbudzed bearings, the high alloy content augmenting the effect of carbon 
in depressing the Ms-Mf transformation range. However, the retained austenite 
will transform to martensite under the high Hertzian stresses induced in service 
and will tend to introduce dimensional changes in the bearing component. For 
this reason, a low level of retained austenite is desirable for critical bearing appli- 
cations and is generally limited to a maximum of about 5%. The formation of 
strain-induced martensite will create a compressive residual stress and should 
therefore be beneficial to the fatigue performance. The white bands observed 
in the microstructure of SAE 52100 bearings after service are thought to be 
associated with the residual stresses created by the formation of strain-induced 
martensite. 
Modern steelmaking methods 
During the 1950s, vacuum degassing facilities were introduced which resulted in 
a marked improvement in the cleanness of bearing steels. By the early 1960s, 

Engineering steels 253 
argon shrouding of the molten stream was adopted which prevented reoxidation, 
leading to a further reduction in the non-metallic inclusion content. In the mid- 
1970s, many steelmakers introduced vacuum induction melting and vacuum arc 
remelting (VIM, VAR) to produce exceptionally clean steels. However, dramatic 
improvements in cleanness have also been obtained in bulk steelmaking processes 
for bearing grades, particularly with the introduction of secondary steelmaking 
facilities. Davies et al. 27 have described the facilities that have been installed at 
Stocksbridge Engineering Steels for the production of beating steels and these are 
summarized in Table 3.12. Steels from a 100 t electric arc furnace are processed 
via a vacuum arc degassing (VAD) unit while melts from a 150 t furnace are 
transferred to a ladle furnace (LF), equipped with argon stirring, arc heating and 
alloying facilities. Care is also taken to minimize the inclusion content with the 
use of high alumina and graphitized magnesia refractories. 
The SAM count rating for alumina (Type B) and globular oxides (Type D) 
on casts of SAE 52100, produced by Stocksbridge Engineering Steels between 
1984 and 1986, have been monitored by Hampshire and King. 2~ These data are 
shown in Figure 3.35. The major decrease in Type D inclusions in April 1985 
coincides with the introduction of the ladle steelmaking facility and it is reported 
that individual Type D SAM counts since that time have rarely exceeded a value 
of 3. On the other hand, the introduction of ladle steelmaking did not have a 
dramatic effect on the incidence of Type B alumina inclusions, the SAM count 
being between 3 and 8 over the period shown. Mean oxygen contents of less than 
about 10 ppm can now be obtained via the ladle refining route, i.e. approaching 
that produced by vacuum arc remelting. 
Table 3.12 
Facilities for the production of clean steels at Stocksbridge Engi- 
neering Steels 
Process route element 
B Furnace route 
C Furnace route 
Slag-free tapping 
Ladle stirring 
Slag control 
Reheating 
Degassing 
Alloying 
Ladle refractories 
Ingot teeming shroud 
Ingot holloware 
CC ladle to tundish a 
CC tundish 
CC tundish to mould 
Submerged taphole 
Argon through sidewall 
plug 
Specific synthetic slags 
Arc heating in VAD 
Integral part of VAD 
via 13 alloy hoppers 
75-85% A1203 walls and 
bottom 92% MgO slag line 
Inert gas 
60% A1203 
Graphitized A1203 shroud 
700-mm deep, MgO-lined 
Graphitized A1203 
submerged entry shroud and 
flux, or inert gas 
Submerged taphole 
Argon through sidewall 
and bottom plugs 
Specific synthetic slags 
Arc heating in LF 
Separate tank degasser 
via 13 alloy hoppers 
82-85% A1203 walls and 
bottom 96% MgO slag line 
Inert gas 
60% AI203 
Not applicable 
Not applicable 
Not applicable 
aCC = continuous caster. 
After Davies et al. 27 

254 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
6 
:3 
8 
< 4 
oo 
10 
sl 
2 I 
|l.~--D-Type Inclusions 
Sept. 
Apr. 
Sept. 
1984 
1985 
1986 
Time 
(each point is the average of 10 casts) 
Figure 3.35 SAM counts of steel delivered from major steel supplier (After Hampshire 
and King 26) 
High-speed steels 
High-speed steels are so called because of their ability to maintain a high level of 
hardness during high-speed machining operations. They are characterized by high 
carbon contents, sometimes up to 1.5%, and major additions of strong carbide- 
forming elements such as chromium, molybdenum, tungsten and vanadium. Up 
to 12% Co is also included in some of the more complex grades. The constitu- 
tion, manufacture and properties of high-speed steels have been reviewed very 
thoroughly in a book by Hoyle. 28 
Role of alloying elements 
The microstructure of high-speed steels consists of primary and secondary 
carbides in a matrix of tempered martensite. The primary carbides are coarse 
particles which are not dissolved during solution treatment for the hardening 
operation and the secondary carbides are fine particles that are precipitated in 
martensite during tempering treatments. The role of the major alloying elements 
is outlined below. 
A high carbon content is required in order to produce a hard martensitic matrix 
and also to form primary carbides. Both constituents are effective in providing 
abrasion resistance during metal cutting. However, the amount of carbon that 
can be accommodated in high-speed steels is limited on two counts. Firstly, 
carbon lowers the solidus temperature of steels substantially and therefore reduces 
the maximum temperature that can be employed for solution treatment prior to 
hardening. Secondly, carbon has a powerful effect in depressing the Ms-Me 
temperature range and a very high level of carbon in solution will lead to 
excessive amounts of retained austenite. 

Engineering steels 255 
The chromium content of most grades of high-speed steel is about 4%. 
Chromium forms carbides such as M23C6 and M7C3 but these carbides dissolve 
fairly readily and are taken into solution at the normal solution treatment 
temperatures employed for these steels, i.e. 1200-1300oc. Chromium is therefore 
added as a hardenability agent and promotes the formation of martensite. In 
addition, chromium is also beneficial in improving the scaling resistance of these 
steels at the high temperatures generated during machining operations. 
Molybdenum and tungsten are the principal alloying elements in high-speed 
steels and can be present in levels up to about 10% and 20% respectively. 
From a metallurgical standpoint, the two elements are very similar and in most 
types of steel they are interchangeable on the basis of atomic weight %. Both 
elements are strong carbide formers and the principal carbide type is M6C. 
This carbide is sometimes called eta-carbide and has a low solid solubility in 
steel. Therefore molybdenum and tungsten contribute little to the hardenability 
of high-speed steels but the small amounts that are dissolved are very effective 
in promoting tempering resistance and maintaining a high level of hardness at 
the cutting temperature (red hardness). Both elements also induce secondary 
hardening reactions in martensite, as illustrated schematically in Figure 3.36. 
This figure also indicates that appreciable softening does not take place until 
the temperature exceeds about 550~ 
which therefore represents the effective 
maximum operating temperature for these steels. 
In the early development of high-speed steels, tungsten was regarded very 
much as the preferred element and molybdenum the substitute element to be 
tolerated only in special circumstances. However, this prejudice has now largely 
disappeared and there appears to be no technical reason for recommending a 
tungsten grade in favour of a comparable molybdenum grade. 
All high-speed steels contain between 1% and 5% V and as the vanadium 
content is increased, the carbon is generally increased by at least 0.1% for 
each additional 1% V. Vanadium is a very strong carbide-forming element and 
produces extremely hard particles of V4C3 (MC type). This carbide has a very 
low solid solubility in steel and again contributes very little to hardenability. 
Figure 3.36 
r 
12 
-r" 
:_ 
:: 
i 
i 
i 
,,! 
, 
i 
...... 
i, 
, 
I 
0 
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
Tempering temperature (~ 
Tempering curve for high-speed steel (schematic) (After Hoyle 2s) 

256 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
However, vanadium carbide improves the abrasion resistance of high-speed steels 
and is also beneficial as a grain-refining agent. 
Although not a standard addition, up to 12% Co is incorporated in some high- 
speed steels and, according to Hoyle, 2s the role of this element is less clearly 
defined than that of the other major additions. Cobalt does not form carbides and 
has a high solubility in austenite. For a given hardening temperature, it reduces the 
level of retained austenite and also improves the secondary hardening response. 
Cobalt also increases the thermal conductivity, particularly at high temperatures. 
The net result is that cobalt increases the red hardness of high-speed steels and 
improves their performance in fast-cutting operations. 
Heat treatment 
Given the high carbon content and complex alloy design, it might be anticipated 
that the heat treatment of high-speed steels would involve rather complicated 
procedures. However, these procedures are based on sound metallurgical princi- 
ples and are designed to achieve specific microstructural features and properties. 
A schematic illustration of the heat treatment of high-speed steels, including the 
annealing, hardening and tempering cycles, is shown in Figure 3.37. 
Because of their high alloy content, high-speed steels are air hardening and 
will form martensite on cooling from the austenite temperature range. Therefore, 
after forging or hot-forming operations, these steels must be annealed in order to 
produce: 
1. A softened condition for easier machining operations. 
2. The relief of internal stresses. 
3. A suitable microstructure for the subsequent hardening treatment. 
Annealing is carded out by heating slowly to a temperature just above Acl which 
involves temperatures in the range 850-900~ 
depending upon the particular 
grade of steel. The material is held at the annealing temperature for two to 
four hours and then furnace cooled to a temperature below 600~ 
The rate 
1500 
1250 
1000 
750 
500 
250 
Annealing 
Hardening 
Tempering 
I 
I 
I Slow 
/'~ 
I 
I 
I 
Ii 
1st 
i 
temper 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
J 
J 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
t 
t 
I 
2rid 
3rd 
I 
I 
temper 
temper I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
,,,i 
I 
Time 
.~ 
Figure 
3.37 The heat treatment of high-speed steels 

Engineering steels 257 
of cooling can then be increased. This treatment results in the formation of a 
ferrite matrix with finely dispersed carbide particles. However, the large primary 
carbides remain virtually unaffected by this treatment. After annealing, the hard- 
ness of the standard grades of high-speed steel is less than 300 HB. 
As indicated earlier, elements such as molybdenum, tungsten and vanadium 
form stable carbides which have only limited solubilities in steel. However, in 
order to produce a high-carbon martensite, with good tempering resistance and 
the facility for secondary hardening, it is essential that a proportion of these 
carbides is taken into solution. Solution treatment temperatures very close to 
the solidus temperatures are therefore employed, i.e. temperatures in the range 
1200-1300~ 
depending upon the grade. According to Hoyle, 2s the solution 
of M23C6 (Cr-based) carbide begins at temperatures just above 900~ 
and is 
complete at about 1100"C. The solution of M6C (Mo- and W-based) carbides 
begins at about 1150~ and continues until the solidus is reached. On the other 
hand, MC (V-based) carbide is extremely stable and little solution is achieved, 
even at temperatures close to the solidus. 
In order to minimize thermal shock, the steel is preheated slowly to a temper- 
ature of about 850~ 
This is generally carried out in one furnace and the steel 
is then transferred to a high-temperature furnace with a neutral atmosphere. 
However, the soaking time at the hardening temperature must be short, e.g. two 
to five minutes, in order to minimize decarburization and grain growth. 
Following solution treatment, the cooling operation can be carried out in air 
or by quenching into oil or a salt bath. Salt bath temperatures of 500-600~ are 
employed and the treatment is carded out in order to reduce temperature gradients 
and thereby reduce distortion and the risk of cracking. However, the salt bath 
treatment should only be long enough to allow the material to attain a uniform 
temperature and the component should then be air cooled. Transformation to 
martensite will begin at a temperature below 200~ 
and will be about 80% 
complete at room temperature. Whereas it is important to ensure that the steel 
reaches ambient temperature in order to achieve a high degree of transformation, 
tempering treatments must take place immediately after the hardening cycle in 
order to prevent stabilizing effects in the residual retained austenite. 
Tempering treatments are carded out at 530-570~ 
and serve two purposes: 
1. To produce a tempered martensitic structure which will be hard but stable at 
elevated temperatures. 
2. To destabilize the retained austenite such that martensite will form on cooling 
to room temperature. 
As indicated in Figure 3.36, a secondary hardening reaction takes place with 
a peak at a temperature of about 550~ 
i.e. the typical tempering temperature 
for high-speed steel. Therefore, as well as providing a structure which will be 
stable in the short term up to this temperature, the tempering treatment also 
produces the maximum level of hardness. During the first tempering treatment, 
carbide precipitation takes place in both the martensite and retained austenite 
that were present in the structure after the hardening treatment. In the latter case, 
carbide precipitation depletes the phase in carbon and alloying elements, such 

258 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
that the Ms-Mf temperature range is raised and the retained austenite transforms 
to martensite on cooling to room temperature. Therefore at the end of the first 
tempering treatment, the microstructure will consist of: 
1. Primary (undissolved) carbides; 
2. Tempered martensite containing secondary carbides; 
3. Untempered martensite; 
and a second tempering treatment is required in order to temper the newly formed 
martensite. The second tempering treatment is again carded out at 530-570~ 
and for most grades this achieves the required microstructure, i.e. primary 
carbides in a matrix of tempered martensite. However, for optimum performance 
and maximum dimensional stability, it may be necessary to carry out a third 
tempering treatment, particularly in high-cobalt grades. 
Standard specifications and uses 
In the UK, high-speed steels are specified in BS 4659:1989 Tool and die steels, 
which also includes details of hot-work tool steels, cold-work tool steels and 
plastic moulding grades. The specified ranges for the main alloying elements 
in high-speed steels, together with the hardness requirements in the annealed 
and hardened conditions, are summarized in Table 3.13. The grade designations 
adopted for the various types of tool steel in this specification follow the system 
laid down by the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) except that in all cases 
they are preceded by the letter 'B'. Thus grade T1 in the American standard 
is designated BT1 in the UK standard. In both cases, the letter 'T' refers to 
grades in which tungsten is the principal alloying element and the letter 'M' is 
used for molybdenum or tungsten-molybdenum grades. In the German system, 
the designations have the prefix 'S' (Schnellstahl) and the numbers that follow 
represent the levels of tungsten, molybdenum, vanadium and cobalt in that order. 
The chromium content is not specified but is most likely to be of the order of 
4%. Thus M2/BM2 (6% W, 5% Mo, 4% Cr, 2% V) in the American and British 
standards have the same alloy design as $6-5-2 in the German standard. 
Although 13 grades of high-speed steels are listed in BS 4659: 1989, the three 
popular grades of high-speed steel are listed in Table 3.14. 
In the United States, M10 (8% Mo, 4% Cr, 2% V) is also a common grade and 
with the three steels listed above makes up nearly 90% of the general purpose 
high-speed tools. However, an M10-type steel is not listed in the British standard. 
Hoyle 2s has prepared a basic guide to tool selection and this is shown in 
Table 3.15. This selection reflects the benefit of cobalt additions in maintaining 
a high level of red hardness at high cutting speeds and the use of higher carbon 
and vanadium contents in order to increase the resistance to abrasive wear when 
cutting very hard materials. 
Although high-speed steels constitute the major type of cutting tool, sintered 
carbides now feature very prominently in this market and ceramic materials, 
such as alumina and cubic boron nitride, are also being used for fast machining 
operations or for very hard workpiece materials. 

Table 3.13 High-speed steels - BS 4659: 1989. Details of composition and hardness 
Designation 
C% 
C f i  
Mo% 
W% 
V% 
Co% 
Hardness after 
Hardness after heat 
matment HV (min.) 
annealing HB (mar) 
BM1 
0.75-0.85 
3.75-4.5 
8-9 
1-2 
1-1.25 
1 max. 
241 
823 
BM2 
0.82-0.92 
3.75-4.5 
4.75-55 
6-6.75 
1.75-2.05 
1 max. 
248 
836 
BM4 
1.25-1.4 
3.75-4.5 
4.25-5 
5.75-6.5 
3.75-4.25 
1 max. 
255 
849 
BM15 
1.45-1.6 
4.5-5 
2.75-3.25 
6.25-7 
4.75-5.25 
4.5-5.5 
277 
869 
BM35 
0.85-0.95 
3.75-4.5 
4.75-5.25 
6-6.75 
1.75-2.15 
4.6-5.2 
269 
869 
BM42 
1-1.1 
3.5-4.25 
9-10 
1-2 
1-1.3 
75-8.5 
269 
897 
BT1 
0.7-0.8 
3.75-4.5 
0.7  ma^. 
17.5-18.5 
1-1.25 
1 max. 
255 
823 
BT4 
0.7-0.8 
3.75-4.5 
1  ma^. 
175-18.5 
1-1.25 
4.5-5.5 
277 
849 
BT5 
0.75-0.85 
3.75-4.5 
1  ma^. 
18.5-19.5 
1.75-2.05 
9- 10 
290 
869 
BT6 
0.75-0.85 
3.75-4.5 
1  ma^. 
20-21 
1.25-1.75 
11.25-12.25 
302 
869 
BT15 
1.4-1.6 
4.25-5 
1 max. 
12-13 
4.75-5.25 
4.5-5.5 
290 
890 
BT21 
0.6-0.7 
3.5-4.25 
0.7  ma^. 
13.5-14.5 
0.4-0.6 
lmax. 
255 
798 
BT42 
1.25-1.4 
3.75-4.5 
2.75-3.5 
8.5-9.5 
2.75-3.25 
9-10 
277 
912 
After BS 4659 1989. 

260 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 3.14 
Grade 
C% 
W% 
114o% 
Cr% 
V% 
T1 
0.75 
18 
4 
1 
M1 
0.8 
2 
8 
4 
1 
M2 
0.85 
6 
5 
4 
2 
Table 3.15 
Selection of high-speed steels 
Application 
Grade 
Composition (%) 
M1 
0.8C, 
2W, 
8Mo, 
4Cr, 
1V 
Normal duty 
M2 
0.85C, 6W, 
5Mo, 
4Cr, 
2V 
T1 
0.75C, 18W, 
4Cr, 
1V 
M35 
0.9C, 
6W, 
5Mo, 
4Cr, 
2V, 
Higher speed cutting 
T4 
0.75C, 18W 
4Cr, 
1V, 
5Co 
T6 
0.8C, 
20W, 
4Cr, 
1.5V, 
12Co 
Higher hardness 
M15 
1.5C, 
7W, 
3Mo, 
5Cr, 
5V, 
M42 
1.3C, 
9W, 
3Mo, 
4Cr, 
3V, 
5Co 
5Co 
lOCo 
Maraging steels 
The term maraging relates to ageing (precipitation strengthening) reactions in 
very low carbon martensitic steels for the development of ultra-high strengths, 
i.e. 0.2% proof strength values of 1400-2400 N/mm 2. Maraging steels are char- 
acterized by high nickel contents and a very important feature is that they exhibit 
substantially higher levels of toughness than conventional high-carbon marten- 
sitic grades of equivalent strength. 
Work on these steels began in the United States in the 1950s at the Bayonne 
Research Laboratory of the International Nickel Company and was directed 
primarily to the development of a high-strength material for submarine hulls. 
However, maraging steels proved unsuitable for this application and their main 
usage has been in the areas of aerospace, tooling and machinery, and structural 
engineering. An excellent summary of information on these steels is contained 
in a publication by the American Society for Metals. 29 
Metallurgy 
Maraging steels generally contain about 18% Ni and the carbon contents are 
limited to 0.03% max. Typically, they are solution treated at a temperature of 
820~ 
and air cooled to room temperature. This results in the formation of a 
martensitic structure, even in large section sizes due to the high hardenability 
effect conferred by the high nickel content and other alloying elements. In 
the solution-treated condition, the low-carbon martensitic structures provide the 
following range of properties: 

Engineering steels 261 
9 0.2% proof strength, 790-830 N/mm 2 
9 tensile strength, 1000-1150 N/mm 2 
9 elongation, 17-19% 
9 reduction of area, 27-35% 
These steels also contain substantial amounts of cobalt and molybdenum and 
smaller additions of titanium which promote age-hardening reactions when the 
solution-treated steels are aged at temperatures of about 480~ 
In the 18% 
Ni-Co-Mo-Ti grades, the main precipitation-strengthening phases are Ni3Mo 
(orthorhombic) and a complex sigma phase (tetragonal), based on FeTi. 3~ As 
illustrated in Figure 3.38, the presence of cobalt intensifies the hardening effect 
of molybdenum but no ageing effects are produced in high-cobalt-molybdenum- 
free compositions. 31 
Commercial grades 
Although a large number of maraging grades has been developed, including 
compositions containing 20% and 25% Ni, the main commercial grades are based 
on the five composition ranges shown in Table 3.16. In this table, the numbers 
ascribed to the various grades relate to the nominal proof strength values in 
units of N/mm 2. However, these grades are also designated according to their 
52 
48 
44 
40 
36 
32 
28 
24 
7Co + Me 
Me 
Mamged martensite 
aged at 800 to 900~ 
28 [- 
~ 
9 
Annealed 
martensite 
24T 
~1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I,, I 
I 
.... l , I 
I ,,I 
I 
I 
0 
1 
2 
3 4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 10 11 12 13 14 
Molybdenum (%) 
Figure 3.38 Effect of molybdenum and cobalt on hardening response in maraging steels 
(After Decker et al. 31) 

262 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 3.16 
Composition ranges for 18% Ni-Co-Mo maraging steels 32 
Grade 
Wrought 
Cast 
18Ni 1400 18Ni 1700 18Ni 1900 18Ni 2400 17Ni 1600 
Nominal 0.2% proof stress: 
N/ram 2 (MPa) 
1400 
1700 
1900 
2400 
tonf/in 2 
90 
110 
125 
155 
1031bf/in 2 
200 
250 
280 
350 
kgf/mm 2 
140 
175 
195 
245 
hbar 
140 
170 
190 
240 
Ni 
17-19 
17-19 
18-19 
17-18 
Co 
8-9 
7-8.5 
8-9.5 
12-13 
Mo 
3-3.5 
4.6-5.1 
4.6-5.2 
3.5-4 
Ti 
0.15-0.25 
0.3-0.5 
0.5-0.8 
1.6-2 
AI 
0.05-0.15 0.05-0.15 0.05-0.15 
0.1-0.2 
C max. 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.01 
Si max. 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.1 
Mn max. 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.1 
Si + Mn max. 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
S max. 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.005 
P max. 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.005 
Ca added 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
None 
B added 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
None 
Zr added 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
None 
Fe 
Balance 
Balance 
Balance 
Balance 
1600 
105 
230 
165 
160 
16-17.5 
9.5-11 
4.4-4.8 
0.15-0.45 
0.02-0.1 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.01 
0.01 
None 
None 
None 
Balance 
proof strength values in ksi units, e.g. 18Ni 1700 (N/mm 2) = 18Ni 250 (ksi). 
As indicated in Table 3.16, the strength of the wrought grades is increased by 
increasing the levels of cobalt, molybdenum and titanium. Whereas the 18Ni 
1400, 1700 and 1900 grades are aged for three hours at 480"C, the 18Ni 2400 
grade requires three hours at 510*C or longer times at 480"C. The larger amount 
of titanium in 18Ni 2400 leads to a greater volume fraction of FeTi sigma phase 
precipitates compared with the lower strength grades. 
Whereas the carbon content of these grades is restricted to low levels, the 
metallurgically active content is virtually zero due to the fixation of carbon by 
titanium. Elements such as silicon and manganese are also tightly controlled 
in order to promote high toughness levels. Aluminium is added primarily as a 
deoxidant, and although larger amounts will supplement the hardening reactions, 
this leads to a loss in toughness. Boron and zirconium are added in order to retard 
grain boundary precipitation, thereby improving toughness and stress corrosion 
resistance. 3~ 
Maraging steels are generally produced by vacuum melting and sometimes 
double vacuum melting (induction plus vacuum arc remelting) is employed. These 
procedures are designed to achieve the following: 
1. Close control over the main alloying elements and the volatilization of impu- 
rities such as lead and bismuth. 
2. Minimization of segregation. 

Engineering steels 263 
Figure 3.39 Fracture toughness of maraging steels and other high-strength martensitic 
grades (After Magnee et al. 33) 
3. Low levels of oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen. 
4. Low levels of inclusions. 
As indicated in Figure 3.39, the toughness of the maraging grades is significantly 
better than that of tempered high-carbon martensitic steels. 33 
The casting grade 17Ni 1600 is normally solution treated by homogenizing 
for four hours at 1150~ 
followed by air cooling. Maraging then takes place 
at 480~ for three hours, which is similar to the conditions used for the lower 
strength wrought grades. However, a more complex heat treatment is sometimes 
employed in order to improve toughness. This involves the following: 
11500C 4 hours + 5950C 4 hours + 820~ 1 hour + 480~ 3 hours 
Corrosion behaviour 
The corrosion rate of maraging steels in both marine and industrial atmospheres 
is almost half of that shown by high-strength, low-alloy steels. In sea water, 
both types of steels show similar corrosion rates initially, but after six months 
the maraging steels corrode more slowly. The International Nickel Co. 32 have 
published Kiscc data for exposure in aqueous environments, with and without 
NaC1, which show that the 18% Ni maraging steels compare favourably with 
other high-strength steels. 
Applications 
From the foregoing remarks, it is apparent that maraging steels are capable of 
producing very high strengths with good fracture toughness but at a cost far in 
excess of that of conventional, low-alloy engineering steels. They are therefore 

264 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 3.17 Applications for maraging steels 32 
Aerospace 
Tooling and machinery 
Structural engineering 
and ordnance 
Aircraft forgings (e.g. 
undercarriage parts, 
wing fittings) 
Solid-propellant missile 
cases 
Jet-engine starter 
impellers 
Aircraft arrestor hooks 
Torque transmission 
shafts 
Aircraft ejector release 
units 
Punches and die bolsters 
for cold forging 
Extrusion press rams 
and mandrels 
Aluminium die-casting 
and extrusion dies 
Cold-reducing mandrels 
in tube production 
Zinc-base alloy die-casting 
dies 
Machine components: 
gears 
index plates 
lead screws 
Lightweight portable 
military bridges 
Ordnance components 
Fasteners 
used selectively in applications where weight saving is of paramount importance 
or where they can be shown to be more cost-effective than low-alloy grades. Some 
typical uses for maraging steels are listed in Table 3.17. As one might anticipate, 
these steels are used to advantage for weight reduction in aerospace and military 
applications but their excellent combination of properties, ease of heat treatment 
and dimensional stability also offer attractions in the more commercial sector of 
tooling and machinery. 
Steels for steam power turbines 
Electricity is generated on a large scale by the following sequence of operations: 
1. The production of steam at high temperature and pressure in fossil-fired boilers 
or nuclear reactors. 
2. The passage of the steam through a turbine where it impinges on the blades 
of a rotor, thereby creating rotational energy. 
3. The transmission of the energy developed in the turbine rotor to a generator 
rotor which produces electricity in the windings of the stator. 
The rotor shafts in the turbine and generator are produced from very large, high- 
integrity forgings which operate at speeds of about 3000 rev/min and over a range 
of temperatures, depending on their position in the power train. In a typical 
660 MW coal-fired station, the turbine has three stages, namely high pressure 
(HP), intermediate pressure (IP) and low pressure (LP), and the last stage can 
involve two or three cylinders. On the other hand, the turbines for large water- 
cooled reactors operate at 1200 MW and involve only the HP and LP stages 
with very large rotors. This is illustrated in the data in Table 3.18 by Collier 

Engineering steels 265 
Table 3.18 
Component 
Weight (tons) 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
660 MW Fossil unit 
1200 MW Nuclear unit 
HP rotor 
15 
90 
IP rotor 
30 
- 
LP rotor 
50 
210 
Generator rotor 
90 
190 
and Gemmil134 for the weights of finished forgings. These authors also point out 
that the ingot weights for these components are usually a factor of two or three 
times that of the finished forgings and often involve the combined production of 
several steelmaking and secondary refining units in order to achieve the required 
ingot weights. 
Attention will be focused on the rotors for turbines and generators but reference 
will also be made to other components such as casings, bolts and blades. A very 
detailed text on the materials used in both steam and nuclear power plant has 
been prepared by Wyatt. 35 
Turbine casings 
The casings for the HP and IP stages of turbines are made from large castings, 
and in the UK the 0.5% Cr-Mo-V grade is favoured: 
0.15% C, 0.5% Cr, 0.5% Mo, 0.25% V 
The casings are generally cast in two halves which are bolted together longitudi- 
nally along a heavy flange. In fossil-fired plant, steam inlet temperatures of 540 
or 565"C are employed and therefore the casings are subjected to high internal 
pressure within the creep range. In addition, the two shifting operation of being 
on load during the day and shut down overnight imposes significant thermal 
fatigue stresses on the casing and other components in the HP and IP stages. 
Repair welding in 0.5% Cr-Mo-V casings can give rise to stress relief 
cracking which is associated with low creep ductility in the coarse-grained heat- 
affected zone of weldments. This problem is generally overcome by adopting 
titanium as opposed to aluminium deoxidation and this practice has proved to be 
beneficial to both weldability and rupture ductility. 
liP and IP rotors 
The following 1% Cr-Mo-V composition is used world-wide for the rotor shafts 
of both the HP and IP stages of turbines: 
0.25% C, 1.0% Cr, 1.0% Mo, 0.3% V 
As indicated earlier, the HP rotor is the smallest in the turbine and operates at 
temperatures up to the main steam temperature of 540-565~ 
During operation, 
the rotors are subjected to centrifugal forces and also to torques which mainly 

266 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
affect the rotor journals due to their smaller cross-sectional area. However, given 
the temperature of operation, the creep and rupture behaviour of the HP rotor is 
of major concern. 
The IP rotor is similar in design but larger than the HP rotor and again there is 
the need for high creep and rupture strength in the hotter regions. However, at the 
exhaust end of the IP stage, the blades are longer and impose greater centrifugal 
forces. This factor, coupled with the cooler operating conditions, therefore intro- 
duces fracture toughness as an important design parameter. In addition, transient 
operating phases, such as start-up and shut-down, can result in further thermal 
stresses and reinforce the need for adequate fracture toughness at lower tempera- 
tures. However, there tends to be an inverse relationship between rupture strength 
and toughness and whereas the best creep and rupture strengths in 1% Cr-Mo-V 
steel are obtained in an upper bainitic microstructure, such material has poor 
toughness. On the other hand, the lower bainitic or martensitic structures that 
promote good fracture toughness have poor creep strength. The final hardening 
treatment for 1% Cr-Mo-V rotors therefore depends very much on whether 
high-temperature strength or good toughness is considered to be the more impor- 
tant design criterion. In the UK, rotors are oil quenched for improved fracture 
toughness, whereas in the United States, air cooling is adopted in favour of creep 
strength. 
Both Reynolds et al. 36 and Viswanathan and Jaffe 37 have reviewed the factors 
that might lead to an improved combination of creep strength and fracture tough- 
ness. These include the use of vacuum carbon deoxidation, electroslag remelting 
and modifications to the traditional 1% Cr-Mo-V composition to incorporate 
higher levels of chromium (1.5%) and an addition of nickel (0.7%). It has also 
been shown that improvements in the toughness of HP and IP rotors can be 
obtained by reducing the level of impurity elements and suppressing temper 
embrittlement. However, it is generally accepted that temper embritflement is 
more pronounced in the 3.5% Ni-Cr-Mo-V LP rotor grade and this matter will 
receive greater attention in the next section. 
LP rotors 
The LP rotor is the largest in the turbine assembly and operates at temperatures 
between 270~ and ambient. The blades in this segment are also very long, e.g. 
up to 1.12 m, and impose high stresses on the rotor shaft. Therefore the main 
design criteria in LP rotors are a high proof strength and good fracture toughness 
as opposed to the major requirement for high creep strength in the HP and IP 
components. The 0.2% proof strength values for LP rotors are of the order of 
750 N/mm 2 and the increasing demand for good fracture toughness is illustrated 
by the data in Table 3.19 for FATI' values over the period from 1970 to 1985. 
The material used for LP rotor forgings is 3.5% Ni-Cr-Mo-V steel to the 
following composition: 
0.25% C, 3.5% Ni, 1.5% Cr, 0.5% Mo, 0.1% V 
In addition, the steel is made to low levels of silicon (0.1% max.) and manganese 
(typically 0.2%), together with restricted levels of elements such as arsenic, 

Engineering steels 267 
Table 3.19 
FATI' Values in LP rotors 
Period 
FA77,oc a 
Average 
" iange 
1970-1975 
+25 
0 to + 50 
1976-1980 
+ 16 
- 18 to + 40 
1981-1985 
+ 10 
-4 to + 20 
aFracture appearance transition temperature. 
antimony, tin and phosphorus in order to minimize the effects of temper 
embrittlement. The evolution of the current composition will be described briefly 
to reflect the various changes that have taken place to accommodate the demands 
for increased turbine size and improved fracture toughness. 
Boyle et al. 39 have given a very detailed account of the development work 
that was undertaken in the United States in the 1950s following failures in a 
number of turbine and generator rotors. These failures were attributed to inade- 
quate fracture toughness and prompted an industry-wide development to improve 
the performance of the 2.7% Ni 0.5% Mo 0.1% V steel that was used for large 
turbine rotors at that time. It became evident that temper embrittlement was a 
significant factor in contributing to low toughness and the manganese content 
of the steel was reduced from 0.7% to 0.4%. In order to compensate for the 
loss in hardenability and to improve toughness, the nickel content was raised 
from 2.7% to 3.5%. Boyle et al. state that nickel contents as high as 5% were 
investigated but that the benefits derived from additions greater than 3.5% were 
insufficient to compensate for the difficulties introduced by the depression of 
the Acl. Presumably these difficulties related to the fact that the Acl can be 
depressed to a temperature close to or below the nominal tempering temperature 
with the potential risk of reaustenitization. 
Although changes to the manganese and nickel contents realized significant 
improvements in toughness, there was also the need to develop a composition for 
larger diameter rotors which required higher tensile and yield strengths, together 
with good toughness and ductility. This led to the addition of 1.5% Cr to the 
modified Ni-Mo-V to provide the current 3.5% Ni-Cr-Mo-V grade. Since 
the 1950s, a considerable amount of work has been carried out in the UK to 
improve the fracture toughness of LP and generator rotors, particularly in relation 
to the suppression of temper embrittlement. In addition, the original FATI' data 
have been augmented with K ic fracture toughness values and a good correlation 
between the two parameters has been derived via the expression: 
KIcMNm_3/2 _ 
6600 
60 - B 
where B = (test temperature- FATT value)~ 
Following homogenization treatments at temperatures around 11500C, rotors 
are heated slowly to a solution treatment temperature of 840~ and then lowered 
vertically into an array of high-pressure water sprays. Modem LP rotors have a 
diameter in excess of 1700 mm and the above treatment results in the formation 

268 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
of a rim structure which is essentially martensitic and a core structure which is 
essentially bainitic. In order to avoid quench cracking, the large forgings are not 
quenched directly to room temperature but are held for a period at a temperature 
of 200"C in order to reduce internal stresses. The material is then tempered in the 
range 560-640"C, the lower bound avoiding the formation of isothermal temper 
embrittlement and the upper bound avoiding the risk of partial reaustenitization. 
In turn, the rate of cooling adopted from the tempering temperature represents a 
compromise between the fast cooling that inhibits temper embrittlement and the 
slow cooling that minimizes internal stress. The compromise of fan cooling is 
usually employed. 
At one time, the requirement for very low levels of silicon and manganese 
would have posed major problems in deoxidation but these have been overcome 
by the introduction of vacuum carbon deoxidation (VCD). VCD treatment is 
also thought to be beneficial in improving the solidification characteristics and 
reducing the segregation effects in large forging ingots. 
Turbine generator end rings 
The copper windings in an electrical generator are not strong enough to resist the 
rotation stress and end rings are fitted to retain the windings. These components 
are very highly stressed and have 0.2% proof strength values greater than 
1200 N/mm 2. A further requirement is that the material should be non-magnetic 
in order to minimize electrical losses from the generator. Up until the late 1970s, 
a cold-worked steel containing 18% Mn 5% Cr was used world-wide for this 
application but the main disadvantage of this material was its susceptibility 
to stress corrosion cracking (SCC). This could arise in moist conditions and 
the threat of catastrophic disintegration during service necessitated frequent 
inspection. 
Because of these problems, attention was turned to the development of a more 
SCC-resistant material, leading to the introduction of a steel of the following 
composition: 
0.08%C, 0.3%Si, 18.0%Mn, 18.0%Cr, 0.60%N 
This material is substantially solid solution strengthened by nitrogen and, 
additionally, this element also serves to preserve the austenitic (and therefore non- 
magnetic) structure in the presence of a high chromium content. The 18% Mn 
18% Cr steel also offers the facility for attaining higher 0.2% proof strength 
values than 18% Mn 5% Cr steel, i.e. values up to 1400 N/mm 2. 18% Mn 
18% Cr steel now represents the first-choice material for end tings and after 
10 years trouble-free service has virtually eliminated the need for in-service 
inspection. 
Turbine bolts 
Large bolts or studs are used to maintain steam tightness in the flanges of high- 
temperature turbines. These are tightened to a tension that imposes an elastic 
strain of about 0.15% but at the high operating temperatures this tension reduces 

Engineering steels 
269 
due to the process of creep (stress relaxation). Therefore bolting materials must 
have good creep strength in order to minimize relaxation and maintain steam 
tightness. Repeated relaxation and retightening will lead eventually to creep frac- 
ture and therefore the utilities limit both the operating period and the number of 
retightening operations so as to avoid fracture during service. 
In the UK, the majority of the bolting requirements are satisfied by a range 
of Cr-Mo and Cr-Mo-V steels and the evolution of these steels has been 
described by Everson et al. 4~ Details of the composition, heat treatment and 
high-temperature properties of these steels are given in Table 3.20. The Cr-Mo 
(Group 1) steel was introduced in the 1930s when the steam temperatures were 
of the order of 450"C. By the late 1940s, steam temperatures had risen to about 
480"C and higher strength bolts were required. This led to the introduction of 
the Cr-Mo-V (Group 2) steel in which the higher strength is achieved by the 
formation of a fine precipitate of V4C3 on tempering at 700"C. However, steam 
temperatures continued to rise in the UK in pursuit of higher operating effi- 
ciency and in 1955 reached a level of 565"C. This change necessitated a further 
increase in strength and this led to the introduction of the 1% Cr 1% Mo 0.75% V 
(Group 5) steel. However, this material proved to have poor rupture ductility due 
to intergranular cracking after only short exposure at the operating temperature. A 
major research programme was therefore undertaken on this problem and this led 
to the development of the Cr-Mo-V-Ti-B (Group 6) steel. This composition 
represented the addition of about 0.1% Ti and 0.005% B to Group 5 steel which 
produced a significant improvement in rupture ductility. According to Everson, 
Orr and Dulieu, the principal effect is due to boron, about 50% of which is incor- 
porated in the V4C3 precipitates and the remainder is dissolved in the matrix. 
This produces a stabilizing effect on the V4C3 near the grain boundary regions, 
making the carbides more resistant to dissolution and so reducing the rate at 
which denuded zones are formed. Titanium is added primarily as a nitrogen-fixing 
agent and so preventing the formation of boron nitride, which is metallurgically 
inactive. However, the formation of TiN leads to refinement of the austenite 
grains which also contributes to improved rupture ductility. More recently, the 
Cr-Mo-V-Ti-B steel has been used as boiler support rods, operating at temper- 
atures up to 580"C. 
Nimonic 80A (Ni-20.0% Cr, 2.4% Ti, 1.4% AI) is significantly stronger than 
the low-alloy steels and allows the use of smaller bolts and more compact flanges 
than are possible with ferritic bolting materials. It is also likely that Nimonic 
80A would replace Cr-Mo-V (Group 6) steel as the principal turbine bolting 
material if steam temperatures were to be raised above the present operating level 
of 565"C. 
Detailed studies have also shown that marked improvements in the rupture 
characteristics of Cr-Mo-V bolting steels can be produced by restricting the 
level of residual elements. Thus the rupture life of Cr-Mo-V steel can be related 
to the 'R' factor (P + 2.43 As + 3.75 Sn + 0.13 Cu) and Cr-Mo-V bolting 
steels are now made to a typical 'R' value of 0.07% compared to 0.2% in early 
years. This has led to a substantial increase in rupture ductility. The 'R' value 
can also be reduced to a level of 0.015 in VIM-VAR material to provide further 
improvements in creep strength and ductility. 

Table 3.20 
UK turbine bolting steels 
~~ 
~~ 
SES" 
CEGB 
BS 1506: 1986 
Nominal composition (9%) 
Typical heat 
RT tensile 
Strength 
Trade name 
Code 
Type no. 
treatment 
strength 
C 
Cr M o  
V 
Others 
(N/rnmz) 
Rupt. 
Reha? 
c
d
c
d
 
~~ 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
~~ 
DUREHETE900 
GP 1 (Cr-Mo) 
631-850 
0.4 
1 
0.5 
- 
- 
870C O Q + W C  850-1000 
234 
97 
81 - 
DUREHETE 950 
GP 2 
671-850 
0.4 
1 
0.5 
0.25 
- 
950C OQ+7WC 
850-1000 
324 
151 
83 - 
- 
(Cr-Mo-V) 
GP 3 
- 
0.3 
3 
0.5 
0.75 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(3Cr-Mo-V) 
- 
GP 4 (Mo-V) 
- 
0.2 - 0.5 
0.25 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
DUREHETE 1050 
GP 5 
- 
0.2 
1 
1 
0.75 
- 
Superseded by Durehete 1055 
(1Cr-Mo-V) 
(1Cr-Mo-V) 
%ES, Stocksbridge Engineering Steels. 
bStress relaxation for 0.15% strain. 
h values (N/mz) at 500'C. 
dlo4 h values (N/mz) 
at 550'C. 
After Everson et a[.@ 
DWHETE 1050 
GP 6 
681-820 
0.2 
1 
1 
0.75 
Ti, B 
980C OQ+7Oo"C 
820-1000 
418 280 
141 70 

Engineering steels 271 
Turbine blades 
Apart from locations at the extreme ends of steam turbines, all the blades are 
made in 12% Cr steels. Although the metallurgy of these steels will be discussed 
in the next chapter, for the sake of continuity the use of 12% Cr steels in turbine 
blades is better described at this stage. 
In the HP turbine, the blades are short and operate under the maximum steam 
temperature, i.e. 565"C. The creep strength of 12% Cr steels is not adequate to 
operate at such temperatures and therefore the first few rows of blades at the 
HP inlet are generally manufactured from Nimonic 80A. In the LP turbine, the 
blades are long, and in large turbines the exhaust blades can exceed a length of 
one metre. Such blades generate high centrifugal forces and again 12% Cr steels 
are not strong enough to cope with the conditions imposed. In such situations, 
the precipitation-strengthened FV520B steel may be employed, which has the 
composition shown in Table 3.21. 
However, in recent years, interest has grown in the use of titanium alloys, 
typically Ti-6% AI, 4% V (Ti6AI4V), as a substitute for martensitic stainless 
steels in the outlet stages of turbines. The reduced weight and high resistance 
to corrosion fatigue of the titanium alloys allows the length of the blades to 
be increased substantially, compared to what can be achieved in 12% Cr steels. 
Thus the exhaust area of the LP turbine can be increased by about 50%, which 
increases the power by the same amount. 
For all stages between the inlet and outlet, the grades of 12% Cr steels shown 
in Table 3.22 are employed. The tempering resistance and creep strength of these 
materials is increased progressively with the addition of molybdenum, vanadium 
and niobium to the 12% Cr base. As illustrated in the next chapter, nickel is added 
to such steels in order to preserve an austenitic structure at high temperatures, 
in the presence of ferrite-forming elements such as molybdenum, vanadium and 
niobium. 
Although the 12% Cr steels have adequate resistance to attack in moist air, 
the formation of water droplets in the final stages of the turbine can result in 
severe erosion problems. This is overcome by brazing strips of erosion-resistant 
materials such as stellite (cobalt-based) to the leading edges of LP blades. 
Table 3.21 Composition of FV 520B 
C% 
Ni% 
Cr% 
Mo% 
Cu% 
Nb% 
0.05 
5.5 
14 
1.6 
1.5 
0.3 
Table 3.22 
Type 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
Ni% 
Cr% 
Mo% 
V% 
Nb% 
12Cr-Mo 
0.1 
0.3 
0.3 
- 
12.5 
0.75 
- 
- 
12Cr-Mo-V 
0.1 
0.3 
0.6 
0.8 
12 
0.6 
0.2 
- 
12Cr-Mo-V-Nb 
0.13 
0.5 
1 
0.8 
11.2 
0.6 
0.2 
0.4 

272 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Medium-high-carbon pearlitic steels 
Although most of the steels that are used in engineering applications are 
heat treated to form a tempered bainitic/martensitic structure, there are notable 
examples in which the required strength is generated in air-cooled, medium-high- 
carbon steels with a predominantly pearlitic microstructure. These include 
micro-alloy forging grades, rail steels and high-carbon wire rod and these 
applications will be discussed in the sections that follow. However, as a 
precursor to these discussions, it is worthwhile to review very briefly the physical 
metallurgy of pearlitic steels. 
In Chapters 1 and 2, the HaU-Petch relationship was introduced, namely: 
1 
try ---- tri -t- kyd-2 
where ay = yield strength 
tri = friction stress which opposes dislocation movement 
(Peieds stress) 
ky = dislocation locking term 
d = ferrite grain size (mm) 
It was stated that this basic relationship was extended later to take account of 
the solid solution strengthening effects of alloying elements and expressed as 
follows: 
1 
try = tri + k' (% alloy) + kyd-~ 
Following this concept, Picketing and Gladman 4t then produced the following 
quantitative relationships for yields and tensile strength: 
1 
YS (N/mm 2) = 53.9 + 32.3% Mn + 83.2% Si + 354 Nf -I- 17.4d-~ 
1 
TS (N/mm 2) 
294 + 27.7% Mn + 83.2% Si + 3.85% pearlite + 7.7d-~ 
These equations were derived by statistical analysis of steels containing up to 
0.25% C and one of the interesting points to emerge was the absence of a term 
for carbon or pearlite in the equation for yield strength. 
In the 1970s, Gladman et al. 42 went on to develop equations for steels 
containing up to 0.9% C and their equation for yield strength was presented 
in the following form: 
n 
n 
cry = fatra + (1 - fa)trp 
where try = yield strength of the ferrite-pearlite aggregate 
tra = yield strength of ferrite 
trp = yield strength of pearlite 
fa = volume fraction of ferrite 
and by implication (1 - fa) = volume fraction of pearlite. 
Thus the yield strength of the aggregate is presented as the sum of the separate 
contributions from ferrite and pearlite and weighted according to their volume 

Engineering steels 273 
fractions. In the absence of pearlite, try = txa and in the absence of ferfite, try = 
t~p. The index n in the above equation allows the yield strength to vary with 
pearlite content in a non-linear manner and, as indicated below, it was given the 
value of ~. The full quantitative equations for yield and tensile strengths are as 
follows: 
1 
l 
1 
1 
YS (N/ram 2) = f~ [35+58.5%Mn+ 17.4d-[ ]+(1 -f~ )[17.8+3.85So ~ ] 
+ 63.1%Si + 426~/%N 
1 
1 
1 
TS (N/mm 2) = fa3 [247 + 1146~/%N + 18.2d-[] + (1 - f~) 
l 
[721 + 3.55So [ ] + 97.3%Si 
where So = inteflamellar spacing of pearlite (ram). 
Thus in high-carbon steels the volume fraction of pearlite (1 - f~) and the 
interlamellar spacing (So) have a significant effect on both the yield and tensile 
strengths. The major difference between the two equations is the value of the 
constants, namely 35 and 178 N/ram 2 for yield strength and 247 and 721 N/mm 2 
for tensile strength. Manganese in solid solution appears to have no significant 
effect on tensile strength, but this element appears in the equation for yield 
strength. The components of yield strength in medium-to high-carbon steels, 
containing 0.9% Mn, 0.3% Si and 0.007% N, are shown in Figure 3.40. This 
9 Experimental data 
9 
4OO 
.-, 
~eadlte 
r 
i 
200 
50 
Peadlte (wt%) 
100 
Figure 3.40 Components of yield strength in high-carbon steels (After Gladman et al. 42) 

274 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
indicates that ferrite makes a significant contribution to the yield strength even 
when there is 90% pearlite in the microstructure. 
Gladman et al. 42 also generated an equation for the impact transition temper- 
ature of high-carbon steels and this is shown below: 
1 
27J ITr (*C)--- f~[-46- l l.5d-~] 
1 
1 
+ (1 - fa)[-335 + 5.6So g - 13.3p-g + 3.48 x 106t] 
+ 48.7% Si + 762~/%N 
where d = ferrite grain (mm) 
p = pearlite colony size (mm) 
t = cementite plate thickness (mm) 
This equation again emphasizes the importance of a fine grain size in producing 
a low impact transition temperature and it should be noted that the coefficient for 
the pearlite colony size p (13.3) is of a similar order to that of the ferrite grain 
size d (11.5). 
Rail steels 
Up until the 1970s, rails for passenger and freight trains were regarded as 
relatively simple undemanding products and the specifications had changed very 
little for a number of decades. However, investment in railway systems, the 
advent of high-speed passenger trains and the requirement for longer life track 
imposed a demand for rails of high quality, greater strength and tighter geometric 
tolerances. Therefore there have been major innovations in the past 20 years in 
terms of method of manufacture, degree of inspection and range of products. 
Typically, rail steel is produced in large BOS vessels and is vacuum 
degassed prior to being continuously cast into large blooms. Vacuum degassing, 
coupled with ladle trimming facilities, permits very tight control over chemical 
composition. After casting, the blooms are placed in insulated boxes, whilst 
still at a temperature of about 600*C, and are cooled at a rate of I*C per 
hour for a period of three to five days. This treatment, coupled with prior 
vacuum degassing, reduces the hydrogen level in the finished rail to about 
0.5 ppm, thereby reducing substantially the susceptibility to hydrogen cracking. 
The blooms are then reheated and rolled directly to the finished rail profile. The 
rail produced from each bloom is hot sawn to specific lengths prior to passage 
through a rotary stamping machine en route to the cooling areas. Depending upon 
the properties required, the rails are either cooled normally in air or subjected 
to enhanced cooling for the development of high strength. On cooling to room 
temperature, the rails are passed through a roller-straightener machine which 
subjects the section to a number of severe bending reversals and emerge with 
a very high degree of straightness. Finally, the rails pass through a series of 
ultrasonic, eddy current and laser inspection stations which monitor non-metallic 
inclusions, external defects and the flatness of the running surface. The final 

Engineering steels 275 
operation is the cold sawing of the rail ends on high-speed machines with carbide- 
tipped blades. Rails are generally supplied in lengths up to 36 m. 
Rail steel spec~ications 
Historically, high-volume rail steels have been based on fully pearlitic microstruc- 
tures which are characterized by high resistance to wear and plastic flow, both 
of which are major property requirements for good rail performance. Although 
the potential of martensitic structures has been evaluated, they proved to be 
unsuitable, possessing inadequate toughness and ductility. Therefore rail steels 
continue to be based on pearlitic microstructures which are generated through 
various combinations of carbon, manganese and other elements. 
Rail steel specifications can be classified into three types, based on tensile 
strength: 
1. Normal grades, ~700 N/mm 2 min. TS 
2. Wear-resisting grades, 880 N/mm 2 min. TS 
3. High-strength grades, 1080-1200 N/ram 2 TS 
Normal grades 
Typical examples of normal grades are BS 11" 1985 Normal and UIC 860- 
O Grade 70 (Table 3.23). These are the high-tonnage grades which are used 
in normal service conditions in conventional railways, including high-speed 
passenger traffic (200 km/h), and medium-speed (100 km/h) relatively heavy axle 
load (25 tonne) freight. The majority of London Transport underground track is 
also laid in BS 11 Normal grade. 
Wear-resistant grades 
The hardness and wear resistance of pearlitic steels are increased by refining 
the pearlite lamellae. This is achieved by increasing the c~bon and manganese 
contents as illustrated in the specifications for wear-resisting grades given in 
Tables 3.24 and 3.25. 
Thus similar levels of tensile strength can be obtained from various 
combinations of carbon and manganese, both of which depress the temperature of 
transformation from austenite to pearlite and thereby refine the pearlite lamellae. 
These wear-resisting grades are used for heavy axle loads, high-density traffic 
routes or tightly curved track. However, the use of wear-resisting rails on 
conventional railways can also show economic advantages. 
Table 3.23 
BS 11 Normal grade UIC 860-0 Grade 70 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
- 
_ 
. 
.
.
.
.
.
 
Grade 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
TS min. 
Elong. min. 
(N/mm 2) 
5.65~/So 
BS 11 Normal 
0.45-0.6 
0.05-0.35 
0.95-1.25 
UIC 860-0 Grade 70 
0.4-0.6 
0.05-0.35 
0.8-1.25 
710 
9 
680 
14 

276 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 3.24 
BSI 1 wear-resisting grade A/UIC 860-0 Grade 90A 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
TS min. 
Elong. min. 
(N/mm 2) 
5.65~So 
0.65-0.8 
0.1-0.5 
0.8-1.3 
880 
8 
Table 3.25 
BSl l wear-resisting grade B/UIC 860-0 Grade 90B 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
TS min. 
Elong. min. 
(N/mm 2) 
5.65~/So 
0.55-0.75 
0.1-0.5 
1.3-1.7 
880 
8 
High-strength grades 
For the extremely arduous service conditions encountered in tightly curved track 
and under very high axle loads, even higher strengths are required which demand 
further refinement of the pearlitic structure. Up until 1985, most European 
railmakers produced such material by adding up to 1% Cr to the basic C-Mn 
composition and this increased the hardness of the rail head from 280 BHN 
to approximately 330 BHN with an improvement factor of about two in wear 
resistance. However, the gradual replacement of bolted track by welded track 
brought about the requirement for an adequate level of weldability, a property 
not readily satisfied with the high hardenability introduced by the addition 
of 1% Cr. Attention therefore turned to the use of accelerated cooling from 
the austenite range, rather than high-alloy additions, for the depression of the 
pearlite transformation and the development of high-strength rails. A number of 
railmakers have now introduced in-line cooling for the head hardening of rails 
and detailed accounts of the computerized facility installed by British Steel at 
Workington are given in publications by Preston 43 and Hodgson and Preston. 44 
Brief details are as follows. 
The rail leaves the finishing stands at a temperature of about 10(~~ 
and is 
stood head up. The rail passes under temperature monitors and then into a 55-m- 
long cooling train where it is sprayed with water over all surfaces. The outgoing 
rail leaves the cooling station at dull red heat and the main transformation to 
pearlite takes place in still air. Obviously the rate of cooling has to be balanced 
very finely so as to provide sufficiently high rates of cooling in the centre of 
the rail head so as to depress the transformation of austenite to pearlite without 
cooling the surface of the rail at a rate which would lead to the formation of 
bainite or martensite. During cooling, the rail is driven through the cooling station 
by rollers which also maintain straightness in the rail. On leaving the cooling 
station, the rail is finally turned on its side and passes down the cooling banks 
for finishing in the normal manner. Using this facility, the hardness developed in 
the head of a 0.8% C 0.9% Mn rail is controlled to within a fairly narrow range 
of about 350-370 BHN. 44 

Engineering steels 277 
Flash butt welding is used to join lengths of rail into continuous track and 
Preston 43 has commented on the effects of this process on the hardness of 
enhanced cooled rail. In flash butt welding, the rail ends are heated to high 
temperatures by an electric arc and then squeezed together by a hydraulic force 
of 40-60 tonne. The rail ends fuse, excess material is extruded from the joint 
and material in the heat-affected zone cools through the transformation range at 
the rate of about 1.3"C/s. In contrast, the head of mill-hardened rail cools at a rate 
of about 2.5~ 
and after flash butt welding, the hardness of enhanced cooled 
0.8% C 0.9% Mn steel falls to about 300 BHN compared with 350-370 BHN 
in the mill-hardened condition. However, this can be avoided by increasing the 
alloy content of the steel such that a hardness of about 370 BHN is developed 
under a natural cooling rate of 1.3"C/s after welding. 
Wear resistance of rails 
British Steel has carried out extensive laboratory wear tests on rail steels at its 
Swinden Technology Centre in Rotherham. This involves the rotation of discs 
of railway wheel and rail materials, under a controlled contact stress and with a 
controlled amount of slip between the two discs. Wear is determined by weight 
loss on the rail test disc and expressed in terms of mg/m of slip. In this test, a 
very clear relationship has been established between wear rate and hardness and 
this relationship is shown for a range of rail steel grades in Figure 3.41. 45 Thus 
150 
..~ 100 
._o. 
(9 
t,,,, 
so 
0 
0 0 
O0 
0 
o 
~o 
0 
o %o 
~ 
o 
0 
0 
0 
o 
,,,I 
_ 
I 
220 
240 
260 
O O 
Rail type 
o BSll Normal grade 
o Wear-resisting grade A 
9 Wear-resisting grade B 
9 110 kg/mm 21% Cr 
A Enhanced I% Cr 
& 9 
9 
A 9 AA~~ 
AA 
Q 
" 
,i 
9 
,'r 
:.=: 
I,:_ 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
280 
300 
320 
340 
360 
380 
400 
Hardness (Hv) 
Figure 3.41 Effect of hardness on wear rate in laboratory tests (After British Steep s ) 

278 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
A5 
E E 
~4 
~3 
E 
5 mm 
Curve 290 m radius 
Axle load 25 tonnes 
O BS11 Normal grade 
r 110 kg/mm 2 1% Cr grade 
O 
O 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
MGT of traffic 
Figure 3.42 Side wear in normal and 1% Cr rails under identical service conditions 
(After British Steel 45) 
BS 11 with the lowest hardness and tensile strength exhibits the highest wear 
rate but this falls progressively to low values as the alloy content and hardness 
of the materials is increased. However, whilst producing the correct order of 
merit, this test exaggerates the relative performance of the various steels under 
operating conditions and therefore laboratory rig testing has to be supplemented 
by measurements of rail wear under normal track service. An illustration of 
the development of side wear in BS 11 Normal and 1% Cr rails is given in 
Figure 3.42. This indicates that 1% Cr material has a wear resistance of three to 
four times that of BS 11 Normal under the particular track conditions identified 
in this figure. Other track tests indicate that wear-resistant grades have twice the 
resistance of BS 11 Normal. 
Side wear of the type illustrated in Figure 3.42 is a function of axle load and 
track curvature, the centrifugal force causing the flange of the wheel to scrub 
against the gauge comer head of the high outer rail in the curve. 
Austenitic 14% Mn rails 
When the service conditions are such that exceptionally high rates of wear are 
experienced in high-strength rails, then consideration is given to the use of rails 
of the following composition which develop an austenitic microstructure: 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
0.75-0.9 
0.2-0.4 
13-14 
The metallurgy of this material is complex but such steel has a very high resis- 
tance to wear because of its high rate of work hardening when subjected to 

Engineering steels 279 
applied stress or abrasion. This special grade of steel is made in electric arc 
furnaces but is rolled to rail in the same type of mill as that employed for the 
pearlific grades. The mechanical properties 45 of 14% Mn rail material are given 
below: 
TS (N/ram 2) 
YS (N/mm 2) 
Elong. (%) 
818-973 
355-386 
40-60 
The low YS/TS ratio illustrated above is indicative of the high rate of work 
hardening and material with an initial hardness of 180-210 B HN develops a 
hardness of over 400 BHN, and to an appreciable depth, after a short period of 
service. The steel can be welded, using suitably modified techniques, by either 
the thermit or flash butt welding processes. 
14% Mn rails are used traditionally in railway points and crossings and in other 
situations where the extended service life justifies their higher cost compared with 
pearlitic grades. 
At one time, it was postulated that the high rate of work hardening in this 
steel (also known as Hadfields Manganese Steel) was due to the formation of 
strain-induced martensite. However, it is now known that the hardening effect 
is associated with the formation of stacking faults in the austenitic structure and 
strain-induced martensite will only form in decarburized material or in steels of 
a lower alloy content. 
Micro-alloy forging steels 
Up until the late 1940s, the engineering steels that were used for automotive 
engine and transmission parts were based largely on compositions containing 
substantial amounts of nickel and molybdenum. The philosophy that prevailed 
was that these components were subjected to arduous service conditions that 
required high levels of strength and toughness and that this combination of 
properties was best achieved in Ni-Mo grades. However, during the 1950s, 
there was the realization that many of the steels were over-alloyed with regard 
to the hardenability requirements of the components and that the specified levels 
of strength could be achieved by steels of leaner composition. In the 1960s, 
the emerging technology of fracture mechanics provided greater knowedge on 
the level of toughness required in engineering components and indicated that 
satisfactory performance could be provided by steel compositions which gave 
lower impact energy values than the traditional Ni-Mo grades. These factors, 
coupled with major advances in heat treatment technology, led the way to the 
gradual substitution of the Ni-Mo grades by cheaper steels involving additions 
of manganese, chromium and boron. 
By the 1970s, the opportunities for alloy reduction and substitution had largely 
been exhausted but competition in the automotive industry maintained the impetus 
for further cost reduction. Attention therefore turned to potential savings in 
manufacturing costs and particularly in the area of heat treatment. Tradition- 
ally, components such as crankshafts and connecting rods are cooled to room 
temperature after the forging operation, only to be reheated to a temperature 

280 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
of about 850~ prior to oil quenching. Tempering at 550-650~ then produces 
tensile strengths in the range 800-1100 N/mm 2. However, in the mid-1970s, 
German manufacturers demonstrated that these strength levels could be produced 
in a micro-alloy, medium-carbon steel (49 MnVS3) after air cooling from the 
forging operation, thus eliminating the need for heat treatment. Since that time, 
major effort has been devoted to the development of micro-alloy forging steels in 
Europe and Japan and these steels have gradually been introduced as substitutes 
for quenched and tempered steels in some automotive components. 
Metallurgical considerations 
As indicated in earlier chapters, niobium, titanium and vanadium are used as 
micro-alloying elements in low-carbon steels, although high soaking tempera- 
tures must be employed in order to achieve substantial solution of Nb(CN), TiC 
and TiN. However, vanadium has a high solubility in austenite, regardless of 
the carbon content, and is therefore the most suitable micro-alloying element 
for medium-carbon steels. On cooling from the solution treatment temperature, 
vanadium carbonitride precipitates in both the proeutectoid ferrite and the ferrite 
lamellae of the pearlite. The physical metallurgy of these steels has been reviewed 
by Gladman. 46 
As illustrated in Figure 3.43, the tensile properties of these grades increase 
progressively with vanadium content and, depending upon the levels of strength 
required, vanadium contents in the range 0.05-0.2% are employed. The level 
of precipitation strengthening is also influenced by the nitrogen content and 
Figure 3.43 
Mn steel 
1000 
800 
E 600 
v 
" 400 
if) 
200 
0 
0 
25 
A 
El 
,-- 
"~ 
2o N 
e- 
_15 W 
, 
I 
I 
. 
10 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
Vanadium (%) 
Effect of vanadium on the tensile properties of air-cooled 0.45% C 0.9% 

Engineering steels 281 
Lagnenborg 47 has shown that the tensile strength of these steels can be expressed 
as a function of (V + 5 x N)%. Nitrogen levels of up to 0.02% are therefore 
incorporated in the steels in order to intensify the strengthening effect. 
One of the disadvantages of these micro-alloy steels is that they display 
significantly lower levels of toughness than the traditional quenched and tempered 
martensitic grades and this has inhibited their large-scale commercial exploitation. 
The low impact strength is related to the coarse pearlitic structure but this effect 
is exacerbated by precipitation strengthening. Whereas this problem has been 
overcome in structural steel plates with the use of low-temperature finishing 
(controlled rolling), there is little scope for the adoption of this practice in drop- 
forging operations due to the metal flow/die filling problems that occur at low 
forging temperatures. 
The impact strength of these grades can be improved by lowering the carbon 
content and compensating for the loss in strength by increasing the manganese, 
vanadium and nitrogen contents. Experience in Sweden and Germany has shown 
that an improvement in toughness can also be obtained by increasing the silicon 
content of the steels. However, attention has also been given to the potential of 
grain-refining additions of titanium in pursuit of higher impact strength. 
As indicated earlier, titanium has a low solubility in medium-carbon steels 
but TiN is even less soluble than TiC. Particles of TiN are therefore present at 
the normal soaking temperature for forging, namely 1150~ and will refine the 
austenite grains provided the particles are present as a fine dispersion. According 
to Gladman, 46 this is achieved by restricting the titanium content to below the 
stoichiometric level required for reaction with nitrogen in TiN and the growth of 
particles is also minimized by rapid solidification from the liquid state. In practice, 
the titanium additions are restricted to levels of about 0.01% and the need for 
rapid solidification is generally satisfied by continuous casting as opposed to 
ingot casting. 
Japanese steelmakers have expressed concern that the formation of TiN for 
grain refinement can reduce the level of soluble nitrogen that is available for 
precipitation strengthening by V(CN). However, this problem can be overcome 
by adjusting the nitrogen content such that the free nitrogen (total nitrogen minus 
nitrogen as TiN) exceeds 0.006%. 
More recently, it has been reported that improved levels of toughness can 
be obtained in medium-carbon, micro-alloy steels by the generation of bainitic 
structures. However, according to Naylor 4s the benefits of this development are 
not yet clear-cut and the need for alloy additions to achieve a bainitic structure 
may detract from the viability of the approach. 
Commercial exploitation 
Korchynsky and Paules 49 have reviewed the various grades of micro-alloy forging 
steels that are produced in Europe and Japan and their lists of compositions and 
associated tensile properties are shown in Tables 3.26 and 3.27. Heading the list 
is the German grade 49MnVS3, the first medium-carbon, micro-alloy steel to be 
used commercially for air-cooled automotive forgings. Like the Swedish Volvo 

Table 3.26 
Chemical composition of micro-alloy forging steels 
Country 
Grade 
C 
Si 
Mn 
S 
V 
Other 
Germany 
Gr. Britain 
Gr. Britain (UES) 
Gr. Britain (UES) 
Gr. Britain (UES) 
Gr. Britain 
(Austin-Rover) 
Finland (OVAKO) 
Sweden (Volvo) 
Germany 
Germany 
Japan 
(Mirsubisbi-NKK) 
49Mnvs3 
BS970-280M01 
VANARD 
VANARD 850 
VANARD lo00 
CMV 925 
IVA lo00 
v-2906 
44MnSiVS6 
38MnSiVS6 
27MnSiVS6 
0.44-0.5 
0.3-0.5 
0.3-0.5 
0.36 
0.43 
0.37-0.42 
0.47 
0.43 -0.47 
0.42-0.47 
0.35-0.4 
0.25 -0.3 
0.32 
0.6 max. 
0.15-0.35 
0.15-0.35 
0.17 
0.35 
0.15-0.35 
0.5 
0.15-0.4 
0.5-0.8 
0.5-0.8 
0.5-0.8 
0.25 
0.7-1 
0.6- 1.5 
1-1.5 
1.25 
1.25 
1.1 - 1.3 
1.1 
0.6-0.8 
1.3- 1.6 
1.2-1.5 
1.3- 1.6 
1.45 
0.04-0.07 
0.045 -0.06 
0.1 max. 
0.04 
0.06 
0.06-0.08 
0.05 
0.04-0.06 
0.02 - 0.035 
0.04-0.07 
0.03 -0.05 
0.08-0.13 
0.08 -0.2 
0.05-0.2 
0.09 
0.09 
0.08-0.1 1 
0.13 
0.07-0.1 
0.1 -0.15 
0.08-0.13 
0.08-0.13 
0.06 
0.1 Cr 
0.15 Cr 
0.04 Mo max. 
Cr+Cu+Ni=0.5 max. 
0.5 Cr 
0.2 Cr max. 
Ti optional 
Ti optional 
li optional 
0.01 Ti 
0.01-0.016 N 
After Korchynsky and Pa~les.4~ 

Engineering steels 283 
Table 3.27 
, 
,, 
Country 
Grade 
Tensile properties and hardness of micro-alloy forging steels 
Germany 
49MnVS3 
Gr. Britain 
BS970-280M01 
Gr. Britain (LIES) VANARD 850 
Gr. Britain COES) VANARD 1000 
Gr. Britain 
CMV 925 
(Austin-Rover) 
Finland (OVAKO) IVA 1000 
Sweden 
(Volvo) 
Germany 
Germany 
Germany 
Japan 
(Mitsubishi-NKK) 
After Korchynsky and Paules. 49 
UTS 
YS 
(MPa) 
(MPa) 
750-900 450 min. 
780-1080 540-650 
770-930 540 min. 
930-1080 650 min. 
850-1000 
560 
El (% RA (% 
BHN 
min.) min.) 
8 
20 
18/8 
20 
18 
20 
237-277 
12 
15 
269-331 
12 
15 
248-302 
1025 
750 
10 
20 
V-2906:<90 mm 750-900 500 min. 
12 
<50 mm 800-950 520 min. 
15 
44MnSiVS6 
950-1100 600 min. 
10 
20 
38MnSiVS6 
820-1000 550 rain. 
12 
25 
27MnSiVS6 
800-950 500 min. 
14 
30 
720-800 470-550 
290 
230-275 
245-290 
Table 3.28 
Grade 
VANARD 850 
VANARD 925 
VANARD 1000 
VANARD 1100 
Steel replaced 
0.35% C, 1.5% Mn (216M36) 
0.35% C, 1.5% Mn, 0.25% Mo (605M36) 
0.4% C, 0.8% Mn, 1% Cr (530M40) 
0.35% C, 1.5% Mn, 0.25% Mo (605M36) 
0.4% C, 0.8% Mn, 1% Cr, 0.3% Mo (709M40) 
0.4% C, 0.8% Mn, 1% Cr, 0.3% Mo (709M40) 
grade V2906, 49 MnVS3 has a relatively low manganese content which restricts 
the amount of pearlite in the microstructure, and the tensile strengths of these 
grades are towards the bottom of the range. In the UK, substantial effort has been 
devoted to the development and commercial evaluation of the VANARD range 
which is based on the following composition range: 
0.3-0.5% C, 0.15-0.35% Si, 1-1.5% Mn, 0.05-0.2% V 
Within this composition range, increasing levels of carbon, manganese and vana- 
dium are used to provide tensile strengths in the range 850-1100 N/mm 2. 
Some of the quenched and tempered, alloy steels that can be replaced by the 
VANARD grades are shown in Table 3.28. 
Whereas the standard VANARD grades are generally made to a sulphur 
specification of 0.05% max., variants are produced with sulphur contents of the 
order of 0.08% for improved machinability. Other steels listed in Table 3.26 also 
specify enhanced sulphur levels. However, irrespective of the sulphur content, it 
is generally claimed that micro-alloy forging steels offer better machinability than 

284 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
traditional martensitic grades due to easier crack propagation in the predominantly 
pearlitic structure. 
In addition to compositional effects, the mechanical properties of these steels 
are controlled by the soaking temperature, hot-working schedule and cooling 
rate to ambient temperature. The cooling rate from the finishing temperature is 
important since this controls the transformation temperature and the precipitation 
of V(CN). In conventional forging steels, the components may be placed in a bin 
after the forging operation and the slow cooling rates encountered in this situation 
would cause the precipitates to overage, resulting in a substantial loss in strength. 
Simple conveyer systems have therefore been introduced which enable the micro- 
alloy steel forgings to cool freely in air or else the cooling rate is enhanced with 
fan cooling. 
The automotive components that are being produced in medium-carbon, micro- 
alloy steels include crankshafts, connecting rods, steering knuckles, axle beams 
and tension rods. Various manufacturers, including the Rover Group, have 
claimed that very substantial cost savings have been achieved by the adoption of 
these grades due to: 
1. The lower cost of micro-alloy steels compared with the alloy grades that they 
replace. 
2. The elimination of heat treatment costs. 
3. The improved machining characteristics compared with traditional grades. 
However, car makers in the UK have been reluctant to use these steels for 
safety-critical components due to their low impact properties and the rate of 
acceptance has been particularly slow in North America where manufacturers face 
greater threats of litigation on improper application/product liability. Therefore 
the further exploitation of these steels is very dependent on the development of 
improved toughness via controlled processing or grain-refinement techniques. 
Controlled processed bars 
There is a limited demand for normalized or quenched and tempered bar prod- 
ucts that can be machined directly to the finished component form. Given that 
these heat treatments are expensive, there is obviously an incentive to develop 
the required mechanical properties in the as-roUed condition, i.e. the incentive 
is similar to that described in the previous section for the elimination of heat 
treatment in automotive forgings. 
Normalized steels 
Normalizing is applied to bar products in order to refine the grain size and facil- 
itate subsequent processing operations such as machining or cold forging. The 
steel is reheated to just above the reaustenization temperature (Ac3) to achieve a 
fine austenite grain size and the material is then allowed to cool freely in air. In 
order to simulate such a structure in the 'as-rolled' condition, three options can 

Engineering steels 285 
be considered: 
1. Lower billet reheating temperatures. 
2. Lower bar finishing temperatures. 
3. Faster cooling rates after rolling. 
In rolling mills that do not have inter-stand cooling or delayed rolling facilities, 
options (1) and (2) are interdependent and both are aimed at the refinement of 
the austenite grain size. Whereas the austenite grain size will affect the pearlite 
content and ferrite grain size, these microstructural parameters are also influenced 
significantly by the rate of cooling from the finishing temperature. 
Japanese steelmakers have introduced the term normalize-free for controlled 
rolled products that involve billet reheating temperatures of around 1050~ and 
finishing at or below 900~ in order to simulate the properties of normalized 
bars. Whereas such finishing temperatures can be achieved by introducing delays 
into the rolling schedule, economic rates of production can only be sustained 
with the adoption of inter-stand cooling. 
Quenched and tempered steels 
As indicated previously, the tensile properties of quenched and tempered alloy 
steel forgings can be reproduced in air-cooled, micro-alloy steels but the latter 
tend to produce inferior impact properties. However, rolling offers a greater 
opportunity than forging for low-temperature finishing and therefore a greater 
potential for improved toughness via grain refinement. 
The relative effects of vanadium and niobium on strength-toughness 
relationships are shown in Figure 3.44. These additions were made to base 
compositions containing 0.33% C but with varying manganese. Under normal 
120 
80 
40 
-40 
-80 
600 
eheat temp. 1200 ~ 
0.025% N~ ~" Finishing tamp. 1150 ~ 
,
/
 
_ 
.7 .7 
v 
. 
/ 
/" 
O.O5O% V 
. ~'" 
~, 
-~"' 
Reheat temp. 1100 ~ 
Finishing temp. 800 ~ 
,,,,,,, 
,,, 
,,,, 
i 
0.025% Nb 
.... 
~ 
n 
I 
, 
,I 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
TS (N/ram 2) 
Figure 3.44 Strength-toughness relationships in 0.33% C, micro-alloy steels 

286 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
rolling conditions (reheat 1200"C, finish 1150~ 
the vanadium addition produces 
the better impact properties (lower FAIT) and the beneficial effect appears to 
increase slightly with increasing strength. Controlled rolling (reheat l l00~ 
finish 800"C) produces a major improvement in toughness in both types of steel 
but the niobium steel displays the better combination of properties, maintaining an 
FATI' of about - 60~ over the range of tensile strength from 625 to 850 N/mm 2. 
The better performance of the niobium steel under controlled rolling conditions 
is probably related to the fact that niobium has a greater effect than vanadium 
in suppressing austenite recrystallization during hot rolling which leads to the 
production of a finer grain size. However, in situations where controlled rolling 
cannot be employed, then vanadium steels offer the more attractive properties. 
High-carbon wire rod 
Although tensile strengths >2000 N/mm 2 are normally associated with lightly 
tempered martensites, or with maraging grades, these strength levels can also 
be achieved very readily in wire products by cold-drawing rods with a fine 
pearlitic microstructure. The demand for such products in the UK amounts to 
about 230000 tonnes/annum and some of the more important applications are 
listed below: 
9 Wire ropes 
9 Prestressed concrete wire 
9 Tyre cord reinforcement 
9 Bridge suspension cables 
9 High-pressure hose reinforcement 
9 Helical springs (bedding and seating) 
9 Core wire for electrical conductor cables 
9 Piano strings 
Rod rolling and conditioning 
All wire is produced from hot-rolled rod and in the context of high-carbon rod 
this involves steels with carbon contents in the range 0.5-0.9%. Depending upon 
the carbon content, this results in the formation of a mixed ferrite-pearlite or 
a completely pearlitic microstructure. However, natural cooling in air from a 
high finishing temperature results in the generation of coarse pearlite which is 
unsuitable for severe cold-drawing operations. Traditionally, high-carbon rod is 
reheated to a temperature just above Ac3, in order to reaustenitize the mate- 
rial, and then quenched into a lead bath at 450-500"C. The steel is therefore 
allowed to transform isothermally at a relatively low temperature to form a fine 
lamellar pearlite. Such a treatment is termed patenting and develops a high- 
strength structure which is also capable of extensive cold drawing. Patenting is 
still employed to a limited extent but most high-carbon steels are now drawn 
directly from as-rolled rod which has been subjected to an in-line cooling opera- 
tion at the end of rod rolling. This produces a microstructure which is similar to 
that developed by the costly patenting process, but, on average, controlled cooled 

Engineering steels 287 
rod has a tensile strength which is about 100 N/mm 2 lower than that obtained on 
patenting, s~ 
As indicated in the previous section, the strength of pearlitic steels is influenced 
very markedly by the carbon content, which controls the amount of pearlite in 
the structure, and also by the pearlite interlamellar spacing (So). However, for a 
given carbon content, the volume fraction of pearlite can be increased and the 
interlamellar spacing refined by depressing the austenite to pearlite transformation 
temperature. This can be achieved by: 
1. Increasing the prior austenite grain size. 
2. Increasing the rate of cooling from rod rolling. 
3. Adding alloying elements such as chromium and manganese. 
Jaiswal and Mclvor 5~ developed the following equation to illustrate the effects 
of cooling rate and composition on the tensile strength of controlled cooled, plain 
carbon steel rod: 
Tensile strength (N/mm 2) = [267(logCR)- 293] + 1029(% C) 
+ 152(% Si)4-210(% Mn) 
1 
+ 442(% P)[ + 5244(% Nf) 
This equation relates to steels with a prior austenite grain size of ASTM 7 and 
CR is the cooling rate in *C/s at 700"C, i.e. before the start of transformation. 
Although nitrogen has the largest strengthening coefficient, carbon provides a 
much bigger contribution to the strength of these materials because it is present 
in very much higher concentrations. 
Wire drawing 
Prior to wire drawing, the hot-rolled rods must be cleaned in order to remove 
scale. This may be carried out mechanically by grit blasting or by subjecting 
the rods to a series of bending and twisting operations. However, for the more 
critical applications, acid pickling is employed followed by a neutralizing wash. 
The cleaned rod is then coated with lime or zinc phosphate for dry drawing or 
with a layer of copper or brass for wet drawing. 
As illustrated in Figure 3.45, pearlitic steels work harden very rapidly during 
wire drawing to develop tensile strengths well in excess of 2000 N/mm 2. 
Micro.alloy, high-carbon rod 
Jaiswal and Mclvor 5~ have described the use of micro-alloy additions in high- 
carbon rod in order to compensate for the lower tensile strengths that are achieved 
in controlled cooled rod compared with patented material. These authors show 
that additional strength can be achieved by the following mechanisms: 
1. Refinement of the pearlite intedamellar spacing with the addition of chromium. 
2. Solid solution strengthening using higher silicon contents. 
3. Precipitation strengthening by the addition of vanadium. 

288 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
2600 
2200 
r 
E 
03 
1800 
- 
_ _ _ _ _  
140040 
50 
dO 
'70 
80 
90 
% Reduction 
Figure 3.45 Effect of coM drawing on the strength of high-carbon pearlitic rod 
However, micro-alloying increases the tendency for martensite formation which 
has a particularly damaging effect on the wire-drawing characteristics. The 
martensite-forming potential of various elements was therefore determined in 
controlled cooling experiments and the critical cooling rate at which martensite 
first appeared in the pearlitic matrix was determined. With a prior austenite 
grain size of ASTM 7, the following critical cooling rate (CCR) relationship 
was derived: 
CCR (Ks -1) = 97 - (%Si) - 70(%Mn) - 50(%Cr) - 224(%P) 
This equation indicates that manganese is potentially more damaging than 
chromium but it was also shown that chromium was more effective in producing 
a finer interlamellar spacing. Whereas silicon had relatively little effect in 
promoting the formation of martensite, it was also shown to be less effective 
than chromium in refining the interlamellar spacing. Jaiswal and Mclvor therefore 
propose that silicon is used in combination with chromium, or possibly vanadium, 
rather than as a single addition. 
Given the importance of avoiding the formation of martensite, Jaiswal and 
Mclvor recommend that chromium is better used in large-diameter rods where 
the cooling rate is relatively slow and therefore less likely to produce martensite. 
For small-diameter rods, vanadium is recommended. 
In a base steel containing 0.85% C and 0.7% Mn, the above authors state 
that the maximum levels of strength shown in Table 3.29 can be obtained by 
microalloying. 
Table 3.29 
Microalloyed High Carbon Rod 
Additive 
Rod diameter 
TS 
(N/mm 2) 
0.8% Si, 0.25% Cr 
Large 
1330 
0.07% V 
Small 
1300 

Engineering steels 289 
References 
1. Bain, E.C. and Davenport, E.S. Trans. AIME, 90, 117 (1930). 
2. Cias, W.W. Phase Transformation Kinetics and Hardenability of Medium 
Carbon Alloy Steels, Climax Molybdenum Co., Greenwich, Connecticut. 
3. Atldns, M. Atlas of Continuous Cooling Transformation Diagrams, British 
Steel. 
4. Siebert, C.A., Doane, D.V. and Breen, D.H. The Hardenability of Steels, 
ASM, Metals Park, Ohio (1977). 
5. Grossman, M.A. Elements of Hardenability, ASM, Cleveland (1952). 
6. Llewellyn, D.T. and Cook, W.T. Metals Technology, December, 517 (1974). 
7. deRetana, A.F. and Doane, D.V. Metal Progress, September, 100, 105 
(1971). 
8. Gladman, T. Private communication. 
9. Ueno, M. and Inoue, J. Trans. ISI Japan, 13 (3), 210 (1973). 
10. Kapadia, B.M., Brown, R.M. and Murphy, W.J. Trans. Met. Soc. AIME, 242, 
1689 (1968). 
11. Smallman, R.E. Modern Physical Metallurgy (Fourth Edition), Butterworths. 
12. Grange, R.H. and Baughman, R.W. Trans ASM, 48, 165 (1956). 
13. Parrish, G. and Harper, G.S. Production Gas Carburising, Pergamon Press. 
14. Murray, J.D. Auto Engineer, 55, 186 (1965). 
15. Llewellyn, D.T. and Cook, W.T. Metals Technology, May, 265 (1977). 
16. Wannell, P.H., Blank, J.R. and Naylor, D.J. In Proc. International Sympo- 
sium on the Influence of Metallurgy on the Machinability of Steel, September, 
ISIJ/ASM, Tokyo (1977). 
17. Pickett, M.L. Cdstinacce, M. and Naylor, D.J. In Proc. High Productivity 
Machining, Materials and Processing, May, ASM, New Orleans (1985). 
18. Irani, R.S. Metals and Materials, June, 333 (1987). 
19. Naylor, D.J. In Proc. Integrity of Gas Cylinders: Materials Technology, NPL, 
11 (1985). 
20. Oldfield, F.K. In Proc. Integrity of Gas Cylinders: Materials Technology, 
NPL, 1 (1985). 
21. Harris, D., Priest, A., Davenport, J., Mclntyre, P., Almond, E.A. and 
Roebuck, B. In Proc. Integrity of Gas Cylinders: Materials Technology, NPL, 
69 (1985). 
22. Zaretsky, E.V. Effect of Steel Manufacturing Processes on the Quality of 
Bearing Steels (ed. Hoo, J.C.C.), ASTM Special Technical Report, 5, 981 
(1988). 
23. Bamberger, E.N. In Proc. Tribology in the 80's (ed. Loomis, W.F.), NASA 
CP-2300, Vol. 2, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Wash- 
ington, DC, 773 (1983). 
24. Johnson, R.F. and Sewell, J. JISI, December, 414 (1960). 
25. Brooksbank, D. and Andrews, K.W. JISI, 210, 246 (1972). 
26. Hampshire, J.M. and King, E. Effect of Steel Manufacturing Processes on the 
Quality of Bearing Steels (ed. Hoo, J.C.C.) ASTM Special Technical Report 
981, 61 (1988). 

290 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
27. Davies, I.G. Clarke, M.A. and Dulieu, D. Effect of Steel Manufacturing 
Processes on the Quality of Bearing Steels, ASTM Special Technical Report 
981,375 (1988). 
28. Hoyle, G. High Speed Steels, Butterworth (1989). 
29. Source Book on Maraging Steels (ed. Decker, R.F.), ASM. 
30. Spitzig, W.A. In Source Book on Maraging Steels (ed. Decker, R.F.), 299. 
31. Decker, R.F., Eash, J.T. and Goldman, A.J. In Source Book on Maraging 
Steels (ed. Decker, R.F.), 1. 
32. INCO Databook 1976, International Nickel Co. 
33. Magnee, A., Drapier, J.M., Dumont, J., Coutsouradis, D. and Hadbraken, L. 
Cobalt-Containing High Strength Steels, Cobalt Information Centre, Brussels 
(1974). 
34. Collier, J.G. and Gemmill, M.G. Metals and Materials, April, 198 (1986). 
35. Wyatt, L.M. Materials of Construction for Steam Power Plant, Applied 
Science Publishers (1976). 
36. Reynolds, P.E., Barron, J.M. and Allen, G.B. The Metallurgist and Materials 
Technologist, July, 359 (1978). 
37. Viswanathan, R. and Jaffee, R.I., Trans. ASME, 105, October, 286 (1983). 
38. Gemmill, M.G. Metals and Materials, December, 759 (1985). 
39. Boyle, C.J., Curran, R.M., DeForrest, D.R. and Newhouse, D.L. Proc. 
ASTM, 62, 1156 (1962). 
40. Everson, H., Orr, J. and Dulieu, D. In Proc International Conference 
on Advances in Material Technology for Fossil Power Plants (eds 
Viswanathan, R. and Jaffee, R.I.) (Chicago, 1987), ASM International. 
41. Pickering, F.B. and Gladman, T. ISI Special Report 81 (1961). 
42. Gladman, T., Mclvor, I.D. and Pickering, F.B. JISI, 210, 916 (1972). 
43. Preston, R.R. Steelresearch 87-88, British Steel, 57. 
44. Hodgson, W.H. and Preston, R.R. CIM Bulletin, October, 95 (1988). 
45. British Steel Track Products Brochure, British Steel. 
46. Gladman, T. lronmaking and Steelmaking, 16, No. 4, 241 (1989). 
47. Lagnenborg, R. In Proc. Fundamentals of Microalloying Forging Steels (eds 
Krauss, G. and Banerji, S.K.), TMS of AIME, p. 39 (1987). 
48. Naylor, D.J. Ironmaking and Steelmaking, 16, No. 4 (1989). 
49. Korchynsky, M. and Paules, J.R. Microalloyed Forging Steels-A State of the 
Art Review, SAE 890801 (1989). 
50. Jaiswal, S. and Mclvor, I.D. lronmaking and Steelmaking, 16, No. 1, 49 
(1989). 

4 Stainless steels 
Overview 
As chromium is added to steels, the corrosion resistance increases progressively 
due to the formation of a thin protective film of Cr203, the so-called passive 
layer. With the addition of about 12% Cr, steels have good resistance to atmo- 
spheric corrosion and the popular convention is that this is the minimum level 
of chromium that must be incorporated in an iron-based material before it can 
be designated a stainless steel. However, of all steel types, the stainless grades 
are the most diverse and complex in terms of composition, microstructure and 
mechanical properties. Given this situation, it is not surprising that stainless steels 
have found a very wide range of application, ranging from the chemical, phar- 
maceutical and power generation industries on the one hand to less aggressive 
situations in architecture, domestic appliances and street furniture on the other. 
By the late 1800s, iron-chromium alloys were in use throughout the world but 
without the realization of their potential as corrosion-resistant materials. Harry 
Brearley, a Sheffield metallurgist, is credited with the discovery of martensitic 
stainless steels in 1913 when working on the development of improved rifle barrel 
steels. He found that a steel containing about 0.3% C and 13% Cr was difficult 
to etch and also remained free from rust in a laboratory environment. Such a 
steel formed the basis of the cutlery industry in Sheffield and as Type 420 is still 
used for this purpose to the present day. 
During the same period, researchers in Germany were responding to pres- 
sures for improved steels for the chemical industry. Up until that time, steels 
containing high levels of nickel were in use as tarnish-resistant materials but 
had inadequate resistance to corrosion. Two Krupp employees, Benno Strauss 
and Eduard Maurer, are credited with the discovery of Cr-Ni austenitic stainless 
steels and patents on these materials were registered in 1912. However, workers 
in France and the United States are also cited as independent discoverers of these 
steels. 
During the 1920s and 1930s, rapid developments took place which led to the 
introduction of most of the popular grades that are still in use today, such as 
Type 302 (18% Cr, 8% Ni), Type 316 (18% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.5% Mo), Type 410 
(12% Cr) and Type 430 (17% Cr). However, even in the 1950s, stainless steels 
were still regarded as semi-precious metals and were priced accordingly. Up 
until the 1960s, these steels were still produced in small electric arc furnaces, 
sometimes of less than 10 tonnes capacity. The process was carried out in a single 
stage, involving the melting of scrap, nickel and ferro-chrome, with production 
times in excess of 389 hours. However, substantial gains were achieved with 
the installation of larger furnaces with capacities greater than 100 tonnes and 
the introduction of oxygen refining techniques also increased productivity very 
substantially. Since the early 1970s, the production of stainless steels has been 

292 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
based on a two-stage process, the first employing a conventional electric arc 
furnace for the rapid melting of scrap and ferro-alloys but using cheap, high- 
carbon ferro-chrome as the main source of chromium units. The high-carbon 
melt is then refined in a second stage, using either an argon-oxygen decarburizer 
(AOD) or by blowing with oxygen under vacuum (VOD). The AOD process is 
now employed for over 80% of the world's production of stainless steel and 
produces 100 tonnes of material in less than one hour. However, in addition to 
achieving faster production rates, the intimate mixing with special slags results 
in very efficient desulphurization. Other benefits also accrue from the facility to 
produce carbon contents of less than 0.01% and hydrogen levels of 2-3 ppm. 
Substantial cost savings were also achieved with the adoption of continuous 
casting in place of ingot casting and these overall gains in production have led to 
a significant cheapening of stainless steel relative to two of its main competitors, 
namely plastics and aluminium. For the future, there is the prospect of the direct 
introduction of cheap chromium ores and their reduction by coal in a converter 
which would lead to further cost reduction. 
In terms of product innovation, perhaps the greatest benefits have been obtained 
from relatively simple changes, such as the introduction of stainless grades with 
low carbon contents, i.e. below 0.03% C. This modification has virtually elim- 
inated the risk of intergranular corrosion in unstabilized austenitic grades and 
has also improved the corrosion performance and ductility of ferritic grades. 
However, steel users have been reluctant to take advantage of higher strength 
austenitic steels, such as those based on 0.2% N, which can lead to significant 
cost reductions through the use of reduced thicknesses in pipework and pressure 
vessels. This contrasts sharply with the situation outlined earlier in Chapter 3 
where the micro-alloy grades are now used extensively in place of plain carbon 
steel. When these high-nitrogen stainless grades were introduced in the UK in the 
mid-1960s, their high proof strength values could not be used to full advantage 
because of limitations imposed by the design codes of the day. Welding prob- 
lems were also encountered due to the fact that the high nitrogen content led to 
the formation of a fully austenitic weld metal and susceptibility to solidification 
cracking. However, these problems have now been resolved and therefore there 
is the prospect of greater utilization of these materials in the future. 
The 1970s saw the introduction of the low interstitial ferritic grades, with 
combined carbon and nitrogen contents of less than 200 ppm. These steels are 
based on compositions such as 18% Cr 2% Mo and 26% Cr 1% Mo and offered 
the prospect of being a cheaper alternative to an austenitic grade such as Type 316 
(18% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.5% Mo). However, whereas the low interstitial grades 
exhibit good corrosion resistance, particularly with regard to chloride-induced 
stress corrosion, they tend to retain the problem of conventional ferritic steels 
in relation to grain coarsening and loss of toughness after welding. On the other 
hand, high-alloy steels involving duplex austenite plus ferrite microstructures are 
now gaining acceptance, because of their higher strength and better resistance to 
stress corrosion than conventional austenitic grades. 
Whereas the consumption of bulk steel products is likely to remain fairly static, 
stainless steel is still very much in a growth market. This relates to the fact that 

Stainless steels 293 
stainless steel has managed to maintain its traditional image as a decorative mate- 
rial but is now also regarded as an engineering material for use in applications 
where structural integrity is more important that aesthetic appearance. On the 
basis of life-cycle costing, stainless steels are also proving to be attractive alter- 
natives to mild steel in structures or components that require frequent painting 
and maintenance. 
Underlying metallurgical principles 
As indicated in the Overview, stainless steel grades cover a wide range of 
compositions which results in the generation of a variety of microstructures and 
mechanical properties. This is clearly illustrated in the following compositions 
which represent three of the common grades of stainless steel' 
Composition 
Grade 
Microstructure 
12% Cr 
409 
martensitic 
17% Cr 
430 
ferritic 
18% Cr 9% Ni 
304 
austenitic 
Reference will be made in this chapter to the composition-structure relationships 
which show that alloying elements in stainless steels can be divided into two 
groups, namely those that promote the formation of an austenitic structure at hot 
rolling or solution treatment temperatures and those that promote the formation 
of delta ferrite. Chromium is the principal alloying element in stainless steels and 
this promotes the formation of delta ferrite at high temperature. However, iron 
can accommodate up to about 13% Cr at a temperature of around 1050"C and still 
remain completely austenitic at that temperature. On the other hand, the Ms-Me 
temperature range of a 12% Cr steel is sufficiently high to allow this material 
to transform completely to martensite on cooling to ambient temperature. An 
increase in chromium from 12 to 17% brings about a progressive change from 
austenite to delta ferfite at high temperature and the ferrite remains unchanged 
on cooling to ambient temperature. Nickel is a strong austenite-forming element 
and is added to stainless steels in order to preserve an austenitic structure in the 
presence of high chromium contents. Thus a steel containing 18% Cr 9% Ni is 
completely austenitic at a temperature of 1050"C but the overall alloy content 
now depresses the Ms-Mf temperature range to sub-zero temperatures. Therefore 
this material retains its austenitic structure on cooling to ambient temperature, 
providing a relatively low strength but a high level of formability. 
Elements such as silicon, molybdenum and titanium also promote the formation 
of delta ferrite at high temperature, whereas carbon, nitrogen, manganese and 
copper promote the formation of austenite. Therefore consideration must also 
be given to the presence of these elements, in addition to the balance between 
chromium and nickel, in determining the structure of stainless steels at elevated 
temperatures. However, both austenite- and ferrite-forming elements will depress 
the Ms-Mf range and influence the microstructure formed on cooling to ambient 
temperature. Therefore the constitution of stainless steels is governed by: 

294 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
(i) the balance between austenite- and ferdte-forming elements which controls 
the structure at hot rolling and solution treatment temperatures, 
(ii) the overall alloy content which controls the Ms-Me temperature range and 
therefore the structure and properties at ambient temperature. 
Austenitic stainless steels can be subjected to severe cold-forming operations, 
for example in the cold rolling of hot band to strip gauges and also in the 
production of domestic sinks and tableware from annealed strip. This introduces 
the topic of strain-induced martensite, whereby a material which is austenitic in 
the solution-treated condition can transform partially or completely to martensite 
with the application of cold work at ambient temperature. Detailed consideration 
is given to this topic later in the chapter, but in essence it relates to the stability 
of the austenitic structure, as influenced by the overall alloy content, and the 
destabilizing effects due to the magnitude and temperature of cold deformation. 
The metallurgy of the 12% Cr martensitic grades is similar to that involved in 
the engineering grades, although the presence of such a large amount of chromium 
induces a very high degree of hardenability and these steels are capable of devel- 
oping a martensitic structure in substantial section sizes, even in the aft-cooled 
condition. However, like their low-alloy counterparts, the 12% Cr grades must be 
tempered to produce a good combination of strength and ductility/toughness and 
both types of steel often incorporate additions of molybdenum and vanadium 
in order to improve the tempering resistance through the formation of stable 
carbides. 
Whereas austenitic stainless steels are used in domestic or architectural applica- 
tions, where corrosion resistance and aesthetic appeal are the main requirements, 
they are also employed in pressure vessels where both corrosion resistance and 
strength are important considerations. As indicated in the Overview, solid solution 
strengthening with additions of nitrogen is the main avenue for the production 
of higher-strength austenitic stainless steels. Precipitation-strengthening reactions 
can also be induced in these grades through the precipitation of carbides and inter- 
metallic compounds based on nickel, aluminium and titanium. However, such 
materials have found little commercial application, due possibly to weldability 
problems and poor corrosion properties. 
Stainless steels resist corrosion through the formation of a thin passive film 
of Cr203 and, very broadly, the corrosion resistance of these materials increases 
with chromium content. However, as illustrated by the previous remarks, marked 
variations in microstructure are introduced with the addition of alloying elements 
with a marked effect on mechanical properties. Thus the 12% Cr martensitic 
grades are capable of developing high levels of strength but with only moderate 
resistance to corrosion. In contrast, an austenitic grade, based on 18% Cr 9% Ni, 
has a low strength but a significantly higher resistance to corrosion, the latter 
being enhanced by the addition of molybdenum. Therefore throughout the broad 
range of stainless steels, there will be a compromise between corrosion resistance 
and other properties, such as strength, formability and weldability. Additionally, 
it is necessary to differentiate between the various types of corrosion in stainless 
steels, notably: 

Stainless steels 295 
general corrosion 
intergranular corrosion 
pitting corrosion 
stress corrosion 
However, whereas these types of corrosion will be discussed at a later stage, the 
authors are conscious of the fact that the treatment of corrosion in this text is 
superficial and reflects their limited knowledge of the subject. 
Composition-structure relationships 
Iron-chromium alloys 
The simplest stainless steels consist of iron-chromium alloys but in fact the 
binary iron-chromium system can give rise to a wide variety of microstructures 
with markedly different mechanical properties. The Fe-Cr equilibrium diagram 
is shown in Figure 4.1 and is characterized by two distinctive features, namely: 
1. The presence of sigma phase at about 50% Cr. 
2. The restricted austenite phase field, often called the gamma-loop. 
Sigma phase is an intermetallic compound, which is hard and brittle and can 
be produced in alloys containing substantially less than 50% Cr. It also has an 
adverse effect on the corrosion resistance of stainless steels and therefore care 
should be taken to avoid extended exposure in the temperature range 750-820~ 
which favours its formation. 
1600 
Liquid 
.~ 14oo 
2 
~ 1200 
C1. 
E 
~ooo 
800 - 
600 
0 
I 
i 
_ 
~7+a 
a(8) 
/~Sig'ma 
/ 
phase 
sigma 
t 
I, 
J 
J I= i 
!,,I 
I 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Fo 
% Chromium 
1800 
I .... 
I 
I 
so 
90 
loo 
Figure 4.1 Fe-Cr equilibrium diagram 

296 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
From a commercial standpoint, the area of the Fe-Cr diagram of greatest 
importance is that containing up to about 25% Cr, and a simplified illustration 
of that region for alloys containing 0.1% C is shown in Figure 4.2. Because 
chromium is a mild carbide former, many types of stainless steel are solution 
treated at temperatures significantly higher than those used for low-alloy steels 
in order to dissolve the chromium carbides. A solution treatment temperature of 
10500C is typical of a variety of stainless steel grades and this will be used as 
a reference temperature in relation to the microstructure at high temperature. As 
illustrated in Figure 4.2, 0.1% C steels can accommodate up to about 13.5% Cr 
at 10500C and still remain austenitic with a face-centred-cubic structure. As the 
chromium content of the steels is increased within this range, the hardenability 
also increases very substantially such that large section sizes can be through- 
hardened to martensite on cooling to room temperature. For example, a steel 
containing 12% Cr and 0.12% C will form martensite at the centre of a 100 mm 
bar on air cooling from 10500C and the limiting section can be increased to about 
500 mm by oil quenching from this temperature. It should also be noted that 
the Ms-Mf transformation range is depressed significantly with large additions 
of chromium. However, for most commercial grades of 11-13% Cr steels, the 
transformation range is above room temperature and therefore the formation of 
retained austenite is not a major problem. 
As the chromium content is increased above about 13%, a significant change 
takes place in the microstructure at 1050~ as the single-phase austenite region 
gives way to the duplex austenite plus ferdte phase field. Whereas the austenite 
in this region behaves in a similar way to that within the gamma-loop, i.e. it 
transforms to martensite on cooling to room temperature, the ferrite formed at 
1500 
1300 
X 
~D 
z.. 
E 
~D 
I-.- 
1100 
o~(~) 
900 
0 
Fe 
I 
I 
I 
I, 
I 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
% Chromium 
Figure 4.2 Fe-Cr alloys containing O. 1% C 

Stainless steels 297 
80 
.-, 60- 
"~ 40- 
20- 
0 - 
12 
b 
I 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
Chromium (%) 
Figure 4.3 Effect of chromium content on O. 1% carbon steels solution treated at 1050"C 
(After Irvine et aL t) 
high temperature undergoes no phase transformation. Although its structure is 
body-centred-cubic, the high-temperature phase is generally called delta ferrite 
(8) in order to differentiate it from alpha ferrite (cx), the transformation product 
from austenite. As illustrated in Figure 4.3, the delta ferrite content increases 
progressively with further additions of chromium and, in the presence of about 
0.1% C, the material becomes completely ferritic with the addition of just over 
18% Cr. Therefore, between about 13% and 18% Cr, the hardness of these steels 
is reduced as the microstructure changes progressively from 100% martensite to 
100% delta ferfite. Larger additions of chromium have no further effect on the 
microstructure, although such materials become increasingly more susceptible to 
the formation of sigma phase. 
Although the changes from ? ~ F + 8 and Y + 8 ~ 8 occur at chromium 
levels of about 13.5% and 18.5% respectively, it must be emphasized that this 
refers to alloys containing a maximum of about 0.1% C and at a reference 
temperature of around 1050~ 
Larger amounts of carbon or the addition of 
other alloying elements will have a major effect on the microstructure associated 
with particular levels of chromium. Additionally, for a given composition, an 
increase in the solution treatment temperature above 1050~ will also increase 
the amount of delta ferrite at the expense of austenite. 
Iron-chromium-nickel alloys 
Whereas chromium restricts the formation of austenite, nickel has the opposite 
effect and, as illustrated in Figure 4.4, the Fe-Ni equilibrium diagram displays 
an expanded austenite phase field. In the context of stainless steels, chromium 
is therefore termed a ferrite former and nickel an austenite former. Thus having 
created a substantially ferritic microstructure with a large addition of chromium, 
it is possible to reverse the process and re-establish an austenitic structure by 
adding a large amount of nickel to a high-chromium steel. 
As indicated in Figure 4.3, a steel containing 17% Cr and 0.1% C will have a 
microstructure of about 65% delta ferrite-35% austenite at a solution treatment 
temperature of I050~ 
The various changes that then occur with the addition 

1300 
E 
E 
| 
I-- 
100 
500 
I 
I 
0 
50 
100 
Fe 
% Nickel 
200 
100 
~ 
o 
7O 
60 
50 
40 
~" 3O 
20 
-'~ 10 
~ 
o. 
1700 
Figure 4.4 
Fe-Ni equilibrium diagram 
298 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
450 
400 
~" 350 
a. 
~ 300 
r 
250 
-r- 
200 
150 
/ 
t 
.// 
A 
" 
_X X 
refdgerated-78 ~ 
~. 
refdgeratecl--7, ~ - 
-S~176 treated 1050 ~ 
' 
,, 
Solution treated 1 0 ~ C ' ~ ~  
Q~ 
0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 
Nickel (%) 
Figure 4.5 
Effect of nickel content on the structure, hardness and Ms temperature of 
O. 1% C 17% Cr steels (After lrvine et al. 1) 

Stainless steels 299 
of nickel to a base steel of this composition are illustrated in Figure 4.5. This 
shows that the delta ferrite content is steadily reduced and at 1050~ the steels 
become fully austenitic with the addition of about 5% nickel. On cooling to 
room temperature, the austenite in these low-nickel steels transforms to marten- 
site and therefore there is initially a progressive increase in hardness with the 
addition of nickel as martensite replaces delta ferrite. However, the addition of 
nickel also depresses the Ms-Mf transformation range and at nickel contents 
greater than about 4% the M f temperature is depressed below room tempera- 
ture. Further additions of nickel therefore lead to a decrease in hardness due to 
incomplete transformation to martensite and the formation of retained austenite. 
As indicated by the hardness data in Figure 4.5, refrigeration at -78~ 
causes 
the retained austenite to transform to martensite over a limited composition range 
until the Ms temperature coincides with the refrigeration temperature. In commer- 
cial 18% Cr 9% Ni austenitic stainless steels, the Ms has been depressed to very 
low temperatures and little transformation to martensite can be induced, even at 
the liquid nitrogen temperature of- 196~ 
Other alloy additions 
Whereas chromium and nickel are the principal alloying elements in stainless 
steels, other elements may be added for specific purposes and therefore consid- 
eration must be given to the effect of these elements on microstructure. Like 
chromium and nickel, these other alloying elements can be classed as ferrite or 
austenite formers and their behaviour is illustrated in Figure 4.6 which refers to 
a base steel containing 17% Cr and 4% Ni. Thus elements such as aluminium, 
vanadium, molybdenum, silicon and tungsten behave like chromium and promote 
the formation of delta ferfite. On the other hand, copper, manganese, cobalt, 
carbon and nitrogen have a similar effect to nickel and promote the formation of 
austenite. A guide to the potency of the various elements in their role as austenite 
or ferrite formers I is shown in Table 4.1. 
100 
8O 
A 
6o 
~ 4o 
,Va 
~.~ W 
Mo 
20 
Cu and Co 
0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 
8,0 
Alloying element (%) 
Figure 4.6 Effect of various alloying elements on the structure of 17% Cr 4% Ni alloys 
(After Irvine et aL l) 

300 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.1 
Element 
Change in delta ferrite 
per 1.0 wt% 
N 
-200 
C 
-180 
Ni 
-10 
Co 
-6 
Cu 
-3 
Mn 
-1 
Austenite 
formers 
W 
+8 
Si 
+8 
Mo 
+11 
Cr 
+15 
V 
+19 
AI 
+38 
Ferrite 
formers 
Thus carbon and nitrogen are particularly powerful austenite formers and the 
latter is incorporated in certain grades of stainless steel, specifically for this 
purpose. Elements such as titanium and niobium are also ferdte formers in their 
own fight but have an additional ferrite-promoting effect by virtue of the fact 
that they are also strong carbide and nitride formers and can therefore eliminate 
the austenite-forming effects of carbon and nitrogen. 
Whereas alloying elements oppose each other in terms of austenite or ferrite 
formation at elevated temperatures, they act in a similar manner in depressing 
the martensite transformation range. Andrews 2 has derived the following formula 
for the calculation of Ms: 
Ms(*C) = 539- 423C - 30.4Mn- 17.7Ni-- 12.1Cr- 7.5Mo 
Therefore, in predicting the room temperature microstructure of stainless steels, 
consideration has to be given to two major effects: 
1. The balance between austenite and ferrite formers which dictates the 
mierostructure at elevated temperatures. 
2. The overall alloy content which controls the Ms-Mf transformation range and 
the degree of transformation to martensite at ambient temperature. 
A convenient but very approximate method of relating composition and 
mierostrucmre in stainless steels is by means of the Schaeffler diagram which has 
been modified by Schneider. 3 This is illustrated in Figure 4.7, which indicates 
the structures produced in a wide range of compositions after rapid cooling from 
1050"C. In this diagram, the elements that behave like chromium in promoting 
the formation of ferrite are expressed in terms of a chromium equivalent: 
Cr equivalent = (Cr) + (2Si) + (1.5Mo) -t- (5V) + (5.5A1) + (1.75Nb) 
+ (1.STi) + (0.75W) 

Stainless steels 301 
. . . . .  
, 
,. 
.,,, 
. = ,  
,,,, 
, 
.,. 
. 
25 
Austenite 
.. 
20 
\ 
\ 
/ 
,u,,oo,to 
15- 
~. 
Austenite~ 
/ 
.+. 
+ 
~ 
/ 
840rrite 
Z 
-- 
5 
-- 
Nartensite 
0 
I 
I 
,I 
, 
, 
I 
,,, 
I 
, 
,,I 
,, 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Chromium equivalent (%) 
Figure 4.7 Schaeffler diagram-modified (After Schneider 3) 
In a similar manner, the austenite-forming elements are expressed in terms of a 
nickel equivalent: 
Ni equivalent = (Ni) + (Co) + (0.5Mn) + (0.3Cu) + (25N) + (30(2) 
all concentrations being expressed as weight percentages. 
Commercial grades of stainless steels 
From the foregoing remarks, it can be appreciated that stainless steels embrace 
a wide range of microstructures which are controlled by means of a complex 
relationship with composition. Although chromium may be the principal alloying 
element in a stainless steel, the level may give little indication of structure, and 
steels containing 17% Cr can be martensitic, ferritic or austenitic, depending on 
heat treatment and the presence of other elements. In discussing the characteristics 
of stainless steels, it is therefore more convenient to categorize these materials 
in terms of microstructure rather than composition. 
Although most industrialized countries have developed their own national 
standards for stainless steels, these steels are referred to almost universally 
by means of the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) numbering system. 
Thus the martensitic stainless steels are classified as the 400 series but, rather 
confusingly, the 400 series also includes the fetritic grades of stainless steel. The 
more important grades of austenitic stainless steel are classified in the 300 series. 
The nominal compositions of the common stainless grades, according to the AISI 
numbering system, are shown in Table 4.2. In the UK, the familiar specification 

302 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.2 
grades 
Nominal composition of stainless steel 
AISI Type 
Nominal composition 
410 
420 
430 
434 
302 
304 
316 
321 
347 
310 
12.5% Cr, 0.15% C max. 
13% Cr, 0.15% C min. 
17% Cr, 0.12% C max. 
17% Cr, 1.0% Mo 
18% Cr, 9% Ni 
19% Cr, 10% Ni 
17% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.5% Mo 
18% Cr, 10.5% Ni, Ti min. 
5 x C% 
18% Cr, 11% Ni, Nb rain. = 10 x C% 
25% Cr, 20% Ni 
for stainless fiat products was BS 1449: Part 2 Stainless and heat resisting grades, 
but this has now been superseded by the following European specifications: 
BS EN 10088-1:1995 
BS EN 10088-2:1995 
BS EN 10088-3:1995 
List of stainless steels 
Technical delivery conditions for 
sheet/plate and strip for general purposes 
Technical delivery conditions for 
semi-finished products, bars, rods and 
sections for general purposes 
The last specification for stainless long products also supersedes those covered 
earlier in BS 970: Part 1: 1991. As indicated in Table 4.3 BS EN 10088-1 
includes 20 ferritic grades, 20 martensitic grades (including precipitation- 
hardened steels), 37 austenitic grades and 6 austenitic-ferritic (duplex) grades. 
It also contains useful data on the physical properties of these materials. BS EN 
10088-2 and 10088-3 present details of the mechanical properties. 
Martensitic stainless steels 
A fully martensitic structure can be developed in a stainless steel provided: 
1. The balance of alloying elements produces a fully austenitic structure at the 
solution treatment temperature, e.g. 1050"C. 
2. The Ms-Mr temperature range is above room temperature. 
As indicated earlier, these conditions are met in the case of a 12% Cr 0.1% C 
steel and such a grade (Type 410) defines the lower bound of composition in 
the commercial range of martensitic stainless steels. However, given that the Ms 
temperature of a 12% Cr 0.1% C steel is substantially above room temperature, 
there is the facility to make further alloy additions and still maintain the marten- 
sitic transformation range above room temperature. Therefore the alloy content 
can be increased in order to obtain the following improvements in properties: 
1. A higher martensitic hardness by means of an increased carbon content. 

Table 431a) BS EN 10088-1: 1995 Stainless Steels 
Chemicd composition (cast dysis)) offemtic stainless steek 
Steel designation 
%by- 
Name 
Number 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
N 
Cr 
Mo 
Nb 
Ni 
li 
others 
m e r m a T . m a r m e r  
mer 
X2CrNi 12 
1.4003 
0.030 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
10.015 
0.030 1050 to 
0.30 to 
12.50 
1 .00 
12.50 
to 0.65 
X6CrNili 12 
1.4516 
0.08 
0.70 
1.50 
ODlIJ 
50.015 
10.50 to 
0.50 to 
0.05 to 
12.50 
1.50 
0.35 
14.00 
14.00 
18.00 
0.60 
18.00 
18.00 
+OM to 0 . d )  
18.00 
18.00 
1.40 
0.35 
18.00 
0.60 
x2cff112 
1.4512 
0.030 1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
50.015 
10.50 to 
6 x (C+N) 
X6Cr13 
1.4OOO 
0.08 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
~0.015~) 
12.00 to 
X6CrAl13 
1.4002 
0.08 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
50.0152) 
12.00 to 
X2cff117 
1.4520 
0.025 
0.50 
050 
0.040 
50.015 
0.015 
16.00 to 
0.30 to 
X6Cr17 
1.4016 
0.08 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
~0.015~) 
16.00 to 
X3crTi17 
1.4510 
0.05 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
50.O1S2) 
16.00 to 
4 x  (C+N) 
X3CrNb17 
1.4511 
0.05 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
50.015 
16.00 to 
X6CrMo17- 1 
1.4113 
0.08 
1.00 
1.00 
0-040 
50.0152) 
16.00 to 
0.90 to 
X6CrMoS17 
1.4105 
0.08 
1.50 
1.50 
0.040 
0.15 to 
16.00 to 
0.20 to 
Ak 0.10 
to 0.30 
12 x c 
to 1.00 
X2CrMoli 17- 1 
1.4513 
0.025 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
50.015 
0.015 
16.00to 
1.60 to 
18.00 
1.50 
0.30 to 
0.60 
contimed overleaf 

Table 43(a) (continued) 
Chemical composition (cast dysis)') offemtic stainless steek 
Steel designation 
% b y m a S S  
Name 
Number 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
N 
Cr 
Mo 
Nb 
Ni 
zi 
Others 
m a r m a r m a r m a r  
mar 
X2CrMoTi 18-2 
1.4521 
0.025 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
10.015 
0.030 
17.00 to 
1.80 to 
4 x  (C+N) 
X2CrMoTiS18-2* 
1.4523* 0.030 
1.00 
0.50 
0.040 
0.15 to 
17.50 to 
2.00 to 
0.30 to 
(C + N) 
0.35 
19.00 
2.50 
0.80 
5 0.040 
X6CrNi 17- 1 * 
1.4017* 0.08 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
10.015 
16.00 to 
1.20 to 
18.00 
1.60 
X6CrMoNb 17- 1 
1.4526 
0.08 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
10.015 
0.040 
16.00 to 
0.80 to 
7 x (C+N) 
18.00 
1.40 
M.10 to 1.00 
X2CrNbZrl7* 
1.4590* 
0.030 1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
10.015 
16.00 to 
0.35 to 
zr27X 
17.50 
0.55 
(C + N) 
X2CrAlTil8-2 
1.4605 
0.030 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
10.015 
17.00 to 
4 x  (C+N) 
Al: 1.70 
18.00 
fo.15 to O.8d) to 2.10 
X2CfliNbl8 
1.4509 
0.030 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
10.015 
17.50 to 
3 x C+0.30 
0.10 to 0.60 
18.50 
to 1.00 
X2CrMoTi29-4 
1.4592 
0.025 
1.00 
1.00 
0.030 10.010 
0.045 
28.00 to 
3.50 to 
4 x  (C+N) 
30.00 
4.50 
+0.15 to 0.8d) 
20.00 
2.50 
+0.15 to 0.8d) 
+0.15 
')Elements not listed in this table may not be intentionally added to the steel without the agreement of the purchaser except for finishing the cast. All appropriate 
precautions are to be taken to avoid the addition of such elements from scrap and other materials used in production which would impair mechanical properties and 
the suitability of the steel. 
')For bars, rods, sections and the relevant semi-finished products, a maximum content of 0.030% S applies. 
For any product to be machined, a controlled sulphur content of 0.015% to 0.030% is recommended and permitted. 
3)The stabilization may be made by use of titanium or niobium or Zirconium. According to the atomic number of these elements and the content of carbon and 
nitrogen, the equivalence shall be the following: 
*Patented steel grade. 
n;l p&;;Izr 
4 
4 

Table 43(b) BS EN 10088-1: 1995 Stainless Steels 
chemical composition (cast d y s i s ) ' )  of martensitic and pmcipitation hardening stainless steels 
Steel designation 
S b b y m a S S  
~ 
~~ 
NUItU? 
Number 
@) 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
Cr 
cu 
Mo 
h% 
Ni 
Others 
mM. 
mar 
mar 
X12Cr13 
1.4006 
0.08 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
S0.0153) 1150 to 
- 
-=0.75 
X12CrS13 
1.4005 
0.08 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
0.15 to 
12.00 to 
50.60 
X2OCr13 
1.4021 
0.16 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
~0.015~) 12.00 to 
X30Cr13 
1.4028 
0.26 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
~0.015~) 12.00 to 
0.15 
1350 
0.15 
0.35 
14.00 
0.25 
14.00 
0.35 
14.00 
0.32 
0.25 
13.50 
0.42 
14.50 
0.50 
14.50 
XsOCrMoVlS 
1.4116 
0.45 to 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
S0.0153) 
14.00 to 
0.50 to 
v 0.10 
0.55 
15.00 
0.80 
to 0.20 
X7OCrMo15 
1.4109 
0.65 to 
0.70 
1.00 
0.040 
10.0153) 14.00 to 
0.40 to 
0.75 
16.00 
0.80 
X 14CrMoS 17 
1.4104 
0.10 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
0.15 to 
15.50 to 
0.20 to 
0.17 
0.35 
17.50 
0.60 
0.45 
17.50 
1.30 
1.20 
18.00 
0.80 
X29CrS13 
1.4029 
0.25 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
0.15 to 
12.00 to 
- 
(0.60 
X39Cr13 
1.4031 
0.36 to 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
S0.0153) 1250 to 
X46Cr13 
1.4034 
0.43 to 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
~0.015~) 1250 to 
X39crMo17-1 
1.4122 
0.33 to 
1.00 
1.50 
0.040 
10.0153) 15.50 to 
0.80 to 
- 
4-00 
X 105CrMo 17 
1.4125 
0.95 to 
1.00 
1.00 
0.040 
~0.015~) 16.00 to 
0.40 to 
continued overleaf 

Table 43b) (continued) 
Chemical composition (cast analysis)'' of manemitic and precipitation hardening stainless steels 
%bymaSS 
Steel designation 
N
m
 
Number 
dL) 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
Cr 
cu 
Mo 
Nb 
Ni 
others 
m M . m a x . m a r  
~ 
~~ 
V: 0.07 to 
XWrMoV 18 
1.4112 
0.85 to 
1.00 1.00 0.040 10.0153) 17.00 to 
0.90 to 
0.95 
19.00 
1.30 
0.12 
0.22 
17.00 
2.50 
14.00 
0.70 
4.50 
17.00 
1 S O  
6.00 
17.00 
5.00 
to 0.45 5.00 
18.00 
7.80") 1.50 
16.00 
3.00 
7.80 
1.50 
15.00 
2.00 
2.00 
0.60 
6.00 
X17CrNi 16-2 
1.4057 
0.12 to 
1.00 1.50 0.040 10.0153) 15.00 to 
1.50 to 
XSCrNiMo 13-4 
1.4313 
10.05 
0.70 1.50 0.040 50.015 
12.00 to 
0.30 to 
3.50 to N: I 0.020 
X4CrNiMol6-5- 
1 
1.4418 
50.06 
0.70 1.50 0.040 ~0.015~) 
15.00 to 
0.80 to 
4.00 to N 2 0.020 
xSCrNiCuNbl6-4 
1.4542 
10.07 
0.70 1.50 0.040 10.0153) 15.00 to 
3.00 to 50.60 
5 x C 
3.00 to 
X7CrNiAll7-7 
1.4568 
10.09 
0.70 1.00 0.040 10.015 
16.00 to 
6.50 to Al: 0.70 to 
X8CrNiMoAl15-7-2 
1.4532 
50.10 0.70 1.20 0.040 10.015 
14.00 to 
2.00 to 
6.50 to 
Ak 0.70 to 
xSCrNiMduNbl4-5 
1.4594 
10.07 0.70 1.00 0.040 
10.015 
13.00 to 
1.20 to 
1.20 to 0.15 to 5.00 to 
')Elements not quoted in this table may not be intentionally added to the steel without the agreement of the purchaser except for 6nishing the cast. AU appropriate 
precautions are to be taken to avoid the addition of such elements from scrap and other materials used in production which would impair mechanical properties and 
the suitability of the steel. 
2)Tighter carbon ranges may be agreed at the time of enquiry and order. 
3)F0r bars, rods, sections and the relevant semi-finished products, a maximum content of 0.030% S applies. For any product to be machined, a controlled sulphur 
content of 0.015% to 0.030% is recommended and permitted. 
4)F0r better cold deformability. the upper limit may be increased to 8.30%. 

Table 43(c) 
BS EN 10088-1: 1995 Stainless Steels 
chemical composition (cast analysis)) ojausrenitic s&ess 
seek 
8 bymars 
Steel tiesignation 
NamC 
Number 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
N 
Cr 
Cu 
Mo 
Nb 
Ni 
n 
XlOCrNil8-8 
X2CrNiNl8-7 
X2CrNi 18-9 
X2CrNil9-11 
X2CrNiNl8-10 
xSCrNil8- 10 
X8CrNiS 1 8-9 
X6CrNilil8-10 
X6CrNiNbl8-I0 
X4CrNi 18- 12 
XlCrNi25-21 
X2CrNiMo17-12-2 
X2CrNiMoN17-11-2 
1.4310 
1.4318 
1.4307 
1.4306 
1.4311 
1.4301 
1.4305 
1.4541 
1.4550 
1.4303 
1.4335 
1 .w 
1.4406 
0.05 to 
0.15 
50.030 
50.030 
50.030 
50.030 
50.07 
50.10 
50.08 
- 
(0.08 
- 
(0.06 
50.020 
50.030 
50.030 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
52.00 
52.00 
- 
(2.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
- 
c2.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
- 
(2.00 
max. 
0.045 
50.015 
0.045 50.015 
0.045 
(0.015) 
0.045 
50.015) 
0.045 
50.015) 
0.045 50.015) 
0.045 0.015 to 
0.045 
50.015) 
0.045 50.015 
0.045 
50.015) 
0.025 
50.010 
0.045 
50.015) 
0.045 
50.015*) 
0.35 
50.11 
0.10 to 
0.20 
50.11 
50.11 
0.12 to 
0.22 
50.1 1 
50.11 
50.11 
50.1 1 
50.1 1 
0.12 to 
0.22 
16.00 to 
19.00 
16.50 to 
1850 
17.50 to 
1950 
18.00 to 
20.00 
17.00 to 
19.50 
17.00 to 
19.50 
17.00~1 51.00 
19.00 
17.00 to 
19.00 
17.00 to 
19.00 
17.00 to 
19.00 
24.00 to 
26.00 
1650 to 
1850 
1650 to 
1850 
50.80 
50.20 
2.00 to 
2.50 
2.00 to 
250 
10 x c 
to 1.00 
6.00 to 
9.50 
6.00 to 
8.00 
8.00 to 
10.00 
10.00 to 
850 to 
11.50 
8.00 to 
10.50 
8.00 to 
10.00 
9.00to 
5 x c  
12.003) 
to 0.70 
9.00 to 
12.003) 
11.00 to 
13.00 
20.00 to 
22.00 
10.00 to 
13.003) 
10.00 to 
12.003) 
12.003) 
continued overleaf 

Table 43(c) 
(continued) 
~~~ 
chemical composition (cast ~alysis)') of austenitic stainless steeh 
Steel designation 
Q b y m a S S  
~ 
~~ 
~~~~ 
~ 
~ 
Name 
Number 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
N 
Cr 
cu 
Mo 
Nb 
Ni 
li 
X5CrNiMol7- 12-2 
X1 CrNiMoN25-22-2 
X6CrNiMoTi17- 
12-2 
X6CrNiMoNb17-12-2 
X2CrNiMo 17- 12-3 
X2CrNiMoN17-13-3 
X3CrNiMo 17- 13-3 
X2CrNiMo18-14-3 
x2CrNMoN 1 8- 12-4 
XCrNiMo18-15-4 
X2CrNMoN 17-13-5 
X1 CrNiSil8- 
15-4 
X 12CrMnNiN 17-7-5 
1.4401 
1.4466 
1.457 1 
1.4580 
1.4432 
1.4429 
1 .U36 
1.4435 
1 .a34 
1 .438 
1.4439 
1.4361 
1.4372 
- 
(0.07 
- 
(0.020 
- 
(0.08 
- 
(0.08 
- 
(0.030 
- 
(0.030 
50.05 
50.030 
- 
(0.030 
50.030 
50.030 
- 
(0.015 
50.15 
- 
(1.00 
50.70 
51.00 
51.00 
51.00 
11.00 
- 
(1.00 
- 
(1.00 
- 
(1.00 
51.00 
- 
(1.00 
3.70 to 
4.50 
- 
(1.00 
- 
(2.00 
- 
(2.00 
- 
(2.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
52.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
- 
(2.00 
- 
(2.00 
5.50 to 
7.50 
max. 
0.045 
0.025 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.025 
0.045 
50.0152) 
50.010 
- 
<0.0152) 
50.015 
50.0152) 
- 
(0.015 
50.015*) 
50.015*) 
- 
(0.015 
- 
(0.015*) 
50.015 
- 
<0.010 
- 
(0.015 
50.11 
0.10 to 
0.16 
50.11 
0.12 to 
0.22 
50.11 
- 
(0.11 
0.10 to 
0.20 
50.11 
0.12 to 
0.22 
50.11 
0.05 to 
0.25 
16.50 to 
18.50 
24.00 to 
26.00 
16.50 to 
18.50 
16.50 to 
18.50 
16.50 to 
18.50 
16.50 to 
18.50 
16.50 to 
18.50 
17.00 to 
19.00 
16.50 to 
19.50 
17.50 to 
19.50 
16.50 to 
18.50 
16.50 to 
18.50 
16.00 to 
18.00 
2.00 to 
2.50 
2.00 to 
2.50 
2.00 to 
2.50 
2.00 to 
2.50 
2.50 to 
3.00 
2.50 to 
3.00 
2.50 to 
3.00 
2.50 to 
3.00 
3.00 to 
4.00 
3.00 to 
4.00 
4.00 to 
5.00 
- 
(0.20 
10.00 to 
13.00 
21.00 to 
23.00 
10.50 to 
5 x C 
13.5d) to 0.70 
10 x C 10.50 to 
to 1.00 13.50 
10.50 to 
13.00 
11.00 to 
14.w) 
10.50 to 
13.w) 
12.50 to 
15.00 
10.50 to 
14.w) 
13.00 to 
16.w) 
12.50 to 
14.50 
14.00 to 
16.00 
3.50 to 
5.50 

X2CrMnNii17-7-5 
X12CrMnNii18-9-5 
X3CrNiCu19-9-2 
XKrNiCS 18-9-2 
X3CrNiCu18-94 
X3CrNiCuMol7-11-3-2 
XlNiCrMdu31-27-4 
X 1 NiCrMoCu25-20-5 
XlCrNiMoCuN25-25-5 
XlCrNiMduN20- 18-7* 
XlNiCrMduN25-20-7 
1.4371 
1.4373 
1.4560 
1.4570 
1.4567 
1.4578 
1 A563 
1.4539 
1.4537 
1.4547* 
1.4529 
- 
co.030 
50.15 
- 
(0.035 
50.08 
50.04 
- 
(0.04 
50.020 
50.020 
50.020 
50.020 
- 
(0.020 
51.00 
51.00 
- 
(1.00 
51.00 
11.00 
- 
(1.00 
50.70 
50.70 
50.70 
50.70 
50.50 
6.00 to 
8.00 
7.50 to 
10.50 
150 to 
2.00 
- 
(2.00 
52.00 
- 
<1.00 
52.00 
- 
c2.00 
52.00 
- 
(1.00 
- 
c1.00 
max. 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.045 
0.030 
0.030 
0.030 
0.030 
0.030 
50.015 
50.015 
50.015 
0.15 to 
0.35 
50.015') 
50.015 
50.0 10 
- 
<0.010 
50.010 
50.010 
50.010 
0.15 to 
0.20 
0.05 to 
0.25 
50.01 1 
50.01 1 
50.01 1 
50.01 1 
50.01 1 
10.15 
0.17 to 
02.5 
0.18 to 
0.25 
0.15 to 
0.25 
16.00 to 
17.00 
17.00 to 
19.00 
18.00 to 
19.00 
17.00 to 
19.00 
17.00 to 
19.00 
16.50 to 
17.50 
26.00 to 
28.00 
19.00 to 
21.00 
24.00 to 
26.00 
1950 to 
20.50 
19.00 to 
21.00 
1.50 to 
2.00 
1.40 to 
1.80 
3.00 to 
4.00 
3.00 to 
3.50 
0.70 to 
1.50 
1-20 to 
2.00 
1.00 to 
2.00 
0.50 to 
1 .00 
050 to 
150 
50.60 
2.00 to 
250 
3.00 to 
4.00 
4.00 to 
5.00 
4.70 to 
5.70 
6.00 to 
7.00 
6.00 to 
7.00 
350 to 
5.50 
4.00 to 
6.00 
8.00 to 
9.00 
8.00 to 
10.00 
850 to 
10.50 
10.00 to 
11.00 
30.00 to 
32.00 
24.00 to 
26.00 
24.00 to 
27.00 
17.50 to 
18.50 
24.00 to 
26.00 
')Elements not quoted in this table may not be intentiody added to the stcel without the agreement of the purchaser except for finishing the cast ~ l l  
appropriate 
precautions are to be taken to avoid the addition of such elements from scrap and 0th~ 
materials used in production which would impair mechanical p@es and 
the suitabiity of the steel. 
z)For bars, rods, sections and the relevant semi-hished products, a maximum content of 0.030% S applies. For any product to be machined, a conmU& sulphur 
content of 0.015% to 0.030% is recommended and permitted- 
3)Where for special reasons, e.g. hot workability for the fabrication of seamless tubes where it is necessary to minimize the delta ferrite content, or with the aim of 
low pemeabiity, the maximum Ni content may be increased by the following amounts: 
0.50% (m/m): 1.4571 
1.0046 (m/m): 1.4306, 1.4406, 1.4429. 1.4434, 1.4436, 1.4438, 1.4541, 1.4550 
150% (m/m): 1.4404, 
*Patented steel grade. 

Table 43(d) BS EN 10088-1: 1995 Stainless Steels 
Chemical composition (cast analysis)') of austenitic-femlic stainless steels 
Steel designation 
Name 
Number 
C 
Si 
Mn 
P 
S 
N 
Cr 
cu 
MO 
Ni 
W 
mM. 
max. 
max. 
max. 
Inax. 
X2CrNfl23-4* 
1.4362* 
0.030 
1.00 
2.00 
0.035 
0.015 
0.05 to 
X3CrNiMoN27-5-2 
1.4460 
0.05 
1.00 
2.00 
0.035 
0.0152) 
0.05 to 
X2CrNiMoN22-5-3 
1.4462 
0.030 
1.00 
2.00 
0.035 
0.015 
0.10 to 
X2CrNiMocuN25-6-3 
1.4507 
0.030 
0.70 
2.00 
0.035 
0.015 
0.15 to 
X2CrNiMoN25-7-4* 
1.4410* 
0.030 
1.00 
2.00 
0.035 
0.015 
0.20 to 
X2CrNiMoCuWN25-7-4 
1.4501 
0.030 
1.00 
1.00 
0.035 
0.015 
0.20 to 
0.20 
0.20 
0.22 
0.30 
0.35 
0.30 
22.00 to 
0.10 to 
0.10 to 
3.50 to 
24.00 
0.60 
0.60 
5.50 
25.00 to 
1.30 to 
4.50 to 
28.00 
2.00 
6.50 
21.00 to 
2.50 to 
4.50 to 
23.00 
3.50 
6.50 
24.00 to 
1.00 to 
2.70 to 
5.50 to 
26.00 
2.50 
4.00 
7.50 
24.00 to 
3.00 to 
6.00 to 
26.00 
4.50 
8.00 
24.00 to 
0.50 to 
3.00 to 
6.00 to 
0.50 to 
26.00 
1.00 
4.00 
8.00 
1 .00 
')Elements not listed in this table may not be intentionally added to the steel without the agreement of the purchaser except for finishing the cast. All appropriate 
precautions are to be taken to avoid the addition of such elements from scrap and other materials used in production which would impair mechanical properties and 
the suitability of the steel. 
2)For bars, rods. sections and the relevant semi-finished products, a maximum content of 0.030% S applies. For any product to be machined, a controlled sulphur 
content of 0.015% to 0.030% is recommended and permitted. 
*Patented steel grade. 
After British Standard BS EN 10088-1: 1995. 

Stainless steels 311 
2. Improved tempering resistance and toughness via balanced additions of molyb- 
denum, vanadium and nickel. 
Type 410 (12% Cr, 0.1% C) is probably the most popular grade in the marten- 
sitic series and is used in a wide variety of general engineering applications in 
both the wrought and cast condition. In Type 420, the carbon content is raised 
to about 0.3% to provide increased hardness and is typical of the steels used 
in cutlery. Type 416 and 416Se are free cutting versions of 12% Cr steel and 
contain additions of 0.15% S min. and 0.15% Se min. respectively in order to 
provide improved machining characteristics. 
During the 1950s, a considerable amount of work was carried out on the devel- 
opment of high-strength 12% Cr steels, particularly in relation to the requirements 
of the power generation industry for improved steam turbine bolting and blading 
materials. Two publications from that period by Irvine et al. 5 and Irvine and 
Picketing ~ still serve as classic texts on the metallurgy of high-strength 12% Cr 
steels. In the solution-treated condition (1050~ 
AC), a 12% Cr 0.1% C steel 
develops a tensile strength of about 1300 N/ram 2 and must be tempered in order 
to achieve a good combination of strength and toughness. Depending on the 
strength requirement, 12% Cr steels are tempered at temperatures up to about 
675~ and the above authors adopted the temperature-time parameter approach 
to demonstrate the effects of alloying elements on the tempering behaviour. An 
example is shown in Figure 4.8 for a 12% Cr 0.14% C steel, the tempering 
parameter being T(20 + log t) x 10 -3 where T is the temperature in ~ and t the 
time in hours. Detailed electron metaUographic studies revealed the following 
changes during the tempering of the steel: 
500 
450 
4OO 
Z 
13- 350 
300 
25o 
200 
150 
.... 
.g,~ 
d~ 
-.. Init!alhardness 
-- 
o 
~ 
~ 
o300 C 
3OO C 
- 
350oc 
~ 
~ 
o 350~ 
400oC ~ 
~ 
. 400oc 
450~ 
~- 
a 450oc 
_ 
~ 
v 500oc 
v~ 
.550oc 
v 600oc 
- 
v
~
 
9 650~ 
"~. 
9 7oooc 
soooc oo,, soo ';:i 
c 
600~ 
= ................ ~ 
- 
650oc -= ......... 
~ .... : 
700oc : 
9 
., = 
,I 
.I , 
I. 
I 
I 
_ 
I 
I . 
I 
750~C= 
|i: 
. i 
= _.1 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
T (20 + Log t) x 10-3 
Figure 4.8 
Tempering curve for 0.14% C 12% Cr base steel (After Irvine et al. ~) 

312 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
1. In the solution-treated condition, the hardness was 455 HV and there was some 
evidence for the precipitation of small particles of Fe3C within the martensitic 
structure, i.e. slight autotempering. 
2. After tempering at 350~ 
the amount of Fe3C precipitation had increased, 
but at 450 HV the loss of hardness was still negligible. 
3. Tempering at 450~ caused slight secondary hardening and this was associated 
with the precipitation of Cr7C3 and a small amount of MEX (based on Cr2C). 
4. A major loss in hardness occurred at 500~ 
and this was associated with 
the precipitation of relatively large particles of chromium-rich M23C6 at the 
martensite plate and prior austenite grain boundaries. 
5. Further softening occurred as the tempering temperature was increased and 
this was associated with the solution of Cr7C3 and the growth of M23C6 
particles. 
On tempering at 600oc, the steel had lost virtually all of the hardness associated 
with a martensitic structure and there was a particular need to improve the 
tempering resistance of 12% Cr turbine blading material at temperatures up to at 
least 650~ 
This was concerned with a requirement for good impact properties 
but brazing operations for the attachment of wear-resistant shields also raised the 
temperature of the blades locally to a temperature of about 650~ 
As indicated in Chapter 3, additions of molybdenum and vanadium are very 
effective in improving the tempering resistance of low-alloy martensitic steels and 
the same is true for their 12% Cr counterparts. This is illustrated in Figure 4.9, 
which shows the effects of molybdenum and vanadium in a base steel containing 
12% Cr, 2% Ni and 0.1% C. In either case, the addition of nickel is made to the 
steels to counteract the ferrite-forming potential of these elements. In the case of 
molybdenum (Figure 4.9(b)), a progressive increase in hardness is obtained on 
tempering at temperatures up to 500~ 
This is due to an intensification of the 
secondary hardening reaction and a fine dispersion of MEX precipitates persists 
500 
400 
~300 
200 
-~ 12% Cr Base 
_ 
(a) 
"~'~712. ~~ 
oB a sex ~ 
_.-.- 2.0% Mo 
(b) 
~. 3.1% Mo 
,12% Cr Base 
- ..__,=,,--o 9O/o 
v 
_ 
(c) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
~ 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
13 14 15 16 17 18 
19 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 
T (20 + Log t) x 10 -3 
4oo 
soo 
000 
7004oo 
soo 
6oo 
700400 
500 
000 
700 
1 hour at temperature (~ 
Figure 4.9 Effect of alloying elements on the tempering characteristics of a 0.1% C 
12% Cr steel (After Irvine and Pickering 6) 

Stainless steels 313 
at high tempering parameters. The addition of vanadium (Figure 4.9(c)) produces 
a similar effect and the stabilization of M2X maintains a high level of hardness, 
even after tempering at 650~ 
Irvine and Picketing 6 also demonstrated the beneficial effects of carbon, 
nitrogen and niobium on the tempering resistance of 12% Cr steels. As illustrated 
in Figure 4.10, carbon and nitrogen increase the hardness throughout the 
tempering range and in the tempered 650~ 1 h condition, the 0.2% PS values of 
12% Cr-Mo-V steels can be expressed by means of the following parameter: 
0.2% PS = 710 + 772 (C + 2N) N/mm 2 
Carbon and nitrogen also have the further benefit of being austenite formers 
and therefore do not require compensating additions to preserve the required 
martensitic structure. 
6~176 
r 
500 -~'~~N~ 
400 - 
\~,~ 
,-s 
Steel no.C, % N, % ~ ~ . ~ 4  
4 
0.127 0.020 
> 
5 
0.133 0.031 
-1- 
= 300 - 6 
0.130 0.044 
7 
0.129 0.062 
= 
i 
i 
I 
_ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(a) 
-I- 
500 - ~ ' " ~ " ~  
Steel no.C, % N, % 
0.096 0.033 
0.133 0.031 
1 
O. 155 0.039 
400 
- 
300 - 
2 
200 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
(b) 
T (20 + Log t) x 10-3 
I 
i 
~ 
I 
I 
i 
I 
400 450 
500 550 600 650 700 
1 hour at temperature 
(~ 
Figure 4.10 Effect of (a) nitrogen and (b) carbon on the tempering characteristics of a 
12% Cr-Mo-V steel (After Irvine and Picketing ~) 

314 Steels:MetallurgyandApplications 
Table 4.4 
Property 
Base+ 
Base+ 
Base + 0.37% 
Base + 0.33% 
0.015% N 
0.045% N 
Nb, 0.013% N 
Nb, 0.043% N 
TS (N/mm 2) 
936 
1055 
981 
1084 
0.2% PS (N/ram 2) 
772 
871 
815 
962 
Elongation 4~/A% 
22.8 
22.4 
18.1 
19.1 
Charpy V-J at RT 
94 
47 
104 
52 
The action of niobium in promoting tempering resistance is different to that of 
the other elements discussed above in that it intensifies the secondary hardening 
reaction by increasing the lattice parameter of the precipitate relative to that of the 
ferrite matrix. Thus the effect can be superimposed on other tempering retarding 
reactions, involving the stabilization of precipitates, in order to gain additional 
benefit. This is demonstrated in the tensile data given in Table 4.4 for 12% Cr 
2.5% Ni 1.5% Mo 0.3% V steels, tempered 650~ 
1 h. These data also indicate 
that nitrogen produces a powerful strengthening effect, albeit with a significant 
loss in toughness. 
As indicated earlier, the carbon content of 12% Cr steels can be increased 
to high levels in order to promote higher hardness levels but at the expense 
of toughness and weldability. Notable examples are cutlery steels containing 
12% Cr and 0.3% C and stainless razor steels containing 12% Cr and 0.6% C. 
In the latter steel, substantial amounts of carbon remain out of solution as M23C6 
carbides after solution treatment at 1050~ so that the full martensitic hardness 
associated with 0.6% C is not realized. However, the presence of carbides in the 
microstructure improves the abrasion resistance of such steels. 
Ferritic stainless steels 
Ferritic stainless steels can contain up to 30% Cr with additions of other elements 
such as molybdenum for improved pitting corrosion resistance and titanium or 
niobium for improved resistance to intergranular corrosion. These forms of corro- 
sion will be described in a later section. However, the bulk of the requirement 
for ferdtic stainless steels is satisfied by two major grades, namely Type 430 
and 434. As shown in Table 4.2, Type 430 is a 17% Cr steel and at the normal 
solution treatment temperature of 9500C, this steel generally contains a propor- 
tion of austenite which transforms to martensite on cooling to room temperature. 
However, on tempering at 750~ 
the martensite breaks down to ferrite and 
carbide, giving a microstructure which is essentially fully ferritic. 
The corrosion resistance of stainless steels in chloride environments is 
improved substantially with the addition of molybdenum, and Type 434 (17% Cr, 
1% Mo) is the most common grade of this type within the ferritic range. 
As illustrated later, the corrosion resistance of stainless steels can be seriously 
impaired by the precipitation of chromium carbides at the grain boundaries. One 
method of overcoming this problem is to add elements such as titanium and 

Stainless steels 315 
niobium which prevent the formation of chromium carbide. This gives rise to 
grades such as Type 430 Ti (17% Cr-Ti) and Type 430Nb (17% Cr-Nb). 
As discussed earlier, 12% Cr steels are normally martensitic and, as such, 
tend to have poor forming and welding characteristics. However, the addition 
of a strong ferrite former to a 12% Cr base steel can produce a fully ferritic 
microstructure with a marked improvement in the cold-forming and welding 
behaviour. This effect is achieved in Type 409 (12% Cr-Ti), the titanium also 
eliminating the problem of chromium carbide formation as well as promoting 
the ferritic structure. This steel has found extensive application in automobile 
exhausts in place of plain carbon or aluminized steel. 
Type 446 (25% Cr) is the highest chromium grade in the traditional range 
of ferritic stainless steels and provides the best corrosion and oxidation resis- 
tance. Whereas ferritic stainless steels generally possess low toughness, a further 
embrittling effect can be experienced in steels containing more than 12% Cr 
when heated to temperatures in the range 400-550~ 
The most damaging effect 
occurs at a temperature of about 475~ and, for this reason, the effect is known 
as 475~ embrittlement. The loss of toughness is due to the precipitation of a 
chromium-rich, ct prime phase which becomes more pronounced with increase in 
chromium content. However, 475~ embrittlement can be removed by reheating 
to a temperature of about 600oc and cooling rapidly to room temperature. 
Austenitic stainless steels 
As illustrated in Table 4.2, most of the steels in the AISI 300 series of austenitic 
steels are based on 18% Cr but with relatively large additions of nickel in order to 
preserve the austenitic structure. However, as illustrated below, various compo- 
sitional modifications are employed in order to improve the corrosion resistance 
of these steels. 
Type 304 (18% Cr, 9% Ni) is the most popular grade in the series and is used 
in a wide variety of applications which require a good combination of corrosion 
resistance and formability. As discussed later, the stability and work-hardening 
rate of austenitic stainless steels are related to composition, the leaner alloy 
grades exhibiting the greater work hardening. Thus a steel such as Type 301 
(17% Cr, 7% Ni) work hardens more rapidly than Type 304 (18% Cr, 9% Ni) 
and, for this reason, Type 301 is often used in applications calling for high 
abrasion resistance. Steels such as Type 316 (18% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.5% Mo) and 
317 (18% Cr, 15% Ni, 3.5% Mo) have greater resistance to corrosion in chloride 
environments than Type 304 and represent austenitic counterparts of Type 434 
(17% Cr, 1% Mo) discussed in the previous section. 
Reference was made earlier to the corrosion problems experienced in stain- 
less steels with the formation of chromium carbides. It was indicated that the 
problem can be overcome in ferritic stainless steels with the addition of titanium 
and niobium and the same is true in the austenitic grades. This gives rise to 
Types 321 (18% Cr, 10.5% Ni, Ti) and 347 (18% Cr, 11% Ni, Nb) and, because 
of their freedom from chromium carbide precipitation and intergranular attack, 
these grades are often referred to as stabilized stainless steels. 

316 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.5 
Compositions of 200 series steels 
C% 
Si% 
Mn% 
Cr% 
Ni% 
N% 
Type 201 
0.1 
0.5 
6.5 
17 
4.5 
0.25 
Type 202 
0.1 
0.5 
8.75 
18 
5 
0.25 
An alternative method of preventing the formation of chromium carbide in 
stainless steels is to reduce the carbon content to a low level. Thus Type 304L 
(0.03% C max.) is a lower carbon variety of Type 304 and is now used 
extensively in applications calling for resistance to intergranular attack in the 
welded condition. In a similar manner, Type 316L is the lower carbon version 
of Type 316. 
Type 310 (25% Cr, 20% Ni) represents the most highly alloyed composition in 
the popular range of austenitic stainless steels and provides the greatest resistance 
to corrosion and oxidation. 
During the early 1950s, there was a scarcity of nickel in the United States 
and this led to the development of austenitic stainless steels in which some 
of the nickel was replaced by alternative austenite-forming elements. The most 
successful steels of this type were Types 201 and 202, which have the mean 
compositions shown in Table 4.5. 
These steels were developed as alternatives to Types 301 (17% Cr, 7% Ni) and 
302 (18% Cr, 8% Ni), in which reductions in the nickel content were compen- 
sated by large additions of manganese and nitrogen. The addition of 0.25% N 
also causes substantial solid solution strengthening and therefore the 200 series 
steels have high tensile properties. These steels were used extensively for the 
production of railway carriages in the United States but found little application 
in the UK. However, they are difficult to produce because of excessive refractory 
attack and problems in descaling due to their high manganese contents. 
Nitrogen additions of about 0.2% are also made to standard grades such as 
Types 304 and 316 in order to generate high proof stress values. In the UK, these 
steels are marketed under the Hyproof tradename and provide 0.2 PS values of 
about 330 N/mm 2 compared with 250 N/mm 2 in the standard grades (typically 
0.04% N). 
The strength of austenitic steels can also be increased by warm working, i.e. 
by finishing rolling at temperatures below 950~ 
As illustrated in Figure 4.11, 
this results in a major increase in the 0.2% proof stress of standard grades such as 
Type 304 and 321, but significantly higher levels of strength can be obtained by 
warm working compositions which are substantially solid solution strengthened 
with nitrogen. Steels of this type have found limited application in pressure 
vessels and also for high-strength concrete reinforcement. 
Controlled transformation stainless steels 
In the 1950s, interest was generated in an entirely new type of stainless steel 
that was austenitic in the as-delivered, solution-treated condition but which 
transformed to martensite by means of a simple heat treatment. Such materials 

Stainlesssteels 317 
50- 
A 
04 ,o 
v 
i= 
Ix, 
20 
04 
r 
10 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
I 
! 
750 
850 
950 
1050 
Finishing temperature (~ 
Figure 4.11 Effect of finishing temperature on the properties of austenitic stainless steel 
(After McNeely and Llewellyn ?) 
offered the prospect of combining the good forming properties of traditional 
austenitic stainless steels with the high strength of martensitic grades. The concept 
required that the composition of these steels was controlled to within fine limits 
such that the Ms-Mf temperature range was just below room temperature. 
Following cold-forming operations, the steel could then be transformed to 
martensite by refrigeration at a temperature such as -780C (solid CO2). Such 
steels became known as controlled transformation stainless steels and their 
behaviour can be illustrated by reference to Figure 4.5. This indicates that a 
steel containing 0.1% C, 17% Cr and 5.5% Ni is essentially free of delta ferrite 
and has an M~ temperature near to ambient. In the solution-treated 1050~ AC 
condition, this composition has a hardness of about 220 HV, but on refrigeration 
at -78"C, the hardness increases to about 400 HV. This indicates that the steel 
has been substantially transformed to martensite, although Figure 4.5 shows that 
hardness values approaching 450 HV are obtained on complete transformation 
to martensite. 
One of the problems encountered in the production of these steels was the very 
tight control of composition that was required in order to position the transforma- 
tion range just below room temperature. If the alloy content was excessive, the 
transformation range was depressed to low temperatures such that transformation 
to martensite could not be obtained at -78~ 
On the other hand, if the alloy 
content was too low, the high Ms-Mf temperature range meant that substantial 
transformation to martensite occurred on cooling to room temperature. However, 
this problem could be eased to some extent by varying the solution treatment 
temperature and this facility is illustrated schematically in Figure 4.12(a). In 
austenitic steels containing about 0.1% C and 17% Cr, complete solution of 
M23C6 carbides can be obtained at a temperature of 1050~ 
In such a condition, 
both chromium and carbon exercise their full potential in depressing the Ms-Mf 
range. However, if the solution treatment temperature is reduced, then a propor- 
tion of M23C6 carbide is left out of solution and the transformation range is 

318 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
raised due to reduced levels of chromium and carbon in solid solution. Thus the 
use of low solution treatment temperatures provides a means of accommodating 
casts of steel in which the alloy content was slightly higher than the optimum 
but, even so, this approach still necessitated very tight control over the solution 
treatment temperature. 
In addition to the use of refrigeration treatments, controlled transformation 
steels could also be hardened by ageing or primary tempering at a temperature 
of 700"C. This resulted in the precipitation of M23C6 carbide and, as illustrated 
in Figure 4.12(b), this causes a substantial increase in the Ms-Mf range due to 
the reduced level of alloying elements in solid solution. Thus on cooling from the 
tempering treatment, the steel transforms to martensite. In a completely austenitic 
steel, the precipitation of carbide is essentially restricted to the grain bound- 
aries and this limits the degree to which the transformation range can be raised. 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
o 
40 
20 
o 
Q. 
E 
-20 
-40 
-60 
- 80 
-100 
-120 
-140 
(a) 
r 
o 
v 
20~ 
r 
E 
p- 
-70oC 
(b) 
M8 
m 
M, 
M~o 
F 
M. 
M~ 
Mlo~ 
M~ 
M10 
MS0 1 
Mg0 
M, 
M~o 
Mf 
Mlo 
Mso ~ 
Moo 
900~ 
Mso 
M9 ~ 
Mf 
925 ~ 
M9 ~ 
Mf 
950 ~ 
Mf 
1000~ 
1050~ 
S 
"" 
M1 o - 
M~- 
__ __M_~_.- 
950~ 
AC 
Ms 
M~o 
Mso 
Mgo 
M, 
-- 950~ 
AC 
+ 
-- 700~ 2 h 
Figure 4.12 Effect of heat treatment on martensite transformation range: (a) effect of 
solution treatment; (b) effect of primary tempering (After lrvine et aL l) 

Stainless steels 319 
However, if delta ferrite is present in the microstructure, the ferrite-austenite 
interfaces provide further sites for carbide precipitation and transformation to 
martensite is produced more readily. Thus where hardening is to be achieved 
by primary tempering, rather than refrigeration, the steels should contain 5-10% 
delta ferrite. However, the primary tempering route to transformation results in 
the formation of lower carbon martensites and lower strength levels compared 
with those achieved after transformation by refrigeration. This is illustrated in 
Table 4.6, which shows the tensile properties obtained in a particular grade of 
steel after the two forms of hardening. This table also shows the low proof 
stress value and high tensile strength obtained in the solution-treated 1050"C AC 
condition, which gives an indication of the high rate of work hardening in these 
meta-stable grades. 
As indicated in Table 4.6, these steels are tempered after the hardening treat- 
ments and therefore it is desirable to incorporate alloying elements that will 
improve the tempering resistance or provide a secondary hardening response. 
Thus many of the commercial grades that were introduced in the 1950s contained 
about 2% Mo and elements such as copper, cobalt and aluminium were also added 
in order to promote secondary hardening reactions in the low-carbon marten- 
site. The effect of copper additions on the secondary hardening behaviour of a 
17% Cr 4% Ni steel is shown in Figure 4.13 and examples of the compositions 
of commercial grades of controlled transformation stainless steels are shown in 
Table 4.7. Although the range of composition shown in this table is quite wide, 
the steels embody the following features: 
1. A chromium content of 15-17% in order to provide good corrosion resistance. 
Table 4.6 
Properties of a 0.1% C 17% Cr 4% Ni 2% Mo 2% Cu steel 
Heat treatment 
TS 
0.2% PS 
El % 4~/A 
(N/mm 2) 
(N/mm 2) 
1050oc 1 h AC 
1050oc 1 h AC, 700~ 2 h 
10500C 1 h AC, 700oc 2 h, 4500C 6 h 
1000~ 1 h AC, -780C 2 h 
1000~ 1 h AC, -780C 2 h, 4500C 6 h 
1294 
213 
27.1 
1035 
689 
15.6 
1161 
961 
19.6 
1347 
874 
15.6 
1340 
1154 
22.5 
Table 4.7 
Compositions of commercial grades of controlled-transformation 
stainless steels 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
_ 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Grade 
C% 
Mn% 
Si% 
Cr% 
Ni% 
Mo% 
Cu% 
Co% 
Al% 
Ti% 
Armco 17-4PH 0.04 
0.5 
0.3 
16.5 
3.5 
AM350 
0.1 
0.5 
0.3 
17 
4.2 
2.75 
Stainless W 
0.07 
0.5 
0.3 
17 
7 
Armco 17-7PH 0.07 
0.5 
0.3 
17 
7 
Armco 17-5PH 0.07 
0.5 
0.3 
15 
7 
2.5 
FV 520(S) 
0.07 
1.5 
0.5 
16 
5.5 
2 
SF 80T 
0.08 
0.2 
0.2 
17 
4 
1 
3.5 
1.5 
1.2 
2 
0.2 
1.1 
1.2 
0.7 
0.1 

320 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
(a) Aged 400~ 
(b) Aged 450~ 
500 
'450 
- - -~ 
' 
- 
400 1. = 
\\'~" 4.07 
I 
\\~ a.os 
350 [" 
\\2.44 
I 
~'1.97 
300 
I 1"641 
J l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
60 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Time (h) 
Figure 4.13 
Effect of copper on the secondary hardening response in a 17% Cr 4% Ni 
steel (initial conditions 950 ~ C A C, - 78 ~ C, I h) (After Irvine et al. I) 
2. Sufficient austenite-forming elements to produce a mainly austenitic structure 
at 1050~ 
3. Alloying elements to promote tempering resistance/secondary hardening reac- 
tions. 
4. An overall alloy content that produces an Ms-Mf transformation range just 
below room temperature. 
These steels were developed primarily for the aerospace industry but were of 
limited commercial success due to the fact that: 
1. The very tight composition ranges were difficult to achieve in commercial 
production. 
2. The meta-stable nature of the steels results in a very high rate of work hard- 
ening which limited some aspects of cold formability. 
However, FV 520(S) is still in use in the UK and is used primarily in defence 
applications such as gun carriages and aircraft. 
Steel prices 
At the time of reporting (March 1997), stainless steel producers in the UK were 
experiencing difficult trading conditions due to the strength of sterling and the 
volatile prices for ferro-alloys. Over the past 12 months, they had experienced 
price swings for stainless steels of greater than 30% and were therefore very 
reluctant to quote the current prices for these grades. Because of this situation, 
the only information that can be presented at this time are the prices of some 
of the popular grades of strip relative to a value of 1.0 for Type 304 (18% Cr 
9% Ni). These data are shown in Figure 4.14 which also includes the relative 
price for 2205, the duplex grade, which has gained increased usage over the past 
few years. Very clearly, the ratios reflect the alloy content of the steels, Type 409 
(12% Cr) being the cheapest and Type 310 (25% Cr 20% Ni) the most expensive 
in this particular selection of grades. 

Stainless steels 321 
2.5 
- 
2.0 
-- 
O 
1.5- 
8 
11. 
1.0- 
0.5 
t~ 
O 
T" 
409 
0m 
z 
L_ 
0 g 
304 
o,i 
~ 
z 
0 
z 
o 
o 
O3 
0,,=, 
z 
143 
r 
~ 
z 
L 
r~ 
2205 . . . .  
316 
310 
- 
2.5 
" 2.0 
1.5 
- 
1.0 
0.5 
Figure 4.14 Prices of stainless steel strip relative to a value of 1.O for Type 304 at March 
1997 
Based on the prices quoted in the 2nd edition of this book (1994), Type 304 
stainless steel strip was about 3 89 times that of cold-reduced, uncoated, mild steel 
strip. The prices of some high-alloy stainless steels, relative to Type 316L, are 
shown in Table 4.9 (see p. 332). 
Corrosion resistance 
Stainless steels owe their corrosion resistance to the formation of the so-called 
passive film. This consists of a layer, only 20-30 ,~, thick, of hydrated chromium 
oxide (Cr203), which is extremely adherent and resistant to chemical attack. 
If the passive film is damaged by abrasion or scratching, a healing process or 
repassivation occurs almost immediately. In general, the corrosion and oxidation 

322 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
resistance of stainless steels increase with chromium content and the materials 
are used in a wide range of aggressive media in the chemical and process plant 
industries. However, under certain conditions, stainless steels are susceptible to 
highly localized forms of attack in relatively mild environments, rendering them 
unsuitable for further service. In this context, the main types of localized attack 
are intergranular corrosion, pitting corrosion and stress corrosion. However, it 
should be stressed that these forms of attack are well researched and thoroughly 
documented and therefore it is now rare for them to lead to premature or unex- 
pected failure in stainless steel components. 
Intergranular corrosion 
Given favourable temperature conditions, solute atoms can segregate to the grain 
boundaries, causing enrichment in a particular element or the precipitation of 
metal compounds. Under highly oxidizing conditions, these effects can cause the 
grain boundaries of stainless steels to become very reactive, leading to the highly 
localized form of attack known as intergranular corrosion. 
Both austenitic and ferritic stainless steel are susceptible to intergranular corro- 
sion and, in either case, the problem is caused by the segregation of carbon to 
the grain boundaries and the formation of the chromium-rich, M23C6 carbides. 
The concentration of chromium in these carbides is very much higher than that 
in the surrounding matrix and, at one time, it was postulated that this resulted 
in galvanic corrosion between the noble carbides and the more reactive matrix. 
However, currently the most widely accepted theory for intergranular corrosion in 
stainless steels is that involving chromium depletion. Thus, in forming chromium- 
rich carbides at the grain boundaries, chromium is drawn out of solid solution, 
and in areas adjacent to the boundaries, the chromium content becomes severely 
depleted compared to the bulk chromium concentration of the steel. Such areas 
are then said to have become sensitized in that they no longer contain sufficient 
chromium to withstand corrosive attack. Corrosion can then proceed along the 
grain boundaries and a micrograph illustrating this form of attack in an austenitic 
stainless steel is shown in Figure 4.15. 
Two main laboratory tests are carried out for the evaluation of intergranular 
corrosion, namely the Huey and Strauss tests. The former was developed to 
determine the performance of stainless steels in nitric acid plant and has been 
standardized as ASTM A262-70 Practice C. It consists of immersing a sample 
in boiling 65% HNO3 for five periods, each of 48 hours, using fresh acid solution 
in each period. The samples are weighed after each period and the weight loss is 
generally converted to a corrosion rate in terms of mm/year. The geometry of the 
test piece has to be carefully controlled to avoid excessive 'end grain' effects, 
which will be described later, and the type of acid used must also be controlled 
very carefully in order to obtain reproducible results. 
The Strauss test was introduced to determine the pickling behaviour of stain- 
less steels and is now standardized as ASTM A262-70 Practice E. This involves 
exposure to boiling 15.7% H2SO4 + 5.7% CuSO4 solution with the test spec- 
imen in contact with metallic copper which increases the severity of attack. The 

Stainless steels 323 
Figure 4.15 lntergranular corrosion in Type 304 stainless steel 
performance of the steel is then judged in terms of the presence or absence of 
cracks or fissures after bending. 
A third test, often designated the oxalic acid test, has been standardized as 
ASTM A262-70 Practice A. In this test, a polished sample of austenitic stainless 
steel is etched electrolytically in a 10% solution of oxalic acid at room temper- 
ature. In the absence of chromium carbide precipitates, the grain boundaries of 
the etched sample exhibit a step between adjacent grains compared with a ditch 
in material which has experienced intergranular attack. The test also recognizes a 
dual, intermediate condition in which some intergranular corrosion has occurred 
but no single grain is surrounded completely by ditches. 
At temperatures below about 850~ 
the solubility of carbon in an austenitic 
stainless steel falls below 0.03% and exposure in the temperature range 
450-800~ 
can result in the precipitation of M23C6 carbide. This can occur 
during: 
1. Slow cooling through the sensitization temperature range following solution 
treatment at 1050~ or after welding. 
2. Stress relieving after welding or service exposure in the critical temperature 
range. 
Slow cooling from welding and subsequent intergranular attack gave rise to the 
term weld decay before the mechanism was fully understood. The weld decay 
area is generally a band of material, some distance from the weld, which has 
been exposed to the temperature range favouring the precipitation of chromium 
carbide. 

324 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
From the foregoing remarks, it will be obvious that a reduction in the carbon 
content will reduce the susceptibility to intergranular corrosion but, at one time, 
major expense was incurred in reducing the carbon content of an austenitic 
stainless steel to below 0.06%. However, as indicated earlier, the problem was 
controlled initially by adding elements such as titanium or niobium, which are 
stronger carbide formers than chromium, and therefore TiC or NbC are formed 
rather than the damaging chromium-rich M23C6. The addition of these elements is 
said to stabilize stainless steels against intergranular attack and gives rise to the 
standard grades-Type 321 (Ti-stabilized) and Type 347 (Nb-stabilized). These 
elements also form nitrides and the additions made to stainless steels are slightly 
in excess of those required by stoichiometry for complete precipitation of carbon 
and nitrogen, namely, Ti = 5 x (C -t- N)% and Nb = 10 x (C + N)%. 
Although the problem of intergranular corrosion is controlled by the addition 
of stabilizing elements, Types 321 and 347 are not completely immune to this 
form of corrosion since they are susceptible to knife-line attack. During welding, 
the heat-affected zone is raised to temperatures above 1150~ and this can result 
in the partial dissolution of TiC and NbC. Carbon is therefore taken into solution 
in a narrow region adjacent to the weld and can be available for the formation 
of chromium carbide on cooling through the sensitization range of 450-8000C. 
The susceptible region may only be a few grains wide but can give rise to a thin 
line of intergranular attack. Hence the term knife-line attack. 
The problem of intergranular corrosion in austenitic stainless steels can also 
be overcome by reducing the carbon content to low levels. Although steels 
containing 0.03% C max. (L grades) have been available since the 1950s, 
their use was restricted very severely in the early days due to high production 
costs. This involved the use of low-carbon ferro-chrome, which was expensive. 
However, the introduction of AOD refining has cheapened the production of 
the L-grades very considerably and these steels are now used extensively in 
applications formerly satisfied by the stabilized grades. However, the presence of 
TiC and NbC particles gives rise to some dispersion strengthening and Types 321 
and 347 are still used in applications where advantage can be taken of their higher 
strength. 
According to Sedriks, s molybdenum has an adverse effect on intergranular 
corrosion as assessed in the Huey test and a beneficial effect in the Strauss test. 
It is suggested that the adverse effect in the former may be concerned with 
the fact that nitric acid attacks areas other than chromium-depleted regions, e.g. 
areas associated with solute segregation or the early formation of sigma phase. 
At one time, small additions of boron were made to austenitic stainless steels 
in order to improve hot workability and the high-temperature creep properties. 
However, such additions are very deleterious to the performance in the Huey 
test. It has been suggested that boron additions lead to the formation of M2B 
and M23(CB)6 precipitates at the grain boundaries, both of which give rise to 
chromium-depletion effects. Performance in the Huey test is also improved by 
reducing the phosphorus content of austenitic stainless steels to low levels, i.e. 
less than 0.01% P. 

Stainless steels 325 
Transverse 
section 
Rolling direction 
, 
"llk'i'- 
I ~ 
, 
(a) 
Plate 
thickness 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 4.16 Schematic illustration of end grain attack from outcropping inclusions: 
(a) elongated inclusions outcropping on transverse sections; (b) outcropping inclusions 
dissolved in nitric acid; (c) heavy intergranular attack from crevices 
In addition to segregation and precipitation effects at grain boundaries, the 
intergranular corrosion behaviour of austenitic stainless steels can also be 
influenced very markedly by the presence of elongated particles or clusters of 
second phases. These can take the form of sulphides or other plastic inclusions 
but adverse effects can also be induced in niobium-stabilized Type 347 steel due 
to the presence of stringers of coarse niobium carbonitrides. The mechanism is 
shown schematically in Figure 4.16. In the Huey test, outcropping inclusions 
appear to dissolve quickly, creating long narrow passages from the end faces 
into the body of the samples. These passages do not provide ready access for 
the ingress of new acid and it is thought that this gives rise to the formation 
and concentration of hexavalent Cr e+ ions. This leads to particularly aggressive 
corrosion conditions within the passages and intergranular attack proceeds very 
quickly along the adjacent grain boundaries. The effect is known as end grain 
attack and can lead to weight losses far in excess of that experienced in 
cleaner steels or those containing shorter inclusions. In chemical plant, end grain 
corrosion can be experienced in forgings or in tube-to-tube welds where end 
faces are exposed due to ovality effects or differences in tube diameter. In such 
cases, the exposed end grain faces should be covered by capping welds. 
Because carbon has a very low solid solubility in ferritic stainless steels, it is 
extremely difficult to prevent the formation of chromium carbides in these grades. 
Thus when carbon is taken into solution by heating to temperatures above 925~ 

326 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
carbide precipitation may occur even when the material is water quenched from 
the solution treatment temperature. However, intergranular corrosion will only 
proceed in sensitized material in aggressive, oxidizing media and, ordinarily, 
ferritic stainless grades such as Types 430 and 434 are not exposed to such 
environments. Even so, care should be taken to minimize the risk of intergranular 
corrosion. 
Ferritic stainless steels sensitize more rapidly and at lower temperatures than 
their austenitic counterparts, the fastest reaction occurring at a temperature of 
about 600"C. However, by holding at a temperature of about 800"C, or by cooling 
slowly through the temperature range 700-900"C, the risk of intergranular attack 
can be eliminated. Following the initial, damaging precipitation of chromium 
carbides, these treatments allow sufficient time for chromium to diffuse into the 
depleted zones and thereby eliminate the sensitization effects. 
The addition of titanium also reduces the risk of intergranular attack in ferritic 
stainless steels. However, whereas the reduction of carbon to below 0.03% is 
effective in preventing sensitization in austenitic grades (L grades), significantly 
lower levels are required in ferritic stainless steels. Nitrogen is also damaging, 
causing chromium depletion via the formation of chromium nitride. Therefore, 
the total (carbon + nitrogen) must be reduced to below 0.01% in order to prevent 
sensitization in a 17% Cr ferritic steel. The development of low interstitialferritic 
steels will be discussed later. 
Piing corrosion 
As its name suggests, pitting is a highly localized form of corrosion which, in 
its initial form, results in the formation of shallow holes or pits in the surface of 
the component. However, the pits can propagate at a fast rate, resulting in pin- 
holing or complete perforation in the wall of the component. Therefore pitting 
can be completely destructive in terms of further useful life when only a very 
small amount of metal has been attacked by corrosion. In stainless steels, pitting 
corrosion generally takes place in the presence of chloride ions and it is widely 
held that the initiation stage is associated with attack on non-metallic inclusions. 
However, other microstructural features may also play a part. The formation of 
a pit in an austenitic stainless steel is shown in Figure 4.17. 
Fontana and CJreene 9 have stated that pits usually grow in the direction of 
gravity, i.e. downwards from horizontal surfaces, and only rarely do they proceed 
in an upward direction. These authors have formulated a model for pitting in 
terms of an autocatalytic process for stainless steels in aerated sodium chloride 
solution. The sequence of events is as follows: 
1. Anodic dissolution takes place at the bottom of the pit: 
M-+ M++e - 
2. A cathodic reaction takes place on adjacent surface: 
02 + 2H20 + 4e- --, 4OH- 

Stainless steels 327 
Figure 4.17 Pitting corrosion in 1~pe 304 stainless steel 
3. The build up of M + ions within the pit causes the C1- ions to migrate to the 
pit in order to preserve electrical neutrality. 
4. The soluble metal chloride hydrolyses to form hydroxide and free acid: 
M+CI - + H20 --+ MOH + H+CI - 
Thus acid is produced by the reaction which decreases the pH to a low level 
whereas the bulk solution remains neutral. 
Traditionally, the susceptibility of stainless steels to pitting corrosion was 
evaluated by immersion tests in acidified ferric chloride solutions (ASTM Prac- 
tice G48-76 and Practice G46-76). Such tests involve the measurement of pit 
density, size and depth. However, laboratory tests on pitting behaviour are now 
more generally based on electrochemical techniques. 
The resistance to pitting increases with chromium content but major benefit 
is obtained from the addition of molybdenum in stainless steels, e.g. Type 316 
(18% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.5% Mo). The addition of nitrogen is also beneficial and the 
combined effects of nitrogen plus molybdenum will be discussed later in this 
chapter. The potential pitting resistance of stainless steels is often expressed in 
terms of a pitting index: 
Pitting index = Cr% + 3.3Mo% + 16N% 
In terms of microstructure, MnS inclusions are important sites for pit initiation 
but other features such as delta ferrite, alpha prime and sigma phase can also 
promote pitting corrosion. 

328 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Stress corrosion cracking 
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is a form of failure induced by the conjoint 
action of tensile stresses and particular types of corrosive environments. The 
stresses can be either applied or residual and cracking takes place in a direction 
normal to the tensile stresses, often at stress levels below the yield strength of the 
material. A micrograph illustrating SCC in an austenitic stainless steel is shown 
in Figure 4.18. Cracking can take place in either a transgranular or intergranular 
manner and can proceed to the point where the remaining material can no longer 
support the applied stress and fracture then takes place. 
SCC occurs in chloride, caustic or oxygen-rich solutions but the majority of 
failures in austenitic stainless steel take place in chloride-bearing environments. 
Chloride ions may be present in the process stream but can also be introduced 
accidentally through the incomplete removal of sterilizing agents, such as 
hypochlorite solutions. 
It is now generally acknowledged that SCC is initiated by the formation 
of a pit or crevice at anodic sites on the surface, e.g. outcropping inclusions 
which disrupt the passive film. The reactions controlling pitting corrosion were 
described in the previous section. A number of mechanisms has been proposed 
for crack propagation but the surviving theories are based on anodic dissolution 
and hydrogen embrittlement mechanisms. In the former, cracking propagates by 
local anodic dissolution at the crack tip, passivation at that point being prevented 
by plastic deformation. Alternatively, the principal role of plastic deformation 
Figure 4.18 Stress corrosion cracking in ~pe 304 stainless steel 

Stainless steels 329 
is to accelerate the dissolution process. In the hydrogen embrittlement theory, 
hydrogen is generated due to the cathodic reaction (H + 4- e- --, H) and migrates 
to the crack tip where it is absorbed within the metal lattice, causing mechanical 
rupture. This extends the crack and further anodic dissolution then occurs on the 
newly exposed surfaces. 
Although laboratory tests are carried out in a variety of salt solutions, that 
involving boiling 42% magnesium chloride solution is probably the most popular. 
The test specimens may be U-bend specimens which are clamped so as to provide 
a large tensile stress on the outside of the bend or else tensile specimens are 
employed, loaded to perhaps 0.8 times the 0.2% PS of the material. 
Major research effort has been devoted to the effects of composition on 
the stress corrosion behaviour of stainless steels. One of the most important 
elements is nickel and the celebrated Copson curve l~ is shown in Figure 4.19. 
This relates to stainless steels containing 18-20% Cr in a magnesium chloride 
solution boiling at 154~ 
This figure indicates a minimum resistance to SCC at 
nickel contents in the range 8-10%, i.e. typical of those in standard austenitic 
steels such as Types 302 and 304. A reduction in nickel from these levels leads 
to an improvement in the SCC behaviour but of course this is associated with 
the progressive replacement of austenite by delta ferrite in the microstructure. 
Alternatively, the resistance to SCC can be improved by increasing the nickel 
content to levels of 40% and above. The beneficial effect of nickel at levels 
above 8-10% has been attributed to an increase in the stacking fault energy of 
the materials but nickel must also exert an ennobling effect which inhibits anodic 
dissolution. 
Silicon has a beneficial effect on the SCC behaviour in magnesium chloride 
solutions but has virtually no effect in high-temperature solutions of sodium 
chloride. 
1000 
~" 
100 
Cracking 
10 
- -- 
l[ 
/" 
I Testsln 
n 
It 
/ 
I bo~,ng 42~ 
1 
0 
20 
40 
60 
% Nickel 
Figure 4.19 
Effect of nickel on the stress corrosion behaviour of austenitic stainless steels 
(After Copson l~ ) 

330 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Although clearly beneficial in the formation of passive films and in suppressing 
pitting corrosion, both chromium and molybdenum appear to have a variable 
effect on the SCC behaviour of stainless steels. These effects may well be linked 
to austenite stability and a reduction in stacking fault energy which promotes 
crack propagation. 
Temperature is a very important parameter in the SCC behaviour of stainless 
steels and is rarely observed at temperatures below about 60"C. 
High-alloy stainless steels 
As indicated at the beginning of this chapter, most of the popular grades of 
stainless steel were formulated in the 1920s and 1930s and have undergone little 
change to the present day. However, in the intervening period, a large amount of 
research effort has been devoted to the development of new grades but relatively 
few of these compositions have enjoyed major commercial exploitation. 
High.alloy austenitic/duplex grades 
From the basic Type 304 (18% Cr, 9% Ni) composition, a number of develop- 
merits have taken place which were designed to improve a particular property. 
These include: 
1. The addition of up to 0.5% N to improve the strength (solid solution strength- 
ening) or to compensate for reductions in the nickel content (e.g. Types 201 
and 202). 
2. The addition of elements such as aluminium, titanium or phosphorus to 
produce precipitation-strengthening reactions. 
3. The inclusion of high levels of nickel and molybdenum and moderate levels of 
copper and nitrogen to improve the resistance to stress corrosion or reducing 
acids. 
The properties of steels in the first category were discussed briefly on p. 316. 
In contrast to the situation in low-carbon strip and structural grades, very little 
use has been made of Hiproof-type compositions which contain about 0.2% N 
and provide 0.2% PS values of about 330 N/mm 2 (cf. 250 N/mm 2 in standard 
grades). Having overcome the welding problems that Were encountered when 
these steels were first introduced, it is surprising that they are not yet being used 
in large quantities. Whereas the 200 series have enjoyed commercial success in 
the United States, they have always been regarded as inferior substitutes to the 
traditional 300 steels in the UK and, as stated earlier in the text, they also present 
problems in production. 
The metallurgy of precipitation-strengthened austenitic stainless steels was the 
subject of detailed research work in the 1950s and 1960s. 11 Depending upon the 
precipitation system and heat treatment, such steels can develop 0.2% PS values 
up to 750 N/mm 2, i.e. three times that produced in Type 304 in the solution- 
treated condition. However, such grades were produced in very limited quantities, 
probably for the following reasons: 

Stainless steels 
331 
1. The lack of facilities and expense involved in canting out the ageing 
treatments - typically 700-750~ 
for 24 hours. 
2. The reduction in corrosion resistance produced by the precipitation of carbides, 
phosphides or intermetallic compounds. 
3. The loss of strength in the heat-affected zones of welds. 
4. The reluctance of plant designers to consider the very large reductions in plate 
thickness etc. that could be provided by these high-strength steels. 
As illustrated in Table 4.8, a large number of standard and proprietary grades 
have been developed with the objective of increasing the resistance to reducing 
acids, pitting and crevice corrosion. Many of the steels can be regarded as simple 
extensions of Type 316 (18% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.5% Mo) with higher molybdenum 
contents and with increased levels of nickel to preserve a fully austenitic structure. 
Some of these steels also contain up to 0.25% N which increases the strength 
and augments the chromium and molybdenum contents in improving the pitting 
resistance, according to the following pitting index formula: 
Pitting index = Cr + 3.3% Mo + 16% N 
Copper additions of up to 2% feature in some of the compositions which improve 
the resistance to sulphuric acid. 
Many of the compositions listed in Table 4.8 are used in flue gas desulphuriza- 
tion plant where acid condensates, contaminated with chlorides, produce severe 
corrosive conditions. Steels such as 94L are also used in the food industry and 
also for heat exchangers, particularly where salt water is involved. This grade 
Table 4.8 
Compositions of high-alloy austenitic and duplex stainless steels 
Alloy 
Chemical composition (wt %) 
designation 
C 
cr ..... Mo' 
Ni " 
Cu 
N 
Others 
316L 
0.03 
17 
2.25 
12 
- 
- 
316LM 
0.03 
17 
2.75 
12 
- 
- 
317L 
0.03 
18 
.5 
15 
- 
- 
317LN 
0.03 
18 
4.5 
13 
- 
0.15 
317LM 
0.03 
18 
4.5 
15 
- 
- 
317LMN 
0.04 
18 
6 
14 
- 
0.15 
94L 
0.02 
20 
3 
25 
- 
254SMo 
0.02 
20 
6.5 
18 
2 
0.12 
lncoloy 825 
0.03 
22 
42 
- 
Hastelloy G 
0.05 
22 
7 
44 
1.9 
- 
9 
Hastelloy G-3 
0.015 
22 
13 
41 
- 
- 
Inconel 625 
0.05 
22 
16 
61 
- 
- 
Hastelloy C-22 
0.015 
22 
3 
- 
- 
Hastelloy C-276 
0.02 
25 
3.5 
0.75 
- 
2205 
0.03 
22 
3 
5.5 
0.15 
Zeron 100 
0.03 
25 
3.5 
7 
0.75 
0.25 
n 
2.1Nb + Ta, 
2.5Co, 1W 
5Co, 1.5W 
3.65Nb + Ta 
3W 
1.25Co, 4W 
0.75W 
0.75W 
After Lane and Needham. 12 

332 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.9 Prices for high-alloy grades relative to Type 316L 
Alloy types 
Price factor 
316L 
1 
2205 
1.1 
317L 
1.2 
317LM 
1.3 
94L 
2 
High-nickel alloys 
2.3-3 
High-molybdenum alloys (>6% Mo) 
2.7-3.8 
Nickel-base alloys 
3.3-9 
Titanium 
7.6-8.1 
contains 25% Ni and will therefore provide better resistance to stress corrosion 
than traditional grades such as Type 316. 
The last two compositions in Table 4.8 differ from the rest in that the high 
chromium and molybdenum contents are not complemented with a large addition 
of nickel and this results in a duplex, austenite plus ferrite structure. Such steels 
have good resistance to both chloride and sulphide stress corrosion and the duplex 
structure also provides high proof stress values, e.g. 480 N/mm 2. This combi- 
nation of properties is used to advantage in the petroleum industry, particularly 
for the handling of crude oil which is contaminated with hydrogen sulphide. 
Typical applications include transfer pipelines, downhole tubing and liners and 
also topside process equipment, such as heat exchangers and seawater transport 
piping. 13 
British Steel 13 has presented the information in Table 4.9 on the prices of some 
of the high-alloy grades and nickel superalloys relative to Type 316L. 
High.alloy f erritic grades 
As indicated earlier, standard austenitic stainless steels such as Type 304 
(18% Cr, 9% Ni) are highly susceptible to chloride stress corrosion and the nickel 
content must be raised to about 40% in order to provide immunity from this form 
of attack. Such materials are expensive and the addition of nickel alone provides 
little benefit in terms of resistance to pitting and crevice corrosion. On the other 
hand, standard ferdtic grades such as Type 430 (17% Cr) and 446 (25% Cr) are 
resistant to stress corrosion but are prone to intergranular corrosion and have poor 
toughness, even in moderate plate thicknesses. However, as early as 1951,14 it 
was shown that these deficiencies could be overcome by reducing the interstitial 
content of ferritic stainless steels to low levels. However, for many years, this 
information remained little more than laboratory-based data until the development 
of steelmaking processes that enabled the materials to become commercially 
viable. In particular, the Airco-Temescal Division of Airco Reduction Co. Inc. in 
the United States introduced a vacuum melting process with electron beam stirring 
which could achieve total carbon and nitrogen contents of the order of 0.01%. 15 
In addition, an LD converter coupled with a Standard-Messo decarburizer was 
developed in Germany to achieve total interstitial contents of about 0.025%. 16 

Stainless steels 333 
160 I- 
2( 
A 
J~ 
,,,... 
:~ 120 - 
C ~ 
J 
~ 
80 - 
.E 
10( 
> 
,1= 
~ 
40 - 
0.01% C 
0.006-0.023% N 
0.006% C 
0.02-0.028% N 
0.03% C 
0.06-0.033% N 
0.05% C 
0.009-0.044% N 
0 -0 
40 
80 
120 
160 
Test temperature (~ 
Figure 4.20 Effect of carbon and nitrogen on the impact properties of 18% Cr 2% Mo 
steel (After Hooper et al. 17) 
However, the argon-oxygen decarburization (AOD) process has also been used 
for the production of these grades. Thus in the mid-1960s major commercial 
interest was stimulated in low interstitial ferritic stainless steels which offered 
the potential of cheaper alternatives to austenitic grades, particularly in relation 
to resistance to stress corrosion. 
The influence of carbon and nitrogen on the impact properties of an 18% Cr 
2% Mo base steel was investigated by Hooper et al. 17 and the data are shown 
in Figure 4.20. From this figure, it is apparent that a reduction in carbon content 
to 0.01% produces a marked improvement in the impact transition behaviour, 
whereas a change in nitrogen content has little effect. However, the grain size 
of these steels was about ASTM 0 and even at low interstitial levels, the impact 
transition temperature is still above room temperature. Therefore, in order to 
produce attractive impact properties, the grain size must be reduced, i.e. to a 
level below ASTM 8. 
In addition to a reduction in carbon and nitrogen contents, the new range of 
ferritic steels contained higher levels of chromium and additions of molybdenum 
and nickel. Streicher Is has reviewed the development of these grades and the 
types of composition that have been produced in commercial quantities are shown 
in Table 4.10. Although nitrogen has a relatively small effect on the impact 
properties, its low solubility in ferritic grades means that chromium nitride forms 
very readily and contributes to the susceptibility to intergranular attack. Thus 
many of the high-alloy ferritic grades must be stabilized with titanium or niobium, 
even when the carbon and nitrogen has been reduced to very low levels. 
As illustrated in Table 4.11, most of these grades are resistant to stress corro- 
sion cracking in MgCI2 and NaC1 solutions and they also display good resistance 
to pitting and crevice corrosion. The inclusion of nickel in steels such as 28% Cr 

334 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.10 
Streicher 18) 
Commercial grades of low interstitial ferritic stainless steels (After 
Alloy 
Limits for carbon, 
Melting and 
nitrogen and stabilizers (%) 
refining processes 
I 
Fe-18 Cr-2 Mo-Ti 
C - 0.0250 max. 
N - 0.0250 max. 
II 
Fe-26 Cr-1 Mo 
C + N < 0.030 desirable 
Ti + Nb = 0.20 + 4 (C + N) min. 
= 0.80 max. 
C - 0.0050 max. 
N - 0.0150 max. 
Nb = 13 to 29 (N) 
II-A 
Fe-26 Cr- 1 Mo-Ti 
C - 0.0400 max. 
N - 0.0400 max. 
0.2 to 1.0 Ti 
C + N = 0.050 typical 
III 
Fe-28 Cr-2 Mo 
C + N < 0.0100 
Desirable C + N < 0.050 
III-A 
Fe-28 Cr-2 Mo-4 
C - 0.0150 max. 
Ni-Nb 
N - 0.0350 max. 
C + N < 0.0400 with 
Nb > 12 (C + N) + 0.2 
IV 
Fe-29 Cr-4 Mo 
C - 0.0100 max. 
N - 0.0200 max. 
C + N = 0.0250 max. 
IV-A 
Fe-29 Cr-4 Mo-2 Ni 
Same 
Argon-oxygen 
decarburization 
or 
vacuum-oxygen 
decarburization 
Electron beam 
hearth refining 
or 
vacuum induction 
melting 
Argon-oxygen 
decarburization 
Vacuum melting 
followed by 
arc remelting 
Vacuum-oxygen 
decarburization 
Argon-oxygen 
decarburization 
Vacuum induction 
melting or electron 
beam refining 
Vacuum induction 
melting 
2% Mo 4% Ni-Nb and 29% Cr 4% Mo 2% Ni is beneficial in improving the 
corrosion resistance in reducing acids. It is also claimed 18 that nickel improves 
the toughness of ferritic stainless steels. 
Low interstitial ferritic stainless steels have enjoyed some commercial success 
in Sweden and the United States but failed to make much impression in the UK. 
However, the author recalls one trial, involving an 18% Cr 2% Mo steel, for 
the manufacture of a brewery vessel. This trial proved to be unsuccessful due 
to fabrication problems and poor impact properties in the heat-affected zones 
of welds. 
Welding of stainless steels 
A very high proportion of stainless steels is welded in the fabrication of pressure 
vessels, storage tanks, chemical plant and domestic appliances. In each case, the 
welds are required to be of high integrity and to provide corrosion resistance or 

Table 4.11 The properties of low interstitial fem'tic stainless steels (Afrer Streicher'8) 
Alloy 
180- 
260-IMo 
w26Cr- 
28Cr-2Mo- 
29Cr4Mo 
290- 
2M0-li 
(High purity) 
IMo-li 
4Ni-Nb 
4Mo-2Ni 
~~~ 
~ 
stress corrosion cracking 
MgClz (155 C, 310 F) 
R'* 
R* 
R* 
F 
R* 
R 
NaCl(103 C, 217 F) 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
KMo04-NaCl 
Room Temperature 
F 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
50 C (120 F) 
- 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
90 C (195 F) 
- 
F 
F 
F 
R 
R 
Room Temperature 
F 
F 
F 
R 
R 
R 
- 
F 
R 
R 
50 C (120 F) 
- 
- 
Nitric-65% 
Ft 
R 
Ft 
R 
R 
R 
pitting and Crevice Corrosion 
Ferric Chloride 
Corrosion in Boiling Acids' 
Formic -45% 
F 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
oxalic-10% 
F 
F 
F 
R 
R 
R 
sulfuric- 10% 
F 
F 
F 
R 
F 
R 
HydroChlori~-l% 
F 
F 
F 
R 
F 
R 
Transition Tmperature' 
+25 to +75 c 
-62 C 
c 4 o C  
-5 c 
+16 C 
-7 c 
(+75 to 165 F) 
(-80 F) 
(+I05 F) 
(+U F) 
(+a 
F) 
(+20 F) 
Reliniog Rocesses 
AOD 01 VOD 
EB or VIM 
AOD 
VOD or AOD 
VIM or EB 
VIM 
'R indicates passive M self-repassivatiog with rates 
R = Resistant 
F = Fads by type of corrosion shown 
(0.2 mm/yr0.008 ioJyr) 
'Full size Charpy V-notch specimem 
AOD = Argon-Oxyg~ Decarburizati~n 
*Copper and nickel residuals must be kept low in these alloys 
?Not recommended for oxidizing solutioos 
*Data from Climax MotyWenum Co. publicatioo, '18Cr-2Mo 
VOD = Vacuum-Oxygen Decarburizatioo 
VIM = Vacuum-Induction Melting 
EL3 = Electroo Beam Refining 
to mist ciackiog in this solution 
Ferritic Stainless Steel' 

336 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
mechanical properties similar to that of parent material. Therefore good weld- 
ability is a particularly attractive feature of stainless steels and this contributes 
very significantly to the wide usage and versatility of these materials. The welding 
of stainless steels has been reviewed extensively by Castro and de Cadenet 19 and 
the topic has been updated more recently by Gooch. 2~ 
Martensitic stainless steels 
Because of their high alloy content, 12% Cr steels and other martensitic stainless 
grades exhibit a high level of hardenability and are capable of transforming to 
martensite in large section sizes. Therefore these steels are susceptible to cold 
cracking in the weld metal and HAZ in a similar manner to low-alloy marten- 
sific grades. As with their low-alloy counterparts, the problem is exacerbated 
by the presence of hydrogen, and the risk of cracking increases as the carbon 
content and hardness of the steels are increased. For this reason, the welding 
of 12% Cr martensitic grades is generally restricted to compositions containing 
a maximum of about 0.25% C. However, the problem of hydrogen cracking 
is well understood and can be readily overcome in martensitic stainless steels 
provided the normal precautions are taken. Thus in gas-shielded processes, pure 
argon should be used rather than argon-hydrogen mixtures, and in manual metal 
arc welding, low-hydrogen basic electrodes should be employed. The thorough 
baking of electrodes is also recommended in order to remove the last traces of 
moisture. 
Like other highly hardenable grades, 12% Cr steels are generally preheated to 
reduce the risk of cracking. Preheating temperatures of up to 250~ are employed 
which ensure that the weld metal and HAZ cool slowly through the Ms-Mf 
temperature range, thereby facilitating stress relaxation and reducing thermal 
stresses. On the other hand, martensitic stainless steel containing less than 0.1% C 
and with nickel additions of up to 4% are often welded without preheat. However, 
it is still imperative that low levels of hydrogen are produced in the weld metal 
with matching fillers so as to avoid weld metal cracking. The use of Cr-Ni 
austenitic filler metal can also remove the need for preheating, although the 
strength of the joint will be lower than that achieved with martensitic weld 
metals. 
After welding, 12% Cr steels are subjected to heat treatment in order to provide 
an adequate balance between strength and toughness in the weld zone. Because 
these steels have a low Ms-Mr temperature range, austenite may well be present 
immediately after the completion of welding and it is essential that the assembly 
is cooled to room temperature in order to complete the transformation before 
applying post-weld heat treatment. If adequate cooling is not carried out, austenite 
will be present in the microstructure during the subsequent tempering treatment 
and this may well transform to untempered martensite on cooling to room temper- 
ature. Post-weld heat treatments are generally carried out in the range 600-750" C. 
Martensitic stainless steels can be welded using all the conventional fusion 
processes, providing precautions are taken to minimize the level of hydrogen in 
the weld. 

Stainless steels 337 
Austenitic stainless steels 
Austenitic stainless steels are readily welded, given their high level of toughness 
and freedom from transformation to martensite. Therefore they are not prone to 
the cold-cracking problems encountered in martensitic stainless steels and require 
neither preheating nor post-weld heat treatment. Because of these characteristics, 
austenitic fillers are often used for joining dissimilar steels or, as mentioned 
earlier, in the welding of brittle martensitic stainless grades. However, precau- 
tions must be taken to avoid other problems in austenitic stainless steels, namely 
solidification cracking and sensitization. 
Solidification cracking takes place in the weld metal as it is about to solidify. 
The problem is due to the generation of high contraction stresses in austenitic 
stainless steels because of the high thermal expansion characteristics of these 
materials. These stresses pull the solidified crystals apart when they are still 
surrounded by thin films of liquid metal, giving rise to interdendritic cracking. 
However, it was discovered at an early stage that welds with a fully austenitic 
structure were particularly susceptible to solidification cracking and that the 
problem could be overcome with the introduction of a small amount of delta 
ferrite. The amount of ferrite required to eliminate cracking depends upon the 
degree of restraint imposed upon the joint and also on the composition of the 
steel. However, a level of about 5% ferrite is generally adequate. Therefore in 
autogenous welds, the compositions of commercial grades such as Types 304, 
316, 321 and 347 are balanced such that they are free of delta ferrite in the 
solution-treated condition but generate about 5% ferrite in the weld metal due 
to the thermal excursion into the liquid state. Similarly, in the joining of thick 
sections of austenitic stainless steels, filler metals of the correct composition are 
employed which develop the required microstructure. 
The prediction of the microstructure in the weld metal of stainless steels can 
be carried out using diagrams prepared by Schaeffler 21 and De Long) 2 The latter 
was developed later and has the advantage that it takes account of the nitrogen 
content of the steel. As indicated earlier, nitrogen is a powerful austenite-forming 
element and can therefore have a significant effect on the microstructure. The De 
Long diagram is shown in Figure 4.21 and the chromium and nickel equivalents 
are calculated in the following manner: 
Cr equivalent = %Cr + Mo + 1.5Si + 0.5Nb 
Ni equivalent = %Ni + 30(2 + 30N + 0.5Mn 
Solidification cracking is promoted by the presence of certain elements which 
segregate to the remaining liquid during the solidification process, producing 
interdendritie films of low melting point. Elements such as nickel, silicon, 
sulphur and phosphorus increase the susceptibility to cracking whereas chromium, 
nitrogen and manganese reduce the cracking tendency. With this knowledge, 
filler metals can be designed which are completely austenitic and yet resistant 
to solidification cracking. Such fillers are low in sulphur, phosphorus and silicon 
but often contain 7-10% Mn. One particular use of these zero ferrite electrodes 
is in the welding of grades such as Type 310 (25% Cr 20% Ni) in applications 

338 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
24 
0 
2 
4 
6 
20 
8 
~ 
16 
9 
12 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
Chromium equivalent 
Figure 4.21 
De Long diagram for prediction of microstructure in stainless steel welds 
(After De Long 22) 
calling for low magnetic permeability, which precludes the introduction of delta 
ferrite. 
The problem of chromium carbide precipitation at grain boundaries and sensi- 
tization to intergranular attack was discussed earlier in the section dealing with 
the corrosion behaviour of stainless steels. However, this problem can now be 
avoided with the use of stabilized grades such as Types 321 and 347 or with the 
L grades where the carbon is restricted to 0.03% max. 
Ferritic stainless steels 
Again, the absence of transformation in ferritic grades eliminates the potential for 
cold cracking and, due to their moderate thermal expansion characteristics, these 
steels are generally free from solidification cracking. On the other hand, ferritic 
stainless steels are prone to grain growth and this leads to low levels of toughness 
in the weld, particularly in thicker sections. However, sound autogenous welds 
are produced in Type 430 (17% Cr) steel in thin gauges in applications such 
as domestic sinks, washing machines and dish washers. Where thicknesses of 
several millimetres are to be welded, it is preferable to use an austenitic filler 
such as Type 316 which produces weld metal of high toughness. 
Ferritic stainless steels are susceptible to hydrogen cracking, and in gas 
shielded processes, pure argon rather than argon-hydrogen mixtures should be 
used. 
Variable weld penetration 
With the introduction of automatic welding processes, such as orbital TIG for 
tube joining, major problems were encountered with stainless steels due to 
variable weld penetration. Thus marked differences in the depth of penetration 

Stainless steels 
339 
were observed when steels of nominally the same composition were welded 
under identical conditions. Alternatively, there was a tendency for the weld to 
deflect to one side of the joint when steels from different casts were welded 
together. For this reason, the problem is also known as cast-to-cast variability. 
Although problems of this kind had been observed previously, and also in 
materials other than stainless steels, they could be accommodated in manual 
welding by adjustments to power or welding speed. Whereas factors such as 
arc-metal interactions may be contributory, it is now generally agreed that 
variable peneration is due to composition-induced, surface energy effects. 
Llewellyn et al. 23 investigated the problem in commercial tube and plate 
samples of Type 304L and found a reasonable correlation between current to 
penetrate and sulphur content. This effect is shown in Figure 4.22 and regression 
analysis on the pooled data for tube and plate materials yielded the following 
relationship: 
Current to penetrate (amps) = 47-686 (%S) 
which explained 60% of the variance. No other factors were statistically 
significant at the 95% confidence level. When similar work was carded out 
on laboratory casts of Type 304L, sulphur had no effect. However, these 
materials had oxygen contents of 190-330 ppm compared to 20-70 ppm in the 
commercial steels. Following the work of Heiple and Roper, 24 it was anticipated 
that both sulphur and oxygen would be beneficial in promoting good weldability. 
However, the lack of a sulphur effect in the laboratory casts of Type 304L may 
well have been due to the overriding effect of oxygen in these materials. 
Changes in surface energy across the temperature gradients of the weld pool 
surface give rise to Marangoni convection which has a marked effect on the 
direction and velocity of fluid flow. Thus direction of fluid flow can be changed 
by surface active impurities which reverse the negative temperature dependence 
of surface energy for pure materials to a positive temperature dependence when 
9 Tubes 
50 -'~ ~ 
o Plates 
* 9 o ~  
45 
e9 
- 
~ 
~ 
, 
,g 
o 
= 
~oo 
9 
0 
o 
oe ~ 
35 0 
50 
1 O0 
150 
Sulphur (ppm) 
Figure 4.22 
Effect of sulphur on the current required to give penetration of a 2-ram-thick 
sheet or tube wall with a 5 second arc duration (After Llewellyn et al. 23) 

C ._o 
r 
::3 
O9 
(a) 
High-purity 
steels 
~ negative 
Low-purity 
steels 
dt 
(b) 
Temperature 
Temperature 
Cold 
340 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Cold 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 4.23 Marangoni convection in welds: (a) surface energy dependence; (b) tempe- 
rature distribution in welds; (c) fluid flow on surface; (d) bad and good weld penetration 
impurities are present. The effects are illustrated schematically in Figure 4.23(a). 
The temperature distribution in the weld pool is similar in both 'good' and 
'bad' materials (Figure 4.23(b)) but the different relationships between surface 
tension and temperature in the two materials cause a marked difference in fluid 
flow (Figure 4.23(c)). Thus in high-purity steels, the surface liquid flow is from 
the centre to the outside, giving an upward axial flow and poor penetration 
(Figure 4.23(d)). On the other hand, in steels containing surface active impurities, 
the flow is towards the centre of the liquid pool, giving downward axial flow and 
good penetration. 
Leinonen 25 has also demonstrated the beneficial effect of sulphur on the TIG 
weldability of Type 304 steels. He showed that the maximum welding speed 
that could achieve through-penetration in a steel containing 0.13% S was 74% 
higher than that for a 0.003% S steel, when using 100% argon shielding gas. The 

Stainless steels 341 
addition of hydrogen and helium to the shielding gas enabled the welding speed 
to be increased substantially but, in both cases, the differential in weldability 
between the high- and low-sulphur steels was still preserved. 
In order to achieve good weld penetration, fabricators may well specify a 
minimum of 0.01% S but high levels of sulphur impair the corrosion resistance 
of stainless steels. Therefore the sulphur content needs to be controlled to a 
narrow range to ensure good weldability on the one hand and the avoidance of 
pitting corrosion on the other. 
Cold working of stainless steels 
The cold-working characteristics of stainless steels are important in relation to: 
1. The conversion of hot band to cold-reduced gauges. 
2. The production of components by cold forming. 
Austenitic stainless steels are characterized by high rates of work hardening 
which limit the amount of cold deformation that can be undertaken before an 
annealing treatment is required. However, the work-hardening behaviour is influ- 
enced markedly by chemical composition and can often dictate the grade of steel 
that is used for a particular application. 
Role of alloying elements 
The austenite to martensite transformation in a material can be discussed in terms 
of thermodynamics and this aspect has been covered in detail by Kaufman and 
Cohen) 6 In Figure 4.24, FV and F a' represent the chemical free energies of 
austenite and martensite which vary with temperature in the manner shown. At 
temperature To, the two phases have equal free energies, but above To, austenite 
is thermodynamically stable relative to martensite, and below To, martensite is 
the more stable phase. On cooling from above To, the austenite to martensite 
reaction might be expected to occur at To but, in fact, this reaction does not 
occur until the temperature is lowered to Ms, which in iron-base alloys may be of 
the order of 2000C below To. At Ms, the austenite has derived sufficient energy 
from undercooling to overcome the barriers of nucleation and the inteffacial 
strains that inhibit the growth of the bcc nucleus in its foreign fcc environment. 
On heating from a low temperature, the reverse reaction at As may also require 
superheat and As is generally as far above To as Ms is below. Alloying elements 
depress the transformation from austenite to martensite and in very highly 
alloyed stainless grades, the theoretical To temperature will be below the absolute 
temperature. However, in the leaner alloy grades, To is above and Ms is below 
room temperature. 
When stress is applied to an austenitic stainless steel during cold working, the 
mechanical energy interacts with the thermodynamics of the martensite reaction, 
as demonstrated by Patel and Cohen. 27 Thus in Figure 4.25, F y and F ~' repre- 
sent the conditions in the unstressed system and Fv' and F ~' are the relative 

342 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Figure 4.24 
e- 
| 
1- 
F Y 
[AFo-- J\ )" 
[ 
I 
i 
I 
I 
Ms 
To 
As 
I 
, 
I 
i 
Temperature ~ 
Thermodynamics of the martensite reaction (After Kaufman and Cohen 26) 
l 
>,., 
B~ 
O~ 
C 
.,... 
8 
r 
c~ 
F ~' 
/AF~ .--.,,. a' [~ e= 
AG ~ --~ o~' + AF'r ~ 
=' [M,s 
F ~N 
1 
i 
\\."~ 
: 
1 
\\. 
~ 
[ 
1 
\\. 
i 
i 
\" 
M s 
M s ' 
Temperature 
Figure 4.25 
Effect of applied stress on the martensite reaction (After Patel and Cohen 27) 

Stainless steels 
343 
conditions in the stressed system, where Fy and Fr' are displaced by an amount 
A G~ r'~a', the mechanical energy due to the applied stress. Therefore Ms in the 
unstrained system can be moved to a higher temperature, M' s, where the sum of 
the mechanical and thermodynamic energies (AG~r-*a' + AFr~a'/M's) is equal 
to AF r-*a'/Ms, the critical undercooling energy at Ms. Thus cold working at 
temperatures above Ms may result in the formation of strain-induced martensite, 
depending upon the chemical composition of the steel and the temperature of 
working. 
In addition to their influence on the martensite reaction, alloying elements can 
also affect the work-hardening characteristics of austenitic stainless steels through 
their effect on the stacking fault energy of the system. Stacking faults are planar 
imperfections in the normal stacking of the fcc lattice which increase the rate 
of work hardening by hindering the movement of dislocations. Elements such as 
carbon, manganese and cobalt facilitate the formation of stacking faults whereas 
nickel and copper raise the stacking fault energy which inhibits their formation. 
The effects of these elements on the true stress-true strain behaviour of 18% Cr 
13% Ni-base steels is shown in Figure 4.26. This base composition has suffi- 
cient stability to withstand the formation of strain-induced martensite at ambient 
temperature and therefore any changes that take place in the work-hardening 
behaviour can be attributed to stacking fault effects. Thus cobalt and manganese 
raise the rate of work hardening whereas nickel and copper decrease the rate. The 
effect of chromium on the stacking fault energy was examined in steels containing 
18% Ni and, as illustrated in Figure 4.27, it would appear that chromium reduces 
the stacking fault energy and thereby increases the rate of work hardening. 
Work hardening of commercial grades 
The effects of rolling at ambient temperature on the properties of commercial 
grades of austenitic stainless steel are shown in Figure 4.28 and 4.29. Type 301 
100 
so 
.j' 
Base 18/13 
10% NI 
4% Cu 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
Log o -~ 
Figure 4.26 
True stress-true strain in 18% Cr 13% Ni steel with alloy additions (After 
Llewellyn and Murray 2s ) 

344 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
100 
A 
o 
50 
2 
r 
2 
p- 
f 
f 
G~ 
I,,. 
I 
I 
I 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
Log o -~ 
Figure 4.27 
True stress-true strain in 18% Ni base steels with different chromium levels 
(After Llewellyn and Murray 2s) 
140 
120 
.-. 100 
04 r- 
N 
80 
e- 
,-. 
60 
.~ 4o 
e- 
| 
~ 
20 
301 
201 
347 
r~o2 
( 304 
321 
10 
0 
80 
o~ 
,- 
60 
.g 
40 
t..- 
_o 
uJ 
2O 
-- 
1" 301 
J 302 
304 
,~ 
} 321 
316 
-347 ~."~~,~= 
3
1
0
~
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Reduction (%) 
Figure 4.28 
Effect of coM rolling on the tensile strength and elongation of austenitic 
stainless steels (After Llewellyn and Murray 2s) 

Stainless steels 345 
140 
120 
~" 100 
e-, 
so 
~ 
6O 
~ 4O 
N. 
o 
20 
301 
302 
347 
321 
~1304 
310 
316 
80 
A 
60 
4o 
~ 
20 
301 
302 
347 
304 
321 
316 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Reduction (%) 
Figure 4.29 Effect of cold rolling on the 0.2% proof stress and martensite content of 
austenitic stainless steels (After Llewellyn and Murray 2s) 
(17% Cr, 7% Ni) shows the highest rate of work hardening and this can be 
related to the fact that it has the lowest alloy content in the range examined. 
Therefore it has the lowest stability and forms the greatest amount of strain- 
induced martensite during cold rolling. Conversely, Type 316 (18% Cr, 12% Ni, 
2.5% Mo) and Type 310 (25% Cr, 20% Ni) are the most highly alloyed steels 
in the series and these show the lowest rates of work hardening because their 
alloy content is sufficient to suppress the formation of strain-induced martensite 
at ambient temperature. However, if rolling is carried out at a lower temperature, 
e.g. -78~ 
then transformation to martensite can be induced in Type 316 steel 
and this results in a higher rate of work hardening than that observed at room 
temperature. This is illustrated in Figure 4.30. 
Optimization of cold.forming properties 
A considerable amount of work has been carded out on the optimization of 
composition in austenitic stainless steels in order to promote high levels of stretch 
formability in applications such as the production of sink bowls. Up until the early 
1970s, the standard Type 304 grade (nominally 18% Cr, 10% Ni) was used in 

346 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
g c 
O~ 
060 
I-- 
30 
150 
O4 
e- 
~ 
120 
9O 
30 
0 
0 
_ 
~ n " - 7 8 ~  
90 c 
J 
I 
1 
J 
J 
~ 
J- 
A 
8~ t 
90~ 
40 !- 
-78~ 
., 
..-78~ 
20 
or' 90~ 
lld 
2~176 
- 
I 
I 
o 
lO 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Reduction (%) 
Figure 4.30 Effect of the temperature of rolling on the properties and martensite content 
of Type 316 steel (After LleweUyn and Murray 2s) 
the UK for this application but the degree of precision required in the pressing 
operation, for the consistent production of high-quality bowls, was uneconom- 
ical. This related to the fact that the 18% Cr, 10% Ni composition is relatively 
stable at ambient temperature and the rate of work hardening was insufficient 
to compensate for the reduction in thickness that accompanies the stretching 
operation. Failure therefore occurred before the required degree of stretching 
(uniform strain) could be achieved. However, in very lean compositions, which 
form large amounts of strain-induced martensite at low strain, the rate of work 
hardening reaches a maximum at an early stage and decreases when the reaction 
is complete. Workers in British Steel 29 therefore focused their attention on iden- 
tifying the compositions that would provide the optimum rate of work hardening 
and uniform strain via the formation of controlled amounts of strain-induced 
martensite. The results of this work are shown in Figure 4.31 which illustrates 
the interdependence of composition, stability and uniform strain. In this figure, 
the lower diagram shows the relationship between composition and the amounts 

Stainless steels 347 
c 
8 
"x 
0.52 
0.51 
0.50 
^ .^ 
~ 
Eu 
) 
o.o  
~ 
002 
I 
I 
o 
s 
i 
~o 
15 
| 
I 
% Martensite at e = 0.2 
I.=, 
~1 
14 
-- 
I 
~ 
I 
I 
15 
Figure 4.31 Effect of composition factor and carbon content on the formation of marten- 
site at a true strain of 0.2 and on the uniform true strain (~,) (After Gladman et al. 29) 
of martensite induced at a true strain of 0.2, the composition being expressed 
through the following factor: 
CF = 18 (%C) + 13 (%N) + 0.90 (%Ni) + 0.27 (%Cr) + 0.47 (%Mn) 
+ 0.53 (%Mo) + 0.97 (%Cu) 
By controlling the CF value to within the limits shown, the level of martensite 
is controlled to between 3 and 6% at a true strain of 0.2 and, as shown in 
the upper diagram, this results in the optimum uniform strain at various carbon 
levels. It will also be noted that uniform strain increases with carbon content. 
Ordinarily, it would be anticipated that an increase in carbon would reduce the 
rate of work hardening by suppressing the formation of martensite. However, for 
a given composition factor, and therefore a defined level of austenite stability, 
it is proposed that an increase in carbon leads to an increase in work-hardening 
rate through its strengthening effect on the strain-induced martensite. 
Austenitic stainless steels are also used in fastener applications where they 
undergo severe deformation during cold-heading operations. In this context, a 
low rate of work hardening is required and the grades involved must have suffi- 
cient stability to resist the formation of strain-induced martensite. Beyond this 
basic requirement, the performance can be enhanced by the selection of alloying 
elements that provide both austenite stability and a high stacking fault energy. 
In stable compositions, the rate of work hardening is dictated solely by stacking 
fault energy and the effects of alloying elements in an 18% Cr, 13% Ni base were 
described earlier (Figure 4.26). Having eliminated stability effects, the addition 
of copper has a significantly greater effect than nickel in reducing the rate of 

348 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
work hardening, but the strengthening effect of adding 10% Mn was very small 
compared with that produced by a similar level of cobalt. 
In the United States, Armco 18-9 LW (18% Cr, 9% Ni, 4% Cu) was devel- 
oped for the production of cold-headed fasteners and grades based on 18% Cr, 
12% Ni, 2% Cu have been used in the UK. In addition to fastener applications, 
materials with a low yield stress and low rates of work hardening are also required 
in cold-drawing operations. These characteristics therefore contrast sharply with 
the compositions used in stretch forming operations which are designed to work 
harden and accommodate the reduction in cross-section via the formation of 
controlled amounts of strain-induced martensite. Deep-drawing grades are there- 
fore based on compositions with a low level of interstitial dements, sufficient 
alloy content to preserve a stable structure and ideally with a high stacking fault 
energy. A coarse grain size is also beneficial, consistent with the avoidance of 
the orange peel effect. Texture considerations are also important in deep drawing 
performance and high r values are associated with strong {111} and/or {110} 
planes parallel to the surface of the sheet. 
Mechanical properties at elevated and sub-zero temperatures 
Although austenitic stainless steels are used primarily because of their high corro- 
sion resistance, they also possess extremely good mechanical properties over a 
wide temperature range. Unlike ferritic materials, austenitic stainless steels do 
not exhibit a ductile-brittle transition and maintain a high level of toughness 
at liquid gas temperatures. On the other hand, they also exhibit good creep 
rupture strength at temperatures above 600"C, where ferritic and martensitic steels 
undergo microstructural degradation. The standard grades of austenitic stainless 
steel are therefore used in cryogenic applications, such as liquid gas storage 
vessels and missiles, and at elevated temperatures in chemical and power plant 
applications. These aspects are discussed on pp. 351-356. 
Tensile properties 
The tensile properties of the standard grades over the temperature range -200 
to 800~ have been examined by Sanderson and Llewellyn 3~ and the data are 
summarized in Figure 4.32. This indicates that the tensile strengths of the majority 
of the grades fall within a fairly narrow scatter band at temperatures above about 
100*C. As the temperature falls below this level, there is a marked increase in 
tensile strength, the lower alloy steels such as Types 302 and 304 achieving higher 
strengths than the highly alloyed grades such as Types 309 and 310. However, 
this situation tends to be reversed in the case of the 0.2% proof stress values, 
the more highly alloyed grades such as Types 316, 309 and 310 providing higher 
strengths than Types 302, 304, 321 and 347. This behaviour is related to the 
stability of the austenitic structure in these materials and the relative ease with 
which they undergo transformation to strain-induced martensite. 
At temperatures above 100*C, solid solution strengthening is the main crite- 
rion controlling strength and therefore the more highly alloyed steels, such as 

Stainless steels 349 
1800 
1600 
304 \ 
302 
~ 1400 
316 
~- 1200 
30g 
310 
\ 
1000 - 
X~X~ ' \ 
309 
~['~ 
309 
1304 
600 
",~ 
~ 
..... 
~",,- 
1321 
.... 
_ 
310 '\ 
~[i"~ 
310 
~ 
~316 
"- 
, 
" ~ ~ ~ " ~ ,  
400-3,6......N 
L347 
200 
,I 
..... 
I 
i 
I ......... 
1,, 
, 
I 
80 
,r 
to 
r 
to 
.-. 60 
r o 
r 
40 
..g 
u.I 
20 
- 
i 
/ 
/ 
- 
316, / 
r'302 
~,,..Z 
1304 
1316 
309 ~. 
... 
(321 
310 
- 
J 
1347 
304' 
13o9 
1.310 
I 
_ 
J 
_ 
I 
I 
1 
I 
-200 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
Temperature (~ 
Figure 4.32 Tensile properties of standard austenitic stainless steels: -200 to 800"C 
(After Sanderson and Llewellyn 3~ 
Types 309 (25% Cr, 15% Ni) and 310 (25% Cr, 20% Ni), possess the highest 
strengths. However, at temperatures below 100~ deformation in the tensile test 
takes place by means of: 
1. Slip/dislocation movement. 
2. Transformation to strain-induced martensite. 
Thus the more lowly alloyed grades such as Type 304 (18% Cr, 9% Ni) 
undergo strain-induced transformation to martensite with relatively little strain 

350 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
160 
140 
120 
IO0 
"3 
c 
80 
G) 
15 
r r 
_E 
60 
40 
20 
(a) 
Charpy 
~I//////~ 
Scatter bands for: 302 
347 
" ~ ~ ~ ~ _ _ . ~ ~  
Izod 
-I, 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
__ 
I. 
I 
.. 
I 
I 
I 
-200-~00 
0 
i00 
2oo 
300 
400 
soo 
6oo 
700 
800 
120 -
-
 
100 
60 
E 
40 
20 
- 
310 
, 
, 
9 
' 
-- Charpy 
s f 
~"~.. 
~ 
310 
--/s ~ 
" "~" Izod 
.. ~... 
Charpy 
Izod 
-200 -100 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 800 
(b) 
Temperature (~ 
Figure 4.33 Impact properties of standard austenitic stainless steels: -200 to 800"C 
(After Llewellyn and Sanderson 3~ 

Sminlesssteels 351 
at temperatures below about 50"C, resulting in low proof stress values. However, 
this behaviour also leads to a very high rate of work hardening and produces high 
levels of tensile strength. Conversely, steels such as Types 309 and 310 are stable 
enough to resist the formation of strain-induced martensite and their proof stress 
values increase significantly below 100*C, following the characteristic of fcc 
alloys in showing a marked increase in flow stress with decreasing temperature. 
However, the suppression of strain-induced martensite leads to low rates of work 
hardening and therefore to relatively low levels of tensile strength. 
As indicated in Figure 4.32, the elongation values of these materials are also 
strongly correlated with alloy content at temperatures below about 100*C. Thus 
stable grades such as Types 309 and 310 exhibit a modest peak in ductility 
at temperatures of the order of -50"C whereas the less stable grades such as 
Types 304 and 316 show sharply defined maximum values at temperatures of 
about +20 and -20"C respectively. The reason for this behaviour is complex 
but can be explained in terms of the temperature dependence of the flow stress 
and work hardening rate. 3~ 
Impact properties 
The impact properties of the standard austenitic grades over a similar range 
of temperature are shown in Figure 4.33 (a) and (b). Again with the exception 
of Types 309 and 310, the materials fall within reasonably well defined scatter 
bands but with a very clear differentiation between Charpy and Izod values. In 
the Charpy test, the energy values decrease at temperatures below about 100*C, 
whereas in the Izod test the values decrease progressively as the temperature 
is increased. However, these variations are largely a function of the operating 
conditions in the testing machines used for this work, and the main point to 
emerge is the excellent toughness provided by these steels at extremely low 
temperatures. 
Steels for boilers and pressure vessels 
Carbon, alloy and stainless steels are used in boilers operating at elevated 
temperatures and also in pressure and containment vessels operating at room 
and sub-zero temperatures. Whereas the metallurgy and applications of these 
various types of steel have been discussed in discrete chapters of this text, it 
was considered more appropriate to deal with this general topic under a single 
heading at this stage. Thus, although this chapter is concerned primarily with 
stainless steels, this particular section will also deal with the use of carbon and 
alloy steels in boilers and pressure vessels. 
Steel specifications 
Pressure vessels are manufactured from plates, sections, tubes and forgings and 
steel specifications for these and other product forms have been formulated 
specifically for use in pressure vessels. A summary of the relevant BS and 

352 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.12 
Specifications for boiler and pressure vessel steels 
Specification 
Product form 
Title 
BS EN 10028 
Hates 
BS 1501 
BS 1502 
Sections and bars 
BS 1503 
Forgings 
BS EN 10213 
Castings 
BS 3059 
Tubes 
BS 3601 
Pipes and tubes 
BS 3602 
Pipes and tubes 
BS 3603 
Pipes and tubes 
BS 3604 
Pipes and tubes 
BS 3605 
Pipes and tubes 
BS 3606 
Tubes 
Part 2: Non-alloy and alloy steels with 
specified elevated temperature properties 
Part 3: Weldable fine grain steels, 
normalized 
Part 4: Nickel alloy steels with specified 
low temperature properties 
Part 3: Corrosion and heat-resisting steels 
Steels for fired and unfired pressure vessels 
Steel forgings for pressure purposes 
Steel castings for pressure vessel purposes 
Steel boiler and superheat tubes 
Part 1: Low-tensile carbon steel tubes 
without specified elevated temperature 
properties 
Part 2: Carbon, alloy and austenitic stainless 
tubes with specified elevated temperature 
properties 
Steel pipes and tubes for pressure purposes: 
carbon steel with specified room 
temperature properties 
Steel pipes and tubes for pressure purposes: 
carbon and carbon manganese steels with 
specified elevated temperature properties 
Steel pipes and tubes for pressure purposes: 
carbon and low-alloy steel with specified 
low-temperature properties 
Steel pipes and tubes for pressure purposes: 
ferritic alloy steel with specified elevated 
temperature properties 
Seamless and welded austenitic steel pipes 
and tubes for pressure purposes 
Steel tubes for heat exchangers 
European specifications in this sector is given in Table 4.12. Thus, whereas 
particular grades of structural steel are specified for use in bridges and 
buildings, similar compositions for pressure vessels are also identified in other 
specifications, e.g. BS EN 10028. The first reaction to this situation might well be 
to suggest that this represents an unnecessary and confusing duplication but, in 
fact, the two types of specification deal with the property data that are important to 
the specific end use. Whereas both types of specification cover tensile and impact 
properties at ambient and sub-zero temperatures, pressure vessel codes may also 
specify the tensile and stress rupture properties at elevated temperatures. 

Stainless steels 353 
Pressure vessel codes 
In an earlier chapter, an introduction was given to the British Standard 
Specification relating to the construction of bridges (BS 5400) and steelwork 
in buildings (BS 5950). In a similar vein, specifications have also been prepared 
for the construction of boilers and pressure vessels, e.g.: 
1. BS 1113:1992 Design and manufacture of water tube steam generation plant. 
2. BS 5500:1997 Unfired fusion welded pressure vessels. 
Both specifications have a materials section which defines the steels that can be 
used and the associated design stress values. An example is shown in Table 4.13 
which has been reproduced from BS 1113. The steels identified in this table are 
from BS 3059 (Steel boiler and superheat tubes) and cover a range of compo- 
sitions from 0.3% Mo up to 12% Cr-Mo-V. Against each steel grade, a series 
of design stress values (f) is provided for various operating temperatures up to 
a maximum of 620"C in this particular table. As illustrated shortly, these design 
stresses are calculated on the basis of short-term tensile properties at low to 
moderate temperatures, but at higher operating temperatures design is based on 
creep rupture strength. Where the latter is the case, the values in Table 4.13 are 
shown in italics. 
Thus specifications such as BS 1113 and BS 5500 provide design engineers 
with clearly defined data on the allowable design stress values at different oper- 
ating temperatures for the various steel specifications and product forms identified 
in the previous section. 
Steels for elevated-temperature applications 
Prior to dealing with the derivation of design stress values, the following termi- 
nology must be defined: 
9 Rm min. TS at room temperature 
9 Re(T) rain. 0.2% PS (1.0% PS for austenitic steels) at temperature T 
9 Sat mean value of stress to cause rupture in time t at temperature T 
* fE design strength based on short-term tensile strength properties 
9 f F design strength based on creep rupture characteristics 
In BS 1113 and BS 5500, the allowable design stresses at elevated temperatures 
are calculated in the following manner: 
1. C, C-Mn and low-alloy steels 
BS 1113 
BS 5500 
Rm 
Re(T) 
Rm 
> 2500C fE = 
Re(T) or 
_> 150 ~ fE = 
or 
1.5 
2.7 
1.5 
2.35 
whichever gives the lower value. 

Table 4.13 
Design stress values for tube steels according to BS I I13 (Design and manufacture of water tube steam generating p h t )  
~~ 
m-84 
b 
& 
nickness 
lblws off for duip vnrpcmnuc ('0 
not exceeding 
&sign 
WMOJ 
250 
Mo 350 400 440 450 460 470 480 490 XXl 
510 
520 530 540 
550 560 
570 
580 590 600 610 
620 
(h) 
and 
(N/mm2) W h * )  tmll) 
lifdme 
m- 
BS 3059 
pan 2 -  
Alloy steel 
243 
480 
215 
149 
128 
120 
117 
115 
113 
112 
95 
78 
62 
52 
41 
32 
100 000 
03Mo 
I 0 7  
88 
70 
57 
46 
37 
30 
l50000 
s1. s 2  
I00 
81 
65 
53 
42 
34 
28 
200000 
ERW 
and 
CEW 
95 n 62 
50 
4.0 
32 
25 
250000 
620 
460 
180 
129 
129 
129 
120 
116 
114 
113 
I12 
93 
76 
62 
52 
42 
33 
27 
100000 
s1, s2 
113 
94 
76 
61 
49 
40 
32 
26 
22 
200000 
ERW and 
CEW 
107 
88 
70 
57 
45 
37 
30 
25 
20 
250000 
622-490 
490 
215 
157 
153 
I49 
145 
137 
135 
133 131 118 
105 
94 
a2 
n 61 
53 
45 
39 u 29 
26 
Loo000 
s1, s2 
130 117 Iw 
92 
79 
MI 
59 
52 
45 
38 
33 
28 
zs 
22 
200000 
I26 I13 100 
87 
75 
65 
57 
49 
42 
36 
32 
27 
23 
20 
250000 
629-590 
590 
400 
219 
217 
215 
211 
208 
207 
I95 I76 I59 I 4 4  
I29 II5 
I03 
91 
80 
MI 
58 
48 
38 
31 
26 
100000 
9 0  
1 Mo 
207 
188 
I69 I52 137 I23 
110 
97 
85 
74 
62 
52 
42 
34 
28 
23 
150000 
SI, s2 
204 183 
165 
148 
132 118 
105 
93 
81 
69 
58 
18 
38 
31 zs 
22 
200000 
I 9 9  
I 7 9  
I59 I44 
I29 I15 
102 
89 
78 
66 
55 
45 
35 
28 
24 
21 
250000 
762 
720 
470 
2 4 1 2 3 4 2 3 0 2 2 5  
215 
2OS 
201 
191 I73 155 
I38 I22 I07 
93 
80 
68 
58 
48 
40 
33 100000 
12CrMoV 
200 IW 
IMI 
152 135 I I S  
98 
85 n 62 
52 
44 
37 
30 i m m  
s1. s2 
I 9 7  
I 8 0  
I 6 4  
I 4 6  
I28 110 
94 
80 
68 
58 
49 
41 
34 
28 200000 
192 176 16o 
142 124 105 
90 
n 65 
55 
46 
38 
32 
25 250000 
1CriMO 
113 
I02 
83 
67 
55 
44 
35 
29 
25 
150000 
2:CrlMo 
133 
I22 108 
97 
85 
73 
63 
56 
48 
42 
36 
31 
27 
23 
150000 
After BS 11 13: 1989. 

Stainless steels 355 
2. Austenitic stainless steels 
BS 1113 
BS 5500 
Rm 
Re(T) 
Rm 
> 250 ~ C f ~. = Re(T) or -- 
> 150 ~ f ~ = 
or - 
1.35 
2.7 
- 
1.35 
2.5 
whichever gives the lower value. 
3. For time-dependent design stresses (creep range) 
BS 1113 and BS 5500 
SRt 
fF 
1.3 
These rules give rise to the type of design curve shown in Figure 4.34 and 
which is a graphical representation of the sort of information that is presented in 
Table 4.13. As illustrated schematically in this figure, there is a marked change 
in the design stress values at the cross-over temperature where the values based 
on short-term tensile properties give way to those based on the time-dependent 
creep rupture strength. 
The actual design stress values for a series of ferritic grades and austenitic stain- 
less steels are shown in Figure 4.35(a) and (b) respectively. The steels concerned 
are in tube form (to BS 3059) and the design values in the creep range relate to 
rupture in 100000 hours. As illustrated in Figure 4.35(a), the allowable stresses 
increase progressively as the alloy content of the ferritic grades is increased. 
Whereas the C-Mn steel exhibits a cross-over temperature of 430~ 
the alloy 
steels undergo this change in the range 450-500~ 
In the austenitic series, 
Figure 4.35(b), the design stress values increase progressively in the order: 
9 Type 304- 18% Cr, 9% Ni 
9 Type 316- 18% Cr, 12% Ni, 2.75% Mo 
9 Esshete 1250- 16% Cr, 10% Ni, 8% Mn-Mo-V-Nb 
E 
C 
.0.2% Proof stress 
Rupture stress 
3 
Temperature 
Figure 4.34 Design strength values for low-alloy steels according to BS 1113 

356 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
12 CrMo V 
240 - 
~.~ 
200 - 
160 - 
120 - 
c ._~ 
| 
80- 
40- 
0 
200 
(a) 
240 - 
9Crl 
Mo 
288 
Cr 1 Mo 
1Cr89 
* BS 3059 360 
I 
I 
I 
aoo 
400 
soo 
Temperature (~ 
I 
600 
I 
700 
200 - 
160 - 
120 - 
80- 
40 - 
0 
200 
Esshete 1250 
Type 316 
Type 304 
I 
I 
I 
I 
300 
400 
500 
600 
(b) 
Temperature (~ 
I 
700 
Figure 4.35 
Design stress values according to BS 1113:1992 (Design and manufacture 
of water tube steam generating plant); (a) C-Mn and alloy steels; (b) austenitic stainless 
steels 

Stainless steels 357 
The last composition was developed specifically for use in power plant boilers 
and will be discussed later on pp. 363-365. However, the main feature to note 
with these steels is that the design stress values are relatively low at temperatures 
up to about 500~ 
compared with the ferritic grades, whereas the cross-over 
between short-term tensile properties and time-dependent properties is extended 
to considerably higher temperatures. As discussed later, Esshete 1250 offers a 
significant advantage over standard grades because of the facility to design on 
the basis of proof strength at operating temperatures up to 630~ 
From the data presented in Figure 4.35, it can be appreciated that the economic 
selection of steels for service at elevated temperature would dictate the use of 
C-Mn or low-alloy grades at temperatures up to 500-525~ 
However, at higher 
temperatures, use must be made of austenitic stainless grades which exhibit better 
properties, particularly in the creep rupture range. 
Steels for low-temperature applications 
As illustrated on pp. 350-351 austenitic stainless steels possess excellent 
impact properties at extremely low temperatures, which is a characteristic of 
face-centred-cubic metals. Therefore stainless steels, together with alloys of 
aluminium, copper and nickel, are used extensively for the construction of 
equipment operating at temperatures below -200~ 
However, there are many 
structures which operate at only moderately low temperatures which do not 
require the high toughness levels of these materials and which are satisfied by 
the use of less expensive steels. This situation is demonstrated very clearly by 
Wigley 31 in Figure 4.36, which identifies the boiling temperatures for a wide 
range of gases and the materials that are used for the associated structures and 
containment vessels. Thus for temperatures down to about -50~ 
C-Mn steels 
(to BS 4360) may be adequate and a range of nickel steels (288 3 89 and 9% Ni) 
can be used progressively down to temperatures of the order of -200~ 
Wigley 
states that 9% Ni steel is the only ferritic steel which is permitted for use at 
liquid nitrogen temperatures (-196~ 
It is also economical for the construction 
of storage tanks for liquid argon (-186~ 
oxygen (-183~ 
and methane 
(-161"C). 
The specifications, composition ranges and properties of these C-Mn and 
nickel steels are summarized in Table 4.14. In this table, Wigley makes the point 
that although specific impact test temperatures are laid down in the relevant 
standards, this does not guarantee that the steel will be satisfactory for use at 
those particular temperatures. This aspect is particularly pertinent if the mate- 
rims are used in thick sections. Annex D of BS 5500:1997 therefore specifies 
particular requirements for ferritic steels for use in vessels operating below 0*C. 
These take the form of diagrams providing relationships between the lowest oper- 
ating temperature (design reference temperature) and impact test temperature for 
different thicknesses of material. These relationships are shown in Figures 4.37(a) 
and (b) for as-welded and post-weld heat-treated conditions respectively. Given 
the beneficial effect of post-weld stress-relieving treatments, the impact test 
requirements are less demanding than those required in the as-welded condi- 
tion. For example, 20 mm material operating at a minimum design temperature 

Table 4.14 
The compositions and mechanical properties of femtic steels for use at low temperatures 
me 
Condition 
DesigMtion 
Composition 
Mechanical pmpertics a 2WC 
C 
M n  
Si 
M o  
Nb 
Ni 
Cr 
?ieU 
Tmile 
Elongation 
C h a m  
(96) 
(%) 
(%) 
(W 
(46) 
(%) 
(5%) 
smngrh 
strength 
(gauge 
V-notch 
@@a) 
(MPa) 
length 
inpacttest 
5.65 JSo) 
t e m p e m d  
(%) 
(C) 
C-Mn 
semi-killed 
C-MU-Nb 
Semi-killed 
C-Mn-Nb 
silicon killed 
C-Mn 
silicon killed, 
finem 
Ni-Cr-Mo 
23% Ni 
31% Ni 
9% Ni 
As mlled 
Normalired 
Normalized 
Normalized 
Quenched 
and 
tempend 
Normalized 
Normalized 
and 
tempexed 
Double 
normalired 
and tempad 
As welded 
with 
Ni-Cr-Fe 
(Inconel 92) 
elechDde5 
BS grade4OC 
BS grade4OD 
4360: grade 43D 
BS gnde50D 
4360: 
BS gradc4OE 
4360. gnde 43E 
grade 55E 
BSC QT 445 
ASTM A517 
Gd F (USS T1) 
ASTM A203 
GdA 
BS 1501/503 
ASTM A203 
Gd D 
BS 1501/509 
4360: grade 43c 
grade 5oc 
ASTM code 
Case 1308 and 
A353 
0.22 
1.6 
0.22 
1.6 
0.19 
1.6 
0.19 
1.6 
0.24 
1.6 
0-0.55 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.22 
1.6 
0.1-0.55 
0.1 
260 
400-480 
280 
430-510 
260 
400-480 
280 
430-510 
355 
490-620 
355 
490-620 
0.19 
1.6 
0.1-0.55 
260 
400-480 
0.19 
1.6 
0.1-0.55 
280 
430-510 
0.26 
1.7 
0-0.65 
0.1 
450 
550-700 
0.1-0.2 
0.6-1 
0.15-0.35 
0.4-0.6 
0.7-1 
0.4-0.65 
690 
795-930 
0.17-0.23 
0.7-0.8 
0.15-0.3 
2.1-25 
255 
450 
0.17 -0.2 
0.7 -0.8 
0.15 -0.3 
3.25-3.75 
255 
450 
515 
690 
0.13 
0.9 
0.13-0.32 
8.4-9.6 
480 
655 
25 
22 
25 
22 
20 
20 
25 
22 
19 
18 
25 
22 
22 
- 
0 
0 
-20 
-20 
-15 
-30 
-50 
-50 
-50 
-45 
-60 
-100 
- 1% 
-1% 
The impact test temperature is that laid down by the relevant standards for quality control purposes. This does not guarantee that the steel, especially if used in thick 
sections, will be completely satisfactory for use at low temperams. 
After wigIey.3l 

Stainless steels 
359 
Approximate range for 
vark 
i 
Z 
.o 
l 
m 
m 
m 
i 
| 
m 
a) 
! 
~D 
v 
m 
)us materials 
I 
z 
m 
i 
i 
C 
C 
=z=z 
6~ 
C 
~Z.L 
= E 
LL 
m 
,,== 
Fixed 
Temperature 
point + 
K 
~ 
400"~ 
[a) H20 
373.2-- 100 
300 
- 
b) H20 
273.2 .--- 
0 
a) SO2 
283.1 - - -10.0 
a) CH3CI 249.2_ _-23.7 
a) CCI2 ~ 243.1 - - -30.0 
a) NH 3 
239.8 " "-33.3 
a) CHCIF~ 232.5 = =-40.6 
a) C3He 
230.8- --42.3 
a) Calls 
226. I 
-47.0 
200 - 
c) CO2 
194.5" "-78"5 
a) C2H 2 
189.1 - -- 84.0 
-88.3 
a) C2Ho 
184.8 
a) C2H4 
169.3- "-103.8 
a) Xe 
184.0- "-109.1 
a) 
121.3- --151.8 
a) CH4 
111.7- ,.,-161.4 
100- 
la) O~ 
90.1 - _-183.0 
(a) A 
87.4-." -"-185.7 
(a) 1=2 
86.0" :-187.0 
(a) CO 
81.1 
-192.0 
(a) N2 
77.3 
-195.8 
(a) H2 20.4---252.8 
(a) 4He 4.~)- --268.9 
(c) Sublimation point 
(a) boiling point 
(b) melting point 
Typical range for 
various applications 
i | 
| 
t- 
.-..~ 
i 
--J 
Figure 4.36 
Some significant temperatures and typical operating temperature ranges for 
various structures and constructional materials (After Wigley 31) 
Table 4.15 
Specified min. 
tensile strength 
Min. impact energy (J) at material test temperature 
(N/ram 2) 
10 mm x 10 mm 
10 mm  7.5 mm 
10 mm  5 mm 
10 mm  2.5 mm 
<450 
27 
22 
19 
10 
>450 
40 
32 
28 
15 

360 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
20 
10 
0 
t-lO 
0 
o v -20 
=e 
~ -30 
E 
-40 
~-50 
c ._~ -6o 
-70 
-80 
-90| 
-60 
(a) 
-10 
-2O 
o 
o v 
-40 
=e 
~ 
-so 
E 
-60 
r 
=e 
_7oi 
e- ._~ 
-8o' 
o 
a 
6 mm 
4 mm 
<2mm 
-50 -40 
-30 
-20 -10 
0 
10 
Material impact test temperature (~ 
_ 
J 
J 
20 
3 mm 
4 mm 
,=2mm 
mm 
8 mm 
-100 
-110 
(b) 
-60 -50 
-40 
-30 -20 -10 
0 
10 
20 
Material impact test temperature (~ 
Figure 4.37 Relationship between minimum operating temperature and impact test 
temperature for various thicknesses of ferritic steels: (a)as-welded condition; 
(b) post-weld heat-treated condition (From Annex D, BS 5500: 1997) 

Stainless steels 361 
of-40"C would need to provide a minimum Charpy V value at a test tempera- 
ture of -50"C in the as-welded condition compared with a temperature of 0*C 
in the post-weld heat-treated condition. The minimum Charpy V value depends 
upon the strength of steel employed as indicated in Table 4.15. 
Steels in fossil-fired power plants 
Since the early 1970s, major events have taken place which have had a profound 
effect on the choice of fuels for power generation. First, the oil crises of 1973 
and 1979 curtailed the use of oil for steam-raising purposes but, currently, this 
fuel accounts for about 8% of power generation. At a later stage, the fire at Three 
Mile Island in the United States and the devastating melt-down at Chemobyl had 
a very significant effect in limiting further commitment to nuclear power. More 
recently, the privatization of the electricity industry in the UK has prompted the 
dash for gas and in 1993, natural gas accounted for 9.2% of power generation. 
As a result, the use of coal is declining but, currently, coal makes up 53% of 
the power requirements. However, with proven reserves for more than 300 years, 
coal-fired power stations are likely to feature prominently well into the twenty- 
first century. 
Boiler layout and operation 
The selection of steels for the various parts of fossil-fired boilers will be appre- 
ciated more readily by first providing an outline of boiler construction and the 
steam-water circuit. A schematic cross-section through a boiler is shown in 
Figure 4.38 The boiler has a large rectangular combustion chamber in which 
high-temperature gases are generated by burning coal or oil, providing maximum 
temperatures of up to 1600 and 2000"C respectively. The walls of the furnace 
section are formed with the evaporator tubes which are arranged in closely 
packed, vertical rows. Each tube has two longitudinal fins at 180" and the fins 
on adjacent tubes are welded together to form an airtight wall, except for entry 
ports for burners or exits for flue gas. 32 Although the temperatures of the furnace 
gases are very high, the cooling effect of the steam/water mixture generally limits 
the outer metal (fire-side) temperature of the evaporator tubing to about 450"C. 
On the other hand, significantly higher metal temperatures can be generated in 
some circumstances, e.g. when a flame impinges directly onto the surface of the 
evaporator tubes. 
The atmosphere in the combustion chamber of fossil-fired boilers can be 
extremely aggressive, leading to severe attack and premature replacement of 
the boiler tubes. This arises from the chlorine content of coals whereas sulphur 
and vanadium are the damaging elements in fuel oils. Under normal oxidizing 
conditions, a protective oxide scale is formed on the surface of the tubing which 
limits the corrosion rate. However, reducing conditions promote complex reac- 
tions between sulphur, chlorine, carbon and oxygen, leading to the formation 
of non-protecting scales. Particularly damaging conditions are produced when 
unburnt particles of coal impinge on the side-wall of the evaporator tubes, the 

362 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Pendant 
Superheaters 
( 
Bumers [ 
( 
Ash 
collection 
Pendant 
reheater 
: 
Horizontal 
~~,"~~""'J 
! " "~; Hreohdeza::tral 
[ 
9 
II 
/111 superheater 
i 
nomizer 
I 
wall 
I tubes 
\ ....... 
~" Gas flow 
Figure 4.38 Schematic illustration of coal-fired boiler 
generation of carbon monoxide promoting sulphidation and the formation of 
hydrogen chloride. 33 
At the top of the combustion zone, the hot gases are turned through an angle 
of 90 ~ and over banks of superheater tubes which are suspended from the 
boiler roof. In this region of the boiler, the steam is heated progressively to 
maximum temperatures of 540"C in the case of oil-fired boilers and 565"C in 
coal-fired stations. These temperature limits in UK power stations are dictated 
very largely by the aggressive environmental conditions described above and the 
need to maintain an adequate balance between operating efficiency and excessive 
corrosion/oxidation of the boiler tubing. In the superheater section, the first few 
rows of tubing are subjected to very arduous conditions due to the impingement 
of hot gases and fly ash. 
Beyond the superheater section of the boiler, the hot gases turn through a 
second angle of 90* and over the reheater tubes. Being in the same part of the 
boiler, the temperatures in the superheater and reheater are similar but, due to 
the fact that they operate on different steam circuits, the pressure of steam in the 
reheater is significantly lower than that in the superheater. 
Before leaving the boiler, the gases pass over a final bank of tubes that consti- 
tute the economizer. At this stage, the gas temperature has fallen to about 300"C 
and the economizer operates at a steam temperature of about 250~ 
The flow of steam/water through the boiler is shown in Figure 4.39. Feedwater 
is first preheated in the economizer before passing into the evaporator tubing in 
the furnace walls. From the various outlets in the evaporator, the steam/water 
mixture then passes into a large collection vessel, known as the steam drum. In 
this vessel, the steam is separated from the water, the steam being passed to the 

Stainless steels 363 
Evaporator 
Reheater 
Super 
heater [ I.____...._J'~~ 
Turbine 
' 
! Condenser 
i  ~176176 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Figure 4.39 Water-steam flow in coal-fired boiler 
superheater and the water being directed to the feedwater circuit. On reaching a 
temperature of 540-565~ and a pressure of 170 bar in the superheater, the steam 
is conveyed from the boiler to the turbine via headers, steam pipes and valves. 
The headers are very large pressure vessels, with many stub tube connections, 
and act as collection units for steam from the various tubes in the superheater. A 
typical unit in a large power station would measure 500 mm diameter x 40 mm 
wall thickness x 12 m long. 
As indicated in Figure 4.39, part of the steam leaving the turbine is diverted 
to the reheater section of the boiler. At this stage, the steam has lost a substantial 
amount of pressure but, after reheating, the steam is then passed again into the 
turbine via a header system. 
The conditions described above relate to traditional coal or oil-fired stations 
but in recent years, the combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) has been introduced 
in which the maximum steam temperature is only of the order of 400-450~ 
Steel selection 
From the foregoing remarks, it can be appreciated that boiler tube materials are 
subjected to a wide range of temperatures and operating conditions and economic 
selection dictates that a variety of steel grades is used to satisfy these conditions. 
However, one statistic worthy of note is that in the 660 MW boilers at Drax, 
there are 480 km of tubing with 30 000 butt and fillet welds. 
Evaporator tubing 
As indicated earlier, the fire-side temperature of evaporator tubing is generally 
of the order of 450"C and C-Mn steel, typically BS 3059 Grade 440, is used in 
this region. However, in areas of the furnace wall where the operating conditions 

364 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
are particularly troublesome, it is sometimes necessary to use tubing which has 
a surface cladding of stainless steel in order to achieve reasonable life. These 
so-called co-extruded tubes will be discussed later. 
Superheater/reheater tubing 
Depending upon the position in the boiler and steam temperature, the tubing in 
various stages of the superheater will be made from the following steel compo- 
sitions: 
Increasing 
temperature 
resistance 
1% Cr, 89 Mo 
2~%, Cr, 1% Mo 
18% Cr, 12% Ni, 289 Mo (Type 316) 
16% Cr, 10% Ni, 8% Mn-Mo-V-Nb 
(Esshete 1250) 
Esshete 1250 was developed by the former United Steel Companies Ltd in the 
1960s specifically as a high-temperature superheater material and the number 
indicates the maximum operating temperature in degrees fahrenheit (675"C). As 
indicated in Figure 4.35, the proof strength of the steel at 600*C is 40% higher 
than that of Type 316, whereas its rupture strength is approximately 95% greater 
than that of the standard grade. This provides a design cross-over temperature 
from proof to rupture strength of 630"C in the case of Esshete 1250 compared 
with 590~ for Type 316. This enables the use of substantially thinner tubing in 
Esshete 1250 compared to other austenitic steels, which results in a considerable 
cost saving. 34 
Reheater tubing operates at the same temperature as superheater tubing and 
this usually dictates the use of an austenitic stainless steel, such as Type 316, 
in coal-fired stations. However, 288 % Cr 1% Mo steel can be used in oil-fired 
boilers or in coal-fired stations where the design temperature has been reduced 
deliberately to allow the use of ferritic steels. In this respect, steels such as 9% Cr 
1% Mo can also be considered as candidate materials. 
Steam headers 
Although operating at high temperatures and pressure, steam headers are not 
subjected to the corrosive conditions encountered by superheater or reheater 
tubing and therefore headers are generally made from 89 
% Cr-Mo-V, 1% Cr-Mo 
or 21% Cr 1% Mo steel. For steam temperatures in excess of 565"C, highly 
alloyed ferritic or austenitic steels would be required, as discussed in the next 
section dealing with steam pipe. 
Steam pipe 
Steam pipes carry large volumes of steam from the headers to the turbine and, 
like headers, they are not subjected to aggressive environments. In the UK, 89 
% 
Cr-Mo-V steel is used extensively for steam temperatures up to 565~ 
and 
therefore the material is operating in its creep range. 
Steam pipe is heavy-walled material and, according to Wyatt, 32 1% Cr-Mo-V 
piping operating at a temperature of 565~ 
would have a wall thickness of 

Stainless steels 365 
6.3 cm. At higher temperatures, greater wall thicknesses would be required or 
else stronger steels would be selected. These would include 9% Cr-Mo-V-Nb 
(T91) and 12% Cr-Mo-V (X20) which could be used in thinner sections, thereby 
reducing the cost of the pipework. At the super-critical Drakelow 'C' station, 
operating at 599~ 
bar, both Type 316 and Esshete 1250 have been used for 
steam pipes. 
Other components 
The steam drum in the steam-water circuit between the evaporator and super- 
heater is fabricated from C-Mn steel plates and presents no problems in material 
selection. 
The economizer tubing, situated near the exhaust end of the boiler, operates 
in a gas temperature of 400~ 
and again a C-Mn steel is adequate for these 
conditions. 
Feedwater pipes are made in C-Mn-Nb steel (BS 3602 Grade 490 Nb) and 
operate at temperatures up to 250~ 
Previously, a 0.4% C-Mn steel was used 
for this purpose but BS 3602 Grade 490 Nb (0.23% C max.) is more weldable 
and has a higher proof strength than the traditional medium-carbon steel. 
Co-extruded tubing 
As indicated earlier, C-Mn or low-alloy steels, clad with a stainless steel or 
superalloys, are used in parts of the boiler where metal loss is excessive due 
to high-temperature corrosion. The experience of these materials in UK power 
stations is the subject of a detailed paper by Flatley et al. 35 
The tubes are manufactured by conventional hot extrusion and in essence 
comprise a corrosion-resistant outer layer over a conventional, load-beating inner 
layer. Co-extruded tubing involving Type 310 (25% Cr, 2% Ni)/carbon steel was 
first introduced into the furnace wall of a 500 MW boiler in 1974 and gave 
a corrosion benefit of three to ten times, depending upon the severity of the 
location. This practice has now become widespread in UK coal-fired stations. The 
tube dimensions have varied from 76.2 mm OD  8.3 mm total wall thickness 
(4.3 mm outer 310 on 4 mm C steel) to 50.8 turn OD  6 mm total wall (3 mm 
outer on 3 mm inner). 35 
In the superheater and reheater stages of the boiler, the combination of mate- 
rials has generally involved Type 310 heat-resistant steel over Esshete 1250, the 
high rupture strength steel. Co-extruded tubing of this type has been installed 
in various power stations in the UK, providing a benefit of 2.5 or more over 
monobloc Esshete 1250. 35 To avoid the possibility of intergranular attack due 
to the migration of carbon at the service temperature, later installations have 
incorporated niobium-stabilized, Type 310 material. 
Flue gas desulphurization equipment 
Prior to the privatization of the electricity industry, the UK Government 
announced plans for the installation of flue gas desulphurization (FGD) equipment 

366 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
on all new coal-fired power stations and also for the retrofitting of such plant 
on certain existing coal-fired stations. Following privatization, PowerGen have 
completed the installation of FGD at Ratcliffe and National Power have FGD 
operational at Drax power station. The main function of FGD plant is to remove 
at least 90% of the SO2 from boiler exhaust gases and, ideally, the process should 
also generate a saleable by-product. 
Most FGD plants operate on the basis of a wet scrubbing process in which 
SO2 is obsorbed in a suspension of lime (CaO) or limestone (CaCO3) in water: 
CaCO3 -I- SO2 -.>. CaSO3 -t-CO2 
In the above reaction, calcium sulphite (CaSO3) forms as a sludge and having 
no commercial value would have to be disposed of to landfill. However, by 
incorporating an oxidation stage in the process, the calcium sulphite is converted 
to gypsum: 
CaSO3 -I- O -t- 2H20 -+ CaSO4.2H20 
Coal-fired 
boiler 
Flue 
gas 
Electrostatic 
precipitator 
r 
t 
Reheater 
Demister 
Absorber 
Chloride 
pre-scrubber 
Heat 
exchanger 
l Stack 
Bypass 
duct 
Figure 4.40 Schematic layout for flue gas desulphurization plant 

Stainless steels 367 
Gypsum is more environment-friendly than the calcium sulphite sludge and also 
represents a commercially useful product in the building industry. 
The various process stages in a typical FGD are shown schematically in 
Figure 4.40. The flue gas leaves the boilers at a temperature of about 130"C 
and passes through an electrostatic precipitator for the removal of solid particles, 
e.g. fly ash. The gas then passes to a heat exchanger where it is cooled to about 
90"C before entering a chloride prescrubber. UK coals contain high levels of 
chlorine (typically 0.25 wt%) and chloride ions are removed from the flue gas 
by a spray containing calcium chloride, limestone or dilute hydrochloric acid. 
The gas stream leaves the chloride prescrubber at a temperature of about 50"C 
and then enters the SO2 absorber section. 
As indicated earlier, the SO2 is reacted with alkalis in this section to form 
gypsum. On leaving the absorber, the gas passes on to a mist eliminator for the 
removal of entrained droplets and then via a reheater to the stack. 
Lane and Needham 12 have reported on the temperature and chemical conditions 
in the various stages of the FGD process and these are shown in Table 4.16. 
Prior to the heat exchanger, the gas is hot and dry and therefore the operating 
conditions are not aggressive. Therefore materials such as mild steel and Cor-Ten 
(weathering steel) perform adequately up to this stage. 
Table 4.16 
Operating conditions in flue gas desulphurization plant 
Zone 
Temperature Chloride ion 
Acidity 
(*C) 
content (ppm) 
(pH) 
Comments 
Electrostatic precipitator 
120-150 
Inlet duct 
120-150 
Reheater 
88 
(heat extraction) 
Low 
Inlet/quench zone 
88-49 
High 
Low 
Prescrubber 
49 
Up to 350000 
5-30000 
Absorber 
49 
Outlet duct 
49-80 
Variable 
1.5-20 
4.5 -6.5 
Low 
Dry gas 
Dry gas 
Below dewpoint of 
flue gas plus entrained 
particulate matter not 
removed in ESP 
Highly abrasive, scale 
deposits and 
accumulation of 
chloride ions 
Conditions will be 
process dependent 
Conditions will be 
process dependent 
Temperature below 
dewpoint, slurry 
carryover and mixing 
with raw gas can 
lead to scale 
deposits and high 
chloride levels 
After Lane and Needham. 12 

368 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.17 
Materials used in absorber towers of FGD plant 
Alloy 
Chloride ion 
pH 
Plant 
designation 
content (ppm) 
316L 
1000 
7.5 
316LM 
1700 
6 
317L 
Not specified 
317LM 
7000 
6.5 
94L 
Few thousand 
6 
Hastelloy G 
1600 
- 
Inconel 625 
10 000 
2 
Cane Run 5, La Cygne 1, Cane Run 4, 
Colstrip 1 and 2, Duck Creek 1, Coal 
Creek 1 and 2, Jeffrey 1 and 2, 
Lawrence 4 and 5 (new) and Green 
River 
Dallman 3, Jim Bridger 2 and Laramie 
River 1 and 2 
Museatine 9 
Schahfer 17 and 18, Colstrip 3 and 4, 
Four Comers 4 and 5 and Jim Bridget 4 
Big Bend 4 
Cholla 1 
San Juan 1, 2, 3 and 4 and Somerset 1 
After Lane and Needham. 12 
In the heat exchanger, the conditions become more aggressive as the tempera- 
ture falls below the dewpoint of the flue gas and grades such as 316L and 317LM 
are used in this region. 
As indicated in Table 4.16, the conditions can vary significantly in the 
prescrubber and absorber and the choice of grade will depend very much on the 
particular combination of chloride ion concentration and acidity (pH). A summary 
of the stainless grades used in the absorber section is shown in Table 4.17. The 
compositions of these grades are included in Table 4.8. 
Nuclear fuel reprocessing plant 
The nuclear fuel reprocessing industry is a major user of stainless steels in the 
form of plates, tubes and forgings and the selection of steels in this sector has 
been reviewed very thoroughly by Shaw and Elliott. 36 Whereas the choice of 
materials for chemical plant is generally governed solely by the nature of the 
process stream, due regard must also be paid in the nuclear industry to the hazards 
of radiation which have a major influence on the opportunity for equipment 
repair and maintenance. Thus materials operating in areas of high radioactivity 
in nuclear reprocessing plant, where access is difficult or even impossible, are 
designated primary plant materials, whereas those operating in more accessible 
areas with low levels of radiation are defined as secondary plant materials. 
Reprocessing is based upon the dissolution of irradiated nuclear fuels in hot 
nitric acid, followed by solvent extraction and evaporation stages. The first 
reprocessing plant at Sellafield in Cumbria was commissioned in 1952 and was 
constructed in two main types of stabilized stainless steel, namely 18% Cr 13% 
Ni-Nb (similar to Type 347) for primary plant and 18% Cr 9% Ni-Ti (Type 321) 

Stainless steels 369 
for secondary plant. Early work had indicated that the niobium-stabilized steel 
corroded at less than half the rate of Type 321 in boiling nitric acid and this was 
ascribed to the fact that the former had a completely austenitic structure whereas 
Type 321 contained some delta ferrite. However, the above authors state that it 
was shown subsequently that delta ferrite had no significant effect on the corro- 
sion behaviour and that the inferior performance of Type 321 was due to the 
presence of TiC particles which are readily dissolved in hot nitric acid. 
The use of 18% Cr 13% Ni-Nb and Type 321 remained in force until the 
mid-1970s, when several factors brought about a re-appraisal of steel selection. 
It is stated that these included the fact that some forgings in 18% Cr 13% Ni-Nb 
were badly corroded and that Type 321 was prone to knife-line attack in the heat- 
affected zone of welds. Welding problems had been experienced with the fully 
austenitic, niobium-stabilized steel and this material was also prone to end grain 
attack due to outcropping stringers of coarse NbC carbides. However, perhaps the 
greatest impetus for the re-appraisal of material selection stemmed from the fact 
that the nitric acid manufacturing industry had ceased to use the stabilized grades 
of stainless steels, having experienced improved manufacturing and operating 
performance with the low-carbon grades such as 304L and 310L. 
Following extensive testing in nitric acid-based liquors and vapours, BNFL 
elected to replace 18% Cr 13% Ni-Nb by a low-carbon grade of 18% Cr 10% 
Ni steel. Initially, this material was called Nitric Acid Grade 304L but was 
subsequently designated by BNFL as NAG 18/lOL. The carbon content of this 
grade is restricted to 0.025% max. compared with 0.03% max. in 304L and 
restriction on the phosphorus content (0.018% max.) also ensures very low levels 
of sensitization and intergranular attack. In addition, the steelmaking practice for 
this grade of steel has to be tightly controlled in order to produce a very clean 
steel so as to minimize the inclusion content and the tendency for end grain 
corrosion. Large quantities of NAG 18/lOL have been used in the construction 
of the Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (THORP) at Sellafield, and Shaw and 
Elliott report that the steel has given excellent welding performance. Whereas 
9.3% of welds showed signs of cracking in 18% Cr 13% Ni-Nb, this has been 
reduced to 0.2% in NAG 18/IOL. 
Stainless steels are also used in the nuclear power and fuel reprocessing 
industries for the storage and transportation of spent fuel elements. For such 
applications, the materials must provide substantial neutron absorption, and this 
characteristic is provided by the inclusion of up to 1% B in a base steel containing 
18% Cr and 10% Ni. The production and properties of such material, designated 
Hybor 304L, have been described by King and Wilkinson. 37 The addition of 
large amounts of boron to a stainless steel results in the formation of an 
austenite-(FeCr)2 B eutectic which reduces the hot workability of the material. 
However, steels containing up to 1% B have been successfully rolled to plate 
and welded satisfactorily by the TIG, MIG and MMA processes. As illustrated 
in Figure 4.41, the addition of boron also produces a substantial dispersion 
strengthening effect, coupled with significant loss of toughness and ductility. The 
above authors therefore conclude that the conflicting interests of the steelmaker, 
fabricator and the nuclear industry are best served by steels with boron contents 
in the range 0.5-1%. 

370 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
750 
700 
650 
600 
550 
E 
~,,500 
.= 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
-- 
~ ~ "  
~ Ultimate tensile 
_ 
/i 
/ 
strength 
~ 
// 
.~<// 
- 
~ 
NNNX x 
_ 
x 
~ ~ 0.2% Proof stress 
"- 
~" 
~
~
 
o 
1t 
\ 
'/o Elongation 
_ 
-ti 
~, 
-, 
9 
1 
. . . . . .  
"1Impact strength 
1 
2 
% Boron 
8C 
7C 
6(] 
50 ~ 
8 
4o 
30 
20 
10 
- 220 
- 200 
-18o 
-160 
--140 "~ 
120 
~- 
-100 
e- 
Jr- 
- 
80 
o c- 
O 
-- 60 
z 
i 
:::) 
- 40 
- 
20 
3 
-0 
Figure 4.41 
Effect of boron on the mechanical properties of Type 304 steel (After King 
and Wilkinson 37) 
Corrosion/abrasion-resistant grades 
Large quantities of wear-resistant materials are used for the handling of bulk 
solids in industries such as steelmaking, coal mining, quarrying and power 
generation. Many of the requirements are satisfied by quenched and tempered 
low-alloy steels, with hardness values in the range 360-500 B HN, and provide 
long life and satisfactory performance under a wide range of operating conditions. 
However, under wet corrosive conditions, corrosion losses can contribute 
significantly to the wear process. Additionally, corrosion in low-alloy steel linings 
can increase friction and prevent the free flow of material in chutes and bunkers, 
causing metering and blockage problems. Under such conditions, stainless steels 
become attractive alternatives to low-alloy wear-resistant grades. 
One interesting example of the use of stainless steel in this field is as a 
composite material bonded to a thick resilient rubber backing. Both ferritic 
(Type 409) and austenitic (Type 304) stainless steels are used in such appli- 
cations, the rubber backing reducing the amount of steel required and also the 
level of noise generated. Ferritic stainless steel has been used very successfully 
in such composites for lining coal silos in British Steel plant and many of the 
installations have handled over 2 million tonnes of coal. 38 
Austenitic stainless steels are generally used in situations where the conditions 
are very corrosive but the high rate of work hardening in these materials also 

Stainless steels 371 
provides good resistance to wear. Cook et al. 39 have reported on the performance 
of austenitie steels in a number of installations handling coal, coke and ore 
and, as well as providing long life compared with low-alloy steels or high- 
density polythene, the authors also comment favourably on the flow-promoting 
characteristics of Type 304 steel. 
For many applications, a 12% Cr steel provides adequate corrosion resistance 
and the high martensitic hardness of such material also offers comparable abrasion 
resistance to the traditional quenched and tempered low-aUoy steels. Many of the 
12% Cr steels used for this type of work are based on Type 420 steel (12% Cr 
0.14-0.2%C) and provide hardness levels of 400-450 BHN in section sizes 
up to 40 mm thick in the as-rolled condition. Hyflow 420R is an example of 
a proprietary 12% Cr steel that is marketed as a corrosion/abrasion-resisting 
material and provides the mechanical properties shown in Table 4.18 in the 
as-rolled condition. Thus low-carbon material of this type can provide a good 
combination of strength and toughness without resort to costly heat treatments. 
Metcalfe et al. 4~ have described the development of 8-12% Cr steels for 
corrosion/abrasion-resistant applications in South African gold mines. The rock 
in which the gold-bearing ore is embedded is extremely hard and causes severe 
abrasion problems. In addition, large quantities of water are used to allay dust 
and cool machinery. In turn, the water becomes contaminated with acids and 
salts from the working environment and, at air temperatures of about 30"C, this 
leads to very humid and corrosive operating conditions. The compositions of the 
steels developed for use in such situations are shown in Table 4.19. 
After oil quenching from 1100*C and tempering at 200"C, the first three 
steels in Table 4.19 develop microstructures that are predominantly martensitic 
with hardness levels in the range 471-583 HV. Steel 1210 involves an entirely 
different approach in that the high manganese and nitrogen contents produce an 
austenitic microstructure. However, the austenite is unstable and transforms to 
strain-induced martensite under mechanical action in service. 
Table 4.18 
TS 
(N/ram 2) 
Mechanical Properties of Hyflow 420R 
0.2% PS 
El (%) 
2 mm CVN (J) 
(N/ram 2) 
Long. 
Trans. 
HV 
1520 
1050 
16 
55 
16 
450 
Table 4.19 
.
.
.
.
 
Code 
Corrosion/abrasion resistant steels 
DIN designation 
Composition % 
C 
Mn 
Cr 
Ni 
Al 
N 
825 
102A 
122 
1210 
X 25 CrNi 8.3 
0.25 
X 20 CrNiAI 10.1 
0.2 
1 
X 20 CrMn 12.1 
0.2 
1 
X 5 CrMnN 12.10 
<0.05 
10 
8 
lO 
12 
12 
0.5 
0.17 

372 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Automotive exhausts/catalytic converters 
Motor car owners were conditioned to the fact that a traditional mild steel 
exhaust would need to be replaced after a typical service life of only 18 months, 
whereas engine and transmission components are expected to last in excess of 
10 years/100000 miles. The use of aluminized mild steel in place of uncoated 
material is cost-effective but, even so, the average life of the exhaust is only 
extended to about 30 months. On the basis of life-cycle costing, the most effec- 
tive material for exhausts is a 12% Cr steel which will give a life of four to five 
years at a cost of about 1.5 times that of a mild steel system. 
During the 1970s, British Steel directed major effort to the optimization of 
high-chromium steels for automotive exhausts following a major survey that 
showed that corrosion was responsible for about 80% of the failures that occurred 
in mild steel exhausts. Two types of corrosion are operative in automotive 
exhausts, namely: 
1. That taking place on the outside of systems due to the action of water/solids 
thrown up from road surfaces and, more particularly, from the use of deicing 
salts in winter periods. 
2 That occurring on the inside of exhausts due to the action of corrosive exhaust 
gas condensate which forms in the cooler parts of the system. 
Information was available which showed that Type 302 (18% Cr, 8% Ni) 
austenitic stainless steel would be very effective in overcoming these corrosion 
problems but it was considered that this material would prove too expensive 
to achieve a major market conversion from mild steel systems. Additionally, 
experience in the United States had indicated that a 12% Cr muffler grade steel 
might provide adequate corrosion resistance. 
On the basis of preliminary laboratory tests, samples of steels containing up 
to 15% Cr were exposed on both the inside and outside of an exhaust system 
for 889 months, including the winter period, and during this time the car covered 
16000 miles. 41 This trial confirmed that a very significant improvement in corro- 
sion resistance over mild steel could be achieved in steels containing 10-12% Cr 
and therefore further work was focused on steels within this chromium range. 
This culminated in the development of Hyform 409, a variant of the standard 
titanium-stabilized Type 409 grade, with the following typical composition: 42 
0.02% C, 0.6% Si, 0.3% Mn, 11.4% Cr, 0.4% Ti 
Because the manufacture of exhausts involves major welding operations, a stabi- 
lized grade was required in order to eliminate any possibility of intergranular 
corrosion. However, as indicated earlier, the addition of titanium to a 12% Cr 
steel also ensures that the microstructure is ferritic, thereby providing a much 
more formable and weldable material than the 12% Cr martensitic grades. 
Hyform 409 can be welded satisfactorily using most techniques, including 
MIG, TIG and HF. When MIG welding is employed, the preferred filler metal is 

Stainless steels 
373 
Type 316L. It has been established that exhausts in Hyform 409 can be manufac- 
tured on the same equipment as that used for mild steel, which is an important 
factor in maintaining the cost of stainless steel exhausts at a relatively low level. 
Whereas 80% of failures in mild steel exhausts were attributable to corrosion, 
it was found that the remaining 20% were due to fatigue. Having improved the 
corrosion performance very substantially, fatigue therefore becomes the predomi- 
nant mode of failure in stainless steels. It was established that the limiting fatigue 
stresses of Hyform 409 and mild steel were virtually identical. The thermal 
conductivity and expansion coefficients were also very similar, indicating that 
the 12% Cr material could replace mild steel without increasing the risk of 
thermal fatigue. Therefore to ensure that a stainless steel exhaust system does 
not undergo premature failure due to fatigue, careful consideration must be given 
to design details and standards of manufacture rather than to the intrinsic mate- 
rial properties. Extensive road trials have shown that attention to these details 
can provide exhausts with excellent fatigue characteristics, thereby ensuring the 
long-term integrity of stainless steel systems. 
Whereas some car manufacturers fit complete 12% Cr exhaust systems as orig- 
inal equipment, others have opted for hybrid systems involving a combination of 
mild steel, aluminized mild steel and Hyform 409. In such systems, the 12% Cr 
steel is restricted to the areas that constitute the greatest risk of failure by corro- 
sion, i.e. the rear silencer boxes. 
The exhaust manifold is generally made in cast iron and the material is perfectly 
satisfactory in this application. However, cast iron manifolds are relatively heavy 
components, and for weight reduction/improved fuel economy, consideration has 
been given to their replacement with manifolds fabricated from stainless steel 
strip. Type 304 has been used for this purpose and also some of the 17% Cr 
steels that will be discussed in the following paragraphs on catalytic converters. 
Catalytic converters have been fitted to cars in the United States since 1974 in 
order to reduce the level of toxic products such as CO, NOx and unbumt hydro- 
carbons in the exhaust gases. These devices are also being introduced gradually 
in Europe and represent a major potential market for stainless steel. Typically, 
a platinum catalyst mounted on a ceramic substrate is contained in a stainless 
steel case, comprising a cylindrical shell flanked by inlet and outlet cones. In 
early models, the operating temperatures were low and casing materials reached 
a maximum temperature of 550-600"C. Given the experience with the 12% Cr 
muffler grade in the United States, steels such as Type 409 were evaluated as 
candidate materials for the early converters and proved to be perfectly satisfac- 
tory. However, as the requirements of legislation have tightened, the operating 
temperatures in the converter have been increased up to 900"C, which imposes 
severe demands on casing materials. These include good elevated-temperature 
strength to withstand the stresses produced by exhaust gas pressure and also 
by the weight of the device itself. Additionally, the materials are required to 
have good resistance to oxidation and scaling, not only for long life, but also 
to avoid blockage and malfunction of the converter. Type 409 has a maximum 
operating temperature of about 7000C and therefore more highly alloyed steels 
are required for modem converter systems. Whereas austenitic grades such as 
Type 304 (18% Cr, 9% Ni) have excellent creep rupture strength, coupled with 

374 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Table 4.20 
Steels for catalytic converters 
Grade 
Cr% 
Al% 
Nb% 
Ti% 
Zr% 
409 
11.5 
430Nb 
17 
0.7 
18CrNb 
18.6 
0.6 
Armco 12SR 
12 
1 
0.6 
Uginox FK 
17 
12 x C 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.4 
good scaling resistance at temperatures up to 900"C, they are expensive and 
their high thermal expansion characteristics could also introduce large thermal 
stresses and cyclic fatigue in constrained parts of the component. The lower 
cost and thermal expansion characteristics of ferritic steels therefore offer greater 
attraction as candidate materials for high-temperature converters. 
The nominal compositions used in current catalytic converters are compared 
with Type 409 in Table 4.20. 
Thus the majority of the grades rely on higher chromium contents in order 
to achieve improved scaling resistance compared with Type 409. However, both 
silicon and aluminium are also beneficial in this respect and a high aluminium 
content is included in Armco 12SR. Each of the above steels also contains 
substantial amounts of strong carbide-forming elements which stabilize the mate- 
dais against intergranular corrosion. However, it is interesting to note that these 
steels employ dual stabilization, involving niobium plus either titanium or zirco- 
nium. Whereas the latter are the more powerful stabilizing elements and also 
ensure a martensitic-free weld, the inclusion of niobium ensures better impact 
properties in the HAZ. The creep resistance of ferritic stainless steels is also 
improved significantly by the precipitation of Fe2Nb (Laves phase). In addition 
to its function as a stabilizing element, zirconium is also beneficial in improving 
the oxidation resistance of these steels. Therefore significant benefits are obtained 
from the inclusion of more than one stabilizing element in ferritic stainless steels 
for operation at high temperatures. 
Because of the very large number of cars involved and the substantial amount 
of material in each converter, it is reported that General Motors is now the largest 
consumer of stainless steel in the United States. 
Architectural applications 
With its aesthetic appeal, excellent resistance to atmospheric corrosion and low 
maintenance requirements, stainless steel offers major attractions as an archi- 
tectural material. However, whereas stainless steel has featured prominently in 
the architectural sector in Japan and the United States, it is only recently that it 
has begun to enjoy similar success in the UK and Europe. One of the earliest 
architectural uses of stainless steel was in the cladding of the top section of the 
320 m-high Chrysler building in New York in 1930. After a period of 60 years, 
an ASTM examination has shown that the stainless steel on this building is still in 

Stainless steels 375 
excellent condition. Of particular note in recent years have been the construction 
of the Lloyd's building and Canary Wharf tower in London, where extensive use 
has been made of stainless steel cladding. In addition, stainless steel is now being 
used more frequently in doors, entrance halls, portals, stairways and roofing and 
also in street furniture such as lighting columns and telephone boxes. 
As illustrated in Figure 4.42, stainless steels are now available in a range of 
textured finishes which increase the options open to designers and architects. 
Fashion and preference have also turned away from the traditional, highly reflec- 
tive finishes in stainless steel in favour of the No. 4 brushed finish. However, 
this finish is produced by mechanical abrasion which can introduce fissures and 
crevices into the surface which can act as initiation sites for pitting corrosion. 
Therefore, in producing the No. 4 finish, great care has to be taken to produce 
a cleanly cut surface and this is generally achieved with silicon carbide belts 
rather than alumina abrasive belts. For architectural applications, major attention 
must also be given to strip flatness and to the complete removal of oxide parti- 
cles from hot-band material prior to cold rolling. Small particles of scale which 
remain on the surface can introduce a galvanic corrosion effect which leads to 
rusting during atmospheric exposure. 
British Steel has operated atmospheric corrosion test sites in the UK since the 
1960s in various rural, industrial and marine locations. A wide range of steels 
and finishes are being investigated, but in the stainless steel range, attention has 
been focused on the following grades: 
Type 304 
18% Cr 
10% Ni 
Type 315 
18% Cr 
10% Ni 
1.5% Mo 
Type 316 
18% Cr 
12% Ni 
2.5% Mo 
Type 317 
18% Cr 
12% Ni 
3.5% Mo 
The stainless steel samples were examined thoroughly for evidence of pitting 
corrosion after 15 years exposure and the performance has been reported by 
Figure 4.42 Textured finishes in stainless steel strip (Courtesy of British Steel Stainless) 

376 
Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
Stone et al. 43 and also by Needham. 44 As indicated in Figure 4.43, the marine 
location is the most aggressive because of the high chloride content in the atmo- 
sphere. However, as anticipated, the corrosion behaviour of these steels correlates 
strongly with the molybdenum content. This is illustrated by the following pitting 
data in Tables 4.21 and 4.22 which were obtained after 15 years exposure in a 
marine environment. 
Thus both the maximum pit depth and the pit density decrease progressively 
with molybdenum content. It is also apparent that washing, either by the natural 
action of the rain in unsheltered conditions or by manual washing in sheltered 
areas, exerts a beneficial effect in reducing pitting attack. Thus the design of 
structures is important and, ideally, the material should be unsheltered such that 
rain water will remove airborne salts and other damaging debris. 
The information derived from this work has confirmed that Type 316 is the 
most appropriate grade of stainless steel for architectural applications, particularly 
where the atmosphere is relatively high in chloride ions. The long-term data 
obtained in marine locations were also instrumental in convincing operators of 
offshore oil and gas platforms of the benefits of using stainless steels for topside 
100 
- 
80- 
E 
-I 
:E; 60- 
40 
20- 
0 
- 
Semi- 
Rural 
industrial 
site 
site 
Heavy 
Marine 
industrial 
site 
site 
Figure 4.43 Atmospheric corrosion in Type 304 steel after 15 years exposure (unwashed 
samples) (After Needham 44) 
Table 4.21 
Type 
Pit density (pits/cm 2) 
Unsheltered 
Sheltered 
Washed 
Unwashed 
Washed 
Unwashed 
304 
3060 
3172 
3798 
4214 
315 
647 
728 
789 
890 
316 
364 
377 
419 
450 
317 
37 
46 
52 
67 
After Stone et al. 43 

Stainless steels 377 
Table 4.22 
~pe 
Maximum pit density (l~m) 
Unsheltered 
Sheltered 
Washed 
Unwashed 
Washed 
Unwashed 
304 
55 
315 
37 
316 
25 
317 
22 
After Stone et al. 43 
85 
88 
102 
39 
50 
72 
24 
46 
70 
18 
25 
24 
Figure 4.44 North Sea oil rig with accommodation module clad in ~pe 316 stainless 
steel (Courtesy of British Steel Stainless) 
architecture in place of traditional painted mild steel. An example is shown in 
Figure 4.44. In the North Sea, the environment is particularly aggressive and the 
high corrosion resistance of Type 316 is attractive. However, fire resistance is a 
very important requirement which rules out the use of organic materials and also 
raises questions as to the integrity of low melting point metals such as aluminium. 
In the event of fire, stainless steel is also preferable to painted mild steel because 
of its higher strength at elevated temperature and the elimination of the smoke 
or toxic hazards associated with burning paint. 
Because no corrosion allowance is required, stainless steel module walls can be 
up to 50% thinner than similar components in mild steel, resulting in significant 

378 Steels: Metallurgy and Applications 
weight savings. Whereas Type 316 stainless is considerably more expensive, the 
cost differential at float out is less than 15% compared with mild steel fabrica- 
tions. A cost analysis 43 indicates that this initial differential is eliminated after 
the first five years of operation due to the need for the first repaint on mild steel 
at that time. 
Based on this work, Type 316 stainless steel has now been used for wall 
cladding on accommodation modules, ventilation louvres and other architectural 
features on more than half the oil fields in the North Sea. 
References 
l, 
2. 
" 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
0 
0 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
41' 
Irvine, K.J., Llewellyn, D.T. and Pickering, F.B. JISI, July, 218 (1959). 
Andrews, K.W. Atlas of Continuous Cooling Transformation Diagrams, 
British Steel. 
Schneider, H. Foundry Trade Journal, 108, 562 (1960). 
Stainless Steels Specifications, 2nd edn, British Steel Stainless. 
Irvine, K.J., Crowe, D.J. and Pickering, F.B. JISI, 195, 386 (1960). 
Irvine, K.J. and Pickering, F.B. ISI Special Report 86, 34 (1964). 
McNeely, V.J. and Llewellyn, D.T. Sheet Metal Industries, 49, No. 1, 17 
(1972). 
Sedriks, A.J. Corrosion of Stainless Steels, John Wiley & Sons, New York 
(1979). 
Fontana, M.G. and Greene, N.D. Corrosion Engineering, 2nd edn, McGraw- 
Hill (1978). 
Copson, H.R. In Proc. 1st Int. Cong. Met. Corr. (London, 1962), Butter- 
worths, p. 328 (1962). 
Irvine, K.J., Llewellyn, D.T. and Picketing, F.B. JISI, October (1961). 
Lane, K.A.G. and Needham, N.G. Materials for Flue Gas Desulphurisation 
Plant No. 1 - Stainless Alloys and Coated Steels, British Steel Stainless. 
Steelresearch 84-85, British Steel, 23. 
Binder, W.R. and Spendelow, H.O. Trans. ASM, 43, 759 (1951). 
Gregory, E. and Knoth, R.J. Metal Progress, January, 114 (1970). 
Stahl und Eisen, 88, 153 (1968). 
Hooper, R.A.E., Llewellyn, D.T. and McNeely, V.J. Sheet Metal Industries, 
January, 49, No. 1, 26 (1972). 
Streicher, M.A. In Proc. Stainless Steels '77, Climax Molybdenum Co. 
Castro, R. and de Cadenet, J.J. Welding Metallurgy of Stainless and Heat 
Resisting Steels, Cambridge University Press. 
Gooch, T.G. In Proc. Stainless Steels '87 (York, 1987), The Institute of 
Metals, p. 53. 
Schaeffler, L.A. Metal Progress, 56, 680 (1949). 
DeLong, W.T. Metal Progress, 77, 98 (1960). 
Llewellyn, D.T., Bower, E.N. and Gladman, T. In Proc. Stainless Steels '87 
(York, 1987), The Institute of Metals, p. 62. 
Heiple, C.R. and Roper, J.R. Welding J., 60, 74 (1981). 

Stainless steels 379 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
40 
Leinonen, J.I. In Proc. Stainless Steels '87 (York, 1987), The Institute of 
Metals, p. 74. 
Kaufman, L. and Cohen, M. Progress in Metal Physics, Vol. 1, Pergamon 
Press. 
Patel, J.R. and Cohen, M. Acta Met., 1, 531 (1953). 
LleweUyn, D.T. and Murray, J.D. ISI Special Report 86, 197 (1964). 
Gladman, T., Hammond, J. and Marsh, F.W. Sheet Metal Industries, 51, 219 
(1974). 
Sanderson, G.P. and Llewellyn, D.T. JISI, August (1969). 
Wigley, D.A. Materials for Low Temperature Use, Engineering Design 
Guides, Oxford University Press. 
Wyatt, L.M. Materials of Construction for Steam Power Plant, Applied 
Science Publishers (1976). 
Cutler, A.J.B., Flatley, A. and Hay, K.A. The Metallurgist and Materials 
Technologist, 13, No. 2, 69 (1981). 
Townsend, R. In Proc. International Conference on Advances in Materials 
Technology for Fossil Power Plants (Chicago, 1987) (eds Viswanathan, R. 
and Jaffee, R.I.), ASM International. 
Flatley, T., Latham, E.P. and Morris, C.W. In Proc. Advances in Materials 
Technology for Fossil Power Plants (Chicago, 1987) (eds Viswanathan, R. 
and Jaffee, R.I.), ASM International. 
Shaw, R.D. and Elliott, D. In Proc. Stainless Steels '84 (GOteborg, 1984), 
The Institute of Metals, p. 395. 
King, K.J. arid Wilkinson, J. In Proc. Stainless Steels '87 (GOteborg, 1984), 
The Institute of Metals, p. 368. 
Guy, D.J. and Peace, J. In Proc. Steels in Mining and Minerals Handling 
Applications (London, 1990), The Institute of Metals, p. 58. 
Cook, W.T., Peace, J. and Fletcher, J.R. In Proc. Stainless Steels '87 (York, 
1987), The Institute of Metals, p. 307. 
Metcalfe, B., Whittaker, W.M. and Lenel, U.R. In Proc. Stainless Steels '87 
(York, 1987), The Institute of Metals, p. 300. 
Steelresearch 75, British Steel, p. 43 (1975). 
Hooper, R.A.E., Shemwell, K. and Hudson, R.M. Automotive Engineer, 
February (1985). 
Stone, P.G., Hudson, R.M. and Johns, D.R. In Proc. Stainless Steels '84 
(G6teborg, 1984), The Institute of Metals, p. 478. 
Needham, N.G. Steelresearch 87-88, British Steel, p. 49 (1988). 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Index 
Accelerated cooling, 151-2 
Acrylic coating, 94 
Adhesives, 109 
Aerospace industry, use of stainless steels, 
320 
Ageing see primary tempering 
Alloying elements 
effect on cold-working, 341-5 
effect on hardenability, 210- 213 
in high-speed steels, 254-6 
see also under individual names 
Alpha iron see ferrite 
Alumina, as additive, 240 
Aluminium 
in aluminium-killed steel, 43-4, 46-7 
as delta ferrite former, 299 
effect on inclusions, 166-7 
for grain size control, 147, 148-9 
as hot-dip coating, 93 
to promote secondary hardening, 319 
use in hot dip galvanizing process, 86 
Aluminium nitride, 44 
Aluminium-killed (AK) steel, 37, 39 
bake-hardening, 69 
batch-annealed, 43- 5 
continuously-annealed, 46-55 
solid solution-strengthened, 63-4 
Aluminium/zinc coatings, 92-3 
American Bureau of Shipping (ABS), 168 
American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI), 
numbering system, 301 
American Petroleum Institute (AI'I), 
specifications, 187-8 
Annealing process, 4-5, 218 
batch see batch annealing process 
continuous see continuous annealing 
process 
for high-speed steels, 256-7 
Architectural applications, stainless steels, 
374-8 
Architectural Polyester coating, 125 
Argon-oxygen decarburization (AOD) 
process, 292, 324, 333 
Armco 12SR, 374 
Ashby-Orowan model (precipitation 
strengthening), 144 
Austempering treatment, 204 
temperature, 76- 7 
Austenite (gamma iron), 6 
conditioned, 151 
duplex, 296 
formers, 298, 299- 301 
Austenite phase field, 295 
Austenitic manganese rail steels, 278-9 
Automotive applications 
control of distortion, 226 
corrosion resistant materials, 121 - 3 
exhausts/catalytic converters, 372-4 
low-carbon strip steel, 115 
micro-alloy forging steels, 281, 284 
need for weight reduction, 116-20 
ULSAB project, 118-21 
use of high strength steels, 116 
Autotempering, 312 
Bainite, 8, 11, 82 
Bake-hardening steels, 57, 66-7 
batch annealing process, 68-9 
continuous annealing process, 69-71 
Balanced (semi-killed) ingots, 147 
Batch annealing process, 4-5, 43-6 
bake-hardening steels, 68-9 
Battelle Drop Weight Tear test, 188 
Bauschinger effect, 188, 190 
Bearing steels, 199- 200, 201,249 
fatigue testing, 250-52 
Bendability, 31 
Bismuth, as free cutting additive, 239 
Blackplate, 98 
Body-in-white (BIW), 118 
Boilers 
layout and operation, 361-3 
selection of steels, 351,363-5 
Bonnazine 2000, 122 
Boron 
effect on hardenability, 213-17, 224-5 
for formability improvement, 50 
for strength improvement, 64 
Bottle unit (offshore structure), 178 
Box girder bridges, 182 
Brearley, Harry, 291 
Bridges see steel bridges 
Brittle fracture design, steel bridges, 
182-3 
Buckling effect, in pressing process, 30 
Building code requirements, multi-storey 
buildings, 185-7 
Buildings 
use of low-carbon strip steel, 123-5 
see also architectural applications 
Bulkheads, 173 

382 
Index 
C- Mn- V steels, 192 
Calcium 
for control of inclusions, 163, 166 
as desulphurizing agent, 166 
as free cutting additive, 239-40 
Can-making processes, 98-100 
Carbon 
as austenite former, 293, 299, 313 
effect on hardenability, 210-211 
effect on impact properties, 333 
effect on recrystallization, 17, 19 
effect on tempering resistance, 313 
in engineering steels, 201 
Carbon enrichment process, 6-8 
Carbon potential (carburizing process), 
220 
Carbonitriding process, 222 
Carburizing processes, 201, 219-21,223 
Carrier gas (carburizing process), 220 
Case carburizing, 219 
Cast steel nodes, offshore structures, 178 
Cast-to-cast variability (welding), 339 
Catalytic converters, 373-4 
Cementite, 7 
Certificates of Fitness, for offshore 
structures, 176 
Charpy test results, 152, 188-9, 351 
Charpy V notch energy 
multi-storey buildings, 186-7 
pipelines, 188-9 
steel bridges, 183-4 
Chromium 
effect on corrosion resistance, 163, 291 
effect on hardenability, 211 - 12 
effect on interlamellar spacing, 288 
effect on SCC behaviour, 330 
as ferrite former, 297 
in high-speed steels, 255 
in stainless steels, 293, 295-7, 297-9, 
333 
Chromium depletion theory, 322 
Chromium equivalent, 300 
Chromium/chromic oxide coatings, 98 
Cladding, for buildings see steel cladding 
Classification Societies (for shipbuilding 
materials), 167-8 
Clean steels, 163 
Clinchbonding, 109 
Clinching see lock forming technique 
Co-extruded tubing, 365 
Cobalt 
as austenite former, 299 
in high-speed steels, 255-6 
to promote secondary hardening, 319 
Coiling temperatures, 49, 51 
Cold reduction, micro-alloyed steels, 62-3 
Cold rolling process, 3-4 
Cold-forming, 19-25 
optimization of properties, 345- 8 
secondary embrittlement, 113-14 
stainless steels, 341-8 
zinc-coated steels, 89-90 
Colorcoat, 94 
Combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT), 363 
Compact strip production (CSP) process, 
5-6 
Composition factor (martensite formation), 
347 
Concrete reinforcement see reinforcing 
bars 
Continuous annealing process, 4-5, 
46-55 
bake-hardening steels, 69-71 
Continuous casting process, 3 
Continuous-cooling transformation (CCT) 
diagrams, 205-207 
Controlled cooling process, 138 
high carbon rod, 287 
reinforcing bars, 180-82 
Controlled processed bars, 284 
Controlled rolling process, 138, 139, 148, 
150-51,285, 286 
Controlled transformation treatment, 
stainless steels, 316-20 
Copper 
as austenite former, 293, 299 
effect on corrosion resistance, 163 
resistance to HIC, 196 
to promote secondary hardening, 319 
Copson curve, 329 
Cor-Ten steels, 158-61,367 
Corrosion resistance 
automotive requirements, 121 - 3 
developments, 291 - 3 
maraging steels, 263 
stainless steels, 321 - 30 
zinc-coated steels, 88-9 
see also stainless steels 
Corrosion/abrasion resistant grades, 
370-71 
Creuselso 42, 192 
CRIFF (uncoated steel), 121 
Critical cooling rate (CCR), 288 
Cross-over temperature, 355 
Cyclic stress-strain curve, 110, 112-13 
De Long diagram, 337 
Deep drawing, 348 
Deformation, during controlled rolling, 
150 
Deformation stored energy, 15-17 
Deformed (fibbed) reinforcing bars, 179 

Index 
383 
Delayed fracture, 31 
Delta ferrite, 297 
Direct quenching, 138, 152 
Dislocation density, 15 
Dislocation locking term, 140 
Dislocation strengthening, 140 
Distortion effects 
in carburized components, 223-6 
in pressing process, 30 
Domestic appliances, use of steel, 125 
Double lock seam, 106 
Draw and redraw (DRD) canmaking 
process, 100 
Drawability, 19 
Drawing and wall-ironing (DWI) 
canmaking process, 98-100 
Drums, steel, 125-6 
Dual-phase steels, 56, 71-6 
Duplex coatings, 122-3 
Durasteel, 122 
Dx 51D/DX 54D designation of grades, 91 
Ear height (drawing condition), 24-5 
Eckold press forming, 107 
Economizer tubing, 362, 365 
Electric resistance welding (ERW), 189 
Electro-galvanizing, 87 
Electrolytic coating, 87 
Elevated temperature behaviour 
boiler steels, 353-7 
stainless steels, 348-51 
475~ embrittlement, 315 
End grain attack, 325 
Energizers (for carburizing process), 219 
Engineering steels, 199- 200 
alloying elements, 200- 201 
carbon content, 201 
heat treatment, 200, 203 
metallurgy, 200-202 
Engineering strain, 21 
Engineering stress, 20 
Epoxy coating, 94 
Esshete 1250 grade, 357, 364 
Eta-carbide, 255 
Evaporator tubing, 361,363 
Expulsion (welding condition), 102 
Fastener applications, 108-109, 349 
Fatigue cracking, offshore structures, 176 
Fatigue cycling, hydrogen cylinders, 
248-9 
Fatigue damage, 109-10 
crack growth, 111 - 12 
crack initiation, 110-11 
threshold level, 112 
Fatigue testing, beating steels, 250-52 
Fe PO designation of grades, 37, 91 
Fe-C phase diagram, 6 
Feedwater pipes, 365 
Ferrite (alpha iron), 6 
grain size refinement, 8, 140-4 l, 
146-7 
Ferrite formers, 151,297- 300 
Ferrite phase field, 296-7 
Ferrite-martensite steels see dual-phase 
steels 
Ferrite-peadite steels, 141, 145-6 
Ferritic rolling, 55-6 
Ferrostan process, 96-8 
Fibre texture, 14 
Filler metals (welding), 337 
Finishing stage, hot rolling, 3 
Finite element modelling, 35-6 
Fish scaling, 128 
Flame hardening process, 222 
Flash butt welding, rail steels, 277 
Flower pattern (diagram), 35 
Flue gas desulphurization (FGD) 
equipment, 365-8 
steel selection, 331 
Food industry steels, 331 
Forming limit diagram (FLD), 28-9 
Forming process, 19 
finite element modelling, 35-6 
side effects, 29-33 
see also cold-forming 
Fossil-fired power plants, 361 
boiler layout and operation, 361-3 
flue gas desulphurization see flue gas 
desulphudzation equipment 
steel selection, 363-5 
Fracture, hydrogen sulphide-induced, 195 
Fracture appearance transition temperature 
(FATI'), 266 
Free cutting steels 
effect of additives, 236-40 
low-carbon, 240-41 
medium-carbon, 241-2 
FV 520B steel, 271 
Galfan, 93 
Galvalume, 92 
Galvanizing, 85-7 
Galvanneal, 121 
Galvanneal strip, 87 
Galvatite, 121 
Gamma iron see austenite 
Gamma-loop (austenite phase field), 295, 
296-7 
Garlic breath, 239 
Gas carburizing, 220 
Gas cylinders, 243 
design and manufacture, 245-8 

384 Index 
Gas cylinders (continued) 
hydrogen influence, 246-9 
steel composition, 243-5 
use of higher-strength steels, 249 
Gas nitriding, 221 
Gas-knives, 86 
Grain refinement, 8, 10, 49, 60-61 
effect of size on hardenability, 209 
Greenhouse gas, 116 
Hadfields Manganese Steel, 279 
Hall-Petch equation, 8, 140, 145, 272 
Hardenability 
definition, 199, 200, 207 
factors affecting, 209-17 
testing, 207-209 
Heat exchanger steels, 331 
High alloy stainless steels 
austenitic/duplex grades, 330-32 
ferritie grades, 332-4 
High-carbon wire rod, 286 
drawing processes, 287 
micro-alloy additions, 287-8 
rolling and conditioning, 286-7 
High-speed steels, 254 
alloying elements, 254-6 
heat treatments, 256-8 
specifications, 258 
uses, 258 
High-strength low-alloy (HSLA) steels, 
58-63, 137, 139, 202 
High-strength steels, 36, 56-8 
for automotive applications, 116-18 
Higher strength steels 
for gas cylnders, 249 
for ship construction, 170-71 
Hiproof-type compositions, 330 
HNX gas, for annealing process, 4 
Hogging (deck in tension) condition, 172 
Hole expansion effect, 31 
index, 31 
Homogeneity index, 31 
Hot dip coating, 5 
aluminium, 93 
galvanizing (HDG), 85-7 
Hot rolling process, 3, 148 
Hot shortness (cracking), 237 
Houses, steel-framed, 123- 5 
Huey test, 322 
Hybor 304L, 369 
Hydraulic bulge test, 20 
Hydroforming technique, 34 
Hydrogen annealing process, 4 
Hydrogen cylinders, fatigue cycling, 
248-9 
Hydrogen embrittlement theory, 329 
Hydrogen sulphide, effects of, 195-6 
Hydrogen-induced cracking (HIC), 195, 
336 
Hyflow 420R, 371 
Hyplus 29, 192 
Hyproof, 316 
Impact properties, changes over extended 
temperature range, 351 
Inclusion shape control, 163, 166 
Induction hardening process, 222, 223 
Interface failure, welding, 102 
Intergranular corrosion, 314, 322-6 
International Association of Classification 
Societies (IACS), 168 
International Institute of Welding (IIW), 
weldability formula, 189 
Interphase precipitation, 143 
interstitial-free (IF) steels, 39 
bake-hardening, 69- 71 
solid solution-strengthened, 64-5 
Inverse pole figure, 12 
Iron-chromium alloys, 291,295-7 
Iron-chromium-nickel alloys, 297-9 
Iron/zinc coating, 87 
Isothemal transformation diagrams, 
203-205 
Izod test results, 351 
Jerkontoret (JK) test (inclusions content), 
252 
Joining techniques 
mechanical, 106-109 
organic-coated steel, 94-5 
strip steel, 100-101 
using fasteners, 108-109 
see also welding processes 
Jominy end quench test, 207-208 
Knife-line attack, 324 
Ladle steelmaking, 253 
Lamellar tearing, 163 
Lankford value see strain ratio 
Laser seam welding, 105-106 
Laves phase, 374 
Lead, as free cutting additive, 202, 238-9 
Liberty ships, 137 
Limiting drawing ratio, 19 
Linepipe 
manufacturing process, 189 
specification, 189-90 
Lintels, prefabricated, 125 
Lloyd's Rules, 172- 3 
Lock forming technique, 106 
Low alloy steels, machinable, 242 

Index 
385 
Low interstitial ferfitic grades, 292 
Low-carbon free cutting steels, 240-42 
Low-carbon strip steel 
behaviour in use, 109-114 
cold-forming behaviour, 19- 25 
hot dip aluminium coating, 93 
joining methods, 100-109 
manufacture, 36 
metallurgical principles, 6-19 
organic-coated, 93-5 
other uses, 125-8 
overview, 1-2 
prices, 95 
processing, 2-6 
use in automotive applications, 
115-123 
use in buildings, 123-5 
work-hardening coefficient, 25-7 
zinc-coating, 85-93 
see also tinplate 
Low-carbon structural steels 
corrosion resistant, 153, 158, 158-63 
grain size control, 138-9 
inclusion shape control, 163, 166 
metallurgical principles, 138-9 
overview, 137-8 
prices, 153 
rolling]thermomechanical processing, 
147-52 
standard specifications, 152-3 
strengthening mechanisms, 139-47 
Low-strength steels, 37-9 
Interstitial-free (IF), 39-43 
Low-temperature applications, 357-61 
Lttders lines (strain markings), 86 
Machinability, 202, 232 
low-alloy steels, 242 
stainless steels, 242-3 
testing, 236 
Magnesium, as desulphurizing agent, 166 
Manganese 
as alloying element, 45, 47, 64, 202 
as austenite former, 293, 299 
effect on corrosion resistance, 163 
effect on hardenability, 211 - 12 
effect on interlamellar spacing, 288 
effect on strength, 147 
effect on toughness, 195 
as nickel replacement, 316 
Maraging steels, 260 
commercial grades, 261-3 
corrosion behaviour, 263 
metallurgy, 260-61 
uses, 263-4 
Marangoni convection, 339 
Martempering treatment, 203 
Martensite, 8, 11-12 
start/finish temperatures, 12 
strain-induced, 294, 343, 349, 351 
Maurer, Eduard, 291 
Mayari R steel, 161 
Micro-alloy steels, 58-63, 137, 147 
alloying elements, 139, 142 
cold-reduction, 62-3 
commercial uses, 281-4 
forging grade, 202, 279-80 
high-carbon wire rod, 287-8 
metallurgy, 280-81 
VANARD grades, 283 
MIG (metal inert gas) welding, 106 
mild steels, 36, 37-9 
minimum effective bridge temperature 
(MEBT), 183 
Mn-Mo-Cu steel, 192 
Molybdenum 
as alloying element, 201 
for corrosion resistance, 314, 376 
as delta ferrite former, 299 
effect on hardenability, 211-12 
effect on intergranular corrosion, 324 
effect on SCC behaviour, 330 
effect on tempering resistance and 
hardenability, 218-19, 312 
in engineering steels, 199 
in high-speed steels, 255 
promotion of delta ferfite, 293 
promotion of secondary hardening, 319 
in stainless steels, 333 
for temper embrittlement resistance, 
219 
Muffler grade steel, 372, 373 
Multi-storey buildings, 184 
building code requirements, 185-7 
Multiphase steels see TRIP steels 
Multiplying factor, hardenability, 212, 216 
n value see work-hardening coefficient 
National Association of Corrosion 
Engineers (NACE), 195 
HIC test, 195 
Nickel 
as austenite former, 297 
effect on corrosion behaviour, 329 
effect on hardenability, 211-12 
in engineering steels, 199 
as ferrite strengthener, 219 
resistance to HIC, 196 
in stainless steels, 293, 297-9, 333 
Nickel equivalent, 301 
Nicuage 1N787, 192 
Nimonic, 80,4, 269, 271 

386 
Index 
Niobium 
as alloying element, 8, 10, 39, 41, 61, 
64, 70, 285 
as carbide former, 324 
effect on corrosion resistance, 374 
effect on tempering resistance, 313-14 
for grain size control, 148-9 
as micro-alloying element, 139, 142 
prevention of chromium carbide 
formation, 315 
Niobium carbonitride, 9-10 
Nitric Acid Grade (NAG) steels, 369 
Nitriding process, 221-2, 223 
Nitro-carburizing see carbonitriding 
process 
Nitrogen 
as alloying element, 43 
as austenite former, 293, 299, 313 
as cause of chromium depletion, 326 
effect on impact properties, 146, 333 
effect on recrystallization, 17, 19 
effect on tempering resistance, 313 
as nickel replacement, 316 
to increase stress values, 316 
Nizec (zinc/nickel coating), 87, 122 
Noise reduction, sound deadened steel, 
120, 126 
Normalize-free products, 285 
Normalized steels, 284-5 
Normalizing process, 138-9 
Nuclear fuel reprocessing plant, 368-9 
Offshore structures, 175-6 
cast steel nodes, 178 
Certificates of Fitness, 176 
design considerations, 176-7 
fatigue cracking, 176 
steel selection, 177-8 
steel specifications, 178 
tubular frame construction, 176- 7 
use of stainless steels, 376-8 
Orange peel effect, 348 
Organic-coating 
Durasteel, 122 
low-carbon strip steel, 93-5 
Orientation distribution function, 12-15 
Orientation textures, 12 
Overageing process, 47, 53 
Oxalic acid test, 323 
Pack carburizing, 219- 20 
Paint stoving, 66 
Passive layer/film, 291,321 
Patenting process, 286 
Pearlite, 7, 146 
Pearlitic steels, 272-4, 287 
Peierls stress, 272 
Perforation corrosion, 121 
Petch equation see HaU-Petch equation 
Petroleum industry steels, 332 
Phosphorus 
as alloying element, 56, 57, 64 
effect on corrosion resistance, 163 
effect on toughness, 142 
Pickle lines, 3 
Pinholing (corrosion attack), 326 
Pipelines 
fittings, 190-92 
property requirements, 187-9 
sour gas service, 195-6 
specifications, 187-8 
toughness requirement, 188 
see also linepipe 
Pitting corrosion, 314, 326-7 
Pittsburgh lock seam, 106 
Plastic coating see organic-coating 
Plug failure, welding, 102 
Polar thickness strain, 24, 27 
Pole figure, 12 
Polyester coatings, 94, 125 
Precipitation strengthening, 8, 139 
of stainless steels, 330 
strengthening mechanisms, 142-4 
Press joining, 106-108 
Pressure vessel steels, 351-3 
Prices see steel, prices 
Primary tempering, 318-19 
PVC Organosol coating, 94 
PVC Plastisol coating, 94, 125 
PVF2 coating, 94, 125 
Quenching treatments, 4, 220- 21 
R factor (rupture ductility), 269 
r value see strain ratio 
Rail steels, 274 
austenitic manganese, 278-9 
flash butt welding, 277 
high-strength grades, 276 
specifications, 275 - 7 
wear resistance, 277-8 
Recrystallization 
during controlled rolling, 150- 51 
stop temperature, 150 
texture changes, 10, 16-19 
Red hardness, 255 
Reinforcing. bars, 179 
cold-twisted, 180 
controlled-cooled, 180-82 
standard specifications, 179 
traditional steels, 180 
Repassivation process, 321 

Index 
387 
Residual elements, in engineering steels, 
200 
Resistance seam welding, 104-105 
Resistance spot welding, 101 - 102 
high-strength steels, 102-104 
zinc-coated steels, 104 
Retained austenite steels see TRIP steels 
Rimming steel, 47, 49, 67 
Rivbonding, 109 
Rivets, self-piercing, 108-109 
Rockwell (HRC) hardness testing, 207 
Roll forming technique, 34-5 
Roughing stage, hot rolling, 3 
SAC test, 208-209 
Sacrificial protection, 85 
Sagging (bottom in tension) condition, 172 
Salt bath carburizing, 220 
Salt bath nitriding, 221 
SAM counting technique (inclusions), 
252, 253 
Scantlings (web plate thickness), 171 
Schaeffler diagram, modified, 300 
Sea Gem collapse, 176 
Secondary cold work embrittlement 
(SCWE), 57, 113 
test procedures, 113-14 
Secondary hardening reaction, 219 
Selenium, as free cutting additive, 239 
Semi-killed steel, 147 
Sensitization (of stainless steels), 322, 337 
Shape fixability, 29 
Ship construction 
choice of steels, 167-9 
design considerations, 171 - 5 
higher strength steels, 170-71 
standard-strength steels, 167-70 
Side wear, rails, 278 
Sigma phase, 295 
Silicon 
as alloying element, 64, 92 
as delta ferrite former, 293, 299 
effect on corrosion resistance, 163 
effect on inteflamellar spacing, 92, 288 
effect on SCC behaviour, 329 
Silicone Polyester coating, 125 
Skin passing see temper rolling 
Slab-reheating stage, 148- 9 
Slamming (major impact loads), 176 
Solid solution-strengthened steels, 8, 56, 
62, 63-5, 139, 296 
strengthening mechanisms, 141-2 
Solidification cracking, 337 
Solubility product, 8-9 
Solute drag, 10, 150 
Solution treatment temperature control, 
stainless steels, 317-18 
Soudronic welding process, 104 
Sound deadened steel, 120, 126-7 
Sour gas service, pipelines, 195-6 
Spall (fatigue pit), 251 
Spangle (zinc coating), 86 
Specifications see standard specifications 
Splash (welding condition), 102 
Spot welding, 101 - 102 
Springback effect, 30 
Stacking fault energy, 329, 343 
Stainless steels 
at elevated and sub-zero temperatures, 
348-51 
austenitic, 315-16 
brushed finish, 375 
cold working, 341-8 
commercial grades, 301-20 
composition-structure relationships, 
295-301 
controlled transformation treatment, 
316-20 
corrosion resistance, 314-15, 315-16, 
321-30 
ferritic, 314-15, 338 
high strength, 311-14 
high-alloy see high-alloy stainless steels 
machinable, 242-3 
martensitic, 302, 311-14, 336-8 
metallurgical principles, 293-5 
overview, 291 - 3 
prices, 320- 21, 332 
stabilized, 315, 324 
welding, 334-41 
Standard specifications 
BS, 970, 227-9 
BS, 1113 353, 354 
BS, 1449 37, 302 
BS, 4360, 152 
BS, 4449 179, 180 
BS, 5400, 182-4 
BS, 5500, 353 
BS, 5950, 185-7 
BS EN, 10025, 153 
BS EN, 10083 229, 230-31 
BS EN, 10088, 302 
BS EN, 10113, 153 
BS EN, 10130, 37 
BS EN, 10137, 153 
BS EN, 10142, 90 
BS EN, 10155, 163 
engineering steels, 227-32 
free-cutting steels, 228 
high-speed steels, 258 
for hot dip galvanized products, 90 

388 
Index 
Standard specifications (continued) 
for linepipe, 189-90 
low-carbon structural steels, 152-3 
mild/low-strength steels, 37 
for offshore structures, 178 
for pipelines, 187-8 
for pressure vessels, 351-3 
rail steels, 275 
reinforcing bars, 179 
for ship construction, 168-70 
stainless steels, 228-9, 301-302 
for steel bridges, 183-4 
for steel-framed buildings, 185-7 
weathering steels, 153, 163 
weldable structural steels, 152 
zinc-coated steels, 90-91 
Steam drums, 362, 365 
Steam headers, 363, 364 
Steam pipes, 363, 364-5 
Steam power turbines, 264-5 
generator end rings, 268 
HP and IP rotors, 265-6 
LP rotors, 266-8 
turbine blades, 271, 311 
turbine bolts, 268-70, 311 
turbine casings, 265 
Steel bridges, 182 
brittle fracture design, 182-3 
standard specifications, 183-4 
Steel cladding, for buildings, 124-5 
Steel drums, 125-6 
Steel lintels, 125 
Steel prices 
engineering steels, 232, 235 
high-alloy steels, 332 
low-carbon strip steel, 95 
nickel superalloys, 332 
stainless steels, 320-21 
Steel-framed buildings, 123-4, 184, 185 
Stelvetite, 94 
Stitch folding technique, 106 
Strain, 20-21 
Strain ageing, 33 
Strain markings, cold forming, 86 
Strain ratio, 20, 21-4 
strain-induced martensite, 294, 343, 349, 
351 
Strauss, Benno, 291 
Strauss test, 322 
Strengthening mechanisms 
dislocation strengthening, 140 
ferrite grain refinement, 140-41 
precipitation strengthening, 142-4 
solid solution strengthening, 141 - 2 
transformation strengthening, 144 
work hardening, 140 
Stress see engineering stress; true stress 
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC), 268, 
328-30, 333 
see also sulphide stress corrosion 
cracking 
Stress-life curve, 111 
Stretchability, 19, 20 
Stretcher strain markings, 33 
Strip steel see low-carbon strip steel 
Structural steels see low-carbon structural 
steels 
Sub-zero temperature behaviour, stainless 
steels, 348-51 
Submerged arc welding (SAW), 189 
Sulfinuz process, 221 
Sulphide stress corrosion cracking 
(SSCC), 195 
Sulphur 
as alloying element, 41, 43, 202 
effect on weldability, 339, 340-41 
as free cutting additive, 237-8 
Superheater/reheater tubing, 362, 364 
Surface roughness, 33 
Surface-hardening treatments, 219- 26 
Tailored blanks, laser-welded, 33-4 
Taylor Tool Life test, 236 
Tellurium, as free cutting additive, 239 
Tempcore (controlled cooling) process, 
180-82 
Temper rolling, 5, 33 
Tempering process, 217-19 
Tensile properties, changes over extended 
temperature range, 348-51 
Terne-coating, 123 
Ternex coated steel, 123 
Texture characterization, 12-15 
Thermomechanical processing, 138, 148 
Thin slab casting, 5-6 
Thin strip casting, 6 
Three-piece can-making process, 98 
Through-hardening steels, 201, 233-4 
Ti6A 14V, 271 
TIG (tungsten inert gas) welding, 106, 338 
Time- temperature-transformation (TIT) 
diagrams see isothemal 
transformation diagrams 
Tinplate 
can-making processes, 98-100 
electrolytic, 97-8 
manufacture, 96-8 
Titanium 
as alloying element, 8, 39, 41 
as carbide former, 324 
corrosion resistance, 374 
effect on bake hardening, 70-71 

Index 
389 
effect on fatigue performance, 251 
effect on recrystallization, 10 
for grain size control, 148-9 
as micro-alloying element, 139, 142, 
281 
prevention of chromium carbide 
formation, 314-15 
promotion of delta ferrite, 293 
for reduction of intergranular attack, 
326 
for strength increase, 61, 64 
Transformation-induced plasticity (TRIP), 
57-8, 71 
Transformation-strengthened steels, 
10-11, 71, 139, 144, 151 
TRIP retained austenite steels, 76-81, 84 
True strain, 20- 21 
True stress, 20-21 
Tubular frame construction, offshore 
structures, 176-7 
Tungsten 
as delta ferfite former, 299 
in high-speed steels, 255 
Turbine blades, 271 
Turbine bolts, 268-9 
Turbine casings, 265 
Turbine generator end rings, 268 
Turbine rotors, 265-8 
Type, 304 stainless steels, 370, 373, 375 
Type, 310 steels, 365 
Type, 315 steels, 375 
Type, 316 steels, 364, 375, 376 
Type, 317 steels, 375 
Type, 321 steel, 369 
Type, 409 stainless steels, 370, 373 
Type, 1210 steels, 371 
ULSAB (ultra light steel auto body) 
project, 118-21 
Ultra-high-strength steels, 82-5 
Ultra-low carbon (ULC) steels, 39, 41 
bake-hardening, 69- 71 
Unisteel Bearing Fatigue Rig testing, 250 
Vacuum arc degassing (VAD), 39, 253 
Vacuum arc remelting (VAR), 253 
Vacuum carbon deoxidation (VCD) 
treatment, 268 
Vacuum degassing, 252-3 
Vacuum induction melting (VIM), 253 
Vacuum melting process 
(Airco-Temescal), 332 
Vacuum oxygen process (VOD), 292 
Vanadium 
as alloying element, 8, 61, 71,201,285 
as delta ferrite former, 299 
effect on hardenability, 211 - 13 
effect on intedamellar spacing, 288 
effect on strength, 147 
effect on tempering resistance and 
hardenability, 218-19, 312 
in high-speed steels, 255-6 
as micro-alloying element, 139, 142, 
28O 
for precipitation strengthening, 149 
VANARD grades, micro-alloy steels, 283 
Vickers (HV) hardness testing, 207 
Vitreous enamelling process, 127- 8 
Wall-ironing operation, 99 
Wear-resistant materials, 370-71 
rail steels, 275, 276, 277-8 
Weathering grade steels, 142 
for FGD process, 367 
Weld decay, 323 
Weld penetration, 338-41 
Weldability formulae, 189 
Weldability lobes, 102 
Weldbonding, 109 
Welding processes 
electric resistance, 189 
for stainless steels, 334-41 
for strip steel, 101 - 106 
for structural steels, 185 
submerged arc, 189 
zero ferrite electrodes, 337 
White rust, 86, 89 
Wire drawing, 287 
Wire rod, high carbon see high-carbon 
wire rod 
Work hardening 
stainless steels, 341,343-5 
strengthening mechanisms, 140 
Work-hardening coefficient, 20, 25-7 
Wrinkling effect, in pressing process, 30 
Yield strength, 272-.4 
Zalutite, 92 
Zero ferrite electrodes, 337 
Zinc-coated steels 
alloy coatings, 91-93 
cold-forming behaviour, 89-90 
corrosion resistance, 88-9 
performance in aqueous media, 89 
production methods, 85-7 
resistance spot welding, 104 
standard specifications, 90-91 
zinc/nickel coating, 87 
Zincal Duplex, 122 
Zirconium, corrosion resistance, 374 

Printed in the United Kingdom 
by Lightning Source UK Ltd. 
118436UK00001 B/87 
II!!!U!l 
IJIll! JUl!!!lr 

