1
Teachers College Record  Volume 122, 090313, September 2020, 32 pages
Copyright © by Teachers College, Columbia University
0161-4681
The Better Book Approach for Education 
Research and Development
JAMES W. STIGLER
University of California at Los Angeles
JI Y. SON
California State University, Los Angeles
KAREN B. GIVVIN
University of California at Los Angeles
ADAM B. BLAKE
University of California at Los Angeles
LAURA FRIES
University of California at Los Angeles
STACY T. SHAW
University of California at Los Angeles
MARY C. TUCKER
University of California at Los Angeles
Background/Context: Despite advances in the learning sciences, a persistent gap remains 
between research and practice.
Purpose/Objective/Research Question/Focus of Study: In this project, we develop and try 
out a new approach to education research and development in which researchers, designers/
developers, and instructors collaborate to continuously improve an online interactive textbook.
Intervention/Program/Practice: Using a “learn by doing” strategy, we first created a highly 
instrumented online textbook for introductory statistics. The design of our online book is 
based on the practicing-connections hypothesis: Instead of learning individual “bits” of 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
2
information and then hoping that learners end up with transferable knowledge, we designed a 
curriculum to engage students in repeated practice of the connections—between core concepts, 
representations, and the world—that make knowledge transferable.
The textbook includes more than 1,200 formative assessments, generating large amounts 
of data relevant to both the process and outcomes of college students learning of statis-
tics. Using the affordances of technology, we then began working to apply routines and 
practices from open software development (Git) and improvement science (Toyota Kata) 
to build an improvement community focused on continuous improvement of the online 
book. We also are building a technology platform (CourseKata) to publish the book from 
markdown files stored on GitHub; distribute the book through widely used learning man-
agement systems; collect detailed student data and deliver it back to instructors and, in a 
de-identified form, researchers; and manage experiments that randomly assign different 
versions of content to different students within a single class, and then assess the effects 
on students’ learning.
Research Design:  Our research design is a mixed-methods design research and 
improvement study. We gauge success through measures of process, outcome, and transfer.
Conclusions/Recommendations: We are at only the beginning of what we see as a lengthy 
project. We are encouraged, however, by our progress, and invite others—including 
researchers, designers/developers, and instructors—to join us in our improvement 
community focused on improving the transferable learning of basic statistical 
concepts at scale.
Applying research to the improvement of education is a notoriously 
hard thing to do. Despite huge advances in our fundamental under-
standing of human learning, harvesting the potential of these advances 
to yield sustainable improvements in student outcomes has proved an 
elusive goal. More recent attempts to remedy this situation—one thinks 
of the What Works Clearinghouse, and the view of education science em-
bodied in that effort—have had little effect on the overall education 
landscape. Of course, all of this was predicted by Dewey in 1929, who 
foresaw a more modest role for scientific research in the improvement 
of education:
No conclusion of scientific research can be converted into 
an immediate rule of educational art. For there is no edu-
cational practice whatever which is not highly complex; 
that is to say, which does not contain many other conditions 
and factors than are included in the scientific finding . . .  
The value of the science . . . resides in the enlightenment and 
guidance it supplies to observation and judgment of actual sit-
uations as they arise. (pp. 19 and 31)

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
3
Although Dewey’s view has proven accurate up to now, there are 
some signs, at least to us, that we might be ready to take a major step 
forward in our ability to successfully apply science to the improvement 
of education and learning. In this article, we start by reviewing some 
of the reasons why, up to now, this application of science has proven so 
difficult. We start with a dose of reality, in other words, reviewing what 
makes this endeavor hard. Then, based on a realistic understanding 
of why it’s hard, we propose a new approach for applying science to 
improving education. This new approach does not ignore the realities 
but does leverage advances in several fields—technology especially—in 
a somewhat novel way. Having worked to develop and apply this ap-
proach in a preliminary way, we report what we have learned so far 
about how to carry out this process.
WHY IT IS HARD
It seems like each new generation of researchers and practitioners 
needs to discover anew what Dewey observed in 1929. We often hear 
people remark, in consternation, that given how much we’ve learned 
about the science of learning, it’s a shame that educators don’t apply 
what we know in the classroom or in the design of educational pro-
grams. The fact is, they often do try, yet fail to get the results they expect 
based on the laboratory science. Here are some of the reasons for this.
TEACHING IS A COMPLEX SYSTEM
Research findings in the learning sciences mostly come from carefully 
designed and controlled laboratory studies. Individual studies seek to 
isolate the effects of specific variables, assessing the effect of each on 
learning outcomes. But education, where we hope research findings 
will apply, is quite different from the laboratory. Education is a com-
plex system with many interacting parts: teachers, students, content, 
curriculum, homework, assessments, culture, belief systems, motiva-
tions, and so on. Even if a variable makes a reliable difference in the 
lab, it may have little or no effect in the context of such a complex 
system. Ideally, we would study learning in real settings over long peri-
ods of time; learning in complex domains usually takes weeks, months, 
or years, and is not well modelled by a one-hour lab experiment. Yet 
finding ways to study teaching and learning in more ecologically valid 
settings is fraught with challenges.

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
4
TEACHING IS HIGHLY CONTEXTUAL
Even well-designed curriculum materials will produce wide variation 
in student outcomes, both across classes and across individuals with-
in classes. Figuring out how to make any set of materials work for all 
students—and to reduce variation among students to an acceptable 
range—is largely a problem of implementation: adjusting the program to 
fit the specific context. This is what skilled teachers do. Yet, though skilled 
teachers innovate every day, we have no means of capturing what they 
learn so that it can be shared with others.
EDUCATION R&D IS HIGHLY SILOED
Contributors with at least three kinds of expertise are required to produce 
effective educational programs: researchers, designers/developers, and 
practitioners on the ground. Currently, these kinds of expertise are repre-
sented by three distinct groups of people, each working largely indepen-
dently of the others. Although there are many reasons for this divide, it is 
clear that isolation holds us back. Researchers are well equipped to pro-
vide theories and methods for addressing the implementation problems 
identified by practitioners, and for revising their theories accordingly. Yet, 
by the time a program is turned over to the practitioners, researchers are 
no longer involved. Meanwhile, developers have the technical skills to 
build and deploy learning technologies at scale but rarely have access to 
the type of “on the ground” insights needed to guide meaningful improve-
ment on a continuous basis.
Many practitioners attempt to perform all three roles: to develop 
their own materials and carry out independent research projects 
within the confines of their classrooms, but by and large these results 
do not get shared with the broader profession—and sometimes not 
even with the teacher’s own school site. It is an unrealistic expectation 
that a teacher be able to perform all three professional roles and do 
their job well.
TEACHING IS A CULTURAL ACTIVITY
Cross-cultural research brings us face to face with another incontrovert-
ible fact: not only is teaching a complex system, but it is also a cultural 
activity. It is governed by daily routines that evolve over long periods of 
time, are supported by widely shared beliefs, and are highly resistant 
to change (Gallimore, 1996). This makes innovative educational ap-
proaches or programs very hard to evaluate. Unless you can implement 
a program and sustain it at some scale, you cannot even study whether, 

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
5
and how, it is effective (Ostrow, Heffernan, & Williams, 2017). And the 
more innovative a program is, the less likely it is to fit with existing cul-
tural routines, and thus the more difficult it is to get it up, running, and 
implemented at scale.
SUMMARY
All of these factors together make it very hard for science as we know 
it to yield reliable improvements in student outcomes. The most in-
novative programs involve a redesign of the system, not just one com-
ponent part; massive effort is often required just to get such programs 
off the ground.
WHAT HAS CHANGED
With this dire assessment before us, we nevertheless find ourselves with 
renewed optimism that we can exceed Dewey’s expectations. Why? 
Because the world has changed. We have learned a lot, and technology 
has revolutionized our view of what is possible, both for research and 
for education.
TECHNOLOGY
The advent of online learning is a game changer in terms of the affor-
dances it provides for research and development in education (Stigler 
& Givvin, 2017). Research on teaching and learning has long been 
hampered by the organization of schooling. When one teacher teaches 
a course to dozens or hundreds of students, and when that teacher is 
free to construct his or her own curriculum and instruction, it is hard 
to tie student outcomes to specific features of the instruction.
Putting learning resources online—whether they are implemented 
fully online or in blended learning environments—enables us to do 
things we simply could not do before. Let us consider our better book ap-
proach. First, students’ interactions with learning objects generate data 
that tell us what students are doing as they work their way through the 
book—something we never could know with a hard-copy textbook. By 
embedding formative assessments inline with the instructional materi-
als we can get new insights into how students interpret the materials—
even specific text passages or questions—which can be used to guide 
improvements in the online materials.
Second, because at least part of the instruction is delivered to stu-
dents at their computers or mobile devices, individual students—
even those who are members of the same face-to-face class—can be 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
6
randomly assigned to get different versions of the content. This makes 
it possible to do experimental research in the context of real educa-
tional settings, something that was nearly impossible to do before us-
ing research designs that required random assignment of schools and 
classrooms, not individual students, to different instructional conditions 
(Ostrow et al., 2017).
Third, online materials, because they are easy to update, provide a means 
of storing what we learn through efforts to improve the program (cf. Morris 
& Hiebert, 2011). If practitioners, for example, find a paragraph that leaves 
students mystified, they can work to rewrite it, and perhaps even consult with 
learning scientists to help them craft a solution. If their rewrite is judged 
better based on testing, it can replace the original paragraph and be avail-
able immediately to the next group of students. In this way, online learning 
promotes dialogue between researchers, developers, and practitioners, and 
offers a novel setting for collaboration and innovation.
ADVANCES IN IMPROVEMENT SCIENCE
At the same time as these technological advances, we have seen advances 
as well in methodologies for improving complex systems. The roots of im-
provement science grew out of the work of Deming, Juran, and Shewhart 
after World War II (Kenney, 2008), the first to apply statistical process con-
trol to the improvement of complex systems. These ideas became the basis 
of the lesson study movement in Japanese primary and middle schools 
(Lewis, 2015).
In recent years, we have seen these ideas popularized by authors such as 
Mike Rother in his book Toyota Kata (2009), developed further (Langley et 
al., 2009), and applied to health care (Kenney, 2008). Most recently, these 
ideas have taken hold in education (Bryk, Gomez, Grunow, & LeMahieu, 
2015; Lewis, 2015). Recognizing that teaching and learning are complex 
systems has naturally led to an interest in methodologies for improving 
the performance of such systems, and we now have success stories to vali-
date the approach in education (Lewis, 2015).
NEW PROTOCOLS FOR COLLABORATION
If improvement science methodologies have the potential to lead to incre-
mental improvements in online learning resources, wouldn’t it be great 
to involve large communities of researchers, designers/developers, and 
practitioners in making such improvements? Yes. But if we do get more 
people involved, how do we keep them all working toward the same goals? 
And how do we integrate myriad changes in the materials without creating 
an incoherent mess?

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
7
Pioneers of the open software movement have created solutions to this 
exact problem (Nielsen, 2011). Thanks to distributed version control sys-
tems (DVCS; e.g., Git, Mercurial), thousands of software engineers can 
contribute to the development of a common software project and track 
their changes. DVCS, and the concepts that underlie them, give us new 
tools and processes for implementing continuous improvements in edu-
cational materials. Bringing together these advances and applying them to 
the problem of education research and development (R&D) is the focus 
of our current work and the goal of this article.
THE BETTER BOOK APPROACH
Starting in 2017, we set out to leverage these recent advances to develop 
a new approach for education R&D, one that would lead to the continu-
ous improvement of educational programs over time. Our strategy was to 
“learn by doing.” Our vision: to build a better book. There are many layers to 
this phrase, which we will lay out in some detail before reporting on our 
progress and learning so far.
LEARN BY DOING: BUILDING A BETTER INTRODUCTORY 
STATISTICS BOOK
As part of our learn-by-doing strategy, we decided to work on creating, 
implementing, improving, and scaling a college-level course. We are, pri-
marily, researchers. Our research focus is on how students come to un-
derstand complex domains—things that are hard to learn. We decided to 
focus on introductory statistics because it is a complex domain, difficult 
to learn, taught in every institution and across many departments, and 
critical for navigating the modern world. Statistics, especially at the intro-
ductory level, is generally taught as a series of isolated concepts and pro-
cedures: p, t-test, F, chi-square, ANOVA, regression, and so on. Although 
students are somewhat successful at learning these “bits” of knowledge, 
they often fail to grasp the coherent structure that underlies the field of 
statistics and data analysis, resulting in knowledge that doesn’t easily trans-
fer to new situations.
Our innovative statistics curriculum—which we set forth in detail in 
Son, Blake, Fries, and Stigler (in preparation)—is grounded in research 
in the learning sciences. Briefly stated, we base our course on what we 
have called the practicing connections hypothesis (Fries, Son, Givvin, & Stigler, 
in press) with the explicit aim of fostering transferable learning.
The practicing connections hypothesis, which we as researchers seek 
to investigate, suggests that we might produce more flexible, transfer-
able knowledge if we consistently give students opportunities to practice 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
8
the connections that make statistics a coherent domain (Fries et al., in 
press). To begin this work, we decided to test our ideas by building an in-
novative introductory statistics course in which we teach students, from 
the beginning, to understand all of statistics in terms of the General 
Linear Model.
BUSINESS AS USUAL
It is worth noting, at the outset, how a research-based theory such as 
the practicing connections hypothesis might currently be expected 
to find its way into educational practice. As pointed out previously, 
researchers, designers/developers, and instructors currently work in 
silos (see Figure 1). As researchers, our role is to develop knowledge 
and theories about how people learn. We conduct studies—often in 
the laboratory—and then publish them in academic journals. Our ear-
nest hope is that someone who creates educational curriculum and 
materials might read our articles and put our ideas to good use. But in 
general, that’s not our job as researchers.
Figure 1. Business as usual—A sequential process
Designers and developers of educational curricula and materials 
are often quite interested in research but not in the details. They are 
looking for exactly what Dewey warned they would not find: a “rule 
of educational art” that they can adhere to as they build their prod-
ucts. But Dewey was right, and so there is slippage from research to 
development. And researchers who study teaching and learning are 
generally not in the same departments as the professors who develop 
educational materials, and so aren’t able to assist in translating their 
research into products.
Once products get launched, they are essentially sold (or distributed 
free) in “as is” condition for practitioners to implement. With a few ex-
ceptions, there are no feedback loops whereby changes, or knowledge 

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
9
about how best to implement the products, can find their way back to 
the designers and developers. This is especially concerning given that 
most of what it takes for an educational product or program to succeed 
is the know-how supplied by practitioners. Needless to say, researchers, 
by this time, are long gone from the process.
THE BETTER BOOK VISION
In our project we are trying to replace this business-as-usual approach 
with a new one that leverages the technological advances and method-
ological developments outlined above. Key elements of our vision are:
1.	 Create an innovative set of online materials (we think of this, cur-
rently, as an online textbook), with which students interact in or-
der to learn. Fully instrument the online book so that it generates 
data relevant to students’ interactions and learning.
2.	 Expand the number of students and instructors using the book. 
This is critical to drive improvement: more students means more 
data, and across universities, more diversity among students. We 
accomplish this by providing the materials free of charge, and 
by making them easy to adopt (in addition to being effective for 
learning).
3.	 Engage a community of researchers, designers/developers, and 
practitioners to work on continuous improvement of the materi-
als and their implementation. Transform the relationship among 
the three legs of the R&D stool from one that is sequential and 
siloed to one in which all three work collaboratively over time (see 
Figure 2).
In our initial learn-by-doing phase we are working to implement this 
new R&D approach. As we go, we are developing supports (technology, 
settings, and routines) to make the process more effective and more share-
able with others who want to apply the better book approach to a different 
set of online materials.
This approach opens up some new opportunities for both research and 
education. On the research front, we will have developed a research con-
text for studying—in an ecologically valid setting—the processes through 
which students come to understand core concepts in complex domains—
processes that play out over weeks and months. Researchers involved in 
this process will not be left to wonder if their discoveries will be able, some-
day, to help improve education. Instead, their discoveries will be imme-
diately applied, and if useful, built into future versions of the materials, 
accessible to future students (cf. Morris & Hiebert, 2011).

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
10
Figure 2. The better book vision
On the education side, we will have created a way to engage instructors 
in the improvement of educational materials such as our online textbook. 
Practitioners get a respected voice at the table, rather than being the pas-
sive recipient of materials. When they discover that something does not 
work, there are technologies, settings, and routines to help close the feed-
back loop between instructors and curriculum developers.
Building out this ambitious and fully instrumented research infrastruc-
ture for the study of learning in complex domains provides a sort of “space 
shuttle” for educational research. Just as scientists with specific research 
interests worked to get their experiments included on the space shuttle, 
learning scientists interested in understanding how students learn in com-
plex domains will be drawn to the opportunities of an improvement com-
munity focused on deep learning in a real course.

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
11
LEARNING TO IMPROVE
With this vision in mind, we set out to make it happen. We have read 
widely in the field of improvement science, as applied in a number of 
fields, and participated in improvement projects. But our specific vision—
the continuous improvement of an online textbook—will require some 
adjustments. In this section we outline our strategy for innovation and 
improvement, and report on our progress thus far.
Much of our focus at this point will be on the technology platform 
(CourseKata) we are building to support the work. In later reports we will 
focus more on the settings and routines that are required to support col-
laborations among the stakeholders involved in the work.
BUILDING VERSION 1.0 OF THE STATISTICS BOOK: THE 
INNOVATION PHASE
Our first step was to create Version 1.0 of our online statistics textbook. 
This task initially fell to two of us (Son and Stigler), learning scientists 
armed with a theory and actively engaged in teaching undergraduate in-
troductory statistics courses at two different universities. In this “innova-
tion phase” of the project, our goal was to implement our vision and get it 
working in our own classrooms with our own students.
The Minimum Viable Product
Our vision for this book was innovative in both content and pedagogy (Son 
et al., 2018; Fries et al., in press). We approached this vision with a shared 
understanding: the more innovative the approach, the more investment 
it will take to build Version 1.0. The reason for this traces back to the idea 
that teaching is a system. If an innovation is incremental, affecting only 
one component of a system, then it can be developed and dropped into 
the system to replace the current component. But if it is a major innova-
tion, affecting the system itself, then an entirely new instructional system 
would have to be built just to test it.
Our statistics course differs in significant ways from most introductory 
statistics courses. To get it up and running, therefore, we not only had to 
write a textbook but also had to develop other components of the system 
such as assessments that aligned with our new learning goals. Knowing 
that our eventual goal is to get other instructors using our online book, 
we had to build enough of a complete system so that others could imple-
ment and test. (This is similar to what Ries, 2011, and others have termed 
a “Minimum Viable Product,” or MVP.)

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
12
Early Design Decisions
If our only goal was to improve our own courses, it would have been simpler. 
But we knew from the beginning that we wanted to build a networked im-
provement community focused on improving our online book. This knowl-
edge led to some early design decisions that, no doubt, made life a little more 
complicated during the innovation phase. Here are the main decisions that 
impacted the development of our technology platform (described later).
Interleaved pedagogy. We wanted our book to be a fully featured learning 
environment, aligned with our pedagogical theory (practicing connec-
tions). We thus looked for a platform on which we could build a book that 
would interleave text, graphics, videos, R coding exercises, and formative 
assessment questions all on a single page (see Figure 3). What we found 
is that none of the existing learning management systems (LMS) are de-
signed to deliver this kind of pedagogy.
Delivered through any LMS. At the same time, we thought that delivering 
the book through widely used LMS platforms would make it easier for in-
structors to adopt the book and join our community. Thus, we identified 
two web applications that we could embed within the book’s pages that 
could create the interleaved pedagogy we wanted: DataCamp Light, for R 
data analysis exercises; and Learnosity, for embedded assessments.
Learnosity for assessments. Learnosity (learnosity.com) is the only propri-
etary platform we included in our design. We chose to use it for several 
reasons. First, it is a relatively mature and robust platform with a strong 
application programming interface, meaning we can easily embed it in 
our custom technology platform later. Most important, though, is that it 
is a cloud-based solution that, from the start, keeps student response data 
separate from students’ identifying information. This makes it possible 
to deliver identified data back to instructors (through the LMS), and de-
identified data to researchers. It also frees student data from the LMS. We 
don’t need to figure out how to get the data out of different LMSs, but can 
simply store data externally from the beginning.
Using Markdown and Git for distributed version control. In order to make 
our content easily transportable between different LMSs, we decided to 
write the book in Markdown (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown). 
Because Markdown files are plain text, they can be stored on a GitHub 
repository and tracked using the open and widely used Git distributed ver-
sion control system (the strategy used for most open-source software de-
velopment projects today).
By the end of the innovation phase we had created a course that we were 
delivering on the Canvas LMS. We were using Git workflows to manage 
collaborative changes to the materials—processes that were overkill for 

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
13
our small team but which we established with future expansion in mind. 
The end result was Version 1.0 of our book, which we managed to teach 
three times, to more than 500 students, during the first 1.5 years of our 
project—twice at UCLA and once at Cal State LA. The results of these 
initial implementations were encouraging (see Son et al., in preparation).
Figure 3. An example page from our interleaved online textbook, 
showing text, an R coding exercise, some R output, and a formative 
assessment question

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
14
However, the process of getting the content into Canvas was extremely 
labor-intensive. We also had no way to easily share the course with oth-
ers, port the book to a different LMS, or get the student data out of the 
Learnosity data base—a process that required software development in 
order to accomplish. We needed a platform to manage all of this, one 
that did not exist at the time. But before we describe the platform we 
have built, let us further define what we need in order to support the next 
phase of our work, the implementation and improvement phase.
Time and Space for Innovation
Although our goal was to eventually develop a networked improvement 
community focused on improving our book, we recognized early on that 
it would be difficult to create an initial prototype of an innovative vision 
with a team that is too large or widely varying in perspectives. Our core 
team had to share a common vision of the MVP, and have the patience to 
bring it to life before getting into questions of its effectiveness or how to 
improve it.
THE IMPLEMENTATION AND IMPROVEMENT PHASE
Supporting Adoption
To realize our vision we need to grow the number of instructors and stu-
dents using the online textbook: the more users there are, the more data 
will be generated and the more, presumably, we can use the data to make 
improvements in the book. We made several decisions designed to make 
adoption easy.
We decided to give the book away for free to any instructor (and their 
students) who are willing to join our networked improvement community. 
But a free book is not enough: we also need to make the book easy for 
the instructor to use, or at least easier than using a normal textbook. We 
accomplished this by making it possible for instructors to get reports on 
their students’ interactions with the content, and to use these data both 
for formative assessment and for automatic grading of students. We also 
have realized the importance of professional development for instructors. 
To feed growth, we will need to provide opportunities for new instructors, 
who may not have deep training in statistics, to learn about the ideas in our 
book, and the options for implementation. This is something we plan to at-
tend to soon. Right now we are recruiting early adopters (the brave ones!).

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
15
The Improvement Framework
As we start to build a wider networked improvement community, we have 
begun to lay out a framework to guide our improvement efforts. The 
framework we started with is an adaptation of the Toyota Kata framework 
as described by Rother (2009, 2018; see Figure 4). The word kata is from 
the Japanese and means routine. Rother summarized the improvement 
routine as practiced at Toyota Motor Sales like this:
Briefly put, the continuously repeating routine of Toyota’s im-
provement kata goes like this: (1) in consideration of a vision, 
direction, or target, and (2) with a firsthand grasp of the current 
condition, (3) a next target condition on the way to the vision 
is defined. When we then (4) strive to move step by step toward 
that target condition, we encounter obstacles that define what we 
need to work on, and from which we learn.
Figure 4. The Toyota Kata model (from Rother)
Based on this framework, and on other information in the growing field 
of improvement science (e.g., Bryk et al., 2015: Langley et al., 2009), we 
set out to design and implement our better book R&D approach.
We realized that responsibility for the overall vision or challenge (Step 1)  
falls to our core innovation team. Although we started out thinking of 
ways to democratize the process of improvement—e.g., making it easy for 
anyone to submit changes to our master book—we were re-oriented in 
our thinking during a visit from Mike Rother in November of 2018. Mike 
reminded us of the critical role that an overarching vision plays in keeping 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
16
the process on track. Indeed, a unified vision, advocated by the core 
innovation team, is even more important in the context of a large and 
diverse networked improvement community of the sort we are seeking to 
grow. Our vision is this: deep, flexible, transferable knowledge of statis-
tics for all students. We want to teach an advanced course but make it ac-
cessible to everyone, even those with poor preparation in mathematics.
Steps 2, 3, and 4 of the Toyota Kata framework are the core iterative parts 
of the improvement routine, and we envision small teams consisting of 
researchers, designers/developers, and instructors working together on 
these steps. As reported by Rother (2009), it is important to spend time 
on Step 2, trying to understand what in the current condition might be 
preventing us from achieving our vision. Often, just understanding the 
nature of the problem is enough to suggest a viable solution. Whereas 
the vision or challenge is longer term, the target condition (Step 3) is 
a short-term goal, something that might be achievable within weeks or 
months. The target condition, from a research perspective, is like a de-
tailed hypothesis of what you expect to see happen through the iterative 
experimentation cycles (otherwise known as PDSA, or Plan, Do, Study, 
Act cycles). Experimenting toward the target condition leads to new dis-
coveries, and new solutions, which in our case will be stored in improve-
ments to the online textbook and its implementation.
The Importance of Measurement
The success of an improvement effort must be defined by the outcomes 
of the system you are trying to improve. Although there is often one 
primary outcome of interest—which in our case might be deep un-
derstanding of statistics—it also may be important to measure other 
outcomes. For example, we may want to improve understanding of sta-
tistics, but we also want to make sure that gains in understanding are 
not achieved by sacrificing the enjoyment students might get from do-
ing data analysis, an outcome that may have huge impact on students’ 
career trajectories. As Bryk et al. (2015) wrote, “You can’t improve what 
you don’t measure.” So the very things we want to improve should be 
the things we measure.
In the context of learning, we also need to measure both the immediate 
effects of our textbook and the long-term effects. In essence, how long 
does learning last? We know that details will fall away over time, but we 
hope students will be left with some kind of residue (Davis, 1992). Even 
if students forget specific details, we hope they will be better prepared 
to re-learn the concepts we taught them, or more quickly learn more ad-
vanced concepts.

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
17
Using outcome measures to guide improvement is a commonsense 
idea. The more sensitive the outcome measures are, the easier it will be 
to see whether a change you are testing is making a difference in the 
right direction. But another, less intuitive, part of improvement science 
is the focus on reducing variability of outcomes to within “acceptable 
limits” (Langley et al., 2009). In our project, we want students’ overall 
level of understanding to increase. But we also want to make sure that 
improvements bring everyone up to some desired level, not just students 
in one part of the distribution. In an education context, this means that 
much of our focus must be on students in the bottom end of the distribu-
tion, if only because getting the top students up to speed turns out to be 
relatively less challenging.
Finally, outcomes are not the only thing we need to measure. We also 
want to develop process measures (Langley et al., 2009) that indicate 
the underlying mechanisms through which students learn. For instance, 
when and at what rates do students complete the online assignments? Do 
they complete practice quizzes, and when? How much do they write in 
response to open-ended questions, and how does that change over time? 
Process measures help us to get beyond trial-and-error testing of specific 
changes to test theories of teaching and learning. A good theory can be 
used again and again, in different contexts, to improve outcomes.
The Need for a Large Item Bank for Assessments
Although the course we built included more than 1200 embedded assess-
ments, we needed to develop summative assessments as outcome indica-
tors. We assess students with five quizzes and a final exam over the course, 
which we implemented in either a quarter or a semester of instruction. 
Initially we created our own assessments, and we administered them inde-
pendently of the online book. But as other instructors started to use our 
book, they too needed assessments.
Developing a very large and psychometrically sound item bank is cur-
rently one of our biggest needs. We need the number of items to be large 
enough that students will find it pointless to try to guess which ones will be 
on the exam. We also want to make the quizzes and exams available through 
the online book platform (see more later on our CourseKata platform).
Testing Improvements
In the Toyota Kata framework, key stakeholders experiment their way to-
ward a “target condition.” This process involves identifying the most im-
portant obstacle preventing them from getting there, figuring out ways 
to remove the obstacle, and then testing the resulting solutions one by 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
18
one. This is an iterative process, repeated multiple times over a short 
time period.
One challenge of implementing this framework in our context is that 
the process we are trying to improve spans an entire course; it is not 
something that can be easily repeated over and over again as we try to 
improve it. Some parts are repeated, such as the ordering of elements on 
a page (e.g., do you explain, then ask questions, or ask questions prior 
to offering explanations?). But other things can be tested only once per 
class (e.g., should we start with the sampling distribution of the mean, or 
start, instead, with the sampling distribution of the difference between two 
means?). We are beginning to see that different kinds of changes require 
different standards of evidence before they get adopted into the master 
version. If someone spots a spelling error in the book, we don’t need to 
test it; just getting one other person to agree that the word should be 
changed is enough to warrant a change in the master.
But other changes must be backed up by evidence. For some changes, 
correlational data might be enough to warrant the change. But for oth-
ers, a true random-assignment experiment might be required before we 
institute the change for everyone. One of our goals in this project is to be 
able to easily generate the kind of data needed to support the improve-
ment process.
Managing Improvements Through Git
We decided to put all of our content in Markdown text files and to store 
them on GitHub. But learning how to use GitHub for our specific project 
turned out to be much more challenging than the decision itself. Using 
Git is as much a cultural practice as it is a piece of software, involving new 
vocabulary and new ways of working. We had to fundamentally change the 
way we think about and implement versioning of content.
Now, a year and a half into the project, we have started to feel the 
benefits of this new way of working. Whereas we previously would have 
turned on track changes as we worked on a Word document or on a 
Google Doc, now we routinely “branch” the repository that holds our 
book, which means making a complete copy of the book on our own 
computer and, at the same time, on GitHub. Once you have your own 
branch, you can make any changes you want without affecting the work 
that others are doing. Periodically you can “rebase” your own branch 
onto the master branch to make sure your branch is up to date and not 
in conflict with recent changes to the master. You can share your branch 
with a collaborator, and work together on a change, before merging it 
into the master.

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
19
Maybe the most valuable concept in the Git workflow is that of a pull 
request. When you have marshalled enough evidence to warrant merging 
your changes into the master branch, you initiate a pull request. This, in 
essence, is a request that the team overseeing the improvement process 
review your work and decide whether or not to approve the merge (the 
adoption of your change into the master). The pull request process serves 
the function of peer review and structures the interactions and thinking 
that go into evaluating a change. If a change is approved, a merge is per-
formed. Sometimes merge conflicts will arise, which must be examined 
and resolved. But everything is documented, and you are left without 
that nagging feeling that something must somehow have gotten lost in 
the process.
The Role of Instructors
In our team, we often say, “The idea is 20%; implementation is 80%.” This 
idea translates into an important role for instructors in the R&D process. 
A researcher may have a new theory; a designer may have a new idea. But 
ultimately, instructors will be needed to figure out how to make the theory 
and the idea work in practice. We have a few thoughts about the role of 
instructors in our R&D approach.
First off, not all instructors need to be on the R&D team engaging in the 
iterative improvement process. Some instructors—and we need as many 
of these as possible—will just want to use the online book with their stu-
dents and nothing more. This is perfectly fine. Every instructor who uses 
the book with their students generates valuable data that can be used by 
the R&D team in the improvement process.
Another thought, which comes from Douthwaite (2002), is that the 
role of instructors will undoubtedly change as the online book ma-
tures. As more students from different backgrounds and with different 
interests take the course, the more know-how will be required by the 
instructor in order to get the most out of the course for every student. 
This know-how will primarily be developed by instructors, in the field, 
and not by researchers or designers/developers. As the book evolves, 
instructors will play a greater role in figuring out ways to improve stu-
dent outcomes. And as more instructors teach the course, more can be 
gained by studying variations in implementation among them. What 
we learn from this variation can be captured as improvements in the 
online materials. This information will also inform our understanding 
of the science of implementation.
Finally, it is important to socialize instructors—the ones who do join 
the R&D community—into a new and more sophisticated way of seeing 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
20
their own role in the community. In other approaches for research/
practice collaboration, instructors see themselves as bit players in the pro-
cess of figuring out if a new program works (perhaps as part of a random-
ized controlled trial). We want to change their mindset from one of help-
ing to judge if a program works to one of helping figure out what it will take 
to make a program work for their students.
The OER Movement
Although we give our book away for free, and although we are creating a 
community of instructors implementing the book in their classrooms, our 
project does not fit seamlessly into what has come to be known as OER, or 
the Open Educational Resources, movement. The OER community seems to 
have some values in alignment with ours but others that are not in alignment.
For example, one assumption commonly voiced is that content for ba-
sic courses (such as introductory statistics) is all the same, that it can be 
commoditized, and that fundamentally there are no differences in qual-
ity, just in price, across different textbooks. Although we do agree that 
variation among textbooks is often minimal, we also think that it doesn’t 
have to be this way, and that quality differences are real and significant. 
Furthermore, we believe that innovation in textbooks is unlikely to hap-
pen in an environment in which anyone can mix and match chapters from 
different books into their own unique versions.
The emphasis on individuals creating derivative books based on their 
own taste, in our view, can work against innovation and the improve-
ment of quality over time. Letting everyone do their own thing can, of 
course, yield some good ideas. Yet, unless the changes are incorporated 
into an explicit research design, it will not be easy to know which chang-
es result in better student outcomes. The mix-and-match approach also 
ignores the fact that true innovations may require coherence in design 
across an entire course, something that can be provided by a visionary 
author on a mission to realize their idea but less likely to emerge from 
a democratic process. Innovation needs its own space to grow, because 
that is where many of our largest leaps forward will come from.
In our R&D approach, we try hard to prevent instructors from making 
changes in the textbook unless those changes are part of a well-thought-
out research design. In work similar to ours, Hiebert and colleagues at 
the University of Delaware (Hiebert & Morris, 2009) have adopted a 
group norm: If you are an instructor using the common materials, you 
don’t have to use the materials exactly as designed. But if you decide 
to change them, you have to make sure there is some way to test that 
change so that everyone can learn from your experience.

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
21
The Role of Researchers
Researchers, too, have unique contributions to make to the networked 
improvement community, a point that may seem obvious given that 
we are developing a new R&D approach. In fact, we see an expansive 
and symbiotic relationship possible between researchers and the rest of 
the networked improvement community. It is clear from what we have 
written above that researchers bring critical skills to the table when 
it comes to implementing the Toyota Kata improvement framework. 
Researchers, in general, are trained specifically to do the kind of work 
envisioned in Step 2 (understand the current condition). They have 
theories, which provide lenses through which to see the current system; 
and they have methods for analyzing the current condition in light of 
their theories, and also in a more open discovery mode. The Toyota 
Kata framework is, fundamentally, a process based on scientific inquiry, 
and researchers are generally well suited to undertake such inquiry.
Researchers also may have real contributions to make as they work 
with designers/developers and instructors to test their theories in the 
classroom. And in fact, being able to work in such settings is a major 
draw for researchers who, by tradition, have been relegated to pub-
lishing their findings in journals in hopes that someone will read and 
use them. Most researchers in the learning sciences want their work to 
make a difference. A networked improvement community of the sort 
we envision gives them access to a test bed, and an ecologically valid re-
search site, in which they can work to get their ideas out into the world.
But researchers will also need to change the way they define their 
own research interests. Whereas traditionally, researchers see them-
selves on a mission to advance their theory, and thus their standing in 
the academy, they need to shift their focus from their own theory to a 
large problem shared by many stakeholders. As the improvement work 
progresses, researchers may need to change their theories, or even 
their overall research focus, based on the problems that are of highest 
priority to the community.
THE COURSEKATA PLATFORM
In the previous section we reported on our progress in our “learn by 
doing” approach to building a continuously improving online text-
book for introductory statistics. We started with little more than a vi-
sion, then set about finding out what it would take to implement the 
vision for a single online book. Along the way we confronted a number of 
challenges, to which we rigged up solutions (basically, with the education 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
22
equivalent of duct tape). But as our goal is to create an approach that 
could be adopted by others, we used our experiences as a starting point 
to identify the kinds of support—especially technology—that would make 
the approach easier to implement moving forward.
The result of this process is the CourseKata platform, now in its second 
major version, that we are using to author and deliver our online book, 
and to support our continuous improvement work. We are continuing to 
develop this platform and will make it available to others who want to rep-
licate the work we are doing with other online materials. We will provide a 
brief description of the platform here.
REQUIREMENTS IN BRIEF
We realized early that the approach we were developing would be dif-
ficult to implement without technology supports. As we labored hard 
to get the approach up and running, we also kept track of what would 
make it possible to implement the approach at scale. This list, borne of 
the school of hard knocks, became the requirements we used to guide 
the development of the CourseKata platform.
Here are the requirements we have developed so far:
Authoring and publishing: We need to be able to author content, 
consistent with our pedagogical model; easily and automatically 
preview the pages as they will look to students; store the content 
in the cloud so that it can be shared and accessed by collabora-
tors; keep track of different versions of the course; and manage 
the process of testing and improving the content.
Distribution: We need to be able to easily distribute the current 
version of the book to instructors so that they can deliver it to 
their students through their preferred LMS, and to track the 
classes, so we can link student-generated data to instructors and 
institutions.
Data collection: We need to be able to collect and store students’ 
responses and interactions with the book while protecting stu-
dents’ privacy and confidentiality, and to store students’ re-
sponses to summative assessments (quizzes and exams).
Data delivery: We need to be able to provide detailed data back 
to instructors in real time so they can use it to guide instruction 
and grade students, and back to the R&D team to feed into the 
improvement process.

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
23
Experimentation: We need to be able to conduct random assign-
ment experiments, within classes, in which different students 
get different versions of the online book.
These requirements guided the development of the CourseKata plat-
form, now in its second major iteration. We will briefly describe the 
platform in terms of the four functional systems suggested by these 
requirements.
SYSTEM 1: AUTHORING AND PUBLISHING
Our first priority in developing the platform was to automate the author-
ing and publishing process, which was highly labor-intensive in our in-
novation phase. As illustrated in Figure 5, content developers can now 
work in Markdown, using GitHub as a collaboration and version control 
platform. As the GitHub files are updated, CourseKata re-generates the 
HTML pages for the online textbook, and stores them on the Amazon 
cloud. The latest development version can be immediately previewed on 
the CourseKata.org website, as can release versions.
Figure 5. CourseKata content authoring and publishing system.
SYSTEM 2: CONTENT DISTRIBUTION
Once an instructor is granted an instructor membership on CourseKata.
org, they can go into the website and create a class (defined as a group 
of students and a particular release version of the book; see Figure 6). 
Once they have created a class, they can download the course in Common 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
24
Cartridge format, and import it into their LMS (in the current version 
we support Canvas, but other LMSs will be added soon). Each instructor 
gets a unique consumer key and shared secret (i.e., passwords needed 
for installing the cartridge into the LMS), which allows us to track each 
instance of the course. Instructors can enroll students in their class just as 
they normally would. If they teach the course again, they simply need to 
go back to CourseKata.org and set up a new class.
Figure 6. CourseKata content distribution system
SYSTEM 3: TEACHING, LEARNING, AND DATA COLLECTION
Once the instructor has enrolled students in the class, the course can be-
gin. Students take the course through the LMS. All student responses are 
sent by the LMS to the CourseKata server. The server stores the data in 
the cloud but also summarizes the data, sending reports back to both the 
students and the instructor through a special My Progress page in the LMS 
(see Figure 7).

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
25
Figure 7. CourseKata teaching, learning, and data collection system
SYSTEM 4: RESEARCH
Finally, we have built a research system that currently serves two functions 
(see Figure 8). First, it allows researchers to download and analyze de-
identified student data in order to inform the improvement process. And 
second, it enables researchers to set up random assignment experiments 
on CourseKata.org. The ability to run experiments within classes of stu-
dents is one of the most exciting features of the CourseKata platform. 
Researchers can make an experiment branch of the course, in which 
they alter the content in some way (this could be something as small as 
changing a picture, inserting a video, or changing the way an explanation 
is written).

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
26
Figure 8. CourseKata research system
After researchers add one or more classes into a study, which they can 
do on CourseKata.org, CourseKata will randomly assign each student in 
the class to get the latest release version or the experiment version of the 
pages. CourseKata delivers the assigned page to each student, tracks the 
data for students in the experimental versus the control condition, and 
gives researchers an easy way to download the experiment data for analysis.
DISCUSSION AND NEXT STEPS
Our project is very much a work in progress. However, we wanted to out-
line our vision now—including some of the challenges and how we have 
met them—before they recede into distant memory. We also wanted to 
describe the web platform we have designed and built to support our vi-
sion. Although the current version of the platform is being used only for 
our introductory statistics project, it is a scalable platform that can handle 
many courses, each with its own networked improvement community. We 
look forward to helping the next communities get started. Meanwhile, 
here are some thoughts we have about our next steps in the project.
BUT FIRST: WHAT ABOUT RCTS?
One question researchers often ask when hearing about our project is: 
Does it work? At face value, post-class surveys show promising reactions 
from students in the course. Students found the textbook and embedded 
coding exercises were the most important tools for learning the content 
of the course (average rating ~4.5/5), as opposed to lectures and other 

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
27
face-to-face instruction (average rating ~3/5), a finding that suggests stu-
dents are comfortable taking ownership of their learning. A vast majority 
of students indicated that they would recommend the course to others 
(~ one-third of students rate a 100% recommendation, and ~ two-thirds 
gave a recommendation of 70% or greater). But perhaps most important, 
a core concern of creating a better book is fostering learning that transfers 
to new content and contexts. Though this course only teaches modeling 
through simple linear regression, students were able to accurately extend 
their knowledge to answer questions on multiple regression regarding no-
tation, proportional reduction in error, and partitioning of sums of squares 
for testing individual terms (Son, Blake, Fries, & Stigler, in preparation).
Of course, this does not answer the “gold standard” question, “Have 
we compared what our students learn with what students in traditional 
courses learn?” As scientists, we’ve been socialized into this view ourselves, 
wanting to compare new programs with the “standard practice” that most 
students are engaged with through a randomized controlled trial (RCT). 
Based on what we are learning, and on some of the principles of improve-
ment science, we believe that randomized controlled trials have an im-
portant role to play in improving education. But we also believe that they 
can be conducted too early, and kill off important innovations before they 
have been given a chance to realize their full potential.
Education is a cultural system. Building a new system is an incredibly 
hard thing to do, and it takes time. If we conduct an RCT too early, it isn’t 
even clear what we are testing, as most early-stage products and programs 
produce high variation in outcomes. Once we bring variation under con-
trol, to within acceptable limits—evidence that we understand the system 
we have created well enough to control it—then it makes sense to com-
pare the new program to others. Before that, we need to give innovation 
the time and space it needs to grow.
WHEN TO IMPROVE AND WHEN TO FORK
Building out an innovative program requires leadership. Someone needs 
to own the vision, and make sure that it is realized. If the process is democ-
ratized too early, there is great danger that the innovative vision will not be 
realized, but whittled away by the onslaught of too many voices.
Steve Jobs reportedly observed that the concept cars of the future 
you would see at the auto show almost never ended up being produced. 
Though exciting as concepts, by the time they went through the engi-
neering, manufacturing, marketing, and sales departments they were 
slowly whittled back to something more resembling the cars of today than 
the cars of tomorrow. This is something to watch out for in a networked 

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
28
improvement community. Once it gets too large, it may be even more dif-
ficult to live up to the innovation that inspired it than it was in the initial 
stages of the project.
This is a tension that must be managed. Sometimes, the improvers are 
right; the system does need tweaking to work. But other times, the right 
approach is to encourage someone with a conflicting vision to “fork” the 
course (a bit of Git terminology) and launch out on their own. This is okay, 
and eventually, once both visions are realized, might create the conditions 
for really testing, with RCTs, the differences between the two visions.
BEYOND IMPROVEMENT: PERSONALIZATION
We have described two phases of our project: the innovation phase, and 
the implementation and improvement phase. There is a third phase on 
the horizon, and that is personalization. Our focus in the improvement 
phase is on improving the online book for all students, which we define as 
an increase in average performance on outcome measures, and a decrease 
of variability to within acceptable limits.
Sometimes, however, achieving these goals may require that different 
students get different input, i.e., that the instruction be personalized 
based on a model we can create of students who are taking the course. 
Fortunately, today’s web technologies allow us to do that. We can, for ex-
ample, learn about who our students are in terms of their interactions with 
and responses to the content, and then make adjustments in the book we 
deliver based on this knowledge.
We saved personalization until later because, no matter how you ap-
proach it, you need more data—and hence more students—in order to 
discover reliable differences in the exact content different students can 
benefit from most. In the last decade, terms like machine learning, deep 
learning, and neural nets have become prominent buzzwords in the field 
of personalization science. These types of (relatively) advanced artificial 
intelligence hinge on having a vast pool of training data and the ability to 
identify key variables that will perform well on data in the wild. That said, 
there have been some notably promising achievements in the field, like 
Amazon’s eerily spot-on suggestions of what you might like to buy next.
Machine learning, however, is not necessarily the only model for how 
personalization should be done in education, though it is the model most 
commonly being pursued. In our view, some of the things we learn can be 
parsed into the “bits” that are needed in order to do machine learning. But 
some things—and especially complex domains like statistics—cannot be 
learned well if broken down into a long list of micro-objectives. Someone 
can learn all the pieces—p, chi-square, F, ANOVA, and so on—yet still not 

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
29
understand the deep structure of statistics. For this reason, we take a more 
deliberate approach to personalization. Instead of slicing up statistics into 
bits, and then letting algorithms generate personalized recommendations 
of brief learning resources to address each bit, we believe we must really 
come to understand the variation among our students, develop and test 
hypotheses about how different students learn, and then design targeted 
instruction that is aligned with our evolving theories. We aren’t saying this 
is the only way to approach personalization, only pointing out that we are 
going against the tide in this sense.
NEXT STEPS AND AN INVITATION
We are continuing to strive toward our vision of the continuously improv-
ing textbook. As we learn, we take notes, and then reflect on what kinds of 
supports—in terms of technology, settings, and routines—will be needed 
in order to enable others to do this work. We are continuing to develop 
our technology, and we are writing a handbook of sorts that others can use 
to help us in this journey.
Our experience working to improve education and learning has been 
from the perspective of university-based researchers. Although many 
young people go to graduate school because they want to do research 
that makes a difference in education, they often emerge frustrated, having 
narrowed their audience from the world at large to the small group of re-
searchers who do research in their own field. Through a process of social-
ization, they have somehow traded their goals for improving education for 
goals more narrowly focused on getting peer-reviewed publications in top 
journals. We believe that the better book approach provides a pathway for 
researchers such as these to bring their talent, training, and ideas to bear 
on solving important educational problems in the world. It does not ask 
them to give up their identities as researchers but instead shows how they 
can use the theories, methods, and findings in their field to contribute to 
the goal of improving learning in complex domains.
We have met many instructors and designers/developers of curriculum 
materials who would similarly be motivated to join the kind of community 
we envision. Curious instructors want to test ideas inspired by research, 
and they want a way to share what they learn with other instructors and 
with researchers, who, without detailed knowledge of implementation, 
only have part of the story. Similarly, many designers and developers want 
to contribute their imagination and ingenuity to a process of discovery 
that can lead to lasting improvements in instructional design and learn-
ing. And sometimes the three legs of our stool—research, practice, and 
design—end up in the same person.

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
30
If these ideas resonate with you, we invite you to join our community. If 
statistics is your thing, you can jump right in. Our introductory statistics 
book is now available to any instructor who wants to use it. As our user base 
grows, our CourseKata platform provides a testbed for researchers wishing 
to refine their theories but also a place where findings can be immediately 
translated into improvements. And we can always use the talents of design-
ers and developers who see ways of making incremental improvements to 
the book. Of course we are just learning how to organize this work, which 
we see as a long-term cultural change in the way we do education research 
and development. We welcome all who want to help us take the next step 
forward, using this better book approach to improve education.

TCR, 122,  090313   The Better Book Approach for Education Research and Development
31
References
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., Grunow, A., & LeMahieu, P. G. (2015). Learning to improve: How 
America’s schools can get better at getting better. Harvard University Press.
Davis, R. B. (1992). Understanding “understanding.” Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 
11, 225−241.
Dewey, J. (1929). The sources of a science of education. Liveright.
Douthwaite, B. (2002). Enabling innovation: A practical guide to understanding and fostering 
technological change. Zed Books.
Fries, L., Son, J. Y., Givvin, K. B., & Stigler, J. W. (in press). Practicing connections: A 
framework to guide instructional design for developing understanding in complex 
domains. Educational Psychology Review.
Gallimore, R. (1996). Classrooms are just another cultural activity. Research on classroom 
ecologies: Implications for inclusion of children with learning disabilities, 229−250.
Hiebert, J., & Morris, A. K. (2009). Building a knowledge base for teacher education: An 
experience in K–8 mathematics teacher preparation. The Elementary School Journal, 
109(5), 475−490.
Kenney, C. (2008). The best practice: How the new quality movement is transforming medicine. 
Public Affairs.
Langley, G. J., Moen, R., Nolan, K. M., Nolan, T. W., Norman, C. L., & Provost, L. P. (2009). The 
improvement guide: A practical approach to enhancing organizational performance. Jossey‐Bass.
Lewis, C. (2015). What is improvement science? Do we need it in education? Educational 
Researcher, 44(1), 54−61.
Morris, A. K., & Hiebert, J. (2011). Creating shared instructional products: An alternative 
approach to improving teaching. Educational Researcher, 40(1), 5–14.
Ostrow, K. S., Heffernan, N. T., & Williams, J. J. (2017). Tomorrow’s EdTech today: 
Establishing a learning platform as a collaborative research tool for sound science. 
Teachers College Record, 119 (3).
Nielsen, M. (2011). Reinventing discovery: The new era of networked science. Princeton 
University Press.
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create 
radically successful businesses. Crown Business.
Rother, M. (2009). Toyota Kata: Managing people for improvement, adaptiveness and superior 
results. McGraw-Hill Professional.
Rother, M. (2018). Toyota kata practice guide. McGraw Hill Education.
Son, J. Y., Blake, A. B., Fries, L., & Stigler, J. W. (in preparation). Modeling first: Applying 
learning science to the teaching of introductory statistics.
Son, J. Y., Ramos, P., DeWolf, M., Loftus, W., & Stigler, J. W. (2018). Exploring the practicing-
connections hypothesis: Using gesture to support coordination of ideas in understanding 
a complex statistical concept. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 3(1), 1.
Stigler, J. W., & Givvin, K. B. (2017). Online learning as a wind tunnel for improving teaching. 
New Directions for Evaluation, 2017(153), 79−91.

Teachers College Record, 122, 090313 (2020)
32
JAMES W. STIGLER is a professor of psychology at UCLA. Research in-
terests include teaching and learning in complex domains, impacts of 
culture and technology on learning, and applications of improvement sci-
ence to education.
JI Y. SON is a professor of Psychology at California State University, Los 
Angeles. She is interested in how basic cognitive and perceptual processes 
foster rich and transferable learning.
KAREN B. GIVVIN is a researcher and adjunct professor of psychology at 
UCLA. Her research interests include teaching, learning, and motivation 
in achievement domains.
ADAM B. BLAKE is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Psychology 
at UCLA. He is interested in the factors that influence students’ judg-
ments, decisions, and strategies about learning, and how instruction and 
learning materials can improve their behaviors.
LAURA FRIES is a graduate student in developmental psychology at 
UCLA. Her research interests include pedagogical strategies to promote 
deep understanding, and the cognitive and affective factors that influ-
ence learning.
STACY T. SHAW is a graduate student in developmental psychology at 
UCLA. She is interested in creative and flexible thinking in mathemat-
ics, and how cognitive and affective factors influence creative processes in 
education.
MARY C. TUCKER is a graduate student in developmental psychology at 
UCLA. Her research interests include psychological, social, and contex-
tual factors that influence teaching and learning, design of environments 
to support learning and participation in STEM domains, and the applica-
tion of technology and data analytics to understand and improve teaching 
and learning.

