XV
THE SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
WITH Archimedes and Apollonius Greek geometry reached
its culminating point. There remained details to be filled
in, and no doubt in a work such as, for instance, the Conies
geometers of the requisite calibre could have found proposi-
tions containing the germ of theories which were capable of
independent development. But, speaking generally, the fur-
ther progress of geometry on general lines was practically
barred by the restrictions of method and form which were
inseparable from the classical Greek geometry. True, it was
open to geometers to discover and investigate curves of a
higher order than conies, such as spirals, conchoids, and the
like. But the Greeks could not get very far even on these
lines in the absence of some system of coordinates and without
freer means of manipulation such as are afforded by modern
algebra, in contrast to the geometrical algebra, which could
only deal with equations connecting lines, areas, and volumes,
but involving no higher dimensions than three, except in so
far as the use of proportions allowed a very partial exemp-
tion from this limitation. The theoretical methods available
enabled quadratic, cubic and bi-quadratic equations or their
equivalents to be solved. But all the solutions were geometri-
cal ; in other words, quantities could only be represented by
lines, areas and volumes, or ratios between them. There was
nothing corresponding to operations with general algebraical
quantities irrespective of what they represented. There were
no symbols for such quantities. In particular, the irrational
was discovered in the form of incommensurable lines; hence
irrationals came to be represented by straight lines as they
are in Euclid, Book X, and the Greeks had no other way of
representing them. It followed that a product of two irra-
tionals could only be represented by a rectangle, and so on.
Even when Diophantus came to use a symbol for an unknown
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

198 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
quantity, it was only an abbreviation for the word ap
with the meaning of 'an undetermined multitude of units',
not a general quantity. The restriction then of the algebra
employed by geometers to the geometrical form of algebra
operated as an insuperable obstacle to any really new depar-
ture in theoretical geometry.
It might be thought that there was room for further exten-
sions in the region of solid geometry. But the fundamental
principles of solid geometry had also been laid down in Euclid,
Books XI-XIII; the theoretical geometry of the sphere had
been fully treated in the ancient sphaeric; and any further
application of solid geometry, or of loci in three dimensions,
was hampered by the same restrictions of method which
hindered the further progress of plane geometry.
Theoretical geometry being thus practically at the end of
its resources, it was natural that mathematicians, seeking for
an opening, should turn to the applications of geometry. One
obvious branch remaining to be worked out was the geometry
of measurement, or mensuration in its widest sense, which of
course had to wait on pure theory and to be based on its
results. One species of mensuration was immediately required
for astronomy, namely the measurement of triangles, especially
spherical triangles; in other words, trigonometry plane and
spherical. Another species of mensuration was that in which
an example had already been set by Archimedes, namely the
measurement of areas and volumes of different shapes, and
arithmetical approximations to their true values in cases
where they involved surds or the ratio (n) between the
circumference of a circle and its diameter ; the object of such
mensuration was largely practical. Of these two kinds of
mensuration, the first (trigonometry) is represented by Hip-
parchus, Menelaus and Ptolemy ; the second by Heron of
Alexandria. These mathematicians will be dealt with in later
chapters; this chapter will be devoted to the successors of the
great geometers who worked on the same lines as the latter.
Unfortunately we have only very meagre information as to
what these geometers actually accomplished in keeping up the
tradition. No geometrical works by them have come down
to us in their entirety, and we are dependent on isolated
extracts or scraps of information furnished by commen-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NICOMEDES 
199
tators, and especially by Pappus and Eutocius. 
Some of
these are very interesting, and it is evident from the
extracts from the works of such writers as Diocles and
Dionysodorus that, for some time after Archimedes and
Apollonius, mathematicians had a thorough grasp of the
contents of the works of the great geometers, and were able
to use the principles and methods laid down therein with
ease and skill.
Two geometers properly belonging to this chapter have
already been dealt with. The first is NICOMEDES, the inventor
of the conchoid, who was about intermediate in date between
Eratosthenes and Apollonius. The conchoid has already been
described above (vol. i, pp. 238-40). It gave a general method
of solving any vtvais where one of the lines which cut off an
intercept of given length on the line verging to a given point
is a straight line; and it was used both for the finding of two
mean proportionals and for the trisection of any angle, these
problems being alike reducible to a vedcris of this kind. How
far Nicomedes discussed the properties of the curve in itself
is uncertain; we only know from Pappus that he proved two
properties, (1) that the so-called ' ruler5 in the instrument for
constructing the curve is an asymptote, (2) that any straight
line drawn in the space between the 'ruler' or asymptote and
the conchoid must, if produced, be cut by the conchoid.1 The
equation of the curve referred to polar coordinates is, as we
have seen, r = a + b sec 6. According to Eutocius, Nicomedes
prided himself inordinately on his discovery of this curve,
contrasting it with Eratosthenes's mechanism for finding any
number of mean proportionals, to which he objected formally
and at length on the ground that it was impracticable and
entirely outside the spirit of geometry.2
Nicomedes is associated by Pappus with Dinostratus, the
brother of Menaechmus, and others as having applied to the
squaring of the circle the CUrve invented by Hippias and
known as the quadratrix* which was originally intended for
the purpose of trisecting any angle. These facts are all that
we know of Nicomedes's achievements.
1 Pappus, iv, p. 244. 21-8.
2 Eutoc. on Archimedes, On the Sphere and Cylinder, Archimedes,
vol. iii, p. 98.
8 Pappus, iv, pp. 250. 33-252. 4. Cf. vol. i, p. 225 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

200 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
The second name is that of DIOCLES. We have already
(vol. i, pp. 264-6) seen him as the discoverer of the curve
known as the cissoid, which he used to solve the problem
of the two mean proportionals, and also (pp. 47-9 above)
as the author of a method of solving the equivalent of
a certain cubic equation by means of the intersection
of an ellipse and a hyperbola. We are indebted for our
information on both these subjects to Eutocius,1 who tells
us that the fragments which he quotes came from Diocles's
work nepl nvpeicou, On burning-mirrors. 
The connexion of
the two things with the subject of this treatise is not obvious,
and we may perhaps infer that it was a work of ponsiderable
scope. What exactly were the forms of the burning-mirrors
discussed in the treatise it is not possible to say, but it is
probably safe to assume that among them were concave
mirrors in the forms (1) of a sphere, (2) of a paraboloid, and
(3) of the surface described by the revolution of an ellipse
about its major axis. The author of the Fragmentum mathe-
maticwrn Bobiense says that Apollonius in his book On the
burning-mirror discussed the case of the concave spherical
mirror, showing about what point ignition would take place;
and it is certain that Apollonius was aware that an ellipse has
the property of reflecting all rays through one focus to the
other focus. Nor is it likely that the corresponding property
of a parabola with reference to rays parallel to the axis was,
unknown to Apollonius. Diocles therefore, writing a century
or more later than Apollonius, could hardly have failed to
deal with all three cases. True, Anthemius (died about
A.D. 534) in his fragment on burning-mirrors says that the
ancients, while mentioning the usual burning-mirrors and
saying that such figures are conic sections, omitted to specify
which conic sections, and how produced, and gave no geo-
metrical proofs of their properties. 
But if the properties
were commonly known and quoted, it is obvious that they
must have been proved by the ancients, and the explanation
of Anthemius's remark is presumably that the original works
in which they were proved (e.g. those of Apollonius and
Diocles) were already lost when he wrote. There appears to
be no trace of Diocles's work left either in Greek or Arabic,
1 Eutocius, loc. cit.y p. 66. 8 sq., p. 160. 3 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIOCLES 
201
unless we have a fragment from it in the Fragmentum
mathematicum Bobiense. But Moslem writers regarded Diodes
as the discoverer of the parabolic burning-mirror; 'the ancients',
says al Singari (Sachawi,» Ansari), ' made mirrors of plane
surfaces. 
Some made them concave (i.e. spherical) until
Diocles (Diuklis) showed and proved that, if the surface of
these mirrors has its curvature in the form of a parabola, they
then have the greatest power and burn most strongly. There
is a work on this subject composed by Ibn al-Haitham.' This
work survives in Arabic and in Latin translations, and is
reproduced by Heiberg and Wiedemann1; it does not, how-
ever, mention the name of Diocles, but only those of Archi-
medes and Anthemius. 
Ibn al-Haitham says that famous
men like Archimedes and Anthemius had used mirrors made
up of a number of spherical rings; afterwards, he adds, they
considered the form of curves which would reflect rays to one
point, and found that the concave surface of a paraboloid of
revolution has this property. It is curious to find Ibn al-
Haitham saying that the ancients had not set out the proofs
sufficiently, nor the method by which they discovered them,
words which almost exactly recall those of Anthemius himself.
Nevertheless the whole course of Ibn al-HaithamJs proofs is
on the Greek model, Apollonius being actually quoted by name
in the proof of the main property of the parabola required,
namely that the tangent at any point of the curve makes
equal angles with the focal distance of the point and the
straight line drawn through it parallel to the axis. A proof
of the property actually survives in the Greek Fragmentum
mathematicum JBobiensey which evidently came from some
treatise on the parabolic burning-mirror; but Ibn al-Haitham
does not seem to have had even this fragment at his disposal,
since his proof takes a different course, distinguishing three
different cases, reducing the property by analysis to the
known property AN — AT> and- then working out the syn-
thesis. The proof in the Fragmentum is worth giving. It is
substantially as follows, beginning with the preliminary lemma
that, if PTy the tangent at any point P, meets the axis at T,
and if AS be measured along the axis from the vertex A
equal to \AL> where AL is the parameter, then SP = ST.
1 Bibliotheca mathematical x3, 1910, pp. 201-37.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

202 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
Let PIT be the ordinate from P; draw AY at right angles
to the axis meeting PT in Y, and join SY.
Now 
PN*=AL.AN
= 4A8. ^ r (since AN =
But PN = 2AY (since AZV = ^Lf);
therefore 
AY2 = TA. AS,
and the angle TYS is right.
The triangles 8YT, SYP being right-angled, and TY being
equal to YP} it follows that &P = ST.
With the same figure, let BP be a ray parallel to AN
impinging on the curve at P. It is required to prove that
the angles of incidence and reflection (to S) are equal.
We have SP = 8T, so that < the angles at the points T, P
are equal. So', says the author,' are the angles TPA, KPR
[the angles between the tangent and the curve on each side of
the point of contact]. Let the difference between the angles
be taken; therefore the angles SPA, RPB which remain
[again ' mixed' angles] are equal. Similarly we shall show
that all the lines drawn parallel to AS will be reflected at
equal angles to the point 8.'
The author then proceeds: 'Thus burning-mirrors con-
structed with the surface of impact (in the form) of the
section of a right-angled cone may easily, in the manner
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIOCLES. PERSEUS 
203
above shown, be proved to bring about ignition at the point
indicated/
Heiberg held that the style of this fragment is Byzantine
and that it is probably by Anthemius. Cantor conjectured
that here we might, after all, have an extract from Diocles's
work. Heiberg's supposition seems to me untenable because
of the author's use (1) of the ancient terms ' section of
a right-angled cone for parabola and ' diameter ' for * axis
(to say nothing of the use of the parameter, of which there is
no word in the genuine fragment of Anthemius), and (2) of
the mixed ' angles of contact'. Nor does it seem likely that
even Diodes, living a century after Apollonius, would have
spoken of the 'section of a right-angled cone' instead of a
parabola, or used the (mixed' angle of which there is only the
merest survival in Euclid. The assumption of the equality
of the two angles made by the curve with the tangent on
both sides of the point of contact reminds us of Aristotle's
assumption of the equality of the angles ' of a segment' of
a circle as prior to the truth proved in Eucl. I. 5. I am
inclined, therefore, to date the fragment much earlier even
than Diocles. Zeuthen suggested that the property of the
paraboloidal mirror may have been discovered by Archimedes,
who, according to a Greek tradition, wrote Catoptrica. This,
however, does not receive any confirmation in Ibn al-Haitham
or in Anthemius, and we can only say that the fragment at
least goes back to an original which was probably not later
than Apollonius.
PERSEUS is only known, from allusions to him in Proclus,1
as the discoverer and investigator of the spiric sections. They
are classed by Proclus among curves obtained by cutting
solids, and in this respect they are associated with the conic
sections. We may safely infer that they were discovered
after the conic sections, and only after the theory of conies
had been considerably developed. This was already the case
in Euclid's time, and it is probable, therefore, that Perseus was
not earlier than Euclid. 
On the other hand, by that time
the investigation of conies had brought the exponents of the
subject such fame that it would be natural for mathematicians
to see whether there was not an opportunity for winning a
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 111. 23-112. 8, 356.12. Cf. vol. i, p. 226.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

204 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
like renown as discoverers of other curves to be obtained by
cutting well-known solid figures other than the cone and
cylinder. A particular case of one such solid figure, the
(nreTpa, had already been employed by Archytas, and the more
general form of it would not unnaturally be thought of as
likely to give sections worthy of investigation. Since Geminus
is Proclus's authority, Perseus may have lived at any date from
Euclid's time to (say) 75 B.C., but the most probable supposi-
tion seems to be that he came before Apollonius and near to
Euclid in date.
The spire in one of its forms is what we call a tore, or an
anchor-ring. It is generated by the revolution of a circle
about a straight line in its plane in such a way that the plane
of the circle always passes through the axis of revolution. It
takes three forms according as the axis of revolution is
(a) altogether outside the circle, when the spire is open
(&ex*7y)j (&) a tangent to the circle, when the surface is con-
tinuous (crvvexys), or (c) a chord of the circle, when it is inter-
laced (€fx7r€7r\€yfjiii'7)), or crossing-itself 
(kiraXkaTTovo-a); an
alternative name for the surface was KpiKo?, a ring. 
Perseus
celebrated his discovery in an epigram to the effect that
* Perseus on his discovery of three lines (curves) upon five
sections gave thanks to the gods therefor'1 
There is some
doubt about the meaning of(three lines upon five sections'
(rpeFy ypafxjias kirl irivre TO/JLOUS). We gather from Proclus's
account of three sections distinguished by Perseus that the
plane of section was always parallel to the axis of revolution
or perpendicular to the plane which cuts the tore symmetri-
cally like the division in a split-ring. It is difficult to inter-
pret the phrase if it means three curves made by five different
sections. Proclus indeed implies that the three curves were
sections of the three kinds of tore respectively (the open, the
closed, and the interlaced), but this is evidently a slip.
Tannery interprets the phrase as meaning 'three curves in
addition to five sections \2 Of these the five sections belong
to the open tore, in which the distance (c) of the centre of the
generating circle from the axis of revolution is greater than
the radius (a) of the generating circle. If d be the perpen-
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 112. 2.
2 See Tannery, Mdmoires scientifiques, II, pp. 24-8,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PERSEUS 
205
dicular distance of the plane of section from the axis of rota-
tion, we can distinguish the following cases :
(1) c + a>d>c. 
Here the curve is an oval.
(2) d = c: transition from case (1) to the next case.
(3) od 
>c — a. The curve is now a closed curve narrowest
in the middle.
(4) d = e — a. 
In this case the curve is the hi'ppopede
(horse-fetter), a curve in the shape of the figure of 8. The
lemniscate of Bernoulli is a particular case of this curve, that
namely in which c = 2 a.
(5) c — a>d>0. 
In this case the section consists of two
ovals symmetrical with one another.
The three curves specified by Proclus are those correspond-
ing to (1), (3) and (4).
When the tore is ' continuous' or closed, c = a, and we have
sections corresponding to (1), (2) and (3) only; (4) reduces to
two circles touching one another.
But Tannery finds in the third, the interlaced, form of tore
three new sections corresponding to (1) (2) (3), each with an
oval in the middle. This would make three curves in addi-
tion to the five sections, or eight curves in all. We cannot be
certain that this is the true explanation of the phrase in the
epigram; but it seems to be the best suggestion that has
been made.
According to Proclus, Perseus worked out the property of
his curves, as Nicomedes did that of the conchoid, Hippias
that of the quadratrix, and Apollonius those of the three
conic sections. That is, Perseus must have given, in some
form, the equivalent of the Cartesian equation by which we
can represent the different curves in question. If we refer the
tore to three axes of coordinates at right angles to one another
with the centre of the tore as origin, the axis of y being taken
to be the axis of revolution, and those of z, x being perpen-
dicular to it in the plane bisecting the tore (making it a split-
ring), the equation of the tore is
(x2 + y2 + z2 + c2- a2)2 = 4 c2 (z2 + x%
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

206 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
where c, a have the same meaning as above. The different
sections parallel to the axis of revolution are obtained by
giving (say) z any value between 0 and c + a. For the value
z — a the curve is the oval of Cassini which has the property
that, if r, r' be the distances of any point on the curve from
two fixed points as poles, rr'= const. For, if z = a, the equa-
tion becomes
(x* + y2 + c2)2 = 4 c2x2 + 4 c2 a2,
or 
{c-x2+y*} 
{c + x2 + y2} = 4c2a2;
and this is equivalent to rr == + 2 ca if x, y are the coordinates
of any point on the curve referred to Ox, Oy as axes, where 0
is the middle point of the line (2 c in length) joining the two
poles, and Ox lies along that line in either direction, while Oy
is perpendicular to it. Whether Perseus discussed this-case
and arrived at the property in relation to the two poles is of
course quite uncertain.
Isoperimetric figures.
The subject of isoperimetric figures, that is to say, the com-
parison of the areas of figures having different shapes but the
same perimeter, was one which would naturally appeal to the
early Greek mathematicians. We gather from Proclus's notes
on Eucl. I. 36, 37 that those theorems, proving that parallelo-
grams or triangles on the same or equal bases and between
the same parallels are equal in area, appeared to the ordinary
person paradoxical because they meant that, by moving the
side opposite to the base in the parallelogram, or the vertex
of the triangle, to the right or left as far as we please, we may
increase the perimeter of the figure to any extent while keep-
ing the same area. Thus the perimeter in parallelograms or
triangles is in itself no criterion as to their area. Misconcep-
tion on this subject was rife among non-mathematicians.
Proclus tells us of describers of countries who inferred
the size of cities from their perimeters; he mentions also
certain members of communistic societies in his own time who
cheated their fellow-members by giving them land of greater
perimeter but less area than the plots which they took
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ISOPERIMETRIC FIGURES. ZENODORUS 
207
themselves, so that, while they got a reputation for greater
honesty, they in fact took more than their share of the
produce.1 
Several remarks by ancient authors show the
prevalence of the same misconception. Thucydides estimates
the size of Sicily according to the time required for circum-
navigating it.2 About 130 B.C. Polybius observed that there
were people who could not understand that camps of the same
periphery might have different capacities.3 Quintilian has a
similar remark, and Cantor thinks he may have had in his
mind the calculations of Pliny, who compares the size of
different parts of the earth by adding their lengths to their
breadths.4
ZENODORUS wrote, at some date between (say) 200 B.C. and
A.D. 90, a treatise irepl lo-ofjLerpcoi' (Tyr)iiaTtov, On 
isometric
figures. A number of propositions from it are preserved in
the commentary of Theon of Alexandria on Book I of
Ptolemy's Syntaxis; and they are reproduced in Latin in the
third volume of Hultsch's edition of Pappus, for the purpose
of comparison with Pappus's own exposition of the same
propositions at the beginning of his Book V, where he appears
to have followed Zenodorus pretty closely while making some
changes in detail.5 From the closeness with which the style
of Zenodorus follows that of Euclid and Archimedes we may
judge that his date was not much later than that of Archi-
medes, whom he mentions as the author of the proposition
(Measurement of a Circle, Prop. 1) that the area of a circle is
half that of the rectangle contained by the perimeter of the
circle and its radius. The important propositions proved by
Zenodorus and Pappus include the following: (1) Of all
regular polygons of equal perimeter, that is the greatest in
area which has the most angles. (2) A circle is greater than
any regular polygon of equal contour. 
(3) Of all polygons of
the same number of sides and equal perimeter the equilateral
and equiangular polygon is the greatest in area. Pappus
added the further proposition that Of all segments of a circle
having the same circumference the semicircle is the greatest in
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 403. 5 sq. 
2 Thuc. vi. 1.
3 Polybius, ix. 21. 
4 Pliny, Hist. nat. vi. 208.
5 Pappus, v, p. 308 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

208 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
area. Zenodorus's treatise was not confined to propositions
about plane figures, but gave also the theorem that Of all
solid figures the surfaces of which are equal, the sphere is the
greatest in solid content.
We will briefly indicate Zenodorus's method of proof. To
begin with (1); let ABC, DEF be equilateral and equiangular
polygons of the same perimeter, DEF having more angles
than ABC. Let G, H be the centres of the circumscribing
circles, GK, HL the perpendiculars from G, H to the sides
AB, DE, so that K, L bisect those sides.
AM
Since the perimeters are equal, AB > DE, and AK > DL.
Mate KM equal to DL and join GM.
Since AB is the same fraction of the perimeter that the
angle AGB is of four right angles, and DE is the same fraction
of the same perimeter that the angle DHE is of four right
angles, it follows that
AB: DE = LAGB: Z DHE,
that is, 
AK:MK=AAGK:lDHL.
But 
AKiMK > LAGK.LMGK
(this is easily proved in a lemma following by the usual
method of drawing an arc of a circle with G as centre and GM
as radius cutting GA and GK produced. The proposition is of
course equivalent to tan a/ tan (3 > oc/'/?, where \TT > oc > j3).
Therefore 
Z MGK > Z DHL,
and consequently 
Z GMK < Z HDL.
Make the angle NMK equal to the angle HDL, so that MN
meets KG produced in N.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENODORUS 
209
The triangles NMK, EDL are now equal in all respects, and
NK is equal to EL, so that GK < EL.
But the area- of the polygon ABC is half the rectangle
contained by GK and the perimeter, while the area of the
polygon DEF is half the rectangle contained by EL and
the same perimeter. Therefore the area of the polygon DEF
is the greater.
(2) The proof that a circle is greater than any regular
polygon with the same perimeter is deduced immediately from
Archimedes's proposition that the area of a circle is equal
to the right-angled triangle with perpendicular side equal to
the radius and base equal to the perimeter of the circle;
Zenodorus inserts a proof in extenso of Archimedes's pro-
position, with preliminary lemma. The perpendicular from
the centre of the circle circumscribing the polygon is easily
proved to be less than the radius of the given circle with
perimeter equal to that of the polygon; whence the proposition
follows.
(3) The proof of this proposition depends on some pre-
liminary lemmas. The first proves that, if there be two
triangles on the same base and with the
same perimeter, one being isosceles and
the other scalene, the isosceles triangle
has the greater area. (Given the scalene
triangle BDC on the base BC, it is easy to
draw on BC as base the isosceles triangle
having the same perimeter. We have
only to take BE equal to ^(BD + DC),
bisect BC at E, and erect at E the per-
pendicular AE such that AE2 = 
BE2-BE2.)
Produce BA to F so that BA = AF, and join AD, DF.
Then BD + DF> BF, i.e. BA + AC, i.e. BD + DC, by hypo-
thesis; therefore DF > DC, whence in the triangles FAD,
CAD the angle FAD > the angle CAD.
Therefore 
LFAD>\L FAC
> LBCA.
Make the angle FAQ equal to the angle BCA or ABC, so
that AG is parallel to BC; let BD produced meet AG in Gy
and join GC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

210 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
Then
AABC=AGBC
> ADBC.
The second lemma is to the effect that, given two isosceles
triangles not similar to one another, if we construct on the
same bases two triangles similar to one another such that the
sum of their perimeters is equal to the sum of the perimeters
of the first two triangles, then the sum of the areas of the
similar triangles is greater than the sum of the areas of
the non-similar triangles. 
(The easy construction of the
similar triangles is given in a separate lemma.)
Let the bases of the isosceles triangles, EB, BC, be placed in
one straight line, BG being greater than EB.
Let ABC, DEB be the similar isosceles triangles, and FBC,
GEB the non-similar, the triangles being such that
BA + AC+ED + DB = BF+FC+EG+ GB.
Produce AF, GB to meet the bases in K, L. Then clearly
AK, GL bisect BC, EB at right angles at K, L.
Produce GL to H, making LH equal to GL.
Join HB and produce it to N\ join HF.
Now, since the triangles ABC, DEB are similar, the angle
ABC is equal to the angle DEB or DBE.
Therefore ZNBC (= ZHBE = L GBE) > ZDBE or Z ABC;
therefore the angle ABH} and a fortiori the angle FBH, is
less than two right angles, and HF meets BK in some point M.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENODORUS 
211
Now, by hypothesis,
therefore 
DB + BA = HB + BF > HF.
By an easy lemma, since the triangles DEB, ABC are similar,
(DB + BA)2 = (DL +'AK)* + (BL + BKf
Therefore 
(DL + AKf + LK2 > HF*
whence 
DL + AK > GL + FK,
and it follows that 
AF > GD.
But BK>BL\ 
therefore AF.BK > GD.BL.
Hence the ' hollow-angled (figure)' (Koikoy&viov) ABFC is
greater than the hollow-angled (figure) GEDB.
Adding A DEB + A BFC to each, we have
ADEB + AABC> AGEB + AFBC.
The above is the only case taken by Zenodorus. The proof
still holds if EB = BC, so that BK = BL. 
But it fails in the
case in which EB > BC and the vertex G of the triangle EB
belonging to the non-similar pair is still above D and not
below it (as F is below A in the preceding case). This was
no doubt the reason why Pappus gave a proof intended to
apply to all the cases without distinction. This proof is the
same as the above proof by Zenodorus up to the point where
it is proved that
DL + AK > GL + FK,
but there diverges. Unfortunately the text is bad, and gives
no sufficient indication of the course of the proof; but it would
seem that Pappus used the relations
DL : GL =ADEB:A 
GEB,
AK : 
FK=AABC:AFBC,
and 
AK*:DL2=A 
ABC: A DEB,
combined of course with the fact that GB + BF = DB + BA,
in order to prove the proposition that,
according as DL + AK > or < GL + FK,
ADEB + AABC> or < AGEB + AFBC.
P 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

212 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
The proof of his proposition, whatever it was, Pappus
indicates that he will give later; but in the text as we have it
the promise is not fulfilled.
Then follows the proof that the maximum polygon of given
perimeter is both equilateral and
B 
equiangular.
(1) It is equilateral.
For, if not, let two sides of the
maximum polygon, as AB, BC, be
unequal. Join AC, and on 4 P as
base draw the isosceles triangle AFC
such that AF+ FC = AB + BG. The
area of the triangle AFC is then
greater than the area of the triangle ABC, and the area of
the whole polygon has been increased by the construc-
tion: which is impossible, as by hypothesis the area is a
maximum.
Similarly it can be proved that no other side is unequal
to any other.
(2) It is also equiangular.
For, if possible, let the maximum polygon ABODE (which
we have proved to be equilateral)
have the angle at B greater than
the angle at D. Then BA 0, DEC are
non-similar isosceles triangles. On
AC, CE as bases describe the two
isosceles triangles FAC, GEC similar
to one another which have the sum
of their perimeters equal to the
sum of the perimeters of BAC,
DEC. Then the sum of the areas of the two similar isosceles
triangles is greater than the sum of the areas of the triangles
BAC, DEC; the area of the polygon is therefore increased,
which is contrary to the hypothesis.
Hence no two angles of the polygon can be unequal.
The maximum polygon of given perimeter is therefore both
equilateral and equiangular.
Dealing with the sphere in relation to other solids having
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENODORUS. HYPSICLES 
213
their surfaces equal to that of the sphere, Zenodorus confined
himself to proving (1) that the sphere is greater if the other
solid with surface equal to that of the sphere is a solid formed
by the revolution of a regular polygon about a diameter
bisecting it as in Archimedes, On the Sphere and Cylinder,
Book I, and (2) that the sphere is greater than any of
the regular solids having its surface equal to that of the
sphere.
Pappus's treatment of the subject is more complete in that
he proves that the sphere is greater than the cone or cylinder
the surface of which is equal to that of the sphere, and further
that of the five regular solids which have the same surface
that which has more faces is the greater.1
HYPSICLES (second half of second century B. c.) has already
been mentioned (vol. i, pp. 419-20) as the author of the con-
tinuation of the Elements known as Book XIV. He is quoted
by Diophantus as having given a definition of a polygonal
number as follows:
' If there are as many numbers as we please beginning from
1 and increasing by the same common difference, then, when
the common difference is 1, the sum of all the numbers ia
a triangular number; when 2, a square; when 3, a pentagonal
number [and so on]. And the number of angles is called
after the number which exceeds the common difference by 2,
and the side after the number of terms including 1.'
This definition amounts to saying that the nth a-gonal num-
ber (1 counting as the first) is \n {2 -f (a— 1) (a— 2)}. If, as is
probable, Hypsicles wrote a treatise on polygonal numbers, it
has not survived. On the other hand, the 'AvafyopiKos (Ascen-
siones) known by his name has survived in Greek as well as in
Arabic, and has been edited with translation.2 
True, the
treatise (if it really be by Hypsicles, and not a clumsy effort
by a beginner working from an original by Hypsicles)
does no credit to its author; but it is in some respects
interesting, and in particular because it is the first Greek
1 Pappus, v, Props. 19, 38-56.
2 Manitius, Des Hypsildes Schrift Anaphorikos, Dresden, Lehmannsche
Buchdruckerei, 1888.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

214 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
work in which we find the division of the ecliptic circle into
360 ' parts' or degrees. The author says, after the preliminary
propositions,
'The circle of the zodiac having been divided into 360 equal
circumferences (arcs), let each of the latter be called a degree
in space (fioipa ro7nKrj, 'local' or'spatial part'). And simi-
larly, supposing that the time in which the zodiac circle
returns to any position it has left is divided into 360 equal
times, let each of these be called a degree in time {fiolpa
j '
From the word KaXeiadco (' let it be called') we may perhaps
infer that the terms were new in Greece. This brings us to
the question of the origin of the division (1) of the circle of
the zodiac, (2) of the circle in general, into 360 parts. On this
question innumerable suggestions have been made. 
With
reference to (1) it was suggested as long ago as 1788 (by For-
maleoni) that the division was meant to correspond to the
number of days in the year. Another suggestion is that it
would early be discovered that, in the case of any circle the
inscribed hexagon dividing the circumference into six parts
has each of its sides equal to the radius, and that this would
naturally lead to the circle being regularly divided into six
parts; after this, the very ancient sexagesimal system would
naturally come into operation and each of the parts would be
divided into 60 subdivisions, giving 360 of these for the whole
circle. 
Again, there is an explanation which is not even
geometrical, namely that in the Babylonian numeral system,
which combined the use of 6 and 10 as bases, the numbers 6,
60, 360, 3600 were fundamental round numbers, and these
numbers were transferred from arithmetic to the heavens.
The obvious objection to the first of these explanations
(referring the 360 to the number of days in the solar year) is
that the Babylonians were well acquainted, as far back as the
monuments go, with 365-2 as the number of days in the year.
A variant of the hexagon-theory is the suggestion that a
natural angle to be discovered, and to serve as a measure of
others, is the angle of an equilateral triangle, found by draw-
ing a star * like a six-spoked wheel without any circle. If
the base of a sundial was so divided into six angles, it would be
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HYPSICLES 
215
natural to divide each of the sixth parts into either 10 or 60
parts; the former division would account for the attested
division of the day into 60 hours, while the latter division on
the sexagesimal system would give the 360 time-degrees (each
of 4 minutes) making up the day of 24 hours. The purely
arithmetical explanation is defective in that the series of
numbers for which the Babylonians had special names is not
60, 360, 3600 but 60 (Soss), 600 (Ner), and 3600 or 602 (Sar).
On the whole, after all that has been said, I know of no
better suggestion than that of Tannery.1 It is certain that
both the division of the ecliptic into 360 degrees and that of
the vvy6r\\i^ov into 360 time-degrees were adopted by the
Greeks from Babylon. 
Now the earliest division of the
ecliptic was into 12 parts, the signs, and the question is, how
were the signs subdivided ? Tannery observes that, accord-
ing to the cuneiform inscriptions, as well as the testimony of
Greek authors, the sign was divided into parts one of which
(dargatu) was double of the other (mwrran), the former being
l/30th, the other (called stadium by Manilius) l/60th, of the
sign; the former division would give 360 parts, the latter 720
parts for the whole circle. The latter division was more
natural, in view of the long-established system of sexagesimal
fractions; it also had the advantage of corresponding toler-
ably closely to the apparent diameter of the sun in comparison
with the circumference of the sun's apparent circle. But, on
the other hand, the double fraction, the 1/3Oth, was contained
in the circle of the zodiac approximately the same number of
times as there are days in the year, and consequently corre-
sponded nearly to the distance described by the sun along the
zodiac in one day. It would seem that this advantage was
sufficient to turn the scale in favour of dividing each sign of
the zodiac into 30 parts, giving 360 parts for the whole
circle. While the Chaldaeans thus divided the ecliptic into
360 parts, it does not appear that they applied the same divi-
sion to the equator or any other circle. They measured angles
in general by ells, an ell representing 2°, so that the complete
circle contained 180, not 360, parts, which they called ells.
The explanation may perhaps be that the Chaldaeans divided
1 Tannery, ' La coudee astronomique et les anciennes divisions du
cercle' (Memoires scientifiques, ii, pp. 256-68).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

216 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
the diameter of the circle into 60 ells in accordance with their
usual sexagesimal division, and then came to divide the cir-
cumference into 180 such ells on the ground that the circum-
ference is roughly three times the diameter. The measure-
ment in ells and dactyli (of which there were 24 to the ell)
survives in Hipparchus (On the Phaenomena ofEudoxus and
Aratus), and some measurements in terms of the same units
are given by Ptolemy. It was Hipparchus who first divided
the circle in general into 360 parts or degrees, and the
introduction of this division coincides with his invention of
trigonometry.
The contents of Hypsicles's tract need not detain us long.
The problem is: If we know the ratio which the length of the
longest day bears to the length of the shortest day at any
given place, to find how many time-degrees it takes any given
sign to rise; and, after this has been found, the author finds
what length of time it takes any given degree in any sign to
rise, i.e. the interval between the rising of one degree-point on
the ecliptic and that of the next following. It is explained
that the longest day is the time during which one half of the
zodiac (Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius) rises,
and the shortest day the time during which the other half
(Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, Gemini) rises.
Now at Alexandria the longest day is to the shortest as 7
to 5; the longest therefore contains 210 ' time-degrees', the
shortest 150/ The two quadrants Cancer-Virgo and Libra-
Sagittarius take the same time to rise, namely 105 time-
degrees, and the two quadrants Capricornus-Pisces and Aries-
Gemini each take the same time, namely 75 time-degrees.
It is further assumed that the times taken by Virgo, Leo,
Cancer, Gemini, Taurus, Aries are in descending arithmetical
progression, while the times taken by Libra, Scorpio, Sagit-
tarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces continue the same de-
scending arithmetical series. The following lemmas are used
and proved:
I. If a1? a2...an, 
an+l, an+2... a2n is a descending arithmeti-
cal progression of 2n terms with S (= ax~a2 = a2 — c&3 = ...)
as common difference,
( 
+ 
+...+a2n) 
=n2S.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HYPSICLES 
217
II. If c&j, a2... an... a2w-i is a descending arithmetical pro-
gression of 27i— 1 terms with 8 as common difference and an
is the middle term, then
a1 + a 2+... + a2n_1 = 
(2n-l)an.
III. If av a2...an, 
#n+1... cs2Tt is a descending arithmetical
progression of 2 n terms, then
Now let A, B, G be the descending series the sum of which
is 105, and D, E, F the next three terms in the same series
the sum of which is 75, the common difference being 8; we
then have, by (I),
-(D + E+ F) = 95, or 30 = 98,
and 8= 3±.
Next, by (II), A+B+C= 
SB, or 3 5 = 105, and B = 35;
therefore A, B, C, D, E, .Fare equal to 38§, 35, 31|, 28§, 25,
2If time-degrees respectively, which the author of the tract
expresses in time-degrees and minutes as 38*20^ 35*, 31f40',
28* 20r, 25*, 21* 40'. We have now to carry through the same
procedure for each degree in each sign. If the difference
between the times taken to rise by one sign and the next
is 3* 20r, what is the difference for each of the 30 degrees in
the sign ? We have here 30 terms followed by 30 other terms
of the same descending arithmetical progression, and the
formula (I) gives 3*. 20r= (3O)2cZ5 where d is the common
difference; therefore d = ^ 
x 3*. 20r= 0* 0r 13" 20w. Lastly,
take the sign corresponding to 21*40'. This is the sum of
a descending arithmetical progression of 30 terms alt a2 ... a30
with common difference 0* 0r 13" 20/r/. Therefore, by (III),
21* 40'= ^(oj + o^), whence o1 + a 3 0= 1* 26r 40". 
Now,
since there are 30 terms ax, a2... a30, we have
It follows that a30 = 0* 40' 6" 40'" and ax = 0* 46r 33" 20"',
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

218 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
and from these and the common difference 0* 0'13"20'" all
the times corresponding to all the degrees in the circle can be
found.
The procedure was probably, as Tannery thinks, taken
direct from the Babylonians, who would no doubt use it for
the purpose of enabling the time to be determined at any
hour of the night. Another view is that the object was
astrological rather than astronomical (Manitius). In either
case the method was exceedingly rough, and the assumed
increases and decreases in the times of the risings of the signs
in arithmetical progression are not in accordance with the
facts. The book could only have been written before the in-
vention of trigonometry by Hipparchus, for the problem of
finding the times of rising of the signs is really one of
spherical trigonometry, and these times were actually cal-
culated by Hipparchus and Ptolemy by means of tables of
chords.
DIONYSODORUS is known in the first place as the author of
a solution of the cubic equation subsidiary to the problem of
Archimedes, On the Sphere and Cylinder, II. 4, To cut a given
sphere by a plane so that the volumes of the segments have to
one another a given ratio (see above, p. 46). Up to recently
this Dionysodorus was supposed to be Dionysodorus of Amisene
in Pontus, whom Suidas describes as ' a mathematician worthy
of mention in the field of education'. But we now learn from
a fragment of the Herculaneum Roll, No. 1044, thatl Philonides
was a pupil, first of Eudemus, and afterwards of Dionysodorus,
the son of Dionysodorus the Caunian'. Now Eudemus is
evidently Eudemus of Pergamum to whom Apollonius dedi-
cated the first two Books of his Conies, and Apollonius actually
asks him to show Book II to Philonides. In another frag-
ment Philonides is said to have published some lectures by
Dionysodorus. Hence our Dionysodorus may be Dionysodorus
of Caunus and a contemporary of Apollonius, or very little
later.1 A Dionysodorus is also mentioned by Heron2 as the
author of a tract On the Spire (or tore) in which he proved
that, if d be the diameter of the revolving circle which
1 W. Schmidt in Bibliotheca mathematica, iv3, pp. 321-5.
2 Heron, Metrica, ii. 13, p. 128. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIONYSODORUS 
219
generates the tore, and c the distance of its centre from the
axis of revolution,
(volume of tore): TTC2 . d = %7rd2: \cd,
that is, 
(volume of tore) = -|7r2. cd2,
which is of course the product of the area of the generating
circle and the length of the path of its centre of gravity. The
form in which the result is stated, namely that the tore is to
the cylinder with height d and radius c as the generating
circle of the tore is to half the parallelogram cd, indicates
quite clearly that Dionysodorus proved his result by the same
procedure as that employed by Archimedes in the Method and
in the book On Conoids and Spheroids; and indeed the proof
on Archimedean lines is not difficult.
Before passing to the mathematicians who are identified
with the discovery and development of trigonometry, it will
be convenient, I think, to dispose of two more mathematicians
belonging to the last century B.C., although this involves
a slight departure from chronological order; I mean Posidonius
and Geminus.
POSIDONIUS, a Stoic, the teacher of Cicero, is known as
Posidonius of Apamea (where he was born) or of Khodes
(where he taught); his date may be taken as approximately
135-51 B.C. In pure mathematics he is mainly quoted as the
author of certain definitions, or for views on technical terms,
e.g. ' theorem' and ' problem', and subjects belonging to ele-
mentary geometry. More important were his contributions
to mathematical geography and astronomy. He gave his
great work on geography the title On the Ocean, using the
word which had always had such a fascination for the Greeks;
its contents are known to us through the copious quotations
from it in Strabo; it dealt with physical as well as mathe-
matical geography, the zones, the tides and their connexion
with the moon, ethnography and all sorts of observations made
during extensive travels. 
His astronomical book bore the
title Meteorologica or irepl fierediptov, and, while Geminus
wrote a commentary on or exposition of this work, we may
assign to it a number of views quoted from Posidonius in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

220 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
Cleomedes's work De motu drculari corporum caelestium.
Posidonius also wrote a separate tract on the size of the sun.
The two things which are sufficiently important to deserve
mention here are (1) Posidonius's measurement of the circum-
ference of the earth, (2) his hypothesis as to the distance and
size of the sun.
(1) He estimated the circumference of the earth in this
way. He assumed (according to Cleomedes1) that, whereas
the star Canopus, invisible in Greece, was just seen to graze the
horizon at Rhodes, rising and setting again immediately, the
meridian altitude of the same star at Alexandria was ' a fourth
part of a sign, that is, one forty-eighth part of the zodiac
circle' (= 7-|°); and he observed that the distance between
the two places (supposed to lie on the same meridian) ' was
considered to be 5,000 stades'. The circumference of the
earth was thus made out to be 240,000 stades. 
Unfortunately
the estimate of the difference of latitude, 7-J°, was very far
from correct, the true difference being 5^° only; moreover
the estimate of 5,000 stades for the distance was incorrect,
being only the maximum estimate put upon it by mariners,
while some put it at 4,000 and Eratosthenes, by observations
of the shadows of gnomons, found it to be 3,750 stades only.
Strabo, on the other hand, says that Posidonius favoured ' the
latest of the measurements which gave the smallest dimen-
sions to the earth, namely about 180,000 stades'.2 This is
evidently 48 times 3,750, so that Posidonius combined Erato-
sthenes's figure of 3,750 stades with the incorrect estimate
of 7\° for the difference of latitude, although Eratosthenes
presumably obtained the figure of 3,750 stades from his own
estimate (250,000 or 252,000; of the circumference of the earth
combined with an estimate of the diffeience of latitude which
was about 5f° and therefore near the truth.
(2) Cleomedes3 tells us that Posidonius supposed the circle
in which the sun apparently moves round the earth to be
10,000 times the size of a circular section of the earth through
its centre, and that with this assumption he combined the
1 Cleomedes, De motu circular}, i. 10, pp. 92-4.
2 Strabo, ii. c. 95.
3 Cleomedes, op. cit. ii. 1, pp. 144-6, p. 98. 1-5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

POSIDONIUS 
221
statement of Eratosthenes (based apparently upon hearsay)
that at Syene, which is under the summer tropic, and
throughout a circle round it of 300 stades in diameter, the
upright gnomon throws no shadow at noon. It follows from
this that the diameter of the sun occupies a portion of the
sun's circle 3,000,000 stades in length; in other words, the
diameter of the sun is 3,000,000 stades. The assumption that
the sun's circle is 10,000 times as large as a great circle of the
earth was presumably taken from Archimedes, who had proved
in the Sand-reckoner that the diameter of the sun's orbit is
less than 10,000 times that of the earth; Posidonius in fact
took the maximum value to be the true value; but his esti-
mate of the sun's size is far nearer the truth than the estimates
of Aristarchus, Hipparchus, and Ptolemy. Expressed in terms
of the mean diameter of the earth, the estimates of these
astronomers give for the diameter of the sun the figures 6|,
12§, and 5f respectively; Posidonius's estimate gives 39J, the
true figure being 108-9.
In elementary geometry Posidonius is credited by Proclus
with certain definitions. 
He defined ' figure' as ' confining
limit' (nepas avyKXdov) 1 and ' parallels' as ' those lines which,
being in one plane, neither converge nor diverge, but have all
the perpendiculars equal which are drawn from the points of
one line to the other '.2 (Both these definitions are included
in the Definitions of Heron.) He also distinguished seven
species of quadrilaterals, and had views on the distinction
between theorem and problem. 
Another indication of his
interest in the fundamentals of elementary geometry is the
fact3 that he wrote a separate work in refutation of the
Epicurean Zeno of Sidon, who had objected to the very begin-
nings of the Elements on the ground that they contained un-
proved assumptions. Thus, said Zeno, even Eucl.L 1 requires it
to be admitted that ' two straight lines cannot have a common
segment'; and, as regards the ' proof' of this fact deduced
from the bisection of a circle by its diameter, he would object
that it has to be assumed that two arcs of circles cannot have
a common part. Zeno argued generally that, even if we
admit the fundamental principles of geometry, the deductions
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 143. 8. 
2 Ib., p. 176. 6-10.
8 Ib., pp. 199. 14-200. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

222 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
from them cannot be proved without the admission of some-
thing else as well which has not been included in the said
principles, and he intended by means of these criticisms to
destroy the whole of geometry.1 We can understand, there-
fore, that the tract of Posidonius was a serious work.
A definition of the centre of gravity by one ' Posidonius a
Stoic' is quoted in Heron's Mechanics, but, as the writer goes
on to say that Archimedes introduced a further distinction, we
may fairly assume that the Posidonius in question is not
Posidonius of Rhodes, but another, perhaps Posidonius of
Alexandria, a pupil of Zeno of Cittium in the third cen-
tury B.C.
We now come to GEMINUS, a very important authority on
many questions belonging to the history of mathematics, as is
shown by the numerous quotations from him in Proclus's
Commentary on Euclid, Book I. 
His date and birthplace are
uncertain, and the discussions on the subject now form a whole
literature for which reference must be made to Manitius's
edition of ihe so-called Gemini elementa astronomiae (Teubner,
1898) and the article 'Geminus' in Pauly-Wissowa's Real*
Eneyclopadie. The doubts begin with his name. Petau, who
included the treatise mentioned in his Uranologion (Paris,
1630), took it to be the Latin Geminus. Manitius, the latest
editor, satisfied himself that it was Geminus, a Greek name,
judging from the fact that it consistently appears with the
properispomenon accent in Greek (Te^uvos), while it is also
found in inscriptions with the spelling Pe/xe^oy; Manitius
suggests the derivation from ye/x, as 'Epywos from epy, and
'AXegtvos from d\e£; he compares also the unmistakably
Greek names 'IKTWOS, Kparcvos. Now, however, we are told
(by Tittel) that the name is, after all, the Latin G&ninus,
that Tejilvo^ came to be so written through false analogy
with 'AXegivos, &c, and that Te^e^oy, if the reading is
correct, is also wrongly formed on the model of 'Avraveivos,
'Aypiirireiva. The occurrence of a Latin name in a centre
of Greek culture need not surprise us, since Romans settled in
such centres in large numbers during the last century B.C.
Geminus, however, in spite of his name, was thoroughly Greek.
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 214. 18-215 13, p. 216. 10-19, p. 217. 10-23.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEMINUS 
223
An upper limit for his date is furnished by the fact that he
wrote a commentary on or exposition of Posidonius'js work
nepl fjL€T€<Dpcov; on the other hand, Alexander Aphrodisiensis
(about A.D. 210) quotes an important passage from an 'epitome'
of this egfjyrjo-i? by Geminus. The view most generally
accepted is that he was a Stoic philosopher, born probably
in the island of Rhodes, and a pupil of Posidonius, and that
he wrote about 73-67 B.C.
Of Geminus's works that which has most interest for us
is a comprehensive work on mathematics. Prod us, though
he makes great use of it, does not mention its title, unless
indeed, in the passage where, after quoting from Geminus
a classification of lines which never meet, he says ' these
remarks I have selected from the <f>i\oKa\ia of Geminus',1
the word c/yiXoKaXta is a title or an alternative title. Pappus,
however, quotes a work of Geminus * on the classification of
the mathematics' (kv ro> nepl rrjs TS>V [laOr^iidrcov Tdgeas),
while Eutocius quotes from l the sixth book of the doctrine of
the mathematics' (kv T£> €KTG> rfjs 
TS>V iiaOrnidrcov 
Qecopias).
The former title corresponds well enough to the long extract
on the division of the mathematical sciences into arithmetic,
geometry, mechanics, astronomy, optics, geodesy, canonic
(musical harmony) and logistic which Proclus gives in his
first prologue, and also to the fragments contained in the
Anonymi variae collectiones published by Hultsch in his
edition of Heron; but it does not suit most of the other
passages borrowed by Proclus. The correct title was most
probably that given by Eutocius, The Doctrine, or Theory,
of the Mathematics; and Pappus probably refers to one
particular section of the work, say the first Book. If the
sixth Book treated of conies, as we may conclude from
Eutocius's reference, there must have been more Books to
follow; for Proclus has preserved us details about higher
curves, which must have come later. 
If again Geminus
finished his work and wrote with the same fullness about the
other branches of mathematics as he did about geometry,
there must have been a considerable number of Books
altogether. It seems to have been designed to give a com-
plete view of the whole science of mathematics, and in fact
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 177. 24.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

224 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
to have been a sort of encyclopaedia of the subject. The
quotations of Proclus from Geminus's work do not stand
alone; we have other collections of extracts, some more and
some less extensive, and showing varieties of tradition accord-
ing to the channel through which they came down. The
scholia to Euclid's Elements, Book I, contain a considerable
part of the commentary on the Definitions of Book I, and are
valuable in that they give Geminus pure and simple, whereas
Proclus includes extracts from other authors. Extracts from
Geminus of considerable length are included in the Arabic
commentary by an-Nairizi (about A.D. 900) who got them
through the medium of Greek commentaries on Euclid,
especially that of Simplicius. 
It does not appear to be
doubted any longer that 'Aganis' in an-Nairizi is really
Geminus; this is inferred from the close agreement between
an-Nairizfs quotations from (Aganis' and the correspond-
ing passages in Proclus; the difficulty caused by the fact
that Simplicius calls Aganis 'socius noster' is met by the
suggestion that the particular word socius is either the
result of the double translation from the Greek or means
nothing more, in the mouth of Simplicius, than ' colleague'
in the sense of a worker in the same field, or l authority '.
A few extracts again are included in the Anonymi variae
collectiones in Hultsch's Heron. Nos. 5-14 give definitions of
geometry, logistic, geodesy and their subject-matter, remarks
on bodies as continuous magnitudes, the three dimensions as
' principles' of geometry, the purpose of geometry, and lastly
on optics, with its subdivisions, optics proper, Catoptrica and
o-KrjvoypafaKrj, scene-painting (a sort of perspective), with some
fundamental principles of optics, e.g. that all light travels
along straight lines (which are broken in the cases of reflection
and refraction), and the division between optics and natural
philosophy (the theory of light), it being the province of the
latter to investigate (what is a matter of indifference to optics)
whether (1) visual rays issue from the eye, (2) images proceed
from the object and impinge on the eye, or (3) the intervening
air is aligned or compacted with the beam-like breath or
emanation from the eye.
Nos. 80-6 again in the same collection give the Peripatetic
explanation of the name mathematics, adding that the term
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEMINUS 
225
was applied by the early Pythagoreans more particularly
to geometry and arithmetic, sciences which deal with the pure,
the eternal and the unchangeable, but was extended by later
writers to cover what we call * mixed' or applied mathematics,
which, though theoretical, has to do with sensible objects, e.g.
astronomy and optics. Other extracts from Geminus are found
in extant manuscripts in connexion with Damianus's treatise
on optics (published by R. Schone, Berlin, 1897). The defini-
tions of logistic and geometry also appear, but with decided
differences, in the scholia to Plato's Charmides 165 E. Lastly,
isolated extracts appear in Eutocius, (1) a remark reproduced
in the commentary on Archimedes's Plane Equilibriums to
the effect that Archimedes in that work gave the name of
postulates to what are really axioms, (2) the statement that
before Apollonius's time the conies were produced by cutting
different cones (right-angled, acute-angled, and obtuse-angled)
by sections perpendicular in each case to a generator.1
The object of Geminus's work was evidently the examina-
tion of the first principles, the logical building up of mathe-
matics on the basis of those admitted principles, and the
defence of the whole structure against the criticisms of
the enemies of the science, the Epicureans and Sceptics, some
of whom questioned the unproved principles, and others the
logical validity of the deductions from them. 
Thus in
geometry Geminus dealt first with the principles or hypotheses
(dpxai, viro6e(T€i$) and then with the logical deductions, the
theorems and problems (rot /xera ras dpxas)- The distinction
is between the things which must be taken for granted but
are incapable of proof and the things which must not be
assumed but are matter for demonstration. The principles
consisting of definitions, postulates, and axioms, Geminus
subjected them severally to a critical examination from this
point of view, distinguishing carefully between postulates and
axioms, and discussing the legitimacy or otherwise of those
formulated by Euclid in each class. In his notes on the defini-
tions Geminus treated them historically, giving the various
alternative definitions which had been suggested for each
fundamental concept such as ' line', ' surface',' figure '/body',
' angle', &c, and frequently adding instructive classifications
1 Eutocius, Comm. on Apollonius's Conies, ad init.
1523.2 
Q
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

226 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
of the different species of the thing defined. 
Thus in the
case of 'lines' (which include curves) he distinguishes, first,
the composite (e.g. a broken line forming an angle) and the
incomposite. 
The incomposite are subdivided into those
' forming a figure' {(rx^fiaTonoiovarai) or determinate (e.g.
circle, ellipse, cissoid) and those not forming a figure, inde-
terminate and extending without limit (e.g. straight line,
parabola, hyperbola, conchoid). In a second classification
incomposite lines are divided into (1)' simple', namely the circle
and straight line, the one * making a figure', the other extend-
ing without limit, and (2) 'mixed'. 
'Mixed' lines again are
divided into (a) ' lines in planes', one kind being a line meet-
ing itself (e.g. the cissoid) and another a line extending
without limit, and (b) 'lines on solids', subdivided into lines
formed by sections (e.g. conic sections, spiric curves) and
Mines round solids' (e.g. a helix round a cylinder, sphere, or
cone, the first of which is uniform, homoeomeric, alike in all
its parts, while the others are non-uniform). Geminus gave
a corresponding division of surfaces into simple and mixed,
the former being plane surfaces and spheres, while examples
of the latter are the tore or anchor-ring (though formed by
the revolution of a circle about an axis) and the conicoids of
revolution (the right-angled conoid, the obtuse-angled conoid,
and the two spheroids, formed by the revolution of a para-
bola, a hyperbola, and an ellipse respectively about their
axes). He observes that, while there are three homoeomeric
or uniform ' lines' (the straight line, the circle, and the
cylindrical helix), there are only two homoeomeric* surfaces,
the plane and the sphere. Other classifications are those of
'angles-' (according to the nature of the two lines or curves
which form them) and of figures and plane figures.
When Proclus gives definitions, &c, by Posidonius, it is
evident that he obtained them from Geminus's work. Such
are Posidonius's definitions of ' figure' and ' parallels ', and his
division of quadrilaterals into seven kinds. We may assume
further that, even where Geminus did not mention the name
of Posidonius, he was, at all events so far as the philosophy of
mathematics was concerned, expressing views which were
mainly those of his master.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEMINUS 
227
Attempt to prove the Parallel-Postulate.
Geminus devoted much attention to the distinction between
postulates and axioms, giving the views of earlier philoso-
phers and mathematicians (Aristotle, Archimedes, Euclid,
Apollonius, the Stoics) on the subject as well as his own. It
was important in view of the attacks of the Epicureans and
Sceptics on mathematics, for (as Geminus says) it is as futile
to attempt to prove the indemonstrable (as Apollonius did
when he tried to prove the axioms) as it is incorrect to assume
what really requires proof, ' as Euclid did in the fourth postu-
late [that all right angles are equal] and in the fifth postulate
[the parallel-postulate] \1
The fifth postulate was the special stumbling-block.
Geminus observed that the converse is actually proved by
Euclid in I. 17; also that it is conclusively proved that an
angle equal to a right angle is not necessarily itself a right
angle (e.g. the ' angle' between the circumferences of two semi-
circles on two equal straight lines with a common extremity
and at right angles to one another); we cannot therefore admit
that the converses are incapable of demonstration.2 And
' we have learned from the very pioneers of this science not to
have regard to mere plausible imaginings when it is a ques-
tion of the reasonings to be included in our geometrical
doctrine. As Aristotle says, it is as justifiable to ask scien-
tific proofs from a rhetorician as to accept mere plausibilities
from a geometer... So in this case (that of the parallel-
postulate) the fact that, when the right angles are lessened, the
straight lines converge is true and necessary; but the state-
ment that, since they converge more and more as they are
produced, they will sometime meet is plausible but not neces-
sary, in the absence of some argument showing that this is
true in the case of straight lines. For the fact that some lines
exist which approach indefinitely but yet remain non-secant
(dcrvfjL7rT(OToi), although it seems improbable and paradoxical,
is nevertheless true and fully ascertained with reference to
other species of lines [the hyperbola and its asymptote and
the conchoid and its asymptote, as Geminus says elsewhere].
May not then the same thing be possible in the case of
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 178-82. 4; 183. 14-184. 10.
2 Ib., pp. 183. 26-184. 5.
Q 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

228 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
straight lines which happens in the case of the lines referred
to ? Indeed, until the statement in the postulate is clinched
by proof, the facts shown in th-e case of the other lines may
direct our imagination the opposite way. And, though the
controversial arguments against the meeting of the straight
lines should contain much that is surprising, is there not all
the more reason why we should expel from our body of
doctrine this merely plausible and unreasoned (hypothesis) ?
It is clear from this that we must seek a proof of the present
theorem, and that it is alien to the special character of
postulates.' *
Much of this. might have been written by a modern
geometer. 
Geminus's attempted remedy was to substitute
a definition of parallels like that of Posidonius3 based on the
notion of equidistance. 
An-Nairizi gives the definition as
follows: * Parallel straight lines are straight lines situated in
the same plane and such that the distance between them, if
they are produced without limit in both directions at the same
time, is everywhere the same', to which Geminus adds the
statement that the said distance is the shortest straight line
that can be drawn between them. 
Starting from this,
Geminus proved to his own satisfaction the propositions of
Euclid regarding parallels and finally the parallel-postulate.
He first gave the propositions (1) that the 'distance ' between
the two lines as defined is perpendicular to both, and (2) that,
if a straight line is perpendicular to each of two straight lines
and meets both, the two straight lines are parallel, and the
'distance' is the intercept on the perpendicular (proved by
reductio ad absurdum). 
Next come (3) Euclid's propositions
I. 27, 28 that, if two lines are parallel, the alternate angles
made by any transversal are equal, &c. (easily proved by
drawing the two equal 'distances' through the points of
intersection with the transversal), and (4) Eucl. I. 29, the con-
verse of I. 28, which is proved by reductio ad absurdum, by
means of (2) and (3). Geminus still needs Eucl. I. 30, 31
(about parallels) and I. 33, 34 (the first two propositions
relating to parallelograms) for his final proof of the postulate,
which is to the following effect.
Let AB, CD be two straight lines met by the straight line
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 192. 5-193. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEMINUS 
229
EF, and let the interior angles BEF, EFD be together less
than two right angles.
Take any point H on FD and draw HK parallel to AB
meeting EF in K. 
Then, if we bisect EF at L, LF&t M, MF
at N, and so on, we shall at last have a length, as FN, less
than FK. 
Draw FG, NOP parallel to AB. 
Produce FO to Q,
and let FQ be the same multiple of FO that FE is of FN]
then shall AB, CD meet in Q.
Let $ be the middle point of FQ and R the middle point of
FS. Draw through R, S, Q respectively the straight lines
RPG, STU, QV parallel to EF. Join MR, LS and produce
them to T, V. Produce FG to U.
Then, in the triangles FON, ROP, two angles are equal
respectively, the vertically opposite angles FON, ROP and
the alternate angles NFO, PRO; and FO = OR; therefore
RP = FN.
And FN, PG in the parallelogram FNPG are equal; there-
fore RG = 2FN=FM 
(whence MR is parallel to FG or AB)
Similarly we prove that SU = 2 FM — FL, and LS is
parallel to FG or AB.
Lastly, by the triangles FLS, QVS, in which the sides FS,
SQ are equal and two angles are respectively equal, QV = FL.
Therefore QV = LE.
Since then EL} QV are equal and parallel, so are EQ, LV,
and (says Geminus) it follows that AB passes through Q.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

230 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
What follows is actually that both EQ and AB (or EB)
are parallel to ZF, and Geminus assumes that EQ, AB
are coincident (in other words, that through a given point
only one parallel can be drawn to a given straight line, an
assumption known as Playfair's Axiom, though it is actually
stated in Proclus on Eucl. I. 31).
The proof therefore, apparently ingenious as it is, breaks
down. Indeed the method is unsound from the beginning,
since (as Saccheri pointed out), before even the definition of
parallels by Geminus can be used, it has to be proved that
' the geometrical locus of points equidistant from a straight
line is a straight line', and this cannot be proved without a
postulate. But the attempt is interesting as the first which
has come down to us, although there must have been many
others by geometers earlier than Geminus.
Coming now to the things which follow from the principles
(TO, jiera ra? dp^ds), we gather from Proclus that Geminus
carefully discussed such generalities as the nature of elements,
the different views which had been held of the distinction
between theorems and problems, the nature and significance
of Stopicrfioi (conditions and limits of possibility), the meaning
of ' porism' in the sense in which Euclid used the word in his
Porisms as distinct from its other meaning of ' corollary', the
different sorts of problems and theorems, the two varieties of
Converses (complete and partial), topical or Zocus-theorems,
with the classification of loci. He discussed also philosophical
questions, e.g. the question whether a line is made up of
indivisible parts (e£ dpepooi/), which came up in connexion
with Eucl. I. 10 (the bisection of a straight line).
The book was evidently not less exhaustive as regards
higher geometry. Not only did Geminus mention the spiric
curves, conchoids and cissoids in his classification of curves;
he showed how they were obtained, and gave proofs, presum-
ably of their principal properties. 
Similarly he gave the
proof that there are three homoeomeric or uniform lines or
curves, the straight line, the circle and the cylindrical helix.
The proof of 'uniformity' (the property that any portion of
the line or curve will coincide with any other portion of the
same length) was preceded by a proof that, if two straight
lines be drawn from any point to meet a uniform line or curve
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEMINUS 
231
and make equal angles with it, the straight lines are equal.1
As Apollonius wrote on the cylindrical helix and proved the
fact of its uniformity, we may fairly assume that Geminus
was here drawing upon Apollonius.
Enough has been said to show how invaluable a source of
information Geminus's work furnished to Proclus and all
writers on the history of mathematics who had access to it.
In astronomy we know that Geminus wrote an egrjyrjo'LS of
Posidonius's work, the Meteorologica or nepl /xerecopcoi/. This
is the source of the famous extract made from Geminus by
Alexander Aphrodisiensis, and reproduced by Simplicius in
his commentary on the Physics of Aristotle,2 on which Schia-
parelli relied in his attempt to show that it was Heraclides of
Pontus, not Aristarchus of Samos, who first put forward the
heliocentric hypothesis. 
The extract is on the distinction
between physical and astronomical inquiry as applied to the
heavens. It is the business of the physicist to consider the
substance of the heaven and stars, their force and quality,
their coming into being and decay, and he is in a position to
prove the facts about their size, shape, and arrangement;
astronomy, on the other hand, ignores the physical side,
proving the arrangement of the heavenly bodies by considera-
tions based on the view that the heaven is a real Koo-fios, and,
when it tells us of the shapes, sizes and distances of the earth,
sun and moon, of eclipses and conjunctions, and of the quality
and extent of the movements of the heavenly bodies, it is
connected with the mathematical investigation of quantity,
size, form, or shape, and uses arithmetic and geometry to
prove its conclusions. Astronomy deals, not with causes, but
with facts; hence it often proceeds by hypotheses, stating
certain expedients by which the phenomena may be saved.
For example, why do the sun, the moon and the planets
appear to move irregularly ? To explain the observed facts
we may assume, for instance, that the orbits are eccentric
circles or that the stars describe epicycles on a carrying
circle; and then we have to go farther and examine other
ways in which it is possible for the phenomena to be brought
about. * Hence we actually find a certain person [Heraclides
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 112. 22-113. 3, p. 251. 3-11.
2 Simpl. in Phys., pp. 291-2, ed. Diels.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

232 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
of Pontus] coming forward and saying that, even on the
assumption that the earth moves in a Certain way, while
the sun is in a certain way at rest, the apparent irregularity
with reference to the sun may be saved.9 Philological con-
siderations as well as the other notices which we possess
about Heraclides make it practically certain that ' Heraclides
of Pontus' is an interpolation and that Geminus said TIS
simply, 'a certain person7, without any name, though he
doubtless meant Aristarchus of Samos.1
Simplicius says that Alexander quoted this extract from
the epitome of the egrjyrjais by Geminus. As the original
work was apparently made the subject of an abridgement, we
gather that it must have been of considerable scope. It is
a question whether egrjyrjcns means 'commentary' or 'ex-
position '; I am inclined to think that the latter interpretation
is the correct one, and that Geminus reproduced Posidonius's
work in its entirety with elucidations and comments; this
seems to me to be suggested by the words added by Simplicius
immediately after the extract 'this is the account given by
Geminus, or Posidonius in Geminus, of the difference between
physics and astronomy', which seems to imply that Geminus
in our passage reproduced Posidonius textually.
' Introduction to the Phaenomena' attributed to Geminus.
There remains the treatise, purporting to be by Geminus,
which has come down to us under the title Tejiiuov ela-aycoyfj
eh ra Qaivofieva? What, if any, is the relation of this work
to the exposition of Posidonius's Meteorologica or the epitome
of it just mentioned ? One view is that the original Isagoge
of Geminus and the e£rjyr](n$ of Posidonius were one and the
same work, though the Isagoge as we have it is not by
Geminus, but by an unknown compiler. The objections to
this are, first, that it does not contain the extract given by
Simplicius, which would have come in usefully at the begin-
ning of an Introduction to Astronomy, nor the other extract
given by Alexander from Geminus and relating to the rainbow
which seems likewise to have come from the
1 Cf. Aristarchus of Samos, pp. 275-83.
2 Edited by Manitius (Teubner, 1898).
3 Alex. Aphr. on Aristotle's Meteorologica. iii. 4. 9 (Ideler. ii, p. 128;
p. 152. 10, Hayduck).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEMINUS 
233
secondly, that it does not anywhere mention the name of
Posidonius (not, perhaps, an insuperable objection); and,
thirdly, that there are' views expressed in it which are not
those held by Posidonius but contrary to them. Again, the
writer knows how to give a sound judgement as between
divergent views, writes in good style on the whole, and can
hardly have been the mere compiler of extracts from Posi-
donius which the view in question assumes him to be. It
seems in any case safer to assume that the Isagoge and the
egrjyrjo-Ls were separate works. At the same time, the Isagoge,
as we have it, contains errors which we cannot attribute to
Geminus. The choice, therefore, seems to lie between two
alternatives: either the book is by Geminus in the main, but
has in the course of centuries suffered deterioration by inter-
polations, mistakes of copyists, and so on, or it is a compilation
of extracts from an original Isagoge by Geminus with foreign
and inferior elements introduced either by the compiler him-
self or by other prentice hands. The result is a tolerable ele-
mentary treatise suitable for teaching purposes and containing
the most important doctrines of Greek astronomy represented
from the standpoint of Hipparchus. Chapter 1 treats of the
zodiac, the solar year, the irregularity of the sun's motion,
which is explained by the eccentric position of the sun's orbit
relatively to the zodiac, the order and the periods of revolution
of the planets and the moon. In § 23 we are told that all
the fixed stars do not lie on one spherical surface, but some
are farther away than others—a doctrine due to the Stoics.
Chapter 2, again, treats of the twelve signs of the zodiac,
chapter 3 of the constellations, chapter 4 of the axis of
the universe and the poles, chapter 5 of the circles on the
sphere (the equator and the parallel circles, arctic, summer-
tropical, winter-tropical, antarctic, the colure-circles, the zodiac
or ecliptic, the horizon, the meridian, and the Milky Way),
chapter 6 of Day and Night, their relative lengths in different
latitudes, their lengthening and shortening, chapter 7 of
the times which the twelve signs take to rise. Chapter 8
is a clear, interesting and valuable chapter on the calendar,
the length of months and years and the various cycles, the
octaeteris, the 16-years and 160-years cycles, the 19-years
cycle of Euctemon (and Meton), and the cycle of Callippus
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

234 SUCCESSORS OF THE GREAT GEOMETERS
(76 years). Chapter 9 deals with the moon's phases, chapters
10, 11 with eclipses of the sun and moon, chapter 12 with the
problem of accounting for the motions of the sun, moon and
planets, chapter 13 with Risings and Settings and the various
technical terms connected therewith, chapter 14 with the
circles described by the fixed stars, chapters 15 and 16 with
mathematical and physical geography, the zones, &c. (Geminus
follows Eratosthenes's evaluation of the circumference of the
earth, not that of Posidonius). Chapter 17, on weather indica-
tions, denies the popular theory that changes of atmospheric
conditions depend on the rising and setting of certain stars,
and states that the predictions of weather (kirKTruiao-iai) in
calendars (7rapa7rrjyfjLaTa) are only derived from experience
and observation, and have no scientific value. Chapter 18 is
on the egeXiyfjios, the shortest period which contains an integral
number of synodic months, of days, and of anomalistic revolu-
tions of the moon; this period is three times the Chaldaean
period of 223 lunations used for predicting eclipses. The end
of the chapter deals with the maximum, mean, and minimum
daily motion of the moon. The chapter as a whole does not
correspond to the rest of the book; it deals with more difficult
matters, and is thought by Manitius to be a fragment only of
a discussion to which the compiler did not feel himself equal.
At the end of the work is a calendar (Parapegma) giving the
number of days taken by the sun to traverse each sign of
the zodiac, the risings and settings of various stars and the
weather indications noted by various astronomers, Democritus,
Eudoxus, Dositheus, Euctemon, Meton, Callippus; this calendar
is unconnected with the rest of the book and the contents
are in several respects inconsistent with it, especially the
division of the year into quarters which follows Callippus
rather than Hipparchus. Hence it has been, since Boeckh's
time, generally considered not to be the work of Geminus.
Tittel, however, suggests that it is not impossible that Geminus
may have reproduced an older Parapegma of Callippus.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

