MIRI
MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
RESEARCH INSTITUTE
Superintelligence Does Not Imply
Benevolence
Joshua Fox
MIRI Research Associate
Carl Shulman
MIRI Visiting Fellow
Abstract
As machines become capable of more autonomous and intelligent behavior, will they also
display more morally desirable behavior? Earth’s history tends to suggest that increasing
intelligence, knowledge, and rationality will result in more cooperative and benevolent
behavior. Animals with sophisticated nervous systems track and punish exploitative be-
havior, while rewarding cooperation. Humans form complex norms and social groups
of remarkable scale compared to other animals. Even within the human experience, the
accumulation of knowledge over time has been associated with reduced rates of violence
(Pinker 2007) and increases in the scope of cooperation (Wright 2001), from band to
tribe to city-state to nation to transnational organization. One might generalize from
this trend and argue that as machines approach and exceed human cognitive capacities,
Fox, Joshua, and Carl Shulman. 2010. “Superintelligence Does Not Imply Benevolence.”
In ECAP10: VIII European Conference on Computing and Philosophy, edited by Klaus Mainzer.
Munich: Verlag Dr. Hut.
This version contains minor changes.

moral behavior will improve in tandem. We argue that this picture neglects a critical
distinction between two conceptions of morality, and a related distinction between routes
from increased intelligence to more moral behavior.
One conception frames morality as a system for cooperation between entities with
diverse aims and the ability to aﬀect one another’s pursuit of those aims. Practices such
as reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971), help partners increase their respective reproductive
fitnesses. In the cooperative conception, the reason to perform moral behaviors, or to
dispose oneself to do so (Gauthier 1986), is to advance one’s own ends. Another, ax-
iological, conception holds that morality demands revision of our ultimate ends. This
conception is especially important for treatment of the helpless, e.g., nonhuman ani-
mals. Cooperative moral theories, e.g., Gauthier (1986), often can only derive moral
status for the helpless from cooperation with altruistic powerful agents.
We can then evaluate alternative paths from intelligence to moral behavior. First,
machines with greater instrumental rationality could better devise and implement co-
operative practices. Thus Hall (2007) argues that intelligent machines will out-cooperate
humans, at least with powerful peers. Second, on a Kantian view of morality, one might
think that as intelligent machines expanded their knowledge and capacities, they would
be directly motivated to revise their preferences to be more moral (Chalmers 2010).
We consider a particular counterexample to the Kantian view. Using a definition of
intelligence as ability to achieve goals in a wide range of environments (Legg 2008), we
discuss the AIXI formalism, which combines Solomonoﬀinduction with Bayesian de-
cision theory to optimize for unknown reward functions (Hutter 2005). AIXI, although
physically unrealizable, is a compactly specified superintelligence, provably optimal in
maximizing towards arbitrary goals, but has “no room” for the Kantian revision. Instead,
it would preserve arbitrary values in most situations (Omohundro 2008).
Thus we have reason to think that diverse intelligent machines would convergently
display a “drive” to cooperation with suﬃciently powerful partners for instrumental rea-
sons, even if this was not specifically engineered. Yet we have reason for pessimism about
the ultimate ends of intelligent machines not carefully engineered to be altruistic, and
so should work to avoid situations in which such systems are very powerful relative to
humanity (Yudkowsky 2008).

Extended Abstract
If machines become more intelligent than humans, does it follow that their intelligence
will lead them toward beneficial behavior toward humans even without specific eﬀorts
to design moral machines?
Earth’s history suggests that increasing intelligence, knowledge, and rationality re-
sult in an increase in cooperative behavior. Animals with sophisticated nervous systems
frequently track and punish exploitative behavior, while rewarding mutual aid (Trivers
1971). Over human history, the accumulation of cultural knowledge has been associated
with increases in the scope of cooperation from band to tribe to city-state to nation and
beyond (Wright 2001), with reduction in rates of violence (Pinker 2007). Peter Singer
(1981) interprets these trends as an “expanding circle” of moral concern, in which pre-
viously disdained groups are recognized as morally important; he projects continued
expansion of moral concern, including benevolence towards relatively powerless entities
such as nonhuman animals.
To evaluate the analogy between the expansion of cooperation to date and the behav-
ior of possible artificial intelligences, we distinguish three ways in which increased intel-
ligence might prompt behavior favorable to humans. First, intelligence might help the
AI notice instrumental benefits to benevolent behavior. Second, intelligence might help
the AI notice instrumental benefits to enduring benevolent dispositions, e.g., because
of imperfect deception. Third, intelligent reflection might cause the AI to intrinsically
desire human welfare, independently of instrumental concerns. We argue that while all
three factors played roles in human moral progress, the applicability of the first two to
future machine intelligences depends on some key empirical variables, and the third is
unlikely without particular design eﬀort and preconditions.
The first class, direct instrumental motivations, is a mainstay of everyday human
morality in modern societies. Even sociopaths will typically purchase the necessities of
life rather than attempting to seize them by force, in light of the costs of being caught.
Likewise, so long as institutions are capable of monitoring AI behavior and adminis-
tering rewards and punishments (including incapacitation), diverse decision processes
would produce an instrumental tendency toward compliance analogous to Omohun-
dro’s “AI drives” (Omohundro 2008). Increased intelligence could enable improved rep-
utation tracking, surveillance technology, and similar enforcement mechanisms (Hall
2007). Insofar as humanity, or machines directly concerned for human welfare, controls
suﬃciently stable and powerful institutions (relative to AI capability), intelligence may
lead to human benevolence regardless of AIs’ values.
Unfortunately, monitoring and policing techniques are imperfect: in many cases it is
prohibitively costly to maintain continuous incentives rather than trusting individuals.

Thus, in cases where one is at least partially “translucent,” i.e., where one’s trustwor-
thiness can be at least somewhat reliably inferred by observers, having a trustworthy
disposition can be beneficial because of the trust it engenders, even though this will
mean forgoing opportunities to exploit that trust (Gauthier 1986). It may therefore be
possible to incentivize weak early AIs to adopt verifiably benevolent dispositions that
would be retained even if the AIs later gain the power to renege (Hall 2007; Yudkowsky
2008). However, the viability of this approach depends on the credibility of such sig-
nals: if intelligence improves AIs’ deceptive ability faster than it improves their ability
to produce human-verifiable translucency, humans could not trust any apparent proof
of safety.
Both of the above mechanisms depend for their viability on the power relations be-
tween humans and AIs. The first approach (direct incentives for cooperation) works only
while humans maintain high relative power. The second approach requires high human
relative power during an initial time period in which AIs are incentivized to permanently
adopt particular dispositions, although not thereafter; it also requires the ability to ac-
curately evaluate signals about AI dispositions. We can consider more extreme cases,
where miscalculation, perhaps as a result of military or commercial competitive pres-
sure (Shulman 2009), leads to the production of superhumanly intelligent and powerful
AIs whose preferences have not been engineered for benevolence. Under those circum-
stances, the first and second proposed mechanisms would have no chance to operate;
the question then is whether the third proposed mechanism is likely to apply. Chalmers
(2010) notes this question, and considers both what he calls the “Humean possibility,” in
which a system’s intelligence is independent of its values, and the “Kantian possibility,”
in which many extremely intelligent beings would converge on (possibly benevolent)
substantive normative principles upon reflection.
In considering this question, it is helpful to have an explicit technical model of intel-
ligence. Legg (2008) constructs a “universal general intelligence” measure, quantifying
an arbitrary agent’s ability to discover and exploit patterns and achieve goals in a wide
range of environments, or more formally, the agent’s “expected performance with re-
spect to the universal [Kolmogorov complexity-weighted] distribution over the space
of all computable reward-summable environments.” Since our concern with AIs’ intel-
ligence stems from our concern about the consequences of AI power, Legg’s measure
of general-purpose ability to achieve goals is better suited to our purpose than more
anthropocentric measures of intelligence, such as a Turing test (Turing 1950).
One argument against the Kantian view is that we can in principle specify systems
that have any possible quantity of Legg’s “universal general intelligence” while possessing
arbitrary goals. With this measure, the problem of AI has in a sense already been solved
with the compactly specified theoretical model AIXI (Hutter 2005), which in essence

directly optimizes for almost exactly this quantity. AIXI, although incomputable, is
vastly superhuman in its ability to recognize computably approximable patterns, such
as “physics” or “human motivation,” and to use them to advance its goals. The AIXI
model has a free parameter for a reward function (as do many models in current use
in machine reinforcement learning). As such, it might be constructed to optimize for
the expectation of any given pattern of sensory input. Such a machine would have no
mechanisms whereby reflection would change its goals; its actions would be entirely
determined by the dictates of its (fixed) expected reward calculations. Thus, if a good
computable approximation to AIXI were someday implemented, then it, at least, would
have no room for the Kantian move from reason to values.
A second argument against the Kantian view is that a Humean design is a stable equi-
librium. Unless the utility function describing a system’s preferences is self-referential,
i.e., unless it is built with higher-order intrinsic desires, a system that selects the ac-
tion that maximizes the value of a utility function will tend, ceteris paribus, to “lock in”
that utility function stably. Intelligences’ tendency to resist changing their initial goals
(for almost any goal they may initially have) follows from the fact that if a system is
initially optimizing for P, it will only knowingly choose self-modifications that increase
the amount of expected P—and in most cases, P will be higher if the system continues
to optimize for P. Thus, if an AI with an arbitrary non-benevolent goal function some-
how arises, and if humans do not have enough relative power to incentivize goal-change,
the AI will in most cases (Omohundro 2008) continue to have non-benevolent values
regardless of how much intelligence it acquires.
Perhaps the strongest argument in favor of the Kantian view is that we humans
change our goals under reflection. We are sometimes (albeit rarely, and weakly) mo-
tivated in action by moral argument, and we are sometimes normatively uncertain, in
that we anticipate that our views will evolve upon reflection, and we wish to act in ac-
cordance with the (yet unknown) outcome of that reasoning process. To the extent that
such eﬀects of reflection matter in human behavior, they could matter for at least some
AI systems, e.g., for a program very finely emulating a human brain (Sandberg and
Bostrom 2008).
More generally, humans often acquire intrinsic preferences for the correlates of in-
strumentally useful actions. If benevolent actions toward humans are initially rewarded,
any AI systems designed with this feature might similarly acquire enduring disposi-
tions toward human benevolence (even absent translucency). However, as described in
Omohundro (2008), and as noted above, such systems will in many cases self-modify
to prevent further preference evolution as soon as they know how to do so. Similarly,
any system that is designed with an intrinsic preference for coherent goals may general-
ize from useful cases of benevolence to benevolence in general. However, such systems

may equally generalize in less convenient ways, e.g., from useful cases of deception to
valuing deception in general. The outcome of non-motivated reasoning by such alien
systems may be farther from benevolence and other human moral intuitions than one
might think; Haidt (2001) presents strong evidence that human “moral reasoning” is
often rigged post hoc, and has less to do with abstract reasoning than we expect.
Thus, we have reason to think that diverse intelligent machines would convergently
display an instrumental tendency toward cooperation, but only with suﬃciently powerful
partners. Given suﬃcient translucency, diverse machines may also self-modify toward
enduring dispositions to cooperate with these initially powerful partners. But absent
such power diﬀerentials, we have reason for pessimism regarding the values of intelli-
gent machines not carefully engineered to be altruistic; we may need to learn to do AI
preference engineering in advance of such an occurrence (Yudkowsky 2008).

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Anna Salamon and other researchers from the Singularity In-
stitute for Artificial Intelligence for valuable comments.
References
Chalmers, David John. 2010. “The Singularity: A Philosophical Analysis.” Journal of Consciousness Studies
17 (9–10): 7–65. http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/imp/jcs/2010/00000017/
f0020009/art00001.
Gauthier, David P. 1986. Morals by Agreement. New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10 . 1093 /
0198249926.001.0001.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2001. “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to
Moral Judgment.” Psychological Review 108 (4): 814–834. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.108.4.814.
Hall, John Storrs. 2007. Beyond AI: Creating the Conscience of the Machine. Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books.
Hutter, Marcus. 2005. Universal Artificial Intelligence: Sequential Decisions Based On Algorithmic Probabil-
ity. Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/b138233.
Legg, Shane. 2008. “Machine Super Intelligence.” PhD diss., University of Lugano. http://www.
vetta.org/documents/Machine_Super_Intelligence.pdf.
Omohundro, Stephen M. 2008. “The Basic AI Drives.” In Artificial General Intelligence 2008: Proceedings
of the First AGI Conference,edited by Pei Wang, Ben Goertzel, and Stan Franklin, 483–492. Frontiers
in Artificial Intelligence and Applications 171. Amsterdam: IOS.
Pinker, Steven. 2007. “A History of Violence; We’re Getting Nicer Every Day.” New Republic, March 19.
http://www.tnr.com/article/history-violence-were-getting-nicer-every-day.
Sandberg, Anders, and Nick Bostrom. 2008. Global Catastrophic Risks Survey. Technical Report, 2008-1.
Future of Humanity Institute, University of Oxford. http://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/Reports/
2008-1.pdf.
Shulman, Carl. 2009. “Arms Control and Intelligence Explosions.” Paper presented at the 7th European
Conference on Computing and Philosophy (ECAP), Bellaterra, Spain, July 2–4.
Singer, Peter. 1981. The Expanding Circle: Ethics and Sociobiology. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Trivers, Robert L. 1971. “The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism.” Quarterly Review of Biology 46 (1): 35–
57. doi:http://www.jstor.org/stable/2822435.
Turing, A. M. 1950. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind 59 (236): 433–460. doi:10.1093/
mind/LIX.236.433.
Wright, Robert. 2001. Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny. New York: Vintage.
Yudkowsky, Eliezer. 2008. “Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk.” In
Global Catastrophic Risks, edited by Nick Bostrom and Milan M. Ćirković, 308–345. New York:
Oxford University Press.

