Citation: Spagnuolo, M.
Symmetrization of Mechanical
Response in Fibrous Metamaterials
through Micro-Shear Deformability.
Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660. https://
doi.org/10.3390/sym14122660
Academic Editor: Victor A.
Eremeyev
Received: 28 September 2022
Accepted: 1 December 2022
Published: 16 December 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
symmetry
S
S
Article
Symmetrization of Mechanical Response in Fibrous
Metamaterials through Micro-Shear Deformability
Mario Spagnuolo
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Architecture, University of Cagliari,
09123 Cagliari, Italy; mario.spagnuolo@unica.it
Abstract: The basic concept of this study consists of the investigation of symmetrization of the
mechanical response in extension and compression for ﬁbrous metamaterials endowed with a sym-
metric microstructure relative to the axial direction. It is known that generally, this response is
non-symmetric due to the different deformation mechanisms activated in the two tests. If a further
deformation mechanism based on the micro-shearing of connective elements is taken into account,
the global mechanical response is observed to be symmetric for given sets of stiffnesses. The studied
problem is addressed with the help of numerical simulations.
Keywords: generalized continuum mechanics; second gradient theories; metamaterials; axial tests;
numerical simulations
1. Introduction
The central content of this work consists of the study of the active role of connect-
ing elements in metamaterials whose microstructure is composed of ﬁbers arranged in
parallel planes (see Figure 1). This metamaterial, known in the literature as a panto-
graphic metamaterial [1], normally exhibits non-symmetrical behavior with respect to
extension/compression in uniaxial tests such as extension and compression. In fact, its
behavior is mainly determined by the deformations of the individual components, ﬁbers
or connecting elements, and, speciﬁcally, in the ﬁrst stage, the mechanical response is
basically determined by the torsion of the connecting cylinders between the two families
of ﬁbers and the bending of the ﬁbers themselves, while in the second stage of the test,
the elongation of the ﬁbers prevails. Since the elongation mechanism is activated earlier
in the extension test than in the compression test at the same modulus of the prescribed
displacement, there will be a strong asymmetry in the graphs of the two tests. This will be
shown and analyzed in detail in the following sections.
Figure 1. Example of pantographic architecture.
As in this work, attention is paid to metamaterials, it is useful to clarify exactly in
what sense the metamaterial concept is intended here. First of all, the contemporary
inductivist fashioned school pretends to deﬁne a metamaterial as a material which cannot
be found in nature and which exhibits an exotic behavior; this is generally obtained by
looking for randomly generated microstructures and hoping that in the number of the
Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym14122660
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
2 of 11
sorted microstructures someone presents such exotic behaviors. The present work lies
in a totally different school: the synthesis of a microstructure is a procedural step that
follows the choice of the macroscopic mechanical behavior. In other words, one chooses
the governing equations and only a posteriori looks for the microstructure that, once
homogenized, produces a continuum governed by such equations.
Among the mechanical metamaterials [2], a set of interest is represented by ﬁbrous
metamaterials, i.e., metamaterials whose microstructure is composed of ﬁbers that can
be deformed and interact with each other in different ways [3,4]. These metamaterials
are of interest for at least two features: (i) they are very easy to manufacture and (ii) they
exhibit very high mechanical performances. In nature, ﬁbrous microstructures are often
present: different microstructures lead to substantially dissimilar mechanical properties on
the macroscopic scale. Notable examples of natural ﬁbrous microstructures are typically
encountered in bone tissue or wood [5].
Moreover, as said, ﬁbrous metamaterials are easy to manufacture, both with classical
manufacturing techniques and with more modern techniques as 3D printing: the pos-
sibilities opened by the rapid development of additive manufacturing technologies are
huge [6].
A very well-performing geometry for the ﬁbrous microstructure is known as the
pantographic microstructure. It consists in at least two layers of parallel ﬁbers that are
connected to each other (see Figure 1) by some connective elements, generally also referred
to as pivots in the literature. It has been proven that, when using pantographic cells as
a metamaterial microstructure, it is necessary, after homogenization, to use generalized
continua [7] and to take into account the second gradient of displacement in the strain
energy. Thus, the pantographic system consisting in ﬁbers and pivots can be modeled by
taking into account all the possible deformations of these elements: bending and stretching
of ﬁbers and torsion and shear of pivots in a ﬁrst simpliﬁed model. More speciﬁcally, due
to the fact that the study of metamaterials is a multiscale problem, one has to consider at
least two scales, and some misunderstandings can be produced. In particular, it will be
shown that the strain energy of the homogenized continuum will contain a shear term
which is related to the torsion of the pivots, while the shear of the pivots will contribute in
a different way. For this reason, the shear of the continuum will be referred to as macro-
shear or simply shear, while the shear of pivots will be referred to as micro-shear. In fact,
when the micro-deformability of pivots is not negligible, it may be appropriate to specify
the kinematics of the introduced generalized continua with two placement ﬁelds [8]. It
is noteworthy that such micro-mechanisms play a signiﬁcant role in the deformation of
natural as well as synthesized granular materials [9].
As it will become clear in the following, a fundamental role is played by the ﬁber
bending. In fact, this deformation is related to an energetic term that includes the second
gradient of displacement. For this reason, it has been widely attempted to produce panto-
graphic metamaterials whose pivots are perfect hinges, allowing for the experimental direct
measure of a second-gradient contribution. To this aim, the role of pivots in the mechanics
of pantographic metamaterials is crucial, and different studies have been addressed to
their analysis. In a nutshell, it can be easily understood that the micro-shear of pivots
turns non-negligible when they are thin. When, on the other hand, the height-to-diameter
ratio of the pivot is of a very small size, then the torsion energy of the pivots dominates
over the bending energy of the ﬁbers and causes the contribution of the second gradient
to be negligible. From the point of view of the homogenisation of the microstructure,
a ﬁrst-gradient continuum is obtained in this case, as shown in [10].
In Section 2, a continuum second-gradient model is presented and discussed for the
study of pantographic metamaterial based on phenomenological evidence of the micro-
shear of pivots. Section 3 contains numerical analyses that clarify the previous discussions.

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
3 of 11
2. A Symmetrically Designed Microstructure Inducing Second-Gradient Dependence
in Homogenized Energy
In his seminal paper [11], Paul Germain established that, when studying microstruc-
tured continua and given some particular conditions, then the continuum theory that must
be used is based on a strain energy that also depends on the second gradient of displace-
ment. Yet even if the micro and macro levels are not distinctly decoupled, the second-
gradient continuum model can be successfully used to obtain extremely close estimates
from experiments [12].
This second-gradient model [1,12] is a 2-D representation, adequate for the description
of tests that only induce in-plane deformations and stresses. Assuming a placement
ﬁeld that maps each point in the reference conﬁguration to its position in the deformed
conﬁguration (see Figure 2 for employed terminology), we introduce the orthogonal basis
(D1, D2) on the reference conﬁguration, with (D1, D2) oriented in the directions of the two
families of ﬁbers that make up the microstructure under study (see Figure 2).
Figure 2. Reference conﬁguration of pantographic microstructure.
The microstructure shown in Figure 2 can be modeled by means of a discrete model
where the deformations of the ﬁbers are written in terms of different kinds of springs.
This discrete model can be then homogenized for obtaining the continuum strain energy
discussed in the following. To this aim, consider a 2D continuum whose reference shape is
given by a rectangular domain Ω= [0, La] × [0, Lb] ⊂R2, where La and Lb are shown in
Figure 2. Very often, it is assumed that La = 3Lb. This aspect ratio is generally considered
everywhere in the literature on pantographic metamaterials. Its meaning is due to the
fact that, when studying this kind of metamaterial, one is mainly interested in bending of
ﬁbers (this deformation, in fact, is related to second gradient of the placement ﬁeld in the
continuum model), and for observing a pure bending deformation, it is necessary to have at
least a 1:3 ratio. In fact, considering the sample as divided in three squares, only the central
one has sides that are not clamped. In the clamped extremities, important contributions
due to the elongation of ﬁbers must also be considered. Therefore, the minimal aspect ratio
for observing “unclamped” bending of ﬁbers is 1:3. If only planar motions are considered,
then the current shape of the rectangle is mathematically described by a regular placement
function χ : Ω→R2. By means of asymptotic homogenization of the microstructure and
assuming that χ(·) is at least twice differentiable, the macroscopic strain energy obtained
by homogenizing the discrete system [1] is
U(χ(·))
=
Z
Ω∑
α
Ke
2 (||FDα|| −1)2 dΩ
+
Z
Ω∑
α
Kb
2
∇F|Dα ⊗Dα · ∇F|Dα ⊗Dα
||FDα||2
(1)
−
 FDα
||FDα|| · ∇F|Dα ⊗Dα
||FDα||
2#
dΩ

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
4 of 11
where F denotes the deformation gradient ∇χ, and (∇F|Dα ⊗Dα)β = Fβ
α,α = χβ
,αα. It
should be remarked that the Greek indices take values in the range 1, 2. Thus, there is
a ﬁrst integral in Equation (1) representing the stretching energy of the ﬁbers (Ke is the
stretching stiffness), whereas the second integral accounts for the bending energy of the
ﬁbers (Kb is the bending stiffness). Note that the bending energy is written up in terms of
the gradient of the deformation tensor ∇2F that corresponds to a second gradient of the
placement ﬁeld ∇2χ. No energy term relative to the pivots has been added to the strain
energy (1). However, in this case, the pivots are said to be perfect.
When the pivots are not obtained as perfect hinges, then one has to take into account
their deformations. First, it is necessary to consider the torsion of the cylinders used to
realize the pivots. An energetic term due to the torsion of the pivots can be obtained
by considering the variation of the angle between the two ﬁbers connected by a given
pivot. The angle variation, in fact, corresponds to a torsion of the cylinder (see Figure 3).
Following [1], one can express this energetic term as follows:
Us(χ(·)) =
Z
Ω
Ks
2
arccos
 FD1
||FD1|| ·
FD2
||FD2||

−π
2

β
dΩ
(2)
where, generally, the exponent β can be taken to be equal to 2. This energetic term is not
able to predict all kinds of behaviors (for example, for samples manufactured in metal, it
has been seen that it does not ﬁt the experimental data correctly) but is a good compromise
in a ﬁrst approximation. Moreover, it has to be remarked that although it is related to
the torsion of the pivots, this energetic term represents, from the macroscopic viewpoint,
the shear energy of the pantographic continuum.
Figure 3. Kinematics of connective elements, hinges or pivots, depicting torsion (left) and micro-shear
(right) mechanisms.
To summarize in a clear and concise manner, one can consider that two continua
are introduced for the description of this metamaterial. These continua are related to the
two introduced placement ﬁelds, employed to describe the displacements of the material
points of the continua. The placement ﬁelds are deﬁned in any point of the continua.
The need to introduce two continua is related to the fact that this particular metamaterial
has a microstructure that is conceivable as an assembly of two ﬁber families. This is a
mathematical description, and a ﬁber in this model does not correspond to a ﬁber in a
possible practical exempliﬁcation. The mathematical ﬁbers are dense in the sense of a
homogenization procedure. The efforts in this direction are based upon work by Pipkin
and co-workers [13] on inextensible ﬁbers.
2-Fields vs. 1-Field Model
As previously discussed, different deformation mechanisms occur during the deforma-
tion of pantographic metamaterials. Speciﬁcally, these deformations affect the constituent
elements, i.e., ﬁbers and pivots. As far as ﬁbers are concerned, they can basically be ﬂexed

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
5 of 11
or stretched. Speciﬁcally, it was seen in [1] that the deformation energy term related to
ﬁber bending is closely linked from a theoretical point of view to the second gradient of the
placement ﬁeld.
As has been shown, at least two types of deformation are associated with pivots: their
torsion and their micro-shear. These deformations affect the ﬁbers as relative deformations
between the two parallel layers interconnected by the given pivot. In fact, the torsion of the
pivot results in a change in the angle between the ﬁbers, while the micro-shear corresponds
to the sliding between such ﬁbers (see Figure 3).
While torsion of the pivots always occurs, unless they are made as perfect hinges,
the micro-shear of the pivots is advantaged under certain conditions. In fact, the geometry
of the connecting pivot determines its torsional stiffness on the one hand (greater rigidity
corresponds to steeper cylinders), and its tendency to be sheared on the other. It can be
established in a rather general way that slender pivots will be easier to be sheared than
thicker pivots.
The micro-shear deformation of the pivots produces, as already stated, the relative
sliding between the ﬁbers. This can easily be observed experimentally. An example of such
a deformation mechanism is given in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Experimental observation of micro-shear of pivots in an extension test of a 3D-printed
specimen. In (a–c), three different deformation stages are shown. In (d,e), the extremities of the
sample in (c) are magniﬁed for showing the micro-shear of pivots. The author acknowledges Prof. F.
Hild and Mr. X. Pinelli of Paris-Saclay University for their help in performing experimental measures.
When the micro-shear deformation of the pivots cannot be neglected, it becomes clear
that the single-ﬁeld model introduced previously for the description of the pantographic
continuum is no longer sufﬁcient to correctly describe the problem at hand. This model
must therefore be extended. The simplest way to account for micro-shear and ﬁber sliding
is to adopt not one but two placement ﬁelds and to introduce a coupling term. The coupling
term, of course, represents a measure of the micro-shear deformation of the pivots and the
ability of the ﬁbers to slide relative to each other.
From a mathematical point of view, this coupling term can be written as
Ums(χα(·)) = Kint
Z
Ω
χ1 −χ2
2
dΩ
(3)

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
6 of 11
Once one has included the two ﬁelds (χ1, χ2) in Equations (1) and (2), it is sufﬁcient
to add Ums(χα(·)) to the total to obtain a strain energy which correctly describes the
pantographic continuum when micro-shear is not negligible.
In order to clearly convey the ideas presented so far, to account for the pivot shear
microdeformability and the resulting sliding between the ﬁbers of the two families, the one-
ﬁeld model is extended by introducing two ﬁelds in all energy terms described by
Equations (1) and (2) and including the coupling term between the two ﬁelds presented in
Equation (3).
3. Symmetrization of Mechanical Response: Numerical Study
In this section, numerical results are presented to show the inﬂuence of the micro-shear
of pivots in symmetrizing the mechanical response of a pantographic sample. The second-
gradient model reported in Section 2 has been implemented in a commercial ﬁnite element
code, both in its 1-ﬁeld and 2-ﬁelds versions. The constitutive parameters chosen for
performing the numerical analyses are the same in the two simulations: the only difference
is that in the second case, one has a stiffness Kint related to the coupling term modeling the
micro-shear of pivots in Equation (3).
The numerical values of all the stiffnesses are reported in Table 1.
Table 1. Numerical values of the constitutive parameters used in the simulations.
Ke
1.86 × 105 N/m
Kb
1.26 × 10−2 N· m
Ks
100 N/m
Kint
8 × 105 N/m3
A ﬁrst fundamental result is shown in Figure 5, where the reaction forces relative to the
two models are plotted in terms of the prescribed displacement. As is evident, in the 2-ﬁelds
model, the curve (red, dashed line) is, with good approximation, symmetric with respect
to the origin. This means that the micro-shear of pivots has introduced the possibility to
the ﬁber layers to slide one with respect to the other, allowing, in the end, for a reaction
force (or, equivalently, for a total strain energy) lower than in the 1-ﬁeld model. Such a
lowering of the reaction force is understood if one considers that the microstructure can be
stretched to the same prescribed displacement, activating two different mechanisms in the
two cases: in the 1-ﬁeld model, the ﬁber elongation is activated; in the 2-ﬁelds model, on the
contrary, the ﬁber layers are sheared, consisting of a global stretching of the microstructure.
Obviously, in the second case, the ﬁber elongation will also be activated, but in a stage of
deformation that is associated with a considerably larger prescribed displacement.
Figure 5. Comparison between numerically computed reaction forces for compressive-extension tests
for 1-ﬁeld model (blue, full line) and 2-ﬁelds model (red, dashed line). Same constitutive parameters
are used for the two models.

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
7 of 11
In summary, Figure 5 gives a proof of how the sliding of ﬁber levels can be introduced
to decrease the inﬂuence of ﬁber elongation in axial tests, therefore symmetrizing the global
mechanical response.
Numerical simulations also give as a result the plot of deformed shapes in the axial
tests (Figures 6 and 7). In Figure 6, such deformed shapes are shown for the 1-ﬁeld model,
while the same plots are reported for the 2-ﬁelds model in Figure 7. By comparison of the
two ﬁgures, one can simply understand how the sliding of ﬁber levels allows for a global
elongation but with no activation of ﬁber elongation. In fact, by referring to the last step of
deformation in the stretching test for the two ﬁgures (right, bottom corner), it is evident
that in Figure 7, the ﬁbers swiped each other. Moreover, in the 2-ﬁelds model simulations,
the transverse depth of the sample proves to be larger than in the 1-ﬁeld case, thus inducing
less ﬁber elongation (which is activated when the central ﬁbers are in contact).
Figure 6. Comparison between numerically computed deformed shapes of a rectangular sample
of pantographic metamaterial for compressive-extension tests for 1-ﬁeld model. Same constitutive
parameters are used for the two tests. The total energy density is represented in the color scale,
expressed in J/m2. The plots are reported for different values of prescribed displacement: −20 mm,
−40 mm and −60 mm in compression (left); 20 mm, 40 mm and 60 mm in extension (right).
Figure 7. Comparison between numerically computed deformed shapes of a rectangular sample
of pantographic metamaterial for compressive-extension tests for 2-ﬁeld model. Same constitutive
parameters are used for the two tests. The total energy density is represented in the color scale,
expressed in J/m2. The plots are reported for different values of prescribed displacement: −20 mm,
−40 mm and −60 mm in compression (left); 20 mm, 40 mm and 60 mm in extension (right).

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
8 of 11
It has to be remarked that in Figures 6 and 7, the deformed shape of the continuum
has been plotted in grey, while the total energy density has been plotted in the color scale
only on a set of chosen ﬁber directions. This choice has been made to clarify the idea of
ﬁber deformation, which, in a continuum, could be difﬁcult to visualize.
It is noteworthy to observe that in the compression test for the 2-ﬁelds model, a sort
of compression coat arises where the energy density is maximal. It could be interesting to
investigate which kind of deformation would occur for different aspect ratios of the sample.
Finally, it has to be remarked that in the last step of the elongation test, the values of
the energy densities are very different for the two models: this is yet another proof that in
the 1-ﬁeld model, the ﬁber elongation has been activated, while in the 2-ﬁelds model, the
ﬁbers are still not in contact.
The swiping between the two ﬁber layers can be made clearer by plotting the modulus
of the relative displacement, as in Figure 8. Here, the absolute value
χ1 −χ2 is reported
in the color scale. On the left side, this value has been plotted for the compression test,
while on the right side, it is reported for the extension test. Three further observations must
be done relative to Figure 8.
Figure 8. Plot of relative displacements of the two ﬁber families. The absolute value of displacement is
represented in the color scale, expressed in m. The plots are reported for different values of prescribed
displacement: −20 mm, −40 mm and −60 mm in compression (left); 20 mm, 40 mm and 60 mm in
extension (right).
First, it has to be remarked that the values of relative displacement are considerably
higher in the extension test (right) than in the compression test. In fact, it is evident
that, at least in the ﬁrst stage of deformation, both in the extension and compression tests,
the relative angle between the ﬁbers of different layers, which gives a measure of the torsion
of the pivots, is the same in the modulus. This cannot be said relatively to the micro-shear
of pivots. In this sense, in the range of small deformations, differently from what has
been observed in the range of large deformations, the micro-shear contribution induces a
breaking of symmetry. More precisely, in the ﬁrst stages of deformation, the global behavior
is dominated by the torsion of the pivots’ contribution and by their micro-shear (in fact,
the bending of ﬁbers contribution is the smallest one and the ﬁber elongation is not yet
activated). As said, the torsion of pivots is symmetric in compression-extension, while
a priori, the micro-shear is not. Therefore, deformation contributions act differently at
different scales.
Second, the maximum observed value of relative displacement (in the last extension
step) proves to be approximately 8 mm; this value must be correctly set in the experimental
framework. In fact, normally, one does not produce specimens with pivots longer than
a maximum of 3–4 mm. Therefore, this value of displacement would not be physically
observable in an experiment (the displacement cannot be larger than the length of the pivot
itself!). This means that the most sheared pivots would be broken before this value of

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
9 of 11
relative displacement. These displacements could be reduced by increasing the value of
Kint. On the other hand, one should take into account that the value of this stiffness must
be calibrated on the experimental data, if available, and that, as already remarked, a very
large displacement is to be considered unphysical because the considered hinge would be
broken before this displacement is observed. In this sense, the plot in Figure 8 can be used
for introducing a damage criterion. This has been attempted in [8].
Third, it is interesting to observe that on the one hand, the long sides of the rectangular
continuum are micro-sheared in both extension and compression tests, and a certain
similarity can be found between the two plots. On the other hand, there is one point that
behaves differently: it is the vertex of the undeformed triangle (i.e., the isosceles triangle
whose basis corresponds to the short side of the sample and which is mainly non-deformed
in both compression and extension tests). The pivot posed in this particular point is
strongly sheared in the extension test (see also Figure 4 for an experimental example of
this mechanism) and is one of the ﬁrst pivots to be broken in experiments. On the contrary,
in the compression test, this same pivot is approximately not sheared at all.
Finally, Figure 9 reproduces the same relative displacements shown in Figure 8 but
plotted on the deformed shape of the sample and with arrows that represent the vectorial
displacement of selected points of the continuum corresponding to the nodes of the mesh.
The vectorial information of the displacements is of interest. In fact, one can observe that
the relative displacements are in opposite directions on the opposite sides of the sample.
This suggests that the micro-shearing of pivots also contributes to the macro-shear energy.
Such aspect of the problem has not been yet investigated and could be approached in
future works.
Figure 9. Plot of relative displacements of the two ﬁber families. The absolute value of displacement
is represented in the color scale, expressed in m. The arrows represent the vectorial displacement of
the nodes of the mesh. The length of the arrows is proportional to the modulus of the displacement.
The plots are reported for different values of prescribed displacement: −20 mm, −40 mm and
−60 mm in compression (left); 20 mm, 40 mm and 60 mm in extension (right).
A last remark must be devoted to the different energetic component of the two models.
These contribution are plotted vs. the prescribed displacement in Figure 10a,b. In these
ﬁgures, it is clearly observable that some components of the deformation energy are also
non-symmetric in the 2-ﬁeld model, as is natural, but their effect on the macroscopic behav-
ior of the metamaterial is shaded by the contribution due to the micro-shear deformation.

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
10 of 11
(a)
(b)
Figure 10. (a) Plot of the energy contributions for the 1-ﬁeld model. (b) Plot of the energy contribu-
tions for the 2-ﬁeld model.
4. Conclusions
The deformation of hinges affecting the mechanical behavior of pantographic metama-
terials has been investigated. A critical role is assumed by the micro-deformation of the
pivots. Macroscopically, this deformation corresponds to the sliding between the ﬁbers
of the two families that make up the metamaterial. It is shown, numerically, that bias
extension and compression tests are symmetrized by the introduction of slidability between
the ﬁber layers, i.e., the micro-shear of the pivots. However, this symmetry is lost when no
micro-shear is considered and ﬁber elongation deformation is activated.
The study presented in this work could be improved by taking into account more
details from the theoretical point of view. Useful results in the theoretical framework un-
derlying this kind of metamaterial can be found in [14]. As shown in [8,15], micro-shearing
induces failure modes that were not previously observed in pantographic metamaterials.
Such an observation and, in addition, the damage analysis of pantographic metamaterials,
have inspired recent investigations into the optimization of these structures [16,17]. Several
studies on the damage in materials characterized by mechanical properties, which can
be studied in the framework of generalized media, can be helpful in order to improve
the treatment of damage in the special example of pantographic structures. Among the
published results, we refer to [18].
The study of symmetry and symmetry breaking in metamaterials is of relevance: in
the literature, there are examples of interest where symmetry breaking is shown to be
important for multiﬁeld applications [19]. The solution of such kinds of problems often
requires the implementation of non-trivial computational tools. To this aim, it could be
useful to refer to results already present in the literature, such as [20,21].
Funding: Mario Spagnuolo was supported by P.O.R. SARDEGNA F.S.E. 2014–2020—Asse III
“Istruzione e Formazione, Obiettivo Tematico: 10, Obiettivo Speciﬁco: 10.5, Azione dell’accordo
di Partenariato:10.5.12” Avviso di chiamata per il ﬁnanziamento di Progetti di ricerca—Anno 2017
(CUP F24J17000190009).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest. The funder had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.

Symmetry 2022, 14, 2660
11 of 11
References
1.
dell’Isola, F.; Giorgio, I.; Pawlikowski, M.; Rizzi, N. Large deformations of planar extensible beams and pantographic lattices:
Heuristic homogenization, experimental and numerical examples of equilibrium. Proc. R. Soc. A 2016, 472, 20150790. [CrossRef]
2.
Barchiesi, E.; Spagnuolo, M.; Placidi, L. Mechanical metamaterials: A state of the art. Math. Mech. Solids 2019, 24, 212–234.
[CrossRef]
3.
Giorgio, I. Lattice shells composed of two families of curved Kirchhoff rods: An archetypal example, topology optimization of a
cycloidal metamaterial. Contin. Mech. Thermodyn. 2021, 33, 1063–1082. [CrossRef]
4.
Eremeyev, V.A.; Reccia, E. On Dynamics of Elastic Networks with Rigid Junctions within Nonlinear Micro-Polar Elasticity. Int. J.
Multiscale Comput. Eng. 2022, 20, 1–11. [CrossRef]
5.
Giorgio, I.; Andreaus, U.; Scerrato, D.; Braidotti, P. Modeling of a non-local stimulus for bone remodeling process under cyclic
load: Application to a dental implant using a bioresorbable porous material. Math. Mech. Solids 2017, 22, 1790–1805. [CrossRef]
6.
Gibson, I.; Rosen, D.W.; Stucker, B.; Khorasani, M. Additive Manufacturing Technologies; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021.
7.
Alibert, J.J.; Seppecher, P.; dell’Isola, F. Truss modular beams with deformation energy depending on higher displacement
gradients. Math. Mech. Solids 2003, 8, 51–73. [CrossRef]
8.
Spagnuolo, M.; Barcz, K.; Pfaff, A.; dell’Isola, F.; Franciosi, P. Qualitative pivot damage analysis in aluminum printed pantographic
sheets: Numerics and experiments. Mech. Res. Commun. 2017, 83, 47–52. [CrossRef]
9.
Giorgio, I.; dell’Isola, F.; Misra, A. Chirality in 2D Cosserat Media Related to Stretch-Micro-rotation coupling with links to
Granular Micromechanics. Int. J. Solids Struct. 2020, 202, 28–38. [CrossRef]
10.
Boutin, C. Microstructural effects in elastic composites. Int. J. Solids Struct. 1996, 33, 1023–1051. [CrossRef]
11.
Germain, P. La méthode des puissances virtuelles en mécanique des milieux continus, premiere partie: Théorie du second
gradient. J. De Mécanique 1973, 12, 235–274.
12.
Spagnuolo, M.; Yildizdag, M.E.; Andreaus, U.; Cazzani, A. Are higher-gradient models also capable of predicting mechanical
behavior in the case of wide-knit pantographic structures? Math. Mech. Solids 2021, 26, 18–29. [CrossRef]
13.
Everstine, G.; Pipkin, A. Boundary Layers in Fiber-Reinforced Materials. J. Appl. Mech. 1973, 40, 518. [CrossRef]
14.
Eremeyev, V.A.; Cazzani, A.; dell’Isola, F. On nonlinear dilatational strain gradient elasticity. Contin. Mech. Thermodyn. 2021,
33, 1429–1463. [CrossRef]
15.
Ciallella, A.; Pasquali, D.; D’Annibale, F.; Giorgio, I. Shear rupture mechanism and dissipation phenomena in bias-extension test
of pantographic sheets: Numerical modeling and experiments. Math. Mech. Solids 2022, 27, 2170–2188. [CrossRef]
16.
Desmorat, B.; Spagnuolo, M.; Turco, E. Stiffness optimization in nonlinear pantographic structures. Math. Mech. Solids 2020,
25, 2252–2262. [CrossRef]
17.
Harsch, J.; Ganzosch, G.; Barchiesi, E.; Ciallella, A.; Eugster, S.R. Experimental analysis, discrete modeling and parameter
optimization of SLS-printed bi-pantographic structures. Math. Mech. Solids 2022, 27, 2201–2217. [CrossRef]
18.
Placidi, L.; Barchiesi, E. Energy approach to brittle fracture in strain-gradient modelling. Proc. R. Soc. A 2018, 474, 20170878.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Eremeyev, V.A.; Ganghoffer, J.F.; Konopi´nska-Zmysłowska, V.; Uglov, N.S. Flexoelectricity and apparent piezoelectricity of a
pantographic micro-bar. Int. J. Eng. Sci. 2020, 149, 103213. [CrossRef]
20.
Cazzani, A.; Malagù, M.; Turco, E. Isogeometric analysis: A powerful numerical tool for the elastic analysis of historical masonry
arches. Contin. Mech. Thermodyn. 2016, 28, 139–156. [CrossRef]
21.
Greco, L.; Cuomo, M. An implicit G1-conforming bi-cubic interpolation for the analysis of smooth and folded Kirchhoff–Love
shell assemblies. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2021, 373, 113476. [CrossRef]

