Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 1
Running head: COMBINING PSYCHOLOGICAL MODELS WITH MACHINE LEARNING
Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning to Better Predict People’s Decisions
Avi Rosenfeld1, Inon Zukerman2, Amos Azaria3, Sarit Kraus3,4
1Department of Industrial Engineering
Jerusalem College of Technology, Jerusalem, Israel 91160
2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management,
Ariel University Center of Samaria, Ariel, Israel 40700
3Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel 92500
4 Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland, College Park, USA 20742
rosenfa@jct.ac.il, inonzu@ariel.ac.il, azariaa1@mail.biu.ac.il, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 2
Abstract
Creating agents that proﬁciently interact with people is critical for many applications. Towards
creating these agents, models are needed that eﬀectively predict people’s decisions in a variety of
problems. To date, two approaches have been suggested to generally describe people’s decision
behavior. One approach creates a-priori predictions about people’s behavior, either based on
theoretical rational behavior or based on psychological models, including bounded rationality. A
second type of approach focuses on creating models based exclusively on observations of people’s
behavior. At the forefront of these types of methods are various machine learning algorithms.
This paper explores how these two approaches can be compared and combined in diﬀerent types
of domains. In relatively simple domains, both psychological models and machine learning yield
clear prediction models with nearly identical results. In more complex domains, the exact action
predicted by psychological models is not even clear, and machine learning models are even less
accurate. Nonetheless, we present a novel approach of creating hybrid methods that incorporate
features from psychological models in conjunction with machine learning in order to create
signiﬁcantly improved models for predicting people’s decisions. To demonstrate these claims, we
present an overview of previous and new results, taken from representative domains ranging from
a relatively simple optimization problem and complex domains such as negotiation and
coordination without communication.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 3
Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning to Better
Predict People’s Decisions
Introduction
The challenge of predicting people’s decisions is of utmost importance for many economists,
psychologists and artiﬁcial intelligence researchers (Chalamish, Sarne, & Kraus, 2008; Gigerenzer
& Goldstein, 1996; Manisterski, Lin, & Kraus, 2008). Within the ﬁeld of economics and
psychology, validly encapsulating human decision-making is critical for predicting the short and
long term eﬀects of a given policy (Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944; Selten, 1998; Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979). To computer scientists, accurately predicting people’s actions is critical for mixed
human-computer systems such as entertainment domains (Maes, 1995), Interactive Tutoring
Systems (Murakami, Sugimoto, & Ishida, 2005), adversarial interactions (Cheng, Zuckerman,
Nau, & Golbeck, 2011) and mixed human-agent trading environments (Manisterski et al., 2008).
Within these and similar domains, creating agents that eﬀectively understand and/or simulate
people’s logic is particularly important (Chalamish et al., 2008).
To date, two approaches have been proposed for predicting people’s decisions by social and
behavioral scientists. One classic approach, often advocated by economists, has modeled people’s
behavior based on classic decision theory. This direction, originally proposed by Von Neumann
and Morgenstern (Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944), assumes that people’s decisions can be
modeled mathematically and rationally based on expected utility. Even when people are faced
with uncertainty, these models assume that people will adhere to strict mathematical formulas
based on the probability that each event will occur. Game theory follows this approach, and
equilibrium strategies such as the Nash equilibrium (Nash, 1951) apply an expected utility to
situations where two or more people interact in order to predict their decisions. These solution
concepts have proven eﬀective in some applications (Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944; Russell &
Norvig, 2003). However, research into people’s decisions has shown that people do not necessarily

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 4
always adhere to these rigid models (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Selten, 1998; Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979).
A second class of approaches, often advocated by psychologists and experimental
economists, builds cognitive models based on people’s subjective perception of a problem. These
approaches posit that theoretical outcomes are less important, and models must instead be
constructed based on modeling people’s observed behavior. Examples of this direction include
Kahneman and Tversky’s Prospect Theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), which models how
people deviate from expected utility when faced with risk, and Gigerenzer and Goldstein’s fast
and frugal heuristics (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996), which assume that people use simplistic
heuristics to guide their decisions. Models of bounded rationality lie within this group, as they
posit that people search for non-optimal alternatives to fulﬁll their goals. Simon coined the term
“satisﬁes” to capture that bounded decision makers seek solutions that are “good enough” and
not optimal ones (Simon, 1957). We considered one such theory, Selten’s Aspiration Adaptation
Theory (Selten, 1998), whereby people make decisions by attempting to satisfy only one goal
variable at a time, called their “aspiration”.
In contrast to these cognitive models, computer scientists often model peoples’ decisions
through machine learning techniques (Mitchell, 1997). These models are based on statistical
methods such as Bayes’ Rule, Neural Networks or Decision Tree algorithms, and are exclusively
built on observed decisions instead of general predictions about peoples’ behavior. As a result,
these models do not make any claims for their general applicability as they were created
exclusively based on observations in a speciﬁc setting.
The key contribution of this paper is an exploration of how one can combine the cognitive
decision making approaches proposed by social scientists with machine learning
approaches. At times, and as we demonstrate in this paper, suﬃcient data exists to conﬁrm
various behavior models. In these types of cases, decision tree models can be constructed to
demonstrate the typical decision model of people within a given domain. This result is
particularly signiﬁcant if several behavior models are theoretically possible– allowing us to

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 5
conﬁrm without bias which behavior model is best.
Other times, multiple cognitive models are available, but insuﬃcient data exists to allow
machine learning to form a complete cognitive model on its own. However, in these types of
domains, suﬃcient data does exist to help ﬁne-tune parameters within a relevant cognitive model.
Often this process can be completely automated with recognized mathematical packages or
through accepted machine learning algorithms (Azaria, Rabinovich, Kraus, Goldman, &
Tsimhoni, 2012; Ratcliﬀ& Smith, 2004; Nilsson, Rieskamp, & Wagenmakers, 2011). For example,
within computer science Azaria et. al used machine learning to ﬁt parameters within a path
selection model. Within psychology and behaviorial economics, Ratcliﬀand Smith used the
Simplex algorithm to ﬁt parameters within a 2-choice decision model (Ratcliﬀ& Smith, 2004) and
Nilsson et. al contrasted how Bayesian and maximum likelihood approaches could be used to set
parameters within prospect theory (Nilsson et al., 2011).
However, these approaches (Azaria et al., 2012; Ratcliﬀ& Smith, 2004; Nilsson et al., 2011)
are not appropriate for domains that are simply too complex to understand which behavior model
should be applied or how parameters within a given model can be tuned. These domains suﬀer
from a phenomenon often known as the “curse of dimensionality” (Evangelista, Embrechts, &
Szymanski, 2006; Bengio, Delalleau, & Roux, 2005). The curse of dimensionality is, unfortunately,
particularly evident in many real-world situations, as people can potentially act within a very
large set of actions (a high dimension of possible actions), and they often do not consistently
choose the same actions. Even with sophisticated mathematical algorithms or through using
accepted machine learning procedures, people’s behavior within these domains cannot be easily
quantiﬁed because the possible range of actions that a person might take is too large and the data
given to learn a person’s behavior is insuﬃcient given this level of complexity. Particularly in
these types of domains, novel approaches are necessary to accurate predict people’s behavior.
To address this challenge, and a key contribution of this paper, is an exploration of the idea
that one can combine the cognitive decision-making approaches proposed by social scientists
with classic machine learning approaches, as a way of creating improved prediction models of

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 6
people’s behavior. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate that there are cases in which hybrid models
that combine machine learning with a cognitive theory can be more successful than any of its
individual parts. Moreover, we found that the advantage of using a hybrid model increases with
the complexity of the underlying prediction task.
To demonstrate the results, we present an overview of previous and new results considering
two diﬀerent psychological models: Aspiration Adaptation Theory (Selten, 1998) and Focal Points
Theory (Schelling, 1963). Speciﬁcally, in the second section we show that the Aspiration
Adaptation Theory proved to be the best predictor in a relatively simple optimization problem,
and that machine learning methods demonstrated without bias that the AAT model was most
appropriate, even though alternate cognitive models were possible. We also demonstrate that
adding AAT features into a machine learning model signiﬁcantly increased the prediction
accuracy of people’s bids within a complex negotiation domain. In the third section we present
the Focal Points Theory that describes a low-level cognitive ability to pick prominent solutions in
the absence of communication. We found that adding information from this model signiﬁcantly
increased the accuracy of a machine learning based prediction model in problems where people
had to coordinate without communication.
Aspiration Adaptation Theory
Aspiration Adaptation Theory (AAT) was proposed by Selten as a general economic model
that describes how people make certain economic decisions without any need for expected utility
(Selten, 1998). AAT was originally formulated to model how people make decisions where utility
functions cannot be constructed. For example, assume you need to relocate and choose a new
house in which to live. There are many factors that you need to consider, such as the price of
each possible house, the distance from your work, the neighborhood and neighbors and the
schools in the area. How do you decide which house to buy? While in theory utility based models
could be used, many of us do not create rigid formulas involving numerical values to weigh
trade-oﬀs between each of these search parameters.
AAT provides an alternative to utility theory for how decisions can be made in this and

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 7
other problems. First, m goal variables are sorted in order of priority, or their urgency.
Accordingly, the order of G1, . . . , Gm refers to goal urgency, or the priority by which a solution
for the goal variables is attempted. Each of the goal variables has a desired value, or its aspiration
level, that the agent sets for the current period. This desired value is not necessarily the optimal
one, and the agent may consider the variable “solved” even if it ﬁnds a sub-optimal yet suﬃciently
desired value. The agent’s search starts with an initial aspiration level and is governed by its local
procedural preferences. The local procedural preferences prescribe which aspiration level is most
urgently adapted upward if possible, the second most desired aspiration, etc. and which partial
aspiration level is retreated from or adapted downward if the current aspiration level is not
feasible. Here, all variables except for the goal variable being addressed are assigned values based
on ceteris paribus (given all other goals being equal, a better value is preferred to a worse one).
We studied what decision models, AAT or others, were used to solve two types of problems
– a relatively simple optimization problem and a complex negotiation problem. In the ﬁrst
optimization problem, we consider a problem where a person must minimize the price in buying a
commodity (a television) given the following constraints: Assume a person must personally visit
stores in order to observe the posted price of the commodity. However, some cost exists from
visiting additional stores. For any given discrete time period, the person must decide if she wishes
to terminate the search without incurring an additional cost. Full details of our implementation
can be found in our previously published work (Rosenfeld & Kraus, 2009, 2011).
In addition to AAT, other strategies, bounded and strictly rational, were possible here. A
clear optimal strategy existed within the implementation of the commodity search domain. In the
settings with which we experimented, the speciﬁc strategy was to buy the commodity if the price
in the current store is less than 789. Thus, classical expected utility theory would predict that
people would similarly buy the commodity at this price. We also recognize that AAT is not the
only possible option of a bounded model within this domain. Following Gigerenzer and
Goldstein’s fast and frugal heuristics (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996), we would expect people to
formulate simple strategies involving only one variable (e.g. search until price < X, or visit Y

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 8
stores and buy in the cheapest store). However, using an AAT-based model for prediction would
assume that some type of combination strategy exists where one variable is ﬁrst searched for but
then retreated from, assuming that value could not be satisﬁed. For example, a person might
initially search for a price less than 650, but will settle on an even a higher price (e.g. the lowest
found so far) after unsuccessfully ﬁnding this price after searching 5 stores. In fact, our previous
work did ﬁnd that people typically used these AAT strategies instead of optimal or fast and
frugal heuristics (Rosenfeld & Kraus, 2009).
We also analyzed a previously presented negotiation domain (Lin, Kraus, Wilkenfeld, &
Barry, 2008). We consider a negotiation session that takes place after a successful job interview
between an employer and a job candidate. In this session both sides wish to formalize the hiring
terms and conditions of the applicant: her Salary, Job Description, Car Beneﬁts, Pension
beneﬁts and Working hours. In the problem setting considered, each side could pick from a
list of possible values for each of the parameters. For example, the employee might ask for a
salary of 20,000 per month, with the job title of Project Manager, with a car, pension beneﬁts
and an 8-hour work day, while the employer might counter with the same oﬀer, but a salary of
only 12,000 per month and without the pension beneﬁts. The goal of this study is to accurately
predict what each side would oﬀer. Here again, equilibrium strategies were possible based on
strictly rational behavior. Following Gigerenzer and Goldstein’s model of fast and frugal
heuristics, we would have expected that simple compromise heuristics could be used. Possibilities
of such heuristics include always countering the middle position between the previous oﬀer of
both sides or oﬀering the middle position between all previous oﬀers of both sides. Nonetheless,
our overall ﬁnding was that people create aspiration-based strategies where they negotiate for
speciﬁc issues in a speciﬁc order. For example, we found that negotiations ﬁrst focused on the
salary parameter and only then moved on to other parameters such as pension or car beneﬁts. We
found that adding these aspirations explicitly as a parameter for the machine learning models to
consider helped to signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy in predicting people’s oﬀers.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 9
Focal Points Theory
Focal Points were introduced by Schelling (Schelling, 1963) as a prominent subset of
solutions for tacit coordination games, which are coordination games where communication is not
possible. In such games (also known as matching games in game theory terminology) the players
only have to agree on a possible solution, regardless of the solution itself. In other words, they
receive a reward for selecting the same solution, regardless of the solution. When their solutions
diﬀer, both players lose and do not get any reward. A solution is said to be “focal” (also
“salient”, or “prominent”) when, despite similarity among many solutions, the players somehow
converge to this solution.
A classic example of Focal Points coordination is the solution most people choose when
asked to divide $100 into two piles, of any size; they should attempt only to match the unseen
player’s choice. More than 75% of the subjects in Schelling’s experiments created two piles of $50
each; that solution is what Schelling dubbed a Focal Point. Here again, other behavioral models
are possible – using equilibrium strategies would result in a random selection among the 101
possible divisions, as the probability distribution is uniform.
Several attempts have been made to formalize Focal Points from a game theoretic, human
interaction point of view ((Janssen, 1998) provides a good overview). However, that research does
not provide the practical tools necessary for predicting people’s actions. In a meta-analysis of
previous Focal Points experiments we developed some general properties that “focalize” an
answer: (1) Centrality, (2) Extremeness, (3) Firstness and (4) Singularity. For further details and
examples of these rules, we encourage the reader to refer to our previous work (Zuckerman,
Kraus, & Rosenschein, 2011).
The task of learning which of these properties will be used by people is far from trivial due
to the large number of possibilities, resulting in the “curse of dimensionality”. To overcome this
diﬃculty, we present a Focal Points Learning approach which combines this psychological
approach and machine learning. This approach is created by preprocessing raw domain data and
then placing it into a new representation space based on the Focal Points properties. Speciﬁcally,

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 10
we take every game instance of the domain encoded in the most naive raw encoding (called the
original feature space) and we apply a transformation to a new feature space that includes Focal
Points information.
We designed a simple and intuitive tacit coordination game that represents a simpliﬁed
version of a domain where an agent and a human partner need to agree on a possible meeting
place. The game, coined “Pick the Pile” is played on a 5-by-5 square grid. Each square of the grid
can either be empty or can contain either a pile of money or the game agents. Each square on the
game board is white, yellow or red. The players were instructed to pick the pile of money from
the three identical piles which most other players, playing exactly the same game, would pick.
Experimental Results
In this section we present an overview of previous and new results that demonstrate when
and how machine learning techniques can beneﬁt from behavioral theories. In general, we found
that in the relatively simple optimization problem, strictly rational, AAT models and machine
learning converged on nearly identical results. In the more complicated negotiation domain,
adding information about people’s aspirations increased the predictive accuracy of models built
based upon machine learning. Strictly rational models performed far worse. In an even more
complex coordination without communication domain, Focal Points information again improved
the accuracy of a model based upon machine learning models. Strictly rational models and
models built upon Focal Points without machine learning performed far worse.
Results from an Optimization Problem
In the ﬁrst task, a relatively simple optimization problem, we wished to predict if a person
would stop their commodity search in any given store. In this domain an optimal search strategy
exists, namely that in the speciﬁc settings that we considered, the person should stop the search
in the ﬁrst store with a price less than 789. Note that this solution can be mathematically
calculated and does not require any input from observed behavior. At the other extreme, we can
create a prediction model based exclusively on machine learning techniques. Previously we used

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 11
decision trees to create this model. The advantage to speciﬁcally using this type of model lies in
the output – we can check if the decision tree’s decision model is consistent with the optimal
solution or with other bounded models. We considered two such bounded models: simple
heuristics and AAT. Based on the fast and frugal approach, we would expect people to use a
simple decision-making process. Speciﬁcally, we assume that they would stop their search based
on only one parameter, such as the number of stores visited to date, or the price of the
commodity in any given store. This could be considered a classic example of the fast and frugal
take-the-best heuristic (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). According to AAT we would expect to see
more complicated strategies with multiple parameters and some type of ordering and retreat
between them. Our previous work (Rosenfeld & Kraus, 2011) did in fact ﬁnd that the decision
trees’ output was consistent with AAT strategies as people would typically immediately buy the
commodity if its price was below a certain threshold, but would settle on a higher price after
visiting a certain number of stores.
In this paper, we focus on when and how we can combine various decision theories in order
to better predict people’s decisions. In this domain, this included comparing the following models:
1. An optimal model based on expected utility – e.g. people buy only if the price is less than 789.
2. A machine learning model based on observed decisions. 3. A combination model. In this
problem, the combination model involved adding information about the average price where
people stopped their search, and the average number of stores after which they were willing to
settle on a more expensive commodity. Note that here, as well as in all of the domains we
consider, this hybrid approach assumes that we have some general information about a given
population.
For this domain, we found that adding general information about people’s aspirations was
useful, but only slightly. Table 1 presents the accuracy of diﬀerent models in predicting when 41
people stopped their commodity search. Each of these people was presented with a simulation of
the commodity search domain and ran at least 25 trials each ending in their buying the
commodity, logging a total of nearly 5000 instances where these people either decided to buy the

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 12
commodity or to continue their search. The ﬁrst column of Table 1 presents a baseline Naive
model that classiﬁes all decisions based on the majority class, here assuming that people will
always continue the search. In the second column, we present the predictive ability of the optimal
model. Column 3 presents the results from the machine learning method which performed
similarly to the optimal model with 82.67% accuracy. Adding information from people’s
aspirations did help, but only slightly, with 83.45% accuracy achieved through knowing the
average values of these people’s aspirations. Note that this value serves as an upper baseline, as
we collected this aspiration data from the same population being evaluated. A more realistic
aspiration model is the Sparse AAT model which used only 50 randomly selected decisions to help
model peoples’ decisions (or less than 1% of the total logged data). Nonetheless, even this model
did slightly outperform both the optimal and based machine learning methods with 83%
accuracy. This result is even more striking when you consider that machine learning models were
validated through cross-validation of 90% of the data used for training the model, while this
sparse model used less than 1% of the data. Thus, we conclude that in this relatively basic
domain, diﬀerences between the predictive abilities of the diﬀerent models was not large.
Nonetheless, a slight improvement in prediction accuracy was obtained through limited
information about people’s aspirations.
AAT in a Negotiation Domain
According to AAT, one would expect people to rank the importance of each of the
negotiation parameters according to his or her individual aspiration scale. Assuming people often
have the same aspiration scales, we would also see an order where issues are addressed, e.g.
certain parameters are typically negotiated ﬁrst, second, etc. Our premise is that as the
negotiation domain is more complex than the optimization problem, one should add people’s
aspiration information into traditional models such as a decision tree model to more accurately
predict what bids people will oﬀer.
To test this hypothesis, we proceeded to study what gain, if any, did adding AAT
information have in predicting how people will negotiate. In the problem we considered, the

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 13
parameters to be negotiated could have between 2 and 4 discrete values. In order to study this
point we considered several models for the negotiation problem (see Table 3). The goal of all of
these models was to predict the next value for each parameter. First, we considered the
Majority Rule model. Given the full log ﬁle, this rule assumes that a person would oﬀer the
most popular value for any given parameter. For example, in the employer / employee domain,
the most popular title was “Programmer”. Second, we implemented two models based on the
equilibrium strategy. These strategies are based on previous work in these problems (Lin et
al., 2008). However, as the equilibrium strategy depends on which person is allowed to oﬀer the
last bid, we checked both in order to know which equilibrium strategies would best predict all
parameters. Next, we created a baseline strategy that uses a decision tree (D.T.) algorithm
(C4.5) to predict the next oﬀer for each parameter. This model used historical information about
the previous oﬀer and the current negotiation iteration. Next, we created a D.T. with AAT
statistical information prediction model. As we previously demonstrated, each parameter had
diﬀerent urgencies. Thus, we attempted to create a more accurate model by adding information
about which parameters were typically raised or lowered for any given iteration. Speciﬁcally, we
added a ﬁeld with a binary ﬂag value in order to diﬀerentiate between the iterations for which
people typically changed a given parameter’s value with a frequency of ≥0.5, and those which
were typically not changed and where additional information likely would not help. This was
done to avoid over-ﬁtting the AAT statistics for any training / testing pair, and thus to retain the
generality of the results. Finally, we created a D.T. + Complete Behavior Knowledge
model. This ﬁnal baseline had knowledge about what the previous oﬀer was, and also added
perfect knowledge if the person would revise upwards, downwards, or leave unchanged their
previous oﬀer. In cases where only two options exist, one would expect this baseline to guarantee
100% accuracy. However, when more than 3 values exist for a given parameter, even this model
cannot guarantee 100% accuracy. For example, if a previous salary oﬀer was $7,000 per month
and we know that the next oﬀer will be higher, we still do not know if it will be raised to $12,000
or $20,000. Nonetheless, the goal of this model was to provide an upper bound for how much

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 14
AAT-based information could theoretically help.
Table 3 demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of adding AAT information to boost prediction
accuracy. The ﬁrst row of this table show the parameter to be negotiated and the number of
possible values. The second row presents the majority rule baseline. The third and fourth rows
present how eﬀective the equilibrium policies were in predicting what people actually oﬀered.
Note that both of these policies fall well below the naive majority baseline. This again
demonstrates the ineﬀectiveness of using equilibrium theoretical policies to predict how people
actually behave. The ﬁfth row presents the accuracy of the learned decision tree model. This
model represents the eﬀectiveness of this traditional learning method in predicting each of the
parameters. We then added AAT information and reran the same decision tree algorithm, the
results of which are in the sixth row. Note that the signiﬁcant improvement gained from the AAT
information is signiﬁcant and only one parameter did not gain from the added aspiration
information. In this parameter, few instances existed where people had clear general aspiration
changes, preventing any accuracy boost from this approach. Finally, the last line in the table
presents the accuracy of the decision tree algorithm with complete behavior knowledge, or perfect
information about whether a person will retreat from (decrease) a given parameter value or
upwardly revise its aspiration (increase). Note that, as expected, even complete AAT information
could not yield 100% prediction accuracy for parameters with more than 2 values.
Experimental Results for Focal Points in the Pick the Pile domain
In order to evaluate the eﬀectiveness in using Focal Points information to predict people’s
actions, we collected data using an Internet website which logged approximately 3,000 game
instances. We then compared the correct classiﬁcation performance of both decision trees (again
the C4.5 algorithm) and FFBP neural network classiﬁers. The comparison was between a domain
data agent — an agent that was trained only on the raw domain encoding (original domain
without any explicit Focal Points information), a Focal Points agent (FP) — an untrained
agent that used only the Focal Points rules for prediction, weighted uniformly (without running
any machine learning algorithm), and a Focal Points learning agent (FPL) — an agent that

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 15
was trained on the data following the preprocessing stage in which the Focal Points rules were
injected explicitly. “Correct classiﬁcation” means that the agent made the same choice as that of
the particular human player who played the same game. Obviously the learning problem is
extremely diﬃcult as there is no simple function that can capture the notion that for some games,
diﬀerent human players can select diﬀerent choices. We optimized our classiﬁers’ performance by
varying the network architecture and learning parameters, until we attained the best results. We
used a learning rate of 0.3, momentum rate of 0.2, 1 hidden layer, random initial weights and no
biases of any sort. Before each training procedure, the data set was randomly divided into a test
and a training set. Each instance of those sets contained the game description (either the binary
or Focal Points encoding) and the human answer to it. The classiﬁcation results using the neural
network and the decision tree algorithms were very close (maximum diﬀerence of 3%).
Examining the results in Table 4, we see a signiﬁcant improvement when using the Focal
Points learning approach to train classiﬁers, rather than the domain data agent (p < 0.01 in
two-proportion z-tests in all domains). In this domain, the domain data agent is not able to
generalize suﬃciently, thus achieving classiﬁcation rates that are only about 5%–10% higher than
a random guess (which is 33%). Using FPL, the classiﬁcation rate improved to more than 65%
correct classiﬁcation. Since even humans do not have 100% success with one another in these
games, FPL is correspondingly the more impressive. The results also show that even the classical
FP agent, which does not employ any learning algorithm, performs better than the domain data
agent, with 48% correct classiﬁcation. In an additional analysis that was done on the FP agent,
we saw a tendency in which, when facing coordination problems with low focality diﬀerence, the
FP agent’s performance deteriorates to that of random guesses.
An additional advantage of using FPL is the reduction in training time (e.g., in the Pick the
Pile domain we saw a reduction from 4 hours on the original data to 3 minutes), due to the
reduction of input size. Moreover, the learning tree that was created using FPL was smaller and
can be easily converted to a rule-based system as part of the agent’s design.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 16
Discussion and Conclusion
Predicting people’s decisions is an important but complex task. To address this task,
researchers often propose general behavior models such as rationality theory or purely statistical
methods such as machine learning algorithms. However, there often exist specialized cognitive
models or theories that describe various tendencies or biases that are commonly used by the
majority of the people. Such theories include bounded rationality theories, various risk attitudes
and use of heuristics.
This paper addresses how one can take a potentially relevant cognitive theory and use
machine learning methods to help augment it in order to provide added value in predicting
human behavior. We showed how two cognitive theories, Aspiration Adaptation theory and the
Focal Points theory, could be used in conjunction with machine learning algorithms to create an
improved classiﬁer. Possibly equally signiﬁcant is the result that strictly rational models, and
even many specialized cognitive models, often do not accurately predict people’s decisions.
Our results also show some positive correlation between the complexity of the problem
domain and the improvement in performance when augmenting the cognitive model. To
demonstrate this phenomenon, we present our results, which are found in Table 4. In relatively
simple domains, such as the optimization problem we considered, machine learning methods can
accurately predict people’s behavior given enough training data. In these types of problems,
cognitive models will not help improve the prediction accuracy but they can help predict people’s
behavior with less training data. Additionally, we found that using machine learning models
allowed us to conﬁrm the accuracy of a given cognitive model without human bias, here AAT,
even though other cognitive theories were potentially applicable. In complex problems, the
number of parameters that need to be set within the cognitive model is large and cannot be
readily identiﬁed even with large training data sets. Because of the range of possible actions,
these problems suﬀer from the “curse of dimensionality” where even sophisticated machine
learning approaches and parameter tuning alone will not suﬃce (Evangelista et al., 2006; Bengio
et al., 2005). In these problems, the novel hybrid approach we present– using machine learning

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 17
algorithms as the base of the solution, but adding features from the cognitive models – creates
signiﬁcant improvements over both base approaches, often by large amounts.
We believe that the hybrid approaches presented in this paper are successful for the
following reason. At the root of the curse of dimensionality is that the space of possible actions is
too large for mathematical approaches to ﬁnd an optimal value. Thus, any information that will
help reduce the range of possible values will lead to improved models if this allows the curse of
dimensionality to be removed, allowing machine learning models, or other mathematical
approaches, to produce an accurate model from the data. We believe that this also explains why
hybrid models become increasing important as the complexity of the domain rises. Increased
problem complexity contains higher dimensionality. As problem complexity rises, we found that
traditional approaches to model people’s behavior became increasing less successful in creating an
accurate model. However, once our hybrid models introduce information about how people
behave, and just as importantly, how they won’t behave, they reduce the space in which machine
learning algorithms must search for an accurate behavior model. This in terms transforms the
modeling problem into one the machine learning algorithms could solve, resulting in signiﬁcantly
more accurate predictions.
As we present a generalized approach for how to combine cognitive theories with machine
learning algorithms, we expect this approach to be generally applicable to a variety of new
domains as well. We have already discovered new examples from the representative categories
within this paper. For example, we found that using a previously developed driving model
(Fancher & Bareket, 1996) was useful in predicting drivers’ preferred settings within their
adaptive cruise control (Rosenfeld et al., 2012). In this domain, suﬃcient data existed to learn the
drivers’ cognitive model, similarly paralleling the simple optimization problem within this study.
At the other extreme, we have also found additional examples in complex problems where hybrid
models with machine learning and cognitive models have yielded more accurate prediction models
than those based on cognitive models or machine learning alone. Speciﬁcally, we also found that a
hybrid Focal Points / machine learning model was more successful in predicting people’s

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 18
preferences in other coordination settings including shape selection and job candidate selection
(Zuckerman et al., 2011). Other researchers have also used machine learning to infer how social
preferences aﬀect diﬀerent types of people in human-computer negotiation (Gal, Grosz, Kraus,
Pfeﬀer, & Shieber, 2010). Our hope is that additional researchers will also be successful in
creating many additional applications using the hybrid cognitive model / machine learning
approach described in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by ERC grant #267523, MURI grant number
W911NF-08-1-0144, ARO grants W911NF0910206 and W911NF1110344 and JCT grant 963.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 19
References
Azaria, A., Rabinovich, Z., Kraus, S., Goldman, C. V., & Tsimhoni, O. (2012). Giving advice to
people in path selection problems. In Aamas.
Bengio, Y., Delalleau, O., & Roux, N. L. (2005). The curse of dimensionality for local kernel
machines (Tech. Rep.).
Chalamish, M., Sarne, D., & Kraus, S. (2008). Programming agents as a means of capturing
self-strategy. In Aamas ’08 (pp. 1161–1168).
Cheng, K.-L., Zuckerman, I., Nau, D. S., & Golbeck, J. (2011). The life game: Cognitive
strategies for repeated stochastic games. In Socialcom/passat (p. 95-102).
Evangelista, P. F., Embrechts, M. J., & Szymanski, B. K. (2006). Taming the curse of
dimensionality in kernels and novelty detection. In In ajith abraham, bernard de baets,
mario kppen, and bertam nickolay, editors, applied soft computing technologies: The
challenge of complexity (pp. 431–444). Springer Verlag.
Fancher, P., & Bareket, Z. (1996). A comparison of manual versus automatic control of headway
as a function of driver characteristics. 3rd Annual World Congress on Intelligent Transport
Systems.
Gal, Y., Grosz, B., Kraus, S., Pfeﬀer, A., & Shieber, S. (2010). Agent decision-making in open
mixed networks. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 174(18), 1460–1480.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and frugal way: models of bounded
rationality. Psychology Review, 103(4), 650–669.
Janssen, M. C. W. (1998). Focal points. In P. Newman (Ed.), The new palgrave of economics and
the law (pp. 150–155). MacMillan.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47, 263–291.
Lin, R., Kraus, S., Wilkenfeld, J., & Barry, J. (2008). Negotiating with bounded rational agents
in environments with incomplete information using an automated agent. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 172(6-7), 823-851.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 20
Maes, P. (1995). Artiﬁcial life meets entertainment: lifelike autonomous agents. Commun. ACM ,
38(11), 108–114.
Manisterski, E., Lin, R., & Kraus, S. (2008). Understanding how people design trading agents
over time. In Aamas ’08 (pp. 1593–1596).
Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine learning. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Murakami, Y., Sugimoto, Y., & Ishida, T. (2005). Modeling human behavior for virtual training
systems. In Aaai (p. 127-132).
Nash, J. (1951, September). Non-Cooperative Games. The Annals of Mathematics, 54(2),
286–295.
Neumann, J. V., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton
University Press.
Nilsson, H., Rieskamp, J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2011). Hierarchical bayesian parameter
estimation for cumulative prospect theory. Journal of mathematical psychology (Print),
55(1), 84–93.
Ratcliﬀ, R., & Smith, P. L. (2004, April). A comparison of sequential sampling models for
two-choice reaction time. Psychol Rev, 111(2), 333–367.
Rosenfeld, A., Bareket, Z., Goldman, C. V., Kraus, S., LeBlanc, D. J., & Tshimoni, O. (2012).
Learning drivers behavior to improve the acceptance of adaptive cruise control. In
Innovative applications of artiﬁcial intelligence. AAAI.
Rosenfeld, A., & Kraus, S. (2009). Modeling agents through bounded rationality theories. In Ijcai
(p. 264-271).
Rosenfeld, A., & Kraus, S. (2011). Using aspiration adaptation theory to improve learning. In
Aamas (p. 423-430).
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2003). Artiﬁcial intelligence: A modern approach. Prentice Hall.
Schelling, T. (1963). The strategy of conﬂict. New York: Oxford University Press.
Selten, R. (1998). Aspiration adaptation theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 42,
1910–214.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 21
Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of man. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Zuckerman, I., Kraus, S., & Rosenschein, J. S. (2011). Using focal point learning to improve
human-machine tacit coordination. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 22(2),
289-316.

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 22
Table 1
Comparing the Prediction Accuracy between Optimal, Machine Learning and AAT Based Models
Naive
Optimal
Learning
Learning + Complete AAT
Sparse AAT
78.56
82.8
82.67
83.45
83

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 23
Table 2
Comparing the Prediction Accuracy between AAT and non-AAT Based Models in the Employer /
Employee Negotiation Domain
Salary-3
Title-4
Car-2
Pension-3
Promotion-2
Hours-3
Average
Majority Rule
60.19
67.59
57.41
70.37
62.96
62.96
63.58
Equilibrium 1
44.44
67.59
69.44
66.67
41.67
67.59
59.57
Equilibrium 2
25.93
17.59
69.44
19.44
43.51
61.11
39.51
D.T. Without AAT
61.11
68.52
68.52
67.59
83.33
69.44
69.75
D.T. with AAT
62.96
68.52
75.93
71.30
91.67
76.85
74.54
D.T. + Complete
95.37
89.81
100
96.28
100
96.30
96.30

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 24
Table 3
Results from “Pick the Pile” domain
Random guess
Raw Encoding
Only Focal Points Rules
Focal Points Learning
33%
40%
48%
65%

Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning 25
Table 4
Results Summary
Problem Type
Cognitive Model
Hybrid Type
Prediction Improvement
Optimization
AAT
Parameter Learning
Slight / Sparse Improvement
Negotiation
AAT
Cognitive Features
5%
Pick the Pile
Focal Points
Cognitive Features
17%

