
Systems Thinking:
Creative Holism
for Managers
Michael C. Jackson
University of Hull, UK

Systems Thinking:
Creative Holism for Managers


Systems Thinking:
Creative Holism
for Managers
Michael C. Jackson
University of Hull, UK

Copyright # 2003 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England
Telephone (þ44) 1243 779777
Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wileyeurope.com or www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency
Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of
the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ,
England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (þ44) 1243 770620
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to
the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Other Wiley Editorial O⁄ces
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 33 Park Road, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 22 Worcester Road, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada M9W 1L1
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0-470-84522-8
Project management by Originator, Gt Yarmouth, Norfolk (typeset in 111
2/13pt Garamond)
Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International, Padstow, Cornwall
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry
in which at least two trees are planted for each one used for paper production.

Dust as we are, the immortal spirit grows
Like harmony in music; there is a dark
Inscrutable workmanship that reconciles
Discordant elements, makes them cling together
In one society.
Wordsworth (The Prelude, 1850)


Contents
Preface
xiii
Introduction
xix
Part I
Holism and Systems Practice
1
1
The Systems Language
3
1.1
Introduction
3
1.2
Philosophy
4
1.3
Biology
5
1.4
Control Engineering
7
1.5
Organization and Management Theory
9
1.6
The Physical Sciences
11
1.7
Why is the Systems Language so Powerful?
12
References
13
2
Applied Systems Thinking
15
2.1
Introduction
15
2.2
Hard Systems Thinking
16
2.3
The Development of Applied Systems Thinking
17
2.3.1
Problem contexts
18
2.3.2
Systems methodologies related to problem contexts
20
2.4
The Main Strands of Applied Systems Thinking
24
2.5
Conclusion
28
References
28
3
Creativity and Systems
31
3.1
Introduction
31
3.2
Creativity and Metaphor
32

3.3
Creativity and Paradigms
37
3.4
Conclusion
39
References
41
Part II
Systems Approaches
43
Type A
Improving Goal Seeking and Viability
45
4
Hard Systems Thinking
47
4.1
Introduction
47
4.2
Description of Hard Systems Thinking
48
4.2.1
Historical development
48
4.2.2
Philosophy and theory
49
4.2.3
Methodology
51
4.2.4
Methods
54
4.2.5
Recent developments
57
4.3
Hard Systems Thinking in Action
57
4.4
Critique of Hard Systems Thinking
60
4.5
The Value of Hard Systems Thinking to Managers
62
4.6
Conclusion
63
References
63
5
System Dynamics: The Fifth Discipline
65
5.1
Introduction
65
5.2
Description of System Dynamics
66
5.2.1
Historical development
66
5.2.2
Philosophy and theory
66
5.2.3
Methodology
68
5.2.4
Methods
70
5.2.5
Recent developments
74
5.3
System Dynamics in Action
74
5.4
Critique of System Dynamics
78
5.5
The Value of System Dynamics to Managers
82
5.6
Conclusion
83
References
83
6
Organizational Cybernetics
85
6.1
Introduction
85
6.2
Description of Organizational Cybernetics
86
6.2.1
Historical development
86
viii
Contents

6.2.2
Philosophy and theory
87
6.2.3
Methodology
88
6.2.4
Methods
96
6.2.5
Recent developments
100
6.3
Organizational Cybernetics in Action
101
6.4
Critique of Organizational Cybernetics
106
6.5
The Value of Organizational Cybernetics to Managers
109
6.6
Conclusion
110
References
110
7
Complexity Theory
113
7.1
Introduction
113
7.2
Description of Complexity Theory
114
7.2.1
Historical development
114
7.2.2
Philosophy and theory
115
7.2.3
Methodology
119
7.2.4
Methods
123
7.2.5
Recent developments
124
7.3
Complexity Theory in Action
125
7.4
Critique of Complexity Theory
128
7.5
The Value of Complexity Theory to Managers
131
7.6
Conclusion
132
References
132
Type B
Exploring Purposes
135
8
Strategic Assumption Surfacing and Testing
137
8.1
Introduction
137
8.2
Description of Strategic Assumption Surfacing and
Testing (SAST)
138
8.2.1
Historical development
138
8.2.2
Philosophy and theory
139
8.2.3
Methodology
142
8.2.4
Methods
144
8.2.5
Recent developments
146
8.3
Strategic Assumption Surfacing and Testing (SAST)
in Action
147
8.4
Critique of Strategic Assumption Surfacing and Testing
(SAST)
151
Contents
ix

8.5
The Value of Strategic Assumption Surfacing and Testing
(SAST) to Managers
153
8.6
Conclusion
154
References
155
9
Interactive Planning
157
9.1
Introduction
157
9.2
Description of Interactive Planning
158
9.2.1
Historical development
158
9.2.2
Philosophy and theory
159
9.2.3
Methodology
161
9.2.4
Methods
165
9.2.5
Recent developments
168
9.3
Interactive Planning in Action
168
9.4
Critique of Interactive Planning
174
9.5
The Value of Interactive Planning to Managers
177
9.6
Conclusion
178
References
178
10
Soft Systems Methodology
181
10.1
Introduction
181
10.2
Description of Soft Systems Methodology (SSM)
182
10.2.1
Historical development
182
10.2.2
Philosophy and theory
184
10.2.3
Methodology
186
10.2.4
Methods
191
10.2.5
Recent developments
196
10.3
Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) in Action
197
10.4
Critique of Soft Systems Methodology (SSM)
202
10.5
The Value of Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) to
Managers
208
10.6
Conclusion
208
References
209
Type C
Ensuring Fairness
211
11
Critical Systems Heuristics
213
11.1
Introduction
213
11.2
Description of Critical Systems Heuristics (CSH)
214
11.2.1
Historical development
214
11.2.2
Philosophy and theory
215
11.2.3
Methodology
217
x
Contents

11.2.4
Methods
220
11.2.5
Recent developments
221
11.3
Critical Systems Heuristics (CSH) in Action
222
11.4
Critique of Critical Systems Heuristics (CSH)
226
11.5
The Value of Critical Systems Heuristics (CSH) to
Managers
229
11.6
Conclusion
229
References
230
12
Team Syntegrity
233
12.1
Introduction
233
12.2
Description of Team Syntegrity
234
12.2.1
Historical development
234
12.2.2
Philosophy and theory
236
12.2.3
Methodology
238
12.2.4
Methods
241
12.2.5
Recent developments
242
12.3
Team Syntegrity in Action
242
12.4
Critique of Team Syntegrity
247
12.5
The Value of Team Syntegrity to Managers
250
12.6
Conclusion
250
References
251
Type D
Promoting Diversity
253
13
Postmodern Systems Thinking
255
13.1
Introduction
255
13.2
Description of Postmodern Systems Thinking
256
13.2.1
Historical development
256
13.2.2
Philosophy and theory
257
13.2.3
Methodology
261
13.2.4
Methods
264
13.2.5
Recent developments
267
13.3
Postmodern Systems Thinking in Action
267
13.4
Critique of Postmodern Systems Thinking
269
13.5
The Value of Postmodern Systems Thinking to
Managers
272
13.6
Conclusion
273
References
274
Contents
xi

Part III
Creative Holism
275
14
Total Systems Intervention
277
14.1
Introduction
277
14.2
Description of Total Systems Intervention (TSI)
278
14.2.1
Historical development
278
14.2.2
Philosophy and theory
281
14.2.3
Metamethodology
284
14.2.4
Methods
287
14.2.5
Recent developments
289
14.3
Total Systems Intervention (TSI) in Action
289
14.4
Critique of Total Systems Intervention (TSI)
295
14.5
The Value of Total Systems Intervention (TSI) to
Managers
297
14.6
Conclusion
298
References
298
15
Critical Systems Practice
301
15.1
Introduction
301
15.2
Description of Critical Systems Practice (CSP)
302
15.2.1
Historical development
302
15.2.2
Philosophy and theory
302
15.2.3
Metamethodology
305
15.2.4
Methods
308
15.2.5
Recent developments
315
15.3
Critical Systems Practice (CSP) in Action
315
15.4
Critique of Critical Systems Practice (CSP)
321
15.5
The Value of Critical Systems Practice (CSP) to Managers
323
15.6
Conclusion
324
References
324
Conclusion
327
Index
329
xii
Contents

Preface
Managers today are expected to cope with increasing complexity, change and
diversity.
Complexity stems from the nature of problems. They rarely present
themselves individually, but come related to other problems, in richly
interconnected problem situations that are appropriately described by Russ
Acko¡ as ‘messes’. As a result, once you examine them, problems seem to
get bigger and to involve more issues and stakeholders.
Change is a product of our era. Organizations, if they are to remain viable,
have to respond adroitly to constant shifts in their environments. Customers
change their preferences over shorter time spans. Competition can be
global and is often fuelled by the onward march of technological innovation.
Governments impose new regulations. Transformations in society and in
ways of thinking impose fresh responsibilities on managers.
In a world of complexity and change, managers are asked to tackle a
much greater diversity of problems. They have to continue to ensure that
organizational processes are e⁄cient and that they are served by the latest
developments in technology. But this is hardly enough to stay ahead of the
game. Sta¡ have to be inspired and the organization’s stock of knowledge
captured and distributed, so that the organization learns faster than its
competitors. This requires the putting in place of £exible structures as well
as the demonstration of transformational leadership qualities. Changes in
the law and in social expectations require managers to respond positively to
eliminate discrimination and to monitor the impact of their organizations’
activities.
Faced with increasing complexity, change and diversity, managers have
inevitably sought the help of advisers, consultants and academics. So desper-
ate have they become for enlightenment that they have elevated a number
of these to the status of management gurus. Too often, however, managers

have been peddled panaceas in the form of the latest management fad. We are
now awash with quick-¢x solutions such as:
.
scenario planning;
.
benchmarking;
.
rightsizing;
.
value chain analysis;
.
continuous improvement;
.
total quality management;
.
learning organizations;
.
process re-engineering;
.
knowledge management;
.
balanced scorecard;
.
customer relationship management.
Unfortunately, as so many managers have discovered to the cost of them-
selves and their organizations, these relatively simple solutions rarely work
in the face of signi¢cant complexity, change and diversity.
Fundamentally, simple solutions fail because they are not holistic or
creative enough.
They are not holistic because they concentrate on the parts of the organiza-
tion rather than on the whole. In doing so they miss the crucial interactions
between the parts. They fail to recognize that optimizing the performance
of one part may have consequences elsewhere that are damaging for the
whole. This fault is known as ‘suboptimization’. In its early days, as is now
admitted by the originators of the approach, process re-engineering concen-
trated far too much on the things that can be engineered at the expense of
the people in organizations. People reacted and process re-engineering inter-
ventions failed in terms of securing overall improvement. Benchmarking
encourages looking at the e⁄ciency of the di¡erent parts of the organization
separately against external comparators. It fails to see that, even if each part
is optimized, the performance of the whole organization can be disastrous
if the parts do not interact together well.
Management fads also sti£e creativity. They pander to the notion that
there is one best solution in all circumstances. Sometimes, if this solution
tackles only one of the aspects of an organization relevant to its performance,
the e¡ect is to reinforce suboptimization. Total quality management, for
example, has done a lot to improve process design, but can be criticized for
ignoring wider structural issues and the politics of organizations. At other
times, even if more parts are considered, there is the danger that they are all
xiv
Preface

viewed from the same perspective. The balanced scorecard claims to embrace
di¡erent viewpoints on organizational performance while actually requiring
users to transfer a machine-like view of organizations to a wider range of
their activities. It looks at di¡erent things, but in the same way. This inhibits
creativity.
Because of the frequent failure of the panaceas they have been o¡ered,
managers are looking for alternatives. In increasing numbers they are
turning toward systems thinking. Systems thinking managers know that
simple solutions are bound to fail when pitched against complex problem
situations. They are willing to struggle with more complicated ideas that,
at ¢rst acquaintance, may be more di⁄cult to understand. They hope to
emerge from this engagement with systems thinking better equipped to
cope with complexity, change and diversity. This hope is based on the fact
that systems thinking is holistic rather than reductionist and, at least in the
form of critical systems thinking, does everything possible to encourage
creativity.
Holism puts the study of wholes before that of the parts. It does not try
to break down organizations into parts in order to understand them and
intervene in them. It concentrates its attention instead at the organizational
level and on ensuring that the parts are functioning and are related properly
together so that they serve the purposes of the whole. Being holistic also
means approaching problems ready to employ the systems language. For
example, looking at organizations, their parts and their environments as
systems, subsystems and suprasystems. All the systems approaches described
in this book seek to make use of the philosophy of holism and the systems
vocabulary associated with it.
Because of the growing popularity of holistic thinking, there is now a rich
storehouse of di¡erent systems approaches. While these all employ holism
they do not all encourage creativity. Some fall prey to the fault found with
so many management fads ^ they encourage us to look at organizations
from only one perspective. Increasingly, being systemic is also coming to
mean being able to look at problem situations and knowing how to resolve
them from a variety of points of view and using di¡erent systems approaches
in combination. Critical systems thinking speci¢cally encourages this kind
of creativity. Creativity is made possible by this book because it presents a
full range of systems approaches and discusses how they can be used
together.
Managers, although increasingly interested in systems thinking, have
reached di¡erent stages in their understanding of it. Some know little
except that it might help. Others are employing systems ideas almost
Preface
xv

instinctively.Itisamazing how often systems concepts are heard in the every-
day parlance of managers and decision-makers: concepts such as holism,
joined-up thinking, partnership, inclusiveness, stakeholding, governance,
interconnectivity, globalization and ecology. A few have engaged in more
in-depth study of books like Peter Senge’s The Fifth Discipline (Random
House, 1990) or of ideas emanating from the sciences of complexity.
If you are a manager or someone aspiring to be a manager, at whatever
stage you are in your study of systems thinking, this book is designed to
help. If you are new to the ideas, then it should serve as a solid introduction.
If you are familiar with a few of the ideas, but know little about how they
are related or can be used to manage organizations, then the book will give
you a more rigorous understanding of holism and how to use systems ideas
in practice. If you understand some systems approaches but not others,
then the book will expand your knowledge and enable you to be creative in
your choice and use of systems methodologies and methods. You will also
be able to use the book as a guide to further reading about systems thinking.
The genesis of this book goes back to the early 1980s when with Paul
Keys, at the University of Hull, I established a research programme to
inquire into the theoretical coherence and practical value of systems ideas
and di¡erent systems approaches. This work continued in the late 1980s
and in 1991 I published, with Bob Flood, Creative Problem Solving: Total
Systems Intervention (Wiley). The success of that volume is the inspiration for
this book. Creative Problem Solving was very popular and, indeed, is still
widely used. However, in someimportant respects it was £awed and it has in-
evitably got somewhat out of date. Having completed a major theoretical
tome of my own in 2000 ^ Systems Approaches to Management (Kluwer/
Plenum) ^ I became con¢dent that I had clari¢ed my own thinking about
some of the di⁄cult issues surrounding the use of systems ideas. A produc-
tive thing to do, I thought, would be to make available the results of the
new research in a more popular format. This book, therefore, draws on the
strengths of Creative Problem Solving, particularly its introductory nature and
accessibility, together with the latest research ¢ndings. Its name Systems
Thinking: Creative Holism for Managers stems from the emphasis placed, as we
have already discussed, on the creative use of systems approaches.
I am grateful to the following for their permission to reproduce previously
published material: Productivity Press, for Figure 5.4; Abacus, for Figure
7.1; Sage, for Figure 7.2; and Plenum Press, for Figure 10.4.
Bob Flood and I could not agree on what a follow-up to Creative Problem
Solving would be like or on whether we wanted to do one. This volume has
to be, therefore, my own interpretation of what a revised and better Creative
xvi
Preface

Problem Solving should be. Nevertheless, there is a debt to the earlier volume,
in concept if not in content, and I therefore gratefully acknowledge Bob’s
contribution to this book.
For helpful comments on individual chapters I would like to thank Paul
Keys (Chapter 4), Ted Geerling (Chapter 5), Peter Fryer (Chapter 7),
Amanda Gregory (Chapter 8), Russ Acko¡ (Chapter 9), Peter Checkland
(Chapter 10), Gerald Midgley (Chapter 11), Norma Romm (Chapter 13)
and Keith Ellis (Chapter 14). Thanks to Maria Ortegon, Ellis Chung,
Gerald Midgley, Keith Ellis and Alvaro Carrisoza for the case studies in
Chapters 7, 8, 11, 14 and 15, respectively. Very special thanks to Angela
Espinosa who advised on Chapter 6, coauthored Chapter 12 and provided
the case studies for those two chapters. I did not always take the advice
o¡ered and all the faults that remain are my responsibility.
At John Wiley & Sons, Diane Taylor deserves special credit for having
faith in this project and persevering with it ^ even if it has taken so long to
come to fruition that she has already retired. Thanks also to Sarah Booth.
I still write longhand, not very neatly and with whatever biro I can
acquire. My PA Doreen Gibbs copes admirably with this as well as o¡ering
loads of other support. I am extremely grateful to her for help over the years.
This has been the most di⁄cult book to complete of all those I have
written. It has been done at a time when I have been extremely busy as Direc-
tor of the University of Hull Business School. Everyone I know, either as a
colleague, friend or acquaintance, has got used to asking ‘how is the book
coming on?’ Our dog, Kelly, has had even fewer walks than normal. The
major sacri¢ces, however, have been made by my sons Christopher and
Richard and my wife Pauline. Thank you so much for having put up with
this and I promise it is the last book.
Michael C. Jackson
May, 2003
Preface
xvii


Introduction
The book is divided into three parts. The ¢rst part presents some introduc-
tory material on systems ideas and how they came to be applied to manage-
ment problems. Part II considers and classi¢es the most signi¢cant attempts
that have been made to take a holistic approach to improving organizational
performance. Many of these holistic approaches employ systems ideas in a
manner that enhances creativity. The maximum creative use of holism to
assist managers, however, comes from using the di¡erent approaches in
combination. This is the focus of the ¢nal part of the book. Let us now
consider how the book is structured based on this overall plan.
In the Preface we noted that systems thinking eschews simple solutions to
complex problems. It embraces holism and creativity to handle complexity,
change and diversity. These notions are initially a little more di⁄cult to
grasp than the fads and panaceas prepared in easily digestible form for
managers to consume. We begin therefore, in Chapter 1, by learning the
language of systems thinking. Systems concepts have a long history, dating
back to early Greek philosophy. They have penetrated and been re¢ned in
a variety of di¡erent disciplines. We consider the emergence and meaning
of the most important systems terms and how they give rise to a language
¢t for the purpose of dealing with managerial concerns.
It was about the time of the Second World War that the ¢rst attempts were
made to apply systems ideas to managerial problem-solving. Chapter 2
looks at the birth and development of this applied systems thinking. It is
one of the strengths of systems thinking compared with, say, process re-
engineering, knowledge management and the balanced scorecard, that it
has a reasonably long history of application from which much has been
learned. The history of applied systems thinking over the last few decades
has seen it continually reframing itself so as to become slicker in dealing
with complexity and change in a wider range of problem situations.

The ¢nal chapter of Part I relates developments in applied systems think-
ing to di¡erent ways of looking at operations and organizations, and how
they should be managed. This is accomplished by considering what
assumptions managers make when dealing with problems in organizations.
Managers get locked into particular, limited ways of seeing the world and
this clearly a¡ects the way they try to change it. The assumptions they
make can be revealed if set against the backdrop of the metaphors and para-
digms that are used to understand organizations and intervene in them.
The various holistic approaches to management themselves build on di¡er-
ent metaphors and paradigms. Once this is grasped it becomes possible to
understand the strengths and weaknesses of the variety of holistic approaches
and to use them in combination to enhance creativity.
Following these introductory chapters on systems concepts, applied
systems thinking and creativity enhancement, Part II provides a comprehen-
sive review of the best known and most useful holistic approaches to
management. All the approaches considered make use of the systems
language presented in Chapter 1 and at least a signi¢cant subset of the
systems concepts introduced. They are all holistic in character. The use to
which they put systemsideas isdi¡erent however ^ according to the purposes
that they hope to achieve. In particular, the metaphors they employ and the
paradigms they embrace make a di¡erence to what is envisaged as the most
important aim that systems thinking should pursue. On this basis, holistic
approaches can be classi¢ed into four types:
.
systems approaches for improving goal seeking and viability;
.
systems approaches for exploring purposes;
.
systems approaches for ensuring fairness;
.
systems approaches for promoting diversity.
Part II is divided into four; emphasizing that there are these four ‘types’ of
systems approach (Types A^D) each privileging a di¡erent aim.
Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 detail those systems approaches that can help goal
seeking and viability through increasing the e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy of organ-
izational processes and structures (Type A). Their primary orientation is im-
proving organizational performance in terms of how well the organization
does its tasks and responds to changes in its environment. Included in this
category are ‘hard systems thinking’ (Chapter 4), ‘system dynamics ^ the
¢fth discipline’ (Chapter 5), ‘organizational cybernetics’ (Chapter 6) and
‘complexity theory’ (Chapter 7).
Type B systems approaches seek to improve organizational performance
xx
Introduction

by exploring purposes and ensuring su⁄cient agreement is obtained among
an organization’s stakeholders about purposes. Their primary orientation is
to evaluate di¡erent aims and objectives, promote mutual understanding,
ensure an accommodation is reached and gain commitment to purposes. Dis-
cussion around purposes normally involves issues of the e¡ectiveness and
elegance of what is being proposed. Chapter 8 considers ‘strategic assump-
tion surfacing and testing’, Chapter 9 ‘interactive planning’ and Chapter 10
‘soft systems methodology’.
Chapter 11 on ‘critical systems heuristics’ and Chapter 12 on ‘team
syntegrity’ consider Type C systems approaches. The main concern shifts
to ensuring fairness in organizations. Organizational performance is seen as
improved as discrimination of all kinds is eliminated, full and open participa-
tion is encouraged so that people have a say over decisions that involve
them, and organizations pay attention to all those a¡ected by their actions.
This orientation is re£ected in a primary concern with emancipating and
empowering disadvantaged groups.
Type D is covered in just one chapter, Chapter 13, on postmodern systems
thinking. This sees performance as improved if organizations exhibit a diver-
sity appropriate to the challenges they face in new times. Organizations can
become moribund, sterile, boring because they are dominated by particular
systems of thought and routinized ways of doing things. Postmodern
systems thinking challenges normality and the routine, encouraging di¡er-
ence and fun. It emphasizes the importance of looking for exceptions and
of engaging people’s emotions when seeking change.
Part II, therefore, presents and considers the most important attempts
that have been made to bring holism, and the systems language associated
with it, to the attention of managers in ways that they can make use of.
Chapters 4^13 set out and critique the main systems approaches to manage-
ment. As will become apparent the four categories (Types A^D), into
which these systems approaches have been divided, can be related back to
the di¡erent paradigms of thinking about organizations discussed in
Chapter 3. Moreover, within each category the di¡erences between the
systems approaches selected for consideration can be linked to the variety
of metaphors looked at in Chapter 3. This enables us to see clearly the
assumptions on which the di¡erent systems approaches are based, why they
emphasize certain factors as being signi¢cant for organizational performance
and ignore others, and to understand at a deeper level their strengths and
weaknesses.
The role and importance of Part III can now be outlined. Although all the
systems approaches considered in Part II embrace holism, and this has
Introduction
xxi

many advantages in dealing with complexity, change and diversity, they do
so on the basis of particular perspectives on the nature of organizations and
how they should be managed to make them work well. It is surely being
even more holistic to believe that improving organizational performance,
in its very broadest sense, requires an ability to look at organizations from
all these perspectives (based on di¡erent paradigms and metaphors). And it
requires managers to be able to bring to bear, on the complex, diverse and
rapidly changing problem situations they confront, holistic approaches
based on the variety of possible perspectives. Overall organizational
performance must depend on: improving goal seeking and viability; explor-
ing purposes; ensuring fairness; and promoting diversity. Consideration
must be given to e⁄ciency, e⁄cacy, e¡ectiveness, elegance, emancipation,
empowerment, exception and emotion. Improvement can involve all of
these things although, of course, it is necessary for managers to prioritize
and to have a di¡erent emphasis to their actions at di¡erent times.
PartIII ofthe bookiscalled ‘creative holism’ and is concerned with theuse
of di¡erent systems approaches, re£ecting alternative holistic perspectives,
in combination. The various systems approaches cannot be used all at once
but they can be employed creatively, in an informed and ethical way, to
promote together the overall improvement of organizational performance.
This is the essence of creative holism.
Part III consists of two chapters. The ¢rst looks at ‘total systems interven-
tion’, as the best known approach to combining di¡erent systems
approaches. The second describes ‘critical systems practice’, as the modern
expression of creative holism.
A short conclusion closes the argument.
In this introduction I have sought to make clear the structure of the book
and the logic underlying that structure. This is summarized in Table I.1.
xxii
Introduction

Table I.1
The structure of the book.
Introduction
Part I
Holism and Systems Practice
Chapter 1
The Systems Language
Chapter 2
Applied Systems Thinking
Chapter 3
Creativity and Systems
Type A
Improving
Chapter 4
Hard Systems Thinking
Goal Seeking
Chapter 5
System Dynamics: The
and Viability
Fifth Discipline
Chapter 6
Organizational Cybernetics
Chapter 7
Complexity Theory
Part II
Systems
Type B
Exploring
Chapter 8
Strategic Assumption
Approaches
Purposes
Surfacing and Testing
Chapter 9
Interactive Planning
Chapter 10 Soft Systems Methodology
Type C
Ensuring
Chapter 11 Critical Systems Heuristics
Fairness
Chapter 12 Team Syntegrity
Type D
Promoting
Chapter 13 Postmodern Systems
Diversity
Thinking
Part III
Creative Holism
Chapter 14 Total Systems Intervention
Chapter 15 Critical Systems Practice
Conclusion
Introduction
xxiii


Part I
Holism and Systems
Practice
The aim of Part I is to provide the reader with the background information
needed to understand fully the di¡erent systems approaches studied in Part
II. Chapter 1 introduces the systems language and some simple systems
ideas. It does this by tracing the in£uence of holism and the emergence of
various systems concepts in some important intellectual disciplines, such as
philosophy and biology. Chapter 2 considers the development of applied
systems thinking since its birth around the time of the Second World War.
It tries to put a pattern on events by seeing the di¡erent systems approaches
that arose as responses, in turn, to the need to improve goal seeking and
viability, to explore purposes, to ensure fairness, and to promote diversity.
These various requirements themselves originate in the greater complexity,
turbulence and variety of problem situations as discussed in the Preface.
Chapter 3 steps back a little and sees the development of di¡erent systems
approaches in terms of a willingness by systems thinkers to explore and
enrich various metaphors of organization and alternative sociological para-
digms using systems ideas. It is upon an understanding of this process, and
of what di¡erent metaphors and paradigms have to o¡er, that the critique
of the di¡erent systems approaches, exposing their strengths and weaknesses,
can be launched in Part II.


The Systems Language
1
The more we study the major problems of our time, the more we
come to realise that they cannot be understood in isolation. They are
systemic problems, which means that they are interconnected and
interdependent.
Capra (1996)
1.1
INTRODUCTION
Simply de¢ned, a system is a complex whole the functioning of which
depends on its parts and the interactions between those parts. Stated like
this, it is clear that we can identify systems of very di¡erent types:
.
physical, such as river systems;
.
biological, such as living organisms;
.
designed, such as automobiles;
.
abstract, such as philosophical systems;
.
social, such as families;
.
human activity, such as systems to ensure the quality of products.
The traditional, scienti¢c method for studying such systems is known as
reductionism. Reductionism sees the parts as paramount and seeks to identify
the parts, understand the parts and work up from an understanding of the
parts to an understanding of the whole. The problem with this is that
the whole often seems to take on a form that is not recognizable from the
parts. The whole emerges from the interactions between the parts, which
a¡ect each other through complex networks of relationships. Once it has
emerged, it is the whole that seems to give meaning to the parts and their

interactions. A living organism gives meaning to the heart, liver and lungs; a
family to the roles of husband, wife, son, daughter.
It is not surprising therefore that there exists an alternative to reduction-
ism for studying systems. This alternative is known as holism. Holism con-
siders systems to be more than the sum of their parts. It is of course
interested in the parts and particularly the networks of relationships
between the parts, but primarily in terms of how they give rise to and
sustain in existence the new entity that is the whole ^ whether it be a river
system, an automobile, a philosophical system or a quality system. It is the
whole that is seen as important and gives purpose to the study.
Holism gained a foothold in many di¡erent academic disciplines, bene¢t-
ing from the failure of reductionism to cope with problems of complexity,
diversity and change in complex systems. In what follows we look at the
encounter of holism with philosophy, biology, control engineering, organ-
ization and management theory, and the physical sciences. We see how the
systems language associated with holism was developed and enriched in
each case. Particularly fruitful were the encounters with biology and
control engineering, which gave birth to systems thinking as a transdisci-
pline, studying systems in their own right, in the 1940s and 1950s. This pro-
duced a language that describes the characteristics that systems have in
common, whether they are mechanical, biological or social.
In a conclusion to the chapter I seek to explain why this language is
particularly powerful for the purposes of managers.
More detailed accounts of the development of holistic thinking can be
found in Checkland (1981) and Jackson (2000).
1.2
PHILOSOPHY
The classical Greek philosophers, Aristotle and Plato, established some
important systems ideas. Aristotle reasoned that the parts of the body only
make sense in terms of the way they function to support the whole organism
and used this biological analogy to consider how individuals need to be
related to the State. Plato was interested in how the notion of control, or
the art of steersmanship (kybernetes), could be applied both to vessels and
the State. Ships had to be steered safely toward harbour by a helmsman. A
similar role needed to be ful¢lled in societies if they were to prosper.
Holism was pushed to the margins of philosophical debate for many cen-
turies, but the golden age of European philosophy, during the 18th and
19th centuries, saw a renewed interest in what it had to o¡er. Kant and
4
The systems language

Hegel were particularly in£uential in this respect. Kant was an ‘idealist’ who
argued that we could never really know reality or whether it was systemic.
However, he believed it was helpful for humans to think in terms of
wholes emerging from and sustained by the self-organization of their parts.
Hegel introduced process into systems thinking. An understanding of the
whole, or the truth, could be approached through a systemic unfolding of
thesis, antithesis and synthesis. Each movement through this cycle, with
the synthesis becoming the new thesis, gradually enriched our grasp of the
whole.
It was these philosophical ideas that impacted on the scienti¢c disciplines,
where they were given a more rigorous formulation.
1.3
BIOLOGY
The fruitfulness of the relationship between holism and biology can be
accounted for by the complexity of the problems encountered by biologists
in trying to understand whole organisms. Whole organisms seemed to
resist the attempts of scienti¢c reductionists to reduce them to the sum of
their parts. In the 1920s and 1930s, as a response to this, more holistically
inclined biologists began to argue that organisms were more than the sum
of their parts. They conceived that a hierarchy existed in nature ^ molecules,
organelles, cells, organs, organisms ^ and, at certain points in the hierarchy,
stable levels of organized complexity arose that demonstrated emergent
properties, which did not exist at levels below. An organism was one such
level.
It was argued that an organism (e.g., an animal) had a clear boundary
separating it from its environment and was capable, as its main emergent
property, of a degree of autonomy. An organism sustained itself in a steady
state by carrying out transactions across this boundary with its environment.
It had to be capable of making internal transformations to ensure that it
was adapted to its environment. The processes that maintained the steady
state were referred to as homeostatic, an example being the self-regulating
mechanism controlling body temperature. The behaviour of an organism
could not, it seemed, be explained by the properties of its parts in isolation.
It arose from the particular interdependence of the parts, which gave rise to
a new level of organized complexity. Biology was seen exactly as the
science appropriate to this level and could not therefore be reduced to
physics or chemistry.
Ludwig von Bertalan¡y has become the best known of the biologists
who argued that organisms should be studied as complex wholes. In 1950
Biology
5

he published an article in which be made the well-known distinction between
closed systems and open systems. A closed system engages in no exchanges
with its environment. An open system, such as an organism, has to interact
with its environment to maintain itself in existence. Open systems take
inputs from their environments, transform them and then return them as
some sort of product back to the environment. They depend on the environ-
ment for their existence and adapt in reaction to changes in the environment.
Von Bertalan¡y’s lasting fame and in£uence has derived from his sugges-
tion that the sorts of behaviour he witnessed in open systems in biology
could be seen demonstrated by open systems in other domains. Thus, he
initiated and named ‘general system theory’ (see von Bertalan¡y, 1968) ^ a
kind of transdiscipline in which systems were studied in their own right
and which allowed insights from one discipline to be transferred to others.
General system theory was soon embraced by management thinkers who
transferred the open system model to their study of organizations.
The biological system model is represented in Figure 1.1. It shows a
system separated from its environment by a distinct boundary. The
system has a complex structure, being di¡erentiated into subsystems that
themselves have parts (systems arranged in a hierarchy of systems). The
close interrelationships of mutual in£uence between the subsystems must
ensure homeostasis ^ the maintenance of a steady state. One subsystem is
acting in a kind of ‘management’ capacity, trying to ensure integration and
co-ordination. The system takes inputs of material, energy and information
6
The systems language
Figure 1.1
The biological system model.

from its environment, uses some to sustain itself and transforms the rest into
outputs. These outputs may themselves allow the system to secure,
through a cycle of events, more of the useful inputs it needs to survive.
The open systems perspective propounded by von Bertalan¡y, and so in-
£uential in the 1970s and 1980s, has more recently been challenged by the
biologists Maturana and Varela (1980). They emphasize instead the closed
system of interactions that occurs in living entities. These interactions
ensure the self-production of the system and its autonomy. Such self-
producing, or autopoietic (from the ancient Greek for self-production),
systems respond to environmental disturbances, but not directly or simply;
the nature of the response depends on their own internal organizational ar-
rangements. This does not mean that autopoietic systems cannot change
their structure, but it does mean that they do this only with a view to
keeping their fundamental organizational identity intact. The emphasis on
the circular organization of living systems, and their resistance to change,
o¡ers a useful corrective to those general system theorists who stress the
overriding importance of organization^environment relations.
1.4
CONTROL ENGINEERING
The other ¢gure who stands alongside von Bertalan¡y, as a founding father
of systems thinking as a transdiscipline, is Norbert Wiener, a mathematician
and control engineer. In 1948 Wiener published a book on what he called,
borrowing from the Greek, cybernetics ^ the science of control and
communication in the animal and the machine. Cybernetics, Wiener
argued, was a new science that had application to many di¡erent disciplines
because it dealt with general laws that governed control processes whatever
the nature of the system under consideration.
The two key concepts introduced by Wiener into the systems lexicon were
control and communication. In understanding control, whether in the mech-
anical, biological or political realm, the idea of negative feedback is crucial.
This concept allows a proper, scienti¢c explanation to be given of purposive
behaviour ^ behaviour directed to the attainment of a goal. It was Wiener’s
insight that all such behaviour requires negative feedback. In this process,
information is transmitted about any divergence of behaviour from a
present goal and corrective action taken, on the basis of this information,
to bring the behaviour back towards the goal. In a central heating system a
thermostat monitors the heat of a room against some preset temperature
and uses the information that the temperature is too low or high to switch
Control engineering
7

the system on or o¡. Communication is equally signi¢cant because if we wish
to control the actions of a machine or another human being we must
communicate information to that machine or individual.
Figure 1.2 shows a simple, negative feedback system. It operates by
sensing the current output of the process that is to be controlled. The
output is compared with the desired goal and, if it diverges from this, an
activator adjusts the input to bring the process back toward achieving the
desired goal. In this way, systems regulate themselves and are controlled, in
the face of environmental disturbances, through the e¡ective communication
of information. It is of course very important that the sensor and comparator
operate continuously and rapidly. This ensures that discrepancies are identi-
¢ed at the earliest possible opportunity and corrective action can immediately
be initiated. It is also worth noting that it is not necessary to understand the
nature of the process, which might be a complex system, in order to
employ the negative feedback device. The controller can regard it as a
‘black box’ and adjust it simply by manipulating the inputs in order to
achieve the desired outputs.
8
The systems language
Figure 1.2
A negative feedback system.

Although it did not impinge much on the consciousness of Wiener,
another form of feedback, positive feedback, has become signi¢cant for
systems thinking. While negative feedback counteracts deviations from a
goal, positive feedback ampli¢es them. For example, one mistimed tackle
in a soccer match can lead to a series of deliberate fouls, escalating into uncon-
trolled aggression from both sides. Identifying situations where the parts of
a system are locked into a positive feedback loop, and its behaviour is
spinning out of control, is of obvious signi¢cance to managers. A good
referee can re-establish order with the astute use of a yellow card.
A ¢nal systems concept that I need to introduce in this section is ‘variety’.
Variety is a term ¢rst used by Ashby (1956) to refer to the number of possible
states a system can exhibit. According to Ashby’s law of requisite variety,
systems can only be controlled if the would-be controller can command the
same degree of variety as the system. Today, systems are complex and
change rapidly; they exhibit high variety. Managers need to pay attention
to reducing the variety of the system they are seeking to control and/or to in-
creasing their own variety. This process of ‘balancing varieties’ is known as
variety engineering. We shall see how it is done in Chapter 6.
1.5
ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT THEORY
Early attempts to marry holism with organization and management theory
took two main forms. In the ¢rst some basic systems concepts were incorpo-
rated in the prevailing scienti¢c management tradition to yield optimizing
approaches, such as systems engineering. In the second there was a wholesale
transfer of the biological analogy, especially as re¢ned by von Bertalan¡y,
to yield systems models of organization emphasizing the importance of
subsystems to overall organizational e¡ectiveness and the signi¢cance of
the organization^environment ¢t.
Both these early attempts met with di⁄culties because they failed to
recognize that systems containing human beings are, what we now call,
purposeful. The systems of components that engineers are used to dealing
with are purposive ^ designed to reach the goal speci¢ed by the engineers.
Biological systems are adept at survival, but if this is their purpose it is
obviously something ascribed to them from the outside and not something
they think about themselves. The parts of social systems however ^ human
beings ^ can generate their own purposes from inside the system, and these
might not correspond at all to any purposes prescribed by managers or
Organization and management theory
9

outsiders. Social and organizational systems, therefore, have multiple pur-
poses: they are purposeful.
It was soon clear that a di¡erent kind of terminology would be useful for
describing and working with purposeful systems.
A number of roles had to be delimited relevant to purposeful systems and
re£ecting some alternative sources of purposes. The term ‘stakeholder’ is
used to refer to any group with an interest in what the system is doing.
Decision-makers or owners have the power to make things happen in
systems; actors carry out basic tasks; customers or clients bene¢t or su¡er
from what a system does. Problem-owners worry about the performance of
someaspect of a system.Witnesses are a¡ected by systems but unable to in£u-
ence their behaviour. Problem-solvers or analysts take on board the task of
trying to improve systems.
Since purposes emanate from the human mind, attention also has to be
given to the di¡erent mental models that people bring to their roles. These
mental models are made up, in each case, of a mix of the understanding and
values that individuals have gathered through their experiences and educa-
tion. The facts and values that they use in interpreting the world can
perhaps themselves be understood in systems terms. They are said to consti-
tute the world view, Weltanschauung (a German word meaning ‘world
image’), or appreciative system employed by an individual or group.
For those who want to manage purposeful systems or intervene to change
them the resistance, or otherwise, of Weltanschauungen or appreciative
systems to change becomes critical. If the only change that can be contem-
plated takes place in the context of an existing mental model, then you are
limited to bringing about ¢rst-order learning. If, however, the mental
model itself can be changed, and purposes radically altered, then second-
order change is possible. The ways in which world views change became a
primary focus of ‘soft systems thinking’ and, within this, Hegel’s notion of
a ‘dialectical debate’ between thesis and antithesis was particularly in£uential.
Finally, in considering purposeful systems, we need to note how signi¢-
cant the concept of boundary becomes. With a machine or organism it is
usually very apparent where the boundary of the system lies. For those
concerned with purposeful systems, however, this is rarely the case. Where
the boundary is seen to be will depend on the world view of the person
observing the system. For example, whether the boundary of a business
organization should expand to include its natural environment, its local
community, unemployed people, etc. are all very much issues open to
debate. Values and ethics play a part in such decisions. There is the further
matter of who should participate in de¢ning purposes, taking decisions and
10
The systems language

drawing boundaries. And because resources and interests will be at stake, as
well as di¡erent philosophies, power and politics will have a signi¢cant
impact on purposeful systems.
The encounter of holism with management and organization theory has
thrown up complications not found when the focus of attention for
systems thinking was the natural realm. Part II reveals, however, that this
has not been an unequal challenge; holism has stood up to the task well
enough.
1.6
THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES
Systems thinking emerged as a transdiscipline, in the 1940s and 1950s, in
large part as a reaction to the reductionism of the traditional scienti¢c
method and the failure of that reductionism to cope with the complexity
inherent in the biological and social domains. It seemed for some time, there-
fore, that systems thinking was the antithesis of the scienti¢c method. More
recently, however, the physical sciences seem to have undergone their own
systems revolution and holism, and the concepts associated with it have
been welcomed in physics and chemistry as o¡ering new forms of explana-
tion and new avenues of exploration. Quantum theory in physics and the
study of dissipative structures in chemistry are examples of a more holistic
orientation in the physical sciences.
Because they have undergone their own systems revolution, the physical
sciences are now able to make their own contributions to the language of
systems thinking more generally. Quantum physics brought to the fore the
notion of indeterminacy and gave new meaning to the concept of relation-
ships. From chemistry comes a reinforcement of the process view of
systems and the idea of self-organization. Perhaps most important of all,
however, has been the birth of a new kind of general system theory in
science under the banner of chaos and complexity theory (see Gleick, 1987).
Complexity theory ^ the more general term and the one we shall use ^
complements the normal systems concern for order by being equally
concerned with disorder. The fact that so many complex systems appear to
exhibit disorder, irregularity and unpredictability had seemed to put them
beyond the reach of scienti¢c understanding. Complexity theorists did not
actually dispute this. Indeed, their early studies reinforced the notion by
demonstrating that a small change in the initial conditions of a system can
lead to large-scale consequences later on: famously, a butter£y £apping its
wings in the Amazon jungle can conceivably lead to storms in the South
The physical sciences
11

China Sea. However, what they also found was that underlying apparent
chaos was a surprising degree of pattern. Complex systems seem to be
governed in some way by ‘strange attractors’, which means that although
they never repeat exactly the same behaviour, what they do remains within
certain limits. The weather in England is notoriously unpredictable in
detail, but we never experience extreme cold or extreme heat and, only
occasionally, very heavy rainfall and hurricanes. Furthermore, the patterns
that govern complex systems seem to be repeated at di¡erent levels of the
system. The parts of the whole are similar in shape to the whole. Snow£akes
and cauli£owers have been used as everyday examples of ‘fractal wholes’
demonstrating such self-similarity.
Pursuing their research into order and disorder in complex systems, com-
plexity theorists discovered what became known as the ‘edge of chaos’.
This is a narrow transition zone between order and chaos where systems
become capable of taking on new forms of behaviour ^ of self-organization
and particularly innovative activity.
The potential of complexity theory for helping managers is perhaps
becoming clear. The organizations they manage seem chaotic and unpredict-
able. But maybe they too are governed by strange attractors that can, after
all, be understood. The environments in which organizations operate are
turbulent and ever changing, yet organizations seem slow to adapt. Maybe
if they can be driven to the edge of chaos they will be much more creative
in the way they behave. A new systems view of organizations has been
constructed out of these ideas.
1.7
WHY IS THE SYSTEMS LANGUAGE SO POWERFUL?
In this chapter we have started to become familiar with the systems language.
Our undertstanding will be deepened as we start to see how the language
can be used to address management problems in Part II. Obviously, it takes
e¡ort to learn a new language and we will have to encounter still more new
concepts in what follows. In asking you to make this e¡ort I can perhaps
rely on the fact that managers are fed up with being o¡ered simple solutions
to complex, diverse problems. They recognize that more sophisticated
solutions are necessary and that this may demand a more di⁄cult language.
I am keen, however, to close the chapter with just four arguments as to
why you should bother with the systems language.
First, as we have seen, the emphasis on holism o¡ers a useful corrective to
the reductionism that still governs much management thinking. Organiza-
12
The systems language

tions are complex and the relationships between the parts are crucial. There is
a need for joined-up thinking in addressing their problems.
Second isthe emphasis modern systemsthinking puts on processas wellas
structure. This stems from systems philosophy, from von Bertalan¡y’s
open systems concept and from complexity theory. It is not always the
right approach to design systems according to some prede¢ned blueprint.
Allowing a process to take place can lead to innovative behaviour and ways
forward that could not have been foreseen before the process was embarked
on.
Third is the transdisciplinarity of systems thinking. It draws its ideas and
concepts, as we have seen, from a variety of di¡erent disciplines and in so
doing can draw on their di¡erent strengths. Even if analogies derived from
physics and biology do not hold strictly when applied to organizations,
managers have access to a rich storehouse of insights if they can use other
disciplines to provide them with new metaphors for understanding their
role.
Finally, the systems language has proven itself more suitable for getting to
grips with real-world management problems than that of any other single
discipline. Ithas givenrisetoa rangeofpowerful systemsapproaches toman-
agement. The next chapter starts to look at the development of this applied
systems thinking. In Part II you will get the chance to judge the truth of
the claim I am making here for yourself.
REFERENCES
Ashby, W.R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. Methuen, London.
Capra, F. (1996). The Web of Life: A New Synthesis of Mind and Matter. Flamingo,
London.
Checkland, P.B. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: The Making of a New Science. Abacus, London.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Maturana, H.R. and Varela, F.J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization
of the Living. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
von Bertalan¡y, L. (1950). The theory of open systems in physics and biology.
In: F.E. Emery (ed.), Systems Thinking (pp. 70^85). Penguin, Harmondsworth,
UK.
von Bertalan¡y, L. (1968). General System Theory. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
References
13


Applied Systems Thinking
2
OR [operational research] is regarded by many as being in crisis. If OR
is taken to be ‘classical OR’, this is indisputable . . . If, however, the
definition of OR is widened to embrace other systems-based methodol-
ogies for problem solving, then a diversity of approaches may herald not
crisis, but increased competence and effectiveness in a variety of
different problem contexts.
Jackson and Keys (1984)
2.1
INTRODUCTION
As systems thinking evolved, and systems concepts developed in the way
described in the previous chapter, increasing attention was given to
whether it could be used to tackle practical real-world problems. In this
chapter we start to consider the work of those involved in a more applied
approach to systems thinking, especially those who wanted to apply
systems ideas to managerial problem situations. To this end we ¢rst consider
the nature and limitations of what has come to be called ‘hard systems think-
ing’. We then look at how applied systems thinking developed, during the
1970s, 1980s and 1990s, to overcome some of the weaknesses of hard
systems thinking, in the process making itself useful in a much wider range
of problem situations. Section 2.4 introduces the main strands of applied
systems thinking and picks out the characteristics of the particular
approaches we shall be studying in more depth in Part II. A conclusion
summarizes the state of applied systems thinking today and leads us to ask
questions about how we can make the most creative use of the di¡erent
modes of holistic intervention that now exist. Part III, on creative holism,
will seek to provide the answers.

2.2
HARD SYSTEMS THINKING
When systems practitioners bring together various systems ideas and
techniques in an organized way and employ them to try to improve a
problem situation, they are said to be using a ‘systems methodology’ ^
another technical term to which we shall become accustomed. The attempt
to devise such methodologies as a means of tackling real-world problems
began around the time of the Second World War. It was during the Second
World War, and its immediate aftermath, that the methodologies of Opera-
tional Research (OR), Systems Analysis (SA) and Systems Engineering
(SE) were born. OR was used extensively to assist the allied war e¡ort (e.g.,
in increasing the e⁄ciency of radar systems and in optimizing the results of
bombing raids on German cities). After the war OR workers migrated into
government departments and, especially in Britain, into OR groups estab-
lished in the large nationalized industries. SA was promoted by the highly
in£uential RAND (acronym for ‘Research ANd Development’) Corporation
and used extensively to help the US military. Somewhat later, in the form
of spin-o¡s, such as cost^bene¢t analysis, it found willing champions in
central and local government departments. SE was an extension of the
principles adopted by the engineering profession to large industrial engineer-
ing projects (e.g., in the chemical and aerospace industries).
Checkland (1981), recognizing similarities between the approaches of OR,
SA and SE, labelled this kind of systems work ‘hard systems thinking’. We
shall be exploring its nature, strengths and weaknesses more fully in
Chapter 4. In essence, however, it o¡ered managers and management
scientists a means of seeking to optimize the performance of a system in
pursuit of clearly identi¢ed goals. Emphasis is placed on the application of
a systematic methodology that, having established objectives, is able to
identify problems that stand in the way of optimization and rectify them by
employing scienti¢c modelling, rational testing, implementation and evalua-
tion processes.
Hard systems thinking was a breakthrough in terms of applying systems
thinking to real-world problems. In many cases, as we shall see in Chapter
4, it o¡ers a methodology that remains the most appropriate way of proceed-
ing to tackle such problems. A considerable amount of criticism has,
however, been levelled at the limitations of hard systems thinking in the
environment inhabited by managers. These criticisms relate to its inability
to handle signi¢cant complexity, to cope with a plurality of di¡erent beliefs
and values, and to deal with issues of politics and power.
The extreme complexity and turbulence of problem situations, and of the
16
Applied systems thinking

environments surrounding them, frustrate the aspirations of hard systems
thinkers. Hard approaches require an objective account of the system of
concern so that a mathematical model can be produced and an optimal
solution to the problem recommended. The ‘reality’ facing today’s managers
is so complex and subject to change that it is impossible to reduce problem
situations to a form that would make them amenable to such modelling.
How can we distinguish exactly which elements contribute to the problem
situation, identify the relevant interactions between them and quantify their
in£uence?
Another limitation is that hard systems thinking is unable to deal satisfac-
torily with multiple perceptions of reality. It demands that the goal of the
system of concern be known or ascertained before analysis can proceed.
OR, for example, requires ‘formulation of the problem’ on the basis of the
objectives to be achieved. In managerial situations the establishment of
agreed objectives will often lie at the very heart of the problem to be
tackled. Di¡erent stakeholders will have diverse opinions about the nature
ofthesystemthey are involvedwith and aboutits proper purposes.Consider,
for example, a university ^ is it primarily a research institution, a teaching
factory, a servant of its local community, a supplier of trained labour to
employers, a means of passing on the cultural norms of a society, a holiday
camp that keeps kids o¡ the street, etc.? Hard methodologies, lacking
mechanisms for generating accommodations around objectives, are unable
even to get started when confronted with messy situations of this kind.
In need of a clearly de¢ned goal, and an objective account of the situation,
it is not surprising that hard systems thinkers should cleave to the point of
view of the powerful to progress their analyses. This strategy also increases
the chances of having some recommendations implemented. Obviously,
however, it leaves hard approaches open to the charge of being unable to
deal with politics and power, of serving only in£uential clients and of limit-
ing their recommendations to those that defend the status quo.
By the 1970s, because of the obvious failings of hard systems thinking, the
systems community found itself in something akin to a crisis. In Section
2.3 we shall consider further the nature of this crisis and how applied
systems thinking developed in order to overcome it.
2.3
THE DEVELOPMENT OF APPLIED SYSTEMS THINKING
The history ofapplied systems thinkingcan be presentedintermsofe¡orts to
overcome the weaknesses of hard systems thinking as set out in the previous
The development of applied systems thinking
17

section. Success in this endeavour has been hard-won, but over the last 30
years or so signi¢cant developments have taken place and the systems
approach is now valued as making an important contribution to resolving
a much wider range of complex problems than hard systems thinking was
able to deal with. We can understand these developments best using a frame-
work for classifying systems methodologies, developed by Jackson and
Keys in 1984, called the System Of Systems Methodologies (SOSM).
2.3.1
Problem contexts
The starting point in constructing the SOSM is an ‘ideal-type’ grid of
problem situations or problem contexts. This grid has been described and
presented in various ways (see Jackson and Keys, 1984; Jackson, 1993,
2000; Flood and Jackson, 1991), but an easily understandable version is
shown as Figure 2.1.
We argued earlier in the book that problem contexts become more di⁄-
cult to manage as they exhibit greater complexity, change and diversity. In
very general terms, systems thinkers see increasing complexity, change and
diversity as stemming from two sources: the ‘systems’ managers have to
deal with, as they become larger and subject to more turbulence; and the
‘participants’, those with an interest in the problem situation, as their
18
Applied systems thinking
Figure 2.1
Jackson’s extended version of Jackson and Keys’ ‘ideal-type’ grid of
problem contexts.

values, beliefs and interests start to diverge. This gives rise to the ‘systems’
and ‘participants’ dimensions used to establish the grid.
The vertical axis expresses a continuum of system types conceptualized at
one extreme as relatively simple, at the other as extremely complex. Simple
systems can be characterized as having a few subsystems that are involved
in only a small number of highly structured interactions. They tend not to
change much over time, being relatively una¡ected by the independent
actions of their parts or by environmental in£uences. Extremely complex
systems, at the other end of the spectrum, can be characterized as having a
large number of subsystems that are involved in many more loosely
structured interactions, the outcome of which is not predetermined. Such
systems adapt and evolve over time as they are a¡ected by their own purpose-
ful parts and by the turbulent environments in which they exist.
The horizontal axis classi¢es the relationships that can exist between those
concerned with the problem context ^ the participants ^ in three types:
‘unitary’, ‘pluralist’ and ‘coercive’. Participants de¢ned as being in a unitary
relationship have similar values, beliefs and interests. They share common
purposes and are all involved, in one way or another, in decision-making
about how to realize their agreed objectives. Those de¢ned as being in a
pluralist relationship di¡er in that, although their basic interests are compati-
ble, they do not share the same values and beliefs. Space needs to be made
available within which debate, disagreement, even con£ict, can take place.
If this is done, and all feel they have been involved in decision-making,
then accommodations and compromises can be found. Participants will
come to agree, at least temporarily, on productive ways forward and will
act accordingly. Those participants de¢ned as being in coercive relationships
have few interests in common and, if free to express them, would hold
con£icting values and beliefs. Compromise is not possible and so no agreed
objectives direct action. Decisions are taken on the basis of who has most
power and various forms of coercion employed to ensure adherence to
commands.
Combining the ‘systems’ and ‘participants’ dimensions, divided as
suggested above, yields six ideal-type forms of problem context: simple^
unitary, simple^pluralist, simple^coercive, complex^unitary, complex^
pluralist and complex^coercive. This notion of ‘ideal type’ is crucial in
understanding the SOSM and what it is seeking to convey. The grid does
not wish to suggest that real-life problem situations can be de¢ned as
¢tting exactly within any of these boxes. Weber (1969), the originator of
the notion, describes ideal types as stating logical extremes that can be used
to construct abstract models of general realities. The grid presents some
The development of applied systems thinking
19

abstract models that reveal various ways in which problem contexts might be
typi¢ed by managers and management scientists. It is useful to us here if we
are able to show, as we seek to do in the next subsection, that the developers
of di¡erent systems methodologies have themselves been governed by
particular ideal-type views of the nature of problem contexts in producing
their systems approaches.
2.3.2
Systems methodologies related to problem contexts
The ideal-type grid of problem contexts is useful in helping us to understand
how applied systems thinking has developed over the last few decades. It
enables us to grasp the variety of responses made by systems practitioners
in their attempts to overcome the weaknesses of hard systems thinking in
order to tackle more complex problem situations. We are able to discern a
pattern in the history of the development of applied systems thinking.
Let us consider initially the assumptions made by hard systems thinking
about the nature of problem contexts. It is clear that they assume they are
‘simple^unitary’. In other words, hard systems approaches take it for
granted that problem contexts are simple^unitary in character and recom-
mend intervening accordingly. It is not surprising given the circumstances
in which they were developed that they came to rely on there being a
shared and, therefore, readily identi¢able goal. If you are trying to win a
war or are engaged in postwar reconstruction, it is completely reasonable
to make unitary assumptions. Later in the 1960s and 1970s, when hard
systems approaches were taken into universities to be further ‘re¢ned’ by
academics, an original bias toward quanti¢cation became an obsession with
mathematically modelling the system of concern. To believe that this is
possible you have to assume that the system you are dealing with is relatively
simple. So the underlying assumptions of classical OR (and this is true, if to
a lesser extent, of systems analysis and systems engineering) are simple^
unitary. Hard systems thinkers remain stuck in that area of the grid of
problem contexts where it is assumed that people share values and beliefs
and that systems are simple enough to be mathematically modelled. And it
is true that these assumptions have served them well in tackling a whole
variety of operational issues; in the case of OR for inventory, queuing,
scheduling, routing, etc. problems.
Unfortunately, di⁄culties arose when attempts were made to extend the
range of application of hard systems approaches, exactly because of the
assumptions embedded within them. As was mentioned earlier, it is often
di⁄cult to de¢ne precise objectives on which all stakeholders can agree. In
20
Applied systems thinking

these circumstances, methodologies demanding a prede¢ned goal cannot
get started because they o¡er no way of bringing about any consensus or
accommodation around a particular goal to be pursued. Similarly, if the
system of concern is extremely complex, then any mathematical model pro-
duced can only o¡er a limited and distorted view of reality from a particular
perspective ^ and one which, in a turbulent situation, becomes quickly out
of date. In the 1970s, therefore, came a general understanding of the lack of
usefulness of hard systems thinking for more complex problem situations,
and in problem contexts that were deemed to be more pluralist and coercive
in character.
It is to the credit of applied systems thinking that it has not remained stuck
in its simple^unitary ghetto. The last 30 or so years have seen an attempt to
extend the area of successful application of systems ideas by developing
methodologies that assume that problem contexts are more complex,
pluralist and/or coercive in nature. This is the progress in applied systems
thinking that we now seek to chart.
We begin with the vertical axis of the ideal-type grid of problem contexts,
and our concern, therefore, is with those systems practitioners who wanted
to move down the axis by assuming that problem contexts were more
complex than hard systems thinkers believed. The aim of hard systems
thinking was to optimize the system of concern in pursuit of a known goal,
and to do this it appeared necessary to model the interactions between all
those elements or subsystems that might a¡ect that system of concern. In
complex systems, the vast numbers of relevant variables and the myriads of
interactions make this an impossible requirement. The solution, suggested
by those wishing to progress down the vertical axis, was to identify those
key mechanisms or structures that govern the behaviour of the elements or
subsystems and, therefore, are fundamental to system behaviour. It is
regarded as impossible to mathematically model the relationships between
all the variables that ‘on the surface’ appear to be involved in what the
system does. You can, however, determine the most important structural
aspects that lie behind system viability and performance. This ‘structuralist’
approach enables the analyst to determine, at a deeper level, what is going
wrong with the present functioning of the system and to learn how to manip-
ulate key design features so that the system can survive and be e¡ective
over time by continually regulating itself, and self-organizing, as it adapts
to internally and externally generated turbulence.
The systems approaches responsible for making this shift down the
vertical axis show a common concern for understanding the nature of
complex adaptive systems and with ensuring they are designed to have a
The development of applied systems thinking
21

capacity for goal seeking and remaining viable in turbulent environments. In
this book we concentrate on ‘system dynamics’, ‘organizational cybernetics’
and ‘complexity theory’ as systems approaches that assume, in this manner,
that problem contexts are extremely complex and need tackling in a ‘structur-
alist’ fashion. Ineach case, asweshall see, they identify di¡erent key structural
aspects that need to be understood and manipulated in dealing with complex-
ity. In the case of system dynamics it is the relationships between positive
and negative feedback loops that can give rise to ‘archetypes’ of system
behaviour. In the case of organizational cybernetics it is cybernetic laws
that can be derived from the concepts of black box, feedback and variety.
With complexity theory it is ‘strange attractors’ and the variables that have
to be adjusted to ensure that an ‘edge of chaos’ state is achieved.
Applied systems thinkers have also made considerable progress along the
horizontal axis of the ideal-type grid of problem contexts. If we move
part way along that axis we ¢nd that a number of methodologies have been
developed that assume that problem contexts are pluralist and provide
recommendations for analysis and intervention on that basis. This tradition
of work has become known as ‘soft systems thinking’ to distinguish it
from the hard systems thinking that was left behind.
Soft systems thinkers abandoned the notion that it was possible to assume
easily identi¢able, agreed-on goals that could be used to provide an objective
account of the system and its purposes. This was seen to be both impossible
andundesirablegiven multiplevalues, beliefs and interests. Instead, attention
had to be given to ensuring su⁄cient accommodation between di¡erent
and sometimes con£icting world views in order that temporary coalitions
could be fashioned in support of particular changes. The solution was to
make subjectivity central, working with a variety of world views during
the methodological process. In Checkland’s ‘soft systems methodology’
(1981), a highly developed approach of this kind, systems models expressing
di¡erent viewpoints, and making explicit their various implications, are
constructed so that alternative perspectives can be explored systemically,
compared and contrasted. The aim is to generate a systemic learning
process in which the participants in the problem situation came to appreciate
more fully alternative world views, and the possibilities for change they
o¡er, and as a result an accommodation, however temporary, becomes
possible between those who started with and may still hold divergent
values and beliefs.
Systems practitioners seeking to progress along the horizontal dimension
emphasize the crucial importance of values, beliefs and philosophies. Their
primary interest is in exploring the culture and politics of organizations to
22
Applied systems thinking

see what change is feasible and in gaining commitment from participants to
agreed courses of action. Such soft systems thinkers are not trying to devise
system models that can be used over and over again to reveal how real-
world systems can be improved. This is felt not to be relevant or useful
because of the widely di¡erent viewpoints about purposes that will be
present in pluralist problem contexts. Instead, what is usefully replicated, as
Checkland argues, is the methodology employed. The same approach to
bringing about consensus or accommodation is tried again and again and is
gradually improved. As well as studying Checkland’s ‘soft systems method-
ology’ we will be considering ‘strategic assumption surfacing and testing’
and Acko¡’s ‘interactive planning’. All these soft systems approaches have
by now been well researched. As a result we know much better than
previously about some methodological processes that can assist in bringing
about accommodations between di¡erent value positions and generate
commitment among participants to implement agreed changes.
If we shift further along the horizontal axis of the grid of problem
contexts, the issue arises of how to intervene in problem situations that are
regarded as coercive. Soft systems thinking fails to respond appropriately
because of its pluralist bias that consensus, or at least accommodation,
between di¡erent stakeholders can be achieved. Systems practitioners have,
therefore, sought to formulate ‘emancipatory’ systems approaches based on
the assumption that problem situations can be coercive. Ulrich’s ‘critical
systems heuristics’ allows questions to be asked about who bene¢ts from par-
ticular system designs and seeks to empower those a¡ected by management
decisions but not involved in them. Beer’s ‘team syntegrity’ seeks to specify
an arena and procedures that enable all stakeholders to debate openly and de-
mocratically the issues with which they are confronted. Both these ap-
proaches are considered.
Finally, there are systems practitioners who worry about the claims of any
systems methodology to be able to guarantee generalized improvement.
They advocate postmodern systems practice in the face of the massive and
impenetrable complexity and coercion that they see as inherent in all
problem contexts. Suppressed viewpoints must be surfaced and diversity
encouraged as in the emancipatory systems approach. All that is possible
however is contested, local improvement justi¢ed on the basis that it feels
right given local circumstances. Chapter 13 is devoted to this version of
applied systems thinking.
In short, the argument of this section is that applied systems thinking has
developed over the past few decades taking into account the characteristics
of a much wider range of the ideal-type problem contexts represented in
The development of applied systems thinking
23

the grid. It has progressed along the vertical dimension to take greater
account of complexity. It has progressed along the horizontal dimension
acknowledging that problem contexts can be de¢ned as pluralist and
coercive. These conclusions are summarized in Figure 2.2. The intersecting
lines that constructed the particular problem contexts in the grid of Figure
2.1 have been removed in this representation of the SOSM. This should be
taken to mean that it is only indicative of the assumptions made by di¡erent
systems approaches about the nature of problem contexts. There is no inten-
tion to pigeon-hole methodologies and a more sophisticated treatment of
their underlying assumptions will be presented in Part II.
2.4
THE MAIN STRANDS OF APPLIED SYSTEMS THINKING
It is worth taking time at this point to build on the work of the previous
section and to explain brie£y the rationale behind the grouping of systems
approaches in Part II. In Part II, 10 systems approaches are divided into 4
types according to whether their primary orientation is improving goal
seeking and viability, exploring purposes, ensuring fairness or promoting
diversity. These are not mutually exclusive possibilities, but they o¡er a
reasonable guideline as to where the main emphasis of an approach lies and,
therefore, to what managerial end it most easily lends itself.
24
Applied systems thinking
Figure 2.2
Systems approaches related to problem contexts in the System of
Systems Methodologies (SOSM).

Type A systems approaches are dedicated to improving goal seeking and
viability. This is a fairly broad category that ranges from optimizing
approaches, single-mindedly concerned with reaching prede¢ned goals, to
approaches where much more attention is given to capacity building in
those areas of organizational behaviour and design perceived as necessary if
viability is to be ensured, and so goal seeking made possible. In all cases,
however, the measures of success are ‘e⁄ciency’ (are the minimum resources
used in goal seeking?) and/or ‘e⁄cacy’ (do the means employed enable us
to realize our goals?).
The kinds of systems approach we are discussing here are those that have
tended to take the nature of the purposes to be served by the system of
concern for granted. They have assumed that participants are in a unitary
relationship so that goals are already clear or can be easily determined.
Their e¡orts have concentrated on the vertical axis of the grid of problem
contexts where they have sought to optimize the system of concern to
achieve its goals or recon¢gure it to enable it to deal with internally and
externally generated complexity and turbulence.
The original form of applied systems thinking, the hard systemsapproach,
endeavours as we saw to ¢nd the best means of getting from the present
state of the system to some optimum state. Mathematical modelling is often
seen as crucial to the success of this. The other three approaches considered
under Type A are more ‘structuralist’ in nature in terms of the analysis of
Section 2.3. They seek to understand and manipulate the mechanisms,
operating at a ‘deeper’ level, that give rise to system behaviour.
System dynamics sees the key to system behaviour as lying in the inter-
relationships between the positive and negative feedback loops within
which important system elements are bound. If these can be understood,
then the manager can be guided as to how he or she should intervene in
order that system behaviour is controlled close to what is regarded as desir-
able. Organizational cybernetics uses a cybernetic model, the Viable System
Model (VSM), to try to manage issues of complexity and turbulence that
are beyond the capacity of hard systems approaches to handle. The VSM
seeks to help managers to design complex organizations according to
cybernetic prescriptions so that they remain viable in rapidly changing
environments. Managers can learn how to use the VSM to diagnose
problems in organizations and put them right so that viability is secured
and goal seeking becomes possible. Complexity theory is often associated
with unpredictability and with the study of disorder. However, an equally
important ¢nding of complexity theory is that, underlying chaos, it is poss-
ible over time to recognize patterns occurring in the way systems develop.
The main strands of applied systems thinking
25

Managers with access to these patterns can identify points of leverage that
they can exploit to ensure that desirable system behaviour is forthcoming.
Type B systems approaches are dedicated to exploring and clarifying the
purposes stakeholders want to pursue through the operations or organiza-
tion in which they have an interest. The three approaches covered are
alternative examples of ‘soft systems thinking’ and so advocate facilitating a
learning process in which the importance of subjectivity is fully respected.
Stakeholders can bene¢t from being made aware of the systemic implications
of the values and beliefs they hold and by being confronted with di¡erent
visions of the future and the changes necessary to achieve it. Debate can
then be organized around the di¡erent viewpoints about purposes that
exist and accommodations teased out that stakeholders can commit to in
planning systemic improvement. The measures of success for soft methodol-
ogies are ‘e¡ectiveness’ (are we actually achieving what we want to
achieve?) and elegance (do the stakeholders ¢nd what is proposed tasteful?).
The kinds of systems approach we are discussing here are those that have
concentrated their e¡orts on the horizontal axis of the grid of problem
contexts. They have seen the main failing of hard systems thinking as being
its inability to deal with pluralism. They see much the most important task
of systems thinking as being able to handle the disagreements and con£icts
that occur between stakeholders because of the di¡erent values, beliefs and
philosophies they hold. If these can be managed, then solutions to problems
become more or less straightforward.
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing concentrates attention on the
di¡erent assumptions, multiple perspectives and diverse world views that
are likely to exist in any problem situation. It takes advantage of these to
articulate a dialectical learning process of thesis, antithesis and synthesis.
Con£ict is thus harnessed to assist with problem resolution. Interactive
planning seeks to win stakeholder approval for and commitment to an
‘idealized design’ for the system they are involved with. This is meant to
ensure that the maximum creativity is brought to the process of dissolving
the current mess the stakeholders are confronted by and replacing it with a
future they all desire. Appropriate means for achieving the idealized design
are then sought. Soft systems methodology enables managers to work with
and change the value systems, cultures and philosophies that exist in
organizations. It aims to institutionalize continuous learning by seeking
and challenging accommodations between the world views of the di¡erent
stakeholders concerned with a problem situation.
Type C systems approaches are dedicated to ensuring fairness in systems
design and in the consequences that follow from it. The two approaches
26
Applied systems thinking

considered are examples of ‘emancipatory systems thinking’ that have ven-
tured along the horizontal axis of the grid of problem contexts, into areas
where the value of soft systems approaches is threatened by lack of fairness
or by coercion. To that extent their aims are similar. They want to support
those disadvantaged by present systemic arrangements so that they can
make their full contribution to systems design and receive the bene¢ts to
which they are entitled from the operation of the system of concern. This
may not be happening at the moment for all sorts of reasons. There may be
a lack of recognition of the rights of some stakeholder group. And it may
bethat thisis theresult of someform of conscious or unconscious discrimina-
tion based on class, sex, race, sexual orientation, disability, etc. Emancipatory
approaches focus attention on matters of this kind that can easily be missed
by other sorts of systems thinking. They are, of course, of huge signi¢cance
in society and of increasing importance for all organizations.
The measures of success for emancipatory approaches are ‘empowerment’
(are all individuals and groups able to contribute to decision-making and
action?) and ‘emancipation’ (are disadvantaged groups being assisted to get
what they are entitled to?). Critical systems heuristics and team syntegrity
address these emancipatory concerns from di¡ering perspectives. The
former seeks to ensure the full participation of those who are a¡ected by
systems designs who might not otherwise be involved. The latter provides
for the creation of a democratic milieu in which outcomes result from con-
sensus and the better argument rather than power, status and/or hierarchy.
Type D are postmodern systems approaches that seek to promote diver-
sity in problem resolution. Such approaches are, in a sense, antisystemic in
that systems of domination (e.g., dominating discourses) have to be
challenged and broken down in order to let suppressed voices have their
say. They are less well established than other types of systems methodology
(because they are more recent) and one chapter is enough to hint at the
value of some of the postmodern methods now being developed. Post-
modern systems thinkers are phased by what they see as the immense com-
plexity and coercion that are intertwined in all problem situations. They are
therefore sceptical of appeal to any universal guarantees for the success of
action. They would however want to justify and evaluate their interventions
on the basis of ‘exception’ (what otherwise marginalized viewpoints have
we managed to bring to the fore?) and ‘emotion’ (does the action that is
now being proposed feel appropriate and good in the local circumstances
in which we are acting?).
This section has sought to link our account of the development of applied
systems thinking to the arrangement of systems approaches that will be
The main strands of applied systems thinking
27

found in Part II. Further justi¢cation for seeing four major strands in
contemporary systems thinking will be given in the next chapter when the
four strands are linked to four overarching social science paradigms. The
systems approaches detailed as part of the four strands are not, of course, an
exhaustive set. In particular, I regret the omission due to space constraints
of Miller’s ‘living systems theory’, which contributes signi¢cantly to
dealing with systems complexity, and War¢eld’s ‘interactive management’,
a well-regarded soft systems approach. More information about other
systems approaches (including these two), together with full references, can
be found in Jackson (2000).
2.5
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we have covered a lot of ground, looking at the development
of applied systems thinking. The systems approaches available today have
resulted from attempts to correct the original problems found when trying
to use hard systems thinking in practice. They have also arisen from theo-
retical developments in the transdiscipline of systems thinking as new
problem contexts have been envisioned and their implications for practice
have been explored. As we have seen it is reasonable to conclude that there
are now four main strands of applied systems thinking embracing a whole
variety of individual systems approaches.
Awareness of the di¡erent strands of applied systems thinking and of the
variety of systems methodologies leads us to ask whether it might not assist
creative problem solving to use them in combination in the same interven-
tion. The SOSM has after all helped to demonstrate the relationships
between the di¡erent approaches and made it possible to understand that
they do not necessarily clash with one another. They all do rather di¡erent
things. It is this insight ^ that we need to make creative use of the di¡erent
forms of holistic inquiry ^ which inspired the ‘creative holism’ that is the
focus of Part III. Before we can appreciate that, however, we need to under-
stand exactly how creativity can be enhanced by using systems approaches
in combination. That is the subject of the next chapter.
REFERENCES
Checkland, P.B. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
28
Applied systems thinking

Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Jackson, M.C. (1993). The system of systems methodologies: A guide to
researchers. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 44, 208^209.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Jackson, M.C. and Keys, P. (1984). Towards a system of systems methodologies.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 35, 473^486.
Weber, M. (1969). The Methodology of the Social Sciences. Free Press, New York.
References
29


Creativity and Systems
3
People who learn to read situations from different (theoretical) points of
view have an advantage over those committed to a fixed position. For
they are better able to recognise the limitations of a given perspective.
They can see how situations and problems can be framed and reframed
in different ways, allowing new kinds of solutions to emerge.
Morgan (1986)
3.1
INTRODUCTION
This book is concerned with encouraging creativity in viewing management
problems and in resolving those problems creatively using systems thinking.
Viewing problems creatively allows us to see them as parts of ‘messes’ ^ as
interdependent and as arising for a whole variety of reasons ^ and therefore
to approach their resolution in a more integrated manner, in terms of the
‘system’ in which they are embedded. Systems thinking o¡ers us a number
of di¡erent approaches, often distilled into methodologies, for resolving
problems. Systems approaches are holistic and use ‘joined-up’ thinking,
and therefore tackle problems in a more profound way. Using them in
combination opens up another dimension of creativity.
The chapter begins by considering the importance of metaphors in
enabling us to be more creative. The history of management thought is a
story of the use of di¡erent metaphors to understand organizations. At
¢rst, organizations were thought of as being ‘machines’ and attention was
focused on ¢tting well-designed jobs into appropriate structures in order to
ensure e⁄cient goal seeking (scienti¢c management, bureaucracy theory,
administrative management). Later they were studied as ‘organisms’:
complex systems in close interrelationship with their environments and
with subsystems meeting their survival needs. With the birth of cybernetics

it became possible to see organizations as ‘brains’ or information processing
systems and, as a result, interest developed in decision-making, learning
and decentralized control. More recently, organizations have been portrayed
as cultures and attention has been given to values and beliefs, and to the
engineering of corporate philosophies that can be shared by all employees.
Also achieving greater prominence is the notion of organizations as
‘political systems’. Learning to view problem situations through the lens
provided by each of these metaphors, as in Section 3.2, can help us to be
much more creative in recognizing problems and the reasons for their
existence.
Another way to be creative is to view organizations, and the social world
of which they are part, through the lenses o¡ered by di¡erent sociological
paradigms. The four most commonly recognized paradigms in social
theory are the ‘functionalist’, ‘interpretive’, ‘emancipatory’ and ‘post-
modern’. The nature of these di¡erent paradigms, and the implications of
viewing problem situations from inside each paradigm, are explored in
Section 3.3.
It is useful in enhancing creativity to be able to view problem situations
through di¡erent metaphors and paradigms. It is useful, as we argued
earlier, to be holistic in addressing problem situations. How much better
might it be if we can be both creative and holistic at the same time? Fortu-
nately, we can and this is the lesson of the ‘creative holism’ presented in
Part III.
3.2
CREATIVITY AND METAPHOR
When we take conscious action in the world (e.g., intervening to improve an
organization), we do so on the basis of how we see and understand the
world. Di¡erent viewpoints, therefore, give rise to very di¡erent actions
and each of these is rational according to the viewpoint that encourages
and justi¢es it. If we want to act creatively, it follows we have to think
creatively.
Learning to think di¡erently, to inhabit di¡erent viewpoints, is not easy.
The educational system, which is often said to be about absorbing structured
chunks of information that can then be reproduced in examinations, can
constrain creativity. For whatever reason, very few managers ¢nd it easy to
think in di¡erent ways about the operations and organizations they are
responsible for and, as a result, they manage in predictable and restricted
ways.
32
Creativity and systems

A simple experiment will con¢rm this judgement. Ask any group of
managers, perhaps on a management development course, to draw a
picture representing their organization and showing their position in the or-
ganization. Over 90% will draw a conventional organizational chart setting
out the hierarchy of authority that binds together di¡erent groupings. I
have found, sadly, that this is the case even among managers who have alleg-
edly been exposed to systems thinking. I would not feel happy, at the end
of a course in creative holism, if managers did not feel comfortable drawing
their organizations in at least four di¡erent ways, hopefully many more. It
is essential to increasing the creative capacity of managers that they feel
equally at home using a variety of di¡erent perspectives on problem
situations and how they might be tackled.
One of the best ways of challenging our taken for granted assumptions is
by exposing them to some alternatives. This process can be much aided if
we learn to work with metaphors. For example, if we want to ¢nd out
what mental model we carry with us as managers, we might ask whether
we primarily see organizations as ‘machines’, ‘organisms’, ‘brains’, ‘cultures’,
‘political systems’, ‘instruments of domination’, etc. Using metaphors in
this way helps us to bring clarity to what otherwise would be a hidden and
unquestioned mental model. Metaphors are very good at this because they
ask us to understand something in terms of a name or description that is
not literally applicable to it. Usually, the thing described will be less well
known, more intangible and the description will be more familiar; for
example, when we describe an organization as a machine. Nevertheless,
they will have some things in common and the metaphor will draw these
out and highlight them. Thus, we become truly conscious of the biases inher-
ent in our own favoured viewpoint. Original thinking can then be encour-
aged by making use explicitly of other metaphors to reveal alternative
perspectives.
Metaphors are extremely good at allowing us to explore our own world
views and to assist with creative thinking. Morgan (1986, 1997) has done
some very interesting work on di¡erent ‘images’ of organization that have
proved insightful to managers. He selects some familiar metaphors (e.g.,
‘organizations as machines’), some newer ones (e.g., ‘organizations as £ux
and transformation’) and some that are challenging (e.g., ‘organizations as
psychic prisons’) with which to explore issues of management. For each
metaphor, Morgan describes the salient characteristics that allow us to gain
a greater insight into organizations and their problems, and indicates also
its limitations ^ for all metaphors are limited and o¡er ways of not seeing as
well as ways of seeing. This study is helpful in allowing us to elaborate and
Creativity and metaphor
33

be explicit about the frameworks that dominate our particular management
perspective and in allowing us access to alternatives.
Morgan selects eight important images of organization in his study, and
we add a ninth, ‘organizations as carnivals’, from Alvesson and Deetz
(1996). The nine metaphors are:
.
organizations as machines;
.
organizations as organisms;
.
organizations as brains;
.
organizations as £ux and transformation;
.
organizations as cultures;
.
organizations as political systems;
.
organizations as psychic prisons;
.
organizations as instruments of domination;
.
organizations as carnivals.
The main characteristics of these nine metaphors are now outlined.
The machine view dominated management theory during the ¢rst half of
the 20th century and, as we suggested, has been remarkably di⁄cult to shift
from managers’ minds. It represents organizations as rational instruments
designed to achieve the purposes of their owners or controllers. The task to
be achieved is broken down into parts, and rules are established that
govern the behaviour of these parts. A hierarchy of authority exercises co-
ordination and control. E⁄ciency in achieving the predetermined purposes
is the most highly valued attribute of the organization as a machine. This
metaphor is seen as neglecting the individuals who make up the organization
and as producing organizational designs that are too rigid in volatile
environments.
The organism metaphor looks at organizations as wholes made up of
interrelated parts. These parts function in such a way as to ensure the
survival of the organization as an organism. Survival, therefore, replaces
goal seeking as the raison d’e“tre of the enterprise. Furthermore organizations,
according to this view, are open systems that must secure favourable inter-
changes with their environments, adapting to environmental disturbances
as required. Managers in£uenced by this metaphor play close attention to
the demands of the environment and ensure that subsystems are meeting
the organization’s needs. Critics argue that the organismic viewpoint
forgets that individuals or groups in organizations may not share the organi-
zation’s overall purposes. They are not like the parts of the body in this
respect. As a result the metaphor hides con£ict and internally generated
change.
34
Creativity and systems

The brain metaphor, deriving directly fromcybernetics,emphasizes active
learning rather than the rather passive adaptability that characterizes the
organismic view. This leads to attention being focused on decision-
making, information processing and control. The organization having
decided on its purposes must be designed as a complex system to respond
to environmental disturbances relevant to those purposes. In turbulent
environments this necessitates decentralized control because not all the
information necessary to cope with change can be processed at the top of
the organization. The organization must manage single-loop learning,
correcting deviations from prescribed goals; it also needs to be capable of
double-loop learning, changing the nature of its purposes if these become
unattainable as the environment shifts. The brain metaphor is criticized for
the lack of consideration it gives to individuals and their motivations, to
power and con£ict, and to how purposes are actually derived.
The £ux and transformation metaphor is concerned with revealing what
Morgan calls the ‘logics of change’ that give rise to the behaviour we see
on the surface of organizations. We referred to this in Chapter 2 as a more
structuralist orientation, seeking the mechanisms, or hidden processes, that
shape those aspects of organizational activity to which managers normally
devote their attention. The £ux and transformation metaphor, therefore,
asks managers to be less super¢cial in the way they read what is happening
in their organizations. Instead, they should map the counterintuitive behav-
iour that is produced by interacting positive and negative feedback loops.
Or they should seek to understand the consistent patterns that underlie the
behaviour of even the most complex and apparently unpredictable of
systems. Critics of this metaphor, as applied to organizations, doubt
whether there are any deep, structural ‘laws’ that social organizations obey
and worry about the unregulated power that might be given to experts if
they manage to convince others that such laws do indeed exist.
According to the culture metaphor, successful managers should devote
their attention to the people associated with their organizations and to the
values, beliefs and philosophies held dear by those people. People act accord-
ing to how they see the world, and it is through the interactions between
people that organizations take their form and derive their success or failure.
Corporate culture refers to the familiar and persistent ways of seeing and
acting in a particular organization. Managers need to be stewards of
corporate culture ensuring there is su⁄cient shared ground so that
people pull together and damaging long-term con£ict is avoided, but also
maintaining enough freedom of thought to encourage original thinking
and innovation. Critics of the culture metaphor claim that it distracts
Creativity and metaphor
35

attention from other important aspects of organizational success, such as
achieving goals, designing appropriate structures, managing resources, etc.
It can also lead to the ideological manipulation of employees.
The political metaphor looks at how organizations are governed, at the
pursuit and use of power and at the micropolitics of organizational life. Indi-
viduals in organizations can be competitive as well as co-operative, pursuing
di¡erent interests that may con£ict. Often, as in the System Of Systems
Methodologies (SOSM) (see Chapter 2), the possible political relationships
that can obtain between participants in an organization are represented as
being either unitary, pluralist or coercive ^ signalling greater con£ict and
reliance on power, as a means of settling disputes, as we move along that
spectrum. However refreshing this perspective might be, critics suspect
that it can overemphasize and, by doing so, contribute to the politicization
of organizational life. And it does so to the neglect of other factors crucial
to the health of organizations.
The psychic prison and instruments of domination metaphors concentrate
on the negative aspects of organizational life. The psychic prison perspective
emphasizes the impact it can have on the free development of our thinking.
Certain organizational forms are seen by psychoanalytic theory as born of
and contributing to repression. While the ideologies that sustain capitalist
organizations are regarded by Marxist thinkers as preventing individuals
from realizing their full potential. Employees become ‘alienated’, as the
jargon has it. Theinstruments of dominationperspective shifts fromtheindi-
vidual to the group level and ¢xes attention on the way certain groups are
exploited by others through organizations. The classical picture is of man-
agers using hierarchy and control of the labour process to extract surplus
value from the workers in order to bene¢t shareholders. This is extended,
however, in the metaphor to embrace all other groups who might be
exploited by organizations or at least excluded from decisions that impact
on them ^ other employee groups, women, the disabled, those of a di¡erent
sexual orientation, minority races, those in the community a¡ected by the or-
ganization, the environment, etc. Critics see organization theorists and man-
agement scientists who overuse these two metaphors as being themselves
ideologically driven. They have swallowed a radical political agenda that
they hope to thrust on others. They are characterized as being intellectual eli-
tists who, for some reason, resent employees who are happy pursuing a
nice house and car rather than self-actualizing themselves. They are seen as
guardians of ‘political correctness’.
The metaphor of the carnival can help point to at least two aspects of
organizational life that get suppressed by the other metaphors. At carnival
36
Creativity and systems

time normal order is suspended and creativity, diversity and ambivalence are
encouraged. This helps us to see the fragility of the social order that is sus-
tained in organizations and to recognize as well the presence of other voices
and other aspects that are usually suppressed or marginalized. Carnivals are
also meant to be light and bright, and to be places where people have fun.
There is much in organizations too that can be explained if we pay attention
to playfulness, sex, irony, etc. Critics, of course, would see the overemphasis
placed by the carnival metaphor on the ‘irrational’ aspects of organizational
life as trivializing. Organizations are important social institutions and the
well-being of all of us depends on them functioning well.
These metaphors have been elaborated to help managers be explicit about
the biases that inform their own thinking and to enable them to consider
some alternative assumptions about organizations and their management.
Undoubtedly, readers willfeel much more comfortablewithsomemetaphors
and the vision presented of the world they inhabit than others. It is impor-
tant, however, to persevere until you become reasonably comfortable
looking at the management task from the perspective o¡ered by each of the
nine metaphors.
3.3
CREATIVITY AND PARADIGMS
Another way to look at the problem situations managers face is to view them
from the perspectives o¡ered by di¡erent sociological paradigms. The
word paradigm is now commonly used to refer to something like world
view or way of seeing things. Originally, however, it had a technical
meaning, provided by Kuhn (1970), and referred to the tradition of research
regarded as authoritative by a particular scienti¢c community. It was the set
of ideas, assumptions and beliefs that shaped and guided their scienti¢c
activity. I will keep this technical meaning here because it enables a ¢rm
distinction to be kept between metaphor and paradigm.
Metaphors, as we saw, are clearly partial representations of what is
observed. They highlight some things and hide others. It follows that,
while they emphasize di¡erent things, they can hardly be regarded as in
fundamental con£ict with one another. Adherents of di¡erent paradigms,
to the contrary, usually believe that they are o¡ering the best account
available of the nature of the ‘reality’ that is being observed. For this reason
‘paradigm wars’ are frequent and paradigms are often said to be ‘incommen-
surable’, meaning that the accounts o¡ered by di¡erent paradigms cannot
be reconciled. Managers listening to advisers basing their thinking about
Creativity and paradigms
37

organizations in di¡erent paradigms will therefore receive contradictory
advice and will themselves have to mediate.
It is possible to explain now why creativity is best encouraged if we
embrace di¡erent paradigms as well as di¡erent metaphors. Although
metaphors provide various viewpoints on problem situations they do not
demand that radically di¡erent alternative perspectives are always enter-
tained. Paradigms do ^ because they rest on assumptions that are incom-
patible with those of other paradigms. Without adding paradigm creativity
to metaphor creativity, it would be too easy to choose a set of metaphors
that ¢tted well together and corresponded with existing cherished beliefs.
Exploring di¡erent paradigms, however, always ensures that a challenging
encounter with rigorously formulated, alternative theoretical positions
takes place.
We are of course concerned with sociological paradigms because man-
agers, in trying to improve the operations, services or organizations they
manage, have to contend with social systems. A review of the work of
Burrell and Morgan (1979) on sociological paradigms and organizational
analysis, complemented by that of Alvesson and Deetz (1996) to take
account of postmodernism, suggests that there are four common paradigms
in use in social theory today. These are:
.
the functionalist paradigm;
.
the interpretive paradigm;
.
the emancipatory paradigm;
.
the postmodern paradigm.
I will now brie£y describe each of these, at the same time relating them to the
metaphors discussed in Section 3.2.
The functionalist paradigm takes its name from the fact that it wants to
ensure that everything in the system is functioning well so as to promote
e⁄ciency, adaptation and survival. It is optimistic that an understanding
can be gained of how systems work by using scienti¢c methods and tech-
niques to probe the nature of the parts of the system, the interrelation-
ships between them and the relationship between the system and its
environment. The expertise it provides should put managers more in
control of their operations and organizations, and enable them to eliminate
ine⁄ciency and disorder. Associated with this paradigm can usually be
found the machine, organism, brain, and £ux and transformation metaphors.
The interpretive paradigm takes its name from the fact that it believes
social systems, such as organizations, result from the purposes people have
38
Creativity and systems

and that these, in turn, stem from the interpretations they make of the
situations in which they ¢nd themselves. Organizations happen, and people
act and interact in organizations, as a result of their interpretations. This
paradigm wants to understand the di¡erent meanings people bring to
collaborative activity and to discover where these meanings overlap, and so
give birth to shared, purposeful activity. Managers can be guided to seek
an appropriate level of shared corporate culture in their organizations.
They can take decisions, on the basis of participative involvement, that
gain the commitment of key stakeholders. Usually associated with this para-
digm are the culture and political system metaphors.
The emancipatory paradigm takes its name from the fact that it is con-
cerned to ‘emancipate’ oppressed individuals and groups in organizations
and society. It is suspicious of authority and tries to reveal forms of power
and domination that it sees as being illegitimately employed. It criticizes the
status quo and wants to encourage a radical reformation of, or revolution
in, the current social order. It pays attention to all forms of discrimination,
whether resting on class, status, sex, race, disability, sexual orientation, age,
etc. Usually associated with this paradigm are the psychic prison and instru-
ments of domination metaphors.
The postmodern paradigm takes its name from the fact that it opposes the
‘modernist’ rationality that it sees as present in all the other three paradigms.
It challenges and ridicules what it regards as their ‘totalizing’ attempts to
provide comprehensive explanations of how organizations function. From
the postmodern perspective organizations are far too complex to understand
using any of the other paradigms. It takes a less serious view of organizations
and emphasizes having fun. It also insists that we can learn much by bringing
con£ict to the surface, claiming a space for disregarded opinions and thus
encouraging variety and diversity. The carnival metaphor ¢ts well with this
paradigm.
To understand how these di¡erentparadigmscan encourage creativity, try
to picture any organization known to you from the point of view of each
paradigm in turn. How would you manage that organization according to
the very di¡erent perspectives o¡ered by each paradigm?
3.4
CONCLUSION
This chapter has concentrated on the importance of creativity for problem-
solving. We have seen how problem situations can be viewed creatively
through the di¡erent lenses provided by alternative metaphors and
Conclusion
39

paradigms(see alsoFlood and Jackson, 1991). Now we need to discover how
we can be holistic at the same time. Fortunately, as the previous chapter
demonstrates, this is possible because systems thinking has developed a
variety of problem resolving approaches to match the variety of the
problem contexts we can envisage.
In the previous chapter we charted the history of applied systems thinking
in terms of progress along the two dimensions of the SOSM. A di¡erent
and equally enlightening way of conceptualizing this history is to see it as
being about the exploration and opening up of di¡erent metaphors and
paradigms by applied systems thinking.
Hard systems thinking clearly depends on the machine metaphor. System
dynamics and complexity theory can then be seen as abandoning that for
the £ux and transformation metaphor, while organizational cybernetics
builds additionally on insights from the organism and brain metaphors.
The soft systems approaches (strategic assumption surfacing and testing,
interactive planning, soft systems methodology) reject the machine meta-
phor in order to build their foundations on the culture and political
systems metaphors. Critical systems heuristics and team syntegrity are
based on the psychic prison and instruments of domination metaphors,
while postmodern systems thinking privileges the carnival metaphor.
Paradigm analysis can be used to paint a similar picture of the develop-
ment of applied systems thinking ^ this time in terms of the range of types
of social theory it has been prepared to embrace. System dynamics, organiza-
tional cybernetics and complexity theory did not jettison the functionalism
of hard systems thinking although they did take it in a more structuralist
direction. Soft systems thinking, however, made a paradigm break with
hard systems thinking and created systems methodologies for problem-
solving based on the interpretive paradigm. Critical systems heuristics and
team syntegrity make sense in terms of the emancipatory paradigm. Post-
modern systems approaches were created to accurately re£ect the new
orientation and the new learning about intervention that could be derived
from the postmodern paradigm.
In short, not only can we be creative about problem situations by employ-
ing metaphors and paradigms, we can also respond to them, trying to
solve, resolve or dissolve them, using forms of holistic intervention con-
structed on the basis of di¡erent metaphors and paradigms. This relationship
is more fully considered in Part II, and, looking ahead to Part III, modern
systems thinking sees value in all the di¡erent metaphors of organization
and sociological paradigms, and seeks to make appropriate use of the
variety of systems approaches re£ecting di¡erent metaphors and paradigms.
40
Creativity and systems

Creative holism conceives the di¡erent systems approaches as being used in
combination, ensuring for the manager the bene¢ts of both creativity and
holism.
REFERENCES
Alvesson, M. and Deetz, S. (1996). Critical theory and postmodernist approaches
to organizational studies. In: S.R. Clegg, C. Hardy and W.R. Nord (eds),
Handbook of Organization Studies (pp. 191^217). Sage, London.
Burrell, G. and Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological Paradigms and Organizational
Analysis. Heinemann, London.
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure of Scienti¢c Revolutions (2nd edn). University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Morgan, G. (1986). Images of Organisation. Sage, London.
Morgan, G. (1997). Images of Organisation (2nd edn). Sage, London.
References
41


Part II
Systems Approaches
The aim of Part II is to outline and critique 10 applied systems approaches,
demonstrating how they are holistic and why they are signi¢cant from the
point of view of managers. Each approach is reviewed (Chapters 4^13) in
the same way.
First, a description of the approach is provided in terms of historical
background, philosophy/theory underlying the approach (according to its
originators), the methodology used to translate the philosophy/theory into
practical application and the methods ^ di¡erent models, tools and
techniques ^ usually associated with the approach. The distinction between
methodology and methods is crucial here. Methodology is a higher order
term that refers to the logical principles that must govern the use of
methods in order that the philosophy/theory embraced by the approach is
properly respected and appropriately put into practice. Methodology is not
detachable from the philosophy/theory of the particular systems approach
or, therefore, from the approach itself. Methods, however, concerned as
they are with achieving more speci¢c procedural outcomes, are detachable
and can be used in the service of other systems approaches with varying
degrees of success or failure. Each description concludes with a review of
‘recent developments’ in the systems approach under consideration.
Second, an example is o¡ered of the approach in action, concentrating
particularly on how the methodology and associated methods contribute to
the outcomes. Third, a critique of the approach is provided, setting out its
particular strengths and weaknesses. This is conducted by looking at the
systems concepts emphasized by the approach and at how the particular
metaphors and the paradigm it embraces facilitate its ability to achieve
certain things for managers while constraining it in other respects. Finally,
drawing on all the previous sections, attention is devoted to what exactly
each systems approach o¡ers to managers in terms of improving their
ability to handle complexity, change and diversity.

The 10 systems approaches are divided in Part II into ‘Types’, re£ecting
four basic orientations ^ goal seeking and viability, exploring purposes,
ensuring fairness and promoting diversity. A brief introduction to each of
Types A^D establishes and details the nature of these general orientations.
44
Systems Approaches

Type A
Improving Goal Seeking and
Viability
Here we detail four systems approaches that aim to assist managers improve
goal seeking and viability. These approaches are hard systems thinking,
system dynamics, organizational cybernetics and complexity theory. They
were developed because of the failure of reductionism to cope with
problem situations exhibiting increased complexity and turbulence. They
emphasize the e⁄cient use of resources in the achievement of goals and the
e⁄cacious design of organizations so that adaptability is ensured in the face
of complexity and environmental change. In sociologicalterms they are func-
tionalist in character and orientated toward achieving prediction and
control so that better regulation of the enterprise can be obtained. The four
approaches di¡er from one another in the manner in which they seek to pro-
gress in dealing with complexity down the vertical axis of the System Of
Systems Methodologies (SOSM). This is indicated by the particular
metaphors they emphasize within the usual functionalist set of machine,
organism, brain, and £ux and transformation.


Hard Systems Thinking
4
Many elements of such [sociotechnical] systems exhibit forms of regular
behaviour, and scientific scrutiny has yielded much knowledge about
these regularities. Thus, many of the problems that arise in socio-
technical systems can be addressed by focusing such knowledge in
appropriate ways by means of the logical, quantitative, and structural
tools of modern science and technology.
Quade and Miser (1985)
4.1
INTRODUCTION
Hard systems thinking, as we saw in Chapter 2, is a generic name given by
Checkland (1981) to various systems approaches for solving real-world
problems developed during and immediately after the Second World War.
The approaches most commonly associated with this label are operational
research (operations research in the USA), systems analysis and systems
engineering. These, however, gave rise to a myriad of other variants of
hard systems thinking, such as decision science, cost^bene¢t analysis,
planning^programming^budgeting systems and policy analysis. All these
approaches took on a common form, which Checkland identi¢ed and classi-
¢ed as ‘hard systems thinking’ and which we will be examining below.
The pioneers of hard systems thinking were immensely proud of the fact
that they applied the scienti¢c method to problems of real signi¢cance to
decision-makers. They were not the ¢rst to do this. Frederick Taylor had
abandoned the laboratory as the place to practise science much earlier in the
century, when he invented scienti¢c management. They were, however, the
¢rst to recognize that in modifying the scienti¢c method, to make it
applicable to real-world problems, one of its main tenets ^ reductionism ^
had to be thoroughly questioned. Might not holism o¡er a better handle
on the complex sociotechnical problems that managers face?

4.2
DESCRIPTION OF HARD SYSTEMS THINKING
4.2.1
Historical development
The term ‘operational research’ was invented about 1937 in the context of a
project in which UK scientists sought to assist military leaders to maximize
the bene¢ts to be gained from using radar to detect enemy aircraft. What
justi¢ed the new name was that this was scienti¢c research carried out into
operational processes rather than into natural phenomena. From the RAF,
operational researchsoon spread to thearmy and navy andto other countries,
such as Canada, the USA, France and Australia. In the USA its ¢rst usage
was in the Naval Ordnance group dealing with mine warfare. After the war
it found civilian application in government departments and, particularly,
in the newly nationalized industries of the UK such as coal, gas, steel and
transport. The 1950s saw professional societies being formed to promote
Operational Research (OR) and the beginnings of the academic study of
the subject.
Systems analysis is said by its protagonists to have emerged out of
operations research and to be broader in scope. The name was ¢rst applied
to research being done for the US Air Force on future weapon systems in
the late 1940s. In the 1950s and 1960s the approach was promoted by the
in£uential RAND (an acronym for ‘Research ANd Development’) Corpora-
tion, a non-pro¢t body in the advice-giving business, and its use became
widespread in the defence and aerospace industries. In 1965 President
Johnson gave systems analysis (under the label ‘planning^programming^
budgeting systems’) a further boost by ordering its adoption in all
departments of the US federal government. In 1972 the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) was established in Austria,
on the initiative of the academies of science (or equivalent) of 12 nations,
with the remit to apply systems analysis to world problems (e.g., energy,
food supply and the environment). Since that time IIASA has become the
o⁄cial guardian of the development of systems analysis as a discipline and
profession.
Systems engineering grew out of engineering in the 1940s and 1950s as
that discipline sought to extend its scope to the design of more complex
systems involving many interacting components. It was pioneered in the
USA at Bell Telephone Laboratories to meet the networking challenges
faced in the communications industry. It spread rapidly to the defence,
space and energy industries and, in the 1960s and 1970s, various guidelines
and standards were established for the use of systems engineering to
48
Hard systems thinking

develop military systems and in civilian aerospace and energy programmes.
In manufacturing industry, systems engineering had to encompass even
more of the ‘whole’ as it was forced to concern itself with interacting sets of
processes (e.g., in petrochemical plants) and how these could be optimized
in the prevailing market conditions. Today, the International Council on
Systems Engineering (INCOSE) sees the approach as relevant to problems
as wide and diverse as transportation, housing, infrastructure renewal and
environmental systems (www.incose.org).
4.2.2
Philosophy and theory
Much of the philosophy and theory underpinning hard systems thinking is
taken for granted and not declared openly. This is not surprising because
so much of it is borrowed directly from the natural sciences. Discussion
does however sometimes focus on the adjustments that have to be made to
the scienti¢c method to make it applicable to the real-world problems that
interest hard systems thinkers. We can tease out these adjustments by
looking at the common features of well-known de¢nitions of OR, Systems
Analysis (SA) and Systems Engineering (SE).
The British Operational Society for many years de¢ned OR as:
the application of the methods of science to complex problems arising
in the direction and management of large systems of men, machines,
materials and money in industry, business, government and defence.
The distinctive approach is to develop a scientific model of the system,
incorporating measurements of factors such as chance and risk, with
which to predict and compare the outcomes of alternative decisions,
strategies or controls. The purpose is to help management determine its
policy and actions scientifically.
Quade and Miser (1985), in the ¢rst Handbook of Systems Analysis, state that:
the central purpose of systems analysis is to help public and private
decision and policy-makers to solve the problems and resolve the policy
issues that they face. It does this by improving the basis for their judge-
ment by generating information and marshalling evidence bearing on
their problems and, in particular, on possible actions that may be
suggested to alleviate them. Thus commonly, a systems analysis
focuses on a problem arising from the operations of a sociotechnical
system, considers various responses to this problem and supplies
Description of hard systems thinking
49

evidence about the costs, benefits, and other consequences of these
responses.
INCOSE propounds a de¢nition of systems engineering with several
components:
(1) it is an interdisciplinary approach and means to establish a sound
system concept, (2) it defines and validates clear and concise system
requirements, (3) it creates an effective system design or solution, and
(4) it ensures that the developed system meets client and user objec-
tives in the operational environment.
Although the commitment to science is explicit in all these de¢nitions, it is
also clear that the purpose of using science di¡ers from that normally asso-
ciated with the scienti¢c enterprise. Its primary purpose in hard systems
thinking is to serve the interests of clients, managers, decision-makers,
policy-makers, etc., not to bring about the advancement of knowledge for
its own sake.
Another point follows. In hard systems thinking scientists are required to
address real-world problems and the solutions they produce must work in
the operational domain, not in the laboratory. Furthermore, it is usually
too costly or simply unethical to carry out experiments using large socio-
technical systems. They are cut o¡, therefore, from the usual experimental
methods employed to test hypotheses under controlled laboratory
conditions. An alternative to the laboratory has to be found.
All varieties of hard systems thinking propose that models, primarily
mathematical models, can perform in management science the role that the
laboratory plays in the natural sciences. Models, in hard systems thinking,
are designed to capture the essential features of the real world. Sometimes
these will be regularities in behaviour, which detailed observation and
measurement reveal in particular types of sociotechnical system. At other
times the systems practitioner will have to rely on insight and whatever
incomplete information that happens to be available. Whatever is the case,
it is seen as essential that some type of model is built.
Models are so crucial in hard systems thinking because they aim to capture
as accurately as possible the workings of the system underlying the problems
being investigated. Forced to deal with complex problem situations in the
real world, the hard systems thinker replaces the traditional notion of a scien-
ti¢c object with that of ‘system’ as the focus of study. Once the model has
been constructed it can be used to explore how the real-world system
50
Hard systems thinking

behaves without actually taking any action that might alter and damage the
real-world system itself. In particular, di¡erent possible ways of improving
system behaviour from the point of view of the clients can be tested.
Finally, it is clearly recognized in the de¢nitions o¡ered that no one ¢eld
of science is likely to be able to deal with any real-world problem.
Such problems simply do not ¢t into the domains of the established
scienti¢c disciplines. The hard systems thinker, being problem- rather than
discipline-centred, will therefore have to draw on a range of disciplinary
areas or be interdisciplinary in his or her approach.
4.2.3
Methodology
Cutting through the arguments of the advocates of di¡erent strands of hard
systems thinking that their favoured approach is more comprehensive than
the others, Checkland (1981) used an examination of methodology to
demonstrate that all variants of hard systems thinking are in fact similar in
character. Methodology in applied systems thinking, the reader will recall,
refers to the guidance given to practitioners about how to translate the
philosophy and theory of an approach into practical application. Looking
at the methodologies proposed by hard systems thinkers, Checkland
concluded that they all take the same form. They largely assume that they
can de¢ne an objective for the system they are seeking to improve and see
their task as the systematic pursuit of the most e⁄cient means of achieving
that objective. We can now review this conclusion in relation to the speci¢c
methodologies of OR, SA and SE.
The ¢rst full expression of the classical OR methodology appeared in
Churchman, Acko¡ and Arno¡’s textbook on OR published in 1957. The
authors establish that OR is the application of the most advanced scienti¢c
techniques by interdisciplinary teams to the overall problems of complex
organizations and that a systems approach is essential. They then set out a
six-stage methodology:
.
formulating the problem;
.
constructing a mathematical model to represent the system under study;
.
deriving a solution from the model;
.
testing the model and the solution derived from it;
.
establishing controls over the solution;
.
putting the solution to work (implementation).
Description of hard systems thinking
51

There is, therefore, the expected emphasis on problem formulation (specify-
ing the decision-makers and their objectives, and the system involved), on
a modelling phase and an implementation phase.
Manydi¡erent styles ofsystemsanalysis developed out of the early RAND
Corporation military applications. It is, however, reasonable to take the
three IIASA handbooks, edited by Miser (1995), and Miser and Quade
(1985, 1988), as representing the current state of the art as far as systems
analysis methodology is concerned. The handbooks make clear that
systems analysis always starts with the recognition by someone involved
with a sociotechnical system that a problem exists. This problem will
require proper formulation. Once that is achieved the methodology pre-
scribes a research phase during which a scienti¢c approach is brought to
bear on the problem. The research should be multidisciplinary. It requires
identifying alternative ways of tackling the problem and building models
that can be used to test the alternatives. The alternative means are then
evaluated and ranked according to the decision-makers’ preferences,
bearing in mind costs, bene¢ts and other consequences. Finally, assistance
is given with implementation and with evaluation of outcomes. The Figure
4.1 representation of systems analysis methodology appears in all three of
the handbooks.
For A.D. Hall (see Keys, 1991), re£ecting on his experiences with the
Bell Telephone Laboratories, systems exist in hierarchies and should be
engineered with this in mind to best achieve their objectives. The systems
engineer is charged with co-ordinating a multidisciplinary team that must
discover the objectives and then ensure the optimum integration and consis-
tency of system and subsystems in pursuit of those objectives. Jenkins
(1972), a British systems engineer, provides a detailed elaboration of the
steps required:
1.
Systems analysis ^
1.1 formulation of the problem;
1.2 organization of the project;
1.3 de¢nition of the system;
1.4 de¢nition of the wider system;
1.5 objectives of the wider system;
1.6 objectives of the system;
1.7 de¢nition of an overall economic criterion;
1.8 information and data collection.
2.
Systems design ^
2.1 forecasting;
52
Hard systems thinking

2.2 model building and simulation;
2.3 optimization;
2.4 control;
2.5 reliability.
Description of hard systems thinking
53
Figure 4.1
The systems analysis methodology.
From Miser and Quade (1988), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

3.
Implementation ^
3.1 documentation and sanction approval;
3.2 construction.
4.
Operation ^
4.1 initial operation;
4.2 retrospective appraisal;
4.3 improved operation.
INCOSE’s brief guide to systems engineering sees this process as bringing
to projects a disciplined vision of stakeholders’ expectations together with
a disciplined focus on the end product, its enabling products, and its internal
and external operational environment (i.e., a system view).
At the beginning of this subsection we stated that Checkland recognized a
commonality in the form of all types of hard systems methodology. In
essence, he argued, they take what is required (the ends and objectives) as
being easy to ascertain and see their task as undertaking a systematic investi-
gation to discover the most e⁄cient ‘how’ that will realize the prede¢ned
objectives. Hard systems thinking presupposes that real-world problems
can be tackled on the basis of the following assumptions:
1.
there is a desired state of the system S1, which is known;
2.
there is a present state of the system S0;
3.
there are alternative ways of getting from S0 to S1;
4.
it is the role of the systems person to ¢nd the most e⁄cient means of
getting from S0 to S1.
4.2.4
Methods
It isnot entirely correct to say that hard systems thinking has concentrated on
methods of model building at the expense of methods to support other
stages or phases of the methodological process. The three IIASA handbooks
on systems analysis contain a good deal on the craft skills necessary to
support problem formulation, communication with decision-makers and
implementation. The rapid development of ‘soft OR’ in the 1980s and
1990s in the UK is evidence of a tradition of work that has paid attention
to the process of operational research. Successful practitioners of all strands
of hard systems thinking have of necessity had to develop well-tuned social
and political skills. Nevertheless, it is true that the mainstream academic
literature in journals and textbooks certainly does show an overwhelming
bias in the direction of perfecting methods of modelling. It is not surprising,
54
Hard systems thinking

therefore, that this is the area in which hard systems thinking has most to
o¡er.
Models are explicit, simplifying interpretations of aspects of reality
relevant to the purpose at hand. They seek to capture the most important
variables and interactions giving rise to system behaviour. They are used to
experiment on as surrogates for the real-world system. The literature of
hard systems thinking identi¢es various types of models: iconic, analogic,
analytic, simulations, gaming, judgemental and conceptual. Let us consider
these in turn.
Iconic models are simply scale (usually reduced scale) representations of
what is being modelled, such as an aircraft model used in wind tunnel
testing or an architect’s three dimensional model of a new building.
Analogue models are very di¡erent in appearance to the reality, but, never-
theless, seek to mimic the behaviour of what they represent. An example
would be an electrical network used to represent water £owing through
pipes.
Analytic models are mathematical models that are used to represent the
logical relationships that are believed to govern the behaviour of the
system being investigated. They are widely used in operational research.
Wilson (1990) helpfully provides a matrix (reproduced as Figure 4.2) that
divides analytic models into four classes depending on whether they repre-
sent behaviour over time (dynamic) or at one point in time (steady state)
and whether the behaviour is described by ¢xed rules (deterministic) or
statistical distribution (non-deterministic).
Algebraic equations can be used to formulate, for example, problems
about the most appropriate way to allocate productive resources in order to
maximize pro¢t when many alternatives exist and resources are limited.
The linear programming technique has been developed to provide an
Description of hard systems thinking
55
Figure 4.2
Types of analytic model.

optimal solution in this type of situation. Statistical and probability relation-
ships can be employed to determine the degree of dependence of one variable
on another in the absence of complete knowledge about the interrelation-
ships in a system. Wilson shows how the linear regression technique can
provide a model, for example, showing how total electricity sales are
related to the level of industrial production. Di¡erential equations provide
a modelling language for the dynamic deterministic category. Wilson
demonstrates how the problem of designing a suspension system for a
vehicle can be tackled on the basis of di¡erential equations solved by
computer. Dynamic non-deterministic systems require simulation, which
we are treating here as another type of modelling.
Simulation of quite complex systems, in which the relationships between
variables are not well understood and change over time, has been made
possible with the advance in computing power. It refers to the process of
mapping item by item and step by step the essential features of the system
we are interested in. The model produced is subject to a series of experiments
and the outcomes documented. The likely behaviour of the system can
then be predicted using statistical analysis. For example, the essential features
of a tra⁄c £ow system can be represented in a computer simulation as long
as the key factors impacting on tra⁄c £ow can be identi¢ed. Computer-
generated random numbers determine amount of tra⁄c, numbers turning
left, etc., so that the system’s behaviour can be monitored under di¡erent
conditions. A sophisticated type of simulation modelling, system dynamics,
is described in Chapter 5.
Gaming is a kind of modelling in which human actors play out the roles of
signi¢cant decision-makers in a system. They are supposed to behave as
would their real-world counterparts in order that matters of choice, judge-
ment, values and politics can be investigated.
Judgemental models usually rest on group opinion of the likelihood of
particular events taking place. Techniques such as ‘Delphi’ (developed at
the RAND Corporation) and ‘scenario writing’ are used in systems analysis
to develop the best group models from the individual mental models of
members of multidisciplinary teams. Delphi employs an anonymous, itera-
tive process to guide experts and other knowledgeable individuals toward a
reasonableconsensusabout an issue. Scenariowritingexplores the likelihood
of particular future states of a¡airs coming about.
Conceptual models, as the name suggests, are qualitative models used to
make explicit the particular mental models held by parties interested in a
decision. They are more frequently employed in soft systems thinking than
in hard systems thinking.
56
Hard systems thinking

4.2.5
Recent developments
The most important recent developments in hard systems thinking relate to
continued attempts to extend the scope of the approach beyond the some-
what technical problem situations, in which it has proved very successful,
to situations of greater complexity and in which people and politics play
the central role. INCOSE has declared its intention to expand systems
engineering into non-traditional domains, such as transportation, housing,
infrastructure renewal and environmental systems ^ although, it must be
said, little work has been done yet on how the approach might have to
change to make it so applicable. The IIASA handbooks declare that
systems analysis needs to be extended to more ‘people-dominated’ problems.
In this ¢eld considerable e¡ort has gone into documenting the ‘craft skills’
needed to cope with people and politics. But this still remains a long way
from developing appropriate concepts and an appropriate language that
would allow these matters to be discussed theoretically so that continuous
learning can be generated. The greatest progress has been made in OR,
with the establishment of ‘soft OR’ in the UK as a complementary practice
to ‘hard OR’. Soft OR di¡ers markedly from the classical version we have
been studying in this chapter and does put people at the centre of problem
resolving and decision-making. The collection of papers in Rosenhead and
Mingers (2001) is a good introduction.
In general,the question needs asking whether hard systems thinking really
can be adapted in the way certain visionaries believe. Would it not lose the
capacity to be good at what it does well now? Would it not be better for us
to look to other systems approaches, developed for other purposes, to
complement hard systems thinking where it is weak?
4.3
HARD SYSTEMS THINKING IN ACTION
Given the range of hard systems approaches covered in this chapter, it is
di⁄cult to provide one representative example of hard systems thinking in
action. We shall tackle this problem by showing di¡erent aspects of use for
each of OR, SE and SA.
Once the original pioneering spirit had faded, operational researchers, or
at least those of a more academic persuasion, began to concentrate their
e¡orts on developing mathematical models to apply to what they recognized
as frequently occurring types of problems. Each problem type was assumed
to have a particular form and structure, which determined its nature and
Hard systems thinking in action
57

how it could be tackled, regardless of the context in which it was found ^
military, manufacturing industry, service sector, etc. Fortuin et al. (1996)
present 15 case studies of OR at work in application areas as diverse as
transport and logistics, product and process design, maintenance and
¢nancial services, health care and environmental decision-making. Keys
(1991), and Cavaleri and Obloj (1993), provide good introductory material
on the most common OR problems; a typical list being:
.
queuing problems;
.
inventory problems;
.
allocation problems;
.
replacement problems;
.
co-ordination problems;
.
routing problems;
.
competitive problems;
.
search problems.
Queuing models seek an optimum trade-o¡ between the costs of providing
service capacity and keeping customers happy. Inventory models aim to
establish the optimum reorder point for stocks of resources so that pro-
duction £ow can be maintained while the costs of holding excess inventory
are minimized.
Allocation models seek to apportion scarce resources in the most e⁄cient
manner, maximizing output or minimizing costs, while achieving overall
objectives. Keys comments on an example involving a farming enterprise
that both reared cattle for beef and produced crops that could themselves
be sold or, alternatively, used to feed the cattle. A linear programming-type
model was constructed containing 640 constraints and 1,801 variables. A
solution that maximized pro¢t was discovered in 34 seconds of computer
time.
Replacement models help to minimize costs by identifying the point at
which acquisition of new assets is justi¢able. Co-ordination techniques,
such as PERT (Programme Evaluation and Review Technique) and critical
path analysis, calculate how tasks must be sequenced in a project to ensure
completion in minimum time and at minimum cost. The goal of routing
models is to determine the most e⁄cient route between di¡erent locations
in a network. Competitive problems are conceptualized in terms of games,
the aim being to maximize outcomes for one or more participants. Search
models try to maximize the e⁄ciency of a search (say, for a location for a
new factory) by minimizing both costs and the risks of error.
58
Hard systems thinking

A recent INCOSE document (see www.incose.org) sets out systems
engineering pro¢les for 18 di¡erent application domains: agriculture,
commercial aircraft, commercial avionics, criminal justice system and legal
processes, emergency services, energy systems, environmental restoration,
facilities systems engineering, geographic information systems, health care,
highway transportation systems, information systems, manufacturing,
medical devices, motor vehicles, natural resources management, space
systems, and telecommunications. There are also pro¢les for seven cross-
application domains: e-commerce, high-performance computing, human
factors engineering, Internet-based applications, Internet banking, logistics,
and modelling and simulation. Not surprisingly, a number of these pro¢les
are rudimentary, with the most extensive being in areas of traditional
systems engineering practice, such as the design and development of
commercial aircraft.
The commercial aircraft industry operates in a very competitive environ-
ment and depends on complex manufacturing processes arising from
highly integrated subsystems, advanced technologies, use of advanced
materials, detailed speci¢cations and very rigorous testing. The systems
engineering speci¢cations for this domain insist on the principle that
commercial aircraft are considered as wholes, and not as collections of
parts.Both customer and regulatoryrequirementsare ¢rst identi¢ed. Aircraft
architecture is then seen as a hierarchy in which the functions and constraints
operating at the top level, the aircraft system itself, £ow down into require-
ments for the subsystems. A typical decomposition of the aircraft system
into parts would identify the mechanical, propulsion, environmental,
airframe, avionics, interiors, electrical and auxiliary subsystems. These sub-
systems are then further decomposed into subordinate components with
their own requirements deriving from those of the subsystems. Thorough
monitoring and control is essential at all stages of design and construction
to ensure that requirements at the di¡erent levels are veri¢ed and validated
by testing.
The IIASA handbooks provide some comprehensive descriptions of
SA applications, which are then referred to and analysed throughout the
three volumes. The main illustrations are of improving blood availability
and utilization (also described in Jackson, 2000), improving ¢re protection,
protecting an estuary from £ooding, achieving adequate amounts of energy
for the long-range future, providing housing for low-income families and
controlling a forest pest in Canada. Of these examples, the ¢re protection
case is regarded as one that closely follows the prescribed systems analysis
methodology.
Hard systems thinking in action
59

The ¢re protection study began in 1973 in Wilmington, DE and was
conducted by a local project team with technical assistance from the New
York-based RAND Institute. The eight existing ¢rehouses in Wilmington
were getting old and the mayor wanted to ¢nd out if they o¡ered adequate
protection, whether they were located in the right places and whether any
new ¢rehouses needed building. The main objectives of ¢re protection
were pretty obviously to protect lives and safeguard property while, at the
same time, keeping costs low. Unfortunately, there was no reliable way of
evaluating how di¡erent deployment strategies related directly to these
objectives. Three ‘proxy’ measures were therefore developed: approximate
travel time to individual locations, average travel time in a region and
company workload. The consequences of changes in locations and
numbers of ¢rehouses were then considered against these.
The next stage required the analysts to build models that could be used to
test various deployment alternatives. The primary tools employed to encap-
sulate the data were a parametric allocation model, based on a mathematical
formula for allocating companies to di¡erent regions,and a moredescriptive,
simulation model, known as the ¢rehouse site evaluation model. The
transparency of this latter model was crucial as it enabled city o⁄cials to be
involved in suggesting alternatives.
The recommendations to close one of the ¢re companies and reposition
most of the remainder provoked a long battle with the ¢re¢ghters union
before they were eventually implemented. When the results were ¢nally
evaluated it was found that the ¢re protection service was just as e¡ective as
before, but with costs signi¢cantly reduced.
4.4
CRITIQUE OF HARD SYSTEMS THINKING
Hard systems thinking has sought to bring scienti¢c rigour to the solution of
management problems. It wants to produce objective results, free from the
taint of personality and vested interests, through a process in which assump-
tions, data and calculations are made clear, and which is validated in order
to inform the work of other scientists facing similar problems.
At the same time, hard systems thinkers are clear that they do not seek
knowledge for its own sake. They do research aimed at serving the interests
of clients,decision-makers andproblem owners.This shift tovaluing knowl-
edge directly relevant to application rather than simply to the advancement
of a scienti¢c discipline was revolutionary and enabled management
scientists to steal a march on other disciplinary areas that, to this day, are
60
Hard systems thinking

still struggling to put in place the conceptual apparatus that would enable
them to make their ¢ndings more relevant (e.g., see Tran¢eld and Starkey,
1998, on the struggle to establish more application-oriented management
research).
In tackling actual management problems hard systems thinkers pioneered
the use of multidisciplinary teams of researchers and became advocates of
an interdisciplinary approach. Particularly valuable to them, in this respect,
was the existence of various systems ideas and concepts. Reductionism was
useless because of the complexity and unbounded character of real-world
problems and because of the interactive nature of their parts. What was
required was a more holistic, integrating approach that sought to be compre-
hensive by drawing the boundaries of the system of concern more widely.
The systems language, employing concepts such as system, subsystem,
hierarchy, boundary and control, was perfect for this purpose.
Another problem that hard systems thinkers were able to overcome was
how to test the hypotheses they developed. They could not carry out
experiments directly on the systems they were hoping to improve ^ it was
too dangerous because of expense, ethics or both. Unlike natural scientists,
the problems they faced were too interconnected to be broken up and
taken into the laboratory for analysis. The solution was to construct a
model or models that accurately captured the behaviour of the real-world
system and to run tests on those. Considerable progress had to be made by
hard systems thinkers on the techniques of mathematical and computer-
based modelling if this approach was to succeed.
We considered the main weaknesses of hard systems thinking in Chapter
2, when we were looking at why other strands of systems thinking had
emerged and established themselves over the last few decades. To recap,
these related to the failure of hard systems thinking in the face of extreme
complexity, multiple perceptions of reality and the need for radical change.
The extreme complexity of the problem situations that managers
confront, and the fact that they are subject to very di¡erent interpretations,
frustrate hard systems thinkers in their search for an objective account of
the system of concern that can be used to construct a mathematical model.
Modelling is about simpli¢cation, but it is often not clear how complex
problem situations can be simpli¢ed without bias creeping in. There is also
the danger of leaving out of account factors that cannot be quanti¢ed.
Hardsystemsapproaches demand that the goal of the system of concern be
clearly established before analysis can proceed. This makes it di⁄cult even
to get started in many problem situations, where multiple stakeholders
bring di¡erent perceptions to bear on the nature of the system and its
Critique of hard systems thinking
61

objectives. Hard systems thinking tends to leave the human aspect of systems
aside. People are treated as components to be engineered, not as actors
whose commitment must be won if solutions are to be implemented and
plans realized.
Hard systems thinking is also accused of conservatism. It privileges the
values and interests of its clients and customers, and lends its apparent exper-
tise to their realization. It thus gives the facade of objectivity to changes
that help to secure the status quo.
In general terms, despite its many strengths and achievements, hard
systems thinking is today thought of as having a limited domain of applica-
tion. It is ¢ne when world views converge and the problem becomes one of
¢nding the most e⁄cient means of arriving at agreed-on objectives. Such
well-structuredproblems, usuallyarising at the tactical level in organizations,
are meat and drink to an approach that employs a systematic methodology
to seek out alternative means and evaluate them against well-de¢ned
measures of performance.
All this is easily understood when we recognize how totally hard systems
thinking embraces the functionalist paradigm. Its interest is in ensuring the
e⁄cient engineering of systems to achieve known goals. Their behaviour
has to be predicted and they have to be regulated in pursuit of their con-
trollers’ objectives. The concerns of the interpretive paradigm in bringing
about mutual understanding among those with di¡erent values and beliefs,
of the emancipatory paradigm in alleviating disadvantage and the post-
modern paradigm in unpredictability and diversity, do not get a look-in.
Within functionalism, hard systems thinking is further constrained by its
adherence to the machine metaphor. The language of goals, rationality, e⁄-
cient means and control dominates. Other metaphors that might bring to
the fore the environment or cultural and political matters are not exploited.
4.5
THE VALUE OF HARD SYSTEMS THINKING
TO MANAGERS
Although managers need to employ expert practitioners to get the most
value out of hard systems thinking, there are at least ¢ve lessons to be
learned from it that can easily be absorbed and would bene¢t them in their
everyday work:
.
Scienti¢c expertise can help managers at least in dealing with a signi¢cant
set of the operational problems that they confront.
62
Hard systems thinking

.
The insistence of the systems approach on holism, rather than reduction-
ism, in tackling real-world problems can assist managers to obtain
comprehensive and integrated solutions. Suboptimization can be
avoided.
.
The useof a systematicmethodology totackleproblemsisusually prefer-
able to an ad hoc approach based on the manager’s common sense.
.
It is extremely helpful, in seeking to improve problem situations, if man-
agers can clearly set objectives, seek alternative means of achieving
those objectives and evaluate those alternative means on the basis of
precise measures of performance. This is especially the case in the
public and voluntary sectors where the market does not operate to
ensure e⁄ciency.
.
Faced with the complexity of problem situations, managers inevitably
use models. Whether these models are mathematical or not, it can assist
learning if managers are explicit about the models they are using and
the assumptions on which they are based.
4.6
CONCLUSION
The hard systems approach established many of the tenets of applied systems
thinking that have since served it well in dealing with problem situations in
the context of complexity and change. It had limitations, however, that
became obvious to both theoreticians and practitioners in the 1970s and
1980s. New thinking was needed before the systems approach could get
going on the road to creative holism.
REFERENCES
Cavaleri, S. and Obloj, K. (1993). Management Systems: A Global Perspective.
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Checkland, P.B. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
Churchman, C.W., Acko¡, R.L. and Arno¡, E.L. (1957). Introduction to Operations
Research. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Fortuin, L., van Beek, P. and van Wassenhove, L. (eds) (1996). OR at Work.
Taylor & Francis, London.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum,
New York.
References
63

Jenkins, G.M. (1972). The systems approach. In: J. Beishon and G. Peters (eds),
Systems Behavior (pp. 78^104). Open University Press, London.
Keys, P. (1991). Operational Research and Systems: The Systemic Nature of Operational
Research. Plenum, New York.
Miser, H.J. (ed.) (1995). Handbook of Systems Analysis: Cases. John Wiley & Sons,
New York.
Miser, H.J. and Quade, E.S. (1985). Handbook of Systems Analysis: Overview of Uses,
Procedures, Applications and Practice. North Holland, New York.
Miser, H.J. and Quade, E.S. (1988). Handbook of Systems Analysis: Craft Issues and
Procedural Choices. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Quade, E.S. and Miser, H.J. (1985). The context, nature, and use of systems
analysis. In: H.J. Miser and E.S. Quade (eds), Handbook of Systems Analysis:
Overview of Uses, Procedures, Applications and Practice (pp. 1^41). North
Holland, New York.
Rosenhead, J. and Mingers, J. (eds) (2001). Rational Analysis for a Problematic
World Revisited. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Tran¢eld, D. and Starkey, K. (1998). The nature, social organization and
promotion of management research: Towards policy. British Journal of Manage-
ment, 9, 341^353.
Wilson, B. (1990). Systems: Concepts, Methodologies and Applications. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, UK.
64
Hard systems thinking

System Dynamics:
The Fifth Discipline
5
Systems thinking is a discipline for seeing the ‘structures’ that underlie
complex situations, and for discerning high from low leverage change . . .
Ultimately, it simplifies life by helping us to see the deeper patterns lying
beneath the events and the details.
Senge (1990)
5.1
INTRODUCTION
Jay W. Forrester’s ambition in developing system dynamics was to extend
the range of applied systems thinking to more strategic problems. He
believed Operational Research (OR) was losing touch with the real concerns
of managers as it concentrated more and more on speci¢c tactical issues,
amenable to mathematical modelling because they involve just a few vari-
ables in linear relationships with one another. System dynamics, by contrast,
would employ the science of feedback, harnessed to the power of the
modern digital computer, to unlock the secrets of complex, multiple-loop
non-linear systems. Social systems are seen as being of this kind and as
causing no particular problems of their own for system dynamics because
the impacts of the decisions of human actors can be modelled according to
the same rules.
Forrester and his team, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), did all the solid groundwork necessary to establish system dynamics
as a rigorous and respected applied systems approach. It was Peter Senge,
however, with his book The Fifth Discipline (1990), who popularized it.
This volume, promoting system dynamics (the ‘¢fth discipline’ of the title)
as the key to creating ‘learning organizations’, hit the best-seller lists
worldwide.

5.2
DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM DYNAMICS
5.2.1
Historical development
In 1956 Forrester, with a background in the computer sciences and control
engineering, became a professor in the Sloan School of Management at
MIT. He directed the System Dynamics Program there until 1989. The ap-
proach he pioneered was originally called ‘industrial dynamics’ and was
announced to the world in a 1958 article for the Harvard Business Review
titled ‘Industrial dynamics: A major breakthrough for decision makers’.
Later, as Forrester extended his scope, he renamed the approach ‘system
dynamics’. The titles of his books over the years signal his increasing aspira-
tions for system dynamics: Industrial Dynamics appeared in 1961, followed
by Principles of Systems and Urban Dynamics in 1968 and 1969, respectively,
and World Dynamics in 1971.
The attempt to encompass and understand the workings of the world as a
system, in World Dynamics and its sequel The Limits to Growth (D. Meadows
et al.,1972), was, as might be expected, particularly controversial. Taking
¢ve basic parameters as representative of the world system (population,
natural resources, industrial production, agricultural production and
pollution) and studying their behaviour and interactions, Forrester and his
collaborators produced a model which indicated that growth at current
levels was unsustainable. In order to avoid catastrophe brought about by
pollution or complete exhaustion of natural resources, it was necessary to
establish a kind of ‘global equilibrium’. Inevitably, the authors were seen as
doomsday-mongers.
Forrester, in fact, always saw encouragement of ‘learning’ as an important
element in system dynamics. If managers could learn about how complex
systems worked, they could act on them to bring about improvement.
Nevertheless, the central feature of his approach was the development of
rigorous, computer-based simulation models that could be tested for validity
against the behaviour of the real-world systems they were supposed to
represent. More recently, in some sections of the system dynamics commun-
ity, there has been a burgeoning interest in using the approach to promote
learning per se.
5.2.2
Philosophy and theory
According to the theory of system dynamics, the multitude of variables
existing in complex systems become causally related in feedback loops that
66
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

themselves interact. The systemic interrelationships between feedback loops
constitute the structure of the system, and it is this structure that is the
prime determinant of system behaviour. For example, a ¢rm that successfully
launches a new product on the market may generate su⁄cient extra cash to
enable it to invest in a mass advertising campaign, generating more sales,
giving greater revenue, encouraging further advertising, etc. These variables
are linked in a positive reinforcing feedback loop. If at the same time the
product grabs favourable media attention it may become extremely fashion-
able, generating more sales and even greater media exposure. A second pos-
itive feedback loop is then established supporting the ¢rst, and growth in
demand can become huge. At this point pressure on the production
process may get too great and quality su¡er. The product might then
acquire a poor reputation and sales decline. A linked negative feedback
loop has come into being, which counteracts the original growth loops.
The three feedback loops, and the way they interact, give rise to the structure
of the system, which in this case can lead to the failure of the product to
sustain itself in the market. The aim of system dynamics is to provide man-
agers with an understanding of the structure of complex systems so that
they can intervene to ensure behaviour that ¢ts with their goals.
To get an appropriate understanding of structure it is necessary to
establish four things:
.
the boundary of the system;
.
the network of feedback loops;
.
the ‘rate’ or ‘£ow’, and ‘level’ or ‘stock’ variables;
.
the ‘leverage’ points.
The boundary must be drawn so as to include all important interacting
components and to exclude all those that do not impact on behaviour. It is
hereon assumed that all signi¢cant dynamic behaviour arises from the inter-
actions of components inside the system boundary. Feedback loops within
that boundary are then identi¢ed, their nature (positive or negative)
deduced and their interrelationships charted. The substructure of the loops
is detailed in terms of ‘rate’ or ‘£ow’, and ‘level’ or ‘stock’ variables. A level
is a quantity of some element that has accumulated in the system and can
change over time. Rates are relationships between elements, often resulting
from management decisions, that lead to changes in levels. In a simple inven-
tory system, for example, manufacturing rate and delivery rate will together
determine whether the stock level increases or decreases. The complexity
involved usually makes it necessary at this point to represent the system in
Description of system dynamics
67

a computer model using one of the programming languages custom-built for
system dynamics. This simulation will reveal which are the dominant feed-
back loops and predict the e¡ect of any time delays that might occur in the
system. Managers can experiment to gauge the impact of possible
interventions. They will be looking for ‘leverage’ points ^ those areas of
the system at which they can direct action in order to achieve maximum
payback in terms of their objectives. This may demand, for example,
breaking existing links or adding new feedback loops.
The growth in power of the digital computer was a major inspiration to
Forrester at the time he was developing system dynamics. As suggested
above, he believed that the complexity of the structure of many systems
was too di⁄cult for the human mind to grasp. As far as humans are con-
cerned, the dynamic behaviour of such systems appears as counterintuitive.
The computer, by contrast, is capable of tracing the interactions of innumer-
able variables and thus of taking complexity in its stride.
Senge (1990; Senge et al., 1994) has identi¢ed a number of the counter-
intuitive aspects of complex systems and elevated them into 11 ‘laws of the
¢fth discipline’. So, for example: ‘The cure can be worse than the disease’.
This means that easy solutions, which seem to o¡er instant relief, can
become addictive and make the system weaker in the long term ^ as might
drinking as a response to stress. Or: ‘Cause and e¡ect are not closely related
in time and space’. We have to be careful, therefore, in assigning outcomes
to particular actions. Or: ‘There is no blame’. People tend to be criticized
for behaviour of which we disapprove, but the real problem is more likely
to be the system of relationships in which they are embedded. If we are to
avoid becoming slaves to misunderstandings, we need to see the deeper
structural patterns that give rise to problems. System dynamics, Senge
insists, can provide the necessary insight and enable us to learn more
appropriate responses.
5.2.3
Methodology
The methodology speci¢ed by Forrester (1961, 1971) for applying system
dynamics in practice is directly derived from the philosophy and theory of
the approach. As a ¢rst step, the problem worrying the decision-makers is
clari¢ed and the variables that impact on the problem are identi¢ed.
Second, a feedback loop model is constructed that reveals the relationships
between the variables. This must then be turned into a mathematical model
that, on the basis of rates and levels, captures the basic interactions in the
system and,using custom-built software, can betransformed into acomputer
68
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

simulation. In a fourth step the model is validated by comparing its behav-
iour with real-world activity and, once a decent correspondence has been
achieved, experiments are conducted on the model to see how alternative
decisions can improve performance. Finally, recommendations are made on
how the decision-makers might change the situation to make it better.
Forrester (1971) argues that this methodology combines the power of the
human mind with the strengths of today’s computers. The human mind is
best in the early stages, when the problem is being structured and creativity
is necessary to identify the relevant variables and possible feedback loops.
The computer takes over to reveal the unexpected consequences that arise
from complexity and the dynamic behaviour of the system. The human
mind comes into its own again to secure implementation.
To ensure that both these aspects of system dynamics get equal attention,
Wolstenholme (1990) likes to think in terms of a qualitative and a quantita-
tive phase to the methodology. Although moving to the quantitative
phase, the computer simulation, is highly desirable, the qualitative phase
can be valuable in its own right for explicating the decision-makers’ under-
standing of the nature of the system of concern. Wolstenholme is adamant
that the decision-makers are central to the qualitative phase, and he insists
that they should remain involved during any quantitative steps. Only in
this way can implementation of the recommendations be assured.
A more recent ¢ve-phase statement of system dynamics methodology, by
Maani and Cavana (2000), is careful to include the learning potential inherent
in the approach, as emphasized by Senge. The ¢ve phases are:
.
problem structuring;
.
causal loop modelling;
.
dynamic modelling;
.
scenario planning and modelling;
.
implementation and organizational learning.
The ¢rst three are relatively routine although early attention is given to
trying to identify common patterns of behaviour (‘system archetypes’ in
Senge’s terminology) and key leverage points. In the ¢nal two, however,
new techniques are incorporated speci¢cally designed to encourage learning.
Phase 4 develops the idea of using scenarios ^ testing strategies under
varying external conditions ^ to engage managers. The ¢nal phase is more
concerned to extend learning among all the relevant stakeholders than to
reach speci¢c decisions. ‘Microworlds’ (or ‘management £ight simulators’)
are constructed based on the simulation models. These are interactive and
Description of system dynamics
69

provide managers with a user-friendly interface that allows them to experi-
ment with the models. A ‘learning laboratory’ is designed to provide for
the structured learning of groups of managers engaging with a microworld,
and this is then employed to facilitate and di¡use learning throughout the
organization.
5.2.4
Methods
The four methods most frequently used to support the various stages of the
system dynamics methodology are the ‘signed digraph’ or ‘causal loop
diagram’, system archetypes, computer simulation software packages and
microworlds.
The identi¢cation of signi¢cant feedback loops and their causal structure
is central in system dynamics to understanding system behaviour. A signed
digraph can help because it is a causal loop diagram annotated to show the
direction of feedback. The example given in Subsection 5.2.2 is shown in
Figure 5.1 in signed digraph form. A new product is launched successfully
and picks up sales rapidly due to the increased revenue available for mass
advertising and some favourable media attention that makes it extremely
fashionable. The two positive feedback loops (marked by a plus sign) that
yield this result are produced because an increase in any of the variables
shown in the loop leads to a corresponding increase in the variable on
which it impacts. In signed digraphs, relationships that produce a change in
the same direction (either increase or decrease) are marked by a positive
sign. As we can see in Figure 5.1, in the positive feedback loops all the
signs are positive. The problem arises for this product because as production
levels increase, to meet sales demand, quality declines, so does the reputation
of the product for quality and sales su¡er. The relationship between produc-
tion and quality is shown with a negative sign to re£ect the fact that as pro-
duction increases quality falls. Note that the links between quality and
reputation, and sales remain ‘positive’ because a decrease in quality leads to
a corresponding decrease in reputation for quality and then sales. The one
negative sign, between production and quality, produces a negative feedback
loop (marked by a minus sign) that counteracts the other two growth
loops.
If nothing is done, then the ‘dominance’ relationships between the loops
will determine the fate of the product. For example, if the product becomes
exceptionally fashionable, then sales may continue to grow because the
quality of the product is regarded as being less signi¢cant. Managers are
likely to want to ensure a favourable outcome, however, by intervening at
70
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

high leverage points ^ which may be through contacts with the media to
strengthen that loop or by re-engineering the production process to
improve quality and so turn that loop positive as well. They will also need
to be on the lookout for other possible negative feedback loops ^
competition brought into the market attracted by their success or a change
in how fashionable the product is seen as being.
Senge (1990; Senge et al., 1994)has studied reinforcing (positive) feedback
processes and balancing (negative) feedback processes, together with the
phenomenon of ‘delays’, which occur when the impact of a feedback
process takes a long time to come through. He concludes that it is possible
to identify certain system archetypes that show regular patterns of behaviour,
due to particular structural characteristics, that continually give rise to
management problems. Once mastered by managers, according to Senge,
they open the door to systems thinking. One such is the ‘limits to growth’
archetype, when reinforcing growth loops inadvertently set o¡ a balancing,
negative loop that slows down success or even sends it into reverse.
The successful product launch discussed above, which led to the need for
higher production levels, giving rise to quality problems, provides an
example.
Description of system dynamics
71
Figure 5.1
A signed digraph: a new product launch.

Other well-known archetypes are ‘shifting the burden’, ‘balancing process
with delay’, ‘accidental adversaries’, ‘eroding goals’, ‘escalation’, ‘success to
the successful’, ‘tragedy of the commons’, ‘¢xes that fail’ and ‘growth and
underinvestment’. The ‘shifting the burden’ archetype can be illustrated if
we consider a developing country wishing to increase the standard of
living for its people. It may need to make some fundamental adjustments
to its economy in order to achieve this. In the interim it seeks aid to ensure
a reasonable standard of living. The danger is that the country becomes
‘addicted’ to the aid before it sees any bene¢ts coming through from the
changes to its economy. Once addicted it loses its capacity for self-reliance,
the economy is weakened rather than strengthened and the country
becomes completely dependent upon aid. All of these archetypes are
easily represented using causal loop diagrams. Our example is shown in
Figure 5.2. If managers can learn to recognize system archetypes, they can
save themselves a lot of wasted and misdirected e¡ort and target their
interventions to points of maximum leverage.
Once the feedback structure of a system is understood and captured in a
model, it is possible to further elaborate by building a computer simulation
72
System dynamics: the fifth discipline
Figure 5.2
Increasing dependence on aid: an example of the ‘shifting the burden’
archetype.

designed to represent its dynamic behaviour. Indeed, ‘serious’ system dyna-
micists see this step as essential ^ regarding causal loop diagrams and
system archetypes as mere ‘training wheels’ for systemic thinking (see
Sterman, 2000). Building the simulation involves plotting the systemic
impacts of the various feedback loops on the ‘levels’ and ‘rates’ that exist
within the system. Stock-and-£ow diagrams (where the stocks are the levels
and the £ows are the rates) are used for this purpose. In Figure 5.3 we see
some of the typical symbols used in stock-and-£ow diagrams. The stock
level of interest in this case is the number of employees in a company. This
is shown as a rectangular ‘vessel’. The recruitment rate is a £ow, shown as a
kind of valve, which adds to the number of employees. There is another
£ow of sta¡ leaving, which subtracts from the stock of employees. Employ-
ees are recruited from a ‘source’, shown as a cloud, and return to a ‘sink’,
similarly represented, when they leave. Su⁄ce it to say that much user-
friendly software is now available that allows conversion of causal loop and
stock-and-£ow diagrams into sophisticated computer simulations. Popular
examples are DYNAMO, STELLA, ithink, DYSMAP, VENSIM and
POWERSIM.
The software also facilitates the creation of microworlds or management
£ight simulators (see Morecroft and Sterman, 1994). These present managers
with an easily understood control panel that hides the complexity of the
simulation and provides something much more like a gaming environment.
Managers can try out di¡erent decisions on a representation of the situation
they are facing at work and see what consequences ensue. Care is taken in
designing proper settings to maximize the bene¢ts of the learning process.
These settings are called ‘learning laboratories’. The aim is to get groups of
managers to question their existing mental models. In particular, they
should come to recognize the interdependence of the issues they deal with
and to replace super¢cial explanations of problems with a more systemic
understanding.
Description of system dynamics
73
Figure 5.3
Stock-and-flow diagram.

5.2.5
Recent developments
Recent developments in system dynamics have focused further on its ability
to promote learning in organizations.
Senge (1990) regards system dynamics, presented as ‘the ¢fth discipline’,
as the most important tool that organizations must master on the route to
becoming ‘learning organizations’. Only system dynamics can reveal the
systemic structures that govern their behaviour. Nevertheless, it is essential
to support study of the ¢fth discipline with research on the other four disci-
plines seen as signi¢cant in the creation of learning organizations. These are
‘personal mastery’, ‘managing mental models’, ‘building shared vision’ and
‘team learning’. Personal mastery involves individuals in continually clarify-
ing and deepening understanding of their own purposes. The discipline of
managing mental models requires organizations continually to question the
taken-for-granted assumptions that underpin the world views governing
their current behaviour. Shared vision requires unearthing visions of the
future that inspire consensus and commitment. Team learning, if properly
encouraged and enhanced, allows an organization to get the bene¢ts of
synergy fromthe knowledge held by individuals.Althoughsystem dynamics
is more fundamental than any of these and in e¡ect underpins them, they
are nevertheless worthy of study in their own right.
Vennix’s (1996) in£uential work on ‘group model building’ centres on
integrating individual mental models, each of which initially o¡ers only a
limited perspective on the causal processes at work. The approach depends
heavily on the skills of the facilitator who helps the group to elaborate the
initial models into a system dynamics model that re£ects a shared social
reality and a consensus around the nature of the problem. The whole group
is involved throughout, and this enhances team learning and creates commit-
ment to the resulting decisions.
Sterman (2000) holds out a bright future for system dynamics interacting,
through computer technology, with ¢elds such as complexity science and
arti¢cial intelligence, and in qualitative areas of research concerned with
mental models, learning and strategic decision making.
5.3
SYSTEM DYNAMICS IN ACTION
One of the interventions most frequently used to illustrate the power of the
system dynamics approach is that conducted by the MIT System Dynamics
Group with Hanover Insurance (see Senge and Sterman in Morecroft and
74
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

Sterman, 1994; Maani and Cavana, 2000; Cavaleri and Obloj, 1993). The case
reveals that apparently rational action taken by management to reduce the
costs of settling claims and to maintain customer satisfaction actually led to
an erosion of quality of service and increased settlement costs. The system
dynamics study demonstrated, through an analysis of the interacting feed-
back loops, exactly why this happened, suggested less obvious but more
e⁄cacious ways of tackling the problems faced and led to the development
of a microworld and learning laboratory to spread the learning obtained
throughout the company.
Hanover Insurance had undergone an amazing transformation in the
1970s and early 1980s pulling itself from the bottom of the industry to
become a leader in the property and liability ¢eld. During this period it
grew 50% faster than the industry as a whole. Nevertheless, it could not
escape the many problems and resulting runaway costs that impacted on
the industry during the 1980s. Automobile insurance premiums doubled
causing a public backlash, the number of product liability cases increased
massively and the average size of claims settled in court increased ¢vefold.
It was easy to blame dishonest policy holders, biased juries, greedy lawyers
and the increased litigiousness of society. Senior managers in Hanover,
however, determined to look at how their own management practices were
contributing to the problem situation. A good starting point was the
claims management operation responsible now, because of increasing
numbers and complexity of claims, for more than 67% of total company
expenses.
The project began with a team from Hanover, consisting of the senior
vice-president for claims and two of his direct subordinates, meeting regu-
larly with some MIT researchers. A vision statement expressed the desire to
be pre-eminent among claims organizations and to provide ‘fair, fast, and
friendly’ service. From this it was possible to derive an image of the ideal
claims adjuster and the performance measures he or she would be required
to meet. The problem was ¢nding a coherent path from the reality to the
ideal. There were lots of candidate strategies, but these seemed disjointed.
A more systemic solution was required.
STELLA was used with the Hanover team to build computer-based
simulation models. These were subject to basic reality checks and employed
to test the results of current strategies and to seek improvements in manage-
ment practices. Expert judgement was used, alongside whatever quantitative
data were available, to estimate the many ‘soft variables’ involved and their
e¡ects. The ¢nal model was both sophisticated in its treatment of problem
dynamics and fully owned by the Hanover team. Figure 5.4, reproduced
System dynamics in action
75

from Senge and Sterman, is a causal diagram that expresses the problem
dynamics.
The existing, implicit strategy of Hanover, in the face of pressure from
increased claims, was captured in the productivity loop and the work week
76
System dynamics: the fifth discipline
Figure 5.4
System dynamics of claims processing in the insurance industry. Feed-
back loops controlling claims settlement, with processes causing self-reinforcing
erosion of quality and increasing settlement costs. Arrows indicate the direction of
causality. Signs (‘þ’ or ‘’) at arrowheads indicate the polarity of relationships: a ‘þ’
denotes that an increase in the independent variable causes the dependent variable
to increase, ceteris paribus (and a decrease causes a decrease). Similarly, ‘’ in-
dicates that an increase in the independent variable causes the dependent variable
to decrease. Positive loop polarity (denoted by (þ) in the loop identifier) indicates a
self-reinforcing (positive feedback) process. Negative () loop polarity indicates a
self-regulating (negative feedback) process.
From Senge and Sterman (1994), reproduced by permission of Productivity Press.

loop of Figure 5.4. The operating norm for claims adjusters was simply to
work faster and work harder. Working faster helped reduce pending claims
because less time was spent per claim and therefore more claims could be
settled. Working harder helped reduce pending claims because of the e¡ect
on productivity of working longer hours and taking shorter and fewer
breaks. In the short term these ‘¢xes’ might appear to work. In the longer
term, however, other relationships bring about unintended consequences
(initially hidden because of the existence of ‘delays’) that make matters
worse rather than better. They are examples of the ‘¢xes that fail’ archetype.
The unintended consequences of working faster are shown in the settle-
ment cost loop of Figure 5.4. Spending less time per claim reduces the
quality of settlements, and this leads to increased settlement costs. Less time
to investigate and negotiate claims means that in£ated settlements are
agreed. Other customers become dissatis¢ed with the amount of time
devoted to them by the adjuster and are more ready to resort to law. Where
litigation results, inadequate documentation means longer preparation time
and less successful outcomes.
The unintended consequences of working harder are shown in the
burnout loop and turnover loop of Figure 5.4. Working harder leads to
fatigue, ill health and sta¡ burnout, which impacts adversely onproductivity.
Burnout also increases sta¡ turnover, which means fewer assessors and
even greater time pressure on those that remain.
Through the settlement cost, burnout and turnover loops, therefore, the
initial ¢xes provoke longer term unintended consequences that reduce
quality, increase time pressures and increase costs. Because this feedback is
delayed and its causes are not easy to trace, management will tend to react
by relying further on the original ¢xes. In an insurance industry facing
runaway costs the temptation to require claims adjusters to work even
faster and harder was virtually irresistible. The idea of addressing the
problem by hiring new claims adjusters seemed ridiculous. In archetype
terms, therefore, the burden was shifted from capacity expansion to quality
erosion.
Hanover, at the time of the study, had the highest number of assessors per
claim in the industry. Nevertheless, because the Hanover team had been
involved in building the model themselves and, through the model, had
come to appreciate the interconnections that produced the counterintuitive
behaviour of the claims adjustment system, they were prepared to embrace
the only fundamental solution to the problem. This, as is shown by the
capacity loop in Figure 5.4, was increasing adjuster capacity. However well
it compared with the rest of the industry, only by hiring new adjusters and
System dynamics in action
77

training them properly could Hanover genuinely address issues of service
quality and increased costs.
The next challenge for the project was to extend the learning gained to the
entire company. As implied earlier, there was a tendency to blame outside
factors, and not internal management practices, for the travails of the insur-
ance industry. Furthermore, in Hanover responsibility for decision-making
is widely distributed. If there was to be a real change in the way the
company behaved it was essential that all those managers with in£uence
experienced for themselves the counterintuitive behaviour of the claims
processing system. To achieve this a claims learning laboratory, incorporat-
ing a computer simulation game (or management £ight simulator), was
developed. Managers were familiarized with causal loop diagrams and
helped to think through the variables and relationships associated with the
claims system. The design of the game ensured that they were forced to
make explicit their mental models and to challenge them when the results
of the strategies they championed de¢ed their expectations. As a result
‘double-loop’ learning was facilitated.
As is demonstrated by the many excellent examples in Sterman’s (2000)
Business Dynamics, system dynamics is applicable to a wide range of industrial
and public policy issues.
5.4
CRITIQUE OF SYSTEM DYNAMICS
The strengths of system dynamics rest on the power of its claim that structure
is the main determinant of system behaviour and that structure can be
described in terms of the relationships between positive and negative feed-
back loops. If this claim is granted, then system dynamics becomes a unifying
interdisciplinary framework, capable of seeing beyond the surface detail
presented by individual disciplines to the deeper patterns that are really
responsible for generating behaviour. System dynamics can help managers
penetrate complexity and get their hands on the real levers of change and
improvement in social systems.
Again, once the claim is ceded, then some interesting explanations for
organizational ills become available, based on the behaviour of interrelated
feedback systems. It seems that problems arise: when we treat symptoms
rather than fundamental causes; when we become addicted to easy solutions;
when we forget that it takes time for interventions to show signi¢cant
outcomes; when we try to change systems drastically rather than look for
small changes that can produce big results; when we blame others or
78
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

outside circumstances rather than seeing that our own actions also contribute
to the relationships that determine system behaviour; and so forth. An
understanding of feedback systems, and the common dysfunctional system
archetypes to which they give rise, enable managers to cope with complexity
and take more e⁄cient and e⁄cacious decisions in pursuit of their goals.
This is even more the case because system dynamic models help to
pinpoint key decision points. The actions of decision-makers are included
in the models, and it is therefore easy to establish the consequences of
present policies and to explore alternative strategies. This leads to the empha-
sis on learning that is particularly prominent in Senge’s writings. Managers,
unaware of the systemic relationships to which their actions contribute, are
prone to act in ways that exacerbate existing problems. If they are involved
in building causal loop models, however, they become aware of the under-
lying structures at work. They are more willing to question the mental
models that contribute to the consolidation of damaging archetypes.
Combine these powerful theoretical insights with the advances made in
methodology, quantitative modelling, computer simulation and software
packages, and there is much to support the argument that system dynamics
has achieved Forrester’s ambition for systems thinking of making it more
applicable to strategic problems.
Critics, however (Keys, 1991; Flood and Jackson, 1991; Jackson, 2000),
urge considerable caution. To those working in speci¢c disciplines and
trained in the scienti¢c method, system dynamics can seem imprecise and
lacking in rigour. Sometimes, system dynamicists seem to jump to building
their models without doing their homework. They simply ignore existing
theories in the ¢eld they are exploring. At other times, if insu⁄cient data
are known about an area of concern, they remain prepared to plough on,
building their models without bothering to collect all the relevant data that
others would regard as essential. Judgement rather than proper scienti¢c
research is used to ¢ll in the gaps. Forrester’s claim, in the early 1970s, that
we know enough to make useful models of social systems reeks of arrogance.
Senge’s work can appear ‘unscienti¢c’, even to others working within
system dynamics. Forrester was reacting against the tendency in OR to
reduce management science to a limited number of mathematical models.
Senge seems to be repeating the mistake in believing that key management
problems can be explored using a limited set of system archetypes. Forrester
insisted that rigorous computer simulation, designed to tease out the
counterintuitivebehaviourof social systems, was central to system dynamics.
Senge appears to replace this, as the core of the approach, with managers
learning about feedback relationships.
Critique of system dynamics
79

If system dynamics models are imprecise, then they cannot give very
accurate predictions of future system states and, therefore, will be of limited
usefulness to decision-makers. This criticism is reinforced if we take seriously
insights derived from chaos and complexity theory (see Chapter 7). Com-
plexity theory insists on the ‘butter£y’ e¡ect ^ the idea that small changes
in a system’s initial conditions can alter its long-term behaviour very signi¢-
cantly. If system dynamics has no accurate grasp on initial conditions or of
the exact impact di¡erent relevant variables have on one another, then the
claim to make accurate predictions must appear as preposterous. This can
be illustrated if we take Cavaleri and Obloj’s (1993) example of a causal
loop diagram outlining the systemic relationships supposed to determine
the future political direction of Russia. Using this diagram readers are
invited to suggest which of six scenarios has the greatest likelihood of
occurring: ‘confusion reigns’, ‘a return to communism’, ‘the ‘‘Russian’’
state’, ‘Chile revisited’, ‘European-style democratic socialism’ or ‘New
York on the Volga’. I have no idea, using the diagram, how anyone could
attempt to answer this question.
Another line of criticism against system dynamics sees its theory, method-
ology and methods as simply unsuitable to the subject matter of its
concern. To these critics, human beings, through their intentions, motiva-
tions and actions, shape social systems. If we want to learn about social
systems we need to understand the subjective interpretations of the world
that individual social actors employ. Social structure emerges through a
process of negotiation and renegotiation of meaning. System dynamics
misses the point when it tries to study social systems ‘objectively’, from the
outside. And in trying to grasp the complexity of social reality using
models built on feedback processes, system dynamics presents itself with an
impossible task.
To critics of this persuasion, system dynamics, the raison d’e“tre of which is
to tackle greater complexity, is itself the perpetrator of gross simpli¢cation.
It is easy to show, using simple feedback diagrams, that providing aid to a
developing country is not a long-term solution to its economic problems
(to take our earlier example), that increasing police recruitment may not be
the best way of reducing crime, that building more roads may not ease road
congestion, that reducing cost might not be the best solution to declining
pro¢ts. But, in my experience, these things are hardly enlightening to
actual decision-makers, who are well aware of them as well as of the myriad
of other pragmatic, cultural, ethical and political factors that prevent them
acting in the rational way prescribed by system dynamics. None of these
80
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

problems are as simple as system dynamics makes them out to be. Few
management problems are as simple as Senge’s archetypes suggest.
The emphasis in system dynamics on understanding objectively the un-
derlying structure of social systems, and the relative neglect of subjectivity,
has other consequences as well. Little attention is given to the variety of
purposes that di¡erent social actors might see social systems as serving.
There is a tendency, in a unitary fashion, to assume that purposes have
already been agreed or, in a coercive manner, to take for granted the objec-
tives of powerful decision-makers. And system dynamicists can sometimes
contribute to disenfranchising other stakeholders if they present themselves
as elite technicians capable of providing objective accounts of the nature of
social systems.
We can see the debate we have just been examining as one between those
adhering to the functionalist and the interpretive paradigms. System
dynamics, despite the recent emphasis on mental models and learning, is
essentially functionalist in nature. It sees system structure as the determining
force behind system behaviour and tries to map that structure in terms of
the relationships between feedback loops. The aim is to better predict the
behaviour of social systems so that managers can control them. Improving
goal seeking, or at least ensuring that stability is maintained so that
goals can be achieved, is to the fore. The guiding rationales behind other
systems approaches ^ exploring purposes, ensuring fairness and promoting
diversity ^ receive much less support. The work of Senge (1990) and
Vennix (1996), it is true, edges closer to the interpretive paradigm and a
greater concern with ensuring mutual understanding through group
problem-solving. If system dynamics leans too far in this direction,
however, it risks jettisoning the claim to our attention it derives from the
functionalist presumption that it can unearth laws that govern the behaviour
of systems. If humans are free to construct social systems as they wish, what
determining in£uence does system structure have? And what con¢dence
can we have in the power of causal loop analysis to predict system behaviour?
This tension between determinism and free will is unresolved in, for
example, the work of Senge, and eats at its credibility. System dynamics, to
be worthy of our attention, must maintain its functionalist aspirations.
Otherwise, it becomes simply an undertheorized soft systems approach.
The functionalism that underpins system dynamics di¡ers somewhat from
the functionalism of hard systems thinking in embracing a structuralist
rather than positivist epistemology. In other words, its claim to knowledge
is that it gives access to the underlying structures that determine system
Critique of system dynamics
81

behaviour rather than to the surface details that, once logically examined,
explain what is happening. A belief in the existence of these deeper patterns
governing surface events, and its ability to unearth them, gives to system
dynamics an ability to cut through apparent complexity. This is why the
approach can claim to be broader in scope and more powerful than hard
systems thinking.
A broader range of system concepts is employed in system dynamics
than in hard systems thinking. Notions such as stocks and £ows, positive
and negative feedback, causal loops, structure, behaviour and learning
are added to the ideas of system, subsystem, hierarchy and boundary.
There is a much more dynamic orientation, which is due to the ‘£ux and
transformation’ metaphor dominating over the machine metaphor in
system dynamics ^ even if somewhat tempered by a mechanical equilibrium
slant. The culture metaphor is beginning to assume greater importance, but
remains in a supportive role. Metaphors that would point to the signi¢cance
of environmental relations or the play of power and politics are not
employed.
5.5
THE VALUE OF SYSTEM DYNAMICS TO MANAGERS
As with hard systems thinking, managers need the help of experts in order to
get the most out of system dynamics. Nevertheless, it is worth following
the pattern begun in the previous chapter by trying to pick out ¢ve lessons
that managers can easily learn from system dynamics that can certainly
bene¢t their practice:
.
It is often helpful to look beyond the apparent mess presented by surface
appearances to see if there are any underlying patterns of feedback
loops that are determining system behaviour. Occasionally, computer
simulation can help to tease out the e¡ects that the relationships
between variables and loops are producing.
.
An understanding of how feedback loops interact to cause system
behaviour can inform the way managers work. For example, they
become much more aware of the dangers of unintended consequences,
of treating symptoms rather than causes, of the importance of ‘delays’,
etc.
.
Rather than jumping to what appear to be obvious solutions to
problems, managers need to appreciate that complex systems often
behave in subtle and unexpected ways. It is worth spending time
82
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

looking for smaller interventions that, nevertheless, may be the levers to
bring about substantial changes.
.
System dynamics supports the conclusion that ‘no man is an island’. It is
no good, therefore, blaming the environment or other people for our
problems. Our decisions are part of the set of relationships giving rise
to the di⁄culties that we face.
.
System dynamic models, management £ight simulators, etc. can assist
managers to appreciate the systemic relationships in which they are
involved and to which their decisions contribute. They teach managers
that they often need to radically change their thinking before improve-
ment can become possible. The double-loop learning involved in
changing mental models is crucial to successful management practice.
5.6
CONCLUSION
The system dynamics approach can provide insight for managers in many
circumstances. In basic terms it is an advance down the vertical, systems
dimension of the SOSM (see Chapter 2). It o¡ers better prospects for
dealing with system complexity than hard systems thinking. Many would
want to claim more for it and, like Senge, seize the label ‘systems thinking’
for the system dynamics strand within the systems approach. This is to
push too far. System dynamics has a particular, limited competence that it
would do well to consolidate and cultivate. Those system dynamics authors
who tread beyond functionalism risk losing touch with their core compe-
tence and come into competition with systems thinkers who have been
exploring other paradigms for some time and, as a result, have developed
methodologies and methods more attuned to those paradigms. Rather than
believing that system dynamics can do everything, a critical systems thinker
is likely to want to combine the strengths of system dynamics with what
other systems approaches have learned to do better.
REFERENCES
Cavaleri, S. and Obloj, K. (1993). Management Systems: A Global Perspective.
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
References
83

Forrester, J.W. (1958), Industrial dynamics: A major breakthrough for decision
makers. Harvard Business Review, 36, 37^48.
Forrester, J.W. (1961). Industrial Dynamics. Productivity Press, Portland, OR.
Forrester, J.W. (1968). Principles of Systems. Productivity Press, Portland, OR.
Forrester, J.W. (1969). Urban Dynamics. Productivity Press, Portland, OR.
Forrester, J.W. (1971). World Dynamics. Productivity Press, Portland, OR.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Keys, P. (1991). Operational Research and Systems: The Systemic Nature of Operational
Research. Plenum, New York.
Maani, K.E. and Cavana, R.Y. (2000). Systems Thinking and Modelling. Pearson
Education, New Zealand.
Meadows, D.H., Meadows, D.L., Randers, J. and Behrens, III, W.W. (1972).
The Limits to Growth. Universe Books, New York.
Morecroft, J.D.W. and Sterman, J.D. (eds) (1994). Modelling for Learning
Organizations. Productivity Press, Portland, OR.
Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning
Organization. Random House, London.
Senge, P. and Sterman, J.D. (1994). Systems thinking and organizational
learning: Acting locally and thinking globally in the organization of the
future. In: J.D.W. Morecroft and J.D. Sterman (eds), Modelling for Learning
Organizations (pp. 195^216). Productivity Press, Portland, OR.
Senge, P., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C., Ross, R. and Smith, B. (1994). The Fifth
Discipline Fieldbook. Century, London.
Sterman, J.D. (2000). Business Dynamics ^ Systems Thinking and Modelling in a
Complex World. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Vennix, J.A.C. (1996). Group Model Building: Facilitating Team Learning Using
System Dynamics. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Wolstenholme, E.F. (1990). Systems Enquiry: A System Dynamics Approach. John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
84
System dynamics: the fifth discipline

Organizational Cybernetics 6
Our institutions are failing because they are disobeying laws of effective
organisation which their administrators do not know about, to which
indeed their cultural mind is closed, because they contend that there
exists and can exist no science competent to discover those laws.
Beer (1974)
6.1
INTRODUCTION
Cybernetics, as we saw in Chapter 1, was originally de¢ned as the science of
control and communication in the animal and the machine. Inevitably,
however, ideas from this powerful interdisciplinary science soon began to
be transferred to the managerial domain. Initially, they were used simply as
a bolt-on to existing hard systems approaches. Employing the negative
feedback mechanism, for example, was recognized as essential to ensuring
conformance to externally de¢ned goals. In this ‘management cybernetics’
guise, the usefulness of cybernetics was constrained by the machine meta-
phor. The work of Sta¡ord Beer on ‘organisational cybernetics’ changed all
that.
Beer was determined to break with traditional management thinking. He
looked at company organization charts and regarded them as totally unsatis-
factory as a model for complex enterprises. They suggested that the person
at the top of the organization needed a brain weighing half a ton ^ since all
information £owed up to him and all decisions appeared to be his responsi-
bility. As Beer commented, peoples’ heads do not get bigger toward the
top of an organization, except perhaps in a metaphorical sense. Drawing
upon a wider range of cybernetic concepts, and important insights from
neurophysiology, he rede¢ned cybernetics as the ‘science of e¡ective organi-
sation’ and set out to construct a more accurate and useful model. The

result was his in£uential ‘viable system model’, which, as its namesuggests, is
a model of the key features that any viable system must exhibit.
6.2
DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATIONAL CYBERNETICS
6.2.1
Historical development
According to Beer, the cybernetic concepts of black box, negative feedback
and variety,which we met in Chapter 1,are ideal for helping us to understand
and improve complex systems, like organizations, that are characterized
by extreme complexity, self-regulation and probabilism. The black box
technique reminds us that we should not try to break systems down into
their parts to understand them, but rather control them through monitoring
their outputs and manipulating their inputs appropriately. The negative
feedback mechanism can then be employed to ensure that they are regulated
to achieve preferred goals. Variety engineering o¡ers a means of ensuring
control of probabilistic systems, the behaviour of which cannot be predicted
in advance.
Beer reasoned that if he wanted to understand further the principles of
viability underpinning the behaviour of complex organizations, it would
be useful to take a known-to-be-viable system as a model. The human
body, controlled by the nervous system, is perhaps the richest and most
£exible viable system of all. In his book Brain of the Firm (1972), therefore,
Beer takes this example and builds from it a neurocybernetic model consist-
ing of ¢ve essential subsystems, which can be identi¢ed in the brain and
body in line with major functional requirements. This is the basis of the
‘Viable System Model’ (VSM), which he then seeks to show is equally
relevant to social organizations.
In a later book, The Heart of Enterprise (1979), the same model, consisting
of ¢ve subsystems and appropriate feedback loops and information £ows,
is derived from the original cybernetic laws. This demonstrates that the
VSM is generally applicable to all systems, and to organizations large and
small. Indeed, in a one-person enterprise all ¢ve functions will still need to
be performed by that one individual if viability is to be ensured.
The year 1985 saw the publication of Diagnosing the System for Organizations
in which Beer introduces the VSM, and o¡ers advice for applying it, in the
form of a handbook or manager’s guide. A second edition of Brain of the
Firm (1981) details the most ambitious use of the model in support of the
Allende Government in Chile. Many other applications are described in
86
Organizational cybernetics

Beer’s books, as they are in Espejo and Harnden (1989), and Espejo and
Schwaninger (1993).
6.2.2
Philosophy and theory
Beer’s organizational cybernetics, like system dynamics, is ‘structuralist’ in
nature. In the case of system dynamics (see Chapter 5) it was the relationships
between feedback processes operating at the deep structural level that gave
rise to system behaviour at the surface level. With organizational cybernetics
it is cybernetic laws and principles at work below the surface that generate
the phenomena we observe and the relationships between them. Beer advo-
cates a rigorous scienti¢c procedure to unearth these cybernetic laws. Model-
ling is crucial and, as we saw Beer doing in Brain of the Firm, it is possible to
use precise models developed in one scienti¢c discipline to inform develop-
ments in another ¢eld. In this way, the management scientist can get
beyond mere metaphor and analogy to produce models that can be shown,
by logic and mathematics, to be homomorphic in nature because they
express genuinely interdisciplinary laws. The VSM is Beer’s attempt to
demonstrate, in as simple a way as possible, how cybernetic laws underpin
the operation of all complex systems. We shall study this in Subsection 6.2.3.
One of the most important ¢ndings of organizational cybernetics is that
complex systems have a ‘recursive’ nature. This refers to the fact that
systems exist in hierarchies, and that the organizational form of higher level
systems can be found repeated in the parts. The second characteristic is, of
course, a consequence of the ¢rst since, according to cybernetics, all viable
systems exhibit the same organizational characteristics. The VSM respects
the recursive nature of systems, and its applicability to di¡erent system
levels allows elegant representations of organizations to be constructed and
acts as a great variety reducer for managers and management scientists. The
same viable system principles can be used to model a subsystem (a division)
in an organization, that organization and its suprasystem (the system of
which the organization is a part). Using the VSM, lower level systems,
which inevitably appear as ‘black boxes’ when the organization as a whole
is being observed, can become the focus of interest in their own right with
only a slight adjustment of attention.
In later discussions of the VSM, Beer also makes use of the theory of
autopoiesis developed by Maturana and Varela (e.g., 1980). Autopoietic
systems are self-producing systems, and viable systems necessarily therefore
need to be autopoietic. However, as Beer notes, it is essential that this
property be embodied only in the system as a whole and in its key operational
Description of organizational cybernetics
87

elements. Ina company,thatmeans thecompany itselfandthebusiness units.
If support services become autopoietic, seeking to produce themselves for
their own bene¢t, then bureaucracy ensues.
Another insight from the theory of autopoiesis is that the VSM captures
and describes the essential ‘organization’ of systems rather than particular
structures. Organization, in this sense, is what de¢nes a system and enables
it to maintain autonomy and identity. Structure concerns itself with the
variety of arrangements between components that might enable the ‘organ-
ization’ to be realized. This emphasis on essential organization rather than
particular structures goes a long way toward accounting for the generality
of the model.
6.2.3
Methodology
The VSM embodies in a highly usable way the various cybernetic laws and
principles that Beer regards as essential to improving the performance of
organizations. It is not surprising, therefore, to ¢nd it at the very centre of
the approach I am calling organizational cybernetics. Nevertheless, it is
worth remembering that the VSM itself is a model rather than a method-
ology and can be used for purposes other than those prescribed by Beer.
When the VSM is employed as part of organizational cybernetics its role is
to reveal whether enterprises obey cybernetic laws or £out them. If used in
a ‘design’ mode its gaze is focused on plans for new organizations, and it
aims to ensure they are constructed according to good cybernetic principles.
The model can also be used in a ‘diagnostic’ mode. Here it acts as an exemplar
of good organization against which the structures and processes of an
actually existing system can be checked. In this mode, the organizational
physician can ‘X-ray’ the actual system and judge what is going wrong on
the basis of his or her knowledge of what a healthy organization should
look like.
Our starting point for understanding the VSM must be the concept of
‘variety’ and Ashby’s (1956) law of requisite variety: ‘only variety can
destroy variety’. Figure 6.1 shows the situation facing the managers of a
complex set of operations in these terms. It can be assumed that the
environment is of much greater variety (it can exhibit more system states)
than the operations, which are in turn of much greater variety than the
management. However, as Ashby’s law tells us, for management to be able
to control the operations and if the operations are to be sustainable in the
environment, varieties must be balanced. This requires variety engineering
88
Organizational cybernetics

^ the attenuation of the variety of high-variety systems and the ampli¢cation
of the variety of low-variety systems.
The VSM is in part a sophisticated working through of the implications
of Ashby’s law of requisite variety for enterprises. In the process a crucial
conundrum facing organizations has to be resolved ^ that of centralization
versus decentralization. As can be gleaned from study of Figure 6.1, manage-
ment will be keen to control the operations in order to realize agreed-on
goals. At the same time, if the operations are to be responsive to changes in
the environment, they will require the maximum capacity to act in an auto-
nomous manner. If management restricts the variety of the operations too
much, then the organization will not be adaptive to changes in the environ-
ment. If management e¡ects too little control over operations, then the
organization will drift and be incapable of achieving goals. The VSM
claims to demonstrate to managers a solution whereby the maximum
autonomy is granted to operations consistent with the maintenance of
systemic cohesion and thus goal-seeking capability.
Use of the VSM can now be outlined. The ¢rst step is to agree on the
identity of the organization in terms of the purposes it is to pursue. The
policy-making function of the system (‘System 5’, as we shall see) must
express and represent these purposes, but, obviously, should not be the
sole repository of identity. Ideally, it should re£ect purposes that emerge
from and are accepted by the operational elements. Equally clearly, purposes
need to be derived taking into account the state of the organization’s
environment and the opportunities and threats that exist. Proper manage-
ment of this ¢rst step in the methodology attenuates environmental variety
by helping to determine what aspects of the environment are actually
relevant to the system.
The second stage involves ‘unfolding’ the complexity of the organization
by deciding what operational or business units will enable it best to achieve
its purposes. According to the logic of the model these units will be made
Description of organizational cybernetics
89
Figure 6.1
Variety engineering.

as autonomous as possible within the constraints of overall systemic
cohesion. The strategy of unfolding complexity, therefore, increases the
variety of the organization with respect to its environment. It also reduces
the overwhelming variety that the overall management of the organization
would otherwise have to face because this can be ‘absorbed’, and decisions
can be taken at lower levels in the enterprise.
There will always be a choice of ‘dimensions’ along which an organization
can unfold its complexity. A university, for example, might decide that its
primary activities should be teaching and learning, research and reach-out;
or arts, social sciences, sciences, medicine and business; or undergraduate,
postgraduate, postexperience and part-time teaching. It is in making this
decision that the VSM requires of its users perhaps the greatest creativity.
The key is to ¢nd the best expression of identity and purpose given what
thenature of theorganization and its environmentwillallow. So,a university
that had chosen to be teaching-centred or been forced by history and circum-
stances in this direction would be unwise to adopt the ¢rst of those options
provided above.
Once a decision has been made about primary divisions, it is usual to focus
the VSM analysis on three levels of recursion. At level 1 resides the system
with which we are currently most concerned, called the ‘system in focus’.
In the university example, this might be the university itself. At level 0 is
the wider system of which the university is part, which might be universities
in the north of England, or universities in the UK. At recursion level 2 lie
the primary activities that have now been determined ^ perhaps arts, social
sciences, sciences, medicine and business. This can be seen in Figure 6.2
where University X is our system in focus. As Figure 6.2 suggests, if the
management of the university wished to delve into what for it is normally
the ‘black box’ of the business school, it could go down to what would be
recursion level 3 and use the VSM to ask questions about the various
activities in the business school.
The aim then, paying particular attention to the ‘system in focus’, is to use
the VSM to model at three levels of recursion. The VSM itself is shown in
Figure 6.3, and we must now elaborate on its essential organization. It is
made up of ¢ve elements (Systems 1 to 5), which we can label implementa-
tion, co-ordination, operational control (including services management),
development and policy. The functions handled by these ¢ve elements
must, cybernetics dictates, be adequately performed in all systems that wish
to remain viable. I will now describe the ¢ve systems in turn and the informa-
tion £ows that connect the bits of the model.
System 1 consists of the various parts of the organization concerned with
90
Organizational cybernetics

Description of organizational cybernetics
91
Figure 6.2
Triple recursion levels: an example.

implementation ^ with carrying out the tasks directly related to purposes. In
Figure 6.3 the organization has been broken down into four operational
elements, labelled A, B, C and D. Each of these has its own localized manage-
ment 1A, 1B, 1C and 1D, and its own relations with the relevant part of the
92
Organizational cybernetics
Figure 6.3
The Viable System Model (VSM).

outside world. The elements may interact (shown by the wavy lines) in
various ways, perhaps by passing on subassemblies, sharing facilities or
competing for resources.
The System 1 parts, as we know, need to be as free as possible to deal
with their environments. They too, therefore, must be designed according
to the VSM, with their own policy, development, operational control, co-
ordination and implementation functions. A ‘blown-up’ version of element
B, with its localized management 1B and appropriate environmental
relations, would resemble Figure 6.3 as a whole. In our university example,
the business school is a black box to the vice-chancellor interested in his
VSM model of the institution as a whole, but, by dropping a level of recur-
sion, it can be examined in detail using the same model. The System 1
parts, then, are designed to be viable in their own right. They can respond
to changes in their environments according to their own priorities. Localized
management 1B, for example, agrees its goals with higher level management,
interprets these for its own operations B, receives feedback information on
performance and takes corrective action as necessary. The autonomy of the
parts is the basis for spreading leadership and control throughout the
whole system.
The onlyrestrictions on the autonomyoftheSystem 1 elements stemfrom
the requirement that they continue to function as part of the whole organiza-
tion. To this end they receive con¢rmation of their goals and objectives
from System 5, re¢ned into targets by System 3, down the vertical
command channel, and are subject to co-ordination and audit by Systems 2
and 3*, respectively. They report back on performance to System 3.
It is easy to see the VSM as hierarchical and these restrictions on the
freedom of the System 1 parts as ‘constraints’. This is, however, a misrepre-
sentation. The VSM really needs turning upside down so that it is clear that
System 1 is the most important and that Systems 2^5, sometimes called the
‘metasystem’, merely facilitate the proper operation of System 1. Element B
cannot realize its goals if it is destabilized by the actions of A, C or D ^
hence the need for co-ordination or System 2. There is no point in B
continuing to pursue its existing goals, to take another example, if a
massive change in the overall environment makes these irrelevant ^ hence
the need for development driven by System 4. Systems 2^5, therefore, must
be designed to be facilitative. The restrictions they impose need to resemble
the laws of a democratic society. Laws against theft or fraud are seen as
enabling not constraining. Danger arises when any of Systems 2^5 takes on
a life of its own (becomes pathologically autopoietic!) and starts to get in
the way of what System 1 needs to achieve as the operational arm of the
Description of organizational cybernetics
93

organization’s identity. Systems 2^5 must not become viable systems in their
own right.
The autonomy of the System 1 elements is best protected, the VSM
maintains, if management control is exercised by co-ordination and audit
rather than authoritatively down the vertical command channel (see Figure
6.3). System 2 ful¢ls the co-ordination function. System 2 consists of the
various rules and regulations that ensure the System 1 parts act cohesively
and do not get in each other’s way. It will also embed any legal requirements
that must be obeyed. To continue with the university example, there are
likely to be System 2 regulations relating to governance, ¢nance, human
resources and quality, among others. These prescribe ways of acting for the
parts of Systems 1 and, if well formulated, should feel helpful rather than
constraining to those who need to follow them. Other examples of System
2 in action would be a timetable in a school or production scheduling in a
manufacturing concern. System 2 is there to ensure harmony between the
elements of System 1. If Division A employed a member of sta¡ on di¡erent
terms and conditions than usually used in B, C and D, this could set up
reverberations around the whole of System 1 and have a destabilizing impact.
System 3* is a servant of System 3, ful¢lling an auditing role to ensure that
targets speci¢ed by System 3 and rules and regulations promulgated by
System 2 are being adhered to. This channel gives System 3 direct access,
on a periodic basis, to the state of a¡airs in the operational elements.
Through it, System 3 can check more immediately on performance,
quality, conformance to ¢nancial regulations, maintenance, etc.
The roleofSystem 3 proper is operational control of System 1 and services
management (of functions such as human resources and ¢nance). It has
overall responsibility for the day-to-day running of the enterprise, trying its
best to ensure that policy is implemented appropriately. It sits on the vertical
command axis and must produce a co-ordinated plan and pass it down the
line to System 1. It engages in a ‘resource bargain’ with the parts of System
1 during which targets are agreed together with the resources to achieve
them.As soon as this isdone it tries as far as possible(especially inthe services
area) to operate indirectly through co-ordination and audit. Occasionally,
however, on the basis of information it receives from System 4, 3* or 2, it
will need to employ more hierarchical control measures. It is after all in
possession of information relevant to the whole organization while the
System 1 parts have only local facts to go on. System 3 also has to report
upward any information needed by the policy-determining System 5.
Systems 1, 2 and 3 make up what Beer calls the ‘autonomic management’
94
Organizational cybernetics

of the organization. They can maintain internal stability and optimize
performance, within an established framework, without reference to higher
management. Autonomic management does not however possess an
overall view of the organization’s environment, and it is therefore incapable
of responding to threats and opportunities by reviewing corporate strategy.
It does not possess the capacity for double-loop learning. This is why
Systems 4 and 5 are necessary.
System 4, development, is the place in the organization where internal
information received from System 3 is brought together with information
about the organization’s total environment and presented in a form that
facilitates decision-making. Beer proposes it become the ‘operations room’
of the enterprise, a real ‘environment of decision’. It follows that the
primary function of System 4 must be to capture for the organization all
relevant information about its total environment. If the organization is to
match the variety of the environment it faces, it needs a model of that
environment that enables predictions to be made about its likely future
state. System 4 must provide this model and communicate information to
System 3 if quick action is required or to System 5 if it has longer term
implications. System 4 will also help the organization represent itself to its
environment. In general, it is home to activities such as corporate planning,
marketing, research and development, and public relations.
System 5, policy, is responsible for the direction of the whole enterprise. It
formulates policy on the basis of the information received from System 4
and communicates this downward, to System 3, for implementation by the
divisions. An essential task is balancing the often con£icting internal and
external demands placed on the organization. Here it needs to adjudicate
between System 3, representing the commitment of autonomic management
to ongoing operations, and System 4, which with its links to the environ-
ment tends to be outward and future-oriented. System 5 has to ensure that
the organization adapts to the external environment as and when necessary,
but still maintains the bene¢ts to be gained from internal stability.
System 5 must also articulate the identity and purposes of the whole
system to the wider system of which it is part. In this role it is acting as the
localized management of a particular element of the System 1 of that wider
system.
Beer recommends that System 5 increase its variety by employing
integrated teamwork and organizing itself as an elaborate, interactive
assemblage of managers ^ a ‘multinode’. Decision-making needs to be
formalized and the e¡ects of decisions monitored without threatening the
Description of organizational cybernetics
95

freedom and £exibility of interaction in the multinode. System 5 may also on
occasion seek to enhance its variety by recruiting experts or employing con-
sultants.
Alsocrucial tothe VSM is the proper functioning of the information £ows
it prescribes. Given the importance of negative feedback for control much
of the information is about how di¡erent divisions, or the organization as a
whole, are doing in relation to their goals. The information systems involved
need to be designed to reduce the variety managers have to handle. They
should convey only variances from planned performance to avoid managers
becoming overwhelmed by irrelevancy. This is especially true if System 5 is
to function e¡ectively. Finally, Figure 6.3 shows a ‘hatched line’ information
£ow, leaving the normal System 1 to System 3 £ow and speeding vital
communications to System 5. This ‘algedonic’, or pleasure^pain, signal
‘wakes up’ (the alarm clock) System 5 to any potential disasters occurring
lower down that it needs to be immediately aware of.
6.2.4
Methods
Three types of method have been developed that can help to operationalize
organizational cybernetics. Theseare a set of ‘guidelines’ that can be followed
to assist application of the VSM, an enumeration of ‘frequent faults’ found
by VSM diagnosis and an approach to ‘measures of performance’ that Beer
recommends using along with the VSM.
The guidelines are meant to facilitate development of new system designs
or examination of existing designs. They can be divided into those relating
to ‘system identi¢cation’ and those concerned with ‘system diagnosis’.
(i) System identification
.
Identify the purpose(s) to be pursued (using some appropriate participa-
tory approach).
.
Determine the relevant system for achieving the purpose(s) (this is called
the ‘system in focus’ and is said to be at recursion level 1).
.
Specify the system of which the system in focus is a part (wider systems,
environments) (this is at recursion level 0).
.
Specify the viable parts of System 1 of the system in focus (‘unfolding
complexity’) ^ these are the parts that ‘produce’ the system in focus
(they are at recursion level 2).
96
Organizational cybernetics

(ii) System diagnosis
Study System 1 of the system in focus:
.
For eachpartof System 1 detail itsenvironment, operations and localized
management.
.
Ensure that each part of System 1 has the capacity to be viable in its own
right.
.
Study what constraints are imposed upon the parts of System 1 by higher
management.
.
Ask how accountability is exercised for each part and what indicators of
performance are used.
.
Model System 1 according to the VSM diagram.
Study System 2 of the system in focus:
.
List possible sources of disturbance or con£ict in the organization.
.
Identify the various System 2 elements that are needed to ensure har-
monization and co-ordination.
.
Ask how System 2 is perceived in the organization ^ as threatening or
facilitating.
Study System 3 of the system in focus:
.
List the System 3 activities of the system in focus.
.
Ask how System 3 exercises authority ^ isthis seen as autocratic or demo-
cratic in System 1 and how much freedom do System 1 elements possess?
.
How good is System 3 at translating overall policy into operational
plans?
.
How is the ‘resource bargain’ with the parts of System 1 carried out?
.
Who oversees the performance of the parts of System 1?
.
What audit, or System 3*, enquiries into aspects of System 1 does System
3 conduct and are these appropriate?
.
Are all control activities clearly facilitating the achievement of purpose?
.
How istheperformance of System 3 elements in enablingachievement of
purpose measured?
Study System 4 of the system in focus:
.
List all the System 4 activities of the system in focus.
Description of organizational cybernetics
97

.
How far ahead do these activities consider?
.
Do these activities guarantee adaptation to the future?
.
Is System 4 monitoring what is happening in the environment and
assessing trends?
.
Is System 4 open to novelty?
.
Does System 4 provide a management centre/operations room, bringing
together external and internal information and providing an ‘environ-
ment for decision’?
.
Does System 4 adequately process, ¢lter and distribute relevant
information?
.
Are all development activities clearly facilitating the achievement of
purpose?
.
How istheperformance of System 4 elements in enablingachievement of
purpose measured?
Study System 5 of the system in focus:
.
Who is responsible for policy (e.g., on the ‘board’) and how do they act?
.
Does System 5 provide a suitable identity and convey clear purposes for
the system in focus?
.
How does the ‘ethos’ set by System 5 a¡ect the perception of System 4?
.
How does the ‘ethos’ set by System 5 a¡ect the relationship between
System 3 and System 4 ^ is stability or change emphasized?
.
Is System 5 organized to behave creatively?
.
Does System 5 share an identity with System 1 or claim to be something
di¡erent?
Finally, check that all information channels and control loops are properly
designed.
A list of the ‘frequent faults’ discovered in organizations when the VSM is
used can help to direct a manager’s investigations into fruitful areas. The
following are some of the most common faults in organizations as revealed
by cybernetics (see Beer, 1984; Jackson, 2000):
.
Mistakes in clarifying purposes and consequent recursion levels so, for
example, an operational element crucial to overall success does not get
the attention it deserves.
.
Failure to grant autonomy to System 1 elements.
.
Failure to ensure adequate localized management exists at the System 1
level.
98
Organizational cybernetics

.
Systems 2, 3, 4 or 5 seeking to become viable in their own right (patho-
logical autopoiesis) rather than serving the whole system by promoting
implementation ^ leads to ‘red tape’.
.
Any of Systems 1^5 being absent or not working properly, but
particularly ^
e
System 2 is too weak, so co-ordination is jeopardized.
e
System 4 is too weak so System 5 ‘collapses’ into System 3 and
becomes overly concerned with day-to-day a¡airs.
e
System 5 does not represent the essential qualities of the whole
system to the wider systems of which it is part.
.
The information £ows do not correspond to those believed necessary in
any viable system.
Achievement in most organizations is measured in terms of money ^ the
criterion of success being the extent to which pro¢ts are maximized. This is
not however regarded as satisfactory by Beer. It ignores how well the
organization is doing in terms of preparing for the future by investing in
research and development, or in terms of more abstract resources like
employee morale. It fails to reveal the cost-cutting manager who, in search
of immediate pro¢ts, is damaging the organization’s long-term future.
Instead, Beer advises adopting three levels of achievement (actuality, capabil-
ity and potentiality) that can be combined to give three indices (productivity,
latency and performance) expressed in ordinary numbers. These can be
used as comprehensive measures of performance in relation to all types of
resource throughout the organization.
De¢ning more clearly the three levels of achievement:
.
actuality is what we manage to do now, with existing resources, under
existing constraints;
.
capability is what we could achieve now, if we really worked at it, with
existing resources and under existing constraints;
.
potentiality is what we might be doing by developing our resources and
removing constraints, although still operating within the bounds of
what is already known to be feasible.
Then, the indices are:
.
productivity:
the ratio of actuality and capability;
.
latency:
the ratio of capability and potentiality;
Description of organizational cybernetics
99

.
performance:
the ratio of actuality and potentiality and also the
product of latency and productivity.
This is shown diagrammatically in Figure 6.4. These measures are able to
detect the irresponsible cost-cutter. The cost-cutting manager will increase
productivity not by increasing actual achievement but by lowering capability
(e.g., by neglecting research and development and employee morale). This
will show as an increase in productivity and, no doubt, this year’s pro¢ts
will rise. But the manager’s latency index, under this scheme, will deteriorate.
This should signal that a careful watch be kept on his or her overall perform-
ance; future pro¢ts may be being threatened.
6.2.5
Recent developments
Organizational cybernetics can appear to managers as Utopian, rationalistic
and overly prescriptive when presented to them by experts.Not surprisingly,
therefore, recent developments have sought to ‘soften’ the approach.
Espejo (in Espejo and Harnden, 1989) suggests a kind of combination of
soft systemsmethodology andthe VSM as a means of easingtheimplementa-
tion problems often associated with organizational cybernetics.
More radically, other advocates of the approach have embraced what is
called ‘second-order cybernetics’ ^ or the cybernetics of the observing
system as opposed to the observed system. This shift, with its emphasis on
subjectivity, mimics that already made by soft systems thinkers in systems
100
Organizational cybernetics
Figure 6.4
Measures of performance.

thinking generally. Harnden (in Espejo and Harnden, 1989), for example,
prefers to see the VSM not as a model trying to capture objective reality
but as a focus for discussion about complex organizational issues among
interested observers. Those readers who remember Chapter 3 will recognize
that Harnden is trying to rescue the VSM from the functionalist paradigm
for use according to the ‘interpretive’ rationale. There may be some bene¢ts
from such a move, but there are many losses. Beer (1974) trumpeted that
Ashby’s law of requisite variety was as important to managers as Einstein’s
law of relativity to physicists. It revealed something of the properties of
complex systems and lost none of its force however long people conversed
about its implications.
6.3
ORGANIZATIONAL CYBERNETICS IN ACTION
Beer’s VSM has been much used both with single organizations and in
grander scale applications. While there are many accounts of the former
type of intervention in the literature, there are far fewer of the latter ^
Beer’s work in Chile excepted. I am therefore grateful to Angela Espinosa
for sharing with me the details of a recent VSM project in Colombia
to create an ecoregional approach to sustainable development (see also
Espinosa, 2002).
The Colombian Constitution of1991recognized a national environmental
system (SINA) consisting of the Ministry of the Environment, a set of
regional environmental corporations (CARs), and various environmental
research institutes, including the Environmental Development Institute
(IDEAM). SINA was seen as directly responsible for developing environ-
mental policies, programmes and instruments that would lead to responsible
environmental practices and the protection and regeneration of environ-
mental resources at the local level. One of the main di⁄culties in the early
years was the lack of co-ordination experienced at the level of the ecosystem,
where the most critical problems needed action. The agencies charged with
dealing with the problems were organized according to the existing political
and administrative structures, whereas problems such as pollution and
£ooding require a co-ordinated approach based on an ecoregion. Another
problem was a failure to follow through on the development of a National
Environmental Information System (NEIS), which was to provide the data
and models to support environmental management by SINA. This was
despite several attempts, sponsored by agencies such as the International
Development Bank, to design a centralized system to hold information on
Organizational Cybernetics in action
101

the main environmental issues as de¢ned by academic disciplines ^ £ora and
fauna, water resources, forests, mineral resources, oceans, etc.
In 1999 the project described here began when the Ministry and IDEAM
initiated a new approach to the NEIS using cybernetic thinking based on
Beer’s VSM. By 2001 a project team consisting of representatives from the
Ministry, the CARs, IDEAM, other research institutes and other national
institutions with an interest in the environment were using the VSM to
radically reformulate their understanding of SINA and NEIS.
The identity of SINA was rede¢ned as follows:
The National Environmental System [SINA] is a network of recurrent
fluid interactions involving individuals, communities and institutions
aimed at achieving a sustainable way of living and of interacting with
each other and with nature.
Workshops have also been held at which agreements were reached about
the levels of recursion in the system. The basic level of recursion, where
environmental action happens, was seen as the community (individuals,
families, local
industries and
organizations inhabiting
a
particular
settlement) interacting with its natural environment. The organizational
purpose at this level was seen as being sustainable development.
At the next higher level of recursion the parts of System 1 would be
networks of communities with an interest in a particular subecoregion.
They would need to interact to solve environmental problems stemming
from,for example, a speci¢c ecosystem like a river basin, a natural reservation
or a forest region. A higher level of recursion, concerned with managing
environmental issues shared by several subecoregions, was recognized as
an ecoregion. At this level more than ten ecoregions were identi¢ed in
Colombia. Finally, at a high level of recursion, there was the natural environ-
ment of the whole nation. Figure 6.5 represents these recursion levels.
With this analysis in place, it was possible to use the VSM to understand
what had gone wrong with SINA and the NEIS, and to propose alternative
organizational and structural arrangements. The starting point was to
ensure that the parts of System 1 at each level of recursion (such as the
communities and groups of communities) had the capacity to develop the
practices and relationships necessary to achieve sustainable development
(i.e., they could be autonomous). This meant that, for each level of recursion,
Systems 2, 3, 4 and 5 would have to be put in place to support the System 1
parts. All the levels of recursion would also have to cohere as a whole
capable of realizing sustainable development as a national priority. We can
102
Organizational cybernetics

now consider, as illustrative examples, work under way at the level of the
ecoregion, the community and aimed at the redesign of the NEIS.
Figure 6.6 can help us understand developments at the ecoregion level. It
shows the VSM applied to SINA with an ecoregion as the system in focus
at recursion level 1. Recursion level 0 is then the natural environment of
Colombia and the operational System 1 elements (at recursion level 2) are
the networks of communities concerned with environmental problems at
the level of the subecoregion. The task for the project team was to assist in
establishing a suitable metasystem (Systems 2, 3, 4 and 5) to manage and
co-ordinate these networks of communities so that they could act on relevant
environmental problems. Previous attempts had failed because the CARs,
which might have done the job, were administratively related to existing
governmental structures rather than to ecoregions and subecoregions. The
Organizational Cybernetics in action
103
Figure 6.5
Recursion levels in SINA.

way forward, it seemed, was to redirect the CARs and get them to co-operate
with other relevant agencies to produce the kind of metasystemic function
required by the VSM diagnosis in order to deal with key environmental
issues at the ecoregion level.
Aware of this, and determined to reorientate the CARs, the Ministry of
Environment focused the main investment resources, from both national
104
Organizational cybernetics
Figure 6.6
The viable system model: an ecoregion as the system in focus.

and international sources, on what they felt were important strategic
ecoregions. The CARs, and other relevant institutions, had to put their
e¡ort into developing goals and programmes relevant to these ecoregions.
In the process they learned co-operatively to overcome the divisions
between them created by the existing governmental and administrative
arrangements and, gradually, appropriate Systems 2, 3, 4 and 5 were estab-
lished (see Figure 6.6) in some of the most strategic ecoregions in the
country.
An example of how thishappened was the co-ordination of projects on the
Magdalena River. This is the second most important river in Colombia and
provides water to dozens of communities, towns and cities. The health of
this water source is critical for national development. There were signi¢cant
problems of pollution that required co-ordinated management because no
one would take on a commitment to clean the river unless they were
convinced those upstream would do the same. A new CAR was established
by the Ministry speci¢cally to address the problems of the Magdalena
River. System 2 was established through negotiations with other CARs
from areas crossed by the river, which led to agreements on such matters as
pollution standards. System 3 emerged from discussions between CAR man-
agers and various local environmental authorities. It began to plan longer
term policies and programmes to clean the river and to get agreement on
clearer norms and sanctions if these were broken. E¡orts began to pool re-
sources to set up a proper System 4. This would need to collect and structure
required knowledge on the main ecosystems bordering the river, as well as
about the socioeconomic and cultural characteristics of the industries and
neighbourhoods using and sometimes abusing it. The main challenge for
System 5, in the medium term, was establishing a common culture of sustain-
able development among relevant regional bodies. This would require a
signi¢cant educational e¡ort to convince the appropriate people that it was
necessary, especially as it could mean loss of short-term pro¢t.
Of course, success at the level of the ecoregion and subecoregion depends
critically on success at the community level of recursion. Everything
ultimately rests on communities of individuals, families, local industries
and organizations. Previous SINA e¡orts at this level had emphasized the
establishment of mechanisms for controlling the use of resources, managing
information and meeting legal requirements. The VSM diagnosis,
however, focused on the need for communities to develop self-organizing
skills in managing their local environments. Attention should be paid to
sharing and improving local knowledge on environmental issues and their
management, on employing local skills for environmental development, on
Organizational Cybernetics in action
105

conservation programmes and on utilizing local information to predict and
respond to emergencies.
Success at all levels of recursion depended on rethinking the NEIS. The
NEIS had previously concentrated on collecting information on the
various relevant academic disciplines. If a local agency required information
useful for dealing with high levels of pollution in a particular environment,
it was unable to help. Following the VSM diagnosis it was recommended
that it devote its attention toward information systems that would support
decision-making relevant to the achievement of environmental goals at
each level of recursion. Clear examples of such a reorientation have been
some pilot projects, conducted for NEIS, in which CARs and the research
institutes have sought to design shared information networks providing
information on the type, current state of and critical issues surrounding the
main environmental resources characterizing an ecoregion. To ¢nish the
job, it would be necessary to combine appropriate geographic information
systems, databases and environmental indices in a manner suitable for
supporting the main decision areas in the ecoregion.
Although the SINA project required considerable cybernetic expertise, it
also recognized the need to cascade the VSM language downward. Long-
term change in any organization cannot be achieved on the basis of remote,
expert diagnosis by consultants and recommendations endorsed only by
higher management. Participation at all levels is essential.
6.4
CRITIQUE OF ORGANIZATIONAL CYBERNETICS
Organizational cybernetics, as embodied in the VSM, o¡ers a model of great
generality that can be applied to all types of system and organization, and
to systems at di¡erent levels in the same enterprise. It is able to do this
because it concentrates on informing us about those aspects of organization
that are essential to viability rather than on possible organizational structures
as normally understood. The generality of the model certainly assists
managers and management scientists in using it.
Those who have employed the model regard it as an extremely rich
representation of organizations. I have argued elsewhere (Jackson, 2000)
that the VSM integrates the ¢ndings of around 50 years of work in the
academic discipline of organization theory. And it goes beyond organization
theory by incorporating those ¢ndings in an applicable management tool
that can be used to recommend very speci¢c improvements in the design
106
Organizational cybernetics

and functioning of organizations. The model is insightful in the way it treats
organization and environment relations. The organization is seen as
capable of in£uencing its environment as well as adapting to it. In essence,
it needs to set up a sustainable balance with its milieu. It is sophisticated in
the manner it understands the tension between stability and change (the
System 3^System 4 interface), the vertical interdependence of di¡erent
levels within an enterprise (through the notion of recursion), the horizontal
interdependence of parts (integrated by Systems 2 and 3) and the spread of
control throughout the system ^ so that decisions are taken and problems
corrected as closely as possible to the point where they occur and senior
management is freed to concentrate on strategic issues. The VSM also
o¡ers a particularly suitable starting point for the design of information
systems in organizations because it emphasizes identi¢cation of the key
operational elements and clari¢cation of the role of the necessary facilitative
functions.
As another point in its favour, the VSM o¡ers a scienti¢c justi¢cation for
empowerment and democracy in organizations. The parts must be granted
autonomy so that they can absorb some of the massive environmental
variety that would otherwise overwhelm higher management levels. The
VSM arrangements, particularly the emphasis on co-ordination and audit
rather than hierarchical control, seek to ensure that the autonomy granted
is the maximum possible subject only to the whole continuing to exist. Of
course, for this freedom to be meaningful, the parts must also have a say in
the overall purposes being pursued by the system. Beer recognizes this and
insists that System 5 should embody the concerns of the workforce and
managers, of customers and of the society that sustains the system, as well
as looking after shareholders.
Any model is, necessarily, a partial representation of reality, and it is
important to recognize the limitations of the VSM if we are to use it wisely.
In essence, the VSM is about the design of organizations as adaptive, goal-
seeking entities. It pinpoints various systemic/structural laws that must be
observed if an enterprise is to be viable and succeed. Critics (e.g., Flood
and Jackson, 1991; Jackson, 2000) argue, however, that the de¢ning
feature of social organizations is that their component parts are human
beings who attribute meaning to their situations and act according to their
own purposes. E¡ort should be concentrated, therefore, on managing
processes of negotiation between di¡erent viewpoints and value positions.
Although cybernetics pays lip service to notions of empowerment and
democracy, it actually says little about how individuals can be motivated to
perform and how participation and democracy can be arranged. In this
Critique of organizational cybernetics
107

respect ‘team syntegrity’, developed later in Beer’s career (see Chapter 12),
can be seen as complementary to the VSM.
Two further criticisms follow from the biases inherent in the VSM. The
¢rst states that although it may be the intention of the VSM to promote de-
centralization and autonomy, it actually o¡ers to the powerful an extremely
e⁄cient means of increasing control and consolidating their own positions.
In the wrong hands it becomes little more than a sophisticated management
control device. This is because power relationships are endemic in organiza-
tions and we are accustomed to acquiescing in hierarchy. Beer (1985)
acknowledges that power imbalances can dis¢gure use of the VSM but is
unable to see any solution.
The second attacks the concept of ‘good management’ entailed by the
VSM. Organizational cybernetics implies that good management is manage-
ment that establishes requisite variety between itself and the operations
managed, and between the organization as a whole and its environment.
To those of another persuasion it seems clear that ‘good management’ is
more about the meaning and signi¢cance of purposes for participants in an
enterprise and whether the purposes themselves are good or bad.
Organizational cybernetics is about ensuring an organization is viable
and so in a position to reach goals (e⁄cacy) and about doing so without
waste of resources (e⁄ciency). It does not bother itself about whether the
goals we are pursuing are the right ones in the sense that they are goals that
we actually want to achieve (e¡ectiveness). This stems from its innate
functionalism. The VSM seeks to provide knowledge, based upon cyber-
netic principles, that supports regulation in the social domain. Its aim is to
increase our ability to ‘steer’ organizations and other social systems. It is
true that there are those who wish to ‘capture’ the VSM for other paradigms,
but they need to ask whether it really is an appropriate tool with which to
pursue interpretive and emancipatory ends, and what is lost in the process.
For the VSM is an exceptionally sophisticated and powerful model used in
the service of functionalism.
The model draws strength from its structuralist epistemology. It has been
able to integrate some profound insights into a usable management tool
that carries enormous explanatory power because it rests upon the science
of cybernetics.
That strength is further enhanced by the combination of machine, organ-
ism and brain metaphors that the VSM employs. Autonomic management
(Systems 1, 2, 3) ensures the optimum use of resources in carrying out
transformation processes, while System 4 ensures adaptation to the environ-
ment and the institutionalization of learning. System 5 is charged with
108
Organizational cybernetics

maintaining a balance between the ‘inside and now’ and the ‘outside and
then’. Being willing to draw upon these three metaphors enables cybernetics
to employ the vast range of systems concepts to which they have given
rise: black box, feedback, control, communication, variety, hierarchy,
recursion, viability, autonomy, environment, autopoiesis, self-regulation,
self-organization, learning, etc.
Critics, naturally enough, ¢nd that the culture, political system, psychic
prison, instruments of domination and carnival metaphors are underplayed
in cybernetics. They draw inspiration for their attacks on the approach
from the interpretive, emancipatory and postmodern paradigms.
6.5
THE VALUE OF ORGANIZATIONAL CYBERNETICS
TO MANAGERS
A little knowledge of the VSMcan take managers a long way.And it can save
them a lot of time ^ no need to read any more about organization theory; it
is all here. That is not to say that once they become committed to the
approach they do not need expert help. The VSM has many levels of sophis-
tication and we have certainly not been able to touch on them all in this
chapter. That said, let us outline the ¢ve main lessons that managers can
learn from organizational cybernetics:
.
It is essential to establish a clear identity for an organization, which
embodies purposes achievable in the environment and is agreed and
understood throughout the enterprise. If the environment changes, the
organization will need to reinvent and recon¢gure itself.
.
The VSM o¡ers an easy route to developing a shared understanding of
organizational complexity and a precise language for discussing issues
of organizational design and structure, stability and change, control
and co-ordination, centralization and decentralization, etc.
.
There is a solution to the perennial problem of centralization versus
decentralization. The parts can be given autonomy and empowered
without any threat to managerial control and organizational cohesion.
Indeed, freedom and control are complementary rather than in
opposition.
.
Once an identity and purposes have been developed, the VSM enables
essential business units and their necessary support services to be
determined. It is a vehicle for design or diagnosis that tells managers
The value of organizational cybernetics to managers
109

which structures and processes are essential and which can be dispensed
with.
.
Because the VSM spreads decision-making and control throughout the
‘architecture’ of the system it makes sense of the idea of leadership at all
levels.
6.6
CONCLUSION
All managers, at one time or another, must have felt Sta¡ord Beer’s frustra-
tion and despair with organization charts as models of enterprises. Until
Beer started to develop organizational cybernetics, however, there was
nothing else available. We now have at our disposal the VSM. Just as
organization charts embodied mechanistic thinking, the VSM captures
what it is like to view organizations as organisms with a brain. This is an
extremely powerful way of thinking, which managers should treasure and
employ as an alternative to the conventional model. Since the VSM delivers
that alternative in such a usable package, they have only themselves to
blame if they do not do so.
REFERENCES
Ashby, W.R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. Methuen, London.
Beer, S. (1972). Brain of the Firm. Allen Lane, London (second edition, 1981,
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK).
Beer, S. (1974). Designing Freedom. CBC Publications, Toronto.
Beer, S. (1979). The Heart of Enterprise. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Beer, S. (1984). The viable system model: Its provenance, development, method-
ology and pathology. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 35, 7^26.
Beer, S. (1985). Diagnosing the System for Organizations. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
Espejo, R. and Harnden, R.J. (eds) (1989). The Viable System Model: Interpretations
and Applications of Sta¡ord Beer’s VSM. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Espejo, R. and Schwaninger, M. (eds) (1993). Organizational Fitness: Corporate
E¡ectiveness through Management Cybernetics. Campus Verlag, New York.
Espejo, R., Schuhmann, W., Schwaninger, M. and Bilello, U. (1996). Organisa-
tional Transformation and Learning. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Espinosa, A. (2002). Proyecto Consolidacio¤ n del Sistema de Informacio¤ n Ambiental
Colombiano
(SIAC)
(Working
Paper,
United
Nations
Development
Program). United Nations, Bogota¤ , Colombia.
110
Organizational cybernetics

Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Maturana, H.R. and Varela, F.J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization
of the Living. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
References
111


Complexity Theory
7
Although the specific path followed by the behaviour [of complex
systems] . . . is random and hence unpredictable in the long term, it
always has an underlying pattern to it, a ‘hidden’ pattern . . . That
pattern is self-similarity, that is a constant degree of variation, consistent
variability, regular irregularity . . . a constant fractal dimension. Chaos is
therefore order (a pattern) within disorder.
Stacey (1993)
7.1
INTRODUCTION
One of the most important popularizers of complexity theory, Gleick (1987),
has argued that 20th century science will be remembered for three things:
relativity, quantum mechanics and chaos. What all three share in common
and signal is a revolutionary transformation in the nature of modern
science. Scientists are required to abandon the mechanistic and deterministic
assumptions underlying the Newtonian world view and to embrace a
perspective that, in recognizing relationships and indeterminacy, is much
more holistic in character.
Of the three scienti¢c movements noted by Gleick, it is the study of
chaos ^ in the form of complexity theory ^ that is having the most profound
impact on thinking about management. Earlier models of organization can,
from a complexity theory perspective, be seen as emphasizing order and
regularity at the expense of the erratic and discontinuous. Complexity
theory focuses attention on those aspects of organizational life that bother
most managers most of the time ^ disorder, irregularity and randomness. It
accepts instability, change and unpredictability and o¡ers appropriate
advice on how to act. Help is apparently at hand in areas where it was
thought none was available.

7.2
DESCRIPTION OF COMPLEXITY THEORY
7.2.1
Historical development
The pioneer in the development of chaos theory is usually considered to be
the meteorologist Edward Lorenz (see Gleick, 1987). Lorenz was working
on the problem of long-range weather forecasting using a simple computer
simulation based on just 12 equations. Intent on studying one particular
weather sequence at greater length, and in a hurry, Lorenz re-entered the
initial conditions, but using three rather than six decimal places. Given that
the di¡erence was only one part in a thousand, he assumed that the new run
would exactly duplicate the old. To his amazement, however, the new
weather pattern rapidly diverged from that shown in the previous run and
within a few months all resemblance had been lost. Lorenz had discovered
that tiny changes in a complex system’s initial state can alter long-term
behaviour very signi¢cantly. This sensitive dependence on initial conditions
became known as the ‘butter£y e¡ect’: on the basis that it suggested that
the single £apping of a butter£y’s wings today might, over time, alter a
system to such an extent that it could lead to a storm occurring, or not
occurring, somewhere else in the world.
Lorenz had discovered the non-linear relationships that are widespread
in complex natural and social systems and that make prediction impossible.
It was also clear to him, however, that there was a good deal of order
underlying the chaos. After all, even if the weather is notoriously ¢ckle
in England, we do not su¡er from severe drought, or monsoon, or
frequent hurricanes. Lorenz began to experiment on a range of complex
systems in an e¡ort to understand the nature of the pattern that underlies
unpredictability.
Lorenz published his results in a meteorological journal in 1963. The next
decade or so was marked by individual scientists unearthing similar
¢ndings in a range of di¡erent disciplines. The behaviour of complex
systems in mathematics, chemistry and biology was studied and found to
be characterized by the emergence of unpredictability even though they
appeared describable in terms of a few simple equations. In many cases,
however, this unpredictability seemed to be governed by a considerable
degree of order.
In the late 1970sthe chaos and complexity theory movement began to take
shape, de¢ning itself as the science of the global nature of systems. For
example, the Dynamical Systems Collective was formed, at Santa Cruz
College in the USA, headed by the physicist Robert Stetson Shaw. The
114
Complexity theory

year 1984 saw the establishment of what has become the most famous centre
for research into complexity theory. Known as the Santa Fe Institute, it
brought together scientists froma rangeof disciplines, who have co-operated
to build computer models of a variety of biological, ecological and economic
systems.
By the time that the Santa Fe Institute was set up, the original term ‘chaos
theory’ was giving way to the grander conception of ‘complexity theory’.
A strict interpretation of the scope of chaos theory sees it as limited to the
mathematics of non-linear dynamic behaviour in natural systems, such as
the weather system. Complexity theory, by contrast, is represented as being
applicable to the behaviour over time of complex social as well as natural
systems. Social systems are not just ‘complex adaptive systems’ bound by
the ¢xed rules of interaction of their parts. Rather, they are ‘complex
evolving systems’ that can change the rules of their development as they
evolve over time.
Understood as embracing complex evolving systems as well as complex
adaptive systems, new applications are constantly being found for complex-
ity theory ^ in astronomy, geology, physiology, economics, computer art,
music and, not least, in management.
7.2.2
Philosophy and theory
As we noted in the introduction, chaos and complexity theory is often
represented as being part of a revolution in thinking that is having an
impact on all scienti¢c disciplines whether they study natural, human or
social phenomena. The new paradigm that is emerging from this revolution
(as charted by authors such as Capra, 1996; Jantsch, 1980; and Wheatley,
1992) is holistic in character. The parts of systems can only be understood,
it seems, in terms of their relationships with each other and with the whole.
The focus of attention, therefore, has to be on relationships (as, for
example, in quantum mechanics). It is the pattern of relationships that deter-
mines what a system does.
The new paradigm also embraces a process view. Systems are constantly
changing due to the interaction of their parts as they seek to process a
continuous £ow of matter, energy and information from theirenvironments.
They are therefore best understood as being in constant £ux: as arenas of
dynamic process from which stable structures are temporarily born.
Order is an emergent property of disorder and it comes about through self-
organizing processes operating from within the system itself.
Description of complexity theory
115

The new thinking sees systems as in an intimate relationship and as con-
stantly conducting exchanges with their environments. Furthermore, they
do not simply adapt to their environments but coevolve with them. System
and environment change in response to one another and evolve together.
According to the Gaia hypothesis, for example, life on Earth has developed
in mutual interaction with the world seen as a living system. They have
become involved together in creating the conditions that support life.
The synthesis across disciplines, made possible by the widespread accep-
tance of the new paradigm, is best expressed in chaos and complexity
theory. It is through this science that a number of the conjectures developed
as a result of the ‘systems revolution’ have been re¢ned into ideas and
concepts rigorous enough to support a genuine ‘general system theory’, in
von Bertalan¡y’s sense (see Chapter 1). There are perhaps six key theoretical
notions in complexity theory : ‘sensitive dependence on initial conditions’,
‘strange attractors’, ‘self-similarity’, ‘self-organization’, the ‘edge of chaos’
and the ‘¢tness landscape’.
Lorenz had discovered that the way weather systems develop is extremely
sensitive to minute changes in initial conditions. His later experiments on
simpler systems, like a convection system and a waterwheel (see Gleick,
1987), con¢rmed this result. Other scientists, meanwhile, were replicating
the ¢nding in other disciplines, studying phenomena as diverse as biological
populations and a dripping water faucet. It seems that the behaviour of
systems of many types becomes completely unpredictable in the medium
and long term.
Lorenz, however, the reader will recall, also postulated that there was a
good deal of order underlying the apparent chaos. Weather systems with
slightly di¡ering initial conditions might not repeat the same behaviour
over time, but they did demonstrate similar patterns. Again he was able to
show that the sets of equations describing even simple systems often
produced exactly the same result. The behaviour of his waterwheel, for
example, when plotted on a graph, never repeated itself, but it did remain
within the limits of a double spiral curve. It seemed, therefore, that although
such systems were unpredictable they were ‘attracted’ to a particular pattern
of behaviour. Lorenz called the image he had produced the ‘Lorenz
attractor’. It is shown (reproduced from Gleick, 1987) as Figure 7.1. Such
‘attractors’ are now called ‘strange attractors’. They keep the trajectory
followed by an otherwise unpredictable system within the bounds of a
particular pattern, without ever requiring it to repeat itself exactly. It has
been argued that all manner of natural systems, studied by physics, chemistry
and biology, are governed by strange attractors.
116
Complexity theory

Another characteristic of systems governed by strange attractors is that
they exhibit self-similarity. If a graph of their behaviour is examined closely
it will often be found to have an exact copy of itself inside on a di¡erent
scale. The same property is observed when we look at the patterning of the
parts of complex systems. The parts of the system are similar in shape to
Description of complexity theory
117
Figure 7.1
The Lorenz attractor. This magical image, resembling an owl’s mask or
butterfly’s wings, became an emblem for the early explorers of chaos. It revealed the
fine structure hidden within a disorderly stream of data. Traditionally, the changing
values of any one variable could be displayed in a so-called time series (top). To
show the changing relationship among three variables required a different tech-
nique. At any instant in time, the three variables fix the location of a point in three-
dimensional space; as the system changes, the motion of the point represents the
continuously changing variables. Because the system never exactly repeats itself,
the trajectory never intersects itself. Instead, it loops around and around for ever.
Motion on the attractor is abstract, but it conveys the flavour of the motion of the real
system. For example, the crossover from one wing of the attractor to the other
corresponds to a reversal in the direction of spin of the waterwheel or convecting
fluid.
From Gleick (1987), reproduced by permission of the Random House Group.

the whole. This type of structure is described as ‘fractal’. Fractal structures
have been observed in many ¢elds of knowledge, and a special geometry
has been established to study them. Simple examples are a cauli£ower and a
snow£ake. In Chapter 6 we witnessed organizational cybernetics making
use of the idea of self-similarity, at di¡erent levels of recursion, to understand
the organization of complex social systems.
Complex adaptive systems have also been found to be capable of ‘self-
organization’. Order seems to arise spontaneously out of chaos. The
discovery of this feature of their behaviour is usually attributed to Ilya
Prigogine, a Russian chemist, who won the Nobel Prize in 1977 for his
work on ‘dissipative structures’ (see Prigogine and Stengers, 1984). He
argued that traditional science had concentrated on studying systems in a
state of ‘thermodynamic equilibrium’ at the expense of those operating far
from equilibrium. If a system is driven far from equilibrium, perhaps as a
result of the e¡ects of positive feedback loops, it may disintegrate. Prigogine
showed, however, that under certain conditions chemical systems can
pass through randomness and achieve a new level of order as ‘dissipative
structures’ ^ so-called because they require energy from the outside to
prevent them from dissipating. Open systems driven far from equilibrium
appear to be able to self-organize and to achieve a new type of order.
They can evolve toward greater complexity through spontaneous self-
organization.
The ‘edge of chaos’ phenomenon was discovered independently by
the physicist and mathematician Norman Packard, a member of the
Dynamical Systems Collective, and Chris Langton, working on information
systems at the University of Arizona (see Gleick, 1987). The edge of
chaos is a narrow transition zone between order and chaos that is extremely
conducive to the emergence of novel patterns of behaviour. A system
driven to the edge of chaos is likely to exhibit the sort of spontaneous pro-
cesses of self-organization witnessed by Prigogine in chemical systems. The
edge of chaos notion has proved powerful in many di¡erent ¢elds, including
management and organization.
Kau¡man, a medical scientist working at the Santa Fe Institute, was apply-
ing the notion to biology and evolution when he invented another important
complexity theory concept: that of ‘¢tness landscapes’. Complexity theory
holds, as we know, that systems coevolve with their environments. The
environment of any system, of course, will contain numerous other systems
engaged in the same process of coevolution. Kau¡man (1995) envisages the
overall environment as a heaving landscape, the behaviour of which is
unpredictable from the point of view of any one system. The landscape, in
118
Complexity theory

shifting around, throws up peaks of di¡erent heights separated by valleys. A
system has to try to navigate this landscape. If a system ¢nds itself on a
high peak, then it is highly evolved and can gaze contentedly at competitors.
If it is in a ¢tness valley it is in a poor situation. Luck might drive it up a
local peak, representing a rise in ¢tness, but it may still only be in the foothills
compared with the high peaks it can now see in the distance. Furthermore,
seeking to reach those distant peaks is treacherous both because it will have
to cross a ¢tness valley and because of the ever-changing nature of the land-
scape. Even when the system attains a high peak it will need to be watchful
because, as everyone else clambers onto it, their weight will force the peak
down.
7.2.3
Methodology
Advocates of chaos and complexity theory insist that their approach
demands a complete mind shiftfrom managersif they want to secure business
success. Managers have to accept that the long-term future of their organiza-
tions is inherently unknowable. Organizations and their environments are
characterized by non-linear feedback loops, which make them sensitive to
small di¡erences in initial conditions and ensure that their behaviour is un-
predictable. Long-term planning is therefore impossible. Indeed, long-term
planning, and the rigid structures, precise task de¢nitions and elaborate
rules that often accompany it, is positively dangerous. It can ‘¢x’ an organiza-
tion in pursuitof a particular vision when an uncertain world requires £exible
responses.
Managersareadvised to acceptand delight inchaos. The absence of a strict
hierarchy and tight control does not mean that things will fall apart. Man-
agers can trustin chaosand allow their organizationsto evolve, remembering
that continuous transformation and emergent order is a natural state of
a¡airs. The burden of trying to plan, organize and control everything can
be laid aside.
That said, all commentators also wish to give chaos a helping hand. It is
from the recommendations of authors much as Morgan (1997), Stacey
(1993, 1996) and Wheatley (1992), in this regard, that the outlines of a
methodology for applying complexity theory ideas in practice can be
discerned.
Figure 7.2, from Morgan (1997), suggests that there could be three
stages to any such methodology. Stage 1 would consist of understanding
the attractor pattern determining the current behaviour of the organization
and the reasons why it is dominant. If the pattern is not desirable from the
Description of complexity theory
119

organization’s point of view, then change must be brought about in order to
ensure the system shifts to another pattern. Making the change is Stage 2.
Stage 3 requires the new attractor pattern to be stabilized while, at the same
time, ensuring that it does not lock the organization, in the long term, into
routine forms of action.
The key to Stages 1 and 3, therefore, is to try to grasp ‘pattern’ at the
deeper level, to unearth the order underlying chaos. If we can apprehend
120
Complexity theory
Figure 7.2
Attractor patterns and organizational change.
From Morgan (1997), reproduced by permission of Sage Publications.

the pattern giving rise to complex dynamic behaviour, then we gain some
insight into what is going on and we can start to make sensible decisions.
This is made easier if we remember that such patterns are often constructed
on the basis of simple fractal structures.
Apprehending patterns in complexity theory is similar to recognizing
‘system archetypes’ in Senge’s ‘¢fth discipline’ (see Chapter 5), although the
process seems somewhat less sure. Stacey (1993) argues that success
depends upon ‘learning’ and especially on honing our powers of intuition
and reasoning by analogy. Wheatley (1992) looks for patterns of movement
in the whole, focusing on qualities like rhythm, £ow, direction and shape.
This may seem vague but, in fact, the use of intuition to gain understand-
ing and to plan is something well understood by almost all of us. Peter
Fryer, a consultant who uses complexity theory (see www.trojanmice.
com), describes attending a strategic planning course run mainly for people
working in the oil industry. The participants were asked to write on a card
what they thought the price of oil would be in ¢ve years time. All put
down pretty much the same price. They were then asked if they were
willing to bet ^ cash, jewellery, any other valuables they had in their
possession ^ on that price coming true. No one would. The tutor asked
them to repeat the exercise, this time putting on the card a price they would
be prepared to bet on. The answers were again very close to each other, but
were completely di¡erent to the ¢rst price given. When asked why, they
answered that the ¢rst price could be justi¢ed to the board of a company.
In terms of trends, economic forecasts and political analyses, it was rational.
The second answer could not be supported in this way, but it simply ‘felt
right’. They had more con¢dence in the answer that depended on their
intuitive understanding of the complexities of the oil industry and its market.
Stages 1 and 3 require gaining an understanding of the relevant strange
attractors. Stage 2 is about managing the shift between attractors. As do
proponents of the ‘¢fth discipline’, complexity theorists suggest identifying
the points of maximum leverage so that small changes can be made that
have the maximum impact. Peter Fryer calls these changes ‘trojanmice’.
Heavily £agged, large-scale, planned changes of the Trojan Horse variety
usually fail because they are too big to be understood and owned by the
workforce. The art in changing complex evolving systems is to recognize
and implement those small, well-focused changes that have resonance with
those concerned and that have signi¢cant, far-reaching e¡ects.
Ultimately, however, the impact of any changes made by managers is
unknowable, especially given the dynamic nature of the ¢tness landscapes
in which organizations are, nowadays, usually embedded. Stage 2 must also
Description of complexity theory
121

involve, therefore,ensuring that organizations arequick enough on their feet
to ¢nd the highest ¢tness peaks as the shape and structure of the landscape
changes. Managers may not be able to predict and control organizations,
but they can ensure their £exibility and responsiveness by propitiating
favourable conditions for learning and self-organization.
Learning requires an empowered workforce operating under favourable
group dynamics that allow new mental models to emerge ^ so that the
learning can be ‘double loop’. The existence of a strong, shared culture that
sti£es innovation must be avoided at all costs. Encouraging self-organization
demands that we pay attention to structure. Wheatley (1992) conceptualizes
this as a matter of ‘relationships’. Because relationships are paramount in
dynamic systems, di¡erent relationships evoke di¡erent potentialities from
those involved. Experimenting by linking people, units and/or tasks in
di¡erent ways can help ensure novelty. It is essential that structures do not
inhibit relationships. The same is true if we want to encourage an organiza-
tion to operate £exibly in its environment. Kau¡man (1995) suggests that
organizations should be broken up into networks of units that can act auton-
omously in their local environments, but are in continuous communication
and interaction with each other.
Stacey (1996) uses the ‘edge of chaos’ concept to articulate the most
detailed account of how learning and self-organization can be promoted in
organizations. He notes the complexity theory conclusion that all complex
adaptive systems can operate in one of three zones: a stable zone, an unstable
zone and at the edge of chaos, a narrow transition zone between stability
and instability. In the stable zone they ossify, in the unstable zone they disin-
tegrate, but at the edge of chaos spontaneous processes of self-organization
occur and innovative patterns of behaviour can emerge. This, therefore,
seems to be the best place for organizations to be. At the edge of chaos, in a
state of ‘bounded instability’, they behave like dissipative structures and
display their full potential for creativity and innovation.
The edge of chaos is di⁄cult to reach and sustain because it requires a kind
of balance between the forces promoting stability in an organization and
those continuously challenging the status quo. In Stacey’s terms, it
demands that an appropriate degree of tension exists between an organiza-
tion’s ‘legitimate system’ and its ‘shadow system’.
The legitimate system consists of the dominant corporate culture and
those structures, processes and power hierarchies that support it. It promotes
‘ordinary management’ in pursuit of the organization’s objectives and is
essential for ensuring the e⁄cient delivery of products and services, and for
containing con£ict and anxiety. If it becomes too dominant, however,
122
Complexity theory

because the shadow system is not functioning properly, it can constrain all
opposition, prevent questioning of objectives, kill double-loop learning
and stop all change.
The shadow system of an organization consists of those informal aspects
that harbour the potential for contradiction, con£ict and change. It works
well when it generates new ways of thinking that challenge the legitimate
system and threatens, by bringing forth su⁄cient tension and crisis, to
replace at least some parts of that system. If the shadow system becomes
too dominant, however, because the legitimate system is unable to check
the positive feedback loops produced by instability, anarchy can result. The
shadow system sabotages pursuit of objectives, levels of anxiety rise among
the workforce preventing creativity and double-loop learning, and the
system enters the unstable zone and disintegrates.
The edge of chaos, the preferable state, demands therefore that creative
tension be maintained between the legitimate and shadow systems. The legit-
imate system must provide clear guidelines, authorize appropriate structures
and procedures, and contain anxiety among the personnel. At the same
time, the shadow system must give rise to a diversity of perspectives. It is
the source of innovation, contention and political struggle as di¡erent
groups engage in dialogue and learning, and entertain alternatives to the
status quo. If this creative tension is to ful¢l its purpose, there will be
occasions when the shadow system manages to undermine the legitimate
system and forces it to change. The organization will then be able to
perform its primary task in novel ways or to pursue entirely new primary
tasks. Creativity has been unleashed, ampli¢ed to the organizational level
and may allow the enterprise to climb higher up its ¢tness peak or even
scale a new peak.
7.2.4
Methods
Stacey (1996) outlines ¢ve ‘control parameters’ that can be manipulated to
ensure an organization remains at the edge of chaos. These are : ‘information
£ow’, ‘degree of diversity’, ‘richness of connectivity’, ‘level of contained
anxiety’ and ‘degree of power di¡erential’. Inevitably, they suggest
‘methods’ that managers can employ in support of a commitment to
complexity theory.
For an organization to achieve its potential, the increased information
£ow it will have to deal with must be managed through a combination of
the formal and shadow system. If it overwhelms both, then the organization
moves into an unstable state. The shadow system of an organization has to
Description of complexity theory
123

generate a su⁄cient degree of diversity to provoke learning, but not so much
that it induces anarchy. Connections between parts of a system should be
su⁄cient to produce variety, but not so great as to risk instability. They
also need to be set at an appropriate strength so that while they add value
they do not prevent new connections emerging. Anxiety is a necessity if
creativity is to be encouraged, but at the same time the legitimate system
has to contain it within certain parameters to prevent it becoming disabling.
Power di¡erentials are crucial if anxiety is to be contained within reasonable
limits. On the other hand, if an organization is too authoritarian, then
freedom of expression and creativity will be expunged.
Apart from what is hinted at in Stacey, few methods have been developed
that are speci¢cally attuned to assist with the application of complexity
theory. Practitioners who want to employ the approach will need to look
for appropriate methods among those originally produced to serve other
systems approaches. A number of the techniques used by soft systems
thinkers to promote ‘learning’ immediately spring to mind (see Chapters
8^10). We will nevertheless pick up more hints on application when we
consider complexity theory in action in Section 7.3.
7.2.5
Recent developments
Stacey has long argued that complexity theory can provide a radical alterna-
tive to systems thinking, which he sees as irredeemably stuck within the
stable equilibrium paradigm. In order to do this, however, he argues in
more recent work (Stacey, 2000, 2003), complexity theorists need to ¢nally
throw o¡ the ‘dominant voice’ that pervades thinking about management
and organizations and that has inhibited them in mounting their radical
challenge. That dominant voice, due to systems thinking, sees managers as
standing outside organizational systems and trying to gain objective knowl-
edge of how they function in order that they can better design and control
them.
Stacey admits that he himself, in earlier writings, was one of those com-
plexity theorists too much in thrall to the dominant systems way of thinking.
He believed that organizations literally were complex adaptive systems,
that they could be understood and that prescriptions about how they
should be managed could be produced. He was simply, he now believes,
restating the dominant discourse using the vocabulary of complexity theory.
The mind shift required, if complexity theory is to bring about its revolu-
tion,isaway from thinking about organizationsas systemsand towardthink-
ing about them as processes. Organizations should be seen as emerging
124
Complexity theory

from the relationships between their members. They result from self-
organizing processes that are creative and unpredictable. Complexity
theory needs to concentrate on paradox and on di¡erence, spontaneity and
diversity.
In the language of paradigms, Stacey wants to lead complexity theory
away from functionalism and toward interpretivism and postmodernism.
We shall consider this further in Section 7.4. Su⁄cient to note here that,
rather than representing a break with systems thinking, this simply follows
a path already well trodden by systems theorists.
7.3
COMPLEXITY THEORY IN ACTION
This case study explores the e¡orts made by Humberside Training and
Enterprise Council under the leadership of its Managing Director (MD),
Peter Fryer, to transform itself into a ‘learning organization’ by making use
of complexity theory. The account is taken from material written by
Frances Storr and Peter Fryer (and available on Peter Fryer’s website at
www.trojanmice.com), and from the ¢ndings of a PhD student of mine,
Maria Ortegon (see Ortegon, 2002), who was invited to study the later
stages of the process. Peter Fryer (in press) has recently provided a further
account.
Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) were established by govern-
ment to promote local economic development by ensuring the provision of
appropriate training and encouraging businesses to take advantage of the
opportunities made available. In 1998 Humberside TEC had approximately
150 sta¡ and a budget of around »30 million with which to reach its
objectives.
Humberside TEC determined that it would achieve its purposes better if it
could become a ‘learning organization’ and, during the second half of the
1990s, a number of initiatives were undertaken designed to bring this
about. These included: the establishment of action learning groups; the
introduction of 360 appraisal; experiments with soft systems thinking; and
various other activities designed speci¢cally to promote learning, such as
the MD’s ‘serious thinking sessions’ and the installation of an electronic
bulletin board called CollabraShare.
During this period it became clear that what the TEC hoped to achieve,
and much of what it was trying to do, was compatible with and could be
better understood and facilitated using ideas from the emerging ¢eld of
complexity theory. In ‘Becoming a learning company’, Storr explains that
Complexity theory in action
125

complexity theory demands a shift from a command-and-control style of
management to one more suitable to organizations viewed as complex
evolving systems. Complexity theory is a holistic rather than systematic
approach and emphasizes creativity and change rather than stability. When
organizations are pushed far from equilibrium, self-organizing processes
occur naturally and they become capable of generating more variety and
responding more £exibly to their environments. Sustaining this ‘edge of
chaos’ state is essential because today’s business environment is constantly
changing as a resultof decisions made by thetightlyinterconnected organiza-
tions inhabiting it. Using the ‘¢tness landscape’ analogy, only £exible
organizations are able to take adaptive walks to higher ¢tness points.
The TEC set out on the road to implementing complexity theory ^
although not in any tightly planned manner. Appropriate initiatives were
introduced when they felt right rather than according to a linear trajectory.
Crucial to the whole process were the leadership style adopted by the MD
and a number of clearly identi¢ed organizational design principles.
The MD gave a clear lead in pushing the TEC to the edge of chaos. He
described his own role as: explore the environment, share feedback, clear
pathways, give oceans of support and bugger things up! At the same time,
he sought to contain anxiety by stressing that mess and confusion were
inevitable, even to be welcomed. In this vein, supportive messages were
conveyed, such as ‘the best ideas do not always come from the top’,
‘control is only an illusion’ and ‘people in the organization want to do a
good job and will do so given the right support’.
The organizational design principles were articulated in such a way that
people who were not interested in the technicalities of complexity theory
could still nevertheless understand its essence and make use of its main
ideas. In other words, they were the TEC’s means of operationalizing the
concepts of complexity theory. There were three principles: ‘make connec-
tions’, ‘learn continuously’ and ‘make processes ongoing’.
If the TEC was to survive and thrive, it was seen as essential that it be
highly interconnected both internally and externally. Strong networking
allows information and knowledge to £ow, breeds creativity and o¡ers new
opportunities for action. Various mechanisms were employed to encourage
networking. Developments, such as moving to new premises and the 360
appraisal, were planned by cross-TEC groups. A new role was created with
the remit to facilitate networking. Regular conferences and learning sessions
were held for all sta¡. Informality and accessibility to managers at all levels,
especially the MD, became the norm. Forms of dialogue, aimed at ensuring
win^win rather than win^lose outcomes, were introduced to help overcome
126
Complexity theory

barriers to communication. The ‘messages’ conveyed to support ‘making
connections’ were ‘everyone can talk to everyone and should’, ‘everyone is
responsible’ and ‘network extensively’.
The TEC needed to learn continuously if it was to improve its perform-
ance and be responsive to its coevolving and rapidly changing ¢tness
landscape. Both single-loop and double-loop learning, involving a radical
shift in world view, were essential. To ensure continuous learning, TEC
sta¡ needed to develop sophisticated thinking skills. They were encouraged
to attend ‘thinking skills modules’ as well as the MD’s ‘serious thinking
sessions’. The ‘whole brain model’ was introduced as a way of helping
people to understand di¡erent modes of thinking. Sta¡ completed a ‘devel-
opment activity sheet’ each month, setting out what they had learned.
These were read and followed-up by the MD. The messages conveyed to
support ‘learn continuously’ were ‘love mistakes to death’, ‘respond to the
environment’ ‘learn by doing’, ‘be comfortable with the uncomfortable’,
and ‘think out of the box’.
‘Make processes ongoing’ was meant to stress that the TEC was a
self-organizing system and that structures and strategy should therefore
follow rather than dictate what needed doing. To prosper in a continuously
changing environment, learning, planning and evaluating had to be
ongoing. This degree of £exibility and £uidity could only be obtained if
controls were dropped and sta¡ trusted to use their own judgement and
exercise responsibility. TEC policies were changed to ensure they were
related to outcomes rather than following procedures and that they were
premised on the best people in the organization rather than the one or two
who could not be trusted. Fixed working hours were abolished as long as
the job got done. The expenses policy was simply to reimburse any reason-
able expense incurred on TEC business. Any member of sta¡ attending a
meeting was granted the authority to commit the organization there and
then. Sta¡ were made responsible for their own appraisal under the 360
scheme. A favourite analogy used by Peter Fryer, to support the notion of
‘make processes ongoing’, likened rules and regulations to the stabilizers
on a bicycle. They are useful when you are learning to ride, but a hindrance
once you are able to cycle. Furthermore, the best way to teach someone to
ride a bike is to provide supportive guidance, but then to let go when the
time is right.
Storr and Fryer do not claim that a perfect result was achieved in the TEC
on all the control parameters listed by Stacey as needing attention if the
‘edge of chaos’ state is to be reached and sustained. They conclude that at
any one time certain parts of the organization exhibited chaos while others
Complexity theory in action
127

were much more stable. Nevertheless, the informal system was engaged to
handle information; ‘valuing the di¡erence’ became embedded in people’s
thinking; explicit attention was given to connectivity; sta¡ were assisted in
dealing with high levels of anxiety; and hierarchy was combined with
giving people self-responsibility. As a result the whole system was robust
enough to tolerate a creative mixture of stability and instability. External
auditors rated the performance of Humberside TEC against its objectives
very highly indeed.
Maria Ortegon, as a participant^observer during the later stages of the
complexity programme, was able to judge the impact of the changes made.
In her view, thanks to the language used in setting out the organization
design principles, the main ideas of complexity theory were relatively easily
absorbed in the TEC. People worked out the implications of the new
concepts for themselves. Terms such as self-organization and the edge of
chaos became part of the jargon used by sta¡ to understand their situation.
In this way the essentials of complexity theory were assimilated into the
culture of the organization and began to change values and actions as
people found alternative ways of doing things.
Observing one self-managed team of around 30 consultants, within the
‘investors in people’ directorate, Ortegon saw initial uncertainty develop
into increasing con¢dence. People began to enjoy working in this way,
collective decisions were taken, commitment was gained and creativity was
enhanced. The team began to learn how to learn and to think more
strategically about their role in the organization.
For those who witnessed the introduction of complexity theory to
Humberside TEC, two questions continue to loom large. The ¢rst is
whether the TEC, as a medium-sized organization with a high degree of
interconnectivity, provided a rather favourable environment for testing the
ideas of complexity theory. The second is whether the paradox of using
command and control to get rid of command and control can ever be
overcome.
7.4
CRITIQUE OF COMPLEXITY THEORY
Complexity theorywould havea hugeclaimon theattention of managersif it
could be demonstrated that the laws it reckons to have discovered, operating
in physical and biological systems, apply equally to the complex evolving
systems that managers have to deal with. If this were so, they could use the
knowledge gained to manipulate and control organizations so that they
128
Complexity theory

‘thrive and strive’. Through the control parameters they could ensure that
their enterprises operated at the edge of chaos. Once this happy state was
attained, the legitimate system would enable managers to plan for and
control short-term performance. It would never be possible to plan for the
long term, but an organization operating at the edge of chaos would self-
organize and throw up patterns of behaviour that managers could
intuitively understand, even if they could not predict in detail what was
going to happen. Moreover, they could encourage creativity and learning
in such a way as to give the organization the best chance of recognizing
those patterns that could be detected and responding to whatever unpredict-
able events the ¢tness landscape conjured up.
The ¢rst problem with this strong claim, according to Rosenhead (1998),
is that chaos and complexity theory still has much to do, as a science, to
establish its scope and validity in the domain of natural systems. There is
some evidence of its power, but other results rest more on suggestive
computer simulations rather than on empirical observations. In the social
domain there is a complete lack of solid evidence that complexity theory
holds and that adopting its prescriptions will produce the bene¢ts claimed.
Given its state of immaturity as a ¢eld of research, we should be careful of
complexity theory even as a source of well-de¢ned analogies that managers
can employ.
There is a more fundamental problem with applying complexity theory to
management, which has to do with the di¡erence between natural and
social systems. Physical systems, like the weather, are governed by a limited
number of deterministic laws. In these circumstances it is possible to see
how strange attractors arise. Social systems, however, are in£uenced by
innumerable variables and probabilistic elements abound. Strange attractors
do not seem to manifest themselves. In particular, Rosenhead (1998)
argues, because of the self-consciousness and free will exhibited by humans,
the behaviour of social systems cannot be explained in the same way.
Humans think and learn, act according to their own purposes and are
capable of reacting against and disproving any law that is said to apply to
their behaviour.
Even if the strong claim cannot be justi¢ed, complexity theory might still
deserve the attention of managers as an illuminating metaphor ^ throwing
light on those aspects of the organizational world ignored by traditional
theory because they seem too ‘di⁄cult’, chaotic, unpredictable and contro-
versial. Rosenhead sees the metaphor to which complexity theory gives rise
as particularly useful because it challenges the classical view that consensus
in organizations is a good thing. It suggests that shared vision can lead to
Critique of complexity theory
129

groupthink, which prevents valuable alternative opinions being expressed.
It suggests that organizational politics need to be fostered as a means of
ensuring the creativity and learning necessary for organizational survival.
If this is true, it needs to be recognized that there are downsides to the
metaphor as well. For the most part, complexity theorists believe that, even
in social systems, there is enough order underlying chaos to enable them to
provide advice to managers on how to improve their organizations.
Science tells them that organizations must be manoeuvred to the edge of
chaos and how this can be achieved. To that extent, managers who embrace
complexity theory believe that they have access to some specialist knowledge
denied to other stakeholders. There is a justi¢cation for authoritarian action
hidden in this.
And what does complexity theory seek to achieve? It denies that managers
can use the techniques of planning to pursue purposes. At best they can act
to increase the ability of their organizations to survive, adapt and reach
higher ¢tness peaks. The market environment seems to be the determinant
of all things. As with organizational cybernetics, ‘good’ management tends
to be reduced to improving e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy, to doing things right.
E¡ectiveness, or doing the right things, is recognized as important by com-
plexity theory, but not directly assisted by it. The idea of choosing purposes
and using organizations as rational vehicles of, say, achieving social progress
is not easily conceptualized in its language. Rosenhead (1998) suggests that
complexity theory is so popular at present because it o¡ers intellectual
succour to the political argument that there is no alternative to the market
for ordering our social a¡airs.
Given its origins in the natural sciences, the emphasis on ¢nding order
underpinning chaos and the representation of the edge of chaos as a desirable
state, it is not surprising that complexity theory ¢nds itself most at home in
the functionalist paradigm (see Jackson, 2000). The great majority of
writers on complexity theory interpret it this way and discuss the apparent
insights that it can o¡er managers about how to drive their organizations
to the edge of chaos. Stacey’s more recent work (e.g., 2000, 2003), as we
saw, is an exception. He wants to reinvent complexity theory by using its
concepts in the service of interpretivism and postmodernism. Here lies a
problem for complexity theory. If it remains theoretically underdeveloped,
confused even, then its ideas can easily be captured by any paradigm. We
end up with functionalist, interpretive, emancipatory and postmodern ver-
sions of complexity theory emphasizing, respectively, order beneath chaos,
learning, self-organization and unpredictability. Stacey sometimes seems to
approve of this, regarding complexity theory as ordering a variety of com-
130
Complexity theory

patible insights in one paradigm. The problem is that there is not just one
paradigm at work. We have four competing paradigms interpreting com-
plexity theory in radically di¡erent ways. The whole thing falls apart.
The only coherent future for complexity theory in management, I would
argue, lies in the functionalist paradigm. It is comfortable playing around
with a mix of machine, organism, brain, and £ux and transformation meta-
phors and giving them its own twist through notions such as legitimate
system, strange attractors, self-organization, edge of chaos and the ¢tness
landscape. Although there is reference to culture and politics this is under-
played by comparison, and these metaphors play a dependent role in assisting
organizations to arrive at the edge of chaos. The functionalist paradigm is
the natural home for complexity theory, and it can play a signi¢cant role
there in revitalizing functionalism by introducing a set of original and
insightful ideas and concepts. Beyond functionalism it will be unable to
compete with other forms of systems thinking (explored under Types B, C
and D) that have a much longer history of exploring and developing
alternative paradigms.
7.5
THE VALUE OF COMPLEXITY THEORY TO MANAGERS
In picking out ¢ve lessons that managers can easily learn from complexity
theory, I take a lead from Peter Fryer (see www.trojanmice.com) who
used the approach to manage Humberside TEC and now employs it in his
consultancy practice. Peter Fryer’s lessons derive from comparing the
complexity theory approach to the traditional approach to management.
Traditional management theory advises managers what to do in order to
achieve goals in an optimum way. It teaches them how to organize the
parts of an enterprise into a coherent structure. It seeks conformity from
employees and puts in place detailed control procedures to ensure that this
is realized. By contrast, complexity theory teaches that:
.
The most important thing that managers can do is change their way of
thinking, abandoning mechanism and determinism, and learning to
appreciate and cope with relationships, dynamism and unpredictability.
.
Organizations coevolve with their environments, and therefore manag-
ing relationships with the environment is crucial. This means being
prepared to respond to the environment, adapting as necessary but also
being ready to grasp opportunities as they present themselves.
The value of complexity theory to managers
131

.
The best managers are able to intuitively grasp the patterns that are
driving the behaviour of their organizations and the environments they
are confronting. They look for patterns in the whole and seek small
changes that can have the maximum impact on unfavourable patterns.
.
The most successful organizations do not try to control everything. To
an extent managers can trust in chaos and allow the processes operating
at the edge of chaos to bring new order through self-organization.
.
So that organizations have the best chance of understanding those
patterns that do exist and responding to the unpredictable, managers
should encourage learning, diversity and a variety of opinion.
7.6
CONCLUSION
Complexity theory, as applied to management in a variety of contexts, is very
fashionable these days. Its advocates sometimes claim that it represents an
advance on systems thinking. This is nonsense. With its emphasis on
holism, emergence, interdependence and relationships, complexity theory
is de¢nitely a systems approach. Indeed, previous work in the systems ¢eld,
on informal groups, group working, autonomous work groups, double-
loop learning, organizations as information processing systems, open
systems and ‘turbulent ¢eld’ environments, seems to cover much of the
territory that complexity theory wants to claim as its own. Nevertheless, it
has introduced a set of original concepts that help to enrich the functionalist
form of systems thinking.
To ¢nd systems ideas used in radically new ways, however, we need to
study systems approaches that have developed in and are now inextricably
linked to alternative sociological paradigms. That is what we shall do
under Types B, C and D in the rest of this part of the book.
REFERENCES
Capra, F. (1996). The Web of Life: A New Synthesis of Mind and Matter. Flamingo,
London.
Fryer, P. (in press). Complexity ^ A case study: Humberside Training and
Enterprise Council. In: D. Kernick (ed.), Complexity and Health Care
Organisation. Radcli¡e Medical Press, London.
Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: The Making of a New Science. Abacus, London.
132
Complexity theory

Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Jantsch, E. (1980). The Self-Organising Universe: Scienti¢c and Human Implications of
the Emerging Paradigm of Evolution. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Kau¡man, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe. Oxford University Press, New
York.
Morgan, G. (1997). Images of Organisation. Sage Publications, London.
Ortegon, M. (2002). An exploration of chaos and complexity theory in manage-
ment from a critical systems thinking perspective. PhD. thesis, University of
Lincoln.
Prigogine, I. and Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with
Nature. Bantam Books, New York.
Rosenhead, J. (1998). Complexity Theory and Management Practice (LSE Working
Paper 98.25). London School of Economics, London.
Stacey, R.D. (1993). Strategic Management and Organizational Dynamics. Pitman,
London.
Stacey, R.D. (1996). Complexity and Creativity in Organizations. Berret-Kohler, San
Francisco.
Stacey, R.D. (2000). Complexity and Management: Fad or Radical Challenge to Systems
Thinking? Routledge, London.
Stacey, R.D. (2003), Strategic Management and Organisational Dynamics (4th edn).
Prentice Hall, Harlow.
Storr, F. and Fryer, P. (www.trojanmice.com).
Wheatley, M.J. (1992). Leadership and the New Science: Learning about Organization
from an Orderly Universe. Berret-Kohler, San Francisco.
References
133


Type B
Exploring Purposes
Here we detail three systems approaches that aim to assist managers improve
the way in which they decide what purposes their enterprises should
pursue and achieve a measure of agreement around those purposes. These
approaches are strategic assumption surfacing and testing, interactive
planning and soft systems methodology. They were developed because of
the failure of functionalist systems approaches, especially hard systems
thinking, to pay su⁄cient attention to the existence of di¡ering values,
beliefs, philosophies and interests in a world exhibiting increasing pluralism.
Agreement on purposes could no longer be taken for granted. The three
approaches emphasize e¡ective problem resolution based on the clari¢cation
of purposes and the formulation of elegant solutions that can command
stakeholder commitment. In sociological terms they are interpretive in
character, orientated toward achieving greater mutual understanding
between di¡erent interested parties so that better regulation of the enterprise
can be obtained. The approaches di¡er from one another in the manner in
which they seek to progress in dealing with pluralism along the horizontal
axis of the System Of Systems Methodologies (SOSM) (see Chapter 2).
These di¡erences are re£ected in the ways they draw variously on the
culture and political systems metaphors and in their willingness to pay
attention to other images of organization.


Strategic Assumption
Surfacing and Testing
8
The systems approach begins when first you see the world through the
eyes of another.
Churchman (1968)
8.1
INTRODUCTION
Surveying the ¢eld of management science in the late 1970s, Mason and
Mitro¡ (1981) concluded that the methodologies and tools then available
could only be successful if used on relatively simple problems. This was
selling managers short because most of the policy, planning and decision-
making problems they had to deal with were ‘messes’: ill-structured
problem situations made up of highly interdependent problems. Mason
and Mitro¡ determined to design an approach speci¢cally to deal with
messes or, as they preferred to describe them, ‘wicked problems’. The
result was Strategic Assumption Surfacing and Testing (SAST).
SAST, therefore, is a systems methodology that is meant to be employed
when managers and their advisers are confronted by wicked problems.
These are characterized by being interconnected and complicated further
by lack of clarity about purposes, con£ict, uncertainty about the environ-
ment and societal constraints. In tackling wicked problems, problem struc-
turing
assumes
greater
importance
than
problem-solving
using
conventional techniques. If problem formulation is ignored or badly
handled, managers may end up solving, very thoroughly and precisely, the
wrong problem.

8.2
DESCRIPTION OF STRATEGIC ASSUMPTION SURFACING
AND TESTING (SAST)
8.2.1
Historical development
The reader will recall from Chapter 4 the names of Acko¡ and Churchman,
who were among the most in£uential pioneers of operations research (OR)
in the postwar period in the USA. During the 1960s and 1970s both
became increasingly disillusioned with OR and turned their considerable
talents to the development of what is now known as soft systems thinking.
We consider Churchman’s later work in this chapter (the primary in£uence
on Mason and Mitro¡) and Acko¡’s in the next.
Churchman’s disillusionment (see 1979a) stemmed from what he saw as
the betrayal of the original intention of OR. In his view it set out to be a
holistic, interdisciplinary, experimental science addressed to problems in
social systems. It had ended up obsessed with perfecting mathematical tools
and techniques of relevance only to a narrow range of tactical problems. As
a result, Churchman established his own educational programme in ‘social
systems design’, at Berkeley, which was an attempt to keep alive the original
vision he had for OR. This programme in£uenced Mason and Mitro¡ and
many others, including Ulrich whose ‘critical systems heuristics’ is consid-
ered in Chapter 11.
One e¡ect of Churchman’s antipathy to the way he saw OR going was that
social systems design, and the same can be said of the systems approaches
of his disciples, came to resemble nothing more closely than conventional
OR turned on its head. These opposite characteristics would, borrowing
from Rosenhead (1987), include:
.
a satis¢cing rather than optimizing rationale;
.
an acceptance of con£ict over goals;
.
di¡erent objectives measured in their own terms;
.
the employment of transparent methods that clarify con£ict and facilitate
negotiation;
.
the use of analysis to support judgement with no aspiration to replace it;
.
the treatment of human elements as active subjects;
.
problem formulation on the basis of a bottom-up process;
.
decisions taken as far down the hierarchy as there is expertise to resolve
them;
.
the acceptance of uncertainty as an inherent characteristic of the future
and a consequent emphasis on keeping options open.
138
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

8.2.2
Philosophy and theory
In formulating his social systems design, Churchman (1968, 1971) drew on
the whole of the Western philosophical tradition ^ although this was ¢ltered
through his understanding of American pragmatism and especially the
work of E.A. Singer. The most pithy account of the conclusions he
reached is to be found in the four aphorisms that close his book The Systems
Approach (1968). We shall take each of these in turn and expand on its
meaning.
The systems approach begins when first you see the world through the
eyes of another.
Here we learn lessons from Kant and Hegel. We are reminded that whatever
world view, or in German Weltanschauung (W), we hold is inevitably based
on certain taken-for-granted, a priori assumptions (Kant). Following
Hegel, we also need to recognize that there are many possible, alternative
Ws constructed on di¡erent sets of taken-for-granted assumptions. Systems
designers, therefore, must accept that completely di¡erent evaluations of
social systems, their purposes and their performance will inevitably exist.
The only way we can get near to a view of the whole system is to look at it
from as many perspectives as possible. Subjectivity should be embraced by
the systems approach.
The systems approach goes on to discovering that every world view is
terribly restricted.
This aphorism has profound implications for our understanding of objectiv-
ity in systems thinking. In the hard, system dynamic, cybernetic and
complexity theory traditions, objectivity is seen to depend on how well the
model constructed predicts and, preferably, explains the behaviour of the
system of concern. Churchman is arguing that a model can only capture
one very restricted version of the nature of a social system. It follows that a
di¡erent understanding of objectivity is necessary ^ one that includes
subjectivity rather than trying to exclude it. Only by ‘sweeping in’ di¡erent
subjectivities, through stakeholder participation, can the restricted nature
of any one W be overcome.
A related point, noted by Churchman, is that although particular world
views are terribly restricted they are also usually very resistant to change.
Certainly, they cannot be seriously challenged just by exposing them to
Description of strategic assumption surfacing and testing
139

apparently contrary ‘facts’, which they will simply interpret to ¢t their own
assumptions. What we need to do, therefore, is to get at the foundations of
Ws by examining them systemically.
Churchman recommends employing a dialectical approach to objectivity,
which he derives from Hegel. Faced by a set of proposals emanating from
one particular, inevitably restricted W, we ¢rst need to understand the
nature of that world view ^ why it makes the proposals meaningful. This
¢rst W (or thesis) should then be challenged by another ‘deadly enemy’ W,
based on entirely di¡erent assumptions that give rise to alternative proposals
(antithesis). Whatever facts are available can then be considered in the light
of both world views. This should help to bring about a richer (i.e., more
objective) appreciation of the situation, expressing elements of both
positions but going beyond them as well (synthesis).
Churchman argues that it is the role of systems designers to challenge the
mental models of powerful decision-makers so that they are brought to act
according to the purposes of ‘clients’ or ‘customers’, the people supposed
to bene¢t from the systems they participate in.
There are no experts in the systems approach.
This refers to adherents of any particular branch of science who might claim
special expertise in resolving a problem situation. They all o¡er partial
viewpoints and need to be co-ordinated in a systemic process of inquiry. It
applies most strongly, however, to systems thinkers themselves. Systems
designers, because they seek to address systems as wholes, may become
arrogant in the face of opposition from apparently sectional interests. They
need to listen carefully to all ‘enemies’ of the systems approach (such as
religion, politics, ethics and aesthetics) since these enemies re£ect the very
failure of the systems approach to be comprehensive ^ to draw the boundary
wide enough (see Churchman, 1979b). Churchman insists that when it
comes to matters of aims and objectives (and appropriate means), which
inevitably involve ethical considerations and moral judgements, there can
be no experts.
The systems approach is not a bad idea.
The attempt to take on the whole system remains a worthwhile ideal even if it
cannot be realized in practice. The systems designer says Churchman,
echoing Singer, must pursue his or her profession in the ‘heroic mood’.
Increasing human purposefulness and participation in systems design is a
140
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

never-ending process.Thereisa need to help bring about a consensusaround
a particular perspective so that decisions can be taken and action occur.
Before this world view can solidify into the status quo, however, it should
itself be subject to attack from forceful alternative perspectives. The
process of generating learning through the dialectical method is never
ending.
The radical reorientation in the systems approach demanded by Church-
man’s philosophy comes through in a story of the engagement of his research
group with NASA during the period of the Apollo space programme.
NASA wanted an evaluation of the innovative, hard systems methods it
was using to manage the project. Churchman’s group (see 1979b) drew the
boundary much wider and began asking challenging questions about the
purpose of the Apollo programme, which from their systems perspective
did not obviously contribute to the betterment of the human species.
Reviewing the performance of Churchman’s group, NASA awarded it the
highest marks for interdisciplinarity and the lowest for relevance to their
mission.
Mason and Mitro¡ (1981) have adopted all of Churchman’s philosophy
and given it their own, slightly more mundane twist.
They accept the interconnectedness associated with all wicked problems
and the implication that they must therefore be tackled holistically. This
demands the participation of all involved and a¡ected parties in the process
of problem resolution. Each of these will bring his or her own perspective
on the problem situation and interpret the facts from the point of view of
that perspective.
The problem with conventional planning and problem-solving, accord-
ing to Mason and Mitro¡, is that it fails to recognize the value that can be
obtained from entertaining di¡erent world views. Most organizations fail
to deal properly with wicked problems because they ¢nd it di⁄cult to
challenge accepted ways of doing things. Policy options that diverge from
current practice are not given serious consideration. An approach to
planning and problem resolving is needed that ensures that alternatives are
fully considered. This requires the generation of radically di¡erent policies,
based on alternative world views, because data alone, which can always be
interpreted in terms of existing theory, will not lead an organization to
change its preferred ways of doing things. An organization only really
begins to learn when its most cherished assumptions are challenged by
counterassumptions. Assumptions underpinning existing policies and pro-
cedures should therefore be unearthed and alternatives put forward based
on counterassumptions. A variety of policy perspectives, each interpreting
Description of strategic assumption surfacing and testing
141

the data available in its own way, can then be evaluated systemically. Further-
more, because problem situations are dynamic, this type of organizational
learning needs to be ongoing.
Mason and Mitro¡ recognize that tensions will inevitably arise during the
process of continuously challenging assumptions ^ not least because its
success depends, initially at least, on di¡erent groups being strongly com-
mitted to particular policy options. However, they regard it as naive to
believe that wicked problems can be tackled in the absence of such tensions.
Organizations are arenas of con£ict between groups holding to and expres-
sing alternative world views. This o¡ers great potential for developing and
examining alternative strategies; but, the manner in which this is done
needs to be carefully managed. SAST attempts to surface con£icts and to
direct them productively as the only way eventually of achieving a produc-
tive synthesis of perspectives. It is in the design of this methodology that
Mason and Mitro¡ have shown real originality.
8.2.3
Methodology
Four principles are highlighted by Mason and Mitro¡ (1981) as under-
pinning the SAST methodology:
.
participative ^ based on the belief that di¡erent stakeholders should be
involved, because the knowledge and resources required to resolve
wicked problems and implement solutions will be spread among di¡er-
ent parts and levels in an organization and di¡erent groups outside the
organization;
.
adversarial ^ based on the belief that di¡erent stakeholders perceive
wicked problems very di¡erently and that judgements about how to
tackle such problems are best made after full consideration of opposing
perspectives;
.
integrative ^ based on the belief that the di¡erent options thrown up by
the participative and adversarial principles must eventually be brought
together again in a higher order synthesis, so that an action plan can be
produced and implemented;
.
managerial mind supporting ^ based on the belief that managers exposed
to di¡erent assumptions that highlight the complex nature of wicked
problems will gain a deeper insight into the di⁄culties facing an organ-
ization and appropriate strategies that will enable it to move forward.
It may not be obvious that an approach can be both adversarial and integra-
142
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

tive. That it can was brought strongly home to me while conducting an
intervention in a printing company that was in the process of adopting a
quality management programme (see Jackson, 1989). In that ¢rm there was
an apparent consensus around the need for a particular type of quality pro-
gramme. In fact, this consensus was founded on verydi¡erent interpretations
of the key concepts underpinning the programme. Only through a process
of adversarial debate could these very signi¢cant di¡erences be highlighted
and the ground prepared for a more soundly based consensus built on
common understanding.
The four principles are employed throughout the stages of the SAST
methodology. The following account is drawn from a variety of sources
(Mason and Mitro¡, 1981; Mason, 1969; Mitro¡ et al. 1977; Mitro¡ et al.,
1979) and recognizes the approach as having four main stages:
.
group formation;
.
assumption surfacing;
.
dialectical debate;
.
synthesis.
We shall consider these in turn.
As wide a cross section of individuals as possible who have an interest in
the policy or problem being investigated should be involved in the SAST
process. They are ¢rst carefully divided into groups. Within each group the
aim is to maximize convergence of perspectives so as to minimize inter-
personal con£ict and to achieve constructive group processes. Between
groups the aim is to maximize divergence of perspectives so as to get the
most out of all the groups in their totality by taking advantage of their di¡er-
ences. A number of techniques can be used to accomplish this ^ grouping
according to functional area, organizational level or time orientation
(short- or long-term perspective), or on the basis of personality type and
vested interest, or advocates of particular strategies. Each group should
have or develop a preferred strategy or solution, and each group’s viewpoint
should be clearly challenged by at least one other group.
The aim of the second, assumption surfacing, stage is to help each group
uncover and analyse the key assumptions on which its preferred strategy or
solution rests. It is important to provide a supportive environment and
good facilitation so that people can be as imaginative and creative as possible.
Three techniques are recommended to help with this stage and they are
dealt with in Subsection 8.2.4.
Description of strategic assumption surfacing and testing
143

The groups are then brought together and encouraged to enter into a
dialectical debate. A spokesperson for each group will present the best
possible case for its preferred strategy or solution, being careful to identify
the key assumptions on which it is based. During this presentation other
groups are only allowed to ask questions of clari¢cation. It is important
that each group understands each other’s viewpoint and assumptions
before debating and challenging them. Only after each group has presented
its case clearly does open, dialectical debate begin. The debate may be
guided by asking the following questions:
.
How are the assumptions of the groups di¡erent?
.
Which stakeholders feature most strongly in giving rise to the signi¢cant
assumptions made by each group?
.
Do groups rate assumptions di¡erently (e.g., as to their importance for
the success of a strategy)?
.
What assumptions of the other groups does each group ¢nd the most
troubling with respect to its own proposals?
After the debate has proceeded for a time, each group should consider
whether it now wishes to modify its assumptions. This process of ‘assump-
tion modi¢cation’ should continue for as long as progress is being made.
The aim of the synthesis stage is to achieve a compromise on assumptions
from which a new, higher level of strategy or solution can be derived.
Assumptions continue to be negotiated and modi¢ed, and a list of agreed
assumptions is drawn up. If this list is su⁄ciently long an implied strategy
can be worked out. This new strategy should bridge the gap between the
di¡erent strategies of the groups and go beyond them as well. If no synthesis
can be achieved, points of disagreement are noted and research undertaken
to resolve the remaining di¡erences. Any strategy adopted will be very
fully understood and the assumptions on which it is based can be evaluated
as it is put into e¡ect.
8.2.4
Methods
The three methods most closely associated with SAST are stakeholder
analysis, assumption speci¢cation and assumption rating. They all serve the
assumption surfacing stage of the methodology.
Mason andMitro¡ believe that a strategyorsolution can be thought of as a
set of assumptions about the current and future behaviour of an organiza-
tion’s stakeholders. In surfacing the assumptions underlying a particular
144
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

strategy or solution, therefore, it is useful to decide who the relevant stake-
holders are taken to be. Stakeholder analysis recommends that each group
putting forward a strategy be asked to identify the key individuals, parties
or groups on which the success or failure of their preferred strategy would
depend were it adopted. These are the people who have a ‘stake’ in the
strategy. The process can be helped by asking questions like:
.
Who is a¡ected by the strategy?
.
Who has an interest in it?
.
Who can a¡ect its adoption or implementation?
.
Who cares about it?
Stakeholder analysis was used to help decide whether to undertake substan-
tial capital expenditure on a swimming pool for the social club of a hospital
in the Middle East (see Flood, 1995). In this example, it yielded the following
list of stakeholders:
.
Western nurses;
.
developing countries’ male sta¡;
.
Arab families;
.
matron;
.
residential medical sta¡;
.
government liaison sta¡;
.
recruiters;
.
swimming pool manufacturers;
.
¢nancial controller;
.
hospital administrator;
.
support services manager;
.
hotels in the city;
.
religious fundamentalist groups.
The second technique is assumption speci¢cation. This asks each group to
list what assumptions it is making about each of the stakeholders identi¢ed
in believing that its preferred strategy will succeed. Two or three assump-
tions should be unearthed for each stakeholder. These are therefore the
assumptions on which the success of the group’s preferred strategy or
solution depends.
Assumption rating, our third method, requires each group to rank each of
the assumptions it is making according to two criteria:
Description of strategic assumption surfacing and testing
145

.
How important is this assumption in terms of its in£uence on the success
or failure of the strategy?
.
How certain are we about the likelihood of occurrence or the truth of the
statement of events contained in the assumption?
The results are recorded on a chart such as that shown in Figure 8.1. Because
of their lack of importance those assumptions falling on the extreme left of
the chart are of little signi¢cance for e¡ective planning or problem resolving.
Those falling in the top right (certain planning region) are important, but it
is those in the lower right-hand quadrant (problematic planning region)
that are most critical. Because of their signi¢cance but our uncertainty
about them, they deserve close attention.
8.2.5
Recent developments
A more recent development has seen Mitro¡ and Linstone (1993) seeking to
integrate elements of SAST with Linstone’s ‘multidimensional’ systems
thinking. Linstone recommends examining any problem situation through
three lenses: the traditional, Technical (T) perspective, an Organizational
(or societal) perspective (O) and a Personal (or individual) perspective (P).
These three lenses o¡er radically di¡erent world views that can be taken
advantage of in SAST. The combined Mitro¡ and Linstone approach is
labelled ‘unbounded systems thinking’.
It is also worth mentioning again the in£uence that Churchman’s writings
have had on emancipatory systems thinking, particularly on Ulrich’s ‘critical
146
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing
Figure 8.1
Assumption rating chart.

systems heuristics’. In many respects the work of Churchman, and similarly
that of Mason and Mitro¡, can be seen as obsessed with how the ‘boundaries’
are drawn around a system of interest. What assumptions lead us to draw
the boundaries in a particular place? What di¡erence would it make to draw
the boundaries in another way? How can we challenge the way the bound-
aries are currently drawn? This easily leads on, as we will see in Chapter 11,
to the emancipatory systems question of who is advantaged and who disad-
vantaged by particular boundary judgements.
8.3
STRATEGIC ASSUMPTION SURFACING AND TESTING
(SAST) IN ACTION
Good examples of the use of SAST can be found in Mason and Mitro¡
(1981), Ellis (2002), Flood (1995) and Jackson (2000). This case study is
taken from an intervention I was involved in with the Humberside Co-
operative Development Agency (CDA) (see also Flood and Jackson, 1991).
The CDA was established to serve its region by fostering, encouraging,
developing and promoting industrial and commercial activity through the
formation of co-operative enterprises ^ enterprises owned by the people
who work in them and usually also managed by those same people. The
particular focus of the SAST exercise was a disagreement in the CDA over
the relative merits of ‘top-down’ as opposed to ‘bottom-up’ co-operative
development work. The top-down approach, which involves identifying
business opportunities and then recruiting individuals to form workers’ co-
operatives in these ¢elds, is usually viewed with great distrust in co-operative
circles. The preferred approach is bottom-up, essentially encouraging and
assisting groups already thinking about starting co-operatives in particular
areas of work. The description of this exercise follows the four stages of the
SAST methodology.
Within the CDA the idea of trying a top-down strategy had some support,
although there was also vehement opposition from other development
workers. The development workers were therefore divided into two
groups, one consisting of those with some sympathy for the top-down
approach and the other of those opposed. The opposed group was asked to
make the best case it could against top-down. It was felt that this, rather
than asking them directly to make the case for bottom-up, would lead to
the most fruitful debate.
The separated groups then went through the assumption surfacing
phase, using the stakeholder analysis, assumption speci¢cation and
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing (SAST) in action
147

assumption rating techniques. The groups came up with widely di¡erent
lists of stakeholders, obviously in£uenced by initial perceptions about
which individuals or groups might or might not support the case for the
top-down strategy. The stakeholders listed by each group are shown in
Table 8.1.
The lists of stakeholders were combined and each group was asked,
following the logic of assumption speci¢cation, what it was assuming
about each stakeholder in believing that its arguments for or against the
top-down strategy were correct. This facilitated the emergence of numerous
assumptions supporting/against the top-down strategy. These were ranked
as to their importance and certainty by each group and the results recorded
on assumption rating charts. Table 8.2 contains lists of those assumptions
rated most signi¢cant by the two groups (i.e., those appearing in the right-
hand quadrants of Figure 8.1). The particular stakeholder generating each
assumption is noted in parentheses.
The groups were then brought back together to engage in dialectical
debate. During the presentations it becameclear that the groups were empha-
sizing assumptions derived from consideration of di¡erent stakeholders as
the main props for their arguments. Group 1 (for top-down) drew heavily
on the stakeholders ‘funding bodies’ (increase in credibility, ensures con-
tinuous support, carries out expectations) and ‘unemployed’ (provides em-
ployment, gives unemployed a solution in a package). Group 2 (against
top-down) concentrated on assumptions generated by the stakeholders
148
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing
Table 8.1
Stakeholders listed in the study for the Humberside Co-operative
Development Agency.
Group 1 (for top-down)
Group 2 (against top-down)
The development workers
The development workers
The unemployed
Potential clients
Local authorities
The ideologically motivated
Business improvement schemes
Local authorities
Existing co-operatives
Department of Trade and Industry
Funding bodies
Existing co-operatives
Other CDAs
People already in work
Marketing agencies
Trade unions
General public
Other businesses

Table 8.2
Significant assumptions concerning the stakeholders listed in Table 8.1.
Group 1 (for top-down)
Group 2 (against top-down)
Another way to set up workers’
Mixed feelings of the development
co-operatives (potential clients)
workers toward the strategy
(development workers)
Increases the CDA’s credibility in job
Lack of group cohesion among the
creation (funding bodies)
cooperators (potential clients)
Ensures continuous support to the
Lack of willingness to co-operate among
CDA (funding bodies)
the co-operators (potential clients)
Carries out the expectations of the
Getting people who are not motivated
funding bodies (funding bodies)
(the unemployed)
Strengthens the co-operative sector
Less development workers’ time on
(existing co-operatives)
helping existing co-operatives (existing
co-operatives)
Provides employment (the unemployed)
Lack of knowledge of business
opportunities hinders ‘top-down’
(development workers)
Provides the unemployed with a
Lack of experience of the development
solution in a package (the unemployed)
workers in this area of activity
(development workers)
A more e¡ective way of starting worker’s
Lack of commitment to business idea
co-operatives (development workers)
among the new co-operators (potential
clients)
Establishes a successful precedent (other
Against principle of self-determination
CDAs)
(ideologically motivated)
Increases numbers working in
Could be criticized as a waste of
co-operatives (existing co-operatives)
development workers’ time (funding
bodies)
Increase in industrial democracy (trade
Very dangerous if failed (funding bodies)
unions)
Suspicions of other co-operatives, fear of
hierarchy and getting co-operatives a bad
name (existing co-operatives)
Too risky a venture for them (funding
bodies)
No previous association of co-operative
members (potential clients)
May have nothing in common with other
co-operators (potential clients)
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing (SAST) in action
149

‘development workers’ (mixed feelings, lack of knowledge about business
opportunities, lack of experience in the area), ‘potential clients’ (lack of
group cohesion, lack of willingness to co-operate, lack of commitment to
business idea, etc.) and ‘existing co-operatives’ (less development workers’
time for them, suspicion). This analysis helped clarify for the participants
the nature and basis of the arguments for and against top-down and contrib-
uted to a very productive debate.
As debate continued, other interesting results emerged. The two groups
interpreted the reaction of the stakeholder ‘funding bodies’ from entirely
di¡erent perspectives. Group 1 insisted that top-down would assist the
CDA’s credibility in job creation and ful¢l the expectations of funders, so
ensuring continued support. Group 2 believed that top-down might be
seen as a waste of development workers’ time on risky ventures and this
dangerous experiment could lose the CDA credibility with the funders if it
failed. On the issue of whether top-down promoted industrial democracy,
Group 1 argued that more people in workers’ co-operativeswouldinevitably
bring this e¡ect; Group 2 argued that the very idea of top-down took
choice away from the individuals concerned; and Group 1 argued back
again that many of these were unemployed and had few choices anyway, so
work in a co-operative could only increase their options.
The most troubling assumptions of the other side for Group 1 (for top-
down) were the divisions among the development workers themselves and
the possible lack of commitment from those brought together in a top-
down scheme. Group 2 (against top-down) worried that, if no top-down
work took place, a genuine opportunity to set up more co-operatives
would be wasted and chances to improve the lot of the unemployed and to
gain credibility with funders would be missed.
Following the dialectical debate attempts were made at assumption nego-
tiation and modi¢cation, but it proved impossible to arrive at any overall
synthesis. Consensus was however reached on particular matters, such as
the need to seek out sources of information about business opportunities,
to research other top-down experiences elsewhere and to carry out some
experiments with a modi¢ed top-down approach.
The intervention using SAST in the Humberside CDA was useful in
assisting creativity, in helping to clarify where di¡erences of opinion lay
and in generating a very full and rich discussion. Overall synthesis proved
impossible to achieve, but agreement around speci¢c issues was obtained
and this brought bene¢ts. The inclusion of the items mentioned above in
an action plan would not have been possible without the changes in percep-
tion and culture brought about through the use of SAST.
150
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

8.4
CRITIQUE OF STRATEGIC ASSUMPTION SURFACING
AND TESTING (SAST)
There is little empirical evidence in favour of the superiority of SAST over
more conventional planning approaches. Where tests have been carried out
the results have been ambiguous (see Jackson, 1989). This does not surprise
Mason and Mitro¡ (1981) who remind critics that SAST was designed to
assist with ‘wicked problems’. In the context of wicked problems the
concern is with clarifying purposes and ¢nding elegant ways forward,
rather than with producing the ‘best’ solution that can be compared with so-
lutions derived from other methodologies. We are drawn back therefore, as
with all soft systems thinking, to the philosophy of the approach and the
way that philosophy is operationalized in the methodology as the only poss-
ible guarantees for the bene¢ts said to be associated with using SAST.
Mason and Mitro¡ recognize this well enough and search for guarantees in
aspects such as participation, the provision of challenging assumptions, and
the controlled con£ict encouraged.
In a thought experiment, Mason (1969) seeks to highlight SAST’s advan-
tages by comparing it with the ‘expert’ and ‘devil’s advocate’ approaches to
planning.
In the expert approach, organizations set up special planning departments
or obtain the services of outside experts and require them to produce a plan
based on the best available evidence. However, the planners’ or experts’
own world views and strategic assumptions often remain hidden. Moreover,
experts usually provide plans from a limited perspective and ignore the
wide range of additional perspectives that policy-makers and managers
might usefully take into account. The lack of transparency over assumptions
and the failure to test assumptions leaves the decision-makers handicapped
at crucial stages of the formulation and implementation process.
The devil’s advocate approach does allow the surfacing and testing of
some assumptions when the planners present their proposals for scrutiny
by senior management. However, this approach often encourages top
management to be hypercritical, with the added problem that, if they are
too destructive, the suggested plan disintegrates with no alternative to
replace it. In these circumstances, planners may be tempted to produce
‘safe’ plans to protect themselves from severe criticism. Again, with the
devil’s advocate approach the chance is lost to develop alternative plans
constructed on the basis of di¡erent world views.
Mason argues that the dialectical philosophy embedded in SAST over-
comes the weaknesses of the other two methods. Critics (see Jackson, 2000)
Critique of strategic assumption surfacing and testing (SAST)
151

have largely been willing to accept the coherence of that philosophy and its
value when translated into problem management. At the same time they
insist that it limits the domain of applicability of SAST.
Mason and Mitro¡ designed SAST for use with wicked problems. In
doing so they appear to assume that formulating such problems is synony-
mous with tackling them. There seems to be an unwarranted, for some,
assumption that once problems arising from the existence of di¡erent
world views have been dissolved, then all the hard work is done. This
appears to skip over the daunting tasks associated with organizing large-
scale complex systems ^ those matters that system dynamics, organizational
cybernetics and complexity theory concern themselves with.
Other critics point out that SAST depends for its success on the willing-
ness of participants to have their assumptions exposed. This is ¢ne in situa-
tions where some basic compatibility of values and interests exists and
compromise is possible. There will be many circumstances, however,
where there are barriers to the extension of the participative principle, and
in such instances many of the bene¢ts of SAST will be lost. The ‘powerful’
have the need to be convinced that it is of value to them to reveal their
strategic assumptions. In ‘coercive’ contexts this is unlikely to be the case
and any employment of SAST will get distorted and provide bene¢t only
to those who already hold power in the organization.
It is clear, with SAST, that we are dealing with a completely di¡erent
animal to the ‘functionalist’ systems approaches reviewed as Type A. In the
language of Chapter 2, SAST is seeking to develop systems thinking along
the horizontal dimension of the System Of Systems Methodologies
(SOSM). It is an approach primarily concerned with philosophies, percep-
tions, values, beliefs and interests. It focuses managers’ attention on diverse
world views, multiple perspectives and di¡erent assumptions, and seeks to
achieve a much greater degree of mutual understanding. To this end,
SAST works well ^ handling pluralism e¡ectively ¢rst by sustaining and
making use of it to generate creative discussion and then managing its reso-
lution in a new synthesis. SAST is a successful example of a soft systems
methodology.
We noted in Subsection 8.2.1 that SAST could be represented as being
conventional ORturned on its head. This,ofcourse,indicates that itoperates
from a completely di¡erent paradigm. SAST is clearly an ‘interpretive’
systems approach that embraces subjectivity rather than the ‘objectivism’
that underpins those systems methodologies wedded to functionalism. The
shift in paradigm arises from following Churchman’s philosophy. For
Churchman, systems and whether they work or not are in the mind of the
152
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

observer, not in the ‘real world’. A model captures only one possible
perception of the nature of a system. To gain an appreciation of the whole
we have to engage with multiple subjectivities. And the results of a
systems study can only receive their guarantee from the maximum partici-
pation of di¡erent stakeholders, holding to various Ws, in the design
process. ‘Objectivity’, it turns out, can only emerge from open debate
among holders of many di¡erent perspectives.
This shift in paradigm allows a new set of metaphors to come forward.
The machine, organism and brain metaphors fade into the background to
be replaced by those of ‘culture’ and ‘political system’. These marry with
and gain enhanced meaning from systems concepts, such as purpose,
stakeholder, world view, boundary, dialectical debate and synthesis, to
produce a powerful methodology orientated to pluralist problem contexts.
SAST is well equipped to assist in structuring the exploration of di¡erent
perceptions and values, and to help in bringing about a synthesis, or at least
accommodation, among participants so that action can be taken.
To those who do not share SAST’s commitment to the interpretive
paradigm, and the culture and political system metaphors, it is an easy
approach to criticize. Functionalists bemoan the lack of attention given to
e⁄cient processes and well-designed organizational structures, as their
favoured machine, organism and brain metaphors are pushed aside. Emanci-
patory systems thinkers, employing the ‘psychic prison’ and ‘instruments
of domination’ images of organization, believe it is impossible in most
circumstances to achieve the participative and adversarial debate necessary
for the proper application of SAST. Integration is achieved in coercive con-
texts, they argue, by power and domination rather than through consensual
agreement. Because it lacks an emancipatory dimension (in this respect it
fails to follow the implications of Churchman’s systems thinking), SAST
becomes little more than a kind of multigroup brainstorming, that tinkers
with the ideological status quo in ways which further bene¢t the powerful.
Its journey along the horizontal dimension of the SOSM takes SAST far
enough to encounter pluralist contexts but not far enough to recognize
coercive situations.
8.5
THE VALUE OF STRATEGIC ASSUMPTION SURFACING
AND TESTING (SAST) TO MANAGERS
We are committed to setting down ¢ve lessons that managers can learn
from each systems approach. Having gained an appreciation of SAST, it is
The value of SAST to managers
153

reasonable to suggest that the following list captures the main learning it has
to impart:
.
SAST demonstrates that systems thinking can be employed to help
managers arrive at decisions about the purposes they should pursue
based on a higher order synthesis of stakeholder objectives. Systems
thinking is not simply technical ^ it can promote e¡ectiveness and
elegance as well as e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy.
.
The use of dialectical debate helps managers overcome the tyranny of
‘either^or’ ^ proposals and counterproposals seen as exclusive alterna-
tives. There is the possibility of the ‘and’: combining two opposites as
part of a new and grander synthesis.
.
In the right circumstances SAST is a methodology that can encourage
and orientate a participative style of problem management. The involve-
ment of many stakeholders brings a large spread of opinion to bear on
a problem situation and eases the implementation of proposed courses
of action.
.
It is often argued that the best and most creative debate occurs when
there is strong opposition to a preferred set of proposals. The problem
is that tensions arise. SAST shows that an approach can be both adver-
sarial and integrative. The understanding gained by participants of the
assumptions underlying favoured options, and of the deeply held
convictions of other parties, prepares the ground for a more soundly
based consensus.
.
The methods associated with SAST ^ stakeholder analysis, assumption
speci¢cation and assumption rating ^ are profoundly ‘managerial mind
supporting’. They are excellent means of feeding a comprehensive
debate on planning or problem resolution and throw up many pre-
viously unconsidered issues.
8.6
CONCLUSION
As we saw in Chapter 2, during the 1960s and early 1970s systems thinking
had begun to lose its way. OR and management science had become obsessed
with perfecting mathematical solutions to a small range of tactical problems.
Meanwhile, most of the pressing problems managers faced were of the
ill-structured variety, strategic in nature and set in social systems. SAST
was speci¢cally developed by Mason and Mitro¡ to deal with ill-structured
154
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

problems of signi¢cance to senior managers of organizations. As we have
seen, it has much to o¡er. It is well grounded on Churchman’s systems
philosophy, which in practice it does much to promote. It has helped to
revitalize systems thinking.
SAST is one of three soft systems approaches that we will consider in this
book. In looking at the work of Acko¡ and Checkland in the next two
chapters we shall gain a deeper appreciation of what it is like to pursue
systems thinking and practice from an interpretive perspective ^ and in the
process enrich stillfurther our understanding of whatSAST seeks to achieve.
REFERENCES
Churchman, C.W. (1968). The Systems Approach. Dell Publishing, New York.
Churchman, C.W. (1971). The Design of Inquiring Systems. Basic Books, New York.
Churchman, C.W. (1979a). Paradise regained: A hope for the future of systems
design education. In: B.A. Bayraktar, H. Muller-Merbach, J.E. Roberts and
M.G. Simpson (eds), Education in Systems Science (pp. 17^22). Taylor &
Francis, London.
Churchman, C.W. (1979b). The Systems Approach and Its Enemies. Basic Books,
New York.
Ellis, K. (2002). Toward a systemic theory of organisational change. PhD thesis,
City University, London.
Flood, R.L. (1995). Solving Problem Solving. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Jackson, M.C. (1989). Assumptional analysis: An elucidation and appraisal for
systems practitioners. Systems Practice, 2, 11^28.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Mason, R.O. (1969). A dialectical approach to strategic planning. Management
Science, 15, B403^414.
Mason, R.O. and Mitro¡, I.I. (1981). Challenging Strategic Planning Assumptions.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Mitro¡, I.I., Barabba, C.P. and Kilmann, R.H. (1977). The application of beha-
vioral and philosophical techniques to strategic planning: A case study of a
large federal agency. Management Science, 24, 44^58.
Mitro¡, I.I., Emsho¡, J.R. and Kilmann, R.H. (1979). Assumption analysis: A
methodology
for
strategic
problem-solving.
Management
Science,
25,
583^593.
References
155

Mitro¡, I.I. and Linstone, H.A. (1993). The Unbounded Mind. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Rosenhead, J. (1987). From management science to workers’ science. In:
M.C. Jackson and P. Keys (eds), New Directions in Management Science
(pp. 109^131). Gower, Aldershot, UK.
156
Strategic assumption surfacing and testing

Interactive Planning
9
If you read the newspapers and are still satisfied with the state of the
world, put this book down; it is not for you. My objective is not to
convert those who are satisfied N even though I believe they need
conversion N but to give those who are dissatisfied cause for hope
and something to do about it.
Ackoff (1974)
9.1
INTRODUCTION
It is a tribute to his continual inventiveness and to the power and originality
of his insights that Russell Acko¡, who formulated ‘interactive planning’,
still bestrides the world of the management sciences more than 50 years
after he ¢rst came to prominence.
In that time he has inspired several new directions in the discipline: as
when his research gave birth to ‘social systems science’ and ‘community
operational research’. His personal interventions have helped to develop
the management sciences in various countries. And he has had a signi¢cant
impact on areas of work as diverse as Operational Research (OR), corporate
planning, applied social science, management information systems and
management education.
Interactive planning is of particular relevance to us in this book because it
was speci¢cally designed to cope with the ‘messes’ that arise from the in-
creased complexity, change and diversity that managers have to confront in
the modern era (see the Preface). Acko¡ (1974) argues that about the time
of the Second World War the ‘machine age’ associated with the industrial
revolution began to give way to the ‘systems age’. The systems age is
characterized by increasingly rapid change, by interdependence and by
complex purposeful systems. It demands that much greater emphasis is

placed on learning and adaptation if any kind of stability is to be achieved.
This, in turn, requires a radical reorientation of world view. Machine-age
thinking, based on analysis, reductionism, a search for cause^e¡ect relations
and determinism, must be complemented by systems-age thinking, which
proceeds by synthesis and expansionism, tries to grasp producer^product
relations and admits to the existence of free will and choice. Those who
would manage organizations in the systems age, and those who would
intervene to improve social systems, need a di¡erent kind of planning that
re£ects this new thinking ^ interactive planning.
9.2
DESCRIPTION OF INTERACTIVE PLANNING
9.2.1
Historical development
Acko¡’s graduate work was done in the philosophy of science under the
tutelage of C. West Churchman who, we saw in the last chapter, was much
in£uenced by the American pragmatist tradition and especially the writings
of E.A. Singer. Acko¡, originally trained as an architect, was a very practical
philosopher. Indeed, he recounts (Acko¡, 1999a) that he was dismissed
from his ¢rst professorial appointment in philosophy because he wanted to
create a centre for applied philosophy and dared to put on a conference on
philosophy and city planning.
Acko¡’s commitment to philosophically grounded practice led him to
change his academic a⁄liation to OR. In Chapter 4 we saw how, with
Churchman, he became one of the most in£uential pioneers of OR in the
postwar period in the USA.
The same commitment led Acko¡ out of OR again when he judged that
it had become wedded to its mathematical models (‘mathematical mastur-
bation’ as he described it) and lost touch with the real issues that concern
managers. In his view (Acko¡, 1981) those who continue to work in the
vein of hard systems thinking, with its emphasis on optimization and objec-
tivity, inevitably opt out of tackling the important issues of the systems
age. To cling to optimization in a world of multiple values and rapid
change is to lose your grip on reality. The emphasis has to be on adapting
and learning. Objectivity in the conventional sense is also a myth. Purposeful
behaviour cannot be value-free.
Disillusioned with OR, Acko¡ (1974, 1981) set out to develop a more
all-encompassing systems approach, giving the name ‘social systems
sciences’ (S3) to the educational and consultancy activities he initiated at the
158
Interactive planning

University of Pennsylvania. Interactive planning is the main vehicle for
putting S3 into e¡ect.
9.2.2
Philosophy and theory
Acko¡’s (1974) general philosophical orientation endorses that of
Churchman, and he has contributed to the new understanding of ‘objectiv-
ity’ that is embraced in soft systems thinking. For him, the conventional
view that objectivity results from constructing value-free models that are
then veri¢ed or falsi¢ed against some real world ‘out there’ is misguided.
Objectivity in social systems science can only be approached through the
interaction of groups of individuals with diverse values. It can be approxi-
mated by science seen as a system, but not by individual scientists. It is
‘value full’, not value-free.
These conclusions lead to some distinctive Ackovian themes. One is that
planning and design must be based on wide participation and involvement.
Another is that improvement needs to be sought on the basis of the client’s
own criteria. It may wellbethat the analyst’s modelofreality di¡ers markedly
from that of the client. Nevertheless, if you want to serve that client you
are better o¡ granting rationality to him or her than rationality to yourself
as the analyst. A linked idea is that people must be allowed to plan for
themselves. People’s own ideals and values must be paramount in the
planning process; although operationalizing that process may require assis-
tance from professional planners. This sidesteps one of the major paradoxes
of conventional planning, how to quantify quality of life, since this only
strikes if you are trying to plan for somebody else.
Acko¡’s philosophy acquires a more precise meaning when we see it
applied to the management of organizations in the ‘systems age’. Those
who manage corporations in the modern era, he argues (Acko¡, 1981),
need to alter the way they think about them. In the past it has been usual to
regard corporations either as machines serving the purposes of their creators
or owners, or as organisms serving their own purposes. Today, organiza-
tions must be viewed as social systems serving three sets of purposes: their
own, those of their parts and those of the wider systems of which they are
part. It follows that corporations have responsibilities to themselves
(control problem), to their parts (humanization problem) and to those
wider systems (environmentalization problem). Managers should seek to
serve purposes at all these three levels, developing their organization’s
various stakeholders and removing any apparent con£ict between them. If
this is achieved, internal and external stakeholders will continue to pursue
Description of interactive planning
159

their interests through the organization and ensure that it remains viable and
e¡ective.
Acko¡ has devised a new approach to planning, which he believes re£ects
the nature of the systems age and responds to the three sets of purposes. It
is called ‘interactive planning’ and brings his philosophy to bear on systems
of interdependent problems, or messes, set in social systems. It is best under-
stood if it is compared with three other ideal types of planning: reactivist,
inactivist and preactivist.
Reactivist planners want to return to some ‘golden age’ they believe
existed in the past. They treat problems in a piecemeal fashion and fail to
grasp current realities. Inactivists want to keep things as they are. They too
treat problems separately as they muddle through, trying to avoid real
change. Their approachisto satis¢ce as they try to resolve day-to-day di⁄cul-
ties. Preactivist planners are future-orientated and seek to predict what is
going to happen in order that they can prepare for it. Their aim is optimiza-
tion on the basis of forecasting techniques and quantitative models that
allow problems to be solved. To Acko¡ this ‘predict and prepare’ approach
is illogical since if the future was so determined that we could accurately
predict it, there would also be nothing we could do about changing it.
Acko¡’s preferred approach is interactive planning (see Acko¡, 1974,
1981, 1999a, 1999b). Interactivists do not want to return to the past, keep
things as they are or accept some inevitable future. They take into account
the past, the present and predictions about the future, but use these only as
partial inputs into a methodology of planning aimed at designing a desirable
future and inventing ways of bringing it about. Interactivists believe that
the future can be a¡ected by what the stakeholders of an organization do
now ^ especially if they are motivated to reach out for ideals. In the process
problems simply ‘dissolve’ because the system and/or environment giving
rise to them is changed so radically.
Acko¡ recounts how severe inventory and customer satisfaction problems
plagued General Electric’s Appliance Division because of uncertainty
about how many left-hinged and right-hinged refrigerators to build. The
problem failed to respond to either resolving (salesmen-generated forecasts)
or solving (statistically based forecasts) approaches. It was eventually
dissolved by designing refrigerators with doors that could be mounted on
either side and thus could be made to open either way. As well as eliminating
the inventory mix problem, this proved an attractive marketing feature as
customers were not faced with the possibility of having to replace their
fridge when they moved.
We have noted the depth and breadth of Acko¡’s in£uence in the
160
Interactive planning

management sciences. An important explanation is the inspiring vision he
presents for the discipline, deriving from his philosophy and theory. The
job of the systems practitioner is no longer just to build mathematical
models in order to enable key decision-makers to ‘predict and prepare’
their enterprises for an inevitable future. Rather, it is to assist all the stake-
holders to design a desirable future for themselves and to invent the means
of realizing it.
While carrying out development work with leaders of the Mantua ghetto
in Philadelphia, Acko¡ was delighted to ¢nd many of the lessons he was
trying to impart to management scientists captured in the motto of the
Mantua Community Planners: ‘plan or be planned for’. These sentiments,
in turn, bring to mind the words of the English poet William Blake (1815):
I must Create a System, or be enslaved by another Man’s;
I will not Reason and Compare: my business is to Create.
It is indeed the case that the spirit of Blake’s words is well captured in Russell
Acko¡’s work. He has shown why they are apposite to systems thinking
and why they are just as relevant, probably more relevant, to the systems
age as to the time when Blake wrote them. Acko¡’s achievement goes
beyond this, however. For in his book Creating the Corporate Future, subtitled
‘plan or be planned for’, he sets out a detailed methodology that can actively
be used by stakeholders to plan and pursue a desirable future.
9.2.3
Methodology
Three principles underpin the methodology of interactive planning (Acko¡,
1981, 1999b). The ¢rst is the participativeprinciple. If possible all stakeholders
should participate in the various phases of the planning process. This is
the only way of ensuring ‘objectivity’. It also secures the main bene¢t of
planning ^ the involvement of members of the organization in the process.
This is more important than the actual plan produced. It is by being involved
in the process that stakeholders come to understand the role they can play
in the organization. It follows, of course, that no one can plan for anyone
else. The role of professional planners is not to do the planning, but to help
others plan for themselves.
The second principle is that of continuity. Because values change and
unexpected events occur, plans need to be constantly revised.
Description of interactive planning
161

The third is the holistic principle. Because of the importance of the inter-
actions between the parts of a system, we should plan simultaneously and
interdependently for as many parts and levels of the organization as
possible.
With these principles in mind we can now consider the ¢ve phases of the
interactive planning methodology itself:
.
formulating the mess;
.
ends planning;
.
means planning;
.
resource planning;
.
implementation and control.
These phases may be started in any order and none of the phases, let alone the
whole set, should ever be regarded as completed. They constitute a systemic
process.
Formulating the ‘mess’ involves determining the future an organization
would be in if it were to continue its current plans, policies and practices,
and if its environment changed only in ways that it expected. It demonstrates
that every organization needs to adapt. Three types of study are necessary:
.
systems analysis ^ giving a detailed picture of the organization, what it
does, its stakeholders and relationships with its environment;
.
obstruction analysis ^ setting out any obstacles to corporate develop-
ment;
.
reference projections ^ extrapolating on the organization’s present
performance in order to predict future performance if nothing is done
and trends in the environment continue in entirely predictable ways.
Synthesizing the results of these three types of study yields a ‘reference
scenario’, which is a formulation of the mess in which the organization
currently ¢nds itself. It reveals the seeds of self-destruction inherent in its
current policies, practices, plans and external expectations.
Phase 2, ends planning, is about ‘where to go’ and involves specifying
the purposes to be pursued in terms of ideals, objectives and goals. It has
¢ve steps. First, a mission statement is prepared. This should outline the
organization’s ultimate ends (its ‘ideals’), incorporate the organization’s
responsibilities to its environment and stakeholders, and aim to generate
widespread commitment. Second, planners should help the stakeholders to
162
Interactive planning

prepare a comprehensive list of the desired properties stakeholders agree
should be built into the system. Third, an ‘idealized design’ of the organiza-
tion should be prepared. The fourth step requires formulation of the
closest approximation to this design that is believed to be attainable.
Finally, the gaps between the approximation and the current state of the
system should be identi¢ed.
Idealized design is both the unique and most essential feature of Acko¡’s
approach. It should capture the vision that the stakeholders have for the
organization. An idealized design is the design for the enterprise that the
stakeholders would replace the existing system with today, if they were free
to do so. The idea that the system of concern was destroyed ‘last night’, no
longer exists and can be designed afresh today, is meant to generate
maximum creativity among those involved.
It is recommended that idealized design should be repeated twice ^ once to
produce a ‘bounded’ design, assuming no changes in the wider system, and
once to produce an ‘unbounded’ design, assuming that changes in the con-
taining system can be made. In Acko¡’s view, designers will ¢nd that most
organizations can be considerably improved just within the context of the
bounded design. This is because the barriers to change are usually in the
decision-makers’ own minds and in the organization itself.
To ensurethatcreativity is not hinderedduring idealized designonly three
constraints on the design are admissible. First, it must be technologically
feasible, and not a work of science ¢ction. It can be based on likely techno-
logical developments, but not, for example, on telepathy. Second, it must
be operationally viable: capable of working and surviving if it were imple-
mented in what would be its environment now. Third, the design must be
capable of being continuously improved. The aim of idealized design is not
to produce a ¢xed ‘Utopia’, but an ‘ideal-seeking system’ that will be in con-
stant £ux as it responds to changing values, new knowledge and information,
and bu¡eting from external forces. Beyond thesethree constraints everything
is open. Constraints of a political, ¢nancial or similar kind are not allowed
to restrict the creativity of the design.
An idealized design should cover all aspects of an organization and Acko¡
(1999b) provides the following as a typical list:
.
Products and services to be o¡ered.
.
Markets to be served.
.
Distribution system.
.
Organizational structure.
.
Internal ¢nancial structure.
Description of interactive planning
163

.
Management style.
.
Internal functions, such as ^
e
purchasing;
e
manufacturing;
e
maintenance;
e
engineering;
e
marketing and sales;
e
research and development;
e
¢nance;
e
accounting;
e
human resources;
e
buildings and grounds;
e
communications, internal and external;
e
legal;
e
planning;
e
organizational development;
e
computing and data processing.
.
Administrative services (e.g., mail and duplicating).
.
Facilities.
.
Industry, government and community a¡airs.
The remaining three phases of interactive planning are aimed at the realiza-
tion of the idealized design, at closing the gaps that have been identi¢ed in
the ¢nal step of that process.
Means planning is concerned with ‘how to get there’. Policies and pro-
cedures are generated and examined to decide whether they are capable of
helping to close the gap between the desired future, the idealized design
and the future the organization is currently locked into according to the
reference scenario. Creativity is needed to discover appropriate means of
bringing the organization toward the desirable future invented by its stake-
holders. Alternative means must be carefully evaluated and a selection made.
Resource planning involves working out ‘what’s needed to get there’.
Five types of resource should be taken into account:
.
money;
.
plant and equipment (capital goods);
.
people;
.
materials, supplies, energy and services (consumables);
.
data, information, knowledge, understanding and wisdom.
164
Interactive planning

Each of the chosen means will require appropriate resources. It must be de-
termined how much of each resource is wanted, when it is wanted and how
it can be obtained if not already held. It almost always turns out that there
is an excess or a shortage in terms of the initial means plan. This, in turn,
leads to a planning cycle in which either a productive use of excesses is
found or they have to be disposed of, or shortages have to be overcome or
plans changed.
Implementation and control is about ‘doing it’ and learning from what
happens. Procedures must be established for ensuring that all the decisions
made hitherto are carried out. Who is to do what, when, where and how is
decided. Once implementation is achieved the results need to be monitored
to ensure that plans are being realized. The outcome is fed back into the
planning process so that learning is possible and improvements can be
devised.
9.2.4
Methods
Readers of Acko¡’s books and articles will ¢nd him using many methods,
tools and techniques in support of the interactive planning process. Here
we concentrate on four models that he believes should be employed to help
shift from a ‘mechanistic’ or ‘organismic’ to a social^systemic form of organ-
ization; and so are essential to the establishment and success of interactive
planning. In considering these four models ^ of a ‘democratic hierarchy’, a
‘learning and adaptation support system’, an ‘internal market economy’ and
a ‘multidimensional organizational structure’ ^ we also need to bear in
mind Acko¡’s injunction that transformational leadership is essential in
putting them into e¡ect.
The need for a democratic hierarchy, or ‘circular organization’, arises:
from the fact that managers are best employed focusing on the interactions
of the parts rather than on controlling the parts directly; from the rising
level of educational attainment among the workforce; and from dissatis-
faction, in democratic societies, with working in organizations structured
along Stalinist lines (Acko¡, 1999b). The proposed democratic organization
strongly supports the participative principle that underpins interactive
planning.
In a circular organization every manager within the organization is pro-
vided with a ‘board’. At the top level this will involve external stakeholders
as well. Each manager’s board should minimally consist of the manager
whose board it is, the immediate superior of this manager and the immediate
subordinates of this manager. This design is shown in Figure 9.1 (from
Description of interactive planning
165

Acko¡, 1999a). The functions of the board are de¢ned as planning for the
unit whose board it is, policy for that unit, co-ordination, integration,
quality of work life, performance improvement and approval (if necessary,
dismissal) of the head of unit. Although this arrangement may seem un-
wieldy and time-consuming, Acko¡’s experience is that the bene¢ts in
terms of synergy and motivation are very considerable.
The model of a learning and adaptation support system should be used in
constructing the ‘ideal-seeking system’ that carries the idealized design. It
contains ¢ve essential functions (Acko¡, 1999a, b):
166
Interactive planning
Figure 9.1
A circular organization.
From Ackoff (1999a), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

.
identi¢cation and formulation of threats, opportunities and problems;
.
decision-making ^ determining what to do about these;
.
implementation;
.
control ^ monitoring performance and modifying actions;
.
acquisition or generation, and distribution of the information necessary
to carry out other functions.
This model is built on an array of feedback controls and takes account of the
work of Argyris and Scho« n on organizational learning, especially the impor-
tance of double-loop learning. It also insists that an organization monitor
errors of omission as well as errors of commission. Errors of omission,
which occur when something is not done that should have been done, are
usually ignored in bureaucracies that tend to be much more interested in
punishing people who do things.
Acko¡ (1999b) has found that many organizational problems involve
‘internal ¢nance’. These can be dissolved if the typical centrally planned
and controlled corporate economy is replaced with an internal market
economy. Every unit within an organization, including the executive
o⁄ce, must become a pro¢t centre or a cost centre for which some pro¢t
centre is responsible. It should then be permitted to purchase goods and
services from any internal and external supplier it chooses and sell its
output to any buyer it wishes. Higher authorities can override these
decisions, but if they do so are required to compensate the unit for any loss
of income or increased costs that arise due to the intervention.
A multidimensional organizational structure (Acko¡, 1999b) is recom-
mended because it increases £exibility and eliminates the need for continual
restructuring. Organizations divide their labour in three ways and, in so
doing, create three types of unit:
.
functionally de¢ned units whose output is primarily consumed
internally;
.
production- or service-de¢ned units whose output is primarily con-
sumed externally;
.
market- or user-de¢ned units de¢ned by type or location of customers.
Restructuring occurs when the relative importance of the three ways of
dividing labour changes and the system adjusts the level in the hierarchy at
which di¡erent types of unit are manifested. Acko¡ argues that time and
e¡ort can be saved if units of each type are placed permanently at every
level. Reorganization can then be replaced by reallocating resources.
Description of interactive planning
167

9.2.5
Recent developments
In recenttimes Acko¡(1999a) has feltobliged to use hisconsiderableintellect
to denounce the ‘panaceas, fads and quick ¢xes’ with which managers are
assailed and to which they are, unfortunately, prone. He shows that such
approaches as quality management, business process re-engineering and the
balanced scorecard are always likely to fail because they are fundamentally
antisystemic. They treat the whole as an aggregation of parts that can be
improved independently of one another. As systems thinking explains, this
often does not lead to any improvement in the performance of the whole
because it is the interactions between the parts that are fundamental and
need managing.
Another recent development is the establishment of the Acko¡ Center
for Advancement of Systems Approaches (ACASA) at the University of
Pennsylvania. This is signi¢cant because Acko¡ has often had problems
integrating the entrepreneurial and practice-orientated units he haspioneered
in normal university structures. It provides a base from which the Ackovian
form of systems thinking can be further re¢ned and applied to the many
organizational, societal and world problems to which it is relevant.
9.3
INTERACTIVE PLANNING IN ACTION
The account that follows picks some highlights from an interactive planning
project conducted in the DuPont Specialty Chemicals Safety, Health and
Environment (SHE) Function. Further details can be found in Leeman
(2002), who was central throughout. Acko¡ was involved at various points
as an advisor and has endorsed the project as a good example by including
a version in Re-creating the Corporation (1999b). My account is drawn from
these two sources. During the period that the work was ongoing (1995^
1998) DuPont was undergoing major corporate-wide transformation and
downsizing. The circumstances were not necessarily favourable, therefore,
for a successful application of interactive planning.
Throughout its long history, in the chemical production industry,
DuPont has prided itself on the attention it pays to the health and safety of
its employees. More recently, it has evinced similar concern about its
impact on the environment. The year 1994 saw a further step forward in all
these areas when its SHE policy was revised and released as ‘The DuPont
Commitment ^ Safety, Health and the Environment’. From this commit-
ment, the corporation derived a new slogan, ‘The Goal is ZERO’. Its
business units were to aim for zero injuries and illnesses, zero wastes and
168
Interactive planning

emissions, and zero environmental, process and transportation accidents and
incidents. In the Specialty Chemicals business unit it was recognized that
this meant the SHE function would need to go about its work in a radically
di¡erent fashion.
Leeman realized that bringing about such a transformation would require
a methodology that allowed purposes to be rethought and new goals sys-
temically pursued, and that encouraged widespread participation. Following
a chance meeting with Acko¡ and an analysis using the System Of Systems
Methodologies (SOSM) (see Chapter 2), it became apparent that interactive
planning would be suitable.
Mess formulation was curtailed as Acko¡ pointed out that DuPont was
already a leader in needed, occupational health and environmental protec-
tion, and the real e¡ort, therefore, should go into improving its leadership
position by gaining competitive advantage by further developing the
excellence of its SHE function. Nevertheless, a brief systems analysis was
conducted to ensure that SHE professionals were fully acquainted with
Specialty Chemicals’ businesses. And a brief obstruction analysis helped to
reveal certain weaknesses in the way SHE performed its current role. It was
structured in a centralized^hierarchical manner with a regulative rather
than facilitative orientation. As a result its expertise was not integrated into
business decision-making. SHE professionals were caught in a situation of
having to perform a multitude of mundane tasks and operating in a reactive
mode to crises. Knowledge management was poor.
Ends planning, featuring idealized design, was divided into two
parts. First, a group of consumers of SHE information and knowledge
was invited to specify the properties of an ideal SHE system. Second, a
designer group was asked to redesign the SHE system according to those
speci¢cations.
The consumer group consisted of individuals from Specialty Chemicals
chosen on the basis of six criteria:
.
they use SHE information;
.
they are responsible for its implementation;
.
they are capable of specifying what they need from a SHE system;
.
they represented diversity in thought and in gender and race;
.
they are capable of thinking ‘out of the box’;
.
they understand the need for SHE and its role in the business.
A number of SHE professionals were irritated by the role given to the
consumer group, believing that only they had the expertise to contribute
sensibly to the redesign of SHE.
Interactive planning in action
169

A ¢rst session concentrated on identifying positive and negative outputs
from the current SHE system. Some of Senge’s ideas (see Chapter 5) helped
the group to recognize the main structural problem as being the failure of
the SHE function to connect to the business needs of the Strategic Business
Units (SBUs). The next step was to specify the properties for an ideal SHE
system based on the presumption that the existing system had been destroyed
the night before and the new system could be designed unhindered by
traditional constraints. The consumer group identi¢ed 58 speci¢cations for
the ideal system; later narrowed to 19 and categorized in 9 major arenas.
The designer group was then put together, consisting of an even number
of SHE professionals and other managers from within Specialty Chemicals
with detailed knowledge of SHE. The group was tasked with designing an
ideal SHE system, to replace the one destroyed the previous night, using
all the speci¢cations from the consumer group and being sure to dissolve all
the negative outputs that had been identi¢ed.
The process began with the identi¢cation of nine stakeholders crucial to
SHE’s success: customers; employees; representatives from plant sites; busi-
ness functions; government agencies; SBUs; local communities; the
DuPont Company; and the corporate SHE function. The expectations of
each of these groups with regard to the SHE system were considered. John
Pourdehnad, from ACASA, then suggested following a version of idealized
design that required three iterations of four major steps:
.
creating a mission statement;
.
identifying the functions of the SHE system;
.
formulating the processes for doing the SHE work;
.
organizing the SHE structure to do the SHE work.
The ¢nal version of the mission statement read as follows:
A seamless SHE system that integrates, enables, and installs the core
DuPont SHE competency to successfully make chemicals, win in
business, and sustain our communities.
Paying attention to stakeholder expectations, the designer group then identi-
¢ed the key functions that the redesigned SHE system needed to o¡er. The
eventual list was:
.
performance auditing and analysis;
.
related project front-end loading guidance;
170
Interactive planning

.
training and education;
.
personnel development;
.
knowledge and learning;
.
risk assessment and recommendations;
.
federal, state and local regulatory advocacy;
.
community interactions;
.
methodology and technology development;
.
management and decision-making (planning);
.
core competency management;
.
information management.
For each function the group then designed the necessary work processes for
getting the work done. Finally, an organizational structure was proposed
for SHE that provided for appropriate relationships between units and
£ows of responsibility, authority, communications and resources, in order
to deliver the functions to the businesses. At the end of the three iterations
the designer group was convinced that their idealized design would meet
stakeholder expectations, match consumer speci¢cations and dissolve all
the output issues. The SHE ideal system is shown compared with the
SHE current state, in terms of mission, function, process and structure, in
Table 9.1.
The next phase of interactive planning, means planning, involves deter-
mining how the gaps between the idealized design and the current state are
going to be ¢lled. The team chosen for this task consisted of SHE pro-
fessionals from within Specialty Chemicals, most of whom had also been in
the designer group. The critical gaps identi¢ed were as follows:
.
current SHE system does not adjust to changing needs;
.
SHE professionals do not have time to deliver the ‘high value’
functions ^ prevention versus intervention;
.
we currently do not deliver many of the ideal state primary functions;
.
we do not know where the ‘required inputs’ reside;
.
SHE is focused on operations, not on increasing the business com-
petitive advantage.
For each of these, ways of closing the gap were proposed. For example, ‘SHE
is focused on operations . . .’ could be addressed by:
Interactive planning in action
171

.
clearly de¢ned connections between SHE and business leaders;
.
clearly de¢ned and supported SHE functions for business teams and
customers;
.
make SHE part of the SBU sta¡ to increase status.
Leeman emphasizes the e¡orts needed during this phase to keep the team
focused, integrated and committed, and to ensure continued high-level
management support.
The resource plan, aimed at identifying and providing the resources neces-
sary to bridge the gaps and realize the idealized design, was then put in
place. This consisted of personnel planning, ¢nancial planning, facilities
and equipment planning, and materials, suppliers and services planning. In
personnel planning, for example, the need to hire a full-time project
manager and new facilitator, and to set up eight SHE knowledge networks,
a core team and a steering team were identi¢ed.
Implementation concerns who is going to do what, when, whereandhow.
It was achieved successfully by paying particular attention to ‘the human
factor’, ‘the organizational factor’ and ‘the commitment factor’, and by
ensuring that controls over implementation were designed that allowed
tracking of progress.
Atthe end of the interactiveplanning project in DuPont, it was possible to
identify the following clear bene¢ts:
.
a step-change improvement in SHE performance, shown by the most
signi¢cant improvement in operational SHE performance metrics in its
history;
.
SHE work was aligned with business goals and objectives to such an
extent that relationships between SHE professionals and people in the
business were transformed into a partnership;
.
SHE began to be perceived as a value-adding pro¢t centre rather than a
‘cost-of-doing-business’ unit, and its services became highly valued by
the wider organization and recognized as a powerful di¡erentiator by
external customers;
.
organizational learning £ourished among SHE professionals who were
enabled to do more higher value-adding work, while their knowledge
was made available to all to aid decision-making and routine SHE tasks
were carried out by line employees;
.
a wider range of creative and less expensive solutions to SHE issues and
problems were explored and implemented.
172
Interactive planning

Interactive planning in action
173
Table 9.1
Safety, Health and Environment (SHE) fundamental changes.
SHE current state
SHE ideal state
Mission
Mission
1. Compliance-driven
1. Stakeholder-driven
2. Reactive/Intervention
2. Proactive/Prevention
3. Not aligned with business
3. Fully integrated within the business
4. Cost of doing business
4. Revenue enhancer/Value adder
Function
Function
1. SHE is operations support
1. SHE is business, operations and
customer support
2. Regulation tracking and interpretation
2. Regulation knowledge:
f shaping regulations
f quick access to regulation
interpretations
f shaping business plans
3. SHE training
3. SHE education
4. Data/Information generation
4. Knowledge/Understanding
generation
Process
Process
1. Policing through auditing
1. Risk assessment and loss prevention
2. Government report preparation
2. Automated/Electronic reporting
3. Manual data collection/documentation
3. Automated data collection/
documentation
4. Classroom training
4. Online learn^teach^learn SHE system
Structure
Structure
1. SHE is ‘centralized’
1. SHE is leveraged and distributed
2. ‘Stovepiped’
2. SHE is on cross-functional business
teams
3. Hierarchical
3. ‘Lowerarchical’
4. SHE personnel con¢ned to plant
4. SHE personnel on transunit teams
5. Line accountable for safety
5. Business and line accountable for
SHE
6. SHE reports to operations
6. SHE reports to vice-president/
general manager

Leeman is convinced that the project’s success was due to the principles of
participation, continuity and holism embraced and operationalized through
interactive planning. The idealized design process was essential for unleash-
ing creativity, and participation ensured that energy and commitment
levels were maintained during the hard work of implementation.
9.4
CRITIQUE OF INTERACTIVE PLANNING
Acko¡’s development of interactive planning, with its commitment to
dissolving problems by designing a desirable future and inventing ways of
bringing it about, has taken him a long way from some of his erstwhile
colleagues stuck in the predict-and-prepare paradigm of hard systems
thinking. In the systems age, he believes, it has become necessary to shift
the emphasis of management science toward exploring purposes and institu-
tionalizing agreed ideals, objectives and goals in a manner that allows for
continuous learning and adaptation. Idealized design seeks to harness the
diverse purposes of di¡erent stakeholders by focusing their attention away
from petty di¡erences onto the ends they would all like to see their organiza-
tion pursue. Participation at the di¡erent stages of the planning process
allows stakeholders to incorporate their aesthetic values in the idealized
design and the means necessary to realize it. Doing the right things (e¡ective-
ness) according to the values of stakeholders and in ways that are pleasing
to them (elegance) are central to Acko¡’s approach.
Acko¡ has demonstrated the usefulness of interactive planning as a
practical systems approach in hundreds of projects with organizations of all
types in the USA and elsewhere. Much of its success is due, he believes
(Acko¡, 1999a), to the fact that it is based on an appropriate kind of
systems model. In explaining this, he argues that there are four di¡erent
types of system. ‘Deterministic’ systems have no purposes and neither do
their parts (although they can serve the purposes of other purposeful
systems). ‘Animated’ systems have purposes of their own, but their parts
do not. ‘Social’ systems have purposes of their own, contain purposeful
parts and are usually parts of larger purposeful systems. ‘Ecological’
systems contain interacting mechanistic, organismic and social systems, but
unlike social systems have no purposes of their own. They serve the purposes
of the biological and social systems that are their parts. Problems arise if a
model appropriate to one type of system is applied to a system of a di¡erent
type.
Acko¡ builds interactive planning, as we have seen, on the back of a
174
Interactive planning

purposeful systems model. This is appropriate to organizations, he believes,
because social systems are purposeful systems containing other purposeful
systems and are part of wider purposeful systems. Interactive planning
seeks to galvanize stakeholders, upholding various purposes, in pursuit of a
vision of what their organizations might be like. It conducts a process that
can generate consensus, mobilize stakeholders and reveal to them that only
their own limited imaginations prevent them from getting the future they
most desire right here, right now. Those who apply deterministic or
animate models to social systems may sometimes bring bene¢ts, over a
short period of time, but in the longer run they will get less desirable
results because these models omit to consider what is essential about social
systems.
It needs remembering, though, that while Acko¡ distances himself from
deterministic and animate models, and builds interactive planning on a
more sophisticated view of the nature of organizations, he is still willing to
make use of what the earlier thinking had to o¡er in support of his own pre-
ferred S3. Systems age thinking complements rather than replaces machine
age thinking and, for example, Acko¡’s model of a ‘learning and adaptation
support system’, recommended for use in support of interactive planning,
has much in common with Beer’s neurocybernetic ‘viable system model’.
Critics of Acko¡ (see Jackson, 1982, 1983, 2000; Flood and Jackson, 1991)
concentrate on what they see as a bias in the particular social systems model
that he endorses. There has always been a tension in social theory between
those who emphasize the consensual and those who concentrate on the
con£ictual aspects of social systems. To his critics, the nature of interactive
planning suggests that Acko¡’s orientation is toward consensus. He seems
to believe that there is a basic community of interests among stakeholders,
which will make them willing to enter into interactive planning and to
participate freely and openly in idealized design. It appears that there are no
fundamental con£icts of interest between and within system, wider system
and subsystem that cannot be dissolvedbyappealing to thisbasic community
of interests.
It is further argued that it is only because Acko¡ believes in a basically con-
sensual social world that he is able to lay such store by participation as a
remedy for somany organizational ills. Participation isessential to interactive
planning because it guarantees the ‘objectivity’ of the results and because it
generates creativity and commitment, and ensures implementation. Critics
point to various barriers to full and e¡ective participation. The powerful
may not be willing to enter into a debate about an idealized design that
would result in them losing their in£uence and prestige. Even if interactive
Critique of interactive planning
175

planning can be got under way, we cannot expect that all the stakeholders
will be able to participate equally. They will enter the process with widely
divergent economic, political and international resources. The less fortunate
will be disadvantaged and the debate will be exceptionally constrained.
All this seems obvious to those who argue that con£ict is endemic in social
and organizational systems and that incompatibility of interests is common.
Such critics see Acko¡ as operating at the ideological level to smooth over
subjective di¡erences of opinion. In their view, however, permanent resolu-
tion of con£icts between stakeholders needs to be in terms of objective and
not merely subjective interests, and may require a revolution in the whole
social structure.
Acko¡ (1982, pers. commun. 2003) argues back that in every case in which
con£icting parties have been willing to meet him, face to face, he has been
able to ¢nd a solution to the con£ict. If participation proves to be an issue,
it is possible to work at gradually increasing the involvement of less
privileged stakeholders and assisting them when they do get involved.
What do the critics expect? It is surely better to work with stakeholders to
see what changes are possible in the circumstances prevailing than to wait
for ever for the arrival of a Utopia in which no inequalities exist. Further-
more, if he comes across genuinely irresolvable con£icts and cannot bring
the parties together, Acko¡ is quite prepared to work with the willing
(usually disadvantaged) party to help them get what they want and what he
feels is just. He will not work for clients whose values he cannot endorse.
The critics respond that Acko¡ underestimates the frequency of irresolv-
able con£icts because he does not seek to challenge his sponsors’ interests.
By getting the disadvantaged to believe they have interests in common
with the powerful he is locking them further into ‘false-consciousness’ and
depriving them of the ability to represent properly their real interests.
In the exchanges between Acko¡ and his critics we are witnessing a war
between sociological paradigms. In breaking with hard systems thinking
and establishing S3, Acko¡ was moving from a functionalist rationale,
emphasizing making systems work more e⁄ciently, to an interpretive
rationale emphasizing the need for mutually agreed purposes among stake-
holders. To critics of an emancipatory persuasion, however, both these
positions remain ‘regulative’. What Acko¡ is missing is an understanding
of the forms of power and domination that distort social systems and that
can only be overcome by radical change. In terms of the SOSM, Acko¡
explores the ‘participants dimension’ far enough to take account of plural-
ism, but not far enough to be able to recognize coercion.
Metaphor analysis provides further insight. Acko¡ is not happy with
176
Interactive planning

looking at corporations, in the systems age, as though they are machines or
organisms. His purposeful systems view brings the culture and political
system metaphors to the fore. The problem, for emancipatory theorists, is
that this still leaves out of account the metaphors that they most value ^
organizations as psychic prisons and as instruments of domination.
Acko¡’s work is powerful because it addresses a wide variety of organiza-
tional issues as revealed by a number of important metaphors. It responds
to the idea that organizations depend on a political coalition of stakeholders
sharing something of a common culture, as well as recognizing that they
should be designed to promote learning, like brains. The machine and
organism models are seen as useful too ^ in a dependent role and in the
right circumstances. Recognition of the di¡erent insights provided by this
range of metaphors gives Acko¡ access to almost the full dictionary of signif-
icant systems ideas and concepts. And the process is not ¢nished. Jamshid
Gharajedaghi (1999), a disciple of Acko¡’s, has sought to interpret chaos
and complexity theory in an interactive planning framework. Acko¡
(1999b) has taken to talking of his ‘multidimensional organizational
structure’ as a fractal design. What if anything Acko¡ misses seeing, in
terms of emancipatory and postmodern concerns, can be judged from a
review of the approaches described under Types C and D in this part of the
book.
9.5
THE VALUE OF INTERACTIVE PLANNING TO MANAGERS
The advantages for managers of adopting interactive planning are said to be
many, and these are well documented in Acko¡’s work. The ¢ve most
frequently cited and evidenced are the following:
.
The approach facilitates the participation of all stakeholders in the
planning process and therefore secures the main bene¢t of planning,
continuous engagement in the process itself and not the production of
some ¢nal document.
.
Allowing stakeholders to be dominant in the planning process and to
incorporate theirown aesthetic values into planning relieves professional
plannersof the impossible taskofmeasuring‘quality’on behalfof others.
.
Idealized design releases large amounts of suppressed creativity and
harnesses it to organizational and personal development.
.
Interactive planning expands participants’ conception of what is possible
The value of interactive planning to managers
177

and reveals that the biggest obstructions to achieving the future we most
desire are often self-imposed constraints.
.
The participative principle helps generate consensus and commitment,
and eases the implementation of the outcomes of planning.
9.6
CONCLUSION
Interactive planning was developed by Acko¡ to assist stakeholders design a
desirable future for themselves, their organization and the environment it
inhabits, and to help them invent ways of bringing that future about. This
is a powerful vision of the role of management science and explains in large
part why Acko¡’s work has had such a colossal impact on the OR and
systems communities.
Examined in detail, and in terms of what it is really able to deliver, interac-
tive planning does not disappoint. It is arguable, however, that no approach
can be comprehensive enough to achieve what Acko¡ wants from interactive
planning and that, in representing itself as being comprehensive, it inevitably
disguises its own particular biases. Creative holism or critical systems
thinking, as we will see in Part III, shares the vision, but tries to pursue it
in a rather di¡erent way.
REFERENCES
Acko¡, R.L. (1974). Redesigning the Future. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Acko¡, R.L. (1981). Creating the Corporate Future. John Wiley & Sons, New
York.
Acko¡, R.L. (1982). On the hard headedness and soft heartedness of M.C.
Jackson. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 9, 31^33.
Acko¡, R.L. (1999a). Acko¡’s Best: His Classic Writings on Management. John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Acko¡, R.L. (1999b). Re-creating the Corporation: A Design of Organizations for the
21st Century. Oxford University Press, New York.
Blake, W. (1815). Jerusalem (Chapter 1).
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Gharajedaghi, J. (1999). Systems Thinking: Managing Chaos and Complexity.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston.
178
Interactive planning

Jackson, M.C. (1982). The nature of soft systems thinking: The work of
Churchman, Acko¡ and Checkland. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis 9, 17^
28.
Jackson, M.C. (1983). The nature of soft systems thinking: Comments on the
three replies. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 10, 109^113.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Leeman, J.E. (2002). Applying interactive planning at DuPont. Systems Practice
and Action Research, 15, 85^109.
References
179


Soft Systems
Methodology
10
Here we need to remember that what in the end turns out to be feasible
will itself be affected by the learning generated by the project itself:
human situations are never static.
Checkland and Scholes (1990)
10.1
INTRODUCTION
Peter Checkland, the founder of Soft Systems Methodology (SSM), studied
chemistry and did research on spectroscopy at Oxford before spending 15
years with ICI, initially as a technical o⁄cer later as a group manager. As
his managerial responsibilities increased in ICI, he began to look for assis-
tance to the literature of management science, then dominated by ‘hard
systems thinking’. He was shocked and disappointed to ¢nd that much of
what he read was completely irrelevant to his job. Management science was
in thrall to the ‘goal-seeking’ paradigm exempli¢ed in the work of the
Nobel Prize winner Herbert Simon. Checkland regarded this as an inade-
quate formulation in terms of the actual practice of management, which he
later came to describe, following Geo¡rey Vickers, as much more about
‘relationship maintaining’.
A growing fascination with such matters, together with an interest in the
application of systems ideas, led Checkland to leave ICI and to join the ¢rst
‘systems’ department in the UK: the Department of Systems Engineering
established at Lancaster University, with a grant from ICI, by Professor
Gwilym Jenkins. There, in 1969, he began the research from which SSM
emerged.
SSM is a methodology, setting out principles for the use of methods, that
enables intervention in ill-structured problem situations where relationship
maintaining is at least as important as goal-seeking and answering questions

about ‘what’ we should do as signi¢cant as determining ‘how’ to do it. The
success of SSM has been central to the soft systems revolution which has
liberated systems thinking from the intellectual straightjacket in which it
was locked and, at the same time, has made it much more relevant to man-
agers. Today, SSM is used by both academics and practitioners, is important
in a number of applied disciplines (e.g., ‘information systems’) and has
spread its in£uence to many countries outside the UK.
10.2
DESCRIPTION OF SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
(SSM)
10.2.1
Historical development
The systems approach used in the newly established department at Lancaster
University was inevitably Jenkins’ systems engineering, as described in
Chapter 4. This demanded well-structured problems and clearly de¢ned
objectives and measures of performance; it was a typical hard systems
methodology. Jenkins was determined, however, that systems engineering
should not stagnate, which it was likely to do if its study became purely
‘academic’, and so he initiated an action research programme in which the
approach was ‘tested’ in real organizations outside the University. A virtuous
circle of interaction between ideas and experience became possible and was
fully exploited in later years by Checkland and his coworkers at Lancaster.
The research strategy adopted by Checkland when he arrived at Lancaster
was to try to use Jenkins’ systems engineering approach to tackle manage-
ment problems and to learn from the results. During the course of this
action research the methodology had to be radically changed to make it
appropriate for dealing with the greater complexity and ambiguity of the
managerial as opposed to the engineering context. What eventually
emerged after considerable project work and re£ection on the experience
gained was an entirely di¡erent kind of approach ^ Checkland’s SSM (see
Checkland, 1981, 1999).
In the ¢rst full account of this methodology, Checkland (1976) describes
three of the most signi¢cant early project experiences that led to the break
from systems engineering and the formulation of SSM. In all three it was
clear that serious problems existed in the organizations of interest, but the
clients simply could not say what they were in precise terms. Each of the
problem situations was vague and unstructured. One of the projects, in a
textile ¢rm, gave rise to at least a dozen candidates for the role of ‘the
182
Soft systems methodology

problem’. Generalizing from these three projects, Checkland was able to
specify how SSM needed to di¡erentiate itself from hard approaches.
First, in confronting ‘softer’ problems the analysis phase of a method-
ology should not be pursued in systems terms. In the absence of agreed
goals and objectives, or an obvious hierarchy of systems to be engineered,
using systems ideas too early can lead to a distortion of the problem situation
and to jumping to premature conclusions. Analysis, in soft systems
approaches, should consist of building up the richest possible picture of the
problem situation rather than trying to capture it in systems models.
Second, given that it is not obvious which if any system needs to be
engineered, it is more appropriate from the analysis to de¢ne a range of
systems possibly relevant to improving the problem situation, each expres-
sing a particular world view (or Weltanschauung). These notional systems
can be named in ‘root de¢nitions’ and developed more fully in ‘conceptual
models’. The use of SSM will therefore lead to the construction of a
number of models to be compared with the real world, rather than just one
as in hard methodologies.
These models represent ‘human activity systems’, and Checkland came to
recognize their delineation as one of the most important breakthroughs in
the development of SSM. Previous systems thinkers had sought to model
physical systems, designed systems, even social systems, but they had not
treated purposeful human activity systemically. A human activity system is
a model of a notional system containing the activities people need to under-
take in order to pursue a particular purpose.
Finally, while the models produced by hard approaches are meant to be
models of the real world or blueprints for design, human activity system
models are contributions to a debate about change. They explicitly set out
what activities are necessary to achieve a purpose meaningful from a particu-
lar point of view. On the basis of such models, participants in the problem
situation aim to learn their way to what changes are systemically desirable
and culturally feasible. The models are thus epistemological devices used to
¢nd out about the real world.
The action research programme that was established at Lancaster and
yielded theseearly successes has been continued in many hundreds of projects
since. Figure 10.1 shows the essence of the process as described by Checkland
and Holwell (1998). The researcher ¢rst seeks out a real-world problem
situation relevant to his or her research interests. He then negotiates entry
into that area of concern (A) declaring in advance the framework of ideas
(philosophy, theories, etc.) and methodology he will use in trying to bring
about improvements. He takes part in action in the situation and re£ects on
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
183

what happens using the framework of ideas (F) and methodology (M). This
yields ¢ndings relevant to F, M and A, and possibly some new research
themes.
The articulation and pursuit of this action research programme ensured
that lessons could be learned from experience and incorporated in SSM,
that re£ection could take place on the philosophical underpinnings of the
methodology, and re¢nements could be made to supportive methods and
techniques. The developments that have occurred can be traced through
the series of books Checkland has written on SSM: Systems Thinking,
Systems Practice (1981); Soft Systems Methodology in Action (with Scholes)
(1990); Information, Systems and Information Systems (with Holwell) (1998); and
Systems Thinking, Systems Practice (including a 30-year retrospective) (1999).
10.2.2
Philosophy and theory
In re£ecting on the shift in philosophical perspective necessary to establish
SSM, Checkland (1983) has suggested that whereas hard systems approaches
184
Soft systems methodology
Figure 10.1
The cycle of action research.
From Checkland and Holwell (1998), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

are based on a paradigm of optimization, his own methodology embraces a
paradigm of learning.
Hard approaches assume the world contains systems the performance of
which can be optimized by following systematic procedures. These proce-
dures involve establishing clear objectives and then using generalizable
models, based on systems logic, to enable prediction and control of the
real-world systems of concern so that the objectives are realized with
maximum e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy. Unfortunately for hard systems thinking,
logic is usually much less signi¢cant in terms of what happens in organiza-
tions than is the history, culture and politics of the situation.
Recognizing this, SSM takes reality to be problematical and ceases to
worry about modelling it systemically. Instead, it seeks to work with di¡er-
ent perceptions of reality, facilitating a systemic process of learning in
which di¡erent viewpoints are examined and discussed in a manner that can
lead to purposeful action in pursuit of improvement. Participants use a
systemic methodology to learn what changes are feasible and desirable
given the peculiarities of their problem situation. Checkland puts this
concisely in stating that SSM shifts ‘systemicity from the world to the
process of enquiry into the world.’
At the theoretical level what is being announced is a complete break with
the functionalism that, until the 1980s, dominated the systems approach.
The implied social theory of hard systems thinking, for example, is clearly
functionalism. It is objectivist and regulative in orientation. Checkland
rightly argues that the social theory implicit in SSM is interpretive rather
than functionalist. In his methodology, systems are seen as the mental
constructs of observers of the world. Di¡erent descriptions of reality, based
on di¡erent world views, are embodied in ‘root de¢nitions’. These root
de¢nitions are turned into conceptual models that are explicitly one-sided
representations of reality expressing a particular Weltanschauung. A debate is
then structured around the implications of these di¡erent perceptions of the
way things could be. This is resonant of the interpretive sociology of
Weber rather than the functionalism of Durkheim, and of the phenomenol-
ogy of Husserl and Schutz rather than the positivism of Comte.
As a ¢nal attempt to elucidate the philosophy and theory underpinning
SSM, it is worth outlining the concept of ‘organization’ that Checkland
and Holwell (1998) see as implied by the approach. SSM treats the notion
of ‘organization’ as extremely problematical. It only arises because of the
readiness of people, members and non-members alike, to talk and act as
though they were engaging with a collective entity capable of purposeful
actionin its ownright. Onthisbasis, there may emerge a degree of agreement
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
185

on purposes, social processes to pursue those purposes, and criteria for evalu-
ating performance. This, in turn, may lead to the de¢nition of organizational
‘roles’ and the establishment of norms and values. Despite the willingness
of individuals to conform in this way, there will be many di¡erent conceptua-
lizations of the nature and aims of the ‘organization’, premised on the
values and interests of individuals and subgroups, apart from any ‘o⁄cial’
version of its purpose. People constantly seek to renegotiate their roles,
norms and values, and are capable of displaying considerable ‘cussedness
and irrationality’ in the face of o⁄cial goals. Because the di¡erent values
and interests will rarely coincide exactly, the ‘organization’ depends for its
existence on the establishment of temporary ‘accommodations’ between
individuals and subgroups. These also provide the basis for any action to
bring about change.
The concept of ‘organization’ set out by Checkland and Holwell suggests,
following Vickers (1965, 1970), that management is much more about
managing a richly unfolding set of relationships than it is about taking
rational decisions to achieve goals. This, of course, is exactly what SSM
seeks to do. Checkland and Holwell argue that the hundreds of successful
action research projects conducted using SSM speak for the superiority of
their concept over the traditional, machine model of organization.
10.2.3
Methodology
Although Checkland no longer favours it, the representation of SSM as a
seven-stage cyclic, learning system, which appeared in 1981 in Systems
Thinking, Systems Practice, is still frequently used today. It is shown in
Figure 10.2.
In the ¢rst stage a sense of unease felt by individuals leads to the identi¢ca-
tion ofa problem situationthat demandsattention. The second stage requires
that this problem situation is expressed, not in systems terms but in the
form of a rich picture. The aim is to gain and disseminate creative under-
standing of the problem situation. The early guidelines emphasized the
need for a ‘neutral’ rich picture constructed by gathering information about
the structures and processes at work, and the relationship between the
two ^ the ‘climate’. Later, it became clear that a good way of doing the
expression stage was to take the idea of rich pictures literally and to draw
pictorial, cartoon-like representations of the problem situation that highlight
signi¢cant and contentious aspects in a manner likely to lead to original
thinking at stage 3 of SSM. The rich picture technique is one of the most
successful and frequently used of the methods that have come to be asso-
186
Soft systems methodology

ciated with SSM and, as with other such methods, is explained in Subsection
10.2.4.
It is now time for some ‘below the line’ (see Figure 10.2) systems thinking
to be undertaken. In stage 3 some relevant human activity systems, poten-
tially o¡ering insight into the problem situation, are selected and from
these ‘root de¢nitions’ are built. A root de¢nition should be well formulated
to capture the essence of the relevant system and, to ensure that it is, should
pay attention to the factors brought to mind by CATWOE (Customers,
Actors, Transformation process, World view, Owners and Environmental
constraints). As the W indicates, each root de¢nition re£ects a di¡erent way
of conceiving the problem situation. Checkland (1987) provides the
example of a prison, which it can be helpful to consider as a punishment
system, a rehabilitation system, a system to deter, a system to protect
society and as a ‘university of crime’. In stage 4 these root de¢nitions are
used to construct conceptual models. Conceptual models consist initially of
seven or so activities, each with a signi¢cant verb, structured in a logical
sequence and representing those minimum activities that are necessary to
achieve the transformation enshrined in the root de¢nition. They are
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
187
Figure 10.2
The learning cycle of Soft Systems Methodology (SSM).

perhaps the key artefact in SSM and Checkland refers to them as ‘holons’ to
emphasize their arti¢cial status and to distinguish them from the ‘systems’
people loosely refer to as existing in the real world. Thus, for example, no
prison is ‘a punishment system’ or ‘a rehabilitation system’ or ‘a system to
protect society’; these are notional concepts relevant to exploring the realities
of any actual prison.
The conceptual models, developed if necessary to a higher level of resolu-
tion, are then brought back above the line in Figure 10.2 to be compared
with what is perceived to exist in the problem situation according to the
rich picture. This constitutes stage 5 of the methodology. The aim is to
provide material for debate about possible change among those interested
in the problem situation. Thus SSM articulates a social process in which
Ws are held up for examination and their implications, in terms of human
activities, are made explicit and discussed. Stage 6 should see an accommoda-
tion developing among concerned actors over what changes, if any, are
both desirable in terms of the models and feasible given the history, culture
and politics prevailing. Often these changes can be classi¢ed as attitudinal,
structural and procedural. When accommodations are found, action can be
taken that alleviates some of the initial unease and, therefore, improves the
problem situation.
The conclusion of the methodological cycle is more likely to lead to the
emergence of another, di¡erent problem situation than it is to provide a
long-standing ‘solution’. Ending a systems study is therefore, for Checkland,
an arbitrary act. Problem resolving should be seen as a never-ending
process in which participants’ attitudes and perceptions are continually
explored, tested and changed, and they come to entertain new conceptions
of desirability and feasibility.
An important point to note, and one that is clear from Figure 10.2, is that
SSM is doubly systemic. It uses ‘human activity system’ models in stages 4
and 5 as part of an overall systemic learning process.
As experience of using SSM accumulated, Checkland began to ¢nd the
original seven-stage representation too limiting. It had always been stressed
that the learning cycle could be commenced at any stage and that SSM
should be used £exibly and iteratively, but the seven-stage model still
seemed to contribute to a systematic (rather than systemic) understanding
of the process and one, moreover, in which use of the methodology appeared
cut o¡ from the ordinary day-to-day activities of the organization. In an
attempt to overcome this, and to demonstrate that SSM in use requires
constant attention to and re£ection on cultural aspects of the situation of
concern, a new representation of the methodology was developed. This
188
Soft systems methodology

‘two-strands model’, which ¢rst appeared in Checkland and Scholes’ Soft
Systems Methodology in Action (1990), is shown in Figure 10.3.
The two-strands model of SSM gives equal attention to a ‘stream of
cultural analysis’ as to the logic-based stream of analysis that had tended to
dominate the seven-stage version. SSM after all takes, as its task, manage-
ment of the ‘myths and meanings’ that are so central to the functioning of
organizations because they are the means by which individuals make sense
of their situations. The enhanced cultural analysis takes the form of three
types of inquiry, referred to as Analyses 1, 2 and 3.
Analysis 1 considers the intervention itself and the roles of client,
problem-solver and problem-owners, de¢ned as follows:
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
189
Figure 10.3
The two-strands version of SSM.
From Checkland and Scholes (1990), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

.
the client is the person(s) who causes the systems study to take place;
.
the problem-solver is the person(s) who wishes to do something about
the problem situation;
.
the problem-owners are stakeholders with an interest in the problem
situation.
The way the intervention is de¢ned needs to re£ect the problem-solver’s
perceptions, knowledge and ability to make resources available and to take
into account the client’s reasons for causing it to happen. No one is intrin-
sically a problem owner, but, in order to be holistic, the problem-solver(s)
should consider a wide range of stakeholders as possible problem owners.
Looking at the problem situation from the various perspectives of many
di¡erent problem owners ensures a good source of relevant systems to feed
the logic-based stream of analysis.
Analysis 2, social system analysis, looks at roles, norms and values, de¢ned
as follows:
.
roles are social positions that can be institutionally de¢ned (e.g., head of
department, shop steward) or behaviourally de¢ned (e.g., opinion
leader, con¢dante);
.
norms are the expected behaviours that go with a role;
.
values are the standards by which performance in a role is judged.
These three elements are assumed to be in continuous interaction with each
other and to be constantly changing.
Analysis 3 examines the politics of the problem situation and how power
is obtained and used. This can be overt or covert and rests on various
‘commodities’ that bring in£uence in an organization, such as command
over resources, professional skills, talent and personality.
Analyses 1, 2 and 3 are not done once and then stored for reference in a
systems study. It is essential that they are continually updated and developed
as the intervention progresses. Often it is helpful to incorporate them into
an initial rich picture, which is then revisited and reworked. Recognition of
the cultural and political aspects of a problem situation, and the way they
are changing, can massively assist in the logic-based stream of analysis. It
can guide the choice of insightful relevant systems, help an analyst secure
more open discussion and inform the process of arriving at recommenda-
tions for feasible changes.
Before leaving soft systems methodology itself, it needs to be emphasized
that the process of using it should be participative. It is desirable that as
190
Soft systems methodology

many interested parties as possible cometo ‘own’ the study and the changes it
recommends, by being involved in using the methodology. Only in this
way will participants learn their way to new conceptions of what is feasible
as their perceptions and attitudes are tested and modi¢ed. Changes that
could not be conceived of before the intervention began, because of the
history and culture of the situation, may then seem obvious by the time it is
¢nished.
10.2.4
Methods
Given the importance of participation for the success of SSM interventions,
it is surprising that Checkland and his coworkers have not given more
attention to how it might be promoted and facilitated. This is especially the
case when we consider the e¡ort that has gone into re¢ning certain other
methods associated with the methodology. Here we consider four of the
best known tools: rich pictures, root de¢nitions, conceptual models and
‘comparison’. The ¢rst assists with the cultural stream of analysis, the
second and third with the logic-based stream, and the fourth provides the
link between the two.
Rich pictures are actual drawings that allow the various features of a
problem situation, as it is perceived, to be set down pictorially for all to see.
There are no rules for drawing rich pictures and, while some are quite
formalized, others are very cartoon-like in nature. Much depends on the
skill and purposes of the person(s) doing the drawing. The idea that it is
useful to look at a problem situation in terms of structures, processes and
climate may help, and Analyses 1, 2 and 3 should certainly feed into the
rich picture(s). Otherwise, it is obvious that rich pictures are selective and
that it is an art to know which issues, con£icts and other problematic and
interesting aspects to accentuate. If done well, rich pictures can assist
creativity, express the interrelationships in a problem situation better than
linear prose, allow the easy sharing of ideas between those involved in an
intervention, catalyse discussion and act as an excellent memory aid. Figure
10.4 is a rich picture produced by Superintendent P.J. Gaisford (1989)
during a soft systems study of female street prostitution in central London.
From the representation of the problem situation in the rich picture and
drawing especially on what the problem owners regard as important,
various ‘relevant systems’ can be chosen for further analysis. Relevant
systems should o¡er insight into the problem situation and begin to
suggest actions for improving it. They are the bridge to the rigour of the
logic-based stream of analysis.
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
191

Each relevant system is expanded into a ‘root de¢nition’, which is a
concise statement of what that (notional) system is in its most fundamental
form. Since this root de¢nition is the basis for a model of purposeful
human activity, it needs to have at its core a transformation (T) process in
which some input is changed into a new state or form, which then becomes
the output. It must also specify the Weltanschauung (W) that makes the
192
Soft systems methodology
Figure 10.4
A rich picture.
From Flood and Carson (1988), reproduced by permission of Plenum Press.
KEY
A
Shepherds Market Area
B
Sussex Gardens Area
C
Bayswater Road Area
D
Piccadilly Circus Area
E
Victoria Station Area
F
Soho Area
JPU
Juvenile Protection Unit
Clubs Office
SOS
Street Offences Squad
JAR
Juveniles at risk
WCC
Westminster City Council
LTP
London Teenage Project

transformation meaningful in terms of the context. A well-formulated root
de¢nition ^ one that can give rise to a useful conceptual model ^ is also
likely to pay attention to who can stop the transformation from happening,
who is to do it, who is to bene¢t or su¡er from it, and what environmental
constraints limit the actions and activities.
We now have six elements that a root de¢nition should make reference to
unless justi¢cation can be provided for omitting any of them. These are
captured in the mnemonic CATWOE as follows:
C
‘customers’ ^ the bene¢ciaries or victims of the transformation process;
A
‘actors’ ^ those who would undertake the transformation process;
T
‘transformation’ ^ the conversion of input to output;
W ‘world view’ ^ the world view that makes this transformation
meaningful;
O ‘owners’ ^ those who could stop the transformation;
E
‘environmental constraints’ ^ elements outside the system that are taken
as given.
In a study for the Information and Library Services Department (ILSD) in
ICI Organics (discussed in Checkland and Scholes, 1990), Checkland
produced the following root de¢nition of the role of ‘enabling systems’,
which continues to be in£uential in SSM:
An ICI-owned and staffed
system to operate wealth-generating
operations supported by enabling support systems which tailor their
support through development of particular relationships with the main
operations
C
ICI
A
ICI people
T
need for supported wealth generation N need met via a structure of
main operations and enabling support
W
a belief that this structure will generate wealth
O
ICI
E
structure of the main operations plus support; ICI ethos.
Root de¢nitions are used to explore the possibilities available for change in
the problem situation given its history, culture and politics. To ensure the
exploration is thorough, or ‘holistic’, it is always necessary to consider a
number of di¡erent root de¢nitions. It is also useful to take forward two
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
193

types of root de¢nition: ‘primary task’ and ‘issue-based’. Primary task root
de¢nitions tend to refer to o⁄cially declared tasks in the organization and
to give rise to models that map existing organizational structures. Issue-
based models refer to current matters of concern, perhaps the need to be
more innovative or to resolve a con£ictual situation, that cross established
boundaries.
Finally, Checkland and Scholes (1990) suggest that it can help to conceive
the core transformation in a root de¢nition as ‘a system to do P by Q in
order to contribute to achieving R’. This ensures that ‘what to do’, ‘how to
do it’ and ‘why do it’ are captured and draws attention to concerns at the
system, subsystem and wider system levels.
A root de¢nition is a precise account of what a relevant system is. Once it
has been formulated satisfactorily, a ‘conceptual model’ can be built from it
that sets out the activities that must be undertaken in order to carry out the
transformation and ful¢l the other requirements of the root de¢nition.
Conceptual models are not models of anything in the real world; they are
purposeful ‘holons’ constructed with the aim of facilitating structured
debate about the problem situation and any changes to it that might be
desirable. They should therefore be developed from their relevant root
de¢nitions alone, without reference to reality.
A conceptual model is produced by thinking through and writing down
the minimum number of activities that seem necessary to carry out the
transformation in the way de¢ned in the root de¢nition. Since they are
‘human activity systems’ they will consist of verb statements describing
actual activities that humans can undertake. They will normally, at the ¢rst
stage of their development, consist of a handful, usually around seven activ-
ities. These are logically ordered in terms of their interactions, showing
how they depend on one another. A common feature is to have a number
of verbs in one subholon concerned with operations and another set of activ-
ities that are responsible for monitoring and control. Proper monitoring
and control depends minimally on specifying criteria for e⁄ciency
(‘amount of output divided by amount of resources used’), e⁄cacy (‘do the
means work?’) and e¡ectiveness (‘is the transformation meeting the longer
term aim?’). Checkland suggests that other criteria setting out measures for
‘ethicality’ and ‘elegance’ can be added.
The conceptual model derived by Checkland from the earlier root
de¢nition and CATWOE analysis is presented in Figure 10.5. Basic models
of this type, containing seven or so verbs, can if necessary be expanded to
higher levels of resolution by taking any activity within them as the source
of a new root de¢nition and accompanying conceptual model.
194
Soft systems methodology

As we know, in order to generate debate about possible changes that
might be made in the problem situation, it is necessary to make a ‘com-
parison’ between the conceptual models and what is perceived to exist
there, often expressed in rich pictures. Checkland (1981) mentions four
ways in which this might be carried out:
.
informal discussion of the main di¡erences between the models of what
might be and what seems to be the case now;
.
a more formal questioning of the main di¡erences, which involves ¢lling
out a matrix that asks for each activity such questions as: does it exist or
Description of soft systems methodology (SSM)
195
Figure 10.5
A conceptual model derived from the root definition presented earlier.

not in the real situation?, how is it done?, how is it judged?, any other
comments?
.
scenario writing based on notionally operating the human activity
system, in the mind or on paper, to see how it is expected to behave
into the future ^ this might be compared with how an actual system
appeared to work in the past in similar circumstances;
.
trying to model the real world using the same structure employed in the
conceptual model in order to highlight any signi¢cant di¡erences that
might provoke discussion.
10.2.5
Recent developments
Although not a recent development in terms of its initial formulation (in
Checkland and Scholes, 1990), the distinction between Mode 1 and Mode 2
SSM is still being worked on, especially the exact nature of Mode 2.
Checkland argues that because of the experiences with systems engineer-
ing and the need to concentrate on developing an alternative approach that
is more successful with problems of managing, much of early SSM was
methodology-orientated. The methodology was introduced as an external
recipe to drive an intervention in a structured and sometimes sequential
manner. This is now de¢ned as Mode 1 usage. As experience grew,
however, those using SSM began to internalize the methodology. When
this happens, it allows them to remain much more situation-driven and
problem-orientated. The methodology ceases to dominate what is done
and becomes instead the basis for re£ecting on what is happening in the
everyday £ux of occurrences. It is used £exibly and only occasionally
breaks the surface to interact with ongoing ideas and events. This is Mode
2 SSM.
Although Mode 1 and Mode 2 are ‘ideal types’, and any SSM study is
likely to include elements of both, it seems clear that Mode 2 is more easily
incorporated by managers in their daily working lives. Managers are
absorbed by the concerns and pressures of their immediate environments.
They act and react according to their personalities, knowledge, instincts,
values, etc. and are unlikely, on an everyday basis, to operate according to
the rules of a methodology. Inevitably, they are situation-driven. Occasion-
ally, however, they may wish to step outside the hurly-burly of ongoing
events to make sense of what is happening (perhaps using rich pictures) or
to apply some structured, systems thinking to proposals for change
(perhaps using root de¢nitions and conceptual models). In these circum-
stances, if SSM’s procedures and methods have been su⁄ciently internalized,
196
Soft systems methodology

a manager or group of managers can refer to the approach to help them think
through the situation they are experiencing and the possibilities it opens up.
A more obvious ‘recent development’ is the attention now given by
Checkland and his collaborators to the use of SSM in the speci¢c ¢eld of
‘information systems’. A third Checkland book Information, Systems and
Information Systems (1998), written with Holwell, signals this new emphasis.
The volume is an ambitious attempt to initiate ‘conceptual cleansing’ in the
Information Systems (IS) area. This involves trying to bring intellectual
clarity to confusions about concepts such as ‘data’, ‘information’ and ‘knowl-
edge’, and replacing the outdated model of the organization as a machine,
which has traditionally been used to underpin work in information
systems, with one that more adequately matches actual experience. This
alternative model must emphasize values and meanings, and the processes
that obtain as purposeful action is formulated. Once such action has been
decided and agreed it becomes possible to see what information needs exist
among those involved and to provide appropriate ISs to support action.
SSM is seen as the perfect vehicle to guide the development of ISs that
truly meet users’ needs. To illustrate this further, I have chosen an IS study
as our example in the next subsection.
10.3
SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY (SSM) IN ACTION
This SSM intervention was conducted by Checkland and Holwell for an
Information Department (ID) located in the central research and develop-
ment laboratories of a multinational science-based group. ID had just over
100 sta¡ and was linked to a library employing a further 25. It consisted of
four sections; three concerned with technical aspects of IT and telecommuni-
cations and one with the organization of ID itself and IS rather than IT
issues. The role of ID was to serve the Research and Development labora-
tories (R&D), ensuring they were up to date with relevant knowledge and
that the new knowledge they generated was appropriately managed and
made available to those who needed and were entitled to it. R&D was itself
divided into four sections: products research, process research, engineering
research and general administration (of which ID was a part).
The ‘Reorganization Project’, as it was known (see Checkland and
Holwell, 1998), was led by Eva, a member of sta¡ seconded from that part
of ID(call it IDI) concerned with its organization and themore general infor-
mation systems issues. The project was a response to the feeling that the
service o¡ered by the IS/IT professionals to R&D needed rethinking. Its
Soft systems methodology (SSM) in action
197

justi¢cation was the rate of technical change overtaking IT, and it was sup-
posed to answer questions such as ‘what are the presentation requirements
for information transfer?’, ‘what are the costs of information access, storage
and quality?’ and ‘at what rate will changes occur within the laboratories?’
SSM was called on because it was felt a more holistic approach to this
broad ‘information support problem’ would bring bene¢ts.
In entering the problem situation, Checkland and Holwell noted that,
although the project had been set up by the head of ID, its recommendations
were supposed to be limited to the activities of IDI. It seemed inevitable
that the project would impact on the whole of ID and its relationships with
R&D. Perhaps the head of ID was worried about possible resistance to
change from the other section heads within ID and about the reaction of
clients in R&D. This was just one of the historical, cultural and political
factors they faced. Others were a lack of high regard for the work of ID
and the di⁄culty of justifying expenditure on any aspect of R&D when the
returns are indeterminate and often far into the future.
The ‘problem situation expressed’ stage took the form of workshops
involving Checkland and Holwell, Eva, other sta¡ from ID and around 20
clients of ID from R&D. A rich picture, reproduced as Figure 10.6, was
developed, and this helped to bring about a shared understanding of ID’s
support function and to identify some important roles and processes
worthy of further investigation. Another problem-structuring device used
was a conceptual model derived by taking the ID’s o⁄cial mission statement
as a root de¢nition. This had the added bene¢t of familiarizing participants
with some of the most important techniques associated with SSM.
The logic-based stream of analysis was carried forward in two one-day
workshops at which researchers and ID professionals were present. They
began with the head of ID and Eva explaining the Reorganization Project,
which, increasingly, was becoming associated with achieving greater ‘client
orientation’ and with determining how relationships between ID and
R&D should develop going forward. Then some models, previously tried
out on researchers, were presented for discussion and modi¢cation in small
groups. These were about the role of R&D in the company in the particular
circumstances it faced. One example, and the root de¢nition from which it
came, is presented in Figure 10.7.
Later in the sessions small groups were again used, this time to discuss
R&D^ID interaction. In the ¢rst workshop, for example, attention was
focused on those activities in the models that either were or could be
supported by ID. The groups were then asked to consider, for each activity
that might be supported, whether ID should do it, provide expertise relevant
198
Soft systems methodology

to it, o¡er appropriate education and training, or help manage it. Figure 10.8
reproduces one of the models used to assist the debates. It is an expanded
version of activity 7 in the earlier model (Figure 10.7), with the thick
arrows indicating activities to which ID could contribute support.
The learning from the two workshops was condensed into reports that
highlighted a number of matters ^ such as whether ID should be more
Soft systems methodology (SSM) in action
199
Figure 10.6
An initial picturing of the problem situation in the research laboratories.
From Checkland and Holwell (1998), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

responsive or proactive. The most signi¢cant issue, however, was the need to
improve mutual understanding and contact between ID and R&D. Unless
this happened there was no chance of ID succeeding in its aim of becoming
more client-centred. A conceptual model was therefore produced, setting
out what activities would be necessary to ensure that ongoing dialogue
200
Soft systems methodology
Figure 10.7
An activity model relevant to carrying out R&D in the company.
From Checkland and Holwell (1998), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

between ID and R&D became institutionalized. Eva then argued for the
Reorganization Project to continue: ¢rst, by making changes in IDI and
then by spreading change to the whole of R&D in a manner that would
realize productive ID^R&D relationships.
It is worth noting at this point that the ‘stream of cultural analysis’ was
proceeding alongside the logic-based stream throughout the project. It
took the form of a very informal use of Analyses 1, 2 and 3. The cultural
shift of ID toward a more client-driven perspective was monitored.
Discussions at the workshops helped surface hidden agendas and possible
political constraints on progress. There was growing realization that,
despite its turbulent environment, things changed pretty slowly in this
Soft systems methodology (SSM) in action
201
Figure 10.8
An activity model that expands activity 7 of Figure 10.7.
From Checkland and Holwell (1998), reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons.

company. Now, Checkland and Holwell were confronted with con¢rmation
of their original concerns about the nervousness of the head of ID. Both
the new conceptual model and the plan for continuing the Reorganization
Project pointed to the need for change beyond the boundaries of IDI and,
indeed, the ID itself. His determination to proceed with extreme caution in
these circumstances imposed a considerable delay on further progress.
About a year down the line, however, an idea emerged that was to allow
the institutionalization of dialogue between the ID and R&D to occur in a
natural rather than contrived manner. An ‘Information Market’ was estab-
lished in the headquarters building of R&D. This was a permanent exhibi-
tion space displaying the latest IT products. It acted as a magnet to
researchers interested in the latest toys. It also became a forum for meetings
and discussions with IS/IT professionals about the researchers’ needs and
how new technology could help address them.
Checkland and Holwell document the considerable learning they gained
from this intervention. The idea that it is necessary to understand the
purposeful activity that requires supporting before you can build e¡ective
support systems was con¢rmed and re¢ned. So was the notion, previously
expressed as an SSM research theme, that those delivering support services
should be involved in the organizational discourses and interactions that
give rise to that higher level purposeful activity. Finally, they were able to
make sense of the di⁄dence of the head of ID by re£ecting on it as part of a
more general problem. The IS function is potentially a very powerful one
in organizations because of its position at the centre of meaning generation.
Those responsible for it have to play their cards carefully if they are not to
be seen as a threat.
10.4
CRITIQUE OF SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY (SSM)
At the beginning of his endeavour to establish a systems methodology more
appropriate to the problem situations faced by managers, Checkland (1976)
declared his intention to take systems thinking beyond the abstractions of
general system theory and the constraints of the specialized techniques then
dominating such approaches as operational research. The story of SSM
reveals the success of this enterprise.
Contemporary SSM is based on some clearly de¢ned activities that guide
the process of intervention in ill-structured problem situations. Subsuming
the cultural stream of analysis into each of the elements, Checkland (1999)
recognizes four essential activities:
202
Soft systems methodology

.
¢nding out about a problem situation, including culturally/politically;
.
formulating some relevant purposeful activity models;
.
debating the situation, using the models, seeking from that debate both ^
e
changes that would improve the situation and that are regarded as
both desirable and (culturally) feasible; and
e
the accommodations between con£icting interests that will enable
action to improve to be taken;
.
taking action in the situation to bring about improvement.
At the sametimeas it sets out these principles of methodology, SSM does not
constrain method use. It is capable of providing a di¡erent response in each
situation depending on the user and the nature of the situation. Mode 2
SSM, as we saw, requires the methodology to be £exible enough to supply
its assistance when placed in a secondary position to the demands of the
problem situation. Although it has some extremely powerful methods (rich
pictures, root de¢nitions, conceptual models, etc.) associated with it, SSM
does not require that they all be used, or that they are used in the same way,
in each intervention. It is this £exibility that ensures its relevance in so
many managerial situations.
Another reason why SSM is so widely applicable is that the cyclic learning
process it seeks to articulate builds naturally on the complex social processes,
including processes of management, that occur in organizations. As we
know, organizations for Checkland are made up of individuals possessing
di¡erent evaluations of the situation they are in. Their evaluations will
overlap to some extent, but there will usually be su⁄cient di¡erence among
world views to give rise to issues that have to be managed. The aim of
SSM is to structure a debate that will lead, if not to the creation of shared
perceptions, at least to an accommodation between di¡erent viewpoints
and interests so that desirable change can be implemented. Managers trying
to improve things inorganizations haveto worryaboutthe present situation,
try to get some handle on it, postulate alternative ways forward and seek
accommodations that allow change to happen. With all of these, SSM can
help. There is nothing in SSM, therefore, that should seem unnatural to
managers. Indeed, once they have participated in a few SSM studies,
managers should be able to internalize the methodology in a manner that
will enable them to use it in their everyday work. The soft systems thinker
is aware of this and is as concerned to give the approach away as to provide
a set of recommendations for action.
The main criticism of SSM (see Jackson, 1982, 1983, 2000) is that it has a
limited domain of applicability and fails to recognize it. Checkland is happy
Critique of soft systems methodology (SSM)
203

to criticize hard systems thinking in this respect, but cannot, seemingly, see
the relevance of the same critical point to his own approach. SSM is well
suited to pluralist situations where there is a need to create some shared
appreciation among stakeholders about what action needs taking to bring
about improvement. If the problem situation is one in which organizational
design of complex systems is required or in which signi¢cant con£ict and
coercion ¢gures, then SSM is much less obviously the most suitable
approach.
To hard systems thinkers and those concerned with building complex
adaptive systems, SSM o¡ers a limited perspective on why problem
situations occur. For example, the idea that there are cybernetic laws that
must be obeyed when all complex systems are being organized is not taken
seriously in the soft systems thinking of Checkland. He sees hard or system
dynamic or cybernetic approaches as usable only in the ‘special case’ when
world views have coalesced to such an extent that there is consensus about
what system to design. It is soft systems thinking that must be employed in
the vast majority of cases where these special circumstances do not pertain.
‘Harder’ systems thinkers regard this as anathema. They believe it is possible
to provide knowledge that can guide action in large areas of social and organ-
izational life. Within these domains it is the rationality of their approaches,
as witnessed by their ability to increase prediction and control, that must
hold sway. What is the best queuing system for a supermarket or what
would be an e⁄cient and e⁄cacious information systems design for a
multinational company are, for them, more matters of expertise than of
intersubjective agreement.
For a di¡erent reason, emancipatory systems thinkers also regard SSM as
having a limited domain of applicability. They argue that SSM veers too
closely to a consensus world view that plays down fundamental con£icts of
interest and promotes the belief that they can be papered over through a
debate structured around conceptual models. The alternative sociological
position, that deep-seated con£ict is endemic and the social world is charac-
terized by asymmetry of power, does not seem to be given proper attention
by Checkland. This leads (as with Acko¡) to an exaggerated commitment
to participation as the appropriate and apparently su⁄cient mechanism for
achieving mutual understanding on purposes.
Participation is of considerable importance in SSM, especially at stages 5
and 6 when comparisons between conceptual models and what is perceived
to exist in the real world are being made, and feasible and desirable changes
agreed. Checkland, however, does not address the issue of how far the
participation should run or o¡er ground rules for what is to count as
204
Soft systems methodology

‘genuine’ participation. In the absence of such rules any debate that takes
place can be constrained and distorted because particular individuals or
agendas are excluded, because of hierarchy and the threat of sanctions,
because of the unequal intellectual resources or powerful ideologies that
hold sway. It is all too easy for those with power and in£uence to dominate
the discussions and to have their own priorities re£ected in the outcome.
To the critics, therefore, SSM cannot be properly employed in the many
circumstances where participation is severely constrained and power
determines the outcome of the debate.
Checkland (1982) argues back that, rather than just asserting the existence
of dominating power relationships and other constraining features of social
reality, critics could test their hypotheses using SSM. It is open to them to
propose radical root de¢nitions. Since SSM is a learning system it can, at
the very least, help them ¢nd out about whatever constraints do exist. This
would augment Analysis 3, which explores power and politics to the
degree that it is useful to do so. Given that SSM encourages Weltanschauungen
to change it might, given the chance, assist radicals to shift attitudes and
events in ways that will enable them to realize their aspirations. In the end,
as Checkland puts it (pers. commun. 2003), SSM cannot guarantee the over-
throw of ‘tyrants’; no mere methodology ^ which is only some words on
paper ^ can do that. It will depend on the user and the situation how
‘regulative’ or ‘emancipatory’ SSM proves to be in any particular case
(Checkland, pers. commun. 2003).
In trying to get some handle on these arguments at the theoretical level,
the ¢rst thing to notice is the apparent ‘isolationism’ of Checkland’s work
on SSM. Mingers (2000) claims that he cannot ¢nd a single example from
Checkland’s writings where any other methodology is used alongside SSM.
He points out as well how self-contained the SSM cycle of learning has
become. New problem situations prompt a search of earlier Lancaster experi-
ences for related projects rather than a review of other relevant, easily avail-
able and well-known literature.
Checkland (pers. commun. 2003) responds that he was not seeking to
conduct an academic review of di¡erent systems approaches, but to ¢nd
out through experience better ways of coping with real-world problem situa-
tions, starting with the basic systems ideas he had inherited. Fair enough,
but it is clear that SSM has bene¢ted much from being theoretically in-
formed; early on by the work of Churchman and Vickers, later by the inter-
pretive philosophical and sociological theories of Husserl and Weber, and
by various social theory classi¢cations. Checkland is the most theoretically
pure of the soft systems thinkers because he recognized the theoretical
Critique of soft systems methodology (SSM)
205

direction in which his thinking was heading, made this explicit and, in con-
structing SSM, consciously employed interpretive theoretical foundations.
If one looks back at the account of the interpretive paradigm provided in
Chapter 3, it is di⁄cult to conceive how any systems methodology could
be truer to it than that of Checkland.
Self-consciously embracing an unadulterated interpretive position brings
many advantages to Checkland. It enables him to theorize thoroughly the
nature of his break with hard systems thinking and to identify some
‘tensions’ between hard and soft positions that remain in Churchman’s and
Acko¡’s work. Because he is clear about the theory he employs, relevant
research themes can be identi¢ed and explored in a recoverable way using a
well-de¢ned methodology that is constructed according to the dictates of
the theory. Methods can be used and tested in a theoretically informed
manner. Checkland is able to extract the greatest possible bene¢t from the
culture and politics metaphors and the systems concepts (client, problem-
solver, problem-owners, appreciative systems, Weltanschauung, purposeful
systems, learning, etc.) that are most clearly linked to the interpretive
paradigm.
Such awholeheartedadherenceto interpretive thinking, however, appears
to blind Checkland to the allure of other paradigms and their associated
systems approaches. This makes SSM a tempting target for critics who
adopt and value other theoretical positions.
Functionalist systems thinkers get frustrated with the subjectivism of
SSM and its failure, as they see it, to provide knowledge about how to
design complex adaptive systems. They are dismayed that the prescriptions
they derive from the machine, organism, brain, and £ux and transformation
metaphors are ignored. They believe that there is something real about the
various models produced by experts in management science and organiza-
tion theory that managers must take seriously. To Checkland such models
may merit a place at the debating table and prove useful in speci¢c circum-
stances, but they certainly cannot provide any objective truth about how
organizations should be designed and managed.
Critics of an emancipatory persuasion attack the ‘regulative’ orientation
they see SSM inheriting from the interpretive paradigm. They view the
social world as full of con£ict of real interest, coercion and contradiction,
and believe that the failure of interpretive thinkers, such as Checkland, to
address this directly means that their methodologies become distorted in
use and are ine¡ective in achieving signi¢cant change for the better. Much
of the argument, as we saw, is about the nature of the accommodations
206
Soft systems methodology

that SSM is able to bring about and on which agreements about change
are founded. The critics argue that the methodology, if it is to have any
emancipatory potential, must pay attention to the possibility that ‘systemati-
cally distorted communication’ can jeopardize the emergence of genuine
shared purposes. SSM suggests nothing can be done about this and thus
too easily facilitates a social process in which the essential elements of the
status quo are reproduced ^ perhaps on a ¢rmer footing since di¡erences of
opinion will have been temporarily smoothed over. Methodologies cannot
of themselves overthrow ‘tyrants’, but they can be more helpful to those
seeking their overthrow.
The reason SSM ignores constraints on discussion, according to Mingers
(1984), comes back to its subjectivism. It is condemned by this to act only
at the level of ideas; seeking to change things by changing people’s world
views. It cannot recognize that it is di⁄cult to change world views without
¢rst doing something about the structures ^ organizational, political and
economic ^ that give rise to world views and determine their in£uence. A
sophisticated social theory, embracing the psychic prison and instruments
of domination metaphors, is necessary in order to ‘unmask’ ideologies and
provide an understanding of how emancipation can be brought about.
SSM lacks any theory about the wider features of the social structure
because of its interpretive foundations. They condemn it to regulation.
This conclusion, it might be noted, would be shared by proponents of the
postmodern paradigm who would see SSM as helpless in the face of the
power of the ‘system’. Its role is to readjust the ideological status quo by
engineering human hopes and aspirations in a manner that responds to the
system’s needs and so ensures its smoother functioning.
Checkland believes that the results achieved during 30 years of action
research, using SSM, fully justify the interpretive perspective he brings to
the social world. If, during his experiences using SSM, he had found other
theoretical perspectives and their associated systems methodologies useful,
he would have employed them. He ¢nds it disappointing (Checkland, pers.
commun. 2003) that ‘. . . most of the critique of SSM gives the impression
of deriving from nothing morethan a casual readingof someof the literature,
rather than from real-world experience ^ which could provide a legitimate
grounding for criticism.’ The trouble with this, as Churchman would put
it, is that no data ever destroyed a Weltanschauung. Unless you are willing
and able to view the world through alternative theoretical lenses you are
likely to go on ¢nding con¢rmation for the one you favour, however much
real-world experience you gain.
Critique of soft systems methodology (SSM)
207

10.5
THE VALUE OF SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY (SSM)
TO MANAGERS
SSM asks managers to replace the goal-seeking approach with which they
have been inculcated with a model based on relationship maintaining.
Using human activity system models they can then learn their way to what
changes to the problem situation are desirable and feasible, given the accom-
modations between concerned actors that are possible. This is a process
they can conduct aided by SSM (a methodology they can internalize and
employ without losing touch with the dynamics of the problem situation).
With this orientation, it is not surprising that it brings much of value to
managers. Here are ¢ve major things:
.
SSM does not require the establishment of clear goals before problem
resolving can begin; rather, it maps onto the normal managerial tasks
of considering the ‘mess’, suggesting ways forward and seeking agree-
ments for action ^ thus it is easily absorbed into organizational processes.
.
SSM o¡ers an excellent way of exploring purposes, using human activity
system models to ¢nd out what is possible given the history, culture
and politics of the problem situation.
.
SSM articulates a learning system that challenges existing ways of
seeing and doing things, and can lead to some surprising shifts in
Weltanschauungen, opening up novel and elegant proposals for change.
.
SSM has shown that the e¡ective design of support systems, such as
information systems, depends on a clear understanding of the purposeful
activitythat isto be supported inthehigher order human activity system.
.
Some powerful methods, such as rich pictures, root de¢nitions and
conceptual models, have been developed and re¢ned to assist with
using SSM.
10.6
CONCLUSION
Checkland’s break with the predominant goal-seeking tradition in manage-
ment science and his recognition of the signi¢cance of relationship maintain-
ing as an alternative have led to a revolution in systems thinking. The
development of SSM, based on an action research programme that linked
ideas and experience directly, operationalized this and enabled the continual
re¢nement of soft systems thinking. Checkland’s clear understanding that
he was engaged in making an ‘epistemological break’, reframing systems
208
Soft systems methodology

thinking on new philosophical foundations, helped to steer the revolution
through. SSM, with its associated principles and methods, is an achievement
that revitalized the systems approach and has hugely increased its relevance
to business and management.
REFERENCES
Checkland, P.B. (1976). Towards a systems-based methodology for real-world
problem-solving. In: J. Beishon and G. Peters (eds), Systems Behaviour (pp.
51^77). Harper & Row, London.
Checkland, P.B. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
Checkland, P.B. (1982). Soft systems methodology as process: A reply to M.C.
Jackson. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 9, 37^39.
Checkland, P.B. (1983). OR and the systems movement: Mappings and con£icts.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 34, 661^675.
Checkland, P.B. (1987). The application of systems thinking in real-world
problem-situations: The emergence of soft systems methodology. In: M.C.
Jackson and P. Keys (eds), New Directions in Management Science (pp. 87^96).
Gower, Aldershot, UK.
Checkland, P.B. (1999). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice (new edn, including a
30-year retrospective). John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Checkland, P.B. and Holwell, S. (1998). Information, Systems and Information
Systems. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Checkland, P.B. and Scholes, P. (1990). Soft Systems Methodology in Action. John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. and Carson, E. (1988). Dealing with Complexity: An Introduction to the
Theory and Application of Systems Science. Plenum Press, New York.
Gaisford, P.J. (1989). A systemic analysis of female street prostitution within the
environs of central London. M.Phil. thesis, City University, London.
Jackson, M.C. (1982). The nature of soft systems thinking: The work of
Churchman, Acko¡ and Checkland. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 9,
17^28.
Jackson, M.C. (1983). The nature of soft systems thinking: Comments on the
three replies. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 10, 109^113.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Mingers, J.C. (1984). Subjectivism and soft systems methodology ^ A critique.
Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 11, 85^103.
References
209

Mingers, J.C. (2000). An idea ahead of its time: The history and development
of soft systems methodology. Systemic Practice and Action Research, 13, 733^755.
Vickers, G. (1965). The Art of Judgement. Chapman & Hall, London.
Vickers, G. (1970). Freedom in a Rocking Boat. Allen Lane, London.
210
Soft systems methodology

Type C
Ensuring Fairness
Here we detail two systems approaches that aim to assist managers improve
their enterprises by ensuring fairness. These approaches are critical systems
heuristics and team syntegrity. They were developed because of the failure
of functionalist and interpretive systems approaches to give appropriate at-
tention to ensuring the proper participation of all stakeholders in taking de-
cisions and to addressing the disadvantages faced by some groups in and
a¡ected by organizations. The two approaches emphasize the empowerment
of those discriminated against in terms of the way they are treated and their
emancipation so that they can take full advantage of their rights. In socio-
logical terms they are emancipatory in character, oriented toward eliminating
sources of power and domination that illegitimately oppress particular
individuals and groups in society. They have explored the horizontal axis
of the System Of Systems Methodologies (SOSM) to the point where they
see con£ict and coercion as endemic in organizations and as deserving of
primary attention. The psychic prison and instruments of domination
metaphors guide their recommendations for systems intervention.


Critical Systems
Heuristics
11
Likewise, the meaning of critique threatens to be lost if we do not link it
properly to the emancipatory interest, that is, if we do not give the
latter an adequate methodological status and place in CST [critical
systems thinking].
Ulrich (2003)
11.1
INTRODUCTION
The publication of Werner Ulrich’s Critical Heuristics of Social Planning, in
1983, stands as a landmark in the development of systems thinking. This is
because the book describes, for the ¢rst time, a systems approach that takes
as amajor concerntheneed to counter possibleunfairnessinsociety by ensur-
ing that all those a¡ected by decisions have a role in making them. In doing
so it established emancipatory systems thinking and provided it with a
methodology that can be used by planners and concerned citizens alike to
reveal and challenge the normative content of actual and proposed systems
designs. By normative content Ulrich means both the underlying value as-
sumptions that inevitably enter into planning, and the social consequences
and side e¡ects for those at the receiving end. Critical Systems Heuristics
(CSH) is a practically orientated, emancipatory systems approach that can
ensure planning and decision-making include a critical dimension, and can
enable the designs emanating from other systems approaches, whether hard
or soft, to be suitably interrogated to reveal whose interests they
serve.

11.2
DESCRIPTION OF CRITICAL SYSTEMS HEURISTICS (CSH)
11.2.1
Historical development
In setting out his approach, Ulrich (1983) distances himself from the
currently dominant (in 1983) use of the systems idea in what he calls
‘systems science’: Operational Research (OR), systems analysis, systems
engineering, cybernetics. In systems science, which he sees as premised on
the limited mechanistic and organismic analogies, the systems idea is used
only in the context of instrumental reason to help us to decide how to do
things. It refers to a set of variables to be controlled. Ulrich’s purpose is to
develop the systems idea as part of practical reason, to help us decide what
we ought to do.
As a PhD student of Churchman’s, Ulrich was in an excellent position to
get the inspiration he needed to achieve his purpose. In particular he took
two of Churchman’s central ideas and drove each of them in a slightly
more radical direction (see Ulrich 1988, 2003).
One of Churchman’s greatest contributions to systems thinking was
establishing the fundamental idea that the drawing of boundaries is crucial
to determining how improvement is to be de¢ned and what action should
be taken. He was also the ¢rst to argue that justifying systems interventions
requires continually redrawing the boundaries to ‘sweep in’ stakeholders
previously excluded from consideration. With Churchman it is the responsi-
bility of the systems designer to ensure that boundaries are redrawn so that
the system comes to serve all its customers. In one of his examples he notes
that women have not been taken into consideration in some proposed
systems designs. Ulrich readily accepts the signi¢cance of boundary judge-
ments, but does not want to leave responsibility for getting them right to
the individual systems designer. He is in£uenced here by Habermas who
argued that rationality emerges from dialogue. On this basis Ulrich suggests
that appropriate boundaries can only be established through dialogue,
especially between those involved and those likely to be a¡ected by a
systems design.
Another theme of Churchman’s, developed by Ulrich, focuses on the
apparent need for social systems design to take on the whole system. To
critics this makes Churchman’s work appear hopelessly idealistic and imprac-
tical. All that Churchman is doing, however, is pointing out the fate of all
the applied sciences, which have no option but to live with the prospect
that localized action based on partial understanding can lead to unexpected
consequences in terms of whole system improvement. Ulrich (1983) argues,
214
Critical systems heuristics

therefore, that the critics are blaming the messenger for the bad news.
Reading Churchman positively we see that he is using the theoretical indis-
pensability of comprehensive systems design as an ideal standard to force
us to recognize the inevitable lack of comprehensiveness of our actual
designs. Ulrich is intent on ¢nding a way of proceeding given Churchman’s
insight that what is necessary if we are to justify our designs (understanding
the whole system) is in practice impossible. His approach is about making
the lack of comprehensiveness of our designs transparent so that we can
re£ect critically on their limitations.
11.2.2
Philosophy and theory
Ulrich calls his approach ‘critical systems heuristics’, interpreting each of
these words as did the philosopher Kant. To be critical means re£ecting on
the presuppositions that enter into both the search for knowledge and the
pursuit of rational action. Systems designers must make transparent to
themselves and others the normative content of their designs so that they
can be subject to inspection and debate. The systems idea in Kant refers to
the totality of elements ^ ethical, political, ideological and metaphysical ^
on which theoretical or practical judgements depend. In trying to grasp the
whole system we inevitably fall short and produce limited accounts and
suboptimal decisions based on particular presuppositions. What we should
try to do, therefore, is unearth the partial presuppositions that underpin the
‘whole system’ judgements we make. Heuristics refers to the process of
continually revealing these presuppositions and keeping them under
review. Systems designers should never be allowed to get away with the
claim that their designs are objective.
These concepts are further developed in a debate with the ideas on social
systems design present in or inferred from the writings of Popper, Habermas
and Kant (again).
Popper’s position is that critical reason can only assist social systems
design with technical issues, such as the most e⁄cient means to achieve
predetermined ends. Rational answers to questions about ends, and even
about the value content of means, are apparently not possible. This is the
attitude Ulrich sees as assumed in systems science. The goals served go
unexamined and all the e¡ort is put into ¢nding the most e⁄cient means of
achieving taken-for-granted ends. Ulrich wants to bring the central question
of practical reason ^ ‘what ought we to do?’ ^ back within the scope of critical
re£ection and rational guidance.
Description of critical systems heuristics (CSH)
215

Habermas’ work is of great help to Ulrich because he has sought to show
that both practical reason and emancipatory reason (aiming at freedom
from oppression) are capable of being brought within the domain of critical
re£ection and reasoned argument. In order that such questions as ‘what
ought to be done’ may be properly decided, according to Habermas, a
process of rational argumentation must be established. All citizens, or at
least all those a¡ected by a social systems design, must be allowed to partici-
pate in the debates and decisions concerning the design. This echoes the
soft systems thinkers’ call for participation, but Habermas goes much
further. The debates surrounding the design must be so arranged that all
ideological and institutional constraints on discussion are eliminated, and
the force of the better argument wins the day. Through an analysis of the
structure of actual speech situations, Habermas is able to determine what an
‘ideal speech situation’, free from all distortion, must be like. This is his
theory of ‘communicative competence’.
Ulrich is willing to follow Habermas in grounding rationality on dialogue
(a break from Kant), but he worries about the applicability of Habermas’
musings. In essence he sees Habermas’ work as providing a theoretical
basis for critical re£ection, but as having little practical usefulness. In order
to enter Habermas’ debate it appears that speakers must already be willing
and able to exhibit communicative competence. This presupposes the very
rationality the debate is designed to ensure. Habermas, in attempting to
ground critical re£ection theoretically, cuts himself o¡ from the real world
in which personal and group interests inevitably contaminate any such
debate. Far better, Ulrich argues, to ground critical re£ection on social
systems designs heuristically, to provide a methodology that enables practical
judgements to be constantly reviewed and their partiality revealed by ordin-
ary, everyday accounts of the nature of social experience.
Ulrich returns to Kant’s philosophy for clues on how the judgements we
make can be unearthed and re£ected on. Kant wanted to ¢nd a way of justify-
ing the kind of knowledge we have about the world. He was particularly
concerned about what he called synthetic a priori concepts. These concepts
were deeply implicated in the production of knowledge, but were little
understood and di⁄cult to justify. Kant attempted to show the theoretical
necessity for thought and knowledge about the world of three sets of
synthetic a priori concepts. First are two ‘pure forms of intuition’ ^ space
and time ^ present in the very possibility of things as appearances. Second
are 12 ‘categories’, pure concepts of understanding necessary to connect
perceptions together. Finally, there are three ‘transcendental ideas’ ^ the
216
Critical systems heuristics

World, Man and God. These reveal to us the necessary conditional character
of our understanding of the totality.
11.2.3
Methodology
Ulrich now has to transform the philosophy and theory he ¢nds attractive
into a methodology applicable to planning and systems design. The result
is CSH.
He begins (Ulrich, 1983) by outlining the ‘purposeful systems paradigm’
that underpins his methodology. Kant had argued that space and time are
necessary mapping dimensions for the objects studied by Newtonian
natural science. Social systems designers inevitably come up against human
intentionality (self-consciousness, self-re£ectiveness and self-determination)
as well as space and time. Ulrich reasons, therefore, that if we wish to under-
stand and improve social reality, we must add an additional dimension of
‘purposefulness’ and design social systems to become purposeful systems.
In a purposeful system the ability to determine purposes must be spread
throughout the system; the system should produce knowledge relevant to
purposes and encourage debate about purposes; and all plans or design pro-
posals should be critically assessed in terms of their normative content.
The next step is to construct some principles for the methodology around
Kant’s three transcendental ideas. In Kant these notions are employed to
reveal the necessarily limited character of our understanding of the whole.
They are adjusted by Ulrich to yield the ‘systems’, ‘moral’ and ‘guarantor’
concepts (quasitranscendental ideas more suited to social reality and capable
of acting as critical standards against which the partiality of particular social
system designs can be compared). The systems idea (as we saw) requires us
to re£ect on the inevitable lack of comprehensiveness of attempts to map
social reality and produce system designs. The moral idea instructs the
systems designer to use his or her designs to improve the human condition
for all, but at the same time to question constantly the values built into
designs and consider their moral imperfection. Moral limitations are best
revealed by listening to the views of those a¡ected, but not involved in
planning. The guarantor idea insists that there can be no absolute guarantee
that planning will lead to improvement; but, the systems designer should
seek to incorporate as many sources of imperfect guarantee as possible.
This means taking into account any scienti¢c data available, evaluation feed-
back, etc., as well as the views of experts and other stakeholders.
The next stage of the methodology is intended to assist systems designers
to make transparent to themselves and others the ‘whole system’ judgements
Description of critical systems heuristics (CSH)
217

(limited by knowledge, ethics and guarantee) that inevitably enter into social
systems designs. Ulrich suggests using the concept of ‘boundary judge-
ments’. When planners design systems they inevitably make assumptions
about what is inside the system of concern and what belongs to its
environment. These boundary judgements re£ect the designers’ whole
system judgements about what is relevant to the design task. If they are not
made transparent, they also represent ‘justi¢cation break-o¡s’, revealing the
scope of responsibility accepted by the designers in justifying their designs.
Thus boundary judgements provide an access point to the normative
presuppositions entering into systems designs. The task is to ¢nd a means
of interrogating systems designs to reveal the boundary judgements
currently being made and a means of asking what other boundary judge-
ments might be possible.
Ulrich proceeds to look at the nature of the boundary judgements that
must inevitably enter into any social systems design. These are said to have
heuristic necessity and so the status of synthetic, relatively a priori concepts.
They are heuristically necessary because only by making them explicit does
it become possible to re£ect critically on the presuppositions conditioning a
social systems design. The boundary judgements meeting this criterion are
12 in number (like Kant’s 12 ‘categories’) and are arranged around a distinc-
tion between those ‘involved’ in any planning decision (client, decision-
taker, designer) and those ‘a¡ected but not involved’ (witnesses).
To reveal the boundary judgements involved, boundary questions must
be asked for each of the four groups ^ client, decision-taker, designer and
witnesses. The questions relating to the client concernthe ‘sources of motiva-
tion’ £owing into the design. They are about its purposes. The questions
relating to the decision-taker examine ‘sources of control’. They are about
the design’s ‘basis of power’. The questions relating to the designer
concern ‘sources of expertise’. They ask for the basis of guarantee. And the
questions relating to the witnesses re£ect on the ‘sources of legitimation’
considered in the design. So they ask about the values it incorporates.
There are three questions asked of each of the four groups ^ giving the
complete set of 12 boundary questions. The ¢rst question is about the
‘social roles’ of the involved or a¡ected; the second refers to ‘role-speci¢c
concerns’; and the third to ‘key problems’ surrounding the determination
of boundary judgements with respect to that group.
The power of the 12 questions to reveal the normative content of systems
designs is best seen if they are asked in an ‘is’ mode and an ‘ought’ mode,
and the answers contrasted. For example, we could compare the answer to
the question ‘who is the actual client (bene¢ciary) of the system S to be
218
Critical systems heuristics

designed or improved?’ with answers to the question ‘who ought to be the
client (bene¢ciary) of the system S to be designed or improved?’ The 12
questions are set out, in the ‘ought’ mode, in Table 11.1.
Using the 12 boundary questions makes explicit the normative premises
that inevitably £ow into systems designs. For Ulrich, no systems design can
be regarded as rational unless it does reveal its own normative content.
This, however, is not the only criterion of rationality. The ¢nal justi¢cation
for practical action, Ulrich insists (following Habermas), must come from
some sort of participative debate involving all relevant stakeholders.
Habermas’ forum of speakers exhibiting communicative competence has,
however, already been dismissed as impracticable. Ulrich suggests instead,
as the ¢nal element of his methodology, a ‘dialectical solution’ to the
problem.
It is not enough that the involved, making use of the heuristically
necessary concepts, be self-re£ective about the partiality of their designs.
Description of critical systems heuristics (CSH)
219
Table 11.1
Ulrich’s 12 boundary questions in the ‘ought’ mode.
1. Who ought to be the client (bene¢ciary) of the system S to be designed or
improved?
2. What ought to be the purpose of S (i.e., what goal states ought S be able to achieve
so as to serve the client)?
3. What ought to be S’s measure of success (or improvement)?
4. Who ought to be the decision-taker (i.e., have the power to change S’s measure of
improvement)?
5. What components (resources and constraints) of S ought to be controlled by the
decision-taker)?
6. What resources and conditions ought to be part of S’s environment (i.e., not be
controlled by S’s decision-taker)?
7. Who ought to be involved as designer of S?
8. What kind of expertise ought to £ow into the design of S (i.e., who ought to be
considered an expert and what should be his role)?
9. Who ought to be the guarantor of S (i.e., where ought the designer seek the guaran-
tee that his design will be implemented and will prove successful, judged by S’s
measure of success (or improvement))?
10. Who ought to belong to the witnesses representing the concerns of the citizens that
will or might be a¡ected by the design of S (i.e., who among the a¡ected ought
to get involved)?
11. To what degree and in what way ought the a¡ected be given the chance of emanci-
pation from the premises and promises of the involved?
12. On what worldview of either the involved or the a¡ected ought S’s design be based?

They must also be subject to a dialogue with the witnesses ^ in practice,
representatives of those a¡ected, but not involved. The witnesses need only
state their concerns in everyday language since the ‘polemical employment
of reason’ (Kant) in itself will be enough to reveal that the social systems
designs of the involved are based on challengeable assumptions. It will
become clear that only agreement among all involved and a¡ected citizens
can ¢nally lead to conclusions about what ought to be done. Ulrich’s dialec-
tical solution, therefore, is to bring the systems rationality of the planners
directly into contact with the ‘social rationality’ of those who have to live
in and experience the social systems designs.
11.2.4
Methods
Methods are provided for assisting with the exposure of the normative
assumptions entering into social systems designs and to ensure proper
dialogue between those involved in planning and those a¡ected, but not
involved.
In the ¢rst case we have Ulrich’s list of 12 boundary questions, which we
detailed in the previous subsection because they are sointrinsicallyembedded
in his methodology. These can be used to interrogate existing or proposed
systems designs and, as we mentioned, in an ‘is’ or ‘ought’ mode. Midgley
(2000) has suggested that they include some jargon and that it can be useful
to employ other versions of the questions in plain English. There will be
other alternative methods that can be used for getting at normative assump-
tions. It is also clear that the 12 questions can be extracted from Ulrich’s
overall approach and used as a tool to support other methodologies. They
are very much a method in these senses.
To ensure proper dialogue Ulrich suggests a tool called the ‘polemical
employment of boundary judgements’. This is a practical method that
ordinary citizens can employ to cause the involved to re£ect on their design’s
normative content even if they should appear less than willing to do so.
The main obstacle that might seem to lie in the way of the a¡ected is their
lack of expertise and, therefore, their apparent lack of ‘objectivity’.
However, as Ulrich shows, this is not really such a di⁄culty. All designs
are based on boundary judgements incorporating justi¢cation break-o¡s
and these are, of course, beyond the reach of expertise to justify. Anyone
who understands the concept of boundary judgements knows that planners
who justify their proposals on the basis of expertise or ‘objective facts’ are
in fact employing boundary judgements whether cynically or unre£ectively.
If they can be made to debate their boundary judgements they are put in a
220
Critical systems heuristics

position where they are no better o¡ than ordinary a¡ected citizens. It
becomes a matter of trading value judgements about what assumptions
should in£uence plans and what consequences are desirable or otherwise.
In order to put recalcitrant planners into a position where they have to
admit their boundary judgements, Ulrich advocates the ‘polemical employ-
ment of boundary judgements’. A¡ected citizens use di¡erent boundary
judgements, re£ecting an alternative value position, purely with critical
intent against the planners. This is quite good enough to shift the burden
of proof onto the planners because it demonstrates:
.
that the planners’ proposals are governed by their boundary judgements;
.
that the knowledge and expertise of experts is insu⁄cient to justify their
boundary judgements or to falsify those of others;
.
that planners or experts who seek to justify designs on the basis of
knowledge or expertise are, in fact, employing boundary judgements
dogmatically or cynically, and so disqualify themselves.
The technique should secure a position in the dialogue for any ordinary
citizens who care to employ it.
11.2.5
Recent developments
In his more recent writings Ulrich (1998) has been propounding a research
programme called ‘Critical Systems Thinking for Citizens’. The aim is to
contribute to the revival of civil society by further developing and simplify-
ing his ‘emancipatory systems approach’, particularly the idea of boundary
critique, so that it can be used by ordinary citizens to help them participate
fully in decisions over matters of public concern.
In a similar vein, Gerald Midgley and coworkers at the Centre for Systems
Studies at the University of Hull are seeking to extend and pragmatize the
work of Churchman and Ulrich on boundary critique. This has involved
theoretical innovation as well as the use of CSH alongside other systems
methodologies. Midgley (2000) argues that con£ict between groups often
arises when they possess di¡erent ethical positions and thus repeatedly
make di¡erent boundary judgements. These boundary judgements can
become stabilized by social attitudes and rituals. The tendency to unre£ec-
tively accept stabilized boundary judgements, and so buttress the status
quo, needs addressing at the beginning of a systems intervention. It is
necessary, Midgley believes, to challenge whatever consensus exists on
boundaries by seeking to involve all those who might have a relevant
Description of critical systems heuristics (CSH)
221

perspective on the issue of concern. Having addressed issues of marginaliza-
tion through boundary critique and ensured the ‘sweeping in’ of a wide
variety of viewpoints, Midgley recommends proceeding by the ‘creative
design of methods’. In negotiation with the various stakeholders, research
questions are identi¢ed, each of which may require resolution using a
di¡erent method or part of a method. Inevitably, the research questions
will be systemically interrelated, and thus it is necessary to achieve a synthesis
among the methods used to address them, at the same time as ensuring the
continued involvement, if possible, of marginalized groups. If their contin-
ued involvement is prevented by the exercise of power, then the researcher
needs to consider whether there might be other ways to represent their
views or contemplate withdrawing his or her services.
11.3
CRITICAL SYSTEMS HEURISTICS (CSH) IN ACTION
The intervention described was conducted by Gerald Midgley, Isaac Munlo
and Mandy Brown of the Centre for Systems Studies, University of Hull,
and was funded by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (see Midgley et al.,
1997, 1998). Its initial aim was to review how policy for the development
and provision of housing services for older people was informed by data
aggregated from assessments made of individual applicants. Overall, it was
hoped that improvements to the process of information collection, handling
and use would lead to more general improvements in housing services for
older people. The research was to cover possible adaptations to properties
or other assistance needed to enable older people to stay in their homes, as
well as housing itself, and to involve all forms of provision, whether
public, private or by voluntary means.
The researchers suggested a two-stage approach. In a ¢rst phase a wide
perspective would be taken on the problems associated with the identi¢ca-
tion of need, the handling of information and its use for planning. In a
second phase, various stakeholders would be engaged in designing actual
improvements to the information provision aspects of the problem situation.
The researchers were clear that, since this purposeful system was about
designing housing services for older people, it was essential that the a¡ected,
the older people who were clients, should participate in the design.
The ¢rst phase ^ problem identi¢cation ^ consisted of interviews with
relevant stakeholders in two geographical areas. Rather than trying to
determine at the beginning exactly which stakeholders to interview, the
222
Critical systems heuristics

researchers used the approach of ‘rolling’ out the boundaries of the people
they should talk to. This required starting o¡ with an obvious set of
interviewees and inviting them, as part of the interview, to suggest who
else might reasonably be questioned. Interviewees were asked which other
stakeholders were relevant, perhaps because they held a di¡erent opinion
on the problem situation, and in particular who else was involved in or
a¡ected by the interviewee’s activities. This process continued until no new
names came forward and produced some surprising additions to the original
list. In the end 131 interviews were conducted with clients, potential
clients, carers, councillors, senior and middle managers, wardens and assess-
ment o⁄cers. Local government departments, health purchasers and pro-
viders, housing associations, voluntary organizations, private providers,
building companies, users and other stakeholders were all represented.
After about 20 of these interviews it was clear that an important choice had
to be made, which would impact on the whole of the rest of the study. The
interviews revealed that the second phase of the intervention would miss
many of the most signi¢cant problems that concerned stakeholders if it
remained limited to looking only at issues of information provision. This
was especially the case because the procedures for collecting information
ensured that needs that could not be met within current spending priorities
were not even recorded. Older people were asking why there was such a mis-
match between what they asked for in terms of housing services and what
they got. Further, a number of the agencies involved were highlighting, as
their primary concern, the di⁄culties they encountered in co-operating
with other interested parties (i.e., in multiagency working). Neither of
these issues could be addressed given the existing narrow speci¢cation of
the second stage of the project.
The researchers saw this as an ethical problem about where the boundaries
were drawn in this problem situation. If they followed the narrow speci¢ca-
tion they would only be able to increase e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy in the
context of current resource distribution. This might lead to improvements
in the provision of housing services for older people from the point of
view of those who believed current levels of spending appropriate. It could
hardly bring about improvements from the perspectives of older people or
many of the managers or planners. In terms of the ‘systems’, ‘moral’ and
‘guarantor’ ideas propounded in CSH, accepting the narrow boundaries of
the study as originally prescribed could detract from rather than enhance
‘whole system improvement’.
The researchers called a meeting of the Advisory Group for the project at
which the ethical consequences of di¡erent boundary judgements were
Critical systems heuristics (CSH) in action
223

considered. It was decided that the boundaries of the research should be
widened to ensure that the larger problems now identi¢ed by some of the
stakeholders could be embraced in the next stage of the study. The ¢rst
phase ended, therefore, with the production of two ‘problem maps’
showing the interrelationships between key issues, including issues of multi-
agency co-operation and of capturing the stated needs of older people.
A workshop was now suggested so that discussions could be held on how
the second phase would be conducted. During the preparations for this,
however, it became clear that, because of certain sensitivities and the internal
politics of the situation, the Housing and Social Services Departments
wanted the workshop to be restricted to their own managers. The researchers
were concerned that this would lead to the marginalization of the values
and interests of users and other involved stakeholders and that they would
be implicated in reinforcing this marginalization if they went ahead. Weigh-
ing the ethical pros and cons they decided to let the workshop proceed, but
to put in place certain safeguards to ensure that the boundaries remained
wide. One of the researchers was given the role at the workshop of being
advocate for the stakeholders who were not directly represented. And all of
the researchers insisted throughout the workshop that the managers who
were present try to put themselves in the position of other stakeholders and
speak on their behalf. The decision to go ahead was justi¢ed and the tactics
vindicated when it was clearly speci¢ed that the improvements sought in
the second phase would be based on the desires of all stakeholders including
older people and their carers.
The discussions at the workshop now turned to the methods that would
be used to design improvements in the second phase. This again required
care on the part of the researchers, lest their knowledge of the intricacies of
systems methodologies and use of systems jargon marginalized the managers
who would be responsible for the outcomes. The ‘systems discussion’ was
initially conducted by the researchers alone, with the permission and in the
presence of the managers. The results were then explained to the managers,
and further general debate took place before actual decisions on methods
were taken.
The second phase of the intervention ^ designing improvements ^ had
two parts. In the ¢rst part Acko¡’s ‘idealized design’ technique was used
alongside Ulrich’s ‘boundary questions’ to discover what the stakeholders
felt an ideal housing system for older people needed to be like. This was in
response to the outcome of the ¢rst phase of the project, which had shown
all the various issues to be so interrelated that only a ‘problem dissolving’
approach was going to be useful. The second part used Beer’s viable system
224
Critical systems heuristics

model to assistmanagersfrom the various involved agencies to design a form
of multiagency structure that could support the ‘idealized design’.
The ¢rst part of the second phase consisted of workshops held separately
with three stakeholder groups: older people in receipt of housing services,
carers and representatives of relevant community groups and voluntary
organizations, and managers and front line professionals working for statu-
tory agencies concerned with housing. The choice of these three groups of
a¡ected and involved stakeholders ensured the boundaries continued to be
wide. Holding the workshops separately, so that each group had its own
space, ensured that ‘professional discourses’ did not dominate over the
ordinary language of users. It avoided the risk of drawing the boundaries
back in again.
Employing Acko¡’s idealized design technique (see Chapter 9), each
group was asked to design an ‘ideal’ housing system on the basis that the
existing service system had disappeared the night before and they could
construct its replacement as they wished, so long as it was technologically
feasible, viable and adaptable. The natural ‘boundary-busting’ features of
Acko¡’s approach were enhanced by using Ulrich’s boundary questions to
lead the discussions. For example, it was asked ‘who should bene¢t from
the provision of housing services to older people?’, ‘who should be consid-
ered an expert?’, etc. Ulrich’s questions ensured that important boundary
matters, which might otherwise have been taken for granted, were raised
and debated. To ensure the maximum bene¢t was obtained from the
questions they were translated into plain English and phrased speci¢cally to
relate to housing for older people. The workshops produced three long
lists of the desired properties of the housing service from the perspectives
of the three stakeholder groups.
The three lists de¢ning ideal housing systems were so similar that it was
possible for the researchers themselves to produce a ¢rst draft synthesis
re£ecting a single vision. This, together with the disagreements that did
exist, was discussed and debated at a further workshop of managers from
relevant agencies. At this workshop the researchers again acted as advocates
for those groups not directly represented and asked the managers to be
careful that the ¢nalized list of desired properties re£ected the concerns of
users and carers.
In the second part of the second phase the same managers and the
researchers used Beer’s Viable System Model (VSM) (see Chapter 6) to
construct an organizational structure capable of delivering the ideal service
while overcoming the existing problems of multiagency working. Beer’s
model was originally chosen because it was non-hierarchical in the sense of
Critical systems heuristics (CSH) in action
225

demanding that the primary focus should be on facilitating the work of those
directly providing the service (the System 1 elements). During the workshop
the model was discussed in simple English to ensure that the expertise of
the researchers did not dominate and some changes were made to it as a
result. The managers were then asked to use it to provide an organizational
design in which each of the ¢ve key functions described in the VSM was
performed in accordance with the list of desired properties. At the end of
the process the ¢nal design was validated by systematically checking it
against the lists of desired properties of the housing service system produced
by the various stakeholders.
This case study o¡ers an excellent example of the design of a purposeful
system, the provision of housing services for older people, in which a
wide range of involved and a¡ected stakeholders participated to ensure
whole system improvement in the way required by the systems, moral and
guarantor concepts. Ulrich’s boundary questions were employed to ensure
critical re£ectionduring the designofan ideal service system.The researchers
were able to use the ‘polemical employment of boundary judgements’
method while acting as advocates for the users.Midgley and his coresearchers
added to CSH, in this intervention, an acute awareness that the choice of
methods and techniques is itself an important element in ensuring that
vulnerable stakeholder groups are not marginalized.
11.4
CRITIQUE OF CRITICAL SYSTEMS HEURISTICS (CSH)
Ulrich’s work provides a solid philosophical foundation for the purposeful
systems approach and, in CSH, a methodology and techniques to realize
the bene¢ts of that approach in practice. If they are to be justi¢able, plans
for purposeful systems should re£ect the values of the widest possible con-
stituency of stakeholders. Particular attention needs to be paid to ensuring
representation of those a¡ected by proposed or actual systems designs, but
not involved in their formulation. In order that all the stakeholders can
evaluate the plans it is essential that they are transparent with regard to the
‘boundary judgements’ they express ^ what they focus on and what they
exclude from their remit. Groups that do feel excluded can call systems
designers to account using the ‘polemical employment of boundary judge-
ments’ and so secure for themselves a position in the argument. Ulrich
believes that this approach can be used by all concerned citizens and thus
contribute to an increase in rational decision-making in society.
226
Critical systems heuristics

It will be clear from this brief summary, and the longer account that
precedes it, that Ulrich’s work expands on soft systems thinking in the way
it devotes attention to the interests of those who might otherwise be excluded
from debate about social systems design. The values of the ‘a¡ected, but
not involved’, who have to live the consequences of the designs, are em-
phasized. The debate has to be made accessible to them, and they must be
enabled to participate without being cowed by the expertise or power of
others. CSH seeks to emancipate all ‘citizens’ by empowering them to take
part in dialogue about the shape and direction of the purposeful systems
their actions and interactions produce and which they inhabit.
How successful is it?
Critics argue (see Jackson, 1985, 2000; Midgley, 1997) that CSH is limited
by the type of critical thinking, emanating from Kant and Churchman, that
it embraces. Kant and Churchman are seen as ‘idealists’ and as providing
Ulrich with a form of critique that is only able to re£ect on the values and
ideas that enter into social systems designs. Philosophers and sociologists
of a ‘materialist’ persuasion (e.g., Marx and the theorists associated with the
Frankfurt School) want to extend critique to the material conditions that
give rise to particular values and beliefs. They argue that the social positions
of stakeholders, in organizations and the wider society, go a long way to
explaining the ideas that they hold. A historical materialist analysis would
reveal how values and beliefs arise; how they are related to the political and
economic aspects of the totality; and how power, deriving from the very
structures of society, determines that certain ideologies dominate at particu-
lar times.
This neglect of the structural aspects of social systems leads directly to
another criticism: Ulrich’s recommendations are ultimately just as Utopian
as those of Habermas. Critics are led to ask ‘why should the involved
bother to take account of the views and interests of those who are a¡ected
but not involved?’, ‘which class, group or agency has the power, will and
interest to bring about a rational society in which the better argument wins
through?’ It is because Ulrich neglects this type of question that Midgley
(1997) believes the successful use of CSH depends on there already existing
a situation in which some kind of forum for debate is in operation where
planners have to consider their accountability. It is hardly, therefore, an
adequate response to power and coercion since these are likely to lead to
closure of debate. If Ulrich wanted to be genuinely ‘emancipatory’ he
would have to develop an appropriate social theory and then confront the
forces in organizations and society that prevent rational argumentation and
participative decision-making.
Critique of critical systems heuristics (CSH)
227

A third line of criticism is intimately related to these ¢rst two. If CSH does
not possess a social theory it cannot provide much assistance, let alone an
answer, to the question of where the boundaries should be drawn in under-
taking a social system design. In Mejia’s (2001) terms it is a ‘content-less’
form of critique. The answers to the 12 critically heuristic categories need
‘¢lling in’, perhaps by the stakeholders in the design situation, perhaps by
those who bring CSH to that situation. In the former case this may simply
be on the basis of the knowledge held tacitly and unquestioningly by those
stakeholders, who may not, for example, recognize that they are discriminat-
ing against women. In the latter case it can lead to the imposition of the
analyst’s predetermined views in the name of critique. These dangers are
reinforced if certain stakeholders are inarticulate, lack con¢dence, su¡er
from learning disabilities or, for whatever other reason, are unable to
engage e¡ectively in rational argumentation. They are highlighted by
studies that suggest CSH and the 12 questions are not so ‘commonsensical’
and easy to use as Ulrich believes.
Finally, Flood and Jackson (1991) accuse CSH of methodological im-
maturity. It lacks the well-tried methods, tools and techniques to support it
that, for example, soft systems methodology has developed. Moreover,
Ulrich has not thought through the relationship of his approach to others
and is overly dismissive of those systems methodologies that serve ‘instru-
mental reason’. This is unfortunate because rational social action depends
on what it is possible to do and on the choice of e⁄cient means (matters of
instrumental reason) as well as on what we ought to do (a matter of practical
reason and, as we know, Ulrich’s overriding concern). Recently, case
studies have begun to emerge, from Midgley and others, that employ CSH
and seek to develop it to make it more usable. It is noticeable, however,
that in all these instances CSH is used alongside other, more established
systems approaches.
At a more theoretical level, in terms of the System Of Systems Methodol-
ogies (SOSM) outlined in Chapter 2, Ulrich has moved systems thinking
along the horizontal ‘participants dimension’, noting the possible existence
of coercion and seeking ways to counter it in order that all stakeholders can
take part in debate about change. In doing so, he follows soft systems think-
ing in continuing to honour the culture and political system metaphors
and expands on it by responding, to a degree, to the psychic prison and
instruments of domination metaphors.CSHdoes not see its role as managing
complexity along the ‘systems dimension’ of the SOSM, and it is not
surprising, therefore, that Ulrich rails against the machine, organism and
brain metaphors that dominate what he calls ‘systems science’. It is arguable,
228
Critical systems heuristics

however, that this lack of attention to complexity in the real world defeats his
intention of supplying an ‘emancipatory’ systems approach. CSH can
respond to transparent causes of coercion, but is useless in the face of
complex^coercive situations where, for example, power might ¢nd its
expression through a mobilization of bias expressed in the very structures
of society, or in the existence of ‘false consciousness’.
In paradigm language, CSH rejects functionalism and takes seriously the
need to extend interpretive thinking in an emancipatory direction. It wants
to enlighten all stakeholders, especially disadvantaged ones, about the
nature of the social systems designs they encounter and empower them to
participate in debate about the validity of such designs. It is, however, an
emancipatory approach of a very limited kind. CSH fails to provide any
account of the social structures that may lie behind and determine the
character of the debate and its outcomes.
11.5
THE VALUE OF CRITICAL SYSTEMS HEURISTICS (CSH)
TO MANAGERS
CSH’s value to managers can be summarized in the following ¢ve points:
.
It o¡ers an ‘inclusive’ systems approach that emphasizes the bene¢ts of
incorporating the values of all stakeholders in planning and decision-
making.
.
CSH puts the concept of ‘boundary’ at the centre ofsystemsthinking and
makes it easy to see that drawing the boundary around a problem situa-
tion in di¡erent ways impacts massively on how it is seen and what is
done.
.
It allows managers and others to question whose values are being
respected and whose interests served by particular systems designs.
.
CSH demands that attention be given to disadvantaged stakeholders,
especially those a¡ected by a design, but not involved in it.
.
CSH empowers managers and other stakeholders by undermining the
notion that expertise rules in planning and design, and allows them to
fully participate in discussions and decisions about purposes.
11.6
CONCLUSION
The systems tradition has long been strong in methodologies for the e⁄cient
design of systems to achieve known goals. More recently, soft systems
The value of critical systems heuristics (CSH) to managers
229

thinking has provided approaches capable, in pluralistic situations, of achiev-
ing su⁄cient accommodation among stakeholders for some agreed course
of action to follow. Until the publication of Ulrich’s Critical Heuristics of
Social Planning, however, there was no systems approach that provided a
means for critically re£ecting either on the goals sought and the means used
in hard systems thinking or on the nature of the accommodations achieved
and the changes brought about through soft systems thinking. CSH has,
therefore, helped to ¢ll a signi¢cant gap.
CSH is now most frequently used in multiagency situations where it is
important to gain the commitment of all parties and to take account of the
wishes of clients who may have limited opportunity, otherwise, to have
their perspectives taken into account. It will be interesting to see if its range
can be extended to more hierarchical settings. Managers of all types are
increasingly being asked to account for the performance of their organiza-
tions on such matters as provision for disabled people, sexual discrimination,
racial equality, equal opportunities for people from di¡erent social classes
and environmental protection. Perhaps if they incorporated CSH in their
repertoires they would already know they were acting responsibly and their
organizations would bene¢t as a result.
REFERENCES
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Jackson, M.C. (1985). The itinerary of a critical approach: Review of Ulrich’s
‘Critical Heuristics of Social Planning’. Journal of the Operational Research
Society, 36, 878^881.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Mejia, A. (2001). The Problem of Knowledge Imposition: Paulo Freire and Critical
Systems Thinking (Research Memorandum No. 29). University of Hull
Business School, Hull, UK.
Midgley, G. (1997). Dealing with coercion: Critical systems heuristics and
beyond. Systems Practice, 10, 37^57.
Midgley, G. (2000). Systemic Intervention: Philosophy, Methodology and Practice.
Kluwer/Plenum, New York.
Midgley, G., Munlo, I. and Brown, M. (1997). Sharing Power. Policy Press,
Bristol.
230
Critical systems heuristics

Midgley, G., Munlo, I. and Brown, M. (1998). The theory and practice of
boundary critique: Developing housing services for older people. Journal of
the Operational Society, 49, 467^478.
Ulrich, W. (1983). Critical Heuristics of Social Planning. Haupt, Bern.
Ulrich, W. (1988). Systems thinking, systems practice and practical philosophy:
A program of research. Systems Practice, 1, 137^153.
Ulrich, W. (1998). Systems Thinking as if People Mattered: Critical Systems Thinking
for Citizens and Managers (Working Paper No. 23). University of Lincoln,
Lincoln, UK.
Ulrich, W. (2003). Beyond methodology choice: Critical systems thinking as
critically systemic discourse. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 54, 325^
342.
References
231


Team Syntegrity
12
When I started to construct physical polyhedra with my own hands, it
was truly a revelation to follow Bucky’s route. An unwholesome mess of
wooden doweling, panel pins, rubber bands, string, and glue, strength-
ened with gratuitous contributions from skin and beard, quite suddenly
transformed itself into a polyhedron so strong that I could actually stand
on it.
Beer (1990)
12.1
INTRODUCTION
Sta¡ord Beer, the founder of organizational cybernetics and inventor of the
Viable System Model (VSM) (see Chapter 6), devoted his last years to the
development and re¢nement of an approach to democratic decision-
making called Team Syntegrity.
Team syntegrity provides a theory and a set of procedures (a ‘protocol’)
that support non-hierarchical, participative and e¡ective decision-making
around a topic that is interesting for a group of people who share some
knowledge and experience relating to it. It is of obvious value in organiza-
tions that are already democratic and in multiorganizational settings where,
of necessity, the commitment of a variety of stakeholders to action has to
be obtained. White (1994, 1998) illustrates the latter scenario, describing
team syntegrity sessions that debated the questions ‘how can we, sovereign
world citizens, govern our world?’ and ‘how should we run London?’ But
its use isby no means con¢ned to such situations. Indeed in the postindustrial
age, where democracy and decentralization are coming to be valued more
highly than hierarchy and centralization, there is likely to be an increasing
need for Team Syntegrity to promote inclusiveness, £atter structures and
self-management even in otherwise conventional organizations.

Beer’s book Beyond Dispute: The Invention of Team Syntegrity, published in
1994, presents all the theoretical and practical aspects of the approach. Since
that time the protocol has been used extensively and has shown its worth in
supporting teamwork, particularly (according to Schwaninger, 1997) in
relation to problems of planning, innovation and knowledge acquisition.
This chapter draws heavily on previous work by Angela Espinosa (2003)
who was also the organizer and a facilitator of the ‘Gorgona Syntegration’
described in Section 12.3. I am grateful to her for her help.
12.2
DESCRIPTION OF TEAM SYNTEGRITY
12.2.1
Historical development
The origins of team syntegrity lie, on the one hand, in what Beer sees as a
misunderstanding of his VSM and, on the other, in a necessary requirement
of that model (see Beer, 1990).
The misunderstanding is that the VSM is hierarchical. Beer believes that
this arises from people taking at face value the diagram that usually depicts
System 5, ‘the boss’, at the top. A more sophisticated grasp of the model
reveals that the sole purpose of Systems 2 through 5 is to facilitate the
functioning of the embedded System 1. After all, Beer protests, ‘are not the
lowest autonomic functions in the human body represented in the cortex?’
and ‘is not the leadership of a democracy supposed to embody the will of
the people?’ In this sense the emphasis Beer has given to developing a
protocol for democratic dialogue is his rebuke to all those he feels have
got the VSM wrong. But, what essential requirement of the model does it
meet?
In his work on the VSM, Beer highlighted the need for organizations to
develop conversational tools that can handle the divergent and often
con£icting viewpoints of their members and facilitate the emergence of a
shared social consciousness. In order to de¢ne and specify a resolution to
most policy, control, co-ordination and monitoring issues it is important to
have proper communications mechanisms that can deal with the variety the
participants necessarily bring to their discussions. For example, as we saw
in Chapter 6, it is essential to promote rich and productive debate at the
point in an enterprise where information about its internal state (generated
by System 3) is brought together with information about the external
environment (generated by System 4); a point known as the ‘operations
234
Team syntegrity

room’ in VSM parlance. Beer knew, based on Ashby’s work on variety, that
most organizational structures are variety inhibitors and constrain
interaction and debate because they impose barriers re£ecting organizational
rules and practices. If the required conversations and debates are to take
place at the high variety levels necessary and achieve the kinds of balances
demanded throughout the architecture of the VSM, it is important to pay
attention to the design of the negotiation spaces in which they occur and to
create the democratic conditions in which all relevant viewpoints and
world views can be fully expressed and taken into account.
Beer set out in search of a mechanism that could integrate, through demo-
cratic dialogue, the ideas and experiences of participants, promote e¡ective
synergy and translate the outcome into social knowledge. As a cybernetician,
he looked for useful analogies that could be drawn between other scienti¢c
¢elds and the social domain in which he was interested. He explored holo-
graphy (the study of wholes that are manifest in their parts), experimented
with lasers and toyed with various abstruse areas of mathematics. One day,
in a completely di¡erent context, Beer remembered Buckminster Fuller’s
dictum: ‘All systems are polyhedra.’ At once he recognized that no structure
could be less hierarchical than a regular polyhedron ^ an example being the
geodesic dome that Fuller had designed. Furthermore, in a geodesic dome
the whole gains its cohesive strength from the tension existing between the
faces. This was the example of ‘structural synergy’ that he wanted, and he
began to construct physical polyhedra himself in order to understand better
their nature and properties. Beer (1990) found to his amazement that using
wooden dowelling, panel pins, rubber bands, string, and glue, together
with, as he put it, ‘gratuitous contributions from skin and beard’, he was
able to build a polyhedron so strong that he, a man of large stature, could
stand on it.
To a holistic thinker, like Beer, the geodesic dome was likely to be just one
expression of a ‘natural invariance’ that would be repeated throughout the
natural and social worlds. Fuller, indeed, was already producing designs for
cars, ships and houses based on the same structural characteristics. He
determined, therefore, to investigate the phenomenon as a possible guide
for democratic and e¡ective dialogue. The analogy he developed was of a
group of participants (an ‘Infoset’) that is consciously trying to express its
integrity by compressing a shared idea into a cohesive statement, but is also
experiencing the tension that discussions and arguments produce in the
process. A Fullerian tensegrity (tensile integrity) balance would help as a
model for designing this conversational space.
Description of Team Syntegrity
235

12.2.2
Philosophy and theory
Beer (1990, 1994) follows Fuller in regarding the icosahedron as the most
interesting of the regular polyhedra and as the type exhibiting the most
perfect tensegrity in nature. He sees it, therefore, as a possible model for an
ideal democracy. Using the analogy, democracy and the robustness and e¡ec-
tiveness of the process are guaranteed by organizing discussion according
to this particular geometric structure. To understand the theory underlying
Team Syntegrity, therefore, we have to know about the peculiar properties
of the icosahedron.
The icosahedron has 20 triangular sides described by 30 edges. It has 12
vertices each connecting ¢ve edges. Figure 12.1 shows the shape of the
icosahedron. We now have to think through how these properties can be
transferred to the social domain to provide for democratic and synergistic
conversations.
Taking the icosahedron to represent an organization, or the ‘Infoset’,
Beer asks us to regard each of the edges as a person. There are therefore 30
236
Team syntegrity
Figure 12.1
An icosahedron showing how 30 ‘people’ (edges) are connected to 12
‘topics’ (vertices).

people. Each of the 12 vertices gathers ¢ve edges together. If a vertex is
regarded as a discussion group, there are, therefore, 12 groups and 60
group members. As each edge (or person) has two ends, each of the 30
people belongs to two groups and no two people belong to the same two
teams. Again:
.
There are 30 people, divided into 12 discussion groups.
.
Each person belongs to two groups, which might be called his or her
left-hand and right-hand group. Thus there are 60 team members. No
person belongs to the same two teams as anyone else.
Beer regards this as a good start for a model of a perfect democracy because
it exhibits no global hierarchy ^ each of the 12teamshave identical structures,
connectivities and relative position. Moreover, this arrangement demon-
strates total closure; it is in logical terms self-referential. If the discussions
are appropriately ordered, this should produce the phenomenon of ‘rever-
beration’. Views emanating from one discussion group will reverberate
around the structure, gaining and losing adherents, consolidating and
subtly changing, and this should ensure maximum creativity among the
groups and generate synergy.
The other bene¢t of the icosahedron, for Beer, lies in its structural
strength. Fuller had discovered that polyhedral structures, like the icosa-
hedron, are held together by what he called ‘tensile integrity’, or ‘tensegrity’
for short. Tensegrity is de¢ned by Fuller as the unity of the structure of any
physical object as determined by its distributed tensile stresses. In structures
like the geodesic dome the forces of compression and tension achieve a
natural, reinforced balance. The integrity of the structure then derives not
from the local compressor stresses where elements conjoin, but from the
overall tensile stresses governing the entire system.
Fuller achieved cohesive strength in the geodesic dome by running struts
between the centres of adjacent triangular faces, thus providing for a thick
two-dimensional skin. Beer recognized that in his theoretical construct, of
an organization exhibiting tensegrity, even greater strength could be
obtained by driving the ‘struts’ straight through the central spaces that, in
the architectural design, had to be kept open. He now had to work out
what the correlate of a strut is in organizational terms.
Beer came up with the idea of ‘critics’, appointed to each of the teams
formed at the vertices, from positions across the phase space. Critics were
to o¡er constructive advice to the team on the basis that they were relatively
disinterested members of the whole organization and individuals having
Description of Team Syntegrity
237

detailed specialized knowledge of one other, but unadjacent team. The
tension created by each critic was to be balanced by appointing a member
of the receiving team as a critic to another distant team ^ in fact, the second
team of which the original critic is also a member. Again:
.
Each person is appointed a critic of a team of which he or she is not a
member. The team to which he or she is appointed as a critic will
appoint a critic to his or her right-hand team.
.
Similarly, each person becomes a critic in that team of which he or she is
not a member, but of which a right-hand teammate is a member. And
that team will appoint a critic to his or her left-hand team.
.
Since each person has two critical appointments, there are 60 critics
spread with tensegrity over 12 teams. So, each ¢ve-member team has
¢ve more quasimembers who are critics as de¢ned.
We now have a model of an organization generating synergy out of perfect
democracy and, at the same time, demonstrating great strength and cohesion
because of its tensegrity. The model exhibits synergistic tensegrity or ‘syn-
tegrity’. It remains necessary to specify how this theory can be translated
into practice through the ‘protocol’ of team syntegrity.
12.2.3
Methodology
Essentially, team syntegrity is a process that guides non-hierarchical group
decision-making for an ‘Infoset’ of 30 people who share an interest in
addressing an issue of particular concern to them and about which they will
inevitably have di¡erent opinions. The 30 individuals must agree to a
communications protocol ^ a set of procedures designed to extract
maximum advantage from the qualities of the icosahedron. The protocol
establishes how these individuals share information about the issue,
develop their conversations and reach conclusions. It places the participants
in roles of equal status so that every voice is heard and no individual is
allowed to dominate. Peopleare divided into groups,meetings are sequenced
and information is distributed in such a way as to ensure a highly interactive
and democratic event, which o¡ers the best opportunities for balancing
tension and synergy as the groups negotiate di¡erent viewpoints. It should
be clear that the protocol simply speci¢es the form of the interactions and
conversations in the Infoset. It puts no restrictions and makes no comment
on the content of what is said. That is left up to the judgement of individuals
and the teams.
238
Team syntegrity

A team syntegrity exercise, in its classic form, will last for around ¢ve days
and have ¢ve stages:
.
opening;
.
generation of the agenda;
.
topic auction;
.
outcome resolve;
.
closing session.
Once the decision to use the methodology has been made, the ¢rst step is to
agree on an ‘opening’ question that captures the issue on which all partici-
pants hope to reach agreement. Participants are then selected and should
include a rich variety of perspectives on the opening question; in a multi-
agency situation, for example, representatives from di¡erent geographical
regions, ethnic, age, gender and status groups, and from communities and
institutions a¡ected by the issue. The participants are invited to the
opening of the event.
During the ¢rst actual session the participants concentrate on ‘generating
an agenda’ that will help them to address the opening question. Since they
are going to be divided into 12 groups, this requires clustering the concerns
of all the 30 individual participants around 12 main issues, or ‘topics’, that
will be the focus of discussion.
The ‘topic auction’ sees the 30 participants allocated in di¡erent groups
according to their preferences among the topics and the logic of the
icosahedron. Individuals are asked to rank their preferred topics and an
algorithm is employed to ensure that the highest level of satisfaction is
obtained while respecting the constraints imposed by the structure of the
icosahedron. Each of the 12 vertices is taken to represent 1 of the 12 topics
for discussion (topics A^L in Figure 12.1) and, as we know, each edge repre-
sents one participant. Thus every discussion group is allocated ¢ve people,
corresponding to the vertex that is formed by ¢ve edges joining together.
And each participant ends up assigned to two groups de¢ned by the ends
of their edge. The structure then determines which two other topics the
person will be a critic of. There are, therefore, 12 teams each developing
1 of the topics and consisting of 5 members and 5 critics. Each of the 30
people involved plays 2 roles: a participant in the 2 groups de¢ned by their
edge and a critic in the 2 groups de¢ned by the edge on the opposite side of
the icosahedron. Once the groups are ¢xed in the topic auction they remain
the same for the remainder of the exercise.
Description of Team Syntegrity
239

The topic auction ensures that maximum lateral communication is
obtained and, in Beer’s view, enables ‘reverberation’ to happen in the
closed system represented by the icosahedron. Participants feel ideas
rebounding back to them in a di¡erent and enhanced form.
The fourth stage, the ‘outcomeresolve’, takes up the majority ofthe 5 days
and consists of a series of meetings of the 12 groups. The meetings typically
last between 45 and 75 minutes and each group will meet 3 or 4 times
depending on the time available. The sequence of meetings is determined
by the protocol, which stems from the geometry of the icosahedron. As
each participant is involved in developing 2 issues and as a critic of 2
others, it turns out that only 2 groups can meet at any one time. The 5
discussants in each group seek to work up their thinking on the topic into
an insightful Final Statement of Importance (FSI). The 5 critics on the
team must remain silent while this process is going on, but may then join
in with 10 minutes of relevant questioning. The critics should act as devil’s
advocates by challenging the group to review any agreements reached and
questioning the assumptions behind apparent agreements. Observers may
also be present from other groups that are not meeting and, while they may
not intervene, they can scrawl on any written outcomes (‘gra⁄ti’) and
make use of the information they garner from being present in the sessions
when they are discussants or critics.
Given that each participant belongs to four teams (two as participant, two
as a critic), they act as information di¡usion channels, rapidly spreading
information around the di¡erent teams. This produces the desired reverbera-
tion or ‘echo e¡ect’, so that all the team members share information about
all the others thanks to the icosahedron structure. It has been demonstrated
that after the third iteration around 90% of the information initially
generated about the opening question has been distributed among all the
participants.
After each iteration of meetings there is a plenary session at which the 12
teams present the current results of their conversations and raise questions
and proposals concerning the content of the discussions or the methodology
itself.
At the end of the whole event there is a ‘closing’ plenary session where the
teams present their FSIs. There are 12 of these, one for each team, which by
now should meet with general assent in the Infoset. Teams are also invited
to assess the event and methodology, and their own learning and experience
as participants. Plans for further meetings or actions can be made at this
closing session.
240
Team syntegrity

12.2.4
Methods
Team Syntegrity Inc., the company that brought the methodology to
market, has developed special tools for supporting the planning and delivery
of team syntegrity sessions. We have already mentioned the optimization
software for deciding team membership. There are also various brainstorm-
ing, visual applause, and other creative and democratic techniques for
sharing information and promoting enhanced group learning. Here we
describe one approach to generation of the agenda (to give an idea of what
can be done) and comment on the important role that facilitators play in
Team Syntegrity as well.
A much used technique for helping to generate the agenda is called the
‘problem jostle’. The 30 participants and the facilitators assemble in a large
room with extensive wall space, to which documents can be a⁄xed, and
containing 12 tables with a few chairs around each. The problem jostle
begins with each player submitting to the facilitators at least one Statement
of Importance (SI) that he or she feels is particularly relevant to the
opening question. An SI should be a concise, one- or two-sentence assertion.
The facilitators scrutinize the SIs, eliding any that say similar things, type
them up and make them available to the players. Any player who then
regards a particular SI of extreme importance can move to one of the 12
tables (called ‘hours’ because they are arranged in the pattern of a clock),
name the SI and start a discussion group around that topic. Other players
are free to champion alternative SIs in this way, join existing discussion
groups or simply wander around the room. When, at a given table, enthu-
siasm develops around a particular topic, its advocates can write the topic
down and seek further adherents to their cause. Any topic that gains ¢ve
signatories is classed as an Aggregated Statement of Importance (ASI).
While this self-organizing process is taking place, the facilitators assist by
pointing out similarities between certain ASIs and by seeking to position
‘polar opposite’ statements at polar extreme ‘hours’ (e.g., 6 and 12). The
¢rst session of the problem jostle should end with all 12 hours having ASIs
beside them. The next three sessions are designed to promote further
re£ection on existing ASIs, the emergence of new ASIs, and the reduction
and re¢nement of these to just 12 Composite Statements of Importance
(CSIs) arranged according to the prescribed pattern. This is known as
‘hexadic reduction’. If necessary, a rating system can be employed to decide
on the best CSIs.
If the facilitators have an important role in helping generation of the
agenda, they are crucial in the outcome resolve. During each team meeting
Description of Team Syntegrity
241

a facilitator is responsible for handling the variety of the conversations and
integrating the contributions from all the participants and critics. He or she
moderates the amount of time taken by each discussant in the conversation,
making sure all have the opportunity to have an equal say. The critics too
must be allocated time to make their contribution. The facilitator aims to
give the participants the space and time they need to have an impact. It is
not his or her role to in£uence the content of what is said. The facilitator
needs skills in hearing, understanding and feeding back the participants’
conversations. He or she is also responsible for making a visible record of
the important issues addressed. In this he or she may have the support of a
technical assistant, with a computer, who records an electronic version of
the development of team conversations so that they can be reproduced for
the plenary sessions.
12.2.5
Recent developments
In Beyond Dispute Beer describes the traditional form of team syntegrity
involving 30 people over around 5 days. However, he was, from the
beginning, aware of the di⁄culties created by the strict demands of this
form. More recently, Joe Truss, of Team Syntegrity Inc., has developed
protocols called ShortForms and SmallForms. The most widely used Short-
Form involves 24 to 30 people over 3.5 days. A SmallForm event requires 12
people over 2 to 3 days.
One of the main questions asked of team syntegrity is what it does to assist
with implementation after the event. To answer this Joe Truss has
continued to re¢ne ‘FACE planning’ (see Beer, 1994) to co-ordinate further
meetings of willing and available Infoset members. This has been tested
and found to work following a number of syntegrations in recent years.
12.3
TEAM SYNTEGRITY IN ACTION
Readers of Chapter 6 will recall that the Colombian Constitution of
1991 established a Ministry of the Environment together with a set of
organizations ^ the national environmental system (SINA) ^ and charged
them, at the national, regional and local levels, to deal with environmental
issues in a more holistic and participatory way in order to promote sustain-
able development. The organizational design and policies of SINA sought
242
Team syntegrity

to respect these goals. Nevertheless, by 1996 it was clear that many organiza-
tional problems remained at SINA, and its practices and results were actually
far removed from its objectives. For this reason, the Ministry of the Environ-
ment and the National Auditing O⁄ce decided to sponsor a syntegration
to get agreement on the main strategic issues still plaguing SINA’s develop-
ment and operation. The event took place on the Colombian island of
Gorgona, a beautiful and valuable ecological reserve in the Paci¢c Ocean.
The principal organizer was Angela Espinosa and the following account
(2003) is hers. She was assisted with facilitation by Chris Cullen and Joe
Truss of Team Syntegrity Inc., the Canadian company holding the copyright
for the methodology.
Senior managers from the national institutions sponsoring the event
and the consultants organizing it agreed that the opening question should
be:
How should public, private and voluntary sector organisations and in-
stitutions be co-ordinated in order to preserve the natural environment
in Colombia?
They then drew up criteria for inviting participants in order to achieve a
varied and balanced representation of individuals from di¡erent bodies
involved with strategic environmental matters around the country. Issues
of ethnicity, gender, age, geographical spread, political and professional
background, etc. were taken into account. The ¢nal list of participants in-
volved (a) senior managers from the following public sector institutions:
.
Ministry of Environment;
.
National Auditing O⁄ce;
.
Risaralda ^ the county auditing o⁄ce;
.
Ministry of Agriculture;
.
national parks;
.
La Macarena ^ a regional environmental corporation (CAR);
.
Environmental Development Institute (IDEAM);
.
a Colombian petroleum enterprise (Ecopetrol);
.
National Planning Department;
.
Van Humboldt Research Institute;
.
Cartagena’s environmental agency (DAMA);
.
the city of Cordoba (an ex-governor);
.
the National University;
Team syntegrity in action
243

and (b) individuals representing di¡erent communities, organizations and
institutions:
.
representative of black communities;
.
senior manager from a private sector company ^ Antioquia;
.
women’s leader;
.
researcher ^ environmental issues;
.
postgraduate student (studying environmental issues);
.
countryside and peasants’ representative;
.
editor of Environmental and Socio-Economic Review;
.
Ecology Teachers’ Association ^ Cundinamarca;
.
Colombian Environmental Funding Agency (Ecofondo);
.
environmental non-governmental organization ^ Popayan;
.
Los Andes University;
.
Colombian Association of Small and Medium Sized Enterprises
(ACOPI).
The organizers made the necessary travel and accommodation arrangements
and the participants gathered on the ¢rst afternoon for the opening. At this
session the methodology and protocol were explained, as well as the roles
of participants, facilitators and assistants, and the various facilities available
were described.
The rest of that afternoon and evening focused on generation of the
agenda using the problem jostle technique. More than a hundred SIs were
produced. With the help of the facilitators these were then collapsed and
prioritized, during hexadic reduction, into ASIs and, ¢nally, 12 CSIs ^ the
12 issues relevant to the opening question, which would guide later conver-
sations. This whole process was stressful for the participants, already tired
from travelling, and it was 9 p.m. before agreement was reached on the
following 12 issues:
.
participatory mechanisms;
.
search for peace ^ war, corruption and environment;
.
culture and education;
.
equity and agrarian reform;
.
institutionalization;
.
territorial and environmental ordering;
.
management and development;
.
gender and environment;
.
ethical values;
244
Team syntegrity

.
environmental conservation;
.
rationalization of environmental control;
.
sustainable development and the international dimension.
Once the CSIs were agreed, the topic auction stage began with the partici-
pants each expressing their preferences for discussing particular issues. The
computer program did the best it could to satisfy these preferences within
the constraints imposed by the icosahedron structure, and the results were
announced ¢rst thing on the second day. Not everyone was satis¢ed: three
participants in particular were unhappy with being allocated to the gender
group. Nevertheless, everyone eventually accepted membership of the
groups to which they had been assigned.
The outcome resolve could now commence. It lasted for 3 days and the
participants worked wellin the 12teams, as discussants, critics and observers,
to address the 12 CSIs. They were supported throughout by the facilitators
and technical assistants who recorded the conversations and their outcomes,
and fed them back to the whole Infoset during the plenary sessions. There
were certain problems arising from faulty installation of computers and soft-
ware, but these were overcome by good teamwork and everything ran to
schedule.
The closing session saw the groups sharing their conclusions on the 12
issues, and the Infoset discussing the experience and the learning they had
derived. A few individuals had been upset by con£ict in their teams and
were disappointed with the outcomes. The great majority, however, as
shown by evaluation questionnaires, had a positive and pleasant learning
experience and declared themselves satis¢ed both with their contributions
and with the quality of the ¢nal results.
FACE planning, which would have brought together participants after
the event to ensure implementation of the outcomes, was not implemented
following Gorgona. However, some of the organizers and participants did
meet again to work out a ¢nal version of the 12 FSIs, and some months
after the event the organizers published the Gorgona Manifesto setting out
their conclusions. A very brief summary follows:
.
Participatory mechanisms. The State should encourage communities to
take advantage of the opportunities for participation open to them ^
unless they learned to participate sustainability could not be achieved.
.
Search for peace ^ war, corruption and environment. War and corrup-
tion are social phenomena that destroy the environmental and social
milieus.
Team syntegrity in action
245

.
Culture and education. Environmental education should be introduced
at all educational levels and there is the need to value, conserve and
transmit traditional wisdom.
.
Equity and agrarian reform. It is necessary to agree on a new develop-
ment model promoting agrarian reform on the basis of equity. Without
this there cannot be democracy, peace, political stability or sustainable
development.
.
Institutionalization ^
e
SINA must grant autonomy to institutions involved in environ-
mental management at the local level, but they must still act
cohesively as a whole;
e
its components should cohere by region and theme so they can act
jointly to tackle complex, transdisciplinary and inter-regional issues;
e
there should be strategies promoting environmental investments
aimed at key programmes and institutions, and encouraging partici-
pation and responsibility;
e
it is essential to involve universities and research institutes in devel-
oping environmental educational programmes;
e
monitoring and control systems should be put in place to assess the
impact of the development programmes and industrial projects on
sustainability;
e
SINA should review current environmental laws and design
e¡ective control and punishment mechanisms.
.
Territorial and environmental ordering. An integrated regional strategy
was needed to manage the water basins of the main rivers, and an inte-
grated national strategy to ensure all possible bene¢ts are obtained
from environmental reserves.
.
Management and development. Knowledge, science, technology and
local wisdom form the basis for sustainable development and these
need to be co-ordinated to support decision-making contributing to
sustainable development at the local level in the context of a shared
national ethos.
.
Gender and environment. The participation of women in environmental
issues is fundamental because of their traditional roles in the family,
education, agriculture and the community, and relevant female values
should be more highly valued and shared by males.
.
Ethical values. An environment of ethical responsibility should be
collectively built, based on trust, throughout society ^ thus enabling
co-operative behaviour between individuals and between communities.
.
Environmental conservation. We need to monitor environmental
246
Team syntegrity

damage, understand its causes and be prepared organizationally and
economically to prevent or respond to it.
.
Rationalization of environmental control. Communities must be in-
volved participatively in defending their local environments.
.
Sustainable development and the international dimension. Colombia
needs to improve its negotiating skills on environmental issues at inter-
national fora in order to protect its national interests.
Following the publication of the GorgonaManifesto there were no more meet-
ings of the organizers or participants. Nevertheless, many of those who
took part in the syntegration continued to be involved with SINA, and it
does seem that the event and the Manifesto made an important contribution
to the debate about organizational development going on within SINA at
that time and is likely to do so into the future. For example, in the ‘environ-
mental strategic plan’ for the period of the last Colombian government,
1998^2002, the section on the ‘institutional development strategy’ of SINA
shows a precise alignment with the conclusions on ‘institutionalization’ set
out in the Manifesto. Three of the main action lines ^ ‘organizing actions by
region and theme’, ‘strategies for promoting participation and responsibility’
and ‘developing monitoring and control systems’ ^ echo the sentiments
and even employ many of the same words used in the Manifesto. At a
broader level, an evaluation report on SINA’s performance during the
same period of government, produced by the National Council of Socio-
economic Development (COMPES), highlights results that relate closely
to the guidelines for action established at the Gorgona syntegration.
12.4
CRITIQUE OF TEAM SYNTEGRITY
Those who have experienced a syntegration attest to the fact that the process
feels non-hierarchical, open and self-organizing. Based on the structure of
the icosahedron it supports participative decision-making by ensuring that
noindividual orgroupdominates theconversations. Furthermore, itguaran-
tees that the views of each participant are taken seriously and are ‘heard’,
through reverberation, even in groups that they do not belong to. The
approach is, therefore, an e¡ective vehicle for achieving truly democratic
dialogue. It can promote fairness in decision-making by neutralizing the
baneful in£uence power and hierarchy can have on discussion.
Team syntegrity additionally o¡ers a communications design that maxi-
mizes the constructive engagement of participants and achieves the greatest
Critique of Team Syntegrity
247

possible learning from the resources brought to the event. Using the geom-
etry of the icosahedron, as a guide to organizing the conversations, produces
robust and e¡ective dialogue because it allows a balance to be struck
between integrating the knowledge and experience of the participants
about an area of concernto themand creatinga healthy tension frommultiple
viewpoints. The protocol ensures that information circulates freely, that
people are exposed to the views of others and so can experience learning,
and that new synergistic knowledge emerges because of the reverberation
of ideas set in train. The end result of a syntegration should be the agreement
and commitment of the Infoset to a ¢nal document, structured around 12
issues, which represents the best of the participants’ understanding and
experience brought to bear to answer the opening question.
Critics (see Jackson, 2000) inevitably argue that, whatever the apparent
success of a syntegration, it cannot guarantee that anything will actually get
implemented inpractice. Good intentions arrived at in the contextofa demo-
cratically organised Infoset can soon dissolve when they encounter power
relationships and hierarchy in the real world. This is likely to be the case
whatever attention is given to follow-up meetings using FACE planning.
This criticism suggests some limitations to the usefulness of team
syntegrity, but should not be seen as detracting from what it was designed
for and what it does well. A syntegration opens up a conversational space
and helps to achieve a coherent understanding at a certain stage in the devel-
opment of thinking about a matter of public concern or an organizational
issue. This kind of outcome might be of particular bene¢t in arriving at
agreement on strategic issues or the design of an organizational change
programme. As we saw with the Gorgona syntegration, the event can
produce a climate in favour of change that resonates through future action
and, of course, that creates a coterie of critical, active learners. Nevertheless,
to properly implement and institutionalize the results of a syntegration is
likely to require that the methodology be used in combination with other
systems approaches.
Other critics (including Jackson, 2000) baulk at the cybernetic logic that
connects icosahedra, geodesic domes and participative decision processes.
To them the constraints imposed by team syntegrity, which require 30
people to take 5 days out of their lives to discuss 12 topics, seem arti¢cial.
E¡orts have been made, as we know, to increase £exibility by o¡ering alter-
native protocols ^ although these too re£ect other geometric designs. And
the e¡ectiveness of these alternatives still needs to be fully researched.
Another line of criticism (Mejia, 2001; Espinosa and Mejia, 2003) points
out that while Team Syntegrity can ensure democratic interaction, it cannot
248
Team syntegrity

impact on the actual content of the conversations that take place. It has to
rely on the content brought to the sessions by the participants or developed
as part of the learning process that occurs during the conversations. The
content-less type of critical approach o¡ered by team syntegrity (and
criticized in relation to critical systems heuristics ^ see Chapter 11) cannot
guarantee that emancipatory concerns are recognized since it depends on
the existing level of understanding and awareness of the participants. As
Mejia and Espinosa note, if distorted forms of knowledge have been
imposed on participants in the past, then under the guise of democratic
dialogue those forms can easily be passed over or even legitimized again
during a syntegration.
Furthermore, it has been argued that team syntegrity assumes that
participants will have the same fundamental capacity to enter into dialogue
and to grasp meaning. White (1994, 1998) notes the lack of speci¢c mechan-
isms to involve the silent or inarticulate. He also suggests that there is a
danger that discussions can degenerate into ‘networking sessions’ rather
than being topic-focused. This hints at a more general concern. Beer seems
to assume that people are willing to enter into dialogue because they want
to reach a consensus. Others, however, see dialogue as an arena for struggle
and dissension in which speakers seek to defeat their opponents, often for
the simple pleasure of the game. From this perspective dialogue is simply a
di¡erent form of power struggle and whatever issues forth from ‘democratic
debate’ represents just another claim to power. Beer is relying on the
participants wanting to play the same language game that he prefers.
At the theoretical level team syntegrity uses the properties of the ico-
sahedron, as transferred to the social domain, to maximize the interplay
between the culture and political system metaphors in order that the bene¢ts
of both integration and tension are gained. And it does so with a full aware-
ness of the problems highlighted by the psychic prison and instruments of
domination metaphors. To ensure the bene¢ts are won, people must be em-
powered so that they can take part in dialogue on an equal and fair basis.
In this way team syntegrity pays attention to issues of coercion that arise as
we move along the horizontal dimension of the System Of Systems
Methodologies (SOSM) (see Chapter 2) and that are ignored in soft
systems thinking.
Team syntegrity, therefore, responds to the emancipatory paradigm by
establishing ground rules that enable democratic participation in decision-
making. It does not seek out procedures for predicting and controlling the
behaviour of complex adaptive systems ^ and so o¡ers little to functionalism.
It di¡ers from interpretive approaches in paying more attention to the form
Critique of Team Syntegrity
249

than to the content of conversations. Interpretive thinkers have little time
for the elaborate protocol developed as part of team syntegrity to ensure
democratic dialogue. It ¢nds its severest critics among postmodernists who
question the role Beer assigns to language as o¡ering the possibility of
achieving a genuine consensus among participants. As we shall see in the
next chapter, postmodernists believe that we live in a world of multiple
truths that give rise to incommensurable interpretations of reality and think
that we should promote di¡erence rather than seek to subsume it in the
quest for agreement and consensus.
12.5
THE VALUE OF TEAM SYNTEGRITY TO MANAGERS
Team syntegrity’s value to managers can be summarized in the following ¢ve
points:
.
It o¡ers a ‘democratic’ systems approach that emphasizes the bene¢ts of
the equal and participative involvement of stakeholders in de¢ning and
clarifying social and organizational concerns, and seeking their resolu-
tion. Team syntegrity promotes fairness.
.
Team syntegrity produces robust and e¡ective dialogue though a proto-
col that takes advantage of the tensions induced by multiple viewpoints,
integrating these to strengthen the agreements reached among partici-
pants about an area of concern to them.
.
The end result of a syntegration, a record of the agreed responses to 12
topics, will re£ect the very best of the participant’s shared understanding
and experience of the opening question, enhanced by their involvement
in highly interactive and participative group processes.
.
Participants in a syntegration emerge with a shared understanding of a
matter of concern and interest to them, and with a commitment to
some ways of addressing it. These will serve later to help with implemen-
tation of particular actions in the real world.
.
Participants in a syntegration gain an understanding and respect for
participative processes and have their learning capacities enhanced.
12.6
CONCLUSION
Since 1994 there have been well over a hundred team syntegrity events in
di¡erent countries. According to the evaluations these have yielded very
250
Team syntegrity

good results. Beer’s development of team syntegrity, and the associated
methods and concepts (many new to the systems ¢eld), has added consider-
ably to the armoury of applied systems thinkers. It is essential, however, to
recognize what a syntegration can and cannot achieve. The main purpose
of a syntegration is to provide a proper context for developing democratic
and insightful agreements about complex policy or strategic topics. It
cannot guarantee that after the event the agreements reached will be re-
spected or e¡ectively implemented by relevant organizations. A syntegration
event in isolation will not ensure that long-term organizational or societal
changes are realized. Beer originallydesigned itasa complementaryapproach
to be employed along with the viable system model, and it is this combina-
tion that perhaps o¡ers the best possibilities for profound organizational
development.
REFERENCES
Beer, S. (1990). On suicidal rabbits: A relativity of systems. Systems Practice, 3,
115^124.
Beer, S. (1994). Beyond Dispute: The Invention of Team Syntegrity. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, UK.
Espinosa, A. (2003). Team Syntegrity as a tool to promote democratic agree-
ments: An example from the national environmental sector in Colombia. Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Annual Conference of the ISSS [International Society for the
Systems Sciences], Crete, Greece.
Espinosa, A. and Mejia, D. (2003). Team Syntegrity as a learning process: Some
considerations about its capacity to develop critical active learners. Proceedings
of the 2003 Annual Conference of the ISSS [International Society for the Systems
Sciences], Crete, Greece.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Mejia, A. (2001). The Problem of Knowledge Imposition: Paulo Freire and Critical
Systems Thinking (Research Memorandum No. 29). University of Hull
Business School, Hull, UK.
Schwaninger, M. (1997). Self organisation and self reference in the cognition of
organisations. In: V. Braitenberg, et al. (eds) Interdisciplinary Approaches to a
New Understanding of Cognition and Consciousness (pp. 70^80). Unipress,
Augsburg, Germany.
White, L.A. (1994). Let’s syntegrate. Operational Research Insight, 7, 13^18.
White, L.A. (1998). Tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor: A syntegrity to explore
London’s diverse interests. Operational Research Insight, 3, 12^16.
References
251


Type D
Promoting Diversity
Here we detail the postmodern systems approach. This aims to assist man-
agers improve their enterprises by promoting diversity. The approach was
developed because the dominating and ‘totalizing’ discourses of modernism
^ represented by functionalist, interpretive and emancipatory systems think-
ing ^ are seen as suppressing di¡erence and creativity. The postmodern
systems approach by contrast emphasizes the exceptional, seeks to make a
space for suppressed voices to be heard and hopes to unleash creativity and
a sense of fun by engaging people’s emotions. In sociological terms post-
modernism stands opposed to the other modernist paradigms, subverting
and ridiculing their attempts to impose order on a world that is inevitably
too complex, coercive and diverse. Postmodern thinkers believe only local
and temporary resolutions of di⁄culties can be achieved because they see
problem contexts as lying toward the extreme ends of both axes making up
the System Of Systems Methodologies (SOSM). The carnival metaphor
has been suggested as a lens through which to capture the diversity and
creativity called for by postmodern systems thinking.


Postmodern Systems
Thinking
13
The answer is: Let us wage a war on totality; let us be witnesses to the
unpresentable; let us activate the differences and save the honor of the
name.
Lyotard (1984 N replying to the question ‘what, then, is
the postmodern?’)
13.1
INTRODUCTION
Postmodernists would classify all of the various systems approaches consid-
ered so far, whether their aim is to improve goal seeking and viability, to
explore purposes or to ensure fairness, as being ‘modernist’ in character.
They are expressions of a European intellectual movement, with its origins
in the 18th century, known as the Enlightenment. This movement sought
to use rational modes of thought to sweep away superstition, ignorance
and prejudice, and to build a better world.
Lyotard, in his book ThePostmodernCondition(1984), recognizes two major
manifestations of modernism that can be labelled, following Cooper and
Burrell (1988), ‘systemic modernism’ and ‘critical modernism’. Systemic
modernism is concerned with increasing the ‘performativity’ of systems, in
terms of input ^ output measures, and with handling environmental uncer-
tainty. It relies on science to discover what is logical and orderly about the
world, and on technology to assist with prediction and control. This form
of modernism is expressed in classical accounts of hard systems thinking,
system dynamics, organizational cybernetics and complexity theory.
Critical modernism sees its task as the progressive realization of universal
human emancipation. It depends on language being ‘transparent’ so that it
can act as a means whereby humans arrive at agreement about the purposes
they wish to pursue. This form of modernism can be recognized in soft

systems thinking and in the work of emancipatory systems thinkers. In the
latter case it is felt necessary to take careful precautions to ensure that any
consensus or accommodation reached emerges from rational discourse and
not from ‘distortions’ that re£ect the current system and simply lead to its
reproduction.
Postmodernists attack the whole Enlightenment rationale and, therefore,
the pretensions of both systemic and critical modernism. They reject particu-
larly the belief in rationality, truth and progress. They deny that science can
provide access to objective knowledge and so assist with steering organiza-
tions and societies in the face of complexity. They deny that language is
transparent and can function as a regulative principle of consensus. Post-
modernists emphasize, instead, that we have to learn to live with the
incommensurable, accepting multiple interpretations of the world and
being tolerant of di¡erence. Indeed, they want to ensure diversity and
encourage creativity by reclaiming con£ict and bringing marginalized
voices forward to be heard. Postmodernism o¡ers little security. Rather
it thrives on instability, disruption, disorder, contingency, paradox and
indeterminacy.
Even this brief introduction suggests that there are di⁄culties in manag-
ing a ¢t between the systems approach and postmodern thinking.
13.2
DESCRIPTION OF POSTMODERN SYSTEMS THINKING
13.2.1
Historical development
The roots of postmodernism are traced, by Brocklesby and Cummings
(1996), to a break with the Enlightenment tradition established by Nietzsche
and followed up by Heidegger. Nietzsche questioned the emphasis placed
by Enlightenment philosophers, such as Kant, on the human essence and
individual rationality and ridiculed the notion that history revealed that
humanity was making ‘progress’. The self, for Nietzsche, is a contingent
product of various physical, social and cultural forces. To be free, an indi-
vidual has to restyle himself by critically questioning all received opinion
and accepted ways of doing things. People need power in order to do this
and, therefore, people’s ‘will to power’ is something to be celebrated.
Taking his lead from Nietzsche, Heidegger sought to undermine the
Western philosophical tradition and to reorientate philosophy around the
study of Being, concentrating particularly on the uniqueness of each person’s
‘being in the world’. To be ‘authentic’, he argued, it is necessary to face up
to the contingency of our own existence and make of it what we will.
256
Postmodern systems thinking

Emancipation is a personal matter, not something provided by history in the
form of a shared Utopia.
The work of Nietzsche and Heidegger promoting self-emancipation
provides an alternative, therefore, to the Enlightenment tradition, mapped
out by Kant, Hegel and Habermas, which is engaged on the quest for univer-
sal or collective human emancipation. This alternative proved particularly
attractive to various French philosophers, among them Foucault, Derrida,
Lyotard and Baudrillard, who were reacting against the ‘structuralism’ that
dominated much of French intellectual life in the 1960s and 1970s. Structur-
alism, the reader may recall from our study of system dynamics and organiza-
tional cybernetics, seeks to uncover the causal relationships that are seen to
exist ‘beneath the surface’ and that give rise to system behaviour. The new
breed of French philosophers, labelled poststructuralists or postmodernists
(and we do not seek to make a distinction here), rejected the idea that such
determining structures existed and, therefore, could be ‘objectively’ revealed
by social scientists.
They were drawn instead to the‘surface’ meanings,appearancesandrepre-
sentations that structuralists ignored, to how these are inextricably linked
to power relationships and to the impact they have on how individuals
understand themselves and are able to express themselves in the world. As
a result the somewhat marginal opposition that existed to Enlightenment
thinking, as found in the writings of Nietzsche and Heidegger, became trans-
formed into a fully £edged alternative position across a whole swathe of
social science disciplines. This alternative way of thinking and doing came,
most commonly, to be called postmodernism.
13.2.2
Philosophy and theory
In order to show the relevance of postmodernist writers to organizational
research, Alvesson and Deetz (1996) highlight seven common themes that
they pursue. These are explained below, each by reference to the work of
one postmodernist thinker. This will do for our purposes; although it
certainly cannot be inferred that all postmodernists share exactly the same
views on each theme. For more on the individual theorists see Jackson
(2000).
(a) The loss of power of the ‘grand narratives’
In the introduction to this chapter we followed Lyotard in identifying two
forms of modernism ^ ‘systemic modernism’ and ‘critical modernism’.
Description of postmodern systems thinking
257

Lyotard is opposed to both, believing that the quest for precise, objective
knowledge about systems and the hope that language can operate as a
regulatory principle of consensus are both misguided. Moreover, both
types of modernismare dangerous becausethey give riseto ‘grand narratives’
about, for example, continuous economic growth or the emancipation of
humankind.
Lyotard wants to construct a postmodern alternative opposed to all
‘totalizations’. This should emphasize dissension, instability and unpredict-
ability, and activate ‘di¡erence’. The blind spots of modernism, those
things rendered unpresentable and unspeakable in its narratives, must be
brought to the fore. Science needs to be seen as only one kind of language
game with limited relevance to social a¡airs. Language should be regarded
not as orientated to achieving consensus, but as necessarily characterized by
struggle and dissent. It is a vehicle for promoting innovation, change and
renewal, for energizing and motivating human action, and so refusal of
conformity should be encouraged. Consensus is possible only in very
localized circumstances and is only desirable if subject to rapid cancellation.
(b) The centrality of discourse
Foucault’s early work sought to provide an ‘archaeology’ of discursive
formations in di¡erent human sciences, such as medicine, psychiatry and
criminology. In his view every ¢eld of knowledge is constituted by sets of
discursive rules that determine whether statements are adjudged true or
false in that ¢eld. The discursive formations and classi¢catory rules that
operate in a discipline will alter over time, but there is no reason to believe
the current arrangements give rise to more ‘objective’ classi¢cations than
earlier ones ^ in the sense that they resemble reality more closely. The idea
of accumulation of knowledge is, therefore, rejected by Foucault. So is the
notion of a constant human subject who can autonomously engage in
promoting emancipation. Individuals have their subjectivities formed by
the discourses that pertain at the time of their birth and socialization. These
not only structure the world but shape individuals in terms of their identity
and way of seeing as well.
(c) The power/knowledge connections
If Foucault’s earlier work was ‘archaeology’, looking at the origins and
nature of discourses, his later writings emphasize the need to study the
power relations with which they are inextricably connected. Particular
258
Postmodern systems thinking

discourses come to the fore because of power relations. They also embody
knowledge and, Foucault argues, knowledge o¡ers power over others: the
power to de¢ne others. Discourses therefore play a role in establishing
patterns of domination, bene¢ting the meanings favoured by some while
marginalizing the voices of others.
This explanation of the power/knowledge relationship is usually seen as
Foucault’s most valuable contribution to social theory. Discourses depend
on power relationships. On the other hand, they carry power in the way
they make distinctions and so open or close possibilities for social action. A
claim to power can, therefore, be seen as present in any claim to knowledge.
Because of the nature of power, understood in this way, it is omnipresent
in social relations.
(d) Research aimed at revealing indeterminacy and encouraging
resistance rather than at maintaining rationality, predictability
and order
Foucault gives the name ‘genealogy’ to the accounts he o¡ers of the power
struggles associated with the rise to dominance of particular forms of dis-
course. Genealogy is aimed at unmasking the pretensions of ‘totalizing
discourses’. It dismisses their claims to provide objective knowledge. In par-
ticular, it o¡ers criticisms directed at the power/knowledge systems of the
modern age and support for ‘subjugated’ knowledge. In this way a space is
opened up that makes resistance possible, albeit on a local basis in response
to speci¢c issues. By paying attention to di¡erence at the local level, to
points of continuing dissension, it becomes feasible to give a voice back to
those silenced or marginalized by the dominant discourses.
(e) The discursive production of natural objects rather than
language as a mirror of reality
Derrida accepts one aspect of structuralism ^ the notion that linguistic
meaningderives from the structureoflanguage. Accordingto thisargument,
the meaning of a ‘sign’ in a language is determined not by its correspondence
to some objective thing in the world, or to the intentions of the speaker,
but results from its relationships with other signs. He goes much further
than the structuralists, however, in embracing what might be described as a
relativistic position. Once the relationship between signs and what is signif-
ied in the world is broken, it appears to Derrida that it must be possible to
create an in¢nite number of relational systems of signs from which di¡erent
Description of postmodern systems thinking
259

meanings can be derived. Rather than simply mirroring objects, language
creates objects. To take the distinctions made in any particular discourse as
representative of reality is an illegitimate privileging of that discourse,
which involves hiding other possible distinctions. Derrida’s ‘deconstructive’
method seeks to reveal the deceptiveness of language and the work that has
to go on in any ‘text’ to hide contradictions (which might reveal alternative
readings) so that a certain unity and order can be privileged and ‘rationality’
maintained.
(f) The discursive production of the individual
The shift to the study of the structure of language and away from the
intentions of the speaker, as the route to discovering the meaning of ‘texts’,
puts Derrida at the forefront of the postmodernist assault on humanism. In
his view it is discourse that speaks the person and not the person who uses
language. In the contemporary world, where there are many possible
discourses, the idea of an integrated, self-determining individual becomes
untenable. From this follows a rejection of the notion of historical progress,
especially with humans at the centre of it.
(g) Hyper-reality N simulations replace the real world in the
current world order
Baudrillard takes the idea that signs gain their meaning from their relation-
ships to other signs, and not from re£ecting some reality, and uses it to
interpret the contemporary world. In this world signs and images are every-
thing, and ‘reality’ counts for nothing. We inhabit ‘simulations’, imaginary
worlds which consist of signs that refer only to themselves. Disneyland is
an exemplar, but Los Angeles too o¡ers a make-believe world with no
connection to any other reality. Writing at the time of the war against Iraq,
it is impossible not to add that campaign as another example. Television is
a signi¢cant culprit in much of this.
If the postmodernists are right there are considerable implications for tradi-
tional systems thinking. If there is no rationality or optimum solution to
problems, then its problem-solving techniques will lack legitimation. Deep
analysis of systems in search of laws and regularities is not going to yield
dividends. It would be more productive to pay attention to the local, to con-
centrate on image, to take note of accidents, and to respect arbitrariness and
discontinuity. In a world of multiple truths competing for prominence,
260
Postmodern systems thinking

even soft and emancipatory systems thinkers are left impotent unless they
recognize the importance of power and engage with (rather than seek to
avoid) the social and political contexts of their work. Overall, if there are
no acceptable grand narratives to guide progress, then systems thinking has
to abandon the idea of universal, veri¢able improvement to which it often
seems to aspire, and recognize that it can bring about only temporary and
contested improvements.
The ¢t between postmodernism and the systems thinking we have been
studying to date may not look good. Certainly we must recognize that post-
modernism does not o¡er us a systemic theoretical framework or even a
systemic manner of proceeding in intervention. Nevertheless, we shall
discover in the next couple of subsections two ways in which systems think-
ing and postmodernism can collaborate. The ¢rst is using various systems
methods, models and techniques, but in the spirit of postmodernism. The
second is by postmodernism providing some new methods and tools that
can assist the systems practitioner.
13.2.3
Methodology
It would be inconsistent with the philosophy of postmodernism to o¡er a
structured methodology for turning theory into practice. Accordingly,
Foucault (see Brocklesby and Cummings, 1996) refers to his work as provid-
ing a ‘toolkit’, which anybody can make use of, as they see ¢t, in order to
short-circuit or disqualify systems of power. Taket and White (2000), adopt-
ing a postmodernist stance in management science, see themselves as o¡ering
a ‘cookbook’ that sets out some favourite recipes, but then encourages varia-
tion and innovation in the actual cooking. Nevertheless, Taket and White
do set out quite clearly what they see as the main features of intervention in
the spirit of postmodernism, and it is their guidelines that are set out here.
Taket and White give the name PANDA ^ Participatory Appraisal of
Needs and the Development of Action ^ to the approach to intervention
that they endorse. PANDA is said to embrace ‘pragmatic pluralism’ and to
have grown from postmodern roots. It is an attempt to work holistically
and pragmatically to address the diversity and uncertainty found in multi-
agency settings and, increasingly, in modern organizations. PANDA
rejects prescription based on totalizing theories and instead encourages
mixing di¡erent perspectives, accepting contradiction, recognizing and af-
¢rming di¡erence and diversity, taking an open and £exible stance, and re-
sponding to the characteristics of the moment.
Description of postmodern systems thinking
261

PANDA has four phases and nine tasks or foci to be addressed during the
phases, as set out in Table 13.1. ‘Deliberation I’ involves opening a space
for discussion, selecting participants, respecting and multiplying diversity,
and enabling and facilitating participation. Taket and White produce a list
of their favourite, tried-and-tested methods, which can be mixed and
matched to make a success of this phase. ‘Debate’ may require more forceful
facilitation than Deliberation I because the aim is to deepen understanding
of the options under consideration, structure them, lose some and combine
others. This demands more systematic appraisal of the options, explicit nego-
tiation over preferences and continued striving toward full and equitable
participation. Another list of methods is supplied, which have been found
useful in Debate. ‘Decision’ involves not only discussion about the options
to take forward but also about the methods to be used in deciding between
these options. ‘Deliberation II’ oversees the monitoring and evaluating of
the e¡ects of the agreed actions. Taket and White again provide lists of
favourite methods for Decision and Deliberation II.
This may look very much like a classical methodology, but Taket and
White insist that its application is more an art or craft than a science. In par-
ticular, in order to remain true to the spirit of postmodernism, it is essential
to recognize and respond to pluralism in each of four areas:
.
in the nature of the client;
.
in the use of speci¢c methods;
.
in the modes of representation employed;
.
in the facilitation process.
262
Postmodern systems thinking
Table 13.1
The four Ds and nine tasks of PANDA (Participatory Appraisal of Needs
and the Development of Action).
Deliberation I
Selecting participants
De¢ning purpose/objectives
Exploring the situation
Debate
Identifying options
Researching options (which could include consulting on options)
Comparing options
Decision
Deciding action
Recording decisions
Deliberation II
Monitoring/Evaluating

Pluralism in the nature of the client refers to the diverse viewpoints held by
various stakeholders, all of which must be acknowledged and respected.
This demands attention to the three Cs:
.
Critical ^ ensuring the widest possible range of viewpoints and values are
heard and any that are being suppressed are brought to the fore;
.
Consent ^ acknowledging that consensus may be impossible and that we
might have to be satis¢ed with a ‘system of consent’;
.
Contingent ^ accepting that the only ‘truths’ are those relevant to the
local circumstances at the moment.
Pluralism in the use of speci¢c methods requires that we ‘mix and match’
methods, adopting a £exible stance according to ‘what feels good’ in the
situation we are confronting. To do this well we should bear in mind the
four Ms:
.
Mixing ^ using whole methods, or parts of di¡erent methodologies,
together and at di¡erent times during an intervention;
.
Modify ^ being aware of the need to change and adapt methods to
particular circumstances;
.
Multiply ^ trying out di¡erent methods for the same task;
.
Match ^ choosing an appropriate mix of methods according to the
preferences of the stakeholders and facilitators, and the nature of the
situation addressed.
Pluralism in the modes of representation employed acknowledges the shift,
signalled in postmodernism, from the idea of ‘representation’ as picturing
objects ‘out there’ to representation as capturing only other impressions of
the world. This implies that we need to develop modes of representation
that allow participants the freedom to express themselves naturally. Remem-
bering the three Vs will help:
.
Verbal ^ making use of traditional verbal forms of representation;
.
Visual ^ employing also visual modes of representation, such as rich
pictures (see Chapter 10);
.
Vital ^ encouraging participation and learning through techniques such
as sociodrama.
Pluralism in the facilitation process requires facilitators to mix and match
di¡erent roles and guises at di¡erent times during an intervention and in
Description of postmodern systems thinking
263

relation to the di¡erent individuals/groups involved. This is encapsulated in
the four Fs:
.
Flexibility ^ responding and adapting to the dynamics of the situation;
.
Forthrightness ^ challenging and intervening when appropriate;
.
Focus ^ keeping a sense of purpose, progress and place;
.
Fairness ^ engaging in critical re£ection about whether equitable partici-
pation is being achieved and about the facilitator’s own role and ethical
position.
Following their postmodern logic, Taket and White are unable to provide
any formal justi¢cation for embracing pragmatic pluralism and employing
PANDA. They have to accept that all knowledge is partial, provisional and
contingent and that improvement can only be de¢ned according to the
local context. This does not, however, mean that ‘anything goes’. Rather, it
replaces futile questions about ‘the truth’ (according to Taket and White)
by responses to issues such as:
.
How does this feel?
.
Is this fun?
.
Does this do what we want?
.
Does viewpoint or action a seem better than b, at least for the moment?
.
Are we achieving a novel and exceptional outcome, at least locally?
.
Am I being self-critical about my own involvement?
It seems that an engagement can be deemed successful if it appeals to our
emotions, brings about the exceptional and is conducted according to a
personal code of ethics.
13.2.4
Methods
We now turn to another way in which systems thinking and postmodernism
can work together. This involves the appropriation of certain postmodern
ideas and their conversion into postmodern methods that can be used in
the course of a systems intervention. This systems intervention might itself
be in the spirit of postmodernism (e.g., follow the PANDA guidelines) or
it might be guided by a methodology serving another paradigm (e.g.,
functionalist, interpretive or emancipatory). Here we brie£y describe four
postmodern methods drawn from the work of Foucault, Derrida and
Lyotard.
264
Postmodern systems thinking

Knowledge systems diagnostics is a method, developed by Topp (1999),
based on Foucault’s early work on the ‘archaeology of knowledge’. It
seeks to uncover and inquire into the ‘formative system’ operating in an
organization. The formative system is a system of ‘second-order’ knowledge
production that enables and regulates what it is possible for organizational
actors to think and express at any point in time. This system is not usually
understood by people in the organization. Organizational change, therefore,
becomes a matter not of shifting individual perspectives, but of altering the
knowledge matrix governing the organization that is determining what it is
possible for individuals to say. Understanding the formative system is
achieved by asking a series of critical questions derived from the work of
Foucault. These questions inquire into matters such as the following:
.
How is new knowledge created or adopted by the organization?
.
What are the sources of the generation or regulation of knowledge?
.
What rules underlie such generative or regulative processes?
.
Why are some concepts and systems ideas adopted and circulated within
conversation while others are discounted and never established as
guides for action?
Once a map of the formative system has been completed, it becomes possible
to examine it and aim organizational interventions at the points of leverage
likely to have the greatest impact in transforming the ¢rst-order knowledge
of organizational actors. If this works, individuals will be able to think and
discuss new things relevant to their business context.
Foucault’s later work on ‘genealogy’, the reader will recall, focused on
unmasking the characteristics of totalizing discourses. Brocklesby and
Cummings (1996) concentrate on the practical aspects of this and argue that
it enables individuals to understand the extent to which they are determined
by existing structures of power and knowledge. It also allows them to
grasp some of the mechanisms by which the current order is sustained and
o¡ers them tools and techniques to use, as they see ¢t, in local strategizing
and subversion to undermine the status quo. They cannot hope to proceed
on the basis of consensus to achieve universal emancipation ^ they must
accept that di¡erence will prevail. But, in Taket and White’s (2000) terms,
they may be able to achieve ‘consent to act’.
Taket and White have found Derrida’s ‘deconstruction’ a powerful device
in a number of interventions using their pragmatic pluralism. Deconstruc-
tion is aimed at exploring the values or deep structure of a ‘text’ (and for
Derrida everything can beseen as a text) in order to exposethe biases inherent
Description of postmodern systems thinking
265

in it. Various strategies are used to probe texts for contradictions and ambi-
valences. They can then be taken apart to reveal what they privilege or
ignore, and alternative meanings can be derived. Building on Beath and
Orlikowski, Taket (2002) provides examples of deconstructive strategies,
as set out in Table 13.2.
Drawing on Lyotard’s key work The Di¡erend, Topp (1999) proposes
‘generative conversation’ as a postmodern method that can lead to the emer-
gence of new concepts, systems ideas and themes that may guide future
action in organizations. The strategy in generative conversation is to
replace one ‘language game’ with another in order to create new knowledge.
The only rule is that any new phrase brought forth in the conversation
must always link to the previous phrase. This prevents the recurrence of
phrases that take the conversation back to some ‘higher regulatory business
stake’. Beyond that, certain ‘guides’ can be provided:
.
generative conversation is a game in which we play with ideas, not
against each other;
.
appoint a facilitator at the start to monitor the application of the linking
rule;
.
there is no rush ^ ‘regulative conversations’ (those that do not escape
from existing concerns) are characterized by speed;
.
allow at least three seconds of silence between each phrase;
.
watch the pull of habit and pattern and be aware of the tension to link in a
certain way;
.
keep a notebook to jot down ideas so that they are not forgotten;
.
questions can form part of the conversation, but must obey the linking
rule;
266
Postmodern systems thinking
Table 13.2
Examples of deconstructive strategies.
a.
Focusing on marginalized elements
b.
Exploring a false distinction
c.
Exploring a false identi¢cation
d.
Looking at claims or assertions that depend on something other than what is
clearly stated ^ especially those that make explicit or implicit recourse to claims of
‘naturalness’
e.
Examining what is not said, what is omitted (deliberately or not)
f.
Paying attention to disruptions and contradictions
g.
Examining use of metaphor
h.
Examining use of double entendres

.
make use of creative misunderstanding;
.
listen, take a few breaths, think, link;
.
remember, silence is a phrase;
.
try to link multiple previous phrases.
Later analysis of the conversation transcripts should allow the facilitator and
participants to identify new themes and concepts that have emerged during
the conversation.
13.2.5
Recent developments
The acceptance of postmodern approaches in systems thinking is a relatively
new phenomenon. Those persuaded by postmodernism continue to experi-
ment and so learn about how the idea can best be used to facilitate interven-
tions. They also seek to re¢ne the postmodern methods they employ (e.g.,
Taket, 2002). More traditional management scientists have started to look
at some of the postmodern methods to see if they can be incorporated as
tools in more orthodox interventions (e.g., Ormerod, 2003).
13.3
POSTMODERN SYSTEMS THINKING IN ACTION
A variety of case studies are described by Taket and White (2000) that
show PANDA in action, including ¢ve fuller accounts chosen to illustrate
its use in a diversity of settings. A brief description of an engagement to
assist a development agency in Belize shows attention to pluralism in the
nature of the client and pluralism in relation to the use of methods (at
di¡erent stages, Participatory Rapid Appraisal (PRA), elements of Team
Syntegrity and aspects of ‘Strategic Choice’ are all employed). There is a
longer account of another intervention in Belize, for the Association of
National Development Agencies, which was designed to help them reach
strategic decisions in the face of reduced funding. Emphasis on pluralism in
the nature of the client and mixing and matching methods ^ in this case
cognitive mapping, nominal group technique, a composite causal map, role
playing, etc. ^ is still strong. In this example, however, attention is also
paid to pluralism in the modes of representation and in the facilitation
process. The existence of more powerful groups in the network represented
by the Association and the lack of facility of some other groups with
verbal approaches meant that the facilitators had to work hard and employ
Postmodern systems thinking in action
267

non-verbal forms of representation, to develop fuller and more equitable
participation.
We do not have space to show all the various postmodern methods in use
so will restrict ourselves to an account of an application of ‘deconstruction’
provided by Taket (2002).
Deconstruction, the reader will recall, involves analysing a text to see what
is being suppressed in order that the discourse can be made to appear a
unity. Tensions and con£icts in the text are pinpointed so that its partiality
becomes obvious and a space is opened for suppressed sides of the discourse
to be heard. The example given by Taket is of deconstruction employed as
part of the evaluation of a ‘linkworker’ project in an inner city district. The
‘linkworkers’ were bilingual individuals employed to assist communities
whose mother tongue was not English to gain access to primary health care
services. As part of the evaluation a number of meetings were held with
stakeholder groups and these meetings were taped and transcribed. Taket
provides a transcript of one part of one meeting and shows how the partici-
pants themselves were able, with the help of facilitators, to employ decon-
structive techniques to open out and move on their dialogue and
understanding.
The facilitator begins by commenting on certain problematic aspects of
the linkworker scheme, to do with communications, record keeping and
safety, and inviting further discussion of these. Taket sees this as the use of
deconstructive strategies d. and f. in Table 13.2. Three participants then
come in to emphasize that, despite these problems, the linkworkers are
doing a great job, are well respected, are seen as ‘brilliant’. This ampli¢es a
tension that seems to exist between the positive way the linkworkers are
perceived and the problems that, nevertheless, surround the scheme.
The facilitator then asks ‘so where do these problems come from?’ This
continues the application of strategy d., but reinforced by e. ^ examining
what is omitted. A further brief discussion yields general agreement that
the problems arise not from the actual work of the linkworkers (which is
positively evaluated), but come up in the course of meetings of other sta¡
held to discuss the scheme. At these meetings the problems of communica-
tions, records and safety dominate.
The facilitator probes further: ‘what do you think makes the sta¡ say the
scheme caused all these problems?’ (strategies c., d., e. and f.). The partici-
pants themselves are then able to push the deconstruction forward. One
suggests that some people simply want to do the scheme down, however
well it is working. Another argues that although the scheme is seen as the
cause of the problems this is not really the case (strategy c.). What is being
268
Postmodern systems thinking

suggested here is that the scheme is revealing issues that need addressing in
the wider social services directorate. The scheme makes these apparent, but
is not the cause of them.
This analysis is generally accepted and two participants begin to provide
examples that support it. One points to the issue of what have been repre-
sented as the ‘overprotective’ safety guidelines issued to the linkworkers.
Perhaps the problem is the safety guidelines issued to sta¡ in the directorate
more generally. The other focuses on the issue of the accountability of the
linkworkers and points out that a similar problem has, for many years,
plagued school nurses and theirauxiliaries.Taket sees this as the employment
of deconstructive strategies b. and a. ^ it reveals a false distinction made
between the linkworkers and others, and demonstrates that discussion of
the circumstances of other sta¡ groups in the directorate has been marginal-
ized in the discourse. The earlier discussant returns with another example
concerned with record keeping. Linkworkers have been criticized because
they keep separate records. This participant points out that this is also true
of district nurses, school nurses and health visitors (strategy b.). It seems
that the usual practice of these groups has been marginalized in the discussion
(strategy a.). What is really required is to look at record keeping across the
directorate as a whole ^ not concentrate just on the linkworkers.
The problem can now be restated as one of not having ‘teams working in
partnership’. The issues surrounding the linkworker scheme are seen as
e¡ects rather than the cause of this, and new ways forward can be explored.
Taket regards this as a good example of deconstruction carried out as a
group activity. She is well aware that others might see it just as ‘probing
interviewing’, but suggests that the deconstructive strategies add great
value because of their ability to bring to the fore the implicit assumptions
that are not obvious, but which often shape discussion.
13.4
CRITIQUE OF POSTMODERN SYSTEMS THINKING
According to Taket and White (2000), we are entering ‘new times’ in which
new organizational forms are coming into being based on fragmentation,
decentralization and networks. In these postmodern times, individuals have
more choices available to them, there is a greater diversity of stakeholders
involved in decision-making and the turbulence of the organizational
environment demands greater levels of co-operation between di¡erent enter-
prises. We seem to be entering an age in which participation and partnership,
Critique of postmodern systems thinking
269

and decision-making in ‘multiagency settings’ (broadly de¢ned) will be
crucial. Other systems approaches draw upon modernist theories of rational
action that, with their reliance on rationality, abstraction and verbal compe-
tence, can su¡ocate diversity, spontaneity and creativity. An alternative
postmodernist approach is required, Taket and White argue, that encourages
diversity by strengthening the opportunity for di¡erent stakeholders to
participate and enabling them to explore the possibilities available and the
constraints limiting them. It then becomes possible to build, out of various
‘fragmented rationalities’, a local and provisional plan for action. The great
strength of postmodernism/poststructuralism, therefore, is that it seems
appropriate to the new times in which we live.
Topp’s (1999) experience in trying to change business organizations
supports this argument. In the postmodern world, he suggests, traditional
systems approaches still have a role in helping businesses to achieve goals
e⁄ciently and e⁄caciously, and in assisting managers to regulate debate.
What have become crucial to the success of postindustrial businesses,
however, are creating new knowledge and using existing knowledge more
productively. Modernist systems methodologies tend to be frustrated in
this endeavour by ‘subtle systemic resistance’. All they can achieve are new
moves in the same game. There is a need, therefore, for new systems
methods appropriate to the creation of new knowledge in postindustrial
business. Topp provides a number of private business examples (e.g., South-
ern Life in South Africa) in support of his contention. These complement
the multiagency examples, in Taket and White, and suggest that postmodern
systems thinking has a wide ¢eld of application.
There is much that is attractive in Taket and White’s PANDA, whether or
not you share their allegiance to postmodernism. The complete abandon-
ment of unitary assumptions, and the willingness to see problem situations
as arenas for dialogue in the context of diversity, are exhilarating. Their
extension of the normal meaning of pluralism in management science to
embrace modes of representation and facilitator roles and guises is of great
utility. The £exibility provided for the employment of methods, the redirec-
tion of attention to ‘local improvement’ and the emphasis on the ethical
responsibilities of facilitators are all to be welcomed.
Critics are likely to remain sceptical, however, about the value of a post-
modern orientation in the great majority of organizational settings. In tradi-
tional organizations concerns about e⁄ciently and e¡ectively pursuing
goals still seem to be paramount. No doubt many managers value diversity
and having fun, but these will be secondary compared with other aims,
such as improving the functioning of the system or achieving a consensus
270
Postmodern systems thinking

around goals. Taket and White argue that other aims and objectives are
misleading because they require us to deal with ‘unanswerable’ questions
posed by the complexity of the situation or the need to achieve genuine
consensus. It is a matter of engaging people’s emotions, having fun and
leaving the rest for ethical decision. But are we not then left heavily
dependent on the ethical practice of the facilitators? And isn’t their ability
to recognize disadvantaged groups and marginalized issues simply another
form of unargued expertise?
Theoretically, and making use of the System Of Systems Methodologies
(SOSM) (see Chapter 2), postmodernism seems determined to explore the
far reaches of both the ‘complexity’ and ‘participants’ dimensions. Problem
situations are deemed to be so extremely complex that they are impossible
to understand and participants are regarded as subject to power/knowledge
relationships they cannot control. The response is to do what feels right,
seeking only local improvement of the situation. The usual metaphors that
inform systems thinking, such as the organism, brain, £ux and transforma-
tion, culture, even psychic prison and instruments of domination, are
regarded as simplistic and misleading. A more appropriate metaphor,
suggested by Alvesson and Deetz (1996), is the carnival. Carnivals are sub-
versive of order, they allow diversity and creativity to be expressed, they
encourage the exceptional to be seen, they are playful and engage people’s
emotions.
We have, of course, no di⁄culty in recognizing the ‘paradigm’ to which
pragmatic pluralism and PANDA respond. Whereas other systems
approaches relied on particular paradigms implicitly or, having established
themselves through practice, sought the explicit assistance of a paradigm
to help them develop further, postmodern systems thinking has been
consciously constructed on the basis of the postmodern paradigm since its
inception. Whether the result is seen as good or bad depends on the paradigm
you yourself favour.
If the ‘grand narratives’ of economic growth, emancipation, religion, etc.
have inspired human endeavour in the past, it is also true to say that they
have, on occasion, given birth to extremely destructive ideologies. The
scepticism of postmodernism to all grand narratives has, therefore, much to
recommend it. So has, in many ways, its prioritizing of the local and its em-
phasis on how we achieve our own identities by engaging in local ‘struggles’.
The debunking of pomposity and the constant challenge to cultural elitism
and the notion of expertise are also positive aspects of postmodernism. The
original contributions of the approach to our understanding of discourse
and power will not need further emphasis.
Critique of postmodern systems thinking
271

Adherents of other paradigms are, however, horri¢ed by postmodernism.
Functionalists see it as a retreat into irrationalism. They regard the
achievements of science and technology as contributing to the progressive
improvement of the human condition and will not have them denigrated.
Interpretive thinkers wish to promote mutual understanding and learning
through the widest possible participation in decision-making. The post-
modern injunction to value diversity and con£ict above all else seems, to
them, more of a call for anarchy than improvement based on accommoda-
tion. Emancipatory thinkers are not convinced that postmodernism can
contribute in any way to human ful¢lment and emancipation. Diversity is
not necessarily a good in itself. Within the variety of human experience lie
viewpoints and actions propelled by some pretty nasty forces (e.g., racism).
It is surely legitimate to keep an ‘emancipatory check’ on the emergence of
such forces. Furthermore, from the emancipatory position, collective eman-
cipation is an absolute prerequisite for the self-emancipation the post-
modernists seek. How can we restyle ourselves without also remaking the
power/knowledge relations that create us? Many of the ills we face, such as
gender, race and class inequality, seem to be system-wide. Others are literally
global in nature (e.g., pollution and world poverty). It seems clear that indi-
vidual and local resistance are going to be futile in the face of the forces
that sustain such problems. A wider, more universal coalition for change
needs to be constructed if they are to be addressed.
Finally, it can be disputed whether postmodernism really provides an
alternative paradigm. Some use its ideas as part of consulting practice,
others in support of soft systems thinking, still others as part and parcel of
an emancipatory rationale. This very promiscuity should give us pause.
Certainly the lack of clear methodological guidance binding postmodern
insights, methods and techniques to the overall theoretical framework (and
forbidden by that framework) makes it di⁄cult to do research on post-
modernism. What are the methods and techniques seeking to achieve if
they can serve any paradigm? How then can we judge the value of methods
like deconstruction, genealogy and generative conversation?
13.5
THE VALUE OF POSTMODERN SYSTEMS THINKING
TO MANAGERS
The value of postmodern system thinking to managers can be summarized in
the following ¢ve points:
272
Postmodern systems thinking

.
It emphasizes a number of things, such as having fun at work, engaging
emotions, etc., which may appear ‘super¢cial’, but are very signi¢cant
(and are ignored in many more traditional systems approaches).
.
It recognizes the importance of encouraging diversity and creativity if we
want to maximize learning and so be successful in modern organizations
as well as in the increasingly common multiagency situations we
confront.
.
Postmodernism challenges the notion that there are universal solutions
to management problems, deriving from expertise, or universal ways
of arriving at them, perhaps thorough appropriately designed participa-
tive processes.
.
It encourages managers to experiment with and learn from a whole
variety of forms of pluralism (i.e., of client, methods, modes of represen-
tation and facilitative processes).
.
Postmodernism has given rise to some highly original postmodern
systems methods (e.g., deconstruction) that can be employed in the
spirit of postmodernism or in the service of some other systems
approach.
13.6
CONCLUSION
It is worth concluding by referring to a series of 12 lectures by Habermas
(1987) in which he seeks to respond to the postmodern attack on his own
modernist position. In the process he develops a critique of postmodernists,
such as Nietzsche, Heidegger, Derrida and Foucault. In each case he shows
that the theorist he is critiquing has something valid to say, but exaggerates
it out of all proportion. Foucault, for example, focuses on certain dysfunc-
tions associated with rationalization processes in society. He ignores the
undeniable achievements of those same forces. Derrida concentrates on
certain defects that arise in argumentation. Habermas acknowledges they
exist, but details all the positive aspects of language as a means of dealing
with problems in the world. We should continue to value it and develop
communicative approaches that increase mutual understanding and learning.
Language remains a vehicle through which reason can reach out to the
ideals of truth and justice.
In short, Habermas recognizes that the postmodernists have something to
say, but believes that rather than abandoning the Enlightenment vision we
need to renew and revitalize it. To do this requires more reason ^ to
overcome the di⁄culties on which the postmodernists focus ^ rather than
Conclusion
273

less. This is the argument followed by critical systems thinking in the ¢nal
part of the book.
REFERENCES
Alvesson, M. and Deetz, S. (1996). Critical theory and postmodernist approaches
to organizational studies. In: S.R. Clegg, C. Hardy and W.R. Nord (eds),
Handbook of Organization Studies (pp. 191^217). Sage Publications, London.
Brocklesby, J. and Cummings, S. (1996). Foucault plays Habermas: An alterna-
tive philosophical underpinning for critical systems thinking. Journal of the
Operational Research Society, 47, 741^754.
Cooper, R. and Burrell, G. (1988). Modernism, postmodernism and organiza-
tional analysis: An introduction. Organizational Studies, 9, 91^112.
Habermas, J. (1987). Lectures on the Philosophical Discourse of Modernity. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Lyotard, J.-F. (1984). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Manchester
University Press, Manchester.
Ormerod, R.J. (2003). Taket’s suggestions for the OR toolkit. Journal of the
Operational Research Society, 54, 322^323.
Taket, A. (2002). Facilitation: Some contributions to theorising the practice of
operational research. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 53, 126^136.
Taket, A.R. and White, L.A. (2000). Partnership and Participation: Decision-making
in the Multiagency Setting. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Topp, W.K. (1999). Towards heuristic systems methods for generating new
knowledge in post-industrial business. PhD thesis, University of Cape
Town, South Africa.
274
Postmodern systems thinking

Part III
Creative Holism
Part III, which provides the book with its subtitle, ‘creative holism’, is con-
cerned with how to maximize the bene¢t of the di¡erent holistic approaches
studied in Part II by using them creatively in combination. I would argue
that managers can become more successful if they possess the capacity to
view their organizations through the lenses o¡ered by the four sociological
paradigms and the various metaphors of organization referred to in
Chapter 3. They also need the ability to choose and to use the di¡erent
systems approaches discussed in Part II, which re£ect the variety of meta-
phors and paradigms, in an informed manner in order to improve organiza-
tional performance. To cope with the complexity, turbulence and diversity
of the problem situations they are confronted by in the 21st century, man-
agers must give attention to: improving goal seeking and viability, exploring
purposes, ensuring fairness and promoting diversity. They need to measure
against standards of e⁄ciency, e⁄cacy,e¡ectiveness,elegance, emancipation,
empowerment, exception and emotion. It is the essence of managerial
creativity to pursue improvement, systemically, in all these areas, although
of course managers will have to prioritize and to place a di¡erent emphasis
on what their actions are intended to achieve at any particular conjuncture.
The commitment to using a plurality of systems approaches, their related
methodologies and some appropriate systems methods, together, is some-
times called Critical Systems Thinking (CST), sometimes multimethodology
practice. I am employing the phrase ‘creative holism’ in this book to refer
to the same thing because it is, perhaps, more resonant of what I am actually
trying to encourage: the creative use in combination of di¡erent ways of
being holistic. Chapter 14 describes ‘Total Systems Intervention’, the best
known critical systems or multimethodological approach. Chapter 15
brings the reader up to date in terms of the latest research in ‘Critical
Systems Practice’.


Total Systems Intervention 14
The future prospects of management science will be much enhanced if
(a) the diversity of issues confronting managers is accepted, (b) work on
developing a rich variety of problem-solving methodologies is under-
taken, and (c) we continually ask the question: ‘What kind of issue can
be ‘‘managed’’ with which sort of methodology?’.
Flood and Jackson (1991a)
14.1
INTRODUCTION
Early approaches to applied systems thinking, labelled hard systems
approaches, were suitable for tackling certain well-de¢ned problems, but
were found to have limitations when faced with complex problem situations
involving people with a variety of viewpoints and frequently at odds with
one another.
Systems thinkers, as we saw in Part II, responded by developing: system
dynamics, organizational cybernetics and complexity theory to tackle
complexity and change; strategic assumption surfacing and testing, interac-
tive planning and Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) to handle pluralism;
Critical Systems Heuristics (CSH) and team syntegrity to empower the
disadvantaged in situations involving con£ict; and pragmatic pluralism to
manage diversity. There has been a corresponding enlargement in the
range of problem contexts in which systems practitioners feel competent to
intervene.
It was becoming apparent, however, in the 1980s and 1990s, that some-
thing more was needed if systems thinking was ever to realize its potential
as a guide for managers. It was Critical Systems Thinking (CST) that pro-
vided this ‘something more’. CST has supplied the bigger picture, has
allowed systems thinking to mature as a transdiscipline and has set out how

the variety of approaches, methodologies, methods and models, now avail-
able, can be used in a coherent manner to promote successful intervention
in complex organizational and societal problem situations.
Once CST had been formulated as a philosophy and theory, it needed
guidelines that would enable it to be applied in practice. These were provided
in 1991 with the publication of Flood and Jackson’s (1991a) book Creative
Problem Solving: Total Systems Intervention. Total Systems Intervention (TSI)
was heralded as a new approach to planning, designing, problem-solving
and evaluation based on CST. This chapter outlines the development of
CST and highlights the ¢rst critical systems methodology: TSI.
14.2
DESCRIPTION OF TOTAL SYSTEMS INTERVENTION (TSI)
14.2.1
Historical development
The development of CST and TSI can be traced to three sources: a growing
critical awareness of the strengths and weaknesses of individual systems
approaches; an appreciation of the need for pluralism in systems thinking;
and the rise of emancipatory systems thinking.
The major steps in the development of critical awareness in systems think-
ing were the assaults launched, in the 1970s, by soft systems thinkers on
hard systems thinking and the critique of soft systems thinking, elaborated
in the 1980s, by those of an ‘emancipatory’ persuasion. In the ¢rst case, soft
systems thinkers sought to demonstrate that hard systems thinking is ine¡ec-
tive in the great majority of problem situations. Checkland, as we saw in
Chapter 10, argues that hard systems thinking is a special case of soft
systems thinking, applicable only in those rare cases when problem situations
present themselves in terms of systems with clearly de¢ned goals and objec-
tives. In the second case, the critics argued that soft systems thinking, too,
had a limited domain of application. The kind of open participative debate
that is essential for the success of the soft systems approach, and that is used
to validate the recommendations that emerge, is impossible to obtain in
problem situations involving signi¢cant con£ict between interest groups
that have access to unequal power resources.
As the 1980s progressed the level of informed critique of individual
systems approaches grew, culminating in Jackson’s (1991) review of ¢ve
strands of systems thinking ^ ‘organizations as systems’, ‘hard’, ‘cybernetic’,
‘soft’ and ‘emancipatory’ ^ from the point of view of some appropriate
278
Total systems intervention

social theory. It had become obvious that all systems methodologies had
certain weaknesses as well as certain strengths.
Our second source of CST is ‘pluralism’. There has alwaysbeen a tendency
to pluralism in systems thinking applied to management ^ presumably on
the basis that it assists with being holistic. Sociotechnical systems theory
(concerning itself with the social, technical and economic subsystems of
organizations) and contingency theory (interested in the goal, human, tech-
nical and managerial subsystems) are cases in point. However, while these
early systems approaches identi¢ed di¡erent aspects of the organization to
look at, they always looked at them from the same point of view ^ taking
an essentially functionalist perspective (see Jackson, 2000). The sort of
pluralism that inspired CST did not emerge until 1984. In that year Linstone
released his book Multiple Perspectives for Decision Making and Jackson and
Keys ¢rst published their System Of Systems Methodologies (SOSM).
These two events signalled the birth of a more advanced form of pluralism
that required systems practitioners both to look at problem situations from
a variety of di¡erent perspectives and to use di¡erent systems methodologies
in combination.
Linstone’s form of multiperspective research seeks to use three di¡erent
viewpoints to gain a rich appreciation of the nature of problem situations.
The Traditional or technical (T) perspective, dependent on data and model-
based analysis, is augmented by an Organizational (O) or societal perspec-
tive, and a Personal (P) or individual perspective. The T, O and P perspec-
tives act as ¢lters through which systems are viewed, and each yields
insights that are not attainable with the others. Linstone argues that the
di¡erent perspectives are most powerfully employed when they are clearly
di¡erentiated from one another, in terms of the emphasis they bring to the
analysis, yet are used together to interrogate the same complex problem.
Nor, he believes, can one expect consistency in ¢ndings: two perspectives
may reinforce one another, but may equally cancel each other out.
Jackson and Keysweremotivated to explore the relationshipsbetween the
di¡erent systems methodologies that had arisen as guides to intervening in
problem situations and to understand their capacities and limitations. To
this end, during 1983/1984, a research programme was established at the
University of Hull (UK) that used as its primary research tool the SOSM
described in Chapter 2. This research programme was successful enough to
open up a new perspective on the development of systems thinking.
Previously, it had seemed as if the discipline was undergoing a Kuhnian
‘paradigm crisis’ (Kuhn, 1970) as hard systems thinking encountered
increasing anomalies and was challenged by other approaches. The SOSM,
Description of total systems intervention (TSI)
279

by contrast, demonstrated that alternative systems approaches could be seen
as complementary rather than in competition. Each systems approach is
useful for certain purposes and in particular types of problem situation.
The diversity of approaches, therefore, heralds not a crisis but increased
competence in a variety of problem contexts.
The SOSMo¡eredaway forwardfrom the prevailing systemsthinking ‘in
crisis’ debates. In doing so it established pluralism as a central tenet of CST
and encouraged mutual respect between proponents of di¡erent approaches
who had previously seen themselves as being at war with one another.
Furthermore, going beyond Linstone, the SOSM recognized that pluralism
could be achieved based on methodologies (hard, cybernetic, soft, etc.) that
were developed from more than one paradigm.
The centrality of pluralism was reinforced by Jackson, in 1987, inan article
that compared it with ‘isolationism’, ‘imperialism’ and ‘pragmatism’ as a
development strategy for systems thinking. Isolationists, who believed in
just one systems methodology, divided the discipline and discredited the
profession. Imperialists, who sought to incorporate di¡erent methodologies
within their favoured systems^theoretical orientation, ignored the bene¢ts
of other paradigms and ‘denatured’ many of the approaches they used.
Pragmatists, who eschewed theoretical distinctions and concentrated on
building up a ‘toolkit’ of methods and techniques on the basis of what
‘worked’ in practice, limited the possibilities for learning (e.g., why the
method worked) and passing on knowledge to future generations.
Pluralism, however, o¡ered excellent opportunities for future progress. It
respected the di¡erent strengths of the various strands of systems thinking,
encouraged their theoretical development and suggested ways in which
they could be appropriately ¢tted to the diversity of management problems
that arise. It was argued that a metamethodology (TSI was still to come) would
develop that could guide theoretical endeavour and advise practitioners,
confronted with problem situations, which approach or combination of
approaches is most suitable.
The third element that was important in the development of CST was the
emergence of the ‘emancipatory systems approach’. Indeed, in the early
days of both approaches they could hardly be separated. There was a good
reason for this, which can be understood using the SOSM. Once the
strengths and weaknesses of existing systems methodologies were better
understood, it became possible to ask whether there were any ‘ideal-type’
problem contexts for which no currently existing systems approach seemed
appropriate. The most obvious candidates were the ‘coercive’ contexts,
de¢ned as situations where there is fundamental con£ict between stake-
280
Total systems intervention

holders and the only consensus that can be achieved arises from the exercise
of power. Recognition that such contexts were important for systems think-
ing led to the ¢rst explicit call (Jackson, 1982a, 1985) for a ‘critical approach’
that could take account of them.
This call for (essentially) an emancipatory systems approach, inspired by
the SOSM, was met by the arrival of Ulrich’s CSH (see Chapter 11).
Although Ulrich’s (1983) approach represented an independently developed
strand of CST, deriving from Kantian idealism and Churchman’s re£ections
on systems design, when the approach became known at Hull it was like
the discovery of an element that ¢lled a gap in the periodic table (the
SOSM). CSH was capable, where soft systems thinking was not, of provid-
ing guidelines for action in certain kinds of coercive situation.
ThisearlyinvolvementofCSTwithemancipatorysystemsapproaches,led
to a concernwith ‘emancipation’ becoming one of its de¢ningcharacteristics.
14.2.2
Philosophy and theory
By the time of the creation of TSI, in 1991, CST could be summarized
(Jackson, 1991) as having ¢ve main commitments to:
.
critical awareness;
.
social awareness;
.
pluralism at the methodological level;
.
pluralism at the theoretical level; and
.
‘emancipation’.
We have dealt with ‘critical awareness’, ‘pluralism at the methodological
level’ and ‘emancipation’ in the previous subsection, but we did not detail
their philosophical and theoretical underpinnings. We do that now and
combine this with a discussion of ‘social awareness’ and ‘pluralism at the
theoretical level’, these two commitments having emerged more directly
from theoretical considerations.
The philosophy of the social sciences provided the major theoretical
prop in developing critical awareness. Of particular importance has been
work that allows an overview to be taken of di¡erent ways of analysing
social systems and intervening in organizations. For example, Burrell and
Morgan’s (1979) book on sociological paradigms and organizational analysis
was used by Checkland (1981) to demonstrate that hard systems thinking is
functionalist in nature and that its shortcomings (in Checkland’s eyes) can
be understood in those terms. The same source allowed Jackson (1982b)
Description of total systems intervention (TSI)
281

and Mingers (1980, 1984) to argue that soft systems thinking is interpretive
in nature; embracing both subjectivism and regulation. Jackson’s 1991
book, Systems Methodology for the Management Sciences, made use of Burrell and
Morgan’s classi¢cation, Morgan’s (1986) work on ‘images’ of organization,
Habermas’ (1970) theory of three human interests (technical, practical,
emancipatory) and the modernism versus postmodernism debate, to critique
the assumptions di¡erent systems approaches make about social science,
social reality and organizations. This kind of critique allows a much richer
appreciation of the theoretical assumptions lying behind their strengths and
weaknesses.
As well as facilitating critical awareness, the social sciences drew the
attention of critics to the importance of the social context in which systems
approaches are used ^ and so to the need for ‘social awareness’. Social
awareness considers two things. First, it looks at the organizational and
societal circumstances that lead to certain systems theories and method-
ologies being popular for guiding interventions at particular times. For
example, hard systems thinking and management cybernetics were widely
used in the old Soviet Union, and the communist states of Eastern Europe,
because of their ¢t with hierarchy and bureaucracy. Second, social awareness
makes users of systems methodologies contemplate the consequences of
use of the approaches they employ. For example, using soft systems
approaches in circumstances where open and free debate are not possible
may simply reinforce the status quo.
The desirability of pluralism at the methodological level was established,
as we saw, by the work of Linstone (1984), Jackson and Keys (1984) and
Jackson (1987). Following Jackson’s (1987) paper, debate about pluralism
in systems thinking began to focus at the theoretical level. This was
because of philosophical di⁄culties posed for the pluralist position by
arguments in favour of ‘paradigm incommensurability’ derived from Kuhn
(1970) and Burrell and Morgan (1979). It seemed inconceivable to pro-
ponents of paradigm incommensurability that di¡erent systems methodolo-
gies, based on what were (to them) irreconcilable theoretical assumptions,
could ever be employed together in any kind of complementarist way. This
would require standing ‘above’ the paradigms. How could such a privileged
position be attained?
To ¢nd an answer to this problem, and therefore to give coherence to
pluralism at the methodological level, critical systems thinkers turned to
Habermas’ theory of human interests.
Habermas (1970, 1975, 1984) has argued that there are two fundamental
conditions underpinning the sociocultural life of the human species. These
282
Total systems intervention

he calls ‘work’ and ‘interaction’. Work enables us to achieve goals and to
bring about material well-being through social labour. Its success depends
on achieving technical mastery over natural and social processes. Human
beings, therefore, have a ‘technical interest’ in the prediction and control of
natural and social systems. The other anthropologically based cognitive
interest is linked to interaction and is labelled the ‘practical interest’. Its
concern is with securing and expanding the possibilities for mutual under-
standing among all those involved in social systems. Disagreements
between individuals and groups are just as much a threat to the sociocultural
form of life as a failure to predict and control.
While work and interaction have pre-eminent anthropological status, the
analysis of ‘power’ and the way it is exercised is equally important, Habermas
argues, if we are to understand past and present social arrangements. The
exercise of power can prevent the open and free discussion necessary for
the success of work and interaction. Human beings have, therefore, an
‘emancipatory interest’ in freeing themselves from constraints imposed by
power relations and in learning, through a process of genuine participatory
democracy conducted in ‘ideal speech situations’, to control their own
destiny.
Now, if we all have a technical, a practical and an emancipatory interest in
the functioning of organizations and society, then an enhanced systems
thinking that can support all of these various interests must have an ex-
tremely important role to play in securing human well-being. But this is
exactly what CST, with its commitment to pluralism, o¡ers. It seems clear
that hard, system dynamic, organizational cybernetic and complexity
theory approaches can support the technical interest, soft systems thinking
the practical interest, and CSH and team syntegrity can assist the emancipa-
tory interest.
By 1991, based on Habermas’ thinking, it was possible for Flood and
Jackson (1991a) to suggest that the concern about paradigm incommensur-
ability could be resolved at the level of human interests. As a result the
SOSM could be rescued as a vehicle for promoting methodological
pluralism. Complementarism at the theoretical level provided the basis and
justi¢cation for complementarism at the methodological level. The SOSM
could point to the strengths and weaknesses of di¡erent strands of systems
thinking and put them to work in a way that respects and takes advantage
of their own particular theoretical predispositions in the service of appropri-
ate human interests.
As we saw in the previous subsection, the SOSM bene¢ted CST by
providing a warm embrace to emancipatory approaches. By 1991,
Description of total systems intervention (TSI)
283

however, it was possible to see that it was necessary to keep emancipatory
systems thinking at arm’s length as far as becoming a permanent partner
was concerned. The appropriate relationship became clear once CST had
attached itself to Habermas’ theory of three human interests: the technical,
practical and emancipatory. It then became possible to de¢ne CST’s ‘emanci-
patory commitment’ in terms of a much broader dedication to ‘human
improvement’. Flood and Jackson (1991a) saw this as meaning bringing
about those circumstances in which all individuals could achieve the
maximum development of their potential. This, in turn, means raising the
quality of work and life in the organizations and societies in which they
participate. Habermas had shown that human improvement required that
each of his three interests needed serving by systems methodologies. Critical
systems thinkers made the point that this was exactly what their approach
wanted to achieve.
Emancipatory systems thinking is, therefore, narrower than CST. Its role
is to provide methodologies that, through critique, enable the open and
free discussion necessary for the success of work and interaction. The
domain of e¡ective application of emancipatory approaches is ‘coercive’
problem contexts, or organizations as psychic prisons and/or instruments
of domination. But not all problem situations are usefully regarded as coer-
cive; some are better seen as unitary or pluralist. Emancipatory systems
thinking, therefore, just like hard and soft approaches, possesses a limited
domain of application. CST, by contrast, is about putting all the di¡erent
system approaches to work, according to their strengths and weaknesses,
and the social conditions prevailing, in the service of a more general project
of improvement.
14.2.3
Metamethodology
TSI aims to put into practice the commitments adhered to by CST. Brie£y, it
regards problem situations as messes that cannot be understood and
analysed on the basis of only one perspective. For this reason, it advocates
viewing them from a variety of perspectives, perhaps as encapsulated in
di¡erent metaphors. Once agreement is reached among the facilitators and
participants about the major issues and problems they are confronting, an
appropriate choice needs to be made of systems methodology, or set of
systems methodologies, for managing the mess and tackling the issues and
problems. This choice should be made in the full knowledge of the strengths
and weaknesses of available systems approaches as revealed, for example,
by the SOSM. When selecting methodologies it is important that the idea
284
Total systems intervention

of pluralism is kept in mind. Di¡erent methodologies can be used to address
di¡erent aspects of problem situations and to ensure that the technical, prac-
tical and emancipatory interests are all given proper consideration. Further-
more, the initial choice of methodology or methodologies must be kept
constantly under review and may need to change as the nature of the mess
itself changes. In this way TSI guides intervention in such a way that it con-
tinually addresses the major issues and problems faced in an organization or
multiagency situation.
From this brief account it will be clear that, because it organizes and
employs other systems methodologies, TSI should strictly be described as a
metamethodology. Flood and Jackson (1991a) see seven principles as under-
pinning this metamethodology:
.
problem situations are too complicated to understand from one perspec-
tive and the issues they throw up too complex to tackle with quick ¢xes;
.
problem situations, and the concerns, issues and problems they embody,
should therefore be investigated from a variety of perspectives;
.
once the major issues and problems have been highlighted it is necessary
to make a suitable choice of systems methodology or methodologies to
guide intervention;
.
it is necessary to appreciate the relative strengths and weaknesses of
di¡erent systems methodologies and to use this knowledge, together
with an understanding of the main issues and concerns, to guide choice
of appropriate methodologies;
.
di¡erent perspectives and systems methodologies should be used in a
complementary way to highlight and address di¡erent aspects of organ-
izations, their issues and problems;
.
TSI sets out a systemic cycle of inquiry with interaction back and forth
between its three phases;
.
facilitators and participants are engaged at all stages of the TSI
process.
The sixth principle refers to the three phases of the TSI metamethodology,
which are labelled creativity, choice, and implementation.
The task during the creativity phase is to highlight the major concerns,
issues and problems that exist in the problem context that is being addressed.
Various creativity-enhancing devices can be employed to help managers
and other stakeholders during this phase. It is mandatory, however, that a
wide range of di¡erent perspectives is brought to bear so that the picture
built up of the problem situation is derived from viewing it from di¡erent
Description of total systems intervention (TSI)
285

paradigms. TSI uses ‘systemsmetaphors’ as its favouredmethod for ensuring
this happens.
The key aspects of the problem situation revealed, by whatever creativity-
enhancing devices are employed, are subject to discussion and debate
among the facilitators, managers and other stakeholders. The outcome
(what is expected to emerge) from the creativity phase is a set of signi¢cant
issues and concerns. There may be other important but less immediately
crucial problems that it is also sensible to record and pursue into the next
phase. These ‘dominant’ and ‘dependent’ concerns, issues and problems
then become the basis for designing an appropriate systems intervention
approach.
The second phase is known as the choicephase. The taskduring this phase is
to construct a suitable intervention strategy around a choice of systems
methodology or combination of systems methodologies. Choice will be
guided by the characteristics of the problem situation, as discovered during
the examination conducted in the creativity phase, and knowledge of the
particular strengths and weaknesses of di¡erent systems methodologies. A
method is therefore needed that is capable of interrogating these method-
ologies to show what they do well and what they are less good at. Tradition-
ally, TSI has used the SOSM, but any of the devices employed by Jackson
(1991) could be adopted for this purpose (i.e., metaphors, sociological para-
digms, Habermas’ three ‘interests’, positioning in the modernism versus
modernism debate). The most probable outcome of the choice phase is that
there will be a dominant methodology chosen, to be supported if necessary
by dependent methodologies to help with secondary problem areas.
The third phase of TSI is the implementation phase. The task is to employ
the selected systems methodology or methodologies with a view to bringing
about positive change. If, as is usual, one methodology has been deemed
dominant, it will be the primary tool used to address the problem situation.
TSI stipulates, however, the need always to be open to the possibilities
o¡ered by other systems methodologies. For example, the key problems in
an organization su¡ering from an inability to learn and adapt may be
structural, as revealed by the organism and brain metaphors. But the cultural
metaphor might also appear illuminating albeit in a subordinate way given
the immediate crisis. In these circumstances, organizational cybernetics
could be chosen to guide the intervention, but with a soft systems method-
ology taking on other issues in the background. Of course, as the problem
situation changes, it may be necessaryto reassessthe state of the organization,
by re-entering the creativity phase, and then select an alternative method-
ology as dominant. The outcome of the implementation phase should be
286
Total systems intervention

co-ordinated change brought about in those aspects of the problem situation
currently most in need of improvement.
The three-phase TSI approach is summarized in Table 14.1.
It is important to stress, as a ¢nal point, that TSI is a systemic and interac-
tive process. Attention needs to be given during each phase to the likely out-
comes of other phases. As the problem situation changes in the eyes of the
participants, a new intervention strategy will have to be devised. The only
way to attend to these matters is to continually cycle around creativity,
choice and implementation, ready to change those methodologies that are
dominant and dependent. TSI is a dynamic metamethodology.
14.2.4
Methods
In the previous subsection we hinted at some of the methods that can be used
by TSI in support of its three phases. Here we add a little more detail about
some of them.
To encourage managers and other participants to think creatively about
the problem situation they face, TSI will often ask them to view it through
the lenses of various systems metaphors. Di¡erent metaphors focus attention
on di¡erent aspects of the problem context. Some concentrate on structure,
while others highlight human and political aspects. By using a varied set
Description of total systems intervention (TSI)
287
Table 14.1
The TSI metamethodology.
Creativity
Task
To highlight signi¢cant concerns, issues and problems
Tools
Creativity-enhancing devices including systems metaphors
Outcome
Dominant and dependent concerns, issues and problems identi¢ed
Choice
Task
To choose an appropriate systems intervention methodology or
methodologies
Tools
Methods for revealing the strengths and weaknesses of di¡erent
systems methodologies (e.g., the SOSM)
Outcome
Dominant and dependent methodologies chosen for use
Implementation
Task
To arrive at and implement speci¢c positive change proposals
Tools
Systems methodologies employed according to the logic of TSI
Outcome
Highly relevant and co-ordinated change that secures signi¢cant
improvement in the problem situation

of Morgan’s (1986) ‘images’ of organization, TSI ensures that it is gaining a
holistic appreciation of the problem situation and taking on board
perspectives that draw their meaning from di¡erent paradigms. Some of
the common metaphors used by TSI are:
.
machine;
.
organism;
.
brain;
.
culture;
.
coalition;
.
coercive system.
The sorts of question it is useful to ask during metaphor analysis are:
.
What metaphors throw light onto this problem situation?
.
What are the main concerns, issues and problems revealed by each
metaphor?
.
In the light of the metaphor analysis, what concerns, issues and problems
are currently crucial for improving the problem situation?
If all the metaphors reveal serious problems, then obviously the organization
is in a crisis state!
Flood (1995) has suggested supplementing metaphor analysis: by
allowing participants to create their own metaphors (‘divergent’ meta-
phorical analysis); by using techniques such as brainstorming and ‘idea
writing’ to enhance creativity; and by paying attention to the ‘ergonomics’
of re£ection ^ providing participants with the time and space to be creative.
These are useful additions as long as they are not seen as a replacement for
the discipline of metaphor analysis, which as has been emphasized is neces-
sary to achieve a genuinely pluralistic appreciation of the problem situation.
The SOSM is the traditional tool employed by TSI in the choice phase. As
we know from Chapter 2, it unearths the assumptions underlying di¡erent
systems approaches by asking what each assumes about the system(s) in
which it hopes to intervene and about the relationship between the partici-
pants associated with that system. Combining the information gained
about the problem context during the creativity phase and the knowledge
provided by the SOSM about the strengths and weaknesses of di¡erent
systems approaches, it is possible to move toward an informed choice of
systems intervention strategy. For example, if the problem context can
reasonably be characterized as exhibiting clear and agreed objectives
288
Total systems intervention

(unitary) and as being transparent enough so that it can be captured in a
mathematical model (simple), then a methodology based on simple^unitary
assumptions can be used with every hope of success.
One of the main methods associated with the implementation phase is the
use of dominant and dependent methodologies together and in a potentially
changing relationship. More details will be given about this technique in
Chapter 15.
14.2.5
Recent developments
Since its formulation TSI has been taken in rather di¡erent directions by its
two originators, Flood and Jackson. In a 1995 book, Flood suggests
additions to the methods that can be used in each of the three phases of the
metamethodology and speci¢es three ‘modes’ in which TSI can be used.
The three modes are the traditional ‘problem-solving’ mode, the ‘critical
review’ mode and the ‘critical re£ection’ mode. The critical review mode
applies TSI to the assessment of candidate methodologies that might be in-
corporated inthe metamethodology. Itis an elaboration of critical awareness.
The critical re£ection mode sees TSI used to evaluate its own interventions
after theevent in order toimproveTSI itself. Thisseemsto meto beessential,
if properly speci¢ed, for ensuring that TSI ful¢ls its obligation to pursue
research as well as practice. In further books (1996, with Romm, and 1999),
Flood has explained the relationships between TSI and postmodernism,
and TSI, chaos and complexity theory, respectively.
Jackson’s more recent work has focused on developing ‘critical systems
practice’, which is the topic covered in the ¢nal chapter of this book.
14.3
TOTAL SYSTEMS INTERVENTION (TSI) IN ACTION
The intervention described here was one of a series that took place, using
TSI, within North Yorkshire Police (NYP) in the mid-1990s. NYP is the
largest police force in England in terms of geographical area, covering
some 3,200 square miles. It serves a population of over 750,000, some
living in towns and cities, such as York, and others in low population areas
such as the North Yorkshire Moors. NYP, in 1993, had a budget of over
»70 million per annum and employed over 2,750 police o⁄cers and civilian
support sta¡.
NYP was commanded, from the Force Headquarters, by a chief constable
and two assistant chief constables. A civilian ¢nance director oversaw all
Total systems intervention (TSI) in action
289

the ¢nance and administrative activities. This group of senior sta¡ consti-
tuted the Chief O⁄cer Team of NYP. There were seven divisions, each
headed by an o⁄cer of superintendent rank, which were responsible for
operational policing.
The intervention was conducted by Keith Ellis, an academic and
consultant with experience of TSI, and Andrew Humphreys, a divisional
commander in NYP who was on secondment, learning about systems think-
ing. I am grateful to Keith Ellis for allowing me to draw heavily on, and
take extracts from, his account of the project (Ellis, 2002).
The Chief Constable had determined that NYP should develop a long-
term organizational strategy that would enable it to realize its mission.
First, however, it was necessary to create a strategic planning process that
could produce such a strategy. That was the aim of this particular interven-
tion, which according to the brief should develop ‘a top level corporate
strategic planning process . . . together with the approach to be used.’
The consultants (Ellis and Humphreys) were under no illusions about the
scale of the task given the complexity of the organization and its environ-
ment, and the current propensity in NYP toward reactive planning. They
also recognized the major importance of the project for the Chief O⁄cer
Team, who were the clients and who were expecting major changes to the
management of the organization to result from it. It was agreed that the
intervention would last about a year with regular reports back to the Chief
O⁄cer Team. The consultants also secured a free hand to utilize any method-
ology they considered appropriate. They chose TSI and used it in a pure
form so that they could learn as much as possible about the metamethodol-
ogy itself as well as improve the situation in NYP. This allows the three
phases to be described very precisely.
The creativity phase had two interrelated aspects: an interview pro-
gramme and a metaphor analysis.
In order to gain a holistic understanding of the problem situation
surrounding the strategic planning process in NYP, it was essential to
gather opinion from the widest possible range of stakeholder groups. The
following stakeholder groups were identi¢ed:
.
NYP chief o⁄cers;
.
divisional commanders and police o⁄cer departmental heads;
.
police sta¡ associations;
.
special constabulary;
.
police authority chairpersons;
.
North Yorkshire County Council senior o⁄cials;
290
Total systems intervention

.
community consultation representatives;
.
Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary;
.
Police Sta¡ College, Bramshill;
.
Humberside Police Force;
.
Northumbria Police Force.
Forty-two representatives of these groups were interviewed. The interviews
were semistructured, based around a set of ‘trigger questions’, and were
tape-recorded, but with contributions to remain anonymous to all but the
consultants.
A metaphor analysis was conducted immediately after each interview and
the results combined to build up a ‘metaphoric picture’ of the organization.
The metaphors used for this were of the organization as a:
.
machine;
.
organism;
.
brain;
.
culture;
.
coercive (political) system.
The majority of stakeholder representatives saw NYP as a goal-seeking
machine dominated by hierarchy, engaged in repetitive functions and con-
trolled through ¢nancial constraints. It was hindered as a ‘machine’ by a
lack of clear direction from the top. Moreover, because NYP operated like
a machine, current top-level planning ignored environmental in£uences.
Despite its machine-like character, NYP simply had to recognize environ-
mental disturbances and react accordingly in some areas of its activity. Use
of the organism metaphor revealed that this had gone furthest at the
divisional and local service levels, where stakeholders were becoming
involved in planning. This was not, however, mirrored at the top level of
the organization.
The Viable System Model (VSM) (see Chapter 6) was used to help
interpret the interview results from a brain perspective. It revealed that
NYP was weak in terms of its capacity to learn and adapt. It possessed only
a limited development function, connecting it to the outside world, and
lacked an audit function that would enable senior managers to get feedback
about the performance of the operational elements. As a result the Chief
O⁄cer Team tended to forget about their environment and to spend their
time trying to ¢nd out what was going on lower down. This was inevitably
Total systems intervention (TSI) in action
291

perceived as interference by the divisional commanders who retaliated by
actively withholding information. NYP, it seemed, was very far from the
ideal of a learning organization.
The culturemetaphor,applied to the resultsof the interviews,showed that
NYP was a complex mix of cultures, with di¡erent camps distinguished by
phrases such as ‘shapers’ and ‘doers’, ‘dreamers’ and ‘implementers’, ‘innova-
tors’ and ‘applicators’. Many interviewees identi¢ed separate ‘language
zones’ and pleaded for a ‘common language’, ‘management speak-free
documents’, ‘clari¢ed value statements’ and ‘targeted documents’. In
general there seemed to be a divide between those whose thinking was
dominated by the ‘single issue of policing with ever-diminishing resources’
and those most concerned about ‘socially demanded 24-hour policing in a
multifaceted community’. NYP seemed to be in the process of shifting
from unitary to pluralist internal relations, but with no means of managing
pluralism.
Externally, NYP was entwined in a complex web of political engagements
involving itself, central government and local government. Internally,
there were also a number of political agendas. Nevertheless, the ‘coercive’
exercise of power did not seem to be a problem. It existed in terms of top-
down planning and decision-making, but this was seen as normal for a
goal-driven organization.
On the basis of the interviews and the metaphor analysis, the consultants
concluded that the dominant concerns and issues for NYP revolved around
the need for viable organizational structures that would enable the shift
from a ‘closed mechanistic entity’, through an ‘open organismic body’ into
a ‘learning brain organization’. Also important was the need for a strategic
planning process, owned by the Chief O⁄cer Team, that would assist this
shift at the same time as introducing a more pluralistic approach to planning.
Rapid change meant that pluralism and politics were inevitable facts of life
that had to be embraced.
Using the SOSM as the main vehicle for the ‘choice’ phase, it seemed clear
to the consultants that the NYP strategic planning problem situation could
be described as systemic^pluralist.
NYP was a complex system containing many sub-subsystems, which
themselves contained components that were made up of elements. There
was no doubt that the wider system, of which NYP was a part, was becoming
more turbulent.
One aspect of that environmental turbulence was a growing diversity of
opinion about the role of police in a modern society. The debates taking
292
Total systems intervention

place were re£ected internally in NYP itself. There was increasing divergence
of values and beliefs, not least between the chief o⁄cers and lower ranks.
The SOSM analysis pointed at Acko¡’s interactive planning (see Chapter
9) as a suitable systems methodology to help develop the strategic planning
process. Its strengths were its ability to marshal pluralism to productive
ends together with its willingness to entertain models that could help
design complex systems. At the same time, it had to be borne in mind that
the metaphor analysis had pointed strongly to the need to develop viable
organizational structures capable of supporting an e¡ective strategic
planning process. And the brain perspective, based on the VSM, had
seemed particularly insightful in revealing what problems existed in this
respect.
In the eventthe consultants decided to proceed with the VSM as the domi-
nant approach, to tackle structural weaknesses in the organization, closely
coupled with Interactive Planning (IP), in a dependent role, to move
forward with actually developing the strategic planning process.
Implementation therefore proceeded using the VSM and IP in combina-
tion. The VSM diagnosis brought to the fore a variety of structural issues
that needed addressing:
.
System 5 ^
e
identity weak and fragmented;
e
chief o⁄cers did not act as a team;
e
lack of strategy-making process left NYP without corporate
direction;
e
chief o⁄cer-thinking dominated by lower level tactical and opera-
tional issues;
e
chief o⁄cer interference in operational activities.
.
System 4 ^ almost non-existent development function.
.
System 3 ^ poor operational control by the managerial team.
.
System 3* ^ limited and ine¡ective audit of operational unit activities.
.
System 2 ^ lack of co-ordination of operational units.
The initial, mess formulation, stage of IP could draw from the outcomes
of the creativity phase of TSI. A reference scenario was constructed that
revealed the absence of a strategic planning process in NYP and lack of
clarity about how to get one. It also highlighted the need for: improvements
in clarifying organizational values; involving stakeholders in planning;
agreeing a planning terminology; and communicating, disseminating and
co-ordinating plans.
Total systems intervention (TSI) in action
293

Working with a number of the stakeholders, the consultants then
produced an idealized design for a strategic planning process. This had as
key attributes:
.
involving all those who might a¡ect, or be a¡ected by, strategies relating
to policing in North Yorkshire;
.
informing and communicating through involvement, thus avoiding the
pitfalls associated with ‘retelling the strategy’;
.
enhancing the relevance of strategic planning to operational policing by
concentrating on core service areas;
.
ensuring continuity in the planning process;
.
providing a clarity of purpose within community consultative bodies;
.
providing a basis for innovation within a dynamic and unstable
environment.
Having decided on the ends, it was now necessary to agree means (as in-
formed by the VSM diagnosis), secure resources and begin implementation.
To this end, the draft, idealized design, strategic planning process was
presented at a two-day workshop attended by the chief o⁄cers, as clients,
and representatives of the wider set of stakeholder groups.
Initially, there were severe problems. The chief o⁄cers had become
aware of ¢ndings critical of them that had emerged during the interview
programme. The Chief Constable, particularly unwilling to see his authority
challenged in the presence of in£uential outsiders, reacted against this
information in an autocratic and coercive manner. In turn this led to other
stakeholders modifying their ‘messages’. Some persuasion had to be used
to overcome the Chief Constable’s defensive mindset of ‘I’m in charge’ and
replace it with one that recognized that involving others assists with
creativity and ‘spreads the risk’. Eventually, this worked, the situation was
recovered and the workshop achieved its aims. In particular, a NYP ¢ve-
year strategic planning process was agreed and fully operationalized in 1995.
Ellis argues that TSI provided a powerful guiding metamethodology for
this intervention, which produced useful output for NYP. The following
list of successful outcomes re£ects both the VSM and IP inputs:
.
a strategic planning process that replaced ad hoc tactical planning;
.
an acceptance by the Chief Constable that wider stakeholder input to
strategic planning is useful;
.
Police Authority input to strategic planning;
.
a generalized, systemic understanding of the nature of NYP as a complex
organization undergoing radical change;
294
Total systems intervention

.
a recognition by the Chief O⁄cer Team of the strategic nature of their
roles in terms of boundary scanning and the relationship between NYP
and the wider system at local and national levels;
.
an understanding that NYP needed to become a learning organization
and of the need to overcome organizational defensive routines.
As a result of the intervention Ellis was able to: suggest improvements to
TSI, particularly with regard to its ability to recognize and respond to
coercion; learn much about using TSI to bring about change, which he was
able to incorporate into his own ‘systemic theory of organisational change’
(Ellis, 2002); and use the considerable knowledge he gained of NYP to
secure further consultancy contracts.
14.4
CRITIQUE OF TOTAL SYSTEMS INTERVENTION (TSI)
It can reasonably be argued that CST rescued systems theory from a crisis
produced by warring paradigms and o¡ered it a coherent developmental
strategy, as a transdiscipline, based on ¢rmer foundations. A similar claim
can be made for TSI in relation to systems practice. By setting out a meta-
methodology for using methodologies adhering to di¡erent paradigms in
the same intervention and on the same problem situation, TSI suggested
that the approaches and skills developed by di¡erent systems practitioners
could be brought together and co-ordinated to achieve a more successful
form of systems intervention.
TSI rejects isolationism and moves beyond imperialism. Imperialism, it
will be recalled, is prepared to use di¡erent tools and techniques, but only
in the service of its favoured theoretical assumptions and methodology.
TSI suggests a way of managing, in a coherent way, very di¡erent methodol-
ogies built on the foundations of alternative paradigms. This puts it a
step ahead of other systems approaches in dealing with the complexity,
heterogeneity and turbulence of the problem situations we face today. At
the same time TSI rejects pragmatism, insisting that the use of a variety of
methodologies and methods must remain theoretically informed to ensure
that learning can take place and be passed on to others.
TSI does not try to disguise the di⁄culties inherent in using di¡erent
methodologies alongside one another in highly complex situations. Indeed,
it argues that, although this is desirable, if it proves practically impossible,
then the best way to handle methodological pluralism is to clearly state that
one methodology is being taken as dominant (and others as dependent) for
Critique of total systems intervention (TSI)
295

some period of time. One methodology, encapsulating the presuppositions
of a particular paradigm, is granted imperialistic status ^ but only tem-
porarily; its dominance is kept under continuous review.
Another strength of TSI has been to bring together pluralism in the
creativity phase (looking at the problem situation from di¡erent perspec-
tives) with pluralism in terms of the management of di¡erent methodologies
in combination (in the choice and implementation phases).
If TSI’s great strength is operating at the metamethodological level, this
also leads to some weaknesses. As Mingers and Brocklesby (1996) point
out, TSI requires the use of ‘whole’ methodologies. This has two conse-
quences. First, TSI is dependent on the set of systems methodologies it has
inherited, such as system dynamics, organizational cybernetics, interactive
planning, CSH, etc. These were not always carefully formulated with explicit
reference to their theoretical foundations. It can be argued that TSI would
be better developing its own ‘pure’ methodologies that are clearly related
to the theoretical paradigms it recognizes. Second, it seems that, once you
have chosen a particular methodology as dominant, you must employ only
the methods and techniques closely associated with it and in exactly the
manner prescribed by that methodology. For example, having chosen
Checkland’s SSM you get rich pictures, root de¢nitions and conceptual
models, but are prevented from using causal loop diagrams or idealized
design. There is an unnecessary lack of £exibility here that needs addressing.
There is nothing philosophically wrong with using a selection of methods
and techniques, as long as they are employed according to an explicit logic.
Indeed, it allows a much greater responsiveness to the peculiarities of each
problem situation as it evolves during an intervention.
Another criticism centres on the lack of attention given to the process of
using TSI. For example, Taket and White (2000) ¢nd little guidance on the
roles and styles that facilitators might adopt. Most detail is provided on the
implementation phase, whereas they suspect users of TSI have greatest di⁄-
culty with the creativity and choice phases.
A further gap in the TSI armoury is highlighted by those management
scientists who give attention to the users of methodologies. TSI, which
demands multimethodological competence and adherence to a variety of
‘commitments’, clearly asks a great deal from would-be users. Brocklesby
(1997), for example, identi¢es severe cognitive di⁄culties for individuals
trying to work across paradigms. TSI does not detail whether or how the
relevant competences can be obtained.
Again, there are those who accuse TSI of partiality in seeking improve-
ment. TSI suggests it is in favour of human emancipation, but tends to
296
Total systems intervention

ignore environmental concerns. For Midgley (1996), the two are inextricably
linked.
TSI receives support from CST, which has spent a considerable amount of
time and e¡ort establishing, developing and promoting its theoretical
tenets. Inevitably, this openness has drawn the attention of critics. The two
main lines of criticism come from those who take a strong paradigm incom-
mensurability stance and from postmodernists.
TSI grounds its pluralism, or complementarism, on Habermas’ early
theory of human interests ^ a theory that he has himself subsequently
abandoned. This theory suggests that TSI can, on the basis of the three
human interests, stand ‘above the paradigms’ and pick out appropriate meth-
odologies according to the particular human interest to be served. Tsoukas
(1993), however, notes that di¡erent paradigms constitute di¡erent realities
and, therefore, seek to provide answers to all three human interests. If TSI
claims to stand above the paradigms, adjudicating between them, how can
this claim be grounded? If it has to abandon this claim, does it mean that
CST constitutes a paradigm in its own right? If this is the case what has hap-
pened to pluralism?
From their postmodern perspective, Taket and White (2000) see TSI as an
approach that seeks to tame pluralism and diversity rather than embracing
them. The emphasis on rigour and formalized thinking in TSI sets up a
tension, they believe, with the espoused purpose of employing a plurality
of methodologies and methods. A deconstruction of the language of TSI
reveals a contradiction between statements that imply closure and those
encouraging an openness to other approaches and ways of proceeding.
Taket and White also worry that the emphasis on rationality and abstraction
in TSI leads to the privileging of methods that are verbally based and that
this can hinder the participation of some groups. Another problem with
giving primacy to rationality is that the feelings and emotions of
participants in decision processes get ignored.
14.5
THE VALUE OF TOTAL SYSTEMS INTERVENTION (TSI)
TO MANAGERS
Proponents of TSI have always warned managers not to be fooled by those
who peddle fads and quick ¢xes. The problems they face are too complicated
and diverse to be handled by anything other than considered, and often
prolonged, holistic endeavour. TSI seeks to guide and structure this holistic
endeavour, in particular by:
The value of total systems intervention (TSI) to managers
297

.
Advocating and enabling the maximum creativity when the problem
situation is being analysed.
.
Helping managers to evaluate the usefulness to them, in their situation,
of di¡erent management solutions and, particularly, di¡erent systems
approaches.
.
Opposing a ‘one best way in all circumstances’ mentality and ensuring
that managers have available to them a variety of systemic problem-
resolving strategies that can be used in combination if necessary.
.
Asking managers to take into account a number of considerations ^
technical (prediction and control), practical (mutual understanding)
and emancipatory (fairness) ^ when planning and evaluating interven-
tions.
.
Providing a learning system that, through critical self-re£ection,
managers can tap into to improve their own practice.
14.6
CONCLUSION
The early years of CST were ones of huge intellectual excitement, providing
for very rapid theoretical and practical development of the approach. These
years culminated in the publication, in 1991, of three books that took their
inspiration from CST and tried to present the main ¢ndings as they stood
at that date. Flood and Jackson’s (1991b) Critical Systems Thinking: Directed
Readings was a collection of papers, accompanied by a commentary, that
traced the origins and development of CST. Jackson’s Systems Methodology
for the Management Sciences sought to provide a comprehensive critique of the
di¡erent systems approaches, drawing on the social sciences as the basis for
that critique. Flood and Jackson’s (1991a) Creative Problem Solving: Total
Systems Intervention introduced the TSI metamethodology as a means of
operationalizing CST in practice. This latter volume, in particular, spawned
a myriad of applications of CST using TSI. By 1991, therefore, a position
had been established from which creative holism could be further
developed.
REFERENCES
Brocklesby, J. (1997). Becoming multimethodology literate: An assessment of
the cognitive di⁄culties of working across paradigms. In: J. Mingers and A.
298
Total systems intervention

Gill (eds), Multimethodology: The Theory and Practice of Combining Management
Science Methodologies (pp. 189^216). John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Burrell, G. and Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological Paradigms and Organizational
Analysis. Heinemann, London.
Checkland, P.B. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
Ellis, R.K. (2002). Toward a systemic theory of organisational change. PhD
thesis, City University, London.
Flood, R.L. (1995). Solving Problem Solving. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. (1999). Rethinking ‘The Fifth Discipline’: Learning within the
Unknowable. Routledge, London.
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991a). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (eds) (1991b). Critical Systems Thinking: Directed
Readings. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. and Romm, N.R.A. (1996). Diversity Management: Triple Loop
Learning. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Habermas, J. (1970). Knowledge and interest. In: D. Emmet and A. MacIntyre
(eds), Sociological Theory and Philosophical Analysis (pp. 36^54). Macmillan,
London.
Habermas, J. (1975). Legitimation Crisis. Beacon Press, Boston.
Habermas, J. (1984). Reason and the Rationalization of Society. Beacon Press, Boston.
Jackson, M.C. (1982a). Verifying social systems theory in practice: A critique. In:
L. Troncale (ed.), A General Survey of Systems Methodology (pp. 668^673).
Society for General Systems Research, Louisville, KY.
Jackson, M.C. (1982b). The nature of soft systems thinking: The work of
Churchman, Acko¡ and Checkland. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 9,
17^28.
Jackson, M.C. (1985). Social systems theory in practice: The need for a critical
approach. International Journal of General Systems, 10, 135^151.
Jackson, M.C. (1987). Present positions and future prospects in management
science. Omega, 15, 455^466.
Jackson, M.C. (1991). Systems Methodology for the Management Sciences. Plenum,
New York.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Jackson, M.C. and Keys, P. (1984). Towards a system of systems methodologies.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 35, 473^486.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure of Scienti¢c Revolutions (2nd edn). University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Linstone, H.A. (1984). Multiple Perspectives for Decision Making. North-Holland,
New York.
References
299

Midgley, G. (1996). Evaluating services for people with disabilities: A critical
systems perspective. Evaluation, 2, 67^84.
Mingers, J.C. (1980). Towards an appropriate social theory for applied systems
thinking: Critical theory and soft systems methodology. Journal of Applied
Systems Analysis, 7, 41^49.
Mingers, J.C. (1984). Subjectivism and soft systems methodology ^ A critique.
Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 11, 85^103.
Mingers, J.C. and Brocklesby, J. (1996). Multimethodology: Towards a
framework for mixing methodologies. Omega, 25, 489^509.
Morgan, G. (1986). Images of Organization. Sage Publications, Beverley Hills, CA.
Taket, A.R. and White, L.A. (2000). Partnership and Participation: Decision-making
in the Multiagency Setting. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Tsoukas, H. (1993). The road to emancipation is through organizational devel-
opment: A critical evaluation of Total Systems Intervention. Systems Practice,
6, 53^70.
Ulrich, W. (1983). Critical Heuristics of Social Planning. Haupt, Bern.
300
Total systems intervention

Critical Systems Practice 15
This is the source of the trouble. Persons tend to think and feel exclu-
sively in one mode or the other and in so doing tend to misunderstand
and underestimate what the other mode is all about . . . To reject that
part of the Buddha that attends to the analysis of motorcycles is to miss
the Buddha entirely.
Pirsig (1974)
15.1
INTRODUCTION
The subtitle of this book is ‘Creative Holism for Managers’. Being ‘holistic’,
in the managerial domain, means using systems ideas and concepts to under-
stand and intervene in problem situations. However, there are di¡erent
ways of being holistic, as we have seen. This is an advantage because it
allows us to be ‘creative’ in the manner in which we employ systems think-
ing. Creative holism is about the creative use in combination of di¡erent
ways of being holistic. Once understood, it allows managers to be holistic
in a more profound sense.
Creative holism evolves as its philosophy and theory ^ Critical Systems
Thinking (CST) ^ and its metamethodology ^ called Critical Systems
Practice (CSP) ^ change. In the previous chapter we looked at the early devel-
opment of CST and considered Total Systems Intervention (TSI) as the
best known version of CSP. In this chapter we bring the story up to date,
by reviewing the further development of both CST and CSP in the 1990s
and early years of this century.

15.2
DESCRIPTION OF CRITICAL SYSTEMS PRACTICE (CSP)
15.2.1
Historical development
As we saw in the last chapter, CST and CSP had a signi¢cant impact on the
systems thinking scene within a relatively short period of time. By 1991 it
was ¢rmly established, and further development took on a dynamic of its
own. This was propelled by an internal logic (e.g., learning from applications
of TSI) and by the responses made to challenges from the outside, such as
from postmodernism. We started to consider both of these in the last
chapter and will continue to do so in this. To them, however, was added a
third motor of change, which we will refer to speci¢cally at this point.
This third motor was fuelled by pluralism in method use becoming
popular among practitioners. To put it simply there was a clamour for
pluralism in the applied disciplines. This was true of organization theory,
information systems, operational research, evaluation research and manage-
ment consultancy. Munro and Mingers (2002) report on a survey of opera-
tional research, management science and systems practitioners, which
demonstrates just how widespread multimethod use had become in those
¢elds by 2002. For those working on real-world problems, pluralism
seemed to be necessary and, judging from the response of Munro and
Mingers’ sample, combining methods brought success.
The fact that multimethod use was becoming common in practice, and
was apparently successful, spurred on its advocates. The year 1997 saw the
publication of Mingers and Gill’s (eds) Multimethodology ^ The Theory and
Practice of Combining Management Science Methodologies. This was a de¢nitive
collection of papers on multimethodological thinking addressed to an opera-
tional research/management science/systems audience. It drew on highly
theoretical work in CST as well as on multimethod applications by consul-
tants. The result was the emergence of something of a community of those
interested in CST or multimethodology, call it what you will, which led to
a further round of rapid progress in the development of creative holism.
15.2.2
Philosophy and theory
The ¢ve ‘commitments’ of CST (Section 14.2.2) in 1991 had, by 2000 (see
Jackson, 2000), been transformed into three: with ‘critical awareness’
swallowing ‘social awareness’, and ‘methodological pluralism’ and ‘theoret-
ical pluralism’ now usually treated together. We can consider the philosophy
302
Critical systems practice

and theory of CSP, therefore, by looking at the three, revised commitments:
to ‘critical awareness’, ‘improvement’ and ‘pluralism’.
Critical awareness retains as its main purpose critiquing the theoretical
underpinnings,strengths and weaknesses of di¡erent systemsmethodologies
and methods. Work of this kind continued throughout the 1990s, and the
results have been reported in Jackson (2000) and summarized in Part II of
this book. The other aspect of critical awareness (which was previously
dealt with as social awareness) considers the societal and organizational
‘climate’ within which systems approaches are used. This impacts on their
‘popularity’ and the results they can generate. As Flood and Romm (Flood,
1990; Flood and Romm, 1996) have insisted it must include consideration
of the e¡ects that power at the microlevel can have on the development and
use of knowledge. This idea derives, of course, from postmodernism and,
in particular, from the work of Foucault (see Chapter 13). A related point
has been urged on critical systems thinkers by Brocklesby (1994, 1997). He
asks that more attention be given to the various ‘constraints’ (cultural,
political, personal) that hinder acceptance of CST.
Turning to the second commitment, CST has since its inception made
somewhat grand statements about being dedicated to human ‘emancipation’.
Putting fairness and empowerment on the agenda, by promoting emancipa-
tory system thinking, has certainly been one of its main achievements. As
we saw in the previous chapter, however, this led to some initial confusion
between critical and emancipatory systems thinking. Eventually, it became
clear that emancipation was only one of the three human interests that,
following Habermas, CST sought to support. CST in 1991, therefore, still
embraced emancipation, but as part of a much broader commitment to
realizing those circumstances in which all individuals could realize their
potential (Flood and Jackson, 1991).
These days, following the attack on the ‘grand narratives’ of universal
liberation conducted by such postmodernists as Lyotard, critical systems
thinkers are much more circumspect about even using the phrase ‘human
emancipation’. It has been accepted that Habermas’ universalist position,
based on the notion of the ‘ideal speech situation’, has been undermined.
Instead, it has become more normal to talk in terms of achieving ‘local
improvement’. This adjustment, in the face of the postmodernist challenge,
does not mean that critical systems thinkers have completely accepted the
conclusion that collective emancipation is a dangerous ¢ction and that self-
emancipation is the only proper objective. Universal ethical standards can
still be used to evaluate local practices, which may look decidedly dubious
in this light. Rather, critical systems thinkers have tempered their argument
Description of critical systems practice (CSP)
303

to re£ect the di⁄culty of generalizing such an idea as emancipation. The
current commitment re£ects an awareness of the need to be sceptical of any
claims to emancipation ^ either universal or local ^ but still to strive for
something bene¢cial, call it ‘improvement’, all the same.
Pluralism in systems thinking is about using di¡erent systems theories,
methodologies and methods in combination. There have been developments
here at all three levels.
The reader will recall that one of the main criticisms of TSI was that it
uncritically adhered to Habermas’ early theory of human interests. This
theory seemed to allow it to operate at a metalevel to the paradigms, allocat-
ing appropriate methodologies to di¡erent aspects of a problem situation as
appropriate. Critical systems thinkers have now largely accepted that it is
untenable to believe, in the manner of TSI, that paradigm incommensurabil-
ity can be resolved by reference to a metatheory. Gregory (1992, 1996), for
example, has argued for ‘discordant pluralism’ against the ‘complementarist’
version, based in Habermas’ work, that she sees as dominating TSI.
Discordant pluralism suggests that the di¡erences between paradigms
should be emphasized rather than ‘rationalized away’. This is a useful
clari¢cation and one that points the way forward to the kind of pluralism
that can deliver the greatest bene¢ts for systems thinking. In CSP a meta-
methodology is required that accepts and protects paradigm diversity and
handles the relationships between the divergent paradigms. This meta-
methodology must accept that paradigms are based on incompatible
philosophical assumptions and that they cannot, therefore, be integrated
without something being lost. It needs to manage the paradigms, not by
aspiring to metaparadigmatic status and allocating them to their respective
tasks, but by using them critically. Paradigms have to confront one another
on the basis of ‘re£ective conversation’ (Morgan, 1983). Critique is
managed between the paradigms and not controlled from above them. No
paradigm is allowed to escape unquestioned because it is continually con-
fronted by the alternative rationales o¡ered by other paradigms.
A contribution from Mingersand Brocklesby (1996)helps to explain what
developments have occurred at the methodology and methods levels. They
provide an overview of the di¡erent possibilities that they believe can exist
under the label of ‘pluralism’. Of these, three are to various degrees com-
patible with CST: ‘methodology selection’, ‘whole methodology manage-
ment’ and ‘multiparadigm multimethodology’.
In ‘methodology selection’, the systems practitioner regards a variety of
di¡erent methodologies, based on di¡erent paradigms, as useful and
chooses a whole methodology (such as system dynamics or SSM) according
304
Critical systems practice

to the nature of the problem context and what he or she is trying to achieve.
That methodology, and its associated methods, tools and techniques, is
then employed throughout the intervention to try to resolve the problem
situation. The System Of Systems Methodologies (SOSM) (see Chapter 2),
before it was incorporated into TSI, can be seen as encouraging this form
of pluralism.
The second type, labelled ‘whole methodology management’, again uses
whole methodologies based on di¡erent paradigms, but this time is prepared
to employ them together in the same intervention. The emphasis shifts to
how a variety of very di¡erent methodologies, and their associated
methods, can be managed during the process of intervention. This, of
course, is the primary task that TSI sets for itself.
The third type, preferred by Mingers and Brocklesby, is called ‘multi-
paradigm multimethodology’. This involves using parts of di¡erent
methodologies together on the same problem situation. Here the whole
methodologies are ‘broken up’ and the methods, models and techniques
usually associated with them brought together in new combinations
according to the requirements of the particular intervention.
In support of ‘multiparadigm multimethodology’ are: operational re-
search and management science practitioners who want the freedom to use
whatever methods seem appropriate at the time; postmodernists who are
quite at home ‘mutilating’ methodologies to achieve a judicious ‘mix and
match’ of methods; and, these days, most critical systems thinkers. The
great merit of allowing methods, models, tools and techniques to be
detached from their usual methodologies, and employed £exibly, is that it
allows practitioners the maximum freedom to respond to the needs of the
problem situation and to the twists and turns taken by the intervention.
There is one caveat, however, imposed by CST on unrestricted multi-
method use. This is that, at all times, there must be an explicit recognition
of the paradigm(s) the methods are being used to serve. There must be no
relapsefrom ‘genuine’ pluralism into unre£ective imperialism or pragmatism
(see Chapter 14). The way CSP achieves this, while allowing the £exible use
of methods, is set out in the next subsection.
15.2.3
Metamethodology
TSI went a long way toward providing a suitable metamethodology for
CST. In considering CSP as the revised metamethodology, it is worth
noting that the basic philosophy, principles and phases of TSI remain
pretty much intact. The philosophy embraced can still be described in
Description of critical systems practice (CSP)
305

terms of commitments, now simpli¢ed to the three of ‘critical awareness’,
‘pluralism’ and ‘improvement’. The principles have stood the test of time
(the reader is referred back to Chapter 14). Intervention can still be seen as
possessing: a ‘creativity’ phase, which surfaces ideas about the current
problem situation; a ‘choice’ phase, which considers alternative ways of
addressing important issues; and an ‘implementation’ phase during which
change processes are managed. Nevertheless, we saw well enough in the pre-
vious subsection that changes need making to re£ect the reconceptualizing
of the nature of a critical systems metamethodology and to allow for more
£exible multimethod use.
As a metamethodology, CSP no longer aspires to metaparadigmatic
status. Its job instead is to protect paradigm diversity and encourage critique
between the paradigms. This needs to take place during each of the phases
of the methodology. In order to appreciate the complexity and heterogeneity
of problem situations the systems practitioner must, in pursuing ‘creativity’,
consider them from the perspectives of the four di¡erent paradigms,
perhaps as re£ected through the concerns of various metaphors. Engaging
in ‘choice’, the practitioner will be looking at what he or she hopes to
achieve in terms of the strengths and weaknesses of di¡erent systems
methodologies as seen from the paradigms they represent and alternative
paradigms. In order to protect the bene¢ts that each paradigm has to o¡er,
he or she will need to be extremely watchful. Political, cultural and cognitive
constraints can delimit the range of methodologies it is possible to use and
so reduce the potency of pluralism. Similarly, the way ‘implementation’ pro-
ceeds will be continually critiqued through the lenses o¡ered by alternative
paradigms. And the results obtained will be evaluated according to the con-
cerns evinced by the di¡erent paradigms. Currently, having incorporated
postmodernism, CSP manages relationships between the functionalist, inter-
pretive, emancipatory and postmodern paradigms. It is ready and able to
include more if they o¡er radically new ways of seeing and acting.
In order for CSP to protect paradigm diversity during ‘creativity’, ‘choice’
and ‘implementation’, it requires a clear statement of the methodologies
that purport to operationalize the perspectives of the di¡erent paradigms.
For this purpose TSI used existing systems methodologies and their asso-
ciated methods, models and techniques. CSP sees advantages in specifying
the exact nature of ‘generic methodologies’, representing the functionalist,
interpretive, emancipatory and postmodern paradigms. One advantage is
that the theoretical link back to paradigms is made explicit; so allowing us
to operationalize better and more obviously the hypotheses of particular
paradigms and to test the conclusions of these paradigms in real-world
306
Critical systems practice

interventions. Another is that it makes it possible for usto keep an open mind
on the usefulness of the complete set of available methods, models and tech-
niques and to research what they might be capable of delivering for each
methodology and paradigm. We are no longer restricted to using, with
each methodology, those methods speci¢cally designed alongside it. This
extends multimethod £exibility, while ensuring that we can still evaluate
the usefulness of methods in support of the various generic methodologies.
I would claim it as one of the great achievements of CSP (see Jackson,
2000) that it has established generic systems methodologies and so freed
itself from the speci¢c methodologies it inherited ^ many of which were
underspeci¢ed as to their theoretical assumptions. The generic method-
ologies have been derived in part from the clear dictates of the paradigms
to which they correspond. They also take into account existing systems
methodologies, which either implicitly or explicitly follow the orientation
provided by the relevant paradigm. For example, the ‘generic interpretive
systems methodology’ draws from the philosophy and theory of the inter-
pretive paradigm as well as from strategic assumption surfacing and
testing, interactive planning and SSM. It follows as well that it should be
possible to recognize the main tenets of the existing systems methodologies,
described in Part II, in the appropriate generic methodology (e.g., system
dynamics in the generic functionalist systems methodology). The generic
methodologies are set out, following the guidelines for ‘constitutive rules’
of methodologies o¡ered by Checkland and Scholes (1990) and Checkland
(1999), in Tables 15.1^15.4. Just two points remain to be made about CSP
as a metamethodology.
First, it has been designed speci¢cally as an ‘action research’ approach.
This means that it seeks to contribute to research as well as to improving
real-world problem situations. Any use of the metamethodology is, in
principle, capable of yielding research ¢ndings about: how to manage the
relationship between di¡erent paradigms; the philosophy and theory that
constitutes the paradigms underpinning any of the generic methodologies
used; the generic systems methodologies themselves and how to use them;
the methods, models, tools and techniques employed; and about the real-
world problem situation investigated. Having worked so hard in producing
the ‘generic systems methodologies’, so that all of this can be achieved, it is
worth adding a ‘re£ection’ phase to CSP to ensure that research, and the
generation of new learning, receives the attention it deserves.
Second, as with TSI, it is essential to use CSP £exibly and iteratively. It is
now capable of being adapted to di¡erent situations both in terms of the
methodologies it employs and the methods, models and techniques it
Description of critical systems practice (CSP)
307

makes use of. Critical systems practitioners should exhibit conscious thought
in each intervention, about how their approach needs to be moulded to the
particular circumstances. They should also be willing to cycle, as many
times as necessary,aroundthefour phases of ‘creativity’,‘choice’, ‘implemen-
tation’ and ‘re£ection’. CSP can now be summarized as in Table 15.5.
15.2.4
Methods
Our consideration of the methods now associated with CSP will include:
those that can be employed to support the generic systems methodologies;
308
Critical systems practice
Table 15.1
Constitutive rules for a generic functionalist systems methodology.
1. A functionalist systems methodology is a structured way of thinking, with an
attachment to the functionalist theoretical rationale, and is focused on improving
real-world problem situations.
2. A functionalist systems methodology uses systems ideas as the basis for its inter-
vention strategy and will frequently employ methods, models, tools and techniques
that also draw on systems ideas.
3. The claim to have used a systems methodology according to the functionalist
rationale must be justi¢ed according to the following guidelines:
a. an assumption is made that the real-world is systemic;
b. analysis of the problem situation is conducted in systems terms;
c. models aiming to capture the nature of the situation are constructed, enabling us
to gain knowledge of the real world;
d. models are used to learn how best to improve the real world and for the purposes
of design;
e. quantitative analysis can be useful since systems obey laws;
f. the process of intervention is systematic and is aimed at improving goal seeking
and viability;
g. intervention is best conducted on the basis of expert knowledge;
h. solutions are tested primarily in terms of their e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy.
4. Since a functionalist systems methodology can be used in di¡erent ways in di¡erent
situations and interpreted di¡erently by di¡erent users, each use should exhibit con-
scious thought about how to adapt to the particular circumstances.
5. Each use of a functionalist systems methodology should yield research ¢ndings as
well as changing the real-world problem situation. These research ¢ndings may
relate: to the theoretical rationale underlying the methodology; to the methodology
itself and how to use it; to the methods, models, tools and techniques employed;
to the real-world problem situation investigated; or to all of these.

those o¡ering guidelines for using the metamethodology itself; and those
that can enhance the use of CSP in other ways.
TSI dealt in ‘whole’ methodologies, like system dynamics, strategic
assumption surfacing and testing, soft systems methodology and the
methods devised explicitly to support them. It has since been argued that
systems practitioners must be allowed much greater freedom to tailor their
use of methods, models and techniques to the exigencies of the problem
situation they are seeking to intervene in. CSP recognizes that the link
between a methodology and the methods traditionally associated with it
Description of critical systems practice (CSP)
309
Table 15.2
Constitutive rules for a generic interpretive systems methodology.
1. An interpretive systems methodology is a structured way of thinking, with an
attachment to the interpretive theoretical rationale, and is focused on improving
real-world problem situations.
2. An interpretive systems methodology uses systems ideas as the basis for its inter-
vention strategy and will frequently employ methods, models, tools and techniques
that also draw on systems ideas.
3. The claim to have used a systems methodology according to the interpretive
rationale must be justi¢ed according to the following guidelines:
a. there is no assumption that the real world is systemic;
b. analysis of the problem situation is designed to be creative and may not be
conducted in systems terms;
c. models are constructed that represent possible ‘ideal-type’ human activity
systems;
d. models are used to structure debate about changes that are feasible and desirable;
e. quantitative analysis is unlikely to be useful except in a subordinate role;
f. the process of intervention is systemic and is aimed at exploring purposes,
alleviating unease and generating learning;
g. the intervention is best conducted on the basis of stakeholder participation;
h. changes are evaluated primarily in terms of their e¡ectiveness and elegance.
4. Since an interpretive systems methodology can be used in di¡erent ways in di¡erent
situations and interpreted di¡erently by di¡erent users, each use should exhibit
conscious thought about how to adapt to the particular circumstances.
5. Each use of an interpretive systems methodology should yield research ¢ndings as
well as changing the real-world problem situation. These research ¢ndings may
relate: to the theoretical rationale underlying the methodology; to the methodology
itself and how to use it; to the methods, models, tools and techniques employed;
to the real-world problem situation investigated, or to all of these.

can be broken. It is, therefore, happy to see existing methodologies
‘decomposed’, giving the systems practitioner access to the full range of
methods, tools and techniques to use in combination as he or she feels
appropriate, in support of the generic systems methodologies that are being
employed in the intervention. So, for example, the Viable System Model
(VSM), originally designed as a functionalist device, is freed up for use to
310
Critical systems practice
Table 15.3
Constitutive rules for a generic emancipatory systems methodology.
1. An emancipatory systems methodology is a structured way of thinking, with an
attachment to the emancipatory theoretical rationale, and is focused on improving
real-world problem situations.
2. An emancipatory systems methodology uses systems ideas as the basis for its inter-
vention strategy and will frequently employ methods, models, tools and techniques
that also draw on systems ideas.
3. The claim to have used a systems methodology according to the emancipatory
rationale must be justi¢ed according to the following guidelines:
a. an assumption is made that the real world can be systemic in a manner alienating
to individuals and/or oppressive to particular social groups;
b. analysis of the problem situation must take into account who is disadvantaged by
current systemic arrangements;
c. models are constructed that respond to the sources of alienation and oppression;
d. models are used that allow everyone to participate properly in addressing the
problem situation;
e. quantitative analysis may be useful especially to capture particular biases in exist-
ing systemic arrangements;
f. the process of intervention is systemic and is aimed at ensuring fairness;
g. intervention is conducted in such a way that the alienated and/or oppressed
begin to take responsibility for their own liberation;
h. changes designed to improve the position of the alienated and/or oppressed are
evaluated primarily in terms of empowerment and emancipation.
4. Since an emancipatory systems methodology can be used in di¡erent ways in
di¡erent situations and interpreted di¡erently by di¡erent users, each use should
exhibit conscious thought about how to adapt to the particular circumstances.
5. Each use of an emancipatory systems methodology should yield research ¢ndings as
well as changing the real-world problem situation. These research ¢ndings may
relate: to the theoretical rationale underlying the methodology; to the methodology
itself and how to use it; to the methods, models, tools and techniques employed;
to the real-world problem situation investigated; or to all of these.

help the interpretive, emancipatory or postmodern systems methodologies.
Of course, it will have to prove its worth, particularly when it ¢nds itself
serving purposes very far from those originally intended. As long as we
consciously monitor the performance of methods, models and techniques
Description of critical systems practice (CSP)
311
Table 15.4
Constitutive rules for a generic postmodern systems ‘methodology’.
1. Postmodern systems practice is a way of thinking and acting, with an attachment to
the postmodern theoretical rationale, and is focused on improving real-world
problem situations.
2. Postmodern systems practice uses systemic and antisystemic ideas as the basis for its
intervention strategy and will frequently employ methods, models, tools and
techniques that also draw on systems ideas.
3. The claim to have used systems thinking and systems ideas according to the post-
modern rationale may be sustained locally according to the following guidelines:
a. an assumption that the real-world is constructed in such a way through discourse
that particular groups and/or individuals are marginalized;
b. intervention in the problem situation is designed to reveal who is marginalized
by existing power/knowledge structures;
c. diverse forms of pluralism are used to surface subjugated discourses and to allow
marginalized voices to be heard;
d. diverse forms of pluralism are used to allow relevant stakeholders to express
their diversity and, possibly, grant a ‘consent to act’;
e. quantitative analysis is unlikely to be used except as part of the process of
deconstruction;
f. the process of intervention takes the form of local strategizing and subversion in
an endeavour to promote diversity;
g. the intervention is conducted in such a way that con£ict is reclaimed, and
diversity and creativity are encouraged;
h. changes are evaluated on the basis of exception and emotion.
4. Since postmodern systems practice can take di¡erent forms in di¡erent situations
and be interpreted di¡erently by di¡erent users, each use should exhibit conscious
thought and/or an emotional response about how to adapt to the particular
circumstances.
5. Each case of postmodern systems practice may yield research ¢ndings as well as
changing the real-world problem situation. These ¢ndings may relate: to the
theoretical rationale underlying the practice; to the ‘methodology’ for applying a
postmodern systems approach; to the methods, models, tools and techniques
employed; to the real-world problem situation investigated; or to all of these.

against what we expect them to achieve for di¡erent methodologies, we will
continually learn just how £exible we can be in their use.
In summary, CSP allows practitioners the greatest possible freedom in
their choice of models, tools and techniques ^ as long as it is clear which
generic systems methodology they are being employed to help. CSP can
draw methods from the full range of existing systems methodologies, and
anywhere else, as long as it uses them in an informed way.
It is necessary now to say something about what guidelines can be o¡ered
to help operationalize CSP.
312
Critical systems practice
Table 15.5
The CSP metamethodology.
Creativity
Task
To highlight signi¢cant concerns, issues and problems
Tools
Creativity-enhancing devices employed to ensure that the
perspectives of the four paradigms receive proper attention
Outcome
Dominant and dependent concerns, issues and problems
Choice
Task
To choose an appropriate generic systems methodology or
methodologies and a variety of suitable methods, models and
techniques
Tools
Methods for revealing the strengths and weaknesses of
methodologies, methods, tools and techniques, including paradigm
analysis, previous experience, etc.
Outcome
Dominant and dependent generic systems methodologies and
appropriate methods, etc. chosen for use
Implementation
Task
To arrive at and implement speci¢c positive change proposals
Tools
Generic systems methodologies and appropriate methods, etc.
employed according to the logic of CSP
Outcome
Highly relevant and co-ordinated change, which secures signi¢cant
improvement in the problem situation according to the concerns of
the di¡erent paradigms
Re£ection
Task
To produce learning about the problem situation, the
metamethodology itself, the generic systems methodologies and the
methods, etc. used
Tools
Clear understanding of the current state of knowledge about these
Outcome
Research ¢ndings that, for example, feed back into improving
earlier stages of the metamethodology

I have, elsewhere (Jackson, 2000), compared the critical systems prac-
titioner with a holistic doctor. Confronted by a patient with pains in her
stomach, the doctor might initially consider standard explanations, such as
overindulgence, period pains or irritable bowel syndrome. If the patient
failed to respond to the usual treatment prescribed on the basis of an initial
diagnosis you would expect the doctor to entertain the possibility of some
more deep-seated and dangerous malady. The patient might be sent for X-
ray, body scan or other tests designed to search for such structural problems.
If nothing was found, a thoughtful conversation with the patient might
suggest that the pains were a symptom of anxiety and depression. Various
forms of counselling or psychological support could be o¡ered. Or,
perhaps, a knowledge of the patient’s domestic circumstances, and bruises
elsewhere on the body, might reveal that the patient was su¡ering at the
hands of aviolent partner.What shouldthe doctordo inthese circumstances?
Finally, perhaps the patient just needs another interest ^ such as painting or
golf ^ to take her mind o¡ worries at work.
We would expect a ‘holistic’ doctor to be open to all these possibilities and
to have appropriate responses and ‘treatments’ available. To my mind, the
critical systems practitioner, probing with his or her functionalist (positivist
and structuralist), interpretive, emancipatory and postmodern perspectives,
is similarly taking a holistic approach to organizational and societal
problems.
We can illuminate the procedure further if we return to the conception of
dominant and dependent methodologies that was present in the original
TSI. It was argued that the di⁄culties associated with multiparadigm
practice can be managed if an initial choice of dominant methodology is
made, to run the intervention, with a dependent methodology (or methodol-
ogies), re£ecting alternative paradigms, in the background. The relationship
between dominant and dependent methodologies can then change as the
intervention proceeds in order to maintain £exibility at the methodology
level. In our medical analogy, above, the doctor began with the equivalent
of a functionalist methodology as dominant, but was willing to shift to
interpretive, emancipatory or postmodern methodologies as required.
This remains, for me, an extremely powerful idea because it allows the in-
tervention to proceed in a theoretically informed way (making research poss-
ible), and with less confusion to the participants, while as far as feasible
protecting paradigm diversity. As long as we are explicit about our initially
dominant methodology and are ready to switch paradigm and methodology,
then that initial choice does not exclude us from introducing alternative
methodologies, based on di¡erent paradigms, as required.
Description of critical systems practice (CSP)
313

There is stilltheissue of what would make us switch methodology once an
intervention has begun. Let us say we begin an intervention with the inter-
pretive approach as dominant. It is possible that an occasion will arise when
a model introduced, simply to enhance mutual understanding, will appear
to ‘capture’ so well the logic of the problem situation that a shift to a func-
tionalist position will seem justi¢able. The model will then be taken as a
representation of reality and a shift made, which establishes the functionalist
methodology as dominant. Similarly, there will be occasions when the
ethics of the analyst or relevant stakeholders are so o¡ended that the shift
to an emancipatory rationale becomes clearly necessary. And, ¢nally, it may
sometimes seem appropriate, in the interests of subverting tradition
and introducing some fun into an organization, to adopt a postmodern
orientation.
For completeness, it should be remarked that there is some theoretical
justi¢cation for the strategy of alternating dominant and dependent meth-
odologies. The philosopher Althusser (see Jackson, 2000) conceived the
social totality as a system that, at various times, is dominated by one of its
‘instances’: economic, political, theoretical, ideological, etc. In order to act
to change the social totality, Althusser argued, you need to understand the
relationships between these ‘instances’, how each is developing and which
one is dominant in a particular era of history. We are simply replacing the
notion of alternating, dominant ‘instances’ with the idea of ‘improving
goal seeking and viability’, ‘exploring purposes’, ‘ensuring fairness’and ‘pro-
moting diversity’, each becoming the dominant concern of an organization
for some period of time.
There are two other sets of ideas that can help us further enhance the way
we use CSP.
Checkland’s distinction between Mode 1 and Mode 2 uses of SSM (see
Chapter 10) can, with bene¢t, be transferred to CSP. An academic, imbued
with CSP and in a position to set up a study, is likely to start from the
metamethodological level, choose dominant and dependent methodologies
and operate with a range of methods and models appropriate to the method-
ology dominant at a particular time. This allows the academic, according to
his or her inclinations, to research the process of critique between paradigms,
the theoretical assumptions of the paradigms, the robustnessof themethodo-
logical rules, and the usefulness of certain tools and techniques for serving
a particular purpose. This would be a formal Mode 1 use of CSP, where the
metamethodology guides the intervention. A CSP-aware manager or
management consultant will, on the other hand, be more likely to use CSP
in a Mode 2 manner. The intervention will be dominated by the concerns
314
Critical systems practice

and pressures of the immediate problem situation. The participants will
employ whatever methods, tools and techniques happen to come readily to
hand. However, the metamethodology might be used, during the course of
the intervention, to help those involved re£ect on what was happening and
perhaps open up new possibilities. CSP could also be employed, after the
event, to analyse what had occurred and draw research lessons from the inter-
vention. In practice, most actual applications are likely to be somewhere
between the extremes of Mode 1 and Mode 2.
Second, it is worth reminding the reader of two other forms of ‘pluralism’
that have not been given much attention hitherto by CSP, but have been
brought to the fore by Taket and White (2000) using their postmodern
lens. These are (see Chapter 13) pluralism ‘in the modes of representation
employed’ and ‘in the facilitation process’. CSP will be enhanced once it
embraces these additional aspects of pluralism.
15.2.5
Recent developments
In this chapterI have begun to sketch out a research programme that will lead
to new developments in CSP. This includes: testing the various methods,
models, tools and techniques available in the service of di¡erent rationalities;
clarifying the constitutive rules for the di¡erent generic methodologies and
ensuring they transfer the propositions of the di¡erent paradigms into
practice; reviewing the philosophy and theory of each paradigm against
what happens in practice; and learning better how to facilitate re£ective
conversation at the metamethodological level.
This research programme is under way and, in the next section, we review
one CSP intervention that produced some very interesting results.
15.3
CRITICAL SYSTEMS PRACTICE (CSP) IN ACTION
The intervention took place in Kingston Gas Turbines (KGT) over a three-
year period, between 1997 and 2000. KGT has been in the business of manu-
facturing gas turbines since 1946 and, at the time of the study, employed
around 2,000 personnel. KGT’s existing structure was of a ‘matrix’ type,
with the primary design, sales, production and production-support depart-
ments cross-cut by support functions, such as ¢nance, quality, human
resources, information technology, plant maintenance and contracts. In
1997 it embarked on an ambitious ‘double the business’ strategy. As part of
Critical systems practice (CSP) in action
315

this, all sta¡ were to participate in interdisciplinary teams, which would seek
to analyse and solve the company’s problems.
The intervention was carried out by Alvaro Carrizosa, ¢rst as an MSc
student and then as a change agent/researcher, funded by the company and,
at the same time, undertaking a PhD. I was his academic supervisor. The
intervention has been described before: in detail in Carrizosa (2002) and in
outline in Jackson (2000). The aim here is not to replicate these reports, but
to use the intervention to illustrate the main elements of CSP as set out
earlier in this chapter.
The three-year intervention can be seen as evolving through ¢ve
‘projects’, labelled here Projects 1^5.
Project 1 was undertaken for the Proposals Department, which was
responsible for working up formal tenders to submit to customers for jobs.
This ‘proposals’ project was concerned with the consequences of the
‘double the business’ strategy for the way the department managed its
internal and external relations.
Brief £irtations with hard systems thinking and organizational cybernetics
as dominant methodologies (the idea of generic systems methodologies had
not been fully formulated) ended because of the degree of pluralism in the
problem situation. The SOSM pointed to a soft, or interpretive, approach
as an appropriate response, and this remained dominant during the rest of
Project 1.
The various issues and problems facing the Proposals Department were
unearthed through interviews and informal conversations and captured in a
rich picture. Discussion of the rich picture yielded various themes that
demanded further consideration: communication themes, structure themes,
uncertainty themes, e⁄ciency themes and roles themes. Metaphor analysis
was used to engender creative thinking about possible futures that would
dissolve the problemsas they currently existed. Participants were encouraged
to develop their own original metaphors, but the TSI ‘set’ was also employed
to ensure that the perspectives of the di¡erent paradigms were all taken into
account. In general terms, the participants favoured the ‘organism’ metaphor
as a way of viewing what the future should be like. It seemed necessary to
become more customer- and market-orientated in order to survive and
prosper in what was becoming an extremely turbulent environment. The
project, at this point, inevitably started to involve the Sales Department,
and ¢ve ‘relevant’ systems were outlined that described structures for sales
that would enable it to react more £exibly to the environment. The VSM
was used to explore one of these alternatives. The outcome of considering
possible ‘feasible and desirable’ changes was recommendations for changing
316
Critical systems practice

the structure of the Sales Department to give it more of a project manage-
ment orientation.
The success of this project led to Alvaro being hired by KGT to help with
Project 2, which was about organization structure. This was called the PIT
project because it was undertaken by a group of middle managers known
as the Process Implementation Team (PIT Group). It arose as a result of
dissatisfaction with previous restructurings, which had established the
matrix and the various interdisciplinary teams spread across the company.
There was a feeling that the technical knowledge, on which the engineers
prided themselves, was becoming diluted because they were no longer in
such close contact with one another. Moreover, the capacity to transmit
information and learning from one part of the organization to another also
seemed to be reduced.
Project 2 was governed throughout, we can see now, by functionalism.
The main impact of systems thinking was to signi¢cantly expand the bound-
aries of what was being looked at. So, what began as a search for solutions
in terms of the layout of o⁄ces and departments turned into a review of
communication systems generally, then organizational structures, then to
the vision and strategy that needed, in the minds of the members of the
PIT Group, to inform organizational structure. Receiving little help from
top management on vision and strategy, the PIT Group seized the opportu-
nity to focus on ¢ve business processes that had a direct link to the market.
A new organizational structure was proposed built around these business
processes. The new arrangements were presented to top management and,
following some minor changes, were approved for immediate implementa-
tion without further consultation.
Project 3 ^ ‘the thinking space’ ^ was born of the realization by those
middle managers charged with implementation that not all members of the
organization understood, let alone agreed with, the changes proposed by
the PIT Group and now adopted by senior management. They determined
to setup a forum for discussion about howthe reorganization shouldactually
be implemented. They hoped this would help ameliorate any negative
consequences that might follow from the autocratic way in which plans for
the new structure were adopted and imposed. The focus became what
characteristics a thinking space should have in order to permit open discus-
sion of how implementation might proceed. It was felt all participants
should be able to disseminate their views and re£ections on the evolving
situation. This sharing of multiple perspectives would help promote and
enrich communication, re£ection and learning, and eventually encourage
Critical systems practice (CSP) in action
317

co-operation among those involved. Alvaro’s role was to constantly bring
new perspectives to bear on the issues being discussed.
The dominant generic systems methodologies, during Project 3, were the
interpretive and the emancipatory, with the postmodern in a subsidiary
role. This can be seen as a reaction to the overwhelming functionalist
rationale that dominated Project 2. The aim becameto increase the ‘collective
competence’ of those directly contributing to the thinking space and even
among those who were not contributing, but nevertheless were interacting
with those involved. To assist in achieving this, rich pictures, root
de¢nitions, conceptual models, the VSM, system dynamics models and
metaphors were all introduced and used. Carrizosa (2000) lists the ‘properties
and characteristics’ of the thinking space as they were eventually code¢ned
by the researcher and the participants:
.
an action language, focusing on actors and activities in everyday work;
.
structured conversations that helped the actors address the most relevant
issues;
.
coequal actors engaging in equal participation and able to freely express
their viewpoints;
.
a systems approach that helps actors de¢ne what is important to them;
.
an activity,a way of doing and acting, not another company programme;
.
the researcher as actor;
.
a dynamic process.
The thinking space, enacted on this basis, played an important role in en-
couraging participation and learning during the various projects undertaken
as the new organizational structure was implemented. Its success led to the
idea that it should become a permanent part of continuous learning in the
company beyond the implementation activity. Projects 4 and 5 stemmed
from this ambition.
Project 4 ^ ‘the book’ ^ consisted of writing a book about the experiences
of participants in implementing the new organizational structure. The
book was produced in an interactive manner with di¡erent actors contrib-
uting their thoughts on change processes and how they could be brought
about e¡ectively. The multiple perspectives available from the participants
were further enriched by discussing Senge’s ideas on organizational learning
(see Chapter 5) and relevant aspects of complexity theory derived from the
work of Stacey (see Chapter 7). As well as allowing self-re£ection, and
exchange and enhancement of viewpoints, the book permitted issues of
power relations and constraints on action to be addressed. The book
318
Critical systems practice

allowed the participants to structure and share their thoughts on Project 3
and so consolidate their learning. The new ‘organization theory’ that was
then held in common, and objecti¢ed in the book, could become the basis
for new purposeful action.
The book project continued the pursuit of the interpretive and emancipa-
tory rationales established in Project 3 (with the postmodern ‘dependent’)
through the very novel device of cowriting a book. It remained open how
the experience of cowriting and the contents of the book would be taken
forward in later problem-resolving exercises.
In fact, Project 5, addressing the problem of creating ‘an integrated
business approach’ in KGT, drew upon both the book and the knowledge
gained of what was required for a thinking space. Known as ‘the walls
workshops’, Project 5 allowed participants to engage in completely open
communication about the complex issues facing KGT and how to tackle
them. Everyone was encouraged to contribute and, once discussions on a
particular issue had reached a certain level, to represent the results on walls
accessible to all actors. The representations were in the form of systems
diagrams and various other visual artefacts. They expressed possible
options and actions to be taken, new perceptions and interpretations of
problems, possible causes and e¡ects, suggestions for local and more global
improvements, etc. The representations could be continuously modi¢ed
and updated. The discussions taking place were therefore available for
scrutiny, validation or revision, and feedback. By the end of the project this
approach had become readily accepted in KGT and was still being used in
2002.
The walls workshops project clearly had a strong postmodern element to
it, as well as continuing the emancipatory and interpretive themes established
in Projects 3 and 4.
The intervention in KGT illustrates most aspects of good CSP.
The critical systems commitments of critical awareness, pluralism and
improvement were honoured throughout. The change agent/researcher
brought with him some critical awareness of the strengths and weaknesses
of di¡erent systems approaches, and this was revisited by himself and
others as experience was gained of their use in the particular circumstances
of KGT. Improvement was a constant theme and was judged, in the di¡erent
projects, according to the concerns of a wide variety of paradigms and
methodologies. Pluralism was adhered to in a variety of ways. Most of the
projects had clearly de¢ned creativity, choice and implementation phases
(though not always in that order!) and pluralism was used in each of these.
At the theoretical level, as the intervention progressed, pluralism began to
Critical systems practice (CSP) in action
319

take on the sophisticated form of a pluralism of ‘generic systems method-
ologies’. At the level of methods, the freedom to mix and match was fully
exploited. There was an instance (Project 1) of the VSM used in support of
a dominant interpretive methodology. In Project 3, system dynamic
models and the VSM were employed alongside rich pictures, root
de¢nitions, conceptual models, etc.
There were numerous shifts of dominant and dependent methodologies
during the intervention. Project 1 started as functionalist, but ended as
interpretive. Project 2 was functionalist. Project 3 and 4 were governed by
interpretive and emancipatory rationales, with postmodernism in the back-
ground. In Project 5 postmodernism came forward to share dominance
with the interpretive and emancipatory approaches.
The KGT intervention began as a Mode 1 exercise, but soon became more
Mode 2. By the time of Project 3, the situation was very de¢nitely deter-
mining what aspects of systems thinking could be usefully brought to the
intervention. The change agent/researcher was continually having to learn
more systemsthinkinginorder to keep up and re£ecton whatwas happening
in the problem situation. At a further step removed from the action, I was
trying, in a Mode 2 manner, to make sense of what was going on with
reference to critical systems thinking.
The metamethodology of CSP certainly showed itself to be responsive to
the changing circumstances in KGT, adapting its dominant methodologies
as necessary and using a vast array of methods, models, tools and techniques
as they became suitable. Its natural £exibility with respect to clients, meth-
odologies and methods was added to, in postmodern terms, by pluralism in
the use of di¡erent ‘modes of representation’ and ‘facilitation’. Indeed, it is
in these areas that the intervention demonstrated much of its originality.
Finally, CSP proved itself as an approach to action research. As well as
bringing about changes in KGT, much was learned about CST and CSP.
Carrizosa (2002) details learning in respect of ‘pluralism’, ‘improvement’
and the ‘roleof the agent’. Even more signi¢cant, perhaps,are hisconjectures
about the particular situations in which CSP can be properly operationalized.
He calls these circumstances ‘platforms’ and sets out two elements that
must be present for such platforms to come into existence. First, facilitator(s)
and participants must be willing to engage in pursuing ‘collective
competence’ ^ part of which will mean them becoming competent in multi-
methodology practice. Second, the involved actors need to see what they
are doing as a continuous mutual research endeavour.
The KGT project was an exhilarating experience. The period 1997^2000
was a time of great turbulence in KGT, with new ownership structures,
320
Critical systems practice

changes in organization design and major initiatives of all kinds. At times it
seemed that the only thing that did remain constant was the existence of
our critical systems study, exploring purposeful change in KGT. The
change agent/researcher and his supervisor emerged even more convinced
of the need to employ, in intervention, a pluralism of perspectives and theo-
retical positions and to use methods and models according to the needs of
the particular moment.
15.4
CRITIQUE OF CRITICAL SYSTEMS PRACTICE (CSP)
The purpose of creative holism is to learn about and harness the various
systems methodologies, methods, models and techniques so that they can
best be used by managers to respond to the complexity, turbulence and
heterogeneity of the problem situations they face today. As we saw in
Chapter 14, it was a criticism of TSI that, because it was reliant on the
methodologies and associated methods that it had inherited, it lacked a
degree of responsiveness in addressing complex, dynamic and diverse
problem situations. CSP has sought to overcome the problems of TSI in
order that the promise of creative holism can be realized.
A key element in this has been the delimitation in CSP of the four generic
systems methodologies seen as relevant during each of its phases. In order
to be holistic during creativity it is necessary to view the problem situation
from the perspectives of the functionalist, interpretive, emancipatory and
postmodern paradigms ^ often mediated through the range of metaphors.
Choice and implementation too bene¢t from consideration and use of
methodologies clearly owing allegiance to di¡erent paradigms. It is again
the complexity, heterogeneity and turbulence of problem situations that
suggest systems practitioners need a pluralism that encourages the use
together of di¡erent methodologies based on alternative paradigms. We
should seek to bene¢t from what each paradigm has to o¡er. This is not to
dismiss the usefulness of sometimes employing just one methodology, in
an ‘imperialist’ fashion, to guide the use of a variety of methods, tools and
techniques. But, it is to insist that such an approach needs to be followed
self-consciously and in a way that permits change of paradigmatic orienta-
tion. Pluralism can provide its greatest bene¢ts only in the context of
paradigm diversity.
Three further strengths of CSP can also be associated with the develop-
ment of the generic systems methodologies.
Critique of critical systems practice (CSP)
321

First, they o¡er us very di¡erent ways of evaluating the success of an
intervention. Functionalism looks for e⁄ciency and e⁄cacy, the interpretive
approach for e¡ectiveness and elegance, the emancipatory approach for
empowerment and emancipation, while postmodernism values exceptions
and engaging the emotions. We will not succeed on all these criteria in any
one intervention, but it seems bene¢cial to pay attention to all of them over
some longer period of involvement.
Second, the generic systems methodologies have eased the separation of
methods, models and techniques from the host methodologies they were
originally developed to serve. They can now be employed freely, as required
by the problem situation, as long as this is consciously in the service of one
or other of the generic methodologies. TSI dealt in whole methodologies,
like organizational cybernetics or Soft Systems Methodology (SSM). It is
now possible to break these up and extract relevant methods so that, for
example, the VSM can be used alongside root de¢nitions and conceptual
models. This gives systems practitioners immense £exibility. They are able
to draw on a wide variety of tools, from whatever source, and employ
them in combination to respond to the complexities of the problem situation
they are intervening in and the dynamics of that situation as it changes.
And they can still use them in an ‘informed’ way.
Finally, it is essential that managers and their advisors are in a position
continually to improve the CSP metamethodology, and the methodology
and methods it uses. The generic systems methodologies assist by enabling
research to take place. They are clear about the theoretical assumptions on
which they are built and how they seek to convert these into practice. It is
therefore possible to re£ect on how valuable the di¡erent paradigms are in
helping us to understand the social world and to improve the performance
of the methodologies designed to apply their insights. By ensuring they are
consciously employed in the service of one of the generic methodologies,
we can also gauge the usefulness of methods, models and techniques for
di¡erent tasks and try to improve them.
Of course, critics will point to certain issues that CSP has not yet fully
addressed. The critical systems practitioner is required to hop between
con£icting paradigms. Often he or she will be operating from within a
paradigm to explore a problem situation and intervene in it according to
the dictates of that paradigm. He or she then needs to move to other
paradigms to critique what he or she has been doing to that point and to
see if the problem situation needs reconceptualizing. We have already
noted Brocklesby’s (1997) concern about the severe ‘cognitive di⁄culties’
faced by individuals required to work in di¡erent paradigms. In his view
322
Critical systems practice

it is unlikely, if by no means impossible, for individuals to become
multimethodology-literate. But there is an even greater concern stemming
from the same source.
CST has abandoned the claim, based on Habermas’ work and under-
pinning TSI, to have metaparadigmatic status. CSP manages relationships
between paradigms that it knows are incommensurable. What, therefore,
does the systems practitioner do when the paradigms start telling him or
her di¡erent things and pushing him or her to act in di¡erent ways? An
easy solution (apparently approved by Midgley, 2000) is always to favour
one paradigm over the others. The answer to the questions ‘how should we
view this problem situation?’ and ‘what should we do now?’ can always
then be provided, in the last resort, by the preferred paradigm. But, this is
‘theoretical imperialism’ and is ruled out for CSP because of its ultimate
commitment to pluralism at the theoretical level. The way forward, and it
seems a sensible one, is to value the fact that, while CSP can provide the
manager or systems practitioner with holistic awareness and guidance, it
cannot ultimately take responsibility for choice away from her or him.
Managers, informed by creative holism, still have decisions to make that
will draw on their own ethical positions, their own conceptions of right
and wrong.
Of course, we are then dragged back into discussion with postmodernists
about the methodology-user and the particular social context that has
formed his or her identity. As Midgley (1997) argues, any approach to plur-
alism in systems thinking must take into account the dynamic interaction
that occurs between the subject who wishes to take action and the power^
knowledge formations that form the identity of the subject. This is interest-
ing and important stu¡.
15.5
THE VALUE OF CRITICAL SYSTEMS PRACTICE (CSP)
TO MANAGERS
The ¢ve primary bene¢ts listed for TSI are preserved in CSP. The following
¢ve points are, therefore, in addition to those:
.
CSP reduces the multitude of di¡erent systems methodologies to just
four generic types.
.
At the same time CSP provides managers with access to all the various
methods, models, tools and techniques developed as part of those
The value of critical systems practice (CSP) to managers
323

methodologies. Thisistheirtoolkit from which they can freely (and in an
informed manner) choose, as circumstances demand.
.
CSP is clear that, although considerable guidance of a holistic nature can
be provided to managers, they will still be confronted with ethical
choices.
.
CSP points to the need to evaluate management action, in the long-term,
using measures based on e⁄ciency, e⁄cacy, e¡ectiveness, elegance,
empowerment, emancipation, exception, emotion ^ and ethics.
.
CSP eases the task of doing research, as well as taking action, in the
managerial domain. Managers should therefore bene¢t from action
researchers continually updating and improving CSP.
15.6
CONCLUSION
CSP provides a basis for action research and must continue to develop by
enhancing the theory^practice relationship. An appropriate research
programme is in place, and this should ensure the further development of
creative holism.
Another vital element is the establishment of more educational and
training programmes that embrace the challenges of teaching CST and
CSP. In this way the ‘cognitive’ and ‘cultural’ constraints preventing the
wider adoption of creative holism by managers and systems practitioners
can be overcome.
REFERENCES
Brocklesby, J. (1994). Let the jury decide: Assessing the cultural feasibility of
Total Systems Intervention. Systems Practice, 7, 75^86.
Brocklesby, J. (1997). Becoming multimethodology literate: An assessment of
the cognitive di⁄culties of working across paradigms. In: J. Mingers and A.
Gill (eds), Multimethodology: The Theory and Practice of Combining Management
Science Methodologies (pp. 189^216). John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Carrizosa, A. (2000). Enacting thinking spaces towards purposeful actions: An
action research project. Unpublished paper, University of Lincoln, UK.
Carrizosa, A. (2002). Platforms for critical systems practice. PhD thesis, Univer-
sity of Lincoln, UK.
Checkland, P.B. (1999). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK (with a 30-year retrospective).
324
Critical systems practice

Checkland, P.B. and Scholes, P. (1990). Soft Systems Methodology in Action. John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. (1990). Liberating Systems Theory: On Systems and Inquiry. Plenum, New
York.
Flood, R.L. and Jackson, M.C. (1991). Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Flood, R.L. and Romm, N.R.A. (1996). Diversity Management: Triple Loop
Learning. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Gregory, W.J. (1992). Critical systems thinking and pluralism: A new constella-
tion. PhD thesis, City University, London.
Gregory, W.J. (1996). Discordant pluralism: A new strategy for critical systems
thinking? Systems Practice, 9, 605^625.
Jackson, M.C. (2000). Systems Approaches to Management. Kluwer/Plenum, New
York.
Midgley, G. (1997). Mixing methods: Developing systemic intervention. In: J.
Mingers and A. Gill (eds), Multimethodology: the Theory and Practice of Combining
Management Science Methodologies (pp. 291^332). John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK.
Midgley, G. (2000). Systemic Intervention: Philosophy, Methodology and Practice.
Kluwer/Plenum, New York.
Mingers, J.C. and Brocklesby, J. (1996). Multimethodology: Towards a
framework for mixing methodologies. Omega, 25, 489^509.
Mingers, J.C. and Gill, A. (1997). Multimethodology ^ The Theory and Practice of
Combining Management Science Methodologies. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
UK.
Morgan, G. (ed.) (1983). Beyond Method: Strategies for Social Research. Sage
Publications, Beverley Hills, CA.
Munro, I. and Mingers, J. (2002). The use of multimethodology in practice:
Results of a survey of practitioners. Journal of the Operational Research Society,
53, 369^378.
Pirsig, R.M. (1974). Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance. Bodley Head,
London.
Taket, A.R. and White, L.A. (2000). Partnership and Participation: Decision-making
in the Multiagency Setting. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
References
325


Conclusion
Creative holism, a new development in systems thinking, wants to provide
managers with the joint bene¢ts of holism and creativity so that they can
do their jobs better. Holism by itself confers many advantages over tradi-
tional, reductionist approaches in dealing with complexity, change and
diversity. As systems thinking has developed it has discovered a variety of
di¡erent ways of being holistic, based on di¡erent paradigms and metaphors.
We are now able, therefore, to be creative in the way we approach being
holistic. Creative holism enables us to use di¡erent systems approaches,
re£ecting alternative holistic perspectives, in combination. Perhaps we
cannot use all the various systems approaches at once, but they can be
employed creatively, over time, to promote together overall improvement
in the problem situations managers face. This is the essence of creative
holism.
No doubt creative holism will seem di⁄cult. But then, managerial work is
becoming more complex, turbulent and diverse. Most managers are likely
to ¢nd themselves, on a regular basis, confronted by messes made up of
interacting issues, such as the need to increase productivity, become more
market-centred, improve communications, adopt fairer recruitment and
promotion strategies, and motivate a diverse workforce. They will also ¢nd
themselves having to prioritize between the demands made on them
because of lack of time and resources. They cannot tackle them all at once.
This all seems like common sense. Creative holism is in tune with this
common sense. It recognizes that excellent organizational performance
depends on managers paying attention to improving goal seeking and
viability, exploring purposes, ensuring fairness and promoting diversity.
And it o¡ers critical systems practice, which provides guidelines on how to
tackle in a holistic and balanced way, using various systems approaches, the
messes that managers so often confront. Creative holism responds to the
everyday problem situations that managers have to deal with.

It is one of the satisfactions of systems thinking that its insights translate
between levels. If we move beyond the organizational to the societal and
world levels, we ¢nd that the same imperatives for improvement, high-
lighted by creative holism, continue to be crucial. We are unlikely to
improve things unless we pay attention to e⁄ciency and e¡ectiveness,
mutual understanding, fairness and diversity. And we need to understand
the interactions between these and treat them holistically. Few of us will
get the opportunity to practise our systems thinking on the world stage.
Perhaps, though, if we pay attention to each and all of these things, as
managers in organizations, our actions will have a resonance beyond our
immediate environments and, in some way, contribute to global improve-
ment. This is a nice thought. Most managers, as well as doing a good job,
would like to make things better rather than worse for future generations.
328
Conclusion

Index
360 degree appraisals 125
accidental adversaries archetype 72
accommodations, temporary
accommodations 186
achievements, organizations 99^100
Acko¡, R. L. 23, 138, 155, 157^78, 204,
206, 224^5
action research programmes 182^4,
208, 307^24
activators, control engineering 8^9
actors, soft systems methodology
187^208
actuality levels, achievement 99^100
adaptation needs 158^78
adversarial principle, strategic
assumption surfacing and testing
142^54
aesthetics 140
agenda generation, team syntegrity
239^50
aircraft industry 59
algebraic equations 55^6
allocation models 58
alternatives
assumptions 33^41, 74, 139^54,
288^9
systems analysis 52^3
systems thinking 124^5, 139^54,
277^8
Althusser, L. 314
Alvesson, M. 34, 38, 257, 271
ambivalence 36^7
analogic models 55^6
analysis phase, soft systems
methodology 183^4
analytic models 55^6
anarchy allegations, postmodernists
272
animated systems 174^5
antithesis 5, 26, 140
anxiety, complexity theory 123^32
applied social science 157
applied systems thinking 15^29
see also systems thinking
concepts 15^29
development 17^24
historical background 17^24
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
21^4
main strands 24^8
overview 17^29, 43^5
appraisals, 360 degree appraisals 125
archaeology, knowledge 258^9, 265
archetypes, system dynamics 70,
71^84, 121
Argyris, C. 167
Aristotle 4^5
Ashby, W. R. 9, 88^9, 101, 234^5
assumption rating method, strategic
assumption surfacing and testing
144^54

assumption speci¢cation method,
strategicassumption surfacing and
testing 144^54
assumption surfacing stage, strategic
assumption surfacing and testing
143^54
assumptions 20^6, 33^41, 74, 139^54,
288^9
alternatives 33^41, 74, 139^54,
288^9
creative challenges 33^41, 74
critical systems heuristics 218^31
hard systems thinking 20^1
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 23^4, 26, 40, 137^54
autonomic management 94^5, 108^9
autopoiesis theory 7, 87^8, 109
balanced scorecard 168
balancing process with delay archetype
71^2
balancing variety concepts 9
Baudrillard, J. 257, 260
Beer, S. 23, 27, 40, 85^110, 175, 224^6,
233^51
Being 256^7
beliefs 19^24, 35^9
hard systems thinking 20^1
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
19^24
Bell Telephone Laboratories 48^9, 52
below the line systems thinking, soft
systems methodology 187^209
Beyond Dispute: The Invention of Team
Syntegrity (Beer) 234, 242
biases 20, 23, 37
hard systems thinking 20, 54^5
interactive planning 175^6, 178
organizations 37
postmodernist 265^6
viable system model 108
biology interactions 3^4, 5^7, 11, 13,
116, 118
black box, concepts 8, 22, 86^110
Blake, W. 161
bottom-up processes 138, 147^50
boundaries
advantaged/disadvantaged parties
147
concepts 5^7, 10^11, 34, 61, 67^8,
147, 214^15
critical systems heuristics 214^31
judgements 214^31
organisms 5^7, 31^2
purposeful systems 10^11, 147
bounded designs 163^5
Brain of the Firm (Beer) 86^7
brain metaphor 34^5, 38^40, 85^111,
131, 153, 177, 206, 228, 288^97
brainstorming sessions 153, 241, 288
Brocklesby, J. 256, 265, 296, 303^5,
322^3
Brown, M. 222
Buddha 301
building shared vision discipline 74
bulletin boards 125^8
Burrell, G. 38, 255, 281^2
Business Dynamics (Sterman) 78
business process re-engineering 168
butter£y e¡ect 11^12, 80, 114
capability levels, achievement 99^100
Capra, F. 3
carnival metaphor 34, 36^7, 39^40,
109, 253, 271^2
Carrizosa, A. 316^20
CARs 101^6
CATWOE 187^96, 322
causal loop diagrams 70^8, 80^1, 296
causal loop modelling 69^78, 80^1,
257, 296
Cavaleri, S. 58, 80
Cavana, R.Y. 69
CDA see Humberside Co-operative
Development Agency
centrality, discourses 258
330
Index

centralization, decentralization 89,
108^9, 269^70
change 4, 7, 18^19, 43, 61^2, 327^8
adaptation needs 158^78
complexity theory 11^12, 22^4,
25^6, 40, 80, 113^33
resistance issues 7, 139^40, 259^60
systems age 157^61
‘trojanmice’ changes 121, 125
turbulence 132, 269^70, 327^8
chaos theory 11^12, 25^6, 80, 113^33
see also complexity theory
historical background 113^15
Lorenz attractor 116^18
Checkland, P. B. 16, 22^3, 47, 51, 54,
155, 181^209, 278, 281^2, 296,
307, 314^15
chemistry 11^12, 116^18
Chile 86, 101
choice phase
critical systems practice 306^24
total systems intervention 285^98,
306^7
Churchman, C. W. 51, 137^55, 158^9,
205^6, 214^15, 221, 227, 281
circular organizations, interactive
planning 165^78
civil society 221^2, 328
clients
see also stakeholders
critical systems heuristics 216^31
interactive planning 159^78
closed systems 6^7
concepts 6^7
co-operativeness issues 36
co-ordination 6^7
techniques 58
viable system model 90^110
coalition metaphor 288^97
coercive participants, ideal-type grid of
problem contexts 18^24, 36, 81,
152^3, 206, 211, 228^9, 249, 253,
271, 280^1, 284^97
cognitive mapping 267^8
Colombia 101^6, 242^7
commitments 23, 74, 282^98, 302^24
critical systems practice 302^24
total systems intervention 282^98,
302^3, 305^6
common sense 327^8
communications
concepts 7^9, 122^3, 216, 219^31
control engineering 7^9
protocols 238^50
team syntegrity 23^4, 27, 40, 74, 108,
233^52
communicative competence theory
216, 219^31
community operational research 157
comparators, control engineering 8^9
comparison tools, soft systems
methodology 191, 195^208
competitive models 58
competitiveness considerations 36
complex adaptive systems 21^2, 124^5,
204^6, 249^50
complex systems, ideal-type grid of
problem contexts 18^29, 83, 253,
271
complexity
hard systems thinking 16^17, 20^1,
61^2
systems 3^13, 16^24, 66^84, 327^8
complexity theory 11^12, 22^4, 25^6,
40, 80, 113^33, 283, 318^19
in action 124, 125^8
concepts 11^12, 22, 25^6, 80,
113^33
control parameters 123^4
critique 128^32
description 114^25
groupthink dangers 129^30
historical background 11^12,
113^15
Lorenz attractor 116^18
managers 119^23, 129^32
Index
331

methodology 119^23
methods 123^4
philosophy 115^19
recent developments 124^5
strange attractors 11^12, 22, 116^32
theory 115^19
value 128^32
weaknesses 129^32
computer models, system dynamics
65^84
Comte, A. 185
conceptual cleansing 197
conceptual models 55^6, 183^209, 296,
320
con£icts
alternative assumptions 141^2
goals 138
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
19^24, 26, 39
interactive planning 175^6
organizational cybernetics 97^8
postmodernists 256^74
shadow systems 122^32
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 138^55
wicked problems 141^55
connectivity, complexity theory
123^32
conservatism failings, hard systems
thinking 62
constitutive rules, generic systems
methodologies 307^15
consultants, viable system model 96
contained anxiety, complexity theory
123^32
contingency
postmodernists 256^74
theory 279
continuity principle, interactive
planning 161^78
continuous learning 26^7, 34^5,
125^8, 174^8
controls
see also feedback . . .
engineering 3^4, 7^9
interactive planning 162^78
conversations
generative conversations 266^7
re£ective conversations 304^5
Cooper, R. 255
corporate planning 157
cost^bene¢t analysis 16^17, 47
Creating the Corporate Future (Acko¡)
161
creative design of methods 222
creative holism 32^3, 41, 63, 178,
275^327
see also critical systems practice; total
systems intervention
concepts 32^3, 41, 63, 178, 275^327
managers 297^8, 322^4, 327^8
Creative Problem Solving: Total Systems
Intervention (Flood and Jackson)
278, 298
creative thinking 33^4
creativity 12, 26, 28, 163, 253, 275^327
complexity theory 12, 306
concepts 12, 26, 28, 31^41, 275^327
education systems 32^3
idealized designs 162^78, 224^5
interactive planning 162^78
metaphors 31^40, 275, 288^9, 321^4
paradigms 32, 37^40, 275, 306^7
postmodernists 256^74
problem-solving 31^41, 306
system dynamics 69
systems 12, 26, 28, 31^41, 63, 178,
275^327
team syntegrity 237^50
views 31^41, 237^50
creativity phase
critical systems practice 306^24
total systems intervention 285^98,
306^7
332
Index
complexity theory (cont.)

crises, hard systems thinking 17,
279^80
Critical Heuristics of Social Planning
(Ulrich) 213, 230
critical modernism 255^6, 257^8
critical path analysis 58
critical reason 215^31
critical re£ection 215^31
critical systems heuristics (CSH) 23^4,
27, 40, 146^7, 213^31, 281
12 boundary questions 218^31
in action 222^6
concepts 23, 27, 146^7, 213^31, 281
critique 226^9
description 214^22
historical background 213^15, 281
immaturity allegations 228
managers 229
methodology 217^20
methods 220^1
philosophy 215^17
purposeful systems 217^31
recent developments 221^2
theory 215^17
value 226^9
weaknesses 227^9
workshop 222^6
critical systems practice (CSP) 289,
301^25, 327^8
see also total systems intervention
in action 315^21
commitments 302^24
concepts 289, 301^25, 327^8
critique 321^4
description 302^15
dominant and dependent
methodologies 313^24
education programmes 324
facilitators 315^21
generic systems methodologies
307^24
guidelines 312^15
historical background 302
holistic doctors 313
Kingston Gas Turbines 315^21
managers 322^4, 327^8
metamethodology concepts 301^24
methodology 301^24
methods 307^15
phases 306^24
philosophy 302^5
recent developments 315
switching decisions 314, 323
theory 302^5
value 321^4, 327^8
weaknesses 322^4
Critical Systems Thinking: Directed
Reading (Flood and Jackson) 298
critical systems thinking (CST)
275^328
see also creative holism
critical awareness commitment
critical systems practice 302^24
total systems intervention 281^98,
302^24
critical re£ection mode, total systems
intervention 289
critical review mode, total systems
intervention 289
critics, team syntegrity 237^50
CSH see critical systems heuristics
CSP see critical systems practice
CST see critical systems thinking
Cullen, C. 243
cultural analysis, soft systems
methodology 189^208
cultural issues 22^4, 26, 80^1, 109,
122^3, 135^209
culture metaphor 34, 35^6, 39^40, 62,
82, 135, 153, 228, 249^50, 288^97
Cummings, S. 256, 265
customers, soft systems methodology
187^208
cybernetics 7^9, 22^5, 31^5, 40,
85^111, 175, 204, 214, 224^6,
233^5, 278^9
Index
333

see also organizational cybernetics
concepts 7^9, 22, 25, 31^2, 34^5,
85^111
second-order cybernetics 100^1
viable system model 25, 86^111
debates
critical systems heuristics 215^31
dialectical debates 10, 26, 140^54,
219^31
power struggles 249^50
team syntegrity 234^51
decentralization, centralization 89,
108^9, 269^70
decision science 47
decision-makers 10^11, 69, 79^110,
138, 140, 151^2, 161, 167, 213^51,
269^98, 314, 323
deconstruction concepts 265^6, 268^9,
297
Deetz, S. 34, 38, 257, 271
degree of diversity parameters,
complexity theory 123^32
degree of power di¡erential
parameters, complexity theory
123^32
delays, system dynamics 67^84
Delphi technique 56
democracy bene¢ts, viable system
model 107^8
democratic decision-making
critical systems heuristics 23^4, 27,
40, 146^7, 213^31
icosahedron analogy 236^50
team syntegrity 23^4, 27, 40, 74, 108,
233^52
democratic hierarchy model,
interactive planning 165^73
Derrida, J. 257, 259^60, 265^6, 273
designs
idealized designs 162^78, 224^5, 296
lack of comprehensiveness 215
systems 13, 50, 52^4, 138, 140^2,
162^78, 214^31, 277^300
total systems intervention 277^300
deterministic behaviour 55^6, 174^5
development element, viable system
model 90^110
devil’s advocate approaches, planning
151^2
dialectical debates 10, 26, 140^54,
219^31
dialogue
power struggles 249
rationality 214
di¡erence, postmodernists 255^74
di¡erential equations 55^6
discordant pluralism 304
discourses
centrality 258
person 260
discursive rules 258, 259^60
discussions, team syntegrity 235^50
Disneyland 260
disorder 11^12, 25^6, 113^33
complexity theory 11^12, 113^33
concepts 11^12, 25^6, 113^33
postmodernists 256^74
disruption, postmodernists 256^74
dissension, postmodernists 258^74
dissipative structures 11, 118
diversity 4, 12^29, 36^7, 43^4, 81,
253^74, 297, 304^5, 327^8
alternative assumptions 33^41, 74,
139^54
complexity theory 123^32
interactive planning 159^78
metamethodology concepts 280,
284^98, 301^24
postmodernists 253^74
promotion 253^74
dominant and dependent
methodologies
critical systems practice 313^24
334
Index
cybernetics (cont.)

total systems intervention 289,
313^14
double-loop learning 35, 65^84, 122^3,
127^8
Dupont Specialty Chemicals Safety,
Health and Environment
Function (SHE) 168^73
Durkheim, E. 185
dynamic behaviour 55^6
dynamic modelling 69^70
Dynamical Systems Collective 114^15,
118
e-commerce 59
ecological systems 174
edge of chaos 12, 22, 116, 118^32
edges, team syntegrity 236^50
education
action research programmes 182^4,
208, 307^24
creativity constraints 32^3
critical systems practice programmes
324
in£uences 10
management education 157, 324
e¡ectiveness measures 26, 108, 270^1,
322, 324, 328
e⁄cacy 25, 108, 130, 322, 324
e⁄ciency 25, 34, 54, 62, 108, 130,
215^16, 270^1, 322, 324, 328
Einstein, A. 101
elegance measures 26, 135^209, 322,
324
Ellis, K. 147, 290^5
emancipatory paradigm 32, 38^40, 62,
109, 130^1, 153, 176^7, 204^7,
249^50, 303^4, 310^12, 319^24
emancipatory systems thinking 23^7,
32, 146^7, 153, 176^7, 204^56,
278^98, 303^4, 310^12, 319^24
see also critical systems . . .; team
syntegrity
concepts 23^4, 27, 146^7, 211^52,
278, 280^98, 303^4, 310
critical systems practice 303^24
measures 27
total systems intervention 278^98
emergence concepts 113^33
emotions 27^8, 271^3, 297, 322
employees
human interests 282^4, 297, 303^24
morale levels 99^100
multidimensional organizational
structure model 167^73
empowerment issues 27, 107^8, 122^3,
249^50, 303^4, 322
complexity theory 122^3
learning issues 122^3
team syntegrity 249^50
viable system model 107^8
ends planning phase, interactive
planning 162^78
enemies, systems approach 140
Enlightenment rationale 255^7, 273^4
environment
boundaries 5^7, 10^11, 34, 61, 67^8,
147, 214^15
complexity theory 116^33
law of requisite variety 9, 86^110,
234^5
organization ¢t 9^11, 34
organizational cybernetics 9, 86^110
soft systems methodology 187^208
ergonomics of re£ection 288
eroding goals archetype 72
errors of commission/omission,
interactive planning 167
escalation archetype 72
Espejo, R. 100^1
Espinosa, A. 234, 243, 249
ethics 10^11, 61, 80^1, 140, 215^31,
271, 303^4
see also values
exception measures 27^8, 271^3, 297,
322
Index
335

expansionism 158
experiences 10, 181^209, 235^51
experts 140, 151^2, 220^1
planning approaches 151^2
viable system model 96
FACE planning 242, 245^6
facilitators 74, 138, 143^4, 191, 241^50,
262^72, 285^98
critical systems practice 315^21
postmodernists 262^72
team syntegrity 241^50
total systems intervention 285^98
fairness 24^9, 44, 81, 211^52, 303^4,
327^8
false-consciousness issues 176, 229
feedback loops 7^9, 22, 25, 35, 65^84,
85^110
see also controls interactive planning
167
non-linear feedback loops 114,
119^32
signed digraphs 70^8
system dynamics 22, 25, 65^84
The Fifth Discipline (Senge) 65^83, 121
¢re protection case 59^60
¢tness^landscape notions, complexity
theory 116, 118^32
¢xes-that-fail archetype 72
Flood, R. L. 147, 228, 277^89, 298, 303
£ux and transformation metaphor 34,
35, 38^40, 82, 131, 206
Fontuin, L. 58
formative systems, postmodernists 265
formulating-the-mess phase,
interactive planning 162^78
Forrester, J. W. 65^9, 79
Foucault, M. 257^9, 261, 264^5, 273,
303
fractal wholes 12, 118^32, 177
fragmented rationalities 270
Fryer, P. 121, 125^8, 131
Fuller, B. 235, 237
functionalist paradigm 32, 38^40, 62,
81, 101, 108^9, 130^5, 152, 176,
185, 206, 211, 229, 249^50, 272,
279, 281^2, 308^24
the future, interactive planning
160^78
Gaia hypothesis 116
gaming models 55^6
genealogy concepts 259, 265
General Electric 160
general system theory 6^7, 11^12, 116
concepts 6^7, 11^12
origins 6^7
generative conversations 266^7
generic systems methodologies
constitutive rules 307^15
critical systems practice 307^24
geodesic domes 235^7
Gharajedaghi, J. 177
Gill, A. 302
Gleick, J. 113^18
goals 7^9, 16^17, 20^1, 24^9, 44^133,
181^2, 327^8
con£icts 138
control engineering 7^9
hard systems thinking 16^17, 20^1,
47^64, 181^2
interactive planning 162^78
good management, organizational
cybernetics 108^9, 130
Gorgona syntegration 234, 243^8
grand narratives, power issues 257^8,
271^2, 303^4
Gregory, W. J. 304
group formation stage, strategic
assumption surfacing and testing
143^54
groups 129^30, 143^54
see also team . . .
groupthink dangers 129^30
growth and underinvestment
archetype 72
336
Index

guarantor idea, critical systems
heuristics 217^31
Habermas, J. 214^15, 216, 219^20,
227, 257, 273^4, 282^6, 297,
303^4, 323
Hall, A. D. 52
Hanover Insurance 74^8
hard systems thinking 15^25, 40,
47^64, 174, 182^6, 204, 255,
278^83
see also operational research; systems
analysis; systems engineering
in action 57^60, 282
assumptions 20^1
bias 20, 54^5
complexity failings 16^17, 20^1,
61^2
concepts 15^17, 20^1, 25, 43^64, 282
conservatism failings 62
crises 17, 279^80
critical systems heuristics 213^31
critique 15^17, 20^1, 54^5, 60^2,
278^9
de¢nitions 49^51
description 15^17, 20^1, 25, 48^57
historical background 16, 47^9, 182
interdisciplinary approaches 61^2
managers 62^3
mathematical modelling 20^1, 25,
50^64, 138, 158
measures 25, 54, 62
methodology 51^64
methods 54^6
objectives 16^17, 51^64
philosophy 49^51
problem contexts 20, 47^64
reality 50^1, 183^5
recent developments 57
system dynamics 81^2
theory 49^51
value 60^1, 62^3
weaknesses 15^17, 20^1, 54^5, 60^2,
135, 138, 158, 204, 277^9, 281^2
Hegel, F. 10, 139^40, 257
Heidegger, M. 256^7
heroic moods 140^1
hierarchies
democratic hierarchy model 165^73
living organisms 5^6
machines 34
systems 5^6, 34, 87
viable system model 93^4, 234
historical background
applied systems thinking 17^24
complexity theory 113^15
critical systems heuristics 213^15
critical systems practice 302
hard systems thinking 16, 47^9
interactive planning 23, 26, 157^9
organizational cybernetics 22^5,
85^7
organizations 9^10, 31^2
pluralism 18^24, 279^81
postmodern systems thinking 255^7
soft systems methodology 181^4
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 23^4, 137^8
system dynamics 22^4, 65^6
systems concepts 4^13
systems methodology 16^17
team syntegrity 233^5
total systems intervention 277^81
holism 4^13, 28, 40^1, 47, 61, 113^33,
162^78, 235^51, 275^327
concepts 4^13, 28, 275^327
creative holism 32^3, 41, 63, 178,
275^327
historical background 4^13
interactive planning 162^78
PANDA 261^71
physical sciences 11^12
root de¢nitions 193^4
holistic doctors, critical systems
practice 313
Index
337

holography 235
holons 188, 194
Holwell, S. 183, 186, 197^202
homeostatic processes 5^6
Hull University 221, 279^80
human
see also employees
intentionality 217
interests 282^4, 297, 303^24
human activity systems (soft systems
methodology) 183^209
humanism, assaults 256^60
Humberside Co-operative
Development Agency (CDA)
147^50
Humberside Training and Enterprise
Council 125^8, 131
Humphreys, A. 290
Husserl, E. 185
hyper-reality concepts 260
ICI 181, 193
iconic models 55
icosahedron, team syntegrity 236^50
idea writing 56, 196, 288
ideal speech situation 216, 219^31, 283,
303^4
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
see also coercive . . .; pluralist . . .;
system of systems methodologies;
unitary . . .
concepts 18^29
idealized designs, interactive planning
162^78, 224^5, 296
IDEAM 101^6
ideas 37^9, 181^209, 235^51
ideological elements, critical systems
heuristics 215^31
IIASA see International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
ill-structured problems 137^55,
181^209
ILSD see Information and Library
Services Department
images
organizations 31^7, 135^209, 260^1,
282, 287^8
postmodernists 260^4
imperialists 280, 295, 305, 321, 323
implementation element, viable system
model 90^110
implementation phase
critical systems practice 306^24
total systems intervention 285^98,
306^7
implementation and control phase,
interactive planning 162^78
improvement commitment, critical
systems practice 303^24
inactivist planning 160
INCOSE see International Council on
Systems Engineering
indeterminacy notions 11^12, 259^74
industrial dynamics 66
information £ows
complexity theory 123^32
organizational cybernetics 90^110
team syntegrity 238^50
Information and Library Services
Department (ILSD) 193
information systems 182, 197, 204
Information, Systems and Information
Systems (Checkland and Holwell)
197
Infoset, team syntegrity 235^50
innovation
complexity theory 122^3
postmodernists 258^74
team syntegrity 234
inputs, systems 6^13
inside and now balance,
outside and then 109
instruments of domination metaphor
34, 36, 39^40, 109, 153, 211, 228,
249^50, 284
338
Index

integration 6^7, 249^50
integrative principle, strategic
assumption surfacing and testing
142^54
interaction condition, human interests
282^3
interactive management 28, 168
interactive planning 23, 26, 40, 157^79
in action 168^73
biases 175^6, 178
concepts 23, 26, 157^79
critique 174^8
description 158^68
false-consciousness issues 176
historical background 23, 26, 157^9
idealized designs 162^78, 224^5, 296
leadership issues 165^78
managers 23, 26, 40, 157^79
methodology 161^5
methods 165^7
mission statements 162^5
phases 162^78
philosophy 159^61
power issues 176^7
principles 161^78
purposes 159^60
recent developments 168
SHE project 168^73
theory 159^61
value 174^8
weaknesses 175^7
interactiveness, systems 3^13
interdependencies
complexity theory 113^33
systems age 157
interdisciplinary approaches, hard
systems thinking 61^2
interests, ideal-type grid of problem
contexts 19^24
internal market economy model,
interactive planning 165^73
International Council on Systems
Engineering (INCOSE) 49, 50,
54, 57, 59
International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis (IIASA) 48, 52,
54, 57
Internet 59
interpretive paradigm 32, 38^40, 62,
81, 101, 109, 130^1, 152^3, 176^7,
185^6, 206, 211, 229, 250, 272,
282, 309^11, 319^24
interventions
critical systems practice 289, 301^25
postmodernists 261^74
soft systems methodology 185^209
total systems intervention 277^300
intuition 121, 216^17
inventory models 58
Iraq 260
irrationalism allegations,
postmodernists 272
irregularity 113^33
isolationists 280, 295
issue-based root de¢nitions 194
Jackson, M. C. 15, 18, 28, 59, 106, 147,
228, 248, 257, 277^85, 289, 298,
303, 307, 313^16
Jenkins, G. 52^3, 181^2
Joseph Rowntree Foundation 222
judgements 55^6, 79, 216^31
Kant, I. 4^5, 139, 215^20, 227, 256^7,
281
Kau¡man, S. 118^19, 122
Keys, P. 15, 18, 58, 279
KGT see Kingston Gas Turbines
Kingston Gas Turbines (KGT)
315^21
knowledge
archaeology 258^9, 265
critical systems heuristics 216^31
postmodernists 255^74, 323
Index
339

power connections 258^9, 303^4,
323
team syntegrity 249^50
Kuhn, T. 37, 279, 282
kybernetes 4
Lancaster University 181^2
Langton, C. 118
latency indices 99^100
law of requisite variety 9, 86^110,
234^5
leadership issues
see also managers
interactive planning 165^78
viable system model 110
learning cycle, soft systems
methodology 186^91, 203^8
learning issues 26^7, 34^5, 65^84,
108^9, 121^8, 158^79
interactive planning 158^79
soft systems methodology 22^9,
185^209
learning laboratories 73^4
learning organizations 65, 69^70,
74^84, 125^8, 318^19
learning and adaptation support
system model, interactive
planning 165^73
Leeman, J. E. 168^73
legitimate systems 122^32
level of contained anxiety parameters,
complexity theory 123^32
leverage points
complexity theory 121^3
system dynamics 67^84
limits to growth archetype 71^2
linear programming 55^6, 58
linear regression 56
linguistic meaning 259^60
Linstone, H. A. 146, 279, 282
living organisms 3^4, 5^7
living systems theory 28
local improvements 303^4
logic-based stream of analysis, soft
systems methodology 189^208
logics of change 35
long-term planning 119
Lorenz, E. 114, 116^17
Lyotard, J.^F. 255^8, 266^7, 303
Maani, K. E. 69
machine age 157^8
machines 9^10, 31^8, 40, 62, 82, 131,
153^8, 177, 186, 206^7, 228,
288^97
management
education 157, 324
£ight simulators 69^70, 73^84
information systems 157
problems 13, 15^29, 31^41, 327^8
science 157^78, 181^2, 267, 282, 302
theory 4, 6^7, 9^13
managerial mind supporting principle,
strategicassumption surfacing and
testing 142^54
managers
circular organizations 165^78
complexity theory 119^23, 129^32
creative holism 297^8, 322^4, 327^8
critical systems heuristics 229
critical systems practice 322^4,
327^8
hard systems thinking 62^3
interactive planning 23, 26, 40,
157^79
organizational cybernetics 88,
109^10
postmodern systems thinking 272^4
soft systems methodology 196^208
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 142^4, 153^4
system dynamics 73, 79, 82^3
team syntegrity 247^51
total systems intervention 297^8,
323^4
340
Index
knowledge (cont.)

traditional management theory
131^2
managing mental models discipline 74
Mantua Ghetto, Philadelphia 161
Marxism 36, 227
Mason, R.O. 137^55
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) 65^6, 74^8
mathematical modelling
hard systems thinking 20^1, 25,
50^64, 138, 158
system dynamics 68^84
Maturana, H. R. 7, 87
Meadows, D. H. 66
means planning phase, interactive
planning 162^78
Mejia, A. 228, 248^9
mental models 10^11, 74, 83, 122^3,
140, 185^6
messes 137, 157, 160^78, 284^98,
327^8
metamethodology concepts 280,
284^98, 301^24
see also critical systems practice; total
systems intervention
metaphors 31^40, 62, 108^9, 120^1,
176^7, 249^50, 271^5, 284^6,
321^4
see also individual metaphors
concepts 31^9, 275, 284
creativity 31^40, 275, 288^9
total systems intervention 288^97
metaphysical elements, critical systems
heuristics 215^31
metasystems 93, 103^6
methodology concepts 43, 51,
304^15
methods, concepts 43
microworlds, system dynamics 69^70,
73^84
Middle East hospital 145
Midgley, G. 220^1, 222^8, 296, 323
Miller’s living systems theory 28
Mingers, J. 57, 205, 207, 282, 296, 302,
304^5
Miser, H.J. 47, 49^50, 52^3
mission statements, interactive
planning 162^5
MIT see Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
Mitro¡, I. I. 137^55
modernist systems thinking 255^6,
257^8,
270^1, 282
Modes, soft systems methodology
196^7, 314^15
money, organizations 99^100
moral idea, critical systems heuristics
217^31
morale levels, employees 99^100
Morgan, G. 31, 33^5, 38, 119^20,
281^2, 287^8, 304
motivation issues, organizational
cybernetics 107^8
multi-paradigm multimethodology
305
multidimensional organizational
structure model, interactive
planning 165^73
Multimethodology ^ The Theory and
Practice of Combining Management
Science Methodologies(Mingers and
Gill) 302
multimethodology practice see creative
holism
multinode assemblage, viable system
model 95^6, 234^5
multiple perceptions, reality 17, 20^4,
61^2, 185^209
Multiple Perspectives for Decision Making
(Linstone) 279
Munlo, I. 222
Munro, I. 302
mutual understandings 328
Index
341

NASA 141
natural systems, chaos theory 113^18,
129^31
negative feedback 7^9, 22, 25, 35,
67^84, 85^110
concepts 7^9, 22, 67^84
organizational cybernetics 85^110
system dynamics 22, 25, 65^84
negotiations 80, 107^8, 235
NEIS 101^6
networks 269^70
Nietzsche, F. 256^7, 273
nominal group technique 267
non-deterministic behaviour 55^6
non-linear feedback loops 114, 119^32
norms, soft systems methodology
190^6
North Yorkshire Police (NYP) 289^95
NYP see North Yorkshire Police
objectives
experts 140, 151^2
hard systems thinking 16^17, 51^64,
181^2
interactive planning 162^78
objectivity issues 22^3, 26, 80^1,
139^40, 152^3, 158^78
critical systems heuristics 215^31
soft systems thinking 159
Obloj, K. 58, 80
obstruction analysis, interactive
planning 162^3
open systems 6^7, 13, 34, 132
challenges 7
concepts 6^7, 13
operational research (OR) 15, 16^17,
20^1, 47^64, 79, 138, 157^8, 214,
302
in action 57^60
community operational research 157
concepts 15, 16^17, 20^1, 47^64,
138, 157
de¢nition 49
historical background 16, 48^9
methodology 51^2
soft OR 54^5, 57
operational control element, viable
system model 90^110
operations room, viable system model
95, 234^5
opportunities, interactive planning
167
optimizing approaches 9^10, 16, 21,
25, 53^4, 94^5, 131, 138, 158^60,
185, 241
OR see operational research
order 11^12, 113^33
complexity theory 11^12, 113^33
concepts 11^12, 113^33
postmodernists 256^74
organism metaphor 34, 38^40, 108^10,
131, 153, 165^78, 206, 228, 288^97
organisms 3^4, 5^7, 31^2, 165^78, 214
organization theory 4, 7, 9^13, 36
concepts 9^11, 36
environment ¢t 9^11, 34
organizational cybernetics 22^5, 31^2,
34^5, 40, 85^111, 214, 224^6,
233^5, 283^95, 310^21
see also cybernetics; viable system
model
achievement levels 99^110
in action 101^6, 291^5, 316^21
concepts 22^5, 31^2, 34^5, 40,
85^111
critique 106^9, 278^9
description 86^101
frequent faults 96^100
good management 108^9, 130
guidelines 96^100
historical background 22^5, 85^7
managers 88, 109^10
method 96^100
methodology 88^96
modelling 87^110
performance measures 96^100, 108
342
Index

philosophy 87^8
recent developments 100^1
recursiveness processes 87^110, 118
SINA 101^6
theory 87^8
value 106, 109^10
weaknesses 107^9, 278^9
organizations 9^10, 31^7, 69^70,
185^6
achievements 99^100
bias 37
carnival metaphor 34, 36^7, 39^40,
109, 253, 271^2
circular organizations 165^78
concepts 9^10, 31^7, 185^6
formative systems 265
historical background 9^10, 31^2
idealized designs 162^78, 224^5
images 31^7, 135^209, 260^1, 282,
287^8
interactive planning 23, 26, 40,
157^79
learning organizations 65, 69^70,
74^84, 125^8, 318^19
machines 9^10, 31^8, 40, 62, 82, 131,
153^8, 177, 186, 206^7, 228,
288^97
metaphors 31^40, 108^9, 275, 284,
321^4
money 99^100
responsibilities 159^61
soft systems methodology 185^209
temporary accommodations 186
organized complexity 5
Ortegon, M. 128
outputs, systems 6^13
outside and then balance, inside and
now 109
overview 17^29, 43^5
owners, soft systems methodology
187^208
Packard, N 118
PANDA see Participatory Appraisal of
Needs and the Development of
Action
paradigms 32, 37^40, 108^9, 130^2,
152^3, 176^7, 206^7, 249^50,
271^82, 296^7, 303^24
see also individual paradigms
concepts 32, 37^9, 81, 275, 281^2,
296^7, 303^7
creativity 32, 37^9, 275, 306^7
multiparadigm multimethodology
305
paradox, postmodernists 256^74
parametric allocation models 60
participants
see also ideal-type grid of problem
contexts
soft systems methodology 190^6,
204^8, 216
stakeholders 139^54, 190^6, 216
participative principle
interactive planning 161^78
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 142^54
Participatory Appraisal of Needs and
the Development of Action
(PANDA) 261^71
patterns
complexity theory 11^12, 25^6, 82,
113^33
concepts 11^12, 25^6, 82, 113^33
perceptions
reality 17, 20^4, 61^2, 185^209,
216^17
soft systems methodology 185^209
performance measures
organizational cybernetics 99^100
reference projections 162^3
personal mastery discipline 74
perspectives 10^11, 22^4, 27^8, 31^41,
139^54, 279^98
see also views
Index
343

metamethodology concepts 280,
284^98, 301^24
total systems intervention 284^98
PERT see programme evaluation and
review technique
phenomenology 185
philosophy interactions 3^5, 13, 26,
35^6
physical sciences 11^13
concepts 11^12
holism 11^12
physics 11^12, 13, 116
Pirsig, R. M. 301
planning
critical systems heuristics 213^31
devil’s advocate approaches 151^2
expert approaches 151^2
interactive planning 23, 26, 40,
157^79
long-term planning 119
scenario planning 69^70
team syntegrity 234^51
total systems intervention 277^300
types 160^1
planning^programming^budgeting
systems 47^8
Plato 4^5
pluralism
alternative forms 315
concepts 18^24, 279^98, 302^24
critical systems practice 302^24
discordant pluralism 304
historical background 18^24,
279^82, 302
pragmatic pluralism 261^74
total systems intervention 277^300
pluralist participants, ideal-type grid of
problem contexts 18^24, 36,
135^209
polemical employment of boundary
judgements 220^1, 226^7
polemical employment of reason 220
policy analysis 47
policy element, viable system model
89^110
political metaphor 34, 36, 39^40, 62,
135, 153, 228^9, 249, 288^97
politics 22^4, 32, 54^5, 80^2, 109,
135^209
critical systems heuristics 215^31
hard systems practitioners 54^5, 57
polyhedra, team syntegrity 235^50
Popper, K. 215
positive feedback 9, 22, 25, 67^84, 118
concepts 9, 22, 67^84, 118
system dynamics 22, 25, 65^84
positivism 185
The Postmodern Condition (Lyotard) 255
postmodern systems thinking 23^32,
38, 40, 130^1, 253^74, 282, 297,
303, 311^24
in action 267^9
anarchy allegations 272
common themes 257^61
concepts 23^4, 27^8, 253^74, 282,
311
critique 269^74
description 256^67
four Fs 264^71
historical background 255^7
irrationalism allegations 272
managers 272^4
measures 27
method 264^7
methodology 261^4
PANDA 261^71
philosophy 257^61
postmodernist writers 257^61
pragmatic pluralism 261^74
recent developments 267
systems thinking 260^74
theory 257^61
three Cs 263^71
three Vs 263^71
344
Index
perspectives (cont.)

value 253, 269^74
weaknesses 270^4
potentiality levels, achievement
99^100
Pourdehnad, J. 170
power issues 18^27, 36, 81^2, 108,
152^3, 176^7, 205, 256^8, 281^3,
303^4
coercive problem contexts 18^24,
36, 81, 152^3, 206, 211, 228^9,
249, 253, 271, 280^1, 284
complexity theory 123^32
dialogues 249^50
di¡erentials 123^32
grand narratives 257^8, 271^2,
303^4
interactive planning 176^7
knowledge connections 258^9,
303^4, 323
postmodernists 258^9, 261^74, 323
the self 256^7
soft systems methodology 204^5
team syntegrity 247^51
pragmatic pluralism 261^74
see also pluralism
pragmatists 280, 295
preactivist planning 160
presentations, dialectical debates 144
Prigogine, I. 118
primary task root de¢nitions 194
problem contexts 10^11, 17^24, 81
see also ideal-type grid of problem
contexts
creativity 31^42, 306
hard systems thinking 20, 47^64
ill-structured problems 137^55,
181^209
messes 137, 157, 160^78, 284^98,
327^8
metamethodology concepts 280,
284^98, 310^24
postmodernists 260^1
rich pictures 183^208, 296, 320
soft systems methodology 22^9,
181^210
systems methodologies 20^4
total systems intervention 277^300
wicked problems 137^55
problem jostle technique, team
syntegrity 241^2
processes
complexity theory 115^33
modern thinking 13
systems 6^13
productivity indices 99^100
programme evaluation and review
technique (PERT) 58
progress, postmodernists 256
psychic prison metaphor 34, 36,
39^40, 109, 153, 211, 228, 249^50,
284
purposeful systems 24^9, 44, 81,
135^209, 217^31, 327^8
boundaries 10^11, 147
concepts 9^11, 157
critical systems heuristics 217^31
social systems 9^11
systems age 157
Quade, E.S. 47, 49^50, 52^3
qualitative phase, system dynamics 69
quality management 168
quality of life issues, interactive
planning 159^78
quantitative phase, system dynamics
69, 79
quantum theory 11
queuing models 58
RAND Corporation 16, 48, 52, 56, 60
randomness 113^33
rationality 214, 256^60, 270, 297
dialogue 214
postmodernists 256^60, 270
Re-creating the Corporation (Acko¡) 168
reactivist planning 160
Index
345

reality 5, 17, 20^4, 37^8, 50, 152^3,
183^209, 259^60, 282
action research programmes 183^4,
208, 307^24
hard systems thinking 50^1, 183^5
hyper-reality concepts 260
mirrors 259^60
multiple perceptions 17, 20^4, 61^2,
185^209
perceptions 17, 20^4, 61^2, 185^209,
216^17
root de¢nitions 183^209
signs 259^60
soft systems methodology 185^209
system dynamics 68^84
reason
critical systems heuristics 216^31
polemical employment of reason 220
reasoning by analogy activities,
complexity theory 121
recursiveness processes, organizational
cybernetics 87^110, 118
reductionism 3^4, 11, 12^13, 45, 47^8,
61^3, 158, 327
reference projections, interactive
planning 162^3
reference scenarios, interactive
planning 162^78
re£ection phase, critical systems
practice 306^24
re£ective conversations 304^5
relationships
complexity theory
113^33
feedback loops 66^84
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
18^24, 36
interactive planning 23, 26, 40,
157^79
soft systems methodology 22^9,
181^210
systems 3^13, 18^24, 113^33
relevant systems, soft systems
methodology 191^3
religion 140, 271
replacement models 58
representation modes, postmodernists
263^74
requisite variety 9, 22, 86^110, 234^5
research
see also education
action research programmes 182^4,
208, 307^24
and development 99^100, 197^202
resistance issues, change 7, 139^40,
259^60
resource^planning phase, interactive
planning 162^78
responsibilities
interactive planning 159^61
organizations 159^61
reverberation phenomena, team
syntegrity 237^50
rich pictures (soft systems
methodology) 183^208, 296, 320
richness of connectivity parameters,
complexity theory 123^32
roles, soft systems methodology 190^6
Romm, N. R. A. 303
root de¢nitions (soft systems
methodology) 183^209, 296, 320
Rosenhead, J. 57, 129^30, 138
routing models 58
SA see systems analysis
Santa Fe Institute 115, 118^19
satis¢cing 138
scenario planning 69^70
scenario writing 56, 196, 288
Scholes, P. 181, 189, 193^6, 307
Scho« n, D. 167
Schutz, A. 185
Schwaninger, M. 234
scienti¢c management 9^10, 31^2, 47
SE see systems engineering
346
Index

search models 58
Second World War 16, 47^9, 157
second-order cybernetics 100^1
the self 256^7
self-emancipation concepts 256^7
self-organization ideas 11^12, 109, 115,
118^32, 247^8
self-production concepts 7, 87^110
self-similarity notions, complexity
theory 12, 116, 117^32
Senge, P. 65^83, 318
sensors, control engineering 8^9
shadow systems 122^32
Shaw, R. S. 114^15
SHE see Dupont Specialty Chemicals
Safety, Health and Environment
Function
shifting the burden archetype 71^2
ship analogies 4^5
signed digraphs 70^8
see also causal loop diagrams
signs
postmodernists 259^60
reality 259^60
Simon, H. 181
simple systems, ideal-type grid of
problem contexts 18^29
simulation models 55^6, 66^84, 260
see also system dynamics SINA
101^6, 242^7
Singer, A. E. 139, 140^1, 158
single-loop learning 35, 65^84
SIs see statements of importance
social awareness 281^98, 302^3
social sciences 281^2
social skills, hard systems practitioners
54^5, 57
social systems 9^11, 32, 36^7, 65^84,
115^33, 138^78, 214^31
social systems science 157, 158^9
social theory 259, 278^9, 328
social totality 314
social awareness commitment, total
systems intervention 281^98,
302^3
sociological paradigms 37^40, 132,
281^2
sociotechnical systems theory 279
soft OR 54^5, 57
Soft Systems Methodology in Action
(Checkland and Scholes) 189
soft systems methodology (SSM)
22^9, 181^210, 283, 286, 296, 322
in action 197^202
analysis phase 183^4
CATWOE 187^96, 322
concepts 22^9, 181^210
conceptual models 183^209, 296,
320
critique 202^7, 278^9
cultural analysis 189^208
description 182^97
historical background 181^4
ID intervention example 197^202
learning cycle 186^91, 203^8
logic-based stream of analysis
189^208
managers 196^208
methodology 186^91
methods 191^6
Modes 196^7, 314^15
participants 190^6, 204^8, 216
philosophy 184^6
power issues 204^5
recent developments 196^7
rich pictures 183^208, 296, 320
root de¢nitions 183^209, 296, 320
theory 184^6
two-strands model 189^208
value 202^8
weaknesses 203^7, 278^9
soft systems thinking 10^11, 22^9, 40,
138, 278^9, 282, 320
concepts 10^11, 22^9, 138, 278^9,
282
Index
347

conceptual models 55^6, 183^209,
296, 320
critical systems heuristics 213^31
measures 26, 135
objectivity 159
SOSM see system of systems
methodologies
speech, ideal speech situation 216,
219^31, 283, 303^4
SSM see soft systems methodology
Stacey, R. D. 113, 119, 122^5, 130
stages, team syntegrity 239^50
stakeholders 10^11, 17, 20^9, 54, 61^2,
69^70
concepts 10^11, 17, 20^4, 61^2
critical systems heuristics 23^4, 27,
40, 146^7, 213^31
diverse objectives 17, 20^4, 61^2
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
18^24
idealized designs 162^78, 224^5
identi¢cation 144^8
interactive planning 23, 26, 40,
157^79
participation 139^54, 190^6, 216
soft systems methodology 187^96
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 137^56
team syntegrity 23^4, 27, 40, 74, 108,
233^52
total systems intervention 285^98
universities 17, 90^1
statements of importance (SIs), team
syntegrity 241^50
steady state behaviour 55^6
STELLA 73, 75^6
Sterman, J. D. 74^7
stock-and-£ow diagrams 73
Storr, F. 125^8
strange attractors, complexity theory
11^12, 22, 116^32
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing (SAST) 23^4, 26, 40,
137^56
in action 147^50
concepts 23^4, 26, 137^56
critique 151^5
historical background 23^4, 137^8
managers 142^4, 153^4
methodology 142^4
methods 144^6
philosophy 139^42, 151
recent developments 146^7
stages 143^4
theory 139^42
underpinning principles 142^4
value 151^5
weaknesses 151^3
structural synergy 235^50
structuralist approaches 21^2, 25, 35,
81^2, 87, 108, 137^55, 227^8,
257^60
structure 13, 122^3, 131
subjectivity issues 22^3, 26, 80,
139^54, 258, 282
suboptimization problems 63
subsystems 6^13, 19^24, 34
e¡ectiveness issues 9^11
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
19^24
success to the successful archetype 72
synergy 235^50
syntegration issues 233^51
synthesis 5, 26, 140, 153, 158^78
synthesis stage, strategic assumption
surfacing and testing 143^54
synthetic a priori concepts 216^20
system archetypes, system dynamics
70, 71^84
system dynamics 22^4, 25^6, 40, 56,
65^84, 121, 320^1
see also simulation models in action
74^8
concepts 22^4, 25^6, 65^84
creativity 69
348
Index
soft systems thinking (cont.)

critique 78^83
description 22^4, 25^6, 66^74
Hanover Insurance 74^8
hard systems thinking 81^2
historical background 22^4, 65^6
managers 73, 79, 82^3
mathematical modelling 68^84
methodology 68^84
methods 70^4, 80^1
MIT 65^6
philosophy 66^8
recent developments 74
theory 66^8, 80^1
value 78, 82^3
weaknesses 78^83
system of systems methodologies
(SOSM) 18^24, 28, 36, 40, 45, 83,
135, 152, 169, 228, 249, 271,
279^89, 305, 316
see also ideal-type grid of problem
contexts
concepts 18^24, 28, 36, 40, 135,
279^84, 286, 288^9, 305, 316
historical background 18^24,
279^81
pluralism 279^81, 305
system in focus stage, viable system
model 90^110
systemic impacts, system dynamics
72^84
systemic modernism 255^6, 257^8
systemic processes, soft systems
methodology 188^208
systems
see also ideal-type grid of problem
contexts
characteristics 4^13
concepts 3^13, 15^30
creative holism 32^3, 41, 63, 178,
275^327
creativity 12, 26, 28, 31^41, 63, 178,
275^327
de¢nition 3
designs 13, 50, 52^4, 138, 140^2,
162^78, 214^31, 277^300
formative systems 265
hierarchies 5^6, 34, 87
historical background 4^13, 16^17
recursiveness issues 87^110, 118
types 3^4, 18^24, 174^5
systems age 157^61, 174
systems analysis (SA) 16^17, 20^1,
47^64, 214
in action 59^60
concepts 16^17, 20^1, 47^64
de¢nition 49^50
historical background 16, 48^9
interactive planning 162^3
methodology 52^3, 59^60
systems approach 139^42
concepts 139^42
enemies 140
The Systems Approach (Churchman)
139^42
systems engineering (SE) 9, 16^17,
20^1, 47^64, 182^4, 214
in action 57^60
concepts 9, 16^17, 20^1, 47^64
historical background 16, 48^9, 182
methodology 52^4
systems language 3^13
systems methodologies
concepts 16, 20^4
historical background 16^17
related problem contexts 20^4
Systems Methodology for the Management
Sciences (Jackson) 282, 298
systems revolution 116
systems science 214, 228^9
systems thinking 5, 11^13, 15^29,
31^2, 65^84, 139^54, 277^8, 327^8
alternatives 124^5, 139^54, 277^8
concepts 5, 11^13, 31^2, 139^54,
277^8
critical systems thinking 275^328
historical background 5, 11^13
Index
349

management problems 13, 15^29,
31^41
postmodernists 260^74
transdisciplinarity bene¢ts 13
unbounded systems thinking 146^7
Systems Thinking, Systems Practice
(Checkland) 184, 186
Taket, A. R. 261^71, 296^7, 315
Taylor, F. 47
team syntegrity 23^4, 27, 40, 74, 108,
233^52, 283
in action 242^7
concepts 23^4, 27, 40, 74, 108,
233^52
critique 247^51
description 234^42
empowerment needs 249^50
facilitators 241^50
Gorgona syntegration 234, 243^8
historical background 233^5
managers 247^51
methodology 238^40
philosophy 236^8
polyhedra 235^50
protocols 238^50
recent developments 242
reverberation phenomena 237^50
SINA 242^7
stages 239^50
statements of importance 241^50
theory 236^8
value 247^51
weaknesses 248^50
Team Syntegrity Inc. 241, 242
team-learning discipline 74
teamwork, viable system model 95^6,
234^5
television 260
temporary accommodations,
organizations 186
tensegrity concepts, team syntegrity
237^50
tensions
see also con£icts
alternative assumptions 141^2
texts 260, 265^6, 268^70
thermostats 7^9
thesis 5, 26, 140
threats, interactive planning 167
top-down processes 147^50
topics, team syntegrity 236^50
Topp, W. K. 265, 266, 270
total systems intervention (TSI)
277^300, 304^6, 316^17, 321^2
see also critical systems practice
in action 289^95
commitments 282^98, 302^3, 305^6
concepts 277^300, 304^6
critique 295^8, 304, 321^2
description 278^89
dominant and dependent
methodologies 289, 313^14
facilitators 285^98
guidelines 278
historical background 277^81
managers 297^8, 323^4
metamethodology concepts 280,
284^98
metaphors 288^97
methods 287^9
modes 289
North Yorkshire Police 289^95
phases 285^98, 306^7
philosophy 281^4, 305^6
recent developments 289
theory 281^4, 305^6
uses 295^8, 305^6
value 295^8, 323^4
weaknesses 296^8, 304, 321^2
totality concepts 217^31, 253^74
traditional management theory 131^2
tragedy of the commons archetype 72
350
Index
systems thinking (cont.)

training
see also education
critical systems practice programmes
324
transcendental ideas 216^31
transdisciplinarity bene¢ts, systems
thinking 13
transformation processes, soft systems
methodology 187^208
transparency issues, postmodernists
255^6
‘trojanmice’ changes 121, 125
Truss, J. 242, 243
truth, postmodernists 256, 262^74
TSI see total systems intervention
Tsoukas, H. 297
turbulence 132, 269^70, 327^8
two-strands model, soft systems
methodology 189^208
Ulrich, W. 23^4, 213^31, 281
unbounded designs 163^5
unbounded systems thinking 146^7
uncertainty acceptance 138, 146
unfolding the complexity stage, viable
system model 89^110
unitary participants, ideal-type grid of
problem contexts 18^25, 36,
44^103
universities
recursion example 90^3
stakeholders 17, 90^1
University of Pennsylvania 159, 168
unpredictability, postmodernists
258^74
values 10^11, 16^17, 19^24, 26, 35^6,
107^8, 303^4
see also ethics
hard systems thinking 20^1
ideal-type grid of problem contexts
19^24
interactive planning 159^78
soft systems methodology 190^6
Varela, F.J. 7, 87
variety 9, 22, 86^110, 234^5
concepts 9, 22, 234^5
engineering 9
law of requisite variety 9, 86^110,
234^5
Vennix, J. A. C. 74, 81
viability issues 24^9, 44^133, 327^8
viable system model (VSM) 25,
86^111, 224^6, 233^5, 251, 291^5,
310^11, 316^22
see also organizational cybernetics
biases 108
concepts 25, 86^111
critique 106^9
empowerment issues 107^8
frequent faults 96^100
guidelines 96^100
hierarchies 93^4, 234
measures of performance 96^100,
108
SINA 101^6
system elements 89^110, 234
Vickers, G. 181, 186, 205
views 10^11, 22^4, 27^8, 31^41, 107^8,
139^54, 279^98
creativity 31^41, 237^50
metamethodology concepts 280,
284^98, 301^24
postmodernists 256^74
soft systems methodology 185^209
strategic assumption surfacing and
testing 139^54
team syntegrity 237^50
total systems intervention 284^98
world views 10^11, 22^3, 33^41,
137^54, 158, 183, 328
virtuous circles, ideas/experiences 182
visual applause 241
von Bertalan¡y, L. 5^7, 9, 13, 116
VSM see viable system model
Index
351

War¢eld’s interactive management 28
weather patterns 11^12, 114, 116^17,
129
Weber, M. 19, 185
Weltanschauung 10, 139^40, 153, 183,
185, 192^3, 205^8
Wheatley, M.J. 119^22
White, L. A. 233, 261^71, 296^7, 315
whole methodology management 305,
309^10, 322
whole systems, critical systems
heuristics 214^31
wicked problems 137^55
Wiener, N. 7^9
‘will to power’ concepts 256^7
Wilmington, USA 60
Wilson, B. 55^6
witnesses, critical systems heuristics
219^31
Wolstenholme, E. F. 69
work condition, human interests
282^3
workshop, critical systems heuristics
222^6
World Dynamics (Forrester) 66
world views 10^11, 22^3, 33^41,
137^54, 158, 183, 328
352
Index

