
Systems Thinking:  
Managing Chaos and 
Complexity

Systems Thinking:  
Managing Chaos and 
Complexity
A Platform for Designing  
Business Architecture
Third Edition
Jamshid Gharajedaghi
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Morgan Kaufmann is an imprint of Elsevier

This page intentionally left blank

Acquiring Editor: Pam Chester/Rachel Roumeliotis
Development Editor: Robyn Day
Project Manager: André Cuello
Designer: Eric DeCicco
Morgan Kaufmann is an imprint of Elsevier
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
© 2011 Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage 
and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to 
seek permission, further information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our 
arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright 
Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright  
by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and 
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods or professional 
practices, may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge  
in evaluating and using any information or methods described herein. In using such 
information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of 
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or 
editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a 
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any 
methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gharajedaghi, Jamshid.
  Systems thinking : managing chaos and complexity : a platform for designing business 
architecture / Jamshid Gharajedaghi. — 3rd ed.
    p. cm.
  ISBN 978-0-12-385915-0
1.  System analysis. 2.  Chaotic behavior in systems. 3.  Industrial management.  
4.  Technological complexity. I. Title.
  T57.6.G52 2011
  003'.857–dc22
  2011008828
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978-0-12-385915-0
Printed in the United States of America
11  12  13  14    10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
For information on all MK publications visit our website at www.mkp.com

v
Contents
Foreword to the Third Edition	
xi
Foreword to the Second Edition	
xvii
Preface	
	
	
xix
Acknowledgment	 	
xxi
	
	Part 1   l   System Philosophy: The Name of the Devil
	
Chapter 1	
How the Game Is Evolving	
3
1.1	
Imitation	
4
1.2	 Inertia	
5
1.3	 Suboptimization	
6
1.4	 Change of the Game	
6
1.5	 Shift of Paradigm	
8
1.6	 Interdependency and Choice	
9
	
1.6.1	 On the Nature of Organization: The First Paradigm Shift	
9
1.7	 On the Nature of Inquiry	
13
	
1.7.1	 The Second Paradigm Shift	
13
1.8	 The Competitive Games	
17
	
1.8.1	 Mass Production — Interchangeability of Parts and Labor	
17
	
1.8.2	 Divisional Structure — Managing Growth and Diversity	
18
	
1.8.3	 Participative Management	
20
	
1.8.4	 Operations Research — Joint Optimization	
21
	
1.8.5	 Lean Production System — Flexibility and Control	
22
	
1.8.6	 Interactive Management — Design Approach	
22
	
	Part 2   l   Systems Theory: The Nature of the Beast
	
Chapter 2	
Systems Principles	
29
2.1	 Openness	
29
2.2	 Purposefulness	
33
	
2.2.1	 Recap	
37
2.3	 Multidimensionality	
38
	
2.3.1	 Plurality of Function, Structure, and Process	
42
	
2.3.2	 Recap	
44
2.4	 Emergent Property	
45
	
2.4.1	 Recap	
47
2.5	 Counterintuitive Behavior	
48
	
2.5.1	 Recap	
54
	
Chapter 3	
Sociocultural System	
57
3.1	 Self-Organization: Movement Toward a Predefined Order	
57
3.2	 Information-Bonded Systems	
59
3.3	 Culture	
60
3.4	 Social Learning	
62
3.5	 Culture as an Operating System	
64
	
Chapter 4	
Development	
69
4.1	 Schematic View of Theoretical Traditions	
70
4.2	 Systems View of Development	
73

vi 
Contents
4.3	 Obstruction to Development	
77
	
4.3.1	 Alienation	
78
	
4.3.2	 Polarization	
79
	
4.3.3	 Corruption	
81
	
4.3.4	Terrorism	
82
	
4.3.5	 Recap	
85
	
	Part 3   l   Systems Methodology: The Logic of the Madness
	
Chapter 5	
Holistic Thinking	
89
5.1	 Iterative Process of Inquiry	
89
5.2	 Systems Dimensions	
93
	
5.2.1	 Generation and Dissemination of Wealth	
96
	
5.2.2	 Generation and Dissemination of Power (Centralization  
	
	
and Decentralization Happen at the Same Time)	
97
	
5.2.3	 Generation and Dissemination of Beauty: Social  
	
	
Integration	
101
	
5.2.4	 Generation and Dissemination of Knowledge	
103
	
5.2.5	 Generation and Dissemination of the Value:  
	
	
Conflict Management	
104
	
Chapter 6	
Operational Thinking	
109
6.1	 Complexity	
110
	
6.1.1	 Open Loop or Closed Loop Systems	
111
	
6.1.2	 Linear or Nonlinear Systems	
111
6.2	 Operational Thinking, the iThink Language	
119
	
6.2.1	 Connectors	
120
	
6.2.2	 Modeling Interdependency	
121
6.3	 Dynamics of Throughput Systems	
124
	
6.3.1	 Critical Properties of the Process	
126
	
6.3.2	 Model of the Process	
126
	
6.3.3	 Measurement and Learning	
130
	
Chapter 7	
Design Thinking	
133
7.1	 Design Thinking, as the Systems Methodology	
134
7.2	 Operating Principles of Design Thinking	
137
7.3	 Modular Design	
138
7.4	 Design and Process of Social Change	
141
7.5	 Interactive Design	
142
	
7.5.1	 Idealization	
144
	
7.5.2	 Realization — Successive Approximation	
147
	
7.5.3	 Dissolving the Second-Order Machine	
150
7.6	 Critical Design Elements	
150
	
7.6.1	 Measurement and Reward System (A Social Calculus)	
150
	
7.6.2	 Vertical Compatibility	
151
	
7.6.3	 Horizontal Compatibility	
153
	
7.6.4	 Temporal Compatibility	
155
	
7.6.5	 Target Costing	
156
	
Chapter 8	
Formulating the Mess	
159
8.1	 Searching	
160
	
8.1.1	 Systems Analysis	
161
	
8.1.2	 Obstruction Analysis	
161
	
8.1.3	 System Dynamics	
161
8.2	 Mapping the Mess	
163
8.3	 Telling the Story	
166
	
8.3.1	 Formulating the Mess: A Case Review  
	
	
(Story of Utility Industry)	
166
	
8.3.2	 Success Changes the Game, Lack of Explicit Vision	
169

Contents  vii
	
8.3.3	
Monopolistic, Cost Plus, Regulated Environment	
170
	
8.3.4	
The Non-Competitive Culture	
171
	
8.3.5	
The Input-Based Personnel Policy	
172
	
8.3.6	
Mediocrity, Tolerance of Incompetence	
173
	
8.3.7	
Structural Incompatibility	
174
	
8.3.8	
Uncertainty About the Future	
176
8.4	 The Present Mess	
177
	
8.4.1	
Drivers Defining the Behavior of the Present  
	
	
State of the Economy	
177
	
8.4.2	 How the Game Is Evolving	
177
8.5	 Current Crisis and Future Challenges	
178
	
Chapter 9	
Business Architecture	
181
9.1	
The System's Boundary and Business Environment	
182
9.2	 Purpose	
184
9.3	 Functions	
189
9.4	 Structure	
190
	
9.4.1	
Output Dimension	
192
	
9.4.2	
Input Dimension	
194
	
9.4.3	
Market Dimension	
196
	
9.4.4	 Internal Market Economy	
197
9.5	 Processes	
201
	
9.5.1	
Planning, Learning, and Control System	
202
	
9.5.2	
Measurement System	
202
	
9.5.3	
Recap	
207
	
	Part 4   l   Systems Practice: The Gutsy Few
	
Chapter 10	
The Oneida Nation	
211
10.1	 Desired Specifications	
211
10.2	 Systems Architecture	
213
10.3	 Governance	
214
	
10.3.1	 Governing Body	
215
	
10.3.2	 Chief of Staff	
215
	
10.3.3	 Planning, Learning, and Control System	
216
	
10.3.4	 Planning, Learning, and Control Board	
217
10.4	 Membership Systems	
218
	
10.4.1	 Empowerment	
218
	
10.4.2	 The Tie That Bonds	
219
	
10.4.3	 Membership Network	
220
	
10.4.4	 Consensus-Building Process	
221
	
10.4.5	 Back to the Future	
224
	
10.4.6	 Performance Criteria and Measures	
225
10.5	 Learning Systems	
226
	
10.5.1	 Learning to Learn (Formal Education)	
227
	
10.5.2	 Learning to Be (Cultural Education)	
228
	
10.5.3	 Learning to Do (Professional Education)	
229
	
10.5.4	 Support Functions	
229
	
10.5.5	 Advocacy Functions	
230
	
10.5.6	 Oneida Multiversity	
230
	
10.5.7	 Performance Criteria and Measures	
232
10.6	 Business Systems	
233
	
10.6.1	 Services Sector	
234
	
10.6.2	 Industry Sector	
235
	
10.6.3	 Leisure Sector	
235
	
10.6.4	 Land and Agriculture Sector	
235
	
10.6.5	 Marketing Sector	
236
	
10.6.6	 Governance and Intersystem Relationships	
236

viii 
Contents
10.7	 Core Services	
237
	
10.7.1	 Government Services Division	
237
	
10.7.2	 Infrastructure Development Division	
238
	
10.7.3	 Ordinance Division	
238
	
10.7.4	 Performance Criteria and Measures	
238
	
10.7.5	 Governance and Oversight	
238
10.8	 External Environment	
239
10.9	 Judicial System	
240
	
10.9.1	 Contextual Analysis	
240
	
10.9.2	 Contextual Challenge	
241
	
10.9.3	 Democratic Challenge	
242
	
Chapter 11	
Butterworth Health System	
245
11.1	
Issues, Concerns, and Expectations	
246
11.2	 Design Specifications	
248
11.3	 The Architecture	
249
11.4	 Market Dimension	
250
	
11.4.1	 Market Access	
250
11.5	 Care System	
251
	
11.5.1	
Contextual Background	
251
	
11.5.2	 Desired Specifications	
252
	
11.5.3	 Common Features	
253
	
11.5.4	 Preventive Care	
255
	
11.5.5	 Interventional Care	
256
	
11.5.6	 Viability Care	
257
	
11.5.7	 Terminal Care	
258
11.6	 Output Dimension	
258
	
11.6.1	 Alternative One: Traditional Functional Structure	
259
	
11.6.2	 Alternative Two: Modular Structure	
259
	
11.6.3	 Health Delivery System Design: The Makeup	
261
	
11.6.4	 Community-Based Health Delivery System	
261
	
11.6.5	 Specialized Health Delivery System	
263
	
11.6.6	 Shared Services	
264
11.7	 Core Knowledge	
265
11.8	 Shared Services	
270
	
11.8.1	 Need for Centralization	
270
	
11.8.2	 Control Versus Service	
271
	
11.8.3	 Customer Orientation	
272
11.9	 Health Delivery System, Core Knowledge,  
	
and Care System Interactions	
273
11.10	 The Executive Office	
277
11.11	 Recap	
278
	
Chapter 12	
The Marriott Corporation	
281
12.1	 The Environment: How the Game Is Evolving	
282
	
12.1.1	 Bases for Competition	
282
12.2	 Purpose	
282
	
12.2.1	 Principles and Desired Characteristics	
282
	
12.2.2	 Mission	
283
12.3	 The Architecture	
283
	
12.3.1	 Product/Market Mix	
285
	
12.3.2	 Region/Market Operation	
285
	
12.3.3	 Brand Management	
286
	
12.3.4	 Core Components	
287
	
12.3.5	 Core Knowledge	
287
	
12.3.6	 Critical Processes	
288
12.4	 Recap	
289

Contents  ix
	
Chapter 13	
Commonwealth Energy System	
291
13.1	 Stakeholders' Expectations	
292
	
13.1.1	
Shareholders' Expectations	
292
	
13.1.2	 Regulators' Expectations	
293
	
13.1.3	 Employees' Expectations	
293
	
13.1.4	 Customers' Expectations	
293
	
13.1.5	 Suppliers' Expectations	
294
	
13.1.6	 Public's Expectations	
294
13.2	 Business Environment	
294
	
13.2.1	 The Changing Game: The Energy Industry	
294
	
13.2.2	 The Changing Game: COM/Energy	
296
13.3	 Design	
296
	
13.3.1	 Purpose and Strategic Intent	
297
	
13.3.2	 Core Values and Desired Specifications	
298
13.4	 General Architecture	
299
13.5	 Core Business Units: Gas and Electricity Distribution	
301
	
13.5.1	 Customer-Oriented Business Units:  
	
	
Energy Supply Systems and Management  
	
	
Services	
302
	
13.5.2	 Cogeneration and Packages of Energy Supply  
	
	
(Industrial and Commercial)	
302
	
13.5.3	 Energy Efficiency and Electrotechnologies  
	
	
(Residential and Commercial)	
304
13.6	 Technology/Supply-Oriented Business Units:  
	
Energy Generation and Supply	
305
	
13.6.1	 Energy Generation (Canal)	
306
	
13.6.2	 Gas Storage (LNG)	
307
	
13.6.3	 Steam Services	
307
13.7	 Energy Brokerage and International Operations	
307
	
13.7.1	 Energy Brokerage	
308
	
13.7.2	 International Operations	
308
13.8	 Shared Services (Performance Centers)	
309
	
13.8.1	 Service Company	
310
	
13.8.2	 Financial Systems	
311
13.9	 Executive Office	
311
	
13.9.1	 Core Knowledge Pool	
312
	
13.9.2	 Learning and Control System	
313
	
Chapter 14	
Carrier Corporation	
317
14.1	 Expectations, Assumptions, and Specifications	
318
	
14.1.1	 The Changing Game: In General	
318
	
14.1.2	 The Changing Game: The HVAC Industry	
319
	
14.1.3	 Drivers for Change	
319
	
14.1.4	 Bases for Competition	
319
14.2	 Core Values	
319
	
14.2.1	 Products and Services	
320
	
14.2.2	 Core Technology and Know-How	
321
	
14.2.3	 Sales and Distribution System	
322
14.3	 Systems Architecture	
323
	
14.3.1	 Desired Characteristics	
323
	
14.3.2	 A Multidimensional Framework	
323
14.4	 Markets	
324
	
14.4.1	 Regional Units	
324
	
14.4.2	 Area Units	
326
14.5	 Output Units	
326
14.6	 Components	
327

x 
Contents
14.7	 Inputs	
328
	
14.7.1	 The Technology	
328
	
14.7.2	 Operational Support (Process Design)	
329
	
14.7.3	 Management Support Services	
330
14.8	 Business Processes	
330
	
14.8.1	 Decision System	
330
	
14.8.2	 Performance Measurement and Reward System	
331
	
14.8.3	 Target Costing and Variable Budgeting System	
331
Author Biography	
333
Conclusion	
335
References	
339
Index	
343

xi
A Tribute to Memories and Contributions 
of Russell L. Ackoff to Design Thinking
The grand old man of systems sciences, my dear friend of the last 40 years, 
is no longer with us. Russell Ackoff left us, unexpectedly, on October 29, 
2009, due to complications from hip surgery. Just a week prior, we had a 
beautiful discussion about the resurgence of the same set of old interactive 
problems. We also discussed how the growing concerns with frequent 
market bubbles, faulty business models, challenges of globalization, blind 
pursuit of efficiency at any cost, stubborn unemployment, surging deficit, 
the state of public education, and an increasingly polarized society have 
created an overdue doubt in the minds of many that the existing 
­conventional tools and the dominant growth paradigm may no longer be 
capable of dealing with the emerging complexities of our time. Sharing 
these concerns, we talked about how to make systems thinking more 
­accessible to a larger group of practitioners.
In this context and considering the current surge of interest in design 
thinking, I felt it was time to update and expand the methodology (Part 
Three) portion of this book by dedicating one full chapter to each one of 
the four foundations of systems thinking. This discussion also brought out 
memories of our historic meeting in 1974 when, for the first time, Russ had 
told me: “design is the future of systems methodology and is the vehicle 
through which choice is manifested.” I told him how this statement had 
affected my professional life and how much I would appreciate a ­forward 
from him to the potential third edition explaining why he still believed that 
design thinking is the answer to the challenges of ­interdependency and 
complexity.
In the aftermath of his unfortunate hip operation, I had forgotten all 
about this conversation when Mrs. Ackoff kindly gave me a note she had 
found in Russ' working file. The note, with my name on it, was about our 
meeting and a reminder to write a piece for my book outlining the think-
ing process that had led him to “interactive design.” I sadly realized that 
we had lost a golden opportunity to learn about a colorful thought process 
that for so long had affected so many people.
What a beautiful piece it would have been if Russ had the time to finish 
it. But all was not lost; I remembered that there was another forward writ-
ten by Russ for an earlier book of mine, Towards a Systems Theory of 
Organization, published in 1985 by Intersystems. In this forward Russ tells 
the history from which the phenomenal conception of Social Systems 
Foreword to the  
Third Edition

xii 
Foreword to the Third Edition
Sciences had evolved. Although nothing could replace the beautiful gift of 
having a forward written by him for this book, the old forward at least 
­provided an enchanting window into the history and the traditions that 
had produced this incredible thought process. Unfortunately, I found out 
that Intersystems is no longer in operation and the old book is out of print 
and not readily available. It was then that I decided to ask my publisher if 
I could reproduce the old forward here as a tribute to Ackoff and a reminder 
of his vital and immeasurable contributions to the thinking that is at the 
core of this book. The following is that particular forward.
There is nothing that an author who has tried to produce new ideas values 
more than having another take those ideas and develop them even further. 
Jamshid Gharajedaghi has done just this to my work. But he has done a 
great deal more. He has made significant additions of his own. The tradition 
out of which his work has come and that from which mine has arisen are 
very different, but these two traditions intersected a number of years ago 
and have merged to give his work a freshness and originality that I envy. 
It may be helpful to the reader to share some of the history from which 
Jamshid's and my joint efforts have emerged.
I began graduate work in the philosophy of sciences at the University of 
Pennsylvania in 1941 where I came under the influence of the “grand old 
man” of the department, the eminent philosopher E.A. Singer, Jr. Because 
of the informality of the department he created I began to collaborate with 
two younger members of the faculty, both of whom were former students 
of Singer, Thomas A. Cown and C. West Churchman.
Three aspects of Singer's philosophy had a particularly strong influence on 
me. First, that the practice of philosophy, its application, was necessary for 
the development of philosophy itself. Second, that effective work on “real” 
problems required an interdisciplinary approach. Third, that the social area 
needed more work than any of the other domains of science and that this 
was the most difficult.
We developed a concept of a research group that would enable us to 
­practice philosophy in the social domain by dealing with real problems. 
The organization we designed was called “The Institute of Experimental 
Method.” With the participation of a number of other graduate students in 
philosophy and a few other members of the faculty we started this institute 
on a completely informal basis.
In June of 1946 I accepted an appointment to the Philosophy 
Department of (then) Wayne University in Detroit. I did so because the 
dean of the college had shown enthusiasm for the idea of ­establishing 
an Institute of Applied Philosophy and offered to support an effort to 
create it. In the ­following year Churchman also accepted a ­full-time 
appointment in ­philosophy. Meanwhile, Cowan had immigrated to the 

Foreword to the Third Edition  xiii
Law School of Wayne from Nebraska to which he had gone when he left 
Penn in 1946. The other two members of the philosophy ­department 
of Wayne viewed our efforts to establish an Institute of Applied 
Philosophy as prostitution of this ancient pursuit. A “fight” broke out 
over this issue, one that involved a large part of the faculty, adminis-
tration, and student body at Wayne. My position in that department 
became untenable.
In the spring of 1951 Churchman and I accepted appointments to (then) 
Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland because Case was committed 
to establishing an activity in Operations Research and Churchman and I 
had come to believe we could probably work better under this name than 
under the cloak of academic philosophy. By the end of 1952 we had for-
mal approval, but not without faculty opposition, for the first doctoral pro-
gram in Operations Research. From then on the Group and the program 
grew rapidly and flourished. Case became a mecca to which pilgrimages of 
operations researchers from around the world came. In 1958, Churchman, 
for personal reasons, migrated to the University of California at Berkeley 
where he established a similar activity. Academic Operations Research 
activities began to proliferate and flourish, many of them modeled on those 
at Case.
In June of 1964 the research group and academic program moved to Penn 
bringing with it most of the faculty, students, and research projects. Our 
activities flourished in the very supportive environment that Penn and 
Wharton provided. The wide variety of faculty members that we were able 
to involve in our activities significantly enhanced our capabilities. By the 
mid-1960s I had become uncomfortable with the direction, or rather, the 
lack of direction, of professional Operations Research. I had four major 
complaints.
First, it had become addicted to its mathematical tools and had lost sight 
of the problems of management. As a result it was looking for problems 
to which to apply its tools rather than looking for tools that were suitable 
for solving the changing problems of management. Second, it failed to 
take into account the fact that problems are abstractions extracted from 
­reality by analysis. Reality consists of systems of problems, ­problems that 
are strongly interactive, messes. I believed that we had to develop ways 
of dealing with these systems of problems as wholes. Third, Operations 
Research had become a discipline and had lost its commitment to 
­interdisciplinarity. Most of it was being carried out by professionals who 
had been trained in the subject, its mathematical techniques. There was 
little interaction with the other sciences professions and humanities. 
Finally, Operations Research was ignoring the developments in systems 
thinking — the methodology, concepts, and theories being developed by 
systems thinkers.

xiv 
Foreword to the Third Edition
For these reasons, five of us on the OR faculty designed a new program 
which we wanted to provide as an option to students entering the program. 
In addition to myself, there was Eric Trist, Hasan Ozbekhan, Thomas Saaty, 
and James Emshoff. We were able to initiate a new experimental program 
and administrative entity in The Wharton School called the Social Systems 
Sciences. It came to be known as “S Cubed.” This program along with its 
research arm, the Busch Center, now hosts the largest doctoral program 
in the school.
The graduate and research programs are directed at producing profes-
sionals who were capable of planning for, doing research on, and designing 
social systems, systems in which people play the major role. It is dedicated 
to the development and use of theories of social systems and professional 
practice, and the practice of such theories. It is also committed to the devel-
opment of methodology and conceptual systems, which enable us to design 
and manage social systems more effectively.
In 1968 I made my first trip to lran on a mission for the UN. I met Jamshid 
­during that visit. He was then employed by IBM. On one of my ­subsequent 
visits I found that he had assumed the direction of the Industrial Manage­
ment Institute and had integrated the research and academic ­principles of 
S3 with its own program developed locally. We started a personal and insti-
tutional collaboration. He sent a number of his staff to us for graduate work 
and we engaged in several joint projects. We tried to entice him to Penn 
as a visiting professor but he was unwilling to leave his remarkable insti-
tute. I could not blame him. In his position I would have acted as he did. 
Unfortunately for him, but fortunately for us, the revolution in lran changed 
all that. That upheaval virtually destroyed his institute and his opportuni-
ties for carrying out his work. He left Iran with the help of our invitation and 
immediately joined us. Shortly after, I was able to transfer the direction of 
the Busch Center to him.
His joining us was a major event in my life. An investigator into a ­serious 
and complex subject welcomes a convergence of a broad stream of ideas, 
experience, and hard work of a distinctively different cultural origin. This 
book is a record of collaboration between the system of systems thought 
stemming originally from the works of Edgar A. Singer, T. Cowan, C. West 
Churchman, and myself working primarily in the cultural milieu of the west-
ern world and the author of this book working for many years in the appar-
ently quite dissimilar situation of an ancient eastern culture. An apparent 
miracle happened. What was originally thought of as a fundamentally 
disparate source of alien views on the nature of systems organization 
turned easily and ­naturally into a joint effort. The fundamental nature of 
­systems organization was at once perceived to be a unity in diversity. When 
Professor Gharajedaghi joined the Social Systems Science department of 

Foreword to the Third Edition  xv
the Wharton School and assumed the direction of its research, the Busch 
Center, he began a two-pronged activity of research into the nature of 
systems organization and applied research and application. In a series of 
his writings on systems theory it became evident quite early that the two 
streams of thought were not only basically compatible but also had the 
happy effect of enriching each other. The evidence of this fortunate coales-
cence of a different cultural rapprochement is the present work.
Jamshid is not only an invaluable friend and colleague, he is also a constant 
source of inspiration. Therefore I was delighted by the invitation to open 
this book, which enables me to invite you to share in the inspiration he has 
provided me.
Russell L. Ackoff
Ackoff retired from the University of Pennsylvania in 1986 at the age of 65, 
due to a mandatory retirement rule at the time. Many at the Busch Center 
joined him to create INTERACT, The Institute for Interactive Management. 
For the next 20 years INTERACT became Ackoff's professional home until 
his retirement in 2006.
In addition to being a great mentor, Ackoff was a wonderful friend and 
an exceptional human being. I miss him enormously.
Jamshid Gharajedaghi

This page intentionally left blank

xvii
Professor Thomas Lee of MIT was a dear friend. I met him in the early 
1980s when he was the Secretary General of the International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). Tom was obsessed with the notion that 
two distinct traditions of systems thinking — Ackoff's interactive design 
and Forrester's systems dynamics — were complementary. For years he 
insisted that we should work together to merge the two prominent systems 
methodologies into a single unified one. But at the time I was preoccupied 
with two other exciting conceptions. The first one was consideration of 
culture as an operating system that guides social organizations toward a 
predefined order. The second was a hunch that iteration is the key for 
understanding complexity.
Sadly, Tom passed away, but he managed to get a promise from me to 
work on his favorite project. To fulfill my promise I tried several different 
approaches, all in vain, before realizing that I had the solution all along. I 
had used it in the first edition of this book to combine my version of 
­holistic thinking — iteration of structure, function, and process — with 
interactive design. Suddenly it became clear that interactive design is not 
just a simple methodology. It is also a platform that could be used to inte-
grate the iterative approach, systems dynamics, and the challenge of 
­self-organization of sociocultural systems (neg-entropic process) into a 
comprehensive systems methodology.
I prepared a draft of my thinking and showed it to my mentor Russ 
Ackoff. He liked it very much and insisted that I should publish it in a 
new book.
Coincidentally, at that time, Dean Thomas Manahan of Villanova 
University and Niel Sicherman, Associate Dean of Executive Education, 
asked me to help them design a distinctive Executive MBA program that 
would use systems thinking as a platform to integrate the relevant subjects 
into a unified whole. I was ready for this assignment. The systems method-
ology I had developed was uniquely qualified to deal with the challenge 
that most MBA programs have not been able to deliver. Ten successful 
classes of Villanova Executive MBA graduates are testimony for the 
­effectiveness of this approach.
When Dennis McGonagle, my editor from Elsevier, called to see 
whether I was ready for a new edition, I welcomed the opportunity to 
revise Chapters 4 through 7 from the previous edition to incorporate this 
exciting concept.
Foreword to the 
Second Edition

xviii 
Foreword to the Second Edition 
But, in the end, it was the remarkable support of my valued partner 
Susan Leddick that got the job done. Susan not only edited the revised 
chapters with utmost attention but also had many invaluable suggestions 
that improved the outcome significantly.
So, here it is, my new version of a comprehensive systems ­methodology. 
I sincerely believe that the beauty of interactive design and the magic of 
the iteration of structure, function, and process — when combined with 
the power of operational thinking, and genuine understanding of 
­neg-entropic processes — create a competent and exciting systems 
­methodology that goes a long way in dealing with emerging challenges of 
seemingly complex and chaotic sociocultural systems.
Jamshid Gharajedaghi

xix
This is an unconventional book for an unconventional reader. It is intended 
for those professionals who, in addition to their specialized knowledge, 
would like to get a handle on life so they may put their special text into its 
proper context. It speaks to those thinkers and practitioners who have 
come to realize that learning to be is as much a necessary part of a success-
ful professional life as is learning to do; and that to remain unidimensional 
is to become boringly predictable.
This book is about a new mode of seeing, doing, and being in the world; 
it is a way of thinking through chaos and complexity. It is not another 
“how-to” book, nor an alternative to what is already available. It is not a 
variation on the tired theme of offering the latest version of the common 
characteristics of the winners.
It also violates the golden rule of best sellers. I am told the experience 
of dealing with too many ideas in a single book is way out of the comfort 
zone of most readers.
However, the ideas in this book, although many, converge and create a 
whole that is profoundly more beautiful than any one concept in ­isolation. 
The real beauty, therefore, lies in experiencing the whole, seeing them all 
come together fusing into one.
As for the choice between breaking the message or breaking the norm, 
it was obvious which one had to go. If that meant being a minority of one, 
so be it.
This book, nevertheless, speaks to everyone for whom the joy of think-
ing is still alive and kicking and whose enthusiasm to entertain exciting 
but unfamiliar conceptions is not yet exhausted.
In a nutshell, the book is about systems. The imperatives of 
­interdependency, the necessity of reducing endless complexities, and the 
need to produce manageable simplicities require a workable systems 
methodology, a holistic frame of reference that would allow us to focus on 
the relevant issues and avoid the endless search for more details while 
drowning in proliferating useless information.
Contrary to a widely held belief, the popular notion of a ­multidisciplinary 
approach is not a systems approach. The ability to synthesize separate 
findings into a coherent whole seems far more critical than the ability to 
generate information from different perspectives.
This book, with a practical orientation and yet a profound theoretical 
depth, goes beyond the simple declaration of desirability of systems 
­thinking. It deals with challenges of interdependency, chaos, and choice 
using an elaborate scheme called iterative design.
Preface

xx 
Preface 
The iterative design explicitly recognizes that choice is at the heart of 
human development. Development is the capacity to choose; design is a 
vehicle for enhancement of choice and holistic thinking. Designers, in this 
book, seek to choose rather than predict the future. They try to understand 
rational, emotional, and cultural dimensions of choice and to produce a 
design that satisfies a multitude of functions. They learn how to use what 
they already know, learn how to realize what they do not know, and learn 
how to learn what they need to know.
This book is divided into four parts. Part One identifies where systems 
thinking fits into the overall scheme of things. It provides an overview, a 
total picture of major theoretical traditions in management and systems 
thinking and their relationship.
Parts Two and Three are the guts of the book. Part Two discusses the 
five systems principles as the building blocks of the mental model used to 
generate the initial set of assumptions about the system. It also identifies 
the comprehensive set of variables that collectively describe the organiza-
tion in its totality. Part Three deals extensively with the development of 
iterative design and its practical implications in defining problems and 
designing solutions.
Part Four reviews five actual cases of designing a business architecture. 
The Oneida Nation, Butterworth Health System, Commonwealth Energy 
System, Marriott Corporation, and Carrier Corporation represent a diverse 
group of challenging social organizations. I call them “the gutsy few” 
because they were willing to experiment with unconventional solutions 
without worrying about who had done it first. I am grateful for their trust 
and permission to share synopses of their designs with others.

xxi
A lifetime of teaching and consulting involves indebtedness to ­innumerable 
sources of wisdom. I have learned from my students and clients far more 
than I ever taught them. Looking back, I can hardly even begin to recall the 
fires by which I was warmed, the lights by which I found my way. And yet 
there are faces that vividly stand out.
Russel L. Ackoff has been my mentor, business partner, and a great 
friend. He was there, as always, with his infinite wisdom and uncompro-
mising critique to examine every line and dissect every concept of this 
manuscript. I welcomed his measured views and took all of his 
recommendations.
Reza Niazmand was the first who found my strange way of thinking 
interesting enough to trust me to convert The Industrial Management 
Institute, the entity he had spent all of his professional life to create, 
into a consulting research and training firm based on systems thinking. 
Unyielding support of this giant man during my exciting years of tenure 
as the head of the Industrial Management Institute set the stage for 
­initial development and gutsy practice of many of the ideas presented in 
this work.
Bijan Khorram, as a friend and colleague of over four decades, the 
­infusion of his thinking on me knows no bounds. He acted as the sound-
ing board to examine the soundness of ideas and the potency of their 
­configurations. He directly collaborated in the redesigns and write-ups of 
the cases presented in Part Four: Systems Practice. Stylistically, his ­influence 
permeated the entire exercise.
Johnny Pourdehnad's insatiable love to search was a blessing. With 
him around access to valuable resources was fun rather than obstruction.
Jason Magidson helped with graphics. Pat Egner did the editing; the 
Anglicized version is indebted to her efforts.
Then there were the special clients whose patronage, courage, and 
intellectual challenge in bringing the conceptual ideas to concrete fruition 
proved invaluable indeed. Reza Ghotbi, Akbar Etemad, Nader Hakimi, 
Charlie Ligon, Karl J. Krapek, Len Devanna and Artley Skenandore, Gerry 
Wilson, Tommy Lee, Pat Stocker, and Kathy Dannemiller with their 
­unfailing trust turned out to be the difference that made the difference.
Last but not least is Karen Speerstra, Publishing Director of Butterworth 
Heinemann, who, with remarkable decisiveness, got the project rolling. 
March Jacques proved to be a fantastic matchmaker.
So my gratitude to them will remain a debt I can never repay.
Acknowledgment

This page intentionally left blank

SYSTEM 
PHILOSOPHY 
The Name of the Devil
Part | one

This page intentionally left blank

3
Ch apt er | one
Ch apt er | one
How the Game 
Is Evolving
The most stubborn habits, which resist change with the greatest tenacity, 
are those that worked well for a space of time and led to the practitioner 
being rewarded for those behaviors. If you suddenly tell such persons 
that their recipe for success is no longer viable, their personal experience 
belies your diagnosis. The road to convincing them is hard. It is the stuff of 
classic tragedy. 1
The Dow Jones Industrial Average recently marked its 100th anniversary. 
Of the original companies listed in 1896 only GE had survived to join in 
the celebration. In the mid-1960s, Jean-Jacques Shreiber, in his best-­
selling book, American Challenge (1967), told his fellow Europeans: 
“Swallow your pride, imitate America, or accept her dominance forever.” 
But in late 1970s, it was “Japan Inc.” that somehow posed the greatest 
competitive challenge to corporate America. It took 300% devaluation of 
the dollar to ward off this challenge.
Fourteen of the 47 companies exemplified in Tom Peters' much-acclaimed 
book of the 1980s, In Search of Excellence (1982), lost their luster in less than 
four years, at least in the sense that they had suffered serious profit erosion.
The collapse of savings and loans and real estate, along with the fall of the 
defense industry in the late 1980s, could have led to a disastrous 1990s, but 
counterintuitively, these phenomena resulted in a restructuring of the finan-
cial and intellectual resources in America, which may very well have been a 
coproducer of one of the longest periods of economic expansion and pros-
perity in America. Ironically, in mid-1998, worries about Japan's economy 
were the nagging concerns of American investors. Collapse of the dotcom 
bonanza (late 1999 and early 2000) and the housing bubble and the subprime 
and financial systems fiasco led to the troubling question: What is going on?
1Charles Hampden-Turner and Linda Arc, The Raveled Knot: An Examination of the Time-
to-Market Issue at Analog's Semi-conductor Division, unpublished internal report.

4 
How the Game Is Evolving 
The game keeps changing, but this is hardly news. By now it is a well-
known and even a tired secret that what contributes to the fall of so many 
great enterprises is that somehow their recipe for success becomes ineffec-
tive. There seems to be a devil at work here, and the name of this devil is 
success.
Each one of us can recall cases of great powers, nations, organiza-
tions, or personalities rising and falling. This phenomenon occurs all 
too frequently to be dismissed as coincidental. So what underlying 
forces convert success to failure? Let us start with the following observa-
tion. The forces that make a failure out of success form a five level hier-
archy (see Figure 1.1). Each level represents a distinct tendency, but 
together they form an interactive whole in which higher levels provide 
the context for the lower levels. At each level success plays a critical but 
different role.
1.1  Imitation
Operating at the first level, imitation is the most basic force. Competitive 
advantage is by definition a distinction. Successful distinctions, in time, 
are eroded by imitation. At that point, exceptions become norms and lose 
their advantage.
Although imitation has been present at all times, today its significance 
for American business has changed by an order of magnitude. Advances in 
information technology, communication, and reverse engineering have 
increased the product technology's vulnerability to imitation. Any techno-
logical distinction in a given product is now fair game for potential imita-
tors who can learn, copy, and reproduce it in practically no time. Such easy 
imitation has been significant for American industry. While product 
FIGURE 1.1  Hierarchy of forces that erode competitive advantage.

Inertia  5
­technology has traditionally been the cornerstone of the American com-
petitive game, countries with an advantage in process technology have 
gained a dual advantage.
First, it is difficult to copy a distinction in process technology because 
its critical elements are knowledge workers. Second, competency in a pro-
cess technology makes it simpler to transfer knowledge from one context 
to another, easing the operationalization of new knowledge. The results 
are dramatic: much faster time-to-market performance, a lower break-even 
point, better product variety, and faster response to change.
In the late 1970s, a well-known equipment company in America real-
ized it had a 40% cost disadvantage in comparison with its direct Japanese 
competitor. The company, ironically, was the technological leader in the 
lift truck industry. Its cost structure was 40% raw material, 15% direct 
labor, and 45% overhead. Overhead (transformation cost) was simply cal-
culated as 300% of direct labor.
The company decided to reduce the cost by 20%. It was assumed that 
a 5% reduction in direct labor would automatically reduce overhead by 
another 15%, resulting in a 20% cost reduction. After a whole year of 
struggle, direct labor was reduced to 10% without any reduction in the 
overhead. When we were asked to deal with the situation, this was our first 
reaction: Why does anyone want to reduce the cost by 20% when there is 
a 40% cost disadvantage? Where did the 40% cost advantage come from? 
It was obvious that even if the workers gave up all of their wages the com-
pany would not survive.
Then we realized that the competitive product only used 1,800 parts 
while our product employed 2,800. The difference in the number of the 
parts perfectly explained the difference in cost. The surprising element in all 
of this was that a lower number of parts was achieved by the competition by 
utilizing technologies that were developed by our client over the last 10 
years. The problem was that our client had patched each one of its newly 
developed technologies into an old platform, which resulted in a complex 
and inefficient product, whereas the competition started from a clean 
slate and took full advantage of the potentials that each technology offered.
The moral of this story is that once in a while one should pause and 
reflect on oneself and begin anew.
1.2  Inertia
Inertia is responsible for all of the second level tendencies and behaviors 
that delay reactions to technological breakthroughs. For example, sheer 
inertia by the Continental Can Company provided the opportunity for 
two-piece can technology to replace the three-piece can technology and 
destroy the once mighty Continental Can. Five hundred factories all over 
the United States and 45% share of the three-piece can market could not 
prevent a delayed reaction to two-piece technology from destroying 
Continental Can in fewer than three years.

6 
How the Game Is Evolving 
Ironically, the likelihood that an organization will fail to respond to a 
critical technological break is directly proportional to the level of success 
it had achieved in a previously dominant technology. In other words, the 
more success an organization has with a particular technology, the higher 
its resistance to the prospect of change. The initial reaction is always 
denial. We do have an amazing capacity for denial in the face of undeni-
able events, but the real danger arises when the organization finally 
decides to patch things up. Patching wastes critical time. It provides the 
competition with a window of opportunity to disseminate the new tech-
nology and dominate the market. Patching, moreover, increases the cost 
of the operation and reduces the quality of the output, producing a 
­double jeopardy.
1.3  Suboptimization
Exaggeration — the fallacy that if “X” is good more “X” is even better — is 
at the core of the third level processes that effectively destroy a proven 
competitive advantage. A tendency to push one's strength to its limits 
transforms the strength into a destructive weakness. Unfortunately, many 
stories follow the same line: a winning formula gains adulation, and the 
heroes or heroines who shaped it become the sole authorities. One right 
answer prevails. An increasingly monolithic culture produces an ever-
decreasing set of alternatives and a narrow path to victory. This limited set 
redefines the corporate culture, the assumptions, the premises, and the 
common wisdom that bounds or frames a company's understanding of 
itself and its industry and drive its competitive strategy.
An interesting treatment of this phenomenon can be found in Danny 
Miller's book, The Icarus Paradox (1990). Miller refers to Icarus of Greek 
mythology who became emboldened to fly higher and higher until he 
came so close to the sun that his wax wings melted and he plunged to his 
death. Miller explains how craftsmanship and productive attention to 
detail by the Digital Equipment Corporation turned into an obsession 
with minutia and technical tinkering. Exaggeration was also at work when 
the innovative capability of CDC and Polaroid escalated into high-tech 
escapism and technical utopia. Miller's list of firms that have been trapped 
by this phenomenon includes IBM, Texas Instruments, Apple Computer, 
General Motors, Sears, and many of the most acclaimed American 
corporations.
1.4  Change of the game
Change of the game, or transformation of the problem, is at the heart of 
a counterintuitive process that converts success into failure. In other 
words, the act of playing a game successfully changes the game itself. 
Failure to appreciate the consequences of one's success and tenacity in 
playing the good old game are what create tragedies. Once success is 

Change of the Game  7
achieved, or a problem is effectively dissolved, the concerns associated 
with that ­problem are irreversibly affected. Dissolving a problem trans-
forms it and generates a whole new set of concerns. That is why the basis 
for competition changes and a new competitive game emerges as soon as 
a competitive challenge is met.
The role of success is quite different in the third and fourth level pro-
cesses. When it is exaggerated (third level), success works against the nature 
of the solution and diminishes its effectiveness. By contrast, success in 
handling a challenge (fourth level) transforms the nature of the problem. 
In other words, it changes the game. Henry Ford's success in creating a 
mass production machine effectively dissolved the production problem. 
A familiar concern for production was replaced with an unfamiliar con-
cern for markets. The once unique ability to mass-produce lost its advan-
tage through widespread imitation. This event changed the competitive 
game from concern for production to concern for markets, which required 
an ability to manage diversity and growth.
Henry Ford's refusal to appreciate the implication of his own success 
and his unwillingness to play the new game (“they can have any color as 
long as it is black”) gave Alfred Sloan of GM the opportunity to dominate 
the automotive industry. Sloan's concept of product-based divisional 
structure turned out to be an effective design for managing growth and 
diversity. The new game, artfully learned and played by corporate America, 
became the benchmark for the rest of the world to copy (Womack, 1990).
In an attempt to duplicate the American system, Ohno, the chief engi-
neer of Toyota, came up with yet another new design. His introduction of 
the lean production system changed the performance measures by more 
than an order of magnitude. While it took the American auto industry 
three days to change a die, Toyota could do it in only three minutes. Once 
again, success transformed the game. This time the differentiating factors 
were flexibility and control.
But corporate America was too overwhelmed and overjoyed by its own 
success to even notice the emergence of the new game. This inattentiveness 
provided Japan with an opportunity to launch a slow but effective chal-
lenge. The insidious manner in which the new game evolved underscores 
another important principle of systems dynamics, which is exemplified by 
the story of the frog that boiled to death by sitting happily in water that 
gradually grew hotter.
Examples of the change of the game can also be found in politics. 
Although the success of the Persian Gulf War boosted the approval rating 
of President Bush to an unprecedented level, it inadvertently cost him the 
election. The triumph of his foreign policy caused the nation to shift its 
concern from national security to domestic economy. Failure to under-
stand the implication of this change converted the success to failure.
Recognizing that success changes the game, think what the phenome-
nal success of information technology means. Success marks the beginning 

8 
How the Game Is Evolving 
of the end of the Information Era. Competitive advantage is increasingly 
shifting away from having access to information to generating knowledge 
and, finally, toward gaining understanding.
1.5  Shift of paradigm
The cumulative effects of imitation, inertia, suboptimization, and change 
of the game ultimately manifest themselves in the fifth force — a shift of 
paradigm.
A shift of paradigm can happen purposefully by an active process of 
learning and unlearning. It is more common that it is a reaction to frustra-
tion produced by a march of events that nullify conventional wisdom. 
Faced with a series of contradictions that can no longer be ignored or 
denied and/or an increasing number of dilemmas for which prevailing 
mental models can no longer provide convincing explanations, most peo-
ple accept that the prevailing paradigm has ceased to be valid and that it 
has exhausted its potential capacity.
This is a twilight zone where Stafford Beer's (1975) aphorism rings 
true: “Acceptable ideas are competent no more and competent ideas are 
not yet acceptable.” It is where powerful threats and opportunities emerge; 
where the great organizations rise and fall.
Eventually, it takes the exceptional courage of a few to question the 
conventional wisdom and point to the first crack in it. Thus begins a pain-
ful struggle whose end result is reconceptualization of critical variables 
into a new ensemble with a new logic of its own.
Shifts of paradigm can happen in two categories: a change in the nature 
of reality or a change in the method of inquiry. Also possible, however, is 
a dual shift involving both dimensions. The significance and impact of 
any paradigm shift cannot be overestimated, but facing a dual shift is an 
even more formidable challenge. It tests the outer limits of human capac-
ity to comprehend, communicate, and confront the problematic. For 
example, the shift of paradigm from a mechanical to a biological model, 
despite its huge impact, represented a unidimensional shift in our under-
standing of the nature of organization. It happened in the context of 
­analytical inquiry (Figure 1.2).
We are now facing the challenge of a dual shift. Not only has there 
been a shift of paradigm in our understanding of the nature of the beast — 
from our conception of an organization as a biological model to a socio-
cultural model — but there has also been a profound shift in our 
assumption regarding the method of inquiry, the means of knowing, 
from analytical thinking (the science of dealing with independent sets of 
variables) to holistic thinking (the art and science of handling interdepen-
dent sets of variables). The complementary nature of these two dimen-
sions is at the core of both understanding how the game is evolving and 
identifying the drivers for change.

Interdependency and Choice  9
1.6  Interdependency and choice
While the organization as a whole is becoming more and more interdepen-
dent, the parts increasingly display choice and behave independently. The 
resolution of this dilemma requires a dual shift of paradigm.
The first shift results in the ability to see the organization as a multi-
minded, sociocultural system, a voluntary association of purposeful mem-
bers who have come together to serve themselves by serving a need in the 
environment.
The second shift helps us see through chaos and complexity and learn 
how to deal with an interdependent set of variables. Failure to appreciate 
the significance of this dual change results in excessive structural conflict, 
anxiety, a feeling of impotency, and resistance to change. Unfortunately, 
prevailing organizational structures, despite all the rhetoric to the con-
trary, are designed to prevent change. Dominant cultures by default keep 
reproducing the same non-solutions all over again. This is why the experi-
ence with corporate transformation is so fraught with frustration. The 
implicitness of the organizing assumptions, residing at the core of the 
organization's collective memory, is overpowering. Accepted on faith, 
these assumptions are transformed into unquestioned practices that 
may obstruct the future. Unless the content and implications of these 
implicit, cultural codes are made explicit and dismantled, the nature of 
the beast will outlive the temporary effects of interventions, no matter 
how well intended.
1.6.1  On the Nature of Organization: The First   
Paradigm Shift
To think about any thing requires an image or a concept of it. To think 
about a thing as complex as an organization requires models of something 
similar, something simpler, and something more familiar. The three ­models 
FIGURE 1.2  Shifts of paradigm.

10 
How the Game Is Evolving 
represent the successive shift in our understanding of the nature of the 
organization, from a mindless mechanical tool, to a uni-minded ­biological 
being and, finally, to a multi-minded organized complexity.
1.6.1.1  Mindless system — a mechanistic view
The mechanistic view of the world that evolved in France after the 
Renaissance maintains that the universe is a machine that works with a 
regularity dictated by its internal structure and the causal laws of nature. 
This worldview provided the basis not only for the Industrial Revolution 
but also for the development of the machine mode of organization 
(Gharajedaghi and Ackoff, 1984).
In the early stages of industrialization, machines replaced agricultural 
workers by the thousands. The reservoir of an unemployable army of 
unskilled agricultural workers threatened the fabric of Western societies. 
Then came a miracle, the ingenious notion of organizations. It was argued 
that in the same way a complicated tractor is built by parts, each perform-
ing only a simple task of horizontal, vertical, and circular motions, an 
organization could be created in such a manner that each person performs 
only a simple task. The mechanistic mode of organization was born as a 
logical extension of this conception and became instrumental in convert-
ing the army of unskilled agricultural laborers to semi-skilled industrial 
workers (Figure 1.3).
The impact of this simple notion of organizations was so great that in 
one generation it created a capacity for the production of goods and ser-
vices that surpassed the cumulative capacity of mankind. The essence of 
An Ingenious simple Idea
 
 
 
 
90%
 
This mode of organizaon, in only 
one generaon, produced
goods and services that superseded 
the cumulave producon 
capacity of mankind
 
 
Vertical, 
horizontal, and
circular motions
Every tractor
replaced 500
farm workers
 
 
Industrial Revoluon 
FIGURE 1.3  Machine mode of organization.

Interdependency and Choice  11
the machine mode of organization is simple and elegant. An organization 
is a mindless system; it has no purpose of its own. It is a tool with a func-
tion defined by the user, an instrument for the owner to use to achieve his 
goal of making profit. The important attribute of this tool is its reliability, 
and its performance criterion is simply efficiency. The principle that parts 
should not deviate is at the core of the glamour of tidiness, efficiency, con-
trollability, and predictability of its operation. The parts of a mindless 
mechanical system, just like the whole, have no choice. Its structure is 
designed into it, leaving it with no ability to restructure itself. The system 
functions reactively and can operate effectively only if its environment 
remains stable or has little effect on it.
1.6.1.2  Uni-minded systems — a biological view
The biological thinking or living systems paradigm, which led to the con-
cept of the organization as a uni-minded system, emerged mainly in 
Germany and Britain, but then caught fire in the United States. The under-
lying assumptions and principles of the biological mode of organizations 
are also simple and elegant: an organization is considered a uni-minded 
living system, just like a human being, with a purpose of its own. This pur-
pose, in view of the inherent vulnerability and unstable structure of open 
systems, is survival. To survive, according to conventional wisdom, bio-
logical beings have to grow. To do so they should exploit their environ-
ment to achieve a positive metabolism.
In organizational language, this means that growth is the measure of 
success, the single most important performance criterion, and that profit 
is the means to achieve it. Therefore, in contrast to the machine mode, in 
which profit is an end in itself, profit, for the biological mode, is only a 
means to an end. The association of profit with growth, considered a social 
good, gives profit the much needed social acceptability and status compat-
ible with the American way of life.
Although uni-minded systems have a choice, their parts do not. They 
operate based on cybernetics principles as a homeostatic system, reacting 
to information in the same way as a thermostat. As a matter of fact, the 
beauty of a uni-minded system is that the parts do not have a choice and 
react only in a predefined manner to the events in their environment.
For example, my heart cannot decide on its own that it does not want to 
work for me. My stomach will not get suspicious, thinking “the liver is out 
to get me.” No consciousness, no choice, no conflict. The operation of a 
uni-minded system is totally under the control of a single brain, the execu-
tive function, which, by means of a communication network, receives infor-
mation from a variety of sensing parts and issues directions that activate 
relevant parts of the system. It is assumed that a malfunctioning of any nor-
mal uni-minded system is due to a lack of information or noise in the com-
munication channel. Therefore, the perceived answer for most of the 
problems is more information and better communication. However, if 

12 
How the Game Is Evolving 
parts of a system develop consciousness and display choice, the system will 
be in real trouble. Imagine for a moment that the thermostat in your room 
suddenly develops a mind of its own — when it receives information about 
the temperature in the room it decides it does not like it and wants to sleep 
on it. The undeniable result is a chaotic air conditioning system.
When parts display choice, the central issues become conflict and the 
ability to deal with it. However, as long as paternalism is the dominant 
culture, the imperatives of “father knows best” or “give the apple to your 
sister” become an effective way to handle conflict. Paternalism best approx-
imates the essential characteristics of a uni-minded system, and it creates 
powerful organizations. Corporate giants such as Ford, DuPont, General 
Motors, and IBM owe much to their paternalistic founding fathers.
1.6.1.3  Multi-minded system — a sociocultural view
Multi-minded systems are exemplified by social organizations. A sociocul-
tural view considers the organization a voluntary association of purpose-
ful members who manifest a choice of both ends and means. This is a 
whole new ball game. Behavior of a system whose parts display a choice 
cannot be explained by mechanical or biological models. A social system 
has to be understood on its own terms.
The critical variable here is purpose. According to Ackoff (1972), an 
entity is purposeful if it can produce (1) the same outcome in different 
ways in the same environment and (2) different outcomes in the same or 
a different environment. Although the ability to make a choice is neces-
sary for purposefulness, it is not sufficient. An entity that can behave 
­differently but produce only one outcome in all environments is goal-
seeking, not purposeful. Servo-mechanisms are goal-seeking, but people 
are ­purposeful. As a purposeful system, an organization is part of a larger 
purposeful whole — the society. At the same time, it has purposeful indi-
viduals as its own members. The result is a hierarchy of purposeful systems 
of three distinct levels. These three levels are so interconnected that an 
optimal solution cannot be found at one level independent of the other 
two. Aligning the interest of the purposeful parts with each other and that 
of the whole is the main challenge of the system.
In contrast to machines, in which integrating of the parts into a cohe-
sive whole is a one-time proposition, for social organizations the problem 
of integration is a constant struggle and a continuous process. Effective 
integration of multilevel purposeful systems requires that the fulfillment 
of a purposeful part's desires depends on fulfillment of the larger system's 
requirements, and vice versa. In this context, the purpose of an organiza-
tion is to serve the purposes of its members while also serving the pur-
poses of its environment.
The elements of mechanical systems are energy-bonded, but those of 
sociocultural systems are information-bonded. In energy-bonded systems, 
laws of classical physics govern the relationships among the elements. 

On the Nature of Inquiry  13
Passive and predictable functioning of parts is a must, until a part breaks 
down. An automobile yields to its driver regardless of his expertise and 
dexterity. If a driver decides to run a car into a solid wall, the car will hit 
the wall without objection. Riding a horse, however, presents a different 
perspective. It matters to the horse who the rider is, and a proper ride can 
be achieved only after a series of information exchanges between the 
horse and the rider. Horse and rider form an information-bonded system 
in which guidance and control are achieved by a second degree agree-
ment (agreement based on a common perception) preceded by a psycho-
logical contract.
The members of a sociocultural organization are held together by 
one or more common objectives and collectively acceptable ways of pur-
suing them. The members share values that are embedded in their cul-
ture. The culture is the cement that integrates the parts into a cohesive 
whole. Nevertheless, since the parts have a lot to say about the organiza-
tion of the whole, consensus is essential to the alignment of a multi-
minded system.
1.7  On the nature of inquiry
1.7.1  The Second Paradigm Shift
Classical science is preoccupied with independent variables. It assumes that 
the whole is nothing but the sum of the parts. Accordingly, to understand 
the behavior of a system we need only to address the impact that each 
independent variable has on that system (Figure 1.4).
Handling independent variables is the essence of analytical think-
ing, which has remained intact in all three contexts: physical, biologi-
cal, and social. To share in the glory of classical science, both biological 
and social sciences opted to use the analytical method with no devia-
tion. This might help explain why a whole set of phenomena, known 
as type II (emergent) property, has been conveniently ignored. 
Properties like love, success, and happiness do not yield to analytical 
treatment.
However, increasingly we are finding out that our independent vari-
ables are no longer independent and that the neat and simple construct 
that served us so beautifully in the past is no longer effective. The follow-
ing experience illustrates this point.
Ford Motor Company was one of the first American corporations to 
embark on the quality movement. “Quality is job one” was the theme, and 
the operating units were encouraged to use continuous improvement to 
FIGURE 1.4  Independent variables.

14 
How the Game Is Evolving 
achieve world-class performance. Following the lead was Ford's Woodhaven 
stamping operations, which identified eleven areas of improvement 
(Figure 1.5).
Initial (or baseline) measures in each area were designated as 0 
and world-class performance as 10. The company established a detailed 
and comprehensive program to go from 0 to 10 in three years. Initially, 
significant improvement was recorded, but the operation reached a pla-
teau after only 18 months.
Even doubling the efforts to improve the selected variables' perfor-
mance failed to produce any further change. After 36 months of intense 
effort, the operation remained at the midway point of its goals, well short 
of the benchmark, world-class performance (Figure 1.6).
FIGURE 1.5  Woodhaven stamping plant's quality variables.
FIGURE 1.6  Reaching a plateau before getting to the target.

On the Nature of Inquiry  15
At the time I was teaching in the Ford Executive Development Program. 
Mr. Vic Leo, Program Director, introduced me to Mr. E.C. Galinis, Plant 
Manager of the Woodhaven operation, who shared his frustration with 
me. After spending a few days in the plant, I concluded that the Woodhaven 
operation had used up all of its slack and was now faced with a set of inter-
dependent variables that could be improved only with a redesign of the 
total operation (Figure 1.7).
As Figure 1.7 demonstrates, a given design may contain some slack 
between variables. This permits us to deal with each variable separately as 
though it were an independent variable. The performance of each variable 
can be improved independently until the slack among them is used up. 
Then the perceived set of independent variables changes to a formidable 
set of interdependent variables. Improvement in one variable would come 
only at the expense of the others.
Using the conventional approach to deal with this type of situation 
would be like riding a treadmill. One needs to keep running faster and 
faster to stay in the same place. In Ford's case, the existing design of 
Woodhaven operations had reached its highest potential, unfortunately 
far below the world-class performance. To reach the performance goals, 
the operation would have to be redesigned, and this was done. A new 
design helped the operation not only to reach the target goal, but also to 
surpass it by a wide margin in six months.
An independent set of variables is, therefore, a special case of a more gen-
eral scheme of interdependency. As systems become more and more sophisti-
cated, the reality of interdependency becomes more and more pronounced 
(see Figure 1.8).
Understanding interdependency requires a way of thinking different 
from analysis. It requires systems thinking. And analytical thinking and 
systems thinking are quite distinct.
FIGURE 1.7  Using up the slack among interdependent variables.

16 
How the Game Is Evolving 
Analysis is a three-step thought process. First, it takes apart that which it 
seeks to understand. Then it attempts to explain the behavior of the parts 
taken separately. Finally, it tries to aggregate understanding of the parts into 
an explanation of the whole. Systems thinking uses a different process. It 
puts the system in the context of the larger environment of which it is a 
part and studies the role it plays in the larger whole.
Analytical approach has remained essentially intact for nearly four 
hundred years, but systems thinking has already gone through three dis-
tinct generations of change: 
• The first generation of systems thinking (operations research) dealt 
with the challenge of interdependency in the context of mechanical 
(deterministic) systems.
• The second generation of systems thinking (cybernetics and open 
­systems) dealt with the dual challenge of interdependency and self-
organization (neg-entropy) in the context of living systems.
• The third generation of systems thinking (design) responds to the ­triple 
challenge of interdependency, self-organization, and choice in the context 
of sociocultural systems.
In addition to being purposeful, social organizations are living sys-
tems; therefore, like all living systems, they are neg-entropic and ­capable 
of self-organization. They create order out of chaos. Biological systems 
primarily self-organize through genetic codes, and social systems self-
organize through cultural codes. The DNA of social systems is their 
culture.
Social systems, however, can be organized either by default or by 
design. In default, the beliefs, assumptions, and expectations that under-
lie the system go unexamined. In design, the beliefs, assumptions, and 
expectations are made explicit, being constantly examined and moni-
tored. The third generation of systems thinking therefore has to deal not 
only with the challenge of interdependency and choice, but also with the 
implications of cultural prints reproducing the mess, or the existing order, 
all over again by default. This is why design, along with participation, 
iteration, and second-order learning, is at the core of the emerging con-
cept of systems methodology.
Details of this exciting concept are explored in Part Three of this book, 
which develops an operational definition of systems thinking. The remain-
der of this chapter explores implications of the dual paradigm shift in the 
context of six distinct competitive games.
FIGURE 1.8  Interdependent variables.

The Competitive Games  17
1.8  The competitive games
Each of the competitive games discussed in this section corresponds 
to a given paradigm in the following matrix (Figure 1.9). Together, 
these games have dominated the management scene for the better 
part of the past century. Each has produced an order-of-magnitude 
change in performance measures, and each has had a profound effect 
on our lives.
Each paradigm has its own unique mode of organization, and every 
mode of organization, by virtue of its requirement for specific talents, 
­creates its own clique and privileged members. These members often trans-
late their privileges into power and influence. The higher the level of 
success, the greater the stake in continuing an existing order and the higher 
the resistance to change. Unfortunately, the inability to change an out-
dated mode of organization is as tragic for the viability of a corporation as 
the consequence of missing a technological break is for the viability of a 
product line.
1.8.1  Mass Production — Interchangeability 
of Parts and Labor
Mass production resulted directly from the machine mode of organiza-
tion. Henry Ford's success in designing a production machine by making 
both parts and labor interchangeable led to a mass-production system 
and a whole new competitive game. He could produce 6,000 cars a day, 
while his closest competitor in France could muster only 700 cars a year. 
The ability to produce increased by more than an order of magnitude. In 
one generation we produced goods and services that surpassed the cumu-
lative capacity of mankind.
FIGURE 1.9  Six competitive games.

18 
How the Game Is Evolving 
The effectiveness of this mode of organization in the production of goods 
and services created not just a quantitative change but also a qualitative 
change in the nature of the problem itself. The question was no longer how 
to produce, but how to sell. And so dawned the marketing era. What emerged 
was an environment with an entirely new set of challenges. Foremost among 
them was how to respond to increasing demand for variety and diversity, and 
how to manage growth in size and complexity.
This challenge was too great for even the best that a machine mode of 
organization could offer. The requirement for no deviation, in view of the 
assumption that human nature is essentially deviant, places high empha-
sis on tight supervision to ensure conformity, predictability, and reliability 
of individual behavior within the organization. This emphasis under-
mines the organization's creative ability and limits its response to meeting 
the increasing demand for variety and diversity. A defensive reaction to 
consumer dissatisfaction calls for greater adherence to the rules and more 
rigidity, resulting in a vicious circle.
On the other hand, growth in size tends to reduce efficiency and orga-
nizational effectiveness. Because of an inverse relationship between an 
organization's size and the effectiveness of its control system, large organi-
zations are forced toward decentralization. But this result is inconsistent 
with the principle of no deviation and unity of command.
No driver in his or her right mind would drive a car with decentralized 
front wheels. In an organization that demands a passive functioning of 
parts with a high degree of compatibility and predictability, decentraliza-
tion leads to chaos and suboptimization. The best answer for production 
may be in conflict with the best answer for marketing, and may not neces-
sarily agree with the best answer for finance or personnel. Could this be 
why most large organizations constantly oscillate between centralization 
and decentralization?
1.8.2  Divisional Structure — Managing Growth and Diversity
Unlike Ford, Sloan recognized that the basis for competition had changed 
from an ability to produce to an ability to manage growth and diversity. 
He not only used public financing to generate the necessary capital to sus-
tain growth, but also capitalized on the emerging biological model to pro-
vide a structural vehicle for control that made it possible to manage growth 
and diversity.
Sloan's model, with small variations, constitutes the foundation of the 
MBA programs taught in all prominent schools of management, including 
Harvard, Wharton, Stanford, and MIT. Operationally, this model is built 
around two concepts: divisional structure and predict-and-prepare mode of 
planning (Figure 1.10).
Corporations, in their simplest form, are divided into two distinct types: 
corporate office and operating unit. A corporate office with a ­traditional 
functional structure is the “brain of the firm,” with an algorithm, which is 

The Competitive Games  19
a procedure for producing a desired outcome and for monitoring its imple-
mentation. The operating unit, on the other hand, is the body, which, 
despite a semi-autonomous structure, has no choice and no consciousness. 
It can only react to the command signal from the brain and/or events in its 
environment. Ideally, an operating unit is a robot programmed to carry 
out, with no deviation, a set of procedures predefined by the functional 
units of the corporate office.
Replicas of this operating model — each a product division — are cre-
ated as needed to produce a given product and/or service and sell it in a 
specified market. Operating product divisions are usually not authorized 
to redesign their products or redefine their markets. The main responsibil-
ity of the groups is to “stay the course.” However, they are required to fore-
cast the demand for their product and adjust their capacity to produce it 
accordingly. Therefore, the core concept of “predict and prepare” domi-
nates the management process and complements the divisional structure 
in the pursuit of the essential functions: growth and viability.
The post-World War II environment, with its stability and predictabil-
ity, provided an ideal condition for product-based divisional organiza-
tions. However, their very success in playing the game once again changed 
the game.
The divisional mode of organization, despite its unquestionable suc-
cesses, found itself up against two unprecedented challenges:
1.	 The operationalization of new knowledge, in response to an overall 
shortening of product life cycles.
2.	 The reality of multi-mindedness, or understanding the implication of 
choice, and thus conflict, among the organization's members.
As a result of the research and development era, knowledge was generated 
at a faster rate, which called for periodically redesigning the product and 
redefining the markets. This capability, however, was incompatible with 
FIGURE 1.10  The divisional structure.

20 
How the Game Is Evolving 
the mode of organization artfully designed to prevent change and stay the 
course. Successful divisional structure had tied the fate of product divi-
sions to the life cycle of a single, predefined product. The division, then, 
like the product, experienced periods of uncertainty, growth, maturity, and 
decline. A popular solution for this concern, called strategic planning, 
dominated the practice of management in the United States for more than 
a decade. It simply called for identifying and assigning product divisions 
such designations as “question mark,” “star,” “cash cow,” or “dog” and 
issuing imperatives to “drop the dog,” “milk the cow,” “watch the question 
mark,” and “invest in the star.” By default, it created the strategy of giving 
up on difficult challenges by simply tagging them dogs.
The divisional structure, finally, was challenged from two different 
directions: participative management and the lean production system. Both 
were emerging in tandem as alternative bases for new competitive games.
1.8.3  Participative Management
The unprecedented generation and distribution of wealth and knowledge 
resulted in ever higher levels of choice, which changed the nature of social 
settings and individual behavior in America. But the enhancement of 
choice, which resulted in higher levels of sophistication in social interac-
tions, proved a double jeopardy for the biological mode of thinking. Not 
only did organizations conceived as uni-minded systems become more 
difficult to manage, but they also became more vulnerable to the actions 
of a few. Members of an organization, unlike the parts of a biological 
being, do not react passively to the information they receive.
In this regard, advances in information technology and communica-
tion as a means of control did not produce the panacea once expected. 
Even the ultimate in this mode of thinking, Stafford Beer's famous Brain 
of the Firm (1967), despite its elegance, in my experience, is unable to 
deal with the complexities of emerging social interactions. Nevertheless, 
the model was successful in the context of paternalistic cultures, where 
loyalty, conformity, and commitment are considered core virtues. These 
virtues are reinforced by the security of belonging to a group, which in 
turn protects and provides for its members. For example, Japan, an 
industrialized ­society, with a relatively strong paternalistic culture, 
closely approximates a uni-minded system. Therefore, it has been able 
to capitalize more effectively on the strength of the biological mode of 
organization.
In a strong paternalistic culture, conflict can be resolved by the inter-
vention of a strong father figure, but the realities of highly developed 
multi-minded social systems are fundamentally different. Members of 
societies that have outgrown the secure, unifying web of a paternalistic cul-
ture display real choice. But a price must be paid for this transformation, 
especially in terms of insecurity and the level of conflict. The purposeful 
actors, individually or in groups, generate unprecedented levels of conflict 

The Competitive Games  21
by disagreeing with each other on the compatibility of their chosen ends 
and means.
Corporate America, yet ill-equipped to deal effectively with the conse-
quences of its members' purposeful behavior, is finding itself increasingly 
paralyzed. It is not surprising that a significant part of its energy is lost to 
the conflict. Frustration associated with excessive levels of conflict rein-
forces the organizational inability to change. Members increasingly behave 
independently, and management, on the pretext of empowerment, abdi-
cates its authority and responsibility. Nobody seems to have a handle on 
integration. Feelings of impotency and alienation are commonplace.
Pursuing the ideal of a conflict-free organization has proved problem-
atic. Creating a conflict-free organization means less choice, reducing 
members to the level of robots. Such a situation, even if feasible, may not 
be desirable.
Unable to uncook eggs already half-cooked, we have rejected the 
paternalistic culture, but have not yet found an effective replacement for 
it. Unfortunately, quality of work life (QWL), participative management, 
multifunctional teams, and the other concepts that socio-tech had to offer 
have yet to show us how to manage a multi-minded complexity and effec-
tively dissolve conflict. We are still oscillating between centralization and 
decentralization, collectivity and individuality, and integration and dif-
ferentiation, without appreciating the complementary nature of these 
tendencies. We will deal with these issues in more detail in Part Two of 
this book.
The next three games represent the other dimension of the dual para-
digm shift, dealing with the challenge of interdependency. They actually 
map the evolution of systems thinking in the context of mechanical, bio-
logical, and sociocultural models of organization.
1.8.4  Operations Research — Joint Optimization
The success of the first Operations Research (OR) group, created by Ackoff 
and Churchman at the Case Institute of Technology, which dealt with the 
challenge of interdependency, resulted in the spread of OR programs to 
most American universities. But the first full application of OR in corpo-
rate America came with Ford's whiz kids, when McNamara and his associ-
ates moved from the Defense Department to the Ford Corporation.
The essence of this effort was to use models, basically mathematical, to 
find optimal solutions to a series of interdependent variables. However, the 
assumptions regarding the nature of the organization remained mechani-
cal. The other significant contribution to this version of systems thinking 
was the concept of systems dynamics developed by J. Forrester of MIT.
Operations Research dominated the field of systems thinking for the 
better part of the 1960s until it was challenged, ironically, by one of its 
founding fathers. In a famous article, Ackoff (1979) declared, “The future 
of Operations Research is past.” Instantaneously, he converted an army of 

22 
How the Game Is Evolving 
devoted followers into staunch enemies. He blasted his own creation on 
the grounds that OR assumes passive or reactive parts and does not appre-
ciate the vital implications of parts having choice.
By the assertion that parts in a social system have a choice, he left his 
contemporaries behind by a quarter of a century. His concept of multi-
minded purposeful systems effectively bypassed the next generation of the 
systems models, most importantly Beer's viable systems, which in its own 
right is a masterful thinking in the biological context.
1.8.5  Lean Production System — Flexibility and Control
Effective commercial use of organized research, which evolved during 
World War II, accelerated the role of product development, giving rise to a 
new era marked by rapid change. Unpredictability associated with the 
high rate of change undermined the usefulness of the core concept of pre-
dict and prepare. Both the Chase and Wharton Econometric models, which 
had brought fame and fortune to their respective organizations, even a 
Nobel Prize for the Wharton School, were sold quietly.
The research and development era had generated explosions of new 
knowledge. This knowledge, when successfully operationalized, radically 
changed the competitive game. The new generation of winners were those 
players with the ability to create their own future by interactively influenc-
ing their environment. The name of the game became flexibility and con-
trol, which shortened the time to market of a new product, increased 
product/market differentiation, and improved price/quality performance 
of the outputs, doing more and more with less and less.
This game emerged slowly but effectively in Japan, when Ohno, Chief 
Engineer of Toyota, created the lean production system by applying sys-
tems thinking in the biological context. Using cybernetic principles, he 
was able to lower the break-even point by an order of magnitude and 
­elevated the competitive game to an incredibly higher level. In this game, 
flexibility and control became the basis for competition.
1.8.6  Interactive Management — Design Approach
Design is the operational manifestation of the purposeful systems para-
digm developed by Ackoff (1972) in response to the challenge of manag-
ing interactions between purposeful members of a highly interdependent 
social organization.
Systems design, at present, represents the latest chapter of the evolu-
tion of systems thinking. In Redesigning the Future, Ackoff (1974) argued 
that purposeful social systems are capable of recreating their future; they 
do so by redesigning themselves. Ackoff then proposed a design method-
ology by which stakeholders of a multi-minded system participatively 
design a future they collectively desire and realize it through successive 
approximation.

The Competitive Games  23
In The Design of Inquiring Systems, Churchman (1971) demonstrated 
that the best way to learn a system is to design it. Later, in A Prologue to 
National Development Planning, Gharajedaghi and Ackoff (1986) used 
design as the main vehicle of social development. The design model explic-
itly recognized that choice is at the heart of human development. 
Development is the enhancement of the capacity to choose; design is a 
vehicle for enhancement of choice and holistic thinking.
Designers seek to choose rather than predict the future. They try to under-
stand rational, emotional, and cultural dimensions of choice and to pro-
duce a design that satisfies a multitude of functions. The design methodology 
requires that designers learn how to use what they already know, learn how 
to realize what they do not know, and learn how to learn what they need to 
know. Finally, producing a design requires an awareness of how activities 
of one part of a system affect and are affected by other parts. This aware-
ness requires understanding the nature of interactions among the parts.
Unfortunately, despite all the rhetoric to the contrary, our risk models 
developed on the assumption of independency have failed to protect us 
against recurring events that have long been considered highly improba-
ble. Nassim Taleb (2007), in his eye-opening book The Black Swan, dem-
onstrated how in hindsight one could find a reasonable explanation for all 
of the following catastrophic events by appreciating interactions and pow-
erful reinforcing effects of small interdependent deviations.
• 1982 recession (large American banks lost close to all their cumulative 
earnings)
• Real state collapse of early 1990s (savings and loans were wiped out at 
the cost of $500 billion).
• 1998 collapse of stock market (dotcom bubble)
• 2009 financial crisis (housing bubble and mortgage fiasco, possibly 
trillions of dollars)
Holistic Thinking
Structure, Function, Process, &
Context
 
 
Sociocultural Model
Self-organization
Movement toward predefined
order
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Operational Thinking
Chaos & Complexity
Dynamics of multi-loop feedback
systems
Creating feasible whole from infeasible parts
Design Thinking
FIGURE 1.11  Foundations of systems thinking.

24 
How the Game Is Evolving 
Unfortunately the task is not just an academic discourse; it demands enor-
mous emotional struggles and a huge cultural challenge. Engagement in 
this process, in addition to competence, requires courage.
The remainder of this book attempts to explore the operational mean-
ing of systems thinking and demonstrate the interaction of the four foun-
dations of systems thinking seen in Figure 1.11. The task is also to create a 
comprehensive methodology that can meet the challenges of the emerging 
chaotic and complex environment.

P a r t | TH REE
Part | Tw o
Systems Theory 
The Nature of the Beast
“GOD IS DEAD,” says graffiti on a notice board in Oxford University, England. 
“NO!” it says underneath, “HE IS JUST WORKING ON A LESS AMBITIOUS 
PROJECT.”
Maybe God has given up the idea of an orderly and deterministic world. Maybe 
he/she has playfully decided to mix it up with some degree of randomness and 
choice, or maybe this has been the state of affairs all along. Zoroaster, the ancient 
Persian prophet, proclaimed this some 3,000 years ago:
There are elements of chance, choice, and certainty in every aspect of our 
lives.
Maybe having choice is not an illusion, after all. Nevertheless, choice is but one of 
the three elements. The interaction of choice with chance (randomness) and cer-
tainty (laws of nature) can indeed produce some counterintuitive outcomes.
Natural science has discovered “chaos.” Social science has encountered 
“complexity.” But chaos and complexity are not characteristics of our new real-
ity; they are features of our perceptions and understanding. We see the world 
as increasingly more complex and chaotic because we use inadequate concepts 
to explain it. When we understand something, we no longer see it as chaotic or 
complex. Maybe playing the new game requires learning a new language.
We have used a multitude of languages to express the different ways in 
which we exist in the world. We first told the story of our lives as myth. We sang 
it, danced it, and expressed it in rituals that defined the parameters of our cul-
tures and so gave us a degree of security in a threatening environment. As our 
proficiency increased, so did our learning and ­creative capacity. We started 
writing in the languages of poetry, mathematics, philosophy, and science. There 
were times when music, along with literature and art, produced our most beau-
tiful texts.
But during the past century, we increasingly specialized in one language, the 
language of analytical science. As we emphasized one language to the exclusion of 
all others, we became unidimensional — and boringly predictable.
Today the analytical language has penetrated every facet of our lives. Our sys-
tem of production, organization, interaction, communication — even our choice of 
recreation, sport, and foods —is done in terms of the assumptions and applications 

26 
Systems Theory: The Nature of the Beast
of analytical tools. Finding a correlation is the order of the day. Best sellers, in all 
areas, are those that simply identity a few common attributes of the winners. No 
one can deny the success of this language, but it has acquired an importance dis-
proportionate to its position as only one method of inquiry. When one game states 
the rules for all games, it does not matter how many new games you create, they 
are all the same kind.
History, unfortunately, has not been too kind to those who have capitalized so 
extensively on a single winning strategy. The price on selecting only one pattern of 
existence has been very high.
Alienation, lust for power, frustration, insecurity, and boredom are only a few 
symptoms of the emerging culture where ready-made intellectual goods are mak-
ing the formation of mass opinion a matter of mass production.
The tendency to simplify everything to a level not requiring serious thinking has 
turned the political system into a voting industry, which assumes that people are 
ensured choice over their lives when they elect the decision makers. We have let 
the default values of an analytical culture define what is good, proper, and 
beautiful.
But, somehow, something is missing with the way we think about our lives. 
What has become the dominant language of our time produces only a partial under-
standing of our reality and relates only to parts of our being, not the whole of it. We 
need a holistic language, a language of systems, which will allow us to see through 
chaos and understand complexity. A language of interaction and design will help us 
learn a new mode of living by considering various ways of seeing, doing, and being 
in the world.
We can then design new methods of inquiry, new modes of organization, and a 
way of life that will allow the rational, emotional, and ethical choices for interdepen-
dent yet autonomous social beings.
The systems language, by necessity, will have two dimensions. The first will be 
a framework for understanding the nature of the beast, or the behavioral character-
istics of multi-minded systems. The second will be an operational systems method-
ology, which goes beyond simply declaring the desirability of the systems approach 
and provides a practical way to define problems and design solutions.
To build the first dimension of this language, we need to develop a system of 
systems concepts. In this context, Ackoff's On Purposeful Systems (1972) is a 
Herculean work, a must-read book, which cannot be reproduced here. What I intend 
to do is share the principles and concepts that I believe are critical for developing a 
systems view of sociocultural systems. These principles have evolved with me dur-
ing years of struggling to get a handle on systems. Details of these exciting con-
cepts, which have been tested in a variety of contexts and cultures, are so rich that 
each could be the subject of a separate book. To fit my purpose here they had to be 
simplified at the risk of considerable distortion.
Five systems principles will be discussed in Chapter 2. The information-bonded 
systems and the notion of shared image and culture and the essence of self-organiza-
tion will be the topic of Chapter 3. Theory of development and obstructions to devel-
opment will be discussed in Chapter 4. Finally this notion of a sociocultural system 
(the subject of Part Two), combined with systems methodology — holistic thinking, 

Systems Theory: The Nature of the Beast  27
operational thinking, and design thinking — (the subject of Part Three), constitute an 
interactive whole that, in my view, defines the essence of systems thinking.
A note of caution to those readers with a strong background in total quality 
management (TQM). There is a fundamental difference between TQM and systems 
thinking. TQM operates within an existing paradigm; it could be learned and applied 
as an independent set of tools and methods. But systems methodology cannot be 
separated from systems principles. Systems tools and methods are impotent if iso-
lated from the paradigm of which they are an integral part.

This page intentionally left blank

29
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch apt er | t wo
Systems Principles
The five principles of openness, purposefulness, multidimensionality, 
emergent property, and counterintuitive behavior, acting together as an 
interactive whole, define the essential characteristics and assumptions 
about the behavior of an organization viewed as a purposeful, multi-
minded system (Figure 2.1).
These principles are an integral part of the third-generation systems 
view. Their implications will be present in every aspect and in all of the 
subsequent parts of this work, from defining problems to designing solu-
tions. Please read them carefully, more than once. Make them your own. 
Use them in different contexts so you can internalize them. They are the 
building blocks of the mental model you will need to construct to become 
a systems thinker and systems designer.
2.1  Openness
Openness means that the behavior of living (open) systems can be 
understood only in the context of their environment. The world is, 
indeed, a complex whole in interaction. Therefore, even genuine inqui-
ries regarding human nature, such as the love of liberty, lust for power, 
and search for happiness, are abstractions that cannot be meaningfully 
entertained when separated from the context, or the culture of which 
they are a part.
We can observe, somewhat helplessly, that “everything” depends on 
“everything else,” concluding that we should not mess around with “the 
natural order of things” and that we may be better off leaving everything 
in the hands of the “One” who has control over all.
But if there are elements of chance, choice, and certainty in everything we 
do, we need to know which elements are certain and which ones offer the 
opportunity for choice. And how do we deal with the randomness of 
chance? Remember that appreciation of drag, a law of nature, as a certainty 
made it possible to convert the so-called obstruction into an opportunity 
and use it as an instrument of flying.

30 
Systems Principles 
Our first break came by recognizing that although everything depends 
on everything else, this “everything” can be grouped into two categories: 
those elements that somehow can be controlled and those that cannot. 
This distinction gave us an operational definition of the system, environ-
ment, and system boundary.
The system therefore consists of all of the interactive sets of variables 
that could be controlled by participating actors. Meanwhile, the environ-
ment consists of all those variables that, although affecting the system's 
behavior, could not be controlled by it. The system boundary thus becomes 
an arbitrary, subjective construct defined by the interest and the level of 
the ability and/or authority of the participating actors.
Then a second break came along. We discovered that the behavior of 
the variables in the environment, although uncontrollable, is more or less 
predictable. In most cases, the less controllable a contextual variable, the 
more predictable it becomes.
This led to the formulation of the first rule for getting a handle on 
open systems: the imperatives of predict and prepare. Predicting the envi-
ronment and preparing the system for it became the foundation of the 
neoclassical school of management. Developing the econometric model 
and winning the Nobel Prize brought fame and fortune to Wharton. Chase 
followed suit with its own model, and soon thousands of organizations 
were each specializing in forecasting different industries. The new game 
was learned and played artfully by almost all entities — large and small, 
business and governmental (Figure 2.2).
But success somehow changed the game. Something went wrong. In 
the last 10 years we have observed, with much apprehension, that all the 
predictions made by our prize-winning models were wrong. So much so 
OPENNESS
EMERGENT
PROPERTY
PURPOSEFUL
-NESS
COUNTER-
INTUITIVENESS
MULTI-
DIMENSIONALITY
Figure 2.1  Systems principles.

Openness  31
that those who never used them were much better off than those who did. 
We went back to the drawing board again and this time rediscovered a 
whole new category of variables that we had missed the first time: those 
variables that we do not control but instead influence.
To control means that an action is both necessary and sufficient to pro-
duce the intended outcome. To influence means that the action is not suf-
ficient; it is only a coproducer.
As our knowledge about the environment increased, however, so did 
our ability to convert the uncontrollable variables to those that could be 
influenced. As we increased our ability to influence a variable, we decreased 
our ability to predict it. If a rain dance had any influence on the weather, 
we would not be able to predict the weather. Ironically, the extent to which we 
are able to predict the weather is an indication that we might not be per-
forming the rain dance properly.
The new category of variables, those that could be influenced, form a 
new region called the transactional environment. The transactional environ-
ment is becoming significant to understanding the behavior of an open pur-
poseful system. It includes all the critical stakeholders of a system: customers, 
suppliers, shareholders, the boss, and, ironically, the members themselves.
Customers used to be predictable, but uncontrollable. We were told 
they were always right. Increasingly, they are becoming more and more 
susceptible to influence and therefore are less and less predictable. It seems 
that the nerds are taking over. The boss has become weird and unpredict-
able as well.
Suppliers used to be the most agreeable group. They did what they 
were told. Today they claim to house the core technology. Who is in con-
trol of the computer industry? It is not the big system houses like IBM that 
OPENNESS
No problem or solution is valid free of context. 
 
 
Contextual
Environment
ENVIRONMENT
Uncontrolled
Appreciate
Variables
Influence
M
i
Managing
anaging 
upward
Control
Downward 
SYSTEM
Boss
Lenders
Transactional
Employees
Environment
PREDICT & PREPARE
RECREATE THE FUTURE
Controlled
Variables
Suppliers
Customers
Figure 2.2  System boundary.

32 
Systems Principles 
are in charge; it is the component builders, the Microsofts and Intels of the 
world, that have much more to say and are, in all likelihood, the ones in 
control.
Slowly, we are realizing that we do not actually control much of any-
thing, but do have the ability to influence many things. I do not really 
know how much of me is me and how much is those I love. Managing a 
system is therefore more and more about managing its transactional envi-
ronment, that is, managing upward. Leadership is therefore defined as the 
ability to influence those whom we do not control.
Open (living) systems display certain characteristics that are most sig-
nificant to our understanding of their behavior. Open (living) systems not 
only preserve their common properties but also jealously guard their indi-
vidualities. At the biological level, living systems achieve this durability 
through genetic coding (DNA), a blueprint for self-reproduction. Unless 
their genetic coding is altered, living systems go on replicating themselves 
almost indefinitely. The continuity of the individual and collective identi-
ties owes itself to a similar phenomenon — a tendency to create a pre-
defined order based on an internal blueprint.
As open (living) systems, social groups such as organizations exhibit 
the same tendency, a movement toward a predefined order. Therefore, 
the cultural code becomes the social equivalent of biological DNA, those 
hidden assumptions deeply anchored at the very core of our collective 
memory. Left to be self-organized, these internal codes, by default, act as 
organizing principles that invariably reproduce the existing order.
In an earlier work, Theory and Management of Systems (1972), I devoted 
a whole chapter to the subject of chaos and order, articulating how living 
systems are able to reverse the formidable second law of thermodynamics 
and move toward complexity and order.
The second law states that a general tendency in the universe (as a 
closed system) is toward elimination of all differences. Thus, the ultimate 
state is sameness and randomness, a chaotic simplicity. Entropy (S), the 
measure of randomness, will therefore always increase. However, we know 
that living systems are neg-entropic (–S). They are able not only to negate 
this formidable process by differentiation, but also to move toward a pre-
defined order, an organized complexity. Using the formula I = –S, which 
indicates that a neg-entropic system must have information, one might 
conclude that movement toward complexity and order is only possible if 
the system has a means of knowing and an internal image of what it wants 
to be. This result provided the first clue for constructing the sociocultural 
model, which is the subject of Chapter 3.
To summarize the major points, I have argued the following:
• Open systems can be understood only in the context of their 
environments.
• Leadership is managing upward; it is about influencing what one can-
not control and appreciating what one cannot influence.

Purposefulness  33
• Open systems, by default, are guided by an internal code of con-
duct (DNA or culture). If left alone, open systems tend to reproduce 
themselves.
2.2  Purposefulness
To influence the actors in our transactional environment we have to under-
stand why they do what they do.
Understanding is different from both information and knowledge. 
Information deals with the what questions, knowledge with the how ques-
tions, and understanding with the why questions (Figure 2.3). There once 
was a time when having information about clients was a competitive advan-
tage, but this is not the way it is today. To maintain a competitive position 
one must move to a new plateau, the knowledge level, and learn how they 
do what they do.
Thereafter, to be an effective player, one has to move yet higher, to the 
level of understanding, and learn why they do what they do.
The why question is the matter of purpose, that of choice. The choice is 
the product of the interactions among the three dimensions: rational, 
emotional, and cultural (Figure 2.4).
Rational choice is the domain of self-interest, or the interest of the deci-
sion maker, not the observer. A rational choice is not necessarily a wise 
choice. It reflects only the perceived interest of the decision maker at the 
time. Meanwhile, wisdom has ethical implications and considers the con-
sequence of an action in the context of a collectivity.
The following examples explains this notion of choice with much more 
clarity. My daughter Jeyran was only five and jumping up and down on our 
bed. I said to her, “Jeyran, I would not do that if I were you.” Giving me an 
innocent look, she replied, “No, I don't think so. If you were me, you would 
be doing exactly what I'm doing. You don't know how exciting this is.”
Information
Understanding
Why
Information
What
Knowledge
How
Figure 2.3  Hierarchy of influence.

34 
Systems Principles 
When I worked for IBM, we were told, “The customer is right, always 
right. If you don't believe this, you will not work here. We know he's right 
even if we don't know why; your job is to find his rationale, and learn why 
he's doing what he's doing.”
Actually, in trying to find this rationale, I learned the most important 
lesson of my professional life: market economies, like democracies, make 
only rational choices. The winners are not necessarily the best, but those 
who are most compatible with the existing order. Being ahead of your 
time is sometimes more tragic than falling behind.
The story of the Ford Foundation's birth control project in India was 
another eye-opener for me. During a working visit to India, my senior 
partner, Russ Ackoff, met a number of Americans trying to teach family 
planning and birth control to Indians. They were not succeeding and were 
frustrated over the program's failure to produce any results. “Indians are 
irrational,” the project manager told Russ. “They know population is their 
number-one enemy, and here we are teaching them control, giving them 
all the contraceptives they need, plus a transistor radio as a reward. But 
look what happens. They go home, turn the radio on, and with music 
make a new baby.” Russ suggested that they simply could not dismiss this 
behavior as irrational and should be looking for other explanations. The 
project manager then produced a newspaper clipping in which it was 
reported that an Indian woman had given birth to her 27th child, adding 
“If this isn't irrational then I don't know what irrational is!”
Russ then posed the following: “If a woman can have 27 children, then 
why do Indians, on average, have only 4.6? This means they know how to 
practice control, but aren't willing to do so. Maybe you are solving the 
wrong problem.” When the issue was put in this context it was discovered 
that at the time, there was no social security, no retirement, and no unem-
ployment benefits. Therefore having three sons, by default, was consid-
ered the retirement system. The first priority for each couple was to put 
PURPOSEFULNESS
Cultural
DIMENSIONS OF CHOICE 
Emotional
Rational
Figure 2.4  Rational, emotional, and cultural choice.

Purposefulness  35
their ­retirement in place. Statistically, to have three sons requires an aver-
age of 4.6 children. Not surprisingly, those who had three sons had stopped 
having children. Perhaps the lady in the news clipping was trying to estab-
lish her retirement as well.
Now who was irrational? The Indian couple who got a free transistor 
radio by attending a lecture? Or the Ford Foundation guy who thought 
he could get a couple to give up their retirement by giving them a transis-
tor radio?
The emotional choice is the domain of beauty and excitement. We do 
lots of things because they are exciting or, more precisely, because they are 
challenging. If you happen to beat me 10 times in a tennis game, I do not 
think you will look forward to playing me again. You will probably want 
to play someone who can challenge you — the one, ironically, who might 
have a chance of beating you.
A colleague and friend at the Wharton School, Professor Aron 
Katselenenboigen, liked to use episodes in chess to explain interesting 
social phenomena. I once asked him why a majority of chess players like to 
play with those who are much better at the game than themselves. “It's the 
challenge,” he replied. “Winning is fun if it's associated with a real 
challenge.”
I tested this theory with 10 of my graduate students at Wharton. We 
had a computer program that could play chess at nine different levels. 
Level one was very simple. Anyone with a basic knowledge of chess could 
win with no difficulty. However, the higher levels posed a much greater 
challenge. Winning at level six, for example, required considerable mas-
tery. Each student was told that he/she could play 10 games at any level 
he/she wanted; for every game won he/she would receive a dollar, and for 
every game lost he/she would have to give back a dollar.
All the students started at level one, but after winning a few dollars all 
moved to higher levels. By the finishing time most were playing at level 
five, and two were even at level six.
If the excitement of a good challenge were not part of our decision cri-
teria, life would be a bore. In other words, setting and seeking attainable 
goals is a banal existence. This may come as a surprise to many “human 
resource managers,” but for sure it explains the boredom and meaning-
lessness associated with huge segments of corporate life.
In contrast to rational choice, which reflects on instrumental (extrin-
sic) values, the emotional dimension deals with stylistic (intrinsic) values. 
It is the enjoyment and satisfaction derived from the emotional state in 
and of itself. While rational choice is risk aversive, emotional choice is not. 
Risk is an important attribute of excitement and challenge.
Culture defines the ethical norms of the collectivity, of which the 
decision maker is a member. The ethical values are the constraining 
elements of the decision process. However, by dictating the default val-
ues, culture has a profound impact on the decision process. Just like a 

36 
Systems Principles 
high-level ­computer language that provides default parameters when 
the programmer fails to choose one, the culture provides default values 
when actors fail to choose one explicitly.
Purposeful systems are value-guided systems; in other words, values 
are what purposeful behaviors strive to achieve. More often than not, these 
values are implicit in the culture, and the decision maker is not even aware 
that she/he has a choice. Default values are usually treated as realities out 
there; and they will remain out there as long as no one is willing to chal-
lenge them.
Finally, the essence of purposefulness can be appreciated only by 
understanding the distinctions that Ackoff makes between the three 
types of system behavior: reaction, response, and action. A reaction is a 
system behavior for which an event in the environment is both necessary 
and sufficient. Thus a reaction is an event that is (deterministically) 
caused by another event. A response is a system behavior for which an 
event in the environment is necessary but not sufficient. Thus a response 
is an event of which the system itself is a coproducer. An action is a sys-
tem behavior for which a change in the environment is neither necessary 
nor sufficient. Actions, therefore, are self-determined events, or autono-
mous behavior.
Reactive, responsive, and active systems are, in turn, correlated with 
state-maintaining, goal-seeking, and purposeful systems (Table 2.1).
A state-maintaining system is one that reacts to changes to maintain 
its state under different environmental conditions. Such a system can 
react (not respond) because what is done is determined entirely by the 
change in its environment, given the structure of the system. Nevertheless, 
it performs an intrinsic function by maintaining its state in a different 
way under different conditions. For example, many heating systems are 
state-maintaining. An internal controller turns the system on when the room 
temperature goes below a desired level, then turns it off when the 
Table 2.1  Behavioral Classification of Systems
Behavior
Means
End
Process
Structure
Function
Passive
No choice,
One structure in all
One function in all
Tools
environments
environments
Reactive
No choice,
No choice,
No choice
Variable but Determined
One function in all 
State Maintaining
Different environments
Responsive
Choice of means
Choice of means
Choice of ends
No choice of ends
Variable and Chosen
Variable and Chosen
Variable and Chosen
Variable but Determined
Goal seeking
Active
Purposeful

Purposefulness  37
­temperature goes above this level. The state maintained is the room 
­temperature. Such a system is able to adapt to change but is not capable 
of learning, because it cannot choose its behavior. It cannot improve with 
experience.
A goal-seeking system is one that can respond differently to different 
events in the same or a different environment until it produces a particular 
outcome (state). Production of this state is its goal. Such a system has a 
choice of means but not of ends; hence it is responsive rather than reactive. 
Response is voluntary; reaction is not. For example, lower level animals can 
seek food in different ways in the same or a different environment. If a goal-
seeking system has memory it can learn to pursue its goal more efficiently 
over time.
A purposeful system is one that can produce not only the same out-
comes in different ways in the same environment but also different outcomes 
in both the same and different environments. It can change its ends under 
constant conditions. This ability to change ends under constant condi-
tions is what exemplifies free will. Such systems not only learn and adapt; 
they can also create. Human beings are examples of such systems.
Purposeful systems have all the capabilities of goal-seeking and state-
maintaining systems. Meanwhile, goal-seeking systems have the capabili-
ties of state-maintaining systems, although the converse is not true.
Finally, it is reasonable to assume that decision implies power. And 
power is a concept of many meanings and dimensions. However, accord-
ing to Boulding (1968), it may be defined as the amount of change created 
in a future state by a decision. Since doing nothing is always an option, the 
power of a decision maker can be measured by the difference in the future 
state between doing something and doing nothing.
A concept closely related to that of power is freedom, which also has 
many meanings and dimensions. One meaning is that of an alternative, or 
a range of choices. If I have no alternatives, I am clearly not free to choose; 
therefore I have no power to change the future state.
This brings us to the next discussion: the principle of multidimen­
sionality.
2.2.1  Recap
• The world is not run by those who are right. It is run by those who can 
convince others they are right.
• Choice has three aspects: rational (self-interest), emotional (­excitement), 
and cultural (default).
• While rational choice is risk averse, emotional choice is not. Risk is an 
important attribute of excitement and challenge.
• Realities out there will remain out there as long as no one is willing to 
challenge them.
• Choice is a matter of competence; it implies power-to-do. Liberty with-
out competence is an empty proposition.

38 
Systems Principles 
2.3  Multidimensionality
Multidimensionality1 is probably one of the most potent principles of sys-
tems thinking. It is the ability to see complementary relations in opposing 
tendencies and to create feasible wholes with infeasible parts.
For the majority of cultures, a fallacy has dominated the treatment of 
opposing tendencies as a duality in a zero-sum game. Everything seems to 
come in a pair of opposites: security/freedom, order/complexity, collec­
tivity/individuality, modernity/tradition, art/science, and so on. They are 
cast in such a way that a win for one is invariably associated with a loss for 
the other.
In the context of a zero-sum game, opposing tendencies are formu-
lated in two distinct ways. First, conflicting tendencies are conceptualized 
as two mutually exclusive, discrete entities. The conflicts are treated as 
dichotomies that are usually expressed as X or NX (Figure 2.5). If X is right 
then NX has to be wrong. This represents an or relationship, a win/lose 
struggle with a moral obligation to win. The loser, usually declared wrong, 
is eliminated.
Second, opposing tendencies are formulated in such a way that they 
can be represented by a continuum (Figure 2.6). Between black and white 
are a thousand shades of gray. This calls for a compromise, or resolution 
of the conflict. Compromise is a frustration point, a give-and-take struggle. 
Depending on the relative strength of the poles of tension, the power 
game will come to a temporary halt. The compromise point is an unstable 
mixture, usually containing elements of two extremes. As the power struc-
ture changes, so does the compromised position.
The constant struggle between groups of people who see different “clear 
and urgent” necessities when dealing with social realities — the urgency 
Figure 2.5  Dichotomy.
1Throughout this book I use dimensions to identify quantifiable variables and also to 
reflect aspects and facets of a system.
Figure 2.6  Continuums.

Multidimensionality  39
of production versus that of distribution, the desire to protect the rights of 
­victims versus the rights of the accused, the need to protect the environ-
ment versus the individual right to make a living — is the manifestation of 
a need to develop new frameworks.
Churchman's (1979) concern with the “environmental fallacy,” 
Boulding's (1968) rejection of suboptimization (1968), and Ackoff's 
(1978) concept of “separately infeasible parts making a feasible whole” 
are reflections of the same concern.
It seems as though we live in an age of paradoxes. Even time-honored 
values such as freedom and justice are not spared. Boulding (1953) 
acknowledged the dilemma with the observation that some are afraid of 
freedom, seeing always behind it the specter of anarchy, whereas some 
­others are afraid of justice, seeing always behind it the specter of tyranny.
Furthermore, consider the relation between security and freedom. One 
cannot be free if one is not secure; one will not be secure if one is not free. 
Maybe freedom, justice, and security are three aspects of the same thing 
and were not meant to be separated in the first place. Certainly, treating 
them in isolation has been problematic.
A complement is that which fills out or completes a whole. The prin-
ciple of multidimensionality maintains that the opposing tendencies not 
only coexist and interact, but also form a complementary relationship. 
The complementary relationship is not confined to pairs. More than two 
variables may form complementary relations as the trio of freedom, ­justice, 
and security demonstrates (see Figure 2.7).
The mutual interdependence of opposing tendencies is characterized 
by an and instead of an or relationship. This means that each tendency is 
represented by a separate dimension, resulting in a multidimensional 
scheme where a low/low and a high/high, in addition to low/high and 
high/low, are strong possibilities.
This is a non-zero-sum formulation in which a loss for one side is not 
necessarily a gain for the other; on the contrary, both opposing tendencies 
can increase or decrease simultaneously.
T
E
N
D
E
N
C
Y
A
H
I
G
H
HIGH-LOW
WIN--LOSE
HIGH -HIGH
WIN-WIN
L
O
W
LOW-LOW
LOSE-LOSE
LOW--HIGH
WIN-LOSE
LOW
HIGH
TENDENCY B 
Figure 2.7  Complementary relationships.

40 
Systems Principles 
Using a multidimensional representation, one can see how the tenden-
cies previously considered as dichotomies can interact and be integrated 
into something quite new. The addition of new dimensions makes it pos-
sible to discover new frames of reference in which opposing sets of tenden-
cies can be interpreted in a new ensemble with a new logic of its own.
Says Churchman (1979): “The usual dichotomy of ‘x’ or ‘not x’ never 
seems to display the general, because neither of the above is always so 
prominent an aspect of social systems.”
Note that in classical logic, contradictions are relative to a domain; 
adding a new dimension expands the domain and converts the contradic-
tions to complementaries.
To explain this further, let us look at a related concept: typology. A proper 
way of developing typologies, which corresponds with my intentions 
here, requires that the relevant variables, which together define the state of 
the phenomenon under study, are identified and each conceptualized as a 
separate dimension.
A dimension represented by an arrow is used to reflect a quantification 
of a variable on a given scale. It measures a characteristic specified by the 
operational definition of the variable involved. Segmentation of this scale 
into two regions of low and high is usually based on an assumption that 
the low or high value assigned to the variable will have a significant impact 
on the behavior of the system that is coproduced by the variable.
In this context, the point of distinction between low and high is not 
arbitrary (Figure 2.8). It signifies the level at which the behavior of the 
dependent system is qualitatively affected. This is a change that corre-
sponds to the singularity or inflection point (change of phase) in physical 
phenomena.
In other words, if the variable income has an impact on an individual's 
behavior, there seems to be a critical level of income at which a change in 
lifestyle occurs, qualitatively affecting that behavior.
If I make $10 a week, I may eat one hamburger; with $20 I may have 
two; and with $30 I will try three. However, if I make $1,000 a week, I will 
not eat 100 hamburgers. I may not eat hamburgers at all. Therefore, a 
quantitative change in my income at some point has produced a qualita-
tive change in my way of life. That is the point of distinction between the 
low and the high level of income.
Provided one is aware of their underlying assumptions and limitations, 
typologies can show how behavior of a multidimensional system differs 
significantly according to the emphasis on one or the other dimension.
Figure 2.8  Change of phase.

Multidimensionality  41
For example, the interaction of a high concern for change with a high 
concern for stability produces a completely different mode of behavior 
than the one produced either by a high concern for change coupled with a 
low concern for stability or the one produced by a high concern for sta-
bility coupled with a low concern for change (see Figure 2.9).
The high/high represents the behavior of a mature system, searching 
for stability through change. While the low/high reflects a radical system 
interested in change at any price, it can be reactionary or progressive, 
depending on the direction of the change sought. The high/low, on the 
other hand, represents a conservative state, preferring the status quo and, 
therefore, a tendency for regulation and compromise. But the low/low is 
anarchy with a low concern for change and a low concern for stability, 
opposed to government in any form.
Therefore, with different combinations of the levels of concern (low or 
high), different modes of behavior will emerge. Each mode represents a 
new system whose character can be understood only in its own right.
The typology of the management style developed by Blake and Mouton 
(1964) underscores the same point by demonstrating that although the 
“1.9” and “9.9” styles both reflect a high concern (9) for people, the mani-
festations of these concerns are different in both cases (Figure 2.10).
The 1.9 is a paternalistic, populist leader, whose concern for people is 
basically a concern for their weaknesses. Therefore, he/she assumes a pro-
tective role. Meanwhile, the 9.9 is a leader whose main concern for people 
stems from a respect for their ability and individuality. He/she assumes a 
different role — that of a motivator.
In the work of Gerald Gordon and colleagues (1974) that studies the 
factors conducive to innovation, we see the following two abilities as com-
plementary to an individual's propensity to innovate: the ability to differ-
entiate between objects that seem similar and the ability to find 
simi­larities between seemingly unrelated matters (Figure 2.11).
High
Low
CONCERN FOR
STABILITY
C
O
N
C
E
R
N
F
O
R
C
H
A
N
G
E
Low
High
LOW & HIGH
RADICAL
HIGH & HIGH
MATURE
LOW & LOW
ANARCHY
HIGH & LO W
CONSERVATIVE
Figure 2.9  Behavior of a multidimensional system.

42 
Systems Principles 
Similarly, we can show how seemingly contradictory requirements for 
order and complexity are simultaneously achieved by an organization, 
and the requirement for stability and change is achieved with adaptation. 
In each case, the desired characteristic would not be a compromise, but a 
new totality with characteristics of its own.
2.3.1  Plurality of Function, Structure, and Process
Complementary to the principle of multidimensionality and parallel to it is 
the concept of plurality. Plurality of function, structure, and process, as we 
will see later on, is at the core of systems theory of development. It makes the 
Managerial Grid 
style of management
 
 
Theory Y 
C
o
1 9
9.9
n
1.9
c
The nature of 9 in 1.9 is different from the nature of 9 in 9.9   
e
r
n
f
Nature of 9 in 9.9 is different from  9 in 9.1 
f
o
5.5
  
  
 
r
Theory X
p
e
o
p
?
l
1 1
?
e
1.1
9.1
C o n c e r n   f o r  P r o d u c t i o n 
Figure 2.10  Style of management.
Figure 2.11  Innovative abilities.

Multidimensionality  43
high/high a possibility and choice a reality. Plurality simply maintains that 
systems can have multiple structures and multiple functions and be governed 
by multiple processes (Figure 2.12); it denies the classical view of a single 
structure with a single function in a single cause-and-effect relationship.
2.3.1.1  Plurality of function
A system can have multiple functions, both implicit and explicit. A car, for 
example, in addition to having the explicit function of transportation, 
might have an implicit function of, say, an identification tag. For many, a 
car defines the lifestyle of its owner and can have considerable snob value.
Furthermore, an investor might consider a car company a money-­
making machine, while union leaders see it as job-producing system. For 
an entrepreneur, the organization may present a lifetime challenge to 
create a winning system; however, for a professional corporate citizen it 
might be the platform for an internal power game. Indeed, organizations 
have multiple functions, generating and disseminating wealth, power, 
and beauty. Still, corporate actors, depending on their mindsets or the 
roles assigned to them, consider only one of these functions as primary. 
This is the fallacy that results in successful operations but dead patients.
2.3.1.2  Plurality of structure
Earlier, we proposed that the system's structure defines the components 
and their relationships. Plurality of the structure, therefore, means that the 
components and the relationships among them are multiple and variable.
Consider, for example, salt (NaCl). Its components — chlorine (Cl) 
and sodium (Na) — form a single type of relationship in all environments; 
therefore, salt is said to have a singular structure. But the same cannot be 
said about hydrocarbons. Hydrogen and carbon enter into various 
­combinations and relationships, resulting in multiple structures. Carbon's 
ability to combine with itself gave rise to a whole new branch of evolution 
(the biological systems), creating unstable but steady-state structures.
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
STRUCTURE 1
FUNCTION 1
FUNCTION 2
FUNCTION 3
STRUCTURE 2
STRUCTURE 3
Figure 2.12  Plurality of functions and structures.

44 
Systems Principles 
Human beings display a similar tendency. They form varying rela-
tionships with each other, creating an interactive type of structure, or a 
social system. Interactions between purposeful actors in a group take 
many forms. Social actors may cooperate on one pair of tendencies, com-
pete over others, and be in conflict over different sets, all at the same time. 
In addition, members of a social system learn and mature over time and 
are therefore variable and subject to change. The result is an interactive 
network of variable members with multiple relationships, re-creating 
itself continuously. This is what is meant by the plurality of structure.
Acceptance of plurality of structure, unlike that of functions, is a diffi-
cult proposition, since it goes against the traditional concept of structure 
as something that endures. However, a reconceptualization of this tradi-
tional concept is necessary to appreciate the principle of purposefulness 
and multidimensionality.
2.3.1.3  Plurality of process
The classical principle of causality maintained that similar initial conditions 
produce similar results, and consequently that dissimilar results are due to 
dissimilar initial conditions. Therefore, for a given structure, behavior of the 
system is completely predictable and its future states invariably depend on its 
initial conditions and the laws that govern its transformation (determinism).
Bertalanffy (1968), in analyzing the self-regulating or morphostatic 
features of open biological systems, loosened this classical belief by intro-
ducing the concept of “equifinality”: a final state may be reached by any 
number of different developmental routes. Buckley (1967), in his discus-
sion of morphogenetic processes in sociocultural systems, goes even fur-
ther and suggests an opposite principle, “multifinality”: similar initial 
conditions may lead to dissimilar end states. So the process, rather than 
the initial conditions, is responsible for future states. Accordingly, a social 
phenomenon can also be studied as the end result of a set of interactive 
processes. This adds a new dimension to the process of inquiry, which is 
key for understanding a powerful concept: the emergent property.
2.3.2  Recap
• “With infeasible parts you can create a feasible whole.”2
• In a multidimensional scheme, differences in degrees are differences 
in kind. A “high/high” concern represents a different behavior from a 
“low/high” concern. Each mode has its own distinct interpretation for 
the meaning of the variables involved.
• Freedom, justice, and security, in my belief, are three aspects of the 
same thing. They should not be separated; treating them in isolation 
has always been problematic.
2For demonstration of this beautiful conception see The Art of Problem Solving  
(Ackoff, 1978).

Emergent Property  45
2.4  Emergent Property
I can love, but none of my parts can love. If you take me apart, the phe-
nomenon of love will be lost. Furthermore, love does not yield itself to any 
one of the five senses. It does not have a color, a sound, or an aroma. It 
cannot be touched or tasted. Then how does one measure love? Of course 
one may always measure the manifestation of love. “If you love me why 
don't you call me?” someone may say.
Something does not seem quite right. The phenomenon of love does 
not fit the classical description of a property. Furthermore, it does not 
seem to be alone in this distinction. Similar phenomena, such as success, 
failure, and happiness, display the same types of characteristics. So let us 
give them a name, emergent properties, and put them in a category of their 
own: type II properties, as distinct from the more classical type, which we 
will call type I properties (Figure 2.13).
Emergent, or type II, properties are the property of the whole, not the 
property of the parts, and cannot be deduced from properties of the parts. 
However, they are a product of the interactions, not a sum of the actions 
of the parts, and therefore have to be understood on their own terms. 
Furthermore, they do not yield to any one of the five senses and cannot be 
measured directly. If measurement is necessary, then one can measure only 
their manifestation.
Emergent properties, by their nature, cannot be analyzed, they cannot 
be manipulated by analytical tools, and they do not yield to causal expla-
nations. Consider the phenomenon of life, the most significant emergent 
property. No one has yet been able to identify a single cause for life. Falling 
into the trap of trying to find correlation, we could probably find one 
between life and almost everything. Unfortunately, these correlations do 
not explain much about the essence of life. Relying exclusively on an ana-
lytical approach, not surprisingly, fails to produce a basic understanding 
about emergent properties.
Figure 2.13  Emergent properties.

46 
Systems Principles 
I have suggested that emergent properties are the product of interac-
tions among several elements. The mere notion of interaction signifies 
a  dynamic process producing a time-dependent state. In other words, 
the  emergent phenomenon is reproduced continuously online and in 
real time.
Therefore, life, love, happiness, and success are not one-time proposi-
tions; they have to be reproduced continuously. If the processes that gener-
ate them come to an end, the phenomena cease to exist as well. They cannot 
even be stored or saved for future use. And for sure, none can be taken for 
granted. Life, love, and happiness can be there one moment and gone the 
next. The same is true of success; it is just as vulnerable as love and 
happiness.
If emergent properties are the spontaneous outcome of ongoing pro-
cesses, then to understand them one has to understand the processes that 
generate them. Dying is very natural; staying alive is the miracle. It takes 
simultaneous interactions among hundreds of processes to keep someone 
alive. Those who try to explain the phenomenon of life as a single accident 
do not know what they are talking about.
If success is an emergent property, then it has to be about managing 
interactions rather than actions. An all-star team is not necessarily the best 
team in the league, and it might even lose to an average team in the same 
league. What characterizes a winning team is not only the quality of its 
players but also the quality of the interactions among them. A few years 
ago the New Orleans Saints football team had four defensive players in the 
Pro Bowl, but that did not mean the Saints had the best defense in the 
league. The same year, the Dallas Cowboys won the Super Bowl, without 
having any defensive players in the Pro Bowl.
The compatibility between the parts and their reinforcing mutual inter-
actions creates a resonance, a force, which will be an order of magnitude 
higher than the sum of the forces generated by the separate parts.
On the other hand, incompatibility among the parts will result in a less 
potent force than what the aggregate would have been able to produce. In 
the same way, an organization, depending on the nature of the interactions 
among its members, can be a value-adding or value-reducing system.
I have argued elsewhere that an organization's success is the product of 
the interactions among the five basic processes of throughput, decision 
making, learning and control, membership, and conflict management. 
These processes correspond with generating and disseminating wealth, 
power, knowledge, beauty, and values.
For example, to understand the success of GE, one cannot simply look 
at its earnings and market shares. At any given time, one might win or lose 
for the wrong reasons. Understanding GE's organizational processes 
­(specifically decision, learning, and measurement systems) may provide a 
­better explanation for its continuous success.

Emergent Property  47
We have said that emergent properties cannot be measured directly; 
one can measure only their manifestations. However, measuring the mani-
festation of a phenomenon has proven very problematic.
For example, if the number of phone calls is the measure of love, 
then one can fake it. People can call people without necessarily loving 
them.
Since most of the behavioral characteristics of living systems are type II 
properties, the art of faking has been the major preoccupation of behav-
ioral sciences in recent decades. How one can pretend to be something 
that one is not has been the money-making question of our times. Consider 
the huge market for how-to books, which give advice on a multitude of 
topics such as how to come across as a caring person when one does not 
care at all. Remember when one could pretend to be powerful simply by 
wearing a red tie?
Measuring the success of an organization has not been an easy propo-
sition, either. As the manifestation of success, growth has been considered 
an important performance measure of an organization. If an organization 
is successful, most probably it will grow; however, if an organization is 
growing, this does not necessarily mean that it is successful. One can easily 
grow by “faking,” or making lousy acquisitions. But unfortunately, two 
turkeys will not make an eagle. And that is exactly how many organiza-
tions have grown, only to destroy themselves.
To avoid pitfalls in measuring an emergent property, one has to mea-
sure more than one manifestation. In this context, economic value added 
(EVA) is a much more reliable measure of past success than simple 
growth.
=
×
−
EVA
Investment
(rateof return
castof capital)
EVA is based on two important manifestations of success. It is the ­product 
of both growth and value generation over and above the cost of capital. A 
positive EVA indicates a value-adding growth, while a negative EVA shows 
a value-reducing one.
Finally, manifestation of a phenomenon in its totality can be assessed 
only by picturing the future implicit in the present behavior of a given sys-
tem. To map this future, we need a handle on social dynamics.
2.4.1  Recap
• Instead of trying to describe a property only in terms of being, we can 
also try to understand it as a process of becoming.
• An all-star team is not necessarily the best team in the league, and it 
might even lose to an average team in the same league. What character-
izes a winning team is not only the quality of its players but also the 
quality of the interactions among them.

48 
Systems Principles 
• The compatibility between the parts and their reinforcing mutual 
interactions creates a resonance, or force, which may be an order of 
magnitude higher than the sum of the forces generated by the parts 
separately.
• Emergent properties are the spontaneous outcome of ongoing pro-
cesses. Life, love, happiness, and success are not one-time propositions; 
they have to be reproduced continuously. If the processes that generate 
them end, the phenomena will also cease to exist.
2.5  Counterintuitive Behavior
Social dynamics is fraught with counterintuitive behavior. It stands on a 
level of complexity beyond the reach of analytical approach.
Counterintuitive behavior means that actions intended to produce a 
desired outcome may generate opposite results. It has been said that the 
path to hell is paved with good intentions. Things can get worse before get-
ting better, or vice versa. One can win or lose for the wrong reason.
Making drugs illegal, while costing the nation a fortune, was meant to 
curb abuse and save the society from its ills. Counterintuitively, it has pro-
duced a multi-billion-dollar crime industry, higher consumption, and an 
overburdened criminal justice system.
To appreciate the nature of counterintuitive behavior, one needs to 
understand the practical consequences of the following assertions:
• Cause and effect may be separated in time and space. An event happen-
ing at a given time and place may have a delayed effect, producing an 
impact at a different time and a different place.
• Cause and effect can replace one another, displaying circular relations.
• An event may have multiple effects. The order of importance may shift 
in time.
• A set of variables that initially played a key role in producing an effect 
may be replaced by a different set of variables at a different time. 
Removing the initial cause will not necessarily remove the effect.
Expanding the welfare system to reduce the number of poor families in a 
community may, counterintuitively, increase their numbers. Improvement 
of welfare usually requires additional resources, which means an increase 
in taxes. Excessive taxation may push the wealthy and many businesses to 
move out of the region, diluting the tax base and reducing revenues.
Moreover, a more attractive welfare system will attract higher numbers 
of the needy to the region. It may also reduce the incentive to work, adding 
the burden of unemployment to an already overloaded system. Increased 
cost, coupled with reduced revenue, becomes a recipe for disaster 
(Figure 2.14).
For example, to examine the total effects of smoking on the heart, we 
should consider its multiple outcomes. Smoking might reduce anxiety and 
therefore, in the short term, be beneficial to the heart. In addition, smok-
ing, by reducing excessive desire to eat, helps maintain body weight, also 

Counterintuitive Behavior  49
helping the heart. But the pleasure associated with reduced anxiety is 
habit-forming and results in a desire to repeat the act. However, in the long 
run, smoking has a negative effect on the arteries. Combined with genetic 
dispositions and/or other oxidizing processes, smoking results in rigidity, 
roughness, and hardening of the heart's arteries. The natural defenses of 
the body react with multiple layers of cholesterol coatings to smooth 
things out, which ultimately results in a blockage and heart attacks.
Furthermore, smoking negatively affects the functioning of the lungs, 
resulting in a less-than-optimum supply of oxygen to the heart (Figure 2.15). 
In this context, it seems that developing a simple correlation between vari-
ables does not mean much; it might even be misleading. Is cholesterol the 
real villain or just an element of an overprotective defensive mechanism?
We have said that multifinality negates the classical principle of causal-
ity, suggesting that process, using different combinations of certainty, 
chance, and choice rather than the initial condition, is mostly responsible 
for future states.
All this means that understanding the short- and long-term consequences 
of an action, in its totality, requires building a dynamic model to simulate the 
multi-loop, nonlinear nature of the system. The model should capture the 
critical time lags and relevant interactions among major variables.
This approach is distinctly different from the conventional one, where 
the fallacy of generating simple correlation is responsible for proliferating 
misinformation that is floated around continuously. Considering the level 
of confusion that exists around counterintuitive outcomes, it is not diffi-
cult to see how one might attribute them to the chaotic nature of the 
universe.
Welfare System
again increases
taxes
wealthy
move out
more
money
results
increases
businesses
move out
reduces
reduces
more
welfare
tax
base
requires
increase
incentive
to work
reduces
reduces
unemployment
increases
cost
attracts
increases
results
increases
increasing
number of
needy
Figure 2.14  Dynamics of a welfare system.

50 
Systems Principles 
Ironically, an interesting formulation known as chaos theory (Gleick, 
1987) provides an alternative insight into the nature of this phenomenon. 
Unpredictability of nonlinear systems parallels counterintuitive behavior 
in a social context.
Chaos theory was advanced by a group of scientists3 with different 
backgrounds (in physics, chemistry, and mathematics) working on the 
dynamics of complex physical phenomena. It seemed, at first, that chaos 
theory is but a systems theory of fluid dynamics. But I found it to be very 
relevant to the problems of social dynamics and a welcome addition to the 
realm of systems thinking. It adds a new, somehow twisted perspective to 
the notion of complexity and holistic thinking.
Chaos theory, using a different perspective, reconfirms the signifi-
cance of the Herculean work done by Ackoff (1972), some 40 years ago, 
in explaining the behavioral characteristics of purposeful systems. The 
work essentially provides the basic tools and concepts needed to under-
stand choice and why social systems do what they do. There is another 
reason for my interest in chaos theory. Recognition of the fundamental 
role iteration plays in the discovery of complex patterns is very  
COUNTER-INTUITIVENESS
Oxidation
predisposition
defensive action
 
produces
Weight
helps maintain
Blockage
In the short run
destroys
Heart
Smoking
helps
desire to repeat
negatively affects
 
Cause & effects may replace one another.
Reduces
oxygen 
negatively affects
Lungs
One can win or lose for the wrong reason.
An event may have
multiple effects.
Cause & effects
separated in time
& space. 
Increases
cholesterol
coating 
rigidifies
arteries
In the long run
Reduces
anxiety
In the long run
is good for
gradually
Figure 2.15  Effect of smoking.
3Famous among them were Edward Lorenz, Benoit Mandelbrot, William M. Schaffer, 
and James A. Yorke.

Counterintuitive Behavior  51
compatible with my long-held belief that iteration is the essence of the 
holistic approach, and the core element of the design methodology (for 
details, see Part Three).
The following is my take on the relevant and interesting points of chaos 
theory:
• Analyzing the behavior of a nonlinear system is like walking through 
a maze whose walls rearrange themselves with each step you take (in 
other words, playing the game changes the game).
• Systems too complex for traditional mathematics could yet obey sim-
ple laws, for example, fractal geometry4 and fuzzy logic.5
• Laws of complexity hold universally across hierarchical scales (scalar, 
self-similarity) and are not influenced by the detailed behavior of con-
stituent parts.
• We are less likely to be able to explain the behavior of a complex whole 
by studying the behavior of the parts; contrarily, we are more likely to 
be able to explain the behavior of the parts by studying the behavior of 
the whole.
• A new understanding of time brings the realization that time is not 
really defined by the clock but by rhythms and iterations.6
• “Nature forms patterns, some orderly in space but disorderly in time, 
others orderly in time but disorderly in space. Some patterns are frac-
tal, exhibiting structures self-similar in scale, while others oscillate” 
(Gleick, 1987, p. 308).
Four kinds of attractors determine the nature of the patterns:
1.	 Point attractor (drawn to or repelled from a particular activity)
2.	 Cycle attractor (oscillation between two or more activities)
3.	 Torus attractor (organized complexity repeating itself)
4.	 Strange attractor (unpredictable complex patterns emerging over time)
If one is tempted to use chaos terminology in the social context, the four 
attractors, viewed from a systems perspective, can be explained as follows. 
The point attractors represent the behavior of social beings in pursuit of 
their natural instincts — fear, love, hate, desire to share, or self-interest. 
The cycle attractors (dialectic/self-maintaining) would correspond to our 
principle of multidimensionality, pursuit of seemingly opposite but com-
plementary tendencies: stability and change, security and freedom, and, in 
general, differentiation and integration. Cyclicality, or periodic shift of 
emphasis from one orientation to another, is the result of suboptimiza-
tion. Torus attractors (equifinal/neg-entropic/goal-seeking) exemplify the 
behavior of open systems. These systems are guided by the image (DNA) 
of what they ought to be, as growth patterns of biological systems. Strange 
4For anyone interested, the original, indispensable source is The Fractal Geometry of 
Nature (Mandelbrot, 1977).
5For definition and description see Fuzzy Sets and Applications (Zadeh, 1987).
6This also corresponds with old Persian concept of time.

52 
Systems Principles 
attractors (multifinal/self-organizing/purposeful) reflect the behavior of 
sociocultural systems with choices of ends and means; unpredictable pat-
terns emerge out of ­stylistic preferences of purposeful actors.
Note that self-organization is not always a conscious act. More often 
than not, it happens by default or through a random iterative process of 
deviation amplification (evolution). Therefore, self-organization, if it hap-
pens by default using implicit cultural codes, would be more like the pat-
terns produced by a torus attractor. However, redesign would be the type 
of self-organization created by a strange attractor.
Ackoff's (1972) description of passive, reactive, responsive, and active 
systems corresponds beautifully to the behavioral patterns attributed to 
the four attractors previously listed. (See Section  2.2 earlier in this 
chapter.)
With attractors, it is the iteration that makes it possible for order to 
appear from chaos. Nature automatically creates the iteration, but social 
beings can return to zero only by choice to start a new iteration. Designing 
from a clean slate is a reflection of this imperative.
Counterintuitive behavior of social systems is further exemplified by 
the following observations: 
1.	 Social systems display a tendency to repeat themselves and reproduce 
the same set of non-solutions all over again.
One can never overestimate the resistance to change. “Conventional 
wisdom is like an old guard; it would rather die than ­surrender.” A com-
fort level with the familiar, combined with fear of the unknown, cre-
ates a formidable force that may even override potential self-­interest. 
People may genuinely become excited by a beautiful idea and even 
support it wholeheartedly. But as the idea moves closer to implemen-
tation, insecurity and self-doubt set in. The supporters of the idea may 
then subconsciously sabotage their own efforts and prevent the change. 
Along with this comes pathological behavior, which is produced when 
those in charge of removing an obstruction benefit from it. Absent the 
support of a courageous, charismatic leader who enjoys the confidence 
of his/her people, any suggestions for a fundamental change become 
potentially self-destructive propositions. The fool who chooses to take 
on this role should be aware of his/her eventual loneliness.
2.	 A difference in degree may become a difference in kind.
A commonly accepted principle of systems dynamics is that a quan-
titative change, beyond a critical point, results in a qualitative change. 
Accordingly, a difference in degree may become a difference in kind. 
This doesn't mean that an increased quantity of a given variable will 
bring a qualitative change in the variable itself. However, when the 
state of a system depends on a set of variables, a quantitative change in 
one variable beyond the inflection point will result in a change of phase 
in the state of the system. This change is a qualitative one, ­representing a 

Counterintuitive Behavior  53
whole new set of relationships among the variables involved. Suppose 
my style of life (state of a system) depends on my income. If my income 
were to suddenly change from $1,000 a month to $100,000 a month, 
it would certainly change my style of life. The change, of course, would 
be a qualitative one, representing a new mode of being. The income 
level that brings a qualitative change in lifestyle may be different for dif-
ferent people; however, it defines a critical juncture called the ­inflection 
point as defined above.
Catastrophe theory (Zeeman, 1976), which deals with the same phe-
nomena but in a physical context, reveals that at the inflection point, 
systems display catastrophic behavior (a cusp). In the social context, 
an inflection point will usually occur when one of the critical vari-
ables changes by an order of magnitude, that is, when something can 
be done 10 times faster, cheaper, and/or better than would have been 
possible before.
In his book Only the Paranoid Survive (1996), Andrew S. Grove, 
President and CEO of Intel Corporation, dealt beautifully with 
the change of phase in a modern, technology-driven corporation. 
He explains, with great insight, how a “10X” change in certain vari-
ables (such as technology, markets, and regulations) resulted in a 
“strategic inflection point” and a change in the nature of the busi-
ness, where the known facts of the business become invalid and a 
whole new set of emotions — denial, fear, insecurity, and feeling of 
betrayal — sets in.
3.	 I have mentioned before that market economies, like democracies, do 
not usually select the best solutions. They choose the most compatible, 
satisficing solution. Being ahead of your time is sometimes more tragic 
than falling behind.
The following episode, used by Grove to indicate the impact of a 10X 
change in the marketplace, demonstrates, in my opinion, the essence 
of market economies' counterintuitive behavior as well.
Steve Jobs, co-founder of Apple, is arguably the founding genius of the 
personal computing industry. He left Apple in 1985 to create the “Next” 
generation of superbly engineered hardware, a graphical user interface 
that was even better than Apple's Macintosh interface, and an operat-
ing system much more advanced than Mac. The software would be built 
in such a way that customers could tailor applications to their own uses 
by rearranging chunks of existing software rather than having to write it 
from the ground up. He wanted to create a computing system that would 
be in a class by itself. Jobs did not like PCs. He thought them inelegant 
and poorly engineered. The irony is that he was right. It took him a few 
years, but the Next computer and operating system delivered basically 
on all its objectives.

54 
Systems Principles 
Yet while Jobs was working on his “insanely great computer,” Microsoft 
Windows had come on the market. Windows wasn't even as good as the 
Mac, let alone the Next interface, and it wasn't seamlessly integrated with 
computers or applications. But it was cheap and it worked, most impor-
tantly, on the inexpensive personal computers that by the late 1980s were 
available anywhere in the world from hundreds of PC manufacturers.
Grove,  1996,  pp. 59–60
The Next machine, even with all its beauty, never took off. Despite an 
ongoing infusion of cash, a state-of-the-art software operation, and a 
fully automated factory built to produce a large volume of Next com-
puters, Jobs could not overcome the widespread momentum generated 
by the combination of Microsoft Windows and Intel Pentium chips, 
known figuratively as “WinTel.” Ironically, Microsoft owes as much of 
its success to Intel as Intel owes to Microsoft. Each one, by default, cre-
ated a 10X market for the other.
It is also worthy to note that the Next machine and its operating 
­system is now the basis for the popular and very successful Apple 
­computers and Apple X Operating System.
4.	 Passive adaptation to a deteriorating environment is a road to disaster.
It's been said that if a frog is suddenly dropped into boiling water it 
will immediately jump out. However, if you put the same frog in warm 
water that is heated gradually, the frog will boil to death with no objec-
tion. The same is true of social systems. The capacity to adapt gradually 
to a changing environment can lead to a disaster if the adaptation is to 
a deteriorating environment. That only one of the original companies 
in the Dow Jones index participated in its centennial celebration is an 
indication that death, even among successful organizations, is more 
common than we like to believe. In fact, gradual deaths are more com-
mon than sudden deaths. In what is called the “Pan Am Syndrome,” 
organizations bleed to death by adapting to an imperceptible gradual 
change, always doing too little too late. Ironically, sudden change of 
phase with all of its ramifications is less dangerous than imperceptible, 
gradual change. An organization facing a sudden change may still have 
enough organizational strength left in it to cope. But in the case of pas-
sive adaptation, by the time an organization recognizes the ­severity 
of the problem, it may have already lost most of its strength and be 
unable to do anything about it.
2.5.1  Recap
• Success in playing the game changes the game, and tenacity in playing 
the old game converts success to failure.
• Market economies, like democracies, make only rational choices. The 
winners are not necessarily the best, but those most compatible with 

Counterintuitive Behavior  55
the existing order. Being ahead of your time is sometimes more tragic 
than falling behind.
• Cause and effect display circular relations. Events have multiple effects, 
each with a different time lag and independent life of its own.
• Removing the cause will not necessarily remove the effect.
• Nature's tendency for iteration, pattern formation, and creation of order 
out of chaos creates expectations of predictability. It seems, ­however, 
that nature, because of varying degrees of interaction between chance 
and choice, and the nonlinearity of systems, escapes the boredom of 
predictability.

This page intentionally left blank

57
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a pt er | t hree
Sociocultural System
3.1  Self-organizatioN: movement toward  
a ­predefined order
Self-organization, or the movement toward a predefined order, is one of 
the critical conceptions that describe the essence of sociocultural systems. 
This is a conception shared by all four contemporary theories: quantum 
theory, living systems theory, chaos theory, and systems theory.
The formidable second law of thermodynamics states that the universe, 
as a closed system, has a tendency toward elimination of all distinctions. 
Thus, the ultimate state is sameness and randomness (a chaotic simplicity). 
Entropy (S), the measure of randomness and sameness, will therefore 
always increase.
But one of the major findings of quantum theory is the recognition 
that the universe is an open system. Open systems are neg-entropic (-S) and 
exhibit a tendency toward order. This means that according to quantum 
theory, the universe is a self-organizing system, continuously expanding 
and moving toward increasing order and complexity. In this context even 
subatomic particles show open system behavior and self-referencing 
tendencies.
Despite its name, chaos theory considers the tendency toward order a 
natural phenomenon produced by the action of four types of attractors: 
point attractors, cycle attractors, torus attractors, and strange attractors. 
There is an order in chaos, and the objective of chaos theory is to dis-
cover the hidden order or the attractor responsible for creation of the 
chaotic order.
Living systems theorist Stuart Kauffman, in his book At Home in the 
Universe (1995), sees self-organization as the coproducer of the stunning 
biological complexity around us. “Molecules of all varieties join in a meta-
bolic dance to make cells. Cells interact with cells to form organisms; 
organisms interact with organisms to form ecosystems, or societies. Where 
did this grand architecture come from?” (Kauffman, 1995, p. vii). He 
­further maintains, “For more than a century, the only theory that science 

58 
Sociocultural System 
has offered to explain how this order arose is natural selection. But in 
crafting the living world, selection has always acted on systems that exhibit 
spontaneous order. Formation of this underlying order further honed by 
selection needs to be explained as well.” He then concluded that a natural 
tendency to self-organize must have been present in the formation of the 
initial order.
For Kauffman one of the most awesome aspects of biological order is 
ontogeny — development of the fertilized egg to newborn infant. The sin-
gle cell type differentiates by dissipation and bifurcation to form 256 cell 
types. These 256 cell types then behave as a multi-processing chemical 
computer, undergoing 50 divisions and integration to become the new-
born infant (Figure 3.1).
For Capra (2002, p. 34), the organizing activity of living systems, at 
all levels of life, is a mental activity. “The interactions of a living system 
with its environment are cognitive interactions. The process of living is a 
process of cognition. To live is to know.” One of the most important 
implications of new understandings of life is a novel conception of the 
nature of mind and consciousness, which finally overcomes the Cartesian 
division between mind and matter. Philosopher William James, as early 
as the late nineteenth century, pointed out that consciousness is not a 
thing, but a process.
The central insight of Santiago Theory (Maturana and Varela, 1980) 
is also the identification of cognition, the process of knowing, with the 
process of life. According to Santiago Theory, consciousness is a special 
kind of cognitive process that emerges when cognition reaches a certain 
level of complexity. Reflective consciousness involves a level of cognitive 
abstraction that includes the ability to form mental images. For Capra, 
Figure 3.1  A vision of reality with life at its center.

Information-Bonded Systems  59
this is the extension of a new understanding of life to the social domain. This 
brings us to the notion of self-organizing tendencies of sociocultural 
systems.
I have argued extensively in a previous work (Gharajedaghi, 1972) 
that to be self-organizing and to move toward a predefined order, a social 
system must possess a means of knowing — an internal image of what it 
wants to be. I have also suggested that the same way that DNA is the source 
of this image for biological systems, culture (shared image) is the source of 
the blueprints for the desired future of the sociocultural systems. The 
image of this future provides default values for all decisions and stands at 
the center of the process of change. That is why, despite all kinds of 
­obstructions, sociocultural systems seem to pursue a predefined order with 
tenacity. The persistence of default values explains why it is so difficult to 
induce change into sociocultural systems.
To appreciate the operational meaning of this conception and the criti-
cal role implicit cultural codes play in the process of change and dynamics 
of social systems, we ought to enrich our understanding of the essential 
characteristic of the information-bonded systems and the essential 
­functions of shared image.
3.2  Information-bonded systems
Many things about the behavior of a social system refer to the interaction 
rather than the individuality of its members. Each social system manifests 
certain characteristics that it may retain even if all its individual members 
are replaced.
Ervin Lazlo, 1972
The elements that characterize a social system are not only its members, but 
also the relationship of its members to one another and to the whole. This is 
implicit in the definition of a system. Some kind of linkage between the ele-
ments is presupposed if the aggregate is to be considered a system. The point 
of emphasis, then, is not the existence of a relationship, but the assumptions 
regarding the nature of the relationship. These relationships in turn depend 
on the nature of the bonds that link and hold the components of the system 
together. In this context, there are fundamental differences between the nature 
of the bond in mechanical systems and those in sociocultural systems.
While the elements of mechanical systems are “energy-bonded,” those 
of sociocultural systems are “information-bonded.” In energy-bonded sys-
tems, laws of classical physics govern the relationship existing between the 
elements. Integration of the parts is a one-time proposition. Nail two 
boards together, and they stay that way until the wood rots, the nails rust, 
or a pry bar separates them. In mechanical systems passive and predictable 
functioning of parts is a must, until a part breaks down or an external force 
of sufficient strength is applied. But the behavior of active parts of an 
information-bonded system is a different proposition: integration of these 

60 
Sociocultural System 
parts into a cohesive whole is a lifetime struggle. Think about the ­challenges 
of maintaining a marriage, families, or any other close-knit group of 
human beings — each with a mind of his/her own — to appreciate the 
unique challenges of integrating the members in a social system. 
Organization of a multi-minded sociocultural system is considered a vol-
untary association of purposeful members in which the bonding is 
achieved by a second-degree agreement (an agreement based on a com-
mon perception). In first-degree agreements actors may agree on a course 
of action for completely different reasons. (The leftist and the Islamist in 
Iran agreed to topple the Shah's regime for completely opposite reasons.) 
Second-degree agreement, on the other hand, requires an agreement on 
the why question. Therefore, even agreeing to disagree, in certain situa-
tions, might be considered a second-degree agreement.
Buckley (1967) explained the structural characteristic of sociocultural 
systems based on the effect of information, not energy transmission such 
as we find in mechanical systems. The sociocultural system is viewed as a 
set of elements linked almost entirely by interconnection of information. 
It is an organization of meanings emerging from a network of interactions 
among individuals.
To clarify the meaning of information-bonded systems, we need to 
examine the concepts of culture and social learning in more detail.
3.3  Culture
Image building and abstraction are among the most significant character-
istics of human beings, allowing them not only to form and interpret 
images of real things, but also to use these images to create images of 
things that may not exist. These images are then synthesized into a uni-
fied, meaningful mental model and eventually into a worldview. Man 
feels hunger, observes the fleeing prey, and realizes his inability to capture 
it. After discovering other related objective realities (wood, stones, etc.), 
he thinks about and eventually creates a subjective image of a tool, one 
yet to be, that would help him secure food. Transformation of this subjec-
tive image into an objective reality results in the bow and arrow, which in 
turn will be a reproducer of yet another image, and so on. This dialectic 
interaction between objective and subjective realities lies at the core of a 
process called design thinking, which is responsible for the dynamic devel-
opment of human societies. We have noted several postulations that iden-
tify cognition — the process of knowing — with the process of life. We 
also noted that consciousness is a complex form of cognitive process and 
reflective consciousness involves a level of cognitive abstraction that 
includes the ability to form mental images. It is appreciation of this 
incredible ability to create a mental image that brings the new under-
standing of life to the social domain. It provides the clue for understand-
ing the nature of social bonds, the process of socialization, and human 
development.

Culture  61
As a prerequisite to survival it has always been necessary for people to 
observe and understand events that are constantly occurring in their envi-
ronment. They do so in order to use favorable opportunities and be pre-
pared for antagonistic events. But understanding scattered phenomena in 
isolation, although necessary, is not sufficient for humans to relate to their 
environment. Therefore, an additional struggle to find a logical relation-
ship among these isolated findings impels people to synthesize this frag-
mented information into a unified, meaningful mental image and 
eventually into a worldview. For a beautiful and in-depth discussion of 
image formation see Boulding (1956).
Coproduced by the environment and man's unique process of creativ-
ity, the image (itself a beautiful design) establishes a link between man 
and his environment. It consists of a system of implicit assumptions on 
the nature of spatio-temporal-causal realities, in addition to a concept of 
values, aesthetics, and one's perceived role in the environment.
A considerable part of this image or mental model of the universe is 
shared with others who live in the same social setting. The rest remains 
private and personal. It is the shared image that constitutes the princi-
pal bond among members of a human community and provides the 
necessary conditions for any meaningful interactions. The extent to 
which the image of an individual coincides with the “shared image” of 
a community determines the degree of his membership in that commu-
nity. It is the “shared image” that we refer to as the culture of a people. 
Incorporating their experiences, beliefs, attitudes, and ideals, culture is 
the ultimate product and reflection of their history and the manifesta-
tion of their identity — man creates his culture and his culture creates 
him (Figure 3.2).
Although culture pre-exists for individuals, it can be transformed and 
reproduced by their purposeful actions. It is here that the key obstacles 
and opportunities for development are found — the collective ability and 
desire of a people to transform their culture and re-create the future they 
want. Human culture with all its complexity, ambiguity, and manifold 
potentialities stands at the center of the process of change. This ­process of 
Figure 3.2  Shared image and culture.

62 
Sociocultural System 
change cannot be understood except against the background of the culture 
of which it is a part, which it builds upon and reacts against. This process 
is so ingrained that the success of individual actions invariably depends 
on the degree to which they penetrate and modify the “shared image.”
Operational implications of culture lie in the fact that cultures act as 
default decision systems. For example, if you do not decide explicitly what 
kind of parent you want to be, the culture makes this decision for you. 
When people repeatedly use default values, they tend to forget that they 
have a choice. Instead, they treat such values as “realities out there,” 
undermining the fact that those “realities” will remain “out there” as long 
as no one is willing to challenge them. The problem is that the implicit-
ness of the underlying assumptions prevents actors from questioning 
their validity; therefore, the defaults usually remain unchallenged and 
become obsolete.
The potentiality and vitality of the culture lie in its creative ability to 
meet the challenges of continuously emerging desires and ideals. This pro-
cess demands conscious and active adaptation, not a passive acceptance of 
events. It is a struggle for the creation of new dimensions, appreciation of 
new realities, and, finally, enrichment of the common image. It is a learn-
ing process that entails coordinated changes in motivation, knowledge, 
and understanding throughout the social system.
3.4  Social learning
Social systems learn through the members who adjust their worldviews by 
mapping new realities and observing the actual or potential results of their 
actions’ social learning; however, the sum of each member's learning is 
their collective, shared learning. Sociocultural systems manifest greater 
inertia and resistance to change than their individual members.
The inertia of a culture is manifested when public and private images 
act as filters, developing a selective mode of reception. This process tunes 
the receptors for particular messages. Those consistent with the image 
are absorbed and reinforced, while contradictory and antagonistic ones 
have no significant effect. This phenomenon, although an impediment 
to change, acts as a defense mechanism and structure-maintaining func-
tion. Looking on the positive side, inertia helps to make cultures resilient 
and sustainable.
Failure of a social system to learn leads to other major difficulties. For 
instance, as systems become more sophisticated and problems become 
more profound, the increasing disconnection between science and 
the public image becomes the dilemma of the democratic process and 
remains its main challenge. The disconnection happens in a dynamic 
process with several stages of dissociation. At the outset, since truth is 
commonly identified with simplicity and comprehensibility, what one 
does not understand is simply rejected as false. Further, a high level of 

Social Learning  63
specialization in science moves it further away from the common image, 
creating a small, isolated subculture. Ultimately, creation of a scientific 
subculture that fails to communicate its insights reduces the influence of 
science on the behavior of the public at large at just the time when it may 
be needed most.
Recently involved with a community development project aimed at 
creating a shared vision of a desired future for all the stakeholders, I was 
confronted with the following statement: “Common people don't 
understand these fancy concepts. They would be better off sticking with 
tangible and familiar things they understand.” My answer was 
“Understanding among common people is usually the end result of a 
developmental process, not its beginning. If understanding among com-
mon people becomes a prerequisite for introducing a ‘fancy’ concept, I 
assure you that we will fast fall to the lowest level of banality. Life would 
proceed with setting and seeking attainable goals that would rarely 
escape the limits of the familiar.”
The greatest obstacle in most developmental processes is not so much 
a lack of understanding among common people as a lack of common 
understanding among the so-called experts. It has always been easier to 
generate required levels of understanding among common people than 
among experts, not only because they do not have an ego problem, but 
because learning is much simpler than unlearning. The patronizing myth 
of protecting common people from fancy concepts now borders on the art 
of demagoguery.
Finally, fear of rejection and a strong tendency toward conformity 
among members of a social system are other obstructions to social change. 
An example is the experience of a dry county whose constituents were to 
vote on the alcohol ban. A pre-vote survey indicated that 75% of the voters 
favored abolishing the ban; however, the individual voters thought the 
majority wanted a dry county. When the results were tabulated, 60% of the 
voters had voted to keep the county dry. Not surprisingly, after the survey 
results were published, the next vote on the issue produced a 65% major-
ity in favor of abolishing the ban.
Recall that the role of knowledge in social systems is analogous to that 
of energy in physical systems. But unlike energy, knowledge is not subject 
to the “law of conservation.” One does not lose knowledge by sharing it 
with others; the opposite is true. The ability to learn and share knowledge 
enables sociocultural systems to continuously increase their capacity for 
higher levels of organization. This is what social development is all about. 
It is this collective and shared learning that enables societies to redesign 
themselves by successively creating new modes of organization at higher 
levels of order and complexity. For example, at the time of the American 
Revolution, the thirteen colonies ceased to think of themselves as simply 
an aggregate or collection of discrete economic entities beholden to 
England and began to think of themselves as a unified group of members 

64 
Sociocultural System 
accountable to their shared image of independence. Unification and inter-
dependence are higher levels of order and complexity than colonial 
status.
Creating a new mode of organization involves a cultural transforma-
tion. More specifically, it requires changing the default values of the orga-
nizing principles. But challenging the conventional wisdom is a painful 
process. It demands questioning the sacred assumptions and developing a 
collective ability to reconceptualize the relevant variables into a new 
ensemble with a new characterization of its own. This is a learning process 
of the second order, which must be distinguished from first-order learning 
where the underlying assumptions governing the selection of alternatives 
remain unchallenged. Second-order learning, on the other hand, involves 
challenging the assumptions. It represents a qualitative change that identi-
fies a new set of alternatives and objectives. Second-order learning 
­redefines the rules for first-order learning and provides for orderly trans-
formation and development of sociocultural systems. Business lore is rife 
with stories of how questioning assumptions has led to innovation and 
game-changing new industries. Fred Smith questioned the default assump-
tions about how to deliver mail and packages and created Federal Express. 
Southwest Airlines challenged the implicit rules of how to run an airline. 
Online learning challenges the time- and space-bound rules of traditional 
schooling.
3.5  Culture as an operating system
To re-emphasize our previous assertion, perhaps the most significant func-
tion of the culture is serving as the blueprint for production of a predefined 
order. This function is similar to the operating system of a computer. Without 
an operating system a computer is simply a useless box. Without a viable 
and dynamic culture a social system is doomed. As living systems, sociocul-
tural systems must possess an image of what they ought to be. This is neces-
sary to be able to continuously reposition the systems to move closer to their 
predefined order. They not only move toward a predefined order, but also 
jealously guard their individualities. Unless their stored image is altered, 
social systems go on to replicate themselves almost indefinitely.
The shared image, therefore, stands at the center of the process of 
change. The success of any action invariably depends on the degree to 
which it penetrates and modifies the “shared image.” That is why trying to 
effect social transformation is fraught with frustration. The triumphant 
resurgence of old patterns of behavior despite the concerted efforts of 
change agents is an uninterrupted source of frustration. What seems to 
make this stubborn insurgency so overpowering is the fact that a set of 
organizing principles (cultural codes) that make the system what it is and 
behave the way it does are implicit, and more often than not are consid-
ered to be sacred.

Culture as an Operating System  65
The subset of implicit cultural codes responsible for regenerating the 
existing order is what we metaphorically refer to as the “second-order-
machine.” The second-order-machine is equivalent to the notion of an 
attractor in chaos theory. To produce a change in the behavioral pattern of 
a social system, its underlying assumptions need to be challenged. A new 
set of alternatives must be generated and the attractor in action must be 
modified. How, then, does change enter a social system?
With open, neg-entropic systems changes do not occur randomly. They 
are always consistent with what has gone on before with the history and 
identity of the system. This phenomenon, known as self-reference, is what 
facilitates orderly change toward organized complexity. Self-reference and 
iterative processes along with random mutation and natural selection 
together provide a more complete explanation for the beauty and the 
magic of the evolutionary process.
It has been said that our most critical survival ability can only be learned 
socially; this socially learned ability — culture — has two ­dime­nsions: 
1.	 Cognitive: The process of knowing, language, meaning, and reasoning
2.	 Normative: Values, beliefs, and social contracts
Self-organizing, purposeful, sociocultural systems must be self-­evolving to 
be viable. They cannot passively adapt to their environments but should 
co-evolve with them. They should be able to change the rules of interac-
tion as they evolve over time.
To be viable, a culture must be capable of actively adapting to emerging 
realities. Active adaptation is an iterative learning process of the second 
order that demands freedom to question the sacred assumptions. 
Unfortunately, it is here that major obstructions for development of socio-
cultural systems are found. Members of many traditional societies lack the 
freedom to question any one of their sacred cultural codes. Instead, most 
are subject to enormous intimidation by traditional forces. Questioning a 
sacred practice is often treated as an insult and is punishable by death in 
such systems. But the ability to question sacred assumptions, without fear 
of repercussion, is not only an individual right but also a necessary social 
good that must be preserved at any price. Sometimes intimidating forces 
present such a monumental obstruction to development that paying 
any price to remove them might be justified. This is so true that even the 
tragic intervention of outside power, if it results in dissolving the 
entrenched intimidating forces, may prove to be a tipping point for potent 
cultural evolution (Japan and Turkey provide sobering examples for this 
argument).
On the other hand, chaotic orders, representing a form of seemingly 
stable but frustrated social systems, may experience a sudden, unexpected 
change. This phenomenon is produced when a small disturbance is fed 
back on itself to create a monumental impact. Disturbance to any system 
will be resisted when it first appears, but if it survives the first attempts at 
suppression and resonates with pre-existing frustrations within the ­system, 

66 
Sociocultural System 
an iterative process of deviation amplification begins. This is how a frus-
trated mass motivated by hatred and led by paternalistic/charismatic lead-
ers can produce a phenomenal change in the structure of a less developed 
social system. Unfortunately, without the formation of a comprehensive 
shared image of a desired future, chaotic struggles may not produce trans-
formation to a self-evolving, purposeful, sociocultural system. The reality 
of highly developed sociocultural systems that have outgrown the secure 
web of a paternalistic culture is fundamentally different from those that 
are still trapped within the confines of this type of culture. Unless pater-
nalistic cultural codes are properly challenged and modified, the repeated 
pattern of authoritarian ruler and alienated people will continue to emerge. 
(The Iranian Revolution and the collapse of the Soviet Union are most 
recent anecdotal evidence.)
Emancipation, according to Habermas, takes place whenever people 
are able to overcome past restrictions that resulted from ideological 
distortions.
Unfortunately, ideologies in any form or type have proved to be major 
obstructions to the viability of a social system. The significant and com-
mon characteristic of all ideologies is a claim for ultimate truth with a pre-
defined set of ends and means. Underlying assumptions are not to be 
questioned by true believers. This is incompatible with second-order learn-
ing, which requires questioning sacred assumptions and challenging 
implicit sets of default values.
Unfortunately, many generations of our time have witnessed with despair 
how competing ideologies destroyed millions of livelihoods and have 
undermined the viability of so many vibrant societies. In response the fol-
lowing provocative statements by two contemporary social scientists under-
line the level of our preoccupation with the menacing nature of ideologies.
Francis Fukuyama, in a famous article published in the Foreign Affairs 
Journal (1992) titled “End of History,” declared: “What we are witnessing 
is not just the end of the Cold War but the end of history. The era of ideo-
logical battles is over. The world will be moving toward a global market 
economy and capitalism, democracy and human rights will be spreading 
all over the globe.” A year later, Samuel P. Huntington, in a widely read 
rebuttal in the same journal (summer 1993), predicted that the end of the 
Cold War would be followed by “the clash of civilizations” between what 
he called “Islamic Civilization” and “Christian or western Civilization.”
Needless to say, predicting counterintuitive behavior of complex social 
systems from a single ideological perspective is an oversimplification. 
According to Kenneth Boulding (1981, p. 18): 
The systemic vision of social dynamics is unfriendly to any monistic view 
of human history that seeks to explain it by a single factor, whether this 
is  a  materialistic interpretation as in the case of [classical] Marxism, a 
­simple theistic interpretation, as in biblical Judaism, or an eschatological 

Culture as an Operating System  67
interpretation in terms of some simple denouncement. The simple rhetoric 
of revolution also must be regarded as an essentially minor element in the 
ongoing process of human and societal evolution, although it is sometimes 
important as a special case under particular circumstances.
For systems thinking civilization is the emergent outcome of the interac-
tion between culture (the software) and technology (the hardware; Figure 3.3). 
Technology is universal, proliferating with no resistance, whereas cultures 
are local, resisting change with tenacity. In an open society culture evolves 
with technological advances, but in the closed societies incompatibility 
between technology and culture leads to reactionary struggles. The prob-
lem is amplified by the unfortunate fact that some cultures are producers 
of technology while others are only its consumers. Imported technologies 
that coproduce unwelcome changes in traditional ways of life are often 
seen as a “foreign invasion” by reactionary forces. This leads to further 
campaign for isolation and creation of the “us versus them” mentality.
Finally, the subject of social change and the shared image cannot end 
without a reference to Margaret J. Wheatley's interesting book, Leadership and 
New Science (1994). Wheatley, with simple language, reviews relevant and 
intriguing conceptions from the quantum world and field theory to bring 
additional insights to understanding sociocultural systems. In this context 
appreciation of a field of vision permeating the organizational space adds a 
new dimension for the role of culture in development of social systems.
As Wheatley points out, the field picture of a world permeated with a 
few active media has replaced the Newtonian picture of the world popu-
lated by many particles, each with an independent existence. Space used to 
be the basic ingredient of the universe. An atom is 99.999% empty. But 
something strange has happened to space in the quantum world. No ­longer 
is there a lonely void. Space, everywhere, is now thought to be filled with 
Figure 3.3  Two dimensions of civilization.

68 
Sociocultural System 
fields. Invisible, intangible, inaudible, tasteless, odorless fields that are 
unapproachable through our five senses are as real as the particles in them. 
In reference to field theory, Wheatley (1994) also provided the following 
quotes from Rupert Sheldrake, which highlight the essential message con-
tained in his beautiful conception. 
• “Some of what we know how to do comes not from our own acquired 
learning, but from knowledge that has been accumulated in the human 
species field to which we have access.”
• “Whole populations of species can shift their behavior because the 
content of their field has changed, not because they individually have 
taken the time to learn new behavior.”
To re-create the future by way of influencing the shared image, the cul-
tural field, thus bringing about a more desired pattern of behavior, is 
what interactive design is all about. We will discuss interactive design in 
Chapter 7.

69
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch apt er | fou r
Development
Development is a core concept of the systems view of the world. In contrast to 
the mechanistic and biological views concerned, respectively, with efficiency 
and growth, the systems view is basically concerned with development.
A critical review of major traditional views of development suggests 
that they are generally characterized by problems of (1) ethnocentrism, 
(2) unidimensionality, and (3) deterministic perspective.
In the first place, most developmental theories have built-in ethnocen-
tric biases. The models, as ideal types of developed societies, bear unmis-
takable signs of the western historical experience. Furthermore, the 
fragmentation of developmental theory into competing disciplinary per-
spectives results in a unidimensional view of development. Each disci-
pline tends to exclude the other variables from its own unique domain of 
analysis — material quantities in economics, power in political science, 
and order in sociology.
Perhaps the most serious problem lies in the fact that most develop-
mental theories begin with a preconceived law of social transformation. 
Assumed to be true at all times and in all environments, the path is charted 
beforehand.
Development plays a central role in the systems view of the world, 
therefore, it is important to clarify any misconceptions that exist about the 
nature of development and the properties usually identified with it.
Although it is risky to lump developmental theories together, for prac-
tical purposes we need some kind of classification scheme. Still, important 
differences and some significant continuity exist among them. Further, 
these theories do not necessarily refute each other. In most cases, they 
either complement or supersede one another.
The typology presented here (Figure 4.1) categorizes developmental 
theories into eight types depending on their underlying assumptions 
(explicit or implicit) regarding the singularity or plurality they attribute to 
function, structure, and process.
Singularity refers to theories in which a particular structure, function, or 
process is considered fixed and/or primary in all environments. Plurality 
refers to theories that consider structure, function, or process to be multi-
ple and/or variable in the same or different environments.

70 
Development
Note that the theories in category 1 (singularity of function, structure, 
and process) are descriptive and do not deal with any means of interven-
tion. Other categories, by assuming plurality in at least one dimension, pro-
vide for some means of intervention. Category 8 (purposeful systems, 
representing the systems view of development) assumes plurality in all three 
dimensions: function, structure, and process. Therefore, category 8 is an 
inclusive theory. It provides a framework to explain the other seven catego-
ries as special cases. The following scheme summarizes the assumptions and 
the main features of each type and their perspectives on development.
4.1  Schematic view of theoretical traditions
Without explanation, the significance of the typology presented in Figure 4.1 
may be lost. This section addresses each element in an attempt to differenti-
ate them.
Singularity of Function, Structure, and Process 
Model: Determined, mechanistic, and descriptive model of man in a 
state of nature, homo-economicus; forms social contract to increase 
wealth through increasing productivity and division of labor.
Theoretical Tradition: Classical and neoclassical, as exemplified by 
the writings of Smith, Ricardo, Malthus, Mill, Marshall, Keynes, 
Schumpeter, and Rostow.
Development Process: Stability and growth against major constraints 
of capital accumulation, population growth, and limited natural 
resources; automatic mechanism of adjustment. Keynes introduces 
the principles of conscious manipulation of productive forces 
(neoclassical) to maintain stability and growth. Rostow consid-
ers a stage theory, traditional, pre-take-off, take-off, self-sustaining 
growth, and high mass consumption.
Singularity of Function and Process with Plurality of Structure 
Model: Deterministic and mechanistic model based on linear cause-
and-effect relationships. Conflict, the prime producer of change, 
results in a stage theory and formation of a new social structure.
Singularity of Funcon
Singularity of
Structure
Plurality of
Structure
Singularity of
Process
Singularity of
Process
Plurality of
Process
Plurality of
Process
Plurality of Funcon
Classical
Neo-classical
General
Systems 
Structural
Funconalism
Behaviorism
Orthodox
Marxism
Purposeful
Systems 
New Le$
Radical
Humanism
 
 
Figure 4.1  Typology of development theories.

Schematic View of Theoretical Traditions  71
Theoretical Tradition: Orthodox Marxism and radical Weberianism, 
as exemplified by the writings of Engels, Lenin, Kautsky and 
Plekhanov, Weber, Dahrendorf, and Rex.
Development Process: In orthodox Marxism economy is the prime 
function, and class struggle is the prime process. Historical deter-
minism is about moving from primitive communism to ancient 
slave societies, feudalism, capitalism, socialism, and finally the 
ideal of communism (classless society) through class conflict and 
progressive system transformation. In radical Weberianism, power 
is the prime function, and the legitimization is the prime process. 
Varying structure is defined by authority and classified into three 
pure types to correspond with different types of society: traditional, 
charismatic, and rational-legal. There is increasing rationalization 
of authority from patriarchal to patrimonial to feudal and mod-
ern society moving toward an ideal type of bureaucracy (friction-
less machine). Dahrendorf sees the interest of the power holder as 
so clearly distinct from the interest of the powerless that conflict 
becomes the permanent feature of social life, with varying degrees 
of effect, ranging from revolution to small-scale reform.
Singularity of Function and Structure with Plurality of Process
Model: Input/output (stimulus-response) model of human and 
social behavior (environmentalism); an organic model that uses 
deviation amplification or positive and negative feedback loops to 
change.
Theoretical Tradition: Behavioral, as exemplified by the writings of 
Watson, Skinner, Erikson, and Lasswell.
Development Process: Increasing order through induced motivational 
and behavioral change. Sublimation of the destructive instincts 
into creative work, and finally formation of a world culture shaped 
by “behavioral technology,” which is needed for survival. Watson 
places the central emphasis on controlling behavior through learn-
ing, which, he believes, could be achieved by the principle of  
“conditioning.” Skinner suggests that freedom is an illusion that 
man can no longer afford. He claims that behavior can be predicted 
and shaped exactly as if it were a chemical reaction. But for Erikson, 
physical, social, cultural, and ideational environments are partners 
to biological and psychological innate processes.
Singularity of Function with Plurality of Structure and Process
Model: There is no absolute above man that could re-create the 
social order in which he/she lives. Emancipation of man is the 
prime function, whereas process and structure are seen as multiple 
and variable.
Theoretical Tradition: Radical humanism, as exemplified in the writ-
ings of the early Marx, Marcuse, Lukacs, Sartre, Fromm, Gramsci, 
and the Frankfurt School.

72 
Development
Development Process: Changing the social order through a change in 
mode of cognition and consciousness. Release from the constraints 
the existing social structure places on human development. The 
emphasis is on modes of domination, emancipation, deprivation, 
and potentiality.
Singularity of Structure and Process with Plurality of Function
Model: Biological, integrated, and dynamic equilibrium model; 
multiple functions to maintain an unstable but fixed structure 
(steady state) through the prime process of homeostasis; represent-
ing analytical, positivistic, and empirical view of the world.
Theoretical Tradition: Structural functionalism, as exemplified by the 
writings of Comte, Spencer, Durkheim, Parsons, and Eisenstadt.
Development Process: Integration, adaptation, goal attainment, and 
pattern maintenance are regarded as the four functional impera-
tives for a social system's continuing existence and evolution toward 
maturity and growth.
Plurality of Function and Structure with Singularity of Process 
Model: Multifunctional, organic, and nonlinear cause-and-effect 
relationships. Conflict is considered to be the prime producer 
of change. Varying structure “over-determined” by interaction 
of economic, political, ideological, and theoretical subsystems of 
totality.
Theoretical Tradition: New-left, as exemplified in the writings 
of Althusser, Poulantzas, Della-Volpe, and Colletti.
Development Process: Increased integration, through law of “uneven 
and combined development,” “method of successive approxima-
tion,” “fact of conquest,” and increased accumulative knowledge of 
mankind with regard to nature.
Plurality of Function and Process with Singularity of Structure 
Model: Holistic, open, multi-loop feedback and input/output model 
of social systems. Biological analogy is used to search for the under-
lying regularities and structural uniformity.
Theoretical Tradition: General systems theory and cybernetics, as 
exemplified by the writings of Bertalanffy, Ashby, Miller, Beer, and 
Bogdanov.
Development Process: Equifinal, neg-entropic processes moving 
toward organized complexity. System change through learning, 
adaptation, and induced motivational and behavioral change.
Plurality of Structure, Function, and Process
Model: Purposeful, sociocultural, information-bonded systems. 
Capable of redesigning themselves by new functions, structures, 
and processes creating new modes of organization at the higher 
levels of order and complexity.
Theoretical Tradition: Systems view (third generation), as exempli-
fied by the writings of Ackoff, Boulding, Buckley, and Churchman.

Systems View of Development  73
Development Process: Multi-final, interactive, and purposeful move-
ment toward increased differentiation and integration. A learning 
and creative process to increase ability and desire to re-create the 
future. An ideal-seeking mode of organization to resolve conflicts at 
higher levels. Systemic view of development, by accepting ­plurality 
in all three dimensions of function, structure, and process; consid-
ers the other seven categories as special cases. From the systems 
perspective, development is not only a ­multifunctional phenome-
non, but it involves multiple and varying concepts of ­structure and 
process as well.
4.2  Systems view of development
Development of an organization is a purposeful transformation toward 
higher levels of integration and differentiation at the same time (as repre-
sented in Figure 4.2). It is a collective learning process by which a social sys-
tem increases its ability and desire to serve both its members and its 
environment. Differentiation represents an artistic orientation (looking for 
differences among things that are apparently similar) emphasizing ­stylistic 
values and signifying tendencies toward increased complexity, variety, 
­autonomy, and morphogenesis (creation of a new structure). Integration, on 
the other hand, represents a scientific orientation (looking for similarities 
among things that are apparently different) emphasizing instrumental 
­values and signifying tendencies toward increased order, uniformity, confor-
mity, collectivity, and morphostasis (maintenance of structure).
Depending on the characteristics of a given culture, a social system 
can move from a state of chaotic simplicity toward organized simplicity, 
which is produced by emphasizing integration at the cost of differentia-
tion. It can also move toward chaotic complexity produced by increased 
differentiation at the cost of integration or it can move toward organized 
I
O
R
D
E
R
ORGANIZED
COMPLEXITY
N
ORGANIZED
SIMPLICITY
T
E
G
R
A
C
T
H
I
A
O
CHAOTIC
COMPLEXITY
N
S
SIMPLE
COMPLEX
DIFFERENTIATION
CHAOTIC
SIMPLICITY
O
Figure 4.2  Levels of differentiation and integration.

74 
Development
complexity, signifying a higher level of organization achieved by a move-
ment toward complexity and order concurrently. This means that for 
every level of differentiation there exists a minimum level of integration 
below which the system would disintegrate into chaos. Conversely, higher 
levels of integration require higher degrees of differentiation to avoid 
impotency.
Within the boundaries of a given culture, a variety of different orienta-
tions exist. The presence of a “left” and a “right” in every social group and 
political party is the manifestation of this phenomenon (Figure 4.3).
In a flexible social setting, oscillations of low amplitude occur within 
the cultural boundaries without disruption, as demonstrated by periodic 
shifts of government between the Labor and Conservative parties in the 
United Kingdom or the Democrats and Republicans in the United States. 
However, if an orientation tries to cross the limits of the cultural line, a 
powerful reaction will move it back to the other extreme, producing further 
oscillations and cusping into a change of phase. Unfortunately, in societies 
polarized by antagonistic and rigid ideologies, social transformation takes 
place by a violent change of phase (a cusp). Retrieval from such a situation 
is often extremely problematic, since the relationship between members is 
irreparably damaged, as happens in societies that are thrown into a perpet-
ual state of civil disorder.
Development of social systems is a transformation into successive 
modes of organization. Each mode is a whole, characterized by higher 
degrees of both integration and differentiation, and is potentially capable 
of dissolving lower level contradictions by converting them into contrar-
ies. In contrast to physical systems whose energy level determines their 
mode of organization, in social systems the knowledge level defines the 
mode. The role of knowledge in social systems, therefore, can be said to be 
,
1
7
(
*
5
$
7
,
2
1
',))(5(17,$7,21
/,0,76)25
',))(5(17,$7,9(
7(1'(1&,(6
/,0,76)25
,17(*5$7,9(
7(1'(1&,(6
9,2/(175($&7,21
5LJKW
/HIW
Figure 4.3  Cultural boundaries.

Systems View of Development  75
analogous to that of energy in physical systems. The significant point is 
that knowledge, unlike energy, is not subject to the first law of thermody-
namics (the law of conservation of energy). One does not lose knowledge 
by sharing it with others. On the contrary, its dissemination increases the 
knowledge level of the social system and helps the creation of new knowl-
edge. It is this capability that enables a social system of its own accord to 
constantly re-create its structure and redefine its functions.
In defining development, we identify two active agents: desire and 
ability. Desire is produced by an exciting vision of a future enhanced by the 
interaction of creative and recreative (joyful) processes. The creative capac-
ity of man, along with his/her desire to share, results in a shared image of 
a desired future. This generates dissatisfaction with the present and moti-
vates pursuit of more challenging and more desirable ends. Otherwise, life 
proceeds simply by setting and seeking attainable goals, which rarely 
escape the limits of the familiar.
Unfortunately, for some religions, the fundamentalist interpretation 
regards creation as a sole prerogative of God. Human beings are not 
allowed to engage in any act of creation. Art in almost any form — whether 
painting, sculpture, music, or drama — is prohibited. Recreation (enjoy-
ment) is also considered sinful. This antagonistic attitude toward aesthet-
ics militates against development, because it does not provide much 
opportunity to articulate and expand one's horizon beyond the immedi-
ate needs of mere existence. This self-limitation provides one explanation 
for cases of underdevelopment despite the availability of vast resources.
Dissatisfaction with the present, although a necessary condition for 
change, is not sufficient to ensure development. What seems to be neces-
sary as well is a faith in one's ability to partly control the march of events. 
Those who are awed by their environment and place the shaping forces of 
their future outside of themselves do not think of voluntary or conscious 
change, no matter how miserable and frustrated they are.
Ability, therefore, is the potential for controlling, influencing, and 
appreciating the parameters that affect the system's existence. But ability 
alone cannot ensure development. Without a shared image of a more 
desirable future, the frustration of the powerful masses can easily be con-
verted into a unifying agent of change — hatred — that in turn will suc-
cessfully destroy the present but will not necessarily be a step toward 
creating a better future.
Central to this notion of development is its distinction from growth. 
According to Ackoff:
They are not the same thing and are not even necessarily associated. 
Growth can take place with or without development, and development can 
take place with or without growth. A cemetery can grow without devel-
oping. On the other hand, a person may continue to develop long after he 
or she has stopped growing, and vice versa. A person can build a better 

76 
Development
house with good tools and materials than he/she can without them. On the 
other hand, a developed person can build a better house with whatever 
tools and materials he/she has than a less-developed person with the same 
resources. Put another way: a developed person with limited resources is 
likely to be able to improve his quality of life and that of others more than a 
less-developed person with unlimited resources. Constraints on a system's 
growth are found primarily in its environment, but the principal constraints 
on a system's development are found within the system itself.
Gharajedaghi and Ackoff (1984)
To understand the process of development of a social system we have to 
deal with structures and the processes that help or limit the creation of col-
lective desire and ability for the pursuit of its ends. The parameters that 
coproduce the futures are found in the interaction of the five dimensions 
of social systems: wealth, knowledge, beauty, power, and values. 
Compatibility among these five dimensions defines the effectiveness of 
the emerging mode of organization. This mode of organization deter-
mines the level of integration, and the collective ability of the members to 
create the future they want. This means that a minimum level of integra-
tion is required if the aggregate of individuals is to function as an effective 
system. Ironically, the prime concern of every organization theory has 
been to define the criteria by which the whole is to be divided into parts. 
Major theories have implicitly assumed that the whole is nothing but the 
sum of its parts and have conveniently ignored the fact that effective dif-
ferentiation requires incorporation of a means that would integrate the 
differentiated parts into a cohesive whole. In this regard, the classical 
school of management depends solely on the unity of command and the 
imperative of no deviation. At the opposite end, advocates of free markets 
rely on the assumption that perfectly rational micro-decisions would auto-
matically produce perfectly rational macro-conditions. Both approaches 
fall short because they fail to recognize that effective social integration 
requires that compatibility among the members be continuously and 
actively re-created. Ultimately, the level of integration and development 
that an organization will achieve depends on the means by which it deals 
with interaction among its members.
Differentiation poses little challenge because it is the very nature of 
social systems to become different from each other. From families to cit-
ies and nations, groups of people can usually describe with ease how 
“we're different or unique.” Integration, however, requires skill to accom-
plish. To integrate one has to appreciate the systemic nature of the inter-
actions between opposing tendencies. For example, security and freedom, 
usually considered dichotomous, are actually two aspects of the same 
phenomenon. Freedom is not possible without security and security 
makes no sense without freedom. But if we choose to deal with each one 
of these aspects separately, then we should not be surprised to find them 

Obstruction to Development  77
in conflict. The easiest solution to security, if treated in isolation, would 
be to limit freedom, and that of freedom would be to undermine security. 
Despite seemingly contradictory requirements for pursuit of opposing 
ends, there are processes that would make the attainment of both ends 
feasible. For instance, both freedom and security are attainable by a pro-
cess called participation, stability and change by adaptation, and order and 
complexity by organization. Similarly, production and distribution of 
wealth form a complementary pair. Without an effective production sys-
tem, there can never be an effective distribution system. To fail to note 
this important interdependency is to leave out the most important chal-
lenge of the problem. An obsession with distribution without a proper 
concern about production will result in nothing but an equitable distri-
bution of poverty. Preoccupation with production without a similar con-
cern for an equitable distribution will lead to an alienated society.
The emerging tendencies — innovation, learning and adaptation, 
socialization (parity), participation, and organization — cannot stand 
alone. Together they form the whole, and coproduce a process called devel-
opment (Figure 4.4). The holistic view of societal development requires 
that all of the five social functions — the generation and dissemination of 
knowledge, power, wealth, value, and beauty — develop interdependently, 
utilizing all of the five complementary processes outlined earlier.
4.3  Obstruction to development
Obstructions to development of a social system can be viewed as malfunc-
tioning in any one of the five dimensions. Scarcity, maldistribution, and 
insecurity in any one of the five social functions (i.e., generation and 
­dissemination of knowledge, power, wealth, values, and beauty) are 
­considered primary or first-order obstructions. Alienation, polarization, 
corruption, and terrorism are among social phenomena that represent sec-
ondary or second-order obstructions (Table 4.1).
Collec
vity
S
S
U
O
Organiza
on
Innova
on
Socializa
on
Adapta
on
Par
cipa
on
Complexity
Diﬀeren
a
on
Development
Uniqueness
Individuality
Change
Freedom
Figure 4.4  Developmental processes.

78 
Development
Second-order obstructions are coproduced by the interaction of pri-
mary obstructions. Dealing with primary obstructions is beyond the 
scope of this book. Interested readers will find a full discussion of these 
concepts in A Prologue to National Development Planning (Gharajedaghi 
and Ackoff, 1986). However, since the second-order obstructions — 
alienation, polarization, corruption, and terrorism — are very much part 
of our present reality a brief discussion of these four phenomena may be 
in order.
4.3.1  Alienation
A social system in its ideal form is a voluntary association of purposeful 
members, so that emigration of a member from the system is considered 
to be the highest manifestation of his/her protest. But because of a series 
of self-imposed or external constraints, a dissatisfied member is not able 
to leave the system. He/she therefore becomes alienated from the very sys-
tem of which he/she is supposed to be a voluntary member.
The underlying causes of alienation can be found in the interactions of 
the following primary obstructions.
• Powerlessness. Powerlessness is equivalent to ineffectualness and 
impotency. When an individual feels that her/his contributions to 
the group's achievements are insignificant or she/he cannot influ-
ence the behavior of the group of which she/he is a member, gradu-
ally a feeling of indifference sets in and the individual loses interest 
in the group.
• Rolelessness. Incompetence or lack of the necessary knowledge to carry 
out responsibilities of one's accepted role results in excessive anxiety 
and frustration.
Table 4.1  Obstructions to Development
Obstruction to development
First order
Second order
Dimensions of Social 
Systems
Scarcity
Mal-distribution
Insecurity
WEALTH
Economics
Poverty
Disparity
Deprivation
ALIENATION
KNOWLEDGE
Scientific
Ignorance
Elitism
Illiteracy
Obsolescence
POLARIZATION
POWER
Politics
Impotency
Autocracy
Illegitimacy
CORRUPTION
VALUES
Ethics
Norm less
Discrimination
Fanaticism
TERRORISM
BEAUTY
Aesthetics
Hopeless
Hatred
Fear to lose
Identity

Obstruction to Development  79
• Meaninglessness. Lack of excitement in life and insensitivity toward the 
creative and recreational aspects of being most probably will result in 
a feeling of meaninglessness.
• Exploitation. When individuals or a group feel that they have been 
deprived of their fair share of a system's achievements, feelings of 
injustice will set in and harmful hostilities will result.
• Conflicting value system. As mentioned before, the extent to which an 
individual's value image coincides with the shared image of her/his 
community determines the degree of his/her membership in that com-
munity. An extreme difficulty arises when an individual needs to be a 
member of two communities with conflicting value systems. The level 
of integration that a society will achieve depends on the means by 
which it dissolves the value conflict among all of its diverse member-
ship groups. For sure this challenge cannot be met by just a legalistic 
approach as the following example demonstrates.
In a recent study a group of my graduate students observed that young 
African Americans are caught in an impossible dilemma. To be accepted 
by their community and peers as a member they have to demonstrate that 
they are not playing the white man's game. But “not playing the game” or 
deviation from the norm has a huge price tag. It is usually punished harshly 
and disproportionally to the degree of the harm it has caused the society. 
Unfortunately, the likes of Colin Powel, Condoleezza Rice, Oprah Winfrey, 
Bill Cosby, and many success stories do not seem to be the role models for 
the young African Americans. Accused of playing the white man's game, 
they might not even be considered true members of the black community. 
This unfortunate second-order obstruction has resulted in a vicious circle 
that undermines development of otherwise talented black communities. 
Appreciating this conflict can help us understand why a phenomenal bas-
ketball player with all the apparent success and popularity sometimes has 
to come across as a “bad boy” to keep his membership in his own com-
munity as well.
4.3.2  Polarization
The formation of highly polarized groups around conflicting ideologies is 
perhaps one of the most destructive obstructions to development. Polarization 
usually takes the form of religious versus secular tendencies with each further 
divided into left and right orientations. This polarization is further reinforced 
by ethnic conflicts and “divide and rule” strategies of politicians. In their strug-
gle for fame and power, self-serving and cynical intellectuals manipulate the 
masses with demagoguery — pulling them from one extreme to the other like 
a pendulum. The problem is that none of the so-called opposing groups is 
strong enough to govern without the cooperation of the others, and yet each 
one is powerful enough to disrupt and undermine the effectiveness of the rul-
ing group. This is partly due to increased complexity in the system, making it 

80 
Development
more vulnerable to sabotage on the one hand and difficult to manage on the 
other. Hatred of the ruling group usually becomes the unifying agent of 
change. Another cycle begins with opposing forces regrouping. The oscillation 
will not end until opposing ideologies learn to modify their dogmatic posi-
tions, give up their monopolistic claim on power, and work toward creating a 
shared image of a desired future through processes of integration —  
not at the expense of differentiation, but alongside it.
The critical issues of qualitative change and the need to deal more 
effectively with social pathologies demand incorporation of second-order 
learning in social systems. This requires the creation of a new mode of 
organization in the form of an ideal-seeking system, in contrast to an ideal 
state. This warrants further clarification.
Throughout history there have been repeated attempts to fashion 
human societies in accordance with some sort of idealized image. This 
has been done by prophets, philosophers, social reformers, and in 
recent times by the state apparatus in more than one country. In all 
cases, these ideals have been defined by human authorities that have 
attempted to legitimize their authority by means of an ultimate author-
ity such as science or God. But the identification of the ideal state with 
an ultimate authority precludes freedom to change. This is the essence 
of social pathology that in a social context is defined as inability to 
change.
Within this framework of acceptance of an ideal state defined by 
ultimate authority, it is possible to distinguish between two approaches. 
The first approach consists of specifying a detailed and comprehensive 
set of rules of conduct for individual behavior which, if followed by 
all members of society, would automatically lead to the emergence of 
the ideal state. In the name of ultimate truth, the objective of this 
approach has been the creation of a “new man” who will better con-
form with their image of ideal society. Ironically the repeated failures 
in changing the “nature of man” into a preprogrammed robot has not 
reduced the commitment of “true believers” in their pursuit. On the 
contrary, enjoying a phenomenal capacity for denial, they blame the 
weakness of the man for the failures and see an urgent need for total 
control by establishment of a totalitarian order. The second approach 
is characterized by the struggle to create a new social structure based 
on the assumption that man is solely the product of his/her environ-
ment and that his/her behavior is basically a reaction to it. Scientific 
socialism, which represents the first attempt of this approach, degen-
erated in practice into the first type once it was realized that proper 
structure (Weberian bureaucracy) failed to produce the expected 
outcome.
The fundamental problem with both of these approaches, which 
despite their apparent differences result in the same practical conse-
quences, is in their misconception of the nature of the ideal state and the 
processes that bring it about. They both contend that

Obstruction to Development  81
1.	 There is one and only one end (ideal state) predefined by an ultimate 
authority (God or science).
2.	 The ideal state is not only attainable, but the movement toward it is 
also inevitable.
The inevitability of the final state, and its independence from the generat-
ing processes, leads to the notion that “the end justifies the means.” It is 
assumed that the seizure of power by the chosen class or group is a precon-
dition for its realization.
But, ideals, in the systems view, are regarded as dynamic and changing 
over time. The shared image of a desired future, defined by the members of 
the social system, reflects the spacio-temporal realities (here and now) of 
the particular historical moment, and thus is alterable even before being 
approached (moving target). By considering man as a purposeful system, 
with choice of both ends and means, the systems thinking rejects efforts 
aimed at degrading him to the level of a robot. The recognition of the ele-
ment of choice in the behavior of social systems leads to the belief that these 
systems have the capability of selecting their own future and successively 
approximating it by choosing appropriate means. In the systems view every 
phenomenon is the result of chosen processes; thus, to bring about the 
desired end it is necessary to choose appropriate processes for its attain-
ment. For example, means that negate the end cannot be effective in bring-
ing it about. Creation of a hero to champion the cause against heroism is a 
self-defeating proposition. The means are among coproducers of the end, 
directly influencing the essential qualities of the resulting phenomenon.
4.3.3  Corruption
Corruption is not just malfunctioning of the value system, but a second-
order obstruction. It is the result of structural defects in more than one 
dimension of social systems including generation and distribution of power, 
wealth, and knowledge. To carry out its vital functions, a social system must 
be organized. The way a social system is organized determines its ability to 
overcome the obstructions it faces. In this context a social pathology is pro-
duced when an obstruction to development benefits those who are respon-
sible for removing it. Unfortunately, bureaucracy represents a pathological 
mode of organization where an organized interest group benefits from the 
obstructions it has created. For instance, the more complex a bureaucratic 
process can be made, the more staff is required to manage it and the larger 
and more controlling the administering agency becomes. In addition, the 
present level of interdependence and complexity demand a higher level of 
sophistication that far surpasses the known capabilities of the present 
bureaucratic system. Under these conditions, only a source of power outside 
the bureaucracy can create movement within the system. Therefore, individ-
uals will seek out and support these external power sources. In time, the 
hierarchy of powerful patrons demands certain rewards in exchange for their 
valuable support. This reward structure allows corruption to spread through-
out the entire system, ultimately becoming a justifiable way of life.

82 
Development
Charles Handy, in an interesting article, “What Is a Business For?” 
(Harvard Business Review, 2002) makes a serious observation regarding 
recent corporate practices: 
The current disease is not just a matter of dubious personal ethics or of 
some rouge companies fudging the odd billion. The whole business culture 
of our current Anglo-American version of stock market capitalism may have 
become distorted. We can see with hindsight, that in the boom years of the 
1990s America had often been creating value where none existed, bidding 
up the market capitalization of companies to 64 times earning, or more.
If one takes this argument to its logical conclusion it would reveal that cor-
porate America is facing two critical challenges. The first challenge con-
cerns the effectiveness of corporate governance. The absentee shareholders 
whom Charles Handy calls “gamblers” or investors are supposed to elect 
the members of the board of directors. Most of these gamblers do not have 
any long-term commitment to the entity in which they hold shares. Today 
his/her interest might be in X Corporation, but no one knows where it will 
be tomorrow. It might even find its way in to the Y Corporation that is a 
direct competitor of X. In reality the boards are virtually appointed by the 
management they are supposed to control. They usually re-elect the CEO 
who has placed them on the board in the first place.
The second challenge is produced by the tremendous pressure to man-
age for the short term. Unless the reports of the next quarter meet the 
expectation of the stock market for another double-digit growth perfor-
mance, the overrated stock price will tremble and the gamblers will start to 
sell off the stock. Under this kind of pressure devious behavior will be the 
norm rather than the exception.
4.3.4  Terrorism
Terrorism is perhaps the single most critical obstruction to development 
of a peaceful international order. It is a second-order obstruction that has 
most of the primary obstructions — poverty, disparity, deprivation, pow-
erlessness, hopelessness, discrimination, ignorance, hatred, and fanati-
cism — as its coproducers. And yet there is no agreement on its operational 
definition. One person's terrorist is another person's freedom fighter.
However, irrespective of where one is coming from, there is no question 
that terrorism is based on the false assumption of the “zero-sum game.” In 
a zero-sum game the total sum of winnings and losses add up to zero. If 
you lose I will win, and vice versa. As systems get more sophisticated they 
become increasingly vulnerable to the actions of the few. Making the other 
side lose becomes easier than trying to win. This is why terrorism becomes 
the favorite means of weaker sides when confronting stronger enemies. 
Therefore, to get a handle on terrorism I propose we look at it as a means 
to an end.

Obstruction to Development  83
The ends in this context seem to fall into one of three categories: 
revenge, cry for help, or ideological battle. The tragedy of Oklahoma City 
is an example of terror as a means of revenge. Revenge is a random act dif-
ficult to detect. A cry for help, on the other hand, represents the struggle of 
desperate people trapped in an unfortunate, unjust politico-economic 
mess. This type of terrorism is a reflection of sustained frustration of a 
people to deal with their humiliating powerlessness through normal chan-
nels. The most effective way to stop this type of terror is to dissolve the 
paralyzing impasse.
The bombing of abortion clinics is an example of terrorism in an ideo-
logical battle. The ideological terrorism in all of its manifestations — secu-
lar left or religious fundamentalism — has used intimidation and random 
terror to impose their value systems or preferred way of life on the popula-
tion at large. The strategy is based on the assumption that to paralyze peo-
ple one should make them feel guilty and insecure. This type of terrorism 
usually needs a powerful enemy to hate. Hate, converted to need, becomes 
a way of life. It is used to produce goal-seeking robots. These robotic, true 
believers are capable of brutality incomprehensible to normal human 
beings. Unfortunately, the first and second types of terrorists become foot 
soldiers for the third type.
In light of the ideological vacuum created by the collapse of com-
munism, various forms of fundamentalism have gained momentum 
and are growing noticeably all over the globe. Among these groups, the 
one that generates the most concern is the movement with an unshak-
able faith that a secular style of life is “corruption on the earth.” This 
movement is against beauty, happiness, choice, pluralism, and free-
dom. Its followers oppose all values that have made the world a better 
place to live.
Unfortunately, in the late 1970s religious fundamentalism got a tre-
mendous boost from American policy in the Middle East. After World 
War II, despite winning the war, America found herself losing the ideo-
logical battle. For years leftist ideology had become synonymous with 
intellectualism. In most of the third world, the youth were lost to the left-
ist movement. The U.S. administration at the time, working on the 
assumption that the only way to combat an ideology is with another 
potent one, decided to engage Islam in the ideological battle with com-
munism. America created the Mojahedin to counter the Soviet Union's 
invasion of Afghanistan and supported other Islamic movements in the 
region. Ironically, after sensing a strong anti-American sentiment in the 
Middle East some of these movements, with a Machiavellian move, 
decided to identify their version of Islam with anti-Americanism. This tag 
was needed to promote their cause in the vulnerable countries of the 
region. Figure 4.5 captures the interaction of two reinforcing feedback 
loops. Note how the first loop generates radical Islamists and the second 
one converts them to terrorists.

84 
Development
The network of nationless fundamentalists, unhappy about progress 
of women toward equality and freedom, pose a dangerous threat to all of 
humanity. These true believers are ready to use any kind of intimidation 
and brutality to keep their women subordinate and under control. To 
dissolve this mess is a human rights obligation. It should be treated 
above partisan politics and competing economic interest. Nothing short 
of the uncompromising commitment and determination of the whole 
international community to support the development and formation of 
civil societies will do the trick. Acceptance as a member of the world 
community must be contingent upon accepting and forming a civil soci-
ety. In the age of globalization no nation can afford to be left out of the 
world community. This fact is the most practical means of dissolving this 
mess we now face. It provides the strongest motive for the development 
of civil societies.
The civil society is a secular state that cannot endorse any religion or 
ideology. The basis for its authority is in man-made law, not in religious 
doctrine, divine revelation, or a secular deity. Freedom of religion — 
including freedom from religion — and the freedom not to believe in any 
deity, are preconditions to the formation of a pluralistic order, where the 
majorities that are not capable of protecting the rights of minorities do not 
deserve to govern.
Dire as the current world situation may be, this chapter ends not in 
desperation, but in the belief that interactive design of sociocultural 
Identification
Of LEFT with
intellectualism
Young
Generation Were
Lost to left
Anti-
Americanism
Cold war
Policies and
Realities
Using
Islam in the
Ideological
Battle with left
 
Iran
Islamic
revolution
 
Arms race
Hostage crisis
Anti American
Islam
collapse of
Communism
Ideological
Vacuum 
Support of
Dictatorial
regimes
 
Afghan
Mojahedin
Defeat of
S.Union
Powerlessness
Hopelessness
Support of
 friendly
states 
Lebanon
Hezbollah
Terrorism
Radical
Islamist
Figure 4.5  Islam in the ideological battle.

Obstruction to Development  85
systems offers practical and positive solutions to most of these diffi-
cult problems. The conceptual framework of creating successive modes 
of organization at higher levels of complexity and order has significant 
practical implications in shaping the systems theory of organization. 
We will deal with this exciting conception in Chapter 7.
4.3.5  Recap
• Development of an organization is a purposeful transformation toward 
higher levels of integration and differentiation. It is a collective learn-
ing process by which a social system increases its ability and desire to 
serve itself, its members, and its environment.
• For every level of differentiation there exists a minimum level of 
integration below which the system would disintegrate into chaos. 
Conversely, higher levels of integration require higher degrees of dif-
ferentiation to avoid sterility.
• Unless an organization effectively serves the purposes of its containing 
systems and its purposeful parts, they will not serve it well. This requires 
that the organization be designed to enable the parts to operate as 
independent systems with the ability to be relatively self-­controlling 
while acting as responsible parts of a coherent whole that has the right 
to make collective choices.

This page intentionally left blank

P a r t | TH REE
P A R T | TH REE
Systems 
Methodology 
The Logic of the Madness
During the last 50 years, our worldview has gone through a profound transforma-
tion in two critical dimensions. Not only has there been a fundamental shift in our 
understanding of the nature of the organization from a mindless mechanical sys-
tem to a purposeful sociocultural system, but there has also been a discriminating 
shift in our way of knowing from analytical thinking, the science of dealing with 
independent sets of variables, to systems thinking, the art and science of handling 
interdependent sets of variables.
Unfortunately, despite all the rhetoric to the contrary, our newly found insights 
have had very little influence on our choices. A dominant analytical culture, with a 
scientific tag, keeps reproducing the same set of non-solutions all over again. 
Effective use of these discriminating conceptions requires both a clear understand-
ing of the operating principles of sociocultural systems and unambiguous recogni-
tion of the shortcomings of the analytical approach.
Years of struggle and real-life experimentation with different systems at differ-
ent levels and in different cultures have led me to believe that the interactions 
among the following four foundations of systems thinking are the keys for develop-
ment of an effective systems methodology as a complement and not a replacement 
for analytical thinking. The four foundations include: sociocultural systems, holistic 
thinking, operational thinking, and design thinking.
These four foundations, in my experience, are so interrelated and complemen-
tary that all four are necessary to effectively deal with the complexities of emerging 
chaotic environments. Both Ackoff's Interactive Design (1974) and Forrester's 
Systems Dynamics (1961) are part of this ­comprehensive scheme that also includes 
an in-depth understanding of the nature of sociocultural systems and the opera-
tional meaning of holistic thinking.
We see the world as increasingly more complex and chaotic because we use 
inadequate concepts to explain it. When we understand something, we no longer 
see it as chaotic or complex. An effective systems methodology would deal not 
only with the imperative of interdependency and the complexities of dynamic sys-
tems, but also with the question of purposeful behavior of multi-minded systems. 

88 
Systems Methodology: The Logic of the Madness
As we saw in Chapter 3, unless we understand the implications of self-organizing 
behavior of sociocultural systems, the multi-minded beast will outmaneuver any 
attempt to tame it.
Part Two of this book contained a full discussion of the first foundation of sys-
tems thinking, the sociocultural system. In Part Three, we will deal with the three 
remaining foundations, holistic thinking, operational thinking, and design thinking, 
in Chapters 5 to 9.
This version of systems methodology (interaction of the above-mentioned four 
foundations) is intended to create a holistic operational language of interaction and 
design. It is a way to see through chaos and understand complexities and face the 
dilemma of systems where the whole is becoming more and more interdependent 
while the parts display choice and behave independently. These are critical needs 
of policy makers, leaders, and many others who wrestle daily with how to improve 
organizations at all levels so that they contribute something of worth to their mem-
bers and to the communities and clientele they serve. Far from being abstract and 
esoteric, the four foundations of systems methodology comprise a set of thinking 
tools that are enormously practical.
We will attempt to explicitly and operationally define systems methodology as 
we practice it at INTERACT, The Institute for Interactive Management. Although 
this practice has its origin in the rich and colorful tradition of Ackoff, in its present 
form, it has also been influenced greatly by the works of Jay Forrester, Kenneth 
Boulding, and Stafford Beer, and my own fascination with the complexities and 
engaging potency of the ­phenomenon known as culture. The depth and beauty of 
interactive design and the magic of holistic thinking (iteration of structure, function, 
and process) when combined with the power of systems dynamics, create a compe-
tent and exciting methodology that goes a long way in dealing with the emerging 
challenges of our time by responding to the operating principles of openness, pur-
posefulness, multidimensionality, emergent property, and counterintuitive behav-
ior of sociocultural systems.
Holistic
Thinking
Sociocultural
Systems
Design
Thinking
Operational
Thinking
Four foundations of systems thinking.

89
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch apt er | five
Holistic Thinking
5.1  Iterative process of inquiry
The distinction of systems thinking is its focus on the whole. But in most 
cases, this claim has been a simple declaration of intent without an 
explicit, workable methodology. What is systems methodology and how 
can we use it to get a handle on the whole? There seems to be more agree-
ment on the desirability of systems thinking than on its operational 
definition.
Contrary to a widely held belief, the popular notion of a multidisci-
plinary approach is not a systems approach. The ability to synthesize sepa-
rate findings into a coherent whole is far more critical than the ability to 
generate information from different perspectives. Without a well-defined 
synthesizing method, however, the process of discovery using a multidisci-
plinary approach would be an experience as frustrating as that of the blind 
men trying to identify an elephant. Positioned at a different part of the 
elephant, each of the blind men reported his findings from his respective 
position. “It's a snake.” “It's a pillar.” “It's a fan.” “It's a spear!” Consider 
the futility of trying to make sense of the whole by using this story without  
the prior conception of “elephant.” I am sure you experienced no ­frustration 
in sorting out the distorted information and putting it in perspective 
because the storyteller had already told us that the subject is an elephant. 
It seems we need a preconceived notion of the whole before we can glean 
order out of chaos.
A different version of the same story, found in Persian literature and 
narrated by Molana Jalaledin Molavi (Rumi), captures the level of com-
plexity produced when we have no preconceived notion of the subject. 
The story is about a group of men who encounter a strange object in com-
plete darkness. Because the storyteller is in the dark himself, he cannot 
provide a clue about the object. Here, all efforts to identify the object by 
touching its different parts prove fruitless until someone arrives with a 
light. The light, which in this context is a metaphor for methodology, 
enables them all to see the whole at last.

90 
Holistic Thinking
Rumi's version of the story illustrates that the ability to see the whole 
somehow requires an enabling light in the form of an operational systems 
methodology. In his mystical wisdom Rumi proposed that to get the 
enabling light one needed to tune in to the universe. For our purpose, the 
operational meaning of tuning in is that one should be able to make one's 
underlying assumptions about the nature of the sociocultural systems 
explicitly known and verifiable.
Whatever the nature of the enabling light, my contention is that it must 
have two dimensions. The first dimension is a framework for getting a 
handle on reality, a system of systems concepts to help generate the initial set 
of working assumptions about the subject. The second dimension is an 
iterative search process to verify and/or modify initial assumptions and 
expand and evolve the emerging notions until a satisfactory vision of the 
whole is produced. As beautifully put by Singer (1959): “Truth lies at the 
end, not at the beginning of the holistic inquiry.”
Three well-known inquiring systems (analytical thinking, synthetic 
thinking, and dynamic thinking), despite their success, have yet to agree 
on a method to see the whole.
Analytical thinking has been the essence of classical science. The scien-
tific method assumes that the whole is nothing but the sum of the parts, 
and thus understanding the structure is both necessary and sufficient to 
understanding the whole. Synthetic thinking has been the main instrument 
of the functional approach. By defining a system by its outcome, synthesis 
puts the subject in the context of the larger system of which it is a part, and 
then studies the effects it produces in its environment. Dynamic thinking, 
on the other hand, has long been focused on process. It looks to the how 
question for the necessary answer to define the whole.
However, I contend that seeing the whole requires understanding struc-
ture, function, and process at the same time. They represent three aspects 
of the same thing and with the containing environment form a comple-
mentary set. Therefore, structure, function, and process with the context 
define the whole or make the understanding of the whole possible. 
Structure defines components and their relationships, function defines the 
outcomes or results produced, process explicitly defines the sequence of 
activities and the know-how required to produce the outcome, and con-
text defines the unique environment in which the system is situated.
Use of all three perspectives of structure, function, and process as the 
foundation of a holistic methodology can be justified on both practical 
and theoretical grounds, as this chapter will demonstrate.
On more familiar and practical territory, we could observe that the 
classical school of management, with its input orientation, deals with 
structure. The neoclassical school, with its notion of management by 
objective, is concerned with functions. And the total quality movement, 
with its concern for control, is preoccupied with the process. Analysis, syn-
thesis, and dynamics, each in its own right, have produced a great deal of 

Iterative Process of Inquiry ﻿  91
information and knowledge. However, if we looked at the same phenom-
enon from all three perspectives of structure, function, and process at the 
same time, we could develop a more complete understanding of the whole. 
So, it is reasonable to conclude that a holistic approach must include all 
three notions of structure, function, and process.
On theoretical grounds, we can reach the same conclusion with the fol-
lowing arguments. In a classical concept of reality, a specific structure (S) 
causes a particular function (F), and different structures cause different 
functions (Figure 5.1).
Therefore, it is assumed that to understand a system, we need to know 
only its structure. This is why analysis — understanding structure — is the 
dominant method for classical science.
But according to Ackoff (1972):
1.	 A given structure can produce several functions in the same environ-
ment (Figure 5.2). For example, the structure of the existing education 
system produces the functions of babysitting and buffer, in addition to 
the explicit function of transferring knowledge.
2.	 Different structures can also produce a given function (Figure 5.3). 
For example, the transportation function can be achieved by different 
means such as a train, plane, or car.
The classical notion of causality — where cause is both necessary and suf-
ficient for its effect — proves inadequate to explain this phenomenon. 
Production of different functions by a single structure in the same 
­environment can be explained only by the assertion that different processes 
Figure 5.1  Single structure producing single function.
Figure 5.2  Single structure producing multiple functions.
Figure 5.3  Multiple structures producing the same function.

92 
Holistic Thinking
were involved with the same structure in producing different functions. 
A simplistic example illustrates the point: a screwdriver can be used as a 
gouge, a chisel, a hammer, or a variety of other tools, depending on how it 
is applied.
This idea is compatible with the systemic notion of producers and prod-
uct (Singer, 1959), which claims that a producer is necessary but not suffi-
cient for its product. That is why a structure cannot completely explain its 
outcome and why we need the additional concept of an environment as a 
coproducer. However, when several outcomes are produced in the same 
environment by a given structure, then knowledge of the process becomes 
as necessary to understand the whole as the knowledge of environment, 
structure, and function. Structure, function, and process, along with the 
environment or context, form an interdependent set of mutually exclusive 
and collectively exhaustive variables. Together, these four perspectives 
define the whole or make the understanding of the whole possible.
A set of interdependent variables forms a circular relationship. Each 
variable coproduces the others and in turn is coproduced by the others. 
Which one comes first is irrelevant because none can exist without the 
others. They have to happen at the same time. To fail to see the significance 
of these interdependencies is to leave out the most important challenge of 
seeing the whole. Therefore, to handle them holistically requires under-
standing each variable in relation to the others in the set at the same time. 
This demands an iterative inquiry.
Iteration is the key to understanding complexity. Stephen Wolfram 
(2002) demonstrated how an iterative process of applying simple rules is 
at the core of nature's mysterious ability to produce complex phenomena 
so effortlessly.
Iterations of structure, function, and process in a given context would 
examine assumptions and properties of each element in its own right, 
then in relationship with other members of the set. Subsequent iterations 
would establish validity of the assumptions and successively produce an 
understanding of the whole (see Figure 5.4).
For example, to appreciate the heart holistically, we must understand 
its function, structure, and process within the context of the body. Starting 
with the function we simply note that the output of the system is circula-
tion of the blood; therefore, its function must be that of a pump. The ­structure 
of this pump consists of four muscular chambers and a set of valves, arter-
ies, and veins. And the process, which must explain how the structure pro-
duces the function, simply uses alternating cycles of contractions and 
expansions of the chambers to push the blood through arteries and then 
pull it back into the chambers through the veins by suction.
Now we need to pause and relate our understanding of function, struc-
ture, and process together to appreciate why the heart does what it does. By 
placing the heart in the context of the larger system of which it is a part, we 
might conclude that the heart is at the core of a circulatory system. The 

Systems Dimensions  93
purpose of the circulatory system is to exchange matter and energy between 
the body and its environment. This closely links the heart with autopoie-
sis, the self-generation of living systems (see Figures 5.5A and B).
The principle of iterative inquiry is reinforced by Singerian experimen-
talism: “There is no fundamental truth; realities first have to be assumed in 
order to be learned” (Singer, 1959). Successive iterations would yield a 
greater understanding and more closely approximate the nature of the 
whole. These iterations, then, are like a reverse zoom lens through which 
we see the system we are trying to understand as a working part of succes-
sively bigger and bigger pictures. We stop enlarging the view when we no 
longer gain useful insights as we “go around.”
5.2  Systems dimensions
In addition to iteration of context, function, structure, and process we also 
need to identify and understand the parameters that coproduce the whole. 
These parameters, in my experience, are found in the interactions of the fol-
lowing five dimensions of a social system: wealth, power, knowledge, beauty, 
and values. The generation and dissemination of wealth, power, knowledge, 
beauty, and values form a comprehensive set of interdependent variables 
that collectively describe the social system in its totality (Figure 5.6).
Historically, the identification of social system dimensions has been 
both reactive (reacting to certain problems in social life) and proactive 
(reaching for the ultimate good). Reactively, the five dimensions of social 
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
S t r u c t u r e
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
Context
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
S t r u c t u r e
S t r u c t u r e
Context
Context
Iterative Process of Inquiry
After each iteration:
Pause then synthesize
the information into a 
cohesive image (concept)
of the whole
3rd Iteration
2nd Iteration
1st Iteration
Figure 5.4  Iterative process of inquiry for understanding complexity.

94 
Holistic Thinking
Figure 5.5   (A and B) Understanding the heart as a system.
Maintenance of an
unstable structure
(open system)
A circulation system infra-
structure for exchange of 
matter and energy
Pump
To collect
and distri-
bute food/
energy
To collect
and discharge
waste
Push and 
pull-alternate
contraction and
expansion 
pushes blood 
through arteries 
and pulls it 
back through
veins, into the
chambers
Four muscular chambers;
valves; output pipes (arteries);
input pipes (veins)
Interface with lungs, liver,
kidneys... the whole system
A
Processes
of exchange
in the 
lungs (O2,
CO2),
kidneys,
liver, cells
Purpose (context)
Structure
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
Context:
Function:
Process:
How it works
The Heart
      as System
Structure:
Muscular Chambers (4)
Valves
Valves
B
Open one way
Present back flow
Pull
Push
Chambers
Alternate cycles
Veins
Arteries
What are its components?
What does it do?
It is a pump
Larger Containing System

Systems Dimensions  95
systems correspond to the following major problem areas historically 
faced by all human societies: economics, scientifics, aesthetics, ethics, and 
politics.
Although some prominent social thinkers have implicitly considered 
more than one dimension in their analysis, most have chosen a single and, 
not surprisingly, different function as the prime cause of all social phenom-
ena. Marx, for example, considered the economy, the mode of production, 
as the underlying cause of social realities. For Weber, power, supported by 
notions of authority and legitimacy, seemed the prime concern. Bagdanov 
used knowledge as the organizing principle of society. Meanwhile, religious 
thinkers place values at the core of everything.
On the proactive side, Ackoff, in his discussion of ideal-seeking sys-
tems, identified four classes of societal activity individually necessary and 
collectively sufficient for progress toward the ideal, or omnicompetence: 
the pursuits of truth (scientific function), plenty (economic function), good 
(ethical-moral function), and beauty (aesthetic function).
Coming from a different culture, I had a different point of view. In 
addition to knowledge, wealth, and values I included power, more specifi-
cally power-to-do (freedom and ability to choose), as a critical function of 
social systems. Surprisingly, I had missed the notion of beauty as a sepa-
rate dimension.
When I met Ackoff, in the early 1970s, we argued over this for days, 
until he decided that I needed a good lecture on the subject. That lecture 
was beautiful, and I realized that I had missed the notion of beauty for 
exactly the same reason that Ackoff had missed the notion of power.
Thinking with my heart, I considered beauty to be the liveliness that 
defined life. Beauty for me was the whole, or the emergent property. On 
the other hand, the phenomenon of choice has been a major preoccupa-
tion of Ackoff's discussions. He saw the ability to satisfy needs and desires 
as being equivalent to competence. Competence for Ackoff was a matter of 
power-to-do (as distinct from power-over which is about dominance) and 
POWER
KNOWLEDGE
BEAUTY
VALUE
WEALTH
Figure 5.6  Five dimensions of a social system.

96 
Holistic Thinking
the emergent property of the whole. Maybe it is true that fish do not real-
ize that something called water exists.
Revisiting Aristotle's concept of the “good life,” the pursuit of happi-
ness, and his elaborate scheme defining the elements necessary to achieve 
a good life (Adler, 1978), confirms my earlier assertion that these dimen-
sions may form a complete set and collectively define the whole.
Paralleling our five dimensions of power, wealth, knowledge, beauty, 
and values are Aristotle's association of liberty with choice and the willful-
ness to carry them out; his discussion of health, vitality, and vigor under 
the heading of wealth; the profound argument about the need to know 
and the skill of thinking; the assertion that a loveless life may not be worth 
living; and, finally, the magnificent notion of moral virtues (the good hab-
its of choosing correctly).
In a different context, about 2,000 years later, John Dewey (1989), the 
great American philosopher, in discussing freedom and culture, explicitly refers 
to the states of politics, economics, science, art, and morality as the elements 
of the culture that determine the state of the society. His notion of art includes 
the sphere of emotionality, and in this context he argues convincingly that 
emotions are much more potent than reason in shaping public perception.
Recognizing these five dimensions as a mutually exclusive and collec-
tively exhaustive set, unlike those of conventional practice, is not meant to 
isolate each dimension so it can be analyzed separately. Rather, it is meant 
to emphasize their interactions. Although each dimension represents a 
unique functionality, interdependency among them is such that it is quite 
feasible for any four to become coproducers of the fifth one. For example, 
power, as the ability to do, can be positively or negatively influenced by 
wealth, knowledge, beauty (charisma), and values (tradition).
Recognition of multidimensionality and the imperative of and relation-
ships among the five dimensions of social systems is one of the most sig-
nificant characteristics of holistic thinking. Positive and negative feedback 
loops help to create stability and order while also creating synergy among the 
compatible dimensions, resulting in an order of magnitude improvement in 
systems performance. Systems theory of organizations maintains that major 
obstructions in development of sociocultural systems are the results of a 
malfunctioning in one or all of the five dimensions of social systems.
Finally, appreciation of the and relationship between the two functions 
of generation and dissemination in each dimension results in a whole new 
way of looking at our present set of problems and opportunities.
5.2.1  Generation and Dissemination of Wealth
Consider the classical question of generation and dissemination of wealth. 
Traditionally these two complementary functions have been treated as a 
dichotomy. On the right, high concern for generation of wealth combined 
with low concern for its distribution results in a position that considers the 
cost of labor as the source of the problem. It considers the individual to be 

Systems Dimensions  97
solely responsible for his/her fortune and sees the role of the government 
to be only the protector of wealth and grantor of freedom and security by 
maintaining law and order. In this conception market is the sole arbiter for 
deciding what to produce, for whom to produce, and how to distribute the 
generated wealth, thus creating a polarized and alienated society.
On the other hand, a leftist orientation, with high concern for distribu-
tion of wealth, and taking the production of wealth for granted, looks at 
corporate profit as the source of evil. It considers the collective to be 
responsible for all misfortune and sees the role of the government as the 
main provider of justice and equality by creating and maintaining a neces-
sary social nest. It considers governmental and bureaucratic control as the 
only remedy for limiting the inherent excesses of the corporate world, 
which unfortunately may lead to equal distribution of poverty.
But in reality generation and distribution of wealth are two sides of the 
same coin. Generation cannot be continued if there is no continued pur-
chasing power to consume it. In the long run no society can continue to 
consume more than what it is capable of producing. Distribution without 
effective production can only result in equal distribution of poverty. True 
to the principle of multidimensionality, if we treat complementary pairs as 
a dichotomy we will surely find them to be in conflict. Fortunately, a high 
concern for both generation and distribution of wealth is also a strong 
possibility if we are willing to reward organizations not only for genera-
tion but also equally for distribution of wealth, for example, if our social 
calculus would permit us to consider certain types of payroll, in sectors 
with high unemployment rates, not only as cost but also as an output of 
the organization. This consideration would allow employers to deduct 
from their corporate income tax the equivalent of what their new hires (in 
the predefined categories) would pay in federal income tax. This would go 
a long way toward absolving the persistent 10% unemployment rate. With 
this scheme the amount of tax deductions by the corporation would be 
more than offset by the hired employees' federal income tax, payroll tax, 
state tax, and city tax payments. Government would save payment of 
unemployment benefits and the demand for goods and services will be 
enhanced by the newly added purchasing powers (Figure 5.7).
In the same context both collective and individual responsibility would be 
realized by the reconceptualization of the power dimension as power-to-do 
instead of power-over and by the notion of duplication of power. This obser-
vation brings us to our discussion of generation and distribution of power.
5.2.2  Generation and Dissemination of Power 
(­Centralization and ­Decentralization 
Happen at the Same Time)
To deal effectively with multi-minded systems requires understanding 
choice, and choice is a matter of freedom and power-to-do. We have argued 
that while the parts of a multi-minded system increasingly display choice 

98 
Holistic Thinking
and behave independently, the whole becomes more and more interde-
pendent. This represents a dilemma: a dichotomy of centralization (author-
ity of the whole) or decentralization (autonomy of the parts). This 
dichotomy leads either to suffocation (concentration of power) or chaos 
(abdication of power). On the other hand, a compromise based on “shar-
ing the power” produces frustration and gridlock.
The answer lies in the fact that centralization and decentralization are 
two sides of the same coin. Both have to happen at the same time. This 
phenomenon is possible because power is like knowledge. It can be dupli-
cated. The conceptualization of power as a non-zero-sum entity is the criti-
cal step toward understanding the essence of empowerment and the 
management of multi-minded systems. Empowerment is not about the 
sharing of power. Sharing implies a zero-sum relationship and, therefore, 
abdication of power. Instead, empowerment is duplication of power in an 
organization or any sociocultural system. It requires a collective under-
standing of the reasons why we are doing what we are doing. Such a shared 
understanding not only empowers the members to act in harmony and 
autonomously, but also empowers the leaders to act effectively and deci-
sively on behalf of the collectivity.
The following example illustrates this point. Suppose you have just 
started to work for a no-nonsense management-by-objective guy who has 
promised you that he will manage in a decentralized manner and will 
Generaon & Distribuon of Wealth 
Two sides of the same coin: And not or relaonships
High concern for Distribuon of Wealth
with a low concern for its producon
Corporate proﬁt is the problem 
Collecve responsibility
Government as main provider
(Jusce & equality)
maintaining a social nest  
Governmental & bureaucrac control
Resulng in equal distribuon of poverty
High concern for Generaon of Wealth
with low concern for its distribuon
High Labor cost is the problem
Individual responsibility
Government protector of wealth 
(freedom & Security)
maintaining Law & order
Free market as the sole control system 
Resulng in an alienated & polarized  
society
High concern  for Both 
Generaon & Distribuon of Wealth
Both collecve and individual responsibility
(duplicaon of power)
Creang a new social calculus by
Redesigning
TheMeasurement & Reward systems,
Monitoring 
The Posive & Negave Feedback Loops
Concern for Generaon of Wealth 
Concern for Distribuon of Wealth
Tradional Le
L, H
Tradional 
Right H, L
Systems
View
H, H
LOW
High
W/W
Playing Zero-Sum
Games
LOW
High
Figure 5.7  And instead of or relationship.

Systems Dimensions  99
judge you only on the results. You look forward to this opportunity to try 
a few exciting ideas that require a degree of autonomy to be realized. After 
a few weeks you run into your new boss and decide to share with him 
some of the exciting things you have been doing. Although he attempts a 
poker face, you somehow sense he does not like what he is hearing. Maybe 
he is not in the right mood. You tell yourself, “When he sees the final 
results, he'll like it.”
A few weeks later, at a cocktail party, he seems very upbeat and you 
assume this might be a good time to share your new ideas with him. But 
he does not like them. Maybe you should leave him alone for a while, 
you think. But it is too late; he is already nervous. A few days later he 
shows up in your office and asks a few questions about some things you 
have proposed. When he leaves, you know he is not happy. Decentral­
ization has gone out the window. You cannot risk being found incapa-
ble by the person who controls your future. So what do you do? You call 
him every time you need to make a decision to ask him what he wants 
you to do. You both become increasingly frustrated, and finally you 
decide to quit.
At this point a manager from another department reminds you that 
you have two kids in college and a mortgage to pay. She offers you a job if 
you are willing to forget the nonsense about decentralization and auton-
omy and do exactly what she tells you. Having no other choice, you reluc-
tantly accept the offer. Your new boss, however, has a funny style. Not only 
does she tell you what to do, but she also tells you why she thinks this way. 
For a while you think she wants to brainwash you. Or maybe she is inse-
cure and wants to prove something. You try to reassure her of your loyalty. 
“Just tell me what to do and I'll do it,” you tell her. But she will not give 
up. Apparently, she loves to talk. During these interactions, somehow, you 
find out how she makes decisions, you learn her decision criteria, and you 
begin to understand her value system. One day, when she's thinking out 
loud trying to tell you what to do, you ask her, “How about this?” She says, 
“Fantastic.” Decentralization happens.
The message of this brief story is that it is the sharing of decision criteria, 
not sharing or abdication of power, that results in empowerment and 
makes centralization and decentralization happen at the same time. 
Achieving a higher order of individual responsibility or decentralized deci-
sion making requires a higher order of collective responsibility or central-
ized agreement on decision criteria.
5.2.2.1  Design for participation: ackoff's circular 
organization
To produce a shared understanding of decision criteria among all mem-
bers of an organization individually is an impossible task. The process of 
empowerment has to be institutionalized. The following scheme, known 
as Ackoff's (1994) circular organization, is a design for participation that 

100 
Holistic Thinking
has been used effectively in different contexts. It creates a nested network 
of “learning and design cells” that engage members in an interactive 
process.
Every manager in the organization forms a design cell. The member-
ship of the cell will consist of the manager, his/her board, his/her boss, 
and all the direct reports (see Figure 5.8). Since every cell includes three 
levels of membership, a nested network is created. This provides an oppor-
tunity for everyone to interact with up to five levels in the organization 
(with peers on the same level, with the boss and boss's boss, and finally 
with the direct reports and their subordinates).
The main function of these cells is to create a shared understanding of 
why the organization does what it does, to develop an awareness of the 
default values of the culture, and to take collective ownership of the deci-
sion criteria.
5.2.2.2  Decision criteria
Decision criteria explicitly define the implicit rules of decision making, 
whereas decisions themselves are applications of the decision rule to specific 
situations. The absence of at least one degree of freedom virtually converts 
the decision criteria to decisions. A policy is a decision criterion at a higher 
level of abstraction. Policy essentially deals with choice dimensions (where 
variables are involved), why questions, underlying assumptions, and expected 
outcomes. Policy decisions are value-loaded choices that should be explicit 
about their implications for human, financial, and technical domains. To be 
effective, decision criteria should have the following four attributes:
X
X
X
X
X
X  X  X X X
X  X  X  X
DESIGN CELL 1
Design CELL 3 
Design CELL 2
X  X X  X  X
X
X
X
X
X
Figure 5.8  Design for participation.

Systems Dimensions  101
Degree of Freedom: Decision criteria should leave a healthy degree 
of freedom for the decision maker. They should be specific enough to 
ensure consistency of action, as well as constancy of purpose and direc-
tion. At the same time, they should be broad enough to avoid straight-
jacketing by allowing room for flexibility and learning. Degrees of 
freedom grant choice to the decision maker.
Consistency: Decision criteria should be internally consistent so that 
they do not create structural conflicts by introducing contradictory per-
formance criteria. Examples include conflicts between input-based com-
pensation and output-oriented performance or between cost centers 
(such as production units) and revenue centers (such as sales units).
Explicitness: Criteria to guide policy decisions ought to be explicit. 
They should reveal the assumptions on which the policies are made 
and spell out the expected outcome. The expectations should reflect 
at least these three areas: financial (financial performance), people 
(human system), and customer (quality of output).
Consensus: Effectiveness of any decision depends on the degree of 
consensus generated for it. The understanding and consensus reached 
in adopting a particular policy decision determine the level of collec-
tive commitment to that policy's implementation. Generating con-
sensus is purely a matter of leadership. Here, as in many other issues 
involving rational, emotional, or cultural dimensions of behavior, the 
role of leadership is indispensable. It cannot be reduced to a magic for-
mula. Ultimately, consensus will stand or fall on the quality of leader-
ship. Consensus is not majority rule; it does not even imply unanimity. 
It is an agreement to act. No one should be allowed to take the process 
hostage. A “no decision” is a decision for the status quo, and it should 
therefore be acknowledged as such.
Situations that defy consensus call for leadership in its highest form. The 
absence of consensus would be a judgment call on the leader to ensure 
that the process is not hung up. He/she would then have to formulate an 
explicit working synthesis of the different positions that would be adopted 
as the default decision by the end of the session if the participants produce 
no alternative decision. When the group remains seriously polarized, the 
alternative is for the opposing parties to agree on an experiment whose 
result will produce the decision. The group should agree on the design of 
the experiment and specify its performance criteria. It is also very useful 
for the opposing parties to specify, up front, what will prove them wrong.
5.2.3  Generation and Dissemination  
of Beauty: Social Integration
The dimension of beauty is about the emotional aspect of being, the mean-
ingfulness and the excitement of what is done in and of itself. It is about 
the imperative of “I like it” or simply the pursuit of pleasure. Maturana 
(1980) profoundly stated that, “The path of living systems in general, and 

102 
Holistic Thinking
human history in particular, is guided by emotions not resources. What 
guides this path is simple pleasure.” According to John Dewey (1989), 
“Emotions are much more potent than reasons in shaping public percep-
tion.” Avicenna, the famous Persian philosopher, reinforces this under-
standing of beauty by the assertion that, “The essence of life is love, love of 
beauty, and beauty is in the pursuit of wholeness.”
The understanding of holistic thinking cannot be complete without 
understanding the role of beauty in social integration. In contrast to 
machines in which integration of the parts into a cohesive whole is a one-
time proposition, for organizations the problem of integration is a con-
stant struggle and a continuous concern. Despite a desire for individuality 
and uniqueness, as emotionally vulnerable social beings we display a 
strong tendency to be members of a collectivity. Most of us have a burning 
desire to identify with others, to be accepted by others, and to conform to 
the norms of a group of our choice.
This integrative phenomenon seems rooted in the emotional dimen-
sion of our beings. An exciting book, objects of beauty, and a heroic or a 
tragic encounter all generate an urge to share. The boundary between indi-
viduality and collectivity — the question of how much of me is me and 
how much of me is those to whom I am bonded — remains at the heart of 
the manifestation of beauty. Beauty is, therefore, the most potent agent of 
social integration. The level of integration that an organization achieves 
depends on the level of excitement and commitment it generates among 
its members.
Recall that in the earlier discussion of development we identified desire 
as the essential ingredient for creation of an achieving society. Ability with-
out desire is impotent, just as desire without ability is sterile. In this con-
text aesthetics, contrary to popular belief, is not a luxury. Throughout 
history, societies that were antithetical to aesthetics invariably proved to be 
anti-human and anti-development as well.
5.2.3.1  Membership
The significance of membership in sociocultural systems (family, groups, 
organizations, nations) lies in the fact that the units of these systems are 
not the individuals but the roles imparted to them. Under different cir-
cumstances and in different social settings, individuals display different 
behaviors. A good friend is not necessarily a good employee. A successful 
vice president might make a lousy president. The nature of these roles is 
influenced by expectations and the limitations imposed by the social 
structure, the culture, and various environmental realities mapped by the 
actors.
Effective membership in a multi-minded system requires a role, a sense 
of belonging, and a commitment to participate in creating the group's 
future, so much so that rolelessness is the major obstruction to integrating 
a social system.

Systems Dimensions  103
When an individual feels that his/her contributions to the group's 
achievements are insignificant, or when he/she feels powerless to play an 
effective role in the system's performance, a feeling of indifference sets in 
and the individual gradually becomes alienated from the very system in 
which he/she is supposed to be an active member.
In this context, the inability to carry out the responsibilities of a specific 
role (incompetence) results in anxiety and frustration. To fulfill the role of 
a physician or carpenter requires certain levels of expertise and mastery that 
must be learned. Otherwise, the individual to whom the role is entrusted 
will be alienated. As the strength of a chain is determined by its weakest 
link, incompatibility between the members often causes the more dynamic 
ones to retrogress to the level of the weakest, spreading a general feeling of 
ineffectualness and impotency. Conflicting values within a social system 
also contribute to alienating its members. The extent to which an individu-
al's value image coincides with that of the community determines the 
degree of that individual's membership in that community.
A multi-minded organization is a voluntary association of purposeful 
members. The purpose of an organization, in addition to its own viability, 
is to serve the purposes of its members while serving the purposes of its 
containing whole. Members join an organization to serve themselves. 
Unless the organization serves them, they will not serve it well.
Although it is possible to persuade purposeful members of a purposeful 
social system to engage in a sacrifice for a limited time, it is highly improb-
able that they will accept this condition as a way of life. There needs to be 
an exchange system so that the individual's struggle for his/her own gain is 
enhanced by the degree of contribution he/she makes toward satisfying the 
needs of the higher system and those of the other members.
Nevertheless, proper functioning of a multi-minded organization also 
requires an implicit threat system. In other words, continued membership 
in a system should depend on avoiding a certain set of behaviors consid-
ered antagonistic to the survival of the whole. For an elaborate treatment 
of role, exchange, and threat see Boulding (1968).
5.2.4  Generation and Dissemination of Knowledge
The success of any social system will ultimately depend on its ability to 
generate and disseminate knowledge, which requires a three-dimensional 
learning system.
Learning to learn is about the ability to learn, unlearn, and re-learn, 
both within and beyond conventional frameworks. Given the accel-
erated rate of change that keeps transforming everything in contem-
porary life, the real competency of the knowledge dimension is to 
produce self-directed learners. To relearn one has to unlearn first and, 
unfortunately, unlearning is much more difficult than learning. 
One might have to go through a lot of trouble to undo what previous 
wrong learning has done to him/her.

104 
Holistic Thinking
Learning to be covers the whole spectrum of learning experiences that 
result in both individual and collective development in quality-of-life-
enhancing activities that involve pleasure. It is about desires as well as 
abilities; more about content than capacity, direction rather than speed; 
why rather than how; it is about life, about explicitly understanding the 
state of being and the process of becoming. Learning to be, in essence, 
is about values, worldviews, cultures, and identities; more specifically 
it is about having the courage to question the sacred assumptions. If 
history is a lesson, national declines are preceded by cultural 
stagnation. 
Learning to do is about competency to operationalize knowledge, to 
define problems and design solutions in the real and messy world. 
But the problems in the real world do not divide themselves the way 
universities do. Traditionally, learning to do happened most effec-
tively in the work environment and businesses provided this func-
tion. When I joined IBM in the 1960s, the assumption was that I 
would be working for them for 30 years. That is why they invested 
more than 1,800 hours of formal training to make me a systems engi-
neer. Unfortunately, abdication of this critical responsibility by busi-
ness along with a proliferation of the number of specialists who enjoy 
knowing more and more about less and less and their implausible 
inability to connect the necessary dots is becoming a major concern. 
Learning to do is about acquiring the ability to relate one's special 
text to its proper contexts, and to understand how the other related 
parts or actions coproduce the whole and how action of each part is 
affected by actions of the others. After all, no problem or solution is 
valid free of context. Operational thinking (subject of Chapter 6) tries 
to over come this deficiency.
5.2.5  Generation and Dissemination of the Value:  
Conflict Management
When parts of a system display choice, conflict among them is inevitable. 
The ideal of a conflict-free society not only is not feasible, but it is not even 
desirable. A conflict-free system will only be possible if the behaviors of its 
members are reduced to a robotic level. The answer is that sociocultural sys-
tems should develop the capability for continuously dissolving conflicts.
To integrate a multi-minded system is to design an organization whose 
members can operate as independent parts with individual choices while 
simultaneously acting as responsible members of a coherent whole with a 
collective choice.
The effectiveness of an organization, therefore, depends not so much 
on managing the actions but on managing the interactions among its mem-
bers. The interactions among members of an organization take many 
forms. Members may cooperate with regard to one pair of tendencies, 
compete over others, and be in conflict with respect to different sets at the 

Systems Dimensions  105
same time. In general, by agreeing or disagreeing with each other on com-
patibility of their ends, means, or both, actors (individually or in groups) 
can create four types of relationships: conflict, cooperation, competition, 
and coalition1 (Figure 5.9).
• In conflict, each party reduces the expected value of the outcomes 
for the others. The opposite is true of cooperation. Competition rep-
resents a situation in which a lower level conflict serves the attain-
ment of a commonly held higher level objective for both parties. It 
is a conflict of means, not ends. Coalitions are formed when actors 
with conflicting ends agree to remove a perceived common obstruc-
tion. In this unstable situation, conflict is temporarily converted to 
cooperation, only to be succeeded by possibly more severe conflict 
at a higher level.
• If organizations are to serve their members as well as their environ-
ments, they must be able to deal with conflict. Creating a conflict-free 
organization may not be possible, but creating one capable of dealing 
with conflict is.
• Conflict can be addressed in four different ways: solve, resolve, absolve, 
or dissolve (See Figure 5.10).
• To solve a conflict is to select a course of action believed to yield the 
best possible outcome for one side at the cost of the other; in other 
words, a win/lose struggle.
• To resolve a conflict is to select a course of action that yields an outcome 
good enough and minimally satisfactory to both the opposing tenden-
cies; in other words, a compromise.
• To absolve a conflict is to wait it out, hoping that, if ignored, it will go 
away; in other words, a benign neglect.
• To dissolve a conflict is to change the nature and/or the environment of 
the entity in which it is imbedded, thus removing the conflict.
COALITION
Compatibility
Incompatibility
Incompatibility
Compatibility
ENDS
MEANS
COOPERATION
COMPETITION
CONFLICT
Figure 5.9  Four types of relationships.
1Definitions for cooperation, conflict, coalition, and competition as well as those 
for ­solving, resolving, dissolving, and absolving are from On Purposeful Systems 
(Ackoff, 1972).

106 
Holistic Thinking
Selecting any one of these courses of action depends on how the relation-
ships between opposing tendencies are formulated. As discussed earlier 
(under the principle of multidimensionality), these relationships are con-
ceived in at least three ways: dichotomy, continuum, or multidimensional 
scheme. Dichotomy represents an or relationship, a win/lose ­struggle. This 
calls for a solution to the conflict. The loser, usually declared wrong, is 
eliminated. Continuum calls for a compromise, or resolution of the con-
flict. For multidimensional concepts, however, interaction between oppos-
ing tendencies is characterized by an and relationship. This formulation 
permits the conflict to be dissolved.
When the conflict situation is formulated as a zero-sum game, gain for 
one player is invariably associated with a loss for the other. But in the mul-
tidimensional concept, a lose/lose as well as win/win, in addition to win/
lose struggles, are strong possibilities. Therefore, a loss for one side is not 
always a gain for the other. On the contrary, both opposing tendencies can 
increase or decrease simultaneously.
To dissolve a conflict is to discover new frames of reference in which 
opposing tendencies are treated as complementary in a new ensemble 
with a new logic of its own. It requires reformulation or, more precisely, 
reconceptualization of the variables involved.
Finally, to dissolve a conflict is to redesign the system that contains the 
conflict, creating “a feasible whole from infeasible parts.”
X
WHITE
Lose/lose
Win/lose
Win/win
Lose/win
X
DICHOTOMY
WIN/LOSE
COMPROMISE
COMPLEMENTARITIES
WIN/WIN
Solve
Resolve
Dissolve
ZERO-SUM GAME
OR
CONTINUUM
Figure 5.10  Nature of Conflict.

Systems Dimensions  107
5.2.5.1  From lose/lose to win/win environments
An important characteristic of a win/lose struggle is the possibility of convert-
ing it to either a lose/lose or a win/win environment. In today's complex and 
highly differentiated social systems, emergence of a lose/lose environment is 
not only highly probable, but it is an increasingly dominant reality.
Today, winning requires much greater ability than ever before. It is eas-
ier for groups to prevent others from winning than to win themselves. 
Increasing numbers of small special interest groups are diluting the 
strength of the traditional power centers. Even many disadvantaged minor-
ities have been forced to learn how to keep the opposing sides from win-
ning. The illusion that increased losses for the other side is equivalent to 
winning is what prolongs the struggle and forces the game to be played to 
a lose/lose end. Ironically, it is awareness of this high probability for lose/
lose that becomes instrumental in converting a win/lose to a win/win. 
This is easily confirmed by understanding the reason why the players in 
the famous prisoners' dilemma (Rapoport, 1965) chose the win/win strat-
egy to avoid a lose/lose end. Dynamic interaction of the players, combined 
with awareness of a possible lose/lose situation, creates a meta-game lead-
ing to selection of a win/win strategy.
5.2.5.2  Changing conflict to competition
Ends and means are interchangeable concepts. An end is a means for fur-
ther ends. Changing conflict to competition requires finding higher level 
objectives shared by lower level conflicting tendencies. The lower level 
opposing ends are converted into conflicting means with a shared higher 
level objective, resulting in competition.
The search for finding a shared higher level end can continue up to and 
include the ideal, when ends and means converge and become the same. 
The probability of finding a shared objective increases by moving to higher 
and higher levels. It is maximized at the ideal level. Now, if even the ideal 
level cannot produce a common end for conflicting tendencies, then the 
conflict is considered non-dissolvable within the context of existing world-
views. In this situation, dissolving the conflicts requires a change of world-
views. This change can be a reaction to frustrations with the existing 
assumptions' failure to deal with a new era, a march of events nullifying 
conventional wisdom, or it can happen by an active learning-and-­
unlearning process of purposeful transformation.
5.2.5.3  Democratic challenge
For a viable society based on democratic conventions, it is crucial to define 
the notion and parameters of majority rule. It is imperative to forge a wide-
spread agreement on what constitutes a legitimate majority: its powers, its 
boundaries, and whether it has a right to override the individual or trample 

108 
Holistic Thinking
minorities in the name of the whole. It should define the limits of the 
minority and majority rights so that they may complement, rather than 
encroach on, the rights of others. If the rule of law finds its legitimacy in the 
will of the majority, then tyranny of the majority would already be an 
accomplished fact unless it transcends, and reigns supreme over and above, 
the majority itself. The majority, for example, has no right to disown its 
right to democracy and, thus, democratically undermine democracy itself.
The individual and the collectivity both have separate, and yet interre-
lated, rights and responsibilities. Not only are these two sets of rights and 
responsibilities not exclusive, but they are essentially complementary. 
They are so interdependent that one could not be dealt with without 
touching the other.
Collectivity has distinct rights to security, viability, and sovereignty. It 
has a right to act; its decision process cannot be taken hostage. It is also 
responsible for making sure that the individual, even as a minority of one, 
is provided with enough alternatives to make his/her choices meaningful.
An individual citizen has inalienable rights, such as the right to privacy 
and the right not to be discriminated against. In addition to these rights, 
an individual can enjoy certain privileges, which he/she may acquire or 
lose, provided certain conditions are, or are not, satisfied. An individual, 
however, stands to lose the privileges that he/she abuses; irresponsible 
driving would be one obvious example.

109
Ch a pt er | seven
Chapt er | six
Operational Thinking
Relationships are all there is to reality.
Operational thinking is about mapping relationships. It is about capturing 
interactions, interconnections, the sequence and flow of activities, and the 
rules of the game. It is about how systems do what they do, or the dynamic 
process of using elements of the structure to produce the desired func-
tions. In a nutshell, it is about unlocking the black box that lies between 
system input and system output.
There are certain things about the behavior of complex systems that are 
more related to the way they are organized than the characteristics of their 
individual parts. We call them emergent properties, for they are the property of 
the whole not the parts. Examples include love, life, success, and develop-
ment. In a different context self-maintaining, goal-seeking, self-organizing, 
and purposeful systems also represent another form of emergent behavior.
An emergent property is the end result of a dynamic process that oper-
ates online and in real time. When a living system dies it loses this “living-
ness property”; the self-organizing behavior that held it together no longer 
functions.
Furthermore, the social dynamic represents a level of complexity that 
is beyond the reach of conventional thinking. The late Barry Richmond, 
creator of the iThink1 model, believed “the way we think is outdated. As a 
Dynamic Systems: Dealing  
with Chaos and Complexity
1iThink is software from High Performance Systems, Hanover, New Hampshire.
PROCESS
Black box
input
Output
FIGURE 6.1  Unlocking the black box.

110 
Operational Thinking
result, the way we act creates problems, and we are ill-equipped to address 
them because of the way we think” (Richmond, 2001).
Apparently our highly regarded conventional tools are not doing 
their jobs. Otherwise how could we explain the sorry fact that we have 
been applying the same set of non-solutions to crucial social problems 
such as drugs, poverty, crime, illiteracy, and maldistribution of wealth for 
most of the last 50 years, with no obvious sign of any new learning? Why 
do so many well-intended performance improvement efforts, conceived 
by so many smart people, so often miss the mark? Most re-engineering 
efforts have failed, major projects have overrun by very large margins, 
and the mergers and acquisitions have not been able to realize antici-
pated synergy. Let us examine Richmond's assertion about thinking a 
little further.
To think about anything requires a mental image or model of it. A 
mental model is a selective abstraction of reality and at best it is an 
oversimplification. In addition, our cognitive abilities have unfortu-
nately developed to deal with the static models concerning “here” and 
“now.” It has evolved around assumptions of unidirectional causality or 
open loop thinking. Therefore, we experience extreme difficulty when 
creating a working mental model of even a simple dynamic phenome-
non or attempt to visualize the behavior of interdependent variables.
To capture the multidirectional interactions of interdependent vari-
ables and to map a dynamic process, we first need to use a pictorial lan-
guage. As observed so elegantly by Donella Meadows (2008): 
Words and sentences must, by necessity, come only one at a time in a linear, 
logical order. Systems happen all at once. Their elements are connected not 
just in one direction, but also in many directions simultaneously. Pictures 
work for this language better than words, because you can see all the parts 
of a picture at once.
Therefore, in mapping the dynamic processes, we will rely more heavily 
on pictorial presentation rather than the written language. We also need to 
have a better understanding of the source and nature of complexity. Finally, 
we need an operational modeling tool that can explicitly display the inter-
dependencies, the underlying assumptions, and the richness of the 
dynamic phenomenon under study.
6.1  Complexity
Complexity is a relative term. It depends on the number and the nature of 
interactions among the variables involved. Open loop systems with linear, 
independent variables are considered simpler than interdependent vari-
ables forming nonlinear closed loops with a delayed response. Key words 
in the above statement are open loop, closed loop, linear, nonlinear, and 
delayed response.

Complexity  111
6.1.1  Open Loop and Closed Loop Systems
The first step in understanding complexity is to appreciate the iterative and 
thus dynamic nature of closed loop systems and their counterintuitive 
behavior. Consider the following two simple examples:
1.	 A savings account in a bank earning a simple 10% interest reflects an 
open loop behavior. Both yearly earnings and the amount of principal 
($10,000) remain constant and the total sum (principal plus interest) 
would increase at a slow pace (see Figure 6.2). After 56 years, $66,000 
would accumulate in this account.
2.	 However, if the savings account was to earn 10% compound interest, 
it would represent a closed loop behavior and the money in the savings 
account would grow exponentially, doubling every seven years. The 
initial principal of $10,000 would grow to $1,280,000 in 56 years (see 
Figure 6.3).
Now compare this amount with the $66,000 that would have been earned 
with the simple interest example to better understand the dramatic differ-
ence in behavior.
6.1.2  Linear and Nonlinear Systems
If the interest rate in the previous example varied according to market con-
ditions then we would be facing a nonlinear system. In closed loop think-
ing, linear and nonlinear refer to the rate of change, not the state of a 
system (see Figure 6.4).
Principal
Interest
Open Loop
Simple interest
FIGURE 6.2  Open loop system.
Principal
Interest
Closed Loop
Compound interest
State of the system
Exponential
growth
FIGURE 6.3  Closed loop system.

112 
Operational Thinking
Please note that most of our mathematical tools are based on the 
assumption of linearity rather than nonlinearity. In a linear system, a 
value for the whole can be reached by adding the value of its parts (type 
I property). Nonlinearity, by contrast, is characteristic of an emergent 
property where the whole is the product of interactions of the parts.
With his pioneering work on dynamic behavior of systems, J.W. Forrester 
(1971) observed that reinforcing (positive) and counteracting (negative) 
feedback loops are responsible for creating counterintuitive behavior.
Let us first look at the dynamic behavior of a simple negative feedback 
loop (which we will call goal-seeking). A thermostat best describes it. Room 
temperature is set to a desired degree (goal). Periodically discrepancies 
between the current state of the system (room temperature) and the goal 
are measured and used to initiate corrective actions to bring the state of 
the system closer to the goal (see Figure 6.5).
6.1.2.1  Effects of a delayed response
Introducing a delay function to our simple negative feedback loop will pro-
duce an unexpected oscillation (a counterintuitive behavior). For example, 
a delay between the time a discrepancy is observed and a corrective action 
is taken will result in an oscillation in room temperature (see Figure 6.6).
Second, we will consider the common phenomenon known as a posi-
tive feedback loop, such as a bank account earning compound interest or a 
FIGURE 6.4  Linear versus nonlinear systems.
Goal-
seeking
State
of the 
System
Discrepancy
Corrective
Action
Goal
FIGURE 6.5  Goal-seeking behavior.

Complexity  113
company growing annually at a fixed rate. We said that it would result in 
an exponential growth curve (see Figure 6.7).
The exponential growth curve resulting from a positive feedback loop 
assumes unlimited resources, but in reality, a resource is a universal con-
straint and all exponential growth curves will eventually be influenced by car-
rying capacity and therefore will ultimately convert to an S-shaped curve.
6.1.2.2  Impact of carrying capacity
Now, if we just add the impact of carrying capacity to our simple positive 
feedback loop, we will create a counteracting double loop system produc-
ing an S-shaped curve. Superimposing a delay function, another unavoid-
able reality, will produce the same type of oscillation we experienced in 
the previous example. The overshoot and collapse scenario reflects the cases 
where the growth strategy has an additional negative impact on the carry-
ing capacity of the system. This phenomenon explains the collapse of dot-
coms, the fiasco of Enron, the housing bubble, and the faith of thousands 
of corporations that pursue a blind long-term growth strategy with no 
regard for the limitations imposed by the carrying capacity of the system 
and/or its environment (see Figure 6.8).
Goal 
Oscillation
State of
system 
discrepancy
Corrective
action
delay
delay
FIGURE 6.6  Counterintuitive impact of delay (oscillation).
,IDWKLQJJURZV
HDFK\HDULWZLOO
GRXEOHLQVL]HHYHU\
VHYHQ\HDUV
VWDWHRIWKH
6<67(0
UDWHRIFKDQJH
FIGURE 6.7  Positive feedback loop producing exponential growth curve.

114 
Operational Thinking
6.1.2.3  Understanding the multi-loop nonlinear  
feedback system
Please note that by combining a few simple and ordinary phenomena we 
have managed to create a multi-loop nonlinear feedback system. This is the 
infamous monster that, according to chaos theory, produces chaotic behav-
ior. Unfortunately, as you can see, the monster is not an unusual 
­phenomenon and it is much more common than we have been led to 
believe. The point to emphasize is that the interaction of counteracting 
feedback loops — the prime source for generating chaos and complexity — 
is a common phenomenon in our daily lives. Understanding these dynam-
ics is the key to getting a handle on the notions of complexity, 
interdependency, and counterintuitive behavior of social systems. For an 
in-depth discussion of dynamic behaviors of feedback loops see Business 
Dynamics (Sterman, 2000). Furthermore, and in a different context, Stephen 
Wolfram (2002), in New Kind of Science, makes an important observation:
The idea of describing behavior in terms of mathematical equations works 
well where the behavior is fairly simple. It almost inevitably fails whenever 
the behavior is more complex. Indeed, there are many common phenom-
ena about which theoretical science has had remarkably very little to say. 
Degree of difficulty encountered in mathematical representation of a phe-
nomenon increases exponentially by the degree of its complexity.
Wolfram then goes on to demonstrate how systems too complex for tra-
ditional mathematics could yet obey simple operational rules. With his 
now famous cellular automata, Wolfram demonstrated how iteration of 
S-Shape Growth
Growth & overshoot 
Overshoot & collapse
Rate of 
increase 
State of
System
Carrying
Capacity 
Resource
adequacy
impact
Delay
Delay
Erosion of
Carrying
capacity 
FIGURE 6.8  Impact of carrying capacity on the behavior of a system.

Complexity  115
remarkably simple rules could produce highly complex systems. By devel-
oping a computer program, he was able to reproduce the essential char-
acteristics of complex phenomena. His “new kind of science” makes it 
possible to capture the operation of a self-organizing system and under-
stand how disordered systems spontaneously organize themselves to 
produce vastly complex structures.
Operational thinking is an ingenious way to overcome the difficulties 
encountered in constructing and simulating complex mental models. 
Relying solely on mathematical representation for dealing with complex 
phenomena has been a practical nightmare. Operational modeling and 
use of programs such as iThink software have made it practical to get a 
handle on the increasingly relevant complex phenomena.
Although multi-loop nonlinear feedback systems exhibit chaotic 
behavior, there is an order in this chaos. Such systems seem to produce 
particular patterns of behavior.
Discovering the pattern of behavior for our system of interest is the key 
for recognizing the hidden order that is locking the system into its present 
course. Unless the hidden orders are made explicit and dismantled, the 
current behavior will outlive any temporary effects of interventions no 
matter how well intended.
In this context recognizing the rhythm or the iterative cycle of a closed 
loop system is the first step toward understanding the dynamics of change 
and emergence of organized complexities.
Remember that to map the dynamic behavior of a system is to capture 
the interaction of positive and negative feedback loops. These interactions, 
in essence, define the interdependencies, which in turn are responsible for 
nonlinearity in the system. It is the interdependency that poses the major 
challenge to our cognitive abilities. It is this challenge that we need to 
overcome by using operational modeling. Pattern recognition is critical for 
understanding and changing undesirable behavior. This leads us to the 
need for development of interactive operational representation of the phe-
nomenon under investigation.
Let us consider factors that we assume contribute to academic success. 
A conventional approach normally uses a laundry list approach by assum-
ing that the success factors — good teaching, good parenting, good peer 
group, and a good programming — each act independently, contributing 
directly to our academic success (see Figure 6.9).
However, good teaching, good parenting, good peer-grouping, and 
good programming are not the only things that contribute to academic 
success. We do know that academic success creates an environment to 
attract good teachers, good parents, and good peer groups as well as rein-
forces good programming. In addition we may also agree that good par-
enting reinforces good teaching and good peer-grouping, and in the similar 
way good teaching reinforces good programming and good parenting and 
so forth. Therefore, Figure 6.10 is a more realistic representation of this 

116 
Operational Thinking
dynamic case. It captures interdependencies and the closed loop nature of 
the relationships and highlights the possibility of emerging synergy and 
resonance among the variables.
The following is an “interactive model” of the current financial crisis. It 
re-emphasizes the old truth that the road to the hell is paved with good 
intentions. A bipartisan coalition to expand home ownership to the lower 
middle class and the poor created two reinforcing feedback loops that 
resulted in the housing bubble and subsequent financial crisis of 2008. 
The first loop was created by securitization of subprime mortgages. The 
illusion that mortgages are insured by institutions backed by the U.S.  
government — Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac — relieved the mortgage pro-
viders from any responsibility or liability for the riskiness of the loans 
they issued. The shady loans were immediately re-sold in the multi-­
trillion-dollar security markets. Investment bankers with their risk-free, 
Parenng
Teachers
Program
Peer group
Academic
success
FIGURE 6.9  Independent variables, open loop, and laundry list thinking.
*RRG
WHDFKHUV
*RRG
SDUHQWLQJ
*RRG
SURJUDP
*RRG
SHHUJURXS
$FDGHPLF
VXFFHVV
FIGURE 6.10  Interdependent variables — more realistic interactive operational 
model.

Complexity  117
volume-based business models played the insatiable demand for the dubi-
ous securities to the end. The Federal Reserve's low interest rate policy (the 
­second loop) further reinforced this game by fueling a fictitious housing 
market. Suppose you can afford to pay $1,000 for a monthly mortgage. 
With a 10% rate of interest you will be in the market for a house priced 
around $100,000. If the interest rate drops to 5%, with the same $1,000 
you can afford a house around $200,000. With an interest rate of 2.5%, 
you can look for a house price around $400,000. Now if the variable rate 
drops to 1.25% and mortgage providers are willing to loan you enough 
money with no concern about your financial situation, you will go for the 
house priced around $800,000. The game goes on until the fictitious hous-
ing bubble collapses (see Figure 6.11).
Those who travel to earn a living will not be able to hide their frustra-
tion about the state of air travel. Deregulation of the airlines, free use of air 
space, and autonomy of the airlines to schedule their flights, combined 
with the lack of any cost-effective alternative means to travel have resulted 
in a mess that is not going to be dissolved easily. Most of the airports in the 
Eastern corridor are operating at 20% above their normal capacity. 
Therefore, delays and canceled flights are as normal as small variations in 
the weather. The system that has used up all of its buffers is vulnerable to 
even the smallest of deviations. Post-9/11 security considerations increased 
air-space restrictions in the Eastern corridor. This, combined with the out-
dated air traffic control systems and the increased use of small private 
Bipartisan
coalition facilitating
home ownership
Community
development
act
GSE
Fannie Mae
Freddie Mac
Securitization
of mortgages
Hiding risk in
highly leveraged,
unregulated
hedge funds
Real estate
brokers
bonanza
Federal Reserve
low interest
policy
Low
adjustable
rate
Housing
bubbles
Insure
mortgages
Buys
W/W
reinforces
W/W
W/W
enter
W/W
creating
to support
encourage
Eliminated responsibility
encourage
Subprime
loans
Mortgage
providers
Credit rating
agencies
Miscalculating
the risk
Multi-trillion $
mortgage based
international
derivatives
MKT
Investment banking
faulty bus. model &
rewards system creating
an explosive derivative &
trading games
FIGURE 6.11  Interactive operational model of housing bubble.

118 
Operational Thinking
planes (a small plane with a few passengers takes the same air bubble 
required by a Boeing 747 with 500 passengers on landing and takeoff) 
contribute heavily to the air traffic congestion. Adding the demands of the 
global economy as well as travel demands of the ever-increasing richer and 
older generations to already overloaded air traffic aggregate the unpleasant 
mess illustrated in Figure 6.12.
To summarize, appreciation of the following principles is the key for 
getting in tune with operational thinking:
• It is easier to predict the behavior of the parts by understanding the 
behavior of the whole than to predict the behavior of the whole by 
understanding the behavior of the parts.
• True understanding of operational thinking comes with the realization 
that time is not really defined by an arrow but by the “beat,” or the rhythm 
and appreciation of the iterative nature of complex phenomenon.
• Getting the beat — periodic repeats of a predefined set of operations — 
is essential to getting a handle on the closed loop systems and discov-
ering the hidden order responsible for regenerating chaotic patterns of 
behavior.
• To think one needs to use a mental model, but mental models 
are only an abstraction of reality and at best an oversimplifica-
tion. Making them explicit is the only chance one has to learn and 
improve them.
• One cannot control a complex social system, but can redesign or dance 
with it. To get a handle on a complex system (Meadows, 2008):
Deregulation
competition
Overbooked
flights
Bumped
passengers
Missing
connections
Frustrated
travelers
Suspicious
abusive
environment
Severe
weather
Disturbs
traffic plan
Global
warming
Outdated
control
systems
Limited
runway
Contributes
9/11 security
consideration
Finite
air space
Restricted
air space
Older & richer
demographic
Increased
leisure
travel
Increased
business
travel
Global
economy
Lack of
cost-effective
alternative
Air traffic
congestion
Delays
Increase
Increase
Corporate
use of
private
plane
Free use of
schedules
by airlines
Reduces
slack
FIGURE 6.12  Interactive operational model of air traffic mess.

Operational Thinking, The iThink Language  119
Watch how it behaves
Learn its history
Direct your thought to dynamic, not static analysis
Not only to “What is wrong?” but “How did we get there?”
Search for the why question, why system behaves the way it does.
6.2  Operational thinking, the iThink language
There are four basic icons in the language of operational thinking: stock, 
flow, converter, and connector (see Figure 6.13). These four symbols form 
a complete set for a context-free universal modeling language capable of 
capturing the essence and simulating the behavior of complex dynamic 
social phenomena. 
Stock: State of beings, state of a variable, things that accumulate, 
are measured, or are quantified, for example, customer base, market 
potential, and cash in bank accounts. Love in your heart, quality of the 
product, customer satisfaction, demand, supply, workforce, and skill 
level are also considered stock. It can represent any resource (both type 
I and II). It can be constraints (carrying capacity), buffer (slack), or 
inventory that accumulates on store shelves, in transport trucks, and in 
warehouses. It can also be used to represent conveyors to define transit 
times and/or delays.
Flow: Represents action over time, the beat (periodic repeats of a 
predefined set of operations), and the rate of change that is the 
action (minute, hour, day, month, or year). It is the means to change 
the state of the variables under consideration (adding or subtract-
ing). It also defines activity, things in motion, earning, spending, 
getting angry, becoming frustrated, learning, selling, buying, hiring, 
and firing.
Note that the only way you can change the value of a stock is by an inflow 
or an outflow (Figure 6.14). But a flow can be influenced by stocks, by 
other flows, and by converters (Figure 6.15). Flow can also be constrained 
by a stock (carrying capacity).
Converters, signified by circles, represent constants, conversion tables, 
equation conditions, graphical relationships, iThink functions, and all of 
the factors or variables that do not accumulate but have an influence on 
the behavior of a flow.
FIGURE 6.13  Four symbols that form a universal language for operational 
modeling.

120 
Operational Thinking
6.2.1  Connectors
Connectors, signified by pointers, essentially define the critical feedback 
loops signifying the relationships and capturing the interdependencies 
among the variables. They explicitly define what depends on what and 
what influences what (Figure 6.16).
FIGURE 6.15  Convertors.
FIGURE 6.14  Stock with an input and an output flow.

Operational Thinking, The iThink Language  121
6.2.2  Modeling Interdependency
iThink operational models are used in a variety of problem situations, but 
I especially prefer to use them in the following two contexts:
1.	 To formulate the mess — the future implicit in present operation 
(see Chapter 8).
2.	 To investigate the behavior of interdependent variables and capture 
the dynamic interactions of the phenomenon under study. For this 
purpose I designate each critical variable with a stock and its corre-
sponding inflow and/or outflow, then use the necessary convertor 
and connectors to establish their relationship and the defining feed-
back loops.
The following model is a simple but beautiful classic example of how an 
iThink operational model handles the phenomenon of interdepen-
dency. Two simple feedback loops capture the essence of Adam Smith's 
famous “invisible hand,” which, in essence, is about the interactions of 
three interdependent variables (Figures 6.17 and 6.18). Notice that all 
three interdependent variables are represented by a stock and corres­
ponding bi-flows that will change them. Price in accordance with the 
elasticity curve for each supply and demand determines the changes in 
the supply and demand levels, and price in turn is influenced by the 
relationship between supply and demand. The formula used calls for a 
1% increase in price if demand is greater than supply and a 1% decrease 
in price if demand is less than supply. Price will not change if supply 
and demand are equal. The connectors capturing the feedback loops 
FIGURE 6.16  Connectors.

122 
Operational Thinking
and converters are used to represent the elasticity of the demand and 
supply curve. Figure 6.19 is the simulated output of the above men-
tioned iThink model.
The regional welfare system is an example of how to use the interactive 
operation model and iThink operation model to formulate the “mess.” It 
demonstrates how an attractive regional welfare system created on the 
Supply
Change in supply
Elasticity of
supply
Elasticity of
demand
Demand
Change
Price
Change in
demand
FIGURE 6.18  iThink model of Adam Smith's invisible hand.
DEMAND
SUPPLY
+
_
+
PRICE
FIGURE 6.17  Adam Smith's invisible hand.

Operational Thinking, The iThink Language  123
concern for distribution of wealth could result in two interacting feedback 
loops that counteractively undermine the original good intention. The 
increased taxes — to pay for the welfare cost — force both businesses and 
wealthy people to move out of the region, thus reducing the tax base. With 
another loop the attractive regional welfare system attracts additional poor 
people from neighboring regions, therefore increasing the cost of the 
­welfare system. Increased cost combined with reduced revenue, as a result 
of a reduced tax base, necessitates another round of tax increases, promot-
ing a vicious circle (see Figures 6.20 and 6.21).
FIGURE 6.19  Invisible hand graphic output of the iThink simulation.
0RUH
ZHOIDUH
7D[HV
:HDOWK\
PRYHRXW
7D[
EDVH
0RUH
PRQH\
,QFHQWLYH
WRZRUN
%XVLQHVV
PRYHRXW
8QHPSOR\
PHQW
&RVW
1XPEHURI
QHHG\
LQFUHDVHV
DWWUDFWV
LQFUHDVHV
UHGXFHV
UHGXFHV
UHGXFHV
LQFUHDVHV
LQFUHDVHV
UHTXLUHV
UHGXFHV
UHVXOWV
UHVXOWV
DJDLQ
LQFUHDVHV
FIGURE 6.20  Counterintuitive behavior of the welfare system.

124 
Operational Thinking
6.3  Dynamics of throughput systems
In a global economy, price is set by the global market, making it an uncon-
trollable variable. This renders Sloane's famous “cost plus” pricing policy 
obsolete. Sloane's famous assertion, that cost is an uncontrollable vari-
able and price consisting of cost plus a reasonable profit is the controlla-
ble variable, led to a dominating cost plus economy in America that lasted 
for a long time. But the game has changed. Today, the only way to com-
pete is to reduce cost, improve throughput by periodically redesigning the 
product and throughput processes, and remembering that 75% of the 
cost is design driven. But to improve throughput requires that we deal 
with the following four interdependent variables simultaneously: cycle 
time, cost, flexibility, and quality. This can only be done by building a 
dynamic model of the throughput process that is capable of dealing with 
interdependent variables.
We have defined throughput as the process of generating and dis-
seminating wealth. It contains all of the activities necessary to obtain 
required inputs, convert inputs to outputs, and then take the final prod-
ucts to market. Therefore, marketing, selling, order processing, purchas-
ing, producing, shipping, billing, and accounting — in addition to cash 
management, quality, time, and cost — are among the activities of a 
throughput chain.
Tax level
Business base
Regional growth potential
Tax rate
Population on welfare
Expenses
Quality of welfare
Cash out
Cost per person
Cash in
gap
Tax paying employment
Change in tax paying
population
Change in business base
Tax income
Rate of employment
Rate of change
FIGURE 6.21  iThink model of the welfare system.

Dynamics of Throughput Systems  125
The list of activities for a service industry might be slightly different; for 
example, throughput of an education system will include activities for 
selecting and registering students, scheduling the courses, teaching, giving 
exams, and issuing certifications. Meanwhile, the throughput of a 
­health-care system may include access to patients, access to health-care 
providers, interface with third-party payers, delivery of health care, deliv-
ery of patient care, and management of the reimbursement system.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that even a simple throughput consists of a 
chain of events and activities that need to be integrated. Since these activi-
ties are usually carried out by different groups in different departments of 
an organization, strong interface and effective coupling among them are a 
must for a competitive throughput.
Actually, to design a throughput system, we need to
• Know the state-of-the-art, as well as availability and feasibility of alterna-
tive technologies and their relevance to the emerging competitive game
• Understand the flow, the interface between active elements, and how 
the coupling function works
• Appreciate the dynamics of the system such as the time cycle, buffers, 
delays, queues, bottlenecks, and feedback loops
• Handle the interdependencies among critical variables, plus deal with 
open and closed loops, structural imperatives, and system constraints
• Have an operational knowledge of throughput accounting including 
target costing and variable budgeting
Figure 6.22 describes elements of a holistic approach to designing a ­throughput. 
The basic elements of this scheme are the critical properties of the process, 
model of the process, and the measurement and learning system.
CRITICAL PROPERTIES OF THE
PROCESS  
QUALITY
Critical Properties of Output   
Measurement
EWS
A set of interrelated activities designed to
produce explicit outputs 
Read-Only
Memory
(critical assumptions &
expectations)
Elimination of Waste
Volume ,Time & kind
Continuous Improvement
(increasing efficiency 
within existing framework)
Redesign
(replacing the existing framework
with the desired alternative)
FLEXIBILITY
COST
Reduction of Cycle Time
Diagnostic
system
Elements of a Throughput System
Dynamic & Operational
model of the process
X
Y
W
FIGURE 6.22  Elements of a throughput process.

126 
Operational Thinking
6.3.1  Critical Properties of the Process
The most important element in our throughput scheme is identification of 
critical properties of the process. Time, cost, flexibility, and quality are usu-
ally among the major factors that determine the success of a throughput 
process. They form an interdependent set of variables so that each one can 
be improved at the expense of others. Treating them as independent vari-
ables, as is normally done, is an unacceptable mistake. Unfortunately, 
expertise is in any one of the areas of time cycle reduction, cost control or 
waste reduction, and quality control. Each expert tries to suboptimize the 
single area of her/his concerns by manipulating the process. This might 
lead to incompatibility among the solutions. The challenge is to reduce 
cycle time, while eliminating the waste and ensuring availability of the out-
put (in kind, volume, space, and time), in addition to managing the pro-
cess in such a way that it is “competent and in control” all at the same 
time. This can only be done by simulating the throughput process by 
building a dynamic model.
6.3.2  Model of the Process
The model of a throughput process in its simplest form is a set of interre-
lated activities designed to produce an explicit output. Different ways and 
several levels of sophistication can be used to model a process. The most 
common is a simple flow chart. However, to get a handle on interdepen-
dencies and the dynamics of the system, I like to use the iThink software 
to simulate throughput processes. In addition, I believe Eliyahu Goldratt's 
(1997) constraint theory or more specifically his book, Critical Chain, is a 
must read and a fitting complementary tool to our throughput modeling 
formulation.
In Critical Chain, Goldratt, by recognizing principles of multidimen-
sionality and emergent property, demonstrates beautifully why local opti-
mization does not lead to global optimization. Using the chain as an 
analogy for a throughput he asserts that the strength of the chain repre-
sents the throughput of a process, and the weight of the chain represents 
its cost. Then he goes on to argue why we have lost the luxury of choosing 
between increasing the throughput or reducing the cost, why the old 
dichotomy is not valid anymore, and that to survive we need to increase 
throughput and reduce cost at the same time.
Since the strength of a chain is defined by its weakest element, he pro-
poses an iterative process of strengthening the weak links in sequence of 
the weakest link first. Each iteration improves the throughput to the next 
limit defined by the next weakest element with a minimum cost, thus 
eliminating the cost of over-designs.
Then using his ingenious observation that time estimated to finish a 
task with 80% of confidence is three times greater than the most probable 
time it takes to finish the task (see Figure 6.23) Goldratt develops an 

Dynamics of Throughput Systems  127
­elegant scheme that artfully uses buffers to significantly reduce time, mini-
mize waste, and improve flexibility of a throughput process.
Note that the area under the curve is the probability of finishing the 
task on time. The higher the uncertainty, the longer the tail of the distribu-
tion. Median means that there is only a 50% chance of finishing at or 
before this time.
To reiterate our early discussions about developing a dynamic model 
of a throughput process, I would like to re-emphasize the point that the 
simplest way to build a dynamic model is to identify and map the behav-
ior of the relevant throughput variables, the manner in which the variables 
change, and the way they relate to one another. Using a simplified version 
of the conventions and icons provided by the iThink program — stocks, 
flows, converters, and connectors — we can map the behavior of each vari-
able separately and then put them all together in a web of interde-
pendencies.
The following example represents a real case of throughput modeling 
using iThink. In 1997 I received a request from a prominent telephone 
company for help to overcome a critical challenge in their throughput  
system — the inability of the existing structure to serve the rapidly expand-
ing customer demand to meet the requirements of the Internet era. 
Unprecedented demand had resulted in unacceptable levels of malfunc-
tioning of the throughput system. Consequently, customer complaints 
had reached such a level that the FCC had been forced to impose crippling 
financial penalties on the company.
The four interdependent throughput activities — installation, repair, 
maintenance, and planned capacity expansion — were not only influ-
enced and disturbed by rapid growth of the customer base but also with 
the ever-difficult task of allocating the limited and overworked technical 
resources to competing activities.
10 days
20 days
30 days
50% PROBABILITY
80% PROBABILITY
MEDIAN
TIME
FREQUENCY
Frequency Distribution and task timing
FIGURE 6.23  Probability of finishing a task.

128 
Operational Thinking
The simulation of our iThink model (Figure 6.24) that captures the 
interactions among all of the previously mentioned variables pointed to 
these four areas of trouble:
1. Slack factor: Traditionally 25% of telephone lines in a given installed 
cable are reserved to replace active lines in case of future failures, but 
unprecedented demand of the existing customers for additional lines 
for Internet activity had forced the company to use up the slack lines. 
Therefore when an active line for any reason had failed, under customer 
pressure, it was switched to another active line. As expected, this only 
bought a few days before adding another complaint to the accumulat-
ing list of existing ones.
Installation
requests
Install
waiting
Limited by
installers
Hands in
the plant
Customer
base
Customer
growth
New technology
Request for
repair
Weather effect
Physical
expansion
Slack factor
Slack
Add to capacity
Construction in progress
Plant
capacity
Quality central office
Resource to
installation
Resource to
repairs
Resource to
prevention
Capital budget
Repairs in process
Quality of
records
IOLCS
IOP
IOP
Pros
Table 1
Install in process
Slack factor
Resource to
installation
Resource to
repairs
Customer
base
Plant quality
factor
Install
completed
Repairs
waiting
Plant quality
factor
Quality
of plant
Deterioration
Repairs
performed
Limited by
repairer
Prevention
Improvement
central office
Productivity
overtime
FIGURE 6.24  iThink model for telephone operation.

Dynamics of Throughput Systems  129
2.	 Functional organizational structure: Each of one of the interrelated activi-
ties captured in the following model was the responsibility of a sep-
arate department. All of the reward systems were volume-based not 
result-oriented. Blame was the common game played artfully by all 
involved. There was a constant power struggle and fight for additional 
resources.
3.	 Increased number of hands in the plant: Competing interest among dif-
ferent functions had increased “hands in the plant.” This, along with 
poor and irresponsible documentation, undermined the “quality of 
the records” for each plant and increased the level of malfunctioning. 
There was a high correlation between the number of hands in a plant 
for a given period and the number of additional complaints reported.
4.	 Volume based reward system: Workers were also enjoying record earnings 
based on overtime pay and took full advantage of the volume-oriented 
reward system.
The mess was dissolved within three months after a modular design 
replaced the existing structure where all interdependent activities were 
given to a neighborhood center with a reward system based on results and 
customer satisfaction instead of volume. A team of technicians was assigned 
to a given neighborhood and was told they would receive their full over-
time pay if the number of customer complaints for a given period fell below 
a normal rate. Module managers were given the authority to limit the instal-
lation of new lines based on the state and quality of the plant and slack fac-
tor at the same time expansion of the plant capacity was oriented more 
toward the weakest link rather than the convenience of the capacity expan-
sion group. See Chapter 7 for discussion of modular design.
Finally, we do recognize that the main function of a business is to pro-
duce a throughput, that is, to generate and disseminate wealth. However, 
an effective throughput cannot be designed independent of organizational 
processes that provide the platform and infrastructure for its operation 
(Figure 6.25). The holistic approach requires that designers explicitly 
define the parameters of these subsystems and understand the behavioral 
implication of different designs.
Design parameters and characteristics of organizational processes are 
basically defined by assumptions and imperatives of the dominant culture 
or the paradigm in use for each organization. The four organizational pro-
cesses are very much interdependent and value driven. Together, they define 
critical attributes of the organizational culture. More often than not, these 
attributes are produced by default rather than design. Once in place, how-
ever, they remain intact during ups and downs of technological change.
Throughput processes, on the other hand, are technologically driven. 
They explicitly define how the output of an organization is to be pro-
duced in the context of a given technology. Uniquely designed for each 
output, throughput processes are subject to continuous change and 
improvement.

130 
Operational Thinking
Since throughputs are redesigned more frequently, there is always a 
good chance those new generations of throughput designs will become 
incompatible with more traditional organizational processes already in 
place. This has been the major cause of the failures, already witnessed, in 
most re-engineering efforts of recent times. A redesigned throughput pro-
cess cannot be effectively implemented without proper concern for its 
compatibility with the existing order — the organizational processes 
already in place. Usefulness of any model, needless to say, depends on the 
validity of the underlying assumptions used to develop the operating for-
mulas behind the icons.
6.3.3  Measurement and Learning
The third element of our scheme is the measurement and diagnostic sys-
tem. The simulation model should provide an online capability to moni-
tor all of the interdependent success factors in the same frame, at the same 
time, so their relationships can be monitored. This condition is necessary 
for an effective diagnostic system. The diagnostic system should be able to 
recognize when the improvement process hits a plateau because this indi-
cates that the system has used up the slacks and that the existing design has 
exhausted its maximum potential. To achieve an order-of-magnitude 
change in the system's performance, we need to replace the existing frame-
work and redesign the process. Read-only memory is a critical element of 
Knowledge
(Measurement)
Membership
(Beauty)
Conflict
Management
(values)
Through put Processes (generation & dissemination of wealth) 
Exchange
Role
Threat
Decision
Duplication of
(Power)
Learning &
Design cells 
Processes
Five Dimensions of an Organization
Early Warning System
New Social Calculus
Solving, Resolving
Absolving &
Dissolving 
FIGURE 6.25  Throughput and organizational processes.

Dynamics of Throughput Systems  131
our scheme. We need to incorporate a learning system so that all of our 
assumptions, expectations, and changes in the design process are recorded 
in a read-only memory. These entries, which cannot be altered, will be 
kept intact for learning purposes and future references. See Chapter 7 for 
discussion and design of learning systems.

This page intentionally left blank

133
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a pt er | seven
Design Thinking
During the 1960s, I had the privilege of being an IBMer. It was a period 
when IBM was probably experiencing some of its best and most exciting 
times. One of my notable assignments was to learn Operations Research 
(OR) to help our clients interested in its application. That is how I 
became familiar with the name R.L. Ackoff. However, my fascination 
with OR only lasted for a few years, and after implementing a few proj-
ects with a group of clients, I learned that decision makers — despite 
their willingness to pay handsomely for the work — were not interested 
in the optimum solution. They were only interested in confirming the 
choices they had already made. This is when I came to realize that the 
world is not run by those who are right; it is run by those who can convince 
­others that they are right.
After this eye-opening experience, I became preoccupied with the ques-
tion of why people do what they do, which led me to the fascinating concept 
of choice. Despite the overwhelming evidence that understanding choice 
is a requisite to understanding human systems, the dominant analytical 
culture with a scientific tag had no interest in disturbing its well-groomed 
analytical approach to include the messy notion of choice.
The critical question was how the notion of choice enters into the 
equation of interdependency, self-organizing tendencies, and the dynam-
ics of social change. Ironically it was Russell Ackoff who came to my res-
cue. When we meet in 1974, I had already read his Herculean work, On 
Purposeful Systems (Ackoff, 1972). After a whole day of intense discussions 
he gave me the clue and insight that since has become the centerpiece of 
my professional life. He taught me why design is the vehicle through which 
choice is manifested and how design thinking can effectively deal with the 
three concerns of interdependency, self-organization, and choice all at the 
same time.
After 35 years of friendship, business partnership, and close collabora-
tion with Ackoff, I wonder, in the following formulation, where does he 
end and where do I actually begin?

134 
Design Thinking 
7.1  Design thinking, as the systems 
methodology
In his classic work, The Sciences of the Artificial, H.A. Simon (1996) makes 
two profound statements. The first is the observation that “the natural sci-
ences are concerned with how things are; design, on the other hand, is 
concerned with how things ought to be.” The second observation is the 
assertion that design thinking has a unique characteristic that makes it 
possible for it to be “universalized.” This means that design could be used 
as a vehicle to communicate across disciplines.
Any professional whose task is to create, to dissolve problems, to choose, 
and to synthesize is involved with design thinking. Many beautiful designs 
have been produced in a variety of fields ranging from physical environ-
ments and artifacts to music (composition), philosophy (design of inquir-
ing systems), and political and economic arrangements. Some great thinkers 
have even taken whole societies as systems to be ­redesigned.
Nigel Cross (2007), in his beautiful book Designerly Ways of Knowing, 
makes the following indisputable observation:
Everything we have around us has been designed.
Design ability is, in fact, one of the three fundamental dimensions of 
human intelligence. Design, science, and art form an and not an or rela-
tionship to create the incredible human cognitive ability (Figure 7.1):
• Science — finding similarities among things that are different
• Art — finding differences among things that are similar
• Design — creating feasible wholes from infeasible parts
The unique ability of human beings to create images is what design thinking is 
all about. In this context the distinct advantage of design thinking is to produce 
new alternatives. It goes beyond default solutions by looking for new exciting 
possibilities. It is not about selecting the “best” from the existing set of alterna-
tives. The choices in the existing set usually share one or more properties based 
on an explicit or implicit set of assumptions or constraints produced by the 
FIGURE 7.1  Three dimensions of human intelligence.

Design Thinking, as the Systems Methodology  135
actors' previous experiences with similar situations. The conventional practice 
of using advanced analytical tools to help select the best alternative will only 
result in repeating the same known pattern of behavior, since the underlying 
assumptions governing the generation of alternatives remain unchallenged.
Design thinking, on the other hand, involves challenging assumptions. 
It represents a qualitative change that includes the notion of beauty and desir-
ability. In this way design results in identifying new sets of alternatives and 
objectives, looking for more desirable possibilities for the future. Einstein 
put it so beautifully when he said, “We cannot solve our problems with the 
same thinking we used when we created them.”
To design anything requires a core concept and basic understanding of 
the subject to be designed. To design a car one needs to have a concept of a 
car and be knowledgeable about the state-of-the-art and the relevant tech-
nologies. To design a social system a practical knowledge about the nature of 
sociocultural systems is required. In this context nothing is more practical 
than a good operational theory. Without an explicit theory about the nature 
of the beast and the reasons why it does what it does, one would be con-
demned to keep repeating the same non-solutions all over again. All actions 
are preceded by some mental image, or theory, about the reality. Nobody, 
except perhaps a newborn child, is without a theory, no matter how crude 
and implicit. Those who claim that they are without one are either expecting 
others to accept their opinions without questions or are simply unaware that 
they have it by default. Not to get bogged down in a theoretical maze does 
not mean to fall into the other extreme of mindless action. As long as the 
assumptions underlying the action are explicit, there exists the chance to 
learn from experience and improve the quality of our practice. Part Two of 
this book covered in some detail the critical assumptions about the nature of 
sociocultural systems, therefore, it is an integral part of our theory of design.
At the core of the design process is the iterative process of holistic 
thinking. To design is to create structure, functions, and processes in a 
given context. The context defined by direct user feedback provides the 
selection criteria for the design process. The point to emphasize is that we 
cannot deal with context, function, structure, and process independent 
from one another. We need to use an iterative process to keep the relation-
ships among them interactive and meaningful.
To start, designers must stay at higher levels of abstraction, not letting 
the tendency to be lost in detail distract them from the ability to be playful 
in thinking about the whole.
With the first iteration designers will concentrate on developing the 
desired specifications of the system to replace the existing order. Start by 
specifying the function — the outputs or the desired impact designers 
would like the system to have on the larger system of which it is a part. 
This means understanding the context, especially the behavior of the stake-
holders. Who are they and what is their interest? Which variables do they 
control and which ones do they influence? Designers then will try to 

136 
Design Thinking 
understand and define the interdependencies among the many and often 
diverse desired specifications. They will find out which initial specifica-
tions are compatible and reinforcing, which ones are complementary and 
counterbalancing, and which ones are in conflict. They will also try to 
reconceptualize any conflicting requirements to dissolve the differences. 
In the second iteration, designers will let their imaginations take over to 
create abstract mental images of possible structures and processes that 
potentially would produce the desired outputs. Then they need to pause 
and synthesize the selected images into a conjecture (rough approxima-
tion of a cohesive whole that only defines primary functions), basic struc-
ture, and the outline of the throughput process.
Please recall that the same iterative holistic process that guided the 
process of inquiry to define problems is also used to design solutions 
(Figure 7.2).
In the third iteration, they will make a symbolic model of the design 
to be used to communicate with the design itself and with the stakehold-
ers to achieve consensus that satisfies all concerns. The next iteration will 
convert this initial rough design into the desired next generation of the 
system. In successive iterations, after testing for operational viability, 
more detail and specificity are incorporated into the design. No design 
will be viable without a thorough understanding of its dynamic behavior. 
Understanding unintended consequences of our design and ability to 
map the behavior of positive and negative feedback loops to capture the 
control system makes operational thinking a critical component of our 
design theory.
Holisc Process of Inquiry  
Context
3rd Iteration
S t r u c t u r e
S t r u c t u r e
Context
2nd Iteration
1st Iteration 
Start:
Context
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
Structure
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
Aer each  iteraon
Pause and then
Synthesize
the informaon
Into a whole
FIGURE 7.2  Holistic process of inquiry.

Operating Principles of Design Thinking  137
Therefore, holistic thinking, operational thinking, and sociocultural 
thinking together with design thinking form an interactive set (Figure 7.3). 
They complement each other to create a competent and exciting methodol-
ogy that goes a long way in dealing with the emerging challenges of what 
may seem to be overwhelmingly complex and chaotic social systems.
7.2  Operating principles of design thinking
Design is an intuitive process of creating exciting feasible wholes from 
messy infeasible parts. It is about selecting a desired future and inventing 
the ways to bring it about. Design develops innate abilities in dealing with 
real-world, ill-defined, ill-structured, or “wicked” problems.
Here are ten operating principles of design thinking: 
	 1.	 No problem or solution is valid free of context.
	 2.	 Performance of a system is essentially design-driven. An order of mag-
nitude improvement requires a redesign.
	 3.	 To design is to choose rather than predict the future. The choice 
includes elements of desirability.
	 4.	 A redesign should always deal with both implicit and explicit func-
tions. Ignoring implicit functions would result in a situation where 
the operation was successful but the patient died.
	 5.	 Design is an emergent outcome: its ultimate boundary, functions, struc-
ture, and processes evolve interactively. Designers must develop the 
confidence to define, redefine, and change the problem in light of the 
situation that emerges as the design activity evolves.
	 6.	 Design thinking involves conceptual abstraction and active experi-
mentation. It is as much an art as a science. A system designer should 
have the capacity for abstraction and sensitivity to be moved by the 
power of an idea.
	 7.	 Design culture relies not so much on verbal, numerical, and literary 
modes of thinking and communicating, but on nonverbal modes. 
Holistic 
Thinking
Sociocultural
Model
Operational
Thinking
Design
Thinking
Operaonal Principles of Design Thinking
FIGURE 7.3  Foundations of design theory.

138 
Design Thinking 
Sketches are a means of producing “reflective conjecture” and thus a 
dialog with the design subject.
	 8.	 To design a social system is to produce a clear and explicit image 
of the desired outcome. It should remove the fear of the unknown. 
Motherhood statements will not do it.
	 9.	 Design is the instrument of innovation. Innovation starts by ques-
tioning the sacred assumptions and denying the commonly accepted 
constraints with playful reflections on technology and market 
opportunities.
	10.	 Finally, design thinking is the ability to differentiate and integrate at the 
same time. Design is the most effective tool of integration: to design is 
to create an integrated whole from differentiated parts.
It would be timely here to recall the principle of multidimensionality and 
the discussion that integration and differentiation form a complementary 
pair. Their interdependency is such that for any given level of differentia-
tion there is a corresponding level of integration; otherwise, the system 
will fall into a state of chaotic complexity.
Unfortunately, the increasing amount of subspecialization in every dis-
cipline has reached such a level that we have produced an aggregate of sub-
cultures that are not even capable of communicating within the same 
discipline let alone across disciplines. As a modern scientific culture, we 
have differentiated without paying any attention to the need for integra-
tion. It is no wonder we have lost the ability to connect the dots in a host 
of many arenas. Despite all claims to the contrary, most contemporary 
organizations are merely collections of silos of differentiated functional 
departments — each with very high levels of expertise — without any real 
means of integration among them. We have naively assumed that coordi-
nation is the same as integration. We have erroneously reasoned that if 
several functions report to a coordinating boss he/she will be able to inte-
grate them into the emerging whole and properly connect the dots. The 
recent financial crisis, housing bubble, and the obvious messes we are fac-
ing in education, immigration, and health-care systems, just to name a 
few, should provide enough evidence to convince us that our integrative 
efforts have been a failure.
The failure to integrate specialized parts of the organization makes the 
following discussion of modular design especially important. Modularity is 
both a great vehicle for designing complex systems and a perfect mecha-
nism for functional integration at operational levels as well as an effective 
format to create dynamic structure at architectural levels of social systems.
7.3  Modular design
IBM introduced its formidable architecture for the design of its 360 line of 
computers in the mid-1960s. This was the turning point that led the way 
for the creation of the present monumental state of information ­technology. 

Modular Design  139
The design contained a revolutionary conception known as modularity, 
which transformed the field of complex system design to an unbelievable 
state of possibilities and potentiality.
Being at the right place and at the right time, I was lucky to be among 
the first few in the IBM World Trade Corporation who got the call to learn 
“360 architecture” and the magic of its modular design. The experience 
had such a profound influence on my professional life that many years 
later it became the basis for my attempt to develop a systems theory of 
organization (Gharajedaghi, 1985) and to bring the beauty and immense 
potentiality of the multidimensional modular design into the social con-
text, more specifically, design of business architecture.
A module is an element in the architecture that is designed in such a 
way that it has strong internal interdependency (full functional integra-
tion) and weak or a minimum external dependencies and interactions. 
This fully integrated module is then connected to a specific platform 
designed to simplify the communications or interactions between the 
modules, its host platform, and the rest of the system. A module, therefore, 
is an integrative vehicle to facilitate and manage all of the internal interac-
tions among the differentiated functions to produce an emergent whole  
(a signal or an outcome) to be transmitted or transferred to external 
­elements of the system of which the module is a part.
A platform is a predefined host for a given class of modules. Each mod-
ule of this class might have its own unique functionality, but all would 
share one common characteristic that defines the nature of their relation-
ships with the rest of the system's platforms and modules. The platform, 
in essence, is a predesigned interface with the critical function of simplify-
ing and managing all of the interactions of its class of modules with the 
rest of the architecture.
Multidimensional modular design is the architecture of a dynamic struc-
ture. It is an integrated system of differentiated platforms (each with its 
own class of modules) with a dynamic but simplified, predefined relation-
ship. In this architecture combinations of different modules from differ-
ent platforms transform the system into a different design as necessary. For 
example, we find a telephone, a music box, a GPS, a camera, or hundreds 
of amazing applications in Steve Jobs' incredible iPhone.
Figure 7.4 is the representation of a multidimensional modular design 
with the required minimum of three dimensions of inputs, outputs, and 
markets platforms. The input platform is the host of the class of modules 
that represents internal resources and competencies of the system such as 
a knowledge bank, manufacturing unit, and shared services. Input mod-
ules are also responsible for continuously refurbishing internal resources 
and competencies by continuous re-education and research. In addition 
to mastering their functional expertise, members of the knowledge bank 
will be required to learn design methodology. On the other side we have 
a market platform that includes the class of modules with the capability to 

140 
Design Thinking 
access different markets and ability to assess their emerging needs and 
opportunities. Finally, the outputs platform hosts a group of dynamic 
modules that have the ultimate authority and responsibility for designing 
products, programs, and projects by continuously matching external 
opportunities with internal competencies. The products, programs, and 
projects have varying life spans that range from days to months or even 
years if necessary. Although output modules control the flow of money 
they do not own any resources (all capital assets belong to input mod-
ules); therefore, resistance to change is minimized.
The following example should help explain the intricacies of modular 
design and answer questions regarding its setup. A client of mine was in 
the business of designing custom-made separation units to purify water 
for customers in the electronics industry. The company's core was its engi-
neering division, which was headed by the chief engineer. Reporting to the 
chief engineer were the mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, 
chemical engineering, and process engineering departments. Each of the 
four engineering departments in turn had its own chief engineer as well as 
a deputy chief, a senior engineer, and a few junior engineers who actually 
did the work. The chief engineer was the first to receive a client order 
secured by the company's sales department, and once the chief approved 
the order, the design process began. The process involved all four depart-
ments but in a successive order. It began by transferring the order to the 
chief chemical engineer, who then forwarded it to the deputy chief chemi-
cal engineer, and then down to the senior engineer who finally selected 
one of the junior chemical engineers to initiate the design. The junior 
chemical engineer, upon completing his part of the design, began the 
ascending order of forwarding his work back up the chain to the senior 
engineer, followed by the deputy chief, and finally the chief chemical engi-
neer, who then transferred the approved design to the chief process engi-
neer. The whole pattern was then repeated in the process, electrical, and 
Modularity, designing complex systems
 
 
 
 
Porolio of market opportunies
Porolio of internal competencies
 
 
 
Market plaorm
Input plaorm
 
 
M
I
a
n
p
r
u
k
e
t
t
Output plaorm
 
  
s
s
Modules
with strong internal interdependencies
(full funconal integraon)
and minimum external dependencies 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7.4  Inputs, outputs, and market platforms and modules.

Design and Process of Social Change  141
mechanical engineering departments. When the final design was com-
pleted, it was then returned to the accounting and sales group for pricing 
and cost calculations. Once the final budget was priced and shared with 
the client, the back and forth process of price negotiations between the cli-
ent and the company's sales and engineering teams began.
This process usually took about six to eight months to complete at an 
estimated cost of around $500,000. Over time, both the timetable and the 
associated costs surrounding each bid increased at an annual rate of 5% 
and this was becoming a major source of friction between the company 
and its customers.
After reviewing the situation it was obvious that we needed a modular 
design. But the traditional culture with its strong functional structure was 
not ready for the kind of change that modular design requires. To reduce 
resistance to change, we proposed a simple experiment to see if there were 
other alternative processes the company could consider to reduce cost 
and improve timing. The experiment was to create a learning cell involv-
ing four junior engineers, one from each of the engineering divisions, in 
addition to a cost accountant and a sales engineer from the sales depart-
ment. Each member of the learning cell was asked to teach the remaining 
members of the team the essence and critical aspects of the functions  
he/she performed, and more specifically how each one of the defining 
variables impacted the final result. The learning cell was to manage this 
task on their own time in an effort to prevent this exercise from affecting 
their present work. As an incentive, each member of the team was prom-
ised a $10,000 salary increase if all of the members of the learning cell 
demonstrated that they had learned all of the functions and critical con-
cerns of this design process from one another and successfully finished 
an assigned project.
After three months, the group was ready to accept their first project. 
When they received their first project, all six members of the module met 
with the client together to learn about its operations, major concerns, 
objectives, and requirements firsthand and as a team.
It took the modular design team only four weeks after this visit to pro-
duce the first iteration of their design. This design, with small modifica-
tion, was approved by the client and finalized in another week. Total cost 
was $120,000 and total time was six weeks. This experiment was dupli-
cated twice with similar results, and as such paved the way for the entire 
organization to convert to a modular design.
7.4  Design and process of social change
We have said that self-organizing, purposeful, sociocultural systems are 
self-evolving. They do not simply adapt to their environments but co-
evolve with them. They can change the rules of interaction as they evolve 
over time. However, like all living systems, they exhibit a tendency toward 
a predefined order. Their behavior is guided by an implicit, shared image. 

142 
Design Thinking 
They tend to approximate and reproduce a given pattern of existence very 
closely. To change this pattern of behavior the implicit shared image (the 
organizing attractor) needs to be changed.
The shared image, itself a complex design, stands at the center of the 
process of change. Once formed it acts as a filter so that success of any 
action intended to produce change invariably depends on the degree it 
penetrates and modifies this shared image.
Ackoff's systems methodology aims at the core of this conception. Its 
ultimate objective is to replace the distorted “shared image” responsible 
for regenerating a pattern of malfunctioning order with a shared image of 
a more desirable future. Working together for decades in INTERACT, the 
Institute for Interactive Management, we have used the interactive design 
process to redesign distorted shared images and to produce a lasting 
change in the behavioral pattern of many social systems.
Designers replace the existing order by operationalizing their most excit-
ing image of the future — the design of the next generation of the system. 
An explicit and exciting design/image of the future is a powerful instrument 
of change. The desired future is then realized by successive approximation 
(inventing the ways to close the gap between actual and desired states).
This pretentious and daring optimism, however, is based on the fol-
lowing assumptions:
• Penetrating the shared image is more a question of excitement than 
logic. An exciting image of the future coupled with the instinctive 
human desire to share is a powerful instrument of change. This is why 
active participation of members (stakeholders) in producing a design 
is the fundamental, uncompromising operating principle of interac-
tive design.
• Challenging the established relationships among people is not an easy 
proposition. However, people are more likely to accept a change if they 
had a hand in shaping it.
• The best way to learn and understand a system is to redesign it.
Donella Meadows’ (2008) insightful observation that “The future can't be 
predicted, but it can be envisioned and brought into being. Social systems 
cannot be controlled but can be designed and redesigned” is a welcome 
confirmation of design thinking.
7.5  Interactive design
Interactive design is identified with Russell Ackoff. It is the core of his 
famous purposeful systems methodology. The ultimate aim of interactive 
design is to define problems and design solutions in an environment char-
acterized by chaos and complexity. According to Ackoff (1981), “We fail 
more often not because we fail to solve the problems we face but because 
we fail to face the right problem.” We have routinely been taught how to 
solve problems, but rarely how to define one.

Interactive Design  143
Traditionally, there are three ways to define a problem. The most com-
mon approach defines problems as deviations from the norm. The major 
shortcoming of this approach, besides the difficulty in defining the “norm” 
in a sociocultural system, is to reinforce the existing order. This is usually 
done despite strong suspicion that the existing order might be the source 
of the problem. A simple example is the “back to basics” movement in 
education.
A lack of resources is the next popular way to define a problem. It 
seems that somehow we cannot get enough information or money, and most 
certainly we do not have enough time to deal with most situations. This 
should hardly be a surprise, since time, information, and money are uni-
versal constraints. We will never have enough money. We will never have 
enough time. We will never have enough information. The more we know, 
the more we know that we do not know. A minister of economy in my 
native country once asked me to help him assess the impact of a certain 
decision on three important factors he was concerned with. I told him it 
would take me a month to develop the proper model. He replied, “The 
decision is going to be made without you. If you want to have any influ-
ence on this one, be in my office with your model at 7:00 a.m. Monday 
morning. Otherwise, get the hell out of the way.”
The third, and perhaps the most obstructive, way to define a problem 
is the tendency to define it in terms of the solution we already have. 
Existing solutions conveniently shield us from seeing the reality, so we 
accept the problem at face value. Not surprisingly, an operations researcher 
may see a situation as an allocation problem, while an accountant may 
consider it a cash flow problem.
Those of us trained as professionals — engineers, doctors, and  
­lawyers — come with a tool bag. In each area we have been exposed to a 
series of classic cases, which supposedly resemble the problem set we are 
expected to encounter in our professional lives. We learn the solutions to 
these problems at the professional schools and store them in our tool 
bag for future use. What we have to do in real-life situations is find simi-
larities between the situation we face and one of those cases, and then 
simply apply the proposed solution in the case to the problem at hand. 
This approach is so ingrained in the way we do things that we are not 
even willing to entertain a question if we do not already have the answer. 
A valued client once protested, “Why are you pressuring me to face this 
problem when you know very well that I don't have a solution for it?” It 
was not easy to convince him that today's problems no longer yield 
ready-made solutions and that his job had changed from a tool user to a 
tool maker. I had to remind him that he was paying me quite hand-
somely to help him do so. Unfortunately, even if we have a potent and 
innovative solution at hand, most of the time we lack the confidence to 
use it. We need to know who has done it before. It is as if, despite all 
claims to the contrary, we do not dare to be the first. Stafford Beer (1967) 

144 
Design Thinking 
has expressed this phenomenon elegantly: “Acceptable ideas are compe-
tent no more, but competent ideas are not yet acceptable. This is a 
dilemma of our time.”
We have said that no problems or solutions are valid free of context. A 
phenomenon that can be a problem in one context may not be one in 
another. Likewise, a solution that may prove effective in a given context 
may not work in another. However, the tendency to define the problem in 
terms of the solution, and a strong preference for the context-free solution 
that is tried and true, create a closed loop. The process keeps on regenerat-
ing the same pattern of behavior all over again.
In a chaotic and complex environment we are not confronted with a 
single problem but a system of interdependent problems, or what Ackoff 
calls a mess. A mess is neither an aberration nor a prediction. It is the future 
implicit in the present operations, pointing to the potential seed of its 
destruction.
To map the mess is to capture the iterative nature and the workings 
of the multiple feedback loops that form critical interdependencies 
and define the second-order machine responsible for regenerating the 
problematic patterns repeatedly. Perhaps the best example of mess for-
mulation is Das Capital. Ironically, the most important contribution of 
Karl Marx was not the solution he proposed but the problem he 
defined.
A good formulation of the mess makes a convincing case for funda-
mental change and sets the stage for effective redesign. A detailed discus-
sion of how to formulate a mess will come in Chapter 8. The rest of this 
chapter deals with designing solutions, which consists of two distinct 
phases, idealization and realization.
7.5.1  Idealization
The basic idea of idealization is the notion of backward planning. It starts 
with the assumption that the system has been destroyed overnight and 
that the designers have been given the opportunity to re-create the next 
generation of the system from a clean slate. The new design is subject to 
only three constraints: (1) technological feasibility, (2) operational viabil-
ity, and (3) learning and adaptation.
7.5.1.1  Technological feasibility
Although idealizing, we are not dealing with science fiction. Our design 
can only utilize technologies that are currently available. Nevertheless, in 
addition to knowing the state-of-the-art, interactive designers do not shy 
away from active experimentation. Good designs would use a platform 
that not only permits experimentations but also would be able to incorpo-
rate technologies with new functionality without requiring an additional 
interface or the costly patching process.

Interactive Design  145
7.5.1.2  Operational viability
If our next-generation design comes to existence, in addition to being self-
sustaining in the existing environment, it must also dissolve the current 
mess. Design must generate enough cash to meet its cash flow require-
ments. Moreover, a true viability test requires simulation of a dynamic 
model. Chapter 6 is a good introduction to dynamic modeling.
7.5.1.3  Learning and adaptation
Our design is made to operate in the existing environment. We do not 
have a crystal ball and are not forecasting the future. Therefore our ide-
alized design will have to have sufficient sources of variety to learn and 
adapt to possible emerging environments. Remember that our mental 
vision, which is the basis of our design, is at best an abstraction of real-
ity. To be effective our design has to be equipped with a learning and 
adaptive system to validate our original design assumptions and adapt 
to changing environments. In this context and in my experience, Ackoff's 
(1981) management system provides one of the best frameworks for 
designing a learning system. Figure 7.5 is a simplified version of this 
rich and elaborate scheme. It has been modified to fit my intention to 
relate learning to control and underline the importance of “social 
calculus.”
Learning results from being surprised by detecting a mismatch between 
what was expected to happen and what actually did happen. If one under-
stands why the mismatch occurred (diagnosis) and is able to do things in 
a way that avoids a mismatch in the future (prescription), one has 
learned.
Control
Organization
Read-Only 
Memory
Expectations and assumptions about the relevancy of performance indicators
and the decision process (model) must be explicitly stated,
recorded, and stored in the read-only memory
LEARNING
Four things could be wrong:
Information in error
Implementation wrong
Decision making process faulty
Environment changed
Relevant propertiesof the
of the organization and its
environment;
Performance criteria
Environment
Deviations
Decision
System
INFORMATION
SYSTEM
MEASUREMENT
DIAGNOSTIC
EARLY WARNING
system
SYMPTOM
ANALYZER
Decision System, Learning and Control
Symptoms
FIGURE 7.5  Learning and adaption.

146 
Design Thinking 
To detect a mismatch in the first place, a formal process is needed to 
record expected outcomes. This system will be used only for major deci-
sions and will record the following information:
• The assumptions on which the decision was made
• Performance indicators
• The expected outcome(s)
Although reasons for mismatches are infinite, they fall into one of the 
­following four categories:
1.	 Wrong data
2.	 Wrong implementations
3.	 Wrong decision
4.	 Changed environment
Therefore, during a diagnosis, all four categories must be checked: the data, 
the decision, the implementation, and the environmental condition.
A learning system will be most effective if it includes an early warning 
system that calls for corrective action before the problem has occurred. 
Such a system will continuously monitor the validity of the assumptions 
on which the decision was made, as well as the implementation process 
and intermediate results.
The interactive design process has three steps: selecting the purpose, 
specifying desired properties of the system, and designing the ideal-­seeking 
system.
Purpose identifies the reason for systems existence. It deals with the why 
question. The statement should also specify what effects systems want to 
have on each class of their stackholders. An organization is a purposeful 
­system with purposeful parts and is itself contained in a larger purpose­­
ful systems. Its main function, in addition to serving its own purpose,  
is to serve both the purposes of its members as well as those of its 
environment.
Specifications deals with the what questions specifying the desired char-
acteristics of the system to be designed: 
1.	 Functions: What are we creating and for whom? What are the desired 
characteristics of the outputs from the user point of view? Good design-
ers are capable of transforming themselves into an imaginary user so 
they can better understand the product/market relationships.
2.	 Critical processes: What are the desired specifications for throughput 
and organizational processes?
3.	 Structure: What are the desired specifications of the organizational 
structure?
Design deals with the how question. By using the iterative process, 
design creates structure, functions, and processes in the given context to 
realize the desired specifications. The output of this process is neither 
­utopian nor ideal because it is subject to improvement. It is the best ideal-
seeking system that its designers can conceptualize now, but not necessar-
ily later.

Interactive Design  147
7.5.1.4  Design for participation
We have said that the ultimate objective of interactive design is to replace 
the distorted “shared image” responsible for regenerating a pattern of mal-
functioning order with a shared image of a more desirable future. That is 
why participation of the members in the design process is an uncompro-
mising principle of interactive design. Figure 7.6 is a duplication of a graph 
(Figure 5.9) we introduced earlier in Chapter 5 when discussing duplica-
tion of power. It represents nested design cells that are used as main orga-
nizational vehicles for participative design activities. Each design cell would 
consider the design of its superior design cell as its environment and try to 
redesign its activities within this context. You can recall how these nested 
design cells provide a mechanism for horizontal and vertical integration.
7.5.2  Realization — Successive Approximation
Just as the idealization phase of interactive design is iterative, so is the real-
ization phase. Successive approximation is at the core of realizing an ideal 
design.
The realization of the design has to take place in a real-world environ-
ment. When we wake up from the beautiful dream we will find the mon-
ster very alive and staring right in our face. However, the image of the next 
generation of the system is just too exciting to let go. Therefore, we must 
find a way to implement as much of our design as we possibly can. To do 
so we need to identify all of the constraints that are going to prevent us 
from getting our desired design implemented.
It is crucial to the success of the whole redesign effort that all involved 
demonstrate the highest degree of candor in identifying any reservations 
they may have, subjective or otherwise, about the successful realization of 
X
X
X
X
X
X  X  X X X
X  X  X  X
Design  CELL 1
Design CELL 3
Design CELL 2
X  X X  X  X
Design 
Parcipaon
X
X
X
X
X
FIGURE 7.6  Design for participation.

148 
Design Thinking 
the design at this time. If there is one juncture in the entire process of ide-
alized design where nothing should be spared, this is it. Anything likely to 
inhibit the implementation is strongly encouraged to be put on the table, 
shared, and dealt with right then and there. These constraints usually fall 
into the following three distinct categories (see Figure 7.7A and B).
SUCCESSIVE APPROXIMATION
TypeA 
constraints
Type B
constraints
Type C
constraints
Identify constraints that prevent achievement of the ideal design:
Self imposed 
constraint, 
they can be 
removed
if so desired
Idenfy & 
dissolve second- 
order machine
Responsible for 
generang the 
exisng order
Universal 
Constraints
me, Money & 
Knowledge.
Their removal 
requires extensive 
preparaon 
They cannot be 
removed under 
exisng condion
Strategic  
planning
to remove 
constraints
to achieve target 
design
Successively
approximate
the ideal design
to produce target 
designs.
Improvise for 
elements of 
desired design 
that could not be 
realized at 
present 
condions
BEHAVIOR
-Measurement & reward system
-Those responsible for change
beneﬁt from exisng order
-Fear of unknown/ insecurity
-Mistrust /alienaon/apathy
-Cultural default value
STRUCTURAL
-Legal constraints
-Missing crical component
FUNCTIONAL
-Inadequate technical know-how
-Deﬁciency in output (products)
-Limited market access
-Operaons not in control
-Lack of  leadership & inﬂuence
A
B
Desired future 
next generaon 
Design
First
Approximaon
The 
exisng
mess
FIGURE 7.7  Successive approximation.

Interactive Design  149
7.5.2.1  Type I constraints
Type I constraints cannot be removed within the existing framework. 
Such constraints would require revisions and improvisations of the 
design to create a target design capable of being implemented. Target I 
would be the first approximation of the unconstrained design. If neces-
sary, subsequent approximations will identify target II and target III gen-
erations of the desired design. It is critical that type I constraints be 
continuously monitored so that the target design can further approxi-
mate the idealized design as soon as these constraints are removed. 
Clearly, the realization effort will not be a one-time proposition. Successive 
approximations of the desired state make up the evolutionary process by 
which the transformation from current reality to desired future is affected. 
It may take a number of attempts before the desired design is 
implemented.
7.5.2.2  Type II constraints
Type II constraints are essentially concerned with universal constraints 
whose removal will require extensive preparations. They consist of activi-
ties that consume time and resources and require knowledge and manage-
ment talent. These interrelated activities together define the strategic plan 
that aims at converting the existing system to the target design. The strate-
gic plan usually is the most time-consuming and resource-intensive part of 
the change effort. For control purposes, all critical assumptions and expec-
tations about the selected course of actions must be explicitly recorded 
and continuously monitored.
7.5.2.3  Type III constraints
Type III constraints are essentially behavioral in nature. Selling the idea, 
removing resistance to change, ensuring acceptance, cultivating support, 
and expanding ownership are among the efforts targeted at constraints 
that are self-imposed. Without a prior foundation of trust and commit-
ment, the system would simply refuse to undergo the planned transforma-
tion. These reinforcing constraints, taken together, represent the cultural 
default of the organization that has been reproducing the current mess all 
along. When confronting type III constraints, dissolving the “second-order 
machine” is the most critical phase of realizing the design.
Redesigning social systems, if done with active participation of critical 
actors, is an irreversible process of redesigning mental images. Its impact is 
long term and far exceeds the value of immediate implementation of the 
design document. One of the important outcomes of an idealized design 
is to see the light at the end of the tunnel. This light acts as a guide and 
defines the direction for future interventions as soon as opportunities 
arise. However, if even a design with no constraints cannot produce a 
desired outcome then, most probably, problems lie in the environment 
and the focus of change should be directed outward.

150 
Design Thinking 
7.5.3  Dissolving the Second-Order Machine
The most critical phase of realizing the ideal design and to move from 
existing system to target design is to dissolve the current mess or the 
­second-order machine responsible for generating undesirable patterns of 
behavior. Dissolving the second-order machine consists of two separate 
yet interrelated processes of self-discovery and self-improvement. They 
involve, first, identifying what is relevant and supportive to our shared 
vision of a desirable future, and second, diagnosing what turns out to be part 
of the “mess” and therefore obstructive to our renewal and progress. We 
want to keep the first and dispose of the second.
Accordingly, successful cultural transformation will involve (1) mak-
ing the underlying assumptions about corporate life explicit through pub-
lic discourse and dialog and (2) gaining, after critical examination, a 
shared understanding of what can happen when defaults that are out-
moded, misguided, and/or downright fallacious are left unchanged. The 
process is a high-level social learning and unlearning. Only by the very act 
of discovering and interpreting our deep-seated assumptions can we see 
ourselves in a new way. The experience is liberating because it empowers 
us to reassess the purpose and the course of our lives and, through that, be 
able to exercise informed choice over our preferred future.
For example, in a design experience with a health-care system, I found 
that a dominant set of simple organizing assumptions (such as nurses 
report only to nurses, doctors report only to doctors, or integration is syn-
onymous with uniformity) was at the core of the system's mess. A candid, 
open, and in-depth group discussion of the relevance and the conse-
quences of these assumptions for the behavior of the heath-care system 
was the first step toward dismantling the second-order machine and imple-
menting the target design.
7.6  Critical design elements
7.6.1  Measurement and Reward System (A Social Calculus)
No design has any chance of success without a reasonable and effective 
measurement and reward system. Winning is fun; to win we have to keep 
score, and the way we keep the score defines the game. To the extent that 
membership in a group is desired, the criteria by which the group evalu-
ates the behavior of its members have a profound effect on the manner in 
which individuals conduct themselves.
We all know too well how to play a zero-sum game. We know how one 
can win here at the expense of there, or succeed today at the cost of tomor-
row. In the context of biological thinking, we all have learned how to 
exploit our environment by undermining our collective viability.
Controlling the behavior of purposeful individuals in a multi-minded 
system by using supervision is no longer feasible or even desirable. To 
manage a multi-minded system with self-controlling members, we need a 

Critical Design Elements  151
new social calculus. This calculus should provide a new framework for cre-
ating vertical, horizontal, and temporal compatibility among the mem-
bers of an organization.
Vertical compatibility deals with the extent of compatibility between 
members at different levels; horizontal is concerned with compatibility of 
members at the same levels; and temporal is concerned with the compati-
bility of the interests among past, present, and future members in the 
system.
7.6.2  Vertical Compatibility
We have argued that effective integration of multilevel purposeful systems 
cannot be achieved without performance criteria that make fulfillment of 
a member's needs and desires dependent on fulfillment of the larger sys-
tem's needs, and vice versa.
In other words, individuals' efforts for their own gain should be 
enhanced by the degree of contribution they make toward the needs of the 
higher system, of which they are willing members. This would change the 
measure of success and relative advantage of various activities for the actors 
in favor of those activities that satisfy the requirement of both levels.
Consider the following simple exchange system. A productive unit 
consumes the scarce resources of its environment; in return, it produces 
outputs (goods or services) that partially fulfill the needs of that environ-
ment. The assumption is that the unit will survive as long as the total value 
of the outputs produced is greater than or equal to the total value of the 
inputs it consumes. The pricing system determined by “dollar votes” is 
supposed to be a reliable and sufficient criterion for determining produc-
tion and distribution priorities.
This supposition might be tenable if (1) dollar votes were distributed 
more equitably and (2) end prices were not manipulated. However, fac-
tors such as price control or government protection make the actual cost 
of service much higher than perceived. In other words, inputs are pur-
chased from the environment at a lower price, and outputs (measured by 
the classical accounting method) are made to look more valuable than 
they really are.
Furthermore, even though creating a productive employment opportu-
nity for all members of a social system is an effective means of simultane-
ous production and distribution of wealth, existing social calculus 
considers employment only as a cost and, not surprisingly, tries to mini-
mize it. To remedy the situation we need a new framework, one that will 
use employment on both sides of the equation, as input as well as output. 
We also need performance criteria that, in addition to efficient production 
of wealth, explicitly consider their proper distribution as a social service to 
be adequately rewarded. Without a proper concern about production, a 
sole obsession with distribution will result in nothing but equitable distri-
bution of poverty.

152 
Design Thinking 
The following scheme is a simplified version of an attempt to measure 
the actual costs and benefits of each major economic activity as perceived on 
the national level. It complements the productive strength of a market econ-
omy by enhancing its allocation function. The model registers the needs of 
those members who lack the dollar vote to register their needs. It also explic-
itly values the distribution of wealth (salaries paid) as social service.
For simplicity, let us limit inputs to the two categories of (1) raw mate-
rials and (2) human resources, and the outputs to the two corresponding 
categories of (1) finished goods produced and (2) employment opportu-
nity created. Assigning a “scarcity coefficient” to each set of inputs obtained 
from the environment and a “need coefficient” to each set of outputs 
(goods/services) yielded to the environment, we can compute the relative 
contribution of each major economic activity using Table 7.1.
Once the contribution ratio is calculated, the idea of a new social cal-
culus would be to reward activities with higher social contributions. 
Suppose a certain productive unit produces bread with a contribution 
ratio of 2, but with a low rate of return on investment of 8% (because of 
the weak purchasing power of the consuming class). On the other hand, 
suppose another unit produces yo-yos with a contribution ratio of 1, but 
with a rate of return on investment of 18%. Accordingly, our incentive sys-
tem ought to be able to change the relative rates of return on investment 
in favor of bread. The problem can be overcome with an integrated and 
coordinated application of well-known tools such as a differentiated loan 
structure, a differentiated interest rate structure, and a differentiated tax 
structure. Depending on the contribution ratios (computed from the pre-
vious table), a different loan equity ratio, a different interest rate, and a 
different tax rate can be assigned to each major economic activity. The 
method of determining scarcity and need coefficients is based on succes-
sive approximation. The initial raw coefficients, however, are revised and 
updated regularly to reflect further learning.
Table 7.1  Calculating the Contribution Ratio
Inputs consumed
Outputs produced
Raw material
Goods produced
Material A: Q * Price A * Scarcity ratio A
Material B: Q * Price B * Scarcity ratio B
Material C: Q * Price B * Scarcity ratio C
Output D: Q * Price D * Need ratio D
Output E: Q * Price E * Need ratio E
Output F: Q * Price F * Need ratio F
Talents utilized
Employment created
Skill group G: Q * Cost G * Scarcity ratio G 
Skill group H: Q * Cost H * Scarcity ratio H 
Skill group L: Q * Cost L * Scarcity ratio L
Skill group G: Q * Pay G * Need ratio G
Skill group H: Q * Pay H * Need ratio H
Skill group L: Q * Pay L * Need ratio L
Total value consumed
Total value created
Contribution ratio = Total value created/total value consumed

Critical Design Elements  153
As demonstrated by the example in Table 7.2, this scheme will increase 
the rate of return on investment for bread to 18% and decrease that of 
­yo-yos to 12.6%. Such a scheme has the advantage of minimizing the 
bureaucratic dangers associated with centralized planning, while enhanc-
ing the market economy's strength by promoting a more equitable alloca-
tion and distribution system.
7.6.3  Horizontal Compatibility
Major organizational theories have implicitly assumed that perfectly ratio-
nal micro-decisions would automatically produce perfectly rational 
­macro-conditions. This might have been acceptable if a whole range of 
incompatible performance criteria did not exist, such as a cost center, a 
revenue center, and an overhead center, producing structural conflicts 
among peer units in the organization.
Consider, for example, a typical setup within a corporation. The perfor-
mance criterion for manufacturing units is the minimization of cost of pro-
duction for a specified output. The performance criterion of the marketing 
units is to maximize sales revenue. (These units are often referred to as cost 
centers and revenue centers.) Intuitively, we would expect the interaction 
between the two centers to be complementary and result in maximum effi-
ciency. Unfortunately, this is not the case. In most organizations the rela-
tionship between marketing and production is one of constant friction.
Table 7.2  Changing Relative Rate of Return on Equity Based on the Contribution Ratio
Product
Bread
Candy
Yo-yo
Contribution ratio
Current return on investment
Initial equity
Equity/loan ratio
Total loan
Interest rate
Cost of loan
Total capital employed
Income
Income minus cost of loan
Tax rate
Tax
Net income after taxes
Final return on equity
2
8%
$1,000,000
1/4
$4,000,000
5%
$200,000
$5,000,000
$400,000
$200,000
10%
$20,000
$180,000
18%
1.5
12%
$1,000,000
1/2
$2,000,000
9%
$180,000
$3,000,000
$360,000
$180,000
20%
$36,000
$154,000
15.4%
1
18%
$1,000,000
1/1
$1,000,000
15%
$150,000
$2,000,000
$360,000
$210,000
40%
$84,000
$126,000
12.6%

154 
Design Thinking 
The reason for this is simple: this design violates a basic systemic prin-
ciple. Suboptimization of each part of an interdependent set of variables 
in isolation will not lead to optimization of the system as a whole. The 
two objectives of cost minimization and revenue maximization, taken 
independently, lead to a basic contradiction within the system. To maxi-
mize revenue, sales would prefer to increase the variety of products, add 
­customized features, change delivery schedules on short notice, and so 
on. Minimization of cost of production, on the other hand, can be 
achieved more easily by standardizing the production process. This means 
reducing the number of products and making long-run production sched-
ules. Thus, the basic contradiction emerges: the best answer for marketing 
comes at the expense of manufacturing, and vice versa.
Ironically, the only reason this setup works at all in today's organiza-
tions is that the performance criteria are not taken seriously. (This is the 
major advantage systems with purposeful parts have over mechanical and 
organic systems. Such incompatibility could never be tolerated in a 
mechanical system.)
The usual solution that most corporations adopt for this problem is to 
compromise. The higher level authority over both centers determines which 
set of criteria should dominate the other at any particular time. The possi-
ble gain in one area might be more than offset by the loss in the other.
A totally different approach to this problem is to aim for compatibility 
of performance criteria rather than seek a compromise between incompat-
ible sets. One way is to change the performance criteria for marketing and 
for manufacturing so that they both try to maximize the difference between 
cost and revenue. This means that both complementary units can be a 
profit or a performance center where the relationship between marketing 
and manufacturing is based on exchange, much like that of a customer and 
a supplier. Both units are now expected to be value-adding operations.
Consider the difference in how the two designs handle flexibility of 
delivery schedules. Flexibility is a value to some users who are willing to 
pay a certain premium. For a cost center, this premium has no value what-
soever. The only thing important to the cost center is that a change in pro-
duction schedules will increase the cost. Since it is not concerned with 
revenues, the cost center will resist flexibility even when it results in posi-
tive net value to the corporation as a whole. Furthermore, since transfer of 
costs is based on average cost rather than marginal cost, there can be no 
distinction between users who demand flexibility (or various degrees of it) 
and those who do not; average cost is the same for both.
A profit center, on the other hand, examines each opportunity on a 
marginal cost versus marginal revenue basis. The price that the customer is 
willing to pay for the additional service is balanced against the marginal 
cost that the supplier will have to incur.
While a cost center is instinctively resistant to any change of operations 
requested by marketing, a profit center looks forward to opportunities to 
increase its net contribution to the system.

Critical Design Elements  155
Note that in a profit-center design it may still be possible for one unit 
to benefit at the cost of another. But the critical difference is that a win/win 
situation is now a possibility. Both production and marketing can benefit 
from meeting customer demands, and, more significantly, the ­performance 
criteria are compatible. Note that uniformity of performance criteria, 
although desirable, is not necessary; the important point is compatibility. 
In other words, the performance criteria must be designed such that the 
success of one part does not imply failure of another.
7.6.4  Temporal Compatibility
Concern for compatibility over time in a social system is concern for its con-
tinuity and sustainability. Among stakeholders of an organization are those 
who were members in the past and those who will be its members in the 
future. The argument for compatibility between the interest of past, present, 
and future members, especially on ethical grounds, is so rich that it is beyond 
the scope of this book; our concern here is essentially pragmatic.
It is not difficult to appreciate that a social system can succeed today at 
the expense of its future, or suffer today for the creation of a better future. 
It can also be demonstrated that past members of a social system can have 
a profound (negative or positive) influence in shaping its present, although 
a need for compatibility between the interests of present and future mem-
bers is more or less appreciated in the notion that decisions made today 
should not limit the options available to future members. However, the 
same recognition is not extended to the need for compatibility between 
the interests of present and past members.
In some cultures, the interests of past members continue to dominate 
the present, while in other cultures there is no concern for the interests of 
those who are gone — out of sight, out of mind. Nevertheless, rejecting the 
interests of past members is as undesirable as accepting their dominance. 
The effectiveness of an organization as a voluntary association of purpose-
ful members depends on the degree of their commitment and sense of 
belonging. In this context, alienation is a serious obstruction to an organi-
zation's development. Incompatibility between the interests of past, 
­present, and future members is a main source of its present members' 
alienation. This occurs because a constant threat to the organization's 
long-term viability is a continuous coproducer of anxiety and insecurity 
among members who identify with the future.
But members identify themselves with the past as well. They can see 
the image of their own future in the fate of those who had once been effec-
tive members of the system and served it well. An undesirable and unfor-
tunate image is a serious source of insecurity that is at the core of alienation, 
corruption, and lust for power. This is why concern for the interests of past 
members, minimally in the form of an acceptable retirement system, is 
essential. In this respect the notion of gradual retirement, with all of its 
ramifications, should be considered more seriously than it has been.

156 
Design Thinking 
In summary, to manage a multi-minded system, we need to
• Align the interests of purposeful members and generate excitement 
and commitment to the purpose of the whole, and vice versa.
• Let empowerment happen by duplicating power, not abdicating it.
• Separate control from service and convert it to a learning function.
• Prevent a win/lose struggle and dissolve paralyzing conflicts.
7.6.5  Target Costing
Final consideration in any design is the concept of target costing. Since a 
significant part of an operation's cost is design driven, the designers of a 
system must have cost responsibility. Without a target cost, every fool is 
a designer. Incorporation of target costing and variable budgeting in oper-
ating a throughput system is often the difference between success and 
failure.
Pricing, in the conventional cost-accounting system, is based on a 
cost plus formula. The assumption is that costs are uncontrollable and 
that the producers are entitled to recover their costs plus a reasonable 
margin for profit. Therefore, the prices are set by the cost of the least effi-
cient producer who still manages to remain in the competitive game. 
Higher profits are achieved by targeting higher price levels if one com-
mands a dominant share of the market. Thus, in this model, price is a 
controllable variable.
By contrast, with target costing prices are assumed to be set by the mar-
ket on a competitive basis. In a market economy, values are defined by the 
users. As we move closer toward a global economy, prices increasingly 
become uncontrollable variables, while costs, because of technological 
advances, increasingly become controllable variables. This is a whole new 
ball game.
Cost of Goods
Distribution System
Executive Office
1%
Cost of capital (Return on Sales)
Shared Services
6%
7.5%
5%
40%
2.5%
38%
6%
6%
Eng. 
Firm
Dealer
Retailer
26%
26%
26%
Market
Price
(Planning, Learning & Control System)
Cost of Selling
Region
Customers
Area
FIGURE 7.8  Target costing and variable budgeting for an air conditioning product.

Critical Design Elements  157
After deciding to enter the luxury-car market and compete head-on 
with Mercedes-Benz, Toyota had to use target costing in designing and 
producing the Lexus. Toyota had discovered that $20,000 of a Mercedes' 
$65,000 price tag is snob value. Customers, at the time, were willing to pay 
$20,000 more just for the name Mercedes-Benz. This meant that Lexus 
had to be, at a minimum, a car of the same quality but one that sold for 
less than $45,000. Toyota targeted the car to be priced at $40,000. But 
Lexus was a new entry, requiring a whole new distribution channel. The 
cost of selling was estimated to be nearly 25%, or about $10,000 per car. 
With a 10% return on sales also put aside, the design team was given a 
$26,000 target cost to produce the car. The charge was, “produce it within 
the target cost or get the hell out of the way.”
Target costing requires a variable budgeting scheme (Figure 7.8). With 
variable budgeting, every active element in the process becomes a perfor-
mance center. None will get a fixed budget, but everyone will have a work-
ing capital and a monthly income. This income will be a percentage of 
monthly throughput, which in turn will determine the level of the expen-
diture of the activity.

This page intentionally left blank

159
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a pt er | eight
Formulating the Mess1
We fail more often not because we fail to solve the problem we face 
but because we fail to face the right problem.
R.L. Ackoff
The obstructions that prevent a system from facing its current reality are 
self-imposed. Hidden and out of reach, they reside at the core of our per-
ceptions and find expression in mental models, assumptions, and images. 
These obstructions essentially set us up, shape our world, and chart our 
future. They are responsible for preserving the system as it is and frustrate 
its efforts to become what it can be.
The mess is formulated to achieve the following aims:
• Understand the underlying assumptions and reinforcing operations 
responsible for regenerating the problematic pattern repeatedly
• Develop a shared understanding of why the system behaves the way it 
does and generate a shared understanding about the nature of the cur-
rent reality among the major actors
• Minimize the resistance to change and maximize the courage to act by 
making the real enemy explicitly visible and believable
• Identify the areas of greatest leverage, vulnerability, and/or possible 
seeds of the system's destruction
Formulating the mess is to map the dynamic behavior of a system. It is to 
capture the iterative nature of the multiple feedback loops by demonstrat-
ing the nature of interdependencies in the system. It is the future implicit 
in the present behavior of the system, the consequence of the system's cur-
rent state of affairs. The essence of the mess is the systemic nature of the 
situation. Parts are coproducers of one another. Improvement of one part 
without considering the reinforcing impact of the feedback loops on it 
will not be effective. Messes are very resilient; they have a way of ­regenerating 
1“Formulating the mess” and “idealized design” are synonymous with the name 
Ackoff. However those of us who associated with him long enough have formulated 
messes and produced idealized designs so many times that each has, inevitably, come 
to develop a unique version of his/her own.

160 
Formulating the Mess 
themselves. It is this quality that makes a mess an intractable ­phenomenon. 
The prevalent powerlessness and impotency in dealing with the mess lead 
to the inevitable denial on which messes thrive.
Formulation of the mess is a three-phase process of 
1.	 Searching
2. Mapping
3.	 Telling the story2
8.1  Searching
Searching is the iterative examination that generates information, knowl-
edge, and understanding about the system and its environment. It is about 
watching how a system actually behaves, learning its history, and under-
standing why it does what it does. The search phase of mess formulation 
involves three kinds of inquiry: 
1.	 Systems analysis
2.	 Obstruction analysis
3.	 System dynamics
The three inquiries evolve iteratively (Figure 8.1). With each successive 
cycle of iterations, we try to achieve a higher level of specificity. In the first 
iteration we try to get a feel for the whole; define the system boundary; 
­identify important variables; note areas of consensus and conflict; and 
Structure
SYSTEMS
ANALYSIS
OBSTRUCTION
ANALYSIS
SYSTEMS
DYNAMIC
Power
Wealth
Knowledge
Beauty 
Values
Next Iteration
Process
Function
First iteration
Second iteration
Context
Figure 8.1  Iterative process of inquiry (searching).
2I have adopted this classification on the suggestion of my old friend and colleague 
John Pourdehnad. Look for a more elaborate classification in J. Pourdehnad (1992).

Searching  161
identify gaps in information, knowledge, and understanding. Between 
iterations, we try to fill in the gaps. In subsequent iterations, we verify the 
assertions made in the previous iteration; obtain agreement on significant 
issues; and develop an interactive model to understand the behavior of the 
system.
8.1.1  Systems Analysis
Systems analysis is used to develop a snapshot of the current system and 
its environment that describes their structural, functional, and behavioral 
aspects without making a value judgment (see Table 8.1).
8.1.2  Obstruction Analysis
Obstruction analysis is used to identify the malfunctioning in the power, 
knowledge, wealth, beauty, and value dimensions of a social system (see 
Table 8.2).
Scarcity, maldistribution, and insecurity in any of the five dimensions 
represent what we have called first-degree obstructions and their reinforc-
ing interactions produce second-order obstructions as discussed in Chapter 
4: polarization, alienation, corruption, and terrorism.
8.1.3  System Dynamics
System dynamics is about dynamic, not static, analysis. It is not only about 
learning what is wrong but also about how we got there. This includes 
searching for the why question: why the system behaves the way it does. 
Table 8.1  Systems Analysis
Structure (input)
Members
Stakeholders
Major actors, their interests
Variables they control or influ-
ence, how much stake they have, 
and how they are organized
Major components and their 
relationships
Customers, consumers,  
suppliers, creditors,  
government, regulators
Other interest groups
Function (output)
Product/markets
Market potential
What is being produced for 
whom and why? Explicit, 
implicit, and potential 
requirements
Basis for differentiation
Basis for competition
Market access
Reliability of demand
Intensity of competition
Competitive analysis
Process (knowledge)
Core technology
Industry standard
How they do what they do
Throughput process
Organizational processes
Minimum size to be a player
Cost of selling, cost of goods,  
and cost of overhead

162 
Formulating the Mess 
This requires understanding the nature of multi-loop ­feedback systems 
and interactions of interdependent variables in the context of time (see 
Table 8.3). The trick is to capture the complexity produced by the cumula-
tive effect of repeated actions. For example double-digit growth, for a short 
period of time, not only may be desirable but also in all likelihood might 
not produce many negative concerns. However, repeating double-digit 
growth for a long period of time is not only a formidable challenge, but it 
would also have many negative and undesirable consequences.
Tables 8.1–8.3 are to be used only as guides or examples of the types of 
questions that may be examined in the search process. Use them if you 
find them to be useful for the specific case or context you are considering, 
but do not let the forms take over the content. Trust your intuition. Think 
Table 8.2  Obstruction Analysis
Function
Structure
Process
Output potency
Value to the customer
Relationship with the  
value chain
Authority/responsibility
Coupling/decoupling
Paradigm in use
Measure of success
Core competency
Learning and control
Early warning system
Rewards
Viability of market niche
Source of money
Scarcity of critical resources
Throughput processes
Cycle time, bottleneck buffer, 
queues, feedback delays
Intrinsic value of the output 
(snob value)
Level of commitment and 
membership
Challenges
Levels of boredom
Risk and vulnerability
Discrepancies among policies
How demand for internal  
services is rationalized
Table 8.3  System Dynamics
Past
Future
March of events
Identify critical events in the last 5 
to 10 years that have had significant 
impact on the system under study
Identify plausible events in the next  
5 to 10 years that would put the system at 
a significant advantage or disadvantage
Drivers for 
changes
Changing from:
Changing to:
Success factor
Changing from:
Changing to:
Identify conflicting, competing, collaborating, or reinforcing (cooperating) behaviors
Identify the bases for these behaviors: rational (self-interest), emotional, or cultural (habit)
Is there a pattern, periodic or random, positive or negative trends
Identify causal or feedback loops

Mapping the Mess  163
about ­purposefulness, multidimensionality, and counterintuitive ­behavior. 
Remember, this is an iterative process. Avoid getting lost in the jungle of 
information. Start by looking from 30,000 feet above, and then generate 
enough information to establish the relevancy of each variable under 
consideration.
In a search process, time is an important consideration. The available 
time defines the level of generality and the degree of specificity that can be 
achieved. However, the available time should be allocated to each part of 
the inquiry to permit a pass through the cycle at least twice to understand, 
at a minimum, the holistic nature of the situation and identify the signifi-
cant elements of the mess.
Having completed the first iteration of systems analysis, obstruction 
analysis, and system dynamics, we must pause to make sense of what we 
have already learned. We need to make explicit assumptions about the set 
of critical drivers and major events and their relationships to be able to 
develop a tentative picture of the whole. Subsequent iterations will clarify, 
verify, and/or modify this picture. But we use this picture initially to 
develop a guideline of what we need to know in more detail in further 
iterations.
8.2  Mapping the Mess
The search phase usually identifies a large number of issues, obstructions, 
and drivers. To make sense of these findings, we have to synthesize them 
into a few categories so we can examine their interactions and understand 
the essence of the mess.
The process involves grouping various phenomena into categories or 
subsets, then identifying themes, each of which is the emergent property 
of its constituent elements (members of subsets).
Generation of these themes usually requires an interactive discussion 
to achieve a shared understanding of the grouping criteria. Each theme 
should be (1) defined clearly so there is no confusion about what it repre-
sents and (2) substantiated in terms of its prevalence. Themes should not 
reflect isolated occurrences. A litmus test for the validity of the themes is 
that, when presented to relevant stakeholders, a clear sign of recognition 
results (an “aha” experience).
Finally, after all relevant themes are identified and substantiated, the 
relationships (interactions) among the elements must be addressed.
Each theme is normally a mini mess in its own right; however, for the 
purpose of studying the interactions, we would initially treat each theme 
as a self-containing whole. In subsequent iterations, if a theme were to 
emerge as the central concern we would break it down further into smaller 
components so their interactions with the other elements of the mess 
could be properly represented. Developing pictorial representations of the 
interactions among themes is essential to capture the interdependency 

164 
Formulating the Mess 
and ­holistic nature of the mess.3 Figure 8.2 is an example of such a repre-
sentation, one in which the following themes have been identified: 
• A closed product division culture
• Technological change in the market niche
• Product potency
• Operational effectiveness
• Exaggerated forecast
• Patching
This type of diagram can be constructed and read by tracing numbers on 
the graph and the lines of interactions as follows.
As a substitute product gradually gains acceptance, a gradual loss of 
product potency results in decreased market demand. In a closed divisional 
culture, the identity of any division is defined by the viability of its market 
niche. Any threat to this niche constitutes a threat to that division. Therefore, 
the first reaction to this unpleasant reality is denial. The division, to protect 
itself, repeatedly issues exaggerated forecasts, which prove false and dam-
age its credibility. This increases the pressure to improve sales by reducing 
cost at any cost. But the change in the marketplace demands a redesign to 
improve product potency. Meanwhile, pressure to produce immediate 
results encourages short-term remedies. An ineffective operational system, 
under this pressure, is not capable of redesigning the product, so it patches 
minor changes onto the existing product. This ­further increases the cost, 
A closed
Product-Based
Culture
Reality of the 
Market place
Competitive
Substitute
Products
Revenue
Market
Share
Product
Potency
Operational
Effectiveness
Exaggerated
Forecasts
Ignores
Reduces
Reduces
Reduces
Reduces
Reduces
Reduces
Reduces
Inability to Redesign
Need for
Immediate
Result
Defensive
Reaction
Denial
Leads to patching
Figure 8.2  Failing of a successful product division.
3Peter Checkland (1981) uses a similar method of mapping to capture “the shape of 
systems movement.”

Mapping the Mess  165
reducing the sales and, most unfortunately, granting precious time to the 
competition to solidify its position. The vicious circle thus continues.
Once the elements of the mess and their interactions are mapped, it 
will be easy to see why and how the current mess has evolved. The above 
mess, unfortunately, is a well-known phenomenon that is produced when-
ever a successful product division misses a technological break relevant to 
its field. As put beautifully by Watson Jr., unfortunately “Probability of 
missing a technological break is directly proportional to the level of suc-
cess the organization had achieved in the previous technology.”
Mapping the mess is the heuristic process of defining essential char-
acteristics and the emergent property of the mess. It involves finding the 
“second-order machine” residing within the system. This unanticipated 
consequence of the existing order produces paralyzing “type II” proper-
ties that create inertia, prevent change, and frustrate attempts to make 
significant improvements. To achieve an order-of-magnitude improve-
ment in any system's performance, the second-order machine has to be 
recognized and dismantled. Exaggeration of the winning formula, com-
bined with a possible change of game, faulty measurement, and reward 
system more often than not will point to a set of seemingly innocent, 
simple, but deep-rooted assumptions that are at the core of the second-
order machine.
Figure 8.3 attempts to map the mess of the public education system. 
Although produced specifically for a given state, it captures the generality 
of how the system has been uncoupled from both market and government 
control, and how it has been able to convert its undeniable failure into 
success by exploiting the false assumption that money can solve all short-
comings in education.
>ŽǁĞƌ
ƐŽĐŝŽĞĐŽŶŽŵŝĐ
ĐůĂƐƐ
ŽŶƐŝĚĞƌ
ƐĐŚŽŽůƚŽƐĞƌǀĞ
ĂƐĂďĂďǇƐŝƩĞƌ
ΘďƵīĞƌ
EŽĚŝƐĐŝƉůŝŶĞ
ŽŶĞďĂƐĞĚ
ĞĚƵĐĂƟŽŶƐǇƐƚĞŵ
ǁŝƚŚŶŽĂďŝůŝƚǇΘ
ĚĞƐŝƌĞƚŽůĞĂƌŶ
ĚƵĐĂƟŽŶ
ďŽĂƌĚƐ
ŚĞĂǀŝůǇŝŶŇƵĞŶĐĞĚ
ďǇůŽĐĂů
ŝŶƚĞƌĞƐƚŐƌŽƵƉ
ĞĐŽƵƉůĞĚ
ĨƌŽŵ
ŐŽǀĞƌŶŵĞŶƚ
ĐŽŶƚƌŽů
ůŝĞŶĂƚĞĚ
ƚĞĂĐŚĞƌƐ
ΘĞĚƵĐĂƚŽƌƐ
^ĞůĨͲƉĞƌƉĞƚƵĂƟŶŐ
ŶŽŶͲƌĞƐƉŽŶƐŝǀĞ
ĐůŽƐĞĚĞĚƵĐĂƟŽŶ
ƐǇƐƚĞŵ
sŽůƵŵĞ
ΘƐƵƉƉůǇďĂƐĞĚ
ĨƵŶĚŝŶŐƐǇƐƚĞŵ
zŽƵƚŚ
ƵŶĞŵƉůŽǇŵĞŶƚ
ƐĐŚŽŽůĚƌŽƉŽƵƚƐ
ĐƌŝŵĞΘĚƌƵŐ
ĚŝƐĞŶĨƌĂŶĐŚŝƐĞĚ
ŽŶƐŝĚĞƌƐ
ŵŽŶĞǇĂƐƚŚĞŽŶůǇ
ƐŽůƵƟŽŶƚŽĂůůŽĨŝƚƐ
ƉƌŽďůĞŵƐ
DŝƐŵĂƚĐŚŽĨ
ƚŚĞŽƵƚƉƵƚƐ
ǁŝƚŚƚŚĞŵĂƌŬĞƚ
ĚĞŵĂŶĚ
ĞĐŽƵƉůĞĚ
ĨƌŽŵŵĂƌŬĞƚ
ĐŽŶƚƌŽů
ŽŶǀĞƌƟŶŐ
ĨĂŝůƵƌĞ
ƚŽƐƵĐĐĞƐƐ
>ŽǁƋƵĂůŝƚǇ
ŚŝŐŚĐŽƐƚ
ůŽǁŐƌĂĚĞ
ŽƵƚƉƵƚƐ
DĂƌŬĞƚ
ĚĞŵĂŶĚƐ
ŬŶŽǁůĞĚŐĞ
ǁŽƌŬĞƌƐ
>ŽŶŐŝƌƌĞůĞǀĂŶƚĨĞĞĚďĂĐŬůŽŽƉ
'ůŽďĂůŝǌĂƟŽŶ
ƐŚŝŌŝŶŐŽĨƚŚĞ
ũŽďŵĂƌŬĞƚƐ
ZĞƉĞĂƟŶŐƚŚĞǀŝĐŝŽƵƐĐŝƌĐůĞ
DŽƌĞŵŽŶĞǇ
Figure 8.3  The mess of the public education system.

166 
Formulating the Mess 
8.3  Telling the Story
Mess is not a prediction; it is an early warning system. Proper packaging 
and communicating of the message is as important as the content of the 
message itself. Formulating and disseminating the mess is a significant 
step toward solving it. More often than not, knowledge of the mess helps 
dissolve it. A believable and compelling story that reveals the undesirable 
future implicit in the current state has to be developed. Assume that things 
will go wrong, if they can, all at the same time. Try to produce a resonance 
and show how a system breakdown can occur. The challenge is to create a 
believable shared understanding of the current reality and its undesirable 
consequences, thus creating a desire for change. The story should consider 
the stake, influence, and interest of the relevant stakeholders. It should not 
assess blame or make people defensive. The mess should be presented as 
a consequence of past success, not as a result of failure. Remember, the 
world is not run by those who are right; it is run by those who can con-
vince others that they are right.
Generally, there seems reluctance on management's part to share the 
mess with other stakeholders, especially the members, under the pretext 
that this might discourage them. Not only does this practice defeat the 
purpose of formulating the mess, but it is also counterintuitive. It has been 
my experience that members of an organization, more often than not, are 
aware of the nature of the mess; in most cases they are simply not allowed 
to talk about it, or they might not be able to articulate it as completely as 
during the formulation of the mess. What they really do not know is 
whether management is aware of the mess or not. Usually, sharing the 
mess brings a sigh of relief and a willingness to confront it.
8.3.1  Formulating the Mess: A Case Review 
(Story of Utility Industry)
This section is a sample of a real mess formulation. It represents the mess 
of the utility industry during the early 1990s.
Figure 8.4 represents the context of the utility industry where the oil 
crisis of 1979 had created a mindset of insecurity. This mindset resulted 
in a double jeopardy of over-supply of power generation combined with 
policies that reduced demand. Counterintuitively in a fixed cost regu-
lated environment this combination resulted in a higher per unit cost of 
electricity leading to a vicious circle of reduced competitiveness, down-
sizing, recession, layoffs, and an increasing number of nonpaying cus-
tomers, thus adding to cost of supply and pressure to restructure the 
industry.
XYZ is a name of a fictitious corporation reflecting a typical utility 
company at the time. I am sure many will easily identify with it.
Mapping the mess of the XYZ Corporation followed the stated iterative 
process. It involved observing how the system behaved, understanding its 

Telling the Story  167
history, and appreciating why it does what it does. We identified sets of 
internal and external behavior that coproduce the mess. These behaviors 
were categorized around major themes. Generation of the themes involved 
extensive discussions so a shared understanding of the grouping criteria 
was achieved.
Each theme, therefore, symbolically represents a complex set of behav-
iors reflecting the collective subjectivity of the mess team. The critical ele-
ments of the mess include:
1.	 Success changes the game, lack of explicit vision
2.	 The monopolistic, cost plus environment
3.	 The non-competitive culture
4. Mediocrity, tolerance of incompetence
5.	 The input-based personnel policy
6.	 Structural incompatibility and conflict
7. Uncertainty about the future
But the critical step was to produce a graphical representation of the 
interactions and reinforcing impact of each element of the mess on 
the whole. Recall that elements of the mess all happen at the same 
time. They are not represented properly by written language, which 
naturally is sequential and linear. The pattern of interactions among 
the themes is developed and pictorially represented (Figure 8.5). A 
deliberate effort was made to provide in-depth explanations as to why 
the system behaves the way it does and what was responsible for this 
behavior.
KŝůĐƌŝƐŝƐŽĨ
ϭϵϳϵ
KǀĞƌͲ
ƐƵƉƉůǇ
ŽƐƚŽĨ
ƐƵƉƉůǇ
ĞŵĂŶĚĨŽƌ
ĞůĞĐƚƌŝĐŝƚǇ
EŽŶƉĂǇŝŶŐ
ĐƵƐƚŽŵĞƌƐ
ŶǀŝƌŽŶŵĞŶƚĂů
ĐŽŶĐĞƌŶ
ZĞƐƚƌƵĐƚƵƌŝŶŐ
dŚĞƵƟůŝƚǇ
sŽůƵŵĞ
ŐĞŶĞƌĂƚĞĚ
ŽŵƉĞƟƟǀĞŶĞƐƐ
ŽǁŶƐŝǌŝŶŐ
ĐůŽƐĞĚŽǁŶ
ŽŶƐĞƌǀĂƟŽŶ
DŽƌĞ
ĞĸĐŝĞŶƚ
ĂƉƉůŝĂŶĐĞƐ
DĂƌŬĞƚ
ƐĂƚƵƌĂƟŽŶ
ZĞƐƚƌƵĐƚƵƌŝŶŐ
ZĞĐĞƐƐŝŽŶ
>ĞŐŝƐůĂƟŽŶ
ƌĞŐƵůĂƚŽƌƐ
>ĂǇŽīƐ
ŝŶĐƌĞĂƐĞ
ƌĞĚƵĐĞƐ
ƌĞĚƵĐĞƐ
ƌĞĚƵĐĞƐ
ƌĞĚƵĐĞƐ
ƌĞĚƵĐĞƐ
ƌĞĚƵĐĞƐ
Figure 8.4  Context of the utility industry.

168 
Formulating the Mess 
The initial investigation indicated that the source of XYZ mess is not 
significantly separate from the overall mess of the industry to which it 
belongs. It also became equally apparent that the emergent mess is so pro-
found and overpowering that it warrants an in-depth understanding of it. 
Mess, as was pointed out, is highly interrelated. It is a system-wide phe-
nomenon. No part of a mess can be dealt with independently of other ele-
ments. Messes, therefore, cannot be dissolved partially or locally. No 
sooner is an element of a mess removed than the remaining parts regener-
ate it. This explains why, despite recent management's best efforts, the 
mess has not gone away. Mess is an exaggeration. It is a deliberate concen-
tration on major obstructions that intensifies the system's rigid lock into a 
specific context. The idea is that awareness of the mess is the precondition 
to its dissolution. Once we know where the long-term consequences of 
our actions are taking us, we are likely to make the commitment to take 
the necessary measures and act preventively. The systemic properties of the 
mess are the unintended consequence of the past success. Mess is the leg-
acy of the old game. Given the general context of the regulated utilities, it 
is only natural that the mess is more or less typical of the industry as a 
whole. The mess is XYZ's long-term adaptation to a long-secured context. 
Had the advent of deregulation not rendered the erstwhile context of utili-
ties obsolete, the mess would not have been considered a mess. It would 
still be regarded as an adequate adaptive response to an uncontrollable 
dominant environment. It is the mismatch between the existing culture 
^h^^,E'^
d,'D
>ĂĐŬŽĨĞǆƉůŝĐŝƚ
ǀŝƐŝŽŶ
DŽŶŽƉŽůŝƐƟĐ
ĐŽƐƚƉůƵƐƌĞŐƵůĂƚĞĚ
ĞŶǀŝƌŽŶŵĞŶƚ
/ƌƌĞůĞǀĂŶƚͬĂŵďŝŐƵŽƵƐ
ƉĞƌĨŽƌŵĂŶĐĞ
ĐƌŝƚĞƌŝĂ
DĞĚŝŽĐƌŝƚǇ͗
dŽůĞƌĂŶĐĞŽĨ
ŝŶĐŽŵƉĞƚĞŶĐĞ
/ŶƉƵƚͲďĂƐĞĚ
ƉĞƌƐŽŶŶĞůƉŽůŝĐǇ
ƵƌĞĂƵĐƌĂƟĐŵŽĚĞů
ŽĨĐŽŵƉĞŶƐĂƟŽŶ
ΘƌĞǁĂƌĚƐǇƐƚĞŵ
EŽŶͲĐŽŵƉĞƟƟǀĞ
ĐƵůƚƵƌĞ
WƌĞƐĞƌǀĞƐƚĂƚƵƐƋƵŽ
EŽĚŝīĞƌĞŶƟĂƟŽŶ
WĞĂĐĞĂƚĂŶǇĐŽƐƚ
hŶĐĞƌƚĂŝŶƚǇ
ΘĂŶǆŝĞƚǇ
ĂďŽƵƚĞŵĞƌŐŝŶŐ
ďƵƐŝŶĞƐƐ
ĞŶǀŝƌŽŶŵĞŶƚ
^ƚƌƵĐƚƵƌĂů
ĐŽŶŇŝĐƚ
Figure 8.5  Interrelated system of problems of the utility industry.

Telling the Story  169
and the new challenges that is fraught with unintended (i.e., catastrophic) 
consequences. Therein lies the age-old lesson behind the rise and fall of 
man-made institutions: success changes the game and converts, by default, 
the very secrets of success to the ultimate seeds of destruction.
The mess of XYZ is the product of an exaggerated imbalance: excessive 
attention to a particular aspect of the system (cost plus, input-based, ­friction-free, 
variety-reducing, and stability-oriented characteristics) and extreme neglect of 
the others (performance-based, entrepreneurial, market-driven, change-
oriented, and variety-amplifying characteristics). Suboptimization, given 
enough time, has made virtual evils out of proven virtues. Under the circum-
stances to achieve an order-of-magnitude improvement in the performance of 
XYZ requires that this second-order machine be recognized and dismantled. 
Understanding the mess, therefore, provides XYZ with a powerful tool to real-
ize its transformation effort.
8.3.2  Success Changes the Game, Lack of Explicit Vision
The utility system of America, despite whatever self-criticism is leveled at 
it, was the envy of the world. To have covered and provided for the insa-
tiable energy needs of a vast continent in a span of a few decades could 
not have been achieved without gigantic vision, phenomenal leadership, 
and Herculean effort. Even today, a comparable achievement would be a 
daunting challenge to other industrial societies, even in terms of internal 
technical consistency and operational reliability, let alone the sheer scale. 
In America the utilities used to be looked up to as icons of modern man-
agement. They were not waiting for rate increases to be granted. 
Efficiencies kept pushing costs down. But with success came compla-
cency. The system stopped developing since it was pointless to improve a 
system that was already perfect. Therefore, feeling no need for any new 
sources of variety, utilities closed their gene pool, exclusively dealing 
with the insiders to the industry.
As a consequence, strategic thinking became a casualty of 
• A retroactive pride in the past
• A shift of focus from new discoveries and frontiers to safeguarding 
what has already been achieved
• Crisis management, the organization operating in a reactive mode 
responding only to problems as they emerge
• Erosion of core competence
An annual planning process identified as strategic planning is per-
formed. The plans generated are in effect operating plans that evolve 
into “to-do” lists for the upcoming year. Lack of an articulated strategy 
has caused XYZ to forego new business opportunities. In the absence of 
a new vision for a more exciting future, the system engages in a constant 
struggle to preserve the old, a nostalgic preoccupation with the rear-
view mirror.

170 
Formulating the Mess 
8.3.3  Monopolistic, Cost Plus, Regulated Environment
The nature of XYZ is defined by its exclusive franchise operating in a cost 
plus regulated environment. No other single factor has been more respon-
sible for influencing the nature of XYZ — being what it is, and behaving 
the way it does.
Utility regulations were originally established to correct the utility 
industry's abusive business practices, restore public confidence in the 
monopolistic system, and serve as a proxy for competition. Once the 
industry's abuses were curbed, rate making evolved into the validation 
process in a cost plus system. The cost plus environment performed rea-
sonably well in the post-war era, and even more so in the 1960s, as new, 
less expensive energy sources were developed and rate decreases became 
the industry norm. Price decreases fueled an expanding economy, stimu-
lated customer demand and elevated the industry's stature, and added 
value to shareholder investments. However, the 1970s ushered in short-
ages, embargoes, high inflation, record interest rates, environmental regu-
lations, and the “China Syndrome,” all of which propelled costs and the 
industry into a more contentious relationship with customers and envi-
ronmentalists. In response to higher prices, environmental concerns, and 
public pressures, regulators implemented “social justice” into rate design 
and regulation. During the 1980s, environmentalists and self-interest 
groups used the regulatory arena to promote conservation programs, force 
even further social justice into rate designs, and promulgate rules designed 
to displace the electric industry from its traditional role of plant builder, 
owner, and operator. In the cost plus regulated environment, the regulator 
looms omnipotent. What it does overrides almost every other source of 
influence in the operation of a utility company. The necessity to cope with 
the regulated environment has led to a bureaucratic competency in the 
form of an ability to manage costs and allocation techniques to the best 
advantage of the system. The cost allocation skills, perfected to an art form, 
then shape all operating policies, procedures, and processes. This context 
leads to ambiguous and irrelevant performance criteria. Typical business 
measures are usually disregarded in lieu of a cost plus regulatory environ-
ment. For example, the ill-defined social and economic agenda defies the 
establishment of meaningful performance measures. In a sound competi-
tive environment, for example, it would simply be dismissed as facetious 
to expect that a company should not only reduce the demand for its out-
put but also at the same time pick up the tab for it. Once the survival of the 
system becomes independent of its performance, the luxury of operating 
in a cost plus third-party payer environment leads to the emergence of a 
totally new game with its own unique ground rules and motivational con-
sequences. People realize over time that they can afford to ignore the early 
warnings and to look up to the regulator as the main source of their viabil-
ity with a limited concern for the effectiveness of the organization and the 
discipline of a real marketplace.

Telling the Story  171
The cost plus system is terminally ill. The customer base resents it, and 
the political machine will surely demand its demise. While the future 
model for rate regulation and the industry as a whole has yet to be designed, 
it is clear that a new industry leader or set of standards will emerge for oth-
ers to follow. Any new performance standards will probably draw heavily 
from the competitive model and will, at least initially, favor cost efficiency 
initiatives and reward creative entrepreneurial efforts.
8.3.4  The Non-Competitive Culture
The organizational culture of XYZ, influenced by a cost plus regulatory 
environment, is characterized by the following attributes:
• Non-competitively regulated environment conducive to peaceful coex-
istence of peers
• Mutual respect of players for well-established and sacrosanct territories
• A mainstream tendency to comply with the law of averages; a bias 
toward being similar and non-threatening among like-minded peers 
as opposed to being differentiated and distinct from the other utilities
• A time-honored respect for such communal values as stability, har-
mony, and camaraderie over competency
• A habitual expectation of taking for granted guaranteed earnings and 
continued growth
• An unspoken assumption that the survival of the system is indepen-
dent of the efficiency of its operation
• Looking up to “regulators” as the single source of change, albeit a 
benign one
• Considering the regulator as the real customer, who determines the 
future, instead of the end user who has no choice
• Determining the inputs (size of personnel, years of education, length 
of seniority, etc.) instead of the outputs (innovations, productivity, per-
formance, etc.) as the basis of status and benefits; change is perceived 
as a threat to hard-won security and status
• A much greater sensitivity to errors of commission as opposed to errors 
of omission, an implicit denial of the fact that organizations fail more 
often not because of what they do but because of what they do not do
• The need for power overriding the need for achievement: status and 
membership are enhanced more by patronage and loyalty than compet-
itive behavior (who you know is as important as what you produce)
• Not recognizing the significance of vital talent and relevant technology
• Formation of identities around the closely guarded turfs, rather than 
the whole, which is conveniently ignored
• The unities of command being the overriding vehicle to manage con-
flict, remove confusion, create alignment, and correct deviation
• Considering the superior–subordinate relationship as the only build-
ing block of the organization, leading to hierarchical one-dimensional 
structure

172 
Formulating the Mess 
8.3.5  The Input-Based Personnel Policy
The compensation and reward system of XYZ is based on a mechanistic 
model. This model was originally created in response to strong unions' 
demands for social justice, fairness, and security for workers in large 
industrial concerns. The conventional model is still dominant in a major-
ity of manufacturing environments. Notwithstanding the obvious flaws 
of the conventional model, the competitive nature of these industries 
produces a balancing effect, which makes the model workable despite its 
vital shortcomings. Unfortunately, however, in cost plus non-competitive 
environments, the model brings out the worst of protected bureaucracies. 
At XYZ, the model's absence of clear performance measures has become a 
major obstruction. It has become an integral part of the second-order 
machine that determines the essential character of XYZ and makes it 
behave the way it does. For instance, marginal performers can receive 
favorable reviews and remain with XYZ for many years. To compensate 
for the consequential underperformance, additional personnel are then 
utilized to accomplish the designated work assignments. Personnel pol-
icy, once in place, takes a life of its own. No aspect of the organization is 
too hypersensitive to redesign; therefore it is no accident that the conven-
tional compensation system has long endured as a default value despite 
its crippling effects. The following summarizes the characteristics of the 
conventional compensation system of XYZ. As pointed out, these mani-
festations are not unique. They are shared by many organizations that 
have adopted the traditional model. The existing system is characterized 
by “job” evaluation. It is the job and not the occupant that is the focus of 
evaluation. Fixed or base pay is determined by the job content and the 
qualifications derived from it. Different people having the same job get 
essentially the same pay. The system reflects the motto that constitutes 
this mechanical notion of fairness, that is, “equal pay for equal job.” The 
system avoids differentiating people based on the differences that make a 
difference. The overriding concern seems to be with stability and ease of 
measurement. Since average performers constitute the commanding 
majority of employees, it is therefore believed that compensation based 
on the typical average performer produces less dissatisfaction, and results 
in a more stable work environment. The system is selectively geared to the 
features that are common to all jobs. The real occupant is deliberately 
ignored. It is implied that considering the occupant's unique talents, 
skills, and interests as well as performance and contributions would 
involve personalities, intangibles, complexities, and subjective judgments. 
It is, therefore, imperative to deliberately insulate the process of evalua-
tion from individual judgment “no matter how good it is.” Such job eval-
uation systems are products of machine age thinking. They assume that 
organizations are machines consisting of structurally defined tasks whose 
outputs are determined by their structures. All inputs are, therefore, limited 

Telling the Story  173
to job statements. The relevant human elements, be it the personal judg-
ment of the manager or the characteristics of the occupants, are conve-
niently eliminated from the process in the name of objectivity. There is an 
overriding concern with the ease of accuracy and measurement. In the 
name of objectivity, the process gets linked to the easily measurable 
dimensions such as years of experience, levels of formal education, num-
ber of employees, size of budgets, and so forth. This reconfirms the fact, 
widely ignored in human systems, that “the wrong criteria accurately 
measured” produces unintended and self-defeating consequences. The 
following list summarizes some of the conventional system consequences, 
which are widespread in organizations driven by such a model:
• Encourages empire building (inflates budget and staff to achieve 
­salary-earning status)
• Encourages bureaucratization and resistance to change
• Rewards mediocrity and discourages differentiation based on talent 
and performance
• Encourages promotions to higher levels of incompetence as a means of 
salary increase
• Creates inflated (top- and bottom-heavy) organizations
• Generates indifference and alienation
• Raises the entire pay base by averaging the whole system rather than 
selectively differentiating the occupants in terms of their performance
• Replaces the need for achievement by the need for power
8.3.6  Mediocrity, Tolerance of Incompetence
XYZ operates in a force field that drives everything toward average. The gravita-
tion toward normalcy comes from three separate and yet interrelated areas:
• A cost plus regulatory environment, and irrelevancy of performance 
criteria
• Commitment to a non-competitive culture
• An input-based personnel policy
The convergence point of these reinforcing drivers generates an entropic 
process, a systemic gravitation to non-differentiation and uniformity. 
The welfare of the system, therefore, requires maintenance of a state of 
predictability, harmony, and conformity. Risk and tension are anath-
ema. Motivation to achieve competitive advantage and desire to excel 
are invitations to disruption and a serious threat to peace and healthy 
balance. Differential tendencies away from the established norms are 
discouraged. Innovation and entrepreneurial tendencies are treated as 
social pathologies, discordant deviations from the state of normalcy. To 
maintain this desirable state of uniformity and equality, the system has 
to develop a capacity to tolerate incompetence. Success is defined by 
being average, maintaining a low profile, and making no noise. 
Consequently, the system, under inertia, slips into a downward spiral 

174 
Formulating the Mess 
of organizational ineffectiveness. Vitality suffers; banality sets in. 
When competence becomes irrelevant, then nobody is indispensable. 
Therefore, maintaining a proper relationship with the source of power 
becomes the ultimate criteria for success. If left unchecked, this process 
will ultimately result in an unacceptable level of non-performance. To 
counter this and produce the ­necessary levels of output, the system has 
some degrees of differentiation. Unfortunately the only feasible means 
for differentiation, under the circumstances, is the creation of multi-
layer hierarchies. Proliferation and subdivision of real tasks into insig-
nificant jobs allows successive cycles of promotions to the levels of 
incompetence. The by-products of an overpopulated workforce further 
obstruct the workflow. Since the strength of a bureaucratic chain is 
determined by its weakest element, the organization became increas-
ingly self-absorbed. Inflated workforce took a life of its own and created 
enough internal work to keep it busy. Redundancy proliferates. Process 
becomes an end in itself. Need for duplication is never ending, since 
those who want to do something realize that they could hardly rely on 
others for effective and timely support. This context is responsible for 
the experience of the following paradoxical duality. An implicit appre-
ciation and desire to preserve the system that produces these opportune 
levels of generous benefits, security, and peace of mind militates against 
the natural human desire for a rational alternative that promotes earned 
distinction, legitimate authority, and recognition through superior per-
formance. Witnessing the wasteland, therefore, pains the social con-
science. Widespread expressions of frustration and criticism are reflections  
of experiencing this ongoing tension. The frustrating struggle of trying to 
resolve this dilemma gives rise to the prevalence of a denial syndrome: a 
tendency to blame the actors for the shortcomings of the system rather 
than the ­system itself.
8.3.7  Structural Incompatibility
XYZ is faced with a series of incompatibilities in its architecture (struc-
ture, function, and process) that arise from the requirements of new 
realities in its environment. The present structure of XYZ is consistent 
with an organizational legacy that proved extremely successful in an era 
when the system was operating in a stable and growing environment. It 
is a typical organizational structure, a dominant form of organization in 
corporate America today. The model was initially developed (by Alfred 
Sloan of GM) to meet the increasing challenges of managing growth in 
diversified markets. The basic architecture of this model is made of a 
series of semi-autonomous divisions operating under the central con-
trol of a powerful headquarters (the brain of the firm). Each division is 
a miniature of the whole and responsible for operating in a predefined 
product/market niche. The assigned niche defines the identity, viability, 

Telling the Story  175
and scope of the operation of each division. The required competency 
of each division is a prediction of the demand and preparation for it. 
Otherwise, the divisions are expected to follow a pre-established mode 
of operation with no deviation. The administrative functions are the 
essential means of central control. These functions are duplicated through-
out the organization. Conversely technical competencies are diffused 
and differentiated across product divisions in the form of local technol-
ogies. Since each division is to operate with a predefined product, tech-
nology, and a given market territory, interactions between them are 
minimized. This reduces conflict and complexity and increases focus 
and accountability. Success is achieved by staying the same and cloning 
the product divisions in several markets, a perfect model for a stable 
and growing and predictable business environment. This perfect structure, 
however, becomes grossly dysfunctional in an unstable and unpredictable 
environment latent with new sets of obstructions and opportunities. To  
be viable in this environment requires flexibility and core competency. 
Note that state-of-the-art capabilities, which are specific to a particular 
operation and cannot be successfully duplicated in different contexts, 
are not considered to be core competencies. Incompatibility of control 
and service functions at the corporate level produces unnecessary confu-
sion, making both functions ineffective. Service providers are expected 
to perform a control function while simultaneously providing a service. 
As a means to avoid the control/service conflict, services that could be 
easily and effectively shared are duplicated. This chimerical quality 
results in continuous boundary disputes and loss of accountability. On 
the other hand, control functions, by being part of a service company, 
lose their proper legitimacy to be taken seriously. This, especially in a 
context of a culture that avoids bad news and conflicts in exchange for 
peace, does not provide a proper setting for an effective learning and 
early warning system. It reduces the control function to a minimum, 
mostly a bureaucratic form (i.e., supervision). Finally, determination of 
the attributes and capabilities that are to be common to all parts of the 
organization and those that are unique to specific parts of an operation 
is of paramount importance. The critical question, then, is the process 
(how) by which these objectives are to be achieved. Ironically both cen-
tralization and decentralization, as two complimentary processes, can 
be instrumental in this regard. So the question is not whether to have a 
centralized or decentralized operation, but to distinguish between what 
should or should not be centralized/decentralized. This question can-
not be resolved free of context; for example, as long as a business is 
operating under a regulated environment, it makes a lot of sense to cen-
tralize the administrative functions. This will easily produce the internal 
consistency and uniformity that are so essential to regulatory oversight. 
But if it becomes necessary to operate in a non-regulatory environment 
as well, then centralized administrative functions, in their present form, 

176 
Formulating the Mess 
will surely stifle the new businesses. They should be decentralized to 
keep them confined to the regulated business.
8.3.8  Uncertainty About the Future
XYZ, like other members of the energy industry, is entering uncharted 
waters. Once characterized by the stability of a publicly regulated environ-
ment, the industry has suddenly found itself in the throes of unpredictable 
change. The familiar and closely knit environment is being thrown open. 
Deregulation is ushering in the market and competitive forces will reshape 
the industry beyond recognition. The future, if anything, is uncertain. No 
one knows, with any degree of certainty, what it will look like. What is cer-
tain, however, is that the future of the utility industry is not going to be 
what it used to be. The only certainty will be uncertainty. The challenge is 
to excel in an environment where the competition defines the opportuni-
ties and the end user picks the winners. Great Britain and Canada are 
already in the throes of total utility restructuring. Washington and 
Wisconsin are leading the United States and began experimenting with 
new forms and relationships for doing the same differently. Connecticut 
has taken a “wait and see” approach and others, such as Massachusetts, are 
bracing for the turbulence that lies ahead.
No one knows what direction the future of the utility industry may 
take, but there are speculations, which include:
• Opening the energy industry to market-driven competition and 
management
• Emergence of the independent producer as a major player
• Rise of brokerage: wholesale traders and, in particular, retail wheelers
• Prospects of a change in cost equation by inclusion of the environmen-
tal costs
• Rate differentiation
• Introduction of mergers and acquisitions
• The prospect of limited growth opportunity in the traditional energy 
business
The emerging new reality, whatever shape it takes, will be pregnant 
with an array of new threats and opportunities. In light of the possible 
impact of the emerging reality, different stakeholders have already 
begun reassessing their expectations. Most important, the prospect of 
limited growth of energy is the source of anxiety not only for the stock-
holders but all the other stakeholders of the organization, because the 
viability of the system is growth based. Insufficient growth will have 
two disturbing effects: internally, it will upset the built-in cost increase 
system, and externally, the emerging new game will disrupt the peace-
ful coexistence of the peer utility companies. The game will become 
essentially zero-sum; some will win at the expense of others. Anxiety 
seems to be the order of the day.

The Present Mess  177
8.4  The Present Mess
8.4.1  Drivers Defining the Behavior of the 
Present State of the Economy
Discussion of the formulation of the mess would not be complete without 
at least partially dealing with the critical drivers that define the behavior of 
today's economy. The following interactive models represent an attempt to 
capture the interdependencies among the major drivers and demonstrate 
the nature of the complexities characterizing the emerging current mess.
8.4.2  How the Game Is Evolving
The first formulation (Figure 8.6) captures the dynamic interactions 
among four critical issues: 
• Globalization
• Stock market capitalism
• Aging population
• Realities of sociocultural systems
The model demonstrates why design thinking is rapidly becoming the basis 
for executive education. The scheme not only deals with the impact and 
consequence of each of the four drivers, but it also captures their reinforc-
ing effects.
Globalization has two critical impacts. First, it puts an end to Alfred 
Sloane's famous and dominant cost plus model. Price is no longer consid-
ered a control variable; it is defined by the global market. Cost is ­increasingly 
Globalization
Cost plus
era
Target costing
Elimination of waste
Inc. throughput
redesign
Imitation
& 
innovation 
more
Aging 
population
Increase  consumptions
Reduces production
Cost of 
health care &
benefits
Conflict 
management
W/W
solution
Elimination of
slack
Interdependency
&
complexity
Stock market
capitalism
New style of
leadership
Managing interactions
Managing Upward
Sociocultural model
Self-organization
System dynamics
Short-term
performance 
Long-term
stability & 
viability
Growth & 
profitability
increases
increasing
demand 
for
demands
needs
Money 
managers
behaving more
like a gamblers
than owners
requires
requires
requires
requires
Increasing
reverse engineering
Global access to
information
Retirement
obligations
requires
requires
requires
requires
demands
demands
recognition of
results
results in
blind pursuit of
efficiency
puts an end to
Figure 8.6  How the game is evolving.

178 
Formulating the Mess 
becoming the control variable. To compete cost needs to be reduced and 
throughput needs to be increased. But cost and throughputs are design 
driven. To reduce cost by an order of magnitude, the product and the 
throughput process need to be redesigned. The second impact of global-
ization is increasing global access to information and knowledge and thus 
reverse engineering. This leads to imitation as well as proliferation of tech-
nology. To cope with this duel challenge also requires redesign.
Iteration of redesign and need for continuous improvement increas-
ingly removes slack and redundancies from the system and makes the 
interdependencies among the parts more and more pronounced. This is 
the essence of emerging complexity, which demands a whole new form of 
leadership — managing interaction and managing those you do not con-
trol. Managing upwards requires a paradigm shift and understanding of 
the sociocultural model, self-organization, and nonlinear dynamics. This 
ironically leads back to learning design thinking.
The aging population also has two impacts. It increases the cost of 
health care and retirement obligations, which puts additional pressure on 
cost reduction. In addition, retirees have a tendency to rely heavily on 
money managers to manage their savings and provide them with income 
for a much longer life expectancy. Money managers usually do not act as 
long-term, interested stockholders; they are more like gamblers who will 
cash out at an opportune time to bet on a more promising horse.
Expectation of stock market capitalism for double-digit growth and 
short-term earning performance that is met by emphasis on quarterly per-
formance and continuous mergers and acquisitions conflicts with the 
stakeholder's expectation of long-term viability and stability. To dissolve 
this conflict and create a win/win environment that presents both short- 
and long-term success requires redesign capability.
8.5  Current Crisis and Future Challenges
In the second model (Figure 8.7) I have tried to capture interdependencies 
among other drivers and obstructions that have a major impact on the 
emerging mess and the future challenges. These concerns include:
• Growth as the sole measure of success
• Behavior of financial systems
• Failure of public education
• Outsourcing and realities of globalization
• Structural unemployment
• Radically polarized population
• Political system in a perpetual state of re-election
• Carrying capacity of American consumers
To sustain a growth paradigm, based on biological thinking, requires 
increasing levels of consumption. Unfortunately sustaining double-digit 
growth, which has become the unquestionable expectation of “stock market 

Current Crisis and Future Challenges  179
capitalism,” is not feasible and the dominant growth paradigm, despite its 
tremendous success, is reaching its carrying capacity. The problem is rein-
forced by the behavior of a financial sector with a volume-based business 
model. The banking sector, instead of performing its critical function of 
providing necessary loans for operation of the economy, is engaged in 
trade and middleman-ship, enjoying 57% of corporate profit and draining 
the talent pool with a disproportional reward system, while the economy 
is in recession with more than a 10% rate of unemployment. Failure of 
public education (25% dropout rate), combined with the realities of glo-
balization, and outsourcing have produced the unfortunate persistent lev-
els of structural unemployment. But above all, the political system, with a 
radically polarized population, is engaged in a perpetual state of re-­election 
and playing the zero-sum win/lose game. It is in no position to deal with 
the emerging level of complexity and challenge confronting it.
Unfortunately, dissolving this complex mess is beyond the capability 
of any disjointed efforts. Maybe the time has come to question the validity 
our growth paradigm and analytical thinking. A shift in paradigm may be 
in order.
ŶĂůǇƟĐĂů
ƚŚŝŶŬŝŶŐ
ŝŽůŽŐŝĐĂů
ŵŽĚĞů
ŽŶƐƵŵƉƟŽŶ
'ƌŽǁƚŚĂƐƐŽůĞ
ŵĞĂƐƵƌĞŽĨ
ƐƵĐĐĞƐƐ
ĂƌƌǇŝŶŐ
ĐĂƉĂĐŝƚǇ
ZĞƐŽƵƌĐĞƐ
&ŝŶĂŶĐŝĂůƐǇƐƚĞŵ
ĂŐĂŵďůŝŶŐŚŽƵƐĞ
ǁŝƚŚĚǇƐĨƵŶĐƟŽŶĂů
ǀŽůƵŵĞͲďĂƐĞĚďƵƐŝŶĞƐƐ
ŵŽĚĞůΘƌĞǁĂƌĚ
ƐǇƐƚĞŵ
KƵƚƐŽƵƌĐŝŶŐ
ŽŶƐƵŵŝŶŐ
ŵŽƌĞƚŚĂŶ
ƉƌŽĚƵĐŝŶŐ
'ůŽďĂůŝǌĂƟŽŶ
&ĂƵůƚǇ
ƌŝƐŬ
ŵŽĚĞů
/ŶƚĞŶƐĞ
ĐŽŵƉĞƟƟŽŶ
ŽŶƟŶƵŽƵƐ
ŝŵƉƌŽǀĞŵĞŶƚ
ŵĞƌŐŝŶŐ
ĞĐŽŶŽŵŝĞƐ
ŚĞĂƉůĂďŽƌ
hƐŝŶŐƵƉ
ƐůĂĐŬ
ZĞǀĞƌƐĞ
ĞŶŐŝŶĞĞƌŝŶŐ
ĐĐĞƐƐƚŽ
ŝŶĨŽƌŵĂƟŽŶ
/ŶĐƌĞĂƐŝŶŐ
ŝŶƚĞƌĚĞƉĞŶĚĞŶĐǇΘ
ĐŽŵƉůĞǆŝƚǇ
^ǇƐƚĞŵƐƚŚŝŶŬŝŶŐ
ƐŽĐŝŽĐƵůƚƵƌĂů
ŵŽĚĞů
&ĂŝůƵƌĞŽĨ
ƌĞŐƵůĂƚŽƌǇΘĞǆĞĐƵƟǀĞ
ĨƵŶĐƟŽŶƐ
h͘^͘ĐŽŶƐƵŵƉƟŽŶ
ĞŶŐŝŶĞƌĞĂĐŚŝŶŐ
ŝƚƐĐĂƌƌǇŝŶŐĐĂƉĂĐŝƚǇ
ŽŵŝŶĂŶƚ
ƚƌĂĚĞΘ
ŵŝĚĚůĞŵĂŶƐŚŝƉ
ŵĞŶƚĂůŝƚǇ
WŽůŝƟĐĂůƐǇƐƚĞŵ
ŝŶƉĞƌƉĞƚƵĂůƐƚĂƚĞŽĨ
ƌĞͲĞůĞĐƟŽŶ͕ƉůĂǇŝŶŐ
ƚŚĞŽůĚǌĞƌŽͲƐƵŵŐĂŵĞ
WŽůĂƌŝǌĞĚƉŽƉƵůĂƟŽŶ
&ƌĞƋƵĞŶƚ
ŽĐĐƵƌƌĞŶĐĞƐŽĨ
ďƵďďůĞƐΘĮŶĂŶĐŝĂů
ĮĂƐĐŽĞƐ
&ĂŝůƵƌĞŽĨ
ƉƵďůŝĐĞĚƵĐĂƟŽŶ
ƐǇƐƚĞŵ
^ƚƌƵĐƚƵƌĂů
ƵŶĞŵƉůŽǇŵĞŶƚ
/ŶĐƌĞĂƐĞĚ
ĚĞƉĞŶĚĞŶĐĞ
ŽŶĨŽƌĞŝŐŶ
ĐƌĞĚŝƚŽƌƐ
ŚĞĂƉĞƌ
ΘďĞƩĞƌ
ƉƌŽĚƵĐƚƐ
Figure 8.7  Current crisis and future challenges.

This page intentionally left blank

181
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch apt er | ni ne
Business Architecture
In a global market economy with ever-increasing levels of disturbance, a 
viable business cannot be locked into a single form or function anymore. 
Success comes from a self-renewing capability to spontaneously create 
structures and functions that fit the moment. In this context proper func-
tioning of self-reference would certainly prevent the vacillations and the 
random search for new product–markets that have destroyed so many 
businesses over the past years.
Creation of the ability to continuously match the portfolio of internal 
competencies with the portfolio of emerging market opportunities is the 
foundation of the emerging concept of new business architecture 
(Figure 9.1).
Business architecture is a general description of a system. It identifies 
its purpose, vital functions, active elements, and critical processes and 
defines the nature of the interaction among them. Business architecture 
consists of a set of distinct but interrelated platforms creating a multidi-
mensional modular system. Each platform represents a dimension of the 
system signifying a unique mode of behavior with a predefined set of per-
formance criteria and measures. Designing business architecture follows 
the general rules of interactive design described in Chapter 7. It therefore 
starts by assuming that the system to be redesigned has been destroyed 
overnight but that everything else in the environment remains unchanged. 
The designers have been given the opportunity to design the system from 
scratch.
Figure 9.2 outlines the process of designing business architecture.
WŽƌƞŽůŝŽŽĨŵĂƌŬĞƚ
KƉƉŽƌƚƵŶŝƟĞƐ
WŽƌƞŽůŝŽŽĨŝŶƚĞƌŶĂů
ĐŽŵƉĞƚĞŶĐŝĞƐ
DĂƚĐŚŝŶŐ
FIGURE 9.1  Self-renewing capabilities.

182 
Business Architecture
9.1  The system's boundary and business 
environment
The first step in designing system architecture is to define the system's 
boundary and appreciate the environment in which it intends to 
operate.
To define a system's boundary we need to understand the behavior of 
its stakeholders. A stakeholder of an organization is any individual or 
group who is directly affected by what the organization does and there-
fore has a stake in its performance. Therefore, we need to know the fol-
lowing: Who are the major stakeholders? What are their expectations? 
What are the desired properties of the system from their perspective? 
What is their influence? Which critical variables do they control (or influ-
ence)? For example, in a market economy the customer provides the 
operating income, the boss defines the membership, stockholders pay 
the capital, suppliers are the source of complementary technologies, and 
distributors provide access to customers. However, stake and influence 
do not necessarily go hand in hand; a high stake is often coupled with 
low influence, and vice versa. For example, customers with the highest 
level of influence (refusing their patronage) show a very low level of 
stake in the system. On the other hand, employees with a very high stake 
in the system often have low level of influence. Shareholders with very 
high influence have the least at stake. If unhappy, they simply take their 
money out.
As we alluded to before, the system's boundary is a subjective construct 
defined by the interest and level of influence and/or authority of the par-
ticipating actors. Therefore the system consists of all variables that could be 
sufficiently influenced or controlled by the participating actors. Meanwhile, 
^ƚĂŬĞŚŽůĚĞƌƐ͛ǆƉĞĐƚĂƟŽŶƐ
/ŶŇƵĞŶĐĞĂŶĚŽŶƚƌŽů
ƌŝƟĐĂůWƌŽĐĞƐƐĞƐ
dŚƌŽƵŐŚƉƵƚƉƌŽĐĞƐƐ
KƌŐĂŶŝǌĂƟŽŶĂůƉƌŽĐĞƐƐĞƐ
^ƚƌƵĐƚƵƌĞ
WƵƌƉŽƐĞ
ƵƐŝŶĞƐƐDŽĚĞů
ŽŶƚĞǆƚ
ŶǀŝƌŽŶŵĞŶƚŝŶtŚŝĐŚ^ǇƐƚĞŵtŝůůKƉĞƌĂƚĞ
&ƵŶĐƟŽŶƐ
WƌŽĚƵĐƚͬDĂƌŬĞƚ
FIGURE 9.2  Schematic outline of a design process.

The System's Boundary and Business Environment  183
the environment in which the system must remain viable consists of all 
those variables that, although affecting the system's behavior, could not be 
directly influenced or controlled by the participating designers.
In this formulation the business environment must remain intact, so it 
is critical to get an appreciation of its behavior by understanding: How is 
the game evolving? What are the drivers for change? What are the bases for 
competition? Figure 9.3 captures the drama of the health-care system. The 
game is still evolving. The industry has yet to find alternatives for the three 
villains of third-party payer, cost plus reimbursement, and fee for service, which 
are assumed responsible for creating insatiable demand. Note how a coun-
terintuitive event — General Motors' agreement with the labor union to 
cover the health-care costs of workers in exchange for a one-time conces-
sion on wages combined with President Johnson's Medicare and Medicaid 
programs — led to the “health-care bonanza” and a dynamic that no one 
has figure out how to deal with.
As for the change in the bases of competition, consider the fact that we 
are past the age of mass production based on the interchangeability of 
parts and labor. We have entered the mass customization era where 
­success is defined by producing smaller batches of customized products 
at lower break-even points. In 1999 Honda's break-even point for a given 
model was two thousand cars, whereas Ford Motor Company needed five 
hundred thousand units of the same model car to break even. Economy 
of scale and mastery of a simple procedure was the cornerstone of mass 
production, but the multi-skilled knowledge worker is now the core 
Aging 
population
Wasted
capacity
Exponential 
cost
Media
attention 
Risk
averse
culture
Managed care
Proliferation
of faddish
studies
Defensive 
medicine
Advances
medical
science
Higher
life
expectancy
Individual 
ability to pay
Medicaid 
Medicare & 
programs
Employee
health 
benefit
Fee-for-
service
Insatiable
demand 
Cost 
plus 
Health care 
bonanza
Reduced $
For health care 
Level of
conflict 
Excessive
use of ER
Medicaid
+
-
-
+
+
+
+
3rd party
payer
FIGURE 9.3  How the game is evolving in the health-care industry.

184 
Business Architecture
­requirement of mass customization. Globalization means that price is set 
in the global marketplace, therefore, it is considered an uncontrollable 
variable and the cost becomes the controllable variable (target costing). 
In the “cost plus economy” cost is considered uncontrollable and price is 
the controllable variable (target pricing). Efficiency in performing a rou-
tine used to be a virtue when the cost of automation outweighed the cost 
of labor. The digital revolution has reversed the equation. Increasingly 
cheaper computers have rendered the “narrow skill” and “simple proce-
dure” approach obsolete. When it comes to performing a specific proce-
dure the computer is the ideal actor. Knowledge workers of today are 
capable of putting together whatever pieces of know-how it takes to pro-
duce an integrated solution.
There was a time when problems could be neatly formulated and con-
veniently solved within the confines of a single discipline or department. 
Modern problems, however, are increasingly complex and interrelated. 
These problems are messy; they come in bundles and require a different 
approach. The knowledge workers of today are not only required to be 
competent in their own vocation, but they are supposed to be intimately 
aware of the total context and overall process within which they are to 
collaborate.
9.2  Purpose
Many common sense statements invoked in the process of developing 
organizations prove counterintuitive. The surprise element is not because 
people are knowingly disingenuous. Emerging consequences contradict 
expectations because the operating principles are rooted in assumptions 
that belong to different paradigms. Such surprises are inevitable unless the 
underlying premises are surfaced and their eventual consequences are 
mapped out.
The purpose of business enterprise is essentially defined by its implicit 
paradigm. If the organization in question operates in a mechanistic mode, 
then it is considered to be a tool of its owner. Its purpose therefore would 
be to serve the purpose of its owner. Performance criteria of a tool, of 
course, would be efficiency and reliability. Purpose of organization in a 
biological mode of operation is survival, thus its performance criterion 
would be growth at any cost. Profit as the means of growth finds addi-
tional social value and overcomes the negative stigma of the mechanistic 
era. Since organization in a sociocultural mode of operation is considered 
to be a voluntary association of purposeful members, its purpose would 
be to serve its members and its environment by doing more and more 
with less and less.
As stated so elegantly by Milton Friedman (1962), ultimately “busi-
ness of a business is business”; therefore, for designers of business archi-
tecture understanding the vision of the desired future of the enterprise and 
its business model are of the utmost importance.

Purpose  185
The initial sketches of the vision of the desired future usually can be 
put together after the first iteration of interactive design. Although we are 
told that visions are escape mechanisms of daydreamers, without a vision 
there will be no sense of direction. Without a vision all possibilities would 
have equal values; there would be no basis to judge the relevancy of the 
emerging opportunities.
The business model, on the other hand, defines the way a business 
generates value, creates a deliverable package, and exchanges it with money. 
Today amazing originality is shown when developing new business mod-
els, which is radically influencing the traditional business concepts. 
Consider, for example, the case of the search engine Google. By providing 
free service to a group of consumers it can make so much money from 
advertisers that it exceeds the value of the giants listed in the Dow Jones 
index. Creating a multi-billion-dollar business to create, package, and sell 
operating systems independently from computer hardware, as is done by 
Microsoft, was inconceivable for those of us who worked for IBM during 
the 1960s. In the early 1990s, I was involved with a Fortune 100 company 
as a consultant in the acquisition of a $10 billion business. The total sum 
of money that all service providers — legal, financial, and management — 
charged the client was less than $500,000. This fee was based on actual 
time spent multiplied by the hourly rate. Today the same task would cost 
over $200 million based on a business model that works on percentage.
In general, business is usually defined in terms of three dimensions: a 
know-how or technology, which is transformed into a set of tangible products  
or services and delivered via an access mechanism to its target customers 
or markets. Business architecture defines the nature of relationships among 
the three dimensions of technology, product, and market.
Traditionally one of these dimensions has been designated as primary, 
forcing the other two into subordinating roles.
When the product defines the business, technological requirements 
and the markets to be served are determined by product characteristics. 
Alternative technologies are sought for making the product, and different 
markets are sought for selling the product (Figure 9.4).
The success of a product-based business is usually measured by the 
success of its product divisions, which is why everything is easily compro-
mised and subordinated to the product. However, when the potential 
value of a given technology somehow exceeds the value of the product it 
supports, the business faces a dilemma.
Unfortunately, experience shows that, in these cases, technology is always 
compromised. In a product-based business, the product managers are the 
bosses. They see technology only as a competitive advantage for their prod-
uct; therefore, technology will never get the chance to realize its potential in 
the context of a product-based business. Quite a few cases support this asser-
tion, but the most conspicuous is the fate of the first Apple operating system 
(the famous graphic interface). This phenomenal operating system was used 

186 
Business Architecture
exclusively to sell Apple computers when its potential had been much higher 
than the maximum potential of the initial Apple products it supported at 
the time. This was proven by Microsoft, whose claim to fame, Windows 95, 
was an imitation of the initial Apple operating system used by all computer 
producers. It was reported that IBM spent billions to lay off about 200,000 
people — some say the best available knowledge workers. But it did not con-
sider capitalizing on its advanced “digital technology” and state-of-the-art 
“C4 technology” to become the major player in the most potentially explo-
sive market of the time — “electronics packaging.”
When the market is used as the basis for defining the business, the 
characteristics of the market determine the product mix and the type of 
skills and technologies required to produce it (Figure 9.5). Procter and 
Gamble, for example, provides as many of the products sold in supermar-
kets as it can profitably make.
However, the trauma of the defense industry, when its market collapsed 
overnight, was another confirmation that the price tag on selecting a single 
pattern of existence is very high. The industry's inability to take advantage 
of its access and knowledge of emerging Internet technology was not sur-
prising. Managing technology requires a different set of criteria than those 
necessary to manage products and/or markets.
Technology
Product
Markets
FIGURE 9.4  Business defined by product.
Technology
Product
Markets
FIGURE 9.5  Business defined by markets.

Purpose  187
Finally, when the business is technologically defined, a variety of prod-
ucts are developed around a given core technology, using the same base of 
know-how, and sold in different markets (Figure 9.6). For example, 3M 
defines itself as being in the “sticking” business. The company revolves 
around technologies used to bind different things together (from Scotch® 
tapes and composite structures to electronics packaging).
Using its materials science and processing technology, it continually 
searches for new products that it can produce and offer in different mar-
kets. Managing a technology-based business not only needs broader plan-
ning vision, but also the ability to use the same knowledge in different 
contexts.
The success or failure of each approach depends on its compatibil-
ity with the emerging competitive challenge at the time. Because com-
petitive games change over time, they force companies to switch their 
strategic emphasis from one dimension to another. Since each strategy 
has organizational implications in terms of authority and responsibil-
ity, changes in strategy require changes in the organizational structure 
and the dominant culture of the business. As competition intensifies 
and the changes become more frequent, this unidimensional approach 
becomes more ineffective. Shifts from one dimension to another in 
search of the effective competitive base cause organizational turmoil 
and strategic confusion. The waste and frustration associated with 
periodic restructuring have necessitated a search for alternative 
solutions.
Interactive systems architecture uses product, market, and technology 
in an interactive mode. It recognizes the necessity for achieving competi-
tive advantage in all three dimensions of market, product, and technology 
(Figure 9.7).
The objective is to capitalize on the totality of the value chain and 
actively generate synergy among the three dimensions. An interactive 
architecture is based on managing the interactions among technology, 
product, and markets.
Technology
Product
Markets
FIGURE 9.6  Business defined by technology.

188 
Business Architecture
The emerging multidimensional modular structure, with a different 
business model and reward system for each dimension, dissolves the need 
for subordination or suboptimization around any one business dimen-
sion, eliminates periodic restructuring, and shifts from one dimension to 
another in search of an effective competitive base.
In an unpredictable, turbulent environment, the viability of any design 
depends on its capability to explore and exploit emerging opportunities 
all along the value chain. These opportunities, which emerge out of inter-
actions among technology, product, and markets, remain inaccessible to 
unidimensional cultures and architecture. A platform that identifies the 
basic dimensions of the multicultural architecture is the starting point 
from which the initial elements of the value chain will evolve. As the busi-
ness gains maturity and stability, new elements will be added.
In formulating the strategic intent of an enterprise we must remember 
that competitive advantage is a dynamic and relative phenomenon; it is 
different in different contexts and in reference to different classes of users. 
For example, the element of time, as a basis for competition, is not the 
same for supermarket shoppers at 10 a.m. and those at 5 p.m. Often the 
former are spending time, whereas the latter are interested in saving time. 
What might be an advantage in one context could be a disadvantage in 
another. This explains the success of convenience stores despite their 
higher prices.
Now recall the concept of the experience curve, which is volume-
based learning. An important outcome of learning through an experience 
curve is process control. The volume-based control system is usually 
achieved in a given context after using considerable time and resources. 
When this context is changed or even modified, the whole knowledge that 
was gained in controlling the particular process is lost. Now assume that, 
somehow, we have developed the ability to make this know-how transfer-
able to different contexts and applications without having to go through 
PRODUCT
TECHNOLOGY
MARKET
FIGURE 9.7  Business defined by all three dimensions.

Functions  189
the time- and resource-consuming notion of the experience curve each 
time. If we can really do this, then we have created a core competency, or an 
unmatched opportunity for competitive advantage. Formulating and 
developing state-of-the-art knowledge that can be operationalized in dif-
ferent contexts such as process technology, is, in my opinion, a much 
more profound way of formulating a competitive strategy. For example, 
adding digital technology to miniaturization, as new core competency, 
has provided Sony with a whole new dimension in its competitive 
strategy.
Strategic intent can be formulated as a core competency. In this context 
a core competency is the attribute of the organization as a whole; it cannot 
be housed in a single division. Creation of the ability to transfer knowl-
edge to different contexts requires multiple sources of learning and 
application.
9.3  Functions
To serve its own interest in an exchange, a purposeful system ought to 
have something to give back to its environment. Therefore, it needs access 
to a group of potential users with purchasing power who have a need or 
desire for the product or service it can produce. A true customer, in reality, 
is a pain in the neck. He/she has something you want, and his/her satis-
faction, in competition with other sources of supply, is the price you have 
to pay to get it.
Selecting a product-market niche is the first step in defining an enter-
prise's function and designing its architecture. We need to answer the fol-
lowing questions: Whose problem are we trying to solve? What solutions 
are we offering? How will we access the target customers? And, finally, will 
the target customers have sufficient purchasing power to pay for this 
solution?
Competitive advantage is an attribute of outputs produced by an enter-
prise. It is a difference that makes a difference, for a given class of users, in 
affecting their choice. And it must be transferable to a value for the 
provider.
To select a desired product-market niche, it is necessary to differentiate 
the customer base. There are many different ways to segment a market. 
Each segment reveals something new about the nature of the market and 
the behavior of the target customers. Use as many criteria as you can to 
­differentiate user characteristics and identify their purchasing habits. The 
most useful segmentation is the one that identifies: 
1.	 The group of customers for whom the desired properties of the prod-
uct are more compatible with the organization's potential capabilities
2.	 Those potential customers who have less stake in the old product sys-
tem and therefore display less inertia and offer easier access
Using the traditional bell-shaped distribution curve to differentiate the cus-
tomer base assumes that the majority in the big category alone defines the 

190 
Business Architecture
market (Figure 9.8). The behavior of this single group, considered normal, 
is used to determine the desired properties of outputs, while behavior of the 
smaller groups, considered nerds, are conveniently ignored as insignificant.
Struggle for a share of this monolithic market leads to a game of intense 
competition between big powerful players. However, increasingly it seems 
that the nerds are taking over, and the bell-shaped curve is somehow flat-
tening out (Figure  9.9). Targeting and understanding behaviors of the 
smaller groups that are emerging rapidly provides the best, and sometimes 
only, window of opportunity for a new player to successfully enter the 
game and skillfully avoid the intense competition at the early stages of the 
entry to a new market.
9.4  Structure
Traditionally, organizational theory deals with two types of relationships: 
(1) responsibility (who is responsible for what) and (2) authority (who 
reports to whom).
Structure, so conceived, can be represented by a two-dimensional chart 
in which boxes represent responsibilities and levels and lines represent the 
loci and flow of authority (Figure 9.10).
The criteria used for dividing the whole into areas of responsibility, 
and for determining their relative importance (line of authority), repre-
sent the major differences among organization theories. These criteria, not 
surprisingly, have evolved primarily around three components of a system: 
input (technology), output (products), and environment (markets).
Depending on the nature of the competitive game at any given time, a 
priorities scheme is used to designate one component as primary and the 
other two as subordinates. For example, when the ability to produce was 
the defining factor of competition, input became the primary concern 
FIGURE 9.8  Traditional assumption on distribution of customer base.
FIGURE 9.9  Emerging distribution of customer base.

Structure  191
­rendering market and product subordinate to manufacturing. The market-
ing era saw the shift of emphasis from production to market and thus sub-
ordination of manufacturing to marketing. It seems that a self-imposed 
unidimensional concept of organization has prevented the realization of 
a multidimensional alternative.
For a majority of designers, the unidimensional mode of organization 
based on structurally defined tasks, segmentation, and hierarchical coordi-
nation of functions seems the only acceptable way of organizing work.  
A predominant management culture continues to value command and 
control very dearly and considers any form of variety in the organizational 
structure unacceptable, wasteful, and at best impractical.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the multidimensional structure 
assumes that the three common criteria — input (technology), output 
(products), and environment (markets) — are complements. Treating 
them as interdependent dimensions and managing their interactions elim-
inates the need for periodic reorganization when a change in the competi-
tive environment necessitates a change of emphasis from one orientation 
to another, for example, from products to markets, or vice versa.
The viability of any organization depends on its ability to adapt actively 
to the changing requirements of the emerging competitive game. The abil-
ity to adapt requires some form of flexibility and responsiveness, which in 
turn demands that some degree of redundancy be built into the system.
A modular structure embedded in a multidimensional scheme can 
achieve the required level of flexibility to create an adaptive, learning sys-
tem by shifting its attention from micro-managing the parts (power-over) 
to macro-managing the interactions (power-to-do).
Power-to-do is what organization is all about. It should not be con-
fused with power-over. Power-to-do is the foundation of organizational 
potency and duplication of power, whereas power-over is about domina-
tion. Potent organizations are not built on impotent principles. Power-
to-do multiplies when it is duplicated in special purpose modules. These 
modules enjoy considerable freedom as long as they meet the interface 
and functional requirements of the larger system of which they are a part. 
In any system it is differentiation that keeps the system alive and potent. 
Organizations that differentiate and integrate create real value for them-
selves and others.
ŽƐƐ
>ŝŶĞƐŽĨĂƵƚŚŽƌŝƚǇ
ƌĞĂƐŽĨƌĞƐƉŽŶƐŝďŝůŝƚǇ
&ƵŶĐƟŽŶϭ
&ƵŶĐƟŽŶϮ
&ƵŶĐƟŽŶϯ
FIGURE 9.10  Authority and responsibility.

192 
Business Architecture
Multidimensional, modular design, in my experience, is the most prac-
tical means of handling complexity and uncertainty. It makes it feasible to 
implement a complex design without getting lost in the process.
Multidimensional modular structure consists of a set of distinct, but 
interrelated, platforms. Each platform represents a dimension of the sys-
tem signifying a unique context, mode of operation, and predefined set of 
performance criteria and measures. Each platform hosts a set of special pur-
pose modules with the same set of behavioral characteristics. Relationships 
and the interfaces among platforms are explicitly defined, integrating 
them into a concept of the whole. Parts operate as independent systems 
with the ability to be relatively self-controlling and act as responsible 
members of a coherent whole with the ability to respond effectively to the 
requirements of the containing system.
For example, a technology platform provides a friendly environment 
for component builders. Component builders are modules that usually host 
a core technology and therefore require a different mode of management 
and performance criteria and measures than those necessary for managing 
and controlling the marketing modules.
The organization, so conceived, then becomes capable of expanding or 
contracting by the addition or deletion of replaceable modules that have 
the means of vertical and horizontal interactions. The resulting mode of 
organization is capable of redesigning its structure and redefining its func-
tions, allowing it to exhibit different behavior and produce different out-
comes in the same or different environments. This means work can be 
organized in a variety of ways, and indeed, an organizational choice does 
exist. Figure 9.11 is an outline of the multidimensional modular design.
9.4.1  Output Dimension
Responsibility for achieving an organization's end is vested in the output 
dimension. The output dimension or platform consists of a series of ­general 
purpose, semi-autonomous, and ideally self-sufficient units charged with 
WůĂŶŶŝŶŐ͕>ĞĂƌŶŝŶŐ͕ΘŽŶƚƌŽů
D

Z
<

d
^
/
E
W
h
d
^
KhdWhd^
FIGURE 9.11  Multidimensional design.

Structure  193
all the activities ultimately responsible for achieving an organization's 
mission and production of its outputs. Note that the semi-­autonomous, 
self-sufficient, and purposeful units, for simplicity, are referred to as mod-
ules. Modules are self-sufficient and autonomous to the degree that the 
integrity of the whole system is not compromised.
Each output module represents a specific level in the hierarchy of mul-
tilevel purposeful systems (Figure 9.12). It is a miniature of the whole — 
the larger system of which it is a part.
Since each module may consume scarce resources from its environ-
ment, its outputs should be responsive to the needs of the environment. 
The lowest level output module is the smallest unit that can be account-
able for producing a tangible, measurable output.
Performance of an output module preferably should be as indepen-
dent to the behavior of other peer output modules as possible; it should 
have enough authority over its resources — money and people — to be 
responsible and accountable for its success or failure. It should also be 
able to retain a percentage of its contributions above a minimum level for 
incentive and internal development.
Each output module is responsible for making those decisions that 
affect only its operations. Decisions that impact the other units will be 
made at higher levels with the participation of all affected modules.
An output module is usually conceived as a unit hosting a product, a 
project, or a program. An effective product module has an entrepreneurial 
role. It is responsible for the development, design, marketing, and profit-
ability of the final product. Although they should not be burdened by 
responsibilities for fixed production facilities, output managers should 
have the financial authority to select the production facilities and distribu-
tion systems (Figure 9.13).
Placing a high-capital-intensive production facility in a product mod-
ule will tie the fates of an organization to a single product. The facility-
oriented division or module unwilling to develop any product that would 
require use of different facilities would experience the cycle of growth, 
maturity, and inevitable decline just as the product does.
>ĞǀĞůͲϭ
>ĞǀĞůͲϮ
>ĞǀĞůͲϯ
FIGURE 9.12  Multilevel purposeful systems.

194 
Business Architecture
Ideally, the output platform would be a virtual entity and would have 
up-to-date information about environmental opportunities and internal 
competencies. It would have the distinct capability to consider a new set 
of alternatives and choices that might be available to the organization. 
Finally, modules of the output platform should have the ability and the 
authority to re-engage inputs in a new order.
9.4.2  Input Dimension
To create a system that is more than the sum of its parts, the organization 
needs to fully use its synergy. Economies of scale, the need for specializa-
tion, technological imperative, and development of core technologies are 
among the reasons why some functions and technologies required by out-
put modules ought to be shared.
These shared services and specialized functions can be provided by 
groups of special-purpose modules, which together constitute the input 
dimension of the organization (Figure 9.14).
For example, designating the manufacturing unit as a profit center in 
the input dimension not only results in a more competitive and flexible 
facility management, but it also provides the product managers with the 
freedom to buy their manufacturing requirements from within or outside 
the organization without constraint from fixed facilities.
Input modules, in general, are provided with working capital and are 
expected to earn their operating expenses plus a return on the investment 
by charging the market price for their services.
WƌŽĚƵĐƚ

WƌŽĚƵĐƚ

WƌŽĚƵĐƚ

'ĞŶĞƌĂůWƵƌƉŽƐĞKƵƚƉƵƚDŽĚƵůĞƐ
FIGURE 9.13  Output dimension.
KƵƚƉƵƚƐ
/
E
W
h
d
^
^ŚĂƌĞĚ
^ĞƌǀŝĐĞ
dĞĐŚ
ƐƵƉƉŽƌƚ
FIGURE 9.14  Input dimension.

Structure  195
If insufficiency or unpredictability of demand makes it necessary to 
provide additional support for an input function, then the general rule is 
to subsidize the demand instead of the supply. In the early stages of the 
conversion, the operating budget of an input unit may be given to it by 
means of a purchase contract for its total services.
However, in general, centralization should be avoided unless one or all 
of the following situations weigh overwhelmingly against decentralization 
of a particular service.
9.4.2.1  Uniformity
Some aspects of the system will be centralized when they are common to 
all or some parts and cannot be decentralized without rendering serious 
damage to the system's proper functioning. For example, in areas such as 
measurement systems, where common language and coordination are 
major concerns, uniformity will serve as a criterion for centralization. 
Meanwhile, certain activities that, because of their nature, are deemed 
indivisible and thus require a holistic design can also be centralized. For 
example, the effectiveness of a comprehensive information system lies in 
its holism, consistency, real-time access, and proper networking to trans-
fer information as needed to different users. Developing such a system 
requires cooperation and coordination among all actors in the system.
9.4.2.2  Economy of scale
Although economy of scale is generally considered an important factor in 
creating shared service, the trade-off between centralization and decen-
tralization of each function should be made explicit to prove that the 
benefits significantly outweigh the disadvantages before the function is 
moved to shared services. In this case, it is expected that a service, once 
centralized, will either generate significant savings for the system as a 
whole or help those units that otherwise would be unable to afford it on 
their own.
9.4.2.3  Core technologies
Feeling that a certain level of mastery in a given technology will be critical 
for the enterprise's future success, management may decide to centralize, 
develop, and make the technology available for all units. Sometimes a 
technology developed by an output unit has a much greater potential in 
the marketplace than as a competitive advantage to the product division. 
In this case it is management's responsibility to identify it as a core tech-
nology and centralize it for full-scale development.
Whatever the justification for centralization, the input units will have 
to become state-of-the-art and cost-effective providers of choice. However, 
a sure way to obstruct the functioning of an input unit is to mix its func-
tion with that of control. This practice undermines both the effectiveness 
of the service function and the legitimacy of the controls.

196 
Business Architecture
To protect themselves against the creeping hegemony of service pro-
viders and the obvious risks involved in relying on control-driven ser-
vices, output units resort to duplicating the support services that could 
otherwise be easily shared and effectively used. Rampant, excessive 
duplications of services are symptomatic of the natural reaction of oper-
ating units to service functions assuming the additional function of 
control. On the other hand, disguising a legitimate and necessary con-
trol function as a service function transforms the nature of control from 
learning to a defensive and apologetic act.
Extra care should be taken to ensure that none of the functions of 
shared services undergo a character change and assume control properties. 
Under the pretext of a need for consistency and uniformity, there is a natu-
ral tendency to let the service provider perform the necessary monitoring 
and auditing function. This practice has always proved misguided. The 
providers cannot avoid the slippery slope of wanting, increasingly, to 
assume a control function. This obviously would scare away users who did 
not expect to find a new boss in the guise of a server.
Whereas shared services will provide the customers with requested ser-
vices (such as information, benefits, payroll, and billing), it will be the plan-
ning and control system that will be setting the policies and the criteria 
governing these services as well as conducting the necessary monitoring and 
enforcing functions to ensure proper implementation of those policies.
9.4.3  Market Dimension
Market, the third dimension of the organization, is defined as the access 
mechanism to a class of customers having sufficient purchasing power and 
an explicitly known need or desire for a given service or product 
(Figure 9.15).
The market dimension is the interface with the customers. In most 
cases, this is where organization actually happens. Depending on the 
diversity of the customer base, there might be a need to create a number of 
costly distribution channels. It then becomes imperative to share these 
channels with other output units.
D

Z
<

d
^
/
E
W
h
d
^
KhdWhd^
FIGURE 9.15  Input, output, and market dimensions.

Two major functions of the market dimension are distribution and 
advocacy. Distribution represents the organization to the outside. Advocacy 
is responsible for sensing environmental conditions and exploring the 
expectations of the customers. Advocacy serves all those affected by the 
activities of the organization. Especially important is its role in advocating 
the consumer's point of view inside the organization.
Distribution and advocacy units may be organized geographically or 
by market segmentation. However, if one is organized geographically, the 
other should be based on market segmentation.
Input, output, and market platforms form an interactive whole engaged 
in an ongoing process of redesign to create new orders spontaneously as 
deemed necessary.
Because interactions among purposeful actors take many forms (actors 
may cooperate on one pair of tendencies, compete over others, and be in 
conflict over a different set, all at the same time), we are dealing with a 
dynamic structure. In addition members learn, mature, and change over 
time. The result is an interactive network of varying members with multi-
ple relationships, re-creating itself continuously.
9.4.4  Internal Market Economy
Defining the relationships between input, output, and marketing modules 
is the most critical task of this conception. Extreme difficulties are encoun-
tered when several output units share the vital services of an input or a 
market unit setup as an overhead center.
The key problem of matrix organizations also has been management of 
the implicit, ambiguous, and conflicting relationships between the network 
of input and output units. The “two-boss system” not only has failed to 
understand the problem, but also has resulted in confusion and frustration.
The answer for this inherent complexity is to create an internal-market 
environment,1 which converts the relationships between input, output, 
and market units into the same types of relationships that exist between a 
supplier, a producer, and a distributor.
While superior–subordinate relationships have traditionally been the 
only building block for exercising organizational authority, the supplier–
customer relationship introduces a new source of influence into the orga-
nizational equation. With the supplier–customer relationship emerging 
only in an internal market environment, the helpless recipient becomes a 
real customer. Armed with purchasing power, the customer becomes an 
empowered actor with the ability to influence and interact with his/her 
supplier in such a way that both parties together can now define the type, 
cost, time, and quality of the services rendered.
Structure  197
1The idea of an internal market was first advanced by Forrester (1965) and Ackoff 
(1981). For a detailed treatment see Halal, Geranmayeh, and Pourdehnad (1993).

198 
Business Architecture
Creation of the internal-market mechanism, and thus a supplier–­
customer relationship, is contingent upon transforming the shared ser-
vices into a performance center. Unlike overhead centers, performance 
centers do not receive a fixed budget allocated from the top; they have 
working capital with a variable operating budget. In this model, expenses 
are proportional to the income generated by the level of services rendered 
and the revenues received in their exchange. Treating all units as perfor-
mance centers makes it possible to evaluate every unit at every level in 
exactly the same way.
These two pairs of horizontal (supplier–customer) and vertical 
(­superior–subordinate) relationships are complementary and reinforce 
one another. While superior–subordinate defines the formal authority 
dealing with hiring, firing, and promotion, the supplier–customer rela-
tionship creates a new source of influence that tries to rationalize 
demand.
In the absence of an internal-market environment, there is no built-in 
mechanism to rationalize demand. An agreeable service provider with a 
third-party payer creates and fuels an insatiable demand. A disagreeable 
service provider, on the other hand, triggers prolific duplications of the 
same services by the potential users. This results in an explosion of over-
head expenses in the context of an essentially cost plus operation. The 
trend is irrational, and the corrective interventions prove to be ad hoc and 
ineffective at best.
Creating an internal market not only eliminates the growing problems 
of bureaucratization, but it also provides an effective means for dealing 
with allocation and evaluation problems. Meanwhile, it gives an organiza-
tion a market orientation by forcing each part to consider the marketing 
consequences of its actions.
In the internal-market environment, modules ought to have a choice 
of selling or buying their required services from inside or outside the orga-
nization; otherwise, internal buyers or sellers will have a monopolistic 
advantage. Higher level authority can always override outsourcing by 
agreeing to pay the cost incurred or the profit lost.
The following section provides a real-life example of converting tradi-
tional organization to multidimensional design. During a design session, 
a group of executives produced the following organizational chart as the 
initial structure of their business (Figure 9.16).
When I asked the executives whether or not they would mind if I changed 
their design into the following format (Figure 9.17), they had no objection: “If 
you like colors [patterns] use as many as you like,” one of them said jokingly.
However, despite the apparent similarities in the two designs, signifi-
cant differences existed between them.
Figure 9.16 represents a design concept concerned only with defining 
responsibilities and the line of authority. The case at hand is a mix of 
functional and divisional units all reporting to the CEO. The relation-

Structure  199
ships among peer groups are conveniently ignored as though the organi-
zation is an aggregate of unrelated parts all only related to a CEO. This is 
a linear conception of structure in which a single pair of a superior–­
subordinate relationship is used as the building block of the organiza-
tion. But to produce the structure that fits our purpose here — that is, to 
design a business architecture — parts not only have to be differentiated 
and their roles clearly defined, but the relationships among all peer units 
must be explicitly known and understood.
This is why version two used color to differentiate the parts and group 
them according to the roles they would play in the organization. In this 
context, a part can assume the function of input, output, market access, or 
control. In this particular case, green was used to identify the output units 
(product–market divisions), yellow was chosen to identify the input (man-
ufacturing and engineering), red was used for control (finance and human 
resources), and blue for market access (sales units).
Human
Resources
Sales
Engineering
Business
unit 3
Business
unit 1
Business
unit 2
Manufacturing
Finance
Chief executive
office
FIGURE 9.16  Traditional divisional structure.
,Z
........
DĂŶƵĨĂĐƚƵƌŝŶŐ
ŶŐŝŶĞĞƌŝŶŐ
WůĂŶŶŝŶŐ
&ŝŶĂŶĐĞ
͘h͘ϭ
͘h͘Ϯ
KƚŚĞƌ
K
^ĂůĞƐ
͘h͘ϯ
FIGURE 9.17  Multidimensional representation of the same design.

200 
Business Architecture
To demonstrate the flow and the relationship in the value chain, the 
following format was adopted to underline three basic relationships 
among peer units (Figure 9.18):
1.	 Output units are in such intense competition with one another that 
animosity among sister organizations is much higher than it is with 
outside competitors. To avoid structural conflict, output units should 
operate virtually independently of one another with a modular struc-
ture and adequate levels of autonomy and self-sufficiency.
2.	 Relationships between each output unit with the input and market 
access units are complementary. It is the same relationship that exists 
between a producer and its suppliers or between a producer and its dis-
tributors. An effective interface with all-out cooperation between them 
is a must to generate a competitive throughput. If the output unit is to 
be held accountable for the ultimate outcome and proper integration 
of the operation, it must have some kind of leverage on both input and 
market access units to influence their behavior.
3.	 The relationships between control units and all the input, output, 
and market access units are one way, usually bureaucratic, and more 
or less autocratic in nature. This is why combining a service func-
tion with a control function in a single unit, which is usually done 
under the pretext of coordination, is a design for failure. For exam-
ple, when any one of the service functions like Human Resources, 
Legal, or even Information Services becomes provider and control-
ler at the same time, both the control and service functions will be 
undermined.
. . .
Planning
Finance
Engineering
Manufacturing
Executive Office
Sales
Bus1
Bus2
Bus3
HR
FIGURE 9.18  Value-chain relationships.

Processes  201
Finally, the linear framework of version one lends itself to a unidimen-
sional concept of system architecture where product, market, and technol-
ogy are arranged in sequential order based on their relative ­importance. 
The criteria used for determining the order of subordination define the 
major differences between alternative designs. The second version tries to 
create an interactive relationship among technology (input), product (out-
put), and market (access). This requires a multidimensional structure.
To create a multidimensional structure we need at least two distinct 
types of relationships. A single superior–subordinate pair can produce 
only a unidimensional structure; despite claims to the contrary, a matrix 
organization is not a multidimensional design. Two-boss systems fail 
because they create confusion in the power system. Using the superior–
subordinate pair in two contexts creates frustration, not interaction.
For interaction among peer units, an interactive paradigm uses two 
distinct pairs of relationships: (1) superior–subordinate and (2) customer–
provider. This becomes real and meaningful when, and only when, the 
user of the service has the power of the money and controls the payment to 
the provider. This requires that providers function with a variable budget 
paid by the customer in exchange for their services. If a provider of a 
service has a fixed budget, which is directly paid by the boss, then the 
boss becomes the customer as well. In this case the user of the service has 
no power and the customer–provider relationship is meaningless.
Customer–provider relationships can be forged between input, output, 
and marketing units in the context of an internal market mechanism. If prop-
erly operationalized, the customer–provider relationship will effectively sup-
plement the superior–subordinate pair and provide the organization with a 
much desired market orientation. This means each part of the organization 
understands and lives with the marketing consequences of its actions.
The unit of organization, in this context, is a performance center, a 
value-adding link in a well-defined value chain. Although each unit has 
only a single boss (the superior–subordinate relationship with its contain-
ing system), it can have several customers and suppliers. Customers are the 
sole source of its operating income.
The measure of each unit's performance includes not only its own 
operations but also the contribution it makes to the success of its internal 
suppliers. All units have working capital and operate on a variable budget 
dependent on the throughput of the system.
9.5  Processes
The essential characteristics of a throughput and organizational processes 
were discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. Recall that throughput processes are 
those directly concerned with the actual output of the organization. 
Organizational processes, on the other hand, are concerned with creating 

202 
Business Architecture
integration, alignment, and synergy among the organization's parts. In 
this context, the planning, learning, and control system is an integral part 
of designing architecture.
9.5.1  Planning, Learning, and Control System
An organization's decision-making process is reflected in its mode of plan-
ning, learning, and control system. Planning, as traditionally practiced, is 
either one or a combination of two dominant types: reactive and proac-
tive. Reactive planning is concerned with identifying deficiencies and design-
ing projects and strategies to remove or suppress them. It deals with parts 
of an organization independently of each other.
An organization is a system whose major deficiencies arise from the 
way its parts interact, not from the actions of its parts taken separately. 
Therefore, it is possible, and even likely, that improving the performance 
of each part of an organization separately will bring down the organiza-
tion's performance as a whole.
Proactive planning consists of two major activities: prediction and prep-
aration. The objective is to forecast the future and then prepare the organi-
zation as well as possible. Unfortunately, such forecasts are chronically in 
error, since the social, economic, and political conditions, as well as the 
behavior of supplier, consumer, and competitor, are affected by what the 
planned-for organization and others like it will do. Therefore, it is pre-
cisely such plans taken together that shape the future.
Systems methodology rests on the interactive type of planning, which 
assumes that the future is created by what others and we do between now 
and then. Therefore, the objective is to design a desirable future (next gen-
eration of the system) and to invent or select ways of bringing it about 
(realization).
The planning, learning, and control system is the executive function of 
the organization. It oversees the operation of the whole system by manag-
ing the interaction between the dimensions. The executive function is also 
responsible for creating a vision, generating a shared image of a desired 
future, and providing the leadership for achieving the organizational mis-
sion. It has final responsibility for financial viability, technological ability, 
and human effectiveness of the organization as a whole.
Our design must be viable in the existing environment. To assess the 
viability of a business enterprise requires a measurement system. Defining 
the characteristics of the measurement system is the last connecting piece 
in the design of architecture.
9.5.2  Measurement System
To develop an effective measurement system we need to deal iteratively 
with two elements: performance criteria and performance measures 
(Figure 9.19).

Processes  203
9.5.2.1  Performance criteria
Performance criteria are the expression of what is to be measured and why 
(i.e., how success is defined). The selection process involves identifying 
dimensions and/or variables relevant to an enterprise's successful 
operation.
Relevancy is the most important concern in selecting performance vari-
ables. Traditionally, the overriding concern has been with the accuracy of 
measures. Because we find it difficult to accurately measure what we want, 
we have chosen to want what we can accurately measure. Unfortunately, 
the more accurate the measure of the wrong criteria, the faster the road to 
disaster. We are much better off with an approximation of relevant vari-
ables than with precise measurement of the wrong ones.
Viability of a business enterprise is an emergent property. It is the 
product of the interactions of various entities. It cannot be measured 
directly (i.e., by using any of the five senses). We can only measure its 
manifestation. Growth is the most popular one, but some prefer return 
on investment while others like net present value of future cash flows. 
Unfortunately, using the single manifestation of a phenomenon as the 
measure of an emergent property has proved misleading and very costly. 
For example, if a business is successful, chances are it will grow; however, 
growth alone does not mean that the business is successful. The same 
outcome (manifestation) could be produced by different means. Lousy 
acquisitions can produce high rates of growth but at the same time destroy 
the company.
Therefore, when we measure an emergent property by means of its 
manifestation we have to do it along several dimensions. For example, 
concern for people, when combined with the concern for production, has 
quite a different manifestation from the one without it. In his famous 
work, The Managerial Grid, Blake (1968) demonstrated how the nature of 
a variable in a “1.9 orientation” is different from the nature of the same 
variable in a “9.9 orientation.” Freedom without justice leads to chaos, 
while justice without freedom leads to tyranny.
FIGURE 9.19  Relation between performance criteria and performance measures.

204 
Business Architecture
9.5.2.2  Performance measures
Performance measures are the operational definition of each variable, that 
is, how each variable is to be measured specifically. For example, if we have 
identified capacity utilization as performance criteria, then turnover ratio 
might be designated as its measure. Now we would need a procedure for 
calculating turnover ratio (e.g., divide sales by assets, divide revenues by 
assets, or divide output by input).
An important consideration in selecting any measure is its simplicity. The 
cost of producing a measurement should not exceed the value of the informa-
tion it generates. Although objective measures are preferable, if the cost of obtain-
ing an objective measure is prohibitive, then use a subjective one. Remember that 
collective subjectivity is objectivity (provided that collectivity represents a variety 
of value systems). For example, in evaluating the performance of a gymnast we 
rely on the collective judgment of a number of different judges.
Development of effective performance measures is easier said than 
done. More often than not the operational definitions are left vague and 
ambiguous, even when the underlying concepts are relatively simple, such 
as minimizing the cost. The usual practice of allocating overhead to vari-
ous operating units demonstrates how an innocent matter of a conve-
nience produces unintended consequences.
The criteria for allocation of overhead are usually based on conven-
tional wisdom. Factors such as space occupied by a unit, or the labor con-
tent of a production process, are among the most popular ones. Since 
overhead usually constitutes more than 40% of the total cost, then we 
should not be surprised to see that these variables (space and direct labor) 
are the ones targeted for cost reductions. The fact that allocation rules were 
only a convention does not matter anymore. Once the allocation criteria 
become a rule, their relation with generation of cost, by default, is assumed 
to be causal, as demonstrated by the following case.
A large supermarket chain decided to close down ten of its stores 
because the accounting system showed they were not covering their allo-
cated overheads. Since the shutdown had no effect in reducing overhead, 
the remaining stores now had to carry a larger share of the overhead. This 
in turn put a few more of the stores in the red, and they too were subse-
quently closed. The company was gradually withdrawing from the market. 
Then a new design was developed. Each store became responsible for its 
own operation without having to worry about any artificial overhead allo-
cated to it. The surplus generated by each store was then passed on to the 
corporation as the income of the executive office. This made the executive 
office a profit center responsible for managing its operation, or so-called 
overhead, within the bounds of its income and the profit it needed to gen-
erate to meet the cost of its capital.
This situation is by no means atypical. With the prevalence of allocation 
rules based on labor, pressure is unduly shifted to direct labor. The default 
reaction is to lay off productive manpower. If the police department is facing 

Processes  205
deficits, policemen are the first to be fired. If schools are in financial trouble, 
the number of teachers is reduced. Reduction of operating units does not 
automatically reduce overhead, as management seems to assume. On 
the contrary, it will increase the burden of the remaining units until the 
whole system comes to a halt. In the mid-1970s, when per capita income 
was the conventional measure of development, sudden increases in oil 
prices produced instantly developed nations. Since this was not acceptable, 
a new set of indicators had to be developed. We now have a whole series of 
indicators that substitute for development, such as per capita steel produc-
tion, per capita consumption of fuel, and so forth. It is not surprising, then, 
to find national development policies aimed at improving these measures, 
usually at an incredible cost to the society at large. Yes, winning is fun. But 
to win, one has to keep score. And the way one keeps score defines the game.
9.5.2.3  Viability matrix
The viability matrix developed in Table 9.1 is a framework for identifying 
the relevant dimensions — the performance variables — for measuring a 
business's viability or the different aspects of an operation.
The first dimension of this matrix identifies the variables that define 
the organization as a whole:
• Structure (inputs)
• Function (outputs)
• Environment (markets)
• Process (technology)
Table 9.1  Viability Matrix: Identifying Dimensions and Variables
Structure 
(inputs)
Function 
(outputs)
Environment 
(markets)
Process 
(know-how)
Throughput
Capacity utilization
Attributes of the 
Outputs:
Cost
Quality
Availability
Access mechanism
Throughput 
capability
Waste
Cycle time
Safety
Control
Profitability
Reliability of demand
Synergy
Default values of 
the culture
Compatibility 
of performance 
criteria
Credibility in the 
marketplace
Relations with: 
Suppliers 
Creditors 
Customers
Value-chain 
analysis
Reward systems
Value-added ratio
Latency
Bench strength
Product potency
Market potential
Early warning 
system
Core knowledge
Intensity of 
competition
Planning process

206 
Business Architecture
The second dimension of the viability matrix identifies the processes that 
define the totality of the management system:
• Throughput (production of the outputs)
• Synergy (management of interactions, adding value)
• Latency (defining problems and designing solutions)
The following definitions clarify some of the variables I have used in devel-
oping the scheme in Table 9.1.
Capacity utilization: Turnover ratio is a good indicator of capacity utili-
zation. Compared to industry standards and best in class, it can signal 
the existence of an excess capacity that can be the major source of mal-
functioning and fluctuation in the system.
Profitability: A dynamic and interrelated model of operating income, oper-
ating expense, investment (hard and soft), cash flow, and cost of capital.
Attributes of the outputs: The outputs are defined in terms of a quantifi-
able delivery of goods or services in time and space. They are measured 
on three dimensions: price, quality, and availability (time).
Reliability of demand: Demand for a product is reliable if the amount to 
be purchased can be predicted reasonably, and if actors beyond a firm's 
influence do not create unexpected fluctuations.
Throughput capability: The level of integration and effectiveness of activ-
ities required for the delivery of goods and services to satisfied custom-
ers is measured by cycle time, waste reduction, safety, and competency 
of critical processes.
Default value of the culture: The degree to which members accept 
responsibility and act with authority such as duplication of power, 
assumptions regarding the source of value, nature of competition, and 
relationship between equality and competence.
Credibility in the marketplace: A firm is credible when it can take actions 
its stakeholders will initially accept on good faith alone, that is, rela-
tionships with customers. This is the reflection of the firm and its 
sound relationships with customers, suppliers, and creditors.
Value-chain transaction index: This is a model for explicitly measuring 
the total contributions that a business unit makes to the profitability 
of the whole organization. It recognizes not only the unit's own prof-
itability, but also its contribution to the profitability and/or success of 
other units within the context of a value-chain architecture.
Value-added ratio: A calculation of the value a unit produces in compar-
ison to the value it consumes. The value a unit consumes is adjusted to 
reflect the cost of the resources, the amount and kind of inputs (scarce 
or excess resources) the unit consumes, and whether they are obtained 
internally or externally. The value a unit produces is also modified to 
recognize the contribution of each line in its product–market mix. For 
example, to encourage new product–new market introductions, one 
might multiply revenues generated by selling a new product in a new 
market by 120%.

Processes  207
Reward system: A priority scheme superimposed on the measurement 
system, which will allow the organization to assign priorities to partic-
ular variables (activities) and thus influence the behavior of the actors 
toward achieving organizational goals.
Product potency: Defines the degree to which the product meets a variety 
of customer needs and desires in absolute terms as well as relative to 
competitors' and substitute products.
Market potential: A market has potential when there is a real and sus-
tainable need and sufficient (size) or growing purchasing power to sat-
isfy those needs.
Intensity of competition: Competition is intense when the supply of a 
product is greater than the demand, and it is easy to enter but difficult 
to exit the market.
9.5.3  Recap
• Interactive design is a process for operationalizing the most exciting 
vision of the future that the designers are capable of producing. It is 
the design of the next generation of their system to replace the existing 
order.
• Design of a throughput process is essentially technology driven, 
whereas design of organizational processes depends on the paradigm 
in use.
• Winning is fun, but to win, one has to keep score. And the way one 
keeps score defines the game.
• The realization effort is not a one-time proposition. Successive approx-
imations of the next generation design make up the evolutionary pro-
cess by which the transformation effort is conducted.

This page intentionally left blank

P art | F ou r
My phenomenal journey started in the early 1960s. I was studying mechanical 
engineering at UC Berkeley when Professor Walter B. Henning, the world's author-
ity in middle-Persian studies, chose me to help him develop a program in middle-
Persian culture. That experience re-formed my understanding of culture and its 
significance in shaping human systems. After two years of working with Henning, 
I knew I could not be merely a mechanical engineer anymore. Fortunately, Berkeley 
was experimenting at the time with systems engineering. After enrolling in an 
introductory program in cybernetics, information theory, and systems design, I 
was advised to join IBM if I wanted to pursue this line further.
I was lucky. IBM gave me the opportunity I was hoping for. After five years and 
1,800 hours of formal training at IBM education centers, I was on the path to 
becoming a systems engineer. But it was 20 years of association and finally a part-
nership with Russ Ackoff — and all that it takes to appreciate his tough, uncompro-
mising standards — that made me a systems designer.
I have practiced iterative design in a variety of contexts and cultures, includ-
ing Indian tribes in America, Japan, and South Africa. I have even survived a rev-
olution. But in all cases, I have had the luxury of choosing my clients and working 
only for those I liked. As a result, each case has a special meaning for me and a 
particular place in shaping my professional life.
Over the years, I have learned more from my clients than I have taught them. 
Selecting among them has not been easy. For example, eight years with ALCOA 
(Aluminum Company of America) was a phenomenal learning experience, as chal-
lenging as consulting work can be. The challenge at Material Science Group (MSG), 
headed by Charlie Ligon, was to create five new startup businesses using technolo-
gies developed in the ALCOA lab. Charlie was a demanding, respected leader and a 
great friend. Ken Blevins (president of ALCOA Electronic Packaging) and John 
Star (president of ALCOA Separation Company) were hardworking, committed, 
and competent managers. Accepting me as one of their own, they gave me the 
opportunity to experience firsthand the frustrations, emotional ups and downs, and 
challenges of creating a high-tech startup business in a conventional, incompatible 
environment. The experience taught me why the platform for managing a technol-
ogy business ought to be different from the platform established to manage prod-
uct businesses.
The Gutsy Few
Systems Practice

210 
Systems Practice: The Gutsy Few
Working with Clark Equipment Company and Gary Bella, president of the 
Industrial Truck Division, I learned not to underestimate the value of distribution 
channels and realized that effective management of the markets requires a distinct 
platform.
Jerry Goods, president of Super Fresh, and Wendell Young, president of the 
Clerical Workers Union, with their courage reconfirmed how powerful a shared 
image of a desired future could be.
I have selected to review in more detail the designs of the Oneida Nation, 
Butterworth Health System, Commonwealth Energy Systems, Marriott Corpora­
tion, and Carrier Corporation for the following reasons:
• 
All five have benefited from the cumulative wisdom of these projects. In all five 
designs, architecture has been used as a set of distinct but interrelated plat-
forms. Each platform signifies a unique mode of behavior with a predefined set 
of performance criteria and measures.
• 
In their diversity, all of the designs represent the state-of-the-art. They collec-
tively represent the major areas of concern. Trying times in health care, tough 
competition in global manufacturing, deregulation of energy, the collapse of 
real estate, and the challenges of development seem relevant to the majority of 
potential readers.

211
Ch a pt er | seven
Chapt er | t en
The Oneida Nation
The Oneida Nation project has been a beauty. It is probably one of the 
most emotionally satisfying projects I have worked on. Oneidas certainly 
have been the kindest, warmest, and most fascinating people to work with. 
They have treated us as their own and in return we have given them our 
best.
The members of the Oneida design team who have given their time 
and ideas generously are Neil Cornelius (general manager, gaming), Debra 
Doxtator (chairperson), Kathy Hughes (treasurer), and Bruce King (CFO). 
Artly Skenandore (general manager), with his profound knowledge of the 
language and the culture and an incredible ability and desire to learn, pro-
vided the critical link between past and future.
The members of the work team, whose commitment, support, and 
hard work made this project possible, include Jacque Boyle, Elaine 
Cornelius, Michelle Cornelius, Toni House, Jessica Oudenhoven, Diana 
Peterson, Terry Pouliquen, and Jackie Smith. Finally, our able project man-
ager, Kathy King, kept us all together with her ample modesty, sincerity, 
and insight to finish the task.
My old friend and colleague Bijan Khorram has been my partner 
in three of the four designs selected for this book. That alone should 
say all that is necessary about his valuable contribution to the 
outcomes.
This is yet an ongoing project. The version of the design presented here 
is the outcome of the fifth iteration.
10.1  Desired specifications
The following set of properties represents the desired set of specifications 
that are expected to guide the development of the intended design.
1.	 We would like to learn from our history and combine it with today's 
emerging values to create a successful way of life that will be a model 
for other communities to follow.

212 
The Oneida Nation
2.	 We would like to create a social order that would:
•	 Simultaneously encourage social integration and differentiation 
needed to promote individuality while being mindful of collective 
identity
•	 Produce goods and services effectively and distribute them equita-
bly while ensuring compatibility among the interests of past, pres-
ent, and future generations
•	 Identify, develop, and operationalize core competencies that give 
us distinction and competitive/comparative advantage
•	 Capitalize on the essence of our core values and enable us to evolve 
them in response to the requirements of present realities and emerg-
ing challenges
•	 Encourage the openness of the system to new learning, experimen-
tation, and diversification
•	 Provide us with opportunities to take care of our own and those 
unable to fend for their basic needs
3.	 We would like to see the Nation serve its members and its environment 
in such a way that:
•	 It would project a group identity that will generate internal com-
mitment and external respect.
•	 We would be an open culture with a desire to share our rich tradi-
tions with others while trying to learn and understand other cul-
tures so we can create mutually beneficial relationships.
•	 There would be a complementary educational system to provide 
each member with opportunities to develop both personally and 
professionally and aspire to his/her full potential.
•	 We would create employment opportunities for each member of 
our Nation so all can be productively active in generating goods 
and services that will enhance the quality of our lives.
•	 There would be a platform for participation and meaningful inter-
action among our people so that together we can build an inte-
grated Nation with a shared vision of a desired future to empower 
leaders to effectively pursue and realize our dreams.
•	 We would be a sovereign nation with self-determination and self-
reliance free from one-sided dependencies.
•	 We would be equal partners, of the same height, in every kind of 
relationship we forge with local, state, and federal authorities.
•	 We would be a preferred neighbor in every community we choose 
to live in, a preferred customer for every provider we choose as our 
supplier, and a preferred supplier for every customer who chooses 
to use our products and services.
•	 We would make the most of our limited resources by outsourc-
ing those services offered more cost-effectively by the environment 
without imposing undue vulnerability on the Nation.
•	 We would strike a balance between the material achievement and 
spiritual fulfillment in our lives.

Systems Architecture  213
10.2  Systems architecture
Architecture is a general description of a system. It identifies its vital func-
tions, major elements and their relationships, and the organizational pro-
cesses that define the nature of the whole. An architecture consists of a set 
of distinct but interrelated platforms (see Figure 10.1). Each platform rep-
resents a dimension of the system signifying a unique context, output, and 
mode of behavior controlled by a predefined set of performance criteria 
and measures. These dimensions and their complementary processes are 
individually necessary and collectively sufficient to give rise to a viable sys-
tem capable of realizing its desired specifications.
The Oneida Nation's architecture consists of seven dimensions: five 
operating, one governing, and one judicial. All dimensions of the architec-
ture function under the guidance and leadership of a Business Committee. 
They are identified as
• Governance
• Membership systems
• Learning systems
• Business systems
• Core services
• External environment
• Judicial system
These seven dimensions are identified as necessary and sufficient to create 
a viable nation capable of realizing its desired specifications.
None of the five operating dimensions should be subordinate to the 
others. Each one must be treated with the same attention and pursued 
with the same vigor as the others. However, the performance criteria for 
ENVIRONMENTAL  
SYSTEMS 
TRANSACTIONAL INTERFACE
BUSINESS 
SYSTEMS 
GENERATION & DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH
MEMBERSHIP  SYSTEMS 
NATION BUILDING
LEARNING 
SYSTEMS
SUPPORT 
SYSTEMS 
INFRASTRUCTURE
JUDICIAL SYSTEM
GENERATION OF ABILITIES & DESIRES
GOVERNANCE
MEMBERSHIP
AT
LARGE
FIGURE 10.1  Critical dimensions.

214 
The Oneida Nation
these dimensions will not necessarily be the same. For example, whereas 
units in the core services dimension will be performance centers (their 
budget will be based on a given percentage of total throughput), the 
units in the business dimension will all be profit centers. Creation of a 
new social calculus, in the long term, should facilitate, to the extent that 
it will be compatible with the interests of the system as a whole, the shift 
from cost to performance and, eventually, to a profit-centered mode of 
operation, ultimately maturing them from an input to an output 
orientation.
10.3  Governance
For the governance dimension to be effective, the context in which it will 
be operating should be explicitly specified. According to the Oneida 
Nation's constitution, all powers, legislative, executive, and judicial, rest 
with the General Tribal Council (GTC; see Figure 10.2). The GTC, in reality, 
is the meeting of the membership at large. Unfortunately, discharging all 
three responsibilities directly in a general meeting is a practical impossi-
bility. The GTC, therefore, has delegated its authority to an elected body, 
the Business Committee (BC). Thus, the BC, by default, has come to assume 
all the responsibilities of legislation, executive, and judicial concerns. 
This was a reasonably practical solution at the time. However, increasing 
PLC
BOARD
GOVERNING
BODY
TRUST
TECHNICAL SYSTEM
HUMAN SYSTEM
FINANCIAL SYSTEM
LEGAL
COUNCIL
GAMING
GM
G  O  V  E  R  N  A  N  C  E
JUDICIAL
CHIEF OF
STAFF
MEMBERSHIP   AT   LARGE 
GTC
PLCB 
BUSINESS
PLCB 
ENVIRON'T
BUS. SYSTEMS
PLCB
MEMBERSHIP
PLCB 
SERVICES
PLCB
LEARNING
MEMBERSHIP SYSTEMS
LEARNING SYSTEMS
Oneida Nation
ARCHITECTURE
NESTED CELLS OF
MEMBERSHIP
NETWORK
S
E
R
V
I
C
E
S
FED./STATE GOVERN'T REL.
OTHER INDIAN NATIONS 
BUS./LOCAL ENVIRONMENT
GOVER'T DIVISION
INFRAST. DEVELOP. DIVISION
ORDINANCE DIVISION
LEARNING TO LEARN
LEARNING TO DO
LEARNING TO BE
TRADING COMPANY
LEISURE 
INDUSTRY
AGRICULTURE
LAND 
SERVICES (FIN./TECH.)
PROFES'L
CULTURAL
ENVIRON'T
FIGURE 10.2  Oneida Nation architecture.

Governance  215
complexities and phenomenal expansion and development of the system 
in all dimensions have resulted in an unprecedented level of overload for 
the BC. In spite of all efforts for a timely discharge of its responsibilities, 
the BC is faced with an impossible task. Inevitably, it has become the 
bottleneck.
To reflect the expanded governance responsibility of BC, its name will 
be changed to the Governing Body (GB). In the new format, the GB will 
increasingly concentrate on its legislative and policy setting authority and 
relegate parts of its executive responsibility and judicial function to the rel-
evant platforms of the architecture.
To enhance the monitoring authority of the GB and properly dupli-
cate its power in each platform, a Planning, Learning, and Control 
Board (PLCB) will be established on each platform. A designated mem-
ber of the GB and the chief of staff will be on the board of each plat-
form. Creation and composition of the PLCBs will effectively empower 
the system to be centralized and decentralized at the same time. The 
focus of GB activities on legislation, policy setting, and oversight, along 
with the relegation of some of its executive authority to the executive 
office and operating platforms, will enhance the ­decision-making abil-
ity of the system and increase its responsiveness. Delegation of the 
judicial responsibility to an independent judicial system will also be a 
welcome move toward proper separation of judicial and executive pow-
ers. This separation will also serve as a safety valve. It will channel a 
major portion of the conflicts to the judicial system where they belong, 
thus relieving the political system from the untenable situation of 
being the only channel to absorb the pressures of a polarized nation.
The governance platform will consist of
• GB
• Chief of staff
• Planning, Learning, and Control System (PLCS)
• PLCB
10.3.1  Governing Body
The GB is the highest elected authority of the Oneida Nation. On behalf of 
the membership at large and the GTC, it acts as the main legislative body 
and the governing authority of the Nation. It will appoint the chief of staff, 
approve the appointment of the directors of the PLCS and general manag-
ers, and coordinate and monitor the activities of the operating platforms 
and judicial system.
10.3.2  Chief of Staff
The chief of staff will focus on managing two sets of interactions: (1) inter-
nally, dimensions of architecture and (2) externally, between Oneida and 
its environment. The chief of staff will help define and build consensus 

216 
The Oneida Nation
around an enduring set of core ideals, purposes, and values that will guide 
and inspire the organizational culture in relation to itself, its mission, and 
its community.
The chief of staff will also be responsible to
• Conduct periodic systems analyses and submit Mess Formulation 
reports to the GB and the membership at large
• Make sure that the needs of the system and its constituent parts are pri-
oritized in terms of their contribution to the national mission
• Develop and recommend assumptions and policies that will identify 
the social indicators and set the expected direction and quality of work 
life of the system
• Help develop and recommend organizational and departmental stan-
dards and measures of performance that are consistent with maintain-
ing a high level of quality of work life
• Conduct holistic quality assurance audits of the current and contin-
gency game plans of the system
10.3.3  Planning, Learning, and Control System
To assist the chief of staff in carrying out the responsibilities of governance, 
a PLCS will be created. It will consist of a group of experts who are assigned 
to and operate in three complementary activities: financial system, techni-
cal system, and human system.
10.3.3.1  Director of financial systems
The director of financial systems is responsible for making sure that the 
financial resources of Oneida are safe and their utilization sound. The 
director will develop financial policies and monitor their implementation, 
once approved by the GB. To do that, the director will:
• Develop and recommend the criteria, assumptions, and expectations 
with regard to the operation and management of financial resources
• Develop and recommend financial policies for resource allocation and 
management
• Develop and recommend the standards and measures of performance 
for resource utilization
• Identify systemic deviations and initiate corrective action
• Monitor flows of funds and act as an early warning system
• Prioritize the investment and divestment needs of the system and its 
parts
• Conduct holistic and departmental quality assurance audits of the via-
bility of financial systems and assess their effectiveness
• Provide the information required by the PLCB to carry out its integra-
tive management function
The director of financial systems, in addition to managing its core of finan-
cial experts, will supervise the operations of general accounting, grants, 
and internal audits.

Governance  217
10.3.3.2  Director of technical systems
The director of technical systems, in addition to managing its core of tech-
nical experts, will supervise the operations of the information system. 
Other functions include:
• Help and facilitate development of the system architecture and a 
detailed design of throughput systems
• Advocate and coordinate the development and recommendation 
of the proper standards and measures for assuring organizational 
effectiveness
• Monitor and make sure that policies regarding system management 
and operations, once established, are properly implemented by those 
involved
• Develop and recommend policies regarding the collection, operation, 
integration, dissemination, and management of information
• Develop and recommend the standards and measures of performance 
for managing information systems
10.3.3.3  Director of human systems
The director of human systems, in addition to managing its core of human 
system experts, will supervise the operations of the Human Resources 
Department (HRD) and communications, and will also:
• Define the specifications, directives, and values by which the most 
qualified, committed, and productive workforce can be attracted, main-
tained, and motivated to ensure the continued success of the system
• Monitor significant human systems trends and act as an early warning 
system
• Advocate, facilitate, and coordinate the development and recommen-
dation of the human resource policies such as hiring, training, com-
pensation and benefits, career development, and related issues
10.3.4  Planning, Learning, and Control Board
To create compatibility and manage the interactions among the five oper-
ating dimensions of architecture, an integrative function is needed. This 
integrative function, the critical element of the governance of the system, 
will include development of master plans and general guidelines concern-
ing the performance of each dimension.
The members of the PLCB will consist of the chairperson of the GB, 
the chief of staff, the treasurer, the directors of financial systems, technical 
systems, and human systems, and the five general managers (GMs), each 
representing one of the operating platforms. The PLCB is responsible for  
(1) defining problems, (2) designing solutions, and (3) making recom-
mendations regarding policies and decision criteria to be approved by the 
GB. However, the primary function of the PLCB will be to create synergy 
among the operations of the membership systems, learning systems, busi-
ness systems, core services systems, and environmental systems.

218 
The Oneida Nation
The nature of control, as intended here, reconceptualizes the tradi-
tional notion of control from “supervision” to “learning” and the nature 
of authority from “power-over” to “power-to-do.” Effective control 
involves the duplication of power. Duplication of power will be achieved 
if the decision process, rather than the individual decision maker, is the 
subject of control. This will happen when decision makers collectively 
develop a shared understanding and ownership of decision criteria in all 
dimensions.
Learning results from being surprised: detecting a mismatch between 
what was expected to happen and what actually did happen. If one under-
stands why the mismatch occurred (diagnosis) and is able to avoid a 
­mismatch in the future (prescription), one has learned.
Learning will include an early warning system that will call for ­corrective 
action before the problem has occurred. Such a system will monitor, on an 
ongoing basis, the validity of the assumptions on which the ­decision was 
made, the implementation process, and intermediate results.
10.4  Membership systems
The membership systems are about nation building. Membership pro-
vides a platform for participation to dissolve conflict, create a shared image 
of a desired future, and empower leaders to act effectively and decisively 
on behalf of their constituents.
10.4.1  Empowerment
Empowerment is not about sharing of power. Sharing implies a zero-sum 
relationship and, therefore, abdication of power. Empowerment is dupli-
cation of power. It requires a collective understanding of the reasons why 
we are doing what we are doing. Such a shared understanding not only 
empowers the members to act in harmony, but also empowers the leaders 
to act effectively and decisively on behalf of their people.
The role of leadership is as critical here as the role of the people. The leader 
cannot afford to leave the people behind or fall behind them. The lead-
ers are empowered to the degree of trust and support they generate among 
their people. The support or trust does not necessarily require conformity or 
uniformity. It means that members can agree to disagree, providing they 
understand the decision criteria and are willing to live with the consequences 
of collective decisions. Development of this political maturity, an ability to 
convert dichotomy to complementarity, will be the central aim of the mem-
bership network.
Polarization is, perhaps, the most obstructive feature of a traditional 
society on the verge of transformation. The march of events, voluntary or 
not, makes the conventional solutions ineffective, calling into question 
the efficacy of the traditional leader–follower relationships. Under these 
circumstances, the seemingly irresolvable dichotomies between tradition 

Membership Systems  219
versus modernity, collectivity versus individuality, capital formation ver-
sus consumption, and openness versus closedness drive the people into 
opposite camps. The negative consequence of this polarization manifests 
itself not only in an obvious breakdown of communication, but, most 
important, in the hidden sense of paralysis and widespread inability to 
act. At a time when the Nation must be in its most proactive mode, it tends 
to absolve (benign neglect) rather than dissolve the conflicts (seek com-
plementarities). The purpose of the membership dimension is to empower 
the Nation out of this dilemma.
Nation building is an evolutionary process. It is participative, highly 
time-consuming, and uniquely value driven. Contrary to road building, it 
is not a one-time proposition. It cannot be brought about by declaration. 
Dealing with why questions, nation building is necessarily an agreement 
on a set of organizing principles and common objectives.
10.4.2  The Tie That Bonds
The distinction between a system and an aggregate is the bond that ties the 
otherwise scattered elements together. The strongest bond that holds a 
nation together is a shared image of a desired future and a set of organiz-
ing principles reflecting the essence of the system's unique historical expe-
riences and its value system.
The membership dimension provides structures and processes that 
deal with political empowerment, participation, legitimacy, consensus 
building, self-determination, and sovereignty. As such, the membership 
dimension is the most critical dimension of the architecture. In a sense, it 
is about the Nation itself. Direct involvement creates a feeling of nation-
hood; thereby it makes an environment in which members can and will 
make a difference in the evolution of the system.
The real challenge to building a viable social system is the ability to 
create unity in diversity, meeting the varying interests of independent 
members operating in an interdependent whole. Generation of agreement 
on a series of organizing principles will permit the Nation to act in spite of 
its diversity. Society's need for integration is as legitimate as an ­individual's 
need for differentiation. Integration and differentiation are two sides of 
the same coin. Alone, they self-destruct. Together, they synergize.
Collectivity at the expense of individuality leads to totalitarianism and 
suffocation. Individualism at the expense of collectivity leads to chaos and 
social Darwinism. In the long run, the society and the individual either 
stand together or fall separately. A win/win relationship is achieved not 
through zero-sum or even compromise. For both of them to win requires 
reconceptualization of the nature and the relationship of the whole and 
the parts. You cannot build a great society with belittled people just as you 
cannot build great people in a belittled society. The greatness of each is 
preconditioned by the other. An environment should be created in which 
each can help itself by helping the other.

220 
The Oneida Nation
Once again, the question is not a self-imposed choice between the past 
and the future; that answer would be an easy one, albeit with disastrous 
consequences. Roots as well as wings are indispensable to a viable nation. 
None should come at the expense of the other. The need to fly should not 
mean rootlessness, just as the need to attach should not negate the need 
for flight.
10.4.3  Membership Network
Design of the membership network will consist of a multilevel network 
of nested membership cells. Each cell will have nine members who will 
engage in a process of deliberation to produce a shared understanding 
about the realities facing the Nation. Working together, the cell mem-
bers will try to understand the context (how the environment is 
­evolving), define the problem (formulating the mess), and produce a 
­recommended solution (designing a solution). The outcome of each 
cell, once agreed upon, will be passed on either to the lower level cell 
for further deliberation or higher level cells for integration with others. 
The process will continue until all the critical issues facing the Nation 
are collected, deliberated, resolved, and bought into by all the active 
members participating in their respective cells at different levels of the 
membership network.
To start the development of the membership network, up to nine pri-
mary cells will be initially created. A designated member of the GB along 
with a selected member of the management team and a designated mem-
ber of the work team will form the initial composition of these primary 
cells. Each cell will then recruit six primary members from the member-
ship at large (preferably from active participants of the GTC). The primary 
cell of the membership network will therefore consist of 81 members 
working in nine cells.
Each one of the members of the primary cells, after sufficient delibera-
tion and generation of consensus, will form other nine-member cells oper-
ating on the second level of the network. The second level will therefore be 
made up of 81 cells consisting of 729 members. The third level of the 
membership network will be populated by 6,561 participants working in 
729 cells. It seems that a three-level network will provide adequate national 
coverage. If need be, other successive levels could be added to the member-
ship network until every eligible member is included and nobody is left 
out.
The interactive design document will serve as the starting point of the 
process of deliberation. After the design team provides the first version of 
the design, the GB will deliberate on it to generate necessary consensus. 
Then the design will be taken to the primary cells, where 81 active mem-
bers of the Tribal Council will have their chance to produce the second 
iteration of the interactive design. The second iteration will then move 
down to the second level of the membership network for the next ­iteration. 

Membership Systems  221
Successive iterations will be continued throughout the network until all 
active members can have a chance to participate in the design process and 
make a commitment to its implementation.
The realization of this network (Figure 10.3) requires an effective man-
agement and support system responsible for such critical complementary 
services as
• Collecting and feeding relevant issues and background materials
• Providing logistics, scheduling meetings, and keeping members 
informed of upcoming events and agendas
• Taking, recording, and following up on the minutes of the meetings
• Facilitating the processes and making sure that participants understand 
the protocols and implications of their assigned roles
10.4.4  Consensus-Building Process
Creation of a platform for participation, although necessary, is not suffi-
cient for proper bonding of the membership. To enhance the bonding 
process, we strongly recommend that a new approach based on the Oneida 
Nation's traditional means of consensus building, which so serendipi-
tously and beautifully corresponds with the emerging notion of systems 
thinking, be adopted.
A MEMBER OF BC,
A MEMBER OF MANAGEMENT TEAM,
& A MEMBER OF DESIGN TEAM
FORM UP TO  NINE PRIMARY CELLS
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
PM
CELL
FIGURE 10.3  The membership network.

222 
The Oneida Nation
To appreciate the underlying assumptions and organizing principles of 
systems thinking, it is important to note the following concerns:
1.	 Appreciate the all-important context. We have a tendency to start with 
the problem as though it exists in isolation. A phenomenon that can 
be a problem in one context may not be one in another. Likewise, a 
solution that may prove effective in a given context may not work in 
another. In a systems view, neither the problem nor the solution is 
regarded free of context.
2.	 There is a need to deal with the problem independent of the solutions at hand. 
We have a tendency to define the problem in terms of the solution we 
already have. We fail most often not because we fail to solve the prob-
lem we face, but because we fail to face the right problem. Rather than 
doing what we should, we do what we can. In the systems view, it is the 
solution that has to fit the problem, not vice versa.
3.	 There is a need to redesign as opposed to invoking the same set of predefined 
solutions. We have a tendency to entertain only the tried and true. If a 
solution is unprecedented, it is automatically rejected as suspect. The 
habitual default of so-called problem solving, left to its own devices, 
can turn into a self-reproducing vicious circle militating against any 
difference that can make a real difference. Thus, in the name of rein-
venting the future, we keep on reproducing the past, wondering all 
along why it is that history repeats itself as though no lesson has ever 
been learned.
Separation of the three phases of understanding the context, defining the 
problem, and designing the solution is, therefore, an important element 
of systems methodology. Viewed in this context, problem solvers and 
problem formulators exhibit two different sets of characteristics (Figure 
10.4). Problem solvers are scientifically oriented. They have a tendency to 
find similarities in things that are different. They are generalizers. They are 
concerned with the immediate result as a check on the efficacy of the solu-
tion. Problem formulators are artistically oriented. They have a tendency 
to find differences among things that are similar. They are particularizers. 
They are concerned with the consequences.
Both aspects are important. They complement each other. The two, 
however, should not be confused or mixed up. The more the two activities 
are kept separate, the higher the likelihood of affecting a dissolution of the 
problem as a way of achieving a higher order synthesis. For a problem to be 
actually dissolved, two other actors are required: innovators and doers. 
Innovators are pathfinders. They see the bigger picture. They have a system-
atic orientation. They exhibit purposeful behavior. They set the direction 
based on which (1) problems are defined and formulated and (2) solu-
tions are synthesized and integrated to make sure that they complement 
each other by getting unified into synergistic wholes.
Doers, however, are practitioners. They are concerned neither with the 
bigger picture nor the long-term consequences. They enjoy producing, or 

Membership Systems  223
doing things, using a predefined algorithm. On the other hand, a ­reflection 
on the recorded history and the culture of the Oneida Nation points to a 
similar process of consensus building.
Central to the historical experience, this process was adopted by the 
Great Law of Peace as an effective means for the Great Council where gov-
erning interclan communication, conflict resolution, decision making, 
and generating agreement was done. It is referred to as “getting to be of the 
same mind” (Figure 10.5).
Using different attributes and characteristics for each of the three sym-
bols of turtle, wolf, and bear, the culture, to its credit, had identified and 
TENDENCY TO FIND SIMILARITIES
TENDENCY TO FIND DIFFERENCES
PROBLEM SOLVERS
A SCIENTIFIC
 ORIENTATION:
DEFINES
 ALTERNATIVES
RECOMMENDS
 SOLUTIONS
PATHFINDERS
A SYSTEMIC
 ORIENTATION:
PURPOSEFUL
BEHAVIOR, SETS
THE DIRECTION,
IDENTIFIES ISSUES,
CONTEXT
DOERS
A PRACTICAL
 ORIENTATION:
IMPLEMENTS SOLUTIONS
PROBLEM
FORMULATORS
AN ARTISTIC
 ORIENTATION:
FORMULATES THE MESS
COMPLEMENTARY TENDENCIES
FIGURE 10.4  Complementary tendencies.
THE SIX NATION CONFEDERACY
ONODAGA
(FIRE KEEPERS)
MOHAWK
SENECA
ONEIDA 
CAYUGA 
TUSCARORA
B
E
A
R
getting to be
of the same
mind
T
U
R
T
L
E
WOLF
FIGURE 10.5  Getting to be of the same mind.

224 
The Oneida Nation
separated the three distinct roles of pathfinder, problem formulator, and 
problem solver. The role played out by the wolves is that of pathfinder/
synthesizer. Wolves display purposeful behavior by setting the direction, 
dealing with why questions, identifying relevant issues, and defining the 
agenda and context before they are presented to the turtles, the problem 
formulators, to define them. The defined problems are, in turn, passed on 
by the turtles to the bears, the problem solvers. Bears generate alternatives 
and recommend solutions. Solutions are returned to the turtles to check 
on their relevance and potency before referring them back to the wolves to 
check on their relevance. Wolves are finally responsible for integrating the 
solutions, keeping the records, and ratifying and communicating the final 
agreements. Wolves keep the fire alive by motivating and monitoring 
actions.
Considering that the unit of a social system is not so much the indi-
vidual but the role one plays in different settings, the wolf/turtle/bear role 
playing presents an excellent vehicle for group learning and consensus 
building — the essential ingredients of nation building.
10.4.5  Back to the Future
The design of the membership network is intended to approximate and 
build, as much as possible, on the Oneida's traditional model of forming 
consensus (Figure 10.6). Symbolism is neither value-free nor inconse-
quential. There is more to it than meets the eye. We need to appreciate the 
significance and the implications of what lies hidden at the heart of cul-
tural norms and practices. The insight is indispensable for getting to the 
bottom of what might otherwise come to pass as a collection of age-old 
CONSENSUS-BUILDING CONVENTION
RATIFIES & KEEPS RECORDS
MOTIVATES & INTEGRATES
TURTLE
(WELL OF INFO) 
TIME/SPACE 
PROVIDES CONTEXT 
DEFINES PROBLEMS 
(MESS FORMULATORS)
BEAR
(KNOW-HOW) 
DELIBERATES & 
RECOMMENDS 
DESIGNS SOLUTIONS 
(PROBLEM SOLVERS) 
P
R
O
B
L
E
M
S
O
L
U
T
I
O
N
THE PROCESS OF
 BUILDING 
CONSENSUS
WOLF
(PATH FINDER) 
SETS DIRECTION (PURPOSE) & AGENDA 
C    O    N    T    E    X    T
P  U   R  P  O  S  E   &   D  I   R  E  C  T  I  O  N
FIRE KEEPER
FIGURE 10.6  Consensus-building convention.

Membership Systems  225
customs. It is by rediscovering the true organizing principles implicit in 
the culture that people can take stock of their history and know who they 
are and why they behave the way they do.
This process of consensus building differs from the conventional 
model of majority rule based on a simple voting routine. The “majority 
rule,” a special feature of the Western model of democracy, presupposes 
existence of public debate and formation of public opinion aided by mass 
communication. The voting process is only the means for bringing the 
process to its ultimate closure. But the cultures that are participative, inter-
active, and symbolically expressive are far more spontaneous. They go 
through a less rigid process involving both verbal and nonverbal modes of 
consensus building, referred to as “getting to be of the same mind,” before 
the community arrives at a collectively agreed-upon position. The open, 
patient, unstructured, and well-drawn-out discussions will continue until 
an acceptable and practical solution is reached.
This open-ended mode of deliberation transcends majority rule. In 
fact, majority rule is, in essence, but a special case of consensus building. 
The limitations imposed by the formal “rules of order,” intended to man-
age time more effectively, prove incompatible with the inherently slow 
process of consensus building in dealing with critical issues. In such con-
texts, reaching widely supported agreements cannot afford to compromise 
the prerequisites of consensus building in the name of majority rule. If it 
did, the outcome would not only debunk public commitment but would 
lead to widespread suspicion, if not wholesale alienation.
By capitalizing on the valuable tradition of generating a common 
understanding, the Nation will benefit from multiple advantages: it is 
effective because it engages everyone in the development process, it is 
legitimizing because it resorts to an indigenous device already sanctioned 
by the culture, and it is exciting because it frees up the richness contained 
in the past to become an effective vehicle for future progress. The process 
is liberating because it empowers us to achieve the freedom that we need 
to establish ourselves as the masters of our future rather than prisoners of 
our past. The future need not be a mere extension of the past. By reinter-
preting the underlying drivers of our behavior, we can both preserve and 
renew our culture in ways that make it consistent with what we are and 
supportive of what we desire to be.
10.4.6  Performance Criteria and Measures
Creation of the capacity to act is the greatest single function of the mem-
bership platform. Although diversity is at the heart of a free society, lack of 
agreement on a set of organizing principles and operating procedures will 
rob it of the minimum requirement to act effectively. As such, creation of 
a capacity to convert the paralyzing dichotomies and structural conflicts to 
an enabling complementarity will be the basis on which the success of the 
membership dimension will be measured. The performance system will 

226 
The Oneida Nation
therefore establish the measures and criteria to determine the degree to 
which the membership platform has been able to institutionalize the con-
sensus basis for united action in the face of diversity. This should be the 
outcome of an ongoing and nationwide dialog, the capacity to listen and 
empathize, leading to a reduction of the existing levels of tension and frus-
tration while producing a shared understanding and commitment to a set 
of organizing principles and operating procedures.
To accomplish this purpose, a set of organizing principles, representing 
the underlying assumptions at the core of the Nation's entrenched polar-
ization, will be identified. For each principle, a pair of pro and con argu-
ments will be developed. Using a predesigned index, the attitude of the 
membership as a whole with regard to these principles will be periodically 
measured and tabulated. Successive measurements will yield the pattern 
of change along the organizing principles. This exercise will not act as a 
mirror only. It will serve as a medium by which the membership can both 
understand and influence what makes it behave the way it does. Thus, per-
formance criteria and measures will help the Nation shed its paralyzing 
“mess” and move voluntarily toward its desired state.
10.4.6.1  Interdimensional and interest group activities
The membership platform will support and manage all interest group 
activities requiring voluntarism and participation of active members, such 
as Pow Wow, Arts, and Aging. The activities and interactions of the mem-
bership, learning, and business dimensions will be coordinated at the 
PLCB. It is imperative that each one take the initiative to coordinate itself 
with the other two. To facilitate this coordination, members in the mem-
bership network will be encouraged to join a cultural or professional 
group. The cultural, professional, and other interest groups will act as advi-
sors for the learning and business dimensions.
10.5  Learning systems
The success of the Oneida Nation will ultimately depend on the compe-
tence of its members. Oneidas are both the ends and the means of the sys-
tem of which they are the parts. Like any other human system, the Oneida 
Nation is only as good as its members. The development of Oneidas, the 
system's human assets, therefore constitutes the second most critical dimen-
sion of the architecture.
The function of the learning dimension is the development of human 
assets. It is about reinvigorating the ability and desire of the members to 
satisfy their needs and desires both individually and collectively. Ability 
without desire is impotent, just as desire without ability is sterile.
Cultural development involves desires while professional develop-
ment involves abilities. Desires are the essential ingredients for creating an 
achieving society. Cultural and spiritual mobilization deals with the desire 
dimension. Abilities, no matter how high, are only the necessary ­condition 

Learning Systems  227
for success. To the extent that they are not energized by relevant desires, 
abilities tend to remain latent. In the absence of desires, abilities would be 
mere potentials.
The vitality of a culture is in its potency to act as a vehicle for the real-
ization of the society's shared dreams. A potent culture can rekindle the 
necessary desires without which dreams degenerate into daydreams. 
Renaissance requires reinterpretation of the cultural symbols in such a way 
that new goals can be collectively legitimized and effectively pursued while 
the continuity of group identity is preserved. Ultimately, cultural vitality is 
measured by success in getting the traditional symbols and images to sup-
port the emerging needs of a progressive society. Respect for culture does 
not imply regression nor should progress mean a break with the past. Old 
values were born in response to new needs. In the context of national 
development, innovation is getting these powerful engines reconnected to 
the emerging needs that keep replacing the ones that may have outlived 
the reason for which they were born.
Abilities, on the other hand, involve operationalization of the knowl-
edge required for formulating effective responses to new challenges. 
They involve a whole set of approaches, know-how, and skills for defin-
ing problems and designing solutions. Professional development, there-
fore, is the vehicle to leverage the ability dimension. It requires a 
professional-based system of education. The system should be designed 
so that it can be (1) compatible with the system's special needs and, at 
the same time, (2) capable of meeting licensing requirements of the 
external environment (federal and state) of which it is a part. The exter-
nal requirements are so easily achievable that the educational system 
of the Oneida Nation should position itself to function as ­complementary 
to, rather than a redundant duplication of, the U.S. educational system. 
The system should therefore avoid producing what it can procure from 
the outside.
The learning systems will be responsible for three basic outputs: learn-
ing to learn, or formal education; learning to do, or professional educa-
tion; and learning to be, or cultural education (Figure 10.7).
10.5.1  Learning to Learn (Formal Education)
Given the accelerated rate of change that keeps transforming everything, 
and with it the useful life of learned subject matter, the real responsibility 
of an educational system is to convert the learners to self-educators. It can 
achieve this by increasing the students’ desire and ability to embark on a 
never-ending process of learning, unlearning, and relearning, both within 
and beyond the conventional frameworks. The responsibility for these 
first- and second-order learnings should be common to all levels of formal 
education, from elementary to higher education. Formal education, a 
licensing activity, covers the whole spectrum of K-12, college, and post-
graduate studies.

228 
The Oneida Nation
To ensure the quality and availability of formal education, the learning 
system will:
• Be responsible for identifying and publicizing the Nation's educational 
needs and priorities and making sure that there will be sufficient infor-
mation and resources available to help the members make informed 
decisions in terms of their educational goals
• Provide financial support (i.e., scholarships) to eligible students who 
will otherwise be deprived of pursuing courses of study that are needed/
endorsed by the Nation
• Create a trust fund to offer interest-free loans to eligible students, who 
will be allowed to write them off by working in the Nation's gover-
nance or its business development efforts
• Generate and continually develop a national database to monitor the 
educational progress of each member throughout his/her life
• Consider all Oneidas, regardless of their residence, as its constituency 
and do its best to (1) keep itself informed about their educational his-
tory and progress and (2) make itself accessible to them when condi-
tions require and justify supporting the members’ academic pursuits
10.5.2  Learning to Be (Cultural Education)
Cultural education covers the whole spectrum of learning experiences that 
result in both individual and collective development in arts, languages, 
sports, traditional ceremonies, and other quality-of-life-enhancing activi-
ties that involve leisure time. Learning to be is essentially a character-­
building activity. It is about values, worldviews, and identities. It involves 
desires as opposed to abilities, the capacity rather than the content, the 
direction rather than the speed, the whys rather than the hows, the feeling 
rather than the thinking, the meaning rather than the action, and the pro-
cess of becoming rather than the state of having. It is about doing the right 
thing rather than doing it right.
LEARNING  SYSTEM
CHILDREN
ADULT 
ELDERS
PROFESSIONAL
EDUCATION
FORMAL
EDUCATION
CULTURE 
ART/SPORT
SHARED
FACILITIES
KNOWLEDGE
BANK
S
U
P
P
O
R
T
LEARNING
TO BE
LEARNING
TO  LEARN
LEARNING
TO DO
A
D
V
O
C
A
C
Y
ADVISORY
GROUP
ADVISORY
GROUP
ADVISORY
GROUP
LEARNING   BOARD
FIGURE 10.7  Learning system structure.

Learning Systems  229
Learning to be, in essence, involves aesthetics. If history is a lesson, 
national declines are preceded by cultural declines. Aesthetics, contrary to 
popular belief, is not a luxury. Societies that were antithetical to aesthetics 
invariably proved to be anti-human and anti-development as well.
10.5.3  Learning to Do (Professional Education)
Professional education is responsible for creating the marketable compe-
tency of the members. In doing this, it will avoid reducing the context of 
learning to theoretical inputs and rigid classroom formats. Conventional 
formats, the predominant mode of instruction in higher education, are 
either incompatible or very expensive. The world does not divide itself the 
way universities do. Small communities cannot afford the luxury of hav-
ing a proliferating number of specialists who enjoy knowing more and 
more about a smaller and smaller set of problems facing the Oneida 
Nation. What the Nation requires is a people capable of performing mul-
tiple roles and able to deal with the totality of a problem.
Professional education should carry out its own survey and draw up its 
own conclusion about the Nation's professional needs and desires. It can 
then set out to create plans and programs that will match the nation's 
business and developmental potentials.
Professional education's best option would be to launch apprentice 
models of training. To the extent possible, it should recruit its indigenous 
experts who have proven competence in the needed areas. Such mentors 
will then be supplied with the necessary resources and trainees to pro-
duce the needed technicians (accountants, carpenters, librarians, com-
puter experts, health technicians, etc.). The system can forge alliances or 
affiliations with known colleges and universities to get its programs 
accredited.
10.5.4  Support Functions
The support arm of the learning system will consist of shared facilities and 
the knowledge bank. They will represent those resources commonly uti-
lized by other dimensions of the learning system.
10.5.4.1  Shared facilities
Shared facilities cannot belong to any one of the output units acting as a 
supplier to others. Otherwise, the ensuing power imbalance would favor 
the owning unit at the expense of the other users, rather than letting differ-
ent units duplicate and diffuse scarce physical resources (buildings, facili-
ties, equipment, etc.).
10.5.4.2  Knowledge bank
The knowledge bank will host the core competencies of the Nation. 
Membership in the knowledge bank should be considered a privilege. The 
bank will consist of full- and part-time members. Part-time members are 

230 
The Oneida Nation
those who have parallel responsibilities in other platforms, but their exper-
tise is so much in demand for the system as a whole that their membership 
will be necessitated by the bank. This will make it possible for the system 
to capitalize on this rare expertise. For example, experts serving in the PLCS 
will also be part-time members of the knowledge bank.
The knowledge bank will be the “think tank” of the Nation. It will be 
involved on a project basis in all three areas of consulting, education, and 
research, both for internal and external clients. The bank will be able to 
recruit specialized and/or complementary talent from internal and exter-
nal sources on a temporary project basis.
10.5.5  Advocacy Functions
Advocacy will make sure that the learning needs of all members, children, 
adults, and elders, are actively catered to. For this to happen, all of the 
members will be registered with one of the three advocacy groups of the 
learning system.
Advocacy services will:
• Interact with the three output dimensions to make sure that members, 
especially the youth, are receiving the proper education at the right 
time, in the right amount, and of the right quality
• Intervene, coordinate, and take whatever action is necessary to make 
sure that constituencies are properly treated and their individualized 
needs satisfactorily met
• Keep in touch with parents and enlist their active support for the suc-
cess of educational efforts
• Create special programs for members who are in need of rehabilitation 
services
10.5.6  Oneida Multiversity
The educational effort of the Oneida Nation will be leveraged to operate 
far more effectively by making a fundamental break with the conventional 
models. Conventional models of education, relevant in the previous era, 
have outlived their useful life. They are proving to be more of a constraint 
than instruments of the kind of education needed to create the contempo-
rary citizen. There is a real need for an alternative model grounded in an 
open learning paradigm. The new learning experience, which can be called 
Oneida Multiversity, will:
• Cover all levels of education from kindergarten to postgraduate
• Create a learning society by turning the whole Nation into a school with-
out walls where learning can be freed from time and place restrictions
• Provide formal, professional, and cultural education
• Use learners as educators and educators as learners in the same course
• Remove boundaries between the worlds of work, hobby, and learning
• Remove the boundaries between theoretical, vocational, and artistic 
studies so that members can be learning while earning, and vice versa

Learning Systems  231
• Provide opportunities for every member of the Nation to be, poten-
tially, a teacher and a student at all times
• Allow sufficient flexibility so that noncompulsory (ages six to sixteen) 
learners can get in and out of the system at will
• Introduce learning cells, research cells, and practice cells that allow the 
participants to carry out multiple roles in all of them (as educators 
and/or researchers and/or practitioners) at the same time
• Be open to all kinds of pedagogic approaches, formats, methodologies, 
and curricula in addition to useful conventional ones
• Be accessible by all members — anytime, anywhere
The learning system employs the following educational vehicles.
10.5.6.1  Learning cells
A learning cell is a vehicle for increasing the knowledge and understand-
ing of the participants in a collaborative context. By operationalizing the 
idea that the best way of learning is teaching, it will make the learners 
responsible for both teaching to and learning from each other. The success 
of students assigned to a learner–teacher will then be a measure for evalu-
ating the success of the learner–teacher.
Language dissemination, adult literacy, and vocational education and 
training, for example, can best be achieved through learning cells, which 
produce cascade effects by making learning by teaching and training by 
trainers happen at the same time. Such a system of learning could be made 
exponentially effective by providing added extrinsic incentives to learner–
teachers, whose students could demonstrate proficiency in their subject 
matter. The students who pass the standard can, in turn, go on teaching 
other learners and get compensated for it on an output-oriented basis. 
Thus the motivation of learning to learn is multiplied by learning to teach 
and learning by teaching.
By taking advantage of what is already available in the environment 
and concentrating on an internally generated supply of services in the 
areas unique to the system, the education system can maximize its 
effectiveness. It does so by capitalizing on the available resources in its 
environment and complementing them when they are lacking. One 
such example would be to make the externally hired contractors com-
mit themselves to the task of training counterparts from the internal 
pool of personnel as an integral part of their professional responsibili-
ties. They should expect not to receive the balance of their compensa-
tion unless the pre-assigned trainees achieve the requisite level of 
competence.
This pyramidal structure of group learning requires its own system of 
organization, management, and support services to take care of such 
arrangements as assignment of roles, interconnectivity with training cells 
in the business dimension, and the action plans for future application of 
learned skills in professional/vocational contexts.

232 
The Oneida Nation
10.5.6.2  Research cells
Research cells, like learning cells, have a participant-centered focus. Among 
other things, they are charged with cultural reinterpretation. Research cells 
are to find out how the future can be built with the aid of the past. In this 
regard, a shared vision of the desired future will help them identify and 
select — from a rich and, at times, quite heterogeneous content of cultural 
heritage — the values, the symbolism, the meanings, and the rituals that 
will be relevant to reinventing the future and helpful in the nation-­building 
effort.
10.5.6.3  Practice cells
Practice cells will involve all kinds of participatory group activities such as 
theater, arts festivals, fashion shows, and sporting events. Practice cells will 
promote those activities that are high in their experiential learning con-
tent. They will be instrumental in the cultivation of those tastes that will 
ultimately result in the creation of an environment promoting ever-
increasing generation and consumption of aesthetic creations, artistic val-
ues, and cultural commodities. The idea is to erase the conventional 
boundaries of education, work, and fun and integrate art, sports, and pas-
time into creative activities that attract and engage all the members, espe-
cially the young, wherever they are.
Practice cells, mediums of competency development, will be run by 
members with proven capabilities in specific activities. These mentors 
design the projects and are provided with a budget to develop the partici-
pants as well as the market for their services. Each cell is typically made up 
of five to six participants.
10.5.7  Performance Criteria and Measures
The learning system will be a performance center. It will be a throughput-
oriented operation with a built-in tendency to keep the consumption in 
check and not allow it to grow beyond a healthy percentage of value gen-
eration. The operating budget will therefore be a percentage of its actual 
throughput.
Participating learners pay a tuition in the form of vouchers they have 
obtained. Tuition is considered as income only when the voucher is cashed 
in. The budget, therefore, is on a per-head basis. The source of vouchers, 
and ultimately the budget of the learning system, is the education trust 
fund set up to finance the system as a performance center. The designated 
fund will only be realized by the system once the participant is actually 
picked up for processing by the learning system.
The design of the performance measures will be informed by the degree 
to which the following indicators are realized:
• Cultural, educational, and professional integration
• Widespread and active interest in learning to be, learning to learn, and 
learning to do

Business Systems  233
• Demand, both internal and external, for the graduates of the system
• Multidimensionality, as manifested by the participants (being a learner, 
a teacher, and practitioner at the same time), as well as resource utili-
zation (multiple use of facilities and resources for all kinds of learning 
activities in the system)
• Cultural vitality through revitalization, adaptation, and adoption of 
the norms that prove relevant to the preservation and continued devel-
opment of the Nation
The measures will be eclectic; they will be both objectively and subjec-
tively devised and applied. Objectivity, after all, is collective subjectivity.
10.5.7.1  Governance and intersystem relationships
Since compatibility among the membership, learning, and business 
dimensions is of utmost importance to the success of the Nation, their 
interactions will be coordinated at the PLCB. In addition, the learning sys-
tem will operate under a PLC Learning Board that will be made up of a 
member of the BC, the GM, the director of the learning platform, and his/
her direct reports. Each basic unit of the system will also be assisted by an 
advisory group whose members will be selected from cultural and profes-
sional cells operating in the membership network.
10.6  Business systems
To be viable and self-reliant, a nation should be able to generate and dis-
seminate wealth, products, and services effectively. It should be capable 
of addressing all those factors that affect the standard of living, such as 
health, food, housing, and other material needs of the membership. 
Generation and dissemination are two sides of the same coin. Generation 
without proper distribution breeds alienation, whereas distribution 
without adequate generation will lead to equitable distribution of pov-
erty. Self-reliance, to be self-sustaining, needs to be grounded in diver-
sity. History has not been kind to societies that relied on a single source 
of survival.
The business system is the dimension of architecture responsible for 
expanding and mobilizing the Nation's capacity for viability. In charge of 
entrepreneurial and business development, it will be involved in creating 
business opportunities and supporting the members to successfully detect, 
seize, manage, and exploit the emerging opportunities.
Ultimately, real wealth is about the competence to convert opportuni-
ties into values that are essential for satisfying both one's own needs and 
desires and those of others. Success in contributing to both collective and 
individual life-achievement goals is a vital sign of people who have earned 
the right to be in charge of their destinies. Economic success is, ultimately, 
about freedom to exercise choice. The ugliest manifestation of poverty is 
powerlessness.

234 
The Oneida Nation
Perhaps no other mission of the business function is as important as 
helping communities to prosper while learning to attain higher levels of 
self-reliance. The Indians have always been proud and resourceful people. 
Their culture is replete with qualities that are essentially entrepreneurial. 
Although they valued communitarianism, they have also celebrated rug-
ged individualism, self-reliance, and bravery.
Success is about desires and abilities. Desires and abilities do not have 
substitutes. They cannot be given nor be imposed from the outside. That is 
perhaps the reason why trusteeship, no matter how noble the intentions, 
has the potential of defeating the very purposes for which it was originally 
set up. Intended to help, it can lead to helplessness. Mandated to create 
autonomy, it can degenerate into dependency. Meant to preserve ideals, it 
can end up corrupting them. Experience shows that well-intentioned sys-
tems of bureaucratized assistance can prove, counterintuitively, devastat-
ing. This trend, however limited, needs to be reversed. The answer is 
subsidizing demand instead of subsidizing the supply.
To realize its mission in serving the Nation's economic interests, the 
business system will engage in all of the activities that are primarily 
designed to
• Ensure the long-term financial self-sufficiency of the Nation
• Diversify the sources of revenue
• Eliminate the Nation's reliance on a single source of income
• Create employment opportunities
Business development includes identification of business opportunities, 
raising capital, infusion of seed money, investment, partnership, manage-
ment of operation, and provision of management support services. It will 
actively explore and identify the potential opportunities for Oneida entre-
preneurs. It will also support Oneidas about, and encourage them to take 
advantage of, the available federal provisions for securing special business 
privileges for specific minorities.
All of the units in the business dimension will be profit centers. If and 
when management finds it necessary, for whatever reason, to subsidize a par-
ticular service to a particular user, it will have to do so by subsidizing the 
demand and never the supply. Such a market-based discipline will protect 
both the provider and the user of the service from the unhealthy effects of 
bureaucratized relations leading to providers’ arrogance and insensitivity 
toward the user and the users’ helplessness and dependency on its supplier.
In this context, the business system will consist of a series of business 
units formed as profit centers organized into five dimensions: services, 
industry, leisure, land and agriculture, and marketing (Figure 10.8).
10.6.1  Services Sector
This platform will consist of businesses in the services sector. The service 
providers, operating within the government division, will eventually be 
transformed into a profit center and become a member of this group. 

Business Systems  235
However, initially, the service units in this sector will consist of: financial 
services, such as investment or commercial banks, and ancillary services, 
such as engineering and business development.
10.6.2  Industry Sector
This will include suppliers and technology companies whose output will 
be bought and integrated into the outputs of other platforms or sold 
directly to external clients.
10.6.3  Leisure Sector
This will include gaming, restaurants, hotels, and entertainment operations. 
Generically, gaming belongs to the entertainment industry. It is but one of 
the wide-ranging business activities that capitalizes on the vast opportunities 
emerging from ever-growing leisure time. Approached from a leisure-based 
vantage point, gaming can be treated as one link in a long value chain provid-
ing a whole array of services in response to the entire spectrum of vacationing 
families’ needs. Hotels, resorts, amusement and/or theme parks, zoos, trans-
portation, and other tourism-related services are promising pieces of the 
entertainment jigsaw. Other than lodging requirements, adequate land and 
air accessibility, from as many points as possible, is crucial to the success of a 
broad leisure-based portfolio. Gaming, in terms of its functional properties, 
belongs to the leisure dimension. However, because of its sheer size and stage 
of maturation, it will be managed as a separate entity until such time that 
other nascent leisure-related businesses reach a level of growth that removes 
the threat of their being overshadowed by gaming's presence.
10.6.4  Land and Agriculture Sector
This will include housing, food processing, and farming operations. Land 
is a precious resource. Although it has extrinsic value in terms of national 
sovereignty, its opportunity cost is too high to let it lie fallow simply as a 
BUSINESS SYSTEM
RETAIL BUSINESS 
DISTRIBUTION CHANNEL
M
A
R
K
E
T
LAND  MANAG'T
&  AGRICULTURE
LEISURE
S
E
R
V
I
C
E
S
INDUSTRY
ADVISORY
GROUP
ADVISORY
GROUP
ADVISORY 
GROUP
BUSINESS  BOARD
GAMING, RESTAURANTS, HOTELS,
ENTERTAINMENT
BANKING
SHARED
SERVICES
SERVICE
PROVIDERS
SUPPLIERS
& 
TECHNOLOGY CO
HOUSING
FOOD PROCESSING
FARMING
SECTORAL DIMENSIONS
FIGURE 10.8  Business system structure.

236 
The Oneida Nation
piece of property. Once the ownership of land is established, it should be 
managed by this platform in the most effective manner.
10.6.5  Marketing Sector
The marketing arm of the business system will consist of the retail busi-
ness and distribution channel, which will aggressively search and exploit 
the existing and potential needs of the current and emerging markets in 
and outside of the United States. This sector will work closely with all out-
put units and act as their marketing arm.
Each platform is intended to house all three distinct types of owner-
ship as follows.
10.6.5.1  Collective ownership
This type of ownership will consist of all the business activities that are col-
lectively owned by the Nation. This type of ownership can be used in all 
platforms. Collective ownership can be formed in agriculture, services, 
industry, land management, housing, and leisure/entertainment. For exam-
ple, because of the significant role that gaming plays in the operation of the 
Nation, it is only natural that it continue to be collectively owned. However, 
peripheral activities that are related to gaming that can enhance the leisure 
dimension could be created by means of individual ownership.
10.6.5.2  Individual ownership and strategic alliances
Business units created by entrepreneurial members, alone, in groups, or in 
strategic alliances with outsiders (in all platforms), will be supported by 
the Nation. These units will be licensed to operate for a minimal fee as 
long as their activities are compatible with the economic interests of the 
Nation and provide employment opportunities for its members.
10.6.5.3  Partnership and franchise development
Franchising will be an appropriate format to create partnership between 
the Nation and the individual members to encourage the proliferation of 
business activities that can be packaged and duplicated within or outside 
the reservation.
The franchise model would be a powerful entrepreneurial tool for eco-
nomic development. Well planned, it can easily create hundreds of out-
side businesspersons who would otherwise have no chance of ever 
becoming such for lack of capital, training, or access to professional assis-
tance, or all of those factors combined.
10.6.6  Governance and Intersystem Relationships
Activities and interactions among the membership, learning, and business 
dimensions will be coordinated by the PLCB. However, business systems 
will be governed by a PLC Business Board that will act as a holding ­company. 

Core Services  237
Membership of this board will consist of the treasurer, chief of staff, GM 
of  gaming, director of financial systems, director of technical systems, 
GM of business systems, and his or her direct reports. In addition, each sec-
tor of the business platform (services, industry, leisure, land and agricul-
ture, retail) may choose to have an Advisory Group selected from the 
members of the professional cells in the membership network.
10.7  Core services
Core services will consist of three basic services that are necessary to main-
tain the physical infrastructure and social stability of the Nation. These 
services will benefit all the members collectively and indiscriminately.
10.7.1  Government Services Division
Health services and social services are the major function of the govern-
ment services division.
10.7.1.1  Health services
Delivery of all health services, preventive and interventive, including den-
tal and medicinal, will be organized and managed through this depart-
ment. In addition, the department will be responsible for all of the 
environmental services such as sanitation, industrial hygiene, safety, and 
community health.
It is recommended that the department be redesigned in such a way 
that it will, in general, subsidize the demand instead of the supply of 
health delivery. Delivery units should be gradually converted to profit cen-
ters and moved to the services dimension of the business platform.
10.7.1.2  Social services
The social services department will be responsible for three basic outputs:
• Counseling: Relief and treatment of all chemical dependencies, domes-
tic abuse, and other social ills. Provision of paralegal services as well 
as support of senior citizens and veterans are also the responsibility of 
this unit.
• Economic support and income maintenance: This unit will support those 
who are not able to support themselves. However, as much as possible, 
it is the responsibility of this unit to work closely with the learning and 
business systems to create meaningful employment opportunities for 
the able-bodied in the Nation.
• Housing authority: This unit will make sure that all those who need 
a home or shelter will get one. It will develop and manage all group 
homes and shelters and provide assistance to those families that need 
help in securing housing. The overriding policy should be aimed at 
integrating rather than segregating people.

238 
The Oneida Nation
10.7.2  Infrastructure Development Division
This division will be responsible for space planning and engineering as 
well as public works.
10.7.2.1  Space planning and engineering
This department will plan the space for the Nation. It will deal with all 
environmental concerns, land use, housing, utilities, and transportation. It 
will be responsible for project coordination and construction manage-
ment. Development of zoning, issuing permits, and inspection and 
enforcement of space plans are the responsibilities of this department.
10.7.2.2  Public works
This department will manage the operation of all utilities, wells, septic 
maintenance of buildings, facilities, grounds, parks, and recreational cen-
ters, and automotive and Oneida Transit services.
10.7.3  Ordinance Division
This division will be responsible for compliance and records management.
10.7.3.1  Compliance
This department will be responsible for law enforcement (the police), 
conservation, preferences, vendor licensing, and collection of any taxes 
required.
10.7.3.2  Records management
This department will house all the national historical documents as well 
as registry of individual membership, identification records, and land and 
property titles.
10.7.4  Performance Criteria and Measures
These services will have to be incented to act in a cost-effective manner, 
doing more with less. They will have to operate on a throughput-oriented 
basis with a budget that will be kept as a portion of their revenues. The 
success of these units should never be measured by their size (amount of 
budget, number of employees, or size of populations served), but by the 
cost effectiveness of their delivery.
10.7.5  Governance and Oversight
In addition to the PLCB, which will coordinate the activities of the core 
services with other platforms, core services will be governed by the PLC 
Services Board. Members of the PLC Services Board will consist of a desig-
nated member of the GB, chief of staff, GM of the platform, and his/her 
direct reports.

External Environment  239
It is imperative that core services act as servers and not, as is often the 
case, controllers. Since membership at large is the beneficiary of these ser-
vices, a number of advisory committees, as deemed necessary, may be set 
up to oversee the operation of these services.
10.8  External environment
The external environment dimension will provide mutual interfaces 
between the system and its containing environment. This dimension 
will operate on the assumption that, in order to survive and grow, 
Oneida Nation, like any viable social system, must remain open and 
continuously interact with the other actors in its environment. It is, 
therefore, a means of channeling the scattered energies of the Nation 
that would otherwise be wasted in nonstrategic, and even conflicting, 
activities to focus on external opportunities and threats facing the 
Nation as a whole.
No nation is capable of satisfying all of its needs by itself. Self-
determination and self-reliance should not be confused with self-­
sufficiency. Interdependence implies two-way relationships. It requires 
giving and taking at the same time. Ultimately, a developed society, given 
the same level of resources, can do more with less.
Environmental interface, especially where one represents a minor-
ity, requires recognition of special burdens and responsibilities that go 
with it. External perceptions and the group image are crucial. As far as 
minority groups are concerned, an individual's actions tend to receive 
much greater attention because one is automatically perceived as a 
typical representative of the group. Thus, the actions of a few, for bet-
ter or worse, reflect disproportionately on the image of the whole. 
Minorities, therefore, ought to be that much more sensitive to the 
image they project. They need to take much greater care of the way 
their image is received. Minorities can hardly afford to neglect their 
public relations sensitivities. Negligence and complacency can prove 
too costly.
The external environment dimension will operate at the following 
three levels:
• Federal and state government
• Local and business environment
• Other Indian Nations
All three levels will make sure that the system is kept adequately informed. 
By constantly monitoring the environment, they will provide timely inputs 
on significant trends and developments representing emerging threats 
and/or opportunities. They will also relentlessly pursue the interests of the 
Oneida Nation by influencing the events in their respective environments. 
The idea is to influence where one cannot control and appreciate where 
one cannot influence.

240 
The Oneida Nation
10.9  Judicial system
The two basic functions of an Oneida judicial system are as follows:
• Consummation of the national sovereignty; the ability to interpret and 
modify the constitution and to ensure equal protection of members 
under the law
• Creation of an independent and legitimate channel for conflict reso-
lution and redress of grievances, thus relieving the government from 
becoming diverted by concerns that are basically judicial in nature
10.9.1  Contextual Analysis
Designing an effective judicial system for the Oneida Nation requires that 
the unique characteristics of the system in which it is intended to operate 
be fully understood, explicitly stated, and widely agreed upon. This under-
standing is essential to clarify such questions as
• Why a separate judicial system is needed
• How it will relate to the existing order
• What the main source and nature of different conflicts are
That the Oneida Nation is a unique social system should not be so difficult 
to understand. The relationship between the Oneidas and their government 
is different from that of nations whose governments play a much smaller 
role, and a purely noncommercial one at that, in the lives of their people. 
Therefore, the overriding concern for the Oneida judicial system would 
involve the relationship between the individual and the collectivity.
Government responsibility for collective ownership of critical re­­
sourc­es, while it may serve a useful purpose in special contexts, is fraught 
with powerful political implications. For nations whose governments are 
saddled with the responsibility for collective ownership in addition to 
governance, the way the two functions are arranged and prosecuted impacts 
their systemic consequences enormously. The following points underline 
some of the adverse consequences of bundling up the two functions:
• The governance and business management roles would get so mixed 
up that neither of them, even under the most ideal circumstances, 
could be achieved and assessed satisfactorily.
• Government becomes responsible, not only for normal governance 
functions, but also for providing employment as a means of distrib-
uting wealth. Loss of clear-cut accountability would then be the first 
casualty of such an arrangement. The natural consequence of regarding 
government employment as a right rather than a privilege eliminates 
competence as a requirement for employment. The result would be an 
irresponsible tendency to do less for more, and a burgeoning attitude 
characterized by hostility and negativity.
• In a single-employer environment, the individual's dependency on the 
state would take on larger and more complex dimensions. Losing one's 
job would then be tantamount to permanent unemployment and 

Judicial System  241
condemnation to abject poverty. Chronic dependency would breed 
learned helplessness, frustration, alienation, and a culture of insatia-
ble demand for free services. Natural conflicts arising out of the nor-
mal interactions between a manager and his or her subordinate would 
take on a political tone and be referred to the political system. In this 
context, development and enforcement of equitable employment con-
tracts (HR policies) will become the most sensitive and vital concern 
of every member.
• Based on personal interests and even stylistic preferences, dissatisfac-
tions with any decisions could metastasize into disruptive political 
pressures. Proliferation and increased intransigence of pressure groups 
would then further strain the citizen–state interdependencies until they 
reach explosive proportions. The ensuing fragmentation of the majority 
into several interest groups would give rise to ever-­marginalized pres-
sure groups striking volatile coalitions of convenience based on agree-
ments on means rather than on ends. People would abandon their 
affiliations around the national mandates and, instead, become sub-
divided around hidden and irrational agendas maliciously intended 
to threaten, paralyze, and ultimately undermine the system of which 
they are a part. As a consequence, the administration cannot help but 
become increasingly bogged down and eventually truncated from its 
normal functions by a nightmare of ever-proliferating complaints. This 
overwhelming tendency, if allowed to continue, would force the sys-
tem to either resort to an authoritarian style intended to silence all 
opposition or just cave in to total paralysis.
10.9.2  Contextual Challenge
When the state is the only game in town, existence of an effective mecha-
nism to mediate between the individual and the state becomes a must. 
Otherwise, political pressure would become more pronounced and pre­
sent itself as the only possible recourse for redressing grievances that are 
originally nonpolitical.
The success of a judicial system lies in its effectiveness in handling nor-
mal conflicts that are the inevitable by-products of human interactions. If, 
however, the design suffers from structural conflicts (conflicts whose gen-
eration is a function of adversarially designed structures rather than clashes 
of personalities), then no robust judicial system would ever be capable of 
coping with the conflictual side effects of such an inherently flawed sys-
tem. The constant tugs-of-war, arising, for example, from a common ten-
dency to commingle governance proper with management of collective 
ownership, would produce a no-win situation for any judicial system. The 
usual never-ending contest between conflict generation and conflict reso-
lution, where public sense of fairness would be the ultimate loser, is symp-
tomatic of such a flawed approach.

242 
The Oneida Nation
When particular socioeconomic conditions make it imperative for the 
government to assume a collective-ownership role, it is best to make sure 
that the managements of the two functions are kept separate from each 
other as much as possible. The stewardship of public resources should be 
treated as a trusteeship undertaken on behalf of the people, who are the 
real owners of the assets. As far as this trusteeship responsibility is con-
cerned, the system would have to be designed to reflect the commercial 
nature of such an operation.
This concern has been a critical element in designing Oneida's new 
architecture. The overall design is intended, among other things, to gener-
ate a system free from structural conflict. It separates the conduct of gover-
nance from the conduct of the business management by assigning them to 
distinct, though interrelated, platforms with different performance criteria 
and measures.
To capitalize on the positives and minimize the negatives of combin-
ing governance with collective ownership, it is recommended that the 
learning and business systems platforms become additional and indepen-
dent sources of employment (each with a separate HR department). This 
move will create a propensity to expand and increase internal sources of 
variety in the system, instead of creating a single monopoly that reduces 
the choices of members. Under these conditions, redundancy of some crit-
ical functions is, despite the conventional wisdom, the solution rather 
than the problem. The business platform should provide additional 
sources of variety by expanding opportunities for private as well as collec-
tive ownership.
10.9.3  Democratic Challenge
When creating, within the context of collective ownership, a viable society 
based on democratic conventions, it is crucial to define the notion and 
parameters of majority rule. It is imperative to forge a widespread agree-
ment on what constitutes a legitimate majority: its powers, its boundaries, 
and whether it has a right to override the individual or trample minorities 
in the name of the whole. It should define the limits of the minority and 
majority rights so that they may complement, rather than encroach on, 
the rights of others. If the rule of law finds its legitimacy in the will of the 
majority, then tyranny of the majority would be a fait accompli unless it 
transcends, and reigns supreme over, the majority itself. The majority, for 
example, has no right to disown its right to democracy and, thus, demo-
cratically undermine democracy itself.
Collective ownership carries a series of responsibilities that saddle it 
with commensurate powers. By the same token, the individual has certain 
rights that correspond with commensurate duties. The judicial system 
should therefore make sure that there exists a four-pronged balance and 
reciprocity between rights and responsibilities: both within those of the 
individual and those of the Nation on the one hand, as well as between 

Judicial System  243
the individual's and the Nation's on the other. Rights and responsibilities 
are indivisible; they are two sides of the same coin. Neither could exist 
without the other.
The system should have a built-in capability to differentiate between 
entitlements and privileges of the individual on the one hand, and the 
governance and commercial responsibilities of the government on the 
other. The individual and the collectivity, which is represented by the gov-
ernment, both have separate, and yet interrelated, rights and responsibili-
ties. Not only are these two sets of rights and responsibilities not exclusive, 
but they are essentially complementary. In fact, they are so interdependent 
that one could not be dealt with without touching the other.
Collectivity has distinct rights to security, viability, and sovereignty. It 
has a right to act; its decision process cannot be taken hostage. It is also 
responsible for making sure that the individual, even as a minority of one, 
is provided with enough alternatives to make his/her choices meaningful.
An individual citizen has inalienable rights, such as the right to privacy 
and the right not to be discriminated against. In addition to the rights, the 
individual can enjoy certain privileges, which he/she may acquire or lose, 
provided certain conditions are, or are not, satisfied. The individual, how-
ever, stands to lose the privileges that he/she abuses; irresponsible driving 
would be one obvious example.
10.9.3.1  A critical concern
The existing judicial alternative in the environment has turned out to be 
too costly. The exorbitant cost of justice has pushed it increasingly out of 
the reach of the non-wealthy. As far as ordinary people are concerned, it 
has become an unaffordable commodity. The amount of time and money 
required to sustain almost any litigation makes the pursuit of justice a lux-
ury not many can afford. More often than not, even winning would be 
illusory. The Oneida judicial system should therefore be designed in such 
a way that it will be both accessible to and affordable for all Oneidas, and 
be capable of addressing those concerns of the citizens versus the collectiv-
ity that would otherwise remain unmet by the containing system.

This page intentionally left blank

245
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a p t er | eleven
Butterworth Health 
System
This report summarizes Butterworth's attempt to redesign itself around a 
concept of care that makes a significant break from the current practice. 
The report projects a shared vision of Butterworth's desired future. It is 
produced by active participation of the design team. Members represent-
ing Butterworth are Katy Black, Sharon Buursma, Priscilla A. Dakin, Roy 
Eickman, Michael Freed, William G. Gonzalez, Joyce Henry, Jean Hitchcock, 
Pat Marks, Philip McCorkle, Irma Napoli, Tom Ouellette, Jon Ganz, M.D., 
Ray Gonzales, M.D., Brian Roelof, M.D., Suzanne Rogers, Joel Sacks, M.D., 
Carol Sarosik, James F. VanDam, M.D., Fred Vandenberg, and Randy 
Wagner. Members representing INTERACT are Jamshid Gharajedaghi and 
Bijan Khorram.
The design represents six iterations directed at generating consensus on 
the following key points:
• Shared understanding of the issues, concerns, and expectations of 
those who have a stake in the organization
• Shared understanding of the emerging health-care environment
• Identification of the purpose and strategic intent of the system
• Identification of the specifications of the desired system
• Development of the systems architecture (major components and their 
relationships)
To meet the space limitations of this book, 200 pages of design docu-
ment had to be condensed to 40 pages. To minimize the compromising 
effect on the design as a whole, the main reductions were focused on the 
marketing, administration, and governing dimensions of the architec-
ture. Inevitably in the process, some very interesting ideas have been lost 
or misrepresented. I hope that the design team will accept my apologies 
for this.

246 
Butterworth Health System 
11.1  Issues, concerns, and expectations
The present health-care system has its origin in sickness care. It was designed 
to provide service to those who fall ill and need medical care. The cost-
recovery aspect of utilizing sickness-based health care has been ­associated 
with three basic conceptions: fee for service, cost plus operation, and third-
party payer, as defined in the following:
• Fee for service is an exchange system in which charges are proportional 
to the level of services rendered.
• Cost plus is a pricing mechanism in which the incurred costs plus a 
markup designed to cover the overhead and margin are summed up to 
define the value of the output.
• Third-party payer is an institutional arrangement in which the receiver of 
the service (the consumer) is not the same as the payer (customer). The 
arrangement transfers the costs to the institutional customer (insurance 
companies and government), who in turn transfers them, indirectly,  
to ultimate payers and the public at large.
The current model has no built-in mechanism of self-control to discipline 
the relationship between the provider and the patient. It has created a pos-
itive feedback loop that has fueled an insatiable demand for more services. 
The demand feeds on itself as long as patients are willing to ask, providers 
are eager to serve, and third-party payers do not mind picking up the tab 
and adding a margin before passing it on to the ultimate payer. In such a 
context, demand cannot be rationalized.
Advances in technology have expanded the possibilities for continuous 
medical breakthroughs. As a result, life expectancy has increased and the 
desire to delay the final exit has caused the demand for technology to grow 
exponentially. However, technology can only delay the final exit at exorbi-
tant costs, and every time it does it further fuels the insatiability of the 
demand. This exponential growth in demand for postponing the eventual-
ity at all costs cannot be left unchecked — especially if costs are conve-
niently passed to a third-party payer, leaving the demanding population 
under the illusion of a continuous free lunch.
The system seems to have hit its upper limit. Alarmed by the long-term 
consequences of its own irresponsible demand for more, better, and cost-
lier care, the stakeholders of the system have begun to apply the brakes. 
This has forced the growth curve into an S-shaped form.
The first corrective action against this runaway escalation has been the 
introduction of HMOs to manage care. To reduce the rising costs of care, 
one has to begin to manage the care, since 85% of the operating expenses 
were assumed to be the cost of goods (care). The majority of HMOs, how-
ever, have not been successful at managing care. Instead, they have relin-
quished this responsibility by moving into a contractual mode that 
exchanged volume for wholesale discounts. Thus HMOs have achieved 
economies of scale by delivering their captive customers to the health-care 
system. Although this has reduced the rate of growth, the pressures to 

Issues, Concerns, and Expectations  247
­contain costs have continued and the idea of managing care has resur-
faced. HMOs have been forced to use a bureaucratic system and a mecha-
nistic mode of operation to manage the most emotional and sensitive 
behavior of a human system of health care.
Not surprisingly, the mechanistic management of care has been 
received with resistance. The idea of a bureaucrat telling the health-care 
system what to do, or not to do, proved unacceptable for the two critical 
stakeholders: the patient and the provider. Although some HMOs have 
developed more elaborate models to manage care, they have retained 
their bureaucratic character and have operated within a mechanical frame-
work. Structural conflict, compounded by intractability of developing a 
simple mechanistic solution to what is essentially a complex living phe-
nomenon, has led to the abdication of the problem. The emerging 
response yielded itself to the concept of capitation (per-head payment), 
pushing the decision and the financial risk lower in the supply chain to 
the provider level.
In a parallel development to capitation, the concept of preventive 
care has emerged as an effective way to control costs. HMOs got into the 
act by default and broadened the notion of health care to include well-
ness. The combination of wellness with capitation had promised to be 
an effective solution to the problem of depersonalization of care by 
removing the bureaucrat as an intervening agent between the patient and 
the provider.
This could have proved effective as long as the service was limited to 
preventive and normal care and was carried out in the context of a gener-
ally healthy population with a normal risk distribution that could easily 
be assessed and managed. However, when the treatment of acute cases is 
mixed in with the routine practice of health maintenance, the notion of 
risk management takes on a whole new significance. In the conventional 
capitation model, the patient population is distributed among the pri-
mary care physicians with a fixed payment per member. The smaller the 
population, the higher the risk. This is contrary to the notion of insurance, 
which is to reduce risk within a large population. Otherwise, the idea of 
insurance would be pointless.
To overcome the problem of risk in subgroups assigned to primary care 
physicians, some HMOs have provided a special case approval process. As 
a consequence, in cases that involve life and death decisions, the system 
once again refers the responsibility back to its mechanistic bureaucracy. 
Thus the old problem of conflict is renewed not only between the physi-
cian and the patient but also between the physician and the insurance 
company.
To aggravate the situation further, the supposition that the primary 
physician will pay for the services of specialized care throws the sensitive 
patient–physician relationship, as well as the general practitioner–­
specialist relationship, into suspicion and controversy. The mere ­perception 

248 
Butterworth Health System 
of a conflict of interest, even if unfounded, is not helpful in a relationship 
that should be based upon unshakable trust. Trust among major stake-
holders (primary care physician, medical specialist, and patient) is the 
most crucial element for the success of any health-care model. Any notion 
of structural conflict will disrupt the whole system. Until the system comes 
of age, such suspicions should be preempted. This would imply the need 
to create enough safeguards to make sure that proper functioning of the 
system is not compromised.
The major overhaul of sensitive institutions, foremost among them the 
health-care system, should consider the risks of social experimentation. 
Interventions into social contexts, once brought into existence, tend to 
take on a life of their own. When a cause goes away, its effects do not nec-
essarily go away. In social domains, cause and effect are separated in time 
and space. Consequences of an action may take some time to realize; 
therefore, any new design should be kept deliberately open, flexible, and 
mindful of irreversible consequences of its actions.
The new design should create an opportunity for a well-balanced 
approach. It should avoid alternating between extreme concerns in one 
direction followed by subsequent reversals in the opposite direction. The 
virtues of fee for service, capitation, and other useful concepts should be 
incorporated into an encompassing system that will allow for choice and 
adaptive behavior without an endless series of disruptive fluctuations 
along the way. The system should expand its sources of variety by incorpo-
rating different alternatives and evolve through continuous selection and 
learning.
11.2  Design specifications
The new system should:
• Rationalize the relationship between supply and demand in such a 
way that the patients receive optimum quality care without fueling an 
insatiable demand for wasteful services
• Utilize advanced technology to provide the best possible care without 
creating unreasonable expectations
• Dissolve the structural conflict among patients, providers, payers, and 
administrators of the health-care system in such a way that they com-
plement each other without any of them being compromised
• Maximize the flexibility and responsiveness of the system and take full 
advantage of the existing and emerging possibilities in the health-care 
market
• Be capable of continuous learning, adaptation, and renewal
• Represent the state-of-the-art in health delivery management without 
getting sidetracked into irrevocable social experimentation
• Contain and dissolve the pre-existing conditions (the mess) in the cur-
rent institutional setup while preventing them from spilling over into 
the newly created components

The Architecture  249
11.3  The Architecture
The systems architecture (Figure 11.1) identifies the value chain, the criti-
cal dimensions of the health-care system, and the way it relates users to 
providers in the health-care system. In order to create an architecture that 
will realize the expectations and desires of Butterworth's stakeholders, the 
designers recognized the necessity of employing a multidimensional 
scheme. Such an architecture is intended not only to dissolve the existing 
“mess” but also to transcend it by developing a vision of the next genera-
tion of a health-care system.
The architecture represents a platform from which Butterworth's dis-
tinctive value chain will evolve. The value chain identifies all of the ele-
ments of the health-care system and their relationships along a market 
dimension (access and care systems), an output dimension (health deliv-
ery modules), and an input dimension (core knowledge and shared 
services).
This multidimensional framework not only helps the designers 
understand and differentiate each component of the system, but also 
establishes the components’ relationships in such a way that an inte-
grated and cohesive whole can emerge. Design and incorporation of 
the missing elements, which can be identified by an analysis of the 
value chain, will lead to a value-adding system in which the value gen-
erated by the whole will be greater than the sum of the values produced 
by the parts.
FIGURE 11.1  Systems architecture.

250 
Butterworth Health System 
11.4  Market dimension
The market dimension deals with the users of the health-care system. 
A market is defined in terms of three essential elements: need, access, and 
purchasing power.
The classification and proper grouping of health-care needs define the 
nature of products and services rendered. These will be discussed in detail 
under the following section on the care system. However, the classification 
of users into various groupings reflects their purchasing power and defines 
the market access mechanism necessary to reach them.
11.4.1  Market Access
Users of the health-care system are traditionally grouped into the follow-
ing institutional models.
11.4.1.1  Fee for service
The traditional insurance companies such as Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
usually represent fee-for-service arrangements. Members are free to choose 
their own providers, who are compensated on a cost plus basis. Blue Cross/
Blue Shield of Michigan has converted to a managed payment system; it 
pays on a diagnostic-related group (DRG) basis. This arrangement has 
caused the development of the interventional care system.
11.4.1.2  HMOs
HMOs were designed as a way to curb the rising costs of health care by 
managing the members’ health-care demand needs. They contract for care 
on a discounted basis from providers. HMO patients are limited to a pre-
selected group of providers. In evolving HMOs, the providers are given a 
fixed per-member sum, called capitation, to be drawn against for services 
rendered. Although originally sick-care oriented, HMOs have begun to 
build prevention, maintenance, and wellness into their services to curb the 
treatment costs — hence the term “managed-care plans.”
11.4.1.3  Independents (self-insured)
The independents, or self-insured populations, include employers who 
finance health-related charges for their members based on the plans they 
design for themselves. They may choose to outsource the management of 
their system to HMOs, to other insurance companies, or to third-party 
administrators (TPAs). To serve this group effectively requires a great 
degree of flexibility because each represents a variety of different designs.
11.4.1.4  Medicare
Medicare is a federal government health insurance plan for those who 
have reached a certain age (around 65) and have contributed the mini-
mum premiums required to the fund. Medicare is beginning to move 
patients toward managed-care plans.

Care System  251
11.4.1.5  Medicaid
Medicaid is primarily a state government health insurance plan for those 
who lack the resources to take care of themselves. It also provides nursing 
home funding for long-term maintenance for the poor. Some state plans 
are also beginning to move patients toward managed-care plans.
11.4.1.6  Noncovered customers
Noncovered customers are disenfranchised individuals who are not mem-
bers of any insurance plan. The care for these individuals is important to 
the health system. They ultimately receive care through emergency rooms 
and inpatient hospitals that receive little or no reimbursement.
Butterworth Health System may take the initiative to design and 
experiment with a select neighborhood group of noncovered customers 
and provide them with a Butterworth Health Coverage Card. This pro-
gram would explicitly address the mission of Butterworth to serve the 
community, irrespective of ability to pay. The program would be 
financed by Butterworth and/or the Butterworth Foundation. Later on, 
the program could be extended to include other underserved popula-
tions in the community. Creation of this program would not only make 
it possible to treat the disenfranchised as any other client, but would 
also make Butterworth's contribution to the community visible and 
measurable.
The key responsibilities of the market access function will involve the 
following: market assessment, packaging, product/market negotiations, 
customer/consumer satisfaction assessment, and health-system marketing.
11.5  Care System
As one of the basic dimensions of the Butterworth architecture, the care 
system will be responsible for defining and monitoring the virtual output 
of the system. By doing so, it will bridge the gap between the market and 
the actual delivery of health-care products and services.
The design of the care system in this format embodies a set of concep-
tual models, methodologies, and products that represent the operational-
ization of a distinct system of health delivery management. Such models 
and methodologies include care management, risk management, quality 
management (utilization), and referral protocols. The provision of actual 
care, however, happens at the health delivery modules.
11.5.1  Contextual Background
For the health-care system to deliver its intended goods, it has to deal 
with both maintenance of health as well as treatment of sickness. The 
present health-care system is primarily concerned with taking care of the 
sick. It has evolved into a mature and entrenched system characterized as 
sickness care. The overwhelming success of sickness care has, as financed 

252 
Butterworth Health System 
by historic reimbursement methods, obstructed and even prevented 
development of other critical aspects for the creation of a well-balanced 
health-care system.
Despite the fact that health maintenance and preventive care have long 
been recognized as an effective means of cost control, development of a 
significant wellness subsystem is practically nonexistent in the health-care 
system. Few have taken it upon themselves to address the traditional con-
cept of “care” and develop the necessary operational protocols because of 
lack of adequate funding sources. Development of the care system, as pre-
sented here, will fill the chronic void in the health-care environment by 
introducing a bold, pragmatic dimension.
The conventional approaches of changing the way we pay for health 
care in and of themselves will not reform the system in the desired direc-
tion. Their focus is essentially on payment arrangements. Payment, while 
important, is but one of the concerns. A comprehensive approach should 
address the totality of a given care system, including financial as well as 
operational, technical, and behavioral viewpoints.
11.5.2  Desired Specifications
The care system deals with people when they are most vulnerable. It will 
involve the most sensitive aspect of people's lives. The design, therefore, 
should proceed with care because social institutions, once created, cannot 
be easily undone. The care system should therefore represent a compre-
hensive framework that will:
• Capture the missing dimension in the total management of care — the 
intervening link that can dissolve possible structural conflicts in the 
system and create win/win solutions among the patient, provider, and 
payer
• Be viable in the current environment, but will also be capable of con-
tinuous learning and adaptation in changing environments
• Allow maximum flexibility for the patient and the payer to exercise 
choice in terms of required services (selection of care module), access 
(selection of provider), and payment arrangements (selection of capi-
tation and/or fee for service)
• Center around product differentiation, product development, and 
product management to enable each of its constituent modules to:
•	 Represent a unique category of care; while individually indepen-
dent, collectively they will create an integrated whole
•	 Follow a model of reimbursement that will best optimize multiple 
objectives of the care system (cost, quality, simplicity, and, most 
important, avoidance of structural conflict between payer, patient, 
and provider)
•	 Become infrastructure-free, allowing maximum choice in selection 
and utilization of various care facilities, such as hospitals, homes, 
clinics, and care centers

Care System  253
•	 Be a decentralized and regionalized community-oriented health 
delivery system in order to be able to develop rapid and differential 
responses to its existing and potential communities with different 
health-related needs
•	 Keep all its options open and remain agile and flexible enough so 
it can take advantage of the emerging opportunities in the rapidly 
changing and unpredictable health-care environment
•	 Benchmark its performance against relevant state-of-the-art crite-
ria by making sure that (1) the health-related aspect of the health 
delivery system (HDS) is targeted at the best performance within 
the industry and (2) the support services, such as the adminis-
trative services, hospitality and facility management, and infor-
mation systems, are targeted at the best performance outside the 
industry
•	 Achieve an order-of-magnitude improvement in the cost-effectiveness 
of operating facilities by redesigning the throughput system
•	 Adopt and operationalize a new social calculus to encourage iden-
tification and elimination of waste and value-chain transaction and 
capacity utilization
• Replace the dysfunctional matrix organization (two-boss system) 
with an exchange-based customer–supplier relationship to dissolve 
structural conflicts and create a win/win environment compatible 
with the systems architecture.
Observation of the previous criteria led to the following design and clas-
sification of the care system as
• Preventive
• Interventional
• Viability
• Terminal
To be effectively cultivated, the care system modules will be initiated and 
operationalized into separate but interrelated modules. Initially, these 
modules will be created or redesigned outside of the current environment, 
under a different set of performance criteria to provide incentive for them 
to serve the needs of users, providers, and customers (payers) at the same 
time. Later on, the components can be unified or separated or further dif-
ferentiated. Unification of the care system's modules, at least at the embry-
onic stage, will be avoided because it would lead to unbalanced development 
of one module at the expense of others. For example, the existing size and 
format of the interventional care module has the potential to obstruct the 
healthy evolution of the newest modules.
11.5.3  Common Features
The following will be common to all modules of the care system:
• Each care system module will have the requisite flexibility and capa-
bility to deal with the capitated model, the fee-for-service model, a 

254 
Butterworth Health System 
combination of the two, or any emerging variation that could prove 
operationally sound. The care system modules will therefore have 
mechanisms that will give them the necessary flexibility to deal effec-
tively with the emerging possibilities and make the necessary transi-
tions with ease.
• Each care system module will also enjoy the freedom and responsibil-
ity to make its offerings available through the market access dimension 
to any segment of the market that may promise potential clients. The 
product (care system module) managers will not, therefore, be limited 
to a single channel of HMO in their marketing efforts. They can take 
advantage of different access mechanisms to deal with independent 
institutions or individuals.
• The care system modules will require the development of an inter-
active model of operation that will open the system to not only 
capitation and fee-for-service populations, but other potential 
groups such as independent contractors with different interests and 
requirements.
• Development of the care system is essentially the development of a 
product line. Each care module will therefore have a product man-
ager operating under a board representing the relevant stakeholders 
of that dimension, including physicians, nurses, financial and support 
services, and so on.
• Each care system module will be designed to be a member of an inte-
grated whole while being managed as a stand-alone entity. It will be 
responsible for its own cash flow and financial performance. If any one 
module cannot stand alone financially, the system can decide whether 
to subsidize or redesign the module.
• Each care system module will have a financial model that will pre-
empt structural conflict by aligning the interests of the major players 
actively involved in the delivery of care: the provider, the patient, and 
the payer.
• A target costing system will be developed to determine the relative 
share of each subsystem in the provision and distribution of care. 
The cost-sharing model will determine the costs of goods, selling, 
care, shared services, product development and maintenance, and 
facilities.
• Each and every module will have its own share of indigent patients 
who will be served in an environment that will promote personal 
responsibility and self-reliance.
• The health-care system will encourage and register the clients to sign up 
for a total care package: preventive, interventional, viability, and terminal 
care. However, customers would have  choice among services offered.
• The pricing model should make it cheaper to purchase the prod-
uct offerings as a total package rather than selectively or on a ­partial 

Care System  255
basis. The cost of interventional care, the largest portion of care, will 
­therefore be significantly reduced if the customers are encouraged 
to buy other pieces as well. Thus, the impact of imposing a dispro-
portional allocation to the rest of the system would be significantly 
reduced whenever a group of customers happens to opt for partial, 
rather than total, access.
• Protocols will be formulated to make explicit the predefined sequence 
of procedures as each type of patient is processed through the system.
• Each care module will have the responsibility of defining its informa-
tion requirements and working closely with the information system 
unit to develop an interactive and comprehensive information support 
system that will not only service all the care system modules, but all the 
care providers as well. This information system will act as an input to 
the learning system. The care system, in essence, will act as a customer 
of the information system unit and present a major market for infor-
mation-based products.
• Each care system module will be equipped with an embedded learn-
ing system. The system will have explicitly stated assumptions and 
expected outcomes. It can and will modify itself based on the inputs 
that come from continuous monitoring of the actual performance and 
its comparison with the initial assumptions and expectations.
• The reward and evaluation of the care system and its modules will 
operate on three levels:
•	 At the throughput level, the care system rewards will be based on 
the measure of the volume processed and its effectiveness.
•	 At the latency level, the care system module rewards will be based 
on the measure of outcome, quality, and effectiveness of the care 
system as manifested in the general health of the population 
covered.
–  At the synergy level, the care system module rewards will be based 
on the measure of effective cooperation and collaboration shown 
toward other parts of the care system in particular and Butter-
worth system as a whole.
Descriptions of individual care modules follow.
11.5.4  Preventive Care
Preventive care will be responsible for maintaining and improving the health 
of the covered population as a whole. It will carry out this function by
• Maximizing the health of anyone who comes into the system.
• Keeping those who are free of illness and injury from developing 
­diseases or having disabilities.
• Detecting at an early stage those who are already sick and limiting 
­further illness episodes through early intervention and other preven-
tive measures.

256 
Butterworth Health System 
• Developing protocols that will define recommended sequences of 
procedures for registering, identifying, and directing target groups of 
patients to appropriate centers staffed by appropriate providers based 
on initial assessment results, while respecting and supporting the right 
of each patient to exercise informed choice.
• Developing a measurement and evaluation system that will reward 
successful incidents of early detection.
• Maximizing patients’ choice by providing them open access to 
clinical expertise; based on the screening results, the system will 
identify and target the patients who will then be advised to follow 
a preferred course of action under a recommended primary care 
provider.
11.5.5  Interventional Care
Interventional care is responsible for restoring the health of patients by 
offering a continuous and/or intense level of care. The interventional care 
will consist of the following levels of care: primary, secondary, and tertiary. 
While primary care will serve as an access point for ambulatory patients 
with non-life-threatening problems/symptoms, secondary and tertiary 
care will involve intensive intervention extending over a relatively short 
period of time.
The basis for care differentiation will be the degree of need for continu-
ous nursing care and a specialty provider(s). These different levels of care 
can be addressed by the same or different providers/care givers carrying 
varying costs.
Interventional care will be responsible for the following:
• Develop a treatment plan defining the involvement of specialists, sup-
port staff, facilities, and referrals and/or discharge plans.
• Reimbursement for interventional care will likely be a hybrid. While 
the primary care can be capitated as a whole, secondary and tertiary 
care may utilize a version of the fee-for-service arrangement by means 
of a trust fund. This will provide the flexibility to:
•	 Deal with the complexities of a treatment program due to inherent 
uncertainties and the number and varying degrees of other provid-
ers involved.
•	 Manage the risks involved when small groups of patients may 
require treatments that are extremely expensive.
•	 Remove the potentials for structural conflict and avoid the sus-
picion on the part of the patient or a participating provider that 
the payer may have any ulterior motive in defining the planned 
prescriptions.
–	 Optimize interventional care expenses both at the aggre-
gate and individual levels. The patient's well-being will not be 
­compromised because the risks will be shared between the sys-
tem and individual providers.

Care System  257
11.5.6  Viability Care
Viability care is responsible for restoring functionality (temporary or per-
manent) to the maximum extent given the nature of the underlying physi-
cal limitations. Functional limitations may occur due to accidents, sickness, 
birth defects, or old age. Viability care will provide:
• Prognosis for (1) potential functional improvement and (2) the pros-
pect of returning to home/community based on medical, psychoso-
cial, and economic resources
• Assessment, treatment/equipment, infusion therapy, education, psy-
chiatric therapy, monitoring, and hospitality services, if homeless
Viability care will consist of two levels of care: rehabilitative and support-
ive. While rehabilitative care will involve revitalizing the patients by remov-
ing their functional limitations, supportive care will involve keeping the 
existing levels of irreversible physical limitations from deteriorating fur-
ther. At the same time, supportive care will also involve keeping the patients 
from contracting other illnesses while providing them with compensatory 
support to help them perform their basic functions. Differentiation 
between the two levels is based upon the duration of care and the chance 
of recovery from functional limitations.
Figure 11.2 shows the pattern of interactions both within and between 
the parts of the care modules.
Preventive
Care
Viability
Care
Terminal
Care
Supportive 
Extended Care
Hospice
Rehabilitative
Care
Tertiary Care
Secondary Care
Primary Care
Diagnostic
General preventive
care program
Periodic
Assessment
Procedure
Initial 
Registration
More specific
target popu-
lation test
Assignment to
a primary care
physician
Special 
S c r e e n i n g
preventive 
program
Interventional
Care
decision
target 
test
target 
test
target 
test
assignment
assignment
assignment
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
Care Module
Flow Chart
s.p.p.
s.p.p.
s.p.p.
FIGURE 11.2  Care module flow chart.

258 
Butterworth Health System 
11.5.7  Terminal Care
Terminal care is responsible for developing humane, dignified, and cost-
effective means of taking care of patients who are diagnosed to be irretriev-
ably moribund. The function of terminal care will be to
• Support patients and families through the death experience (choices)
• Provide education and counseling (psychological and legal) to care givers
• Build cost-effectiveness into managed care
Historically, the cases of terminally ill patients have presented the health 
profession with one of its most complicated dilemmas. Health-care pro-
viders, whose ultimate duty is to save the patient's life, find themselves in 
a most awkward position when dealing with death. Faced with such a pre-
dicament, some go out of their way to delay the inevitable at all costs, 
while others abdicate the challenge. Failure to address the totality of the 
situation professionally would be most unfair to all involved. It would 
continue to exact an unbearable psychological and social cost from the 
patient, the family, and the health system. Terminal care here is a deliber-
ate attempt to make the painful termination issues explicit and design an 
optimal system to resolve them professionally.
11.6  Output dimension
Care facilities (actual or virtual) will represent the output dimension of 
the architecture, which provides the interface between the patient/client 
and the provider.
Health delivery is a real-time system, where the provision of the service 
is contingent upon the interface between the client and the provider. The 
output dimension will be represented by the location of the interface 
where care actually occurs. This location is not limited to in-patient, hos-
pital care. Care can occur at other locations, such as ambulatory health 
facilities, physicians’ offices, specialized clinics, labs and diagnostic cen-
ters, nursing homes, fitness centers, and the home.
All of these facilities are included in the administration of care in the 
health delivery modules network. The operational framework for organiz-
ing and managing the totality of this network will constitute the basic 
health delivery module. The module will replicate itself in different degrees 
and in various regions that will be covered by Butterworth Health System.
The health delivery modules are responsible for the operation and 
maintenance of the facilities as well as the actual provision of patient care 
services. The modules will replicate the three-dimensional architecture 
with their own shared services units, including such services as facilities 
management and maintenance. However, the model for delivery of each 
type of care will come from the respective part of the care system.
Some prominent aspects of the health delivery module are as follows:
• The health delivery module will develop a competency in hospitality 
management. This competency is necessary to redesign the operation 

Output Dimension  259
so that an order-of-magnitude change in the performance measures, 
especially cost of operation, can be achieved.
• The providers who are an integral part of a facility, such as operating 
room, general care unit, specialty care unit, and other ancillary depart-
ments, will be permanently assigned to that facility while retaining 
their membership in the knowledge pool.
• The current model of the “emergency room” operation will be recon-
ceptualized and redesigned. No longer will it be allowed to act as 
convenient, free access to the care system. Consequently, creation of 
decentralized regional primary care centers will help take away the 
incongruent responsibilities that are currently imposed on emer-
gency departments. Such a realignment will make sure that Emergency 
Department (ED) units can afford to discharge their legitimate, and 
highly critical, function without having to get constantly sidetracked 
by nonemergency referrals that come in through the ED and must be 
treated in such an intense setting.
• Regional primary care centers will be in charge of services that should 
rightfully fall into their specialized domain. The decentralized arrange-
ments of the regional primary care centers will have the added advantage 
of bringing nonemergency services closer to where the patients are.
• The overall cost-effectiveness of the care system will be significantly 
increased by redirecting an enormous amount of expensive nonemer-
gency services, currently seen in ED, to the regional primary care centers.
• So as not to deny access to indigent patients, the creation of the 
Butterworth Health Care Card for indigent patients will facilitate this 
rationalization of services.
Output units will be responsible for designing the interface among all the 
facilities and locations dealing with different levels of care in such a way 
that a seamless flow of patients will be ensured throughout the system.
In developing the HDS structure, two different approaches were ini-
tially considered.
11.6.1  Alternative One: Traditional Functional Structure
In a traditional functional structure (Figure 11.3), similar services such as 
hospitals, VNAs, nursing homes, and clinics, while maintaining their auton-
omy, will be grouped together. For example, all hospitals will report to a 
single group leader and will serve all communities. The same will be true 
for all the clinics, nursing homes, and other functional units. Each function 
will represent a single organization serving all of the communities.
11.6.2  Alternative Two: Modular Structure
The modular structure (Figure 11.4) would be a community-centered 
design in which a whole array of complementary activities (hospitals, clin-
ics, and nursing homes) is grouped together to form an integrated module 

260 
Butterworth Health System 
under single management. This module would have a community focus, 
and all its units would serve a single community to ensure the kind of effi-
ciency and self-sufficiency needed in responding, on the spot, to the whole 
range of needs in a specified community.
The advantage of a functional structure is that it will be easier to 
implement. There will be no resistance to such a design from the exist-
ing system. However, a functional design will continue to suboptimize 
and reinforce the existing disjointed service centers. The modular design, 
on the other hand, will face stronger resistance to change and will 
require stronger resolve to implement. But it will move the system 
toward a ­community-based health-care system that Butterworth aspires 
to. The modular design will produce a well-integrated and cost-efficient 
health system that is more compatible with requirements of preventive 
care, capitation, and decentralized community-centered health-care 
systems.
However, further iterations led to a synthesis of both alternatives 
(Figure 11.5). It was realized that by incorporating the advantages of 
both functional and modular design into a single structure, the HDS 
will be able to avail itself of the flexibility required to strike the right 
balance between the two structures rather than make an exclusive choice 
hospital
hospital
hospital
nursing
home
nursing
home
clinic
clinic
clinic
clinic
V N A
FIGURE 11.3  Functional arrangement.
hospital
nursing
home
clinics
home
health
hospital
nursing
home
clinics
home
health
hospital
nursing
home
clinics
home
health
FIGURE 11.4  Modular arrangement.

Output Dimension  261
between the two. In the new multidimensional structure, all services 
that are ­general-purpose- and community-based can be grouped into 
decentralized modules capable of being duplicated in each viable com-
munity. However, those services that are highly specialized and capital 
intensive, requiring critical mass market, can take a centralized form 
serving the cases beyond the competence of the community-based mod-
ules. Thus the new design can incorporate a learning capacity that will 
allow the system to experiment with different ideas in different commu-
nities. Successful experiments will then be disseminated among the 
communities. This will provide HDS with opportunities for continuous 
improvement without subjecting the total system to potentially costly 
experiments.
11.6.3  Health Delivery System Design: The Makeup
The HDS design will integrate the advantages of both functional and mod-
ular structures into a multidimensional system. It will be made up of five 
interdependent components: community-based health delivery system, 
specialized health delivery system, shared services, patient relations, and 
president's office (Figure 11.6).
The existing functions of Butterworth Hospital are reassigned among 
three platforms. Those functions requiring development of knowledge 
were housed in core knowledge, those requiring design methodology were 
housed in care systems, and health delivery activities requiring facility and 
equipment were housed in HDS.
11.6.4  Community-Based Health Delivery System
The community-based HDS will be made up of modular entities offering 
integrated services to specific communities. It will be driven by a customer 
focus and be made of regionally dispersed and locally managed networks 
of delivery modules positioned as closely to the delivery point as possible. 
(There seems to be a 20-minute time limit that consumers are willing to 
travel for primary health care unless the area is very rural, in which case the 
time limit expands to 37 minutes.) Once piloted experiments justify their 
other
service
units
nursing
home
clinics
home
health
community
hospital
nursing
home
clinics
home
health
other
service
units
nursing
home
clinics
home
health
Hospital
(highly
specialized
services)
FIGURE 11.5  Mixed structure.

262 
Butterworth Health System 
existence, the networks will offer a whole range of preventive, primary, 
viability, and terminal types of care. Geographic organization of delivery 
modules will have the advantage of making it easier for their outcomes to 
be measured separately.
A network may start as a virtual entity, but it will eventually be orga-
nized around a central physical place. The network will be flexible, fluid, 
and easy to link to. The intention will be to increase the opportunities for 
expanding and extending outpatient services and, at the same time, push 
the ancillary services as closely as possible to financially viable core masses 
of clients.
The community-based HDS will consist, initially, of three integrated 
modular networks: the Urban Grand Rapids community, the Greater 
Grand Rapids community, and the regional community. Each community 
module will report directly to the president of HDS. A typical network will 
include at least a central community hospital serving the network. The sys-
tem will include the following services:
• Primary practices (physicians’ offices)
• Diagnostics centers
• Rehabilitation centers
• Community clinics
• Urgent care
• Hospices
• Home nursing
• Occupational health management
Specialized
Health Delivery
Supplier  Services
Community-Based
Planning, Learning, &
Guest Services
HDS
Butterworth
Customer
President's
Clinical Services
Business Services
Home Health Adm
Laroc Radiation
Mobile MRI
Wellness
DeVos
Greater
Regional
Urban
W & W Pharmacy
A
d
v
o
c
a
c
y
S
h
a
r
e
d
S
e
r
v
i
c
e
s
FIGURE 11.6  HDS structure.

Output Dimension  263
Kent Community Hospital will be integrated into the Urban Grand Rapids 
community, Villa Elizabeth Hospital and Grand Valley Health Center will 
be integrated into the Greater Grand Rapids community, and United 
Memorial Hospital, once transferred from the specialized HDS to this 
dimension, will act as the core of the regional community.
HDS can extend its presence into new regions by partnering with exist-
ing providers who will have demonstrated that they have workable knowl-
edge of, and access to, a given community. In such cases it will be the 
nature of the relationship with the supplier unit rather than its ownership 
that will be of critical importance.
HDS will take advantage of clinical information technology to link all 
providers in HDS and other parts of Butterworth together.
11.6.5  Specialized Health Delivery System
The specialized HDS will represent Butterworth Hospital. It will be a cen-
tralized vehicle where capital-intensive, highly specialized health-care 
delivery will actually take place. As such, it will concentrate on those inter-
vention and tertiary cares that will be outside the competence and resources 
of the community-based HDS.
The specialized HDS will consist of two interdependent components: 
patient care and ancillary services. The two units will have their own heads, 
who will report directly to the president of HDS.
11.6.5.1  Patient care
Patient care, as the output dimension of the specialized HDS, will consist 
of the following health-delivery units:
• Children's care (DeVos Children's Hospital)
• Adult critical care
• General medical services
• Women's health services
• Emergency/urgent care
• Specialized outpatient care
11.6.5.2  Ancillary services
Ancillary services, as the input dimension of the specialized HDS, will 
provide clinical/technical support services to both patient care units as 
well as the units of the community-based HDS. These shared services will 
have to undergo periodic process redesign to remain self-sustained and 
competitively cost-effective. Ancillary services will consist of the ­following 
units:
• Operating room
• Rehabilitation center
• Laboratory
• Cardiology laboratory
• Radiology

264 
Butterworth Health System 
• Respiratory therapy
• Pharmaceutical
• Aeromed
11.6.5.3  Patient relations
Patient relations will perform an advocacy function by representing the 
interests of the patients to the system. It will make sure that patients have 
a voice in the system and are fairly treated. The unit will act as an ombuds-
man to help settle grievances and compensatory claims. This will help pre-
vent problems from growing into major litigation. Advocacy will also be 
responsible for providing social and financial counseling services to the 
patients who will need them.
Patient relations will also represent HDS to its environment. It will 
develop operational contacts with the corporate market access platform to 
receive feedback about the way HDS is perceived by its environment. This 
will ensure that Butterworth's policy of preserving a close community 
touch is enforced.
To effectively safeguard the interests of the patients and make sure 
they enjoy a dependable last resort to settle their grievances, it will be 
important that this dimension be taken seriously by all units of HDS. The 
realization of this market/consumer-oriented policy will require that 
patient relations are represented and directed by a manager who com-
mands organization-wide respect and prestige and has direct access to the 
HDS president.
11.6.6  Shared Services
As an input dimension, shared services will serve and support the activities 
of the other units of HDS. The relationship between shared services and 
the user units will be that of supplier–customer.
Shared services will consist of the following five components. These 
services could have been assigned to the shared services platform at the 
corporate level. However, since they will be utilized mainly by HDS 
units, it was decided that their retention here will help minimize complex-
ity and unnecessary interactions that would otherwise be unavoidable.
11.6.6.1  Hospitality and facility management
Hospitality and facility management will include all those guest services 
that will contribute to the hospitality aspect of an HDS. The idea is to 
make sure that the patient is treated like a guest at a hotel where his/her 
satisfaction receives the utmost priority and attention. To ensure a total 
hospitality approach to health-care delivery, hospitality and facility man-
agement will be in charge of all activities that will be necessary in creat-
ing a hospitable environment. These will include facility planning, 
construction, management and maintenance, escort and hospitality, and 
communications.

Core Knowledge  265
11.6.6.2  Clinical services
Clinical services will function as a centrally managed scheduling and 
deployment system that interfaces with core knowledge. Clinical services 
will include infection control, food and nutrition, volunteer services, labo-
ratory, family care services, information technology, and medical services 
records.
11.6.6.3  Business services function
The business services function will include management consulting, mate-
rials management, plant operations, procurement, general financial ser-
vices (payroll and reimbursements, patient financial services), malpractice 
claims, risk management, process control, environmental safety, and home 
health and hospice administration.
11.6.6.4  Home care management
Home care management at this dimension will only represent the man-
agement of home care that will actually take place on a widely dispersed 
basis throughout the community health modules. It will take advantage of 
the large economies of scale associated with such a large core mass. 
Moreover, HDS may partner with other hospitals to manage these services 
for them. Home care management will therefore consist of general man-
agement, oversight, scheduling, standardization, and accreditation.
11.6.6.5  Occupational care management
Like home care management, occupational care management will repre-
sent only the management of occupational care that will take place 
throughout the HDS's geographical regions. The service will be provided 
to corporate customers interested in outsourcing to HDS their health-care 
needs, as well as other health-related issues of their employees, such as 
workers’ compensation. The economies of scale associated with such a 
potentially large volume of widely dispersed services warrant centralized 
management and oversight.
11.7  Core knowledge
Core knowledge is one of the two components of the input dimension of 
the architecture. Core knowledge is responsible for ensuring the availabil-
ity of the appropriate service scope and number of providers to meet the 
whole spectrum of health-related care in its regions.
Core knowledge will be the system's center of expertise. It hosts and 
develops the provider resource of the system and helps the care system dis-
seminate the state-of-the-art knowledge throughout the system. It will rep-
resent Butterworth's core competencies in medical practice.
Core knowledge will consist of the following health-care providers:
• Medical staff (primarily consisting of physicians as independent con­
tractors)

266 
Butterworth Health System 
• Advanced practice providers
• Nurses
• Technical health workers and other professionals/clinicians
• Other professionals/technicians
The core knowledge network will be designed to accommodate a broad 
range of relationships. It will define and develop the structure for various 
types and degrees of membership in the system and the necessary operat-
ing procedures for members to interact.
Without an infrastructure for collaborative effort, the scarce provider 
resource will tend to be defused and wasted. The supportive organization 
should therefore be flexible enough to enhance maintenance and utiliza-
tion of provider resources. This would ideally require each member of the 
provider system to be a high-level learner/educator, practitioner, and a 
leader of systems development. The absence of any one of these critical and 
interrelated aspects will undermine the others and eventually compromise 
the capacity of Butterworth to perform as a fully functioning system. 
Sustaining such a balanced state of readiness will ensure the comprehen-
siveness and the flexibility of the system's response to emerging problems 
and opportunities and at the same time encourage professional pursuits of 
purposeful networking and results-oriented collaborative initiatives.
To enjoy constant access to a rich resource of expertise representing 
state-of-the-art health care, the organizational context of core knowledge 
will constantly welcome maximum flexibility for innovative collaboration 
and will remain open to existing and emerging inputs of relevance both 
from within and outside the system.
Membership in the core knowledge system will therefore take a wide 
variety of forms functioning at multiple levels of involvement. The types 
of membership will be both full- and part-time and will include the 
following:
• Independent practitioners (retainer-based)
• Associates (referral-based)
• Partners
• Nonaffiliates
To assure openness to external inputs of needed competence, the core 
knowledge system will operate as a confederation. Members of the confed-
eration can be individuals as well as groups of providers. The status of the 
members of the core knowledge confederation may take the following 
form:
• Integrated: full-time members of Butterworth Health System
• Part-time: individuals with limited and predefined contributors
• Strategic alliance: organization-based partners operating within an 
agreed upon framework
Core knowledge members may choose to assume or relinquish different 
degrees of autonomy in working with Butterworth Health System. The 
nature and terms of this voluntary association define the areas in which 

Core Knowledge  267
the parties will choose to compete, collaborate, or cooperate. Thus, core 
knowledge members and Butterworth are codependent parties; their com-
mitment to, and freedom from, each other is mutually reciprocal.
Creation of mutual trust between the Butterworth Health System and 
the core knowledge dimension will be the keystone to the ultimate success 
of the system. They should represent a united front to competition. A pre-
requisite to this loyalty-based success will be an environment that mini-
mizes and dissolves conflict, whether real or perceived. Such an 
environment will require the following:
• All the members of core knowledge, regardless of their status, will have 
an equal voice within their panel, in the management of the group.
• All the members of core knowledge, regardless of their status, will have 
equal access to the shared services, such as billing, which will be pro-
vided to them on a marginal cost basis.
• An explicit internal system of conflict resolution will prevent, mini-
mize, and dissolve potential conflicts before they are polarized.
The architecture of the core knowledge dimension will be a clone of the 
health system. It therefore has the same input, output, and market dimen-
sions. The output dimension defines the types of contributions of the inte-
grated, part-time, and strategic partners of core knowledge to the care 
system and health delivery modules. The market dimension defines the 
access mechanism by which core knowledge services are deployed. The 
input dimension represents those support services that are core-­knowledge-
specific and cannot, by definition, be provided by the system's shared 
­services. The input dimension will provide its services on a marginal cost 
basis to its users.
To bring about a productive climate for continuous innovation and 
improvement of health-care delivery, the professional contributors will 
have to develop an additional vital dimension: the ability and desire for 
organization building. Traditionally, the complementary responsibility 
for designing and managing the contextual environment of HDS has been 
uncoupled and transferred to administrators who are removed from the 
actual provision of clinical services. Because of this separation, substan-
tial amounts of energy have been wasted in settling the unnecessary 
incompatibilities in the structure, function, and process of health-care 
delivery.
The only way to dissolve the paralyzing effects of the structural conflict 
is to add the missing dimension of care management leadership to the 
health-related expertise of the clinical providers. Equipped with leadership 
and design capability, health-care professionals can properly influence 
and/or help design the necessary interface between the context and the 
mode of delivery. The dual capacity would not only remove bureaucratic 
compartmentalization, but would enhance the effectiveness of care ser-
vices by tapping the potentials for experimenting with alternative ways of 
teaming and complementary relations.

268 
Butterworth Health System 
Core knowledge will be responsible for the generation and distribu-
tion of the knowledge, deployment of expertise, and exercise of leader-
ship. These three functions are described in the following list:
1.	 Generation and dissemination of knowledge (learner/educators). The pro-
vider system will be responsible for continuous learning and self-
renewal of its members. The members will be expected to represent the 
health profession's state-of-the-art expertise. They will conduct most 
of this high-level self-education through teaching themselves as well 
as participating in applied research activities. They will be learning by 
teaching and learning while earning.
A portion of the provider resource may be engaged in ongoing aca-
demic pursuits that are either an integral part of medical schools or 
activities complementing such faculty engagements.
Members of the provider system may also engage in educating those 
who have a stake in health-related activities. Those who will be taught 
will include peers, students, interns, consumers, and the public at large.
The core knowledge dimension, however, will be responsible for 
creating interfaces and developing active associations with other 
sources of research and learning, such as universities, research institu-
tions, medical and paramedical education centers, and technological 
development organizations.
2.	 Deployment (practice). As pointed out earlier, core knowledge is respon-
sible for ensuring the adequate availability of and the appropriate 
scope of and level of providers required to meet the whole spectrum of 
health-related care in all its regions at all times.
Members of the provider system, operating within the framework 
and protocols set by the care system, will contribute their knowledge 
and expertise by participating in different long- or short-term projects/
programs that are created and terminated within the care system or the 
health delivery modules. The practice will take place in inpatient care 
(hospitals), clinics, labs, local health centers, wellness centers, homes, 
and long-term-care institutions. Members of core knowledge can 
choose to function on a permanent or temporary basis on different 
programs and projects without losing their full-fledged membership, 
and the privileges that come with it, in the core knowledge group. Each 
member can work in multiple programs/projects at the same time.
The power of multidimensional architecture, as developed in this 
design, is that it intentionally avoids the danger of tying the fate of the 
providers and the programs inseparably together. Once created, there 
is a tendency for the programs and projects to become a permanent 
feature of the organizational landscape. Left to their own devices, they 
develop a life and a mind of their own. Their fate is sealed, however, 
when their personnel are permanently assigned to them. The seed of 
the problem is in identifying the product with the provider, as is done 
in a divisional structure commonly used in academic and industrial 

Core Knowledge  269
settings wherein a program or product, once initiated, can never be dis-
continued. As long as the termination of a program or project threat-
ens one's job and all the hard-won advantages associated with it, it is 
only natural that the job holder, whether a manager or a simple worker, 
does his/her utmost to lengthen the life of the project at all costs. This 
explains the inner rationality of the seemingly irrational resistance and 
obsolete relics that somehow manage to survive in corporate life.
Dissolving the problem will require that the life of the programs and 
projects be uncoupled from the people who are assigned to them. One 
of the advantages of having a core knowledge dimension in the systems 
architecture is that it will serve as the permanent home base for the pro-
fessional resources of Butterworth. Any other relationship and assign-
ment will, by definition, be considered as contingent and temporary no 
matter how long it is expected to last. The permanence of the core knowl-
edge home base, requiring continuous reassessment and renewal, and 
the impermanence of programs and projects, allowing continuous inno-
vation and adaptation, remove the obstinate conditions that lead to 
inflated bureaucracies and entrenched resistance to change.
3.	 Leadership. Leadership in this context is defined as the ability to influ-
ence those over whom one has no authority. Competency in medi-
cal and health technologies, although a crucial necessity, does not by 
itself guarantee the success of a health-care system. To be sufficiently 
effective, every professional member of the system should be an influ-
ential leader as well. Thus every provider should have the desire and 
the ability to positively impact the context, structure, and process of 
Butterworth. To achieve this vital task requires knowledge workers who 
(1) internally, seek to participate in the design and management of 
care modules and procedures for doing more with less and (2) exter-
nally, proactively influence the contextual environment of Butterworth 
to remove the obstructions and expand its potentials for doing more 
and better. Butterworth simply cannot afford the conventional, and 
dysfunctional, division of labor between clinical and management-
related functions.
In the final analysis, a good provider, therefore, is a good learner/educator, 
a good practitioner, and a good leader. The success of Butterworth and its 
providers, and by the same token any health-care system, will ultimately 
depend on whether the members of the provider community have achieved 
this multifunctionality in addition to being competent practitioners.
Building multifunctionality into the provider community will convert 
obstruction into opportunities and replace aggregates with systems. Thus indi-
vidual providers will become purposeful members of a highly interdependent 
system that will make a difference. They will effectively use their multiple 
competencies in managing upward and influencing other parts of and stake-
holders in the health-care system over whom they do not have direct control 
but on whom the success of their professional effort will depend.

270 
Butterworth Health System 
The multifunctionality will also give providers the capability and the 
possibility of designing and managing their practice in terms of afford-
able and user-friendly packages and programs that are both accessible 
and relevant to the consumers. They will cooperate with the care sys-
tem in the development and continuous improvement of generic mod-
els, protocols, and procedures needed to manage the different aspects 
of HDS.
While the core knowledge group is responsible for medical research 
and education, it will replicate the three-dimensional scheme to create 
its own special shared services. Shared services in this context will include 
physician's office management and provider recruiting and creden­
tialing.
11.8  Shared services
Shared services is the other component of the input dimension of the 
architecture. It will be the provider of specific services required for the 
proper functioning of the system as a whole. To ensure its proper function-
ing, shared services will be designed with close attention to the issues sur-
rounding centralization and decentralization, separation of service from 
control, and customer orientation.
11.8.1  Need for Centralization
Centralization will be avoided unless one or all of the following situations 
weigh overwhelmingly against decentralization of a particular service.
11.8.1.1  Uniformity
The aspects of the system that will be centralized are those that are com-
mon to all or some of the parts of Butterworth and cannot be left decen-
tralized without rendering serious damage to the proper functioning of 
the system. In areas such as measurement systems and communications, 
where common language and coordination are of major importance, uni-
formity will serve as the criterion for centralization.
11.8.1.2  Technological imperatives
Certain technologies, which, because of their nature, are deemed indivisi-
ble and therefore require a holistic design, can be centralized. For example, 
the effectiveness of a comprehensive information system is in its holism, 
consistency, real-time access, and proper networking to transfer informa-
tion as needed to different users. Development of such a system requires 
cooperation and coordination among all the actors in the system.
11.8.1.3  Economy of scale
Although economy of scale is generally considered an important factor in 
the creation of shared services, the trade-offs between centralization and 
decentralization of each function should be made explicit to prove that 

Shared Services  271
the benefits significantly outweigh the disadvantages before it is moved to 
shared services. In this case, it is expected that a service, once centralized, 
will either generate significant savings for the system as a whole or help 
some of the units that otherwise would not be able to afford the service on 
their own.
Management may feel that a certain level of specific activities will be 
critical for future success and therefore decide to centralize, develop, and 
specialize them. It is management's prerogative to identify the services 
that should fall under this category either as optional or mandatory. 
Where only one unit/customer is involved, it is best to decentralize the 
relevant service.
Whatever the justification of the services shared, the unit will have to 
become the state-of-the-art and cost-effective provider of choice.
11.8.2  Control Versus Service
The combination of a control function with a service function is the 
most obstructive element to the functioning of shared services. It under-
mines both the effectiveness of the services and the legitimacy of the 
controls. To protect themselves against the creeping hegemony of ser-
vice providers and the obvious risks involved in relying on control-
driven services, the operating units resort to duplicating the support 
services that could otherwise be easily shared and effectively utilized. 
Rampant and excessive duplications of services leading to paralyzing 
bureaucracy and unnecessary redundancy are symptomatic of the natu-
ral reaction of operating units to service functions developing such dual 
personalities. On the other hand, disguising a legitimate and necessary 
control function under the pretext of a service function transforms the 
nature of control from a learning mechanism to a defensive and apolo-
getic act.
Extra care should be taken to make sure that none of the functions of 
the shared services, as is the usual tendency, undergo a character change 
and assume control properties. Under the pretext of a need for consistency 
and uniformity, there is a natural tendency to let the service provider per-
form the necessary monitoring and auditing function. This has always 
proved to be misguided. The providers cannot help falling into the slip-
pery slope of wanting, increasingly, to assume a control function. This 
obviously would scare away the users who did not expect to find a new 
boss in the guise of a server.
While shared services will provide the customers with requested ser-
vices (such as information, benefits, payroll, and billing) in accordance 
with the criteria and protocols set by the Planning, Learning, and Guidance 
(PLG) System, the PLG System will be in charge of setting the policies and 
the criteria governing these services, as well as conducting the necessary 
monitoring and enforcing functions to ensure proper implementation of 
those policies.

272 
Butterworth Health System 
11.8.3  Customer Orientation
While superior–subordinate relationships have traditionally been taken as 
the only building block for the exercise of organizational authority, the 
supplier–customer relationship introduces a new source of influence into 
the organizational equation. With the supplier–customer relationship, 
which emerges only in an internal market environment, the helpless recip-
ient becomes a real customer. Armed with purchasing power, the customer 
becomes an empowered actor with the ability to influence and interact 
with his/her supplier in such a way that both parties together can now 
define the type, cost, time, and quality of the services rendered.
Creation of an internal market mechanism, and thus a supplier–­
customer relationship, is contingent upon transforming the shared ser-
vices into a performance center. Performance centers, unlike overhead 
centers, do not receive a fixed budget allocated from the top. They have 
working capital with a variable operating budget. In this model, expenses 
are proportional to the income generated by the level of services rendered 
and revenues received in their exchange.
These two pairs of horizontal and vertical relationships are complemen-
tary, synergizing one another. Whereas superior–subordinate defines the for-
mal authority, dealing with hiring, firing, and promotion, a ­supplier– 
customer relationship creates a new source of influence that tries to rationalize 
demand.
In the absence of an internal market environment, there will be no 
built-in mechanism to rationalize demand. An agreeable service provider 
with a third-party payer creates and fuels an insatiable demand. A dis-
agreeable service provider, on the other hand, would trigger a proliferation 
of duplications of the same services by the potential customers. The result 
would be an explosion of overhead expenses in the context of an essen-
tially cost plus operation. The trend would be irrational and the corrective 
interventions would prove ad hoc and ineffective, at best.
On the basis of these criteria and considerations, the composition of 
shared services is as follows.
11.8.3.1  Information system group
• Data management (clinical data, financial data, and human resource data)
• Information technology
• Systems analysis
11.8.3.2  Management institute (Education services)
Implementation of the proposed design will require institutionalization 
of a whole new set of management capabilities, such as crisis manage-
ment, conflict resolution, and management of the decision system, learn-
ing system, early warning system, measurement system, and quality. The 
services of the Management Institute will interface with external centers of 

Health Delivery System, Core Knowledge  273
relevant expertise and disseminate the required competencies throughout 
the Butterworth Health System, especially the executive office and core 
knowledge groups.
11.8.3.3  Human resource management
• Payroll
• Benefit administration
• Compensation management
• Recruitment (implementation only)
11.8.3.4  Financial systems
• Budget and cash flow management
• Accounting
• Billing
• Collections
11.8.3.5  Medical records management
• Release of information
• Consistency standards for records
11.8.3.6  Communications
• Public relations
• Media interface
• Audio/visual equipment and management
• Corporate branding
• Advertising
11.8.3.7  Materials management
• Purchasing
11.9  Health delivery system, core knowledge, 
and care system interactions
The health-care system is a unified process. It has, however, three mani-
festations representing three aspects of the same thing: generation and 
dissemination of health-care knowledge, design of health-care products, 
and practice of health care. Correspondingly, the architecture provides 
three interrelated platforms to make sure these three aspects are consid-
ered prime functions requiring equal attention. To safeguard the integ-
rity of the health-care process, it is therefore critical that the integrative 
agent of these seemingly different functions be clearly identified (see 
Figure 11.7).
The integrity of the process of health-care delivery, more than anything 
else, will be the property on which the system will ultimately stand or fall. 
This will require that the three activities of generation and dissemination 
of health-care knowledge, design of health-care products, and practice of 

274 
Butterworth Health System 
health care, while receiving equal attention, be integrated. The importance 
of the three activities is such that the proposed systems architecture 
assigned each one of these activities to a different platform under a sepa-
rate manager.
On the other hand, these three activities are so interrelated that their 
integration will be a prime concern. This seems contradictory to the above 
statement that explicitly assigns the three activities to three separate plat-
forms. The question, therefore, is how the integration of the three plat-
forms is supposed to happen. This brings us back to the core idea of the 
architecture. A key assumption of this design is that the only way to ensure 
the integration of the system would be for the knowledge worker to become 
the integrator.
This means that the integration of the three activities of learning, 
designing, and practicing health care will be realized by the fact that the 
designer, the educator, and the practitioner would be one and the same. To 
preserve the wholeness of the process of providing care, each professional 
contributor, whether a doctor, nurse, or technician, will be engaged in the 
three distinct and yet interrelated roles that will feed on and contribute to 
each other's strength. When in core knowledge, the same provider will 
help generate and disseminate knowledge by participating in learning cells 
as a learner/researcher/educator. When in care systems, the same provider 
will help operationalize his/her knowledge by participating in design cells 
as a designer/evaluator. When in HDS, the same provider will help utilize 
new knowledge by participating in practice cells as an implementer/
practitioner.
P
I
V
T
CORE
KNOWLEDGE
FACILITIES
CARE
SYSTEM
DESIGN &
CONTROL
M
A
R
K
E
T
S
RES
CARE
DIS
EDUCATION
FIGURE 11.7  Interrelationship of HDS, care systems, and core knowledge.

Health Delivery System, Core Knowledge  275
Engagement and ownership of each one of the three complementary 
and mutually reinforcing roles will prepare, empower, and motivate the 
provider to succeed in dealing with the other two. Thus a designer/evalua-
tor and at the same time the practitioner of particular products and ser-
vices will always be most qualified and ready to teach them; a learner/
researcher/educator and at the same time the practitioner of particular 
products and services will always be most qualified and ready to design 
them; and, finally, a designer/evaluator and at the same time the learner/
researcher/educator of particular products and services will always be most 
qualified and ready to administer them.
In all three contexts, the integrative agent is the doer who has first-
hand experience with the problems. Thus the system will become self-cor-
recting, self-educating, and self-integrating. The design will allow the 
professionals to manage upward and create a “low-archical” approach 
intimately suited to the idiosyncrasies of a multi-minded and profession-
ally driven organization. Thus, the success of the system will depend on 
the ability and willingness of the professionals in acting out, depending 
on the context, all the different roles of learner, educator, designer, and 
practitioner interchangeably. Although this seems to be against the implicit 
assumptions of health care, it is perfectly compatible with human nature. 
In real life, individuals perform many different roles. For example, one 
plays, quite naturally and almost simultaneously, the roles of parent, pro-
fessional, friend, boss, and subordinate in different contexts without dif-
ficulty. As a matter of fact, this happens to be one of the characteristics that 
distinguishes humans from other species and constitutes the keystone of 
social existence.
The composite performance profile of each professional will therefore 
reflect the three aspects of his/her role as an educator, a designer, and a 
practitioner. The profile will show the value of the individual to the orga-
nization based on the quality and diversity of the roles he/she will be 
called upon to play in the different contexts of the value chain. The higher 
the competence, the greater the demand; the greater the demand, the 
higher the value. One point, however, needs to be underscored here: the 
design will not encourage, but it will certainly respect, the personal prefer-
ence of those professionals who, for whatever reasons, might elect not to 
engage in multiple roles.
In the trio of core knowledge, care system, and delivery system, core 
knowledge will serve as the home base for the system's physicians, nurses, 
technicians, and other health-based professionals. This will make it 
­possible for the knowledge worker to accept different roles with different 
durations in all three platforms. When at core knowledge, it will be the 
providers themselves who will help perform the stewardship function of 
the human assets. They will be engaged in learning from and teaching 
each other to make sure that the health-care competency of Butterworth 
represents the cutting edge of the health-care profession at all times. 

276 
Butterworth Health System 
They will constantly monitor the direction and state of the science and 
practice of health care. They will make sure that the entire professional 
competence of the system is in a state of readiness to respond rapidly, 
effectively, and adequately to the changing and growing requirements of 
the market.
While care systems will be responsible for designing the process and 
packaging health-care products and services, as well as monitoring and 
ensuring the quality of their deployment, HDS will be where health care 
will actually happen. HDS will own the capital-intensive and health-
related physical assets and will be responsible for their effective utilization 
in providing the care deliverables.
The three-dimensionality should not be mistaken for the conven-
tional concept of the division of labor and the three-boss system. The 
three platforms manage the three different aspects of the system, each 
with a clear-cut accountability in the process. Their relationships will be 
governed by all three aspects of authority: legal, knowledge, and finan-
cial. Across the three contexts, knowledge is the common denominator 
and therefore will work as the integrative agent. The relationship of the 
members and their manager in the core knowledge group is boss–sub-
ordinate (legal), while in the context of the care system and delivery sys-
tem the relationship is customer–provider. The successful operation of 
the three units will therefore require that the creation of a throughput 
and measurement system with variable budgeting be an integral part of 
this design.
The design uniquely matches the exceptional requirements of knowl-
edge-driven organizations. It is based on the fact that role rather than 
individual is actually the building block of social systems. Owing to 
this, people can have multiple memberships in a variety of organiza-
tions in which they act out very different roles. By taking advantage of 
this phenomenon, the design will provide the individual contributor 
with unrestricted possibilities for the kind of continuous development 
and creativity that come with multirole, total involvement in the whole 
process of health care. Multirole involvement will safeguard the whole-
ness of the knowledge worker by saving him/her from compartmental-
ization. Uncoupling the professional from the trappings of narrowly 
defined jobs will de-bureaucratize the system and rescue both the peo-
ple and the organization from insulation, unidimensionality, rigidity, 
petty turf wars, and inevitable obsolescence in a rapidly changing 
environment.
Freedom from fixed and permanent job descriptions will provide the 
care systems and HDS platforms with equal freedom from resistance to 
change, structural conflicts, and suboptimization. It will provide them 
with infinite flexibility and capacity for unprecedented experimentation 
and innovation.

The Executive Office  277
Separation of the knowledge worker from a rigid job description is a 
means for institutionalizing creative freedom. Such freedom ensures pro-
fessional excellence and organizational viability through continuous 
learning and total involvement. Freeing the system to constantly define 
and redefine its basis for competitive advantage will prevent strategic myo-
pia and those organizational defaults that let the requirements of past suc-
cess become the source of future failure. The design is intended to promote 
meritocracy and combat bureaucratic tendencies that, when left unchecked, 
would lead to mediocrity, promotion to incompetence, and eventual con-
version of competence to a disqualification.
Project managers at care systems will be responsible for incorporat-
ing the inputs of the practitioners in the design of care products. They 
will make sure that the product development will reflect the emerging 
market needs. They will also make sure that the integrity of the design 
is not compromised. Project managers will provide the content and be 
responsible for the potency of the deliverables, as well as pay for the 
services of the practitioners/designers who participate in product 
development. The actual training and development of the practitio-
ners/designers, however, will take place in core knowledge. Thus the 
development process will have a dual interface: the market and core 
knowledge.
The challenge is to realize the potentials of the design for respond-
ing to the individual's need for independence and the organization's 
need for interdependence at the same time. The design is a deliberate 
attempt to avoid sacrificing the good of the whole for the convenience 
of the part, and vice versa. Suboptimization is deliberately designed 
out to make it possible for the system to avoid imposition of win/lose 
solutions that would pit the members against each other in their 
attempts to win functional battles at the expense of the corporate war. 
An operation can hardly be qualified as a success if the patient ulti-
mately dies.
The integration of the three platforms, although attractive, should not 
be considered easy. It will take the total cooperation of these platforms, 
the full attention of the HDS president, and a real cultural transformation 
(not to be mistaken with a climate survey) for its enormous potentials to 
be realized. In the process, the intensity of the resistance associated with 
the comfort level that comes with prolonged adaptation to single-role per-
formance should never be underestimated.
11.10  The executive office
As a whole, the executive office will be responsible for ensuring the overall 
viability and effectiveness of the system. It will be responsible for creating 
a vision and generating a shared image of a desired future and providing 

278 
Butterworth Health System 
the leadership to help achieve the organization's mission. To do this, the 
executive office is responsible for creating the following three critical 
processes.
1.	 Latency. The essence of creating latency will be a strategic planning pro-
cess that institutionalizes the continuous search for new opportunities 
relevant to the value chain. This process will develop and implement 
activities leading to cultural transformation, business renewal, genera-
tion of innovative ideas, and improved ways of delivering quality care 
and conducting business.
2.	 Synergy. The essence of synergy is management of interactions. It is 
concerned with the development and implementation of processes, 
systems, and incentives that produce cooperative efforts and alli-
ances that will make the whole of the value chain greater than the 
sum of its parts. These measures, which include the internal market, 
target costing, measurement systems, reward systems, early warning 
systems, and learning systems, are intended to create a win/win envi-
ronment by dissolving structural conflicts among the internal units, 
and linking the performance measure of each unit to its contribu-
tions to other units.
3.	 Throughput. Throughput processes will be concerned with the qual-
ity and efficiency of operations. They will help the system increase its 
effectiveness both within and among all the units of the value chain. 
The system will do so by utilizing continuous improvement method-
ology. The objective is to enhance operational potency through system 
solutions intended to:
•	 Decrease cycle time
•	 Eliminate waste
•	 Improve flexibility
•	 Increase quality
Throughput happens at two levels. The executive office will set the policies 
and standards while the operational managers will be responsible for 
operationalization. The implementation activities concerning the 
throughput process will be carried out at all levels of the organization. 
Every member of the system will participate in the continuous improve-
ment activity.
Under the leadership of the president and CEO, a small group of interdis-
ciplinary staff, operating in cross-functional teams, will be responsible for 
instituting the latency, synergy, and throughput processes in their own area.
11.11  Recap
This section is intended to serve as a reminder of the key points of the new 
design. The design utilizes the three bases of authority at the same time: 
the legal source (the boss), the knowledge source (competence), and the 
economic source (assets and money).

Recap  279
While in core knowledge, all doctors report to a doctor, all nurses to a 
nurse, and all technicians to a technician. Here, the management and 
interrelationships will be solution-oriented and compartmentalized. This 
arrangement will recognize and satisfy the requirements for specialized 
knowledge boundaries and establish the environment and rationality for 
the disciplinary approaches to professional development and peer over-
sight. In core knowledge, the organization will be input-based and there-
fore functional.
When in care systems or HDS, however, the mode is reversed from 
functional to modular. The management, the team, and the relationships 
will be problem-oriented and treatment-driven. The requirements of 
patient care, which is usually a multidisciplinary phenomenon, will 
become the criteria for the composition of the project teams and the appli-
cation of the design and practice methodology. In care systems and HDS, 
the organization will therefore be cross-functional and output based. The 
competence of the manager here is not necessarily a function of a single 
specialization. The requirements of the totality of the output will deter-
mine the most suitable leader, who might happen to be a doctor, a nurse, 
or a technician.
Taken to its logical conclusion, the widely held misconception that 
nobody should report to anybody who represents a different discipline 
will prevent a health delivery system from adopting the interdisciplinary 
approaches based on real-world problems that are so radically different 
from the way universities divide themselves. Such compartmentalizations 
will not only be unidisciplinary and solution-oriented (rather than inter-
disciplinary and problem-oriented), but they will invariably lead to cre-
ation of structural conflicts and imposition of win/lose solutions. That is 
why conflicts based on the traditional division of labor can never be dis-
solved unless the system is redesigned.
The new design will prevent structural conflicts rather than leaving 
them for managers to cope with. The prevention is assured by getting basi-
cally the same people to engage in learning, designing, and practicing 
health care. This is the essence of self-management and managing upward.
Pathways that are not the product of cross-functional teams, even if 
efficient, will not be widely owned or find general acceptance. To be both 
inherently effective and actually applied, the pathways not only should be 
collectively coproduced but should leave a certain degree of freedom for 
the practitioner to improvise. Otherwise, a seemingly perfected procedure 
will prove suffocating because it will be too rigid for adaptation to the case 
at hand and too tight for the practitioner to innovate. An inefficient system 
that would allow choice and experimentation will ultimately prove supe-
rior to a perfected straitjacket.

This page intentionally left blank

281
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a p t er | t welve
The Marriott Corporation
Kathy Dannemiller, a dear friend, had recommended me to the Marriott 
people. Dean Pat Stocker invited me to make a one-day presentation at the 
Aspen Institute, where Bill Tiefel, president of Marriott Lodging, and his 
direct reports were attending a week-long executive seminar.
The Marriott seminar was very exciting. The company faced an incred-
ible challenge. Times were bad. The game had changed drastically. Real 
estate had collapsed, and hotel owners (Marriott's main customers) needed 
more cash to survive. Corporate America (Marriott's major source of cash) 
was involved in so-called “right-sizing” and cutting costs left and right.
A month after our first seminar, in the summer of 1992, the Lodging 
Executive Committee decided to engage in an ideal-design process to 
replace the ineffective and costly divisional structure with a noble design. 
The outcome was a profound transformation of Marriott, which put it 
right back on the path to its continued success.
Two parallel teams were formed: one for design and the other for 
“mess” formulation. The design team consisted of 24 members of Bill 
Tiefel's executive committee. The mess team consisted of six able Marriott 
Lodging professionals. However, the mess team's report, because of its 
confidential nature, will not be discussed here.
John Pourdehnad, my colleague and old friend, was my partner in this 
project. He not only guided the mess team to an outstanding mess formu-
lation, but was also an indispensable participant in the design process.
What follows is a summary of the three iterations by the design team. 
The design process involved the following steps:
• Developing a collective understanding of the environment — “How is 
the game evolving?” and “What are the new bases for competition?”
• Identifying the purpose of the system to be designed (specifying the 
desired properties, core values, and mission)
• Creating a platform, a vision of a desired future for Marriott Lodging 
and a direction for its development, and a learning system that would 
be capable of responding continuously to the challenges of a changing 
environment

282 
The Marriott Corporation
12.1  The environment: how the game is evolving
The future is not what it used to be. It is becoming increasingly difficult, if 
not impossible, to predict and prepare. Contemporary organizations, 
therefore, need to focus on creating their own futures rather than waste 
their time attempting to predict and prepare.
• The current state of the economy (1992) cannot be explained away 
only as a cyclical phenomenon. And it does not only imply recession. 
The economy seems to be restructuring toward a level more compat-
ible with the emerging state of its competitiveness.
• The real estate market has changed. The current weakness of the real 
estate market is not temporary and is unlikely to change in the foresee-
able future. Therefore, the game cannot be played on the assumption 
that one can win through asset appreciation alone.
• Consumer behavior is changing. Customers are becoming smarter and 
want more and more for less and less.
• Businesses face cost pressures and are becoming very price-sensitive.
• Demand is shifting from one tier to the next.
• Quality, cost, and time are interdependent and form a complementary 
whole. None can be compromised at the expense of the others.
12.1.1  Bases for Competition
• Learn to live with uncertainty. Become more flexible and agile — have 
an early warning capability.
• Reduce the cost of operation by an order of magnitude. Select the right 
services and improve their quality.
• Adopt price-competitive measures to fill up unused capacity.
• Redesign the product, the process, and the structure to reap a 20 to 
30% cost reduction.
• Avoid being pushed into an undesirable product/market niche.
• Differentiate and match products in response to the market's emerging 
needs.
• Write down the assets (reflagging) — be a smart deal maker.
• Factor in the ratio of debt service to asset value. Factor in how the 
owner perceives value and is motivated to get into this business.
• Develop a strategy directed at the owners and the lenders.
• If the owners are failing, find out who is buying their assets. The asset man-
agement advisory group should be charged with developing both a strategy 
to deal with this situation and a capability to anticipate rather than react.
12.2  Purpose
12.2.1  Principles and Desired Characteristics
• Our commitment will be to total guest satisfaction.
• We will deliver value (benefits/costs) at all levels of the service value 
chain. We will define value at the end of the chain, “the guest,” and 

The Architecture  283
work our way back to property, owner, region, brand, division, and 
corporation.
• We will continuously match the product offerings with changing cus-
tomer needs (strategic product-market fit).
• We will take responsibility for creating a win/win environment that 
dissolves conflict among guests, associates, shareholders, owners, and 
distributors at various levels of the operations.
• We will challenge the industry by becoming the undisputed leaders in 
hotel management. We will accomplish this by:
• Fostering a lean, simple, nonbureaucratic, and flexible organiza-
tion in which formal and informal systems are in synch and easy 
organization-wide communication is enjoyed
•	 Creating a mutually supportive and interdependent system that 
takes full advantage of the synergy resulting from the interaction of 
technology, product/brands, and markets
•	 Being identified with value excellence through knowledge leadership
•	 Dissolving the dilemma between freedom and accountability, 
ensuring that authority and responsibility are matched at all levels
• Designing a throughput-oriented, win/win reward system that 
helps dissolve structural conflicts
• Leveraging technology to deliver value — doing more and more 
with less and less, resulting in higher resource productivity/yield
• We will attempt to achieve mutual satisfaction of all stakeholders by 
understanding the dynamic interaction of their needs. We cannot suc-
ceed unless all of our stakeholders — guests, associates, shareholders, 
owners, and distributors — are successful.
• We recognize our multi-tier customer base. In addition to our guests, 
property owners are the other critical customers. And when our cus-
tomers are in trouble, we are in trouble.
12.2.2  Mission
We want to be your “FIRST CHOICE.”
At Marriott:
• Every guest will be eager to return.
• Every associate will be able to realize his/her potentials.
• Every owner will be supported by superior management services.
• Every shareholder will be rewarded by premium returns.
12.3  The architecture
The following architecture (Figure 12.1) was accepted as the basis for build-
ing an idealized Marriott Hotels, Resorts, and Suites (MHRS). The architec-
ture, as represented in the following diagram, has four distinct dimensions:
1.	 Region/market operations: Representing the essence of the system. This is 
where MHRS ultimately happens — where the properties are located 
and where services are provided to guests.

284 
The Marriott Corporation
2.	 Products/brands: Representing the output (end products) of the system.
3.	 Core components: Representing operating subsystems that are shared 
throughout the system and/or sold to external markets.
4.	 Core knowledge: Representing MHRS's unique state-of-the-art know-
how to be used across the value chain by any or all of the above dimen-
sions directly.
The architecture recognizes the necessity for achieving competitive advan-
tage in all dimensions of market, product, and technology simultaneously. 
It therefore seeks to eliminate suboptimization around any one dimen-
sion. The objective is to actively generate synergy, latency, and efficiency by 
creating a win/win relationship among the three dimensions.
This architecture opens up possibilities that are usually closed to tradi-
tional approaches by:
• Adding new types of relationships to the superior–subordinate pairs as 
the fundamental blocks for organization building (customer–supplier)
• Changing the nature of control from supervision to learning — 
­supervision is considered wasteful
• Dissolving structural conflicts between the requirements of the mar-
ketplace and the diverse interests of competing product groups
• Reducing complexity by developing integrated solutions instead of 
patching together a multitude of incompatible and discrete solutions
• Allowing centralization and decentralization, integration and dif-
ferentiation, and interdependency and autonomy to all be realized 
simultaneously
FIGURE 12.1  Systems architecture.

The Architecture  285
12.3.1  Product/Market Mix
Matching products with markets is not a one-time proposition. It requires 
continuous research and redesign. Introducing the concept of brand man-
agers as a new dimension in the architecture will institutionalize this 
­function to provide an ongoing response to the challenge. The ideal com-
pany will also seek new opportunities for some of its core components 
and for its core knowledge (i.e., reservation/Honored Guest programs and 
training).
12.3.2  Region/Market Operation
Operations will be organized and managed across all lodging products 
according to each market's specific characteristics and requirements, tak-
ing advantage of the total opportunities presented by the marketplace. The 
markets will be segmented based on the behavioral characteristics and 
requirements of customers in any given economic region. This will reduce 
the structural conflict between competing product divisions and make it 
possible to create an optimum product mix for each regional operation to 
realize its maximum potential.
The total world market will be divided into ten regions. Each region 
will manage 50 to 75 different properties (including all brands). Large 
properties will have GMs, and smaller properties will be clustered into 
area management. The major concentration of effort will be to empower 
properties to do their work on their own and with minimal supervision.
Depending on the extent and diversity of functions, regional managers 
will have several assistants. These assistants to regional managers will be 
trained with candidacy for GM posts in mind. Assistant managers will be 
competent in several functions to avoid top-heavy bureaucratization and 
to promote managerial and organizational flexibility under changing envi-
ronmental conditions.
Within each region, operations will be designed bottom-up, not top-
down. First, those functions and services that are desired and can be 
best operated at the property level will be identified. Then, those func-
tions and services that can be shared at the regional level will be identi-
fied before deciding which ones will best be provided at the regional 
level.
The organization of each geographical region will differ based on the 
market potential of each area. However, the following functions will be 
used as a model.
12.3.2.1  Business management
This function will include finance, accounting, administrative and human 
resources services, and any other regional management support opera-
tions (including owner relations). This group will be supported by the 
business services unit of the core component dimension.

286 
The Marriott Corporation
12.3.2.2  Project management
Project teams will be organized around specific throughput processes, but 
will all have cross-functional expertise in information technology, total 
quality management (TQM), human systems, and design. The objective is 
proper implementation of the integrated solution (developed by each 
brand manager) at each site in the region, allowing all of the following 
critical goals for success to be accomplished simultaneously: reduction of 
cycle time, elimination of waste, creation of flexibility, and management 
of total quality. Rollout of any other projects developed by the core knowl-
edge groups or the corporation as a whole will be undertaken by this 
function.
12.3.2.3  Maintenance management
All of the activities directed at the upkeep of the sites and the engineering 
and maintenance function will be grouped under this function, which will 
provide services to the regional bases.
12.3.2.4  Sales
The regional sales effort will include direct sales, pricing, positioning, and 
sales training.
12.3.3  Brand Management
Brand management will assume total responsibility for product develop-
ment and product management. It will develop all the necessary opera-
tional procedures to operate a given type of lodging operation. Brand 
management will be the owner of the design and the lodging concept, and 
it will be a supplier to the region/market operations.
Initially, brand management will be limited to four models: basic, luxury, 
group, and convention. However, Courtyards, Fairfield Inn, and Residence 
Inn might be added later.
Product/brand management will perform the following functions:
• Concept development and concept implementation guidelines
• Brand marketing and positioning, guidelines, penetration, demand 
requirements, and competitive intelligence
• Franchising guidelines, business modeling, system integration, and 
core deliverables
• Operating procedures and maintaining brand identity (keeping the 
brand clean from other niches)
• Determining the appropriate standards for the product, deliveries in 
rooms, restaurant, lounge, catering, services, and amenities
• Feedback and interaction with advertising, promotion and public 
relations, price analysis, product criteria refinements/value engineer-
ing, emerging trends and market requirements, and adjustments to 
positioning

The Architecture  287
12.3.4  Core Components
Core component groups will make their services available to the internal 
customers at the lowest available price. Internal purchases might initially 
be subsidized by the corporation. The services will be sold at the market 
price to outside customers.
The following will constitute the core components of the lodging 
operations:
• Reservation system: The reservation system will be designed on a modu-
lar basis and offer its services on a differential price base depending on 
the needs of the user (services will be customized).
• Marketing and sales:
•	 Marriott video productions, advertising management, customer 
database, superior channel access, brand name, and other customer 
issues that go beyond one particular property.
•	 A customer survey system to measure guest satisfaction.
•	 The national sales system to include a sales deployment and lead 
referral system.
•	 A customer response (off property) system to be developed for 
escalation.
•	 A national public relations network to be utilized.
•	 Meeting and conference management services to be available.
• Human resources: The Associate Opinion Survey System, career plan-
ning system, succession planning, employee relations, recruitment, 
performance evaluation, promotions/transfers, training and develop-
ment, compensation and benefits, termination, retirement, personnel 
audit, and quality of work life.
• Business management: Payroll and benefits administration, ­procurement, 
and accounting.
• Marriott University: A system will be created to offer continuous 
training and education as an integral part of the MHRS operation. 
Every member of the Marriott family will become a teacher and a 
student.
12.3.5  Core Knowledge
MHRS will develop state-of-the-art capabilities in the following areas:
• Information technology
• Process technology
• Culinary research
The expertise of this group will be utilized by all dimensions of the orga-
nization including core components, brand management, and regional 
and property management.
In MHRS, every unit will be a “performance center.” For each unit, a set 
of specific measures of performance will be developed. Each unit will be 
expected to add value to MHRS through its operations. Therefore, ­profitability 

288 
The Marriott Corporation
will be a key factor in the performance measurement of each unit. Each 
unit's revenues will be derived from their “sales” to other units and/or to 
external customers.
To ensure cost and quality competitiveness, each of the component 
businesses will be capable of surviving on a stand-alone basis. Therefore, 
each of the units in this group will be treated as a separate business.
Units within the components dimension will have the option of sell-
ing their products and services outside MHRS. Likewise, regional manag-
ers will have the option of sourcing their core components from external 
suppliers.
At the beginning, it might be necessary for the MHRS to subsidize the 
core components provider before it can offer competitive prices to its 
internal customers.
12.3.6  Critical Processes
The design team concurred in using planning boards as a vehicle for creat-
ing and controlling the decision process in the ideal MHRS. In particular, 
the planning board concept will be utilized for the following reasons:
• To achieve consistency and empowerment at the same time.
• To eliminate supervision as a bureaucratic waste.
• To match authority with responsibility at all levels of the organization.
• The organization will be flat and decisions will be made at the lowest 
relevant level.
• Core competencies and values (parameters/customer-based) will be 
known at every level of the organization.
• A process that is proactive and anticipates the needs of the customer 
will be used.
• Feedback processes that surface mismatches (e.g., misalignment with 
customer expectations, mismatches with reality) will be developed so 
that corrective action can be taken.
Processes that anticipate the future needs and new ideas of our customers, 
and processes that surface problems that can be incorporated before a pro-
gram is rolled out will be developed.
Interactive policy teams will be the main vehicle for alignment of poli-
cies and plans and for dissolving conflicts among units in MHRS.
Each interactive policy team will have a minimum of three levels of 
management as members: the manager whose team it is, his/her boss, and 
his/her direct reports. Other members may be added on a regular basis or 
on specific issues.
Each policy decision will explicitly specify assumptions under which 
the decision is made and its expected outcome, specifically on the impact 
of the decision on:
• Financial performance
• People
• Output (quality of service)

Recap  289
Interactive policy teams will be responsible for making policies. They will 
not get involved in operation decisions. Policies will establish the criteria 
by which managers make decisions. Agreement on decision criteria will be 
the key to successful decentralization. If no policy exists for a pending 
decision, the responsible manager will make the decision on his/her own. 
The appropriate interactive policy team may later decide to make a policy 
for future situations. Each policy will be made at the lowest level team 
possible.
Special interactive policy teams will be formed to coordinate policy on 
specific issues of strategic importance. Examples may be a technology team 
and area/market teams.
12.4  Recap
The design of a new architecture for Marriott is based on the following 
assumptions:
• Property owners (franchisees) are the real customers of Marriott 
Corporation; therefore, they have to be recognized and treated as 
such.
• Troubled customers are the most serious early warning system for any 
business concern.
• Current weakness in the real estate market is not temporary and is 
unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. The game can no longer 
be played on the assumption that asset appreciation generates suffi-
cient return on investment for property owners.
• There is an urgent necessity to reduce costs by an order of magnitude 
and generate sufficient operating profit to overcome the weakness in 
the real estate market.
• Divisional structure with all its elegance and simplicity is a luxury that 
cannot be afforded any longer.
• Competition among various product divisions in Marriott in a given 
marketplace is much more intense than the conflict between Marriott 
and its competitors.
• Structural conflict among product divisions needs to be rationalized 
by optimizing the product mix in a given marketplace.
• Supplier–customer relations should govern the interactions among 
market management, brand management, and core components.

This page intentionally left blank

291
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a p te r | t hi rt een
Commonwealth Energy 
System
Dr. Thomas Lee of the Center for Quality Management and Professor 
Gerald Wilson of MIT introduced me to Commonwealth Energy System 
(COM/Energy). I had developed a great respect for Dr. Wilson when I 
worked with him on the redesign of Carrier Corporation. I welcomed 
the chance to collaborate with him again when he asked me to help 
develop a new corporate strategy for COM/Energy, where he was a 
trustee. This was a unique opportunity because three members of the 
Board of Trustees, the CEO, and all the company's senior executives had 
joined together to create a compelling vision and new strategic direc­
tion that would place COM/Energy among the leaders in the next gen­
eration of the energy business.
The design team consisted of the following members: officers inclu­
ded Leonard Devanna Vice President, Systems, Planning (project 
­coordinator, COM/Energy); Kenneth Margossian, President, Chief 
Operating Officer, Commonwealth Gas (COM/Gas); William Poist, Chief 
Executive Officer, COM/Energy; James Rappoli, Vice President, Finance, 
and Treasurer, COM/Energy; Michael Sullivan, Vice President, Secretary, 
and General Counsel, COM/Energy; and Russel Wright, President, Chief 
Operating Officer, Common­wealth Electric (COM/Electric). Trustees 
included Dr. Sheldon Buckler, Trustee, Polaroid Corporation; Sinclair 
Weeks, Jr., Chairman of the Board of Trustees, Reed & Barton Corporation; 
Dr. Gerald Wilson, Trustee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
In addition, the following employees formed the “mess team”: Rob 
Bucknell, Director of Sales, COM/Gas; Peter Dimond, Director of 
Communications, COM/Electric; Robert Fleck, Manager, Gas Procurement, 
COM/Gas; David Gibbons, Sr., Forecast Analyst, COM/Energy; Charles 
Kiely, Manager, Consumer Service, COM/Electric; Michael Kirkwood, 
Director, Resource Planning, COM/Electric; Paul Lynch, Director, Treasury 
Services, COM/Energy; Robert Martin, Manager, Cost Administrator, COM/ 
Electric; Richard Morrison, Sr., Attorney, Assistant Clerk, COM/Energy; Denise 

292 
Commonwealth Energy System 
Murphy, Sr., Forecast Analyst, COM/Energy; Bernard Peloquin, Manager, 
Benefits, COM/Energy; and Ronald O'Brien, Manager, Marketing & 
Conservation, COM/Gas. Their report, because of its confidential nature, 
is not reproduced here.
Consultants were Jamshid Gharajedaghi and Bijan Korram, INTERACT; 
and Dr. Thomas Lee and Toby Woll, Center for Quality Management 
(CQM).
The designers believe that the resulting design, presented here, is an 
expression of the expectations, aspirations, and preferences of all stake­
holders. The design focuses on dissolving the mess and creating a desired 
future.
13.1  Stakeholders' Expectations
A stakeholder of a system is an individual or a group that is directly affected 
by the performance of the system and can have an influence in creating its 
future. Below is a summary of what the design team feels are the expecta­
tions of COM/Energy's stakeholders and some implications of these 
expectations (Figure 13.1).
13.1.1  Shareholders' Expectations
The expectations of shareholders are changing. Until recently, COM/
Energy, like most utilities, had been regarded as a safe investment. However, 
because of the franchise's limitations and changes in the business environ­
ment, COM/Energy's present operation is no longer seen to provide a sig­
nificant growth opportunity and a minimal investment risk. The basis for 
many investors' historical preference for utilities in general — a guaran­
teed return on investment — is being called into question by the changing 
environment. Under the circumstances, there might be a transformation 
PURPOSE
&
STRATEGIC INTENT
PRODUCTS
& 
MARKETS
S T A K E H O L D E R S'   E X P E C T A T I O N S
B U S I N E S S   E N V I R O N M E N T
COMPONENTS
& 
RELATIONS
C R I T I C A L
P R O C E S S E S
FIGURE 13.1  Stakeholders' expectations.

Stakeholders' Expectations  293
in shareholder profile indicating a preference for significant growth in 
earnings or a higher rate of return as compensation for the increased risk 
associated with this business.
13.1.2  Regulators' Expectations
Regulators have been caught between two apparently opposing expecta­
tions. One is to respond to politicians' and environmentalists' pressures to 
promote a costly social agenda. This has been accomplished by incorpo­
rating social justice issues into rate formulation to satisfy public expecta­
tions. However, using rate increases as a means of accomplishing these 
objectives is no longer acceptable; the regulators find themselves under 
public and political pressures to decrease rates to satisfy customers and 
promote economic development. The regulators therefore would welcome 
those who offer innovative solutions to their dilemma.
13.1.3  Employees' Expectations
Employees realize that the game has changed. They would like an environ­
ment that assures them continued job security, a quality of work life in 
which they can develop, empowerment to pursue new ideas, differentia­
tion based on their performance, and the ability to build a productive 
career. They have regarded COM/Energy as a preferred employer and have 
responded, in turn, with loyalty to the system.
Recently, however, the employees' sense of job security has been dis­
turbed by the negative impact of emerging national economic and indus­
try trends affecting COM/Energy. They seem willing to go out of their way 
to help secure the advantages of working for COM/Energy. Under the cir­
cumstances, the management has an unprecedented opportunity to gain 
the cooperation of the employees in introducing positive changes in the 
company's direction and organization.
13.1.4  Customers' Expectations
Customers are responding to their own economic pressures by demanding 
that energy services be provided at the lowest possible cost. They believe that 
the cost plus monopolistic system is not responsive to their demands. They 
appreciate the reliability and other benefits that the system has provided, yet 
find the price for maintaining and improving it unreasonably high. Industrial 
customers' expectations are fueled by suppliers promising them lower prices 
if regulations did not keep them out. Customers, therefore, welcome the 
promises of deregulation that would give them the power of choice.
Some customers are equally frustrated by a limited set of utility ser­
vices that ignores their emerging needs and problems just because they do 
not seem to fall into one of the categories of conventional services tradi­
tionally provided. Integrated total energy services are value-adding initia­
tives that customers expect to have in the future.

294 
Commonwealth Energy System 
13.1.5  Suppliers' Expectations
Suppliers have seen major changes in their own business areas. They are 
aware that the advent of new competition and the existence of chronic 
oversupply will usher in increased uncertainty and insecurity. They have 
a considerable level of investment to protect. They need to hedge their 
enormous vulnerability against an increasingly unpredictable environ­
ment. They would like to be considered legitimate members of the fam­
ily and treated as partners who are equally affected by the system and 
who have genuine stakes in its success. They therefore expect to be 
included in companies' strategic planning processes, to make sure they 
have a chance to contribute to the viability of COM/Energy and ensure 
the future of their businesses. The suppliers are prepared to enter the 
entrepreneurial game. However, they expect fairness and equal opportu­
nity to provide their services based on a level playing field. They would 
welcome participation in alliances that strike a balance between risks 
and rewards.
13.1.6  Public's Expectations
The public at large, and especially environmentalists, are worried about 
the environmental threats of energy generation and consumption. They 
welcome moves toward conservation and away from pollution. They sup­
port some form of internalization of external costs associated with pollu­
tion and safety, but believe these measures can be taken even at lower 
prices. The public in general seems resigned to the inevitability of changes 
in energy's economic equation. Taking some of their cues from European 
initiatives, they expect utilities to be efficient and reliable, to project a pos­
itive public image, and to be generally regarded as a benign “green” 
operation.
13.2  Business Environment
The redesign process was conducted under the assumption that the system 
had been destroyed overnight but that its environment remained intact. 
The general and industry-specific changes in the environment that are 
likely to impact COM/Energy are identified as follows (see Figure 13.2 for 
an overview of the environmental dynamics of the energy industry).
13.2.1  The Changing Game: The Energy Industry
• FROM a cost plus regulated environment in which the regulator sets 
the rate to generate a fair return on investment TO limited regulation 
in the areas of generation and distribution with rates highly influenced 
by competitive benchmarking.
• FROM peaceful coexistence among peers and respect for each other's 
territories TO a zero-sum, competitive environment in which many 
energy players try to succeed at each other's expense.

Business Environment  295
• FROM a relatively simple and nondifferentiated business environment 
TO a field ever more crowded with pressure groups (­environmentalists, 
politicians, consumer activists, suppliers, brokers), each competing for 
dominance to advance their specific agenda.
• FROM the stability of a publicly regulated environment TO the unpre­
dictability of a competitive market economy in which competition 
defines the game and customers choose the winners.
• FROM operating in a docile and permissive environment TO one char­
acterized increasingly by hypersensitivity to environmental impacts 
and natural resource conservation.
• FROM a relatively simple and nondiscriminatory customer base TO 
a highly differentiated customer base representing an ever-increasing 
variety of criteria.
• FROM the security of a closed and exclusive franchise TO the insecurity 
of a market open to competition.
• FROM offering discrete solutions to independent problems TO pro­
ducing integrated solutions to a host of interdependent problems.
• FROM a traditionally capital-intensive industry with heavy reliance on 
capital cost recovery TO a niche-oriented marketing of services and/or 
products with a shift of emphasis on core competence and the wealth-
creating power of the “knowledge worker.”
Nonpaying
customers
Market
saturation
Restructuring
Recession
Layoffs
Downsizing
closedown
Competitiveness
Volume
generated
Demand for
electricity
Cost of
supply
conservation
More
efficient
appliances
Legislation
regulators
Restructuring
The utility
Environmental
concern
increase
Over-
supply
Oil crisis of
1979
reduces
reduces
increase
increase
reduces
reduces
FIGURE 13.2  How the energy game is evolving.

296 
Commonwealth Energy System 
13.2.2  The Changing Game: COM/Energy
No one knows, with any degree of certainty, what the future of COM/
Energy, and all utilities for that matter, will look like. What is certain, how­
ever, is that the future of COM/Energy will not be the same as its past. In a 
small, saturated franchise, growing pressures for further deregulation, inclu­
sion of environmental costs, increasing cost-effectiveness, and intensified 
competition are among the major forces changing the company's familiar 
landscape beyond recognition. The only certainty will be uncertainty.
As to what directions the energy industry may take, we identified the 
following possibilities:
• Insufficient growth within the current franchise area to support the 
increasing costs associated with providing necessary energy services.
• Differentiation of customer base (each with a unique set of prefer­
ences) requires differentiation of products and services. This will fur­
ther open up opportunities for different providers to compete in the 
same markets on the basis of the most effective offerings to meet the 
needs of certain preferred customers (e.g., MIT self-generation).
• Deregulation providing COM/Energy with access to new customers in geo­
graphic areas that are less saturated and mature than the existing franchise.
• Emergence of nonregulated entities (e.g., brokers, wholesalers, and 
retail wheelers) as major players.
• Modification of the cost equation makes the application of alternative 
technologies feasible (e.g., possible imposition of environmental taxes 
on the generation of pollution).
• Introduction of mergers, acquisitions, strategic alliances, and networks.
Whatever shape it takes, the emerging new reality will be abundant with 
unprecedented threats and opportunities. In light of its possible impact, 
different stakeholders have already begun reassessing their expectations. 
Most important, the prospect of limited growth is a source of anxiety not 
only for the stockholders but for all the stakeholders of the organization. 
This is so because the viability of the system has been essentially growth-
based. Insufficient growth produces two disturbing effects: internally, it will 
upset the built-in cost increase system; and externally, the emerging new 
game will disrupt the peaceful coexistence of the peer utility companies. 
The game will turn zero-sum; some will win at the expense of others. While 
growth opportunities in the franchise area have become limited, promising 
new opportunities in the unregulated areas are emerging. The implication 
of these changes is that to preserve the beneficial environment COM/Energy 
has enjoyed, a new approach to conducting the business is required.
13.3  Design
Developed under the assumption that the system has been destroyed over­
night but that everything in its environment has survived, the preceding 
sections outlined COM/Energy's defining context in terms of stakeholders' 

Design  297
expectations and business environment. Once this context was estab­
lished, the design team began the next phase of iterations intended to 
redesign COM/Energy from a clean slate. The design represents a shared 
vision of COM/Energy's desired future.
13.3.1  Purpose and Strategic Intent
Although efficient performance in energy distribution is a prerequisite to 
COM/Energy's viability, this commitment in and of itself will not be suf­
ficient for creating the results the stakeholders truly desire. Facing lack of 
growth within the existing franchise and emerging uncertainty in the 
energy industry as a whole, COM/Energy is required to adopt a three-
pronged strategy that will make it possible to explore and exploit the most 
favorable opportunities that present themselves on all dimensions of the 
value chain—technology, product, and market. Such a multidimensional 
strategy will enable COM/Energy to effectively extend its operational reach 
beyond the existing franchise and regulated framework.
Working from such an advantageous platform, the system as a whole 
will become greater than the sum of its parts. In the context of an inte­
grated value chain, we will therefore define our strategy in terms of the fol­
lowing three activities:
1.	 Regulated businesses: Retaining and creating the most efficient energy 
distribution businesses. We intend to retain the existing regulated fran­
chises as our mainstay. We believe that the retail distribution of energy 
will remain regulated, albeit in a different form. We are therefore deter­
mined not only to do our utmost to contain the mess and dissolve it 
within the regulated businesses, but to become one of the most effi­
cient operators in the retail distribution of energy.
Since the prospects for significant growth within the existing fran­
chise are limited and the successful dissolution of the mess in the regu­
lated businesses will require a few years of intensive improvements, 
COM/Energy will pursue a parallel strategy to explore and exploit the 
potentials of the nonregulated market.
2.	 Customer-oriented businesses: Creating growth opportunities for inte­
grated services outside the franchise area. We intend to extend our 
search for order-of-magnitude growth beyond the regulated territory. 
This parallel strategy will capitalize on COM/Energy's multiple intrin­
sic advantages: (1) extensive knowledge of the energy businesses, 
(2) small and potentially agile size, (3) financial strength, and (4) 
committed personnel. These advantages will help achieve the kind of 
growth that can come from market-based offerings that incorporate a 
variety of inputs in response to a wide range of user-specific demands.
The key to a successful customer-oriented dimension is to remove 
the traditional barriers that have made gas and electricity expertise mutu­
ally exclusive. Customer-oriented businesses, by definition, must avoid 
exclusive standardization designed to meet only those specific offerings 

298 
Commonwealth Energy System 
that fall comfortably within the narrow confines of an exclusive source 
of energy (e.g., an isolated gas unit and an isolated electricity unit work­
ing independently of each other, thus missing the vast opportunities rep­
resenting real-world, user-oriented, and synthetic needs/problems).
To this end, our utilization of the value chain will involve a deliber­
ate shift toward user-specific integrated systems and services designed to 
solve unmet and latent customer requirements. We will, therefore, oper­
ate from a combined vantage point that opens up opportunities that 
had been closed to our conventional way of doing business. We will 
apply a highly concentrated effort to continually develop various inte­
grated energy services and systems that address emerging real-world 
needs/problems irrespective of the original sources of required inputs.
At a minimum, we intend to establish two business entities. The first 
will concentrate on residential/commercial energy services, which may 
include conservation and energy management products and services. 
The second entity will focus on the industrial sector and provide energy 
management, cogeneration, brokerage, and other services. Recognizing 
the need for additional expertise in these areas and access to new market 
areas, these business entities will pursue appropriate partners in devel­
oping these opportunities.
3.	 Technology (supply-oriented) businesses: Leveraging energy-generating 
capacities to synergize potentials of the value chain. We intend to 
retain the energy generation and storage businesses. Through these 
businesses, COM/Energy is a major purchaser and/or supplier of oil, 
natural gas, and electrical energy. These markets, which were previ­
ously isolated and distinct, are now becoming increasingly integrated. 
Other companies, operating in only one of these sectors, are form­
ing strategic alliances that simulate, to a lesser degree, the structure of 
the COM/Energy System. As a system, we will develop opportunities 
that integrate oil, natural gas, and electrical energy suppliers of energy 
and energy-related technologies to form mutually beneficial alliances. 
These relationships will serve not only as new sources of income, but 
will also enable us to respond to the energy markets' latent and emerg­
ing needs for new products and services.
For COM/Energy, deregulation is filled with opportunities. Considering the 
limitations of our franchise, we stand to gain more from deregulation than 
our competitors. The franchise is land-locked, whereas consumers are every­
where. By capitalizing on the uniqueness of COM/Energy, the three-pronged 
strategy will allow us to exploit emerging opportunities in energy markets.
13.3.2  Core Values and Desired Specifications
• Remain in the energy business.
• Be a proactive organization capable of reinventing itself.
• Take advantage of opportunities that will add value to the whole and thus 
create the potential for its members to grow (a win/win relationship).

General Architecture  299
• Be among the pioneers that will redefine the energy industry of the 
future, while maintaining organizational stability and minimizing risk.
• Be the preferred investment for our shareholders, assuring them of a 
secure and rewarding investment.
• Create the norms, performance measures, and incentives that will pro­
mote a challenging entrepreneurial culture in which people will enjoy 
stretching to achieve worthwhile goals that give them both intrinsic 
and extrinsic satisfaction.
• Be seen by peers as a model organization worthy of emulation.
• Be able to transcend the traditional frameworks of doing business by 
getting regulators and other stakeholders to buy into different and bet­
ter ways of doing business.
• Project a positive public image as a “green” company.
• Be able to detect, early on, imminent shifts in the relevant technolo­
gies, modes of operation, and customer needs and preferences.
• Make sure that the new businesses enjoy maximum entrepreneurial 
freedom to achieve competitive advantage immune from the spillover 
of norms and practices specific to the regulated businesses.
• Be able to constantly overcome the mess (e.g., empire building, alien­
ation, hierarchies, resistance to change, lack of accountability).
• Change the nature of control from supervision to learning and early 
warning.
• Simultaneously exploit the advantages of both centralization and 
decentralization, integration and differentiation, and interdependency 
and autonomy.
13.4  General Architecture
To realize the expectations of COM/Energy's stakeholders, the designers 
recognize the necessity of employing an integrated value chain strategy. 
The architecture will be positioned to freely explore and exploit emerging 
opportunities along technology, product, and market dimensions. This 
not only will dissolve the mess, by transcending the traditional separa­
tions of gas and electricity operations, but will enable COM/Energy to 
offer systems solutions that will address unmet and latent needs of pre­
ferred customers.
The following describes the basic components of the architecture and 
the critical relationships among them. It represents the platform from which 
COM/Energy's value chain will evolve. The value chain will not be limited 
to these components alone. As the environment evolves, other value-adding 
units will be created. The identification of the components was aided by the 
use of the Business Identification Matrix (see Figure 13.3).
The criteria for expansion will include the contribution each additional 
unit will make to the entire value chain. Thus, the architecture will take 
advantage of the interrelated dimensions of technology, product, and mar­
ket by allowing capitalization on opportunities that would otherwise 

300 
Commonwealth Energy System 
remain inaccessible to a unidimensional strategy. The schematic view of 
COM/Energy's architecture is shown in Figure 13.4.
The components of the architecture include an executive office (a CEO 
supported by a core knowledge pool), regulated business units (gas and 
electricity distribution), customer-oriented business units (energy services 
and systems), technology/supply-oriented business units (energy, gas, 
steam generation, and storage), and shared services (service company and 
financial systems).
Aside from the regulated businesses, which are bound by state and fed­
eral regulations, all other units of the architecture are considered to be per­
formance centers expected to
• Be self-sufficient units with explicit sources of income.
• Meet and exceed the cost of capital.
• Produce values that are measured against the formula: EVA = I (r − c), 
where EVA stands for economic value added, I is investment, and r and c 
represent return and cost of capital correspondingly.
• Operate on target costing. Conventional profit centers operate on target 
pricing. Prices are set by a cost-plus-margin formula. The assumption 
is that costs are uncontrollable but prices are not. Therefore, higher 
profits are achieved by targeting higher price levels. In contrast, perfor­
mance centers operate on target costing. Here, prices are assumed to be 
uncontrollable and are set by the market on a competitive basis, while 
Natural 
Sources of 
Energy:
Coal
Oil
Gas
Uranium
Water
Wind
Trans-
porting
Storage
Conver-
sion
Energy 
Currency:
Distri-
bution/ 
Trans- 
mission
Applications
L
i
g
h
t
i
n
g
S
p
a
c
e
c
o
o
l
i
n
g
S
p
a
c
e
h
e
a
t
i
n
g
T
r
a
n
s
p
o
r
A
p
p
l
i
M
o
t
o
r
s/
Electricity
Gas
Oil
Steam
Coal
t-
a
t
i
o
n
Markets
t
o
o
l
s
-a
n
c
e
s
"Refining"
Wood,
Sun, …
Service
. 
. 
.
ENERGY MARKET
ENERGY SUPPLY
FIGURE 13.3  Business identification matrix.

Core Business Units: Gas and Electricity Distribution  301
costs are assumed to be controllable and are targeted for a profitable 
operation. Initially, performance centers are given a grace period to 
learn how to adjust their operations before they are required to meet 
target costs.
• Be measured not only on the basis of their own profitability but also 
on the contributions they make to the profitability of other members 
of the value chain.
• Manage operations at the lowest competitive cost. The relationships 
among the performance centers are determined, in part, by an internal 
market mechanism, which makes them conduct transactions on the 
basis of supplier–customer relationships. If any unit is made to buy 
from or sell to other internal customers at a comparative disadvantage, 
that unit's opportunity cost would be compensated by the corporate 
entity that imposes the constraint.
13.5  Core Business Units: Gas and Electricity 
Distribution
The gas and electricity distribution business units will constitute the first 
output dimension of COM/Energy's value chain. They will continue to 
operate within the regulated environment. All indications are that, for the 
foreseeable future, the distribution of natural gas and electricity will 
ENERGY  
BROKERAGE
REGULATED 
COM/Energy
System  Architecture
EXECUTIVE
OFFICE
INTERNATIONAL
  OPERATIONS
ENERGY SUPPLY SYSTEMS (INDUST.)
CO-GEN, INTEG. PACKAGES 
ELECTRICITY  
DISTRIBUTION 
FRANCHISE
GAS 
DISTRIBUTION 
FRANCHISE
S
H
A
R
E
D
ENERGY GEN. 
(CANAL)
GAS STORAGE 
(LNG)
FINANCIAL
SYSTEMS
ENERGY MAGT SERVICES (RES./COM)
DSM/APPLIANCES
SERVICE  
COMPANY
LEARNING & CONTROL
(Management Committee)
CORE
KNOWLEDGE POOL
STEAM 
SUPPLY 
(STEAM SRVS)
FIGURE 13.4  COM/Energy architecture.

302 
Commonwealth Energy System 
remain regulated. Gas and electricity businesses will represent the fran­
chise and contain only those activities that must be managed in the regu­
lated format. They will capitalize on the unrealized potentials within the 
existing franchise.
These two units will report to an internal board of directors. As core 
businesses, they will be fully autonomous units. They will have control 
over all of the activities necessary to help them exploit the full potentials 
of the franchise. The units will fully abide with all the laws and require­
ments pertaining to regulated energy distribution.
The core businesses, gas distribution and electricity distribution, will 
provide COM/Energy's stability. For the foreseeable future they will be the 
infrastructure necessary for developing other units of the value chain. 
These business units will have the responsibility and the challenge of fur­
ther identifying, containing, and dissolving their mess. Each will become 
a model of an efficiently managed distribution business in a regulated 
industry.
13.5.1  Customer-Oriented Business Units: Energy 
­Supply Systems and Management Services
The customer-oriented business units, energy supply systems and energy 
management services, will constitute the second output dimension of COM/
Energy's value chain. They will operate outside the regulated environment.
The experience that COM/Energy has gained as a gas and electric hold­
ing company provides it with a unique understanding of customers' 
needs, which can be met by combinations of energy products and ­services. 
With the full support of the gas and electric segments, COM/Energy will 
develop a wide range of energy products and services to complement its 
traditional offerings. These services will encompass industrial/commer­
cial cogeneration, packaged cogeneration, operation and ­maintenance of 
existing generation, and residential/commercial energy management 
services.
13.5.2  Cogeneration and Packages of Energy 
­Supply (Industrial and Commercial)
With regulatory reform and rapidly escalating energy prices during the 
1980s, the application of cogeneration to meet energy requirements 
became increasingly common. Throughout the United States, cogenera­
tion now represents nearly 10% of total electricity production — in New 
England, cogeneration represents greater than 10% of electricity genera­
tion. In recent years, cogeneration activity has been expanding rapidly. 
From 1988 to 1992, total electricity generation in the United States 
increased 7.9% while cogenerated electricity increased 74%. By 1992, the 
total market for cogeneration had reached roughly $4 billion. Cogeneration 
applications can provide customers with a payback of 1–4 years and a 
return on investment of roughly 15–30%.

Core Business Units: Gas and Electricity Distribution  303
Although the market for cogeneration is maturing, it has proven its 
applicability in many energy-intensive industries and is likely to experi­
ence continued growth for the foreseeable future. Utilities are experienc­
ing increased difficulties regarding transmission facilities. As a result, 
providing localized sources of power that obviate the need for transmis­
sion facilities will become increasingly necessary. This trend toward dis­
tributed generation is only in its infancy, with cogeneration being the first 
commercial step. However, cogeneration will be the beginning of a greater 
wave of activity that will ultimately include such technologies as fuel cells 
and photovoltaic arrays.
To meet the need for distributed energy generation, the energy supply 
systems business unit will be involved in commercial and industrial con­
sulting, development, service, and financing for cogeneration projects. 
This subsidiary will:
• Offer consulting services (feasibility studies and evaluations)
• Act as a developer to install equipment
• Provide service/maintenance contracts
• Provide financing and leasing services
These services will be offered both inside and outside the regulated busi­
nesses' service territories, with the primary market being driven by where 
the best opportunities exist. The services will be marketed to industrials, 
such as manufacturing companies, or large commercial establishments, 
such as hospitals. Energy-intensive industrial firms, such as pulp and paper 
producers, chemical plants, and large manufacturing plants, are sites that 
can benefit most from cogeneration.
Although cogeneration is generally targeted to single-plant sites, it has 
applicability to multiple associated sites as well. Industrial parks offer a 
particularly attractive target market. This subsidiary will offer products 
that meet all the energy-related needs of the companies within an indus­
trial park, including electricity, gas, and/or steam. Similar opportunities 
exist in large office complexes, universities, and shopping plazas.
A related opportunity exists for the more standardized version of 
cogeneration, referred to as packaged cogeneration. This option will also be 
offered by the subsidiary to commercial operations such as restaurants, 
hotels, or multifamily housing units. The value of packaged cogeneration 
lies in its modularity, low cost, and minimal maintenance. To offer pack­
aged cogeneration, the subsidiary will align itself with vendors of pack­
aged cogeneration technology.
This energy supply systems subsidiary will become a member of the 
COM/Energy family of diversified energy suppliers (electricity, gas, and 
steam). Cogeneration will become a service that complements the tradi­
tional offerings of the regulated subsidiaries. With this new business 
opportunity, COM/Energy will achieve synergy between its current prod­
uct and service offerings. Involvement in the cogeneration market will pro­
vide an expertise that can be shared with the system so that the system 
obtains a better insight into the needs of specific market sectors.

304 
Commonwealth Energy System 
Synergy will also be achieved with COM/Energy's other new business 
endeavor: an energy management services business unit. As opportunities 
for applying cogeneration technologies are explored, it is likely that related 
opportunities for energy efficiency improvements will be uncovered. These 
opportunities can then be capitalized upon by the energy management 
services subsidiary. Similarly, the energy management services subsidiary 
will likely uncover situations where potential customers could benefit 
from cogeneration technology and pass such information along to the 
energy supply services subsidiary.
It is also possible that other synergies will arise between proposed sub­
sidiaries. An energy brokerage subsidiary could act as a fuel supplier to 
potential cogeneration customers by providing natural gas and oil and/or 
marketing excess electrical energy. Cogeneration plant operation and 
maintenance will also complement COM/Energy's experience at the Canal 
plant and steam facilities.
The business structure for the energy supply systems subsidiary will 
entail acquisitions or joint ventures. Under the latter structure, the subsid­
iary could act as prime contractor and project manager with the partner 
generally supplying its technology.
The shared services unit of COM/Energy will provide accounting, legal, 
and basic information services to this nonregulated operation. These ser­
vices will be charged to a separate chart of accounts set up specifically for 
this operation and will be funded from this operation's profits. The sub­
sidiary may also procure services from outside the system.
13.5.3  Energy Efficiency and Electrotechnologies 
(Residential and Commercial)
In addition to “before-the-meter” activities of the energy supply systems 
subsidiary, the company will engage in “after-the-meter” activities offering 
customers services and products designed to save money on utility ser­
vices. The electric and gas distribution companies typically have not offered 
new services to customers; they have merely provided either kilowatt 
hours or BTUs. However, as deregulation progresses, new services will be 
created.
These new services are already provided to industrial natural gas cus­
tomers whereby the transportation and commodity portions of a previ­
ously bundled product have been separated with FERC Order 636. This 
separation has allowed customers to establish futures contracts as a means 
to hedge energy costs. Similarly, in the electric utility industry, once hourly 
pricing of electricity takes hold and the appropriate technology becomes 
available in appliances, customers will be able to regulate usage of appli­
ances in the home based on hourly price signals from the local utility.
Preliminary research indicates that the energy management systems 
and home automation markets offer great potential. Surveys show that 
U.S. business spends $7 billion on energy conservation in commercial 

Technology/Supply-Oriented Business Units  305
buildings annually. Studies also report that the home automation market 
could exceed $3.5 billion by the year 2000. Many sizable utilities, such as 
American Electric Power and Southern Company, envision great potential 
for this market niche and have become involved as equity participants 
and testers of advanced energy management systems. Pilot projects with 
this equipment have yielded dramatic results in terms of improving load 
management and increasing customer satisfaction. By pairing with tech­
nology players in this marketplace, the company can increase earnings 
from its nonregulated subsidiaries while preparing itself to face the chal­
lenges of more aggressive competition and the growing need for better 
customer service.
In addition to offering new services, this subsidiary would also offer 
the following energy management consulting services to customers both 
inside and outside the electric and gas distribution territories:
• Audits and management programs for commercial and industrial facil­
ities (including public and commercial office facilities, schools, hospi­
tals, etc.)
• Energy accounting methods and investment strategies (including fea­
sibility studies, payback methodology, and use of tax credits and grant 
programs)
• Assistance with implementing electrotechnologies
In addition to providing energy management services directly to ultimate 
customers for a fee, the company may also act as a performance contractor 
for utility companies. The growth rate for utility DSM budgets shows that 
the New England market is mature and will not be growing at the rapid 
rate of recent years. The North Central area of the country is the fastest 
growing, and the West and Northwest are also growing fairly rapidly.
Because COM/Electric has significant experience in the area of demand-
side management, a great deal of knowledge could come from the electric 
distribution company. The shared services entity would provide account­
ing, legal, and basic information services to this nonregulated entity. These 
services would be charged to a separate chart of accounts set up specifically 
for the nonregulated entity and would be funded from this entity's 
profits.
By establishing an energy management services subsidiary to promote 
these energy utilization products and services, COM/Energy will position 
itself to participate in this newly created industry between the utility and 
the customer.
13.6  Technology/Supply-Oriented Business 
Units: Energy Generation and Supply
The technology/supply-oriented business units will constitute the third 
output dimension of COM/Energy's value chain. To the extent possible, 
they will operate outside the regulated environment. This dimension will 
represent all of the components, activities, and businesses that involve the 

306 
Commonwealth Energy System 
generation, conversion, and storage of energy. Traditionally, Canal, LNG 
storage, and steam have been part of the regulated franchise. But to exploit 
their full potential, they will be transferred, where possible, to the non­
regulated part of the value chain, where they will be treated as indepen­
dent businesses. The business units within energy generation/supply will 
be as follows.
13.6.1  Energy Generation (Canal)
Canal is a wholesale electric company providing power to a number of 
electric utilities, including COM/Energy subsidiaries. A portion of the elec­
tric distribution company's supply comes from investments in a number 
of utility power facilities, including the Seabrook nuclear station, which 
are managed investments as part of a portfolio of earnings. Canal also 
owns and operates Canal Unit 1. This unit sells its power to Boston Edison, 
New England Power, Montaup Electric, and Cambridge/Commonwealth 
Electric. The existing contracts to this unit end in 2001, at which time 
Canal will have a fully depreciated power plant that may offer a significant 
business opportunity.
Recognizing the presence of other fully depreciated facilities and the 
fact that capital and operating costs are relatively consistent across many 
units, a newly structured power supplier can be effective only with a 
lower priced fuel supply (compared to other units) or an efficiency 
advantage. Since efficiency advantages cannot be captured with older 
units, Canal is negotiating a potential business alliance with major fuel 
suppliers. To prepare for 2001, Canal 1 will pursue a distinct business 
strategy to continue the life of the unit and market power to existing and 
new customers. To achieve this, Canal will enter into the necessary busi­
ness partnerships to produce market-based pricing with a competitively 
priced fuel supply.
Canal Unit 2 is jointly owned with Montaup Electric Company, and its 
capacity is split evenly between Montaup and Commonwealth/Cambridge 
Electric. Canal Unit 2 will continue to supply power under its existing con­
tracts through 2010. With its conversion to natural gas, Unit 2 will not 
only lower its emissions, but will also have the flexibility to instanta­
neously switch between oil and natural gas. By utilizing the existing oil 
storage facilities and securing various natural gas supplies, Canal will have 
the opportunity to broker significant quantities of natural gas, oil, and 
electricity as markets develop.
Canal, although currently part of the franchise businesses, will eventu­
ally be managed as an autonomous unit with customer and supplier rela­
tionships. As an autonomous unit, Canal will be responsible for managing 
its operations and associated costs to meet market expectations. The first 
phase of this transition will be to establish a project venture as part of the 
marketing and reengineering of Unit1 to obtain extended-life customer 
contracts.

Energy Brokerage and International Operations  307
13.6.2  Gas Storage (LNG)
Now known as Hopkinton LNG, this storage facility subsidiary will con­
tinue to supply natural gas to the gas distribution company during the 
coldest winter months. Given the prospect of deregulation, Hopkinton 
LNG management will be investigating other business opportunities, 
which include the marketing of liquefaction services, emergency backup 
services, and peak shaving services. The development of these opportuni­
ties depends upon the economics of the gas distribution company's con­
tinued usage of LNG for its own purposes.
This subsidiary also owns a satellite vaporization plant in Acushnet, 
Massachusetts, with additional storage capacity. The Hopkinton facility is 
operated and maintained by Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., under a 
long-term contract. The Acushnet plant is operated and maintained by gas 
distribution personnel.
13.6.3  Steam Services
Steam is currently supplied from two Cambridge Electric plants, Kendall 
and Blackstone, through a four-mile distribution system of steam supply 
and return piping. As a nonregulated entity, the steam company will con­
tinue to provide steam to commercial and industrial customers in Boston 
and Cambridge, including a hospital, a museum, two universities, a man­
ufacturer, and a genetic researcher. This subsidiary will be developed as a 
separate entity with its own marketing and technical staff.
The concept of district heating systems using steam has received the 
backing of the state of Massachusetts. In its 1993 Energy Plan, the state 
recommended the support of district energy systems and thermally ori­
ented cogeneration. With this state support and by applying the expertise 
it has gained in operating its Kendall and Blackstone cogeneration plants, 
the company will foster the development of other potential district heat­
ing systems established through its energy supply systems subsidiary.
Also, through business partnerships with MIT and Boston Thermal 
(organizations with contiguous steam systems), the company could estab­
lish interconnections to existing district heating systems and expand its cus­
tomer base beyond the current geographic area. The current steam company 
system is economically more efficient for the customer than the Boston 
Thermal system because the latter contains no condensate loop. Last, tur­
bine modifications to the Blackstone plant could also offer inexpensive 
incremental power to be brokered by the energy brokerage subsidiary.
13.7  Energy Brokerage and International 
Operations
Two major developments in the industry will likely be networking and 
access to energy markets (both buying and selling). These activities will be 
integral to COM/Energy's value chain. To explore these opportunities, 

308 
Commonwealth Energy System 
other business units, including energy brokerage and international opera­
tions, will be developed. Before these units are formed, opportunities in 
these markets will be evaluated.
13.7.1  Energy Brokerage
Brokerage of energy is a major area of opportunity that is evolving. For many 
years, oil has been purchased on a commodity basis with associated futures 
options. With the implementation of Orders 436 and 636, natural gas can 
also be purchased on a commodity basis. Similarly, with the introduction of 
self-generation as a major source of power, electricity will be purchased as a 
commodity in the very near future. With these changes, financial instru­
ments are now being introduced as a means to establish short- and long-
term pricing options. The introduction of futures contracts is the result of 
the markets' need for greater certainty regarding energy prices.
With the utilization of oil, gas, and electricity hedges, new products 
will be launched to meet customer needs. These products will be required 
in the marketplace as a way for utilities and customers to minimize price 
risks. In addition, the coupling of fuel and electricity options will allow for 
contract innovations that will change the industrial and commercial 
markets.
COM/Energy is a major purchaser and supplier of oil, natural gas, and 
electricity. To effectively carry out its business in the future, it will be 
involved in futures markets. Recognizing the multitude of physical energy 
options that the system controls (i.e., Canal Unit 2 oil/gas interchange­
ability, LNG storage, multiple fuel supply contracts, oil storage, natural gas 
supply and transportation rights), the brokerage of energy represents a sig­
nificant business opportunity.
Energy brokerage will serve all the units of the value chain. This subsid­
iary will be engaged in oil, electricity, and natural gas brokerage. The unit 
will coordinate and manage all activities necessary to develop energy sales 
opportunities outside of those that must be kept within the regulated enti­
ties. In the electricity market, the subsidiary will act as a power marketer of 
the low-cost power generated from Canal 1 and other units. In the natural 
gas market, the entity will procure natural gas for cogeneration customers, 
power generation, and other select customers.
In the oil market, the subsidiary will utilize various oil storage options 
and contracts to meet power generation requirements. Finally, this busi­
ness unit will serve as the access mechanism into markets that are specula­
tive, out of normal reach, or unfamiliar to existing business units.
13.7.2  International Operations
Energy markets are becoming increasingly global in nature — events in 
Europe, the Far East, and Latin America have direct consequences for energy 
markets in the United States. This has been true in the oil industry for 
years and is becoming more the norm in other energy markets, ­including 

Shared Services (Performance Centers)  309
gas and electricity. Whether in the form of industry restructuring (British 
electricity markets) or cross-border transactions (Canadian natural gas), 
events throughout the world are directly affecting, or influencing the future 
of, domestic energy industries. As a result it is increasingly important that 
COM/Energy not limit its perspective to the United States, but rather keep 
a watchful eye on events and technologies evolving around the globe.
In this vein, the international operations unit will be responsible for 
monitoring and evaluating trends in energy markets outside North 
America. This unit will continually search for ways to leverage new ideas 
from other parts of the world into the other COM/Energy business units. 
Additionally, this unit will serve as the stepping stone for future overseas 
ventures that capitalize on competencies resident within other COM/
Energy business units.
Already, COM/Energy has established alliances with organizations 
based in other countries (Venezuela and Canada). The international oper­
ations unit will continue to seek out and create further alliances in global 
energy markets. Whether leveraging a competency in a market outside the 
United States or capitalizing on an emerging global trend within the 
United States, the international operations unit will depend initially upon 
partnerships in any ventures it undertakes.
13.8  Shared Services (Performance Centers)
Shared services consists of service company and financial systems business 
units. The transactions between the shared services and other units will be 
governed by an internal market mechanism, analogous to the discipline 
that regulates customer–supplier relations in a free economy. Some practi­
cal implications of an internal market interface are as follows:
• If any unit finds that it can buy services cheaper elsewhere, it will be 
allowed to outsource only after it has given the internal unit a fair 
chance to make its prices competitive. The shared services will have to 
become the state-of-the-art and cost-effective provider of choice.
• If the business units, regulated or otherwise, choose to outsource their 
needs, they will still be bound to pay their proportional share of the 
corporate office's fixed costs, which would have been allocated to the 
shared services until these costs can be eliminated. This charge will be 
levied on them as an internal tax. Therefore, the decision to seek an 
alternative source of supply will be made if the combination of vari­
able cost and internal tax to cover the proportional fixed cost justifies 
the trade-off.
A note of precaution: in dealing with the costs of the shared services, it 
may be best to use throughput accounting that considers certain elements 
of the cost as fixed — the costs that will not be reduced when services are 
eliminated. Therefore, to provide the shared services with a reasonable 
chance of survival, those fixed costs that have been superimposed on the 
operation of the shared services should be paid on the basis of a tax, not 

310 
Commonwealth Energy System 
as throughput. This makes the company's prices more comparable with 
alternative sources of supply offered externally. Shared services will be 
driven by target costing measures in order to become competitive enough 
to retain its internal customers, especially the regulated ones, by helping 
them reduce their costs. Shared services will be encouraged to attract exter­
nal clients as well.
13.8.1  Service Company
The service company intends to transform itself from an overhead center, 
engaged in providing support services to other units operating in a cost 
plus environment, to a viable, competitive, and state-of-the-art perfor­
mance center generating profit while making positive contributions to the 
success of other members of the value chain. The transformation of the 
service company is contingent upon the development of the following 
core competencies:
• Information know-how: The service company will keep and enhance its 
existing information-processing capability centered around designing, 
developing, and operating information systems.
• Industry know-how: The service company will retain and enhance its 
accumulated industry know-how unique to the regulatory/utility envi­
ronment. This competency will spin streams of advantageous profes­
sional services off the strengths of COM/Energy.
• Process redesign know-how: The service company will create and enhance 
the process redesign capability as a new competency dimension. 
This competency involves interrelated capabilities such as interactive 
design, process technology, continuous improvement, and throughput 
management.
The strategic intent of the service company is to integrate the above core 
competencies into customized packages of products and services that will 
significantly add to the competitive advantage of the value chain. Such 
multidisciplinary know-how is brought to bear on cross-functional teams 
of experts assembled to offer energy-specific products/services, turn-key 
operations, and consulting and education services. To make a clear and 
lasting break with its past as an overhead center, the service company will 
use the following guidelines for product offerings:
• By default, all services that the internal customer units are willing to 
keep or are interested in assuming will be released to them.
• Corporate policy-related activities will be relinquished to the executive 
office of COM/Energy System.
All preparatory work leading to drafting of proposed corporate policies 
will be carried out by ad hoc committees chaired by one of the parent 
company's corporate vice presidents and staffed by nonpermanent 
members drawn from relevant parts of COM/Energy System and/or its 
environment. These committees will dissolve once the issues have been 
resolved.

Executive Office  311
The service company will divorce all activities that involve providing 
COM/Energy with corporate control, monitoring, and auditing functions. 
Like any other customer, however, the corporate office of COM/Energy 
System may buy services from the service company.
13.8.2  Financial Systems
Financial systems will play a critical role in realizing the value chain. It will 
act as the system's in-house investment center, and provide the businesses 
with the vital seed money and initial leverage that they need to achieve 
viability. It will effectively serve the capital and the cash-flow needs of all 
the business units. Leveraging COM/Energy's financial resources, financial 
systems will continue to develop relations with bankers and other institu­
tions to reinforce the system's financial capacity in launching new projects 
and/or expanding the existing ones to further realize the potential of the 
value chain.
13.9  Executive Office
Aside from the two core businesses that are already mature and well estab­
lished, other business units will need a period of careful attention and 
nurturing before they achieve viability. The executive office's responsibility 
is to conduct this incubation function while managing the entire value 
chain. To do this, the executive office is responsible for creating the follow­
ing three critical processes:
1.	 Latency: The essence of creating latency will be a strategic planning pro­
cess that institutionalizes the continuous search for new opportunities 
relevant to the value chain. This process will develop and implement 
activities leading to business renewal, generation of innovative ideas, 
and improved ways of conducting business. Once such opportunities 
are identified, members of the core knowledge center will conduct the 
relevant feasibility studies, and, if merited, they will be assigned to 
the management of the startup phase of such projects. To ensure the 
continuous renewal of the system through successive approximations, 
COM/Energy will engage in an interactive planning exercise every three 
years. The exercise, carried out at the corporate level, will result in either 
changing or reconfirming the strategic direction of COM/Energy and 
setting goals, objectives, and policies for realizing the next achievable 
approximation. The interactive planning exercise will consist of two 
functions: mess formulation and design.
The bottom-up mess formulation will identify and define the inter­
related set of variables, as well as the second-order machine, which, 
unless dismantled, makes the system behave the way it does and thus 
frustrates efforts to introduce desirable changes. Mess formulation will 
move upward, whereupon each level will formulate its mess by taking 
the higher level system as its environment.

312 
Commonwealth Energy System 
The top-down design will assume that the system (the unit to be 
redesigned) has been destroyed but that its environment (the larger 
system of which it is a part) has remained intact. The design activity 
will move downward, whereupon each level will redesign itself by tak­
ing the higher level design as its environment.
2.	 Synergy: Synergy is concerned with developing and implementing pro­
cesses, systems, and incentives that produce interactions, alliances, and 
cooperations that will make the whole of the value chain greater than 
the sum of its parts. These processes, systems, and incentives include 
the internal market, target costing, throughput-oriented measurement 
systems, reward systems, early warning systems, and control systems. 
These measures are intended to create win/win incentives by dissolv­
ing structural conflicts among the internal units, and linking the per­
formance measure of each unit to its contributions to other units.
3.	 Throughput: Throughput processes will be concerned with operational 
efficiency and quality. They will help the system increase its efficiency 
and productivity both within and among all the units of the value chain. 
The system will do so by utilizing TQM and continuous improvement 
methodology. The objective is to increase operational potency through 
systems solutions intended to:
• Decrease cycle time
• Eliminate waste
• Improve flexibility
• Increase quality
The activities concerning the throughput process will be carried out at all 
levels of the organization. Every member of the system will participate in 
the continuous improvement activity. Members of the mess team will pro­
vide the seed talent for developing and implementing these critical pro­
cesses and for helping other parts of the organization plan, learn, and 
control the processes.
13.9.1  Core Knowledge Pool
To discharge the responsibility for latency, synergy, and throughput pro­
cesses, the executive office will be equipped with a core knowledge pool. 
The core knowledge pool will be the system's center of expertise that 
develops and disseminates state-of-the-art knowledge throughout the 
value chain. All the essential functions of the executive office will be car­
ried out by professionals who operate in pools of expertise and work in 
an interdisciplinary manner on specific projects. Each member of the 
pool can be involved in more than one project. The main outputs of these 
projects include creation of startup businesses, improvement of existing 
operations' effectiveness, and design of measurement, reward, and early 
warning systems. Generating system-wide “bench strength” and fostering 
an entrepreneurial culture are among the by-products of these corporate 
activities.

Executive Office  313
The core knowledge pool will be staffed by a select group of top-notch 
experts who will rotate among all activities. They will be drawn, temporar­
ily or permanently, from internal businesses and recruited or contracted 
from external sources to contribute to the richness and variety of the sys­
tem's gene pool. Initially, the nucleus of the core knowledge pool will con­
sist of the design team members who will be involved in the development 
of design details for the new architecture. These activities will provide an 
environment for learning by designing, learning by doing, and earning 
while learning. Core knowledge members will offer their expertise in the 
context of project teams designed to produce integrated solutions.
The core knowledge pool will also be responsible for creating a com­
mon language and acting as a center to reinforce organizational learning. 
Organizational learning will include reciprocal traffic of knowledge and 
mutual exchange of people. No new professional will enter the system 
without first being initiated through the core knowledge pool.
Members of the core knowledge pool will have a good insight into 
environmental trends, technological developments, and changing cus­
tomer needs. They will operate in modular cross-disciplinary teams and, 
through the mechanism of project management, may be assigned to other 
shared services for systems development and/or to line-management roles 
for carrying out special missions. The core knowledge pool will also be 
responsible for developing models for the throughput system, target cost­
ing, the measurement and reward system, and an internal market 
mechanism.
13.9.2  Learning and Control System
The following description elaborates on the essence of a learning and con­
trol system. The system, which underlines COM/Energy's new concept of 
empowerment, will be compatible with the design's desired specifications 
and the preferred style of COM/Energy's management. The system will 
change the nature of control from “supervision” to “learning” and the 
nature of authority from “power-over” to “power-to.” Although learning 
and control are highly interrelated aspects of a single system, each aspect 
is described separately below to facilitate understanding.
Effective control involves, essentially, duplication of power. Duplication 
of power will be achieved if the decision process, rather than the individ­
ual decision makers, is the subject of control. This will happen when deci­
sion makers collectively develop a shared understanding and ownership 
of decision criteria.
Decision criteria define the rules of decision making. Decisions them­
selves are applications of the decision rule to specific situations. What 
operationally distinguishes decision criteria from decisions per se is the 
existence of some degree of freedom in decision criteria. The absence of at 
least one degree of freedom virtually converts the decision criteria to 
decisions.

314 
Commonwealth Energy System 
Decision criteria can be grouped into two categories: policies and pro­
cedures. A policy is a decision criterion at a higher level of abstraction. 
Policy essentially deals with choice dimensions (variables involved), why 
questions, underlying assumptions, and expected outcomes. Policy deci­
sions are value-loaded choices that are explicit about their implications 
for human, financial, and technical domains. Procedures, on the other 
hand, are derived from policies. They deal with how questions. They 
explicitly specify the method or the model to be used for applying poli­
cies to specific situations. Policy making will deal with at least three sets 
of decision categories:
1.	 Interaction: These are the policies governing the interactions among the 
dimensions and components of the organization. They include target 
costing, value chain, synergy, reward, measurement systems, and inter­
nal transactions.
2.	 Allocation/selection: These policies normally involve the selection of cri­
teria for allocating resources and capital.
3.	 Execution: These policies pertain to operating decisions affecting pur­
chasing, contracting, generation, distribution, marketing, personnel, 
and research and development.
Learning will include an early warning system that will call for correc­
tive action before the problem has occurred. Such a system will moni­
tor, on an ongoing basis, the validity of the assumptions on which the 
decision was made, the implementation process, and intermediate 
results.
At the corporate level, the management committee, consisting of the 
CEO and all direct reports, will be the vehicle for institutionalizing the 
learning and control system. In this case, the core knowledge pool will 
provide the technical support for designing and operationalizing the 
system.
At the business unit level (specifically the two regulated businesses), 
the operation of the learning and control system will be the responsibility 
of the internal boards of the business units, collectively referred to as the 
nested network. To maximize the effectiveness of the system, it is recom­
mended that each board, which will consist of members of the executive 
office and the president of that unit, invite the president's direct reports to 
participate in the board's deliberations. Later on, the components at the 
business units, if so desired, may choose to create management commit­
tees in their own operation to adopt the learning and control system 
described above. Further evolutions would eventually cover the whole 
organization by a nested network. As such, the nested network will facili­
tate COM/Energy's vertical and horizontal integration. The ongoing activ­
ity of the nested network will provide integration along the time dimension 
as well. The vertical, horizontal, and temporal integration brought about 
by the activity of the nested network will also ensure the compatibility of 
ends and means at all levels of the organization, making coordination 

Executive Office  315
automatic and self-administered. Finally, the new design is expected to 
usher in a mode of organization that thrives on the following drivers for 
change:
• Cultivating members' ability and desire to behave entrepreneurially 
and to achieve competitive advantage free from the norms of the past 
(i.e., those of an overhead center operating in a cost plus regulated 
environment).
• Shifting the character of the organization from management of actions 
to management of interactions.
• Taking advantage of the emerging opportunities that will add value to 
the whole, creating the potential for members to grow.
• Creating the norms, performance measures, and incentives that will 
motivate people to stay the course as a lean, simple, and flexible 
organization.
• Demonstrating an unfailing customer focus and product/market 
orientation.
• Fostering empowerment by matching authority with responsibility at 
all levels of the organization and keeping formal and informal organi­
zation “in synch.”
• Shifting the nature of control from supervision to learning and early 
warning.

This page intentionally left blank

317
Ch a pt er | seven
Ch a p te r | fou rt een
Carrier Corporation
I got the opportunity to work with Carrier Corporation when Professor 
Tom Lee and Gerald L. Wilson of MIT asked me to make a presentation 
to Karl J. Krapek, then the CEO of Carrier Corporation. I was told that I 
would be paid for the full day, but that if Mr. Krapek interrupted me to 
make a phone call I should assume that the presentation was over. 
Although this seemed a little awkward, it somehow challenged me. 
Oddly enough, fifteen minutes into the presentation, Karl wanted to 
make a phone call. I collected my papers, assuming the session was over, 
but much to my surprise he asked me if I could give him ten minutes to 
get a few of his colleagues to join us. He wanted them to hear what I had 
just said. A full-day presentation led to a contract and a redesign project 
for Carrier.
The challenge for Carrier was to create a system out of an aggregate of 
more than 90 autonomous operations. The question was how to integrate 
and differentiate a global operation so it could be both centralized and 
decentralized at the same time. Carrier had to revitalize its core technol-
ogy, manage its interactions with a patchwork of semi-autonomous man-
ufacturing units spread all over the world, and become cost competitive 
in many highly competitive markets, despite having a huge network of 
aging distributors who were unwilling to learn the implications of new 
technology.
This document summarizes the design produced by a 15-member 
design team consisting of Karl J. Krapek and his direct reports in several 
sessions during the fourth quarter of 1992. Ali Geranmayeh from 
INTERACT was my associate in this project.
This is an idealized design. Its content, at this stage, is tentative and 
subject to change. Implementation of this design requires planning. 
Because of changes in the corporate environment and a shift in strategy, 
implementation of this design was not attempted. Nevertheless, it repre-
sents a state-of-the-art design based on Carrier's original intent.

318 
Carrier Corporation 
14.1  Expectations, assumptions,  
and specifications
Carrier is not just a manufacturer of equipment. We are designers, produc-
ers, and distributors of climate control systems. We own different parts of 
the value chain in different parts of the world. Regardless of ownership, 
however, we must understand the desires and needs at various levels of the 
chain.
From Carrier's perspective, all the actors and participants in the value 
chain, from the producer to the end user, are considered customers. They 
may be classified as follows:
• Distributors
• Dealers
• Consulting Engineers
• Contractors
• Retailers
• End users
We must deliver value (benefits/costs) at all levels of the chain. But we 
must start defining benefits at the end of the chain (the end user) and 
work our way backward to the manufacturer. Value comes from the total 
package:
• Performance
• Price
• Service
• Installation
Significant opportunities for creating value for the end user exist in under-
standing the latent needs and desires of customers.
14.1.1  The Changing Game: In General
• FROM mass production based on economy of scale and reliability of 
forecasts TO flexible production based on a low break-even point and 
rapid change of products.
• FROM management of independent variables with separate solu-
tions TO management of interdependent variables with integrated 
solutions.
• FROM generation of knowledge as the basis of competitive advantage 
TO operationalization of new knowledge as the basis for competitive 
advantage.
• FROM sole reliance on product technology TO investment in process 
technology.
• FROM target pricing, taking price as the controllable variable, TO target 
costing with cost as the controllable variable.
• FROM regarding labor as a variable cost and considering dispensable 
cheap labor as a competitive advantage TO regarding labor as a fixed asset 
and considering knowledgeable workers as a sustainable advantage.

Core Values  319
14.1.2  The Changing Game: The HVAC Industry
• Emergence of strong (independent) component suppliers —their large 
scale and focused scope give them the capability to eventually control 
key components that comprise much of the cost, technology, and basis 
for differentiation of final products. They also pose a threat as poten-
tial competitors in the end-products market.
• Emergence of “no frills” competitors offering very low prices. These are 
low-technology, low-cost companies with nimble and lean operations.
• Japanese competitors combine operational effectiveness with high-
technology products. Their likely strategy will be to:
•	 Concentrate on the lower end of the market (a growth sector).
•	 Offer easy-to-use, fully engineered packages requiring little mainte­
nance.
• Sell directly to retailers, bypassing the distributors.
•	 Then move up to larger products, relying on engineers and archi-
tects to sell.
• Integration of electronic controls is becoming a must.
14.1.3  Drivers for Change
• Environmental concerns
• Maturation of large markets and emergence of new ones
• Increasing discrimination and differentiation by customers
• Globalization of competition
• Miniaturization (size of products, material weight and bulk)
• New technologies (e.g., in heat exchange and transfer)
• Duct-free splits change the traditional structure of the value chain
14.1.4  Bases for Competition
• Delivery
• Cost
• Size
• Time to market
• Service
• Distribution
• World-class manufacturing processes
14.2  Core Values
We will create wealth throughout the chain from the supplier to the end 
user. We take responsibility for creating win/win situations to dissolve 
conflict among players at various levels of the chain. We take total respon-
sibility for the entire system all the way to the end user. The Carrier name 
backs the product, guaranteeing it all the way down the chain. Even if we 
do not own pieces of the chain, and even if the product is a private label, 

320 
Carrier Corporation 
we guarantee proper functioning of what the customer buys (product and 
service). No excuses.
• Our commitment is to total customer satisfaction.
• We value excellence through knowledge. We promote intolerance of 
incompetence.
• We are committed to providing clearly communicated rules of the road 
and expectations of performance.
• We will be undisputed leaders in core technologies.
• We will be a mutually supportive interdependent system.
• We will invest in our employees, distributors, and dealers.
• We will influence the industry.
• No one will lose his/her job at Carrier as a result of circumstance, plant 
closings, departmental restructuring, or market downturns.
Three main questions are to be answered in this section:
1.	 Whose problems are we trying to solve?
2.	 What solutions are we providing to them?
3.	 How will we deliver the solution to those with the problem?
The first question deals with market segmentation, the second with prod-
uct line offerings, and the third with access mechanisms. The business can 
be understood in terms of the cube formed by these three dimensions. 
Each dimension is considered in more detail in the following section.
14.2.1  Products and Services
We will use the following criteria for deciding whether to participate in a 
particular segment of the product line:
• Is the product a requirement for global leadership in climate control?
• Will the product help us compete more effectively from a strategic 
point of view? (Strategic concerns may be defensive, such as helping 
to keep our distributors/dealers loyal to us by providing them with 
a broad line of products; or offensive, such as discouraging competi-
tors from going after our distributors/dealers, utilizing our distribution 
channel to move products made by others, or reducing costs due to 
economies of scale and scope.)
• Are there opportunities for utilizing our assets? From time to time we 
may selectively choose to participate in segments where there is no 
long-term strategic advantage but opportunities for utilizing our assets. 
We will not make new investments in such segments.
• Is this an opportunity to broaden the breadth of the line? A wide range 
of products is important to us because (1) it helps us win and maintain 
the loyalty of our distribution network and (2) it helps us leverage our 
technology and reduce our costs. In addition, a broad product line is 
an important defense against smaller competitors “niche-ing” us out 
of various market segments, and it helps support dealers and distribu-
tors in down cycles. A financially strong and loyal distribution network 
is a significant barrier to entry for would-be competitors.

Core Values  321
The following obstructions in the current state of the industry provide sig-
nificant opportunities for product/service offerings:
• The basic problem of climate control is not solved very well: people 
in large buildings are either too hot or too cold and they cannot eas-
ily manipulate the controls; in residential buildings the draft bothers 
people and stiff necks are common.
• There is no integration or cooperation between us and other actors 
controlling major elements of the building that affect the overall per-
formance of the climate control system — insulation, windows, build-
ing materials, architects, and so on (in automobiles, climate control 
people must work very closely with glass, especially windshield, 
manufacturers).
14.2.2  Core Technology and Know-How
• We must have system design capability in all aspects of our business. 
In addition, we must have the following core components (in order of 
importance):
•	 Compressors
•	 Electronic controls
•	 Heat transfer devices
•	 Enclosures: shape and configuration; aerodynamic content and 
capability; and the fan
•	 Motor
• Diesel engines
•	 Air cleaning devices
• We must develop technical capabilities to integrate controls and motors 
(e.g., to generate orbital motion, and use refrigerants to cool the motor 
and the electronics inside it). United Technologies Corp. (UTC) has a 
motor supplier company. Can we work with them?
• We must have design capability for electronic control systems (includ-
ing sensors). We can continue to buy components off the shelf. Partners 
are desirable to get the best electronic design capability.
• We will develop cross-disciplinary knowledge at every level of the engi-
neering organization. An understanding of environmental trends and 
changing customer needs (both manifest and latent) will accompany 
this knowledge to ensure that innovative products reach the market-
place in a timely manner.
• A significant competitive advantage exists in the effective integration of 
disciplines through modeling. To accomplish this, we will encourage 
modeling through incentives and mentoring. Time constraints must be 
balanced with the need to learn by documenting and refining models 
after the design effort is complete. New engineering talent with disci-
plinary skills must be trained to think cross-functionally and the build 
and test culture must be replaced with a scientific predictive modeling 
culture.

322 
Carrier Corporation 
14.2.3  Sales and Distribution System
• Our basic approach is a commitment to customer satisfaction: we will 
guarantee the satisfaction of the end user with all our products.
• We must develop dealer and distributor agreements such that we create 
partnerships throughout the value chain. We will need to rely heavily 
on them to a large extent to help us deliver our guarantee.
• Our guarantee applies to the system as a whole. Therefore, we must be 
able to:
•	 Produce the critical elements of the system (e.g., A/C unit).
• Specify minimum standards for all other elements to be used by 
our dealers (our differentiating factor).
•	 Buy and distribute noncritical items (e.g., duct work, coils, and 
thermostats) through our dealer system — but always give them the 
choice to obtain them elsewhere (so long as they meet standards); 
we supply through our “trading company.”
• We will treat our distributors/dealers “almost as franchisees.” We hope 
to get the cooperation level of a franchisee relationship without the 
legal hassles.
• Compliance with standards will be a major part of our dealer 
agreements.
• A loyal and efficient distribution network is essential to our leadership 
in the marketplace. We will have to create win/win situations in which 
our dealers and distributors remain financially healthy.
• We will have a hybrid distribution system: some company-owned 
distributors and some independents. We will own distributors 
when:
•	 We can meet the cost of capital of our investment.
•	 Ownership is strategically important to us.
•	 We have no other presence in the region.
•	 We will actively develop and utilize independent distributors in 
cases where their strong relationships with local dealers and cus-
tomers cannot be duplicated by us.
•	 Irrespective of whether a distributor is independent or company-
owned, we want them to be successful businesses in their own right 
and to work very closely with Carrier as a partner.
• We must be customer-focused. This implies sensitivity to geographical 
and national differences: understanding the needs of Latin American 
residents as well as those of North American residents (homes in Japan 
and homes in the United States versus rooftop and room A/Cs).
• Our marketing challenge is to find solutions for specific segments and 
applications.
• We must continually strive to drive costs out of the chain. We will 
achieve this through improved logistics, reduction of inventories, and 
lean manufacturing. These improvements will enable us to reduce the 
number of steps in the chain over time.

Systems Architecture  323
14.3  Systems Architecture
14.3.1  Desired Characteristics
• A customer focus.
• Well-understood rules of the road and expectations of performance, 
with explicit decision criteria.
• Respect for the need for a control system to assure accountability, 
thereby allowing effective decentralization: supervision is a waste.
• Effective processes for dissolving internal conflicts. There are no con-
flict-free organizations. Those that can deal with conflicts construc-
tively can use them as the engine for the system's vitality.
• Throughput-oriented rewards (not functionally oriented). Such incen-
tive systems help dissolve structural conflicts while functionally ori-
ented ones create them.
• One integrated solution for problems of reducing cost and waste, com-
pressing time, increasing flexibility, and improving quality (as opposed 
to different solutions for each one).
• Lean, simple, nonbureaucratic, and flexible organization with easy 
communication up and down.
• Few written rules and procedures with formal and informal organiza-
tion “in synch.”
• Empowerment at the lowest level (authority matching responsibility).
• Time sensitivity and awareness of the pressures of external competition.
14.3.2  A Multidimensional Framework
A multidimensional architecture employed in the following design recog-
nizes the necessity for achieving competitive advantage in all three 
­dimensions — market, product, and technology — at the same time. It there-
fore seeks to eliminate suboptimization around any one dimension. The objec-
tive is to actively generate synergy, latency, and efficiency by creating a win/win 
relationship among the three dimensions. A three-dimensional architecture 
recognizes the need for centralization and decentralization, integration 
and differentiation, and interdependency and autonomy at the same time.
In a three-dimensional architecture, structural conflicts inside the cor-
poration are dissolved by incorporation of market mechanisms as the 
basis of interactions among different units wherever possible. The archi-
tecture, however, provides only the hardware for the system; business pro-
cesses provide the software.
Carrier's architecture must be designed to support equal emphasis on 
markets, products, and technology. The architecture that follows will be 
used to accomplish this multidimensional focus while creating a market-
driven business.
The predominant strategic thrust of Carrier Corporation is a strong 
market orientation and responsiveness to customers. The organization will 
be flexible enough to adapt to internal and external changes, stimulate 

324 
Carrier Corporation 
­continuous improvements in the quantity and quality of its outputs, and 
be able to learn rapidly and effectively. The systems architecture described 
(Figure 14.1) is intended to facilitate the pursuit of this strategy. It will 
support equal emphasis on markets, products, and technology, while cre-
ating a market-driven business.
14.4  Markets
Marketing functions in Carrier will be carried out in four semi-­
autonomous areas. Each area in turn will manage a number of regional 
units.
14.4.1  Regional Units
A region is the basic unit of the market dimension. It is where Carrier actu-
ally happens.
• The size and boundaries of a given region are determined by the fol-
lowing considerations:
•	 Physical access
•	 Climate
•	 Construction practices (design and material)
• Stages of economic development
• As the sole marketing arm of the Carrier Corporation, regional man-
agers are relieved of their manufacturing responsibilities. Exceptions 
will be for some local factories designed to serve local markets only.
• Regional units will be sales and distribution service organizations. 
They will be primarily responsible for selling, distributing, installing, 
THIS WILL BE A SEPARATE 
PROFIT CENTER JOINTLY 
"OWNED" BY GLOBAL OUTPUT
UNITS AND AREA UNITS.
EXECUTIVE OFFICE
PLANNING BOARD
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUPPORT
PROCESS DESIGN
TECHNOLOGY
I
N
P
U
T
S
HVAC OUTPUT UNITS
A1
A2
A3
A4
M
A
R
K
E
T
S
ROOM
  AC
CENTRAL
SYSTEMS
DUCTLESS
   SPLITS
PACKAGED
  SYSTEMS
APPLIED
SYSTEMS
AFTERMARKET
PARTS/ 
SERVICE
COMPONENTS
TRANSICOLD
PLANNING, LEARNING,
& CONTROL SYSTEM
Figure 14.1  Carrier systems architecture.

Markets  325
and servicing products. They will include application engineering and 
technical support.
• Regional units will have the responsibility to develop and maintain the 
distribution system in each region. The distribution system will com-
prise three main channels: direct, retail, and dealers.
• The sales organization in the field will be connected to plants and 
product groups by three vital processes:
•	 Product design cycle (requirements of the customer communicated 
to designers)
•	 Order payment cycle
•	 Logistics support
• Regional units have the primary responsibility for understanding the 
end users' requirements and helping Carrier provide appropriate solu-
tions to those requirements.
• Regional organizations will be responsible for creating synergy at the 
local level and reducing unnecessary duplication of services. Since the 
nature of the problems and opportunities is different in each region, 
the organizational setup appropriate for each region will also be differ-
ent in each region.
• Each region will also have a regional advocate who will be responsible for 
the development of new businesses that satisfy the needs of each region.
Figure 14.2 provides an example of how regional units may be organized 
to optimize market access and user concerns.
REGIONAL MANAGER
PLANNING,
LEARNING,
& CONTROL
SYSTEM
PLANNING
BOARD
DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM
RETAIL
OPERATIONS
DIRECT
SALES
ENGINEERING
FIRM
DEALERS
RETAILERS
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUPPORT
THROUGHPUT
SUPPORT
LOCAL
MANUFACTURING
COMMERCIAL
SYSTEMS
RESIDENTIAL
SYSTEMS
EQUIPMENT
&
INSTALLATION
AFTERMARKET
PARTS & SERVICE
EQUIPMENT
&
INSTALLATION
Figure 14.2  Structure of a regional unit.

326 
Carrier Corporation 
14.4.2  Area Units
Every area unit will be responsible for designing, engineering, and marketing 
a system of products and services as solutions to the needs of a given market 
segment. Initially, there will be three such segments in each area: residential 
systems, commercial systems, and industrial and institutional systems.
As market-driven units, area units must understand the current and 
latent climate control problems faced by specific market segments and 
develop and offer solutions to those problems.
Each unit will be responsible for system development in its specific 
segment. System designs will be informed by local requirements in differ-
ent regions. System solutions will be designed on global platforms devel-
oped by output units. These platforms provide modular designs that 
standardize chassis and components while allowing for variations to sat-
isfy different local requirements. Each output unit will have top system 
engineers on their team for developing global platforms within which 
local products can be manufactured.
Area units will develop the basic policies and approach for developing 
and maintaining a distribution system to serve all Carrier units. For exam-
ple, area units will be expected to develop policies for acquiring and dis-
tributing complementary products intended to help increase the business 
at the dealership level. Implementation of policies will be the responsibil-
ity of regional units. Additionally, area managers will be responsible for 
developing new markets, for liaison between regional units and output 
units, and for consolidation and administration at the area level.
In general, area units will have no fixed assets. This will ensure that 
they are not preoccupied with existing facilities and current products. Their 
total focus should be on delivering the best solution to the customer.
These products and services may or may not be provided by Carrier 
manufacturing units. This constant examination and re-evaluation of the 
“make or buy” decisions will keep continuous competitive pressure on 
both the designers and the manufacturers (suppliers).
There will be members of the parts unit in each area to manage the logis-
tics, warehousing, and physical transportation systems at the area level.
Figure 14.3 provides an example of how area units may be organized.
14.5  Output units
Output units will be responsible for the design and production of global 
end products. Such products are sold in more than one geographic region, 
have a high level of complexity, and offer significant economies of scale. 
Output unit managers will have worldwide responsibility for designing 
manufacturability, functionality, and serviceability, as well as lean produc-
tion systems, delivery, and costs.
Global products will be designed on a global platform concept, that 
is, a modular design that standardizes chassis and components while 

Components  327
­allowing for variations to satisfy different local requirements. Carrier 
products must be globally conceived and designed. Carrier technology 
must be globally applied.
Output managers will be responsible for optimizing manufacturing 
facilities on a global basis to ensure competitiveness.
In the first approximation to the design, manufacturing resources will 
be optimized on an area basis. This will not mean, however, that each area 
will be expected to be self-sufficient from a manufacturing perspective. In 
fact, each area will be expected to develop at least one facility as a global 
supplier of products and become the champion of a global product.
Each output unit will be a profit center with the ability to sell and source 
externally. In addition, there will be two other output units: Transicold and 
Aftermarket Parts. The unique nature of the transportation product busi-
ness necessitates treating it as an output unit separate from stationary HVAC 
(heating, ventilation, air conditioning) products. Transicold will continue 
to operate as it currently does; however, it will proactively seek to utilize the 
services offered by the existing Carrier sales and distribution system.
Aftermarket parts are important elements of our total solution to cus-
tomer problems and also a big market opportunity. We must aggressively 
develop these businesses. Aftermarket parts will be a global business unit 
jointly owned by area (market) units and output units. It will buy and dis-
tribute Carrier and non-Carrier parts and components.
Figure 14.4 provides an example of how an output unit may be organized.
14.6  Components
The components group will be responsible for:
• Developing and maintaining state-of-the-art knowledge (product tech-
nology and design) for all of the previous categories.
AREA MANAGER
LEARNING
REGION
  PLANNING
PLANNING
RESIDENTIAL
COMMERCIAL
AFTERMARKET
PRODUCT/MARKET
ADMINISTRATIVE
THROUGHPUT
Figure 14.3  Structure of area management.

328 
Carrier Corporation 
• Manufacturing as many Category 1 products as is economically 
feasible.
• Seeking and creating partnerships to maintain strategic control over 
those Category 1 components that it cannot economically produce.
• Creating strategic alliances with producers of Categories 2 and 3 to 
ensure sufficient influence over the developments and reliable sources 
of supply.
To ensure worldwide cost and quality competitiveness, each component 
business should be able to survive on a stand-alone basis. Therefore, each 
unit in this group will be treated as a separate business. Units within the 
components group will have the option of selling their products to other 
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs). Likewise, Carrier product 
managers will have the option of sourcing their components from external 
suppliers.
At the start, it might be necessary for the corporation to subsidize the 
components group until it can provide competitive prices to its internal 
customers.
Initially, there will be two units in this group: compressors and electronic 
controls.
14.7  Inputs
14.7.1  The Technology
The technology group will be the research and development arm of Carrier, 
responsible for identifying and nurturing core technologies required by 
Carrier businesses. Carrier will continuously assess its technological ­profile 
SYSTEM
ENGINEERING
PROCESS
 DESIGN
PLANTS
PRODUCT
TEAM
PRODUCT/MARKET
PLANNING BOARD
PLANNING/LEARNING
CONTROL SYSTEM
MARKET
SUPPORT
SERVICES
PRODUCT MANAGEMENT
Figure 14.4  Organization of output units.

Inputs  329
to match the emerging needs of the business. The company's desired posi-
tion with respect to related technologies and components will be defined 
using the following three categories:
• Must have knowledge and control in-house
• Must have knowledge and strategic alliances
• Must have knowledge to influence independent developers
Table 14.1 summarizes Carrier's present need for core components and 
corresponding technologies.
A special group within the technology group will focus on developing 
service technology (e.g., remote diagnosis capability). This activity will be 
funded by all the business units.
14.7.2  Operational Support (Process Design)
This unit will focus on increasing throughput of the enterprise. It is orga-
nized around modular teams and provides support to all units in Carrier.
Carrier will create centers of expertise that develop and disseminate 
knowledge throughout the organization. They will be organized into pro-
cess teams and technology teams. This knowledge is not divided by disci-
plines, as in universities, but will be cross-disciplinary so it can provide 
solutions to complex problems.
Process and technology teams will work as internal consultants attack-
ing and improving critical elements of the business. They will educate the 
rest of the organization on the latest advancements in design and through-
put processes. The teams will be expected to market their services to both 
the executive office and to the operating units. Process teams must re-­
create themselves in the organization. They are accountable for redesigning, 
implementing, and handing off systems solutions. Only when the project 
Table 14.1  Needed Technologies and Components
Core technology  
or component
Knowledge  
and control
Knowledge  
and alliance
Knowledge  
and influence
Compressors
X
Electronic controls
X
Heat transfer devices
X
Enclosures, fans, and air 
movements
X
Motors
X
Air cleaning devices
X
Refrigerants
X
Diesel engines
X
Building software
X

330 
Carrier Corporation 
has been considered a success will the team move on to its next 
challenge.
Process teams will be organized around specific throughput processes, 
but all will have cross-functional expertise in information technology, 
total quality, human systems, and design. Their objective is to produce an 
integrated solution (a single design) for each of the critical throughput 
processes so that all of the following critical goals for success can be simul-
taneously accomplished:
• Reduce the time cycle
• Eliminate waste
• Achieve flexibility
• Achieve total quality
Technology teams will be multidisciplinary, with the ability to integrate 
and apply various technologies to solve specific business problems. They 
are charged with educating everyone in the company, from engineers to 
the direct sales force, on the potential impact of emerging technologies on 
Carrier's business. Incentives for team members will be based on the suc-
cess of the team as a whole. Teams will be composed of very competent 
professionals and kept together for an extended period to ensure continu-
ous improvement.
14.7.3  Management Support Services
Management support services include financial, accounting, and adminis-
trative services; human resource services; MIS; and quality. These units will 
all provide services. The function of control will be part of the executive 
office. All input units will be “performance centers.” For each unit, a set of 
specific measures of performance will be developed. Each unit will be 
expected to add value to Carrier through its operations. Therefore, profit-
ability will be a key factor in each unit's performance measurement. The 
revenues for each unit will be derived from its “sales” to other Carrier units 
and/or to external customers.
14.8  Business Processes
14.8.1  Decision System
• Interactive policy teams will be the main vehicle for aligning policies 
and plans and for dissolving conflicts among units in Carrier.
• Each interactive policy team will have members from a minimum of 
three levels of management: the manager whose team it is, his/her 
boss, and his/her direct reports. Other members may be added on a 
regular basis or on specific issues.
• Interactive policy teams are responsible for making policies. They do 
not get involved in operation decisions.
• Policies establish the criteria by which managers make decisions. 
Agreement on decision criteria is the key to successful decentralization.

Business Processes  331
• If no policy exists for a pending decision, the responsible man-
ager will make the decision on his/her own. The appropriate inter-
active policy team may later decide to make a policy for future 
situations.
• Each policy will be made at the lowest level team possible.
• Special interactive policy teams will be formed to coordinate policy on 
specific issues of strategic importance.
14.8.2  Performance Measurement and Reward System
• The measurement system will be throughput-oriented.
• It will create win/win situations for the units. It will avoid endless 
fights among internal units over prices.
• It will recognize not only the performance of the unit itself, but also 
the unit's contribution to other units’ performance.
• It will contain incentives for internal cooperation rather than outsourc-
ing. It may, for example, have a differential tax rate for internal and 
external transactions.
14.8.3  Target Costing and Variable Budgeting System
The following model represents the proposed relationship among the var-
ious units in Carrier's value chain. The aim of this system is to align each 
unit's revenues to the throughput of the system as a whole.
• Each unit will have a variable budget that will be a function of the total 
throughput.
Figure 14.5  Target costing and variable budgeting along the value chain.

332 
Carrier Corporation 
• Each unit will be a profit center. Revenues for the unit will be a percent-
age of the throughput of the total system. Costs for each unit will be 
actual costs.
• The percentage of throughput that will constitute each unit's revenues 
may be determined by a combination of the following methods:
•	 An idealized breakdown derived from corporate strategy and the 
competitive environment
•	 Industry benchmarks
•	 Competitive analysis (alternative sources of supply)
•	 Historical data
– Executive committee discussions at the corporate policy team 
forum
Figure 14.5 illustrates a breakdown of throughput along the value chain.

333
As a managing partner of INTERACT 
(The Institute for Interactive Man­
agement), the author has more than  
35 years of experience with the prac­
tice of systems methodology in design 
and the development of business 
architecture, planning, learning, and 
control systems. His work has taken 
him into corporations and govern­
ment agencies around the world for 
both private and public concerns.
Mr. Gharajedaghi was formerly the 
Director of the Research Center and 
Adjunct Professor of Systems Sciences 
at the Wharton School, University of 
Pennsylvania (1979–1986). He began 
his career with IBM's World Trade 
Corporation where he served as a senior 
systems engineer (1963–1969). He left 
IBM to become CEO of the Industrial 
Management Institute (1969–1979). 
He has held teaching positions at Villanova School of Business (Executive 
MBA 1999 to present); The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania 
(1977–1986); IBM Education Centers (1965–1969); and the University of 
California, Berkeley (1961–1963).
He received his engineering degree from the University of California, 
Berkeley (1963) and completed more than 1,800 hours of professional 
training in systems engineering at the IBM Education Centers in the UK, 
Germany, and France. From this early training in information systems, his 
interests led him to operations research, behavioral sciences, and, finally, 
to the development and application of systems thinking and interactive 
design.
He has been a member of: the Research Board of the International 
Systems Institute, United States (1983–1992); the Governing Body of the 
Asian Productivity Organization, Japan (1972–1979); the Board of 
Trustees for AZAD University, Iran (1976–1979); and Regional Chairman 
of the Society for General Systems Research, Asia (1975–1979).
Author Biography
Jamshid Gharajedaghi, 
Managing Partner of INTERACT

334 
Author Biography
He was the project manager for two internationally acclaimed projects: 
New Economic Order, a United Nations project; and Goals for Mankind, 
a Club of Rome project.
Mr. Gharajedaghi has written several books, including Prologue to 
National Development Planning and Towards a Systems Theory of Organization. 
He is the author of numerous published articles in various international 
scientific and management journals.
Mr. Gharajedaghi has been involved with the following sponsoring 
organizations to redesign businesses, product(s), and/or processes:
Aluminum Company of America 
(ALCOA)
ANGLOVAAL, Ltd. (South Africa)
Armco (Latin American Division)
Butterworth Health System
Carrier Corporation
Chrysler Corporation
Clark Equipment Company
Commonwealth Energy Systems
Edgars Stores, Ltd. (South Africa)
Ford Motor Company
Health Care Forum
Marriott Corporation
Martin-Marietta Corporation
Metropolitan Life Insurance 
Company
NYNEX Science & Technology, Inc.
Oneida Tribe of Indians of 
Wisconsin
Super Fresh Food Markets
United Food & Commercial 
Workers’ Union

335
Having come this far, you must have gotten the bug already. You may even 
have realized that there is tremendous power in the idea of holistic ­iterative 
thinking. To internalize it, you must make it your own. This means that 
you should: (1) make notes of the major points that were of interest to 
you, (2) repeat the main arguments to yourself in your own language, and 
(3) share them with others. The best way to learn is to teach. If you can 
excite others and make them listen to you for one hour, you are on your 
way to becoming an effective systems designer.
Systems thinking is the art of simplifying complexity. It is about seeing 
through chaos, managing interdependency, and understanding choice. We 
see the world as increasingly more complex and chaotic because we use 
inadequate concepts to explain it. When we understand something, we no 
longer see it as chaotic or complex.
Learning the systems methodology is very much like learning to play 
chess. The rules are relatively simple, but proficiency comes only with 
practice. Stay appreciative of the imperatives of the systems dimensions in 
your life. Apply the systems principles to your daily encounters. These 
­concepts are even more potent and relevant in a personal context. To 
understand complexity, one needs to discover the underlying rhythm — 
the order by which things repeat themselves.
The first few tries are not going to be easy, but once you get the hang of 
it you will enjoy the power of iterative thinking. Seeing things differently 
and clearly, in their proper perspective, results in a new mode of being. 
You will be able to manage outward, influence those whom you do not 
control, and produce an order-of-magnitude change in the throughput of 
any system of which you are in charge. Soon, you will discover that the 
world is full of frustrated heroes waiting to be discovered. Happiness and 
success, as well as love, must be continuously reproduced. “They lived 
happily ever after” is a lie. You will learn that excitement, as the essence of 
beauty, is the most potent instrument of change and social integration. 
And that power-to-do is a matter of competence. Like knowledge, power is 
enhanced when it is shared. Last, but not least, people are more likely to 
implement an idea when they have had a hand in shaping it.
The following tips will get you started.
Get a good handle on the problem before you try to solve it. Do not 
accept problems at face value. Remember, neither a problem nor a ­solution 
can be entertained free of context. A tendency to define problems in terms 
of their solutions, and a strong preference for context-free solutions will 
merely continue regenerating the past, reproducing the same non-­solution 
Conclusion

336 
Conclusion 
all over again. Do not use universal constraints such as time and 
­information or resources to define problems. It implies that you have 
defined the problem in terms of a known solution. This may be assuming 
more than what you really want to say. Do not entertain any suggestions 
for possible solutions while you are still engaged in the process of ­defining 
the problem.
Separate the process of defining the problem from the process of 
­producing the solution. Look at the bigger picture; try to see the problems 
as interactive elements of a mess, the future implicit in the present ­behavior 
of the system. To map the mess, generate a snapshot of the system under 
study. Deal iteratively with function (the output), structure (the major 
actors), process (how they do what they do), and purpose (the role the 
system plays in its containing environment). Try to identify obstructions 
to proper functioning of the wealth, power, beauty, knowledge, and value 
dimensions of the system. This should point to a web of problems. Finally, 
you can capture the future implicit in the present order by recognizing that 
(1) cause and effect may form circular relations; (2) events may have 
­multiple outcomes, each with a different time lag; (3) if “X” is good, more 
“X” is not necessarily better; and (4) tenacity in playing the old game 
­converts success to failure. It is not a good idea to make people feel 
­defensive about their past. Presenting the mess as the consequence of 
­success will go a long way toward getting it accepted.
To design a solution, start with an exciting vision of the future that you 
are capable of producing and then work backward to the existing system. 
There is a logic to this apparent madness. Ask children who like to solve 
mazes. They will tell you why you should start from the end.
Imagine that the system you were dealing with was destroyed over-
night; everything else remained intact, and you are to re-create it anew. 
There is a twisted logic in this proposition as well. The point is, if you are 
not able to produce an acceptable design within the existing order, despite 
the absence of imposing constraints, then there might not be a light at the 
end of the tunnel at all. This means that real problems may lie in the 
­environment rather than within the design itself. Change your focus; try to 
influence your immediate environment by managing outward. If this is 
not possible, you may be better off to get the hell out of that impossible 
situation.
Design is the potential means of controlling, influencing, and appre-
ciating the parameters affecting the system's existence. The parameters 
that coproduce the future are found in the interactions of five dimensions 
of a social system. Creating compatibility and reinforcing relations among 
power, knowledge, wealth, beauty, and value produces a resonance, a 10X 
force that, in most situations, will overcome the most stubborn 
obstacles.

Conclusion  337
The five systems architectures discussed in the last part of this book 
were all based on an exciting notion of modular design. Modular design is 
the most potent and practical means of handling change and ­implementing 
complex designs, without getting lost in the process. This notion of 
­modularity is a variation of the powerful concept originally used in the 
design of complex computers. It is the extension of this design principle to 
the organization of the computer industry as a whole that is responsible 
for its remarkable success. It created the ability to build a complex product 
from smaller subsystems that can be designed independently yet function 
together as a whole.
Recall that to create a modular structure we first had to design an 
­architecture — a general description of a system in terms of its vital 
­functions, major elements, and critical processes. An architecture consists 
of a set of distinct, but interrelated, platforms. Each platform hosts a set of 
special-purpose modules. Relationships and the interfaces among 
­platforms are explicitly defined. Parts operate as independent systems with 
the ability to be relatively self-controlling and yet act as responsible 
­members of a coherent system with the ability to respond effectively to the 
requirements of their containing whole. Modular design is a powerful 
instrument of change. Use it to the best of your ability.
Keep in touch. Let me know how this version of Systems Thinking is 
working out for you. Send your e-mail to jghara@earthlink.net.

This page intentionally left blank

339
Re fer e n ce s
Ackoff, R. L. (1974). Redesigning the future. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Ackoff, R. L. (1978). The art of problem solving. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Ackoff, R. L. (1979). The future of operational research is past. Journal of the Operational 
Research Society, 30, 93–104.
Ackoff, R. L. (1981). Creating the corporate future. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Ackoff, R. L. (1994). The Democratic Corporation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ackoff, R. L. (1999). Ackoff's best: His classic writings on management. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Ackoff, R. L., & Emery, F. E. (1972). On purposeful systems. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.
Adler, M. J. (1978). Aristotle for everybody. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
Ashby, W. R. (1958). General systems theory as a new discipline. General Systems, 
3, 1–6.
Banathy, B. H. (1997). Designing social systems in a changing world. New York: Plenum 
Publishing.
Beer, S. (1967). Brain of the firm. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Press.
Beer, S. (1975). Platforms of change. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Bertalanffy, L. V. (1968). General systems theory: Foundation, development, applications. 
Middlesex, UK: Penguin Books.
Blake, R. R., & Mouton, J. S. (1964). The managerial grid. Houston: Gulf Publishing 
Company.
Bogdanov, A. (1980). Essays in tektology. (G. Gorelik, Trans.). Seaside, CA: Intersystems.
Boulding, K. E. (1953). The organizational revolution. New York: Harper.
Boulding, K. E. (1956). The image. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Boulding, K. E. (1968). Beyond economics. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Boulding, K. E. (1981). Ecodynamics. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Buckley, W. (1967). Sociology and modern systems theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall.
Buckley, W. (Ed.) (1968). Systems research for the behavioral scientist: A source book. Chicago: 
Aldine Publishing.
Capra, F. (1988). The turning point: Science, society, and the rising culture. New York: 
Doubleday.
Capra, F. (2002). The hidden connections. New York: Doubleday.
Checkland, P. (1981). Systems thinking, systems practice. New York: John Wiley.
Churchman, C. W. (1968). The systems approach. New York: Delacorte Press.
Churchman, C. W. (1971). Design of inquiring systems. New York: Basic Books.
Churchman, C. W. (1979). The systems approach and its enemies. New York: Basic Books.
Cross, N. (2007). Designerly ways of knowing. Basel, Boston, Berlin: Board of International 
Research in Design Birkhauser.
Dewey, J. (1989). Freedom and culture. New York: Prometheus Books, Great Books in 
Philosophy.
Forrester, J. W. (1961). Industrial dynamics. Cambridge, UK: Productivity Press.
Forrester, J. W. (1965). A new corporate design. Industrial Management Review, 7(1), 
5–17.
Forrester, J. W. (1971). Counterintuitive behavior of social systems. Technology Review, 
73(3), 52–68.
Friedman, M. (1962, 2002). Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fromm, E. (1955). The sane society. New York: Rinehart.
Fukuyama, F. (1992). End of History and the Last Man, New york: free press.

340 
References 
Gharajedaghi, J. (1972). Theory and management of systems. Tehran, Iran: Industrial 
Management Institute.
Gharajedaghi, J. (1983). Social dynamics, dichotomy or dialectic. Human Systems 
Management, 4, 7–17.
Gharajedaghi, J. (1985). Toward a systems theory of organization. Seaside, CA: 
Intersystem.
Gharajedaghi, J. (1994). Making TQM work for America. The Total Quality Review, 
March/April, 11–18.
Gharajedaghi, J. (2006). Systems thinking, managing chaos & complexity: A platform for 
designing business architecture (2nd ed.). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Gharajedaghi, J., & Ackoff, R. L. (1984). Mechanisms, organisms and social systems. 
Strategic Management Journal, 5, 289–300.
Gharajedaghi, J., & Ackoff, R. L. (1986). A prologue to national development planning. 
Newport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Gleick, J. (1987). CHAOS: Making a new science. New York: Viking Penguin Inc.
Goldratt, E. M. (1997). Critical chain. Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, Inc.
Goldratt, E. M., & Cox, J. (1986). The GOAL. Groton-on-Hudson, NY: North River Press.
Grove, A. (1996). Only the paranoid survive. New York: Doubleday.
Halal, W. E., Geranmayeh, A., & Pourdehnad, J. (1993). Internal markets. New York: 
John Wiley.
Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. (1994). Competing for the future. Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press.
Handy, C. (2002). What is business for? Harvard Business Review.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order. Reading, MA: Helix Book, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company.
Huntington, S. P. (1993). Clash of civilizations. Foreign Affairs Journal, summer,  
22–30.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lazlo, E. (1972). Systems view of the world. New York: George Braziller.
Mandelbrot, B. (1977). Fractal geometry of nature. New York: Freeman.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
D. Reidel Publishing Holland.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1987). The tree of knowledge. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
McGregor, D. (1960). The human side of enterprise. New York: McGraw Hill.
Meadows, D. (2008). Thinking in systems. Chelsa green Publishing, White river, Vermont: 
Sustainability Institute.
Meadows, D. H., et al. (1972). The limits to growth. London: Potomac Associates.
Miller, D. (1990). The Icarus paradox. New York: Harper Business.
Miller, J. (1978). Living systems. New York: McGraw Hill.
Peters, T. J., & Waterman, R. H. (1982). In search of excellence. New York: Harper and Row.
Pine, J. B., II (1993). Mass customization. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Popper, K. R. (1966). The open society and its enemies. New Jersey: Princeton University 
Press.
Pourdehnad, J. (1992). Interactive planning. Unpublished doctor Dissertation, Wharton 
School, University of Pennsylvania.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. M. (1965). Prisoner's dilemma. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press.
Richmond, B. (2001). An introduction to systems thinking (iThink software). High 
Performance Systems, Inc. NH: Hanover.
Senge, P. (1990). The fifth discipline. New York: Doubleday.
Servan-Schreiber, J. J. (1967). American challenge. London: Avon Books.
Simon, H. A. (1996). The science of the artificial (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Singer, E. A., Jr. (1959). Experience and reflection. C. W. Churchman (Ed.), Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Taleb, N. N. The black swan, the impact of the highly improbable. New York: Random House.
Thurow, L. C. (1980). Zero sum society. New York: Basic Books.

References  341
Wheatley, M. J. (1994). Leadership and the new science: Learning about organization from an 
orderly universe. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers. Reprint 1994.
Wiener, N. (1954). The human use of human beings. New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Wolfram, S. (2002). New kind of science. Canada: Wolfram Media, Inc.
Womack, J. P., Jones, D. T., & Ross, D. (1990). The machine that changed the world. New 
York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
Zadeh, L. A., et al. (1987). Fuzzy sets and applications. New York: John Wiley.
Zeeman, E. C. (1976). Catastrophe theory. Scientific American, 234(4), 65–83.

This page intentionally left blank

Index
A
Ackoff 's circular organization, 99–100, 
100f
Alienation, 173
Analytical thinking, 8
Apple operating system, 185–186
Architecture design, 337
B
Business architecture
authority and responsibility, 190, 191f
component builders, 192
design process, 181, 182f
functions, 189–190
global market economy, 181
input dimension
centralization and decentralization, 
195
core technologies, 195–196
economy of scale, 195
market price, 194
special-purpose modules, 194, 194f
uniformity, 195
internal market economy
agreeable and disagreeable service 
provider, 198
bureaucratization, 198
customer–provider relationship, 201
linear framework, 201
matrix organizations, 197
multidimensional design, 198, 199f
superior–subordinate relationship, 
197, 198–199
two-boss system, 197
value-chain relationships, 200, 200f
market dimension, 196–197
multidimensional modular structure, 
181, 191, 192, 192f
organizational process, 201–202
interactive design, definition, 207
performance criteria, 202, 203, 203f
performance measures, 202, 203f, 
204–205
planning, learning and control 
system, 202
successive approximation, 207
viability matrix, 205–206
organizational theory, 190
output dimension
environmental opportunities and 
internal competencies, 194
multilevel purposeful systems, 
193, 193f
production facilities and 
distribution system, 193, 194f
semi- autonomous and  
self-sufficient, 192–193
power-to-do, 191
purpose
Apple operating system, 185–186
business model, 184, 185
core competency, 188–189
core technology, 187, 187f
defense industry, 186
dimensions, 185
dynamic and relative 
phenomenon, 188
experience curve, 188–189
interactive design, 185
interactive systems architecture, 
187, 188f
market characteristics, 186, 186f
materials science and processing 
technology, 187
mechanistic mode, 184
multicultural architecture, 188
product-based business, 185
product characteristics, 185, 186f
“sticking” business, 187
self-renewing capabilities, 181, 181f
system's boundary
“cost plus economy,” 183–184
definition, 182
Ford Motor Company, 183–184
health-care system, 183, 183f
market economy, 182
participating actors, 182–183
single discipline/department,  
184
unidimensional concept, 190–191
Business systems
collective ownership, 236
desires and abilities, 234
development, 234
generation and dissemination, 233
343
Note: Page numbers followed by t indicate tables and f indicate figures.

344 
Index
Business systems (Continued)
governance and intersystem 
relationships, 236–237
individual ownership and strategic 
alliances, 236
industry sector, 235
land and agriculture sector, 235–236
leisure sector, 235
partnership and franchise 
development, 236
services sector, 234–235
success, 233, 234
Butterworth health system
architecture, 249
care concept, 245
care system
common features, 253–255
contextual background, 251–252
desired specification, 252–253
interventional care, 256
preventive care, 255–256
terminal care, 258
viability care, 257
core knowledge
confederation, 266
continuous innovation and 
improvement, 267
core competency, 265
health-care providers, 265
leadership, 269
market dimension, 267
medical research and education, 
270
multidimensional architecture, 
268–269
organizational context, 266
research and learning, 268
structural conflict, 267
design specification, 248
executive office, 277–278
HDS
composite performance profile, 275
customer–provider relationship, 
276
engagement and ownership, 275
health-care competency, 275–276
health-care process, 273
“low-archical” approach, 275
organizational viability, 277
product development, 277
social systems, 276
suboptimization, 277
issues, concerns, and expectations
care management, 246–247
health-care system, 248
preventive care, 247
sensitive patient–physician 
relationship, 247–248
sickness-based health care, 246
market dimension
fee for service, 250
HMOS, 250
Medicaid, 251
medicare, 250
noncovered customers, 251
output dimension
ancillary services, 263–264
business services function, 265
care facility, 258
clinical service, 265
community-based health delivery 
system, 261–263
health delivery module, 258
health delivery system design, 261
home care management, 265
hospitality and facility management, 
264
modular structure, 259–261
occupational care management, 265
patient care, 263
patient relation, 264
traditional functional structure, 259
shared services
centralization, 270–271
control vs. service, 271
customer orientation, 272–273
C
Capacity utilization, 206
Carrier Corporation
business processes
decision system, 330–331
performance measurement and 
reward system, 331
target costing and variable budgeting 
system, 331–332
value chain, 331f, 332
components
compressors and electronic controls, 
328
OEMs, 328
product technology and design, 327
core values
core technology, 321
customer satisfaction, 320
market segmentation, 320
products and services, 320–321
sales and distribution system, 322
expectations, assumptions, and 
specifications
bases for competition, 319
climate control system, 318

Index  345
flexible production, 318
HVAC industry, 319
product technology, 318
inputs
management support service, 330
operational support (process 
design), 329–330
technology, 328–329
markets
area units, 326
regional units, 324–325
output units
aftermarket parts, 327
global platform concept, 326–327
sales and distribution system, 327
semi-autonomous manufacturing 
units, 317
state-of-the-art design, 317
systems architecture
desired characteristics, 323
multidimensional framework, 323–324
Catastrophe theory, 53
Centralization and decentralization
Ackoff's circular organization, 99–100, 
100f
autonomy, 98–99
decision criteria, 100–101
dichotomy, 97–98
empowerment, 98
multi-minded systems, 97–98
Centralized administrative functions, 
174–176
Commonwealth energy system (COM/
Energy)
business environment
built-in cost increase system, 296
customer base differentiation, 296
energy industry, 294–295
core business units
cogeneration and packages of energy 
supply, 302–304
customer-oriented business  
unit, 302
energy efficiency and 
electrotechnology, 304–305
natural gas and electricity 
distribution, 301–302
corporate strategy, 291
design
core values and desired specification, 
298–299
purpose and strategic intent, 297–298
energy brokerage, 308
executive office
bottom-up mess formulation, 311
continuous improvement, 312
core knowledge pool, 312–313
latency, 311–312
learning and control system, 313–315
synergy, 312
general architecture
business identification matrix, 299, 
300f
COM/Energy architecture, 299–300, 
301f
integrated value chain strategy, 299
performance centers, 300
international operation, 308–309
shared services
financial system, 311
fixed cost, 309–310
internal market mechanism, 309
service company, 310–311
stakeholders’ expectation
customers’ expectation, 293
employees’ expectation, 293
public's expectation, 294
regulators’ expectation, 293
shareholders’ expectation, 292–293
suppliers’ expectation, 294
technology/supply-oriented business 
units
energy generation, 306
gas storage (LNG), 307
steam service, 307
Conflict management
competition, 107
democratic challenge, 107–108
dichotomy, continuum, and 
multidimensional scheme, 106
interaction management, 104–105
lose/lose to win/win environments, 107
multi-minded system, 104
types of relationships, 104–105, 105f
zero-sum game, 106
Consensus-building process
assumptions and organizing 
principles, 222
complementary tendencies, 222, 223f
doers, 222–224
getting to be of the same mind, 223, 223f
platform creation, 221
problem solvers and formulators, 222
Core business units, COM/Energy
cogeneration and packages of energy 
supply, 302–304
customer-oriented business unit, 302
energy efficiency and 
electrotechnology, 304–305
natural gas and electricity distribution, 
301–302
Cycle attractor, 51–52

346 
Index
D
Demand reliability, 206
Design thinking
critical design elements
“dollar votes,” pricing system, 151
exchange system, 151
horizontal compatibility, 153–155
measurement and reward system, 
150–151
productive employment 
opportunity, 151
rate of return, 153, 153t
raw materials and human resources, 
152, 152t
target costing, 156–157
temporal compatibility, 155–156
interactive design
chaos and complexity, 142
context phenomenon, 144
design for participation, 147
information/money, 143
learning and adaptation, 145–146
mess, definition, 144
“norm,” 143
operational viability, 145
real-world environment, 147
second-order machine, 150
successive approximation, 147–148, 
148f
technological feasibility, 144
type I, II and III constraints, 149
modular design
“360 architecture,” 139
custom-made separation unit 
design, 140–141
modularity, 138–139
multidimensional modular design, 
dynamic structure, 139–140, 140f
platform and module, definition, 
139
operating principles, 137–138
operations research, 133
On Purposeful Systems, 133
social change, design and process, 
141–142
systems methodology, 137, 137f
holistic process, 136, 136f
human cognitive ability, 134, 134f
iterative process, 135
mental image, 135–136
positive and negative feedback loop, 
136
The Sciences of the Artificial, 134
social system, 135
Development
alienation, 78–79
corruption, 81–82
obstruction, 77–85
plurality
of function and process, singularity 
of structure, 72
of function and structure, singularity 
of process, 72
of structure, function, and process, 
72–73
polarization
divide and rule strategy, 79–80
second-order learning, 80
social pathology, 80
spacio-temporal reality, 81
singularity
definition, 69
of function and process, plurality of 
structure, 70–71
of function and structure, plurality 
of process, 71
of function, plurality of structure 
and process, 71–72
of function, structure, and process, 70
of structure and process, plurality of 
function, 72
systems view
cultural boundary, 74, 74f
desire and ability, 75
emerging mode of organization, 76
integration and differentiation, 73, 73f
Labor and Conservative parties, 74
security and freedom, 76–77
self-limitation, 75
social function, 77
social system, 73–74
terrorism
civil society, 84
ideological battle, 83
religious fundamentalism, 83
second-order obstruction, 82
sociocultural system, 84–85
zero-sum game, 82
typology, 69, 70f
E
Energy-bonded systems, 12–13
Exaggeration, 6
F
Ford Motor Company, 183–184
G
Game evolution
American Challenge (Shreiber,  
Jean-Jacques), 3

Index  347
competitive games
divisional structure, 18–20
interactive management, 22–24
lean production system, 22
mass production, 17–18
Operations Research, 21–22
order-of-magnitude change, 17
participative management, 20–21
financial and intellectual resource 
restructure, 3
forces hierarchy, competitive 
advantage, 4, 4f
game change, 6–8
imitation, 4–5
inertia, 5–6
nature of inquiry
independent variables, 13, 13f
initial/baseline measures, 14
interdependency, 15, 16f
participation, iteration, and  
second-order learning, 16
slack, 15, 15f
social systems, 16
systems thinking, 16
Woodhaven operation, 15
Woodhaven stamping plant's quality 
variables, 13–14, 14f
world-class performance, 14, 14f
nature of organization
mindless system, 10–11, 10f
multi-minded system, 12–13
uni-minded systems, 11–12
paradigm shift, 8, 9f
In Search of Excellence (Peters, Tom), 3
suboptimization, 6
Growth and diversity management
post-World War II environment, 19
predict-and-prepare mode, 18, 19
public financing and emerging 
biological model, 18
semi-autonomous structure, 18–19
Sloan's model, 18
strategic planning, 19–20
H
HDS. See Health delivery system
Health-care industry, 183, 183f
Health care system
common features, 253–255
contextual background, 251–252
desired specification, 252–253
interventional care, 256
preventive care, 255–256
terminal care, 258
viability care, 257
Health delivery system (HDS)
composite performance profile, 275
customer–provide relationship, 276
engagement and ownership, 275
health-care competency, 275–276
health-care process, 273
“low-archical” approach, 275
organizational viability, 277
product development, 277
social systems, 276
suboptimization, 277
Holistic iterative thinking, 335
Holistic thinking, 8
freedom and culture, 96
generation and dissemination
beauty (see Social integration)
knowledge, 103–104
power (see Centralization and 
decentralization)
value (see Conflict management)
wealth, 96–97, 98f
ideal-seeking systems, 95
iterative process of inquiry
analytical, synthetic, and dynamic 
thinking, 90
heart as system, 92–93, 94f
interdependent variables, 92
multidisciplinary approach, 89
producers and product, 92
Singerian experimentalism, 93
sociocultural systems, 90
structure, function, and process, 
90–92, 91f
understanding complexity, 92, 93f
multidimensionality recognition, 96
prime cause, 95
social system dimensions, 93–95, 95f
Human intelligence, 134, 134f
I
Inflection point, 52–53
Information-bonded system, 12–13
Institute for Interactive Management 
(INTERACT), 333
Interactive elements, mess, 336
Interactive management
The Black Swan (Taleb, Nassim), 23
The Design of Inquiring Systems 
(Churchman), 23
development, 23
foundations of systems thinking, 23f, 
24
interactions and powerful reinforcing 
effects, 23
operational manifestation, 22
Redesigning the Future (Ackoff), 22
Iterative thinking, 335

348 
Index
J
Joint optimization, 21–22
L
Learning systems
advocacy functions, 230
cultural development, 226–227
function, 226
governance and intersystem 
relationships, 233
knowledge bank, 229–230
learning to be (cultural education), 
228–229
learning to do (professional education), 
229
learning to learn (formal education), 
227–228
Oneida multiversity (see Oneida 
multiversity)
outputs, 227
performance criteria and measures, 
232–233
professional-based system, 227
shared facilities, 229
Linear and nonlinear systems
delayed response effects, 112–113, 113f
goal-seeking behavior, 112, 112f
impact of carrying capacity, 113, 114f
multi-loop nonlinear feedback system
academic success, 115–116
air traffic mess, 117–118, 118f
bipartisan coalition, 116–117
chaos theory, 114
complexity, interdependency, and 
counterintuitive behavior, 114
housing bubble, 116–117, 117f
independent variables, 115–116, 116f
interactive model, 116–117
iThink software, 115
pattern recognition, 115
post-9/11 security, 117–118
principles, operational thinking, 118
rhythm/iterative cycle recognition, 115
rate of change, 111, 112f
reinforcing and counteracting feedback 
loops, 112
thermostat, 112
M
Market potential, 207
Marriott Hotels, Resorts, and Suites 
(MHRS), 283
Mess formulation
drivers, economy state, 177
early-warning system, 166
financial and banking sector, 178–179
game changes and explicit vision, 169
game evolution, 177–178
input-based personnel policy, 172–173
management reluctance, 166
mapping
ineffective operational system, 164–165
product division, 163–164, 164f
public education system, 165, 165f
second-order machine, 165
theme generation, 163
“type II” properties, 165
mediocrity and tolerance, 
incompetence, 173–174
mess impacts, 178, 179f
monopolistic, cost plus and regulated 
environment, 170–171
multiple feedback loops, 159–160
non-competitive culture, 171
searching phase
definition, 160
iterative process, 160–161, 160f
obstruction analysis, 161, 162t
system dynamics, 161–163, 162t
systems analysis, 161, 161t
stock market capitalism, 178–179
structural incompatibility, 174–176
uncertainty, 176
utility industry
critical elements, 167
interrelated system, 167, 168f
iterative process, 166–167
oil crisis, 166, 167f
second-order machine, 169
system-wide phenomenon, 168–169
Modeling interdependency
Adam Smith's invisible hand, 
121–122, 122f
counterintuitive behavior, 122–123, 123f
dynamic interactions, 121
feedback loops, 121–122
invisible hand graphic output, 
121–122, 123f
iThink model, 122–123, 124f
mess formulation, 121
regional welfare system, 122–123
Modular design, 337
Multi-minded systems
centralization and decentralization, 
97–98
conflict management, 104
O
Oneida multiversity
learning cells, 231
learning process, 230

Index  349
practice cells, 232
research cells, 232
Oneida nation
business systems
collective ownership, 236
desires and abilities, 234
development, 234
generation and dissemination, 233
governance and intersystem 
relationships, 236–237
individual ownership and strategic 
alliances, 236
industry sector, 235
land and agriculture sector, 235–236
leisure sector, 235
partnership and franchise 
development, 236
services sector, 234–235
success, 233, 234
core services
compliance, 238
governance and oversight, 238–239
health services, 237
performance criteria and measures, 
238
public works, 238
records management, 238
social services, 237
space planning and engineering, 
238
design team, 211
external environment, 239
governance
BC responsibilities, 215
chief of staff, 215–216
financial systems, 216
GB monitoring authority, 215
governing body, 215
human systems, 217
planning, learning, and control 
board, 217–218
platform, 215
technical systems, 217
intended design, desired specifications, 
211–212
judicial system
contextual analysis, 240–241
contextual challenge, 240, 241–242
democratic challenge, 240, 
242–243
learning systems
advocacy functions, 230
cultural development, 226–227
function, 226
governance and intersystem 
relationships, 233
knowledge bank, 229–230
learning to be (cultural education), 
228–229
learning to do (professional 
education), 229
learning to learn (formal education), 
227–228
Oneida multiversity (see Oneida 
multiversity)
outputs, 227
performance criteria and measures, 
232–233
professional-based system, 227
shared facilities, 229
membership systems
consensus-building convention, 
224–225, 224f
consensus-building process (see 
Consensus-building process)
criteria and measures, 225–226
disadvantages, 225
empowerment, 218–219
majority rule, 225
membership network, 220–221
tie that bonds, 219–220
systems architecture, 213–214
Only the Paranoid Survive (Grove, 
Andrew S.), 53
Operating system, culture
active adaptation, 65
chaotic orders, 65–66
Christian/western civilization, 66
emancipation, 66
field theory (Wheatley), 67–68
foreign invasion, 67
ideologies, 66
interactive design, 68
Islamic civilization, 66
neg-entropic systems, 65
predefined order, 64
second-order-machine, 65
shared image, 64
systems thinking civilization, 67, 67f
Operational thinking
complexity
linear and nonlinear systems  
(see Linear and nonlinear systems)
open loop and closed loop systems, 
111, 111f
dynamic process, 110
emergent properties, 109
iThink language
connectors, 120, 121f
converters, 119, 120f
flow, 119
icons, 119, 119f

350 
Index
Operational thinking (Continued)
modeling interdependency  
(see Modeling interdependency)
stock, 119, 120f
iThink model, 109–110
open loop thinking, 110
throughput systems dynamics
critical properties, 126
cycle time, cost, flexibility, and 
quality, 124
definition of throughput, 124
education system, 125
elements, 125, 125f
interface and effective coupling, 125
measurement and learning, 
130–131
process model (see Throughput 
process model)
Sloane's famous “cost plus,” 124
unidirectional causality, 110
unlocking the black box, 109
Operations Research (OR), 21–22
Original equipment manufacturers 
(OEMs), 328
P
Pan Am Syndrome, 54
Parts and labor interchangeability, 17–18
Point attractor, 51–52
Power-to-do, 335
Product potency, 207
R
Reflective conjecture, 137–138
Reward system, 207
S
Social integration
emotions, 101–102
individuality and collectivity, 102
membership, 102–103
pursuit of pleasure, 101–102
Sociocultural system
culture
default decision systems, 62
design thinking, 60
image building and abstraction, 60
as operating system (see Operating 
system, culture)
potentiality and vitality, 62
shared image, 61–62, 61f
spatio-temporal-causal realities, 61
information-bonded systems, 59–60
self-organization
blueprints, 59
chaos theory, 57
closed system, 57
living systems, 57–58
ontogeny, 58
open system, 57
quantum theory, 57
Santiago Theory, 58–59
social learning
cultural transformation, 64
developmental process, 63
first- and second-order learning, 64
inertia, 62
role of knowledge, 63–64
social system failure, 62–63
Solution design, 336
Stock market capitalism, 178–179
Strange attractor, 51–52
Systems architectures, 337
Systems principles
counterintuitive behavior
attractors, 51–52
chaos theory, 50–51
effects of smoking, 48–49, 50f
multifinality, 49
social dynamics, 48
social systems, 52
welfare system, 48, 49f
emergent property
compatibility, 46
happiness, 46
manifestations of success, 47
online and real time, 46
organization's success, 46, 47
phenomenon of life, 45
phenomenon of love, 45
type I and II properties, 45, 45f
multidimensionality
behavior of, 41, 41f
change of phase, 40, 40f
complementary relationship, 39, 39f
compromise, 38
continuums, 38, 38f
definition, 38
dichotomy, 38, 38f, 40
freedom, justice, and security, 39
function plurality, 43, 43f
innovative abilities, 41, 42f
mutual interdependence,  
tendencies, 39
non-zero-sum formulation, 39
order and complexity, 42
process plurality, 44
structure plurality, 43–44, 43f
style of management, 41, 42f
typology, 40, 41
zero-sum game, 38

Index  351
multi-minded system, 29
openness
chance, choice, and certainty 
elements, 29
chaotic simplicity, 32
contextual variable, 30
customers, 31
definition, 29
econometric model, 30
influence, 30–31
open (living) systems, 32
organized complexity, 32
suppliers, 31–32
system boundary, 30, 31f
transactional environment, 31
purposefulness
cultural choice, 35–36
emotional choice, 35
freedom, 37
goal-seeking system, 37
hierarchy of influence, 33, 33f
power, 37
purposeful system, 37
rational choice, 33, 34–35
reactive, responsive, and active 
systems, 36, 36t
state-maintaining system, 36–37
T
Technology/supply-oriented business 
units, COM/Energy
energy generation, 306
gas storage (LNG), 307
steam service, 307
Terrorism
civil society, 84
ideological battle, 83
religious fundamentalism, 83
second-order obstruction, 82
sociocultural system, 84–85
zero-sum game, 82
The Marriott Corporation
architecture
brand management, 286
business management, 285
core component, 287
core knowledge, 287–288
critical process, 288–289
maintenance management, 286
managerial and organizational 
flexibility, 285
MHRS, 283
optimum product mix, 285
product/market mix, 285
project management, 286
sales, 286
synergy, latency, and efficiency, 284
environment, 282
“mess” formulation, 281
mission, 283
principles and desired characteristics, 
282–283
right-sizing, 281
structural conflict, 289
supplier–customer relation, 289
Throughput process model
Critical Chain (Goldratt), 126
customer complaints, 127, 129
functional organizational structure, 
129
iThink model, telephone operation, 
128, 128f
iThink software, 126
multidimensionality and emergent 
property, 126
organizational processes, 129, 130, 130f 
probability of task finishing, 126–127, 
127f
repair, maintenance, and planned 
capacity expansion, 127
slack factor, 128
stocks, flows, converters, and 
connectors, 127, 127f
volume-oriented reward system, 129
Torus attractor, 51–52
V
Value-added ratio, 206
Value-chain transaction index, 206
W
WinTel, 54

