systems
Article
Autopoiesis and Its Efﬁcacy—A Metacybernetic View
Maurice Yolles 1,*
and B. Roy Frieden 2


Citation: Yolles, M.; Frieden, B.R.
Autopoiesis and Its Efﬁcacy—A
Metacybernetic View. Systems 2021, 9,
75. https://doi.org/10.3390/
systems9040075
Academic Editor: Francis Heylighen
Received: 17 August 2021
Accepted: 22 October 2021
Published: 25 October 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1
The Business School, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool L3 5UX, UK
2
The Institute of Optics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA; friedenr@optics.arizona.edu
*
Correspondence: prof.m.yolles@gmail.com
Abstract: This paper seeks to explain the nature of autopoiesis and its capacity to be efﬁcacious, and
to do this, it uses agency theory as embedded in metacybernetics. Agency, as a generalised intelligent
adaptive living system, can anticipate the future once it has internalised a representation of an active
contextual situation through autopoiesis. The role of observation and the nature of internalisation will
be discussed, explaining that the latter has two states that determine agency properties of cognition.
These are assimilation and accommodation. Assimilation is an information process and results in
implicit cognition and recognition, whereas accommodation uses assimilated information delivering
explicit cognition, recognition, and conscious awareness with rationality. Similarly, anticipation,
a required property of the living, has two states, weak and strong, and these correspond to the
two states of internalisation. Autopoiesis has various properties identiﬁable through the lenses
of three autonomous but conﬁgurable schemas: General Collective Intelligence (GCI), Eigenform,
and Extreme Physical Information (EPI). GCI is a pragmatic evolutionary approach concerned
with a contextually connected purposeful and relatable set of task processes, each undertaken
by a team of subagencies seeking collective ﬁtness. Eigenform is a symbolic approach that is
concerned with how observations can be suitably internalised and thus be used as a token to
determine future behaviour, and how that which has been internalised can be adopted to anticipate
the future. Extreme Physical Information (EPI) is an empirical approach concerned with acquiring
information through observation of an unknown parameter through sampling regimes. The paper
represents the conceptualisations of each schema in terms of autopoietic efﬁcacy, and explores their
conﬁgurative possibilities. It will adopt the ideas delivered to enhance explanations of the nature of
autopoiesis and its efﬁcacy within metacybernetics, providing a shift in thinking about autopoiesis
and self-organisation.
Keywords: General Collective Intelligence; Extreme Physical Information; Eigenform; agency;
metacybernetics; autopoiesis; efﬁcacy
1. Introduction
This is a cybernetic paper concerned with living systems that use networks of au-
topoietic processes to enable them to have versatile adaptive behaviour, this enabling them
to maintain their viability, i.e., to have a capacity to both survive and develop. Living
systems are also cognitive systems [1], operating through information processes [2], and
studied through cognitive science, which, for Simon [3], has a fundamental set of common
concerns that are shared by the disciplines of psychology, computer science, linguistics,
economics, epistemology, and the social sciences, generally all connected with information
processing and adaptive systems. For Grifﬁn [4], versatile adaptive behaviour provides
evidence of consciousness. That living systems are conscious [5] is important because this
allows one to differentiate between classes of living systems by distinguishing between
degrees of consciousness, where more primitive forms of life are less complex with a low
degree of consciousness, and more advanced forms are more complex with a higher degree
of consciousness. Such a gradation has been proposed by Bitbol and Luisi [6,7], who offer
a model of ﬁve evolutionary stages of system consciousness, these part of a hierarchical
Systems 2021, 9, 75. https://doi.org/10.3390/systems9040075
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/systems

Systems 2021, 9, 75
2 of 36
relationship. The different stages are each determined by the system’s capability to inter-
nalise any environmental observations relevant to its life that it is capable of making, this
then being used to determine its future—a process that may be expressed as anticipation.
The hierarchic relationship is therefore deﬁned in terms of the embeddedness of degrees
of internalisation that it has access to. An alternative scheme comes from Bielecki [8],
also offering a ﬁve-stage hierarchy of cognitive entities, each stage with its own cognitive
abilities and functionalities, but this one comes from classiﬁcations that arise through
considerations of perception and knowledge. Some broad synergy between the two might
be expected since internalisation is dependent on perception that results in observations
that then become internalised, and cognitive knowledge is a consequence of internalisation.
Thus, one would expect the two schemas to have a similar trajectory of meaning. This is
shown to be the case in Table 1.
Table 1. Relationship between the Bitbol and Luisi and Bielecki stages of living system development.
Consciousness
Stage
Bitbol and Luisi Hierarchy
Bielecki Hierarchy
Stage Relationship
1
Null pre-conscious. Devoid of
internalisation.
Reﬂexive. Living system can only
create behaviours that directly
support existence and remove
threats.
Null preconscious occurs prior to
reﬂexive since, in the former, threats
cannot be recognised.
2
Limited consciousness. Integration
of environmental factors.
Associative. Able to undertake
simple analysis of direct
cause-and-effect relationships.
Limited consciousness occurs at a
stage prior to associative, the former
being devoid of analytic ability.
3
Enduring modiﬁcations in
self-production. Stable dynamic
support provided able to deliver
strongly anticipative behaviour.
Conscious. Can model complex
cause-and-effect chains, with a
conditional option permitting
future events variants, and an
ability for complex strategies of
activity.
Enduring modiﬁcations in
self-production is approximated by
the consciousness stage since
cause–effect chains deliver strategy
that implies anticipation.
4
More complex changes that inﬂuence
behaviour. Involves observation of
the exterior, but without
awareness of an external
independent world.
Self-consciousness. Epistemic
perspective can change, with
awareness of the existence of
conscious goals perhaps devoid of
proven reliable criteria.
More complex changes are prior to
self-consciousness since the proof
requires awareness and access to
the outside independent world.
5
Collective consciousness that
recognises social aspects.
Knowledge develops by ascribing
properties to intersubjective
invariants. Intersubjectively
shared predictive common rules
become a collective consciousness
obeying internal closure
The hypothetical omniscient stage,
with proven criteria and proof of
the reliability to use it.
Collective consciousness is likely
equivalent to omniscient if one
considers that proof is a
social phenomenon.
Properties of cognition and consciousness are important to living systems, but there
are underlying mechanisms that can explain the capacity to live. One conceptualisation
of this comes from Korzeniewski [9], who considers that living systems are complex and
cybernetic in nature. By complexity is meant the involvement of: (a) dissipative systems
which increase their entropy (or uncertainty) as they move towards equilibrium, while
using energy to create structured spots of locally decreasing entropy that are responsible
for local order and organisation; and (b) a system hierarchy composed of subsystems
that, in turn, have their own subsystems, and so on [10]. Cybernetics suggest control
and communication [11], and this involves processes of feedback and feedforth. Now,
Korzeniewski is concerned with biological living systems, and he limits his consideration
of cybernetic processes to “inferior negative feedbacks” that are concerned with regulation,
and their related “subordinate positive feedbacks” that provide the potential for expansion.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
3 of 36
These feedbacks, we are told, provide a minimal speciﬁcation for the nature of living that
offers necessary and sufﬁcient conditions to distinguish life from non-living systems.
This paper has similar interests, though it adopts a narrative that is concerned with
autopoiesis as a causal process in an “agency” deﬁned as a generic living system. Here,
causation enables processes of both internalisation and anticipation, with the latter deter-
mining whether the system is living [12]. The term autopoiesis was proposed by Maturana
and Varela [13], and while they believed that it could only be applied to living biological
systems, their postulated limitation has been overcome [14], enabling living systems to
be seen in generic terms. Now, autopoiesis, while a difﬁcult concept [15], is a network of
causal processes that enable viable living, and has been deemed responsible for a paradigm
shift [16].
If autopoiesis is so important, how can it be conceptualised within the living system
architecture? One way is to model the living system as a set of partitioned, autonomous,
ontologically related component systems. One might call them the operative system and
its metasystem, but where one is concerned with a generalised descriptor in higher-order
cybernetics, as in metacybernetics [17], it is more useful to call them anterior operative
and posterior strategic–regulatory systems. These are autopoietically connected, with
two orientations: the anterior (feedback) trajectory emanating from the anterior system
and manifesting strategic and regulative structures [17,18] in the posterior system that
are responsible for bounded adaptive strategic movements, and the posterior (feedforth)
trajectory emanating from the posterior system, and manifesting operative structures that
determine the “look” and functionality of the living system and its operative behaviour.
One of the functions of the anterior system is observation. From this, the anterior trajectory
cognitively internalises that which has been observed, this resulting in a cognitive model
we shall call the ideate (and which provides a basis for the strategic structures that will
enable adaptive functionality), residing in the posterior system. Where the ideate inﬂuences
strategic regulatory structures, the posterior trajectory involves operative anticipation that
impacts anterior system structure. Internalisation is a necessary condition that enables the
sufﬁcient condition of anticipation to occur as part of living, since the latter is dependent
on the former occurring. There are certain attributes of the nature and relationship between
internalisation and anticipation within the concept of autopoiesis that require investigation,
such as whether and how the posterior and anterior networks individually operate coher-
ently, how the two networks might mutually relate to ensure living system stability, or
how one may estimate autopoietic efﬁcacy. To provide such explanations, we shall call on
three autonomous but relatable schemas. These are General Collective Intelligence (GCI),
Eigenform, and Extreme Physical Information (EPI). GCI offers a pragmatic evolutionary
approach that is concerned with a contextually connected purposeful and relatable set of
task processes. To explain their relationships, it will be useful to set our narrative within
a single framework. Here, cybernetic agency theory [17] will be adopted, where agency
is a living system having a population of agents, some of which become members of au-
tonomous subagencies. In GCI, the task processes are assigned to appropriate subagencies
that seek a collective “evolutionary ﬁtness.” Eigenform is a symbolic approach that is
concerned with how observations can be suitably internalised and thus be used as a token
to determine future behaviour, and how that which has been internalised can be adopted
to anticipate the future. The notion originally comes from Foerster in 1976 [19], adopting
the terms eigenvalue related to stability, and eigenbehaviour related to operative structure.
However, the story that this tells, while important, is only an entry to explaining living, and
to develop it further, the notions of Dubois [20] have been introduced, which contribute
to an improved understanding of autopoiesis. Extreme Physical Information (EPI) is an
important empirical approach concerned with acquiring information through observation
of an unknown parameter through sampling regimes. It will be explained how this can
contribute to the idea of autopoiesis, and especially its capacity for efﬁcacy.
In order to be able to connect GCI, Eigenform, and EPI, which are independently
derived schemas, it must be shown that they are in some way commensurable. How does

Systems 2021, 9, 75
4 of 36
one do this—that is, what methodological approach is to be pursued? Firstly, it will be
qualitative and conceptual, but what tools may be suitable for this? To provide explanation,
it is useful to go back to principles of metaphor. Modelling living systems necessarily
uses system models, and these are sometimes seen to be metaphors for “reality”. Whether
they are or not, they enable us to increase our understanding of problem situations and
problem-solving processes. Metaphors are important to scientiﬁc enquiry [21], and offer us
a means by which the use of what is known about direct physical and social experiences can
develop an improved understanding of more abstract things (such as work, time, mental
activity, and feelings) [22]. Thus, enquiries into living systems occurring through systemic
approaches are particularly susceptible to being described as metaphorical because they
often occur as a conceptual construction that overlays a real structure. Whether or not
they are, they provide us with templates of ideal or representative relationships and
modes of being that can be applied to complex activity situations where living systems
are deemed to exist. These have certain characteristics that, through the use of cybernetic
principles, enable us to explain how and why they function as they do. This gives us a
better understanding about the nature of the causal processes that enable them to exist, and
a powerful illustration of such a causal process is autopoiesis. Now, a purpose of this paper
is to better address living systems so that the modelling process can be improved, enabling
the nature of living to be better understood, and autopoiesis is central to this. However,
metaphors are double-edged. They can be effective in illuminating new ﬁelds of inquiry,
but they can also establish apparently motivated links that do not exist at all. The former is
an important attribute of the research process, while the latter needs to be addressed by
seeking to determine if the motivated links exist beyond ideology.
How does one determine that independent candidate schemas are relatable and
commensurable? As long as the schemas are relatable—that is, commensurable with
connectable issues—then a conﬁgurative approach can be sought. Following Yolles and
Fink [23], a conﬁguration has inherent coordinative structures that can respond to the
needs of complexity modelling. A plurality of conﬁgurations operate as a complex system
of interdependencies. As such, they have core orchestrating themes with identiﬁable char-
acteristics. Conﬁgurations can satisfy particular modelling purposes or interests, while
simultaneously creating an improved potential to enhance theoretical speciﬁcity by mod-
elling detail and generality by relating a plurality of ontologically connected conﬁgurations,
the result of which can provide elaborated models with an inherent capacity to develop
potential. Taking both speciﬁcity and generality together improves modelling ability and
the capacity to respond to complexity. As a result, a constellation of interconnected concep-
tual and relational schemas can be embraced through identiﬁed explanations, enabling a
complex situation to be better understood as a whole [24].
Here, our interest lies in speciﬁcity, where a narrative concerning commensurability
may be both centrifugal and centripetal. Centrifugal analysis identiﬁes a bounded context
with a set of well-known schemas, with an outward perspective that seeks inherent connec-
tions that can enrich contextual understanding. As an illustration of this, one may consider
a purely cultural context, this involving the schemas of values and norms. An analysis is
then able to deliver an emerging narrative describing how the two relate, and therefore
contribute to the deﬁnition of culture. In the latter centripetal approach, the schemas are
not well-known within the frame of reference adopted, and they must ﬁrst be penetrated to
expose speciﬁc conceptual commonalities, thereby showing how they relate, this then po-
tentially leading to a centrifugal narrative. An illustration of the centripetal argument can
be provided for Foerster’s [19] Eigenform, which is concerned with living system stability
with respect to observation and the resulting cognitive models, and through exploration,
it will be shown how this implicitly connects with autopoiesis. By mutually conﬁguring
GCI, Eigenform, and EPI together, an improved understanding will result of the nature
of autopoiesis. More generally, it will be shown that each of the three schemas involves
processes that are inherently autopoietic, thereby linking them through this characteristic.
In the case of GCI, its interest lies in sets of autonomous collective processes in a living

Systems 2021, 9, 75
5 of 36
system that aims at common operative goal outputs that, for Halpin [25], constitute au-
topoietic processes, and which, when stably converging, provides an indication of the
“evolutionary ﬁtness” referred to earlier, and which constitutes autopoietic efﬁcacy. For
Eigenform, through Foerster and Dubois, internalisation and anticipation in living systems
are either implied (for Foerster) or directly considered (in the case of Dubois), together
contributing to the deﬁnition of autopoiesis that needs to be efﬁcacious if the living system
is to be stable. In the case of EPI, observations create internalised ideates that only arise
through efﬁcacious processes of autopoiesis, with parametric measures arising that give
propositional support to GCI.
To progress this paper, there is a need to ﬁrst create a setting for the concept of
autopoiesis that will provide a basic appreciation of what is being considered. This setting
will be represented in Section 2, where we shall consider some basics of generic living
systems expressed in terms of cybernetic agency theory [17]. Here, agencies are taken to be
complex living systems that (normally) have a population of autonomous living
Agents in their anterior system, the interactions between them inﬂuencing how agency
regulates both itself and its agents through its posterior system. There is extensive liter-
ature on both agency theory and on the notion of autopoiesis, and we will contribute to
the creation of greater coherence in the explanation of how all the characteristics of life
(which include such capacities as self-ordering, adaptability to environmental change, self-
development, self-regulation, and a capability for information processing) occur together.
In Section 3, we shall introduce the three schemas and develop centripetal arguments
to explain how they are mutually reﬂective of autopoiesis, the hook that enables them
to be related once it is understood that they are relatable. In Section 4 of the paper, the
earlier theoretical outcomes will be explored within metacybernetic agency theory, this
providing insight into the potential that each has for responding to contexts that may
have greater complexity. We shall then relate each of the three schemas, informing a
narrative that occurs by setting them in the framework of metacybernetics, this enabling
an exploration, in particular, of autopoiesis, efﬁcacy, and self-organisation. A discussion on
the developments of this paper will then occur, prior to the conclusions in Section 5.
2. The Setting
Here, we shall consider the nature of context as an observable set of characteristics that
are represented by subjects in interaction with objects and other subjects, are meaningfully
characterised by parameters, and are internalised by living systems enabling them to
anticipate the future, so determining behaviour that enables them to maintain their viability.
Contexts will ﬁrst be explored, followed by a discussion about the nature of parameters
and their function within a contextual setting; then, the nature of internalisation and
anticipation will be considered, which together contributes to an improved explanation
of autopoiesis.
2.1. Contexts
Agency, as adopted here, has close, if elaborated, association with the notions of social
cognitive theory as developed by Bandura [26]. Agency has a population of interactive
agents in its anterior (operative) system, and a regulatory structure that is housed in its
posterior system (the metasystem), regulation ultimately emerging from agent interactions.
The posterior–anterior system have a relationship where they are coupled together through
autopoietic processes, de-livering the term autopoietic couple (sometimes also called
an operative couple since it couples the metasystem and operative system: Yolles [17]).
Agencies are complex entities that can take action or intervention, thereby producing a
particular effect. Here, effect relates to an object that, for Kauffman [27], is a symbolic entity
that participates in a network of interactions while simultaneously taking on an apparent
solidity and stability from these interactions. Now, the nature of an interaction is that it is a
mutual or reciprocal inﬂuence from which an effect results, so the word effect can be used
as a broad term to include objects. However, effects, and therefore objects, are part of a

Systems 2021, 9, 75
6 of 36
context. While, earlier, a context was generally deﬁned as any information that can be used
to characterise the situation of an entity, more speciﬁcally, it represents the interrelated
conditions in which something exists or occurs, and this includes not only objects, but
subjects, their interactions, and the resulting effects. Therefore, using the term context
provides a short-hand way of describing complex subject–object interactive dynamics and
the effects that arise. To describe context, there is a need for parameters, these being crucial
in making meaning [28].
2.2. Parameters
By parameter, we refer to a set of properties that represent the characteristics of an
active context, and the parametric representation of that context will not change unless
the context itself does. A variety of parameters may be used to describe and summarise
the context, as well as indicating the dimensionality of issues that may require resolution.
A parameter is essentially an arbitrary constant that may take a value representative of a
contextual characteristic, and it may be qualitative or quantitative. Parameters are used
in models, and these may involve ﬁnding a set of candidate parameter assignments that
together create a scenario, where the assignments can then be tested against prescribed
criteria [29], perhaps, for example, using simulation involving iterative convergence [30,31].
Thus, for instance, Beauﬁls et al. [32] posit a model for cooperative processes in living
systems involving iterations of processes that may be able to converge, this leading to
cooperative agreements. One class of scenario, called the model scenario [33,34], uses a
system model, where variations can be introduced into its unknown or uncertain parame-
ters, this resulting in scenario trajectories that need to be evaluated to determine if they
satisfy problem speciﬁcations and can contribute to problem resolutions. A qualitative
approach may involve a quantitative mathematical model, where the testing criteria may
be a parameter algorithm from which parametric values can be determined. Since a set of
candidate parameters creates a scenario, the model scenario (using mathematical program-
ming) is able to represent a situation through its set of parameters describing possible and
estimable future conditions [35]. Propositions of contextual changes will be represented by
parametric changes that deliver new scenarios.
Qualitative parameters may have their own quantitative parameters that describe
them. To illustrate this, consider (as did Spathopoulou and Papakonstantinidis [36]) the
role of culture in a learning environment, important when it is realised that culture is value-
based and is sensitive to modes of communication that are central to learning. Parrish and
Linder-VanBerschot [37] (citing [38–42]), who are interested in the cultural dimensions of
learning, provide examples of qualitative learning parameters, these expressed in a value
system involving three categories within which there are dichotomous paired values. The
categories, and their paired values, are:
(1)
Social relationships. These have three paired value parameters: (a) equality versus
authority, where determination is sought about how inequality is handled in a given
situation, how status is demonstrated and how respect is given, and what interactions
are appropriate for those of unequal status; (b) individualism versus collectivism, where
it is sought to determine which prevails, the interests of the individual or the interest of
the group, and to what degree are interpersonal relationships valued; and (c) nurture
versus challenge, where, by equality/authority, it is sought to determine which is the
more important set of goals, cooperation and security or recognition and advancement,
which achieves better outcomes, and which are supportive or challenging acts.
(2)
Epistemological. There are three paired value parameters: (a) stability seeking versus
uncertainty acceptance, where determination is sought for how uncertainty is dealt with,
being either avoided or accepted, whether structure is seen to be more important than
ﬂexibility, and what the status of knowledge is and how it is used in development;
(b) logical argumentation versus reasonableness, where one seeks to determine how
arguments are developed, which is more important—logical consistency or practical
outcomes—and how disagreement is managed; and (c) causality versus complexity,

Systems 2021, 9, 75
7 of 36
where determination is sought about how causality is assigned typically, whether it
is assigned to a single, most likely source, or whether it is assigned to the broader
context [39].
(3)
Temporal. This has two paired value parameters: (a) clock time versus event time,
where determination is sought on whether people conform to an external measure of
time, or rather permitting the event at hand to unfold on its own time, and whether
deadlines or relationships are more important; and (b) linear versus cyclic time, where
determination is sought about whether people see time as a path and whether goals
are necessary destinations, or if time is seen as a pattern of interlocking cycles into
which they step in and out over the course of a life.
It can be argued that the paired values in each parameter are epistemically indepen-
dent [23], so that any of the above eight parameters can take values anywhere between their
dichotomous extrema. Thus, for example, in the case of individualism–collectivism, the
parameters may take a value that is either individualism, or collectivism, or indeed some
balance between both [43]. Following on from Spathopoulou and Papakonstantinidis [36],
culturally blind teaching can challenge cultural value-based worldviews, and may create
conﬂicts that confound teaching aims for a population of culturally differentiable students.
Qualitative parameters can be expressed quantitatively, using, for instance, landmark the-
ory [44], where parameters may be differentially scaled into partitions, so that, in the case
of the individualism–collectivism parameter, three or more classiﬁcations may be identiﬁed
that have sliding numerical values within predetermined bounds. Thus, consider that
individualism–collectivism is scaled to (0, 1), with extreme individualism given a value of
0 and extreme collectivism a value of 1; then, assuming a linear relationship between the
extrema, a perfect balance between them may be 0.5, though balances may occur that are
quite different from 0.5. Over the whole population of students, there will be a variance
around the mean for this parameter, which will describe this aspect of the population.
A small variance would indicate that cultural differences are likely not very signiﬁcant.
In planning the teaching approach, there will be a need to consider which qualitative
parameters are important, given prior knowledge from the quantitative parameters of each
qualitative parameter.
Having introduced quantitative parameters, we note that, where they are statistical,
the mean is a central tendency of either a probability distribution or of a random variable
that is characterised by this distribution, and it smooths out hidden details in any dataset.
Variance indicates the variability of a context, and it is a conditioning factor on the mean
since it measures the degree of spread of a set of numbers from their mean value. There is
another empirical attribute called bias, which refers to the difference between the average
predictability from a distribution and a model that is insufﬁciently parameter-rich, and
may thus be considered as an oversimpliﬁcation that can lead to high levels of error.
Another aspect that may result in bias is where, in complex situations, there are
hidden parameters [45], and since context sampling is dependent on the propositions that
determine the parametric composition of a context, so sampling of that context may not
uncover them (especially if contextual characteristics are subsumed within attributions of
noise). As an example in language, Glanzberg [46] explains that hidden parameters imply
hidden structures impacting on meaning, and acting as either logical variables or overt
expressions of personal taste, as noted by the latter having emotional value [47]. If, in any
particular context, there exist hidden parameters, then there will be unobservable elements
with unknown relationships that we may encounter. Any approach that seeks to explore
such contexts must therefore be sensitive to the needs of uncertainty (as does EPI). When
a context is observed, and it is relevant to living, it is internalised through autopoiesis,
manifesting it into agency as an ideate, which in turn enables anticipation of the future.
Foerster [48] explains the importance of observation to this process that directly connects
to cognitive operations, this implying processes of internalisation. However, beyond this,
for the ideate to become a token that determines future behaviour (as noted by Foerster),
anticipation is required.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
8 of 36
2.3. Internalisation and Anticipation
Internalisation and anticipation are causal effects, the functions of which arise from
the reverse trajectories of causal-agents, one arising from an anterior system and the other
from a posterior system. We can propose that causal effects have functions that can be
described in terms of cognitive and context maps. Whether these maps actually exist is not
really relevant because their introduction simply provides an explanatory utility that might
be represented in other ways. Having said this, the propositions that such maps exist is
not new. Internalisation delivers a cognitive map [49,50] from which an ideate is created
through assimilation. Such a map is used to store, recall, and decode information about
the parametric characteristics of context [51]. Just as language is inherently vague [52],
one can deduce that the cognitive maps that underpin language use are inherently fuzzy
(lacking in clarity or deﬁnition). This reﬂects on the ideate in its representation of context,
and hence implies ideate uncertainty, this deriving from posterior autopoietic processes
able to refer to an operative system context map [53–55] that can relate structure with
contextual parameters.
Returning to internalisation, it is a causal effect arising from the anterior autopoietic
causal-agent, which is able to deliver regulation to the posterior system. In contrast,
anticipation is a causal effect arising from posterior autopoiesis, which is able to deliver
structure to the anterior system. Internalisation may begin with a context map, and is
the result of a recursive (repetitive self-calling) autopoietic process of observing an active
context, and, through a cognitive map, creating an ideate that can deliver regulation or
regulatory adjustment. Anticipation is the result of an incursive (penetrative) autopoietic
process that begins with observing an ideate, and, through a set of processes, delivers a
context map from which operative structures derive or are adjusted.
Anticipation is about determining future behaviour [12]. This requires an autopoi-
etically constructed internal model, and it is this that differentiates living systems from
non-living ones. Agency achieves an internal model through internalisation of an active
context, a process that we have already noted has two states, assimilation and accommo-
dation, and which can be respectively enabled through what Dubois [20] calls weak and
strong anticipation. Taking that a cognitive structure is deﬁned by a cognitive schema,
then assimilation occurs when an active context is manifested as an ideate to inform this
pre-existing cognitive schema. Accommodation changes the cognitive structure by in-
tegrating the ideate into the schema and hence into the structure. These two states are
important when it comes to determining whether agency is consciously aware or not, and
this determines the nature of its cognition. There are two forms of cognition: explicit
and implicit [56–59]. Explicit cognition is associated with conscious awareness and is
accompanied by implicit cognition. The distinction between the two lies in their processing
mechanisms, with implicit cognition being an automatic process and having much less
information and operating more rapidly than the rational processes associated with explicit
cognition [60].
To illustrate the evolutionary development and distinction between implicit and
explicit cognition, it is useful to highlight the case of adaptive artiﬁcial intelligence sys-
tems [61]. These systems embrace a need for: robustness—the ability to achieve high
algorithmic accuracy; efﬁciency—the ability to achieve low use of resources in compu-
tation, memory, and power; and agility—which includes an ability for recognition, and
which responds to a need to alter operative conditions based on current requirements. To
enhance these attributes, conscious self-awareness is being introduced into processing,
storing, retrieving information about the self, and a capacity for individuating—the ability
for an entity to distinguish itself from others [62]. Such a development would enable
robots to understand their environment and be cognizant about what they do and about
the purpose of their actions, making timely initiatives beyond goals set by others, and
to learn from their own experiences, knowing what they have learned and how [62,63].
Agencies that are capable of using only assimilation in their internal processes have implicit
cognition and a primitive conscious awareness, while those also capable of accommodation

Systems 2021, 9, 75
9 of 36
have explicit cognition and a more developed conscious awareness. Implicit cognition
is a general agency property through which information can be processed [64], and it
delivers a primitive consciousness connected with agency learning and an ability to modify
agency conﬁgurations and states in autonomous adaptation [65]. Developed conscious-
ness provides a form of evolution based on stable dynamic support, yielding to strongly
anticipative behaviour such as motricity, and enhanced memory and adaptive features,
and developed regulation. Setting the idea of primitive cognition into a broader canvas,
it has already been explained that Bitbol and Luisi [6] propose that all living systems
have degrees of consciousness that enable them to respond to environmental inﬂuences.
We recall that the most elementary living system has a preconscious condition, and the
nature of this is that it has a limited form of assimilation that enables deformation by the
irruption of new contextual elements, these being passively incorporated. The next stage is
a primitive consciousness that is less passive, involving assimilation that enables agency to
evolve and self-regulate, and permits the maintenance of a cognitive status that elaborates
the primitive identity of an organised unit. This allows dynamic contextual interaction
that is the basic condition for life. Primitive consciousness can be complexiﬁed when it
becomes involved with dynamics, as occurs in complex organic contexts. An illustration of
implicit cognition occurs in the adaptive chemistry of biological systems, where proteins
(which participate in system regulation) are able to adapt [66]. Yolles [7] lists six different
stages in the evolution of consciousness that starts with preconsciousness, and shows how
consciousness evolves from a primitive state to a more developed one as it complexiﬁes.
A core distinction between these stages lies in the nature of, and relationship between,
assimilation and accommodation during contextual internalisation.
Now, agency has a population of agents which are its subjects. Within a given context,
a subject interacts with an object in the environment, and a relationship is observed as an
entry to autopoiesis, where observations are acts of identifying, recognising, and noting
attributes of reality. For Wildon Carr [67], recognition has a consciousness dependency,
and for Thibierge and Morin [68], recognition refers to everything that presents itself to us
as reality. Thus, recognition occurs when a context is cognitively internalised, ﬁrstly by
assimilating it (taking it in); secondly, by complexifying the recognition process (where
possible) when that which has been assimilated is now accommodated into the posterior
system (metasystem) structure.
That the word recognition has cognition as its route is not accidental, recognition
necessarily being dependent on cognition, and since there are two forms of cognition
(explicit and implicit), there should also be two forms of relatable recognition. According
to Martens et al. [69], implicit recognition involves a context being perceived repeatedly,
enabling simple feature detection that gives rise to the automatic perceptual analysis of
sensory input from an anterior (operative) system, while explicit recognition involves the
conscious discrimination of characteristics associated with rapid perceptual learning in
identifying contexts. Both forms of recognition are at work in agencies with developed
conscious awareness, but implicit recognition is conﬁned to implicit consciousness in
agencies with only primitive awareness. A case of instance is related to supramolecular
adaptive chemistry (as an information science) in which molecular information is used
by agency in gaining progressive control over its structural and dynamic features during
complexiﬁcation through self-organisation and the drive to life, and where the implicit
recognition of molecular events is based on well-deﬁned interaction patterns [70].
3. The Schemas
3.1. General Collective Intelligence (GCI) and Autopoiesis
GCI can be taken as a schema that seeks to create autopoietic efﬁcacy by satisfying
agency needs of welfare and wellbeing (ﬁtness) sustainably. Autopoiesis as a network
of processes is decomposed into a pragmatic set of contextually related functional task
processes, each undertaken by a team of agents (which we call subagencies). GCI adopts a
number of propositions that determine how subagency functionalities can generate collec-

Systems 2021, 9, 75
10 of 36
tive ﬁtness through mutual cooperation. Thus, consider that agency, with a population of
agents, some of whom collect together as autonomous subagencies, has functionalities that
deliver a task to manifest aspects of an ideate to a contextual situation through agency be-
haviour. Thus, for example, goals that emanate from the ideate are regulatory phenomena
that create autopoietic trajectorial imperatives that exclude agents from seeking alternative
imperatives. Thus, a particular goal (which may have been reﬁned through a “higher-order”
causal-agent [17]) is extracted from the ideate (by the autopoietic causal-agent) that agency
is tasked to manifest materially in a way that complements other related tasks belonging to
other subagencies. Interest lies in seeing the subagency assembly as a whole structure that
satisﬁes what the agency needs to sustain. To do this, the subagencies need to cooperate,
and this requires collective intelligence. In other words, the subagencies participate in
a network of autopoietic processes that need to be coherent together. To determine this
coherence, a measure is required called General Collective Intelligence (GCI), and, as we
shall see, this comes out to be nothing other than a measure of autopoietic efﬁcacy.
GCI is concerned with group performance, which, for Krafft [71], has a number of
attributes associated with it. As illustration, it can be used to increase health and wellness
care outcomes through using the individualisation of the relevant care services to increase
their capacities [72]. Group performance occurs across tasks and tends to be correlated,
so that GCI is a measure of this. A high measure of GCI occurs when a group performs
well across a wide variety of tasks, while a low GCI occurs when a group performs
badly across a wide variety of tasks. GCI also arises from groups having commitment to
cognitive alignment across group goals, accurate shared beliefs, and coordinated actions.
GCI adopts the term generic mechanisms, these acting upon living structures that are capable
of giving rise to morphogenetic rearrangements. Such mechanisms are nothing other
than causal-agents (as with autopoiesis) within which subagencies interact such that there
emerge conditions, the effect of which is cognitive alignment—this resulting in performance
coherence and collective correlation. If one assigns to a causal-agent the property of efﬁcacy,
an efﬁcacious autopoietic trajectory will explain differences in observed correlations in
group performance across tasks. Since GCI performance is correlated, this correlation can
be measured as group performance for classes of tasks with particular combinations of
cognitive alignment requirements.
For Williams [73], GCI enables intelligent agents to become organised into a collective
intelligence with improved problem-solving ability. GCI functionality has the potential to
increase the impact on collective challenges through decentralised collective efﬁcacious
coordination, as opposed to optimisation. GCI is also able to address categories of wicked
(or self-perpetuating) problems associated with some group outcomes. Problem-solving
processes tend to have an element of centralisation, where attributes of the processes are
not inherently decentralised, and where centralised problem-solving processes are not
necessarily dynamically stable while serving the group. The most stable dynamic does not
necessarily serve centralised interests within the group.
An agency is an adaptive (living system) collective of agents that can act or intervene
in relation to an issue, thereby producing a particular effect with, and through, agents
acting as autonomous subjects. For Weinbaum and Veitas [74], intelligence is an agency
competence deﬁned in relation to an a priori problem domain that involves a formative
process of coordinated agent self-organisation. Generic mechanisms are required within
agency to enable cognitive alignment across goals, beliefs, and coordinated actions, and,
as already indicated, are active through causal-agents. Collective coherence delivers high
levels of GCI when agency performances are correlated, with lower levels of GCI when
agency performances are less well correlated. Collective coherence is also a function of
the network of relationships that agents in an agency have together and with the external
world [25]. This is explained through the Extended Mind Hypothesis [75] when two or more
individuals can share the same cognitive state, this explaining the emergence of collective
intelligence [25]. This cognitive state is delivered through an ideate—internal to the agency
and reﬂecting the dynamic interaction between agency as an observer and its agents (the

Systems 2021, 9, 75
11 of 36
subjects) in interaction with an active context in its environment. This enables agency
to anticipate future interactions. The cognitive state also provides a condition that, for
Halpin [25], explains the concept of autopoiesis, which supports our earlier proposition
that generic mechanisms are causal-agents with an efﬁcacy measure.
Cognition can also be collective when it regulates agency by enabling its agents to
become coordinated. Agency regulatory processes function through autopoiesis, as a
generic mechanism. Recall that autopoiesis is a network of processes that enables an
agency to self-produce cognitively or materially. Under complexity, agency self-production
needs to enable intervention strategies that requisitely respond to environmental variety.
Collective coherence enables collective ideates to be manifested efﬁcaciously through
autopoiesis, i.e., autopoiesis is a causal-agent enabling the activation of self-organisation
and an improving capacity for both operative structure and its regulation, leading to
requisite adaptation. Autopoiesis operates effectively through collective intelligence, which,
on its own, is instrumental by having a non-learning regulatory structure that creates an
imperative for behaviour. A measure of agency efﬁcacy should be reﬂected in any measure
of GCI, i.e., the two should correlate. It is because of this that there is necessarily a close
connection between a measure of GCI and efﬁcacy. Autopoiesis is an instrumental network
of processes that requires autogenesis to help it self-create and thus learn. Different from
Bandura’s [26] constructivist approach, Yolles and Fink’s [23] critical realism sees collective
efﬁcacy as the shared capability to organise and execute the courses of action required to
manage current or prospective situations.
In learning living systems, there are two types of collective efﬁcacy. Autopoietic
efﬁcacy is an attribute of the ﬁrst-order causal-agent (autopoiesis) that acts as an operative
intelligence [76], as originally proposed by Piaget [77], and constitutes an evolving net-
work of process producing autonomous patterns of post-contestation coordinated thought
between those agents involved. Autogenetic efﬁcacy is an attribute of the second-order
causal-agent (autogenesis) that, again, after Piaget [76], acts as a ﬁgurative intelligence
involving an evolving higher order of regulation. The posterior system, consistent with
personality psychology, may be represented as a “generic personality,” deﬁned as an assem-
bly of (implicit or explicit) cognitive characteristics that are subject to cognitive biases and
pathologies that may strategise agency adaptation while simultaneously engaging in regu-
lation. Cognitive biases can be thought of as parameter-poor cognitive processes that arise
through unbalanced traits [23], similar to the situation described earlier when discussing
the Parrish and Linder-VanBerschot [37] notions of individualism and collectivism.
Plural agencies, those composed of a subagency collective, operate through the regu-
latory control of a post-posterior system (i.e., one that is superior to the posterior system,
resembling a cultural system that inﬂuences a personality system). Where agency is a plural
entity, personality is normative [76], the norms being regulatory elements that emerge
from agent interactions. Analogous to the distinction between tight and loose cultures [78],
the strength of regulatory control [79] may be usefully described to be tight or loose. In
distributed agencies, loose post-posterior systems provide weak regulatory control, while
in centralised agencies, tight post-posterior systems provide strong regulatory control.
GCI is deemed to operate with distributed subagencies experiencing weak regulatory
controls, when subagency coordination may be a function of negotiation. As an example,
a distributed organisation tends to operate with a loose culture having weak norms, an
emotionally high tolerance to deviant behaviour, few rules or standards, and beliefs which
are relatively heterogeneous [80]. The use of the term emotion does not necessarily imply
explicit cognition. In agents limited to implicit cognition, implicit emotion may be deemed
to be any process that operates without explicit intentions, and modiﬁes the quality, inten-
sity, or duration of immediate responses to internal perturbations that may derive from
malevolent external inﬂuences.
In agencies with efﬁcacious self-production, the measure of GCI will be high. In this
case, autopoiesis will need to satisfy at least one condition: that any inherent fuzziness of
the selected characteristics of a context with parametric representation must be minimally

Systems 2021, 9, 75
12 of 36
bounded by some error function. How such fuzziness may arise is due to the means by
which information is acquired, no matter how advanced the techniques for analysis may
be. This can be seen from the work on GCI undertaken by Krafft [71].
To determine a value for GCI, modern multi-agency approaches can be adopted in
which parameters and constraints take up a central position. Consider that an agency
has an autopoietic network of processes, where each network element is a manageable
logical entity in a distributed structure. Each network element belongs to an autonomous
adaptive subagency (with its own population of agents), where the network element is
seen as a property of a subagency that is associated with a particular functionality. The
multifunctional nature of autopoiesis therefore implies, through the network of processes
that deﬁnes it, a complex interaction between subagencies. The relationship between
subagencies can now be examined from a complex information processing perspective,
and computational theory [81] can be applied through the use of algorithms. For this,
information processing systems can be solved as particular computational tasks through
the particular implementation of speciﬁc algorithms. Krafft [71] explains that, to do this,
there is ﬁrst a need to identify three levels of complexity for a given context: computa-
tional, algorithmic, and implementation. The computational level seeks to question the
teleology/purpose of a functionality, and the algorithmic and implementation levels seeks
to respond to this initially by formulating and then applying algorithms. The way in which
the interactions are solved is by analysing the abstract phenomenon of GCI as if it is a
computational property of varied subagencies across an agency landscape. This involves
the exploration of cognitive parameters such as beliefs, goals, and actions under strict
alignment conditions.
Underlying the GCI approach is that the autopoietic network of processes is deﬁned
in terms of a plurality of autonomous adaptive subagencies that populate the agency,
each delivering its functional process. The overall approach conforms to the interactive
structure of a sustainable plural ecosystem as described by Yolles [7,82] that is not a sin-
gle adaptive system, but rather the assembly that seeks to develop “as an evolutionary
landscape that embraces natural selection, this moderated by an understanding of agency
self-organisation” ([82] (p. 12)) that seeks both viability and sustainability. This requires
that the dynamic in an agency ecosystem composed of subagencies can be anticipated,
thereby facilitating an appreciation towards the needs of sustainability. For Vickers [64],
appreciation is important to the value-based perspective that is consistent with the net-
working needs of beneﬁt, and for sustainability. This requires that subagencies need to be
prepared to respond to interactions through a valuing of processes that are self-reinforcing,
and that involve an examination of their dynamic trajectories and subordinate amenities
that enable them to satisfy their functionalities [83]. Examining the viability of development
in an evolutionary landscape can thus be seen as a process of natural selection, moderated
by an understanding of subagency self-organisation. This, for instance, embraces decision
structures and processes that need to respond to appreciative inquiry [84].
The evolutionary approach towards sustainability and viability relates to agency well-
being (emphasising cognitive and affective/emotional health) and wellness (focused on
physical health), the two together indicating ﬁtness (the ability to cope with the environ-
ment). As Alexiou [85] explains, ﬁtness has arisen through an evolutionary approach to
games, providing an alternative to utility maximisation/optimisation. There is a limitation
to this approach in that the efﬁciency of the competitive strategies that exempliﬁes an
evolutionary multi-agent design is a stable coordination strategy that creates a learning
opportunity essential in achieving cooperation in conﬂicting situations.
This must recognise that agency viability within GCI embraces the maximisation of
subagency ﬁtness [86]. This is a required condition common to evolutionary processes.
Williams [73,87] considers some propositions that can satisfy subagency ﬁtness maximi-
sation for GCI. Since each subagency has a functionality, collectively, they must interact
according to certain principles of decentralised cooperation so that they are able to max-
imise ﬁtness outcomes for each. Thus, functions must be prioritised according to principles

Systems 2021, 9, 75
13 of 36
that enable this. Now, an autopoietic network of processes is deﬁned in terms of active
subagencies that need to satisfy certain adaptive principles. These include a condition
of centralisation, and three classes of decentralisation, which include process operations,
relative value determination, and deﬁnition of ﬁtness, based on Williams [73]:
•
Centralisation:
•
Process selection
#
selected processes to be executed to satisfy ﬁtness in achieving collective
outcomes so that it is possible to maximise those outcomes.
•
Decentralisation:
•
Process operation
#
is purely Peer-to-Peer, with no third-party involvement;
#
is decentralised, where process activities have role assignations;
#
is user-centric, with no third-party information;
#
is massively collaborative, with no predefined limits that scale participation.
•
Relative value determination
#
of work, universally to enable open participation by subagencies in collec-
tive processes;
#
of resources, enabling more open sharing of those resources, thus enabling
collective processes.
•
Metric of ﬁtness deﬁnition for
#
subagency participation, through openness, enabling subagency substitu-
tion for others able to better enhance viability in the cooperative process;
#
subagency process, enabling selection of the best process in which to participate.
Subagencies involved in autopoietic processes may participate in collective cognition,
or operate as functional components of cognition. In both cases, there is a centralisation
constraint to ensure adherence to the principle of cooperation. As already indicated, this
sets up GCI conditions for a multi-agent modelling approach that can enable scenario
creation and the use of simulation techniques [85]. However, in the end, factors such
as hidden parameters and dynamics (especially with respect to personality pathologies,
idiosyncrasies, and cognitive biases) may occur. Instances might be declared subagency be-
liefs, goals, and actions having unexpressed caveats that perturb parameter representation
and corrupt problem deﬁnition.
3.2. Eigenform, Internalisation, and Anticipation
Eigenform began as a cybernetic theory of observation that, using symbolic logic,
describes how an active context is observed and how this results in eigenvalues and
eigenbehaviour. This demands the explanation within the framework being used here that
it occurs through internalisation resulting in an ideate, the internalisation occurring through
autopoiesis. Autopoietic efﬁcacy is an indicator of how capable autopoietic processes are
in internalising context. When context is sufﬁciently well represented, autopoietic stability
results together with eigenvalues, enabling agency to stably self-produce components of
itself as eigenbehaviour, an operative structural dimension of agency which then provides
the potential for behaviour. With stability, the ideate can now be used as a token to
anticipate future agency behaviour. Posterior autopoiesis is responsible for recognising the
ideate and delivering anticipation to agency. The background to this comes from Piaget’s
research into the cognitive development of children.
Piaget [88] was interested in better knowing the abstract learning process by exploring
the connection between an observer and the contextual subject–object relationship. He
illustrates the process involved in such learning with a child counting pebbles. To count
these, the child puts them in a row and progresses a count from 1 to 10. On ﬁnishing the
count, he repeats the process from another direction, similarly to ﬁnd 10. This discovery
enthuses him to reconsider what has happened, and he puts them in a different arrangement

Systems 2021, 9, 75
14 of 36
and continues counting, always to ﬁnd 10. Thus, he discovers a property of actions, not of
pebbles. The interaction between the boy as subject and the set of pebbles as object deﬁnes
the context, where only the relationship between the pebbles and subject changes. When
the context is internalised, the subject no longer needs to count pebbles, but rather combines
the operations symbolically, thereby creating a logical process in which the actions are
collectively coordinated. This in turn results in an abstract structure that may be applied to
contexts other than the counting of pebbles by the subject.
Piaget’s construct was further explored by Foerster [19,89], who noted that when
an observation is internalised at time t, it becomes a token of the past at time t + 1. He
elaborated on this using recursive symbolic logic to describe the process of observation.
That is, observation explicitly recognises and notes characteristics of context, this requiring
awareness as a consequence of explicit cognition. It involves agency autopoietic couple
stability that occurs when the ideate is sufﬁciently similar to the relevant context to enable
stable self-production. An agency with autopoietic couple stability develops an eigenvalue
which, through autopoiesis, enables stable behaviour. Eigenbehaviour occurs in agencies
that have eigenvalues [89] when the autopoietic couple is stable, this being stable self-
production. Stable self-production is necessary to enable agency to develop coherent
operative structures from which stable behaviour can be enabled. These structures may
be virtual, as in the case of organisations. In the case of biological organisms, they can
deliver physically observable agency distinctions of forms that can distinguish between
species through generic patterns, and individual identity through speciﬁc variations in
those patterns. In Foerster’s terminology, this is expressed in terms of eigenbehaviour that
is responsible for operative structures. This might result in physical patterns such as the
coats of animals or the shell of snails or mussels [90], and delivers potential for behaviour.
Foerster represented this recursive process of observation using symbolic logic that ([89]
(p. 371)) explains results in a symbolic logic in a recursive equation that has an implied
solution giving an eigenvalue, and where it is postulated that there exist:
“Solutions for an indeﬁnite recursive equation based on Jean Piaget’s recursive struc-
ture of implications describing an observer’s account of an interaction between a subject
and an object. This equation basically asserts that what is observed at one particular
time (obs) is the result of a cognitive/sensory-motor operation (COORD) on the previous
instance of observation.”
Varela [91] extended Spencer Brown’s [92] “Calculus of Variations” into a calculus
for self-reference through autopoiesis [93], and Kauffman [94–97] similarly applied this
to Foerster’s Eigenform, delivering self-referential equations and supporting the idea of
autopoietic couple stability. Foerster’s formalisation of Piaget’s learning process enabled
this stability to be deﬁned as a precondition for an eigenvalue, with eigenbehaviour a stable
consequence. Brieﬂy, Rocha [89] explains that Foerster’s approach concerns an observer’s
account of an interaction between a subject and an object, this principally describing the
process of internalisation that occurs through anterior autopoiesis. Rocha further explains
Foerster’s approach in terms of a symbolic equation that asserts that an observation at one
particular time (obst) is the result of a cognitive (or sensory–motor) operation COORD (an
autopoietic imperative that, in due course, results in an ideate) on the previous instance of
observation (obst−1):
obst = COORD(obst−1)
(1)
This is a recursive expression that has no starting position or initial condition. As
such, any particular instance of observation will be the result of an indeﬁnite successive
set of cognitive operations. The observables do not refer directly to real world objects, but
are instead the result of an inﬁnite cascade of cognitive and sensory–motor operations
(subsumed in COORD). There are solutions (Oi) to this equation which do not exist in a
strictly mathematical sense, since there are no initial conditions. However, they do represent
an autopoietic couple stability in the chain of COORD operations. This refers to those

Systems 2021, 9, 75
15 of 36
values which maintain their structure (or operation, or function) when cognitive operations
on them are repeatedly performed as the equation pursues its indeﬁnite recursive chain:
Oi => obst = COORD(COORD(... COORD(obst−n = Oi))...)
(2)
(for n = 1, 2, 3, ..., N). Rocha further explains that for a long succession of cognitive
operations, when there is no change in the active context from which obst arises, then this
indicates that a convergence has arisen to an eigenvalue for which Oi is its representation.
Such eigenvalues are self-deﬁning/self-referent in their autopoietic couple stability, which,
through the operator COORD, implies a complementary relationship (circularity, closure)
between eigenvalues and cognitive operators, where one implies/deﬁnes the other. As
Rocha [89] explains, eigenvalues represent the externally observable manifestations of the
(introspectively accessible) cognitive operations (COORD). Eigenbehaviour is thus used to
deﬁne the consequences of self-production deriving from autonomous cognitive systems,
which, through cognitive closure, give rise to perceptual regularities.
By cognitive operations is meant the inclusion of autopoietic processes that are respon-
sible for both internalisation and anticipation. Since obst are agency anterior autopoietic
functions, then, after Rosen, agency is only living if it can anticipate. In this case, COORD
is necessarily not only a function of the past and present, but also of the future, in order to
entail anticipation. However, this anticipatory nature of COORD is not considered; while
it involves obst−n in recursive mode, one might suppose that it should also involve, say,
obst+η (for η = 1, 2, 3, ..., 6).
Reﬂecting on this, and noting comments made earlier in relation to internalisation
and anticipation, one can consider that autopoiesis is a dual process in that it has: (1) an
anterior autopoietic network of processes relevant to the internalisation of an active context
relevant to eigenvalue formation and agency regulation, and (2) a posterior autopoietic
network of processes relevant to anticipation and eigenbehaviour. Adopting principles
elucidated in GCI, each network may itself be considered as a set of interactive subagencies
(delivering its functional processes), which mutually interact and operate as an autonomous
distributed collective subagency. The collective may be stable in its own right in that it
satisﬁes a functional purpose to manifest inputs into requisite outputs, despite any possible
perturbations that need to be overcome (indicating stability) that further differentiate a
context from its representative ideate. This general deﬁnition of autopoiesis can now be
applied to both anterior and posterior trajectories. Thus, anterior autopoiesis is responsible
for transforming an observed context, manifesting it into a requisite ideate that can deliver
eigenvalues. In contrast, posterior autopoiesis is responsible for observing the ideate, and
manifesting this into a potential that delivers eigenbehaviour when stable. In the anterior
case, it would therefore appear that Equation (2), when solvable, creates local anterior
autopoietic eigenvalues. In the posterior case, an equation is needed that, when solvable,
creates posterior autopoietic eigenbehaviour. That eigenvalues can result in eigenbehaviour
in Foerster’s theory is really presented as an opaque and mystical phenomena due to its
lack of concrete description, and we recommend that it should be seen as an operative
structural phenomenon in an anterior system that provides potential for behaviour.
The current problem at hand is therefore to ﬁnd an expression that can represent
posterior autopoiesis that, when solved, can indicate stability. A resolution for this comes
from Dubois [98], who begins by ﬁrst reformulating the recursive expression given in
Equation (2) as:
y(t + 1) = R(..., y(t −2), y(t −1), y(t); A)
(3)
for y(t) = obst, R is the recursive function COORD, and A are a set of parameters that are
representative of the context, and where, for any given scenario, A is to be selected. To
know the function R, the values of the parameters A and the initial conditions..., y(−2),
y(−1), y(0) at time t = 0, and the successive states y(t + 1), y(t + 2), y(t + 3), ..., must be
determined for the time interval ∆t = 1.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
16 of 36
Now, moving on to anticipation, Dubois explains that there are two types, weak and
strong, where:
•
Weak anticipation occurs when the ideate is an informational model of the active
context, and this arises from exo-anticipation, that is, agency anticipation about the
external active context that creates expectations for eigenbehaviour and hence the
potential options for future agency behaviour.
•
Strong anticipation arises from behavioural endo-anticipation, where the ideate becomes
embedded in the agency structure which can then determine eigenbehaviour and the
potential for future agency behaviour.
We may observe that exo-anticipation is an informational subordinate to agency struc-
ture associated with assimilation, while endo-anticipation is structural and a consequence
of accommodation. To represent anticipation, Dubois introduces the term incursion. This
is directly associated with anticipation, and is a fundamental living agency property that
enables it to anticipate, and thus embrace, an evolving future.
Dubois now sets out an expression for incursion that satisﬁes Rosen’s idea of antici-
pation, incidentally implying posterior autopoietic processes. He thus formulates a new
discrete (and later a continuous) expression for weak anticipation that depends on prior
assimilation, where the current agency state at time t is a function of its past states t −3,
t −2, t −1, its present time, t, and its exo-anticipated states at future times t + 1, t + 2,
t + 3, . . . .
y(t + 1) = A(..., y(t −2), y(t −1), y(t), y*(t + 1), y*(t + 2), ...; A)
(4)
where the variable y* at future times t + 1, t + 2, ...is determined through agency exo-
anticipation, for some A. Dubois notes that y* can be an expectation, and there appears to
be no reason that this should not have a probabilistic origin, perhaps from theory similar
to that of EPI.
Essentially, the same expression is used with a minor adjustment to represent strong
anticipation, assuming prior accommodation, where a discrete incursive agency condition
(within which the current state at time t) is a function of its states at past times, ..., t −3,
t −2, t −1, present time t, and its states at future times t + 1, t + 2, t + 3, . . . .
y(t + 1) = A( . . . , y(t −2), y(t −1), y(t), y(t + 1), y(t + 2), . . . ; A)
(5)
and where y at times t + 1, t + 2, . . . for the future is determined through endo-anticipation,
so that agency structure is indicated within the equation. The incursive agency is self-
referential, and able to determine its future states through endo-anticipation as a conse-
quence of accommodation and from itself, rather than from a model-based expectation
connected with assimilation. That solutions can be found for Equations (4) and (5) indicates
the existence of both eigenvalues and eigenbehaviours.
3.3. Extreme Physical Information and Autopoietic Rationality
Extreme Physical Information (EPI) is concerned with gleaning the nature of an observ-
able context from the observation of samples from it, given a set of relational parameters
that have quantitative parametric descriptors that broadly describe it. It acquires contextual
information used to create an ideate, the acquisition being an autopoietic process with an
efﬁcacy measure, this indicating how good the information is from which the ideate is
formed. It can thus be used to indicate the goodness of similarity between the ideate and
the observed active context, and hence it is an indicator of stability.
EPI is intimately connected with Fisher information theory, which was originally
concerned with statistics, though it may also be framed within the context of observation
of context and its analysis. Every one observation of a real effect is a single data value (e.g.,
a time occurrence, a position occurrence, an electron charge occurrence), which is governed
by the statistics of the effect—that is, the probability law governing the effect. The effect
is fundamentally statistical, and as such can be analysed by statistical theorems. These

Systems 2021, 9, 75
17 of 36
are, in turn, mathematical in nature. Statistical data can only be properly analysed by the
use of such statistical theorems. Many of these are due to the renowned statistician R. A.
Fisher [99], including his invention of “Fisher information,” as it is called nowadays. He
was the father of bio-statistics, and the latter of course include those involving humans
and their observations. In EPI, Fisher information values will be represented as a matrix of
values that characterise a matrix of channels, each of which corresponds to a contextual
parameter. However, in the case considered here, we limit ourselves to only one such
channel that characterises the contextual “state” (however one describes it, often its mean
value) of a one-dimensional system (such as a vector). Thus, here, the Fisher information
matrix is manifested as a single scalar number.
Exploring the agency relationship between ideate to context in terms of information,
there is a principle that if a maximum amount of possible information can be extracted
from a context, then there is likely to be autopoietic couple stability. This is consistent with
the idea that perturbing observation through pathology, idiosyncrasy, or cognitive bias can
corrupt the acquisition of information that is representative of a context, this bounding
what can be acquired.
This is consistent with Roy Frieden’s [100,101] EPI mathematical theory built on the
principles of Fisher information. It is a computational approach that originates out of
the observation of data from an unknown phenomenon. That is, observation includes not
only “seeing” or “visualising” the phenomenon but quantifying it. A statistical dynamics
approach, it provides a way of explaining how well one can determine a physical law,
given a ﬁxed amount of data from it.
Suppose that the data values y each obey y = A + x, for some x and with A unknown
parameters deﬁning the system’s state (e.g., its mean energy level). This is a simpler
expression than provided by Equation (3), but there would appear to be equivalence if one
considers that EPI does not need to demonstrate stability in terms of repeat observations,
and is normally interested in a single observation that eliminates the need for recursive
time periods. With the data y known, A is computed via some required function of the
data y (for example, as their simple average). The apparent “noise” values x is purely a
phenomenological ﬂuctuation that actually deﬁne the physical effect driving the system.
It obeys some probability distribution p(x) describing uncertainty in knowledge of the
effect. The data y also ultimately determine the total amount of information I carried by
the system, via the EPI principle I = maximum. This maximisation is carried through
algebraically, subject to all known constraints on p(x) (such as normalisation, perhaps the
mean value <x>, ...; see below). Knowledge of parameters intuitively depends on how
narrow the distribution p(x) is, or, equivalently, how much information is collected in
the data.
The data are, as a result, often termed “smart”. This is most apt in quantum systems,
for which the mean-squared error obeys directly 1/I. On this basis, the higher the infor-
mation level I is, the smaller the error is in determining the system state—an intuitively
correct result.
EPI is a general theory that can operate together with metacybernetics [17,23]. EPI, as
with Eigenform, is also an approach that uses the idea of observation, but we can differ-
entiate between them by again recognising the distinction between implicit and explicit
recognition. Eigenform is an act of implicitly recognising and noting attributes of context,
while in EPI, it is an act of explicitly recognising and noting attributes of context acquired
through measurement (as above). Inherently, then, the two are commensurable since
explicit recognition involves implicit recognition. In both cases, the character of a context
is delivered, from which an ideate derives. In EPI, explicit observation measures active
context, subject to theoretical prior knowledge of that context. EPI and metacybernetics
share certain premises. Metacybernetics is a general theory of higher-order cybernetics
with a substructure of cybernetic axioms, while EPI has an axiomatic substructure deriving
from Fisher information axioms.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
18 of 36
Stability in the autopoietic couple is all about order. If the context is coherent and
therefore is ordered, then there should be a sufﬁciently close, relatable order in the ideate.
Fisher information provides an approach that is capable of determining what it is that con-
stitutes “sufﬁcient” order. Providing that one can identify parameters that can adequately
identify a given context, then one can adopt statistical methods to determine the state of
disorder of that ideate. Essentially, Fisher information is an indicator of the expected error
in a “smart measurement”. Consistent with critical realism, EPI is an observer-based theory
where the observer is not in any way “ideal,” and where there is imperfect observation—that
is, observation with added noise/fuzziness. Nevertheless, as will be seen below, EPI may
be used to ﬁnd the physical laws giving rise to faulty observations. This is a case where
observations are imperfect, but lend themselves to analysis in being simply regarded as
“additive ﬂuctuations” in the values of measurements.
Here, we adopt EPI to explore post-nonclassical autopoietic couple stability. There are
some caveats relevant to EPI. The ﬁrst caveat comes from it being a general mathematical
theory that is concerned with statistically repeatable effects. The second caveat is that it
assumes known context for the observed effect, at least as well as possible under complexity.
Thus, knowledge will be limited to observable relationships between the entities that
are seen to compose a context. The third caveat is that it is able to build theories, i.e.,
mathematical models, and its limitation centres on the measurement of contexts. It has thus
been successful in replicating existent mathematical theories from its own substructural
axioms that relate to Fisher information in a variety of ﬁelds, including quantum mechanics,
classical electromagnetic theory, statistical mechanics, and gravitational theory. EPI has
also been used to build theory in other disciplinary areas such as ecology and economic
and social science [102–104].
Consider that the context can be recognised by the information bound to it, this being
represented by J, and that I is the information acquired from the context that reﬂects the
information content of the ideate. These numbers I and J are values that come from Fisher
information [100]. The relationship between J and I is an effective ﬂow of information
given by
J →I
(6)
Consider now that observation is generally imperfect. Suppose that the context at a
speciﬁc point in time can be speciﬁed by the value of a single parameter A that is indicative
of a scenario, where A is generally a ﬁxed and deﬁnite vector of numbers. Agency wishing to
gain information about the context observes it for its value A. This is indicative of the set
of relationships between parametric components A, which deliver the observed values y,
resulting in the ideate Φ. The relationship between these was earlier indicated, but it is
useful to now set this centre stage. Practically, y is not representative of A since there is also
a random value x, where
y = A + x.
(7)
Now, x is an intrinsic ﬂuctuating effect indicative of an anomaly such as observational
error. Consider now that the totality of possible intrinsic ﬂuctuations x deﬁne a probability
law p(y|A). Knowing p(y|A) can therefore provide some indication of the quality of
contextual observations that deliver the ideate. In the end, EPI is concerned with identifying
the maximum attainable change in Fisher information. This is subject to the constraints
that are determined from a problem context. If one has conﬁdence in the constraints, then
there will be equal conﬁdence in the solution for p(x). Now, the value I for observation y is
deﬁned to obey Fisher Information, as
I = < [d/dx(log(p(y|A)))]2 >
(8)
where d/dx is a mathematical derivative of its log argument with respect to x, and the
brackets < > indicate an expectation—that is, multiplication by the probability law p(y|A),
called the “likelihood function” in statistics. It deﬁnes the probability of each possible

Systems 2021, 9, 75
19 of 36
observation in the presence of an ideal parameter value A. Interest now lies in estimating
the probability law since this deﬁnes the unknown effect under study.
The expectation < > may be evaluated as a simple integral over all x (Frieden, 1998).
Hence, if p(y|A) is known, so is I, and differently shaped laws p(y|A) give rise to different
values for I. Equation (6) holds for the particular law p(y|A) giving rise to the data. If the
wrong law is assumed, the answers will be wrong since the wrong prior knowledge is being
used. The law holds regardless of any error that might occur in the relative connection
between the observation and the context. Such an error occurs if, for example, the observer
is being tricked, and the data observed really do not arise out of the scenario under study,
or, alternatively, if the prior knowledge to be used does not arise out of that scenario. In
the latter case, just different (and correct) prior knowledge must be used. The need is to
avoid errors in prior knowledge (which might include mean and variance).
In evaluating Equation (8) for various laws p(y|A), it becomes apparent that I is
a measure of the width of p(y|A). For example, if p(y|A) is a normal law, its use in
Equation (5) gives I as simply 1 divided by the variance. The variance is roughly the
squared width of p(y|A). Hence, the wider the law p(y|A) is, the smaller is the information
value. The wider/broader the probability p(y|A) on the ﬂuctuation is, the more “random”
the values of x are, and so the less accurate is the estimate for the parameter A from an
observation y. In this case, there would be an expectation that I would take a small value
indicating stability reduction, so that Φ is not a good representation of context. This is
precisely what Equation (8) gives in this situation. As such, Fisher information I measures
the information about an unknown parameter in the context representing a typical data
value y as an indicator of the information possibilities that might be extracted by observing
a context. As such, it is capable of inferring hidden structure.
Consider now that the ﬂuctuation x satisﬁes p(x). The shape of p(x) is important, and
the wider/broader it is, more unpredictable is a value of x, and hence of y. This gives rise
to inadequate observations y, which are then autopoietically delivered to the ideate. Since
observation is part of the autopoietic process, the autopoietic couple cannot be considered
to be stable in terms of its anterior trajectory since the context is not well represented in the
ideate. In this case, we can say that the autopoietic couple is not well ordered, the anterior
autopoiesis having poor efﬁcacy. From Equation (7), the information I allows the degree
of autopoietic efﬁcacy to be quantiﬁed, i.e., represented by a number. This is normally ex-
pressed as a measure of entropic disorder H. Now, H relates to I if the probability law p(x) is
such that the level of disorder monotonically increases with time (called the Fokker–Planck
differential equation: [76]). The level of disorder is determined by the level of entropy H,
which must increase (by a relation dH/dt ≥0 called the “Boltzmann H-theorem” or the
Second Law of Thermodynamics.). Correspondingly, the Fisher information decreases as:
dI/dt ≤0
(9)
This is a “Fisher I-theorem” that corresponds to the “Boltzmann H theorem” dH/dt ≥0.
As a consequence, both measures I and H change monotonically with the level of disorder.
Hence, the Second Law is described by Fisher I as well as by entropy H. This means that
the use of EPI often precludes necessary use of the concept H.
As a result, it may be said that a necessary condition for there to be order in the
autopoietic couple is that the value of I is large. In quantitative terms, this can be stated as
follows: the mean-squared error e2 in estimating the state of the observed system from its
data goes as 1/I. This is called the Cramer–Rao inequality. A small value of e2 indicates
a low level of disorder. Thus, in summary, if the context is in itself a complex coherency,
and if it is well represented by the ideate, then the ideate must also be coherent in itself
with a large value I, and the ideate is well ordered as a reﬂection of the characteristics
represented in the relationships of the context. This is the same that occurs in autopoietic
couple stability in Eigenform theory, and so the two are equivalent.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
20 of 36
Now, in EPI, the efﬁciency with which I is autopoietically determined from J is given
by the expression
I = κJ,
(10)
where 0 ≤κ ≤1, and κ is a constant that measures how well information is acquired
from the context and delivered to the ideate. In EPI, κ is a scenario-determined qualitative
parameter indicative of the minimum loss in representing the J bound information as
acquired I information. However, since this efﬁciency is a reﬂection of the capability of
agency to autopoietically represent the context as an ideate, κ may also be seen as an
autopoietic efﬁcacy measure, the value of which is also indicative of the agency capability
potential to achieve autopoietic stability. If one considers a classical physics scenario, then
the value of κ = 0.5, while in a quantum physics scenario κ = 1, meaning that I = J (no
information is lost). No matter the scenario, the value of I will still have a range able
to indicate autopoietic efﬁcacy. This condition also suggests that the ideate is entangled
with the context so that no information is lost, and for any scenario, all the contextual
information is now characterised in the ideate. The result is unequivocable stability. In
complex situations, there are hidden characteristics and relationships, not all of which
will be inferred, so κ = 1 is unlikely. However, in a learning situation, the value of I can
approach that of J [105]. To explain this, consider a context with hidden attributes from
which wicked problems emerge. If inquiry methods are applied to the context to enable an
observer to learn about these hidden attributes to better enable problem resolution, and
a new observation is made, then, for a given J, the value of I can increase. However, in
wicked problems, new characteristics and relationships will arise after an intervention,
thus complexifying the context, so that J changes and no advancement has occurred.
There is another issue that needs to be considered, for which Gatenby and Frieden [106]
provide relevance. They discussed the problem of carcinogenic growth in biological sys-
tems, where cancer does not grow out of one source but out of many. That is, many nearby
cancerous cells ﬂood a given functioning (healthy) cell with their lactic acid, starting its
own cancer growth, and this is the way in which it spreads. If there were only one source,
then, at most, I ≤J. However, for two sources, at most I ≤2J, and for n, I ≤nJ, giving
κ ≤n. Now, in cancer spread, physical effects allow for selﬁshly beneﬁcial growth, with
cancer growth being enhanced by outside systems to the detriment of the total system
in space–time, since the system dies. This enables one to reﬂect on social situations in
which there is a group of n autonomous subagencies interacting together cooperatively,
all making information contributions. This is a situation that is obverse but reﬂective of
cancer growth, again giving κ ≤n. This, however, also says something deeper, that there is
a very basic difference between physical effects (where κ = 1/2 in classical situations, or
κ = 1 in quantum situations) and social effects in which, in an agency, agent ego dominance
is replaced by collective sustainability through cooperation. Such social effects allow for
mutually beneﬁcial alliances (κ > 1), where agency growth is enhanced by other external
agencies, both of whom beneﬁt from longer life in space–time. This is yet another demon-
stration (originally explored by John Forbes Nash Jr.) that cooperative processes can trump
egocentric tendencies [107].
To explore this further, suppose now that, in the autopoietic process, the n autonomous
self-organising subagencies each have a certain processing purpose that they are pursu-
ing, and to assist collective cooperation, they maintain a lifeworld interaction (lifeworld
being the collective intersubjective pool of perceiving through which meaningful thematic
communication occurs [108]). In other words, we are looking at effects that are the re-
sult of n subagency interactions. In terms of EPI, since the subagencies are functionally
autonomous, their individual information values maximally add. This means that any
collective policy arising out of their functions would convey maximum information about
subagency policies and the parameters contained within. If the subagencies report their
decisions to a central agency, then the overall authority makes a summary assessment for
ﬁtness-related outcomes that incorporate the proposals of the n subagencies, with feedback
recommendations. This situation is related to that of cancer growth, when one cell invades

Systems 2021, 9, 75
21 of 36
another with lactic acid, but instead of acid, there are language-based conversations, not-
ing the realisation by Glanzberg [46] referred to earlier, that language may have hidden
parameters that impact on meaning. The intention over the whole agency for the assembly
of conversations is that subagencies are able to reach agreement on their actions such that
their ﬁtness (physical wellbeing and mental wellness) is maximised. This supposes that
the central agency to which these subagencies report reaches an “agreement” based on
these reports. The total information collected by the central agency from the subagencies
is thereby maximised. Here, then, the context is not so much subject–object interactions,
but rather subagency–subagency interactions. Following from Glanzberg, and recalling
that two types of parameter are logical variables or overt expressions of personal taste, it
appears likely that both are in some way identiﬁable and measurable, the latter at least
by content analysis and related statistical analysis across an array of subagency linguistic
constructions [109]. Hence, policy as a linguistic construct must have within it statistically
measurable parameters, some of which may be hidden (and possibly inferred by EPI).
Thus, following this argument, policy parameters that are reported in the conversations
can be evaluated probabilistically. They might then be associated with such attributes as
goals, beliefs, and coordinated actions, where, for instance, goals might have parameters
relating to who, what, where, and when. Let us speculate on the approach that might be
adopted, which is very broadly related to the analysis of personality by Yolles and Fink [23].
A set of parameters for goals would be identiﬁed that are relevant to the whole assembly
of subagency functions. These could be set up as a cognitive map, together with their cor-
relations. A statistical analysis might then be applied to the assembly of communications
relevant to goals. Applying a statistical correlation approach, joint probability distributions
emerge, and these might be suitable for an EPI analysis.
In a simple qualitative illustration, consider that the subagencies represent election
voters in various sections of a country. Each such subagency counts votes independently of
the others. Next, each subagency reports its vote count to a central government agency
with overall responsibility for the election process. In usual democratic voting situations,
each subagency vote tally is accurate and is independently sent to the central government
agency, where it is assimilated (thereby obeying maximum Fisher information). In this
case, the total vote count by the central government agency contains maximum Fisher
information about votes in all sections of the country. In this manner, democracy is a
systematic program that represents the maximum information voting positions (indicative
of opinions) of the overall population of a country.
The efﬁcacy effect of Equation (10) derives from a premise from Immanuel Kant. This
is that the acquirable level of information I about a context present in data of the total
information level J obeys I ≤J. Depending on the effect, either some or all of its information
can be obtained. Expressed as information change,
K = I −J.
(11)
can indicate an information loss if it is negative. However, this does not necessarily mean
that the autopoietic couple is unstable. For example, conventional simple systems of
classical mechanics, which have long served mankind as paradigms of stability, obey
I = (1/2)J so that K = −(1/2)J, a loss. By Equation (11), K is always zero or negative,
indicating that it is generally an information loss, so that the set of parameters characterising
relationships of a context in Φ, if correct, are insufﬁcient.
When anterior autopoiesis is perturbed in some way, it can cause the observation
of the bound information J to be perturbed, thus perturbing I, and we have instability
unless the autopoietic perturbations can be overcome. With stability, there is no loss of
information, and K takes an extreme value of the maximum possible value of information I
for this partic-ular observed phenomenon, that is
K = I −J = minimum.
(12)

Systems 2021, 9, 75
22 of 36
This is a principle of EPI. The extreme value is attained through a variation of the
likelihood law p(y|A) and subject to the Equation (12) connecting I and J. The extremum is
attained through a variation of the shape of p(y|A). Equation (12) is the extremum principle
used to ﬁnd solution probability laws p(y|A), and is the overall principle of “Extreme
Physical Information”. The naming comes from considering that the information change
I −J is lost information, denoted by K.
To understand the possibilities for instability, it is useful to reﬂect on the need to deter-
mine p(x), thus creating a solution to the speciﬁed problem. This is subject to two aspects:
(1)
Knowledge of a ﬁxed upper-bound level J to the information. All quantities are
to obey a principle of minimum loss of information: I −J = minimum. The p(x)
that obeys this minimisation principle is guaranteed to give an I that is the desired
maximum value. Having said this, practically, the value of J assumed is no longer
of interest.
(2)
Knowledge of constraints that are obeyed by the unknown law p(x) (as mentioned
above). These are:
a.
Normalisation (its integral over all x equals 1) indicating the total probability
of obtaining x = 0 or ∆x or 2∆x or . . . . (last possible value) is unity: in other
words, one such value of x must occur during a measurement of x.
b.
In trying to solve for p(x), one has to ﬁrst go through the algebraic steps of in-
putting everything known about p(x), such as its moments, required in order to
undertake a solution procedure for p(y|A). By “moment” is meant the average
value over x as a continuous integral over its range (where 1st moment is mean,
2nd moment is variance, 3rd moment is skewness). Observing fundamental
effects or constraints to create inputs occurs through repeated measurements,
this requiring an averaging <x>.
c.
Possible knowledge of correlation of x with other outside variables with (say)
known statistics p(z), z denoting a different system. By “outside” is meant some
possible other system phenomenon affecting or constraining the x values that
is “outside our considerations.” Mathematically, this means that not enough
constraints have been imposed through either: (a) that there is some other,
additional set that likewise constrain the solution p(y|A), or (b) the wrong set
of constraints might have been used in the ﬁrst place. The constraints bound
the problem speciﬁcation, and change these and the problem changes.
Use of knowledge types 1 and 2 can uniquely ﬁx the law p(x). It turns out that
knowledge type 1 of a particular bound level J is not decisive: the solution p(y|A), given
A, is always independent of the size of J, only depending on the existence of J, which, in
turn, follows from the philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Moreover, knowledge type 2a is
not difﬁcult to implement. However, knowledge type 2b is a potential source of error.
In physics, use of the least possible number of such constraints gives the best results for
the analytical solution p(y|A). In essence, the observer has to “know” what constraints
are essential to the underlying effect p(y|A). By comparison, societal or economic systems
have generally more complex causes than physical ones, so it makes sense to use more
constraints in analysing these by EPI.
There is an alternative way of inferring whether the ideate Φ is an adequate repre-
sentation of the context represented by A, indicating autopoietic couple stability. This is
by evaluating autopoietic efﬁcacy κ as indicated in Equation (10), where a high level of
efﬁcacy (as characterised by parameter value κ) implies coherence in the operative intel-
ligence that deﬁnes autopoiesis. A direct way of doing this is by evaluating the General
Collective Intelligence.
4. Consequences for Metacybernetic Theory and Overview
4.1. Efﬁcacy in Metacybernetics
The above three schemas can now be used to better inform our understanding of
autopoiesis in the metacybernetic framework. It has been said that metacybernetics is

Systems 2021, 9, 75
23 of 36
a general agency theory of higher-order cybernetics that involves intelligent complex
agencies, these being dynamic systems with various self properties that enable them to
adapt to changing contextual conditions. General theories have a substructure of axioms
that operate with causal mechanisms through causal-agents that deliver causal effects.
Here, causal mechanisms are pathways between ontologically related but distinct systems
that together form the whole agency. They are populated by causal-agent networks of
processes that connect these systems, and they function as agency intelligences. In a third-
order cybernetics (as developed from Eric Schwarz [110]), a ﬁrst-order causal-agent is
autopoiesis (operative intelligence or self-production), and a second-order causal-agent is
autogenesis (ﬁgurative intelligence or self-creation).
Both autopoiesis and autogenesis are causal-agents that generate causal effects. An-
terior autopoiesis creates imperatives for regulatory change, while posterior autopoiesis
creates imperatives for change in the operative structure from which agency behaviour is de-
termined. The autopoietic couple can be seen as a cognitive system in its own right [75,111].
As such, this couple itself has a post-posterior strategy-regulatory system, the two being
connected through autogenesis. It is here that the terminology of the anterior and pos-
terior system comes into effect. We deﬁne a fractal structure composed of an anterior
and posterior system connected through a causal-agent which has both posterior and
anterior trajectories that deliver the causal effects of internalisation and anticipation. A
metasystem hierarchy is composed of a sequence of embedded fractals, so that at the
lowest fractal order being considered, a posterior strategic–regulatory metasystem and
an anterior operative system are coupled through the causal-agent of autopoiesis. At the
next fractal order up, a hierarchic level is a post-posterior metametasystem which connects
with the autopoietic couple (taken as a system in its own right) through the causal-agent
of autogenesis. While one may propose further hierarchies, they are beyond the scope of
this paper. The strategic–regulative metasystem delivers goals, deriving from a selected
cognitive purpose, which is manifested in the operative system through the causal-agent of
autopoiesis as operative structure, from which behaviour arises. The strategic–regulative
metametasystem has a pattern of cognitive knowledge that can be adjusted by the autopoi-
etic couple. It also provides selected cognitive knowledge relevant to context and adaptive
needs that can stimulate aspects of the autopoietic couple through the causal-agent (in this
case, autogenesis), thereby inﬂuencing the strategic–regulative and operative systems. The
implemented strategy stimulates adaptive operative adjustment that is constrained by a
regulative structure, resulting in strategic–regulative imperatives.
We can propose that all causal-agents that connect posterior and anterior structures
have both the dual cybernetic properties of internalisation and anticipation, though the
meaning of these will also vary in a way that is relative to the nature of the fractal order. The
causal action of autogenesis is self-production that can deliver self-organisation to either
strategic–regulative structure in a higher-order posterior system (through a higher form of
internalisation) or operative structure in the operative couple seen as an anterior system
(through a higher form of anticipation). The causal effect of autogenesis is self-creation
that can deliver either a super strategic–regulative structure to the couple by internalising
super strategic–regulatory adjustments that constitute processes of learning, and through
anticipation, deliver imperatives for changes to be made in the couple. While, in principle,
the attributes of autopoiesis also apply to autogenesis, since both are causal-agents, our
interest remains with the former.
Agency has ontologically distinct systems that interact through a network of causal-
agents. Agents produce or are responsible for effects that are the result of events. Examples
of the distinct systems are the anterior operative system and its posterior metasystem. The
operative system has a structure that creates a potential for behaviour, while the metasystem
regulates/strategises the operative system and bounds/adapts behavioural potential. The
metasystem and system are interconnected through the autopoietic causal-agent, a network
of processes that, as already noted, can also be represented as Piaget’s operative intelligence.
Agencies may be any class of organism from an organisation of plural individuals to a

Systems 2021, 9, 75
24 of 36
solitary individual, and they may involve either implicit or explicit cognitive processes.
Agency internally reﬂects/observes the environmental context through internalisation, this
resulting in an internal cognitive model called the ideate; this, when accommodated as a
structure, is now directly used in processes of self-regulation/strategization, i.e., agency
uses this ideate to create requisite adaptive behaviour that responds to changing contextual
conditions to enhance agency viability.
In a third-order cybernetic agency, as in Figure 1, the anterior and posterior systems
are ontologically distinct, interconnected by the autopoietic causal-agent, which operates
with anterior and posterior trajectories. The posterior system has cognitive schemas
with the capability of creating adaptive imperatives in the anterior system. The ﬁrst-
order causal-agent is autopoiesis and the second-order is autogenesis. There is also a
connection between the autopoietic couple as a posterior–anterior system relationship, and
its relative posterior system (the metametasystem) that is also post-posterior to the anterior
(operative) system. The couple is regulated by the posterior system that has context-relative
referent structures in a higher-order ideate. Examples are knowledge or identiﬁcation
information, or even attitudes—where implicit attitudes are those that occur with implicit
cognition, and are constituted as automatic internal agency evaluations that occur without
awareness. The existence of these structures is context-dependent. Sometimes, systems can
become unstable due to internal contradictions. When this happens to the post-posterior
metametasystem, it is no longer able to coherently regulate the autopoietic couple [17], and
this can result in autopoietic couple instrumentality and instability.
Figure 1. Third-order cybernetic agency model.
The autopoietic couple mechanisms that result in either stability or instability can be
relatively easily explained in general terms using context and cognitive maps, which we
shall suppose exist. Context maps represent a context with parameters A, together with
their relationships and agent interactions, and they are connected with the structure of
the anterior (operative) system. Cognitive maps represent an ideate that reﬂects an active
context from which regulation derives. The mechanism for each autopoietic trajectory can
be simply explained:
•
Anterior autopoiesis acquires its notion of context from the anterior (operative) system,
creates or recognises and updates the context map, and then, through internalisation,
manifests a cognitive map (or cognitive map update) in the posterior system (the
metasystem) as an ideate Φ (or ideate adjustment) that is assimilated and/or accom-

Systems 2021, 9, 75
25 of 36
modated. In the case of adjustment and with accommodation, regulative structures
are modiﬁed, as may be strategic structures. In the case of autopoietic stability and
with accommodation, the cognitive map is the result of a causal effect that impacts on
strategic–regulative self-organisation and delivers eigenvalues.
•
Posterior autopoiesis acquires its notion of the ideate from the posterior system
(the metasystem), creates or recognises or updates the cognitive map, and then,
through anticipation, it compares the cognitive map to the context map in the anterior
system, where necessary seeking an update from behavioural intelligence (another
type of causal-agent projected into active context) for the context map. This enables
the operative structure to be adjusted, this modifying the potential from which be-
haviour results. In the case of stability and with strong anticipation, the context map
is the result of a causal effect that impacts on operative self-organisation, thereby
delivering eigenbehaviour.
Self-regulation is important if an agency is to be coherent, i.e., to operate in a way that
enables it to have ordered behaviour in its environment through its agents. The operative
regulatory structure is based on the accommodated ideate schema manifested from the
context. To ensure that self-regulation is able to work successfully, the ideate must be
accommodated in agency, and the autopoietic couple must be stable with respect to both
anterior and posterior autopoiesis. An unstable couple can result in agency incoherency
with behaviour that is entropic/disordered/uncoordinated. Disordered behaviour is not
conducive to agency viability. This is especially so in a potentially malevolently changing
environment in which contextual shifts demand an agency’s strategic adaptation. If the
ideate is not a good representation of the context, then it cannot be used to anticipate
the future, and if such an ideate is accommodated into agency, it is unable to operatively
self-organise suitably in a way that enables its operative adaptation to requisitely respond
to the changes in context that arise from its environment. A similar argument applies
in the reverse trajectory, when agency is unable to cognitively self-organise suitably in a
way that enables strategic–regulative adaptation so as to requisitely respond to changes
in context. Hence, anterior and posterior autopoiesis are intimately and irrevocably con-
nected, the former delivering the causal effect of internalisation of the causal-agent anterior
autopoiesis, and the latter delivering the causal effect of anticipation of the causal-agent
posterior autopoiesis.
Noting that autopoiesis is operative intelligence, then there is another intelligence that
represents the interaction between the anterior (operative) system and the active context,
and we have already referred to this as behavioural intelligence. It relates to agency skills
and abilities that arise through the agents that constitute its population, that act on its behalf
or otherwise, that can contribute to behavioural anticipation and that may be responsible
for delivering context maps. More speciﬁcally, behavioural intelligence allows an agency
to be highly adaptable through behavioural adjustment [112] while constrained by anterior
system structure (eigenbehaviour). For Yolles and Fink [113], behavioural intelligence is a
form of social intelligence, which, following Thorndike [114], is the ability to understand
and manage others, and to engage in adaptive social interactions.
The capability of agency to create a stable autopoietic couple is a function of autopoietic
efﬁcacy κ (as κa and/or κp). This efﬁcacy is a result of the network of autopoietic (operative
intelligence) processes working together effectively and coherently, while autopoietic
couple assembly is regulated by the posterior system to this couple. Where this intelligence
network is not coherent, it delivers a causal effect that is incoherent, i.e., the causal-agent
observation is not well-ordered in its relation with the causal effect. In this case, the ﬁrst-
order causal-agent autopoiesis can be cited as a cause for disorder/instability. Noting that
there are two possible trajectories for autopoiesis, in the case of anterior autopoiesis, the
ideate will, for instance, represent the context incorrectly—for instance, by biasing a set
of parameters and/or parametric relationships. In the case of posterior autopoiesis, the
ideate will not be well-represented as a context map from which structure and behaviour
are sufﬁciently well-linked.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
26 of 36
By a recursive principle, a similar description can be applied to the relationship
between the metametasystem and the autopoietic couple, where there will be an efﬁcacy
measure that reﬂects on the second-order causal-agent of autogenesis. It has already
been noted that this couple can be seen as a cognitive system in its own right so that a
causal-agent recursive principle holds, this suggesting that the term posterior system can
refer to the metametasystem, and the anterior system to the autopoietic couple. Thus,
in the same way that the metasystem has an ideate Φ, the metametasystem may have a
schema that reﬂects the function of the autopoietic couple. Where the metametasystem
is culture, then this schema might be a knowledge structure. In this case, ﬁgurative
intelligence processes will identify and select context-relevant knowledge to be used as a
knowledge-accommodated higher-order ideate that will regulate the autopoietic couple.
Let us suppose that the efﬁcacy κ of an autopoietic process can take values between
(0, 1) for an individual agency, where values closer to 1 indicate greater efﬁcacy than
values closer to 0 (this proposition arising from EPI). Hence, for a large κ, one may refer
to autopoiesis as being efﬁcacious. Such efﬁcacy can be formulated in terms of the rela-
tionship between the context and the ideate. For larger values of κ, the ideate is a good
representation of the context. From the work of Piaget and the Eigenform, when this occurs,
we have anterior and/or posterior autopoietic stability, dependent on the orientation of the
autopoietic trajectory.
Following Piaget, the autopoietic couple can be seen as stable with repeat observation
(leading to information acquisition) of context by agency, thus enabling a continuity of
representation of the ideate Φ. Thus, stability is recognised with an indeﬁnite succession
of recursive cognitive operations ([19,88]. We can note Piaget’s [88] explanation that an
observer observes the developing interaction between a subject and an object [115]. This
relationship is recursive in the process of observation, and it connects the observer with the
subject–object operation that is formed as a coupled structure, continually refreshed with
respect to previous observations. It thus deﬁnes a repetitive cognitive process that occurs
through internalisation, emerging as a symbolic cognitive elaboration in the subject–object
relationship, where the operation is symbolically enhanced through cognitive processes.
Essentially, recursive processes centre on autopoietic imperatives that self-produce agency
change, and that arise from the anterior (operative) system. In contrast, Dubois’ distinction
between recursive and incursive processes highlights the autopoietic processes at work
that create anticipation, this deﬁning agency as a living system with an autonomous
adaptive capacity.
It has been said that context is both complex and dynamic, and, consequently, it is
time-dependent, as, therefore, will be the ideate Φ that is manifested from that context.
Consider now that the autopoietic couple delivers the ideate Φ deriving through
autopoiesis and representing a contextual parameter A. The ideate Φ is therefore an au-
topoietic function of the qualitative and/or quantitative parameters A, where quantitative
parameters might, for instance, be expressed as boundaries that differentiate selectable
qualities that may have statistical properties [44].
We have earlier noted that the process of internalisation includes assimilation (when
A is introduced as a model into the posterior system/metasystem, which agency then
uses to weakly anticipate behaviour), and accommodated (as a posterior system schematic
structure, which agency then uses to strongly anticipate behaviours). If, after accommoda-
tion, the characteristics of the ideate Φ are insufﬁciently close to those of the context, then
agency is unable to realistically anticipate behaviour, i.e., behaviour will not correspond to
agency requisite needs. In this case, the operative couple is unstable. Stability is required
if, under complexity, agency is able to behave in a requisite way such that any potentially
malevolent environmental inﬂuence can be responded to suitably, so as to ensure its via-
bility. This is dependent on autopoietic stability, so that the coherent operative structure
(in the operative system), from which behaviour derives, can be self-produced. The au-
topoietic couple is serviced by the autopoietic network of processes that constitutes agency
operative intelligence. This is intimately involved in the reﬂecting task of observation,

Systems 2021, 9, 75
27 of 36
where operative intelligence identiﬁes and selects context-representative parameters, and
then processes them to assimilate the model using a cognitive map followed, if feasible,
by accommodation.
Since metacybernetics embraces critical realism, it should consider both qualitative
and quantitative approaches to inquiry. Thus far, in metacybernetics, we have considered
only qualitative aspects that are essentially constructivist, and perhaps it is time to turn our
attention to quantitative aspects in which numerical data are used to obtain information
about the world [116]. Now, metacybernetics formulated as a quantitative theory is an
ally of EPI, this we recall being a measurement centred on general information theory
that allows A to be ultimately found, given prior knowledge of constraints such as mean
value or variance. As a probabilistic approach, we recall that it assumes that context can
be represented by the unknown law p(x) under the condition from the EPI principle that
acquired information is maximised.
This can be explored further in relation to contexts. Consider that the ideate is a
token used by agency to interact with other attributes in a context. Contexts can deliver
complex problems that may be wicked. We note that complex problems have tangled
structures and processes. Tight tangles deliver wicked problems, where there is insufﬁcient
knowledge to adequately deﬁne the problem or create relevant intervention strategies.
Where relevant interventions are deemed to occur, they have effects that change the
problem, thus making it self-perpetuating [115]. There are additionally hidden attributes
so that relationships remain unclear, and wicked problems are effectively unresolvable and
the idea of optimisation unrealistic [117]. Thus, especially in wicked problems, there is a
need to make more than one observation if one wishes to ascertain whether and how the
characteristics represented by a predetermined contextual parameter have changed.
Let us now turn our attention to anterior autopoiesis, noting that EPI is concerned
with the measurement of context. Essentially, an agency observing a context over time
internalises it to form an ideate. The anterior autopoietic relationship is stable if the
ideate sufﬁciently well represents context. In terms of information theory, conceptually, the
manifestation of the ideate arises because information has been acquired from the context.
The context may be represented through an observation (or, more correctly, a measure)
y, and, as indicated in Equation (7), it essentially derives from the parameters (providing
meaning). As such, the observation is indicative of the nature of a context only if one takes
into account any observational failing indicated by some random variable x, and that will
be related to the noise that might arise in the anterior (operative) system context map, and
then autopoietically manifested in the posterior system ideate Φ. To determine autopoietic
couple stability iteratively, and thus decide whether Φ is an adequate representation of a
context, one can take recurrent observations from which arise the set of parameters A in
Equation (7). In this case, the need is to compare the set of data y(t). To determine stability,
one is required to evaluate the variance of the probability set p(y(t)/A), which brings us to
consider its composition. It embeds a set of parameters A that are the contextual descriptors,
and those that are statistically measurable will have mean, variance, and perhaps bias
associated with it (cf. [118]).
4.2. Overview and Discussion
At this juncture, it will be useful to take an overview of the nature of agency theory
within metacybernetics, where agencies are taken as living systems that have a variety of
self properties, and they maintain their viability through changing contexts and adaptation.
To adapt, they need to internalise the active context that they observe, and to anticipate
the future so that their behaviours are requisite. The two properties associated with
internalisation are assimilation and accommodation, and agencies that only assimilate
have different anticipatory properties from those also able to (cognitively) accommodate
an observed context, this impacting on the nature of living.
Internalisation occurs through autopoiesis, a topic that is of paramount importance
when considering agency capacity to seek viability. Anticipation also occurs through

Systems 2021, 9, 75
28 of 36
autopoiesis, and is a notion that is required if agency is deemed to be living. This suggests
that there are reverse trajectories for autopoiesis, anterior and posterior, both of which are
capable of delivering imperatives for structural change. The anterior trajectory provides
an imperative that derives from anterior autopoiesis and impacts on strategy-regulatory
structures. The posterior trajectory provides an imperative that derives from posterior
autopoiesis that is directed towards possible agency operative structure adjustment. As
such, agencies are able to self-organise both anteriorly and posteriorly, an idea that redeﬁnes
by extension the normal understanding of self-organisation. In a lesser situation than that
provided, posterior autopoiesis might be considered to be equivalent to feedforth from
a system to its metasystem, while anterior autopoiesis has equivalence with feedback.
However, such terms are inadequate to describe the processes that take place in general
terms, especially with higher-order cybernetic systems. It may also be noted that anterior
and posterior autopoietic processes should, in general, be considered to be autonomous
and interactive, though their relationship is likely to be non-linear in time and space.
While it is usual to talk about self-organisation only in terms of the development
of an anterior (operative) system structure, it is clear that its strategic and regulative
functionalities (essentially a posterior cognitive attribute) are also structured. Consequently,
any self-change in these cognitive structures is also necessarily a result of self-organisation.
To appreciate the consequences of this, a proper understanding of the concept of autopoiesis
is required, and which we improved. This has been due to the consideration of the
three schemas described. There is also an issue concerning the qualities that determine
autopoietic efﬁcacy that have arisen in Section 3 of this paper.
For David [119], autopoiesis has been a mainly theoretical concept, but it can be
used to generate pragmatic outcomes. In this spirit, we have discussed the qualitative
nature of autopoietic efﬁcacy and explored a more generalised quantitative measure for it.
Efﬁcacy may be deﬁned as agency capability in producing a treatment that, if applied ideally,
can result in beneﬁcial effects in real-world settings. By treatment is meant the action or
manner (as promoted by a particular schema) of dealing with something, and where
the successful application of the schema will ideally satisfy intended agency needs [120].
What capability refers to will vary with the framework used, i.e., the nature of efﬁcacy
varies as a function of the paradigm from which a particular schema arises. By schema is
meant a structured knowledge framework which deﬁnes a pattern of thought/behaviour,
and which has an organisation of information categories and effect relationships [121].
They have propositions about their characteristics, relationships, and entailments, may
operate with incomplete information, and may refer to simple abstract concepts or complex
social phenomena. Here, three schemas have been identiﬁed and have effectively been
ﬁltered through a metacybernetic framework to enable them to be mutually conﬁgured
with reference to autopoiesis. Metacybernetics [17] is a general theory that is able to
conﬁgure speciﬁc theoretical approaches to respond to particular contexts, where a context
is described by information that characterises a situation through a set of parameters [122].
A plurality of commensurable schemas may be conﬁgured, where each has inherent
coordinative structures able to respond to the needs of speciﬁc contextual modelling. A
plurality of conﬁgurations operates as a complex system of interdependencies, therefore
having core orchestrating themes with identiﬁable characteristics. It should be noted that
metacybernetics is a critical realism paradigm. This involves inquiry into reality through
both a constructivist–qualitative approach centring on cognition, and a realist–quantitative
approach that centres on measurement. Both have relevance to understanding autopoietic
efﬁcacy. Metacybernetics, as a general theory, has a superstructure that builds theory
through conﬁgurations, and a substructure of axiomatic principles involving causal-agents
(entities that produce effects that are an inevitable result of a causal antecedent). Efﬁcacy
is determined through an evaluated causal effect of treatments which arise from a causal-
agent, and it occurs when the effect is requisite—that is, made necessary for viability by
particular circumstances.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
29 of 36
Here, in discussing the nature of autopoiesis, we formulated some propositions
that derived from the three schemas introduced, set up within centripetal arguments
that enabled recognition of common commensurability. We harnessed the schemas by
exploring aspects of autopoietic efﬁcacy relative to their paradigmatic perspectives. GCI
comes from knowledge management, and, as discussed by Krafft [71], concerns group
performance across correlated tasks, and it is a correlation measure that is an indicator
of collective intelligence [123]. Adopting a centripetal argument that imputes/indicates
autopoiesis, it was explained how GCI is a measure of autopoietic efﬁcacy. Coming from
the theory of knowledge, we reformulated Eigenform [95] as a dual cybernetic theory.
Composed of two parts, the ﬁrst arose from Foerster [19], which considers observation
through which a process of internalisation occurs, where an observer and an observed
context are connected, and which uses recursive logic to explore this. The second came
from Dubois [98], who considers anticipation through incursive logic. Foerster’s approach
informs that of Dubois, and Eigenform therefore provides the validity required to support
the propositions that anterior and posterior autopoiesis occur as reverse trajectories. The
third approach considered was that of EPI, an information theory that centres on the
observation of active contexts, this able to identify conditions for efﬁcacy given parameters
that describe the context under uncertainty.
Now, Eigenform and EPI are connected. Eigenform (in its extended form) has interests
in the logical process associated with anterior and posterior autopoietic trajectories. EPI,
as represented here, is concerned with observed contexts through anterior sampling re-
sulting in the internalisation of information ﬂows. GCI, however, is concerned with group
performance across correlated tasks, and it needs to be explained how this may be related
to observation and autopoiesis. The need, then, was to examine their features through
centripetal discourse to enable autopoiesis to emerge as a linkage between them.
Agencies are adaptive living systems that can internalise an observed context, and
create an ideate that it can use to anticipate its behaviour. Both internalisation and anticipa-
tion are intimately and irrevocably connected, the former a causal effect of the causal-agent
of anterior autopoiesis, and the latter a causal effect of the causal-agent of posterior au-
topoiesis. Internalisation is a function of anterior autopoiesis, with two states:
•
The ﬁrst state of internalisation occurs through anterior autopoiesis, which involves
an autopoietically constructed model of an observed and recognised active context
that the agency assimilates internally as an ideate, and which delivers only implicit
cognition and recognition, both of which are information processes.
•
The second state of internalisation increases complexiﬁcation, incorporating the as-
similated model into the agency posterior system structure through accommoda-
tion, this leading to explicit cognition and recognition, enabling conscious awareness
with rationality.
Anticipation is a function of posterior autopoiesis, and has two states:
•
The ﬁrst state of anticipation is a consequence of assimilation, and corresponds to exo-
anticipation, where agency anticipates the external active context through expectations
about the need for future behaviour.
•
The second state of anticipation is a consequence of accommodation, and corresponds
to endo-anticipation, when the ideate becomes embedded in the agency structure,
which then determines its eigenbehaviour (as operative structure) and creates potential
for future behaviour.
Autopoietic efﬁcacy is an indicator of the capability of autopoiesis to deliver requisite
effects. In exploring autopoietic efﬁcacy through the three schemas, it must be recognised
that GCI did not originate as an autopoietic schema, but here, our centripetal arguments,
independently supported by Halpin [25], have enabled autopoiesis to be deﬁned as a
pragmatic set of contextually connected purposeful and relatable tasks, each undertaken
by a subagency as a team of processing agents that are members of agency population.
Efﬁcacy, a capability to create a beneﬁcial effect in real-world settings (such as effectively

Systems 2021, 9, 75
30 of 36
manifesting goals that are sustainable), is sought for the whole assembly. Eigenform is a
logical symbolic approach and, from our centripetal argument, it is shown that autopoiesis
requires stability if agency is to operate coherently—in other words, when autopoietic
efﬁcacy may be seen in terms of anterior autopoietic stability delivering eigenvalues,
and when posterior autopoiesis stability delivers eigenbehaviours with a potential for
requisite behaviour. In essence, then, Eigenform is concerned with how observations can
be suitably internalised and thus be used as a token to determine future behaviour. Dubois’
elaboration of Foerster’s ideas (of internalisation that, at its very best, implies anticipation)
extended Eigenform theory to an explicit consideration of anticipation. EPI is a schema,
the mechanisms of which constitute an autopoietic process that is concerned with gleaning
the nature of a context from the observation of samples from it through parameters that are
able to describe and give meaning to it.
The conﬁgurative relationship between the three schemas can be summarised as
follows. GCI seeks, for the whole network of autopoietic processes, a collective intelligence,
the efﬁcacy of which may be measured through correlation. Since correlation may be
expressed in terms of joint probabilities, it has immediate connections with EPI, the interest
of which centres (within the theme of this paper) on identifying a measure of autopoietic
efﬁcacy from observation of an active context through measurement sampling, and where
hidden parameters might be inferred from probability distributions, given prior knowledge.
This provides opportunities for GCI and EPI to function together. Eigenform is a symbolic
approach that creates an argument for autopoietic couple stability, this underpinning both
GCI and EPI in their agency application. Foerster’s approach centres on observation, this
delivering the implicit recognition of a developing context through repeat observations
in situations that suppose coherent dynamic continuity. It was formulated for explicit
cognition, where agencies show conscious awareness, though it is relevant to agencies with
implicit cognition. Foerster’s approach centred on anterior autopoiesis (internalisation),
where stability delivers eigenvalues. Stability, he indicated, then applies to agency as a
whole. However, breaking agency down into anterior and posterior forms of autopoiesis
suggests a different proposition. It is that anterior and posterior autopoiesis both have
their individual dynamics. In the case of the former, stability delivers eigenvalues, and in
the latter case, stability delivers eigenbehaviour as an agency operative structure, which
in turn creates potential for behaviour. Clearly, though, eigenbehaviour is dependent on
the existence of eigenvalues. One may contrast Eigenform with GCI and EPI, the latter
pair also inherently allowing for implicit cognition. This does not require any awareness
assumptions, but does require that there is an active information process that enables self
properties. Thus, for instance, in the case of GCI, which is designed for intelligent aware
organisations, their collective intelligence (which is underpinned by patterns of norms,
assumptions, and beliefs prevalent in even a distributed culture) does not necessarily imply
a collective conscious awareness that enables agency as the collective whole to assume
explicit cognition [124]. Hence, in terms of the Bitbol and Luisi [6] propositions about stages
of consciousness, GCI refers to stage 4 cognition that seeks evolutionary development into
stage 5.
The connection between metacybernetics and EPI has been explored elsewhere [23],
and GCI had the potential to be conﬁgured into this. Through metacybernetics, GCI and
EPI therefore can, in principle, act as mutual veriﬁers for relevant situations, since they
can each independently obtain a measure of autopoietic efﬁcacy. GCI has a developing
approach using multi-agent techniques through which algorithms are developed to deter-
mine measures. However, these are still subject to hidden parameters and dynamics. It is
feasible, then, for GCI to incorporate EPI, enabling it to seek hidden parameter inferences.
Eigenform and GCI are speciﬁc theories that sit comfortably within a second-order
cybernetics and its associated autopoiesis. EPI, however, as a general theory, is, in princi-
ple, able to generate measurement criteria for higher-order cybernetic structures through
metacybernetics that conform to post-nonclassical rationality. It has been noted that Eigen-
form provides a logical basis for the conditions that prevail for autopoietic stability by

Systems 2021, 9, 75
31 of 36
exploring recursive operations of observation, but clearly, as a logical structure, it offers no
pragmatic orientation.
The Eigenform approach arises from the individual studies of Foerster, Rocha, and
Kauffman. It formulates a recursive expression for observation, the solution of which
implies autopoietic couple stability that in turn implies autopoietic efﬁcacy. Kauffman
applied Spencer Brown’s logical structures to Foerster’s approach, resulting in the view in
cybernetics that these are underpinning attributes for the idea of observation and, indeed,
autopoiesis. In Foerster’s original development, he produced the notion of the eigenvalue,
which exists only with stability, and eigenbehaviour that requires the existence of an
eigenvalue, and supports stable self-production and which in turn creates the potential for
stable behaviour, though how this may occur is really a mystery since it is not explained.
The elaboration of the recursive notions of Foerster to include incursive notions as provided
by Dubois extends the notion of Eigenform to speciﬁcally embrace anticipation, signiﬁcant
in that it simply deﬁnes living. In the same way that Foerster’s recursive equations, when
solved, imply stability, so too do those of Dubois.
We have argued that GCI is closely linked to autopoiesis and autopoietic efﬁcacy,
and we have already noted that this is a notion independently supported by Halpin. The
efﬁcacy value can be determined by EPI from a probability distribution that measures
acquired information I, where a large value of I is an indicator of order and implies
autopoietic couple stability, at least with respect to anterior autopoiesis. EPI is probabilistic,
developing from propositions of Fisher information to respond to issues of uncertainty.
When it uses the term observation, it is referring to explicit observation, meaning that it
extrinsically recognises and notes attributes of context acquired through measurement.
This measurement is a single observation of context, given pre-knowledge of Gaussian
measures such as mean and variance.
5. Conclusions
The purpose of this paper has been to explore the nature of autopoiesis and its efﬁcacy
within the context of living systems, and in doing this, we have adopted three independent,
demonstrably commensurable schemas. These schemas have been explored in terms of
their interests, showing that they are relatable, and through centripetal arguments, thereby
explaining how they are each related through autopoiesis, their properties, then providing
greater insights into the nature of autopoietic processes.
To summarise this development within an agency context, agencies are here taken to
be living systems through their capacity to anticipate, this being dependent on its capability
for internalisation. This applies to all forms of living system, whether they are biological,
chemical, psychological, mechanical, or social. There are qualitative grades of agency
competence, this being explained in terms of their cognitive ability enabling them to have
a capacity for recognition. There are two types of cognition, implicit and explicit. Implicit
cognition occurs in a lesser form of life that involves an automatic information-based
process that operates rapidly with less information than explicit cognition, which is a more
complex form of life that involves rational processes. Agencies may also be conscious
entities. Consciousness may start as a primitive condition, and then develop. Primitive con-
sciousness is connected with agency learning and an ability to modify conﬁgurations and
states in adaptation, enabling evolution and self-regulation. Developmental consciousness
involves an evolutionary agency process (since evolution is a collective process, and agency
is constituted through a population of agents) based on stable dynamic support yielding
to strongly anticipative behaviour, with enhancing memory structures and increasingly
developing regulatory and adaptive attributes.
Having referred to recognition, agencies observe contexts when they are recognising
and noting parametric attributes of context. Implicit recognition occurs where the discrimi-
nation of context involves repeated exposure to memory through information processing.
Explicit recognition is more complex and involves the conscious discrimination of para-
metric attributes, and is associated with rapid perceptual learning in identifying context.

Systems 2021, 9, 75
32 of 36
Agencies operate through causal mechanisms populated by causal-agents that deliver
causal effects. Autopoiesis (as with autogenesis) is a causal-agent that has a dual cybernetic
functionality through its reverse trajectories. These produce the different causal effects
of internalisation and anticipation. Internalisation arises as an effect through anterior au-
topoiesis, while anticipation arises as an effect from posterior autopoiesis. That these two
causal-agents exist extends traditional autopoietic theory, not only with respect to the intro-
duction of dual reverse trajectories, but also in redeﬁning the notion of self-organisation
so that it applies not only, as in tradition, to the anterior structure from which behaviour
emanates, but also to the strategic–regulative structure that ultimately creates opportu-
nities for adaptive behaviour and bounds on what behaviour is permissible. Anterior
autopoiesis is responsible for agency regulative capacity, while posterior autopoiesis is
responsible for operative structure and hence behaviour. Anterior and posterior autopoiesis
connect an operative system with its metasystem in a ﬁrst-order fractal (in an embedded
sequence of higher order fractals in a metasystem hierarchy), producing an autopoietic
couple. This couple may be seen as a system in its own right, which itself may be regulated
by a higher-order strategic regulator, perhaps called a metametasystem (a post-posterior
system relative to agency’s anterior system). This applies to higher cybernetic orders that
have causal-agents (similar to autogenesis) delivering causal effects. These causal effects
are always internalisation and anticipation, but the nature of these effects alters with the
ontological context, i.e., related to the nature of the cybernetic order being considered.
These relationships are reﬂected in the poem “Siphonaptera,” by Augustus De Morgan, in
which “great ﬂeas have little ﬂeas upon their backs to bite ‘em, and little ﬂeas have lesser
ﬂeas, and so ad inﬁnitum.”
Both anterior and posterior autopoiesis can be measured. Two approaches have been
identiﬁed for this, one coming from GCI, and the other from EPI. The efﬁcacy measure for
the internalisation causal effect is that of anterior autopoiesis represented by κa, and that
for the anticipation causal effect is that of posterior autopoiesis represented by κp. Since,
according to GCI, the subagencies that are involved in each trajectory are autonomous
and organisationally distributed, there is no reason to suppose that κa = κp, and likely
they will normally be different. The Dubois Eigenform equations that represent these two
causal-agent processes, when solvable, indicate autopoietic stability. During internalisation,
stability results in eigenvalues, and during anticipation, stability results in eigenbehaviour.
It should be realised that eigenbehaviour is nothing other than the operative structure that
enables the potential for behaviour. Thus, the teeth of a lion or the neck of a giraffe are
operative structures that directly inﬂuence behaviours.
Now, an autopoietic couple is a second-order cybernetic system with a ﬁrst-order
causal-agent called autopoiesis (self-production), and a third-order cybernetic system op-
erates in exactly the same way, except that its second-order causal-agent is now called
autogenesis (self-creation). While self-production is an effect that can apply to both strate-
gic regulation and operative structure from which behaviour arises, self-creation is rather
concerned with learning/innovation and strategic behaviour adjustment. The core cyber-
netic model involving the causal-agents that deﬁne an anterior and posterior couple is
therefore recursive.
When considering internalisation, we are referring to context, deﬁned as the inter-
related conditions in which something exists or occurs, including objects, subjects, their
interactions, and the resulting effects. Traditionally, a second-order system is considered
to be an observing system. This implies that it is the posterior system that “looks on” at a
context thereby observing it. However, this is a proposition that, if correctly represented,
would seem false. Rather, observation is due to behavioural intelligence from which that
being observed is manifested as a context map, and then through autopoiesis manifested
as a cognitive map from which an ideate emerges in that posterior system. This is so even
while the posterior system is a regulator of agency as a whole.
Observation of an active context is represented in the anterior (operative) system
and becomes manifested as an ideate image in its posterior system (e.g., the metasystem).

Systems 2021, 9, 75
33 of 36
Occurring through internalisation as an effect, it has two possible states. One is assimila-
tion, which is information-based, and the other accommodation, which is structure-based.
Agency observation may also be of the ideate that is connected with regulation, occurring
through posterior autopoiesis, when the causal effect is anticipation. This is the alternative
to internalisation with a reverse trajectory, and which also has two states, weak and strong.
Assimilation is tied to weak anticipation delivering an agency with lesser complexiﬁca-
tion, while accommodation is tied to strong anticipation and delivers an agency with
greater complexiﬁcation.
These propositions are the result of considering the three schemas that we have
introduced within the metacybernetic framework. They lead to stark distinctions from more
traditional cybernetic theory that mostly centres on second-order cybernetics, and creates
mystiﬁcation around eigenvalues and eigenbehaviours. It thus provides an evolutionary
shift in the development of metacybernetics and the causal processes (of which autopoiesis
is one) that deﬁne the nature of living.
Author Contributions: M.Y. is the primary conceptual author, with a specialism in social cybernetics
and, in particular, in the general theory of metacybermetics, which he originated. B.R.F. has provided
conceptual support with respect to the mathematical structures provided and their elaboration,
especially with respect to EPI, a general theory that originates with him. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Maturana, H. Biology of Cognition; Biological Computer Laboratory Research Report BCL 9.0; University of Illinois: Urbana, IL,
USA, 1970.
2.
Farnsworth, K.D.; Nelson, J.; Gershenson, C. Living is Information Processing: From Molecules to Global Systems. Acta Biotheor.
2013, 61, 203–222. [CrossRef]
3.
Simon, H. Cognitive Science: The Newest Science of the Artiﬁcial. Cogn. Sci. 1980, 4, 33–46. [CrossRef]
4.
Grifﬁn, D.R. From cognition to consciousness. Anim. Cogn. 1998, 1, 3–16. [CrossRef]
5.
Bensaude-Vincent, B. Self-Assembly, Self-Organization: A Philosophical Perspective on a Major Challenge of Nanotechnology.
In Proceedings of the France-Stanford Meeting Implications Sociales et Ethiquesde la Convergence Nano-, Bio-, Info- Cogno-,
Avignon, France, 17 December 2006.
6.
Bitbol, M.; Luisi, P.L. Autopoiesis with or without cognition: Deﬁning life at its edge. J. R. Soc. Interface 2004, 1, 99–107. [CrossRef]
7.
Yolles, M. Agency, ecosystems and sustainable development. Part 1: The ecosystem. Kybernetes 2021. [CrossRef]
8.
Bielecki, A. The Systemic Concept of Contextual Truth. Found Sci. 2020. [CrossRef]
9.
Korzeniewski, B. Cybernetic formulation of the deﬁnition of life. J. Theor. Biol. 2001, 209, 275–286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Simon, H.A. The architecture of complexity. In Facets of Systems Science; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 1991; pp. 457–476.
11.
Wiener, N. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1961.
12.
Rosen, R. Anticipatory Systems; Pergamon Press: New York, NY, USA, 1985.
13.
Maturana, H.R.; Varela, F. Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living; Reidel: Boston, MA, USA, 1980.
14.
Hornung, B. Sociocybernetics. In International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2015; pp. 912–917.
15.
Razeto-Barry, P. Autopoiesis 40 years later. A review and a reformulation. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 2012, 42, 543–567. [CrossRef]
16.
Li, Q.; Clark, B.; Winchester, I. Instructional design and technology grounded in enactivism: A paradigm shift? Br. J. Educ. Technol.
2010, 41, 403–419. [CrossRef]
17.
Yolles, M. Metacybernetics: Towards a General Theory of Higher Order Cybernetics. Systems 2021, 9, 34. [CrossRef]
18.
Dopfer, K.; Foster, J.; Potts, J. Micro-meso-macro. J. Evol. Econ. 2004, 14, 263–279. [CrossRef]
19.
Foerster, V.H. Objects: Tokens for (Eigen)-Behaviors. Cybern. Forum 1976, 8, 91–96.
20.
Dubois, D.M. Review of incursive, hyperincursive and anticipatory systems-foundation of anticipation in electromagnetism. AIP
Conf. Proc. 2000, 517, 3–30. [CrossRef]
21.
Brown, T. Making Truth: Metaphor in Science; University of Illinois Press: Champaign, IL, USA, 2003.
22.
Lakoff, G.; Johnson, M. Metaphors We Live By; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1980.
23.
Yolles, M.I.; Fink, G. A Conﬁguration Approach to Mindset Agency Theory—A Formative Trait Psychology with Affect Conition and
Behaviour; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2021.
24.
Miller, D. Conﬁgurations revisited. Strateg. Manag. J. 1996, 17, 505–512. [CrossRef]

Systems 2021, 9, 75
34 of 36
25.
Halpin, H. Foundations of a Philosophy of Collective Intelligence. In Proceedings of the AISB Convention, Birmingham, UK,
2–6 July 2012.
26.
Bandura, A. Human agency in social cognitive theory. Am. Psychol. 1989, 44, 1175–1184. [CrossRef]
27.
Kauffman, L. Eigenform. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the ISSS, Tokyo, Japan, 5–10 August 2007.
28.
Wegener, R. Parameters of Context: From Theory to Model and Application. Ph.D. Thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia, 2011.
29.
Steele, A.; Leitch, R.R. Qualitative Parameter Identiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the QR-97 11th International Workshop on
Qualitative Reasoning about Physical Systems, Cortona, Italy, 3–6 June 1997.
30.
Brooks, S.; Gelman, A. Some issues for monitoring convergence of iterative simulations. In Proceedings of the Section on Statistical
Computing ASA, Washington, DC, USA, 13–16 August 1998.
31.
Yolles, M.I. Least Squares Successive Relaxation. IMA J. Appl. Math. 1975, 16, 329–343. [CrossRef]
32.
Beauﬁls, B.; Delahaye, J.P.; Mathieu, P. Our meeting with gradual, a good strategy for the iterated prisoner’s dilemma. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, Nara, Japan, 16–18 May 1996.
33.
Leinonen, A.; Rasilainen, K.; Komonen, P.; Gotcheva, N. Nuclear Waste Repository as a Scenario Problem: Developing Epistemic
Understanding; VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland: Espoo, Finland, 2021.
34.
Tietje, O. Identiﬁcation of a small reliable and efﬁcient set of consistent scenarios. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2005, 162, 418–432. [CrossRef]
35.
Chakir, R.; Lungarskay, A. Agricultural land rents in land use models: A spatial econometric analysis. In Proceedings of the 150th
Seminar (EAAE) European Association of Agricultural Economists, Edinburgh, UK, 22–23 October 2015.
36.
Spathopoulou, F.; Papakonstantinidis, S. Culture as a parameter in assessing students performance. Humanit. Soc. Sci. Lett. 2017,
5, 72–78.
37.
Parrish, P.; Linder-VanBerschot, J. Cultural dimensions of learning: Addressing the challenges of multicultural instruction. Int.
Rev. Res. Open Distrib. Learn. 2010, 11, 1–19. [CrossRef]
38.
Hofstede, G.; Hofstede, G.J. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 2005.
39.
Nisbett, R.E. The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently—And Why; Free Press: New York, NY,
USA, 2003.
40.
Levine, R. A Geography of Time; Basic Books: New York, NY, USA, 1997.
41.
Hall, E.T. Beyond Culture; Random House: New York, NY, USA, 1981.
42.
Lewis, R.D. When Cultures Collide: Leading Across Cultures; Nicholas Brealey International: Boston, MA, USA, 2006.
43.
Tamis-LeMonda, C.S.; Way, N.; Hughes, D.; Yoshikawa, H.; Kalman, R.K.; Niwa, E.Y. Parents’ Goals for Children: The Dynamic
Coexistence of Individualism and Collectivism in Cultures and Individuals. Soc. Dev. 2007, 17, 183–209. [CrossRef]
44.
Yolles, M. Changing paradigms in operational research. Cybern. Syst. 1998, 29, 91–112. [CrossRef]
45.
Ha, S.; Jeong, H. Unraveling hidden interactions in complex systems with deep learning. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 1–13. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
46.
Glanzberg, M. Not All Contextual Parameters Are Alike; University of Oslo: Oslo, Norway, 2009.
47.
Stojanovic, I. Emotional Disagreement: The Role of Semantic Content in the Expression of, and Disagreement Over, Emotional
Values. Dialogue Can. Philos. Rev. 2012, 51, 99–117. [CrossRef]
48.
Foerster, V.H. Cybernetics of Cybernetics. In Communication and Control in Society; Gordon and Breach: New York, NY, USA, 1979.
49.
Tolman, E.C. Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychol. Rev. 1948, 55, 189–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Heft, H. Environment, cognition, and culture: Reconsidering the cognitive map. J. Environ. Psychol. 2013, 33, 14–25. [CrossRef]
51.
Kitchin, R.M. Cognitive maps: What are they and why study them? J. Environ. Psychol. 1994, 14, 1–19. [CrossRef]
52.
Russell, B. Vagueness. Australas. J. Psychol. Philos. 1923, 1, 84–92. [CrossRef]
53.
Yolles, M. From Competitive Advantage to Knowledge Cybernetics. Syst. Integr. 2006, 72. Available online: http://citeseerx.ist.
psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.491.1609&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed on 22 October 2021).
54.
Henderson, J.M. Regarding scenes. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2007, 16, 219–222. [CrossRef]
55.
Cao, Y. An Information Assistant System for the Prevention of Tunnel Vision in Crisis Management; University of Twente: Twente, The
Netherlands, 2008.
56.
Underwood, G.; Bright, J.E.H. Cognition with and Without Awareness; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1995.
57.
Nosek, B.A. Implicit–Explicit Relations. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2007, 16, 65–69. [CrossRef]
58.
Nosek, B.A.; Hawkins, C.B.; Frazier, R.S. Implicit social cognition: From measures to mechanisms. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2011, 15,
152–159. [CrossRef]
59.
Stammers, S. Is Implicit Cognition Bad Cognition? 2016. Available online: https://icog.group.shef.ac.uk/is-implicit-cognition-
bad-cognition (accessed on 22 October 2021).
60.
Cunningham, W.A.; Zelazo, P.D.; Packer, D.J.; Van Bavel, J.J. The Iterative Reprocessing Model: A Multilevel Framework for
Attitudes and Evaluation. Soc. Cogn. 2007, 25, 736–760. [CrossRef]
61.
de Lemos, R.; Grze´s, M. Self-adaptive artiﬁcial intelligence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 14th International Symposium on
Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS), Montreal, QC, Canada, 25 May 2019.
62.
Chella, A.; Pipitone, A.; Morin, A.; Racy, F. Developing Self-Awareness in Robots via Inner Speech. Front. Robot. AI 2020, 7.
[CrossRef]

Systems 2021, 9, 75
35 of 36
63.
Chatila, R.; Renaudo, E.; Andries, M.; Chavez-Garcia, R.-O.; Luce-Vayrac, P.; Gottstein, R.; Alami, R.; Clodic, A.; Devin, S.; Girard,
B.; et al. Toward Self-Aware Robots. Front. Robot. AI 2018, 5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Prentner, R. Consciousness: A Molecular Perspective. Philosophies 2017, 2, 26. [CrossRef]
65.
Kinouchi, Y.; Kato, Y. A Model of Primitive Consciousness Based on System-Level Learning Activity in Autonomous Adaptation.
In Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2012; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013.
66.
Lehn, J.-M. Supramolecular chemistry? Scope and perspectives: Molecules? Supermolecules? Molecular devices. J. Incl. Phenom.
Macrocycl. Chem. 1988, 6, 351–396. [CrossRef]
67.
Carr, H.W. The problem of recognition. Proc. Aristot. Soc. 1916, 17, 1–27. [CrossRef]
68.
Thibierge, S.; Morin, C. Which Identiﬁcation is Disturbed in Misidentiﬁcation Syndromes? A Structural Analysis of Fregoli and
Capgras Syndromes. J. Mind Behav. 2016, 37, 1–13.
69.
Martens, U.; Wahl, P.; Hassler, U.; Friese, U.; Gruber, T. Implicit and Explicit Contributions to Object Recognition: Evidence from
Rapid Perceptual Learning. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e47009. [CrossRef]
70.
Lehn, J.-M. Toward complex matter: Supramolecular chemistry and self-organization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002, 99,
4763–4768. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.
Krafft, P.M. A Simple Computational Theory of General Collective Intelligence. Top. Cogn. Sci. 2018, 11, 374–392. [CrossRef]
72.
Williams, A. Functional Modeling and General Collective Intelligence as the Basis for Pervasive Healthcare. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:africarxiv/4wzft. Available online: https://osf.io/preprints/africarxiv/4wzft (accessed on 22 October 2021).
73.
Williams, A.E. Applications for General Collective Intelligence. arXiv 2020. Available online: https://osf.io/preprints/africarxiv/
bj8cv/ (accessed on 22 October 2021). [CrossRef]
74.
Weinbaum, D.; Veitas, V. Open ended intelligence: The individuation of intelligent agents. J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 2017, 29,
371–396. [CrossRef]
75.
Wheeler, M. The Extended Mind Hypothesis; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research Publications: Cambridge, UK, 2012.
76.
Guo, K.; Yolles, M.I.; Fink, G.; Iles, P.A. The Changing Organisation: An Agency Approach; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
UK, 2016.
77.
Piaget, J. The Psychology of Intelligence; Harcourt and Brace: New York, NY, USA, 1950.
78.
Uz, I. The Index of Cultural Tightness and Looseness Among 68 Countries. J. Cross-Cult. Psychol. 2014, 46, 319–335. [CrossRef]
79.
Schmeichel, B.J.; Baumeister, R.F. Self-Regulatory Strength. In Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications;
Guilford Press: London, UK, 2004.
80.
Odor, H. Organisational Culture and Dynamics. Glob. J. Manag. Bus. Res. 2018, 18, 23–29.
81.
Mueller, E.T.; Dyer, M.G. Towards a Computational Theory of Human Daydreaming. In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Irvine, CA, USA, 15–17 August 1985.
82.
Yolles, M. Agency, Generic ecosystems and sustainable development: Part 2 agency as an ecosystem. Kybernetes 2021. [CrossRef]
83.
Vickers, G. Value Systems and Social Process; Routledge: London, UK, 2013.
84.
Stowell, F. The Appreciative Inquiry Method-A Suitable Candidate for Action Research? Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 2012, 30, 15–30.
[CrossRef]
85.
Alexiou, A. Understanding Multi-Agent Design as Coordination. Ph.D. Thesis, University of London, London, UK, 2007.
86.
Birch, J. Natural selection and the maximization of ﬁtness. Biol. Rev. 2015, 91, 712–727. [CrossRef]
87.
Williams, A. A Model for General Collective Intelligence. arXiv 2020, arXiv:africarxiv/6u984. Available online: https://osf.io/
preprints/africarxiv/6u984 (accessed on 22 October 2021).
88.
Foerster, V.H. Understanding: Essays on Cybernetics and Cognition; Spinger: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
89.
Rocha, L. Eigenbehavior and symbols. Syst. Res. 1996, 13, 371–384. [CrossRef]
90.
Varela, F. A calculus for self-reference. Int. J. Gen. Syst. 1975, 2, 5–24.
91.
Spencer Brown, G. Laws of Form; The Julian Press: New York, NY, USA, 1969.
92.
Reichel, A. Snakes all the Way Down: Varela’s Calculus for Self-Reference and the Praxis of Paradise. Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 2011,
28, 646–662. [CrossRef]
93.
Kauffman, L. Laws of form and form dynamics. Cybern. Hum. Knowing 2002, 9, 49–63.
94.
Kauffman, L. Eigenforms-Objects as tokens for eigenbehaviors. Cybern. Hum. Knowing 2003, 10, 73–90.
95.
Kauffman, L. Reﬂexivity and Eigenform: The Shape of Process. Constr. Found. 2009, 4, 3.
96.
Kauffman, L. Eigenforms and Quantum Physics. arXiv 2011, arXiv:1109.1892.
97.
Dubois, D.M. Mathematical Foundations of Discrete and Functional Systems with Strong and Weak Anticipations. LNAI 2003,
2684, 110–132. [CrossRef]
98.
Fisher, R. On the mathematical foundations of theoretical statistics. In Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences; Royal Society: London, UK, 1922.
99.
Frieden, B.R.; Binder, P.M. Physics from Fisher Information: A Uniﬁcation. Am. J. Phys. 2000, 68, 1064–1065. [CrossRef]
100. Frieden, B. Science from Fisher Information; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2004.
101. Frieden, B.R.; Hawkins, R.J. Asymmetric information and economics. Phys. Stat. Mech. Appl. 2010, 389, 287–295. [CrossRef]
102. Karunanithi, A.T.; Cabezas, H.; Frieden, B.R.; Pawlowski, C.W. Detection and Assessment of Ecosystem Regime Shifts from
Fisher Information. Ecol. Soc. 2008, 13, art22. [CrossRef]

Systems 2021, 9, 75
36 of 36
103. Karunanithi, A.T.; Garmestani, A.S.; Eason, T.; Cabezas, H. The characterization of socio-political instability, development and
sustainability with Fisher information. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2011, 21, 77–84. [CrossRef]
104. Frieden, B. A Cooperative Universe—Beyond the Participatory. 2013. Available online: https://wp.optics.arizona.edu/rfrieden/
ﬁsher-information/section-7/ (accessed on 17 August 2021).
105. Gatenby, R.; Frieden, B.R. Application of information theory and extreme physical information to carcinogenesis. Cancer Res.
2002, 62, 3675–3684.
106. Mutalik, P. How to Triumph and Cooperate in Game Theory and Evolution. QuantaMagazine. 9 November 2017. Available
online: https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-to-triumph-and-cooperate-in-game-theory-and-evolution-20171109 (accessed
on 20 July 2021).
107. Husserl, E. Addendum XXIII of The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. J. Br. Soc. Phenomenol. 2013,
44, 6–9. [CrossRef]
108. Krippendorff, K. Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology; Sage: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
109. Schwarz, E. Autogenesis.
Available online: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3826203 (accessed on
22 October 2021).
110. Clark, A.; Chalmers, D. The extended mind. Analysis 1998, 58, 7–19. [CrossRef]
111. Duff, A.J.; Tahbaz, A.; Chan, C. The Interactive Effect of Cultural Intelligence and Openness on Task Performance. Res. Pract.
Hum. Resour. Manag. 2012, 20, 1–12.
112. Yolles, M.; Fink, G. Modelling mindsets of an agency. J. Organ. Transform. Soc. Chang. 2014, 11, 69–88. [CrossRef]
113. Thorndike, E.L. Intelligence and its uses. Harper’s Mag. 1920, 140, 227–235.
114. Piaget, J. Development and learning. In Piaget Rediscovered; Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY, USA, 1964; pp. 7–20.
115. Yolles, M. Towards a general hybrid theory in wicked problem structuring part 1: The foundation. Kybernetes 2020, 50, 467–489.
[CrossRef]
116. Burns, N.; Grove, S.K. The Practice of Nursing Research: Appraisal Synthesis, and Generation of Evidence; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2009.
117. Yolles, M. Management Systems: A Viable Approach; Financial Times Pitman: London, UK, 1999.
118. Singh, S. Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoff, Towards Data Science. 2018. Available online: https://towardsdatascience.
com/understanding-the-bias-variance-tradeoff-165e6942b229 (accessed on 19 June 2021).
119. David, O. Dynamic causal models and autopoietic systems. Biol. Res. 2007, 40, 487–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Cartwright, N. What is this thing called efﬁcacy? In Philosophy of the Social Sciences: Philosophical Theory and Scientiﬁc Practice;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2009; pp. 185–206.
121. DiMaggio, P. Culture and cognition. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 1997, 23, 263–287. [CrossRef]
122. Das, M.M.; Chithralekha, T.; Sathya, S. Static Context Model for Context Aware E-learning. Int. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 2010, 2,
2337–2346.
123. Svobodová, A.; Koudelková, P. Collective intelligence and knowledge management as a tool for innovations. Econ. Manag. 2011,
16, 942–946.
124. Ringer, M. Leadership for collective thinking in the work place. Team Perform. Manag. Int. J. 2007, 13, 30–144. [CrossRef]

